



















































Automated Discourse Analysis of Narrations by Adolescents with Autistic Spectrum Disorder


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning, pages 1–9,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automated Discourse Analysis of Narrations by Adolescents with Autistic
Spectrum Disorder

Michaela Regneri
IT Department

SPIEGEL-Verlag
Hamburg, Germany

michaela.regneri@spiegel.de

Diane King
National Foundation for

Educational Research (NFER)
London, United Kingdom
d.king@nfer.ac.uk

Abstract

We present a study about automated dis-
course analysis of oral narrative language
in adolescents with autistic spectrum dis-
order (ASD). The basis of this evaluation
is an existing dataset of fictional narra-
tions of individuals with ASD and two
matched comparison groups. We use three
robust measures for quantifying differ-
ent aspects of text cohesion on this cor-
pus. These measures and several combi-
nations of them correlate strongly with hu-
man cohesion annotations. Our evaluation
will show which of these also distinguish
the ASD group from the two comparison
groups, which do not, and which differ-
ences are related to language competence
rather than to factors specific to ASD.

1 Introduction

Language is, in many ways, a window to the mind.
Written or spoken utterances convey much more
than their content – they also provide information
about the person who is writing or speaking the
respective words. The research field of computa-
tional stylometry is concerned with the analysis of
(written or transcribed) text and how it reveals in-
formation about the person who has produced this
(see Daelemans (2013) for an overview). Typi-
cal applications, often with a focus on frequently
updated websites and social media, are automated
authorship attribution, gender distinction or foren-
sic purposes.

A growing and very interesting subfield of com-
putational stylometry is the detection of idiosyn-
cratic language which may be found in individu-
als who have cognitive, affective or developmental
disorders: while standard stylometry uses mostly
focus on the pure identification of certain users or

user groups, often with hardly interpretable fea-
tures (like function word use), diagnostic analy-
sis has the additional goal of making sense out of
the actual features. The hope here is to gain more
insight into the underlying disorder by analysing
how it affects language. Additionally, there are
also systems that automatically can identify or pre-
dict the onset of the condition in question.

Our focus is on the diagnostic analysis of oral
narratives produced by adolescents with autistic
spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is a neurodevel-
opmental disorder characterised by impairment
in social communication and restricted, repetitive
and stereotyped patterns of behaviour (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). Although the so-
cial and communication difficulties of individuals
with ASD have been well documented, little is
known about narrative language in this population:
whilst there has been a great deal of research on
ASD by psychologists and neurologists, there are
not many corpus analyses to support assumptions
on language development and ASD. We are partic-
ularly interested in discourse cohesion, with cohe-
sion being defined as the way in which devices are
used to link together sentences, clauses and propo-
sitions. This includes the sequencing of and transi-
tions between each event in a narrative. Although
the production of a cohesive narrative is reported
to be challenging for individuals with ASD, there
is only limited work on systematic corpus analy-
ses, mainly due to the lack suitable datasets.

Our work is based on a recently published
dataset of fictional narratives told by young people
with ASD (King et al., 2014). We expressly do not
aim to just automatically identify stories from an
ASD group, because that would be easily accom-
plished using crude features like story length. Our
goal is instead to find meaningful cohesion-related
features that distinguish the language of individu-
als wth ASD.

1



Our contribution is threefold: First, we present
robust measures that allow the automated assess-
ment of cohesion in short texts, and introduce
skewness as a new measure for coreference chains.
Second, we show which features of the text co-
hesion we measure are ASD-specific according to
our data, and which are related to language com-
petence. Lastly, we also show the correlation of
our measures with human judgments of story co-
hesion.

2 Related Work

Many automated approaches to diagnostic anal-
ysis detect Alzheimer’s and related forms of de-
mentia: there are extensive studies on the specific
language changes in people that develop dementia
(Hirst and Wei Feng, 2012; Le et al., 2011), show-
ing how the syntactic complexity of sentences de-
clines with the disease’s progress. Some classi-
fiers are capable of automated diagnosis from con-
tinuous speech (Baldas et al., 2011), and, addi-
tionally, the “Nun study” resulted in a system that
can predict whether or not an individual will de-
velop Alzheimer’s decades before the actual onset
of cognitive decline (Riley et al., 2005).

Other systems recognize spontaneous speech by
individuals with more general mild cognitive im-
pairments, for adults (Roark et al., 2011) and also
for children (Gabani et al., 2009). Hong et al.
(2012) present an unusual study on the language
of adult patients with schizophrenia.

Previous research on narratives of children with
ASD has reported difficulties with both struc-
tural and evaluative language. Individuals with
ASD struggle with expressing sentiment and make
fewer references to mental states than their typi-
cally developing peers (Capps et al., 2000; Tager-
Flusberg, 1996). However, other experiments
show that, when carefully matched with compar-
ison groups on cognitive and language ability,
many of these differences are not evident.

More basic problems emanate from a general
lower syntactic complexity (Tager-Flusberg and
Sullivan, 1995) and difficulties in producing a co-
herent narrative. Karmiloff-Smith (1985) argues
that the production of a coherent narrative is de-
pendent on the integration of knowledge of both
coherence and cohesion; coherence being defined
as the structure of a story and cohesion as the
devices used to link together sentences, clauses
and propositions, thereby maintaining a common

theme. Loveland and Tunali (1993) found that in-
dividuals with autism were less likely to tell a story
as a coherent sequence and more likely to produce
narratives that included bizarre, unrelated or inap-
propriate material. Diehl et al. (2006) also report
that narratives produced by individuals with ASD
were significantly less coherent than those of a
comparison group. However, Tager-Flusberg and
Sullivan (1995) found no significant differences in
the use of lexical cohesion devices between three
groups of children with autism, learning disabili-
ties and typically developing, matched on verbal
mental age.

Some of these language difficulties have been
subject to automated analysis: Prud’hommeaux et
al. (2011) analyzed data of very young children
(6-7 years old). They built an automated classifier
that distinguished sentences uttered by children
with ASD from sentences of two control groups
(one with children with a language-impairment,
one with typically developing children). The au-
thors themselves note some drawbacks of their un-
derlying dataset, in particular that some children in
the ASD group were also classified as language-
impaired. In consequence, a clear distinction be-
tween these groups was impossible.

In two follow-up studies (Rouhizadeh et al.,
2013; Rouhizadeh et al., 2015), the authors anal-
ysed whole narratives (retellings) told by children
(mean age 6.4) with ASD compared to a typi-
cally developing control group (with the same av-
erage age and IQ). As discourse-related measures,
they use the tf-idf measure (Luhn, 1957) and sev-
eral measures of text similarity to identify idiosyn-
cratic words and topics. The texts from the control
group and some crowdsourced retellings from typ-
ically developing adults served as a basis for deter-
mining unusualness.

Regneri and King (2015) present a study on
a much larger dataset with non-fictional stories
about everyday scenarios (like having a birthday
or being angry). Next to several shallow language
features, they also evaluate tf-idf and show that
this is actually more closely related to language
competence than to ASD. However, they do not
evaluate any other discourse-related features.

For our study, we use a dataset with fictional
stories, and take the discourse-level investigation
a step further: we present different measures of
text cohesion, which quantify some actually ASD-
specific difficulties with narrative.

2



FOREST
Group ASD Lang. Age All

Cohesion 1.79 2.93 2.76 2.00
Sent. / Story 7.64 9.07 10.10 8.86
Words / Sent. 10.46 12.19 11.37 11.40

MOUNTAIN
Group ASD Lang. Age All

Cohesion 2.21 2.96 3.04 2.49
Sent. / Story 10.00 9.90 12.39 10.62
Words / Sent. 10.59 10.57 10.98 10.71

ALL STORIES
Group ASD Lang. Age All

Cohesion 2.00 2.95 2.90 2.24
Sent. / Story 8.88 9.49 11.24 9.76
Words / Sent. 10.54 11.33 11.15 11.01

Table 1: Manually assigned cohesion scores, aver-
age story and sentence lengths for the corpus.

3 Data

We base our analysis on a dataset collected by
King et al. (2014), which we describe in more de-
tail in the following. The corpus contains tran-
scripts of fictional stories constructed by the chil-
dren after one of two different prompts. Appendix
A shows some examples from the story collection.
King et al. also report extensive manual annotation
of the narratives, parts of which we will use as a
gold standard for our automated experiments.

3.1 Data collection

The participants were divided in three groups: 27
high functioning adolescents with ASD aged 11
to 14 years, one comparison group of 27 adoles-
cents matched with the ASD group on chronolog-
ical age and nonverbal ability, and a second com-
parison group of 27 children and adolescents aged
between 7 and 14 years, who were individually
matched with the ASD group on a measure of ex-
pressive language (Recalling Sentences subtest of
the CELF IV (Semel et al., 2006)) and on non-
verbal ability. All groups had average scores on
non-verbal and verbal measures, as measured by
the Matrices test of the BAS II (Elliot et al., 1996)
and the BPVS II (Dunn and Dunn, 1997). There
were no significant differences between the groups

in measures of non-verbal ability, verbal ability or
expressive language. The average age difference
between the language-matched control group and
the two other groups is 17 months.

Participants in all three groups were presented
with two story stems and asked to continue the nar-
rative. Each story stem was accompanied with a
picture illustrating each prompt. The development
of these materials was based on the work of Stein
and Albro (1997), but adapted to be more suitable
for the age group of this study. To prevent order ef-
fects, the presentation of the story stems was coun-
terbalanced. After one practice story, each partici-
pant completed the following two story stems:

1. The “forest” story:

The boy ran into the forest. He
looked ahead of him and saw a lit-
tle green man in a spaceship.

2. The “mountain” story:

When the girl climbed up the
mountain, she saw, hidden among
the trees, a little wooden house
covered in snow.

Overall, there were 54 stories per group, totaling
162 stories in the corpus. This corpus is partic-
ularly well suited to analyse difficulties with co-
hesion because it contains texts that were freely
invented, without any structural guidance. More-
over, the inclusion of the language-matched and
the age-matched control groups enables us to dis-
tinguish language development issues from ASD-
specific difficulties.

3.2 Corpus annotations and statistics
The stories were recorded, transcribed and manu-
ally coded and scored according to the Narrative
Scoring Scheme (Stein and Albro, 1997, NSS).
The NSS rates stories on a 0-5 scale in several
categories: introduction, character development,
mental states, referencing, conflict/resolution, co-
hesion and conclusion. To ensure the reliability
of the coding, 10% of the narratives (16) were
also coded by an independent researcher. Inter-
reliability was found to be high (0.87).

Because we are specifically interested in dis-
course structure, the NSS annotations for cohesion
will serve as a gold standard for our own evalua-
tion (cf. Section 5.2). We show these ratings along
with some basic corpus figures in Table 1:

3



Cohesion refers to the manual cohesion annota-
tions, Sent. / Story is the average number of utter-
ances per story, and Words / Sent. quantifies the
average number of words per sentence.

The ASD group has significantly lower cohe-
sion scores than the two comparison groups (Lang.
for the group matched by language competence,
Age for the controls matched by chronological
age). Between the two groups with neurotypical
participants, there is no significant difference. The
mountain story prompt resulted in longer, more
cohesive stories, consisting of shorter sentences.
This difference is particularly clear for the ASD
group and the age-matched controls.

4 Measures for Story Cohesion

In a preprocessing step, we apply the coreference
resolution module of Stanford CoreNLP (Manning
et al., 2014) to the whole corpus. On this basis, we
compute three coreference-related measures: the
proportion of sentences with anaphoric references,
the average length of coreference chains (normal-
ized by story length) and Skewness, a measure we
derive from statistics and apply to clusterings.

4.1 Sentences with anaphoric references
As a simple measure for cohesion in a text t, we
define anaphors(t) as the proportion of sentences
that contain at least one anaphoric reference (with
sentences(t) being the set of sentences in t):

anaphors(t) =
|(sentences w. anaphors in t)|

|sentences(t)|
4.2 Average length of coreference chains
The average length of coreference chains in a text
is a common indicator for cohesion (the longer
the chains, the stronger the cohesion). Computing
this as an absolute number will also directly mea-
sure the average text length, which is always lower
for the ASD group. In order to isolate the cohe-
sion part, we divide the average coreference chain
length by the number of sentences in the text. We
compute chain length(t) of a text t as follows
(with Ct as the set of all coreference chains in t):

chain length(t) =

∑
c∈Ct

length(C)

|Ct| ∗ |sentences(t)|
The average chain length for the same story will
be higher if there are fewer coreference sets (and
thus fewer characters and objects).

4.3 Skewness of coreference chains

As a third coherence measure, we introduce the
notion of Skewness for coreference chains. Skew-
ness is originally a measure for probability distri-
butions, indicating (the lack of) uniformity.

We interpret this score as a geometric measure
for a set partition: for mentions in different coref-
erence chains, this measure shows whether the
narrator has the tendency to devote equally long
story parts to all participants (resembling a uni-
form distribution) or whether he or she focuses
more on a few main characters or objects, with
some supporting entities which are less frequently
mentioned (skewed distribution). We thus inter-
pret the distribution of mentions as a probability
distribution Pr over a random variable x, with
each value xi in X corresponding to a coreference
chain ci in C(t), and Pr(X = xi) being the num-
ber of mentions in ci divided by the overall number
of mentions. skewness(t) is computed as follows
(with E being the expectation operator, µ the mean
of the distribution X , σ the standard deviation):

skewness(t) = abs

(
E

[(
X − µ
σ

)3])

Skewness originally does not only indicate the
strength, but also the direction using negative or
positive values. Because we are only interested in
the overall asymmetry of the coreference chains,
we only note the absolute value of the result. Ac-
cording to Bulmer (1979), a result with an abso-
lute value greater than 1 is considered to indicate
strong skewness.

4.4 Measure combinations

In the final evaluation, we also use pairwise mea-
sure combinations, and the combination of all
three together. Combining here means that we first
make the measures comparable, and then average
the results. To arrive at meaningful scores, we pro-
cess the chain length and skewness as follows:

• The coreference chain length correlates
negatively with human judgements (cf. Table
3), so we combine a “negative chain length”
(1− chain length) with the respective other
measure.

• Skewness is normalized to a value between 0
and 1 before combination to match the value
span of the other two measures.

4



Bob loves Alice. 
He also has a cat.
The cat sleeps on Alice's chair. 
The chair is next to a table.
There is food on the table.
The food is cold.

Bob loves Alice. 
He also has a cat.
The cat sleeps on Alice's chair,
and Alice does not mind sharing it. 
Bob pets the sleepy cat, 
and later vacuums the chair.

Bob loves Alice. 
Alices lives with him.
She's very happy with Bob.
Bob cooks for her every night.
She kills spiders for him.
Bob will marry her really soon.

Randall is Bob's Cat.
He likes playing with 
Bob's fiancé, and spilling 
food over her.
Sometimes, Bob 
catches Randall before the 
cat can mess everything up.
Randall wins most of the
time, and is utterly delighted.

Bob loves Alice, and
his cat. Alice sometimes
steals his food and 
gives it to the cat.
Bob thinks this is really 
funny, he could never 
be angry with Alice.

hi
gh

er
 a

ve
ra

ge
 c

ha
in

 le
ng

th
,

sa
m

e 
sk

ew
ne

ss

higher skewness, same average chain length

Cat Bob
Alice food

table

chair

Protagonists

Figure 1: Constructed examples illustrating chain length vs. skewness

To better illustrate the relationship of skew-
ness and chain length, Figure 1 shows examplary
(made-up) stories with coreference chains of dif-
ferent lengths and skewness. The left column
shows three stories with the same skewness (0),
but different average chain length (2, 4 and 6,
top to bottom, without normalization). An inverse
case is sketched in the middle row: the chains all
have the same average chain length (4), but differ-
ent skewness (0,1.2 and1.4 respectively). Despite
the equally trivial plots, the stories with 4 or more
characters appear more readable when their coref-
erence clusters are more skewed.

5 Experiments

In the following, we first compare the ASD group
with the two control groups using our cohesion
measures and their combinations (Section 5.1).

In a second step, we show the correlation of our
measures with human coherence annotations re-
ported by King et al. (2014) (Section 5.2).

5.1 Comparison of the three groups
The computed results for all measures and their
combination is shown in Table 2.

Viewed in isolation, only the number of sen-
tences with anaphors distinguishes the ASD group
from the two control groups. While the (normal-
ized) average coreference chain length is equal for
all groups, skewness seems to be a matter of lan-
guage competence rather than exposing anomalies
from the ASD group. However, the picture is not
entirely clear: when just considering the ”forest”
stories, we see a tendency for the ASD group to
have less skewed coreference chains.

The combination of anaphoric references plus
the average chain length distinguishes the ASD

group most clearly, showing no difference be-
tween the two neurotypical groups (even though
they differ in general language competence). The
same pattern is evident in the expert annotation
with NSS scores: there is no difference between
the control groups, but the stories from the ASD
group are rated significantly as less cohesive.

All other combinations distinguish all three
groups from each other, which means that the dif-
ferences between the groups are related to both
ASD and language competence. For the combi-
nation of anaphoric references with skewness, our
data indicates that the group differences are more
strongly related to factors specific to ASD: the al-
pha level for the significance of the difference be-
tween the two control groups is lower than for the
remaining differences (p < 0.05, whereas all other
significance levels are at p < 0.01).

The remaining two feature combinations (chain
length with skewness, all three measures together)
also distinguish the ASD group from the compar-
ison groups, but (as expected) additionally bear
components of language competency.

5.2 Correlation with manual annotations

The results of our automated evaluation were
mixed with respect to ability to distinguish the
ASD group from the comparison groups. From
the isolated measures, only counting sentences
with anaphoric references shows results specific
for the ASD group. The combinations of differ-
ent cohesion components gives a clearer picture,
but only one combination shows the same pattern
observed for manual annotations: the neurotypical
groups are indistinguishable for the combination
of anaphors and chain length.

To understand better what contributes most to

5



FOREST MOUNTAIN ALL STORIES
Measure ASD Lang Age ASD Lang Age ASD Lang Age

anaphors (an) 0.83 0.93 0.95 0.80 0.92 0.91 0.81 0.93 0.93*
chain length (cl) 0.56 0.52 0.55 0.47 0.47 0.44 0.51* 0.50 0.50*
skewness (skew) 0.79 0.91 1.04 0.95 0.97 1.22 0.90* 1.04 1.30*

an & cl 0.73 0.80 0.80 0.75 0.81 0.81 0.74 0.80 0.81*
an & skew 0.54 0.63 0.66 0.56 0.62 0.68 0.55 0.63 0.67
cl & skew 0.35 0.41 0.41 0.42 0.43 0.50 0.39 0.42 0.46

All Combined 0.57 0.64 0.66 0.61 0.65 0.69 0.59 0.65 0.67

NSS score 1.79 2.93 2.76 2.21 2.96 3.04 2.00 2.95 2.90

Table 2: Results of cohesion evaluation, along with the manually assigned cohesion scores. Significance
is measured for the group of all stories only. Emphasized values have no significant difference (p> 0.05)
to the ASD group, starred values ∗ have no significant difference to the language-matched group.

the cohesion perceptions of human experts, we
calculate the correlation of our measures with
the NSS scores assigned in our source dataset.
To measure correlation, we use Spearman’s rank
correlation coefficient (ρ), a non-parametric test
which is widely used for similar comparisons
of system ratings with manually assigned scores
(Mitchell and Lapata, 2008; Erk and McCarthy,
2009, among others). Spearman’s ρ compares how
similarly two measures rank the same set of sam-
ples (in our case, a sample is a story).

Table 3 shows the results. For the complete cor-
pus, all measures show significant correlations.

The best isolated measure is skewness (ρ =
0.44), which shows the highest correlation for the
mountain stories. However, combining skewness
with any of the other measures does not result in
a higher ρ value. A partial explanation lies in
the differences in story length: We did not nor-
malize skewness for story length, because ”skew-
ness per sentence” is not a meaningful measure.
However, skewness of coreference chains is intu-
itively a more distinguishing feature if the stories
are longer, simply because the possible skewness
values have a higher range when there are more
referring elements to distribute. In contrast, the
other measures seem to be less suitable for longer
texts, because skewness has the highest ρ values
on the mountain stories, which are, on average,
longer than the forest stories.

The average chain length has a significant neg-
ative correlation, i.e. cohesion is higher when the
chains are shorter on average. (For combinations,
we therefore use an inverted value, cf. Section 4).

Measure FOREST MOUNTAIN ALL

anaphors (an) 0.23 0.17 0.19
chain length (cl) -0.31 -0.22 -0.28
skewness (skew) 0.48 0.38 0.44

an & cl 0.55 0.36 0.46
an & skew 0.54 0.09 (ns) 0.31
cl & skew 0.47 0.13 (ns) 0.31

All Combined 0.57 0.21 0.40

Table 3: Correlation with manual evaluation (in
Spearman’s ρ). Values in italics are not significant
(p > 0.05), maxima are in boldface.

The number of anaphoric references displays
the lowest ρ-values (for the mountain sub-corpus,
the correlation is not significant). When combined
with coreference chain length, the fused measure
has the highest overall correlation (ρ = 0.46), so
these two features make different contributions to
the overall cohesion.

The combination of all three measures has the
second highest correlation with the manual anno-
tations, and the highest ρ for the forest prompt.

Overall, our automated measures correlate
strongly with the human annotations, but surpris-
ingly much more so for the forest stories compared
to the mountain stories. Skewness seems to be
a very good measure in general, but the number
of reference-bearing sentences combined with the
average chain length obviously contributes similar
information to the evaluation of short stories.

6



6 Discussion

The measures we evaluated are all coreference-
based, quantifying different aspects of text cohe-
sion: the proportion of sentences with anaphoric
references reflects the sheer number of corefer-
ence links. The average coreference chain length
(normalized over story length) mainly measures
the number of protagonists and objects (cf. Fig-
ure 1). Skewness applied to coreference sets
shows whether the protagonists differ in impor-
tance within the story, i.e. whether there is a rec-
ognizable main character (or a few of them) next
to several supporting characters (or objects).

We succeeded in demonstrating that these mea-
sures strongly correlate with human assessment
of cohesion, and that some combinations of them
yield different results for the stories from the
ASD group compared to the control groups. In
particular, the measure combination that showed
the strongest correlation with human judgements
(chain length plus number of anaphoric refer-
ences) seems to be directly influenced by ASD,
and not just an indicator of general language com-
petence: there was no difference between the two
neurotypical control groups, but the score of the
ASD group differed significantly from both.

Skewness, which we used as a new measure
for quantifying the distribution of referring expres-
sions into coreference sets, shows the highest cor-
relation with human judgement as an isolated mea-
sure. However, skewness seems to work better
for longer stories, which is intuitively clear: the
possible variation of coreference set distribution is
higher if there are more anaphoric references, and
skewness becomes more distinguishing if the re-
sults show a higher variation.

Obviously, our measures cannot assess the
whole spectrum of discourse features: they do not
include any lexical features or semantic discourse
relations. While we tried to compute such indica-
tors, neither lexical chains nor discourse relations
lead to a meaningful evaluation on our dataset.
This is mostly due to the brevity of the stories,
but is also because the setup of oral narration does
not yield the discourse structure typically found in
written language. Analyses with deeper discourse
features would require a different dataset, which,
however, might be difficult to create.

The most important outcome of this analysis is
that an automatic evaluation of cohesion for di-
agnostic stylometry can be successfully used to

validate theoretical claims. We also took im-
portant steps towards identifying cohesion-based
measures to analyze unusual language traits in
adolescents with autistic spectrum disorder. Our
measures proved suitable for short stories, which
is important because the participants we focus on
have difficulties with producing longer texts. Fur-
ther, our approach is robust enough to assess co-
hesion in transcripts of spoken narrations, which
are more difficult to process with than written lan-
guage. Future work needs to show how our ideas
can be extended beyond this point, either with dif-
ferent measures, or with different datasets, or both.

7 Conclusion

We have presented an automatic evaluation show-
ing differences in stories narrated by adolescents
with autistic spectrum disorder in comparison with
two control groups. For this purpose, we presented
three robust measures applicable to the short story
transcripts, namely the proportion of sentences
with anaphors, the (normalized) average corefer-
ence chain length, and skewness as a new measure
related to coreference set clusterings.

We showed that skewness is the measure that
best correlates with manual cohesion annotation,
and that it seems to be more meaningful for longer
stories. Further we have shown that the combina-
tion of coreference chain length and the number
of sentences with anaphors is sufficient to assess
cohesion in shorter stories.

In future work, we would seek to find other
measures of cohesion which could help to assess
the difficulties of individuals with ASD compared
to neurotypical controls, possibly on a different
dataset with longer stories. Further, it would be in-
teresting to establish whether the features that we
found persist with age, and whether they are com-
parable to the effects reported for other disorders
and diseases such as dementia.

References
American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic

and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5.
APA, Washington, DC, 5th ed. edition.

Vassilis Baldas, Charalampos Lampiris, Christos Cap-
salis, and Dimitrios Koutsouris. 2011. Early Diag-
nosis of Alzheimer’s Type Dementia Using Contin-
uous Speech Recognition. In Lecture Notes of the
Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informat-
ics and Telecommunications Engineering. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.

7



M.G. Bulmer. 1979. Principles of Statistics. Dover
Books on Mathematics Series. Dover Publications.

Lisa Capps, Molly Losh, and Christopher Thurber.
2000. “The Frog Ate the Bug and Made his
Mouth Sad”: Narrative Competence in Children
with Autism. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychol-
ogy, 28(2).

Walter Daelemans. 2013. Explanation in computa-
tional stylometry. In Proc. of CICLing’13.

Joshua J. Diehl, Loisa Bennetto, and Edna Carter
Young. 2006. Story Recall and Narrative Coherence
of High-Functioning Children with Autism Spec-
trum Disorders. Journal of Abnormal Child Psy-
chology, 34(1).

Lloyd M. Dunn and Leota M. Dunn. 1997. The British
Picture Vocabulary Scale Second Edition (BPVS II).
Windsor Berkshire: NFER-NELSON Publication
Company.

Colin Elliot, Pauline Smith, and Kay McCullouch.
1996. The British Ability Scales II (BASII). Windsor
Berkshire: NFER-NELSON Publication Company.

Katrin Erk and Diana McCarthy. 2009. Graded word
sense assignment. In Proc. of EMNLP 2009.

Keyur Gabani, Melissa Sherman, Thamar Solorio,
Yang Liu, Lisa Bedore, and Elizabeth Peña. 2009.
A corpus-based approach for the prediction of
language impairment in monolingual english and
spanish-english bilingual children. In Proc. of
NAACL-HLT 2009.

Graeme Hirst and Vanessa Wei Feng. 2012. Changes
in style in authors with alzheimer’s disease. English
Studies, 93(3).

Kai Hong, Christian G. Kohler, Mary E. March, Am-
ber A. Parker, and Ani Nenkova. 2012. Lexi-
cal differences in autobiographical narratives from
schizophrenic patients and healthy controls. In
Proc. of EMNLP-CoNLL 2012.

Annette Karmiloff-Smith. 1985. Language and cog-
nitive processes from a developmental perspective.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 1(1).

Diane King, Julie Dockrell, and Morag Stuart. 2014.
Constructing fictional stories: a study of story nar-
ratives by children with autistic spectrum disorder.
Research in developmental disabilities, 35(10).

Xuan Le, Ian Lancashire, Graeme Hirst, and Regina
Jokel. 2011. Longitudinal detection of dementia
through lexical and syntactic changes in writing: a
case study of three british novelists. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 26(4).

Katherine Loveland and Belgin Tunali. 1993. Nar-
rative language in autism and the theory of mind
hypothesis: a wider perspective. In Understanding
other minds: Perspectives from autism. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Hans Peter Luhn. 1957. A statistical approach to
mechanized encoding and searching of literary in-
formation. IBM J. Res. Dev., 1(4).

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Proc. of ACL 2014:
System Demonstrations.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
models of semantic composition. In Proc. of ACL
2008.

Emily T Prud’hommeaux, Brian Roark, Lois M Black,
and Jan van Santen. 2011. Classification of atypical
language in autism. ACL HLT 2011.

Michaela Regneri and Diane King. 2015. Automat-
ically evaluating atypical language in narratives by
children with autistic spectrum disorder. In Proc. of
NLPCS 2014.

Kathryn P. Riley, David A. Snowdon, Mark F.
Desrosiers, and William R. Markesbery. 2005.
Early life linguistic ability, late life cognitive func-
tion, and neuropathology: findings from the Nun
Study. Neurobiology of Aging, 26(3).

Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, J Hosom, Kristy
Hollingshead, and Jeffrey Kaye. 2011. Spoken lan-
guage derived measures for detecting mild cognitive
impairment. Audio, Speech, and Language Process-
ing, IEEE Transactions on, 19(7).

Masoud Rouhizadeh, Emily Prud’hommeaux, Brian
Roark, and Jan van Santen. 2013. Distributional se-
mantic models for the evaluation of disordered lan-
guage. In Proc. of NAACL-HLT 2013.

Masoud Rouhizadeh, Emily Prud’Hommeaux, Jan
Van Santen, and Richard Sproat. 2015. Measuring
idiosyncratic interests in children with autism. In
Proc. of ACL 2015.

Eleanor Semel, Elisabeth .H Wiig, and Wayne Secord.
2006. Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamen-
tals (CELF-4 UK). Pearson Assessment, fourth edi-
tion uk edition.

Nancy L Stein and Elizabeth R Albro. 1997. Build-
ing complexity and coherence: Children’s use of of
goal-structured knowledge in telling stories. Narra-
tive development: Six approaches, page 5.

Helen Tager-Flusberg and Kate Sullivan. 1995. At-
tributing mental states to story characters: A com-
parison of narratives produced by autistic and men-
tally retarded individuals. Applied Psycholinguis-
tics, 16.

Helen Tager-Flusberg. 1996. Brief report: Current the-
ory and research on language and communication in
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Dis-
orders, 26(2).

8



Appendix A Corpus Examples

The following shows some examples from our
story corpus collected by King et al. (2014). For
each story stem (repeated below), we show 2 ex-
amples from the ASD group, and one from each
control group. For the sake of brevity, we do
not show the manual annotations from the original
corpus. Slashes (/) indicate utterance boundaries.

A.1 The Forest story
The boy ran into the forest. He looked ahead of
him and saw a little green man in a spaceship.

A.1.1 ASD
Example 1: the spaceship was quite small. / And
the alien was about the size of a small cat. / And it
was friendly. / but it didn’t really understand how
humans said hello. / So it thought, to say ’hello’
you had to vaporise the person in front of you. /
and then the boy ran away, shut his door and then
decided not to drink anymore whisky or beer.

Example 2: The green man had three eyes.
/ It had claws and fangs. / It looked at him and ran
into the spaceship. / Out came three more green
men carrying laser guns, dun dun dun.

A.1.2 Language-Matched Controls
He was shocked at first because he didn’t know
what it is. / So he walked up. / and he got
suck/ed in by a tractor beam. / and he found
himself in a UFO. / he was surround/ed by weird
looking creatures like aliens. / and they started
speaking like this unknown language to him. /
and he couldn’t understand a thing about them.
/ So he tried to escape. / he ran away. / but he
couldn’t cos—because wherever he went he was
surround/ed by aliens. / and they eventually cap-
ture/ed him and took him off to Mars. /

A.1.3 Age-Matched Controls
The little green man waved at him and yelled
at him to come and help him with his spaceship
which had crashed into the forest after he had lost
all his fuel. / The little boy went up to him and
said that he didn’t know what much he could do
because he’s obviously not very talented at fixing
alien space craft. / so he ran out of the forest went
to go get the nearest person he could see. / He
then brought him back to the spaceship where the
little green man was waiting. / and the man he’d
brought back was absolutely amazed. / he went up

to the little alien and started speaking with him. /
And then after a while he persuaded it to come out
of it’s spaceship. / and it went to meet the locals
who were very very amazed. / and then all the peo-
ple joined together. / and they pulled his spaceship
out of the mud. / and he flew back in it to mars.

A.2 The Mountain story
When the girl climbed up the mountain, she saw,
hidden among the trees, a little wooden house cov-
ered in snow.

A.2.1 ASD
Example 1: She went up to the mountain to see
the house. / She went inside and had a cup of tea.
/ After that she can’t get out because the snow
block/ed the door. / And the men came came in
and broke it. / but snow came again. / and then
she was stuck. / That’s it.

Example 2: the snow house was was a zombie.
/ and the zombie / he went up to the door. / and
the zombie scared him. / and the zombie went to
chase the girl. / and the girl ran away to to her
grandma that was climbing up the mountain. / and
she screamed and jumped off the mountain

A.2.2 Language-Matched Controls
She saw it was abandoned. / so she went down
to see what it was like. / She peeked inside the
window. / and inside there was a pixie . / and then
the pixie saw the girl and said ’go away from my
window’. / and then he threw a bowl of soup over
her. / the little girl went home and said: ’daddy
there was a pixie who threw some soup over me’. /
and then the dad said ’don’t be silly’. / stop telling
your little stories’.

A.2.3 Age-Matched Controls
She walked towards the house. / the house lit up.
/ lights switched on. / She knocked on the door. /
she was cold. / she asked if she could come in. /
There was a strange lady come to the door, pim-
ples and spots all over her, mouldy ugly hair and
very very small. / she went in. / the lady was actu-
ally a witch in disguise. / She grabbed the girl and
threw her into the oven. / her friend had also came
into the house five minutes later and seen her in
the oven. / She had pushed the witch over, got her
out and ran off. / they reported it all to the police. /
The police came up the next day. / The house was
not there.

9


