



















































Challenges of Argument Mining: Generating an Argument Synthesis based on the Qualia Structure


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 79–83,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Challenges of Argument Mining: Generating an Argument Synthesis based
on the Qualia Structure

Patrick Saint-Dizier
IRIT-CNRS, 118 route de Narbonne

31062 Toulouse France
stdizier@irit.fr

Abstract

Given a controversial issue, argument mining
from texts in natural language is extremely
challenging: besides linguistic aspects, do-
main knowledge is often required together
with appropriate forms of inferences to iden-
tify arguments. A major challenge is then
to organize the arguments which have been
mined to generate a synthesis that is relevant
and usable. We show that the Generative Lex-
icon (GL) Qualia structure, enhanced in dif-
ferent manners and associated with inferences
and language patterns, allows to capture the
typical concepts found in arguments and to or-
ganize a relevant synthesis.

1 Introduction to Argument Mining

One of the main goals of argument mining is, given a
controversial issue, to identify in a set of texts the ar-
guments for or against that issue. These arguments
act as supports or attacks of the issue. Arguments
may also attack or support the arguments which sup-
port or attack that controversial issue in order to re-
inforce or cancel out their impact. Arguments are
difficult to identify, in particular when they are not
adjacent to the controversial issue, possibly not in
the same text, because their linguistic, conceptual or
referential links to that issue are rarely explicit.

For example, given the controversial issue: Vac-
cine against Ebola is necessary, the link with state-
ments such as Ebola adjuvant is toxic, Ebola vaccine
production is costly, or 7 people died during Ebola
vaccine tests is not straightforward without domain
knowledge, including finding the polarity of these

statements. For example, a knowledge-based anal-
ysis of the third statement shows that it is irrelevant
or neutral w.r.t. the issue (Saint-Dizier 2016).

Argument mining is an emerging research area
which introduces new challenges in natural language
processing and generation. Argument mining re-
search applies to written texts, e.g. (Mochales Palau
et ali.., 2009), (Kirschner et ali., 2015), for example
for opinion analysis, e.g. (Villalba et al., 2012), me-
diation analysis (Janier et al. 2015) or transcribed ar-
gumentative dialog analysis, e.g. (Budzynska et ali.,
2014), (Swanson et ali., 2015). The analysis of the
NLP techniques relevant for argument mining from
annotated structures is analyzed in e.g. (Peldszus
et al. 2016). Annotated corpora are now available,
e.g. the AIFDB dialog corpora or (Walker et al.,
2012). These corpora are very useful to understand
how argumentation is realized in texts, e.g. to iden-
tify argumentative discourse units (ADUs), linguis-
tic cues (Nguyen et al., 2015), and argumentation
strategies, in a concrete way, possibly in association
with abstract argumentation schemes, as shown in
e.g. (Feng et al., 2011). In natural language genera-
tion, argument generation started as early as (Zuck-
erman et ali. 2000). Finally, reasoning aspects re-
lated to argumentation analysis are developed in e.g.
(Fiedler et al., 2007) and (Winterstein, 2012) from a
formal semantics perspective. Abstracting over ar-
guments allows to construct summaries and to in-
duce customer preferences or value systems.

In (Saint-Dizier 2016), a corpus analysis identi-
fies the type of knowledge that is required to develop
argument mining. It is briefly reported in this pa-
per. Then, the Generative Lexicon (GL) is shown to

79



be an appropriate model, sufficiently expressive, to
characterize the types of knowledge, inferences and
lexical data that are required to accurately identify
arguments related to an issue. The present contribu-
tion focuses on the next stage: given a set of argu-
ments for or against an issue that have been mined
in various texts, how to generate a synthesis that is
consistent, well-structured and usable?

2 Mining Arguments: the need of
knowledge

To explore and characterize the forms of knowl-
edge that are required to develop argument mining
in texts, we constructed and annotated four corpora
based on four independent controversial issues. The
texts considered are extracts from various sources,
e.g.: newspaper articles and blogs from associations.
Issues deal with (1) Ebola vaccination, (2) women’s
situation in India, (3) nuclear plants and (4) organic
agriculture. The total corpus includes 51 texts, a
total of 24500 words for 122 different arguments.
From our manual analysis, the following argument
polarities are observed: attacks: 51 occurrences,
supports: 32, argumentative concessions: 17, argu-
mentative contrasts: 18 and undetermined: 4.

Our analysis shows that for 95 arguments (78%),
some form of knowledge is involved to establish an
argumentative relation with an issue. An impor-
tant result is that the number of concepts involved is
not very large: 121 concepts for 95 arguments over
4 domains. These concepts are mainly related to
purposes, functions, parts, properties, creation and
development of the concepts in the issues. These
are relatively well defined and implemented in the
Qualia structure of the Generative Lexicon, which is
the framework adopted in our modeling.

The Generative Lexicon (GL) (Pustejovsky, 1995)
is an attempt to structure lexical semantics knowl-
edge in conjunction with domain knowledge. In the
GL, the Qualia structure of an entity is a kind of
lexical and knowledge repository composed of four
fields called roles:
- the constitutive role describes the various parts of
the entity and its physical properties, it may include
subfields such as material, parts, shape, etc.
- the formal role describes what distinguishes the
entity from other objects,

- the telic role describes the entity functions, uses,
roles and purposes,
- the agentive role describes the origin of the entity,
how it was created or produced.

Let us consider the controversial issue (1): The
vaccine against Ebola is necessary. The Qualia
structure of the head term of (1), vaccine(X), is:

CONSTITUTIVE:
[

ACTIVE PRINCIPLE, ADJUVANT
]
,

TELIC:

MAIN: PROTECT FROM(X,Y,D),AVOID(X,DISSEMINATION(D)),
MEANS: INJECT(Z,X,Y)

,
FORMAL:

[
MEDICINE, ARTEFACT

]
,

AGENTIVE :

[
DEVELOP(T,X), TEST(T,X),
SELL(T,X)

]


The Qualia structure of Ebola is:

FORMAL:
[

VIRUS, DISEASE
]
,

TELIC:

[
INFECT(E1,EBOLA,P)⇒ GET SICK(E2,P)
⇒ 3DIE(E3,P) ∧ E1≤E2 ≤E3

]


Then, via formula expansion, the formal repre-
sentation of the controversial issue is:
2 (protect from(X,Y, (infect(E1,ebola, Y) ⇒
get sick(E2,Y)⇒ 3 die(E3,Y)))
∧ avoid(X,dissemination(ebola)).
3 Generation of an argument synthesis

related to a controversial issue

3.1 A Network of Qualias to Characterize the
Generative Expansion of Arguments

Our observations show that arguments attack or sup-
port (1) specific concepts found in the Qualia of the
head terms in the controversial issue (called root
concepts) or (2) concepts derived from these root
concepts, via their Qualia. For example, arguments
can attack properties or purposes of the adjuvant or
of the protocols used to test the vaccine. Then, a
network of Qualias must be defined to develop the
argument synthesis. This network is limited to three
levels because derived concepts must remain func-
tionally close to the root concepts.

A Qualia Qi describes major features of a concept
such as vaccine(X), it can be formally defined as
follows:
Qi : [ RX : T

i,X
j ], where:

80



- RX denotes the four roles: X ∈
{formal, constitutive, agentive, telic} and
possibly subroles,
- T i,Xj is a term which is a formula, a predicate or a
constant Tj in the role X of Qi.

A network of Qualias is then defined as follows:
- nodes are of two types: [terminal concept] (no asso-
ciated Qualia) or [non terminal concept, associated
Qualia],
- the root is the semantic representation of the con-
troversial issue and the related Qualias Qi,
- Step 1: the first level of the network is composed
of the nodes which correspond to the terms T i,Xj in
the roles of the Qualias Qi The result of this step is
the set T of terminal nodes { T i,Xj } and non termi-
nal nodes { T i,Xj , Q′i′ : [ RX : T ′i

′,X
j′ ]}.

- Step 2: similarly, the terms T ′i
′,X

j′ from the Q
′
i′ of

step 1 introduce new nodes into the network together
with their own Qualia when they are non-terminal
concepts. They form the set T ′, derived from T.
- Step 3: the same operation is carried out on T ′ to
produce T ′′.
- Final step: production of T ′′′. The set of concepts
involved is: {T ∪ T ′ ∪ T ′′ ∪ T ′′′}.

This network of Qualias forms the backbone of
the argument mining system. This network devel-
ops the argumentative generative expansion of
the controversial issue. This network is the or-
ganization principle, expressed in terms of related-
ness, that guides the generation of a synthesis where
the different facets of the Qualias it contains are the
structuring principles.

3.2 Synthesis Generation Input Data

Arguments which have been mined are automati-
cally tagged with the following attributes:
- the argument identifier (an integer),
- the identifier of what the argument attacks or
supports (issue or another argument),
- the text span involved that delimits the argument
compound and its kernel,
- the polarity of the argument w.r.t. the issue with
one of the following values: support, attack, argu-
mentative concession or contrast.
- the concepts involved, to identify the argument:
list of the main concepts from the Qualias used in
the mining process,

- the strength of the argument, based on linguistic
marks found in the argument,
- the discourse structures in the compound, associ-
ated with the argument kernel, as processed by our
discourse analysis platform TextCoop.

Argument 11 is tagged as follows:
<argument Id= 11, polarity= attack with concession, re-
lationWith=issue, conceptsInvolved= efficiency measure,
safety measure, test, evaluation method, strength= mod-
erate >
<concession> Even if the vaccine seems 100% efficient
and without any side effects on the tested population,
< /concession>
<main arg> it is necessary to wait for more conclu-
sive data before making large vaccination campaigns.
< /main arg>
<elaboration> The national authority of Guinea has ap-
proved the continuation of the tests on targeted popula-
tions. </elaboration> < /argument>.

At this stage no metadata is considered such as
date of argument or author status. This notation was
defined independently of any ongoing task such as
ConLL15.

Argument kernels are expressed in various ways:
- evaluative expressions: Vaccine development is
very costly, adjuvant is toxic,
- comparatives: number of sick people much
smaller than for Malaria.
- facts related to properties of the main concept(s)
of the issue: Vaccine is not yet available. There is
no risk of dissemination.
- facts related to the consequences, functions,
purposes, uses or goals of the issue: vaccine pre-
vents bio-terrorism, 3 vaccinated people died.

An indicative evaluation provides an accuracy of
about 82% of the mining and tagging processes
compared to our manual annotation.

3.3 A Multi-facet Argument Synthesis
Generation

The network of Qualias together with the attributes
‘relationWith’, ’Polarity’ and ’ConceptsInvolved’
are the most crucial elements to generate a struc-
tured argument synthesis that corresponds to the do-
main conceptual organization. Each node of the
Qualia network defines a cluster to which mined ar-
guments are associated. Clusters are organized hi-
erarchically by decreasing relatedness to the issue.

81



Redundant arguments characterized by lexical du-
plicates are eliminated.

The generation of a synthesis proceeds informally
as follows:
(1) The concepts of the network of Qualias are or-
ganized hierarchically and by role. Level 0 of the
synthesis contains the concepts T i,Xj of the set T ,
since they are the most relevant. They are organized
by role: constitutive, agentive and telic (which is the
main role for argument mining). Each concept in a
role is considered separately. In the telic role, the
list starts by the ’Main’ category and then the other
types are considered, such as ’Means’.
(2) Each of these concepts defines a cluster that
contains the mined arguments that have this con-
cept in their ‘conceptsInvolved’ attribute, with the
constraint that the argument concerns the issue (re-
lationWith=issue), the other arguments are treated
as presented in (6). For example, the concept
sell(T,X) includes the mined argument with the
value production costs its its attribute ’conceptsIn-
volved’.
(3) This process goes on with the lower levels of the
network of Qualias: the concepts T ′i

′,X
j′ associated

with the Qualias Qi′ are considered and then, the
sets T ′′ and T ′′′ defined in 3.1.
(4) When an argument involves several concepts, it
is included into the concept cluster that is the highest
in the network of concepts.
(5) For each concept, related arguments are struc-
tured by polarity: first supports and then attacks, for
each of polarity, arguments are listed, with an indi-
cation of their number of occurrences found while
mining to give an estimate of their recurrence.
(6) To deal with the generation of a more compre-
hensive graph of attacks and supports, a further stage
of the generation process consists in considering that
each argument that has been mined can also be an
issue which can be attacked or supported. This is
specified in the attribute ‘relationWith’. Therefore,
the same process as for the controversial issue is ap-
plied, while keeping the same network of Qualias.

Let us consider our example on vaccination, then:
(a) the root concepts (Level 0) in the Qualia hierar-
chy are those of vaccine and ebola, e.g.: constitu-
tive: active principle, adjuvant; agentive: develop,
test, sell; telic: protect-from, dissemination, infect,

get-sick, die, inject.
(b) Level 1 concepts are those associated with the
Qualias of the root concepts given in (a), e.g. those
in the Qualias of: adjuvant (e.g. dilute), tests (e.g.
efficiency measure, evaluation methods), develop
(e.g. production costs, availability, ethics), etc.
For example, a synthesis would be composed of the
following clusters:
Level 0: e.g.:
Cluster 1: Adjuvant: attack: adjuvant is toxic (3 oc-
currences) ...
Cluster 2: Dissemination: support: reduces dissemi-
nation (5)..
Cluster 3: Get-sick: concessive support: limited
number of cases and deaths compared to other dis-
eases (2), ...
Level 1:, e.g.:
Cluster 4: Production costs: attack: high production
and development costs (6) ...
Cluster 5: Availability: concessive attack: vaccine
not yet available (4), etc.

Finally, in order to make the synthesis based on
Qualia network structure more clear, each of the
concepts is associated with a simple and direct defi-
nition, directly generated via language patterns from
the Qualia structure network, e.g.:
- Side-effect and toxicity are related to the use of a
medicine,
- Contamination entails disease dissemination.
- Population isolation avoids disease dissemination.
- Production costs are related to the creation and de-
velopment of any product,
- Efficiency must be measured during the test phase.
These definitions are defined for each cluster. The
result is a hierarchically organized and well articu-
lated set of clusters that account for the various argu-
ments for or against an issue found in various texts,
where each level is made clear to the reader. No
evaluation of the relevance of this type of clustering
technique has been carried out so far. This evalua-
tion should involve the analysis of the adequacy of
this clustering technique by real users, its granular-
ity and its adequacy to the problem to investigate. It
may also depend on the type of issue and arguments
that have been mined. Deeper forms of argument
synthesis could be desirable, but these involve com-
plex conceptual planning issues. To the best of our
knowledge, such a task has never been undertaken.

82



References
K., Budzynska, M., Janier, C., Reed, P. Saint-Dizier, M.,

Stede, and O. Yakorska. 2014. A model for processing
illocutionary structures and argumentation in debates.
In proc. LREC, 2014.

V. W., Feng and G, Hirst. 2011. Classifying arguments
by scheme. In Proceedings of the 49th ACL: Human
Language Technologies, Portland, USA.

A., Fiedler and H., Horacek. 2007. Argumentation within
deductive reasoning. International Journal of Intelli-
gent Systems, 22(1):49-70.

M., Janier, C. and Reed, C. 2015. Towards a Theory of
Close Analysis for Dispute Mediation Discourse, Jour-
nal of Argumentation.

C., Kirschner, J., Eckle-Kohler and I., Gurevych. 2015.
Linking the Thoughts: Analysis of Argumentation
Structures in Scientific Publications. In: Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation Mining, Den-
ver.

R., Mochales Palau and M.F., Moens. 2009. Argumenta-
tion mining: the detection, classification and structure
of arguments in text. Twelfth international ICAIL’09,
Barcelona.

H., Nguyen and D. Litman. 2015. Extracting Argument
and Domain Words for Identifying Argument Compo-
nents in Texts. In: Proc of the 2nd Workshop on Argu-
mentation Mining, Denver.

A., Peldszus and M., Stede. 2016. From argument dia-
grams to argumentation mining in texts: a survey. In-
ternational Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natu-
ral Intelligence (IJCINI).

J., Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon, MIT
Press.

P. Saint-Dizier. 2016. Argument Mining: the bottleneck
of knowledge and lexical ressources, LREC, Portoroz.

R., Swanson, B., Ecker and M., Walker. 2015. Argument
Mining: Extracting Arguments from Online Dialogue,
in proc. SIGDIAL.

M.G., Villalba and P., Saint-Dizier. 2012. Some Facets
of Argument Mining for Opinion Analysis, COMMA,
Vienna, IOS Publishing.

M., Walker, P., Anand, J.E., Fox Tree, R., Abbott and
J., King. 2012. A Corpus for Research on Deliberation
and Debate. Proc. of LREC, Istanbul.

G., Winterstein. 2012. What but-sentences argue for: An
argumentative analysis of ’but’, in Lingua 122.

I., Zuckerman, R., McConachy and K. Korb. 2000. Us-
ing Argumentation Strategies in Automatic Argument
Generation, INLG.

83


