



















































Tense and Aspect in Runyankore Using a Context-Free Grammar


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 84–88,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tense and Aspect in Runyankore using a Context-Free Grammar

Joan Byamugisha and C. Maria Keet and Brian DeRenzi
Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town, South Africa,

{jbyamugisha,mkeet,bderenzi}@cs.uct.ac.za

Abstract

The provision of personalized patient infor-
mation has been encouraged as a means of
complementing information provided during
patient-doctor consultations, and linked to bet-
ter health outcomes through patient compli-
ance with prescribed treatments. The gener-
ation of such texts as a controlled fragment of
Runyankore, a Bantu language indigenous to
Uganda, requires the appropriate tense and as-
pect, as well as a method for verb conjugation.
We present how an analysis of corpora of ex-
planations of prescribed medications was used
to identify the simple present tense and pro-
gressive aspect as appropriate for our selected
domain. A CFG is defined to conjugate and
generate the correct form of the verb.

1 Introduction

In Uganda, patients receive medical information ver-
bally during the patient-doctor consultation. How-
ever, DiMarco et al., (2005; 2006) and Wilcox et al.,
(2011) noted that patients consistently retain a rather
small fraction of the verbal information after the
consultation, possibly resulting in improper compli-
ance to medical instructions. Further, it was found
that personalized information increases the likeli-
hood for a patient to be more engaged and likely to
read, comprehend, and act upon such information
better (Cawsey et al., 2000; Wilcox et al., 2011).

The fundamental complexity in the customiza-
tion of patient information is the number of different
combinations of characteristics, which can easily be
in the tens or hundreds of thousands (DiMarco et
al., 2005). Natural Language Generation (NLG) has

successfully been applied to generate personalized
patient information (DiMarco et al., 2005; DiMarco
et al., 2006; De Carolis et al., 1996; de Rosis and
Grasso, 2000).

Localized patient information is encouraged be-
cause the use of English exacerbates literacy diffi-
culties already prevalent in situations of health (Di-
Marco et al., 2009). Our broader programme of
NLG for Bantu languages aims to apply NLG to
generate drug explanations in Runyankore—a Bantu
language indigenous to Uganda, where English is
the official language, but indigenous languages are
predominantly spoken in rural areas. Runyankore
sentences generated through ontology verbalization
(Byamugisha et al., 2016) exposed two crucial is-
sues: (1) What tense and aspect is used in explana-
tions of prescribed medication? and (2) Is a context-
free grammar (CFG) sufficient to conjugate verbs in
Runyankore? Through the analysis of two relevant
corpora, we identify that the simple present (uni-
versal) tense with the progressive aspect would be
best for generating explanations of prescribed med-
ications. We demonstrate that this can be done for
Runyankore using a CFG for verb conjugation.

In the rest of the paper, we first summarize the
Runyankore verbal morphology (Section 2) and re-
lated work (Section 3). Section 4 presents the cor-
pus analysis. The relevant CFGs for the Runyankore
verb are presented in Section 5. We discuss in Sec-
tion 6 and conclude in Section 7.

2 Verbal Morphology of Runyankore

Runyankore is a Bantu language spoken in the south
western part of Uganda by over two million people,

84



which makes it one of the top five most populous
languages in Uganda (Asiimwe, 2014; Tayebwa,
2014; Turamyomwe, 2011). Like other Bantu lan-
guages, it is highly agglutinative to the extent that
a word can be composed of over five constituents
(Asiimwe, 2014; Tayebwa, 2014). Runyankore has
twenty noun classes, (NC), and each noun belongs
to a specific class.

Our discussion of tense and aspect in Runyankore
throughout this paper is based on work done by Tu-
ramyomwe (2011). The standard classification of
tense by dividing time into past, present, and future
is further subdivided, resulting in fourteen tenses.
Aspect focuses on the internal nature of events, in-
stead of their grounding in time. There are two ma-
jor aspects: the perfective and imperfective the lat-
ter subdivided into persistive, habitual, and continu-
ous, with the progressive as a subtype of the contin-
uous). Runyankore expresses tense as prefixes and
aspect as affixes to the right of the verb stem. Table
2 shows the different ‘slots’ in Runyankore’s ver-
bal morphology. We illustrate the general structure
of the Runyankore verbal morphology, where neg is
negation, RM is remote past, VS is verb stem, App is
applicative, FV is final vowel, Loc is locative, Emp
is emphatic, and Dec is declarative.

- titukakimureeterahoganu
‘We have never ever brought it to him’

- ti tu ka ki mu reet er a ho ga nu
- neg-(NC2 SC)-RM-(NC7 SC)-(NC1 SC)-VS-

App-FV-Loc-Emp-Dec
The compulsory slots are the initial, formative (ex-
cept in the case of the universal and near past tense),
verb-stem, and final.

3 Related work

We center our discussion here around the existing
methods of verb conjugation for tense and aspect
in agglutinated languages like Tamil (Rajan et al.,
2014) and Turkish (Fokkens et al., 2009). The
placement of morphemes in a word, and rules gov-
erning the combinations of morphemes to form se-
mantic categories are important in agglutinated lan-
guages (Jayan and Bhadran, 2015). Similar to Run-
yankore, the sequence of morphemes can express
mood, tense, and aspect (Rajan et al., 2014; Fokkens
et al., 2009; Turamyomwe, 2011).

There are several approaches for text genera-

Slot Grammatical
Category

Morpheme

pre-
initial

1. primary negative
2. cont. marker

1. ti-
2. ni-

initial subject marker depends on the
NC

post-
initial

secondary negative -ta-

formative tense all tenses ex-
cept near past

limitative persistive aspect -ki-
infix object marker depends on

NC
extensions App; Cs; Ps; Rec;

Rev;
Stv; Itv; Red; Ism

-er-, -erer-, -ir-
; zi-, -is-; -w-;
-n-; -ur-, -uur-
; -gur-; repeat
the stem; -is+
pre-initial

final 1. final vowel
(a) indicative,
(b) subjunctive
2. near past tense

1.
(a) -a
(b) -e
2. -ire

post-final 1. locatives
2. emphatic
3. declarative

1. -ho, -mu-yo
2. -ga
3. -nu

Table 1: Verbal Morphology of Runyankore (Turamyomwe,
2011); App: applicative, Cs: causative, Ps: passive, Rec: re-
ciprocal, Rev: reversive, Stv: stative, Itv: intensive, Red: redu-
plicative, Ism: instrumental

tion in agglutinated languages, being corpus-based,
paradigm-based, Finite-State Transducer (FST)-
based, rule-based, and algorithm-based (Antony,
2012). Some of these are currently inapplicable to
Runyankore because it is structurally different or
too under-resourced. We thus decided to implement
tense and aspect in Runyankore using a rule-based
approach, derived from a set of grammar rules and
a dictionary of roots and morphemes. A CFG is
powerful enough to depict complex relations among
words in a sentence, yet computationally tractable
enough to enable efficient algorithms to be devel-
oped (Jurafsky and Martin, 2007). Because the verb
conjugation work presented here is intended to be
one of the components in a Runyankore grammar
engine, the use of a CFG is justified.

85



4 Tense and Aspect in Prescription
Explanations

To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior work
specifically discussing tense and aspect for expla-
nations of prescribed medications. We instead an-
alyze text describing drug prescriptions from empir-
ical studies (Berry et al., 1995; Berry et al., 1997).

We limited our analysis here to the corpora from
Berry et al., (1995; 1997), compiled from a series
of empirical studies done to ascertain the kind of in-
formation patients and doctors considered important
about prescribed medication. We further only con-
sidered the tense in the main clause of the sentences
in the corpus in order to simplify our initial scope.

We analyzed 27 sentences, 18 from (Berry et al.,
1997) and 9 from (Berry et al., 1995), describing
medication prescriptions. We were interested in the
form of the verb, in order to identify the tense and as-
pect used. Table 2 shows how often each verb form
occurred in each unique sentence in the corpus.

Example Tense, Aspect |Occ.|
have simple pres. ind. 2
reduce simple pres. ind. 1
is simple pres. ind. 5
should take pres. imp. 3
contains simple pres. ind. 1
are simple pres. ind. 3
if it does not relieve pres. cond. 3
may be taken past perf. subj. 1
may cause simple pres. subj. 2
should be avoided past perf. imp. 2
do not contain simple pres. ind. 1
to store infinitive 1
are produced pres. perf. ind. 2

Table 2: Tense and Aspect used in Prescription Explanations;
pres.=present, perf.=perfect, ind.=indicative, subj=subjunctive,
imp.=imperative, cond.=conditional, occ.=occurence

The simple present tense is used in 55.5% of the
corpus, in 48.2% with the indicative aspect, and
in 7.7% with the subjunctive. The simple present
tense and indicative aspect is used in those sentences
which are informational in nature, but the present
tense and imperative aspect for those which are in-
structional (for example ‘should take Fennodil ...’
and ‘should adopt a more suitable ...’).

5 Verb Conjugation using a CFG

We devise a CFG for verb conjugation in the simple
present tense (Runyankore’s ‘universal’ tense), and
the auxiliary ‘has’ and copulative ‘is’ (from ‘to be’)
as special cases that do not conform to the standard
grammatical structure.

5.1 Universal Tense in Runyankore
The universal tense has no special tense marker, and
as such is sometimes called the null tense (Turamy-
omwe, 2011). We apply the progressive aspect,
which marks a situation which is ongoing at the time
of use. This is appropriate for informational sen-
tences such as those listed in Section 4, because this
information will always be true as long as one is on
that medication. We introduce a new non-terminal,
initial group, which, depending on the tense and as-
pect applied, has productions for one or more of the
three ‘initial’ slots (cf. Table 2). We only consider
five slots here: the pre-initial, as well as the four
compulsory ‘slots’ discussed in Section 2. We as-
sign all six nonterminals the symbols: IG for initial
group, PN for pre-initial, IT for initial, FM for
formative, V S for verb-stem, and FV for final vowl.
Finally, since this tense has no tense morpheme, we
will use the production FM → ∅ to illustrate it. The
example shows productions with verb stems kyendez
‘reduce,’ gw ‘fall,’ vug ‘drive,’ and gend ‘go’:

S → IG FM V S FV
IG → PN IT
PN → ti | ni
IT → a | o | n | tu | mu | ba | gu | gi | ri | ga | ki |

bi | e | zi | ru | tu | ka | bu | ku | gu | ga
FM → ∅
V S → kyendez | gw | vug | gend
FV → a | e | ire

The production of IT has several possible values,
depending on the noun class of the subject of the
sentence. For all verbs, except ‘has’ and ‘to be,’ FV
will always be the indicative final vowel ‘a’.

5.2 Deviations from Standard Grammar
There are two verbs which deviate from the stan-
dard Runyankore grammar: the auxiliary ‘has’ (verb
stem in) and the copulative ‘to be’ (verb stem ri).
The auxiliary deviates in two main ways: first, the
continuous marker is dropped, and second, the sub-
junctive final vowel ‘e’ is used instead. The copula-

86



tive deviates even further because it both drops the
pre-initial and has no final vowel. It is thus our de-
sign decision to use separate CFGs for these special
cases, for two main reasons: firstly, to prevent the
generation of sentences like nibaina, niguine or ni-
baria, nigurie which do not exist in the language.
Secondly, there is no way to limit the inclusion of ∅
as a terminal for PN and FV to only these special
cases, instead of having it applied to all verbs. The
CFG for ‘has’ (verb-stem -in-):

S → IG FM V S FV
IG → PN IT
PN → ∅
IT → a | o | n | tu | mu | ba | gu | gi | ri | ga | ki |

bi | e | zi | ru | tu | ka | bu | ku | gu | ga
FM → ∅
V S → in
FV → e

The CFG for the case of ‘to be’ (verb-stem -ri) is al-
most the same as for ‘have’, except for the following
two production rules:

V S → ri
FV → ∅
The CFGs show that verb conjugation can be

achieved following the grammar rules on the verbal
morphology. We have limited our non-terminals to
six, only those necessary to generate text in our se-
lected tense and aspect. However, by including more
of the grammatical categories presented in Table 2,
it would be possible to create the rules to generate
many more tenses and aspects.

The patterns for generating Runyankore sentences
from ontologies required a method for verb con-
jugation in order to generate correct text. We
thus illustrate the use of the CFG in this con-
text, using a sentence taken from the corpus by
(Berry et al., 1997), which we modify and repre-
sent as a side effect in the example Fennodil v
∃hasSideEffect.Diarrhea: Buri Fennodil eine
hakiri ekirikurugamu kitagyendereirwe kimwe ekya
okwirukana ‘Each Fennodil has at least one side ef-
fect of diarrhea’. According to Byamugisha et al.,
(2016), Buri is the translation of ‘each’ for subsump-
tion (v), eine for ‘has’, hakiri for ‘at least’, and
kimwe for ‘one’; ekirikurugamu kitagyendereirwe is
‘side effect’, and okwirukana is ‘diarrhea’. The eine
‘has’ has e as the subject prefix because Fennodil is
placed in NC 9. With the CFG, one can thus gener-

ate several variations for ‘has’ that occur whenever
a noun in a different NC is to the left of v in the ax-
iom; for example aine, baine, giine, riine for NC 1,
2, 4, and 5 respectively.

6 Discussion

The identification of the tense and aspect relevant to
our domain of interest—explanations of prescribed
medications—through the analysis of corpora on
medicine prescription enabled us to narrow down
the scope of the text to be generated, in terms of
tense and aspect, to only the simple present (uni-
versal) tense and continuous aspect. It is interesting
that the present tense is appropriate for our target do-
main, because an ontology will be the input of our
NLG system. Therefore, the consideration of gener-
ation of sentences, for example with the verb ‘has,’
mirrors axioms which either have ‘has’ as a role or
the ‘hasX’ role naming, such as hasSymptom. In
this way, our work here builds upon (Byamugisha et
al., 2016) to verbalize ontologies in Runyankore, by
solving two crucial issues: which tense and aspect
to use, and how to achieve verb conjugation.

The use of CFGs allows for easy extensibility
both to more tenses, and perhaps even other Bantu
languages. For the case of tenses, we would only
need to add new rules. The near past tense, for ex-
ample, can be generated by changing the rule on
FM from FM → ∅ to FM → ka. CFGs for
other Bantu languages can be produced by stating
language-specific rules and terminals.

7 Conclusion

Through the analysis of corpora of prescription ex-
planations, we identified that the simple present
tense and progressive aspect were most suitable
when generating informational drug explanations.
Therefore, a CFG for universal tense, the auxiliary
verb ‘has’, and the copulative was developed. Fu-
ture work will include the implementation of these
CFGs, inclusion of the imperative aspect, and eval-
uating the generated messages.

Acknowledgements
This work is based on the research supported by the
Hasso Plattner Institute (HPI) Research School in
CS4A at UCT and the National Research Founda-
tion of South Africa (Grant Number 93397).

87



References

K P Antony, P J an Samon. 2012. Computational mor-
phology and natural language parsing for indian lan-
guages: A literature survey. International Journal of
Scientific and Engineering Research, 3.

Allen Asiimwe. 2014. Definiteness and Specificity in
Runyankore-Rukiga. Ph.D. thesis, Stallenbosch Uni-
versity, Cape Town, South Africa.

C. Dianne Berry, Tony Gillie, and Simon Banbury. 1995.
What do patients want to know: An empirical ap-
proach to explanation generation and validation. Ex-
pert Systems with Applications, 8:419 — 428.

C. Dianne Berry, C. Irene Michas, Tony Gillie, and
Melanie Forster. 1997. What do patients want to know
about their medicines and what do doctors want to tell
them: A comparative study. Psychology and Health,
12:467–480.

Joan Byamugisha, C. Maria Keet, and Brian DeRenzi.
2016. Bootstrapping a runyankore CNL from an
isizulu CNL. In 5th Workshop on Controlled Natural
Language, Aberdeen, Scotland. Springer.

J. Alison Cawsey, B. Ray Jones, and Janne Pearson.
2000. The evaluation of a personalized health infor-
mation system for patients with cancer. User Model-
ing and User-Adapted Interaction, 10(1):47–72.

Berardina De Carolis, Fiorella de Rosis, Floriana Grasso,
Anna Rossiello, C. Dianne Berry, and Tony Gillie.
1996. Generating recipient-centered explanations
about drug prescription. Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine.

Fiorella de Rosis and Floriana Grasso. 2000. Affective
natural language generation. In Affective Interactions,
LANI, pages 204 – 218.

Chrysanne DiMarco, Peter Bray, Dominic Covvey, Don
Cowan, Vic DiCiccio, Eduard Hovy, Joan Lipa, and
Cathy Yang. 2005. Authoring and generation of
tailored preoperative patient education materials. In
Workshop on Personalization in e-Health, User Mod-
eling, Conference, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Chrysanne DiMarco, Don Cowan, Peter Bray, Dominic
Covvey, Vic DiCiccio, Eduard Hovy, Joan Lipa, and
Doug Mulholland. 2006. A physician’s authoring tool
for generation of personalized health education in re-
constructive surgery. In American Association for Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AAAI) Spring Symposium on Ar-
gumentation for Consumers of Healthcare, Stanford
University.

Chrysanne DiMarco, David Wiljer, and Eduard Hovy.
2009. Self-managed access to personalized health-
care through automated generation of tailored health
educational materials from electronic health records.
In American Association for Artificial Intelligence

(AAAI) Fall Symposium on Virtual Health Interaction,
Washington D. C.

Antske Fokkens, Laurie Paulson, and M. Emily Bender.
2009. Inflectional morphology in turkish VP coordi-
nation. In The HPSG09, Germany.

V. Jayan and V. K. Bhadran. 2015. Difficulties in pro-
cessing malayalam verbs for statistical machine trans-
lation. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
and Applications (IJAIA), 6.

Daniel Jurafsky and H. James Martin. 2007. Speech
and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natu-
ral Language Processing, Computational Linguistics,
and Speech Recognition. Prentice Hall, Inc., USA.

K. Rajan, V. Ramalingam, and M. Ganesan. 2014. Ma-
chine learning of phonologically conditioned noun de-
clensions for tamil morphological generators. Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Engineering and Applica-
tions, 4.

Doreen Daphine Tayebwa. 2014. Demonstrative deter-
miners in runyankore-rukiga. Master’s thesis, Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology, Norway.

Justus Turamyomwe. 2011. Tense and aspect in
runyankore-rukiga: Linguistic resources and analysis.
Master’s thesis, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Norway.

Lauren Wilcox, Dan Morris, Desney Tan, Justin Gate-
wood, and Eric Horvitz. 2011. Characterising patient-
friendly micro-explanations of medical events. In The
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI’11), pages 29–32, New York. ACM.

88


