



















































Searching Four-Millenia-Old Digitized Documents: A Text Retrieval System for Egyptologists


Proceedings of the 10th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH), pages 22–31,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Searching Four-Millenia-Old Digitized Documents:
A Text Retrieval System for Egyptologists

Estı́baliz Iglesias-Franjo and Jesús Vilares
Grupo Lengua Y Sociedad de la Información (LYS), Departamento de Computación

Facultade de Informática, Universidade da Coruña
Campus de A Coruña, 15071 – A Coruña (Spain)

{estibaliz.ifranjo, jesus.vilares}@udc.es

Abstract

Progress made in recent years has led to a
growing interest in Digital Heritage. This
article focuses on Egyptology and, more
specifically, the study and preservation of
ancient Egyptian scripts. We present a
Text Retrieval system developed specifi-
cally to work with hieroglyphic texts. We
intend to make it freely available to the
research community. To the best of our
knowledge this is the first tool of its kind.

1 Introduction

Until recently, the development of Information
Retrieval (IR) systems has mainly focused on con-
temporary languages. From a socio-economic
point of view, this makes perfect sense since our
needs, as users, are connected to our everyday
tasks, which we develop in our languages. Why
should we pay attention to dead languages such
as Ancient Egyptian? Our civilization was born
in Mesopotamia and Egypt, and the culture of
Pharaohs has fascinated us for decades and even
centuries. Even nowadays, Egyptology continues
to be one of the major branches of Archaeology
and it is not unusual to find, from time to time, that
new discoveries in this field open our news bul-
letins. Moreover, Egyptian is the longest-attested
language, it thus becoming a particularly valuable
object of research for Diachronic Linguists (Lo-
prieno, 1995). However, neither should we forget
its intrinsic value as one of the most representative
elements of one of the most important human civi-
lizations of all time. Egyptian Hieroglyphic script
is a major component of our cultural heritage and,
for that very reason, we should put particular em-
phasis on its preservation and study.

At this point, we need to introduce Digital Her-
itage, the scientific area that focuses on the use

of computing and information technologies for
the preservation and study of the human cultural
legacy for current and future generations.

In this context, this work describes an open
source Text Information Retrieval (TIR) system
designed specifically for the processing of Egyp-
tian Hieroglyphic scripts. To the best of our
knowledge this is the first tool of its kind.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
Firstly, Section 2 makes an introduction to Ancient
Egyptian. Secondly, Section 3 describes how to
encode hieroglyphic texts. Previous related work
is outlined in Section 4. Next, the requirements of
our system are analysed in Section 5, which is then
described in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 presents
our contributions and future work.

2 Language and Writing System

2.1 History

As previously commented, Egyptian (Allen, 2014;
Loprieno, 1995; Cervelló-Autuori, 2015) is the
longest-attested human language, with a docu-
mented history that spans several millenia, from
about 3300 BC until the present day, when it is
still used by the Coptic Christian Church in its rit-
uals. Of course, it has undergone profund changes
throughout its lifetime. So, we can distinguish two
main phases in its development: Earlier Egyptian,
whose writing system corresponds to the stereo-
typical image we have of Egyptian and that lasted
as a spoken language from its origins until after
1300 BC; and Later Egyptian, which started to be
used at that time and, after continuous evolution,
survived until the 11th century AD as a productive
language and until today as the ritual language of
the Coptic Church. Our work focuses on Earlier
Egyptian because of its archaelogical interest, in
particular in the so-called Middle or Classic Egyp-
tian, which remained as the traditional language

22



of hieroglyphic inscriptions until the fifth century
AD, thus still being widely used in royal inscrip-
tions, religious literature and monuments. From
now on, unless we specify the contrary, we will be
referring to Middle Egyptian when using the terms
“Ancient Egyptian” or just “Egyptian” for short.

2.2 Characteristics

Egyptian belongs to the Afro-Asiatic language
family, the same as contemporary languages such
as Arabic, Hebrew and Berber, although Egyptian
constitutes a subfamily of its own.

As in the case of early Arabic and Hebrew,
Egyptian is a consonantal language since its words
are formed from a consonantal root with vow-
els being used to indicate inflectional or derived
forms. For the same reason, only consonants are
written.

Its writing system is pictographic since its
signs, or hieroglyphs, consist of symbols portray-
ing beings and elements of the Egyptian world:
parts of the human body ( #: an eye), plants
(
0
: a reed), animals ( I: a pintail duck), objects

( %: a mast with sail), etc.
It is also logographic since some, but not all,

symbols have a meaning that corresponds, directly
or indirectly (e.g. through a cultural, metonymic
or metaphoric relation), to the same real-word ele-
ment they reproduce. For example: # , an eye for
eye; and % , a mast with sail for wind.

Egyptian writing system is phonographic too,
since part of its signs depict sounds. For example,
? for the phoneme /χ/, transliterated as x.

Finally, Ancient Egyptian had an inherently
“open” writing system with no fixed alphabet.
The number of available signs progressively in-
creased from about 800 hieroglyphs in the Old
Kingdom period to more than 5,000 in the Greco-
Roman period. Moreover, new symbols and vari-
ants continue to be discovered when ancient texts
are analyzed (Rosmorduc, 2003a).

2.3 Sign Types

In contrast with the formerly-held common belief
that Egyptian writing system is a purely symbolic
one, its script is mainly phonetical and combines
different types of signs.

The first group are the phonograms or phonetic
signs. In these signs the image carries no mean-
ing whatsoever, being used by convention to rep-
resent the sounds of language. We can distinguish

Figure 1: The four possible ways of writing the
prenomen of Ramesses II by varying its direction.

three types of phonograms according to the num-
ber of consonantal sounds represented, from one
to three: uniliterals, e.g. ? (x),1; biliterals, e.g.

I (sA); and triliterals, e.g.  (xpr).
The other group are the semagrams. In this

case, the image of the sign participates directly
in the codification and the significance of the lin-
guistic message. In turn, we can distinguish two
types of semagrams. Firstly, the ideograms (aka
logograms) or lexical signs. They represent the
things they actually depict and, consequently, are
read that way. For example # , that depicts an eye
and represents the word irt, which means “eye”;
and " , which depicts a scribe’s kit and is read
sxA, used for “write” and related words. The sec-
ond type are the determinatives or semantic signs.
These signs are placed at the end of a word to indi-
cate that it corresponds to a given semantic group.
They are of great importance since they allow the
reader to differentiate between words that have
the same consonantal representation but different
meaning. Unlike ideograms, determinatives are
silent so they are not read. As an example, given
the above-mentioned ideogram " , and the deter-
minatives  (category [WRITING - ABSTRACT
NOTIONS]) and  (category [MAN - HUMAN BE-
ING]), the word " ( means “to write” while the
word " means “scribe”.

It should be noted that the same glyph may
belong to more than one category at once. For
example, depending on the context, C can be
interpreted as the biliteral phonogram mw, the
ideogram mw (which means “water”) or the de-
terminative [WATER - LIQUIDS].

2.4 Writing Direction
Egyptian writing system is very flexible with re-
gard to its direction of writing, which is not fixed.

1Where appropriate we will indicate the transliteration
corresponding to the hieroglyphic text in question.

23



Hieroglyphic texts can be found written in hori-
zontal rows, as with English and Arabic, or in ver-
tical columns, as with traditional Japanese, Chi-
nese and Mongolian. Moreover, although they are
always read from top to bottom, they may follow
a left-to-right ordering, as with English and Mon-
golian, or a right-to-left ordering, as with Arabic
and Japanese. The reason for such a variety comes
from the fact that Egyptian hieroglyphic script had
a marked artistic nature (Cervelló-Autuori, 2015).
It was intended to be carved or painted in monu-
ments, walls, jewels, etc., even taking part of the
scene itself (Rosmorduc, 2003a), and since one
of the main characteristics of Egyptian art was its
symmetry, they required their writing to adapt to
it. Figure 1 presents a good example of its variety.

2.5 Sign Arrangement

Another remarkable feature is continuous writing,
in which all the words run together with no di-
viders to separate words or phrases. This is also
characteristic of some contemporary languages
such as Chinese or Japanese, where no word sep-
arators are used. For example, in the case of the
text

0 M 
"
O M H!

! 
B
#   (iw Apdw Hr nht), it

stands for “The birds are on the sycamore”.
Additionally, hieroglyphs were not arranged

one after the other, in a linear way, as in the case
of our writing system. Instead, scribes gathered
them in so-called groups, trying to fill the space
available neatly, in a way which resembles con-
temporary Hangul Korean script. Thus, as shown
above, “sycamore” was not written B #  

 
(nht),

but B#   instead.
This arrangement depended, of course, on the

words to be written, but also on several principles
or heuristics (Cervelló-Autuori, 2015) the scribe
followed in order to obtain the most harmonious
and aesthetic arrangement possible.

3 Encoding Hieroglyphic Texts

Egyptologists and Linguists needed a practical
way to represent hieroglyphic texts without having
to re-draw their signs. The problem was solved by
using regular characters to encode those texts.

3.1 Gardiner’s List and the Extended
Library

Named after its creator, the Egyptologist Sir Alan
Gardiner (1957), Gardiner’s List, a standard ref-
erence in the study of Egyptian, classifies its signs

Symbol Operation Example
- concatenation Q3-X1-Z4-N1 "  % 
: subordination X1:Z4:N1  % 
* juxtaposition Q3*X1:Z4 "  %
() grouping Q3*(X1:Z4):N1 "  % 

Table 1: Sign arrangement operators in MdC.

into 26 categories according to their drawing, each
one identified with a letter: category A corre-
sponds to “Man and his occupations” (  !" . . . );
B to “Woman and her occupations” (  ! " . . . );
etc. In turn, hieroglyphs within each category
are numbered sequentially so a given sign can be
coded using the letter of its category and its corre-
sponding number. For example, the code E8 cor-
responds to the sign ' (“goat kid”), the eigth
element of category E (“Mammals”). This clas-
sification includes the most common hieroglyphs
(743 signs and 20 variants), enabling us to encode
a significant proportion of the texts.

In the 1990s, this list was largely extended to
include newly identified signs and variants, thus
becoming the so-called Extended Library (Grimal
et al., 2000), with 4706 symbols. Gardiner’s clas-
sification was not modified since new signs were
numbered after the existing ones, and variants of
existing signs were codified by attaching an extra
letter to its code. For example, the symbol (
(code E8a) was added as variant of ' (code E8).

3.2 Manuel de Codage and its Dialects
In the 1980s, the International Association of
Egyptologists (IAE)2 formed a committee with the
aim of developing a standard encoding system
for the digitalization of hieroglyphic texts. The
resulting document was the Manuel de Codage
(MdC) (Buurman et al., 1988), an evolution of
Gardiner’s List (later adapted to the Extended Li-
brary) where new codes and rules were added
for the accurate representation of hieroglyphs and
other features of Egyptian writing system by using
ASCII text. Next, we introduce an overview of the
most significant additions.

3.2.1 Sign Operators
Table 1 shows, in order of precedence, the basic
operators for arranging the signs. Thus, return-
ing to our previous example, B#   (“sycamore”) is
N35:O4*X1-M1.

2http://www.iae-egyptology.org/

24



(a) (b) (c)

(b) <-N5-F12*C10-N36-M17*(Y5:N35)->
(c) <-N5-(F12#13)*C10-N36#13-M17*(Y5:N35)->

Figure 2: (a) Photo of a damaged cartouche
showing the prenomem of Pharaoh Ramesses III;
(b) MdC code corresponding to the undamaged
cartouche and the output obtained from it with
JSESH; and (c) MdC code corresponding to the
shaded cartouche and its corresponding output.

Figure 3: Example of a handwritten entry, then
printed lithographically, from Faulkner (2006).

3.2.2 Damaged Texts
The majority of the hieroglyphics that have sur-
vived until the present day have suffered the ef-
fects of time, exposure, vandalism, etc. So, one
of the specific problems to be faced in this context
was the representation of these texts in the most in-
formative way. This matter was solved by the use
of shades, implemented as special marks attached
to the sign codes and which allow us to express
whether the sign or even its presence is recogniz-
able or not, how many signs are affected, which
parts of them are damaged, etc. Figure 2 shows a
simple example of their use.

3.2.3 Non-Hieroglyphic Text
MdC includes encoding support for combining hi-
eroglyphs, transliterations, translations and other
types of annotation within the same text. It as-
sumes that all text is hieroglyphic unless it is en-
closed between a given set of marks; for example
’+l’ (opening) and ’+s’ (closing) for enclosing
regular text encoded in Latin script.

3.2.4 Dialects
Although the MdC should have been taken as
the encoding standard for hieroglyphic text edi-
tors (see Section 4), the developers of these sys-
tems instead established their own particular spec-

ifications taking the MdC as their base, thus giv-
ing birth to different dialects. This meant that,
in practice, with a few exceptions, a text writ-
ten with a given program can not be opened and
edited with another one unless it has been previ-
ously rewritten in the new notation. This fact not
only makes it difficult to share documents between
researchers and establish common corpora (Goz-
zoli, 2013), but also decreases the lifespan of those
dialects and their encoded documents because of
their dependence on that particular software they
were created with and the fonts they use (Neder-
hof, 2013).

3.3 Unicode

As stated by Mark-Jan Nederhof (2013), the case
of the inclusion of Egyptian Hieroglyphs in Uni-
code is a very good illustration of the troubles
derived from trying to adapt other writing sys-
tems to Egyptian and its peculiarities. The pro-
cess took more than a decade from the first pro-
posal to its inclusion in Unicode 5.2. The list of
available signs contains 1071 hieroglyphs (range
U+13000..U+1342F) including the original Gar-
diner’s List, its supplements and some other sym-
bols (Everson and Richmond, 2007). Unfortu-
nately, Unicode hieroglyphs encoding is limited
by the lack of important features such as the avail-
ability of shading mechanisms, sign grouping or
varied writing directionality (Richmond, 2015),
thus making it a non-practical choice for many
tasks.

3.4 Revised Encoding Scheme

Seeking to solve the current limitations of
MdC, the above-mentioned software- and font-
dependence of its dialects, and the formatting lim-
itations of Unicode hieroglyphs, Mark-Jan Neder-
hof (2013) proposed the so-called Revised En-
coding Scheme (RES), which lacks such depen-
dences and includes new sign operators. Although
it requires more sophisticated processing than the
MdC because of its added complexity, future hi-
eroglyphic text processing systems will be prob-
ably influenced by this new scheme (Rosmorduc,
2015).

4 Related Work

The research community working on the appli-
cation of Computer Science to Egyptology is
small (Polis et al., 2013b). In the case of the com-

25



puter processing of hieroglyphic text, it has been
closely linked to the development of classic-style
text editors (Gozzoli, 2013; Diop, 1992; Grimal,
1990). Since there were no hieroglyphic type-
writers, scholars had to rely on handwritten texts
when writing and sharing documents, a practical
limitation that could easily lead to misinterpreta-
tions. Even in the case of books, the hieroglyphic
texts printed in their pages were very complex and
costly typographical transcriptions or, most of the
time, mere lithographical copies of those hand-
written by their authors, as shown in Figure 3, for
example. Thus, the need for hieroglyphic text pro-
cessing software was peremptory.

Among the specialized, and scarce, text pro-
cessor software developed for this purpose, we
should highlight two tools in particular. Firstly,
GLYPH (Gozzoli, 2013), developed by Jan Buur-
man, which laid the foundations of future hiero-
glyphic text processors. It was published for DOS
in 1986 and subsequently evolved and migrated to
other operating systems: MACSCRIBE for Macin-
tosh and WINGLYPH for Windows (3.1 and 95).
The second tool we want to cite is JSESH, devel-
oped by Serge Rosmorduc (2014), which is, cur-
rently and in all probability, the most widely used
word processor in Egyptology.

With regard to Text Mining and Natural
Language Processing (NLP), Egyptian is, basi-
cally, a virgin territory waiting to be explored,
namely because of the lack of computer cor-
pora to work with (Rosmorduc, 2015). The
reason for it is that hieroglyphic encoding is
very time-consuming (Rosmorduc, 2015; Neder-
hof, 2015). However, those advances recently
made in projects Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae
(TLA) (Dils and Feder, 2013) and Ramsès (Po-
lis et al., 2013a; Polis and Rosmorduc, 2013) are
promising. Anyway, a few works about auto-
matic transliterion (Barthélemy and Rosmorduc,
2011), language modeling (Nederhof and Rah-
man, 2015a) and text categorization (Gohy et al.,
2013) can be found.

Recent advances in Egyptian OCR are of in-
terest (Franken and van Gemert, 2013; Nederhof,
2015), since OCR would greatly reduce the cost of
encoding these texts (Piotrowski, 2012, Ch. 4).

5 Requirements of the System

Our goal has been to develop an IR system capable
of operating on Egyptian texts. For this purpose,

we have studied the nature of this language and its
writing system, and consulted an expert Egyptol-
ogist to better understand the application domain.
As a result, we established the following require-
ments:

1. Simplicity: It should be intuitive and easy to
use, with a minimum learning curve.

2. Content indexing: The system must be able
to index documents containing conventional
text and hieroglyphic text. At first we will fo-
cus on those documents written with JSESH,
thus covering a significant proportion of the
digitalized contents currently available.

3. Querying using MdC encoding: In the case
of hieroglyphs, users will input the query us-
ing MdC encoding, with which they are al-
ready familiarized.

4. Display the query using glyphs: In order to
make it easier for the user, the system will
display, in parallel, the input MdC query us-
ing pictograms.

5. Querying using conventional text: Since
the documents contain both hieroglyphic and
conventional text (encoded in Latin script),
we also want to be able to submit conven-
tional text queries.

6. Submission of mixed queries: The possibil-
ity of making queries combining both hiero-
glyphic and conventional text.

7. Relevant documents retrieval.

8. Display of document contents: The user
should be able to access the content of the
documents retrieved by the system and check
why they have been retrieved.

6 Description of the System

The architecture of our IR system, currently avail-
able under a free license at http://github.
com/estibalizifranjo/hieroglyphs,
corresponds, in general, to a classic Text Retrieval
system, as shown in Figure 4. Two main phases
of functioning can be distinguished: firstly, the
indexing of the document collection on which
searches are to be performed and, secondly, the
querying–retrieval process. Next, we describe
those modules of the system involved in each of
these phases.

26



Figure 4: Schematic representation of the system: indexing and retrieval processes.

6.1 Phase 1: Indexing

It consists of extracting and indexing the content
of the documents on which searches will be per-
formed later.

6.1.1 Content Extraction
This module uses the Tika toolkit3, which can de-
tect and extract both text and metadata from a wide
range of different file types (ODT, DOC, PDF, etc.),
to extract the text of the documents.

6.1.2 Text Preprocessing
The obtained text is then preprocessed to separate
conventional text from hieroglyphic text and to fil-
ter out irrelevant data. For this task the system ap-
plies a pattern matching approach. For instance,
in the case of detecting pieces of unformatted con-
ventional text, it uses a regular expression for iden-
tifying sequences of characters enclosed between
the marks ’+l’ and ’+s’, corresponding to regular
unformatted text, as explained in Section 3.2.3.

6.1.3 Conventional Text Normalization
The normalization components apply a series of
text operations for tokenizing, conflating and gen-
erating the index terms of the input texts. The
nature of such operations varies according to the
type of text: regular text or hieroglyphs. For
its implementation we have taken as our basis
Apache Lucene.4 In the case of conventional text,
a standard processing is performed (Manning et
al., 2008): firstly, a standard lexical analysis is
applied for tokenizing the text, and the resulting

3http://tika.apache.org
4http://lucene.apache.org/core/

terms are then conflated by lowercasing them and
removing both stopwords and diacritics.

6.1.4 Hieroglyphic Text Normalization

Due to its peculiarities, hieroglyphic text is pro-
cessed in a completely different way. The first
problem is the lack of delimiters to separate words
or phrases. Although MdC provides special mark-
ers for this purpose, in practice they are not used
since they have no effect on the text graphical
representation. As an initial solution, we have
used sign groups (Section 2.5) as a working unit
since they are delimited by ’-’ at encoding level.
For example, the word B#   (N35:O4*X1-M1) is
composed of four signs but only two groups, so
it would be tokenized into B#  (N35:O4*X1) and

 
(M1). This time input text will not be lower-

cased, since MdC encoding is case-sensitive, nei-
ther the punctuation marks will be removed, since
they form part of MdC encoding.

6.1.5 Index Generation

Finally, the index structure is generated. In the
case of the hieroglyphic text, the sign groups are
indexed together with their occurrence positions
within the text. This module has also been imple-
mented using Lucene.

6.2 Phase 2: Querying–Retrieval

Two main sub-processes can be distinguished in
this second phase, the querying process and the
retrieval process, which can be controlled through
the front-end interface of the system.

27



Figure 5: Screenshot of the front-end querying interface. A mixed query containing both Latin and hi-
eroglyphic text (top of right-hand panel) has been composed, the latter with the assistance of the symbol
palette (left-hand panel). The list of relevant documents retrieved by the system is already available
(bottom of right-hand panel).

6.2.1 Querying

The user can query the indexed collection by us-
ing either hieroglyphics, regular text (in the Latin
script) or a combination of both (mixed queries),
that is, a query containing both hieroglyphic text
and conventional text at the same time, such as that
one shown in Figure 5, for example. The query
normalization process is parallel to that performed
during the indexing. In the case of hieroglyphic
text, the exact matching mode requires the docu-
ments to contain exactly the same group sequence
specified in the query (i.e. the same signs with the
same arrangement), while the approximate match-
ing mode allows the user to sub-specify the com-
position of a group (e.g. to require that a given
group of the sequence contains a given sign but
without specifying whether it contains any more
symbols or their arrangement within the group).

6.2.2 Retrieval

Once the query has been normalized, the recov-
ery module accesses the index looking for matches
and identifies those documents of the collection
that are relevant to the query. The current imple-
mentation combines two retrieval models (Man-
ning et al., 2008): firstly, the relevant documents
are selected by using a Boolean model and, then,
a Vector Space model is used to score and rank
those previously selected documents. The result-
ing document list will be returned and presented to
the user.

6.2.3 Front-End Interface

Particular attention has been paid to the design of
the interface to make its use as easy and intuitive
as possible. As shown in the top of the right-hand
panel of Figure 5, separate search forms are pro-
vided for conventional text (in the Latin script) and
hieroglyphic text queries. In the case of the lat-
ter, those pictograms corresponding to the MdC
code text being introduced will be automatically
displayed so that the user can check them on the
fly.

At this point, we decided to integrate addi-
tional features not considered in the original re-
quirements, in order to improve the usability and
flexibility of the interface. Following the exam-
ple of the JSESH editing tool, our interface pro-
vides users, if required, with a palette of hiero-
glyphic signs that enables them to add symbols to
the query by clicking on them, as shown in the
left-hand panel of Figure 5. This palette also func-
tions as a catalog of symbols organized according
to Gardiner’s List classification (Section 3.1), so
the user can navigate through it and consult the in-
formation and variants associated with each sym-
bol. The interface also provides several options
for handling the hieroglyphic text, such as adding
shadows or creating personalised palettes.

In the case of hieroglyphic queries, another
possible choice for its input would have been to
use a similar approach to that one proposed by
Tetsuo Minohara (2010), which is based on the

28



Figure 6: Content of one of the documents re-
trieved for our sample query, as presented by the
system interface, which is highlighting the match-
ings found during the retrieval process.

Japanese Kanji writing method. However, this ap-
proach, although interesting, was not intuitive and
too complex for a non-Japanese user.

At the same time, the interface is also respon-
sible for presenting the user with the result of the
search, as shown in the bottom of the right-hand
panel of Figure 5. Moreover, it enables the user
to access the content of these documents, which,
if so required, will be displayed highlighting the
matchings found during the retrieval process, as
can be seen in Figure 6. Thus, the system provides
the user with useful feedback about why the doc-
ument has been retrieved.

For its implementation we have made use of the
libraries provided with JSESH, including its sym-
bol palette. This was intentional since, as previ-
ously explained in Section 4, JSESH is, currently,
the most popular editing tool among the Egyptol-
ogy community. This way, novice users of our
system will find an interface with a very similar
appearance and behavior to that of the editing tool
they are already familiar with, thus greatly facili-
tating its use and minimizing the learning curve.

7 Conclusions and Future work

Ancient Egyptian Text Mining is still in the initial
stages of development. We have presented in this
work a Text Information Retrieval system specif-

ically designed to manage Egyptian hieroglyphic
texts which, to the best of our knowledge, is the
first tool of its kind. For its development we have
taken into account the lexical and encoding char-
acteristics of this language and its writing system.
Apart from the conflation process to be applied in
the case of the Egyptian text, we have taken spe-
cial care with the design of the front-end interface
in order to make it as intuitive and easy to use
as possible for novel users, paying particular at-
tention to the case of Egyptologists, its intended
future users. Our first distribution have been re-
leased under a free license.

We intend to continue adding new features to
the system. New input filters, for example, would
allow the system to extend the range of source doc-
ument types accepted as input: documents created
with other hieroglyphic text editors, Unicode hi-
eroglyphic text or, as in the case of this article,
HieroTEX LATEX documents (Rosmorduc, 2003b).

From an IR perspective, we would like to con-
tinue studying how to improve performance. One
possible choice is the application of a more flexi-
ble retrieval solution using a single retrieval model
instead of the current double-model 2-stage re-
trieval process. Classic Vector Space and Prob-
abilistic models (Manning et al., 2008) are the
first options. However, the very special and noisy
nature of Egyptian writing system and the appli-
cation context may suggest the use of other ap-
proaches: the use of standard character n-grams
as a working unit, a solution successfully applied
in both noisy contexts (Vilares et al., 2011) and
languages whose writing systems share character-
istics with Egyptian, such as Japanese (Ogawa and
Matsuda, 1999), Chinese (Foo and Li, 2004), Ko-
rean (Lee and Ahn, 1996) or Arabic (Mustafa and
Al-Radaideh, 2004); the use of so-called character
s-grams (Järvelin et al., 2008), a generalization of
the concept of n-gram by allowing skips during
the matching process; the application of locality-
based models (de Kretser and Moffat, 1999); or
phonetic matching (Yasukawa et al., 2012). Closer
to the NLP field, the development of conflation
mechanisms based on lemmatization or morpho-
logical analysis (Piotrowski, 2012, Ch. 7) would
be very useful. However, many of these solu-
tions would require a further study of the language
and its writing system, and the development of re-
sources such as evaluation corpora, which were
beyond the scope of this initial project, although

29



we intend to contact, in a close future, experts in
the field to try to solve these questions.

Acknowledgments

This research has been partially funded by the Spanish Min-

istry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) through

project FFI2014-51978-C2-2-R. We would like to thank Dr.

Josep Cervelló Autuori, Director of the Institut d’Estudis del

Pròxim Orient Antic (IEPOA) of the Universitat Autònoma

de Barcelona for introducing us to the Ancient Egyptian

script and acting as our fictional client. We would also like

to thank Dr. Serge Rosmorduc, Associate of the Conserva-

toire National des Arts et Métiers (CNAM) for all his support

when working with JSESH.

References
James P. Allen. 2014. Middle Egyptian: An Intro-

duction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs
(3rd Edition). Cambridge University Press.

François Barthélemy and Serge Rosmorduc. 2011. In-
tersection of multitape transducers vs. cascade of bi-
nary transducers: The example of Egyptian hiero-
glyphs transliteration. In Proc. of the 9th Interna-
tional Workshop on Finite State Methods and Natu-
ral Language Processing (FSMNLP 2011), pp. 74–
82. ACL.

Jan Buurman, Nicolas-Christophe Grimal, Michael
Hainsworth, Jochen Hallof, and Dirk van der Plas.
1988. Inventaire des signes hiéroglyphiques en vue
de leur saisie informatique: manuel de codage des
textes hiéroglyphiques en vue de leur saisie sur or-
dinateur, volume 8 of Mémoires de l’Académie des
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. De Boccard, Paris.

Josep Cervelló-Autuori. 2015. Escrituras, Lengua
y Cultura en el Antiguo Egipto. El espejo y la
lámpara. Edicions UAB.

Owen de Kretser and Alistair Moffat. 1999. Effective
document presentation with a locality-based similar-
ity heuristic. In Proc. of 22nd Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’99), pp. 113–
120. ACM Press. DOI 10.1145/312624.312664.

Peter Dils and Frank Feder, 2013. In (Polis et al.,
2013b), chapter The Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae.
Review and Perspectives, pp. 11–23. Project web-
site: http://aaew.bbaw.de/tla/ (visited on
May 2016).

Cheikh M’Backé Diop. 1992. Hiéroglyphes et infor-
matique. ANKH: Revue d’Egyptologie et des Civili-
sations Africaines, (1):105–121, February.

Michael Everson and Bob Richmond. 2007. Proposal
to encode Egyptian Hieroglyphs in the SMP of
the UCS. Working Group Document ISO/IEC

JTC1/SC2/WG2 N3237 [L2/07-097]. Technical
report, UTC (Unicode Technical Committee), Uni-
code Consortium, April. Unicode 8.0 hieroglyphs
table available at: http://www.unicode.
org/charts/PDF/U13000.pdf (visited on
May 2016).

Raymond Oliver Faulkner. 2006. Concise Dictionary
of Middle Egyptian. Griffith Institute.

Schubert Foo and Hui Li. 2004. Chinese word
segmentation and its effect on Information Re-
trieval. Information Processing and Management,
40(1):161–190.

Morris Franken and Jan C. van Gemert. 2013. Au-
tomatic Egyptian hieroglyph recognition by retriev-
ing images as texts. In Proc. of the 21st ACM In-
ternational Conference on Multimedia (MM’13), pp.
765–768. ACM.

Alan Henderson Gardiner. 1957. Egyptian grammar:
being an introduction to the study of hieroglyphs.
Griffith Institute, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, 3rd
ed., revised edition. A complete on-line ver-
sion is available at: http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Gardiner’s_sign_list (visited
on May 2016).

Stéphanie Gohy, Benjamin Martin Leon, and Stéphane
Polis, 2013. In (Polis et al., 2013b), chapter Auto-
mated text categorization in a dead language. The
detection of genres in Late Egyptian, pp. 61–74.

Roberto Gozzoli, 2013. In (Polis et al., 2013b), chapter
Hieroglyphic Text Processors, Manuel de Codage,
Unicode and Lexicography, pp. 89–101.

Nicolas Grimal, Jochen Hallof, and Dirk van der
Plas. 2000. HIEROGLYPHICA: Sign List–
Liste des Signes – Zeichenliste (2nd Edition),
volume 1ˆ2. Publications Interuniversitaires
de Recherches Égyptologiques Informatisées,
Utrecht–Paris. Second edition revised and en-
larged by Jochen Hallof, Hans van den Berg and
Gabriele Hallof. Online list available on: http:
//hieroglyphes.pagesperso-orange.
fr/CCER-Hieroglyphica.htm (visited on
May 2016).

Nicolas Grimal. 1990. Hiéroglyphes et ordinateurs.
BRISES. Bulletin de Recherches sur l’Information
en Sciences Économiques Humaines et Sociales,
(15):57–60.

Antti Järvelin, Tuomas Talvensaari, and Anni Järvelin.
2008. Data driven methods for improving mono-
and cross-lingual IR performance in noisy environ-
ments. In Proc. of the Second Workshop on Ana-
lytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND’08),
volume 303 of ACM International Conference Pro-
ceeding Series, pp. 75–82. ACM.

30



Joo Ho Lee and Jeong Soo Ahn. 1996. Using n-grams
for Korean text retrieval. In Proc. of the 19th An-
nual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-
search and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR’96), pp. 216–224. ACM.

Antonio Loprieno. 1995. Ancient Egyptian: A Lin-
guistic Introduction. Cambridge University Press.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and
Hinrich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press.

Tatsuo Minohara. 2010. A writing system for the An-
cient Egyptian hieroglyphs. In Proc. of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Informatics and Systems
(INFOS 2010), pp. 1–7. IEEE.

Suleiman H. Mustafa and Qasem A. Al-Radaideh.
2004. Using n-grams for Arabic text searching.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence and Technology (JASIST), 55(11):1002–1007.

Mark-Jan Nederhof and Fahrurrozi Rahman. 2015a.
A probabilistic model of Ancient Egyptian writing.
In Proc. of the 12th International Conference on Fi-
nite State Methods and Natural Language Process-
ing (FSMNLP 2015). ACL.

Mark-Jan Nederhof, 2013. In (Polis et al., 2013b),
chapter The Manuel de Codage Encoding of Hiero-
glyphs Impedes Development of Corpora, pp. 103–
110.

Mark-Jan Nederhof. 2015. OCR of handwritten tran-
scriptions of Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic text. In
Altertumswissenschaften in a Digital Age: Egyptol-
ogy, Papyrology and Beyond (DHEgypt15). Leipzig,
Germany, November 4-6, 2015.

Yasushi Ogawa and Toru Matsuda. 1999. Overlap-
ping statistical segmentation for effective indexing
of Japanese text. Information Processing and Man-
agement, 35(4):463–480.

Michael Piotrowski. 2012. Natural Language Pro-
cessing for Historical Texts. Synthesis Lectures on
Human Language Technologies. Morgan & Clay-
pool Publishers.

Stéphane Polis and Serge Rosmorduc, 2013. In (Po-
lis et al., 2013b), chapter Building a Construction-
Based Treebank of Late Egyptian. The Syntactic
Layer in Ramses, pp. 45–59.

Stéphane Polis, Anne-Claude Honnay, and Jean
Winand, 2013a. In (Polis et al., 2013b), chapter
Building an Annotated Corpus of Late Egyptian.
The Ramses Project: Review and Perspectives, pp.
25–44. Project website: http://www.egypto.
ulg.ac.be/Ramses.htm. Beta online sys-
tem: http://ramses.ulg.ac.be/ (both vis-
ited on May 2016).

Stéphane Polis, Jean Winand, and Todd Gillen, editors.
2013b. Texts, Languages & Information Technol-
ogy in Egyptology: Selected Papers from the Meet-
ing of the Computer Working Group of the Inter-
national Association of Egyptologists (Informatique
& Égyptologie), Liège, 6-8 July 2010, volume 9 of
Collection Ægyptiaca Leodiensia. Presses Univer-
sitaires de Liège, Liège.

Bob Richmond. 2015. Egyptian Hieroglyphs in Uni-
code plain text: A note on a suggested approach
[L2/15-069]. Technical report, UTC (Unicode Tech-
nical Committee), Unicode Consortium, February.

Serge Rosmorduc. 2003a. Codage informatique
des langues anciennes. Document numérique, 6(3-
4):211–224.

Serge Rosmorduc. 2003b. HieroTeX: A LaTeXperi-
ment of hieroglyphic typesetting. Package available
at: http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/
language/hieroglyph (visited on May 2016).

Serge Rosmorduc. 2014. JSESH docu-
mentation. Software available at: http:
//jsesh.qenherkhopeshef.org/ (vis-
ited on May 2016).

Serge Rosmorduc. 2015. Computational linguistics
in egyptology. In Julie Stauder-Porchet, Andréas
Stauder, and Willeke Wendrich, editors, UCLA En-
cyclopedia of Egyptology. UCLA, Los Angeles,
USA.

Jesús Vilares, Manuel Vilares, and Juan Otero. 2011.
Managing Misspelled Queries in IR Applications.
Information Processing & Management, 47(2):263–
286.

Michiko Yasukawa, J. Shane Culpepper, and Falk Sc-
holer. 2012. Phonetic matching in Japanese. In
Proc. of SIGIR 2012 Workshop on Open Source In-
formation Retrieval (OSIR 2012), pages 68–71.

A Third-Party Pictures

Figure 1, left (cropped picture): original by Khruner; avail-
able in Wikipedia under the Creative Commons Attribution-

Share Alike 3.0 Unported license. Figure 1, top (cropped
picture): original by Hans Ollermann; available in Wikipedia

under the Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic license.

Figure 1, right and bottom (cropped pictures): originals by
Francesco Gasparetti; available in Wikipedia under the Cre-

ative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic license. Figure 2,
left (cropped picture): original by Lord-of-the-Light; avail-
able in Wikipedia under the Creative Commons Attribution-

Share Alike 3.0 Unported license.

31


