



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 129–136,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Graph theoretic interpretation of Bangla traditional grammar 

 
Samir Karmakar 

School of Languages and Linguistics 

Jadavpur University 

samirkrmkr@yahoo.co.in 

Sayantani Banerjee 

School of Languages and Linguistics 

Jadavpur University 

 banerjeesayantni@gmail.com 

Soumya Ghosh 

School of Languages and Linguistics 

Jadavpur University 

ghosh.soumya73@yahoo.com 

 

  

 

Abstract 

The paper is an investigation into the 

graph theoretic interpretation of the 

Bangla traditional grammar to under-

stand the way grammatical information is 

structurally encoded in language. The hi-

erarchical and the linear structural princi-

ples of grammatical compositionality is 

discussed in terms of certain graph theo-

retic concepts like tree, subtree, inverse 

tree etc.  

Translating linguistic structure into the 

tree structure is not new. In fact, the 

Transformational-Generative grammar, 

Tree adjoining grammar etc. have shown 

quite successfully how syntacto-semantic 

principles can be talked about in terms of 

tree structures. The present work differs 

in certain respects from the assumptions 

of TG grammarians, primarily because of 

the type of grammar and language it is 

dealing with.  

1 Introduction 

This paper seeks to investigate how substantially 

the structure of a language can be dealt with the 

aid of graph theory. Because of being qualified 

with the discrete structure, natural language can 

be represented and processed with graph-

theoretic methods. Compositional nature of lan-

guage makes it more viable to the concept of 

constituent hierarchies within the scope of which 

syntactic and semantic principles are operating. 

Under this situation, the graph theoretic interpre-

tation provides excellent opportunities to explore 

the issues pertinent in structural composition. 

Certain contemporary models like head-driven 

phrase structure grammar, semantic networks 

etc. make good use of graph theoretic methods. 

WordNet, VerbNet etc. have also their deep con-

nections with this branch of discrete mathemat-

ics. Under the influence of these approaches, the 

current paper seeks to investigate how grammati-

cal regulations are crucial in imposing constraint 

on the structure with a special reference to the 

traditional Bangla grammar within the frame-

work of graph theoretic enquiry. 

 

Translating linguistic structure into the tree struc-

ture is not new. In fact, the Transformational-

Generative (hereafter, TG) grammar has shown 

quite successfully how syntacto-semantic princi-

ples can be talked about in terms of tree struc-

tures. The present work differs in certain respects 

from the assumptions of TG grammarians, pri-

marily because of the type of grammar and lan-

guage it is dealing with. Not only the TG gram-

mar, tree adjoining (hereafter, TA) grammar has 

also made a good use of the graph theory. 

Though both TG and TA have made use of the 

graph theory but definitely from the two different 

perspectives. 

 

The current proposal resembles TA grammar 

more closely than the TG grammar; and as a re-

sult, the proposed model of language representa-

tion and processing can probably be classified in 

terms of weak generative capacity, a position 

between context free grammars and indexed 

grammars.  

 

2 Research Objectives 

Within the broader theoretical background as is 

discussed in Section (1), this paper will investi-

gate the way grammatical structures of Bangla as 

is described in traditional Bangla grammar 

(Chatterji 1939) can be talked about in terms of 

graph theoretic assumptions. This is possibly the 

most salient point where the paper does differ 

even from its nearest kin TA grammar. Under 

this situation, following two questions will be 

investigated in this paper: (a) how the structural 129



complexity of the Bangla sentence can be talked 

about with respect to graph theoretic assump-

tions; and, (b) if it is possible to develop a theo-

retical scheme to capture the syntacto-semantic 

peculiarities of the individual constituents of a 

sentence.  

3 Theoretical Background 

Approaching the above mentioned research ob-

jectives seeks the setting of the theoretical 

framework which presumes some fundamental 

understanding of the graph theory and the 

knowledge of traditional Bangla grammar.  

 

3.1 Tree as a Graph 

Graphs are not used for some sheer illustrative 

purposes; In fact, they reveal hidden intricacies 

involved in complex structures. As a conse-

quence, it is quite essential to concentrate on 

some basic concepts which are crucial in ex-

plaining the construal of graph in general: Math-

ematically, graph is defined as a set of sets – one 

of which contains the nodes and other, a set of 

ordered pairs or edges. For the purpose of this 

paper, a particular type of graph will be dis-

cussed, namely „tree‟. A tree is defined as a 

graph in which each pair of vertices is connected 

with a unique path.  Tree is characterized as acy-

clic and directed (Liu, 2001). An example of tree 

is given in the figure below: 

 

1. 

 
 
An alternative way to represent the graph of a 

tree is to follow the technique of embedded 

bracketing as is shown in (2). In this framework, 

the notion of hierarchical depth of a particular 

node can be interpreted in terms of its interiority 

in the bracketed representation. Furthermore, the 

concept of edge here in this case is inferred from 

an understanding of „who embeds whom‟.  

 

2. [A [B [D ] [E ]] [C [F ] [G [H ] [I ]]]] 

According to (1) and also (2), then, a graph of 

tree (= GT) could be represented as {VT, ET}, 

where VT is the set of vertices/nodes {A, B, C, 

D, E, F, G, H, I} and ET is a set of edges {AB, 

AC, BD, BE, CF, CG, GH, GI}. Each of the 

members of ET can be defined as a relation de-

fined over the set of vertices. As per this defini-

tion, then, an edge is an ordered pair. In other 

words, an edge could be conceived as a relation 

from one vertex to another non-identical vertex. 

A tree (= G'T) will be called as the subtree of GT, 

iff and only if V'T  VT and E'T  ET. For exam-

ple, the trees drawn in (3) are the subtrees of (1): 

 
3. 

 
Two subtrees of a tree will be considered as in-

verse to each other if and only if their union can 

result into a tree of which they are the subtrees. 

Therefore, the following two subtrees are the 

inverse of each other because their union will 

produce the graph shown in (1): 

 
4. 

 
 

Just like the graph theory, traditional grammar of 

Bangla can also generate the trees. Therefore, it 

becomes quintessential to explore how and to 

what extent trees generated by the grammar of a 

language (here, Bangla) resemble the structural 

aspect of tree as the mathematical object. 

 

3.2 Traditional Bangla Grammar 

Likewise the western tradition, Bangla sentence 

(bākya) also has two distinct parts namely sub-

ject (uddeśya) and predicate (bidheya). Both sub-

ject and predicate can be modified; and, modifi-

ers will be classified as elaborator (sam-

prasāraka). As a result of elaboration, whatever 

is produced is classified again either as subject or 

as predicate. Elaborators are optional and they 

can appear in any numbers for finer grain speci-130



fications of the communicative intent. Unlike 

elaborators, predicate could have complement 

(pūraka). Complements are not optional; rather, 

they are the obligatory components of the predi-

cates, and their numbers are often fixed by the 

semantic expectancy of the verbs. To capture the 

structural peculiarities of a sentence the notion of 

subject, predicate, elaborator and complement 

are extremely useful. In addition to this, the no-

tion of maximality is proposed to incorporate the 

idea of the scope of complete interpretation for a 

particular structure. Within the maximal scope of 

a structure, syntactic and semantic necessities of 

a particular constituent are satisfied and beyond 

that scope these necessities have no role to play. 

Accordingly, the addition of complement to the 

verb in (5) makes their immediate dominator 

maximal in case of transitive Bangla verbs. Note 

this understanding of maximality is quite differ-

ent than the one talked about by Chomsky. This 

issue will be picked up again in our successive 

discussions to exemplify the way maximality is 

instrumental in graph theoretic framework of 

language interpretation. 

 
5. 

 
Note: A = sentence; B = subject; C = predicate; D = 

elaborator; E = subject; F = elaborator; G = predicate; 

H = complement; I = predicate 

 
In addition to what is discussed earlier, we would 

like to incorporate the word-internal composition 

to understand the reach of the graph theoretic 

methods of language description. More im-

portantly, studies solely depended on the mor-

phology of English often fails to appreciate the 

linguistic intricacies involved in other vernacu-

lars. Word internal morphological complexity is 

one such intricacy which demands our attention. 

    

Morphological complexities of words in Bangla 

are more in case of nominal and verbal constitu-

ents of a sentence. Nominal and verbal – both 

types of constituents can be decomposed in two 

major parts: (a) a part constitutive of core mean-

ing, traditionally termed as prātipadika; (b) an-

other part constitutive of relational meaning, tra-

ditionally classified as bibhakti. In case of nomi-

nal, relational meaning denotes case relations 

and has direct relevance with the core meaning 

of the verbal constituents; in case of verbal, the 

relational meaning denotes agreement with the 

nominal and also contain information about the 

time. The core meaning is constitutive of base 

form and the satellite. Depending on how the 

constituent is classified, base could be of two 

types: namely, (a) nominal base (sajñā) and (b) 

verbal base (dhātu). Both of these two bases are 

further decomposed into (a) root (prakriti) and 

(b) formative (avayava). According to the nature 

of the base, the formative could be of two types 

namely gender signifying and causative. In case 

of verbal constituent, satellite is constitutive of 

grammatical aspect and tense, whereas classifier 

has the status of formative in case of nominal. 

 

6. 

 
 

The terminal vertices of (5) – excepting one 

marked as predicate (= I) – will be further aug-

mented by (6); whereas, terminal position „I‟ will 

be augmented with (7): 

 

7. 

 
 

This will then lead us to a fully specified tree 

capable of representing sentences; however, 

without postposition (anusarga). Sentences con-
131



taining postposition are kept aside keeping the 

scope of the paper in mind. 

 

4  Discussion 

After having the brief introductions of different 

theoretical tools, we will now investigate how 

graph theory and the traditional Bangla grammar 

interact with each other. In continuation to the 

above discussion, one can now suggest that in-

stead of having a set of distinct vertices/nodes 

one can simply distinguish the non-identical ver-

tices of (5) in terms of their respective „maximal-

ity‟ – discussed earlier. Developing such mecha-

nism can be done in two distinct stages: Firstly, 

to substitute the identical vertices with a single 

alphabet to indicate the similarities among them; 

and secondly, to capture the dissimilarities in 

terms of their respective syntactic and semantic 

properties certain conceptual measures have to 

be thought of. With the initiation of the first,   (5) 

is simply transformed into (8): 

 

8. 

 
 

Similar vertices/nodes are reflecting their endo-

centric nature. In virtue of being endocentric, 

they are category preserving. Though the similar-

ities of certain vertices are well-represented in 

(8), the dissimilarities are hardly traceable from 

this representation until the seemingly similar 

vertices are interpreted in terms of maximality. 

To understand this problem, consider the case of 

C: Are the three instances of C in (8) same?  Are 

they similar type of „predicate‟? – A little atten-

tion will reveal the fact that they are not. Non-

branching C can license the verbal constituent 

only, when the intermediating one has the provi-

sions for the complement(s) (i.e. the terminal 

vertex H) and the verbal constituents (i.e. the 

terminal vertex C). Finally, the topmost C is pro-

jected due to the addition of elaborator with the 

complement(s) and the verbal constituent. This 

simply compels us to import one another con-

cept, namely hierarchical depth or relative inte-

riority. Hierarchical depth can be translated in 

terms of certain constitutional scopes. Within a 

scope different types of syntactic and semantic 

expectancies are satiated. Under this situation 

then it becomes essential to distinguish these 

three instances of Cs in terms of their respective 

scopes. This leads us to the following proposal: 

In (8), C of the non-branching vertex is the head. 

Being non-branching, the hierarchical depth or 

relative interiority of head C is more than the 

other Cs above it. Due to the successive projec-

tions, this head results into the appearances of 

CMAX as maximal projection (hence, subscripted 

with „MAX‟) and CE as elaborated projection 

(hence, subscripted with „E‟). While getting pro-

jected maximally, complements are accommo-

dated; whereas to get elaborated projection, 

elaborators are accommodated. The distinction 

between these two types of projections namely 

maximal and elaborated is instrumental in distin-

guishing complements from the adjunct. This 

solution is restricted not only to any specific sub-

tree – rather it has some general appeal: Consider 

the case of multiple appearances of B. Following 

the general strategy, outlined above, non-

branching B will be labeled as head. This is pro-

jected into a higher non-branching vertex B 

which has the status of elaborator (= D) and 

therefore must be represented as BE. Since the 

elaborators are not the essential part of a lexeme, 

they are kept out side of the maximal projection 

in this proposal which is contrary to the basic 

claim of the X-bar theory where adjuncts are 

kept within the scope of the maximal projection 

(Chomsky, 1970). Therefore, (8) is further modi-

fied into (9): 

 

9. [A [BE [D ] [B ]] [CE [F ] [CMAX [H ] [C ]]]] 

 

What is of worth mentioning is that the identifi-

cation of a vertex either as maximal or as elabo-

rator has to do nothing with their relative hierar-

chies in a tree. Also, it does not mean that the 

maximal projection will be always embedded 

within the elaborated projection. Relative salien-

cies in terms of hierarchical depth or interiority 

of maximal and elaborated projections may vary 

in a language like Bangla on the basis of how 

they do appear in the body of a sentence: (9) can 

simply be rewritten as (10) if F and H changes 

their respective positions: 

 

10. [A [BE [D ] [B ]] [CMAX [H ] [CE [F] [C ]]]] 

 

The specification of maximal will only serve the 

purpose of stating the fact that beyond it appear-

ance of further complement is simply impossible. 

That means the verb – whose maximal projection 

it is – is completely saturated once it is maximal-132



ly projected. This would simply exclude the pro-

vision for any intermediating projection to attain 

the status of maximal in virtue of not getting 

completely saturated.  

 

Let us consider the case of (6) and (7) now. For 

the sake of brevity and abstraction, the technical 

terms of these two trees are replaced with the 

alphabets in (11) and (12). For the vertices of the 

tree representing nominal constituent, J-Q alpha-

bets are used. Alphabets from R-Z are allotted to 

the vertices of the tree representing the verbal 

constituencies.  

 

11. 

 
 

12. 

 
 

Unlike the structure of the sentence as is repre-

sented in (5), the structures of nominal and ver-

bal constituents are well-demarcated in the sense 

that recurring use of same term is not noticeable. 

That does not mean that the intermediate projec-

tions are not there. Rather, it confirms the inter-

mediating projections by adopting a strict demar-

cating policy.  

 

Notion of subtree can be exploited in favor of 

syntactically and semantically independent ex-

pressions that the native speakers of Bangla en-

counter often in their linguistic world. Consider 

the following example: bṛddh-ā-ṭi-ke means „to 

the old lady‟, where bṛddh- = O, -ā- = P, -ṭi- = Q, 

and –ke = L of (11).  In case of (11), following 

expressions will be syntactically and semantical-

ly well-formed: (i) bṛddh-ā (= M), (ii) bṛddh-ā-ṭi 

(= K), and finally (iii) bṛddh-ā-ṭi-ke (= J). This 

leads to the classification of M, K and J as max-

imal however with reference to different types of 

grammatical compulsions: M is maximal because 

no formative can be added outside its scope; K 

would not permit the addition of any classifier 

beyond it; and, no more relational markers are 

licensed beyond the scope of J. This understand-

ing then in turn justifies why certain trees with 

the roots M, K, and J are in the subtree relations 

with (11). Other subtrees of graph (11) other than 

the ones mentioned above are mathematically 

possible subtrees but linguistically are not plau-

sible. Grammatically significant trees are repre-

sented in (13) with the marking of the concentric 

circles: 

 

13. 

 
 

Contrariwise, in case of (12), except the entire 

tree (which is an improper subtree of itself), no 

proper (stand-alone) subtree can be identified in 

spite of the presence of different maximal nodes 

in different layers of structural hierarchies or in-

teriorities as is evidenced in (14): 

 

14. 

 
 

Therefore, in the context of linguistic structures, 

those subtrees are of immense significance which 

consist of maximally projected nodes as their 

roots – with the statutory precaution that all max-

imally projected nodes are not capable to per-

form the task of the root of a (sub)tree. It is also 133



worthwhile to note that subtree without a root 

marked as maximal are optional in nature. Ex-

tending this discussion beyond the level of the 

words will also unveil similar type of findings. 

For example (9) contains subtrees with the root 

CMAX, CE, BE, and A.  

 

Having discussed this, time now is to look into 

the issues of the semantic import of the nodes 

constituting the tree.  In other words, the ques-

tion which will be delved into is „what consti-

tutes a node?‟ – As per the principle of composi-

tionality, “the meaning of a complex expression 

is a function of the meanings of its parts and of 

the syntactic rules by which they are combined” 

(Partee, Meulen, and Wall 1990). Under the im-

mediate influence of the compositionality princi-

ple then the task will be to explain what governs 

the combinatorial behavior of neighboring nodes 

of same hierarchy. Answer to this question must 

have some provisions for what we will call selec-

tional restrictions. Selectional restriction which is 

a semantic function associated with each of the 

nodes remains instrumental in determining „who 

can go with whom‟.  

 

As per the standard practices of lexical semantics 

like the one proposed by Jackendoff (1990), con-

stitutive nodes should contain information about 

itself with a special reference to the structure 

which it is a part of. Since the constituent node 

has its connotations both at the levels of local 

and global structures the semantics of a node 

must contain information about (a) the subtree 

reflecting its immediate scope and (b) the subtree 

with a root node marked as maximal where the 

immediate scope is embedded. As per this pro-

posal then the meaning of an expression, say for 

example O, will be the following:  

 

15. 

 

 

A subtree – like the one circled with dashed line 

in (15) marked with the presence of maximal 

root – i.e. M, and is in inverse relation with the 

following tree: 
 

16. 

 
 

The traditional grammar of Bangla, then, can be 

conceptualized in terms of the following con-

cepts: 

i) a set of terminal symbols (= ST); Here, termi-

nal symbols are the representatives of different 

word classes; 

ii) a set of non-terminal symbols (= SNT); such 

that, ST ∩ SNT = Φ; 

iii) Non-terminal symbols has a set of distin-

guished members (= D) capable of being marked 

either with MAX or with E resulting into two 

distinct partitions, namely DMAX and DE. Point to 

be noted (DMAX ∩ DE = D) SNT; 
iv) a highly distinguished member A which be-

longs to D; 

v) A set of initial trees (TI) whose interior nodes 

are labeled by nonterminal symbols. Non-

terminal nodes of a particular tree at the bottom 

can be replaced by the distinguished members of 

it for further derivation. However, if the bottom 

consists of terminal symbols, no more replace-

ment as well as further derivation is permitted; 

vi) the appearance of lexical element in a tree 

will indicate the end of a particular path; 

 

The graph theoretic approach to the traditional 

grammar of Bangla will be classified as lexical 

because each lexical item, in virtue of being the 

member of word classes belonging to the set of 

terminal symbols is associated with structural 

description which is functional is nature. In other 

words, the lexical constituents of a language 

must contain the functional descriptions for their 

respective distribution in a structure. In order to 

meet this structural goal, then, one needs to iden-

tify the information in two broad categories: (a) 

the information which is locally relevant and 

constitutes the core of the lexical properties, and 

(b) the information which is globally relevant 

and indicates the relation of the lexical core to its 134



global sentential context within which it is 

grounded. This in one way address the classical 

problem of symbol grounding which is addressed 

by Harnard (1990).   

 

As per the theoretical framework described 

above the structural meaning of classifier (CLS) 

with respect to (13) will be as follows: 

 

17. CLS 

Q 

[N[Q]] 

[K[M][N]] 

 

The first line of this representation is the gram-

matical classification of the node Q as classifier. 

Third line of the representation is a non-maximal 

subtree which is in inverse relation with the sub-

tree mentioned in the fourth line. Subtree men-

tioned in the fourth line contains an intervening 

maximal projection K – which is already dis-

cussed in the context of (11) and (13), previous-

ly. Following the similar graph theoretic ap-

proach, a lexical grammar of simple Bangla sen-

tence can be written with the help of graph-

theoretic assumptions discussed earlier. In fact 

the graphical representations that we have illus-

trated in (5), (6), and (7) can produce the sen-

tences which can be interpreted following the 

techniques of lexical grammar discussed above. 

One such sentence is represented in the Appen-

dix of this article to show how rich the structural 

aspect of Bangla is. This paper will be concluded 

with an observation which we are interested of: 

Since CLS is a word class, the function men-

tioned in (17) will be finitely ambiguous in virtue 

of containing expressions like -ṭi, -ṭā, -khāni, -

khānā etc. In order to exclude this type of prob-

lem, further investigation has to be initiated to-

wards the finer grain analysis of different catego-

ries. 
 

References 

Barbara H. Partee, Alice ter Meulen, and Robert E. 

Wall. 1990. Mathematical Methods in Linguistics. 

Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 

C.L. Lieu. 1985. Elements of Discrete Mathematics. 

Tata MCgraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, 

New Belhi. 

Harnard, S. (1990). The Symbol Grounding Problem, 

Physica D 42, 335-346. 

Noam Chomsky. 1970. Remarks on nominalization. 

In: R. Jacobs and P. Rosenbaum (eds.) Reading in 

English Transformational Grammar, 184-221. 

Waltham, Ginn. 

Ray Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structure. The MIT 

Press, Massachussets. 

Suniti Kr. Chatterji. 1939. Bhasha-Prakash Bangla 

Vyakarana. Edition 2014. Rupa Publication India 

Ltd, New Delhi. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

135



Appendix 1 

 

 

136


