



















































Pictogrammar: an AAC device based on a semantic grammar


Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 142–150,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Pictogrammar: an AAC device based on a semantic grammar
Fernando Martı́nez-Santiago

dofer@ujaen.es
Arturo Montejo-Ráez
amontejo@ujaen.es

Miguel Ángel Garcı́a-Cumbreras
magc@ujaen.es

Manuel Carlos Dı́az-Galiano
mcdiaz@ujaen.es

Computer Science Department
University of Jaén
Jaén, 23071, Spain

Abstract

As many as two-thirds of individuals with
an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) also
have language impairments, which can range
from mild limitations to complete non-verbal
behavior. For such cases, there are sev-
eral Augmentative and Alternative Commu-
nication (AAC) devices available. These are
computer-designed tools in order to help peo-
ple with ASD to palliate or overcome such
limitations, at least partially. Some of the
most popular AAC devices are based on pic-
tograms, so that a pictogram is the graphical
representation of a simple concept and sen-
tences are composed by concatenating a num-
ber of such pictograms. Usually, these tools
have to manage a vocabulary made up of hun-
dreds of pictograms/concepts, with no or very
poor knowledge of the language at semantic
and pragmatic level. In this paper we present
Pictogrammar, an AAC system which takes
advantage of SUpO and PictOntology. SUpO
(Simple Upper Ontology) is a formal semantic
ontology which is made up of detailed know-
ledge of facts of everyday life such as sim-
ple words, with special interest in linguistic is-
sues, allowing automated grammatical super-
vision. PictOntology is an ontology developed
to manage sets of pictograms, linked to SUpO.
Both ontologies make possible the develop-
ment of tools which are able to take advantage
of a formal semantics.

1 Introduction

Language acquisition and comprehension is difficult
for people with certain language impairments. Com-
munications based on modern technologies could

play a relevant role in helping with such processes.
This papers introduces one of those potential tech-
nologies with important novelties.

Autism and autism spectrum disorders (ASD),
such as Asperger syndrome, are neurodevelopmen-
tal conditions diagnosed on the basis of a triad
of behavioral impairments: impaired social inter-
action, impaired communication and restricted and
repetitive interests and activities (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2004). Thus, communica-
tion is severely impaired in persons with acute
autism. What the individual understands (recep-
tive language) as well as what is actually spoken
by the individual (expressive language) are signif-
icantly delayed or nonexistent. Deficits in lan-
guage comprehension include the inability to un-
derstand simple directions, questions or commands
(Lim, 2011). Furthermore, the absence of verbal
communication is common or, when present, it is
often very immature: “want water” instead of “I
want some water, please”. Some of the most popular
tools used to palliate, at least partially, severe com-
munication impairments are the so-called Systems
of Augmentative and Alternative Communication
(SAAC). Augmentative and Alternative Communi-
cation (AAC) involves the study and proposal of
alternative communication mechanisms and, when
needed, to compensate for temporary or permanent
impairments, activity limitations, and participation
restrictions of individuals with severe disorders of
speech-language production and/or comprehension,
including spoken and written modes of communica-
tion (Beukelman and Mirenda, 2005).

Some of the most popular SAACs are based on

142



Figure 1: PECS book

Figure 2: Some examples of PECS pictograms

pictograms, such the Pictograms Exchange Com-
munication System (PECS) (Andy and Lori, 1994;
Andy and Lori, 2001) (Figures 1 and 2). Pictograms
are images which are used to support text, making
the meaning clearer and easier to understand. PECS
is not only a SAAC, but a method for teaching young
children or any individual with communication im-
pairment a way to communicate within a social con-
text. PECS has a very remarkable influence on de-
velopment of most of SAACs based on pictograms.

In the most advanced phases, individuals are taught
to answer questions and to comment. Additionally,
descriptive language concepts such as size, shape,
color, number, etc. are also taught so the student
can make her message more specific by combining
picture symbols. For example, “I want a big yellow
ball” (Figure 3).

Figure 3: “I want big yellow ball” using ARASAAC pic-
tograms

There are several communicators inspired by
PECS, such as Speak4Yourself1, ARaSuite2,
SC@UT3, CPA4, e-Mintza5 or Mind-Express6. The
pictograms are usually categorized under families
of words. The way such families are defined is
a bit vague and it varies across applications. For
example, the pictograms in e-Mintza are sometimes
categorized according to the most usual part-of-
speech of the word such as verbs or adjectives,
while other words are categorized based on mean-
ing, such as food or friends. With this application,
the user chooses every pictogram from the full set
of pictograms available which is made up of several
hundred or even thousands of pictograms in some
cases.

Figure 4: A simplified diagram of the working hypothesis

The main objective of this paper is to describe Pic-
togrammar, a complete AAC system within a frame-
work under the following hypothesis: an upper on-
tology which includes a formal representation of a

1http://speakforyourself.org
2http://sourceforge.net/projects/arasuite/
3http://scaut.ugr.es/scaut/
4http://prezi.com/jcpr9qcmcnr-/cpa/
5http://fundacionorange.es/emintza.html
6http://fundacionorange.es/emintza.html

143



controlled natural language is an adequate frame-
work for developing therapeutic and palliative tools
for severe language impairments in general, and be-
ginning communicators in particular, which refers to
those people (mainly children) learning how to com-
municate. This idea is depicted in a very simplified
way in Figure 4.

Pictogrammar is described in section 2. Sections
3 and 4 describe both SUpO and PictOntology on-
tologies. Then, an overview of an ontology to ma-
nage collections of pictograms, called PictOntology,
is given, along with how it works with SUpO, an
ontology that models the piece of language which
is supported by Pictogrammar. Section 5 provides a
more detailed view of the issues regarding the inte-
gration of these ontologies into Pictogrammar. We
finish with some conclusions and future work.

2 Pictogrammar

Pictogrammar is an AAC device that follows the
scheme outlined in figure 4. It is therefore necessary
to define the three components: a controlled lan-
guage, the ontology to model, at a conceptual level,
this language, and an authoring tool to obtain ac-
cess to the ontology. In the end, this authoring tool
makes communication possible. More specifically,
the elements involved in the platform are described
as follows:

• The controlled natural language is the
piece of symbolic communication to be
learned/mastered.

• The users are the student and a number of peo-
ple such as language pathologists, family and
caregivers. The student is the person to be in-
troduced into symbolic communication, i.e. a
beginning communicator.

• Simple Upper Ontology, SUpO, is the upper
ontology, a semantic grammar with regard to
the world in which it is suitable to communi-
cate within a controlled language. This ontol-
ogy is feasible because the size of the core vo-
cabulary of the controlled language is relatively
small and it is used to make straightforward as-
sertions (Martı́nez-Santiago et al., 2015). Pict-
Ontology is an ontology linked to SUpO (de-
scribed in section 4).

• The authoring tool is Pictogrammar, a system
of Augmentative and Alternative Communica-
tion (SAAC) based on pictograms. Pictogram-
mar uses as input a vocabulary made up of a set
of pictograms contained in PictOntology.

Since Pictogrammar is linked to an ontology with
linguistic knowledge, it provides several benefits
and novel issues in message generation (when the
user ”writes the message by using the pictograms)
and in message communication (when the system
“reads” what the user wrote to transmit this message
to a counterpart). These are the benefits expected:

1. In message generation:

(a) Expandable. By using ontology authoring
tools, it is possible to increase the know-
ledge of the world as the user requires.

(b) Predictive semantic grammar: given the
construction of a sentence, the SAAC fil-
ters pictograms based on the context of the
sentence.

(c) Only syntactically correct sentences are
allowed, by means of a controlled gram-
mar where words are related to syntactic
categories (part of speech). For in-
stance, the pictogram related to dog could
not be used as a verb.

(d) Only meaningful sentences are allowed,
due to syntactic correctness and topic-
based relations.

(e) Adaptive. The syntax and systems of
meanings are adapted to the user’s linguis-
tic skills. For example, a given user could
be ready to use articles and prepositions
whereas other users could use just a few
nouns.

2. In message communication:

(a) Sentences generated using the SAAC are
grammatically correct, so they are more
natural. This is achieved by means of:

i. Correction at the morphosyntactic
level: genre and number concordance,
or correct conjugation of verbal tenses.
The more inflective the term is, the
more impact this aspect produces.

144



ii. Compensating for syntactic deficien-
cies in the input, as much as possi-
ble. For example, the user omits pic-
tograms about articles or prepositions,
but in some cases the grammar could
assign “default” values.

(b) It is easy to translate to other languages
and means of communication.

3. A common ontology makes it possible to share
knowledge about the language model that users
are able to understand and produce. In this way,
a teacher (usually a language therapist) uses a
computer-aid system in order to improve the
verbal behavior of a given student (therapeutic
software).

In addition, the same student could use an aug-
mentative and adaptive communicator (palliative
software). If the language of the student is formally
modeled then it is possible that both the therapeutic
and palliative software share the same knowledge,
creating a homogeneous learning ecosystem. For
example, if the teacher is teaching the expression
I want (also know as a mand according to Skinner
(Chomsky, 1959)), then the student will have access
to specific exercises for this expression and, in addi-
tion, she could use the expression in her own com-
municator. This is the case of Pictogrammar as a
system rather than as a standalone communicator:
the language therapist defines every detail of the vo-
cabulary for every student by using a cloud-based
application (an application program that functions in
the cloud) that, in the end, is an authoring tool used
to produce new knowledge. Meanwhile, the stu-
dent learns and uses such a language by using their
own Android device (smartphone or tablet) with our
communication app, an authoring tool to make use
of the same piece of knowledge (see Figure 5).

Some of these components are detailed in section
5 when explaining the integration of Pictogrammar,
SUpO and PictOntology.

3 SUpO, a simple upper Ontology

SUpO (Martı́nez-Santiago et al., 2015) models
generic and basic knowledge about the world such as
the main properties and uses of everyday concepts:
food, toys, places, persons, etc. On the other hand,

there are several upper ontologies available such as
DOLCE (Masolo et al., 2003) (Descriptive Ontology
for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering), SUMO
(Pease, 2006) (Suggested Upper Merged Ontology)
or OpenCyC 7. All of them formally define concepts
of the world and are filled with axioms and rules
for tasks which concern reasoning and planning, but
they have no semantic detail, especially predicate-
argument structure. Since one of the highlights of
SUpO is the provision of support tools to improve
communicative skills, this ontology has special in-
terest in modeling the semantic level of the lan-
guage. Thus, SUpO is oriented to a more suitable
form for language modeling: FrameNet (Baker et
al., 1998) and the Resource Grammar Library of
Grammatical Framework (GF) (Ranta, 2011).

The semantic model of SUpO is an adaptation and
specialization of a small piece of FrameNet, which
provides the taxonomy of concepts on which SUpO
is designed.

The syntactic and morphosyntactic modules are
implemented with Grammatical Frameworks and
Grammatical Framework Resource Grammar Li-
brary, which is available for more than 20 languages,
including English and Spanish.

An important property of Grammatical Frame-
works is that they are designed to support multilin-
gual grammars, and the translation between gram-
mars which share the same representation of mean-
ings is automatic. From this point of view, it is
possible to define PictOntology as the SUpO ver-
sion whose vocabulary is concreted by means of pic-
tograms.

4 PictOntology

This section is a brief description of PictOntology, a
straightforward ontology to manage a collection of
pictograms linked to SUpO. PictOntology is part of
Pictogrammar, but it could be reused in future appli-
cations where pictograms are involved.

Pictograms provide a visual representation of a
concept. We have chosen pictograms as the visual
representation of every concept included in SUpO.
Thus, our ontology is made up of 621 pictograms be-
longing to SymbolStix8 collection. We have chosen

7available at http://sw.opencyc.org/
8https://www.n2y.com/products/symbolstix

145



Figure 5: Shared vocabulary between teacher(left) and student(right).

SymbolStix because it is a comprehensive collection
of symbols (about 12,000 symbols) which covers a
wide range of categories such as Geography, Sports,
Logos, People, Health, Technology, Food and Drink,
and many others.

The construction of PictOntology is mainly an in-
tegration process with the ontology for media re-
sources, which is a recommendation of the W3C (the
Media Resource Ontology (Champin et al., 2012)).
The intent of the ontology for media resources is to
bridge the different descriptions of media resources,
and to provide a core set of descriptive properties.
It defines a core set of metadata properties for me-
dia resources, along with their mappings to elements
from a set of existing metadata formats. PictOnto-
logy reuses several concepts and attributes concern-
ing Exchangeable Image File Format (EXIF), au-
thoring and creator. Thus, PictOntology could be
defined as a specialization of the ontology for me-
dia resources where we have established additional
properties and a taxonomy of the pictograms (see
Table 1).

The definition of each category in PictOntology
is similar to the SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) idea
of category: a category is made up of words which
are intended to be used as constituents of the same
semantic role. In any case, the PictOntology def-
inition of category is more restrictive: a PictOnto-
logy category groups together pictograms which na-
turally evoke multiple ideas about the same concept
(the category) and, moreover, share the same part of
speech. In this way, we have defined 35 different
categories. Some examples are shown in Table 2.
The goals behind it are:

• To simplify and make intuitive the location of
every pictogram as much as possible.

• The integration of PictOntology whitin SUpO.
It is possible to define PictOntology as the con-
cretion of SUpO by using a vocabulary based
on pictograms so that every PictOntology cat-
egory has a one-to-one relation with a SUpO
category.

• To group together similar categories, if needed.
Categories are pictograms themselves, thus a
category could be part of a more general cat-
egory. This is useful, for example, for adapting
the rendering of categories to different screen
resolution (the bigger the screen, the more cat-
egories)9.

Since PictOntology is based on Media Resource
Ontology, we have formalized PictOntology in the
same way that Media Resource Ontology is formal-
ized, i.e. by using the Web Ontology Language
(OWL) (Horrocks et al., 2012).

5 Improving communication strategies
using Pictogrammar

In this section we outline some available commu-
nicative strategies by using Pictogrammar which are
possible by means of both SUpO and PictOntology.

9The current version of the AAC device of Pictogrammar is
optimized to be used on 7 inches displays. It makes possible to
include 50 categories x 50 concepts per category approximately.
It provides access up to 2500 concepts by implementing a two-
click category + concept pattern

146



Name DataType Description
ma:identifier identifier:URI,

type:String
The file which contains the pictogram

ma:title title:String, type:String The English name of the pictogram. This name is
usually equivalent to its expression in English.

ma:language String Usually, pictograms are language-independent but
sometimes are localized for a given language or cul-
ture, e.g. calendars.

ma:creator String The creator of the resource
ma:contributor identifier:URI—String,

role:String
The ID of the person who added the pictogram to the
ontology

ma:collection URI—String Name of the collection it belongs to
ma:relation identifier:URI, rela-

tion:String
“is-a” relation between a pictogram and its category

pt:expressions List of lang:String, ex-
pression: String

The textual translation of the pictogram in the group
of supported languages

pt:level {“transparent” “learned”
“abstract”} • “transparent” symbols are very obvious depic-

tions of the concepts that they illustrate.

• “learned”: the meaning needs to be learned.
The consistent nature of learned symbols
means that the concepts they represent become
obvious when they are shown together.

• “abstracts”: symbols that have no obvious
meaning when viewed on their own, and typ-
ically represent determiners or adpositions.

pt:learned group String If a pictogram is learned, then it is consistent with
other pictograms relative to the same concept. This
label is shared for the learned pictograms relative to
the same concept. For example, in, on, under and
behind are all about “relative position”

pt:SUpO concepts { identifier:URI, type:List
of Strings }

The ID of SUpO concepts depicted by the pictogram

Table 1: Examples of properties of PictOntology

Category Description Examples
Flavours Usual adjectives regarding food tasty, spicy, salty, sweet
Moving verbs related to movement come, climb, dance, drive, drop, fly, follow, kick,

quit, run
Professions Names of well-known jobs teacher, bus driver, doctor, nurse

Table 2: Examples of categories in PictOntology

147



The American Speech Language Hearing Associa-
tion recommends that an AAC should be thought of
as a system comprising four components: symbols,
aids, strategies, and techniques (American Psychi-
atric Association, 2004). Strategy is defined to be
the way in which symbols can be conveyed most
effectively and efficiently. During the writing of
a sentence, Pictogrammar improves the strategy by
reducing the number of pictograms that the user
has available at a given moment. This makes pos-
sible the implementation of three complementary
strategies: predictive grammar, Language Acquisi-
tion Motor Planning (LAMP) and Motor Planning
overload.

5.1 Semantic predictive parser

Because of the use of a semantic grammar, the
construction of phrases using Pictogrammar is sup-
ported by a predictive parser(Angelov, 2009). Note
that this predictive parser is different to usual pre-
dictive text tools which are applied to the prediction
of possible words when typing the first letters of the
word, or the word taking into account just the gram-
matical role, not the semantic role. Since Pictogram-
mar predicts by taking into account the semantics of
the phrase, the predictions are much more accurate.
Moreover, the number of pictograms available while
the phrase is being constructed is reduced because
the user only has access to the pictograms which
make sense in the sequence. For example, if a user
writes “I want to eat” then Pictogrammar only shows
the most popular foods, other categories of foods
and properties of food. Pictogrammar knows this
from the patterns and categories found in SUpO.

In addition, since semantic predictive grammar
only allows her to write meaningful sentences, the
user receives feedback of the correct use of language
at the pragmatic level, which could be relevant from
a therapeutic point of view, although we have no ev-
idence for this at the moment.

5.2 Language acquisition motor planning

A usual criticism of AAC systems based on pic-
tograms is the high number of pictograms required
as the communicative user’s skills grows. Since
every word has its own pictogram, the user has to
spend a lot of time at first learning every pictogram,
and then finding out where the pictogram is located

in the SAAC. Language Acquisition Motor Plan-
ning (LAMP) (Baker, 1982),(Halloran and Emerson,
2006) is a suitable strategy for dealing with a grow-
ing vocabulary. In short, praxis or motor planning
is the planning and execution of a series of move-
ments. Language Acquisition through Motor Plan-
ning (LAMP) is a therapeutic approach based on
motor planning principles that can be reinterpreted
according to our purposes as follows:

• The motor patterns used to “speak” with the
SAAC must be consistent and unique, that is,
the user should not have variants in the way she
clicks and dives into categories in order to se-
lect the same pictogram in different situations.

• Each consistent pattern of one, two or three
“clicks” on the SAAC must always result in the
same term.

• These motor patterns are meant to reflect the
consistent and unique motor patterns that result
in the production of speech.

• The vocabulary sets in LAMP are organized to
maintain consistent and unique motor patterns.

Consistent motor patterns for word selection al-
low the development of automaticity in com-
munication but they are difficult to implement
in a low-tech SAAC because of the number of
pictograms. In such a case, consistently search-
ing for the location of desired symbols and
the placement of those individual symbols on
a strip requires more motor planning and cog-
nitive attention to the communication process.

Thus, the LAMP strategy is implemented in Pic-
togram as follows:

1. The predictive parser allows the user to hold a
reduced number of icons on the main screen.

2. The only way to communicate with Pictogram-
mar are pictograms (even categories are pic-
tograms)

3. Every PictOntology concept is associated with
a unique motor pattern.

148



Furthermore, motor planning is usually imple-
mented in systems which are not based on pic-
tograms but on icons with several meanings depend-
ing on every motor pattern which the icon forms.
But using pictograms which represent a concept or
idea is a valuable resource if you are interested in
teaching literacy (Flewitt, Nind, A Payler, 2009)
(Lacey, Layton, Miller, Goldbart, A Lawson, 2007).

5.3 Motor planning overload

Another advantage of using motor planning by
means of a predictive parser is that we are able to
design more compact boards by overloading motor
patterns, and this is not a minor issue because makes
it possible to implement Pictogrammar for smaller
screens which would make it easier to carry a de-
vice. Thanks to SUpO, it is possible to infer words
which are mutually exclusive, for example apple and
happy. Thus, two pictograms share the same motor
pattern only if such pictograms cannot be simulta-
neously available. For example, two words which
both represent fruits have to have necessarily dif-
ferent motor patterns, but if one word is about a
fruit and another word is about feelings, they could
share the same motor pattern since there is no way
to choose between both words in a given state of the
construction of a phrase. This issue is what we call
motor planning overload.

6 Conclusion and future work

In this paper we present Pictogrammar, a SAAC
based on PictOntology which has some remarkable
properties from a therapeutic and palliative point of
view, such as: (a) sharing of a common ontology
among students, language pathologists, family and
caregivers, (b) implementation of an effective pre-
dictive parser, (c) motor planning overload and (d)
generation of natural language which is grammati-
cally correct even if the input is not. We also de-
scribe PictOntology, an ontology developed to ma-
nage sets of pictograms. PictOntology is linked with
SUpO, a formal semantic which is made up of de-
tailed knowledge of facts of everyday life as simple
words, with special interest in linguistic roles. In ad-
dition, it is a model of correct use of the language at
the pragmatic level, since Pictogrammar only allows
the user to write meaningful sentences.

As future work, we want to measure the effective-
ness of this system in terms of speed of learning and
size of the vocabulary acquired, evaluating the sys-
tem with real users. The application this approach to
other disorders regarding literacy development and
oral acquisition of language is also under study. Re-
garding oral acquisition of language, we are encour-
aged in following this line since (Kasari et al., 2014)
showed that speech-generating-devices improve the
acquisition of oral, spontaneous, and communicative
utterances in school-aged, minimally verbal children
with autism.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by the Spa-
nish Government (grant TIN2015-65136-C2-1-R)

References

American Psychiatric Association. 2004. Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM). Wash-
ington, DC: American psychiatric association, pages
143–7.

B. Andy and F. Lori. 1994. The picture exchange com-
munication system. Focus on Autism and Other De-
velopmental Disabilities, 9(3):1–19.

B. Andy and F. Lori. 2001. The picture ex-
change communication system. Behavior modifica-
tion, 25(5):725–744.

Krasimir Angelov. 2009. Incremental parsing with par-
allel multiple context-free grammars. In Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 69–
76. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Collin F Baker, Charles J Fillmore, and John B Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th international conference on Computa-
tional linguistics-Volume 1, pages 86–90. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Bruce Baker. 1982. Minspeak. Byte, 7(9).
David Beukelman and Pat Mirenda. 2005. Augmenta-

tive and alternative communication: Supporting chil-
dren and adults with complex communication needs.

Pierre-Antoine Champin, Tobias Bürger, Thierry Michel,
John Strassner, WonSuk Lee, Werner Bailer, Joakim
Söderberg, Florian Stegmaier, Jean-Pierre EVAIN,
Véronique Malaisé, and Felix Sasaki. 2012. Ontol-
ogy for media resources 1.0. W3C recommendation,
W3C, February. http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/REC-
mediaont-10-20120209/.

149



Noam Chomsky. 1959. A review of bf skinner’s verbal
behavior. Language, 35(1):26–58.

John Halloran and M Emerson. 2006. Lamp: language
acquisition through motor planning. Wooster (OH):
Prentke Romich Company.

Ian Horrocks, Markus Krötzsch, Birte Glimm,
and Michael[tm] Smith. 2012. OWL 2 web
ontology language conformance (second edi-
tion). W3C recommendation, W3C, Decem-
ber. http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/REC-owl2-
conformance-20121211/.

Connie Kasari, Ann Kaiser, Kelly Goods, Jennifer Niet-
feld, Pamela Mathy, Rebecca Landa, Susan Murphy,
and Daniel Almirall. 2014. Communication interven-
tions for minimally verbal children with autism: A se-
quential multiple assignment randomized trial. Jour-
nal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 53(6):635–646.

H. A. Lim. 2011. Developmental speech-language train-
ing through music for children with autism spectrum
disorders: Theory and clinical application. Jessica
Kingsley Publishers.

F. Martı́nez-Santiago, M.C. Dı́az-Galiano, L.A. Ureña-
López, and R. Mitkov. 2015. A semantic grammar
for beginning communicators. Knowledge-Based Sys-
tems, 86:158–172.

Claudio Masolo, Stefano Borgo, Aldo Gangemi, Nicola
Guarino, Alessandro Oltramari, and Luc Schneider.
2003. The WonderWeb Library of Foundational On-
tologies Preliminary Report.

Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2001. Towards a standard up-
per ontology. In Proceedings of the international con-
ference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems-
Volume 2001, pages 2–9. ACM.

Adam Pease. 2006. Formal representation of concepts:
The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology and its use in
linguistics. In Ontolinguistics: How Ontological Sta-
tus Shapes the Linguistic Coding of Concepts. Mouton
de Gruyter, New York.

Aarne Ranta. 2011. Grammatical framework: Program-
ming with multilingual grammars. CSLI Publications,
Center for the Study of Language and Information.

150


