



















































Evaluative Pattern Extraction for Automated Text Generation


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 99–103,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

1 

Evaluative Pattern Extraction for Automated Text Generation 

Chia-Chen Lee and Shu-Kai Hsieh 
Graduate Institute of Linguistics, National Taiwan University 

she767219@gmail.com, shukai@gmail.com 
 
 

Abstract 

Getting travel tips from the experienced blog-
gers and online forums has been one of the 
important supplements to the travel guidebook 
in the web society. In this paper we present a 
novel approach by identifying and extracting 
evaluative patterns, providing a different lin-
guistically-motivated framework for auto-
mated evaluative text generation. We target at 
domain-specific observation in online travel 
blogs in Chinese. Results suggest that the se-
mantic prosody accompanying the patterns 
demonstrates that online travel bloggers prefer 
to employ tacit pragmatic strategy in pre-
senting their sentiment polarity in comments. 
The extracted patterns and their differentiation 
can be beneficial to identifying and character-
izing evaluative language for further auto-
mated opinion summarization and mac-
ro/micro planning in natural language genera-
tion (NLG) as well.  

1 Introduction 

With the rapidly growing use of the Internet, text 
mining, sentiment analysis, and evaluative lan-
guage analysis of online resources are becoming 
essential issues. Online travel blogs serve as main 
opinions and comments providers sharing their 
traveling experiences where the texts are con-
structed with authors’ evaluation about the travel-
ing. The automation of text planning in this do-
main has become highly demanded. This paper 
aims to propose a linguistic framework of working 
with evaluative expressions by examining domain-
restricted specialized discourse of traveling articles. 
Identifying the particular linguistic behaviors and 
patterns of evaluative language agglomerative 
structure would facilitate both the macro/ micro 
planning in NLG in this domain. 
In online travel blog articles, evaluative language 
is expressed in several kinds. lexical level terms 

such as ‘recommend’, ‘delicious’, and ‘surprise’, 
are explicit evaluations. Other than this, patterns 
are found and can be generalized into a certain 
fixed meanings in traveling domain. For instance, 
有 N味 ‘has the flavor/feeling of N’ is a common 
pattern used as in 有 家鄉 味 ‘has the feeling of 
home’, 有 台灣 味 ‘has the feeling of Taiwan’ as 
positive evaluation in the data. We propose to 
adopt pattern grammar (Hunston, 1999) in ap-
proaching the evaluative prosody widely occurred 
in the travel blogs. Pattern grammar focuses on the 
concept that meaning belongs to patterns, targeting 
on the recurring co-occurrences and the particular-
ly shared meanings of lexical item nodes. There is 
specialized domain-specific grammar not applying 
to general grammar, resulting a fixed meaning of 
patterns in that specific domain. As Sinclair (1991) 
said: “It seems that there is a strong tendency for 
sense and syntax to be associated”, suggesting that 
meaning and its patterns are highly related. Francis 
(1993) used the pattern v it adj as an example, 
which limits the choices of its lexical items on ei-
ther verbs or adjectives, indicating that the mean-
ing of a pattern is also limited and patterns will oc-
cur with words through semantic restriction. 
Therefore, patterns extracted from the texts should 
be the primary consideration and observation for 
natural language processing, particularly for se-
mantic and sentiment analysis, whether as for an-
notation, summarization or text generation. 

2 Literature Review 

In NLG, content determination is an essential pro-
cess to decide what is the communicated infor-
mation in texts (Reiter, 1995). In order to generate 
natural-language text, a system must be able to de-
termine what to include and how to organize the 
information to achieve its communicative goal 
most effectively. McKeown (1985) based on dis-
course strategies as a guide for natural-language 
text generation, which generated paragraph-length 

99



2 

responses. In domain-specific texts such as weath-
er forecast (Adeyanju, 2012), automated text gen-
eration is expected to have similar weather condi-
tions where its language pattern is observable. In 
traveling blog articles, the evaluative language is 
its dominant feature. Evaluative language has been 
researched since 1970s, starting from Halliday 
(1976), with others making further developments 
or moving on to new approaches such as Chafe 
(1986), Biber and Finegan (1989), Hunston (1994), 
Francis (1995), and Martin and White (2000). 
Hunston (1994, 2000, 2004) defined evaluative 
language as which is “expressed through language 
which indexes the act of evaluation or the act of 
stance-taking. It expresses an attitude towards a 
person, situation, or other entity and is both subjec-
tive and located within a societal value system”. It 
is the driving force behind virtually all communi-
cations. (Thompson and Hunston, 2000). Patterns 
of a word are defined as “all the words and struc-
tures which are regularly associated with the word 
and which contribute to its meaning”. The relation-
ship between patterns and lexis is mutually de-
pendent, in that each pattern appears with a limited 
set of lexical items, and each lexical item occurs 
with a restricted set of patterns. As patterns are 
highly associated with meaning, words sharing a 
given pattern will also tend to share an aspect of 
meaning (Hunston, 1999). 
With the concepts combination of evaluative lan-
guage and pattern grammar, we can discover that 
how evaluation is spread across texts with fixed 
meanings. The necessity of examining evaluation 
language is obvious in that online travel blog arti-
cles serve as the purpose for sharing comments and 
opinions to readers, and to find out if there are cer-
tain structures or patterns in the texts are utilizable 
for generating opinion summaries. 

3 Patterns and Evaluative Meanings in 
Content Determination 

The categorization of evaluation languages is di-
verse for different research purposes. To fit the 
communicative goal in the traveling context, where 
recommendation instead of neutral descriptions is 
needed, the following relevant attributes are target-
ed: attraction, hotel, restaurant, food, and event. 
Among these targets, evaluative expressions are 
realized in different aspects. For instance, main 

evaluated aspects for attraction are its environment, 
transportation, popularity, culture, and so on. 
While in food, its price, taste, quality, or quantity 
are main discussed issues. Table 1 shows the at-
tributes and their evaluated aspects. 
 

Attributes Evaluated Aspects 
Attraction Environment (space, design, atmos-

phere, weather), transportation, popu-
larity 

Hotel Environment (space, design, atmos-
phere), transportation, popularity, 

price, service 
Restaurant Environment (space, design, atmos-

phere), transportation, popularity, 
price, service 

Food Popularity, price, taste, quality, quan-
tity 

Event Environment (space, design, atmos-
phere, weather), popularity, prod-

uct(price, package, quality) 
 
Table 1: Lightweight ontology in traveling domain 
  
In this study, data are crawled from ten online 
travel blogs nominated as the ten most popular 
online travel blogs in GOLDDOT Award 20151, 
held by Pixnet in Taiwan, with 540 articles in total. 
A corpus-based approach is taken for exploring the 
data and extracting the patterns. As evaluated pat-
terns are embodied within sentences and flexible in 
its unit, there is no straightforward way to observe 
them in the corpus. Annotation is based on the at-
tributes mentioned earlier for categorization, using 
LOPOTATOR, an online linguistic annotation tool 
designed by LOPE lab2. One annotator is involved 
in annotation process. Chunks are considered as 
units for patterns detection, mostly restricted in 
phrasal units, where the evaluator and the evalua-
tion are included so as to know the relationship be-
tween the property of evaluated entity and the 
evaluation expression. For instance, chunk like 值
得一探的美景 ‘a beautiful view that is worth visiting’ 
will be annotated as with the evaluator 美景 ‘beau-
tiful view’ and its expression 值得一探的 ‘some-
thing which is worth visiting’. The processing 
pipeline is shown in Figure 1.  

                                                                                                                
1 http://2015golddot.events.pixnet.net/ 
2 http://lopen.linguistics.ntu.edu.tw:8001/lope.anno 2 http://lopen.linguistics.ntu.edu.tw:8001/lope.anno 

100



3 

 
Figure 1: Processing pipeline. 

4 Data Annotation and Analysis 

Different from previous linguistic formalisms 
(such as Rhetorical Structure Theory) used in doc-
ument structuring, where the main focus is hierar-
chical construct of messages, the evaluative pat-
tern grammar as proposed in this paper explores 
the linear interaction of lexis and configuration at 
the evaluative level. In our corpus, lexical items 
are explicitly observable evaluation, such as 大 
‘big’, 新 ‘new’, 好 ‘good’, 分享 ‘share’, 推薦 ‘rec-
ommend’, 喜歡 ‘like’, and 享受 ‘enjoy’ are fre-
quently occurred in the data. Our primary attention 
here is to extract the fixed patterns denoting fossil-
ized polarity in evaluation co-occurring with a va-
riety of word choices.  

 
Manual annotation for patterns extraction in online 
travel blog articles provides an exhaustive result of 
all possible evaluative use.  
In all annotated units, expressions with similar 
meanings and structures can be generalized into 
patterns, generating a fixed basic meaning, where 
they seem to be neutral but denote a polarity when 
used in a context. Table 2 summaries the patterns 
listed by different aspects, with a symbol ‘+’ and ‘-’ 
representing the polarity being positive or negative 
the pattern implies. Due to limit of pages a few 
patterns are listed as instances. Whenever a pattern 
occurs, it brings out a value merging with the 
meaning of its variant noun, verb, or adjectives. 非
常有 N 味 ‘so full of N’s flavor or feeling’ is taken 
as an example. In this pattern, it’s the comment on 
the food evaluator that it is ‘full of the flavor or 
feeling’ of the noun phrase, with implicit neutral 
evaluation until noun phrase is filled in, such as 非
常有 家鄉 味 and realized as the meaning of ‘full of 
home’s feeling; the food makes you feel or think of 
home’, gaining positive evaluation.

Patterns Instances Polarity 
[N直逼 N] 

‘N can nearly compete with N’ 
設計感  直逼  W Hotel 

‘its design can compete with W Hotel’ 
+ 

[N 有梗] 
‘N is interesting’ 

空間  有梗 
‘the space is interesting’ 

+ 

[N  破表] 

‘it’s quite over of the degree of  N’ 
浪漫指數  破表 

‘it ‘s quite over of the degree of the romance’ 
+ 

[讓你有種 N的感覺] 

‘make you have the feeling of N’ 
讓你有種  家  的感覺 

‘make you have the feeling to be home’ 
+ 

[絕對是 N的 N] 

‘it’s definite N’s N’ 
絕對是  飯店  的  基本配備 

‘it’s definite the basic equipment of a hotel’ 
+ 

[N 對我來說已是 N] 

‘N is already N to me’ 
甜度  對我來說已是  極限 

‘the sweetness is already way too enough to me’ 
- 

[非常有 N 味] 

‘so full of N’s feeling’ 
非常有  家鄉  味 

‘so full of home’s feeling’ 
+ 

  [N 十足] 

‘a lot of N; high degree of N’ 
咬勁  十足 

‘high degree of texture’ 
+ 

[光是 V 就知它的 N] 

 ‘knowing its N just by V’ 
光是  看顏色  就知它的  粉嫩程度 

‘knowing its freshness just by looking at the color’ 
+ 

Table 2:  Evaluative patterns and data instances. 
 
Patterns shown in Table 2 are case-specific to the 
traveling domain, and they can be taken as self-
embedded evaluative meaning carriers which are 

useful cues in content determination in that a pat-
tern can simply be a comment unit shown a posi-

101



4 

tive or negative evaluation toward the evaluated 
targets.  
 

 
 

Figure 2: User interface snapshots of traveling 
recommendation searching and searching results. 

 
Figure 2 is a temporary template of user interface 
where users can search for traveling comments or 
opinions, and the comments can be either using the 
evaluative patterns generated from our work or the 
origin sentences from the author. 
Comments from several authors’ comments and 
scores of the traveling targets are useful when only 
searching for a single and specific target, such as 
Taipei 101 or W Hotel. However, common occa-
sions are that people want to know all possible 
comments on one target, such as recommendation 
for traveling in Tokyo, with all things might be ex-
perienced in Tokyo. Therefore, we create a simpli-
fied plan (exemplified in English version) as in 
Figure 3 for generating the evaluative summary 
from a single author’s traveling article. Parenthesis 
units such as ‘(name of the author)’ in Figure 3 are 
information to be extracted from the article, includ-
ing author’s name, places or things experienced by 
the author with comments. Evaluators are com-
ment units extracting from our pattern generation 
work. Both opinions are informative generation re-
sults. 
 

The blogger _( author’s name)_ came to 
_(traveling places)_ for traveling, where he/ 
she experienced __(place1)_, _(place2)_, 
_(place3)_, and _(place4)_. About _(evaluator 
1)_,  _(name of the author)_ like because 
he/she thinks that it is _(evaluative pattern 
1)_, particularly _(part of evaluator 1)_ is 
worth trying. In addition, he/ she also went 
to _(evaluator 2)_, and he/she recommended 
it because of_(evaluative pattern 2)_. Among 

that, _(part of evaluator 2 )_ is the most rec-
ommended one. … 

 
Figure 3. Simplified document plan. 

 
In short, the identification of evaluative patterns in 
texts, as inspired by usage-based linguistic pattern 
grammar theory, can be utilized as a key feature 
for domain-specialized research on opinion mining 
and generation in evaluative texts. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

Due to the socio-pragmatic reasons, the evaluative 
patterns found in online travel blogs have their 
own characteristics and therefore call for more at-
tention. On one hand, the recurrent linguistic 
means of evaluation as performed in texts of this 
genre are mostly beyond the word level; on the 
other hand, bloggers often tacitly organize their 
discourse of feelings or assessments in a relatively 
polite manner. It constitutes a challenge for content 
selection and text planning, more linguistic frame-
work should be involved in properly tailoring the 
data for potential users.  
The approach proposed in this paper can handle 
with affective contents as seen crucial in the opin-
ionated text mining and generation, has encoun-
tered its limitation mainly related to the annotation 
process. Manual annotation can achieve higher ac-
curacy in extracting possible patterns, however 
subjective annotation with only one annotator 
causes time-consuming and inefficiency problems. 
There are few studies relating to the evaluative 
language in online traveling blog domain, this pa-
per serves as a point of departure in discovering 
the evaluative patterns, and as a reference for prob-
ing into other domain-specific evaluative language. 
Patterns extraction can be applied to other domains 
and the annotated data can be used for automatic 
pattern extraction algorithms and for text summari-
zation in the process of document planning in NLG. 
For text generation, pattern is a significant feature 
as a representation of the sentiment or polarity to-
ward the evaluation. Automated patterns extraction 
will be a valuable progress in generating evaluative 
text summary. 

102



5 

References  
Adeyanju, I. 2012. Generating weather forecast texts 
with case based reasoning. International Journal of 
Computer Applications, 45. 

Biber, D., and E. Finegan. 1989. Styles of stance in Eng-
lish: Lexical and grammatical marking of evidential-
ity and affect.  Text 9.93-124. Special issue on The 
pragmatics of affect, ed. by Elinor Ochs). 

Chafe, Wallace and Nichols, Johanna. 1986. Evidentiali-
ty: the Linguistic Coding of Epistemology. Norwood, 
New Jersey: Ablex 

Francis, G. 1993. A corpus-driven approach to gram-
mar — principles, methods and examples. In Baker et 
al. (eds), 137–156. 

Francis, G. 1995. Corpus-driven grammar and its rele-
vance to the learning of English in a cross-cultural 
situation. In English in Education: Multicultural per-
spectives, A. Pakir (ed). Singapore: Unipress. 

Hunston, S. and Francis, G. 1999 Pattern Grammar: a 
corpus-driven approach to the lexical grammar of 
English. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 

Hunston, S. and Sinclair, J. 2000 ‘A local grammar of 
evaluation’ in Hunston and Thompson (eds.) Evalua-
tion in Text: authorial stance and the construction of 
discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Martin, J. R. & White, P. R. R.  2005.  The language of 
evaluation: appraisal in English.  Basingstoke :  Pal-
grave Macmillan. 

Sinclair, J.M. 1991. Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. 
Oxford: OUP. 

McKeown, K. R. 1985. Discourse strategies for gener-
ating natural-language text. Artificial Intelligence, 
27(1), 1-41. 

Reiter E. and Dale R. 1997. Building applied natural 
language generation systems. Natural Language En-
gineering, 3, pp 57-87. 

 

103


