



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 229–238,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Use of Features for Accentuation of ghañanta Words

Samir Janardan Sohoni
IIT Bombay

Powai, Mumbai 400076
India

sohoni@hotmail.com

Malhar A. Kulkarni
IIT Bombay

Powai, Mumbai 400076
India.

malharku@gmail.com

Abstract

Sanskrit is an accented language. The
accent is very prominent in Vedic San-
skrit but classical Sanskrit does not
make use of it. Accent is a disambigua-
tion device which can help to under-
stand the correct sense of a word.
Words in Sanskrit tend to fall in certain
grammatical categories like ghañantas,
vocatives etc. Words in a category tend
to have an accent governed by either a
general or a special rule of accentua-
tion. Pāṇini’s special (apavāda) rules
of accentuation for a specific category
of words can be studied along with the
general (utsarga) rules of accentuation
for the same class. The resulting body
of rules states all the conditions nec-
essary for accentuation of words from
that class. The conditions reveal a set
of features which can be used for de-
termining the correct accent. If the
features of accentuation for a class of
words is understood, computers can
be trained to accentuate unaccented
words from that class. This paper dis-
cusses some features of ghañanta words
and how the features can be used to
restore accent on unaccented ghañanta
words.

1 Introduction
Broadly, Sanskrit has two streams – Vedic
and Classical. The latter is known as bhāṣā,
the commonly spoken language which is the
main focus of Pāṇini’s grammar. The for-
mer is indicated in Pāṇini’s grammar by terms
like mantre and chandasi. Accentual contrasts
are one distinctive feature of Vedic. Dur-
ing the time Pāṇini developed his Sanskrit

grammar, accentuation must have been a fea-
ture of the language. Pāṇini has made pro-
vision for accents in the morphological ma-
chinery of Sanskrit – the roots (dhātus) and
suffixes (pratyayas). The Aṣṭādhyāyī lays out
the mechanisms for production of Vedic forms
as well as those in bhāṣā using the same mor-
phological framework. Accent was destined to
vanish from written form of classical texts –
none of the Sanskrit classics use accent. Clas-
sics would not have been able to use certain
alaṅkāras if accentual contrasts were in force1.

Accent plays an important role in ascertain-
ing the senses of words. For example, the
word jyeṣṭháḥ2 means elder when pronounced
with an acute final syllable. If pronounced as
jyéṣṭhaḥ3, which has an acute initial syllable,
it means praiseworthy. Both forms are created
by adding the superlative suffix iṣṭhan. An-
other example is the base arya which means
honourable, lord or someone earning a living
by doing business. If the word is pronounced
as aryá4 it strictly means a lord. If pronounced
as árya it can take other meanings.

Although classical Sanskrit lacks tonal con-
trasts, marking plain text with correct accents
can lower ambiguity and thereby contribute
to high-quality translations of classical San-
skrit texts. Marking plain text with correct
accents can help to reduce ambiguity by nar-
rowing down senses of words. Low ambiguity
can result in high-quality translations.

Pāṇinian grammar is generative – initial
1Devasthali (1967) pp 1 note 1 – kāvyamārge svaro

na gamyate
2The derivation begins as vṛddha + iṣṭhan. See

Aṣṭādhyāyī rule jya ca (A. 5.3.61). The accent is by
phiṭhsūtras, see jyeṣṭhakaniṣṭhayoḥ vayasi (P. 1.23).

3The derivation begins as praśasya + iṣṭhan. See
Aṣṭādhyāyī rule vṛddhasya ca (A. 5.3.62). The accent
is by ñnityādirnityam (A. 6.1.197).

4See aryasya svāmyākhyā cet (P. 1.18) and aryaḥ
svāmivaiśyayoḥ (A. 3.1.103).229



conditions coupled with the rules from the
Aṣṭādhyāyī lead to the final accented form.
This might be the only way Pāṇinian grammar
is designed to work. How, then, can accent be
marked on unaccented words, such as those
found in classical texts, using the Pāṇinian
process? It seems that words have features due
to which they are accentuated a certain way.
If these features are learned and superimposed
on unaccented words, they can be given the
correct accent.

2 Notion of Compositionality

The meaning and accent of a sentence are com-
posed of the meaning and the accent of words.
Similarly, the meaning and accent of a word
are composed of the meaning and the accent
of morphological elements like roots and ter-
minations. Kulkarni et al. (2015) have shown
that sentences are based on the notion of com-
positionality.

An example of this notion of composition-
ality is shown in figure 1. Unlike sentential
meaning, sentential accent is not cumulative.
Sentential accent is not simply a concatena-
tion of accented words. Accented words such
as gopāláḥ (an agent), grāmáṃ (an object) and
gácchati (a verb) can be combined to form a
sentence which means ‘Gopāla goes to town.’
However, the concatenated form gopāláḥ grā-
máṃ gácchati is not a correctly accented sen-
tence. The correct rendering5 is gopāláḥ grā-
máṃ gacchati because the rule tiṅ atiṅaḥ (A.
8.1.28) makes all syllables of a finite verb low-
pitched when it follows something other than
a finite verb. Just like tiṅ atiṅaḥ provides spe-
cial syntactic conditions for accentuation of fi-
nite verbs, other rules lay down semantic, syn-
tactic and lexical conditions for accentuation
of many classes of words.

The accent on finite verbs is subject to
several sentence-level syntactic considerations
(See sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Aṣṭādhyāyī).
The rule tiṅ atiṅaḥ (A. 8.1.28) happens to
be one rule among many which regulates ver-
bal accent. This rule looks at the inter-
nal structure of adjacent words to decide if
a verb follows a non-verb. Some rules gov-
erning accent on compounds also look at

5Roman transliteration uses grave ()̀ for circumflex
(svarita) accent and acute (´) for the acute (udātta).

Figure 1: An example of how sentential accent
develops

internal structure of words. For example,
the compound mudga-cū́rṇam (paraphrased as
mudgasya cūrṇam) is accentuated by the rule
cūrṇādīnyaprāṇiṣaṣṭhyāḥ (A. 6.2.134). The
genetive suffix sya is elided in the process of
compound formation. The rule A. 6.2.134
needs to know if the first word of the com-
pound had a genetive suffix. Thus, the inter-
nal structure of words is important.

3 The Deep Structure of Words

The surface form of a word is the sequence of
phonemes, which are represented by graphic
letters. The word rājā is made up of the string
of letters r + ā + j + ā. The surface form is
the final form used in language.

For accentuation, meta information used by
Pāṇinian rules is required. The form of the
word which contains this meta information can
be called the deep structure of the word. The
meta information annotated in the deep struc-
ture is of two kinds. One kind represents the
saṃjñās and the second kind represents the
transformations of morphological elements.

3.1 The saṃjñā Labels
As a word is derived using Pāṇinian rules, sev-
eral saṃjñās are applied to various parts of
the word. These are Pāṇinian labels used in
grammar to identify morphologicial elements
so that operations can be applied to those el-
ements. These labels, such as dhātu (root),
pratyaya (suffix), etc. are pieces of meta in-
formation that belong to the deep structure of
the word. Any keyword, which is important
for a rule of accentuation, can be annotated
onto the corresponding substring of the word
in the deep structure.230



3.2 The Transformations

In Pāṇinian grammar, the derivation of a word
begins from an initial set of morphological af-
fixes. The morphological elements undergo a
transformation to become bits and pieces of
the final form of the word. Often, a rule of ac-
centuation specifies accent on an affix and that
accent is honoured even if the affix is trans-
formed later in the derivation. For instance,
in the third person singular lṛṭ (second future)
form bhaviṣyáti (will become), the typical suf-
fix sya is introduced by the rule syatāsī lṛluṭoḥ
(A. 3.1.33) and it has an acute initial syllable
due the rule ādyudāttaḥ ca (A. 3.1.3). Sub-
sequently, sya transforms into ṣya due to the
rule ādeśapratyayayoḥ (A. 8.3.59), but retains
the acute of the original suffix sya.

In general there are six different types
of transformations in Pāṇinian grammar as
shown in Figure 2. The initiation operation
(fig. (a)) refers to the first use (upadeśa) of
any kind of phonetic entity such as a root
or suffix. Carrying forward a phonetic entity
without any modification whatsoever is reten-
tion (fig. (b)). In retention the label upadeśa
is not applicable. In modification (fig. (c)),
several substitutions (ādeśas) can modify pho-
netic units as the derivation progresses. Dele-
tion (fig. (d)) refers to Pāṇinian operations
that elide phonetic units due to lopa, luk, ślu
or lup. In disintegration (fig. (e)) āgamas
(inserted elements) split the original phonetic
unit into multiple units. Combination consists
of combining multiple phonetic units into a
single one due to operations such as ekādeśa.

Figure 2: Types of transformations

3.3 Notation of Deep Structure
The transformations are shown using the left
arrow. The keywords are shown in square
brackets and apply to the immediate phonetic
unit on the left. If such a phonetic unit is an
aggregate having its own internal deep struc-
ture, parentheses are used around it.

As a matter of convention for easy read-
ing, the Devanāgarī script is mixed with Latin
script in the annotations of the deep structure.
The latter is used only to mark the saṃjñās.

The deep structure of the word bhaviṣyáti is
shown below.
(
(भ (्अव <्- औ <- ऊ) [udātta])[dhātu]
( इ ट[्lopa, it]
((ष <्- स)्
य ्
अ [udātta, active])
) [ārdhadhātuka, pratyaya]
(ित प[्lopa, it]) [pratyaya]
)

4 Words Ending in sup Suffixes
A sentence is made of words. The string of
words is not usually punctuated by spaces
in between. Old manuscripts show sentences
written with no spaces between words. In San-
skrit there are very few punctuation marks.
Perhaps the daṇda and the double daṇda,
which appear at the end of a half and full
verse, are the most commonly seen punctu-
ations. The daṇdas are ubiquitous because
there are no morphological markers for end of
the sentence or quarter of a verse.

The rich inflectional morphology of Sanskrit
supplies explicit (but non-unique) nominal ter-
mintions in seven cases and three numbers per
case. The rule svaujasamauṭ… (A. 4.1.2) lists
these suffixes in their raw form. Together the
collection is known as sup suffixes. A nominal
base can be used only after it is inflected. Such
an inflection is called a word (pada)6. How-
ever, due to some mechanisms7 the sup suf-
fixes may vanish blurring the word boundary.
However, the status of being a word is retained
in spite of this by virtue of rule pratyayalope
pratyayalakṣaṇam (A. 1.1.62).

6Whatever ends in sup or tiṅ suffixes is a word, cf.
suptighantaṃ padam (A. 1.4.14)

7The rule halṅyābbhyoḥ dīrghāt sutisyapṛktaṃ hal
(A. 6.1.68) deletes the su in words like rājā.231



Thus, the sup suffixes are an important fea-
ture which helps to establish the word bound-
ary of nominals. The feature can be marked
on words as shown in the examples below.
1) (राजा(स[ुluk,pratyaya])) [...]
2) (िववके
((((: <- र)् उ[lopa,it]) <- स)् उ[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]
) [...]

3) (पण (आत <्- ङिस[pratyaya]))[...]

5 Rules for ghañ-ending Words
Words ending in the suffix ghañ (ghañantas)
are formed by adding the ghañ suffix to
the verbal roots. The rules A. 3.3.16-55 of
the Aṣṭādhyāyī make ghañanta words possi-
ble. These rules apply the ghañ suffix under
coocurrence (upasarga + dhātu) and semantic
conditions. For example, the rule bhāve (A.
3.3.18) states that the ghañ suffix comes after
a root to show pure action regardless of doer-
ship. The rule akartari ca kārake saṃjñāyām
(A. 3.3.19) states that it ghañanta words indi-
cate appellatives in which an entity is coupled
with the action in a non-agentive manner. The
rule parimāṇākhyāyāṃ sarvebhyaḥ (A. 3.3.20)
allows any verbal root to receive the ghañ suf-
fix in order to show a measure of quantity.

The following rules control the accent8 of
ghañanta words.

1. ñnityādirnityam (A. 6.1.197)
This rule causes words to have acute ini-
tial syllables when they are formed using
such suffixes that are ñit or nit. ghañ be-
ing a ñit suffix9 will make the initial syl-
lable acute unless other rules override the
provision of this general rule.

2. karṣātvato ghaño'nta udāttaḥ (A. 6.1.159)
A. 6.1.159 overrides A. 6.1.197 and states
that karṣa (a ghañanta stem derived from
the verbal root √kṛṣã of the bhvādi group,
not the tudādi one) and other ghañanta
words that contain ā have a acute fi-
nal syllable. The words formed using
the ghañ suffix are nominal bases (prāti-
padikas) and get case inflection suffixes.

8In showing accent, the grave and acute diacritical
marks are used for svarita and udātta respectively.

9The ñ is a marker that gets elided during deriva-
tion.

Examples:
a) karṣá = √kṛṣã (bhvādi) + ghañ
b) pāká = √ḍupacaṣ (bhvādi) + ghañ

3. vṛṣādīnāṃ ca (A. 6.1.203)
The words that are part of the vṛṣādigaṇa
have an acute initial syllable. Vṛṣādigaṇa
contains ghañanta words as well as oth-
ers that are differently derived. The three
ghañanta words are kāma, yāma and pāda.
Example:
pā́da = √padã (divādi) + ghañ, Gaṇa:
vṛṣādi

4. tyāgarāgahāsakuhaśvaṭhakrathānām (A.
6.1.216)
The words tyāga, rāga, hāsa, kuha, śvaṭha
and kratha have an acute initial syllable
as an option in addition to their natural
accents which happens to be an acute
final syllable. Thus, there is an optional
accent in the case of ghañantas viz tyāga,
rāga, hāsa.
Example:
tyāgá, tyā́ga = √tyajã (bhvādi) + ghañ.

5. thāthaghañktājabitrakāṇām (A. 6.2.144)
This rule is from the domain of com-
pounds. When a ghañanta word ap-
pears second in a compound, the rule
gatikārakopapadāt kṛt (A. 6.2.139) would
have retained its default (prakṛti) accent.
One thing stated in rule A. 6.2.144 is that
a ghañanta word appearing second in any
compound, such as bhéda in the tatpuruṣa
compound kāṣṭa-bhedá, will have an acute
final syllable.
Example:
kāṣṭhabhedá = kāṣṭha + (√bhidir + ghañ)

6 Outlay of ghañanta words
Figure 3 shows a small window in the universe
of words. It captures the outlay of all ghañanta
words according to the rules listed above. The
text in italics refers to actual words that the
rules treat. Regular text only mentions the
categories that can be gathered by a sim-
ple analysis of the rule text. The category
called ñidantaḥ contains such words that end
in ñit suffixes stated in ñnityādirnityam (A.232



6.1.197). ghañantaḥ is a sub-category of ñi-
dantaḥ containing such words that end in suf-
fix ghañ. The rule karṣātvato ghaño'nta udāt-
taḥ (A. 6.1.159) treats ghañanta words hav-
ing ā and the bhvādi ghañanta karṣa specially,
therefore words from the Having-ā class be-
come another subclass of words within ghañan-
taḥ and karṣa is a special ghañanta word from
the verbal root √kṛṣã which appears in the
bhvādi and tudādi compilations of verbal roots
(gaṇas). The words tyāga, rāga and hāsa are
ghañantas but are specially treated in tyā-
garāgahāsakuhaśvaṭhakrathānām (A. 6.1.216)
so they form a subgroup within the Having-
ā class of words in addition to the subgroup of
vṛṣādigaṇa members kāma, yāma and pāda.

Figure 3: The outlay of ghañanta words.

7 Accentuation of ghañantas

Figure 4 shows the accent that each class of
ghañantas from figure 3 has. A string of ‘F’s
indicates that words in that class have an
acute initial syllable. A string of ‘L’s indicates
that the corresponding words have an acute fi-
nal syllable. A string of ‘O’s indicates that the
words from that class optionally have an initial
or a final acute syllable. A ñidanta (ñit-ending
word form) has an acute initial syllable due to
ñit accent of rule ñnityādirnityam (A. 6.1.197).
A ghañanta also has an acute initial syllable
because suffix ghañ is a ñit suffix. The class
of ghañantas called ‘Having-ā’ has an acute fi-
nal syllable according to karṣātvato ghaño'nta
udāttaḥ (A. 6.1.159). The specific word karṣa,
too, is accented by A. 6.1.159 provided that
it is not derived from the verbal root √kṛṣã
belonging to the tudādi group. The members
of vṛṣādi group of words have an acute initial

syllable as stated in vṛṣādīnāṃ ca (A. 6.1.203).
There are only three ghañanta stems viz kāma,
yāma and pāda that are members of the vṛṣādi
group of words. The class called ‘Without-ā’
contains ghañantas that do not have the sylla-
ble ā. Finally, the words tyāga, rāga and hāsa
are optionally accentuated on the first sylla-
ble due to tyāgarāgahāsakuhaśvaṭhakrathānām
(A. 6.1.216), in addition to being accentuated
like the GaYantas in the ‘Having-ā’ class.

Figure 4: Accents on ghañanta words.

8 Features for Accentuation of
ghañantas

Section §7 shows how ghañantas are accentu-
ated using Pāṇini’s rules. A derivation starts
from a set of initial conditions which enjoins
the ghañ suffix after a verbal root. Over the
course of a derivation, some of the rules ap-
ply at the right juncture to produce the cor-
rect accent. In case of A. 6.1.159, Pāṇini as-
sumes that being ghañanta is a feature of a
word and that this feature be made known.
Similarly, if a ghañanta contains ‘ā’, that too,
is a feature and must be made known so that
A. 6.1.159 may apply. Thus, features are nec-
essary for proper accentuation. All the fea-
tures necessary for accentuation of ghañantas
are discussed in this section.

In figure 4, each line segment is a feature.
Starting from the left hand side, the class ñi-
danta implies that ñit is a feature of the word.233



The next segment implies that suffix ghañ is
a feature too. The property of a word to have
the vowel ā is also a feature. Being a mem-
ber of the vṛṣādi group is also a feature of a
word. Since the rules explicitly treat specific
words like karṣa, tyāga, rāga and hāsa these
words also become features by themselves. If
all these features are noted on a plain-text
word, correct accent can be produced.

Though the set of features discussed above
cannot be compromised upon, all the features
need not be explicitly noted on the plain text,
for some can be deduced. The suffix ghañ is a
ñit suffix so ñit feature inheres and need not
be explicitly noted. Similarly, we need not ex-
plicitly note that the words contain ā. Finally,
the words tyāga, rāga and hāsa will be dealt
with in their respective rules and need not be
explicitly mentioned. Since A. 6.1.159 deals
with the word karṣa which is derived from the
verbal root √kṛṣã in the bhvādi list, it becomes
necessary to include the conjugational class of
a verbal root (dhātugaṅa) as a feature.

Table 1 summarizes the features that must
be noted on ghañantas for accentuation. The
contents within braces are meant to suggest
an option. The vertical bar separates the al-
ternatives.

SN. Feature Rule Rqd.
1 Suffix ghañ 6.1.159 Yes
2 Verb Group 6.1.159 Yes
3 Surface form has ā 6.1.159 No
4 Suffix ñit 6.1.197 No
5 vṛṣādigaṇa list 6.1.203 Yes
6 {tyāga

| rāga
| hāsa}

6.1.216 No

7 2nd word in a com-
pound

6.2.144 Yes

Table 1: Features of ghañantas

SN. Word Annotation

1 karṣa a) √kṛṣã (1) + ghañb) √kṛṣã (6) + ghañ
2 pāda √padã (4) + ghañ,

vṛṣādi
3 hāsa √hasẽ (1) + ghañ
4 veda √vidã (2) + ghañ
5 lekha √likhã (2) + ghañ
6 kāṣṭhabheda kāṣṭha + (√bhidir(7) +

ghañ)

Table 2: Examples of annotations on ghañanta
words

8.1 Represenation of Sense
The rules A. 3.3.18-20 (§5) discussed that
ghañantas are formed under three conditions –
(i) bhāve (pure action), (ii) saṃjñāyām akar-
tari kārake (a non-agentive term) and (iii)
parimāṇe (a measure of quantity). Although,
these are semantic conditions of formation
and not accentuation of ghañantas, they still
need to be represented in the deep structure
of ghañantas. The sense that these condi-
tions represent can be referred to by synset
IDs from IndoWordNet10. The synset ID
is a reference number assigned to a set of
synonymns. The sense can be annotated as
synset=<SynsetID> in the deep structure.
The senses and synset IDs are discussed below.

bhāve The sense of bhāva is represented by
the synset ID 12149 which is glossed as
kāraṇasya kārye parivartanasya avasthā
(state in which a cause produces an ef-
fect).

saṃjñāyām akartari kārake The word
saṃjñā can be represented by synset ID
8150 which is glossed as vyākaraṇaśāstre
prayujyamānaḥ saḥ śabdaḥ yaḥ vās-
tavikaṃ kalpitaṃ vā vastu bodhayati
(that word used in grammar which
conveys a real or imaginary thing). For a
purpose such as this, the idea of akartari
kārake can be captured by negating the
meaning of the word kartā (an agent)
represented by the synset ID 11886 and
glossed as vyākaraṇaśāstrānusāreṇa tat
kārakaṃ yat dhātvarthasya vyāpārasya
āśrayaḥ (according to grammar, that
role, upon which the action of the verb
totally depends - an independent agent)

parimāṇe The sense of the word parimāṇa is
given by synset ID 10743 which is glossed
as bhāraghanaphalādīnāṃ māpanaṃ yena
bhavati (that by which weight, volume
etc. are measured)

8.2 Artificial saṃjñās
The synset annotation is not a Pāṇinian
saṃjñā, yet the deep structure can be anno-

10http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet234



tated with it. The term active, used to in-
dicate the one active udātta among potential
ones, is another instance of a non-Pāṇinian
saṃjñā. It is used in the deep structure of
the word bhaviṣyáti in Section 3.3. It is not
necessary that only formally defined saṃjñās
be used in the deep structure. Pāṇini makes
use of terms such as pūrvapadam and uttara-
padam, without formally defining them, when
discussing samāsas (compounds). A fabri-
cated saṃjñā can also be used if it has a use.

8.3 Example of Deep Structure

Table 2 shows a few examples of ghañanta
prātipadikas (nominal bases). The examples
below show deep structure of masculine, nomi-
native singular inflections of some of the words
from Table 2.

1. pādaḥ
( (प (्आ[udaatta,active] <- अ) द ्अ[ँlopa,it]
)[gana=4]

(घ[्lopa,it] अ[udaatta] ञ[्lopa,it]
) [pratyaya]

((((: <- र)् उ[lopa,it]) <- स)् उ[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]

) [vrshaadigana, synset=!11886 & 8150]

2. hāsaḥ
Due to optional accent there are two

forms – hā́saḥ and hāsáḥ. The following
is the deep structure of hā́saḥ produced
by the rule tyāgarāgahāsa… (A. 6.1.216).

( (ह ्(आ[udaatta,active] <- अ) स ए्[ँlopa,it]
)[gana=1]

(घ[्lopa,it] अ[udaatta] ञ[्lopa,it]
) [pratyaya]

((((: <- र)् उ[lopa,it]) <- स)् उ[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]

) [synset=12149]

The deep structure below is for the form
hāsáḥ produced by the rule karṣātvato…
(A. 6.1.159).

( (ह ्(आ[udaatta] <- अ) स ए्[ँlopa,it]
)[gana=1]

(घ[्lopa,it] अ[udaatta,active] ञ[्lopa,it]
) [pratyaya]

((((: <- र)् उ[lopa,it]) <- स)् उ[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]

) [synset=12149]

3. lekhaḥ
( (ल ्(ए[udaatta] <- इ) ख अ्[ँlopa,it]
)[gana=2]

(घ[्lopa,it] अ[udaatta,active] ञ[्lopa,it]
) [pratyaya]

((((: <- र)् उ[lopa,it]) <- स)् उ[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]

) [synset=10743]

9 Deep Morphological Analysis
Sanskrit morphological analyzers are available
online on websites of JNU11 and the Dept. of
Sanskrit Studies (Univ. of Hyderabad)12. A
Sanskrit segmenter is also available at the San-
skrit Heritage Site13. Given an unaccented in-
put such as lābhaḥ, these morphological ana-
lyzers correctly analyse it as a masculine form
and produce the stem lābha and nominative
singular suffix. However, they do not produce
a deeper analysis of the stem lābha in terms
of derivational morphology to show that it is
derived from the suffix ghañ. Such analysis is
required for accentuation of ghañanta words.
JNU has a separate kṛdanta analyzer which
gives a deep analysis in terms of the root √ḍu-
labhaṣ, kṛt suffix ghañ and the nominative sin-
gular case.

Some of Pāṇini’s rules, such as A. 3.3.18-20
(Section 5), create kṛdantas in specific senses.
For semantic processing of kṛdantas which may
happen upstream in a stack of NLP applica-
tions, it would be good to provide deep analy-
sis of words along with senses that Pāṇini in-
tended. In the case of ghañanta words, vari-
ous features, including the accent, senses and
gaṇa membership, can be embeded in the deep
structure. For example, the word lābhás (a

11http://sanskrit.jnu.ac.in/morph/analyze.jsp
12http://sanskrit.uohyd.ac.in/scl/
13http://sanskrit.inria.fr/DICO/reader.fr.html235



pre-final form of the ghañanta word lābhaḥ) is
shown below.
( ( ड[्lopa,it]
उ[lopa,it]
ल ्
(आ <- अ)[udaatta]
भ ्
अ[lopa,it]
ष[्lopa,it]
) [dhaatu, group=1]

( घ[्lopa,it] अ[udaatta,active] ञ[्lopa,it]
) [pratyaya]

( स उ्[lopa,it]
) [pratyaya]
)[synset=!11886 & 8150]
The deep structure shown above can be pro-

duced by a morphological analyzer created
using the Stuttgart Finite State Transducer
(SFST14). The following snippet15 shows the
FST mapping16 from the string lābhas to the
corresponding deep structure. In the mapping
various portions of the word, namely lābh, a
and s, are mapped to different portions of the
deep structure using the language of the SFST
(see constructs having pattern x:y). These
portions correspond to the basic elements such
as the verbal root √ḍulabhaṣ from the first
(bhvādi) group, the suffix ghañ, and the nom-
inative singular inflectional suffix su.
< ( (q[lopa,it]
u[lopa,it]
l (A<-a)[udaatta]
B a[lopa,it]
z[lopa,it]
)[dhaatu,group=1]>:{lAB}

< (G[lopa,it] a[udaatta,active] Y[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]>:a

< (s u[lopa,it])[pratyaya]
)[synset=!11886 & 8150]>:s

When a string such as lābhas is given to the
transducer, the following output is produced

14http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/ schmid/tools
/SFST

15Snippet is actually a concatenated string, here it
is formatted for easy reading.

16The mapping uses the Sanskrit Library Phonetic
(SLP1) encoding.

which can be parsed as the deep structure of
lābhas.
< ( (q[lopa,it]
u[lopa,it]
l (A<-a)[udaatta]
B a[lopa,it]
z[lopa,it]
)[dhaatu,group=1]>

< (G[lopa,it] a[udaatta,active] Y[lopa,it]
)[pratyaya]>

< (s u[lopa,it])[pratyaya]
)[synset=!11886 & 8150]>

10 Prioritization of Features
In a traditional derivation, the maxim paran-
ityāntraghgāpavādānām uttarotaraṃ balīyaḥ is
used to decide which one of the many applica-
ble rules should apply. In the case of accen-
tuation of a ready word, such as tyāgaḥ, that
opportunity does not arise. Most features in
table 1 apply to tyāgaḥ. Which rule should be
used for accentuation?

The utsarga-apavāda nature of rules dis-
cussed in section 5 allows a prioritization tree
to be created as shown in figure 5. A solid ar-
row points from a high priority rule to a low
priority rule. In the case that a high priority
rule applies, it debars all the low priority rules
up the chain. For example, in accentuating the
compound kāṣṭhabhedá, the rule A. 6.2.144 will
debar the other rules. A dotted arrow shows
an optional rule. The rule A. 6.1.216 is an
optional rule. It does not debar A. 6.1.159
but provides an option to it. Accordingly, the
words tyāgaḥ, rāga and hāsa will be accentu-
ated in two ways (See example in Section 8.3
item 2).

The priority of the rules from figure 5 allows
a prioritization of the features to be created
as shown in figure 6. Accordingly, a feature
towards the bottom of the figure debars the
ones above it when connected using solid ar-
rows. A feature connected using a dotted ar-
row allow an option. When a high priority fea-
ture is found on a word, the corresponding rule
noted in the parenthesis should be used for ac-
centuation. In case a high priority feature is
not found the next level of features should be
checked and so on. If none of the special fea-236



Figure 5: The priority of accent rules for
ghañanta words

tures exist on a ghañanta word, it should be
accentuated by the rule ñnityādirnityam (A.
6.1.197) due to the feature ghañ.

Figure 6: The priority of conditions for accen-
tuation of ghañanta words

11 The Feature Arrays

All ghañanta words must have one or more
primitive features from Table 1. Each of the
prioritized conditions in figure 6 refers to a
bundle of features. The letter in the square
brackets indicates a bundle of features pro-
duced on a ghañanta word when the corre-
sponding condition is true. A bundle of fea-
tures can be translated into an array contain-
ing serial numbers of the corresponding prim-
itive feature from Table 1. Referring to figure
6, condition [A] can be represented by the ar-
ray ‘[1]’. Similarly the condition [E] can be
represented by the feature array ‘[1, 3, 6]’.

Table 3 shows the feature array correspond-
ing to each bundle of features. The ellipsis in
the array for cumulative feature [F] is meant

to show that other features can coexist but are
ignored because only features 1 and 7 are the
important in the context of compounds.

The primitive feature numbers may occur
only once in the feature array. They need not
occur more than once because their repetition
will not convey more information than what is
conveyed by using them once.

Indicator Array Acute Accent On
A [1] First syllable
B [1, 2] Last syllable
C [1, 3] Last syllable
D [1, 3, 5] First syllable
E [1, 3, 6] First or last syllable
F [1, 7, …] Last syllable

Table 3: Possible feature arrays for ghañanta
words

12 The Process of Restoration of
Accent

A morphological analysis, which containis el-
ements of derivational morphology, is neces-
sary for restoration of accent. A morpholog-
ical analyzer built on principles discussed in
Section 9 will be able to show accent in the
deep structure. However, some morphologi-
cal anaylzers, such as JNU’s kṛdanta analyzer,
produce derivational details but do not pro-
vide accent information. Depending upon the
availability of accents in morphological analy-
sis, there are two methods to restore accent on
plain ghañanta words.

In the case that derivational morphology of
a word is available without accent information,
a computer program can produce a feature ar-
ray using prioritized conditions shown in Fig-
ure 6. Given the feature array, accentuation
of the surface form can happen according Ta-
ble 3. If accent information is available, the
accent from the deep structure can be simply
copied onto the surface form.

A compound can be split using a Sanskrit
compound analyser into pūrvapada and uttara-
pada constituents. These words can further be
morphologically analysed to check if the sec-
ond one is a ghañanta. For example, kaṣṭhab-
heda can be split into kaṣṭha + bheda. bheda is
a ghañanta. A program can assigin ‘[1, 7]’ as
a feature array to the entire commpound and
accentuate it using Table 3.237



13 Conclusion and Future Work
The class of ghañanta prātipadikas17 was ex-
amined. utsarga and apavāda rules of accen-
tuation for suffix ghañ were studied. At least
seven features used to accentuate ghañanta
words were found. Thus, it is possible to create
a set of structural, semantic and accent-related
features for a specific morpheme by studying
the utsarga-apavāda rules related to that mor-
pheme.

Words in Sanskrit can be thought to have a
grammatical deep structure, different from the
surface form. The deep structure of words con-
tains structural elements like roots and mor-
phological suffixes. It also notes transforma-
tions of structural elements leading upto the
final form. In addition, it can contain other
features of the word such as senses and gaṇa
membership, if any. Synset IDs from In-
doWordNet are a good way to assign a cer-
tain sense to words for computational purpose.
In this paper, the deep structure for ghañanta
words was created by looking at some utsarga-
apavāda rules. A general deep structure can be
induced by a thorough study of Pāṇini’s rules
and how they interact with one another.

The deep structure shows the complete for-
mation of a word, including its accent. There-
fore, it can be used to build a morphological
analyzer that analyzes the derivational mor-
phology of words in addition to inflectional
morphology.

To mark accent on unaccented ghañantas
from classical texts, words will have to be mor-
phologically decomposed. Existing morpho-
logical analyzers, such as JNU’s kṛdanta an-
alyzer, can be used or new faster ones can be
developed using FST techniques. For restoring
accent on compounds having ghañantas for fi-
nal words, compound analyzers or segmenters
like the Sanskrit Heritage Site, will have to be
used.

Pāṇinian entities, such as the vṛśādigaṇa,
can be turned into computational resources for
accentution.

References
Kāśīnātha Vāsudevaśāstrī Abhyankara. 2001.

Svaraprakriyā of Rāmacandrapaṇḍita.
17kṛttaddhitasamāsāḥ ca (A. 1.2.46)

Ānandāśrama Publication, Pune, India.

Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. Indowordnet. In
In Proc. of LREC-10. Citeseer.

Raj Dabre, Archana Amberkar, and Pushpak
Bhattacharyya. 2012. Morphological analyzer
foraffix stacking languages: A case study of
marathi.

G. V. Devasthali. 1967. Phiṭsūtras of Śāntanava.
Publications of the Centre of Advanced Study
in Sanskrit Class C No. 1. University of Poona,
Pune, India.

Huet Gérard. 2003. Lexicon-directed segmenta-
tion and tagging of sanskrit. In XIIth World
Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki, Finland, Aug,
pages 307–325. Citeseer.

Gérard Huet. 2009. Sanskrit segmentation. South
Asian Languages Analysis Roundtable XXVIII,
Denton, Ohio (October 2009).

Brahmadatt Jigyasu. 1979. Ashtadhyayi
(bhashya) prathamavrtti, three volumes. Ram-
lal Kapoor Trust Bahalgadh,(Sonepat, Haryana,
India)(In Hindi).

Malhar Kulkarni, Chaitali Dangarikar, Irawati
Kulkarni, Abhishek Nanda, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2010. Introducing sanskrit wordnet.
In Proceedings on the 5th Global Wordnet Con-
ference (GWC 2010), Narosa, Mumbai, pages
287–294.

Malhar Kulkarni, Samir Sohoni, and Nandini
Ghag. 2015. Compsitionality in Pāṇinian gram-
mar. In Journal Gaurigauravam. Department of
Sanskrit, University of Mumbai., pages 90–94.
Mohiniraj Enterprise.

Peter Scharf, Pawan Goyal, ANUJA AJOTIKAR,
and Tanuja Ajotikar. 2015. Voice, preverb, and
transitivity restrictions in sanskrit verb use. In
Sanskrit Syntax, Selected papers presented at the
seminar on sanskrit syntax and discouse struc-
tures, pages 157–202.

Srisa Chandra Vasu. 1891. The Ashtadhyayi of
Panini. 2 Vols. Motilal Banarsidass Publishers
Private Limited, New Delhi.

238


