










































%


 
 
 

 

Perception of Lexical Tones by Swedish Learners of Mandarin

 

 

 
Man Gao 

Dalarna University 

mao@du.se 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Models of cross-language perception suggest 

that listeners’ native language plays a signifi-

cant role in perceiving another language, and 

propose that listeners assimilate non-native 

speech sounds to similar sounds in their native 

language. In this study, the effect of native lan-

guage on the perception of Mandarin tones by 

Swedish learners is examined. Swedish learn-

ers participated in an identification task, and 

their performance was analyzed in terms of ac-

curacy percentages and error patterns. The 

ranking of difficulty level among the four lexi-

cal tones by Swedish listeners differs from that 

found among English native listeners in previ-

ous studies. The error patterns also reveal that 

Swedish listeners confuse Tone 1 and 2, Tone 

3 and 4, and Tone 2 and 4, the first two pairs 

rarely being confused by English listeners. 

These findings may be explained with the as-

similation account: Swedish learners assimi-

late Tone 3 and 4 to Swedish pitch accents, thus 

they exhibit a unique pattern when perceiving 

the tones in Mandarin. 

1 Introduction 

Recent years have witnessed a rapid growth of Chi-

nese as a foreign language in Sweden, with an in-

creasing number of high school students choosing 

to study Chinese. Two major hurdles for Swedish 

students wishing to learn Mandarin Chinese are the 

tonal system and the orthographic system, i.e. the 

Chinese characters. Previous studies suggest that it 

is difficult for learners who are not from a tone lan-

guage background to acquire tones (Kiriloff 1969, 

Shen 1989). However, Swedish, along with a few 

other languages such as Japanese, have what are 

known as pitch accents. Pitch differences are used 

in more restrictive ways to contrast meaning among 

certain sets of words, as between anden ‘the duck’ 

and anden ‘the spirit’ in Swedish. Pitch accent lan-

guages are therefore often treated as being typolog-

ically intermediate between tone languages (e.g. 

Chinese) and non-tonal languages (e.g. English), at 

times even described loosely as having “another 

type of tone system” (McGregor 2015:346). The 

question whether Swedish pitch accents exert any 

influence on learning Mandarin tones is thus signif-

icant both from a theoretical and practical perspec-

tive (for Swedish teachers and learners). Therefore 

a pilot experiment was conducted to examine how 

Swedish learners perceive Mandarin tones and the 

possible influence of Swedish pitch accents. 

Cross-language perception research tends to be 

somewhat complicated, however. There are typi-

cally multiple related factors that come into play 

during the process of perceiving non-native speech, 

and many of these additionally often interact to a 

great extent (Jenkins & Yeni-Komshian, 1995). For 

example, the listener’s age, experience with the 

non-native target language, amount of exposure to 

the target language, and the degree of similarity 

with the native language, among many other factors, 

may affect how sound contrast of a non-native lan-

guage is perceived (Best, 1995; Flege, 1995; 

Yamada, 1995). Influence of the native language on 

the perception of a foreign language has consist-

ently proven to be significant across a wide range of 

studies (Wenk, 1986; Odlin 1989; Jenkins & Yeni-

Komshian, 1995). Among the theoretical models in 

this field is the Perceptual Assimilation Model 

(PAM) (Best, 1995). In brief, it focuses on the per-



 
 
 

 

ception of non-native speech contrasts, and hypoth-

esizes that listeners tend to assimilate non-native 

speech segments to the most similar ones among 

their native phonetic categories. Another influential 

model is the Speech Learning Model (SLM) (Flege, 

1995). It focuses on the learning of second lan-

guages (thus for both perception and production), 

and one of its suggestions is that learners relate per-

ceptually the sounds in a second language (L2) to 

the most similar sounds in their first language (L1). 

A deeper comparison between the models is beyond 

the present scope. However, while PAM and SLM 

differ in many aspects, they make similar hypothe-

sis in certain regards. In non-technical terms, if two 

languages have certain speech sounds that are 

highly similar, the listener will assimilate the non-

native sound to the native sound category in percep-

tion. In other words, learners will make reference to 

the native sounds when interpreting the correspond-

ing non-native ones if these are similar enough. This 

hypothesis has been tested on segmental categories 

across a multitude of languages (Best et al., 1988; 

Best & Strange, 1992; Flege, 1988; 1991; 1993; 

Guion et al., 2000; Polka, 1992; etc.). Thus far, 

however, a few studies have put them to test on pro-

sodic categories (Hao, 2014; Reid, et al., 2015; Al-

exander and Wang, 2016). 

A considerable amount of research has been de-

voted to the perception of Mandarin tones by non-

native speakers. To begin with, results suggest that 

discriminating and identifying Mandarin tones may 

generally be regarded as fairly challenging for lis-

teners from a non-tonal language background (e.g. 

Kiriloff, 1969; Broselow, Hurtig, Ringen, 1987; 

Shen, 1989; Chen, 1997; Wang et al., 1999). How-

ever, the relative degree of perceptual difficulty ap-

pears to vary across the four Mandarin tones. Sev-

eral studies on speakers from a non-tonal language 

background have found that Tone 4 tends to be the 

easiest among the four to perceive correctly, and 

Tone 2 and Tone 3 often considerably more difficult 

(Kiriloff, 1969; Broselow, Hurtig & Ringen, 1987; 

Hao 2012). English speakers tend mainly to confuse 

the Tone 2-Tone 3 pair, as well as the Tone 1-Tone 

4 pair (Kiriloff, 1969; Chen, 1997; So & Best, 2010; 

Hao, 2012). As mentioned previously, research has 

commonly found learners with a tonal language 

background to out-perform those with a non-tonal 

language background in various perception tasks 

(Lee et al., 1996; Liang & van Heuven, 2007). Un-

fortunately, so far few studies have examined the 

performance of pitch accent language speakers on 

the perception of Mandarin. So and Best (2010) in-

vestigated the perception of Mandarin tones by na-

ive listeners (having had no previous training in 

Mandarin) from three language backgrounds: Hong 

Kong Cantonese (tonal), Japanese (pitch accent) 

and Canadian English (non-tonal). They found that 

listeners with the tone language and pitch accent 

language backgrounds (Cantonese, Japanese) out-

performed those with a non-tonal background (Eng-

lish). However, the predicted assimilation between 

certain Japanese pitch accents and Mandarin tones 

sharing pitch contours was not found in this study. 

The authors’ explanation is that such mapping of 

similar pitch patterns across the two languages has 

not yet been established owing to the limited previ-

ous exposure to Mandarin tones. The current paper 

will report a small-scale study aiming to examine 

whether Swedish learners assimilate prosodic cate-

gories with similar pitch contours in Mandarin and 

Swedish in perception tasks. 

2 Prosodic categories in Mandarin and 
Swedish  

2.1 Mandarin tones 

Mandarin Chinese has four lexical tones and an ad-

ditional ‘neutral’ tone. Each lexical tone is carried 

by a monosyllable and is used to contrast lexical 

meaning. Table 1 below summarizes the tone sys-

tem in Mandarin. Conventionally, the four tones are 

named Tone 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively. Alterna-

tively, they may be referred to by their descriptive 

labels, corresponding to the overall shape of their 

pitch contour. Tone 1 (high level) is the only level 

(static) tone in Mandarin; the rest are contour (dy-

namic) tones. The neutral tone (Table 1, bottom 

row), sometimes referred to as ‘Tone 5’, only occurs 

in unstressed short syllables. It does not have a sta-

ble pitch height or contour but is dependent on its 

tonal environment.  

 

 

 

 

 



 
 
 

 

Tone Exam-

ple 

Pin 

yin 

Transla-

tion 

Descrip-

tive  name 

Tone 1 妈  mā ‘mother’ (high) 
level 

Tone 2 麻 má ‘hemp’ rising 

Tone 3 马 mǎ ‘horse’ low/low 
falling-

rising 

Tone 4 骂 mà ‘scold’ falling 

Tone 5 吗 ma ‘question 
particle’ 

n.a. 

Table 1:  Lexical tones in Mandarin (Chinese) 

 

Figure 1 displays the pitch contours of the four 

tones over time, extracted from four Mandarin fe-

male speakers’ production of the syllable ma in iso-

lation (Burnham et al., 2015:1461). The four tones 

span over the pitch range from low to high. Tone 1 

is a level tone that stays in the high pitch range. 

Tone 2 is a rising tone that rises from the mid pitch 

range to the high pitch target. Tone 3 is a low falling 

tone that reaches its low target and rises slightly at 

the end. Tone 4 is a falling tone that first rises to the 

high pitch range and then drops dramatically toward 

the pitch target in the lowest pitch range.  

 
Figure 1: Pitch contours of four Mandarin tones (Burn-

ham et al., 2015:1461).  

 

A system based on the Scale of Five Pitch Levels 

(Chao 1968) is often used to represent the Mandarin 

tones. The pitch range in divided into five levels of 

relative pitch height (from 1 to 5, low to high). Tone 

1 is represented as 55, which means that it starts at 

the highest level (5) and ends there (5). Tone 2 is 

characterized as 35, Tone 3 as 214 and Tone 4 as 51. 

An alternative characterization is offered within the 

framework of Autosegmental Phonology (Gold-

smith, 1976). The phonological representations for 

Mandarin tones contain two parts: register and Tone 

(Yip, 1980, 1989). In simplified terms, register in 

this system refers to the pitch range where a tone is 

realized ([-upper] for Tone 3 and [+upper] for the 

other three tones), and Tone specifies the direction 

of pitch change: H or L ([+raised] or [-raised]). Tone 

1 is then represented as H, Tone 2 is LH, Tone 3 is 

L and Tone 4 is HL.  

2.2 Swedish pitch accents 

Along with Norwegian and Japanese, Swedish is la-

belled as a pitch accent language, or alternately a 

word accent language. Swedish has two pitch ac-

cents: Accent 1 (‘acute’) and Accent 2 (‘grave’). 

Like lexical tones in Mandarin, they may contrast 

the meaning between words containing the same 

segmental string. Unlike lexical tones in Mandarin, 

however, the Swedish accents do not contrast mon-

osyllabic words in Swedish, and Accent 2 is only 

seen in words with more than one syllable (Elert 

1981). Various analyses argue that the distribution 

of the two accents may be accounted for with pho-

nological and morphological rules (Bruce 1977, 

Gårding 1977, Riad 1996). There are only about 350 

(Elert 1971) to 500 minimal pairs (Clark & Yallop, 

1990) relying on the pitch accent contrast.  

 
Figure 2: Schematic representation of pitch accents in 
Central Standard Swedish (Adopted from Engstrand 

1997:62). 

 

Figure 2 illustrates a schematic representation of the 

two accents in Central Standard Swedish. Accent 1 

is described as a ‘single falling’ tone that has only 

one peak. Accent 2 has two peaks, reflecting pri-

mary and secondary stress respectively (Malmberg 

1963).  

Figure 3 displays the pitch contours of the two 

Swedish pitch accents over time, extracted from 

three female Swedish speakers’ productions of di-

syllabic words (Burnham et al., 2015:1462). The 

Tone 1       Tone 2                 Tone 3  Tone 4 



 
 
 

 

single falling pitch contour of Accent 1 is most eas-

ily seen when the entire word is considered. For the 

disyllabic word carrying Accent 2, the two separate 

peaks are discernible by a falling contour on each of 

the syllables.  

 
Figure 3: Pitch contours of two Swedish pitch accents 

(Burnham et al., 2015:1462). 

 

Bruce (1986) proposed a phonological representa-

tion for the two Swedish pitch accents within the 

framework of Autosegmental Phonology (Gold-

smith, 1976). He used a star notation (*) to represent 

the association between tone and the stressed sylla-

ble. Accent 1 is represented as HL* and Accent 2 as 

H*L. Bailey (1988) adopted a similar representa-

tion: HL is used to represent the single falling accent 

(Accent 1), and HLHL for the double peaks of Ac-

cent 2. However, he proposed that the underlying 

representation of the two pitch accents is the same: 

HL. 

2.3 A comparison 

Having touched upon the basic phonetic features 

and the phonological treatment of the prosodic sys-

tems in Mandarin and Swedish, a brief comparison 

between Chinese tones and Swedish pitch accents 

will be offered. To begin with, both languages use 

tonal (pitch) variations to contrast meaning, alt-

hough only a subset of Swedish words rely on such 

contrast. Secondly, the falling pitch contour is found 

in both languages, as evidenced by pitch contours 

extracted from empirical data and phonological rep-

resentations. In Swedish, disyllabic words carrying 

Accent 1 have the falling contour (mainly) on the 

second syllable, whereas disyllabic words carrying 

Accent 2 display two consecutive falling contours, 

                                                                                                            
1 Though these students may speak a form of Swedish that 

is different from the Swedish presented in Figure 3, it has 

been reported in the literature (Gårding, 1977; Riad, 1996) 

that Swedish dialects vary mainly in terms of the timing 

pattern between the peak and the segmental string for both 

one on each syllable. In Mandarin Chinese, the fall-

ing contour is seen in (single) syllables carrying 

Tone 3 or Tone 4. Thirdly, Tone 3 and 4 differ from 

Swedish pitch accents in manner. For Tone 3, the 

falling contour is followed by a slight rise at the end, 

when pronounced in isolation. Tone 4 displays a 

very sharp fall from the highest to the lowest pitch 

level. The falling contour is not quite as dramatic for 

Tone 3, in line with its labelling as ‘214’ in Chao’s 

(1968) Scale of Five Pitch Levels and as ‘L’ in Yip’s 

framework (1980, 1989). However, empirical data 

of the Swedish pitch accents (Burnham et al., 2015) 

clearly reveals that neither accent is associated with 

a dramatically falling contour when compared to the 

Chinese tones. Finally, Mandarin Tone 1 is a level 

(static) tone, a type not found in Swedish. Tone 2 

has a rising tone, displaying a pitch rise throughout 

the carrier syllable, thus also not resembling any of 

the Swedish pitch accents in terms of associated 

pitch contour. 

3 Method 

16 high school students (10 Male and 6 Female) 

who have studied Mandarin Chinese as modern lan-

guage for 3 to 4 terms participated in an identifica-

tion task. They were recruited from two high 

schools located in Jönköping and Västra Göta-

land Counties respectively. Twelve (10M, 2F) stu-

dents are from the school in Västra Götaland and 

study Chinese for 120 minutes per week; four are 

from the school in Jönköping and study Chinese for 

180 minutes weekly. All students are native speak-

ers of Swedish1, and except Mandarin Chinese they 

all have knowledge of one or two non-tonal lan-

guages as foreign or second language (e.g. English, 

German). All of them were very used to reading and 

writing Pinyin (the Chinese phonetic alphabet).   

The listening material included a total of 40 to-

kens of 10 different syllables: ba, pao, fa, ge, mo, 

pi, tan, wan, ya and yi. These syllables were chosen 

because they can carry all four lexical tones in Man-

darin. They furthermore consist of consonants and 

vowels which are commonly found in other lan-

guages and were considered less challenging for the 

accents, and the number of peaks for Accent 2. As to the 

shape of corresponding pitch contours, the falling contour 

is seen in nearly all dialects for both Accent 1 and Accent 2 

(Gårding, 1977). 



 
 
 

 

students, who would thus be in a better position to 

focus only on the perception of tones. The tokens 

were presented to the Swedish learners in random 

order. Five monosyllables were added before these 

to act as fillers and warm-up items; responses to 

these five items were excluded from the analysis. 

A female native Beijing Mandarin speaker was 

recruited to produce the speech material for the per-

ception task. She was instructed to read a list of 

monosyllables in random order, and was recorded in 

an anechoic chamber. Acoustic data were collected 

at a sampling rate of 16 kHz with a Brüel & Kjær 

microphone. The distance between the speaker’s 

mouth and the microphone was adjusted for optimal 

output (about 30 cm). The speech output was cap-

tured on the hard drive. The recorded speech mate-

rial was subsequently reorganized using Praat (Bo-

ersma and Weenink, 2005) and presented to the 

Swedish learners in the form of wav format. In the 

perception experiment, every Swedish learner lis-

tened to the prepared listening material on a laptop 

using a headset and they were asked to complete a 

four-alternative identification task; after hearing 

each monosyllable, they had to select the corre-

sponding tone on a response sheet. Participants were 

given six seconds to respond before being presented 

with the next token. The decision time for a similar 

task was reported to be less than four seconds (So 

and Best, 2010).  

4 Results 

The students’ performance in the perception task is 

summarized in figure 4. Accuracy percentages were 

calculated separately for the two schools. Students 

from the school in Jönköping overall performed sig-

nificantly better than those from Västra Götaland, 

with the former scoring between 65% and 95% and 

the latter 37.5% to 80%. Significantly, however, 

both groups presented the same pattern in terms of 

the relative level of difficult among the four Man-

darin tones. For that reason the results for both 

groups will be pooled in the following analysis. 

The students’ accuracy rates indicate that Tone 3 

is the easiest to identify, followed by Tone 4, then 

Tone 1, and, finally, with Tone 2 being the most dif-

ficult. Paired samples t-tests show that only the ac-

curacy rates for Tone 3 and Tone 4 are not signifi-

cantly different (p=0.315); all the other combina-

tions are different at the level of p=0.020 (for Tone 

1 and 3 pair, and Tone 1 and 4 pair) or p=0.000. 

 
Figure 4:  Accuracy percentage of identification task. 

 

The error patterns for the identification task were 

also analyzed and compared. Table 2 displays the 

error matrix, in which the top row represents listen-

ers’ answers and the first column corresponds to the 

actual tone. Tone 1 is most likely to be misperceived 

as Tone 2 and vice versa. Tone 3 is most likely to be 

misperceived as Tone 4, but not vice versa; rather 

Tone 4 tokens, like Tone 1, are most likely to be 

misidentified as Tone 2. Some listeners were unable 

to identify a small number of tokens, most of which 

being Tone 2 syllables. 

Response 

 

Target 

Tone 1 Tone 2 Tone 3 Tone 4 unable 
to iden-

tify 

Tone 1 63.1% 27.5% 0.6% 8.1% 0.6% 

Tone 2 23.8% 44.4% 13.1% 16.3% 2.5% 

Tone 3 3.8% 4.4% 83.8% 7.5% 0.6% 

Tone 4 3.8% 19.4% 0.6% 76.3% 0 

Table 2:  Lexical tones in Mandarin (Chinese) 

 

In sum, Swedish students mainly display confusion 

among the following tone pairs: Tone 1 and 2, Tone 

3 and 4, and Tone 2 and 4. 

5 Discussion 

Results of the identification task show that the rela-

tively level of difficulty among the four lexical 

tones for Swedish learners is: Tone 2, Tone 1, Tone 

4 and Tone 3, from most to least difficult. In com-

parison, for English learners Tone 3 and Tone 2 are 

more difficult to perceive than Tone 1 and Tone 4, 

63.1

44.4

83.8
76.3

TONE 1 TONE 2 TONE 3 TONE 4

A
cc

u
ra

cy
 p

e
rc

e
n

ta
ge

 %

 



 
 
 

 

according to previous results2 (Kiriloff, 1969; 

Broselow, Hurtig & Ringen, 1987; Hao 2012, 

2014). The assimilation hypothesis from both PAM 

(Best, 1995) and SLM (Flege, 1995) may be used to 

account for this finding. Comparison of the Manda-

rin and Swedish prosody systems in section 2 above 

suggests that Tone 3 and 4 both exhibit falling con-

tours that resemble Swedish Accent 1 and 2. It is 

thus possible that Swedish learners assimilate Tone 

3 and Tone 4 in Mandarin to Swedish Accent 1 and 

2. Although Tone 3 receives the highest accuracy 

rate among the four tones, it is not significantly 

higher than the accuracy rate for Tone 4. The accu-

racy rates for the other two tones, Tone 1 and Tone 

2, on the other hand, are found to be significantly 

lower than Tone 3 and Tone 4. Following the same 

line of reasoning, this may be because they cannot 

map them onto any prosodic categories in Swedish. 

This is consistent with findings from Hao’s (2014) 

study: native English learners considered Tone 3 the 

least English-like lexical tone through an English-

likeness rating task, and also perceived Tone 3 with 

the lowest accuracy rate in the identification task.  

Analysis of Swedish learners’ error patterns lends 

additional support to the assimilation account. The 

most commonly reported confusions for native Eng-

lish speakers, namely those among Tone 2 and 3 and 

between Tone 1 and 4 (Kiriloff, 1969; Chen, 1997; 

So & Best, 2010; Hao, 2012), were not found for the 

Swedish students. Since Swedish as a pitch accent 

language differs from English as a non-tonal lan-

guage, it is maybe the case that Swedish influences 

the perception of Mandarin tones in a different man-

ner. For Swedish speakers, Tone 3 and Tone 4 are 

more similar to the pitch accents and to each other, 

and thus not difficult to differentiate from Tone 1 

and Tone 2 (this is especially true to Tone 3). The 

error patterns found in this study reveal that Tone 1 

and Tone 2 pair is most problematic for Swedish 

learners. Tone 1 is nearly exclusively misperceived 

as Tone 2, and majority of misperceived Tone 2 to-

kens were labelled as Tone 1. However, there is cer-

tain proportion of Tone 2 tokens misperceived as 

Tone 3 or Tone 4. In combined with the accuracy 
                                                                                                            
2 A direct comparison between the Swedish learners’ and 

English learners’ performance cannot be made in this study 

for two reasons. One is that the raw data from previous 

studies is not available, thus it is impossible to apply any 

statistical test to verify any observed differences. Secondly, 

though the current study employed similar experimental de-

sign as the previous research, other factors may differ, such 

rates reported in Figure 4, we may conclude here 

that the rising tone (Tone 2) is most challenging for 

Swedish learners. Another source of confusion for 

Swedes is the Tone 2 and Tone 4 pair, which is 

rarely found among native English speakers in the 

literature (Kiriloff, 1969; Chen, 1997; So & Best, 

2010; Hao, 2012). Maybe this is because Tone 2 and 

Tone 4 share some similarities in terms of pitch type 

(both are contour tones) and pitch height (Tone 2 

and part of Tone 4 are active in the mid to high pitch 

range), which confuse Swedish listeners. But in or-

der to verify this explanation, further research that 

examines Swedish speakers’ strategy (i.e. percep-

tual cues) when perceiving tones is recommended.  

The two groups of learners, both of whom had 

studied Mandarin for 3 or 4 terms prior to the inves-

tigation, performed quite differently in this study. 

Several factors may be contributing to this. One 

concerns the amount of exposure to the target lan-

guage (Mandarin). The Jönköping students studied 

approximately 60 minutes more each week than 

those students from Västra Götaland whom they 

outperformed. Second, brief and informal inter-

views with the two instructors indicate that they 

may have quite different teaching style. The teacher 

from Jönköping stated that she tried to speak as 

much Mandarin as possible in class, and put a lot of 

emphasis on improving students’ spoken profi-

ciency. The second teacher seemed to place a lot of 

emphasis on vocabulary and grammar, and to be 

speaking mostly Swedish to his students. Therefore, 

the differences between the two school students in 

the perception task may stem from their different 

proficiency level in Mandarin, especially regarding 

spoken proficiency 

6 Conclusion 

The current study is the first attempt to investigate 

whether Swedish learners assimilate Mandarin 

tones to Swedish pitch accents in perception. It first 

provided a brief overview of the prosody systems in 

Mandarin Chinese and Swedish. Tone 3 and 4 in 

Mandarin along with Accent 1 and 2 in Swedish 

as participants’ Chinese proficiency level and the speech 

material used in the listening tasks, etc. It is highly recom-

mend to conduct a future study that compares the error pat-

terns from matched groups of Swedish and English speak-

ers using the same listening materials.  



 
 
 

 

have a falling contour; they also receive similar pho-

nological representation. According to the two 

cross-language perception models PAM and SLM, 

the non-native listeners are expected to assimilate 

the non-native sound to the closest native sound cat-

egory in perception. Two groups of Swedish learn-

ers participated into a Mandarin tone identification 

task. The results showed that they could identify 

Tone 3 and 4 with a higher degree of accuracy than 

the other two tones, which is consistent with the as-

similation hypotheses in both PAM and SLM mod-

els. Furthermore, analysis of the error patterns pro-

vided additional support for the assimilations hy-

pothesis. This study therefore constitutes an attempt 

to extend the PAM and SLM models to prosodic 

categories, and also revealed possible clues regard-

ing the effect of Swedish pitch accents on learners’ 

perception of Mandarin tones. Further research is 

clearly needed, however, especially into (1) as-

sessing the perceptual similarity between Manda-

rin tones and Swedish pitch accents; and (2) ana-

lyzing Swedish learners’ production of Mandarin 

tones for a complete understanding of the acqui-

sition of Mandarin tones by Swedish learners. 

Acknowledgments 

I would like to thank the Swedish students who par-

ticipated in this study and their teachers who helped 

me to collect the data. 

References  

Jennifer Alexander and Yue Wang. 2016. Cross-language 

Lexical-tone Identification. In Proceedings of the 5th 

International Symposium on Tonal Aspects of Lan-

guages (TAL 2016), 28-32. New York. 

Leslie M. Bailey. 1988. A Non-linear analysis of Pitch 

Accent in Swedish. Linguist, 75:103-204. 

Catherine T. Best. 1995. A direct realist view of cross-

language speech perception. In Winifred Strange (ed.), 

Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues 

in Cross-Language Research. Timonium, MD: York 

Press. pp.171–204. 

Catherine T. Best, Gerald W. McRoberts, and No-

mathemba M. Sithole. 1988. Examination of percep-

tual reorganization for nonnative speech contrasts: 

Zulu click discrimination by English-speaking adults 

and infants. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Hu-

man Perception and Performance, 4:45-60. 

Catherine T. Best and Winifreed Strange. 1992. Effects of 

phonological and phonetics factors on cross language 

speech perception on approximants. Journal of pho-

netics, 20:305-330. 

Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2005. Praat: doing 

phonetics by computer (Version 5.1.15). Retrieved 

from http://www.praat.org/. 

Ellen Broselow, Richard R. Hurtig, and Catherine 

Ringen. 1987. The perception of second language 

prosody. In G. Ioup and S.H. Weinberger (eds.), Inter-

language Phonology: The Acquisition of Second Lan-

guage Sound System. Cambridge, Newbury House 

Publishers. pp. 350-361. 

Gösta Bruce. 1977, Swedish Word Accents in Sentence 

Perspective. Lund: Gleerup.  

Gösta Bruce. 1986. How floating is focal accent? In K. 

Gregersen and H. Bosbøll (eds.), Nordic prosody IV. 

Odense University Press. pp. 41–49. 

Denis Burnham, Benjawan Kasisopa, Amanda Reid, Su-

daporn Luksaneeyanawin, Francisco Lacerda, Vir-

ginia Attina, Nan Xu Rattanasone, Iris-Corinna 

Schwarz and Diane Webster. 2015.  Universality and 

language-specific experience in the perception of lex-

ical tone and pitch. Applied Psycholingustics, 366: 

1450-1491. 

Yuen Ren Chao. 1968. A Grammar of Spoken Chinese. 

Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Qinghai Chen. 1997. Toward a sequential approach for 

tonal error analysis. Journal of the Chinese Language 

Teachers Association, 32:21–39. 

John Clark and Colin Yallop. 1990. An introduction to 

phonetics and Phonology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

Claes-Christian Elert. 1971. Tonality in Swedish: Rules 

and a List of Minimal Pairs. Umeå: Umeå University 

Department of Phonetics. 

Claes-Christian Elert. 1981. Ljud och ord i svenskan 2. 

Acta Universitatis Umensis, Umeå Studies in the Hu-

manities, vol. 40. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell 

International. 

Olle Engstrand. 1997. Phonetic interpretation of the word 

accent contrast in Swedish: evidence from spontane-

ous speech. Phonetica, 54:61–75. 

James Emil Flege. 1988. Factors affecting degree of per-

ceived foreign accent in English sentences. Journal of 

the Acoustical Society of America, 84:70-79. 

James Emil Flege. 1991. The interlingual identification 

of Spanish and English vowels: orthographic evi-

dence. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-

chology, 43A(3):701-731. 

James Emil Flege. 1993. Production and perception of a 

novel, second-language phonetic contrast. Journal of 

the Acoustical Society of America, 93:1589-1608. 

James Emil Flege. 1995. Second language speech learn-

ing: Theory, findings, and problems. In Winifred 

Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Expe-

rience: Issues in Cross-language Research. Timo-

nium, MD: York Press. pp.233–277. 



 
 
 

 

John Goldsmith. 1976. Autosegmental Phonology. MIT 

dissertation.  

Susan G. Guion, James Emil Flege, Rieko Akahane 

Yamada, and Jesica C. Pruitt. 2000. An investigation 

of current models of second language speech percep-

tion: The case of Japanese adults’ perception of Eng-

lish consonants. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 

America, 1075:2711–2724. 

Eva Gårding. 1977. The Scandinavian word accents. 

Lund: Gleerup. 

Yen-Chen Hao. 2012. Second language acquisition of 

Mandarin Chinese tones by tonal and non-tonal lan-

guage speakers. Journal of Phonetics, 40:269–279. 

Yen-Chen Hao. 2014. The Application of the Speech 

Learning Model to the L2 Acquisition of Mandarin 

Tones. In Proceedings of the 4th International Sympo-

sium on Tonal Aspects of Languages (TAL 2014), 67-

70. Nijmegen. 

James J. Jenkins and Grace H. Yeni-Komshian. 1995. 

Cross-language speech perception: perspective and 

promise. In Winifred Strange (ed.), Speech Perception 

and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Cross-Language 

Research. Timonium, MD: York Press. pp.433–463. 

Constantine Kiriloff. 1969. On the auditory perception of 

tones in Mandarin. Phonetica, 20:63–67. 

Yuh-Shiow Lee, Douglas A. Vakoch, and Lee H. Wurm. 

1996. Tone perception in Cantonese and Mandarin: A 

cross linguistic comparison. Journal of Psycholinguis-

tic Research, 25:527–542. 

Jie Liang and Vincent J. van Heuven. 2007. Chinese tone 

and intonation perceived by L1 and L2 listeners. In 

Carlos Gussenhoven and Tomas Riad (eds.), Tones 

and tunes. Volume 2: Experimental studies in word 

and sentence prosody. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 

pp.27-61. 

William Bill McGregor. 2015. Linguistics: An Introduc-

tion. New York: Bloomsbury Academic. 

Bertil Malmberg. 1963. Phonetics. New Yorker: Dover 

Publications. 

Terence Odlin. 1989. Language Transfer: Cross-linguis-

tic Influence in Language Learning. Cambridge: Cam-

bridge University Press. 

Linda Polka. 1992. Characterizing the influence of native 

language experience on adult speech perception. Per-

ception and Psychophysics, 521:37–52. 

Amanda Reid, Denis Burnham, Benjawan Kasisopa, et 

al. 2015. Perceptual assimilation of lexical tone: the 

roles of language experience and visual information. 

Atten Percept Psychophys. 77(2):571-591. 

Tomas Riad. 1996. Remarks on the Scandinavian Tone 

Accent Typology. Nordlyd: Tromsø University Work-

ing Papers on Language and Linguistics, 24:129–156. 

Xiaonan Susan Shen. 1989. Toward a register approach 

in teaching Mandarin tones. Journal of the Chinese 

Language Teachers Association, 243:27–48. 

Connie K. So and Catherine T. Best. 2010. Cross-lan-

guage Perception of Non-native Tonal Contrasts: Ef-

fects of Native Phonological and Phonetic Influences. 

Language and Speech, 532:273-293. 

Yue Wang, Michelle M. Spence, Allard Jongman, and 

Joan A. Sereno. 1999. Training American listeners to 

perceive Mandarin tones. Journal of the Acoustical 

Society of America, 1066:3649–3658. 

Brian J. Wenk. 1986. Crosslinguistic influence in second 

language phonology: Speech rhythms. In Kellerman, 

E. and M. Sharwood Smith (eds.), Crosslinguistic In-

fluence in Second Language Acquisition. New York: 

Pergamon Press. pp.120–133. 

Reiko Akahane Yamada. 1995. Age and acquisition of 

second language speech sounds: perception of Ameri-

can English /r/ and /l/ by native speakers of Japanese. 

In Winifred Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Lin-

guistic Experience: Issues in Cross-Language Re-

search. Timonium, MD: York Press. pp.305–320. 

Moira Yip. 1980. The Tonal Phonology of Chinese. Cam-

bridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Moira Yip. 1989. Contour tones. Phonology, 6:149-174. 

 

 


