



















































How to Handle Split Antecedents in Tamil?


Proceedings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016), co-located with NAACL 2016, pages 84–91,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

How to Handle Split Antecedents in Tamil? 

 

Vijay Sundar Ram R. and Sobha Lalitha Devi 

AU-KBC Research Centre, 

MIT Campus of Anna University, 

Chennai, India 

{sundar, sobha}@au-kbc.org 

 

 

Abstract 

Resolution of the anaphoric entities in natural lan-

guage text is very much essential to extract the 

complete information from the text. In this paper, 

we present a methodology to resolve one of the 

difficult pronouns, plural pronouns with split ante-

cedents in Tamil. We have used a salience measure 

based approach with salience factors obtained from 

sub-categorization information of nouns and selec-

tional restriction rules of the verbs. We have eval-

uated our approach with Tamil novel corpus and 

the results are encouraging. 

1 Introduction 

Anaphoric expressions in natural language text 

help in bringing cohesion to the text. The resolu-

tion of these anaphoric expressions is vital in de-

veloping information extraction and understanding 

systems. Theoretically various anaphoric expres-

sions such as pronominal, reflexives, reciprocals, 

distributors, one pronoun, definite descriptions, VP 

anaphora, and zero anaphora are well studied. Au-

tomatic resolution engines for various types of 

anaphors were presented from early 80’s of the last 

century, starting with Hobb’s (1978) naïve ap-

proach followed by knowledge rich approaches by 

Carter et al (1987), Carbonll and Brown (1988), 

and Rich and LuperFoy (1988). These approaches 

were followed by knowledge poor approaches by 

Lappin and Leass (1994), Kennedy and Baguraov, 

Mitkov (1998) etc. Centering theory based ap-

proach was introduced by Grosz, Joshi and Kuhn 

(1979, 1981). The task of anaphora resolution got 

boosted with various Machine Learning (ML) 

techniques. The first ML approach was presented 

by Dagan and Itai (1980) and various ML tech-

niques were later used.  
Byron (2001) has mentioned difficult anaphors 

which are excluded in most of the systems and 

they are as follows. i) Constructions which are re-

quired to interpret pronouns with split antecedents 

or cataphora. ii) Pronouns with antecedents, differ-

ent from NPs such as clauses. iii) Pronouns with no 

antecedents in the discourse such as deictic or ge-

neric pronouns. There are very less number of au-

tomatic resolution engines for these difficult 

anaphors. In this paper, we present an algorithm 

for automatic resolution of one of the difficult 

anaphors; plural pronouns with split antecedents. 

We have studied the split antecedents in Tamil, a 

morphologically rich and verb final South Dravidi-

an language and came up with an algorithm to re-

solve it. Consider example 1 given below: 

 
Ex 1: 

a) nepaal  pirathamar       ke.  pi. ooli      
Nepal   Prime minister   K   P   Oli   

inthiya  pirathamar       moodiyai 

      Indian   Prime Minister  Modi 

puthu dilliyil   canthiththaar. 

New   Delhi     meet(V)+past+3h 

(Nepal Prime minister KP Oli met Indian 

Prime Minister Modi in New Delhi.) 

 

b) avarkal  ceythiyaalarkalai  
They      press-people(N)   

Ithirabath-aucil                  canththinar. 

Hyderabad-House(N)+loc meet(V)+pst+3p 

(They met the press people at Hyderabad 

House.) 

 

In the above example 1, the plural pronoun 

‘avarkal’ (they) in sentence 1.b, refers to nepal pi-

rathamar ke. pi. ooli (Nepal Prime minister K P 

84



 
 
 

 

Oli) and inthiya pirathamar moodiyai (Indian 

Prime Minister Modi), where these two entities 

have occurred in the subject and object of sentence 

1.a.  

Split antecedents are well studied in the frame-

work of computational model in various languages 

and the details are as follows. Kosuga (2014) has 

presented a study on Japanese reciprocal anaphor 

‘otagai’ with split antecedents. Han et al. (2011) 

have presented a behavioral study of grammatical 

status of ‘caki’ in Korean, which takes split ante-

cedents as referent. Split antecedents were consid-

ered for coreference annotation in various lan-

guages such as Spanish, Catalan, Italian, English, 

Polish etc. MATE, AnaCora, and Polish Corefer-

ence annotation schema support annotation of split 

antecedents. There are no published works on Split 

Antecedents in Indian languages and particularly in 

Tamil and our work is first of its kind. 

Split antecedents are well studied under differ-

ent constructions. Following are the different con-

structions explored in English. Split antecedents 

occur with a relative clause construction as in ex-

ample 2.  

 

Ex 2: 

Marry met a man and John met a woman who 

know each other well. (Mckinney-Bock, 2013) 

 

There are different theoretical solutions for this 

split antecedents in relative construction. McKin-

ney-Bock et al (2013) have presented a head-

external approach and Ning Znang (2007) have 

proposed a syntactic derivation approach. Split an-

tecedents are dealt with VP-ellipsis construction as 

in example 3. 

 

Ex 3: 

‘Sally want to sail around the world and Barba-

ra wants to fly to South Africa and they will, if 

money is available’    (Webber 1978) 

‘Sally will sail around the world and Barbara 

will fly to South Africa’ 

 

Gatt and van Deemter (2009) have studied the 

characteristics of plural pronouns with split ante-

cedents in GNOME corpus. They have studied the 

similarity and distance between the plural pronoun 

and their antecedents.  

Cristea et al. (2002) have presented a paper in-

vestigating the difficult problems that could arise 

in anaphora resolution and proposed some solu-

tions within the frame work of a general anaphora 

resolver.  They have discussed on the methodology 

to resolve the plural pronouns with split anteced-

ents. Consider example 4.  

 

Ex 4: 

a) John waited for Maria. 

b) They went for pizza. 

 

During the interpretation of the above sentence, 

a new discourse entity (DE) must be proposed for 

the group [John, Maria] as soon as the referential 

expression ‘Maria’ is parsed. Cristea et al. (2002) 

came-up with a set of ideas. 

a) Groups should have a property of similari-

ty of their elements and that group for-

mation is triggered by a first referent to it.  

b) A group is considered only if it is verbal-

ized as such in the text and it does not exist 

until it is referred to.  

c) World knowledge is needed for group 
identification. We should use similarity 

measures to identify members of the 

group.  

d) A new DE should be proposed when no 

match between the current entity and the 

preceding DE arise above a threshold. 

 

With these introductions to split-antecedents, we 

continue the paper as follow. The following section 

describes about Tamil and anaphora resolution 

works in this language. In the third section, we 

present our approach to resolve split-antecedents in 

Tamil using selectional restriction rules, sub-

categorization information and salience measure 

(Lappin and Leass, 1994). The fourth section has 

description on the experiments and evaluation. The 

paper concludes with a concluding section. 

2 Pronoun Resolution in Tamil  

Tamil is a morphologically rich and highly agglu-

tinative language. It belongs to Dravidian family of 

languages. It is a verb final, nominative-accusative 

and relatively free-word order language. Subject 

and finite verb has person, number and gender 

(PNG) agreement. Similarly 3
rd

 person pronoun’s 

85



 
 
 

 

PNG has agreement with its antecedent. 1
st
 person 

and 2
nd

 person pronouns have number agreement 

with its antecedents. Among Indian languages, 

there are a few automatic anaphora resolution 

works done in languages such as Tamil, Hindi, 

Bengali, Punjabi and Malayalam. Similar to what 

was mentioned by Byron (2001), these resolution 

engines do not attempt the difficult anaphors.  One 

of the earliest anaphora resolution works in Indian 

languages was ‘Vasisth’ presented by Sobha 

(2000, 2002) for Hindi and Malayalam. Consider-

ing anaphora resolution in Tamil, there are few 

works on resolution of third person pronouns. The 

details are as follows. Sobha (2007) using salience 

measure, Akilandeshwari et al. (2013) using Con-

ditional Random Fields (CRFs), Balaji et al. (2012) 

using bootstrapping approach and  Ram and Sobha 

(2013) using Tree-CRFs. Sobha et al.(2014)  have 

presented a generic pronominal resolution engine 

for resolving pronouns in Indo-Aryan and Dravidi-

an languages. Akilandeshwari et al. (2012) have 

studied a different construction in Tamil, where the 

3
rd

 person pronouns are agglutinated with relative-

participle verbs and they have presented a CRFs 

based approach for resolving these pronouns. 

3 Our Approach for Resolution of Plural 
Pronouns with Split Antecedents  

We attempt to resolve the plural pronouns with 

split-antecedents using selectional restriction rules 

of the verb, categorizing the nouns based on its 

sub-categorization information and ranking the 

possible antecedents using salience factor weights. 

In the following sub-sections we explain Sub-

categorization of nouns and Selectional restriction 

rules. 

3.1 Selectional Restriction Rules  

The verbs describe the action or the process in the 

nature and this allow the verbs to take nouns with 

specific sub-categorization feature as its syntactic 

arguments. This is defined as the selectional re-

striction (SR) rules of a verb. Consider the sen-

tence in example 5. 

Ex 5: 

     raam        aappil       caappittaan. 

     Ram(N)   apple(N)   eat(V)+past+3sn 

    ‘Ram ate an apple’. 

 

 Here ‘raam’ (Ram) has the sub-categorization fea-

ture [+animate, +human] and ‘aappil’ (apple) with 

[+edible]. The SR features required by the verb 

‘caappitu’ (eat) for selecting its subject and object 

are [+animate] and [+edible] respectively. If there 

is a violation in SR rules, the sentence can be syn-

tactically correct but it will not be semantically 

correct (Arulmozhi 2006). Verb has the right to se-

lect its arguments. We have grouped the verbs ac-

cording to the sub-categorization information of 

the subject and object nouns. A group of common-

ly used 1500 verb senses are analyzed and 500 SR 

rules are derived from these verbs in-house. The 

SR rules do not cover figurative usage of language. 

The sub-categorization features of a noun are ex-

plained in the next section. A sample rule is shown 

in Figure 1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Figure 1: Selectional restriction rule for ‘caapitu’ (eat). 

3.2 Sub-Categorization 

Sub-categorization features explain the nature of a 

noun. Essentially, the arguments of the verb, sub-

ject and object are analyzed using these features. 

These features may include the type of noun, its 

characteristics, state etc. Sub-categorization infor-

mation include the features such as [ animate], 

[ concrete], [ edible] etc (Arulmozhi 2006).  

Object 

 

+living 

+animate 

Verb:  

caapitu (eat) 

 

Type: Dyadic  

 

Subject: 

-living 

+concrete 

+movable 

+solid 

+edible 

-living 

+concrete 

+movable 

+food_items 

+solid 

86



 
 
 

 

There are totally 104 sub-categorization fea-

tures. Using the sub-categorization features, which 

are related to the nouns, the SR features of the verb 

selects the nouns as its syntactic arguments. We 

have categoriesed 4500 frequently occurring nouns 

in Tamil. The Sub-categorization feature for the 

noun ‘aappil’ (apple) is presented in Figure 2.  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Sub-categorization features of the noun ‘aappil’ 

(apple) 

 

These sub-categorization features are used as 

nodes in building a language ontology.  This lan-

guage ontology is built with respect to the usage of 

language. Due to this, it deviates substantially from 

the taxonomy of nature. The sub-categorization 

features for the nouns can be obtained easily by 

traversing through various nodes (Arulmozhi, 

2006).  The nouns are grouped under each node, so 

we get a coarse to fine grained information of each 

noun. The ontology starts with [+entity] as the 

head noun and it divides into [+living] and [-

living].  

3.3 Resolution of Plural Pronouns 

Using the SR rules and the sub-categorization in-

formation of nouns we try to resolve the plural 

pronouns in a two-step process. In the first step we 

try to group the noun phrases to form groups which 

can be possible split-antecedents. The nouns are 

grouped based on the sub-categorization infor-

mation and following the verb’s SR rule restriction 

rule. Consider examples 6.  

 

Ex 6:  

a) raam        siitavai           vakuppil    
Ram(N)   Sita(N)+acc   class(N)+loc   

canthiththaan. 

meet(V)+past+3sm 

(Ram met Sita in the class.) 

b) avarkal                   unavu_vituthikku    
They (plural PRP)  hotel (N)+dative             

cenranar. 

go(V)+past+3p 

(They went to the hotel) 

Ex 7: 

a) puunai  pullil  
Cat(N) grass(N)+loc      

vilaiyadi-koNtirunthathu. 

play(V)+progressive 

(The cat was playing on the grass.) 

b) nay         manalil 
Dog(N)   sand(N)+loc 

vilaiyadi-koNtirunthathu. 

play(V)+progressive 

(The dog was playing in the sand.) 

c) unavai      kaNtathum       avai 
Food(N)  on_seeing(V)    they(plural-PRP) 

ooti_vanthana. 

came_running 

(On seeing the food they came running) 

 

In example 6, there are three nouns before the plu-

ral pronoun ‘avarkal’ (they). The sub-

categorization of these nouns are as follows: 

 

a) raam (Ram):[+living; +animate; 
+vertebrate; +mammal; +human; -female] 

b) siita (Sita):[+living; +animate; +vertebrate; 

+mammal; +human; +female] 

c) vakkupu (class):[-living; +concrete;-

movable; +artifact; +building] 

 

The verb in sentence 6.a and 6.b are ‘canthippu’ 

(meet) and ‘cel’ (go). The SR rules for these verbs 

are as follows; 

 

a) Verb: ‘canthippu’ (meet) 
Subj:   [+living; +animate; +vertebrate; 

+mammal; +human;] 

Obj:   [+living; +animate; +vertebrate; 

+mammal; +human;] 

 

b) Verb: ‘cel’ (go) 

Subj: [+living; +animate] 

Obj: [-living; +concrete; -movable] 

 

And the plural pronoun ‘avarkal’ (they) has oc-

curred in the second sentence 6.b. The antecedent 

of “avarkal” (they) occurs as two separate NPs 

[raam, siita]. 

 

-living 

+concrete 

+movable 

+food_item 

+solid 

aappil (Apple): 

87



 
 
 

 

In example 7, there are three nouns before the oc-

currence of the plural pronoun ‘avai’ (they). The 

sub-categorization of these nouns are as follows: 

a) puunai (Cat):  [+living; +animate; 
+vertebrate; +mammal; -human; avion; 

+carnivorous; +cat_family] 

b) naay (Dog): [+living; +animate; 
+vertebrate; +mammal; -human; -avion; 

+carnivorous; +dog_family] 

c) unavu (food):  [-living; +concrete; 

+food_item] 

 

The verbs in sentence 7.a, 7.b and 7.c are ‘villaiya-

tu’ and ‘ooti_va’, where both the verbs take 

[+living; +animate] as subject argument. And the 

sentence 8.c has ‘avai’ (they), plural pronoun.  

Here the split antecedents are [puunai, naay]. 

We describe the methodology to perform the 

resolution of plural pronouns, which do not refer to 

a plural noun phrase, on text preprocessed with 

syntactic information such as morphological analy-

sis (Ram et al, 2010), POS tag (Sobha et al, 2010), 

chunk information, clause boundary (Ram et al, 

2012) and named entity (Malarkodi et al, 2012). 
The morphological analyser gives an indepth anal-

ysis of each word, such as root word, suffixes and 

its labels and person, number and gender (PNG) 

information. The clause boundary identifier marks 

the matrix clause and sub-ordinate clause bounda-

ries, which helps in adding positional constraint 

features.  

 Following are the steps involved in resolving 

the plural pronoun. In the first step, we enrich the 

nouns and the verbs with their sub-categorization 

information, and SR rules respectively. The named 

entities (NEs) are mapped to the sub-categorization 

features, so we get the sub-categorization infor-

mation using the NE information as described in 

the example 8.  

Ex 8: 

a) Person: [+living; +animate; +vertebrate; 

+mammal; +human;] 

b) Location: [-living; -moveable; +landscape] 

 

  In the second step, when a plural pronoun is 

encountered in the sentence, the preceding portion 

of the sentence and two preceding sentences are 

considered for analysis, as Gatt et al. (2009) have 

shown that the distance between plural pronouns 

and their antecedent are very few sentences away. 

The noun phrases in the preceding sentences are 

analysed and grouped to form the possible ante-

cedents. For grouping the NPs, the NPs need to 

satisfy the following matching conditions. 

 

a) The NPs can be grouped together if they have 

same sub-categorization information or till the 

last but one node in the ontology is same. Ex-

ample [+living; +animate; +vertebrate; 

+mammal; +human; +female] and [+living; 

+animate; +vertebrate; +mammal; +human;-

female] are considered to be same since both 

are same till last but one node. 

b) Exceptions are as follows: 
In the case of NPs with sub-categorization 

[+living] and do not have [+human], we look 

for sub-categorization match between the NPs 

only till [+living; +animate] and such NPs are 

grouped together. 

 

Following are the steps involved to form possible 

candidates by grouping the NPs. 

 

a) Identify the plural pronoun in nth sentence. 
b) Consider sentence n-2th, n-1th and in nth 

sentence consider the portion preceding to 

the plural pronoun to form a candidate sen-

tence set.  

c) For each sentence in the candidate sen-
tence set; Noun Phrases in the sentence 

with conjunct suffix ‘um’ or conjunct word 

‘maRRum’ (and) are united to form con-

junct NPs. 

From now onwards the term NPs refers to 

both NPs and conjunct NPs.  

d) For each sentence in sentence set; if there 

exists NPs satisfying the matching condi-

tion, then the NPs are grouped together. 

e) Group the NPs that occur in same syntactic 

argument position and satisfy the matching 

condition across n
th
, n-1

th
 and n-2

th
 sen-

tences. 

 

S.No Salience Factors Weights 

1 Same Ontology Nodes 30 

2 NPs with following verbs 30 

3 NPs with same syntactic argu-

ment position 

20 

4 NPs with different syntactic 

argument position 

10 

88



 
 
 

 

5 NPs are syntactic argument for 

verbs having same SR rules 

30 

6 NPs are syntactic argument for 

verbs with different SR rules 

10 

7 NPs in current n
th

 sentence 30 

8 NPs in n-1th sentence 20 

9 NPs in n-2th sentence 10 
Table 1: Salience Factors and their Weights 

 

In the third step, when the possible antecedents are 

formed by grouping the NPs, they are ranked based 

on the salience factors derived from the features of 

NPs such as the sub-categorization information of 

NPs, the SR rules of verbs followed by the NPs 

and the syntactic argument position of the NPs in 

the sentences. The salience factor weights (Lappin 

and Leass, 1994) are described in table1. The 

weights for the salience factors are initially manu-

ally assigned based on linguistic considerations 

and fine-tuned through experiments. 

4 Experiment, Results and Discussion 

To analyse the plural pronouns, we choose a Tamil 

novel, ‘Ponniyin Selvan’ which was authored by 

Kalki, a well-known writer. As mentioned in Sec-

tion 3.3, we processed the corpus with morpholog-

ical analyser, POS tagger, chunker, pruner, clause 

boundary identifier and named entity recognizer. 

The corpus is made into a column format, where 

the information from each preprocessing module is 

added as a column. In the corpus, we considered 

the first 1000, plural pronouns, ‘avarkal’ and 

‘avai’. These pronouns had four different types of 

antecedents such as plural noun phrase, conjunct 

NPs, split antecedents and the pronoun ‘avarkal’ 

also refers to honorific NP.  The distribution of the 

pronouns with respect to their antecedents is pre-

sented in table 2. 

 

S.No Type of antecedent  Number of 

occurrence 

1 Plural NP 789 

2 Conjunct NPs 147 

3 Split Antecedents 51 

4 Honorific NP 18 

Table 2: Distribution of plural pronouns based on their ante-
cedents 

In this experiment, we focus on plural pronouns 

with split antecedents. We considered the sentence 

having this plural pronoun and its preceding two 

sentences. In this set of sentences, as mentioned in 

Section 3.3, we first tag the sub-categorization in-

formation for the nouns and SR rules of the verbs. 

After forming the possible antecedents by grouping 

NPs, we rank the possible antecedents with the sa-

lience factor weights mentioned in Section 3.3 to 

find the antecedent. The performance evaluation is 

done with accuracy as the measure. The results are 

presented in table 3.  

 

S.No Total number of 

pronouns with 

split antecedents 

Correctly 

tagged 

Accu-

racy% 

1 51 30 58.82 

Table 3: Performance of resolution of plural pronouns with 
split antecedents 

 

On analyzing the output, we found errors, when the 

preceding two sentences have similar NPs in the 

subject position. Consider the following example 

9. 

 

Ex 9: 

a) vanthiyathevan       maNtapaththai  
Vanthiyathevan(N) hall(N)+acc   

atainthaan. 

reach(V)+past+3sm 

(Vanthiyathevan reached the hall.) 

b) kunthavai         vaanathiyai  
Kundhavai(N)  Vanathi(N)+acc 

azaiththaal. 

call(V)+past+3sf 

(Kundhavai called Vanathi) 

c) avarkal    vanthiyathevanai            kaNtu     
they(PN) Vanthiyathevan(N)+acc see(V)    

ciriththanar. 

laugh(V)+past+3pl 

(They on seeing Vanthiyathevan laughed.) 

 

In the above example the possible antecedents 

for the pronoun ‘avarkal’ are [vanthiyathevan, kun-

thavai] and [kunthavai, vaanathiyai]. Here ‘van-

thiyathevan’ and ‘kunthavai’ have occurred in the 

subject position and this group of NPs got higher 

salience score. But [kunthavai, vaanathiyai] is the 

correct antecedent. This shows the salience 

weights have to be altered further after analyzing 

more plural pronouns.  

89



 
 
 

 

Conclusion 

 We have presented a methodology to resolve plu-
ral pronouns which refer to split antecedents in 

Tamil. Automatic resolution of split antecedents is 

less attempted and it is first of its kind in Tamil. 

Our algorithm works on salience measures, the sa-

lience factors for scoring are obtained from the 

sub-categorization information of the noun phrases 

and the SR rules of the verbs. We have tested the 

algorithm on plural pronouns occurred in a Tamil 

novel. The results are encouraging. We need to test 

this methodology on a corpus from other domains. 

References 

Akilandeswari A., Sobha Lalitha Devi. 2013. Condi-

tional Random Fields Based Pronominal Resolution 

in Tamil. International Journal on Computer Science 

and Engineering, Vol. 5 Issue 6 pp 601 - 610  

Akilandeswari A, Bakiyavathi T and Sobha Lalitha De-

vi, 2012. atu Difficult Pronominal in Tamil. In: 1
st
 

Workshop on Indian Language Data: Resources and 

Evaluation, Organized under  LREC 2012, Istanbul 

Arulmozhi P. 2006. Semantic Tagging for Laguage Pro-

cessing. Thesis submitted to Anna University Chen-

nai, India 

Aone C., and McKee D. 1993. A Language-Independent 

Anaphora Resolution System for Understanding Mul-

tilingual Texts. In proceeding of ACL 1993, pp 156-

163. 

Balaji J., Geetha T.V., Ranjani Parthasarathi R.,  Karky 

M. 2012.Two-Stage Bootstrapping for Anaphora 

Resolution In: Proceedings of COLING 2012, pp 

507–516 

Byron, D. 2001.  A proposal for consistent evaluation of 

pronoun resolution algorithms.  

Carbonell J. G., and Brown R. D. 1988.  Anaphora reso-

lution: A multi- strategy approach. In: 12
th

 In-

ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-

tics, 1988, pp. 96-101 

Carter D. 1987. Interpreting anaphors in natural lan-

guage texts. Chisester: Ellis Horwood ltd.  

Cristea, D.; Dima, G. E.; Postolache, O. & Mitkov, R. 

2002. Handling complex cases of anaphora resolu-

tion, In:  4
th

 Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Reso-

lution Colloquium (DAARC2002), University of Lis-

bon, Portugal, pp. 7-12. 

Dagan I., and Itai. A. 1990. Automatic processing of 

large corpora for the resolution of anaphora refer-

ences. In: 13th conference on Computational linguis-

tics, Vol. 3, Helsinki, Finland, pp.330-332. 

Gatt A and Kees van Deemter. 2009. Generating plural 

NPs in discourse: Evidence from theGNOME corpus. 

In: Procs. of COGSCI workshop \Production of Re-

ferring Expressions, Amsterdam 

Han, C., Dennis R. S., and Calen W. 2011. An Experi-

mental Study of the Grammatical Status of Caki in 

Korean. Japanese/Korean Linguistics 19 (JK 19). 

Eds. Ho-min S., Haruko C., William O'., Leon S.and 

Sang Y. C., CSLI, Stanford, 81-94 

Hobbs J. (1978). Resolving pronoun references. Lingua 

44, pp. 339-352. 

Joshi A. K., and Kuhn S. 1979. Centered logic: The role 

of entity centered sentence representation in natural 

language inferencing. In: International Joint Confer-

ence on Artificial Intelligence. 

Joshi A. K., and Weinstein S. (1981). Control of infer-

ence: Role of some aspects of discourse structure – 

centering. In: International Joint Conference on Arti-

ficial Intelligence, pp. 385-387.  

Kosuge, T. (2014). Japanese Reciprocal Anaphor Otagai 

with Split Antecedents in Disguise and Multi-

Dominant Syntactic Structure. JELS 31, 319-324. 

Lappin S., and Leass H. J. (1994). An algorithm for 

pronominal anaphora resolution. Computational Lin-

guistics 20 (4), pp. 535-561. 

Malarkodi C.S and Sobha Lalitha Devi . 2012. A Deeper 

Look into Features for NE Resolution in Indian 

Languages. In: 1
st
 Workshop on Indian Language 

Data: Resources and Evaluation, Organized under  

LREC 2012, Istanbul 

McKinney-Bock, K. 2013. Deriving Split-Antecedent 

Relative Clauses. University of Pennsylvania Work-

ing Papers in Linguistics: Vol. 19: Iss. 1, Article 14. 

Mitkov R. 1998. Robust pronoun resolution with limited 

knowledge. In: 17th International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (COLING’ 98/ACL’98), 

Montreal, Canada, pp. 869-875.  

Ning Zhang N. 2007. The Syntactic Derivations of Split 

Antecedent Relative Clause Constructions. Taiwan 

Journal of Linguistics Vol. 5.1, 19-47 

  Ram R.V.S, Menaka S and Sobha Lalitha Devi. 2010. 

Tamil Morphological Analyser. In: “Morphological 

Analysers and Generators”, (ed.) Mona Parakh, 

LDC-IL, Mysore, pp. 1 –18. 

Ram R.V.S, Bakiyavathi T, Sindhujagopalan, Amudha K 

and Sobha Lalitha Devi. 2012. Tamil Clause 

Boundary Identification: Annotation and Evaluation. 

In:1
st
 Workshop on Indian Language Data: 

Resources and Evaluation, Organized under  LREC 

2012, Istanbul 

Ram, R.V.S and Sobha Lalitha Devi. 2013. Pronominal 

Resolution in Tamil Using Tree CRFs. In Proceed-

ings of 6th Language and Technology Conference, 

Human Language Technologies as a challenge for 

Computer Science and Linguistics - 2013, Poznan, 

Polan 

90



 
 
 

 

Rich, E. LuperFoy, S. 1988. Anaphora architecture for 

anaphora resolution In: Second Conference on Ap-

plied Natural Language Processing (ANLP'88), pp. 

18-24 Austin, Texas (USA). 

Sobha L. and Patnaik B. N. 2000. Vasisth: An Anaphora 

Resolution System for Indian Languages. In Pro-

ceedings of International Conference on Artificial 

and Computational Intelligence for Decision, Control 

and Automation in Engineering and Industrial Appli-

cations, Monastir, Tunisia. 

Sobha L. and Patnaik,B.N. 2002. Vasisth: An anaphora 

resolution system for Malayalam and Hindi. In Pro-

ceedings of Symposium on Translation Support Sys-

tems. 

Sobha L. 2007. Resolution of Pronominals in Tamil. 

Computing Theory and Application, The IEEE Com-

puter Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 475-79. 

Sobha Lalitha Devi and Pattabhi R K Rao T. (2010). 

“Hybrid Approach for POS Tagging for Relatively 

Free Word Order Languages”, in the Proceedings of 

Knowledge Sharing Event on Part-Of-Speech 

Tagging, 25-26th March, 2010, LDC-IL, CIIL, 

Mysore. 

Sobha L., Sivaji B., Ram R.V.S., and Akilandeswari A. 

2011. NLP Tool Contest @ICON2011 on Anaphora 

Resolution in Indian Languages.  In: Proceedings of 

ICON 2011. 

Webber, B. L. 1978. A Formal Approach to Discourse 

Anaphora, Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University. 

 

 

91


