



















































SMT and Hybrid systems of the QTLeap project in the WMT16 IT-task


Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 435–441,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

SMT and Hybrid systems of the QTLeap project in the WMT16 IT-task
Rosa Del Gaudio

Higher Functions Sistemas Inteligentes, Lisbon, Portugal
rosa.gaudio@pcmedic.pt

Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre
University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, San Sebastian, Spain

{gorka.labaka,e.agirre}@ehu.eus

Petya Osenova, Kiril Simov
Linguistic Modelling Department, IICT-BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria

{petya,kivs}@bultreebank.org

Martin Popel
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, ÚFAL, Czechia

popel@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Dieke Oele, Gertjan van Noord
Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

{d.oele,g.j.van.noord}@rug.nl

Luı́s Gomes, João Rodrigues, Steven Neale, João Silva,
Andreia Querido, Nuno Rendeiro, António Branco

Universidade de Lisboa, Departamento de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências
luisgomes@gmail.com,{joao.rodrigues,steven.neale,jsilva,
andreia.querido,nuno.rendeiro,antonio.branco}@di.fc.ul.pt

Abstract
This paper presents the description of 12
systems submitted to the WMT16 IT-task,
covering six different languages, namely
Basque, Bulgarian, Dutch, Czech, Por-
tuguese and Spanish. All these systems
were developed under the scope of the
QTLeap project, presenting a common
strategy. For each language two different
systems were submitted, namely a phrase-
based MT system built using Moses, and
a system exploiting deep language engi-
neering approaches, that in all the lan-
guages but Bulgarian was implemented
using TectoMT. For 4 of the 6 languages,
the TectoMT-based system performs better
than the Moses-based one.

1 Introduction

The QTLeap1 project focuses on the development
of an articulated methodology for machine trans-
lation that explores deep language engineering ap-
proaches and sophisticated semantic datasets. The

1http://www.qtleap.eu

underling hypothesis is that the deeper the level
of representation, the better the translation be-
comes since deeper representations abstract away
from surface aspects that are specific to a given
language. At the limit, the representation of the
meaning of a sentence, and of all its paraphrases,
would be shared among all languages.

This purpose is supported by recent advances
in terms of lexical processing. These advances
have been made possible by enhanced techniques
for referential and conceptual ambiguity resolu-
tion, and supported also by new types of datasets
recently developed as linked open data.

The overall goal of the project is to produce
quality translation between English (EN) and an-
other language X by using deep linguistic infor-
mation. All language pairs follow the same pro-
cessing pipeline of analysis, transfer and synthe-
sis (generation) and adopt the same hybrid MT
approach of using both statistical as well as rule-
based components in a tightly integrated way for
the best possible results.

In this paper, we present the systems developed
by the University of Basque Country for Basque

435



and Spanish, Charles University in Prague for
Czech, by University of Groningen for Dutch, by
University of Lisbon for Portuguese and by IICT-
BAS of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences for
Bulgarian.

For each language two different systems were
submitted, corresponding to different phases of the
project, namely a phrase-based MT system built
using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), and a system
exploiting deep language engineering approaches,
that in all the languages but Bulgarian was im-
plemented using TectoMT (Žabokrtský and Popel,
2009). For Bulgarian, its second MT system is not
based on TectoMT, but on exploiting deep factors
in Moses. All 12 systems are constrained, that is
trained only on the data provided by the WMT16
IT-task organizers.

We present briefly the Moses common setting
and the TectoMT structure and then more detailed
information for each language system are pro-
vided. In the last Section, results based on BLEU
and TrueSkill are given and discussed.

2 Moses

All the systems submitted that were based on
Moses have been trained on a phrase-based
model by Giza++ or mGiza with “grow-diag-final-
and” symmetrization and “msd-bidirectional-fe”
reordering (Koehn et al., 2003). For the language
pairs where big quantities of domain-specific
monolingual data were available along with the
generic domain data, separate language models
(domain-specific and generic) were interpolated
against our ICT domain-specific development set.
For LM training and interpolation, the SRILM
toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) was used. The method of
truecasing has been adopted for several language
pairs where it proved useful.

3 TectoMT

The deep translation is based on the TectoMT
system, an open-source MT system based on the
Treex platform for general natural-language pro-
cessing. TectoMT uses a combination of rule-
based and statistical (trained) modules (blocks
in Treex terminology), with a statistical transfer
based on HMTM (Hidden Markov Tree Model)
at the level of a deep, so-called tectogrammatical,
representation of sentence structure. The general
TectoMT pipeline is language independent, and
consists of analysis, deep transfer, and synthesis

steps.
The design of TectoMT is highly modular

and consists of a language-universal core and
language-specific additions and distinguishes two
levels of syntactic description:

• Surface dependency syntax (a-layer) – sur-
face dependency trees containing all the to-
kens in the sentence.

• Deep syntax (t-layer) – dependency trees that
contain only content words (nouns, main
verbs, adjectives, adverbs) as nodes. Each
node has a deep lemma (t-lemma), a semantic
function label (functor), a morpho-syntactic
form label (formeme), and various grammat-
ical attributes (grammatemes), such as num-
ber, gender, tense, or modality.

T-layer representations of the same sentence in
different languages are closer to each other than
the surface texts; in many cases, there is a 1:1
node correspondence among the t-layer trees. Tec-
toMTs transfer exploits this by translating the tree
isomorphically, i.e., node-by-node and assuming
that the shape will not change in most cases (apart
from a few exceptions handled by specific rules).

The translation is further factorized: t-lemmas,
formemes, and grammatemes are translated us-
ing separate Translation Models (TM). The t-
lemma and formeme TMs are an interpolation of
maximum entropy discriminative models (Max-
Ent) (Mareček et al., 2010) and simple conditional
probability models. The MaxEnt models are in
fact an ensemble of models, one for each indi-
vidual source t-lemma/formeme. The combined
translation models provide several translation op-
tions for each node along with their estimated
probability. The best options are then selected
using a Hidden Markov Tree Model (HMTM)
with a target-language tree model (Žabokrtský and
Popel, 2009).

For this specific task, where we need to work
on a specific domain, an extended version of Tec-
toMT was used allowing interpolation of multiple
TMs (Rosa et al., 2015).

4 Basque

Both English-Basque submissions are trained on
the same training corpora. That is, the PaCO2-
eneu corpus for translation and language model-
ing, and the in-domain Batch1 corpus for domain

436



adaptation and MERT training. Batch2 domain
corpus was used for testing during development.

The Moses system, EU-Moses, uses factored
models to allow lemma-based word-alignment.
After word alignment, the rest of the training pro-
cess is based on lowercased word-forms and stan-
dard parameters: Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et
al., 2014) and Eustagger (Alegria et al., 2002)
tools are used for tokenization and lemmatiza-
tion, MGIZA for word alignment with the ”grow-
diag-final-and” symmetrization heuristic, a maxi-
mum length of 75 tokens per sentence and 5 to-
kens per phrase, translation probabilities in both
directions, lexical weightings in both directions,
a phrase length penalty, a ”phrase-mslr-fe” lex-
icalized reordering model and a target language
model. As for the language model, a 5-gram
model was trained. The weights for the differ-
ent components were adjusted to optimize BLEU
using MERT tuning over the Batch1 development
set, with an n-best list of size 100.

For the TectoMT system, EU-Treex existing
tools were used in order to get the a-layer. Eu-
stagger is a robust and wide coverage morpholog-
ical analyzer and POS tagger. The dependency
parser is based on the MATE-tools (Bjrkelund et
al., 2010). Basque models have been trained us-
ing the Basque Dependency Treebank (BDT) cor-
pus (Aduriz et al., 2003). Transformation from the
a-level analysis into t-level is partially performed
with language-independent blocks thanks to the
support of Interset (Zeman, 2008).

The English-to-Basque TectoMT system uses
the PaCo2 and the Batch1 corpora to train two sep-
arate translation models, and they are used to cre-
ate an interpolated list of translation candidates. In
addition to that, the terminological equivalences
extracted from the localization PO files (VLC, LO
and KDE) as well as the domain terms extracted
from Wikipedia are used to identify domain terms
before syntactical analysis and to ensure domain
translation on transfer. Finally, an extra module
to treat non linguistic elements (URLs, shell com-
mands, ...) has been used, to identify the elements
that should be maintained untranslated on the out-
put.

5 Bulgarian

Bulgarian team participated with two systems im-
plemented using Moses: BG-Moses — a system
that is based on standard factored Moses with fac-

tors retrieved from POS tagged, lemmatized par-
allel corpora; and BG-DeepMoses — a system
that also is based on standard factored Moses but
the translation is done in two steps: (1) semantics-
based translation of the source language text to a
mixed source-target language text which is then
(2) translated to the target language via Moses.
The latter system builds on Simov et al. (2015).

As training data for both systems the following
corpora were used: the Setimes parallel corpus,
the Europarl parallel corpus and a corpus created
on the basis of the documentation of LibreOffice.
The corpora are linguistically processed with the
IXA2 pipeline for the English part and the BTB
pipeline for the Bulgarian. The analyses include
POS tagging, lemmatization and WSD, using the
UKB system,3 which provides graph-based meth-
ods for Word Sense Disambiguation and lexical
similarity measurements.

For the BG-Moses system, the fol-
lowing factors have been constructed:
WordForm|Lemma|POStag.

For the BG-DeepMoses system, we exploited
also the information from word sense annota-
tion in order to predict some translations from
English to Bulgarian based on the WordNet
synsets and their mappings to the Bulgarian
WordNet. Thus, we replaced the English word
form with a representative lemma in Bulgarian.
The motivation for using representative lemmas
in Bulgarian is as follows: we aim at unifying
the various synsets with similar translations
in the Bulgarian language. After the creation
of this intermediate English/Bulgarian text,
we trained Moses with the following factors:
ENWordForm-BGLemma|Lemma|BGPOStag,
where ENWordForm-BGLemma is an English
word form when there is no appropriate Bulgarian
one, or the Bulgarian lemma; BGPOStag is the ap-
propriate Bulgarian tag representing grammatical
features like number, tense, etc.

6 Czech

The Czech Moses system follows the CU-Bojar
system (Bojar et al., 2013). A factored phrase-
based model was trained based on truecased forms
translated directly to the pair <truecased form,
morphological tag>. There were three LMs for
Czech:

2http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/ixa-pipes/
3http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/ukb/

437



• 8grams of morphological tags from the
monolingual part of news and political cor-
pora,

• 6grams of forms from the monolingual part
of news and political corpora and

• 6grams from the Czech side of a bilingual
Czech-English corpus CzEng.

The pre-processing of this SMT system has
been harmonized with the pre-existing version
of Tecto-MT: Tokenization and lemmatization is
handled by Treex followed by further tokeniza-
tion at any letter-digit-punctuation boundary. Ad-
ditionally, casing is handled by a Czech-specific
supervised truecasing method. The output of the
lemmatizer is used, as names have lemmas capi-
talized, the casing of the lemma is cast to the token
(lowercasing non-names at sentence beginnings,
lowercasing also ALL CAPS if correctly lemma-
tized). Finally, the translation is done using case-
sensitive tokens and finally the first letter in every
sentence is only capitalized.

The TectoMT analysis pipeline is based on the
annotation pipeline of the CzEng 1.0 corpus (Bo-
jar et al., 2012) starting with a rule-based tokenizer
and a statistical part-of-speech tagger (Straková et
al., 2014) and dependency parser (McDonald et
al., 2005; Novák and Žabokrtský, 2007). These
steps result in a-layer trees, which are then con-
verted to t-layer using a rule-based process.

The English-to-Czech transfer uses a combi-
nation of translation models and tree model re-
ranking. The Czech synthesis pipeline has re-
mained basically unchanged since the original
TectoMT system (Žabokrtský et al., 2008).

7 Dutch

The Moses system for Dutch was trained on
the third version of the Europarl corpus (Koehn,
2005) and the in-domain KDE4 Localization data
(Tiedemann, 2012). Words are aligned with
GIZA++ and tuning was done with MERT. The
applied heuristics for the Dutch baselines were
set to “grow-diag-final-and” alignment and “msd-
bidirectional-fe” reordering. For the creation of
the language models, IRSTLM was used to train a
5-gram language model with Kneser-Ney smooth-
ing on the monolingual part of the training cor-
pora.

For the TectoMT system, the analysis of Dutch
input uses the Alpino system (Noord, 2006), a

stochastic attribute value grammar. The transfer
uses discriminative (context-sensitive) and dictio-
nary translation models. In addition, a few rule-
based modules are employed that handle changes
in t-tree topology and Dutch grammatical gender.

The Dutch synthesis pipeline includes mor-
phology initialization and agreements (subject-
predicate and attribute-noun), insertion of prepo-
sitions and conjunctions based on formemes, and
insertion of punctuation, possessive pronouns and
Dutch pronominal adverbs. The t-tree result-
ing from the transfer phase is first converted into
an Abstract Dependency Tree (ADT) using rule-
based modules implemented in Treex. The ADT is
then passed to the Alpino generator (de Kok and
Noord, 2010), which handles the creation of the
actual sentence including inflected word forms.

8 Spanish

The Moses system developed for the translation
from English to Spanish, ES-Moses, uses stan-
dard parameters: tokenization and truecasing us-
ing tools available in Moses toolkit, MGIZA for
word alignment with the “grow-diag-final-and”
symmetrization heuristic, a maximum length of
80 tokens per sentence and 5 tokens per phrase,
translation probabilities in both directions with
Good–Turing discounting, lexical weightings in
both directions, a phrase length penalty, an “msd-
bidirectional-fe” lexicalized reordering model and
a 5-gram target language model. The weights for
the different components were adjusted to opti-
mize BLEU using MERT tuning over the Batch1
development set, with an n-best list of size 100.

The English-to-Spanish TectoMT, ES-Treex,
system uses the Europarl and the Batch1 corpora
to train two separate translation models, and these
were used to create an interpolated list of transla-
tion candidates. In addition to that, the termino-
logical equivalences extracted from the localiza-
tion PO files (VLC, LO and KDE) as well as the
domain terms extracted from Wikipedia are used
to identify domain terms before syntactic analysis
and to ensure domain translation on transfer. Fi-
nally, an extra module to treat non linguistic ele-
ments (URLs, shell commands, ...) has been used
to identify the elements that should be maintained
untranslated on the output.

Both systems were trained using the same train-
ing corpora: the 7th version of the Europarl corpus
was used for both translation and language mod-

438



eling, and the in-domain batch1 corpus was used
for domain adaptation and MERT training. The
Batch2 domain-specific corpus was used for test-
ing during development. We have not used all the
available parallel corpora, because of the compu-
tational restrictions in analyzing all those corpora
at the tectogrammatical level of the TectoMT sys-
tem.

9 Portuguese

The Moses system for the translation from En-
glish to Portuguese, PT-Moses, was obtained
by using the default parameters and tools regard-
ing the training of a phrase-based model. For
the pre-processing, a sentence length of 80 words
was used and the tokenization was performed by
the Moses tokenizer. No lemmatization or com-
pound splitting was used and the casing was ob-
tained with the Moses truecaser. For the train-
ing, a phrase-based model was used with a lan-
guage model order of 5, with Kneser-Ney smooth-
ing, which was interpolated using the SRILM tool.
The word alignment was done with Giza++ on full
forms and the final tuning was done using MERT.
The Europarl corpus was used for the training
data, both as monolingual data for training lan-
guage models and as parallel data for training the
phrase-table.

Regarding the English-to-Portuguese TectoMT
system (Silva et al., 2015)(Rodrigues et al.,
2016a), PT-Treex, in order to get the a-layer the
Portuguese system resorted to LX-Suite (Branco
and Silva, 2006), a set of pre-existing shallow pro-
cessing tools for Portuguese that include a sen-
tence segmenter, a tokenizer, a POS tagger, a mor-
phological analyser and a dependency parser, all
with state-of-the-art performance. Treex blocks
were created to be called and interfaced with these
tools.

After running the shallow processing tools, the
dependency output of the parser is converted into
Universal Dependencies (UD) (de Marneffe et al.,
2014). These dependencies are then converted into
the a-layer tree (a-tree) in a second step. Both
steps are implemented as rule-based Treex blocks.
Converting the a-tree into a t-layer tree (t-tree) is
done through rule-based Treex blocks that manip-
ulate the tree structure.

The transfer phase is handled by a tree-to-tree
maximum entropy translation model (Mareček et
al., 2010) working at the deep syntactic level

of tectogrammatical trees. Two separate models
were trained and interpolated, the first model with
over 1.9 million sentences from Europarl (Koehn,
2005) and the second model composed of the
Batch1, the Microsoft Terminology Collection and
the LibreOffice localization data (Štajner et al.,
2016). Each pair of parallel sentences, one in En-
glish and one in Portuguese, are analyzed by Treex
up to the t-layer level, where each pair of trees are
fed into the model.

The TectoMT synthesis (Rodrigues et al.,
2016b) included other two lexical-semantics-
related modules, the HideIT and gazetteers. The
HideIT module handles entities that do not require
translation such as URLs and shell commands.
The gazetteers are specialized lexicons that han-
dle the translation of named entities from the IT-
domain such as menu items and button names.

Finally, synset IDs were used as additional con-
textual features in the lemma-to-lemma Discrimi-
native Translation Models (Neale et al., 2016).

10 Results

Table 1 presents the results of automatic and man-
ual evaluation, based on BLEU and TrueSkill4

scores respectively. For 4 of the 6 languages,
the TectoMT-based system performs better than
the Moses-based one when considering both
BLEU and TrueSkill scores. For Bulgarian,
the BG-DeepFMoses performs worse than the
BG-FMoses on both scores. For Dutch, the
Moses system outperforms the TectoMT only
when considering the BLUE score, but not the
TrueSkill score.

Regarding Bulgarian, although BG-Deep-
FMoses system performed worse than
BG-Moses, the automatic conversion of the
source text into near-target language text
represents a promising direction for further
improvement of the English-to-Bulgarian MT
system. We assume that the current drop might be
overcome by improving the WordNet information
for Bulgarian, its mapping to the English WordNet
as well as the processing pipelines. Also, we plan
to train this system on more data and to exploit
other bilingual dictionaries.

For the English→Dutch translation direction,
the Moses system outperforms TectoMT in terms
of BLEU score. The results of the manual evalu-
ation, however, are in favor of the TectoMT sys-

4For details, see the overview paper in these proceedings.

439



Moses TectoMT Deep-Moses
Language BLEU TrueSkill BLEU TrueSkill BLEU TrueSkill
Basque 8.3 −1.570 10.3 1.570
Bulgarian 16.6 5.262 - - 15.3 −5.262
Czech 20.8 −0.616 21.5 0.130
Dutch 21.9 −2.462 19.0 0.154
Spanish 16.0 −1.926 24.2 −0.809
Portuguese 13.7 −2.276 15.2 −1.063

Table 1: Automatic and manual evaluation results.

tem. This difference may in part be caused by the
fact that BLEU only scores exact word or phrase
matches and the TectoMT output shows more lex-
ical flexibility as compared to Moses. We get bet-
ter results, in terms of BLEU-score, in the oppo-
site translation direction which indicates that more
effort should be put into this translation direction.
Our focus here lies on the Dutch synthesis pipeline
where we still need to fix some basic errors. Also
we intend to implement more modules that are
based on lexical semantics.

We also presented at the IT-task a third sys-
tem for Czech, Dutch, Spanish and Portuguese,
called Chimera that combines Moses and Tec-
toMT (Rosa et al., 2016).

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the 7th Frame-
work Programme of the EU grant QTLeap (No.
610516).

References

Itzair Aduriz, Mara Jess Aranzabe, Jose Mari Arriola,
Aitziber Atutxa, Arantza Daz de Ilarraza, Aitzpea
Garmendia, and Maite Oronoz. 2003. Construction
of a Basque dependency treebank. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories, pages 201–204.

Iñaki Alegria, Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Aitzol Ezeiza,
Nerea Ezeiza, and Ruben Urizar. 2002. Robust-
ness and customisation in an analyser/lemmatiser
for basque. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC). Customizing knowledge in NLP applica-
tions Workshop.

Anders Bjrkelund, Bernd Bohnet, Love Hafdell, and
Pierre Nugues. 2010. A high-performance syntactic
and semantic dependency parser. In Coling 2010:
Demonstrations, pages 33–36, Beijing, China, Au-
gust. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Ondřej Bojar, Zdeněk Žabokrtsky̌, Ondřej Dušek, Pe-
tra Galuščáková, Martin Majliš, David Mareček,
Jiřı́ Maršı́k, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Aleš
Tamchyna. 2012. The joy of parallelism with
czeng 1.0. In Nicoletta Calzolari, editor, Proceed-
ings of the Eight International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istan-
bul, Turkey, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Ondřej Bojar, Rudolf Rosa, and Aleš Tamchyna. 2013.
Chimera – three heads for English-to-Czech trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, pages 92–98, Sofia,
Bulgaria, August. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

António Branco and João Silva. 2006. A Suite of Shal-
low Processing Tools for Portuguese: LX-Suite. In
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL).

Daniel de Kok and Gertjan Van Noord. 2010. A sen-
tence generator for dutch. In LOT Occasional Se-
ries, pages 75–90.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Natalia Silveira, Tim-
othy Dozat, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher Manning. 2014. Universal
Stanford dependencies: A cross-linguistic typology.
In Proceedings of the 9th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics on Human Language Technology - Volume
1, pages 48–54. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
ACL. The Association for Computer Linguistics.

440



Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Machine Translation Summit, pages 79–86.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) System Demonstrations,
pages 55–60.

David Mareček, Martin Popel, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský.
2010. Maximum entropy translation model in
dependency-based MT framework. In Proceedings
of the Joint 5th Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation and MetricsMATR, pages 201–206.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Haji. 2005. Non-projective dependency parsing
using spanning tree algorithms. In In Proceedings of
Human Language Technology Conference and Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 523–530.

Steven Neale, Luis Gomes, Eneko Agirre, Oier
Lopez de Lacalle, and António Branco. 2016. Word
sense-aware machine translation: Including senses
as contextual features for improved translation mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 10th Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference (LREC), European Lan-
guage Resources Association, Portorož, Slovenia.
To appear.

Gertjan Van Noord. 2006. At last parsing is now op-
erational. In In TALN 2006, Verbum Ex Machina,
Actes De La 13e Conference sur Le Traitement Au-
tomatique des Langues naturelles, pages 20–42.

Václav Novák and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2007. Feature
engineering in maximum spanning tree dependency
parser. In Václav Matoušek and Pavel Mautner,
editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue: 10th Interna-
tional Conference, TSD 2007, Pilsen, Czech Repub-
lic, September 3-7, 2007. Proceedings, pages 92–98,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

João Rodrigues, Luıs Gomes, Steve Neale, Andreia
Querido, Nuno Rendeiro, Sanja Štajner, João Silva,
and António Branco. 2016a. Domain-specific hy-
brid machine translation from english to portuguese.
In Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence. Springer.
To appear.

João Rodrigues, Nuno Rendeiro, Andreia Querido,
Sanja Štajner, and António Branco. 2016b. Boot-
strapping a hybrid mt system to a new language
pair. In Proceedings of the 10th Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association, Portorož,
Slovenia. To appear.

Rudolf Rosa, Ondřej Dušek, Michal Novák, and Martin
Popel. 2015. Translation model interpolation for
domain adaptation in tectomt. In Proceedings of the
1st Deep Machine Translation Workshop, pages 89–
96, Praha, Czechia. ÚFAL MFF UK.

Rudolf Rosa, Roman Sudarikov, Michal Nov4́k, Martin
Popel, and Ondřej Bojar. 2016. Dictionary-based
domain adaptation of mt systems without retraining.
In Proceedings of the 1sh Conference of Machine
Translation, WMT2016, Berlin, Germany. To ap-
pear.

João Silva, João Rodrigues, Luıs Gomes, and António
Branco. 2015. Bootstrapping a hybrid deep mt sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the ACL2015 Fourth Work-
shop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 1–
5.

Kiril Simov, Iliana Simova, Velislava Todorova, and
Petya Osenova. 2015. Factored models for
deep machine translation. In Proceedings of the
1st Deep Machine Translation Workshop (DMTW
2015), pages 97–105.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an Extensible Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Spoken Language Pro-
cessing (ICSLP), pages 901–904.

Jana Straková, Milan Straka, and Jan Hajič. 2014.
Open-source tools for morphology, lemmatization,
pos tagging and named entity recognition. In In Pro-
ceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstra-
tions, page 1318, Baltimore, Maryland. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jrg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel Data, Tools and Inter-
faces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12). European Language Resources
Association.

Sanja Štajner, Andreia Querido, Nuno Rendeiro, João
Rodrigues, and António Branco. 2016. Use
of domain-specific language resources in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 10th Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association, Portorož,
Slovenia. To appear.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský and Martin Popel. 2009. Hidden
Markov Tree Model in Dependency-based Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP
2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 145–148.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Jan Ptáček, and Petr Pajas. 2008.
Tectomt: Highly modular mt system with tec-
togrammatics used as transfer layer. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, StatMT ’08, pages 167–170, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable tagset conversion us-
ing tagset drivers. In Nicoletta Calzolari, editor,
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08),
Marrakech, Morocco, May. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA). http://www.lrec-
conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/.

441


