




































Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+12), pages 38–47,
Düsseldorf, Germany, June 29 - July 1, 2016.

Modelling Discourse in STAG:
Subordinate Conjunctions and Attributing Phrases

Timothée Bernard

Université Paris Diderot
ALPAGE

timothee.bernard@inria.fr

Laurence Danlos

Université Paris Diderot
ALPAGE, IUF

laurence.danlos@inria.fr

Abstract

We propose a new model in STAG syntax
and semantics for subordinate conjunc-
tions (SubConjs) and attributing phrases
– attitude/reporting verbs (AVs; believe,
say) and attributing prepositional phrase
(APPs; according to). This model is
discourse-oriented, and is based on the ob-
servation that SubConjs and AVs are not
homogeneous categories. Indeed, previ-
ous work has shown that SubConjs can be
divided into two classes according to their
syntactic and semantic properties. Simi-
larly, AVs have two different uses in dis-
course: evidential and intentional. While
evidential AVs and APPs have strong se-
mantic similarities, they do not appear in
the same contexts when SubConjs are at
play. Our proposition aims at representing
these distinctions and capturing these var-
ious discourse-related interactions.

1 Introduction

A text as a whole must exhibit some coherence
that makes it more than just a bag of sentences.
This coherence hinges on the discourse relations
(DRs), that express the articulations between the
different pieces of information of the text. There
is still debate about the number and the nature
of DRs, yet typical DRs include Contrast, Con-
sequence or Explanation (Asher and Lascarides,
2003). In this paper we consider that DRs are two-
place predicates that structure the text at the dis-
course level (1a) but also at the sentence level (1b).
In these two examples, the Consequence relation
is explicit, i.e. lexically signalled, but a DR can
also be implicit, i.e. semantically inferred. This
is for instance the case when therefore is removed

from (1b) to produce (1c).1

(1) a. Fred was ill. Therefore, he stayed home.

b. Fred was ill, he therefore stayed home.

c. Fred was ill, he stayed home.

Therefore is a discourse connective (DC), a
group of lexical elements whose function is to sig-
nal that a DR holds between two spans of text.2

DCs can be of different syntactic categories; we
are specifically concerned here with subordinate
conjunctions (SubConjs). SubConjs are generally
considered a homogeneous category although pre-
vious work such as (Haegeman, 2004) has shown
they can be divided into two classes with distinc-
tive syntactic and semantic properties. Such prop-
erties are the possibility or impossibility of cleft
sentences illustrated in (2) or the difference of
scope observed in (3).

(2) a. It is when he was twenty that Fred went
to Brazil.

b. #It is even though he really wanted to
come that Fred stayed home.

(3) a. He did not come because he was hungry:
he came because he was thirsty.

b. #He did not come even though he still had
work to do: he came even though he was
tired.

In addition to SubConjs, we are interested in
attitude verbs and reporting verbs (AVs) – verbs

1Following the conventions of the PDTB (Prasad et al.,
2007), we refer to the two arguments of DRs as Arg1 and
Arg2 and use italics and bold face respectively to indicate the
spans of text for each argument.

2There exist more complex markers constituting an open
class, referred to as “AltLex” – “alternative lexicalization”
(Prasad et al., 2010).

38



like say or believe, which describe an action or
a state but also report the stance of an agent to-
wards a given semantic proposition – and attribut-
ing prepositional phrases (APPs; e.g. according
to). These have particular interactions with DCs in
general and SubConjs in particular. Some of these
phenomena could probably be correctly analysed
with a purely semantic treatment of at-issueness
inspired from (Potts, 2005) and (Scheffler, 2013).
However, we think a proper treatment of the syn-
tactic aspects as well requires a different formal-
ism. The goal of this work is to model these var-
ious lexical elements in a Synchronous Tree Ad-
joining Grammar (STAG, (Shieber and Schabes,
1990)). Current models so far (see (Nesson and
Shieber, 2006), or (Danlos, 2009) which focuses
specifically on discourse analysis) do not incorpo-
rate most of the properties mentioned in this paper.

The paper is organised as follows. Section 2
presents relevant work related to DCs, AVs and
some of their interactions. Section 3 exposes and
summarises the properties we are aiming for with
our model. Then, Section 4 describes our STAG
proposition. Section 5 discusses this model and
introduce a possible evolution.

2 Relevant Work

2.1 Non-Alignment of Syntactic and

Discourse Arguments

According to a number of authors (see (Dinesh
et al., 2005) for English and (Danlos, 2013) for
French), in a sentence like (4a) the speaker intends
to contrast her belief with the belief of Sabine;
hence the inclusion of Sabine thinks in Arg2. On
the contrary, in (4b) the speaker does not intend to
oppose her belief with the one of Sabine, but rather
Fred’s stay in Peru with his (alleged) absence of
stay in Lima; hence the exclusion of Sabine thinks
from the argument of the DR. In this last case, we
observe that the (semantic/discourse) argument of
the DR is included in but not equal to the propo-
sitional content of the (syntactic) argument of the
DC.3

Such non-alignments of the syntactic and dis-
course arguments (“mismatches” in the following)
often arise with attitude verbs and reporting verbs
(AV): when an AV together with the clause it in-
troduces is an argument of a DC, the AV may (4a)

3Another argument for this distinction is that Sabine
thinks can be felicitously removed from (4b) while it cannot
from (4a).

or may not (4b) be included in the discourse argu-
ment of the corresponding DR. Following (Asher
et al., 2006), we say the AV is intentional in the
first case and evidential in the second. One can
notice that an evidential AV is equivalent to the
expression according to Sabine.

(4) a. Fred went to Peru although Sabine thinks
he never left Europe.

b. Fred went to Peru although Sabine thinks
he has never been to Lima.

It is interesting to note, as highlighted
in (Hunter and Danlos, 2014), that contrarily to
although not all DCs can be found with such mis-
matches. It is the case, for instance, of because, as
illustrated in (5). (Hunter and Danlos, 2014), us-
ing the DR hierarchy of the PDTB, observes that a
DC lexicalising a COMPARISON or an EXPAN-
SION relation can often be found with a mismatch,
whereas it seems impossible for a DC lexicalising
a TEMPORAL or a CONTINGENCY relation.

(5) a. Fred could not come because he was not
in town.

b. #Fred could not come because Sabine
thinks he was not in town.

2.2 Two Types of Adverbial Clauses

An adverbial clause is a subordinate clause that
functions as an adverb. It is the case of after he ate
(temporal meaning) and although he was starving
(concessive meaning) in (6).

(6) a. Fred left after he ate.

b. Fred left although he was starving.

Traditionally, adverbial clauses are considered
a rather homogeneous syntactical category. But a
particular distinction between two types of adver-
bial clauses is proposed by (Haegeman, 2004):

• on the one hand, the central adverbial
clauses (CAC), which add an information
(time, place, etc.) about the eventuality de-
scribed in the matrix clause;

• on the other hand, the peripheral adverbial
clauses (PAC), whose function is to structure
the discourse (expressing a concession, pro-
viding background information, etc.).

39



In (7), while he was a student specifies the date,
and if it is sunny expresses a necessary condition,
of the event in their respective matrix clause; they
both are CACs. In (8), while Sabine has never left
Europe expresses a fact contrasting with, and if it
is sunny justifies the interrogation in, their respec-
tive matrix clause; they both are PACs.

(7) a. Fred went to Brazil while he was a stu-
dent.

b. If it is sunny, I’ll go outside.

(8) a. Fred has been to Brazil whereas Sabine
has never left Europe.

b. If it is sunny, why aren’t you playing out-
side?

Several phenomena are studied in (Haegeman,
2004) – coordination, ellipsis, ambiguity, or phe-
nomena related to scope, prosody, typography, etc.
–, tending to show a greater integration of CACs
into their matrix clause than PACs. Two of these
phenomena are of particular interest for this work:

• “Main clause negation may scope over cen-
tral adverbial clauses, but peripheral adver-
bial clauses cannot fall within the scope of a
negative operator in an associated clause”;

• “in addition to tense, other adverbial opera-
tors may also have scope over central adver-
bial clauses but they do not scope over pe-
ripheral adverbial clauses”.

These two phenomena are illustrated in (9) – for
negation – and (10) – for adverbs. These exam-
ples each present a pair of sentences with parallel
construction: the first contains a CAC and the sec-
ond a PAC. In line with (Haegeman, 2004)’s ob-
servation, the negation scopes over the whole sen-
tence in (9a) while it only scopes over the matrix
clause in (9b). Similarly, the adverb scopes over
the whole sentence in (10a) while it only scopes
over the matrix clause in (10b).

(9) a. Fred didn’t go to Brazil because he
wanted to learn Portuguese (but for an-
other reason).

b. Fred has not been to Brazil whereas
Sabine travels there often.

(10) a. Fred often wake up in the middle of the
night because he is scared.

b. Fred often takes the bus while Sabine
prefers walking.

It should also be noted that a CAC cannot con-
tain an epistemic modal if it is speaker-oriented
(as in (11a) but not in (11c) where may is mainly
“John-oriented”), while a PAC can (see 11b). Ex-
pressed with the terms of (Hunter and Danlos,
2014): the syntactic and discourse arguments of a
conjunction must be aligned in the case of a CAC,
while there can be a mismatch with PACs.

(11) a. #Mary accepted the invitation without
hesitation after John may have accepted
it. [from (Haegeman, 2004)]

b. The ferry will be fairly cheap,
while/whereas the plane may/will proba-
bly be too expensive. [from (Haegeman,
2004)]

c. John is worried because he may be ill.

In this paper, a SubConj introducing a CAC is
called a CConj and a SubConj introducing a PAC
is called a PConj. It is important to keep in mind
that, as illustrated in (7b) and (8b), a same Sub-
Conj, depending on its meaning, can alternatively
introduce a CAC or a PAC.

3 Desired Properties of the Model

Before exposing our STAG model, we list in this
section the properties that we want to include.
First, we want our model to be able to account for
the possibilities (with PConjs) and impossibilities
(with CConjs) of syntax-discourse mismatch pre-
sented in section 2.1. Then, as explained in sec-
tion 2.2, the model should allow V-modifiers of a
matrix clause – such as a negation or an adverb – to
scope over a CAC but not over a PAC. Finally, two
other interesting properties are presented in the
following section, related to the scope of AVs and
the meaning of attributing prepositional phrases
(according to NP, in NP’s opinion).

3.1 Scope of AVs

The scope ambiguity for V-modifiers described
in (Haegeman, 2004) seems to also apply to some
S-modifiers such as AVs. A sentence of the form
Sabine thinks A because B can either mean that
it is because of B that Sabine thinks A (narrow
scope) or that Sabine thinks that A, that B and

40



the A-because-of-B relation (wide scope).4 This
generalises well to other CConjs, however things
seem different for PConjs.

There has been a lot of discussion since
Frege (Frege, 1948) about the semantics of a
PConj such as although. Like a presupposition,
the concessive meaning of although can project
through presupposition holes (negation, epistemic
modals, etc.), but it also projects through pre-
supposition plugs such as AVs. Indeed, al-
though is often cited as a conventional implica-
ture trigger since (Grice, 1975), which are char-
acterised in (Potts, 2005) with 4 properties: non-
cancellability, not at-issueness, scopelessness and
speaker-orientedness. From these properties one
can explain many of the observation in (Haege-
man, 2004).5

It is also interesting to remark that there is a
strong interpretation bias associated with PConjs
like although: for instance, out of context, (12a)
seems intuitively to imply that Fred was actually
sick. Yet, saying that the Arg2 of a Concession is
never at-issue (i.e. that it cannot be targeted by any
operator, like the concessive part of the meaning)
would be taking shortcuts. Indeed, (12a) can be fe-
licitously followed by (12b) even though it negates
Arg2. So in such a case, he was sick is under the
semantic scope of Sabine thinks. That is why we
believe such an utterance is ambiguous: the Arg2
may (wide scope) or may not (narrow scope) be
under the semantic scope of the AV; the latter be-
ing a default reading. Note that we do not relate
this difference to a matter of centrality vs. periph-
erality; in both cases the lexicalised relation is the
same speaker-oriented Concession and is not at-
issue.

(12) a. Sabine thinks Fred came to work
although he was sick.

b. But she is wrong, he had recovered sev-
eral days ago.

4We are here implicitly dealing with the causal because,
which introduces a CAC, whereas there also exists a prag-
matic because as in It has rained because the ground is wet.
Such pragmatic DCs are particular in many ways and even
though we believe they introduce PACs, we won’t consider
them in detail here.

5One reviewer points out that although can be embedded
under negation as in Fred didn’t leave ALTHOUGH Lucy ar-
rived, but because of it. We think that in such a case, the sub-
ordinate clause behaves as a central one and that although can
be satisfactorily modelled with an ambiguity between PConj
and CConj.

c. Although he was sick, Sabine thinks Fred
came to work.

Although we lack space to support this
claim, we believe that those properties about at-
issueness, speaker-orientedness and scope ambi-
guity are shared among PConjs. Even if PConjs
are strongly biased towards the narrow scope read-
ing, we still want our model to be able to handle
both interpretations. Furthermore, the difference
between them is not only a semantic one; only
when the AV has narrow scope can the adverbial
clause be anteposed (with no shift in meaning)
as in (12c) – this applies to PConjs and CConjs
equally.

3.2 Attributing Prepositional Phrases

In the context of this paper, we can consider that
an evidential AV such as Sabine thinks is seman-
tically equivalent to an attributing prepositional
phrases (APP) such as according to Sabine (13a).
It might then come as a surprise that APPs can
felicitously be found with CConjs (13b), which
otherwise do not accept evidential AVs. In fact,
the situation is not symmetrical; with a CConj,
the APP does not scope only over Arg2 but also
over the DR lexicalised by the CConj. (13b) is in-
deed semantically equivalent to (13c). We want
our model to predict the correct semantics for sen-
tences including an APP. Note that APPs are ad-
verbials, and thus can also appear in clause-medial
position (13d).6

(13) a. Fred could not come even though, ac-
cording to Sabine, he was really looking
forward to it.

b. Fred could not come because, according
to Sabine, he was not in town.

c. Fred could not come and, according to
Sabine, it is because he was not in town.

d. Fred could not come even though he was,
according to Sabine, really looking for-
ward to it.

4 Our Proposition in STAG

We now turn to STAG and propose new structures
for AVs and SubConjs, in addition to a slight vari-

6We are aware that not all APPs are equivalent in terms of
acceptability. In particular, some of our examples are more
natural if in X’s opinion is substituted for according to X. For
the sake of simplicity, however, we have chosen to only use
this latter expression.

41



ation of traditional phrase structures. These modi-
fications reflect the properties described in the pre-
vious sections.

4.1 AVs and APPs

AVs – as other bridge verbs – are usually mod-
elled in TAG as anchors of auxiliary trees that ad-
join on the S-node of the clause they introduce
(Joshi, 1987). Auxiliary trees for these verbs are
motivated by long distance extractions as in He is
the man Paul believes [...] Ringo said Yoko loves,
where NP believes/said is similar to according to
NP (see Fig. 1 for a model of APPs). However
this equivalence seems unwarranted for intentional
AVs: such a verb describes the state or action (of
believing, of saying, etc.) that is the argument of
the DR, the introduced clause being a central el-
ement of this eventuality but not the eventuality
in itself. Intentional AVs, contrarily to evidential
ones, do not appear as semantic modifier of the
clause they introduce.

S

S*PP

PP

NP↓[1]TO

to

V

according

t

e ↓[1]〈e, t〉

t*〈t, 〈e, t〉〉

saccording to

saccording to = λp s.evid(s, p)

Figure 1: APP: βaccording to (the commas are omitted
for readability)

Therefore, to take into account the two eviden-
tial and intentional uses of AVs, we propose an ini-
tial TAG pair (Fig. 2) in addition to the auxiliary
one traditionally used (Fig. 3). In our model their
semantics is also slightly different: evidential AVs
use predicates – marked here without apostrophe
unlike intentional predicates – that are “erased”
when in a peripheral DR. This is achieved by in-
troducing rewriting rules of the form:

Contrast(p, think(a, q))→ Contrast(p, q)

Conversely, unnatural mismatches can be avoided
by discarding any analysis displaying an evidential
AV predicate as argument of a central DR:

Explanation(p, think(a, q))→ ⊥

Thanks to these rules, our model will be able to
get the correct semantics and to account for the
possibilities and impossibilities of mismatch.

S[4]

VP

S↓[2]V[3]

thinks

NP↓[1]

t[3,4]

e ↓[1]〈e, t〉

t ↓[2]〈t, 〈e, t〉〉

sthink′

sthink′ = λp s.think
′(s, p)

Figure 2: Intentional AV: αthink

S[4]

VP

S*V[3]

thinks

NP↓[1]

t[3,4]

e ↓[1]〈e, t〉

t*〈t, 〈e, t〉〉

sthink

sthink = λp s.think(s, p)

Figure 3: Evidential AV: βthink

4.2 Subordinate Conjunctions

In the same vein, the difference in syntax and
semantics between CACs and PACs can be ex-
plained with different structures for CConjs and
PConjs as in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5.7 The syntax of
all SubConjs is usually modelled homogeneously,
be it with an auxiliary tree as in TAG (XTAG Re-
search Group, 2001) or with an initial one as in D-
LTAG (Webber, 2004), but this is not the case in
our proposition. Because we model PConjs with
a substitution node even for the left argument in-
stead of the adjunction node of CConjs, we can
assure that any modifier of the left argument (such
as a negation) is only local and cannot scope over
the whole Arg1 ∧ Arg2 ∧ R(Arg1,Arg2) proposi-
tion, while this is possible with CConjs.

Also note that the link [3] for CConjs al-
lows APPs such as according to Sabine in (13b)
to scope over both the Arg2 and the DR. With
PConjs, the APP must adjoin on the right argu-
ment, which a priori would also be possible with
CConjs but is in fact excluded by the semantic rule
for evidentials within a central DR (an APP is con-
sidered as evidential). Not all S-modifiers should
be allowed to adjoin on [3], in particular no AVs;
a feature should then be used to restrict link [3] to
natural adjunctions only.

7The presence of the SBAR-node for CConjs is necessary
because of the possibility of cleft sentences (It is because A
that B), which shows that there exists such a constituent. No
cleft sentences are observed with PConjs.

42



S

SBAR

S[3]

S↓[1]

IN

because

S*

t

〈t, t〉

〈t, 〈t, t〉〉

λp q. t

p ∧ t[3]

q ∧ Explanation(p, q)

t*

t ↓[1]

Figure 4: CConj: βbecause

S[3]

S↓[1]IN

although

S↓[2]

t[3]

t ↓[1]〈t, t〉

t[2]〈t, 〈t, t〉〉

salthough

salthough = λp q.(p ∧ q ∧ Concession(p, q))

Figure 5: PConj: αalthough

4.3 Sentence Structures

Following (Nesson and Shieber, 2006), we con-
sider that sentence structures have two differ-
ent adjunction sites in their semantic tree for V-
modifiers (such as negation and adverbs) and S-
modifiers (such as AVs). Because multiple adjunc-
tions on the same node are allowed and are used
to represent various scope ambiguities, doing so
avoids (unnatural) interpretations of a V-modifier
scoping over a S-modifier. However, CConjs are
sentence modifiers like AVs but, as seen in the
previous sections, they do present scope ambigu-
ity when confronted with verbal modifiers such as
negation. This is why, as illustrated in Fig. 6, we
consider adding to sentence structures another ad-
junction site on the S-node (link [3]) whose se-
mantic counterpart is at the same node as verbal
modifiers’ one. We can use features to restrict the
other S-site (link [2]) to AVs and APPs, and con-
versely to force them to adjoin there.

Fig. 7 shows the derivations trees obtained from
the adjunction of a negation (or any verbal modi-
fier) on the matrix clause of a SubConj. Our model
correctly predicts that the negation can have local
or global scope in the case of a CConj, but only
local scope in the case of a PConj.

S[2,3]

VP

ADJ

absent

V[1]

is

NP

Fred

t[2]

t[1,3]

absent(Fred)

Figure 6: A sentence structure; link [2] is re-
stricted to AVs and APPs, other S-modifiers adjoin
at [3].

αA

βbecause

αB

1

βnot

1 3
αalthough

αBαA

βnot

1

2 1

Figure 7: The derivation trees for ¬A CONJ B with
a CConj (left) or a PConj (right). Because in αA
links [1] and [3] are at the same semantic node, the
left tree is a scope neutral representation yielding
one syntactic tree but two semantic ones depend-
ing on the order of the adjunctions.

5 Discussion

5.1 Standard STAG

Tab. 1 shows the derivation trees for sentences of
the form A CONJ Sabine thinks B as in (4). We
lack space to display all the derived trees cor-
responding to this configuration, however Fig. 8
shows the trees obtained with a PConj and an ev-
idential AV (top-right possibility in Tab. 1). The
syntactic trees do not depend on the use (inten-
tional or evidential) of the AV, whereas the seman-
tic trees do, but only in the substitution of the ev-
idential sthink term for the intentional sthink′ one.
This slight difference, in addition to the seman-
tic rules stated earlier, accounts for the correct se-
mantic of these various interpretations and the ex-
clusion of analyses where an evidential AV is an
argument of a CConj. Remains for PConjs, how-
ever, an ambiguity that only the semantics of the
various elements involved can solve.

Tab. 2 shows the derivation trees for sentences
of the form Sabine thinks A CONJ B, that is with
the AV in sentence-initial position as in (12a).
In this configuration, A CONJ B may be an S-
constituent introduced by the AV; the latter is not
then part of the arguments of the relation lexi-
calised by CONJ and is called here “external”.
Note that in this case and without context, the in-

43



Intentional AV Evidential AV

PConj:

αalthough

αSabine thinks

αB

2

αA

2 1

αalthough

αB

βSabine thinks

2

αA

2 1

CConj:

αA

βbecause

αSabine thinks

αB

2

1

3

Table 1: Derivation trees for sentences of the form
A CONJ Sabine thinks B.

S

S

VP

S

B

V

thinks

NP

Sabine

IN

although

S

A

t

t

e

Sabine

〈e, t〉

t

q

〈t, 〈e, t〉〉

sthink

〈t, t〉

t

p

〈t, 〈t, t〉〉

salthough

Generated formula:
p ∧ think(Sabine, q) ∧ Concession(p, q)

Figure 8: Result of the analyse of A although
Sabine thinks B with an evidential AV.

tentional or evidential status of the AV is undeter-
mined; we have chosen to use the traditional βthinks
pair. As before, this configuration presents ambi-
guities that can only be resolved with the help of
the semantics of the particular DR.

Fig. 9 shows the two syntactic trees obtained
in this configuration with the PConj although, de-
pending on the role of the AV (on the top: inten-
tional or evidential; at the bottom: external). Note
that our model analyses the evidential case with
a syntax-discourse mismatch on Arg1. Indeed, in
the top tree Sabine thinks A is the syntactic argu-
ment of although, whereas if the AV is evidential,
only the propositional content of A constitutes the
Arg1 of Concession. This analysis is supported
by the possibility of anteposition of the subordi-

nate clause in intentional and evidential cases il-
lustrated in (12c): the anteposition of although B
appears natural from the top tree and not from the
bottom one.

Intentional or evidential AV:
S

S

B

IN

although

S

VP

S

A

V

thinks

NP

Sabine

External AV:
S

VP

S

S

B

IN

although

S

A

V

thinks

NP

Sabine

Figure 9: Syntactic derived trees for sentences of
the form Sabine thinks A although B. Note that
with although (a PConj), the tree at the bottom
corresponds to a less likely reading that must be
forced by the context.

Finally, Fig. 10 shows the analyses for A CONJ,
according to Sabine, B. Note how the additional
link [3] in CConjs lead to a correct interpretation
of (13b) where the APP scopes over both the DR
and its Arg2 as stated in section 3.2.

αA

βbecause

αBβaccording to Sabine

3 1

3

αalthough

αB

βaccording to Sabine

2

αA

2 1

Figure 10: The derivation trees for A CONJ, ac-
cording to Sabine, B with a CConj (left) or a PConj
(right).

5.2 Towards Multi-Component TAG

We have proposed the link [3] in CConj
(see Fig. 4) in order to handle modifiers such as
APPs that are inserted between a CConj and the
rest of the introduced clause while scoping over
the DR and the Arg2. However, we previously
mentioned that such modifiers can also be found

44



Intentional AV Evidential AV External AV

PConj:

αalthough

αBαSabine thinks

αA

2

2 1

αalthough

αBαA

βSabine thinks

2

2 1
αalthough

αBαAβSabine thinks

3

2

1

CConj:

αSabine thinks

βbecause

αB

1

αA

2 3

αA

βbecause

αB

1

βSabine thinks

2 3

Table 2: Derivation trees for sentences of the form Sabine thinks A CONJ B.

in middle position with the same meaning as il-
lustrated in (13d). This clearly poses a problem
for our current approach, because an APP in mid-
dle position must adjoin on the right argument and
thus cannot scope over the DR itself. It seems we
can overcome this problem with the help of Multi-
Component Tree Adjoining Grammars (MCTAG)
in a fashion similar to what is done for noun
phrases in (Nesson and Shieber, 2007). We won’t
give here a fully detailed MCTAG proposition, but
rather sketch the main aspects of it.

Our idea is that when an S-constituent is the
syntactic argument (be it left or right) of a Sub-
Conj, its modifiers can have a local scope (i.e.
within this constituent), or, in the case of a
CConj, also a wider scope (which depends on
whether the S-constituent is on the left or right
of the CConj). These scope phenomena could
be dealt with homogeneously by considering a
two-component structure for the S-constituents as
shown in Fig. 11. One component provides the
content of the sentence while the other one – a
vestigial (S*, t*) one – would serve the purpose
of “pluging in” the correct node of the SubConj’s
semantic tree for subsequent adjunctions. Links
[1,2] in Fig. 11 are for local scope and links [3,4]
for (possibly) wider scope. Because of this multi-
component structure, we probably don’t need an
adjunction site for the left argument of CConjs
anymore, as they can be modelled with two sub-
stitution sites as shown in Fig. 12.

With such a model, sentences with a CAC con-
taining a clause-initial APP like (13b) could be
analysed as in Fig. 13. The derivation tree for sen-
tences with clause-medial APP would be almost
identical: the APP would adjoin on the link [3] of
αB instead of the link [4].

S[2,4]

VP

ADJ

absent

V[1,3]

is

NP

Fred

t[2]

t[1]

absent(Fred) S* t*[3,4]

Figure 11: A sketch of MCTAG structure for S-
constituents.

S[1,2]

SBAR

S↓[1]IN

because

S↓[2]

t[2]

〈t, t〉

〈t, 〈t, t〉〉

λp q. t

p ∧ t[1]

q ∧ Explanation(p, q)

t ↓[2]

t ↓[1]

Figure 12: A sketch of MCTAG structure for
CConjs.

6 Conclusion

We have first recalled the notion of syntax-
discourse mismatch and related it to the two in-
tentional and evidential uses of AVs. Then, we
have presented the distinction made in (Haege-
man, 2004) between central and peripheral ad-
verbial clauses. Additional syntactic and seman-
tic phenomena were mentioned, which have moti-
vated our STAG model. This model is enriched
with new structures for AVs and SubConjs that
reflect the distinctions and properties previously
highlighted.

Yet, it is still too constrained regarding the rel-
atively free position of attributing prepositional
phrases. This lead us to consider the Multi-

45



S[1,2]

S↓[2] SBAR

IN

because

S↓[1]
S[2,4]

B

S*

S[2,4]

A

S*

S

according to Sabine S*

t[2]

〈t, t〉

〈t, 〈t, t〉〉

λp q. t

p ∧ t[1]

q ∧ Explanation(p, q)

t ↓[2]

t ↓[1]

t[2]

t[1]

B

t*[3,4]

t[2]

t[1]

A

t*[3,4]

t

λp.evid(Sabine, p) t*

αbecause

αB

βaccording to Sabine

4

αA

2 1

Figure 13: MCTAG analysis of sentences with a CAC containing a clause-initial APP like (13a).

Component TAG formalism, which we believe is
more suitable for modelling fine-grained phenom-
ena in discourse. Only a sketch of an MCTAG
model is given here; we plan on developing these
ideas in the future. Furthermore, projection prop-
erties not mentioned here will probably require us
to refine our proposal, before extending our ap-
proach to the other categories of discourse connec-
tives. Among them, adverbials are the most prob-
lematic; their ability to be integrated inside one
of their argument has lead previous TAG-based
accounts – namely D-LTAG (Webber, 2004) and
D-STAG (Danlos, 2009) – to resort to a complex
parsing process with an intermediate step. While
more recent work has been successful in getting
rid of this additional step in an elegant way (Dan-
los et al., 2016), it requires a substantial change in
formalism (the use of Abstract Categorial Gram-
mars (de Groote, 2001)). Further investigation
with MCTAG may confirm whether such a change
is necessary.

References

N. Asher and A. Lascarides. 2003. Logics of Conver-
sation. Cambridge University Press.

N. Asher, J. Hunter, P. Denis, and B. Reese. 2006.
Evidentiality and intensionality: Two uses of repor-
tative constructions in discourse. In Workshop on
Constraints in Discourse Structure, Maynooth, Ire-
land.

L. Danlos, A. Maskharashvili, and S. Pogodalla. 2016.
Interfacing Sentential and Discourse TAG-based
Grammars. To appear in the proceedings of the 12th

International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Gram-
mars and Related FormalismsTAG+12 (TAG+12),
Düsseldorf, Germany., June.

L. Danlos. 2009. D-STAG: a Formalism for Discourse
Analysis based on SDRT and using Synchronous
TAG. In P. de Groote, editor, Proceedings of FG’09.
INRIA.

L. Danlos. 2013. Connecteurs de discours adverbiaux:
Problèmes à l’interface syntaxe-sémantique. Lin-
guisticae Investigationes, 36(2):261–275, Decem-
ber.

P. de Groote. 2001. Towards Abstract Categorial
Grammars. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’01, pages 252–259, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
ACL.

N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki, R. Prasad, A. Joshi,
and B. Webber. 2005. Attribution and the (Non-
)Alignment of Syntactic and Discourse Arguments
of Connectives. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Frontiers in Corpus Annotations II: Pie in the Sky,
pages 29–36, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. ACL.

G. Frege. 1948. Sense and Reference. The Philosoph-
ical Review, 57(3):209–230.

H. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
L. Jerry, editors, Syntax and semantics 3: Speech
acts, pages 41–58. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.

L. Haegeman. 2004. The syntax of adverbial clauses
and its consequences for topicalisation. In M. Co-
ene, G. De Cuyper, and Y. D’Hulst, editors, Current
Studies in Comparative Romance Linguistics, num-
ber 107 in APiL, pages 61–90. Antwerp University.

J. Hunter and L. Danlos. 2014. Because We Say
So. In Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop

46



on Computational Approaches to Causality in Lan-
guage, CAtoCL, pages 1–9, Gothenburg, Sweden,
April. ACL.

A. Joshi. 1987. An introduction to Tree Adjoining
Grammars. Mathematics of Language, 1:87–115.

R. Nesson and S. Shieber. 2006. Simpler TAG seman-
tics through synchronization. In Proceedings of FG
2006, pages 129–142, Malaga, Spain.

R. Nesson and S. Shieber. 2007. Extraction Phenom-
ena in Synchronous TAG Syntax and Semantics. In
Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007/AMTA Work-
shop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Transla-
tion, SSST ’07, pages 9–16, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
ACL.

C. Potts. 2005. The logic of conventional implicatures.
Oxford University Press Oxford.

R. Prasad, E. Miltsakaki, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, A. Joshi,
L. Robaldo, and B. Webber. 2007. The Penn
Discourse Treebank 2.0 Annotation Manual. IRCS
Technical Reports Series, December.

R. Prasad, A. Joshi, and B. Webber. 2010. Realization
of Discourse Relations by Other Means: Alternative
Lexicalizations. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1023–1031, Beijing, China, August.

T. Scheffler. 2013. Two-dimensional Semantics.
Clausal Adjuncts and Complements. De Gruyter
Mouton, Berlin/Boston.

S. Shieber and Y. Schabes. 1990. Synchronous Tree-
adjoining Grammars. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume
3, COLING ’90, pages 253–258, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. ACL.

B. Webber. 2004. D-LTAG: extending lexicalized
TAG to discourse. Cognitive Science, 28(5):751–
779, September.

XTAG Research Group. 2001. A Lexicalized Tree
Adjoining Grammar for English. Technical Report
IRCS-01-03, IRCS, University of Pennsylvania.

47


