



















































Supervised Machine Learning for Hybrid Meter


Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 1–8,
San Diego, California, June 1, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Supervised Machine Learning for Hybrid Meter

Alex Estes & Christopher Hench
University of California, Berkeley

Department of German
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

{estes,chench}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Following classical antiquity, European poetic
meter was complicated by traditions negotiat-
ing between the prosodic stress of vernacular
dialects and a classical system based on syl-
lable length. Middle High German (MHG)
epic poetry found a solution in a hybrid qual-
itative and quantitative meter. We develop a
CRF model to predict the metrical values of
syllables in MHG epic verse, achieving an F-
score of .894 on 10-fold cross-validated devel-
opment data (outperforming several baselines)
and .904 on held-out testing data. The method
used in this paper presents itself as a viable op-
tion for other literary traditions, and as a tool
for subsequent genre or author analysis.

1 Introduction

The divergence of Latin into distinct regional di-
alects had profound linguistic and literary impli-
cations for all of Europe. Even before the Mid-
dle Ages, the syllable length of classical Latin had
been nearly forgotten in the vernacular.1 Latin po-
etry had used quantitative meter, whereby syllable
length was the organizing principle. However, the
emerging dialects differed from Latin in that stress
became a phonologically important feature, and so-
called qualitative meter predominated. In order to
reconcile these linguistic differences, poetic forms
emerged in which meter relied on both stress and
syllable length. These hybrid metrical forms pose
unique challenges to automated scansion (the pro-

1Augustine writes toward the end of the fourth century that
while he recognizes time intervals, he can no longer distinguish
between long and short syllables: syllabarum longarum et bre-
vium cognicionem me non habere... “I cannot recognize long
and short syllables...” cf. Augustinus, De musica, III, 3, 5.

cess of determining the metrical value of each sylla-
ble for a line of poetry). In applying machine learn-
ing techniques to scan syllables of a hybrid meter,
we believe we can contribute to the study of both
metrics and poetics, medieval and otherwise. Our
system serves not only pedagogical purposes by in-
troducing students to the meter of medieval German
epic poetry, but also presents itself as a tool for fur-
ther research in author identification or topic model-
ing metrical form.

To illustrate quantitative meter, we consider the
epic poetry of Latin and Greek. Each line consists
of six feet, each foot typically a dactyl (a long sylla-
ble followed by two short syllables) or spondee (two
long syllables). A syllable is considered long if it
has a long vowel or diphthong, or ends in a conso-
nant (Hayes, 1989). All other syllables are short.
The first line of Virgil’s Aeneid serves as example:2

ārma vi|rumque ca|nō, Tro|jae quī|prīmus ab|ōrīs
— ^^ | — ^ ^ |— — |— — | — ^ ^|— —

Shakespeare’s verse, on the other hand, exhibits
qualitative meter, structured in iambic pentameter,
where each line has five iambs (a bisyllabic foot con-
sisting of an unstressed first syllable followed by a
stressed second syllable). The first line of Romeo
and Juliet is scanned below:3

|Two house|holds, both |alike |in dig|nity.|
| × ×́ | × ×́ |××́ |× ×́ |× ×́|

2 Middle High German Meter

This paper considers the meter of twelfth and thir-
teenth century Middle High German (MHG) epic

2— represents a long syllable and ^ a short syllable.
3Every syllable is marked with× . The acute accent ´ marks

stress.

1



verse. Although written in a Germanic language,
MHG poetry was greatly influenced by the Romance
tradition. This heritage is evident in its hybrid metri-
cal structure: MHG verse patterns according to both
syllable stress and length (Bostock, 1947).

The predominating pattern is an alternation be-
tween stressed and unstressed syllables (Tervooren,
1997).4 MHG epic verse employs trochaic tetrame-
ter: each line has four feet (Bostock, 1947), and each
foot is a trochee. Phonologically, a trochee consists
of two syllables; the first syllable is stressed, and
the second is unstressed. For example, the English
word “better” is a trochee, but the word “alive” is
not. The famous Longfellow epic poem The Song of
Hiawatha is written in trochaic tetrameter, and the
first line serves to illustrate this rhythm:

Should you ask me, whence these stories?
| ×́ × | ×́ × | ×́ × | ×́ × |
Similarly, the typical MHG epic verse foot is two

syllables in length, a stressed syllable followed by an
unstressed syllable. However, feet can also be filled
by one or three syllables (Domanowski et al., 2009).
If a foot is filled by one syllable, the syllable must
be phonologically long. If the foot is filled by three
syllables, either the first two or the last two syllables
must both be phonologically short.

It is in these atypical feet that the influence of
quantitative meter, where syllable length is the key
factor, becomes evident. We must slightly redefine
the foot to account for this. Syllable length is mea-
sured in morae. Phonologically, a mora is a unit of
time such that a short syllable has one mora and a
long syllable has two morae (Fox, 2000).5 A foot in
this meter is more precisely defined as having two
morae, not necessarily two syllables.6 Indeed, the
mora, not the syllable, has been called the funda-
mental unit of MHG verse (Tervooren, 1997, p. 1),
although the mora functions differently in this po-

4There is no consensus view on MHG meter. For this work
we have most closely followed the viewpoints presented by Do-
manowski et al. (2009) and Heusler (1956), as well as more
explicitly addressed the function of morae.

5For example, the English word “red” has two morae since
it ends in a consonant, whereas the first syllable in the English
word “reduce” has one mora, since it ends in a short vowel.

6It can be helpful to think of MHG meter in the musical
sense. Each foot is a measure of 2/4 meter, where one mora is
equivalent to one quarter note (Bögl, 2006).

etic tradition than in its phonological definition. If a
foot has only one syllable, the syllable must be long
because a long syllable is two morae and the MHG
foot requires two morae. A short syllable cannot be
the only syllable in a foot, since it cannot be two
morae. If a foot has three syllables, two must be
short because only short syllables can be scanned as
half morae, together forming one mora.7 The other
syllable is analyzed as one mora, yielding the re-
quired two morae in the foot. To summarize, a syl-
lable can have one of three length values: mora, half
mora, or double mora. A half mora must be phono-
logically short, and a double mora must be phono-
logically long. Phonological length is otherwise ir-
relevant and any syllable can be one mora.

In addition to length, as a function of morae, syl-
lables are also assigned stress. There are three stress
values: primary, secondary, or unstressed. Primary
stress is assigned to the first or only stressed sylla-
ble in a word. Secondary stress is assigned to any
following stressed syllable(s) in that word. All other
syllables are unstressed.8

The final mora of the final foot of a line is omitted
by convention. This is construed as a pause, and
receives its own symbol in the scansion, even though
there is no corresponding word or syllable. A short,
word final syllable may also be elided before a word
beginning with a vowel. MHG epic verse permits up
to three syllables in anacrusis (a series of syllables
at the beginning of a line that do not count in the
meter). These syllables may or may not carry lexical
or syntactic stress, but they are always scanned as
unstressed morae.

The above features yield eight possible metrical
values for any syllable:

7Occasionally very weakly stressed long syllables can also
count as a half mora.

8The metrical distinction between different degrees of stress
is rooted in phonological reality (Giegerich, 1985): in a word
with many syllables, one syllable usually has a primary stress,
and the others have either secondary or weak stress. For exam-
ple, many pronounce the English word “anecdotal” with sec-
ondary stress on the first syllable, primary stress on the third
syllable, and weakest stress on the second and fourth syllables.

2



• mora - primary stress (×́): a syllable with pri-
mary stress
• mora - secondary stress (×̀): a syllable with

secondary stress
• mora - unstressed (×): an unstressed syllable
• half mora - primary stress ( ´̂ ): a short sylla-

ble with primary stress; according to metrical
convention the preceding syllable must be long
• half mora - secondary stress ( `̂ ): a short syl-

lable with secondary stress
• half mora - unstressed (^): a short unstressed

syllable
• double mora (—): a stressed long syllable;

double morae always carry primary stress
• elision (e.): an elided syllable
Line 1 of Hartmann von Aue’s Der arme Hein-

rich is prototypical. Each foot consists of a stressed
syllable followed by an unstressed syllable. There is
a one-syllable anacrusis:9

Ein | rı̂ter | sô ge|lêret | was10
× | ×́ × | ×́ ×|×́ × | ×́ ˆ

Line 6 also begins with one syllable in anacrusis.
The second foot has a stressed mora consisting of
two syllables, each one a half mora. The third foot
has one syllable; a diphthong allows it to be scanned
as long. The final foot has a mora with secondary
stress, since the preceding syllable is stressed and in
the same word:

der |nam im |manege |schou|we11
× | ×́ × | ´̂ ^ × | — | ×̀ ˆ

Line 34 has no anacrusis, and in the second foot two
half mora syllables form the unstressed mora:

|die ein |ritter in |sı̂ner |jugent12
| ×́ × |×́ ^ ^ |×́ × | ´̂ ^ ˆ

Line 8 shows an elided syllable in the second foot:

dar |an be|gunde. er |suo|chen13
× |×́ × | ×́ × |— | ×̀ ˆ

9 ˆ represents the rest for the empty mora at the end of a
line. Note that this notation differs slightly from that which is
used for classical and Shakespearian verse.

10“There was a knight so learned”
11“he looked extensively,”
12“which a knight [should have] in his youth.”
13“in [these books] he began to search,”

3 Previous Computational Approaches to
Meter

There are two prevailing treatments of meter in the
literature concerned with computational poetic text
analysis. One approach takes a known meter and as-
signs syllables to stress patterns based on such pa-
rameters (Hartman, 1996). The second approach
assumes nothing of the meter, and seeks to deter-
mine it by marking syllables and identifying pat-
terns (Plamondon, 2006; McAleese, 2007; Greene et
al., 2010; Agirrezabal et al., 2013; Navarro, 2015).
Our approach draws more on the latter.

Previous scholarship has focused on relatively
simple systems of meter and adopted rule-based, sta-
tistical, or unsupervised approaches. The hybrid na-
ture of MHG meter, and other complex systems de-
veloping out of classical antiquity, makes it difficult
to scan poetry using these methodologies.14

4 Data

As supervised machine learning is a novel approach
to scansion, annotated metrical data do not exist for
MHG or most other languages. Following the scan-
sion categorization system outlined above, the au-
thors annotated syllables of MHG epic poetry into
the eight categories of metrical value.

The annotated data consist of 450 lines from Hart-
mann von Aue’s Der arme Heinrich, 200 lines from
Wolfram von Eschenbach’s Parzival, and 100 lines
from Wirnt von Grafenberg’s Wigalois.15 An addi-
tional 10% (75 lines of Hartmann von Aue’s Iwein)
was annotated to be held-out for testing, yielding a
total of 825 annotated lines. Summary statistics for
all annotated data are given in Table 1.

Syllabification was performed prior to annota-
tion. The principles of onset maximization (early
formulation in Vennemann (1972)) and sonority
sequencing (early formulation in Jesperson (1904))
govern syllabification in many languages, includ-
ing, to a great degree, MHG. The division of words

14A strictly rule-based approach was undertaken by Friedrich
Dimpel (2004). While Dimpel’s approach is accurate, it is an ar-
duous task, restrictive, and extremely language specific. More-
over, by identifying only the stressed syllables, it does not en-
compass the full complexity of MHG meter.

15Incorporating different poems from different poets accom-
modates varying styles of writing, but it also introduces more
variability, an issue to be addressed in subsequent work.

3



mean std. min. max.
char. per line 21.34 3.39 9 32
syll. per line. 7.62 1.04 5 11
words per line 5.01 1.13 1 8
char. per word 4.26 1.96 1 17
syll. per word 1.52 .71 1 7
char. per syll. 2.80 .81 1 7

Table 1: Summary statistics for annotated dataset

with only one intervocalic consonant such as ta-ge
“days” poses no difficulties. Only certain conso-
nant clusters necessitate further information from
MHG phonology. For example, the orthographic
sequence of a nasal followed by a velar obstru-
ent, although representing simply a velar nasal in
modern German, were in fact still two separate
phonemes in MHG (Paul et al., 1982). Thus the
word lange “long” is syllabified as lan-ge. Intervo-
calic affricates can be viewed as either ambisyllabic
or biphonemic, for example in sitzen “sit”; under
both interpretations the first syllable has a coda and
the second has an onset. There are also instances
where morpheme boundaries interfere with the oth-
erwise normal processes of syllabification. For ex-
ample, the common MHG suffix -lich in wı̂plich “fe-
male” results in the syllabification wı̂p-lich, not wı̂-
plich, despite onset maximization preferring the lat-
ter. Accounting for these idiosyncrasies, beyond on-
set maximization and sonority sequencing, with ad-
ditional rules resulted in syllabification with an ac-
curacy of 99.4% on the first 1,000 words in Hart-
mann von Aue’s Iwein, yielding a 95% confidence
interval of 98.9% to 99.9%.

Annotation was carried out by both authors, who
are trained in MHG scansion.16 In the case that a
line exhibits multiple permissible scansions, prior-
ity is given to the scansion which best preserves the
alternation of stressed and unstressed syllables. If a
decision still cannot be made, then stress is given to
semantic importance. An additional consideration
is the syntactic stress of a particular line. Clearly,
such evaluations allow some room for interpretation.
Nevertheless, on a sample of 100 lines from the an-
notated data (739 syllables), the Cohen’s kappa co-

16Although neither author is a native speaker of New High
German, the two phases of the language and the metrical tra-
ditions are sufficiently different that both native and non-native
speakers require training in MHG scansion.

Annotator 2
× ×́ ×̀ — ^ ´̂ e. `̂

× 285 4 0 1 3 0 0 0
×́ 0 225 1 0 1 0 0 0
×̀ 1 2 74 0 2 0 0 0
— 1 2 0 72 0 0 0 0
^ 1 0 0 0 36 0 0 0
´̂ 0 1 0 0 0 17 0 0

A
nn

ot
at

or
1

e. 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0
`̂ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1

Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement confusion matrix

efficient for the inter-annotator agreement is .962.
The greatest disagreement for the human annotators
was among unstressed and stressed morae, and be-
tween unstressed morae and unstressed half morae
(Table 2), implying both some stress and some value
disagreement.

5 Conditional Random Fields Model

Our efforts were focused on constructing a Condi-
tional Random Fields (CRF) model to predict scan-
sion for MHG meter (Lafferty et al., 2001).17 Fea-
tures are applied to the focal syllable, as well as to
the ten preceding syllables and the ten following syl-
lables of the line, if present.18 Our resulting MHG
features and their motivations are:

• Position within line: the last mora of a line is
always stressed, and double morae occur most
often in the third foot.

• Length of syllable in characters: longer sylla-
bles are more likely to be stressed. Unstressed
prefixes and suffixes tend to be maximally three
characters.

• Syllable characters: the characters in a sylla-
ble can help identify grammatical morphemes
that are often unstressed. Slices were taken of
the first character, first and second characters,
last three characters, last two characters, and
last character.

• Elision: the last two characters of the previous
syllable and the first two characters of the cur-

17Future work might consider an LSTM neural network
model. The decision to implement a CRF model was predicated
on the interpretability of CRF modeling and understanding the
primary features for MHG scansion.

18The implementation of the CRF model was expedited with
the help of Python’s crfsuite (Okazaki, 2007).

4



rent syllable are identified to detect conditions
for elision.

• Syllable weight and length: syllables ending
in a vowel or consonant are open and closed,
respectively. Syllables ending in a short vowel
are short; otherwise they are long. Such values
are useful in identifying double or half mora
syllables, which must be long or short respec-
tively. For example, the syllable “schou” in
line 6 of Der Arme Heinrich above is a double
mora, and is accordingly long.

• Word boundaries: stress usually occurs on the
first syllable of a word.

The model was tuned only on the development
data and the best performing model was chosen. The
resulting best model uses an L1 coefficient of 1.3
and L2 coefficient of .001. No further changes were
made after the model features and parameters were
selected.

6 Results and Comparison to Other
Models19

To evaluate the performance of our CRF model,
we compare against two baselines: an n-gram
model cascading into regular expressions, and a
Brill transformation-based model on top of the n-
gram model, both using syllables as units, just as
the CRF model does. The n-gram model consists
of cascading trigram, bigram, unigram, and regu-
lar expressions models, i.e. first a label is predicted
based on the previous two labels, if possible; oth-
erwise it is predicted based on the previous one la-
bel, and if the first two models fail it is predicted
solely based on the label probability for the sylla-
ble itself. If the syllable did not appear in the train-
ing data, and it cannot be predicted by the first three
models, it resorts to regular expressions. Based on
MHG scansion theory and observations while anno-
tating, syllables with long vowels were assigned to
double mora, short syllables to unstressed mora, and
the remaining syllables to mora with primary stress
(which proved important to recognize stress alter-
nation). The n-gram model was implemented with
default settings.

19The results for all models are 10-fold cross-validated.

Figure 1: F-score of different models with 95% confidence in-
tervals

The Brill model (Brill, 1995), implemented with
the help of NLTK (Bird et al., 2009), first assigns
the most likely label from the n-gram model de-
scribed above, and then generates rules to improve
the initial estimate of the n-gram model according
to the training data. It then iterates over these rules,
correcting labels until accuracy no longer increases.
The Brill model was implemented with a maximum
of 200 rules.

The n-gram model found little success even with
added training data, ending with an accuracy of
only 61.8%. The transformation-based Brill model
improved quickly upon the n-gram model, but
plateaued at 82.8% accuracy. Figure 1 shows the
increase in accuracy with an increase in the num-
ber of annotated lines for all models, suggesting that
marginal returns to annotation begin to diminish sig-
nificantly after around 400 lines, or, in the case of
MHG, about 3,000 syllables. Supervised machine
learning thus proves to be an economical option for
languages with complex meter.

The final results of the cross-validated CRF model
are given in Table 3 in descending order of fre-
quency in the data, along with a final held-out test
set of 75 lines from Hartmann von Aue’s Iwein.
The model achieves an F-score of .894 on the cross-
validated development data and .904 on the held-out
testing data.

Apart from the infrequent half morae with sec-
ondary stress and elisions, the confusion matrix
highlights four other problematic situations: (1)
stressed morae marked as unstressed morae, (2) un-
stressed morae marked as stressed morae, (3) dou-

5



held-out
metrical value F obs. F obs.
mora - unstr. .922 2403 .938 253
mora - prim. .918 2025 .947 216
mora - sec. .856 437 .880 37
double mora .842 425 .865 34
half mora - unstr. .574 231 .585 41
half mora - prim. .771 103 .737 11
elision .763 65 .500 2
half mora - sec. 0 4 0 0

(macro) average .894 .904
Table 3: CRF model F-score for individual metrical values and
(macro) average in development and on held-out data

ble morae marked as unstressed morae, and (4) un-
stressed half morae marked as unstressed morae.
Three of these issues mirror those of the human an-
notators. Issues (1) and (2) are attributable not only
to the frequency with which these features appear,
but also to the pattern of alternating stress. If the
stress assignment on one syllable is wrong, then it
will likely be wrong for all following syllables in
the line. (1) and (2) also affect (3), as shown be-
low in line 14 of Der arme Heinrich, where the
CRF model labels the penultimate syllable as an un-
stressed mora, when a double mora is correct:

und dâ mite. er sich möhte20

CRF model: | ×́ × | ×́ × | ×́ × | ×̀ ˆ
correct: × | ×́ × | ×́ × | — | ×̀ ˆ

This error can be attributed to the overgeneralization
of stress alternation. Formally, the model’s predic-
tion constitutes a metrically valid line of verse, but it
cannot be correct for this particular line because the
first syllable in möhte must be stressed. The model
notably identifies the elision correctly. The worst
performance, on unstressed half morae (4), paints a
different picture, as illustrated in 21,7 of Parzival:

unsern goten, die in uns brâhten21

CRF model: × × | ×́ × × |×́ × | — | ×̀ ˆ
correct: × × | ×́ ^ ^ |×́ × | — | ×̀ ˆ

The model correctly predicts stress, but does not
hold to the constraints of a foot as defined above.
While these errors may be common, they are not as

20“and with which he might”
21“to our gods, who brought him to us”

CRF Brill
(1) not ×́ if next syll. is
end of line

(1) ×́ → × if at word
boundary and follow-
ing syll. is ×́

(2) — if end of line is
next syll.

(2) ×́ →— if followed
by ×̀ and word bound-
ary

(3) e. if last char is “e”
and first char. of next
syll. is “e”

(3) × → ×̀ if end of
line

(4) not — if syll. is
open and light

(4) ×̀ → ×́ if monosyl-
labic

(5) × if syll in pos. +7
is not end of line

(5) ×→ ×́ if following
syll. is “ge”

Table 4: Top five CRF features and Brill rules

severe as the situation depicted in the first example.
The top five highest scoring features of the CRF

model and rules of the Brill model are given in Table
4. The CRF feature scores show that syllable qual-
ity is helpful (4), something the Brill model cannot
generalize. Both models recognize alternation, but
while the Brill model adopts a more general rule (1),
CRF features (1) and (5) recognize alternation us-
ing the number of syllables and the end of the line.
CRF feature (5) also accounts for anacrusis. No-
tably, the Brill model took more advantage of word
boundaries in (1) and (2), while these features rank
lower in the CRF model. Features for phonemes do
not rank high individually, unsurprising considering
their impact among the other features. Nevertheless,
“ver” and “ge” (MHG prefixes) both score highly in
the CRF for marking a syllable unstressed, but only
“ge” ranks as a top five rule for the Brill model.

The scores from both models confirm extant
MHG metrical theory and suggest new methods of
approach for students of MHG meter. Instead of
first marking stress, as suggested by Minimalmetrik
(1997) and the pedagogically oriented website Mit-
telhochdeutsche Metrik Online (2009), it may be
useful to first determine the cadence and anacrusis,
as noted in CRF features (1), (2), (5), and Brill rule
(3). The advantage of this approach is not mistak-
enly marking stress in anacrusis. Stress can then be
marked in the remaining syllables, and metrical val-
ues can be assigned based on phonological features.
These results and insights support our feature deci-
sions and our implementation of a CRF model.

6



7 Conclusion

This paper has presented a new application of ma-
chine learning models to poetry, specifically to tra-
ditions with hybrid meter. It promises to contribute
to other literary interests in computational linguis-
tics such as author and genre analysis. Research
has shown that a proper account of meter must con-
sider its variation throughout an entire text (Gol-
ston, 2009); automated scansion makes this a realis-
tic enterprise. In applying this method, researchers
can survey large scale variation within and across
texts to discover the patterns that characterize au-
thors and genres. Indeed, subtle differences in me-
ter may prove to be distinct authorial voice or reveal
significant stylistic choices. This paper also paves
the way for further work such as: cluster analysis
of meter over a large corpus of texts, topic modeling
cadence across genre, and charting the literary affect
of meter.22

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to David Bamman for commenting
on drafts, and to the anonymous reviewers for useful
feedback. This work was generously supported by
Digital Humanities at Berkeley.

22The data and source code for this paper are available online
at https://github.com/henchc/CLFL 2016.

References
[Agirrezabal et al.2013] Manex Agirrezabal, Bertol Arri-

eta, Aitzol Astigarraga, and Mans Hulden. 2013.
ZeuScansion: a tool for scansion of English poetry.
Finite State Methods and Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 18–24.

[Bird et al.2009] Steven Bird, Edward Loper, and Ewan
Klein. 2009. Natural Language Processing with
Python. O’Reilly Media Inc.

[Bögl2006] Herbert Bögl. 2006. Abriss der mittel-
hochdeutschen Metrik: mit einem Übungsteil. G.
Olms, Hildesheim ; New York.

[Bostock1947] J. Knight Bostock. 1947. Der Arme Hein-
rich by Hartman von Ouwe. Basil Blackwell and Mott,
Oxford.

[Brill1995] Eric Brill. 1995. Transformation-based error-
driven learning and natural language processing: A
case study in part-of-speech tagging. Computational
linguistics, 21(4):543–565.

[Dimpel2004] Friedrich Dimpel. 2004. Comput-
ergestützte textstatistische Untersuchungen an mittel-
hochdeutschen Texten - Bd. II. Daten und Programme.
A. Francke, Tübingen.

[Domanowski et al.2009] Anna Domanowski, Yochanan
Rauert, Hanno Rüther, and Tomas Tomasek. 2009.
Mittelhochdeutsche Metrik Online. https://www.uni-
muenster.de/MhdMetrikOnline/. Accessed on 04-02-
2016.

[Fox2000] Anthony Fox. 2000. Prosodic Features and
Prosodic Structure: The Phonology of Suprasegmen-
tals. Oxford University Press, New York.

[Giegerich1985] Heinz J. Giegerich. 1985. Metrical
Phonology and Phonological Structure: German and
English. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[Golston2009] Chris Golston. 2009. Old English Feet.
In Versatility in Versification: Multidisciplinary Ap-
proaches to Metrics, pages 105–122. Peter Lang.

[Greene et al.2010] Erica Greene, Tugba Bodrumlu, and
Kevin Knight. 2010. Automatic analysis of rhythmic
poetry with applications to generation and translation.
In Proceedings of the 2010 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing, pages 524–
533. Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Hartman1996] Charles O. Hartman. 1996. Virtual
Muse: Experiments in Computer Poetry. Wesleyan
University Press, Hanover, N.H.

[Hayes1989] Bruce Hayes. 1989. Compensatory Length-
ening in Moraic Phonology. Linguistic Inquiry,
20:253–306.

[Jespersen1904] Otto Jespersen. 1904. Lehrbuch der
Phonetik. Teubner, Leipzig.

[Lafferty et al.2001] John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCal-
lum, and Fernando C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional

7



Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segment-
ing and Labeling Sequence Data. In Proceedings of
the Eighteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML ’01, pages 282–289. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

[Longfellow1932] Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. 1932.
The poems of Longfellow, including Evangeline, The
song of Hiawatha, The courtship of Miles Standish,
Tales of a wayside inn. B. A. Cerf, D. S. Klopfer, New
York.

[McAleese2007] Gareth McAleese. 2007. Improving
Scansion with Syntax: an Investigation into the Ef-
fectiveness of a Syntactic Analysis of Poetry by Com-
puter using Phonological Scansion Theory.

[Navarro2015] Borja Navarro. 2015. A computational
linguistic approach to Spanish Golden Age Sonnets:
metrical and semantic aspects. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for
Literature, pages 105–113, Denver, Colorado, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Okazaki2007] Naoaki Okazaki. 2007. CRFsuite: a
fast implementation of Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs). http://www.chokkan.org/software/crfsuite/.

[Paul et al.1982] Hermann Paul, Hugo Moser, Ingeborg
Schröbler, and Siegfried Grosse. 1982. Mittel-
hochdeutsche Grammatik. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen.

[Plamondon2006] M. R. Plamondon. 2006. Virtual Verse
Analysis: Analysing Patterns in Poetry. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 21:127–141.

[Shakespeare and Gibbons1980] William Shakespeare
and Brian Gibbons. 1980. Romeo and Juliet. The
Arden edition of the works of William Shakespeare.
Methuen, London ; New York.

[Tervooren1997] Helmut Tervooren. 1997. Minimal-
metrik zur Arbeit mit mittelhochdeutschen Texten.
Kümmerle Verlag, Göppingen.

[Vennemann1972] Theo Vennemann. 1972. On the The-
ory of Syllabic Phonology. Linguistische Berichte,
18:1–18.

[von Aue2004] Hartmann von Aue. 2004. Der arme
Heinrich. Number 6 in Bibliothek des Mittelalters.
Deutscher Klassiker Verlag.

[von Eschenbach et al.1994] Wolfram von Eschenbach,
Karl Lachmann, Eberhard Nellmann, and Dieter
Kuhn. 1994. Parzival. Bibliothek deutscher Klas-
siker. Deutscher Klassiker Verlag, Frankfurt am Main,
1 aufl edition.

[von Grafenberg2014] Wirnt von Grafenberg. 2014.
Wigalois: Text der Ausgabe von J.M.N. Kapteyn. De
Gruyter Texte. De Gruyter, Berlin, 2., überarb. aufl
edition.

8


