



















































Who would have thought of that!: A Hierarchical Topic Model for Extraction of Sarcasm-prevalent Topics and Sarcasm Detection


Proceedings of the Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics,
pages 1–10, Osaka, Japan, December 12 2016.

‘Who would have thought of that!’: A Hierarchical Topic Model for
Extraction of Sarcasm-prevalent Topics and Sarcasm Detection

Aditya Joshi1,2,3 Prayas Jain4
Pushpak Bhattacharyya1 Mark James Carman2

1Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India, 2Monash University, Australia
3IITB-Monash Research Academy, India, 4IIT-BHU (Varanasi), India,

{adityaj, pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in , prayas.jain.cse14@iitbhu.ac.in
mark.carman@monash.edu

Abstract
Topic Models have been reported to be beneficial for aspect-based sentiment analysis. This paper
reports a simple topic model for sarcasm detection, a first, to the best of our knowledge. Designed
on the basis of the intuition that sarcastic tweets are likely to have a mixture of words of both
sentiments as against tweets with literal sentiment (either positive or negative), our hierarchical
topic model discovers sarcasm-prevalent topics and topic-level sentiment. Using a dataset of
tweets labeled using hashtags, the model estimates topic-level, and sentiment-level distributions.
Our evaluation shows that topics such as ‘work’, ‘gun laws’, ‘weather’ are sarcasm-prevalent
topics. Our model is also able to discover the mixture of sentiment-bearing words that exist in a
text of a given sentiment-related label. Finally, we apply our model to predict sarcasm in tweets.
We outperform two prior work based on statistical classifiers with specific features, by around
25%.

1 Introduction

Sarcasm detection is the computational task of predicting sarcasm in text. Past approaches in sarcasm
detection rely on designing classifiers with specific features (to capture sentiment changes or incorporate
context about the author, environment, etc.) (Joshi et al., 2015; Wallace et al., 2014; Rajadesingan et al.,
2015; Bamman and Smith, 2015), or model conversations using the sequence labeling-based approach
by Joshi et al. (2016c). Approaches, in addition to this statistical classifier-based paradigm are: deep
learning-based approaches as in the case of Silvio Amir et al. (2016) or rule-based approaches such as
Riloff et al. (2013; Khattri et al. (2015).

This work employs a machine learning technique that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been used
for computational sarcasm. Specifically, we introduce a topic model for extraction of sarcasm-prevalent
topics and as a result, for sarcasm detection. Our model based on a supervised version of the Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model (Blei et al., 2003) is able to discover clusters of words that correspond
to sarcastic topics. The goal of this work is to discover sarcasm-prevalent topics based on sentiment
distribution within text, and use these topics to improve sarcasm detection. The key idea of the model
is that (a) some topics are more likely to be sarcastic than others, and (b) sarcastic tweets are likely to
have a different distribution of positive-negative words as compared to literal positive or negative tweets.
Hence, distribution of sentiment in a tweet is the central component of our model.

Our sarcasm topic model is learned on tweets that are labeled with three sentiment labels: literal
positive, literal negative and sarcastic. In order to extract sarcasm-prevalent topics, the model uses three
latent variables: a topic variable to indicate words that are prevalent in sarcastic discussions, a sentiment
variable for sentiment-bearing words related to a topic, and a switch variable that switches between the
two kinds of words (topic and sentiment-bearing words). Using a dataset of 166,955 tweets, our model
is able to discover words corresponding to topics that are found in our corpus of positive, negative and
sarcastic tweets.

We evaluate our model in two steps: a qualitative evaluation that ascertains sarcasm-prevalent topics
based on the ones extracted, and a quantitative evaluation that evaluates sub-components of the model.
We also demonstrate how it can be used for sarcasm detection. To do so, we compare our model with
two prior work, and observe a significant improvement of around 25% in the F-score.

1



The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related work. Section 3 presents
our motivation for using topic models for automatic sarcasm detection. Section 4 describes the design
rationale and structure of our model. Section 5 describes the dataset and the experiment setup. Section 6
discusses the results in three steps: qualitative results, quantitative results and application of our topic
model to sarcasm detection. Section 7 concludes the paper and points to future work.

2 Related Work

Topic models are popular for sentiment aspect extraction. Jo and Oh (2011) present an aspect-sentiment
unification model that learns different aspects of a product, and the words that are used to express senti-
ment towards the aspects. In terms of using two latent variables: one for aspect and one for sentiment,
they are related to our model. Mukherjee and Liu (2012a) use a semi-supervised model in order to ex-
tract aspect-level sentiment. The role of the supervised sentiment label in our model is similar to their
work. Finally, McAuley and Leskovec (2013a) attempt to generate rating dimensions of products using
topic models. However, the topic models that have been reported in past work have been for sentiment
analysis in general. They do not have any special consideration to either sarcasm as a label or sarcastic
tweets as a special case of tweets. The hierarchy-based structure (specifically, the chain of distributions
for sentiment label) in our model is based on Joshi et al. (2016a) who extract politically relevant topics
from a dataset of political tweets. The chain in their case is sentiment distribution of an individual and a
group.

Sarcasm detection approaches have also been reported in the past (Joshi et al., 2016b; Liebrecht et al.,
2013; Wang et al., 2015; Joshi et al., 2015). Wang et al. (2015) present a contextual model for sarcasm
detection that collectively models a set of tweets, using a sequence labeling algorithm - however, the
goal is to detect sarcasm in the last tweet in the sequence. The idea of distribution of sentiment that
we use in our model is based on the idea of context incongruity. In order to evaluate the benefit of our
model to sarcasm detection, we compare two sarcasm detection approaches based on our model with two
prior work, namely by Buschmeier et al. (2014) and Liebrecht et al. (2013). Buschmeier et al. (2014)
train their classifiers using features such as unigrams, laughter expressions, hyperbolic expressions, etc.
Liebrecht et al. (2013) experiment with unigrams, bigrams and trigrams as features. To the best of our
knowledge, past approaches for sarcasm detection do not use topic modeling, which we do.

3 Motivation

Topic models enable discovery of thematic structures in a large-sized corpus. The motivation behind
using topic models for sarcasm detection arises from two reasons: (a) presence of sarcasm-prevalent
topics, and (b) differences in sentiment distribution in sarcastic and non-sarcastic text. In context of
sentiment analysis, topic models have been used for aspect-based sentiment analysis in order to discover
topic and sentiment words (Jo and Oh, 2011). The general idea is that for a restaurant review, the word
‘spicy’ is more likely to describe food as against ambiance. On similar lines, the discovery that a set of
words belong to a sarcasm-prevalent topic - a topic regarding which sarcastic remarks are common - can
be useful as additional information to a sarcasm detection system. The key idea of our approach is that
some topics are more likely to evoke sarcasm than some others. For example, a tweet about working
late night at office/ doing school homework till late night is much more probable to be sarcastic than
a tweet on Mother’s Day. A sarcasm detection system can benefit from incorporating this information
about sarcasm-prevalent topics. The second reason is the difference in sentiment distributions. A positive
tweet is likely to contain only positive words, a negative tweet is likely to contain only negative words.
On the other hand, a sarcastic tweet may contain a mix of the two kind of words (for example, ‘I love
being ignored’ where ‘love’ is a positive word and ‘ignored’ is a negative word), except in the case of
hyperbolic sarcasm (for example ‘This is the best movie ever!’ where ‘best’ is a positive word and there
is no negative word). Hence, in addition to sarcasm-prevalent topics, sentiment distributions for tweets
also form a critical component of our topic model.

2



Observed Variables and Distributions

w Word in a tweet
l Label of a tweet; takes values: positive, negative, sarcastic)
Distributions
ηw Distribution over switch values given a word w

Latent Variables and Distributions

z Topic of a tweet
s Sentiment of a word in a tweet; takes values: positive, negative
is Switch variable indicating whether a word is a topic word or a sentiment word; takes values: 0, 1
Distributions
θl Distribution over topics given a label l, with prior α
φz Distribution over words given a topic z and switch =0 (topic word), with prior γ
χs Distribution over words given sentiment s and switch=1 (sentiment word), with prior δ1
χsz Distribution over words given a sentiment s and topic z and switch=1 (sentiment word), with prior δ2
ψl Distribution over sentiment given a label l and switch =1 (sentiment word), with prior β1
ψzl Distribution over sentiment given a label l and topic z and switch =1 (sentiment word), with prior β2

Table 1: Glossary of Variables/Distributions used

4 Sarcasm Topic Model

4.1 Design Rationale

Our topic model requires sentiment labels of tweets, as used in Ramage et al. (2009). This sentiment
can be positive or negative. However, in order to incorporate sarcasm, we re-organize the two sentiment
values into three: literal positive, literal negative and sarcastic. The observed variable l in our model
indicates this sentiment label. For sake of simplicity, we refer to the three values of l as positive, negative
and sarcastic, in rest of the paper.

Every word w in a tweet is either a topic word or a sentiment word. A topic word arises due to a topic,
whereas a sentiment word arises due to combination of topic and sentiment. This notion is common to
several sentiment-based topic models from past work (Jo and Oh, 2011). To determine which of the two
(topic or sentiment word) a given word is, our model uses three latent variables: a tweet-level topic label
z, a word-level sentiment label s, and a switch variable is. Each tweet is assumed to have a single topic
indicated by z. The single-topic assumption is reasonable considering the length of a tweet. At the word
level, we introduce two variables is and s. For each word in the dictionary, is denotes the probability of
the word being a topic word or a sentiment word. Thus, the model estimates three sets of distributions:
(A) Probability of a word belonging to topic (φz) or sentiment-topic combination (χsz), (B) Sentiment
distributions over label and topic (ψzl), and (C) Topic distributions over label (θl). The switch variable is
is sampled from ηw, the probability of the word being a topic word or a sentiment word. We thus allow
a word to be either a topic word or a sentiment word.1

4.2 Plate Diagram

Our sarcasm topic model to extract sarcasm-prevalent topics is based on supervised LDA (Blei et al.,
2003). Figure 1 shows the plate diagram while Table 1 details the variables and distributions in the
model. Every tweet consists of a set of observed words w and one tweet-level, observed sentiment label
l. The label takes three values: positive, negative or sarcastic. The third label value ‘sarcastic’ indicates
a scenario where a tweet appears positive on the surface but is implicitly negative (hence, sarcastic). z is
a tweet-level latent variable, denoting the topic of the tweet. The number of topics, Z is experimentally
determined. is is a word-level latent variable representing if a word is a topic word or a sentiment word,

1Note that ηw is not estimated during the sampling but learned from a large-scale corpus, as will be described later.

3



lz

s

wisηw

θl

φz

α ψl

ψzl

χs

χsz

β1

β2

δ1

δ2

γ

N

D

W

L

Z

Z

L

S

Z

Figure 1: Plate Diagram of Sarcasm Topic Model

similar to Mukherjee and Liu (2012c). If the word is a sentiment word, the word-level latent variable s
represents the sentiment of that word. It can take S unique values. Intuitively, S is set as 2.

Among the distributions, ηw is an observed distribution that is estimated beforehand. It denotes the
probability of the word w being a topic word or a sentiment word. Distribution θl represents the distri-
bution over z given the label of the tweet as l. ψl and ψzl are an hierarchical pair of distributions. ψzl
represents the distribution over sentiment of the word given the topic and label of the tweet and that the
word is a sentiment word. χs and χsz are an hierarchical pair of distributions , where χsz represents dis-
tribution over words, given the word is a sentiment word with sentiment s and topic z. φz is a distribution
over words given the word is an topic word with topic z. The generative story of our model is:

1. For each label l, select ~θl∼Dir(α)
2. For each label l, select ~ψl∼Dir(β1)

For each topic z, select
~ψl,z∼Dir(β2 ~ψl)

3. For each topic z and sentiment s, select ~χs∼Dir(δ1), and ~χs,z∼Dir(δ2~χs)
4. For each topic z select ~φz∼Dir(γ)
5. For each tweet k select

(a) topic zk ∼ ~θlk
(b) switch value for all words, iskj ∼ ~ηj
(c) sentiment for all sentiment words, skj ∼ ~ψzk,lk
(d) all topic words, wkj ∼ ~φzk
(e) all sentiment words, wkj ∼ ~χskj ,zk

We estimate these distribution using Gibbs sampling. The joint probability over all variables is de-
composed into these distributions, based on dependencies in the model. Estimation details have not been
included due to lack of space.

5 Experiment Setup

We create a dataset of English tweets for our topic model. We do not use datasets reported in past work
(related to classifiers) because topic models typically require larger datasets than classifiers. The tweets
are downloaded from twitter using the twitter API2 using hashtag-based supervision. Hashtag-based su-
pervision is common in sarcasm-labeled datasets (Joshi et al., 2015). Tweets containing hashtags #happy,
#excited are labeled as positive tweets. Tweets with #sad, #angry are labeled as negative tweets. Tweets
with #sarcasm and #sarcastic are labeled as sarcastic tweets. The tweets are converted to lowercase, and
the hashtags used for supervision are removed. Function words3, punctuation, hashtags, author names

2https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public
3www.sequencepublishing.com

4



and hyperlinks are removed from the tweets. Duplicate tweets (same tweet text repeated for multiple
tweets) and re-tweets (tweet text with the ‘RT’ added in the beginning) are discarded. Finally, words
which occur less than three times in the vocabulary are also removed. As a result, the tweets that have
less than 3 words are removed. This results in a dataset of 166,955 tweets. Out of these, 70,934 are
positive, 20,253 are negative and the remaining 75,769 are sarcastic. A total of 35398 tweets are used
for testing, out of which 26,210 are of positive sentiment, 5535 are of negative sentiment and 3653 are
sarcastic. We repeat that these labels are determined based on hashtags, as stated above.

The total number of distinct labels (L) is 3, and the total number of distinct sentiment (S) is 2. The total
number of distinct topics (Z) is experimentally determined as 50. We use block-based Gibbs sampling to
estimate the distributions. The block-based sampler samples all latent variables together based on their
joint distributions. We set asymmetric priors based on sentiment word-list from McAuley and Leskovec
(2013b).

A key parameter of the model is ηw since it drives the split of a word as a topic or a sentiment word.
SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010) is used to learn the distribution ηw prior to estimating the model.
We average across multiple senses of a word. Based on the SentiWordNet scores to all senses of a word,
we determine this probability.

6 Results

Work Party Jokes Weather

day life Quote Snow
morning friends Jokes Today
night night Humor Rain
today drunk Comedy Weather
work parties Satire Day

Women School Love Politics

Women tomorrow love Ukraine
Wife school feeling Russia
Compliment(s) work break-up again
Fashion morning day/night deeply
Love night sleep raiders

Table 2: Topics estimated when the topic model is learned on only sarcastic tweets

6.1 Qualitative Evaluation
The goal of this section is to present topics discovered by our sarcasm topic model. We do so in two steps.
We first describe the topics generated when only sarcastic tweets from our corpus are used to estimate
the distributions, followed by the ones when the full corpus is used. In case of the former, since only
sarcastic tweets are used, the topics generated here indicate words corresponding to sarcasm-prevalent
topics. In case of the latter, the sentiment-topic distributions in the model capture the prevalence of
sarcasm.

The model estimates the φ and χ distributions corresponding to topic words and sentiment words. Top
five words for a subset of topics (as estimated by φ) are shown in Table 2. The headings in boldface
are manually assigned4. Sarcasm-prevalent topics, as discovered by our topic model, are work, party,
weather, women, etc. The corresponding sentiment topics for each of these sarcasm-prevalent topics
(as estimated by χ) are given in Table 3. The headings in boldface are manually assigned. For topics
corresponding to ‘party’ and ‘women’, we observe that the two columns contain words from opposing
sentiment polarities. An example sarcastic tweet about work is ‘Yaay! Another night spent at office! I
love working late night’.

The previous set of topics are all from sarcastic text. We now show the topics extracted by our model
from the full corpus. These topics will indicate peculiarity of topics for each of the three labels, allowing

4This is a common practice in topics model papers, in order to interpret topics. (Mukherjee and Liu, 2012b; Joshi et al.,
2016a; Kim et al., 2013)

5



Work Party Jokes Weather
Love Great Lol Hate Funny Lol Love nice
Good Sick Attractive Allergic Liar Fucks Glad wow
Awesome Seriously Love Insulting Hilarious Like Fun really

Women School Love Politics
Compliment(s) Talents excited fun best love Losing issues
Thrilled Sorry love omg awesome ignored lies weep
Recognized Bad really awesome greatest sick like really

Table 3: Sentiment-related topics estimated when the topic model is learned on only sarcastic tweets

Music work/school OrlandoIncident Holiday Quotes Food

pop work orlando summer quote(s) food
country sleep shooting wekend morning lunch
rock night prayers holiday inspiration vegan
bluegrass morning families friends motivation breakfast
beatles school victims sun,beach mind cake

Stock(s)/
Commodities Father Gun Pets Health

silver father(s) gun(s) dog fitness
gold dad orlando cat gym
index daddy trump baby run
price family shooting puppy morning
consumer work muslim pets health

Table 4: Topics estimated when the topic model is learned on full corpus

us to infer what topics are sarcasm-prevalent. Table 4 shows the top 5 topic words for the topics discov-
ered (as estimated in φ) from the full corpus (i.e., containing tweets of all three tweet-level sentiment
labels: positive, negative and sarcastic). Table 5 shows the top 3 sentiment words for each sentiment
(as estimated by χ) of each of the topics discovered. Like in the previous case, the heading in boldface
is manually assigned. One of the topic discovered was ‘Music’. The top 5 topic words for the topic
‘Music’ are Pop, Country, Rock, Bluegrass and Beatles. The corresponding sentiment words for Music
are ‘love’, ‘happy’, ‘good’ on the positive side and ‘sad’, ‘passion’ and ‘pain’ on the negative side.

The remaining sections present results when the model is learned on the full corpus.

6.2 Quantitative Evaluation

In this section, we answer three questions: (A) What is the likely sentiment label, if a user is talking about
a particular topic? (Section 6.2.1), (B) We hypothesize that sarcastic text tends to have mixed-polarity

Figure 2: Distribution of word-level sentiment labels for tweet-level labels

6



Stock(s)/
Commodities Father Gun Pets Health Music

gains risks happy lol like sad happy small love tired love sad
happiness dipped love little good hate love sad fun sick happy passion
unchanged down best bless wow angry cute miss laugh unfit good pain

Work/School OrlandoIncident Holiday Quotes Food

great sick love tragedy love beauty positive simple happy foodie
fun hate like hate smile hot happy kind yummy seriously
yay ugh want heartbroken fun sexy happiness sad healthy perfect

Table 5: Sentiment-related topics estimated when the topic model is learned on full corpus

Topics P(l/z) Positive Negative Sarcastic

Holiday 0.9538 0.0140 0.0317
Father 0.9224 0.0188 0.0584
Quote 0.8782 0.0363 0.0852
Food 0.8100 0.0331 0.1566
Music 0.7895 0.0743 0.1363
Fitness 0.7622 0.0431 0.1948
Orlando Incident 0.0130 0.9500 0.0379
Gun 0.1688 0.3074 0.5230
Work 0.1089 0.0354 0.8554
Humor 0.0753 0.1397 0.7841

Table 6: Probability of sentiment label for various discovered topics

words. Does it hold in case of our model? (Section 6.2.2), and (C) How can sarcasm topic model be used
for sarcasm detection? (Section 6.2.3).

6.2.1 Probability of sentiment label, given topic
We compute the probability p(l/z) based on the model. Table 6 shows these values for a subset of topics.
Topics with a majority positive sentiment are Father’s Day (0.9224), holidays (0.9538), etc. The topic
with the highest probability of a negative sentiment is the Orlando shooting incident (0.95). Gun laws
(0.5230), work and humor are where sarcasm is prevalent.

6.2.2 Distribution of sentiment words for tweet-level sentiment labels
Figure 2 shows the proportion of word-level sentiment labels, for the three tweet-level sentiment labels,
as estimated by our model. The X-axis indicates percentage of positive sentiment words in a tweet,
while Y-axis indicates percentage of tweets which indicate a specific value of percentage. More than
60% negative tweets (bar in red) have 0% positive content words. The ‘positive’ here indicates the value
of s for a word in a tweet. In other words, the said red bar indicates that 60% tweets have 0% words
sampled with s as positive.

It follows intuition that negative tweets have low percentage of positive words (red bar on the left part
of the graph) while positive tweets have high percentage of positive words (blue bar on the right part of
the graph). The interesting variations are observed in case of sarcastic tweets. It must be highlighted
that the sentiment labels considered for these proportions are as estimated by our topic model. Many
sarcastic tweets contain very high percentage of positive sentiment words. Similarly, the proportion of
tweets with around 50% positive sentiment words is around 20%, as expected. Thus, the model is able
to capture the sentiment mixture as expected in the three tweet-level sentiment labels: (literal) positive,
(literal) negative and sarcastic.

6.2.3 Application to Sarcasm Detection
We now use our sarcasm topic model to detect sarcasm, and compare it with two prior work. The task
here is to classify a tweets as either sarcastic or not. We use the topic model for sarcasm detection using
two methods:

7



1. Log-likelihood based: The topic model is first learned using the training corpus where the distri-
butions in the model are estimated. Then, the topic model performs sampling for a pre-determined
number of samples, in three runs - once for each label. For each run, the log-likelihood of the
tweet given the estimated distributions (in the training phase) and the sampled values of the latent
variables (for this tweet) is computed. The label of the tweet is returned as the one with the highest
log-likelihood.

2. Sampling-based: Like in the previous case, the topic model first estimates distributions using the
training corpus. Then, the topic model is learned again where the label l is assumed to be latent, in
addition to the tweet-level latent variable z, and word-level latent variables s, and is. The value of
l as learned by the sampler is returned as the predicted label.

We compare our results with two previously existing techniques, Buschmeier et al. (2014) and Liebrecht
et al. (2013). We ensure that our implementations result in performance comparable to the reported
papers. The two rely on designing sarcasm-level features, and training classifiers for these features. For
these classifiers, the positive and negative labels are combined as non-sarcastic. As stated above, the test
set is separate from the training set. The results of these two past methods compared with the two based
on topic models are shown in Table 7. The values are averaged over the two classes. Both prior work
show poor F-score (around 18-19%) while our sampling based approach achieves the best F-score of
46.80%. The low values, in general, may be because our corpus is large in size, and is diverse in terms
of the topics. Also, features in Liebrecht et al. (2013) are unigrams, bigrams and trigrams which may
result in sparse features.

Approach P (%) R (%) F (%)

(Buschmeier et al., 2014) 10.41 100.00 18.85
(Liebrecht et al., 2013) 11.03 99.88 19.86
Topic Model: Log Likelihood 46.40 46.56 46.48
Topic Model: Sampling 45.94 47.70 46.80

Table 7: Comparison of Various Approaches for Sarcasm Detection

7 Conclusion & Future Work

We presented a novel topic model that discovers sarcasm-prevalent topics. Our topic model uses a
dataset of tweets (labeled as positive, negative and sarcastic), and estimates distributions corresponding
to prevalence of a topic, prevalence of a sentiment-bearing words. We observed that topics such as
work, weather, politics, etc. were discovered as sarcasm-prevalent topics. We evaluated the model in
three steps: (a) Based on the distributions learned by our model, we show the most likely label, for
all topics. This is to understand sarcasm-prevalence of topics when the model is learned on the full
corpus. (b) We then show distribution of word-level sentiment for each tweet-level sentiment label as
estimated by our model. Our intuition that sentiment distribution in a tweet is different for the three
labels: positive, negative and sarcastic, holds true. (c) Finally, we show how topics from this topic
model can be harnessed for sarcasm detection. We implement two approaches: one based on most likely
label as per log likelihood, and another based on last sampled value during iteration. In both the cases,
we are able to significantly outperform two prior work based on feature design by F-Score of around
25%.

The current model is limited because of its key intuition about sentiment mixture in sarcastic text.
Instances such as hyperbolic sarcasm go against the intuition. The current approach relies only on bag of
words which may be extended to n-grams since a lot of sarcasm is expressed through phrases with implied
sentiment. This work, being an initial work in topic models for sarcasm, sets up the promise of topic
models for sarcasm detection, as also demonstrated in corresponding work in aspect-based sentiment
analysis.

8



References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical resource

for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In LREC, volume 10, pages 2200–2204.

David Bamman and Noah A Smith. 2015. Contextualized sarcasm detection on twitter. In Ninth International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

Konstantin Buschmeier, Philipp Cimiano, and Roman Klinger. 2014. An impact analysis of features in a classifi-
cation approach to irony detection in product reviews. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 42–49.

Yohan Jo and Alice H Oh. 2011. Aspect and sentiment unification model for online review analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining, pages 815–824. ACM.

Aditya Joshi, Vinita Sharma, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2015. Harnessing context incongruity for sarcasm
detection. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, volume 2, pages 757–762.

Aditya Joshi, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Mark Carman. 2016a. Political issue extraction model: A novel hier-
archical topic model that uses tweets by political and non-political authors. In 7th Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment & Social Media Analysis, pages 82–90.

Aditya Joshi, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Mark James Carman. 2016b. Automatic sarcasm detection: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.03426.

Aditya Joshi, Vaibhav Tripathi, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Mark Carman. 2016c. Harnessing sequence labeling
for sarcasm detection in dialogue from tv series ‘friends’. CoNLL 2016, page 146.

Anupam Khattri, Aditya Joshi, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Mark James Carman. 2015. Your sentiment precedes
you: Using an author’s historical tweets to predict sarcasm. In 6TH WORKSHOP ON COMPUTATIONAL
APPROACHES TO SUBJECTIVITY, SENTIMENT AND SOCIAL MEDIA ANALYSIS WASSA 2015, page 25.

Suin Kim, Jianwen Zhang, Zheng Chen, Alice H Oh, and Shixia Liu. 2013. A hierarchical aspect-sentiment model
for online reviews. In AAAI.

CC Liebrecht, FA Kunneman, and APJ van den Bosch. 2013. The perfect solution for detecting sarcasm in tweets#
not.

Julian McAuley and Jure Leskovec. 2013a. Hidden factors and hidden topics: understanding rating dimensions
with review text. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Recommender systems, pages 165–172. ACM.

Julian John McAuley and Jure Leskovec. 2013b. From amateurs to connoisseurs: modeling the evolution of user
expertise through online reviews. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web,
pages 897–908. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

Arjun Mukherjee and Bing Liu. 2012a. Aspect extraction through semi-supervised modeling. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages
339–348. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Arjun Mukherjee and Bing Liu. 2012b. Aspect extraction through semi-supervised modeling. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages
339–348. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Arjun Mukherjee and Bing Liu. 2012c. Modeling review comments. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 320–329. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ashwin Rajadesingan, Reza Zafarani, and Huan Liu. 2015. Sarcasm detection on twitter: A behavioral model-
ing approach. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining,
WSDM ’15, pages 97–106, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Daniel Ramage, David Hall, Ramesh Nallapati, and Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Labeled lda: A supervised
topic model for credit attribution in multi-labeled corpora. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ’09, pages 248–256, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

9



Ellen Riloff, Ashequl Qadir, Prafulla Surve, Lalindra De Silva, Nathan Gilbert, and Ruihong Huang. 2013. Sar-
casm as contrast between a positive sentiment and negative situation. In EMNLP, volume 13, pages 704–714.

Byron C Silvio Amir, Wallace, Hao Lyu, and Paula Carvalho Mário J Silva. 2016. Modelling context with user
embeddings for sarcasm detection in social media. CoNLL 2016, page 167.

Byron C. Wallace, Do Kook Choe, Laura Kertz, and Eugene Charniak. 2014. Humans require context to infer
ironic intent (so computers probably do, too). In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 512–516, Baltimore, Maryland, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Zelin Wang, Zhijian Wu, Ruimin Wang, and Yafeng Ren. 2015. Twitter sarcasm detection exploiting a context-
based model. In Web Information Systems Engineering–WISE 2015, pages 77–91. Springer.

10


