








































Microsoft Word - NNC_naaclhlt2016_camera_ready.docx


 
 
 

 

Faking Intelligent CALL: the Irish context and the road ahead
 
 
 

Neasa Ní Chiaráin and Ailbhe Ní Chasaide 
The Phonetics and Speech Lab. 

Centre for Language and Communication Studies 
Trinity College, Dublin 
neasa.nichiarain@tcd.ie 

 
 
 
 

Abstract 

Speech-enabled dialogue systems developed 
within an iCALL framework offer a potential-
ly powerful tool for dealing with the challeng-
es of teaching/learning an endangered lan-
guage where learners have limited access to 
native speaker models of the language and 
limited exposure to the language in a truly 
communicative setting. This paper explores 
the major potential of virtual conversational 
agent systems with inbuilt simulated ‘intelli-
gence’ for the Irish (endangered) language 
context. 

1 Introduction 

Multimodal dialogue systems with inbuilt simulat-
ed ‘intelligence’ have huge potential in language 
learning/teaching environments. In the context of 
the many minority/endangered languages, such as 
Irish (Gaelic), these systems could make even 
more of an impact. Major difficulties exist for lan-
guage learners related to the lack of exposure to 
native speaker models and creating virtual ‘native 
speakers’ to converse with learners opens new 
paths towards overcoming these issues in the so-
cio-linguistic context of endangered languages. 
Many languages, and particularly minority, endan-
gered and under-resourced languages lack several 
of the linguistic and technological prerequisites for 
the construction of ‘intelligent’ dialogue partners. 
Nonetheless, as will be illustrated here, interim so-
lutions are possible, which can offer partial         

dialogue systems, which can still have impact in 
the teaching/learning context. 

Following a brief discussion of the socio-
linguistic context of current developments for 
Irish, this paper presents (i) a simulated intelligent 
dialogue partner, constructed for Irish language 
tuition, using synthetic voices and an animated av-
atar (a talking monkey), (ii) a discussion on how, 
in the absence of NLP-based resources (yet to be 
developed for Irish), specific strategies are adopted 
which allow the impression of ‘intelligent’ dis-
course with an agent, and (iii) an outline of the 
steps envisaged to allow a fuller, more ‘intelligent’ 
system, using NLP resources. 

2 The socio-linguistic context of Irish lan-
guage teaching/learning  

Irish is the first official language of the Republic of 
Ireland and is a working language of the European 
Union. Yet, it is an endangered language (Moseley, 
2010) in that it has no monolingual speakers and 
there are few, if any, domains where Irish is the 
sole acceptable language. Irish is a compulsory 
subject of study for all pupils attending second lev-
el schools in the Republic of Ireland. Teachers, 
however, are often second language learners and 
therefore there is huge variation in levels of profi-
ciency ranging from relatively low communicative 
competence to traditional native speakers. At se-
cond level the recommended annual taught time 
for Irish is 110 contact hours per year (Eurydice, 
2013, p. 10) which means learners lack sufficient 
input: far more exposure to the language than what 
is currently available within school hours is need-



 
 
 

 

ed. The use of interactive language learning tech-
nology in schools is extremely limited and the use 
of antiquated and dull teaching materials (and 
sometimes methods) adds further to low levels of 
motivation. 

Since motivation is generally accepted as being 
the prime factor associated with successful lan-
guage learning (Robichaud, 2014), the develop-
ment of virtual world platforms where the learner 
can interact with an artificial interlocutor/dialogue 
partner and create the semblance of a natural con-
versation seems appropriate. The learner can be-
come engaged with the target language and use it 
to complete specific tasks or engage in games. 
Though the development of such platforms is still 
in its infancy, the concept would seem to have a 
particular attraction in the case of minority or en-
dangered languages. 

3 A provisional interim dialogue partner  

In the major world languages much effort has been 
put into creating speech activities which allow 
learners to engage in spoken interaction with a 
conversational partner, the most difficult compe-
tence for a learner to acquire independently. An in-
itial attempt at providing opportunity for students 
of Irish to practice conversation is presented here 
as Taidhgín, (pronounced: [tˠ aɪ ɟ iː nʲ]), an ‘intelli-
gent’ dialogue partner in the form of an animated, 
smartly dressed monkey. Taidhgín was built using 
Artificial Intelligence Markup Language (AIML), 
an XML-based open-source programming lan-
guage which was developed by Richard Wallace 
and the Alicebot free software community during 
the period 1995-2000. Taidhgín is hosted and run 
from Pandorabots which is a ‘free open-source-
based community web service which enables you 
to develop and publish chatbots on the web’ (pan-
dorabots.com). Taidhgín has integrated Irish lan-
guage synthetic voices which are developed as part 
of the ABAIR initiative (www.abair.ie) in Trinity 
College, Dublin. Ideally, the chatbot presented 
here would form part of an end-to-end spoken dia-
logue system with speech input and output but as 
there is not yet an automatic speech recognition 
system for the Irish language, the user must input 
speech to the Taidhgín system by typing into a text 
box. 
 
 

 
Evaluations of Taidhgín were carried out nation-
wide in 13 schools by 228 pupils. The evaluations 
consisted of (1) eliciting learners’ opinions of the 
overall chatbot platform as a learning environment 
and (2) evaluating the intelligibility, quality, and 
attractiveness of the ABAIR text-to-speech syn-
thetic voices used in this platform. Results were 
very positive to both the learning platform and to 
the synthetic voices, evidenced by an evaluation by 
228 16-17 year old learners of Irish, 73% of whom 
rated ‘intelligibility’ at points 4 or 5 (positive or 
very positive) on a Likert scale; 73% rated same 
for ‘quality’; and 53% rated same for ‘attractive-
ness’. This demonstrates that even a partially ‘in-
telligent’ system which exploits speech and lan-
guage technologies stands to have immediate im-
pact in the Irish educational context. For a fuller 
account of evaluations see Ní Chiaráin & Ní Cha-
saide (2016). Further evaluations were carried out 
on proficient speakers of Irish who are teachers 
and results were also found to yield similarly high 
ratings (Ní Chiaráin, 2014). 

The Pandorabots system presented here is based 
on pattern matching whereby all likely responses 
to Taidhgín’s questions are hardcoded. Therefore 
much content development work was needed in 
order to give a certain appearance of intelligence to 
Taidhgín, as the system began with no initial Irish 
language content. The most common errors 
(grammatical and orthographic) made by Irish 
Leaving Certificate students (pre-University exam-
inations) have been documented in work by Ó 
Baoill (1981) and this information was used in the 
development of Taidhgín to build an internal cor-
rection system. Currently the most commonly 
made errors are hardcoded into the system: when 
learner input is matched to these errors Taidhgín  

 
Figure 1:  Taidhgín: the prototype dialogue partner. 



 
 
 

 

Figure 2: Taidhgín feedback: reformulating learner input and recasting the corrected version

reprises a correct version as part of his response. 
This manner of correction avoids a break in the 
flow of conversation, which explicit correction 
would entail. An example of this is presented in 
Figure 2 and discussed further below. 

In addition to this recasting correction mecha-
nism, the log files are made available to the learner 
and tutor for later review. The grammar and 
spelling checkers which are available in Firefox 
are also used so that errors in the input are high-
lighted in the learners’ text box, allowing correc-
tion of the text before submission. Given the com-
plex orthography of Irish this ensures that the us-
ers’ spelling errors don't result in a breakdown of 
the communication. 

At the present stage of development 11 topics 
(aligned to the second level oral examination cur-
riculum, including ‘family’, ‘holidays’, ‘hobbies’, 
etc.) consisting of 3,670 categories have been add-
ed in order to make Taidhgín seem ‘intelligent’ 
(category = a conversational turn consisting of a 
question with potentially multiple responses, in-
cluding anticipated errors, as discussed above). 

Early elements of grammar and spelling correc-
tion facilities have been included in the prototype 
design to date. The example in Figure 2 illustrates 
one example, i.e. the numerical system in Irish, 
which is relatively complex. The learner’s error 
and Taidhgín’s corrected versions are shown in 
boldface. The number ‘2’, for example, can be ex-
pressed as dó, dhá, beirt, dara, dóú / dhó depend-
ing on the context in which it arises. For example, 
the terms dhá and beirt are identically used but 
qualify different types of nouns: dhá is used for in-
animate objects (e.g. dhá chupán ‘two cups’) while 
beirt is used for humans (e.g. beirt chailín ‘two 
girls’). Both correct and incorrect usages are antic-
ipated in the preparation of the categories for 

Taidhgín. If the learner used *dhá deartháir *‘two 
brothers’ instead of beirt deartháir ‘two brothers’ 
the correct version is recast by Taidhgín and the 
conversation continues. 

Another area with which learners tend to have 
trouble concerns the two forms of the verb ‘to be’ 
in Irish. The copula is exhibits a characteristic of 
permanency and stability, and is used to express 
nationality or profession, for example, Is múinteoir 
mé è ‘I am a teacher’. The substantive verb bí (tá 
/ níl ‘I am / I am not’) is employed to describe a 
more transitory state (Tá mé ag obair è ‘I am 
working’). Again, in the AIML categories common 
errors that learners make were predicted and hard-
coded so that the system could provide corrective 
feedback as appropriate. 

4 Next steps towards incorporation of ‘in-
telligence’  

In its current implementation, Taidhgín is faking it. 
He is not intelligent in the sense of being able to 
identify an error and correct it: rather, he simply 
has hardcoded error versions for very specific sen-
tences pertaining to the topics developed so far. 
Our vision for the future is to give Taidhgín more 
of a brain, so, rather than merely pattern matching, 
the system can access correct/incorrect usage of 
grammatical rules, etc. and formulate correct ver-
sions. 

As part of a Digital Plan for Irish Speech and 
Language Technology (2016 - 2026), commis-
sioned by the Department of Arts, Heritage Re-
gional, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, NLP and 
speech technology resources are being developed 
for Irish and we look to some of these develop-
ments to grow Taidhgín’s intelligence. Resources 
that are already available include a grammar 



 
 
 

 

checking engine, (Scannell, 2005), available in 
Firefox and usable with Taidhgín, a morphological 
analyser (Uí Dhonnchadha, Nic Pháidín, & Van 
Genabith, 2003), a part-of-speech tagger (Uí 
Dhonnchadha & Van Genabith, 2006), and a 
chunker (Uí Dhonnchadha & Van Genabith, 2010). 

A recently developed resource is the semantic 
WordNet for Irish (O’Regan, Scannell, & Uí 
Dhonnchadha, 2016) which classifies lexical units 
into categories, e.g. profession or nationality. If 
Taidhgín can detect such information in the learn-
er’s input it should enable him to spot whether the 
correct form of the verb ‘to be’ is being used, i.e. 
the copula is or the substantive verb bí. This is a 
simple case where error detection can be general-
ised rather than being dependent on hardcoding. 

Corrective feedback for the learner can be pre-
sented either implicitly (where the correction is re-
cast by the dialogue partner and flow is not inter-
rupted) as illustrated in Figure 2, or explicitly 
(more on this below). 

As with the forms of the verb ‘to be’, animate 
and inanimate nouns can be classified in WordNet 
and this can be used to identify correct/incorrect 
usage of the numerals, as discussed above (see also 
Figure 2). 

The use of NLP tools will serve different pur-
poses in making Taidhgín a useful pedagogical aid. 
For example, the morphological analyser and gen-
erator (Uí Dhonnchadha et al., 2003) can be used 
both for the creation of CALL content (quizzes, 
etc. for grammatical drilling) and to allow 
Taidhgín to identify if the learner’s input violates 
grammatical rules such as tense and verb conjuga-
tion, etc. Similarly, the spelling and grammar 
checker/corrector (Scannell, 2005) can be used for 
developing drills as well as ensuring comprehensi-
ble learner input to Taidhgín so that the system can 
recognise the learner’s string and respond appro-
priately, ensuring there are fewer breakdowns in 
communication. 

The future plan is to incorporate these new tech-
nologies into the Taidhgín conversational pedagog-

ical agent platform in order to develop a combina-
tion of form-focused instruction and meaning-
focused conversation. 

It is intended that the learner would start by 
chatting to Taidhgín and if/when errors should be 
detected by the system, learners would be given 
the option either to leave the conversation, focus 
on form and concentrate on a specific aspect of the 
language with which they have difficulty (see Fig-
ure 3: Trialacha Taidhgín ‘Exercises with 
Taidhgín’ for options to train certain linguistic fea-
tures) or to continue with meaning-focused conver-
sation, maximising ‘flow’ or the engagement of the 
learner with the task (Csíkszentmihályi, 1988) 
while the learning process is being steered with the 
inclusion of appropriately scaffolded material. 

Up to now we’ve talked about how Taidhgín 
might detect errors. It is important to note that 
there are several remedial approaches that can be 
taken beyond the implicit recasting and explicit fo-
cus on form drilling mentioned above. If errors are 
logged and it transpires a particular error is made a 
set number of times, Taidhgín could adapt the dia-
logue so that areas where the learner needs addi-
tional practice are foregrounded (implicitly, e.g. if 
past tense formation is a problem, Taidhgín could 
frame his questions in the past tense). 

Alternatively, Taidhgín can explicitly draw the 
learner’s attention to the correct form with ‘did you 
mean X?’ questions. Taidhgín could even prompt 
the learner to leave the guided free dialogue and 
spend some time instead practicing using a fun, 
contextualised exercise designed specifically to 
drill a particular linguistic feature of Irish. The in-
terface to such drills is illustrated in Figure 3. 

Personal profiles will be constructed for indi-
vidual language learners so that the responses by 
the avatar may be more finely tuned to the individ-
ual. This not only helps a more adaptive learning 
environment but should enable a degree of person-
alisation of content in such a way as to engage the 
learner by having the avatar establish a rapport 
with them. 



 
 
 

 

Figure 3: Trialacha Taidhgín ‘Exercises with Taidhgín’: interface to a range of 
focus on form exercises including, for example, quizzes on irregular verbs, spelling, general knowledge, etc

 
This paper has discussed those aspects of intelli-
gence that we would hope to work towards incor-
porating into such dialogue systems. Of course 
there are other aspects of Taidhgín’s growing brain 
that will need some attention: he will need to be 
able to ‘hear’ what the learner says to him in order 
to conduct a more meaningful conversation. With-
in the context of the Digital Plan for Irish (2016-
2026), speech recognition is envisaged. Incorporat-
ing recognition into Taidhgín will enable a full 
end-to-end spoken dialogue system. A full recogni-
tion system will inevitably take time to develop but 
even a partial system could, in the short-term, pro-
vide interesting options. It will be important to en-
sure that the future spoken output of Taidhgín can 
handle the conversational prosody of true dia-
logues. 

5 Conclusions  

The overall goal is to harness the emerging tech-
nologies in a way that will enable more effective 
language learning. It is planned to incorporate 
more NLP resources as well as speech resources 

into the current prototype of the Taidhgín system 
which will both ensure that the flow of dialogue is 
less likely to fail, and also enable the dialogue sys-
tem to pick up on incorrect forms, respond appro-
priately to the learner and provide intelligent cor-
rective feedback.  

As the simple prototype illustrated above indi-
cates there is great potential for developments in 
this field. It is hoped that the Taidhgín prototype 
might benefit those dealing with the ever more 
daunting task of maintaining endangered languages 
through education. The future survival of Irish and 
many such endangered languages will depend on 
how effectively they can be transmitted to the next 
generation. In this context, there is some urgency 
with ensuring that our educational resources make 
full use of what modern speech and language tech-
nologies have to offer. 

 
 

 



 
 
 

 

Acknowledgments 
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from 
the Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural 
and Gaeltacht Affairs, Ireland (the ABAIR project) 
and from An Chomhairle um Oideachas Gaeltachta 
& Gaelscolaíochta (the CabairE project).  
 

References  
Csíkszentmihályi, M. (1988). The flow experience and 

its significance for human psychology. In M. 
Csíkszentmihalyi & I. S. Csíkszentmihalyi (Eds.), 
Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow 
in consciousness (pp. 15–35). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Eurydice. (2013). Recommended Annual Taught Time in 
Full-time Compulsory Education in Europe 
2012/13. Eurydice - Facts and Figures, European 
Commission. Retrieved from 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/education/eurydice/docu
ments/facts_and_figures/taught_time_EN.pdf 

Moseley, C. (Ed.). (2010). Atlas of the world’s 
languages in danger (3rd ed.). Paris: UNESCO 
Publishing. Retrieved from 
http://www.unesco.org/culture/en/endangeredlang
uages/atlas 

Ní Chiaráin, N. (2014). Text-to-Speech Synthesis in 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning for Irish: 
Development and Evaluation. (Unpublished 
Doctoral thesis, CLCS, Trinity College, Dublin). 

Ní Chiaráin, N., & Ní Chasaide, A. (2016). Chatbot 
Technology with Synthetic Voices in the 
Acquisition of an Endangered Language: 
Motivation, Development and Evaluation of a 
Platform for Irish. In Proceedings of the Tenth 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC 2016). 23-28 May 2016 
(pp. 3429-3435). Portorož, Slovenia: European 
Language Resources Association (ELRA). 

O’Regan, J., Scannell, K., & Uí Dhonnchadha, E. 
(2016). lemonGAWN: WordNet Gaeilge as 
Linked Data. In LDL 2016 – 5th Workshop on 
Linked Data in Linguistics: Managing, Building 
and Using Linked Language Resources (pp. 36–
40). 

Ó Baoill, D. (1981). Earráidí scríofa Gaeilge. Cuid 3, 
réamhfhocail agus comhréir : earráidí a tharla in 
aistí Gaeilge na hÁrdteistiméireachta, 1975. Baile 
Átha Cliath: Institiúd Teangeolaíochta Éireann. 

Robichaud, A. (2014). Interview with Noam Chomsky 
on Education. Radical Pedagogy, 11(1). Retrieved 
from 
http://www.radicalpedagogy.org/radicalpedagogy.
org/Interview_with_Noam_Chomsky_on_Educati

on.html 
Scannell, K. (2005). An Gramadóir. Retrieved October 

3, 2016, from http://borel.slu.edu/gramadoir/ 
Uí Dhonnchadha, E., Nic Pháidín, C., & Van Genabith, 

J. (2003). Design, implementation and evaluation 
of an inflectional morphology finite state 
transducer for Irish. Machine Translation, 18, 
173–193. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10590-004-
2480-9 

Uí Dhonnchadha, E., & Van Genabith, J. (2006). A 
part-of-speech tagger for Irish using finite-state 
morphology and constraint grammar 
disambiguation. In 5th International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2006). 

Uí Dhonnchadha, E., & Van Genabith, J. (2010). Partial 
dependency parsing for Irish. In 7th International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC 2010). 

 
 


