



















































Linguistic Understanding of Complaints and Praises in User Reviews


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 109–114,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Linguistic Understanding of Complaints and Praises in User Reviews

Kavita Ganesan
Github Inc.

88 Colin P Kelly Jr St
San Francisco, CA 94107
kganes2@github.com

Guangyu Zhou
Department of Computer Science

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801

gzhou6@illinois.edu

Abstract

Traditional sentiment analysis has been fo-
cused on predicting the polarity of texts as
positive or negative at different granular-
ity. This broad categorization does not ac-
count for informativeness of the underly-
ing text. For many real-world applications
such as social listening, brand monitoring
and e-commerce platforms, the opinions
that really matter are the informative opin-
ions describing why something is good or
bad. In this paper, we try to understand
the properties of complaints and praises
which is an informative subset of the neg-
ative and positive categories. Our analy-
sis in the context of user reviews shows
that complaints and praises have distinct
properties that differentiate it from posi-
tive only or negative only sentences.

1 Introduction

Over the last two decades, sentiment analysis re-
search has been focused on predicting positive and
negative polarity ratings at different granularity -
at the passage level, sentence level as well as as-
pect or phrasal level (Pontiki et al., 2015; Wang et
al., 2015; Pontiki and Manandhar, 2014; Pang et
al., 2002; Pang and Lee, 2008; Wilson et al., 2005;
Wang et al., 2010; Snyder and Barzilay, 2007;
Titov and McDonald, 2008; Lu et al., 2009; Wang,
2015; Diao et al., 2014). While such ratings pro-
vide a general sense of ‘what people think’, it does
not take into account the informativeness of the
comments that contribute towards those ratings as
long as the comments have some form of desired
subjectivity (e.g. should contain a noun and an ad-
jective). Consider the following sentences about
the Xbox :

1. The Xbox is way too expensive!

2. I really hate the Xbox!

In the traditional sense, both these sentences
would be considered negative comments of equal

importance. However, sentence (1) is actually
more informative than (2). This difference is criti-
cal in many application scenarios. For example, if
a business analyst wants to analyze the complaints
or pain points of a product, a comment such as ‘I
really hate the Xbox!’ does not increase the un-
derstanding of the analyst. However, the comment
‘The Xbox is way too expensive!’ informs the an-
alyst that one of the problems of the Xbox is that
it is not affordable. Another example is in com-
petitive intelligence. A company will learn more
about a competitor’s product from a comment such
as ‘Wow! the Xbox is very user-friendly!’ as op-
posed to ‘The Xbox is just awesome.’ as the former
provides a concrete reason.

The goal of this paper, is to study the linguis-
tic properties of complaint and praise sentences
which we define as an informative subset of the
more general negative and positive categories, pro-
viding reasons for a topic or aspect being positive
or negative. We perform our study in the context
of user reviews as user generated reviews tend to
have informative subjective content inter-mingled
with non-informative subjective content and fac-
tual or neutral utterances. We investigate several
properties, including the length property, noun and
adjective usage, past tense and negation usage and
finally the usage of intensifiers and causal links.
We contrast the properties of complaint and praise
sentences with negative only or positive only sen-
tences.

Our study shows several distinct properties
of complaints and praises in contrast to pos-
itive only and negative only sentences. We
believe that this study would set a founda-
tion for improving existing sentiment classi-
fication and opinion summarization systems.
The data set used for this study is pub-
licly available at http://kavita-ganesan.
com/complaints-and-praises1.

1You can also reference: https://github.com/
kganes2/complaints-and-praises109



negative only complaint
This is not a good com-
pany, stay away!

This company takes your pay-
ment but on the day of the sched-
uled job, they don’t appear.

The phone’s screen is
very disappointing :(

Unhappy with this phone, the
screen is not clear and the fonts
are way too small.

positive only praise
I really love that
restaurant, its awe-
some.

This restaurant has delicious
tacos and the ambience is amaz-
ing!

Nice phone, love it and
totally recommend it!

I like the fact that the phone fits
right in your pocket

Table 1: Examples of negative only and positive only sentences as well complaint and praise sentences.
Bolded text are the topics and the italicized text answer ‘why’ the topic is positive or negative.

2 Related Work

While there are many systems attempting to pre-
dict finer granularity of sentiment ratings at the as-
pect or phrasal level (Pontiki et al., 2015; Pontiki
and Manandhar, 2014; Wang et al., 2015; Wang
et al., 2010; Snyder and Barzilay, 2007; Titov and
McDonald, 2008; Lu et al., 2009; Wilson et al.,
2005; Wang, 2015; Diao et al., 2014), these sys-
tems still do not have a clear understanding on
what makes a sentence informative enough lin-
guistically to be used for mining fine grained sen-
timents. The common assumption is that a subjec-
tive sentence should contain a noun and an adjec-
tive. In addition, these systems consider all neg-
ative and positive expressions as equal contribu-
tors. For example, the phrases ‘screen is bad’, ‘the
screen is way too small’ and ‘the screen is too big’
would all equally affect ratings on the screen as-
pect. In reality, the first phrase is a general nega-
tive statement compared to the second and third
phrases which are much more informative, pro-
viding reasons for the screen being bad. Having
the option of analyzing only the informative sub-
set would add significant value to sentiment analy-
sis applications. For this purpose, there has to be a
good understanding on how to distinguish between
the different types of subjective comments.

In the work of (Kim and Hovy, 2006), the au-
thors attempt to train a classifier to predict ‘pro’
and ‘con’ reasons in user reviews. However, there
is a lack of definition on what ‘pros’ or ‘cons’ rep-
resent and how they can be linguistically identi-
fied. Our study thus bridges this gap by providing
insights into key linguistic properties of complaint
and praise sentences in contrast to plain negative
only and positive only sentences.

3 Defining Complaints and Praises

In this section, we formally define the concept of
a complaint and a praise. Given a sentence, S, we

refer to this sentence as a positive sentence if its
connotation is positive and a negative sentence if
its connotation is negative. We refer to a negative
sentence as a complaint if it has a negative con-
notation with supplemental information, answer-
ing the question of why a topic or aspect is neg-
ative. We refer to a sentence as negative only if
it is negative with no such supplemental informa-
tion. Similarly, we refer to a positive sentence as
a praise, if the sentence has a positive connotation
with supplemental information, clearly indicating
what makes the topic or aspect positive. A sen-
tence is considered positive only if it is positive
with no such supplemental information.

Our definition of supplemental information
refers to any information in an opinionated sen-
tence that answers the question of ‘why’ the like
or dislike for a topic, improving the user’s un-
derstanding for that topic. For example, the sen-
tence “Xbox is just bad...I hate it.” is consid-
ered negative only and not a complaint because
if does not have information explaining why the
user dislikes the Xbox. However, the sentence
“The Xbox is awfully expensive, I would not rec-
ommend it” would qualify as a complaint as it an-
swers ‘why’ the user has a negative opinion about
the Xbox which in turn improves a user’s under-
standing about the Xbox (that it is expensive). Ta-
ble 1, shows examples of negative only, positive
only, complaint and praise sentences.

4 Dataset
To conduct our analysis, we collected 2500 re-
views from various sources including TripAdvi-
sor, Yelp, Walmart and Sephora. We then recruited
4 students to manually categorize sentences from
the user reviews into 1 of 5 categories. The
categories are: NegativeOnly, Complaint, Posi-
tiveOnly, Praise, and Irrelevant. The sentences
were randomly assigned to the students. Students
were asked to perform categorization based on the110



Category Avg. # of words Avg. length
NegativeOnly 10.25 51.95
Complaint 15.75 80.88
Difference +53.66% +%55.69
PositiveOnly 10.33 53.13
Praise 15.54 82.45
Difference +50.44% +55.19%

Table 2: Average number words and average
length per sentence in the dataset.

formal definition of a complaint and a praise sen-
tence as described in Section 3. Non-opinion con-
taining sentences and noise were placed in the
Irrelevant category. We use the four main cat-
egories - NegativeOnly, Complaint, PositiveOnly
and Praise for our study. For a fair comparison, we
ensured that we only used 500 randomly picked
sentences within each category.

5 Sentence Length Analysis

Our first analysis deals with understanding the
general length of complaints and praises in con-
trast to negative only or positive only sentences. In
Table 2, we report the average length and number
of words in a sentence within each sentiment cat-
egory. On average, a praise or complaint sentence
is at least 50% longer than a positive only or nega-
tive only sentence. The average number of words
in a praise sentence is 15.54 and a positive only
sentence it is 10.33. The average number of words
in a complaint sentence is 15.75 and a negative
only sentence it is 10.25. Intuitively, this makes
sense since complaints and praises require elabo-
ration on why something is good or bad but in the
case of negative only or positive only sentences,
the statements can be fairly general.

6 Noun and Adjective Usage
Nouns and adjectives are essential parts of speech
within subjective sentences as these together are
key indicators of sentiment (Hu and Liu, 2004;
Pang and Lee, 2008; Kim et al., 2011). For exam-
ple, a negative only sentence such as ‘the screen
is bad’ or a complaint such as ‘the screen is not
clear’ both have nouns (‘screen’) and adjectives
(‘bad’ and ‘clear’). Both the noun and adjectives
play a role in indicating negative sentiment. To
better understand if there is a difference in adjec-
tive and noun usage in a complaint or a praise ver-
sus a negative only or positive only sentence, we
obtained the mean, mode and median of nouns and
adjectives in our manually categorized dataset. We
also noted the counts of nouns appearing near ad-

jectives within a 3 word window. We report the
results in Table 3.
Noun analysis: Based on Table 3, we see that
with the NegativeOnly and PositiveOnly cate-
gories, most sentences have 1 noun per sentence
(see mode in Table 3). However, in the Complaint
and Praise categories, most sentences use 3 nouns
per sentence. This is because a complaint or a
praise sentence describes ‘what’ was good or bad
about a topic requiring more use of nouns. For
example, if a praise was about the food at a restau-
rant, the tacos, salsas and chips could have been
outstanding.
Adjective analysis: In terms of adjectives, the
first point to observe is that most praise sentences
use 2 or more adjectives while most complaint
sentences use a single adjective. Upon further in-
vestigation, we realized that in a praise sentence,
user’s tend to compliment more than one aspect
of a topic within a single sentence. For example,
consider the following praise sentence: This is a
really lightweight machine and it is easy to assem-
ble’. The user is complimenting two aspects of
the machine within a single sentence: (1) weight
and (2) assembly. For this same reason, the adjec-
tive+nouns have the highest occurrence within the
praise category as multiple positive sentiments are
coupled within a single sentence.

This is different from complaints, where within
complaints, users tend to elaborate why a single
aspect of a topic is bad. For example, consider
the following complaint: ‘This machine was re-
ally hard to put together, the screws don’t fit so I
sent it back’. This sentence only describes a sin-
gle aspect which is the fact that the product was
hard to assemble, why that was the case and what
the user did to address it. This appears to be the
common nature of complaints. This is why most
complaints use no more adjectives than negative
only sentences.

7 Past Tense Analysis

One observation that we made while visually an-
alyzing our manually constructed dataset is that
complaints seemed to use more past tense than the
other three categories. To validate our observa-
tion, we did a count of occurrence of past tense
words in each category of our dataset. The aver-
age past tense counts per sentence and the top 6
past tense words used is reported in Table 4. From
this, it is evident that complaints have the highest
past tense usage compared to the other three cate-111



Nouns Mean Mode Median
NegativeOnly 1.87 1.00 1.00
Complaint 3.36 3.00 3.00
Difference +1.49 +2.00 +2.00
PositiveOnly 2.16 1.00 2.00
Praise 3.56 3.00 3.00
Difference +1.40 +2.00 +1.00

Adjectives Mean Mode Median
NegativeOnly 0.972 1.00 1.00
Complaint 1.500 1.00 1.00
Difference +0.528 0.00 0.00
PositiveOnly 1.164 1.00 1.00
Praise 2.086 2.00 2.00
Difference +0.922 +1.00 +1.00

Noun + Adjective Mean Mode Median
NegativeOnly 0.60 0.00 0.00
Complaint 1.00 0.00 1.00
Difference +0.40 0.00 0.00
PositiveOnly 0.75 0.00 1.00
Praise 1.50 1.00 1.00
Difference +0.75 +1.00 0.00

Table 3: Mean, mode and median of nouns and adjectives computed on a per sentence basis.

PositiveOnly Praise NegativeOnly Complaint
0.55 0.68 0.63 1.26

Category Top 6 past tense with counts
PositiveOnly was 56, had 23, been 14, were 13, loved 8,

tried 8
Praise was 86, were 32, had 22, made 9, been 7,

got 6
NegativeOnly was 61, had 24, did 19, got 11, were 11,

been 9,
Complaint was 155, had 40, were 35, did 23, got 20,

made 14

Table 4: Average # of past tense words and top 6
past tense words in each category

gories. On average, every complaint sentence uses
at least 1 past tense. As we investigated further, we
found that this is related to our observation from
the previous section where within a complaint, a
user is often explaining away why something was
bad and what their actions were in response to the
situation, which is usually something in the past.

As we looked into the actual past tense words
used, we noticed that there is no significant differ-
ence in the top past tense words used across cate-
gories which can be seen from Table 4. What re-
mains evident is that the complaint category uses
more of these words than any of the other cate-
gories.

8 Negation Analysis

When we want to say that something is not true
or is not the case, we use negative words, phrases
or clauses. Negation can happen in a number of
ways, most commonly, when we use a negative
word such as no, not, never, none, nobody, etc. In
sentiment analysis tasks, negation words are typi-
cally associated with the negative category. How-
ever, since we are interested in a finer granularity
of the negative class (i.e. negative only and com-
plaint) as well as the positive class (positive only
and praise), we try to get an understanding of how
negations are used across the 4 categories. For this
analysis, we used a list of common negation words
(e.g. not, no, never) along with words that end

Category
Avg #
Nega-
tions

%Sentences
with
Negations

Top 6 Negation
Words

PositiveOnly 0.094 8.8%
not 16, no 9, don’t
6, can’t 5, never 4,
didn’t 3

Praise 0.208 18.6%
not 46, no 15, don’t
13, didn’t 8,
wouldn’t 6, can’t 4

NegativeOnly 0.538 48.8%
not 131, don’t 33,
never 27, no 16,
didn’t 13, nothing 9

Complaint 0.428 37.8%
not 88, no 36, didn’t
28, don’t 17, never
9, wasn’t 9

Table 5: Distribution of negations and top 6 nega-
tion words per category.

with “n’t” (e.g. doesn’t, hasn’t, haven’t) and did
a count of these words to determine percentage of
sentences containing negations as well as the av-
erage number of negations per sentence. We also
noted the top negation words in each category and
the results are reported in Table 5.

Based on Table 5, we see that while positive
only sentences rarely use negations, the praise sen-
tences use negations to a certain extent (∼20% of
sentences contain negations). Manual inspection
revealed that negations were primarily used to de-
scribe a positive aspect of a topic. For example,
consider the negation in the following sentence:
this lasts all night and feels really great on my
skin not oily cakey or heavy”. The negation here
is used to describe the fact that the product does
not feel bad on the skin.

Another interesting finding is that the Nega-
tiveOnly category has the highest use of nega-
tions with almost 50% of the sentences contain-
ing at least one negation word. This number is
even higher than the complaint category where the
sentences are generally longer. Through visual in-
spection, we found that this happens because neg-
ative only sentences have limited description on
why something is ‘not good’. Therefore, clear in-
dication of disapproval is with the use of nega-
tions. The following sentences from our dataset112



Category % sentences containing intensifiers
PositiveOnly 14.80%
Praise 20.60%
NegativeOnly 13.40%
Complaint 16.80%

Table 6: Intensifier usage across categories.

are negative only sentences with clear indication
of dislike with the use of negations:

“i would not recommend dinner here at all ”
“never going back”
“don’t stay there ”

“for the price it just wasn’t worth it”

9 Intensifier Usage

Intensifiers are words that strengthen the meaning
of other expressions and show emphasis. Com-
mon intensifiers include absolutely, completely,
extremely, highly, rather, really, and etc. We no-
ticed that intensifiers are heavily used in user gen-
erated opinions to emphasize appreciation or in
some cases dissatisfaction. For example, to ex-
press appreciation on some restaurant service one
may say ‘The service was extremely fast and the
food was super delicious!’. The intensifiers in this
sentence clearly adds strength to the user’s opin-
ion. To understand which category of sentences
are more inclined towards using intensifiers, we
computed the percentage of sentences that contain
at least one intensifier. We used a list of 35 intensi-
fiers, expanding on the list published in (Ganesan
and Zhai, 2012).

Based on Table 6, we can see that intensifiers
are mostly used in praise sentences with almost
20% of the sentences containing at least one in-
tensifier. The use of intensifiers is less prominent
in the other 3 categories. Based on manual analy-
sis, we found two reasons for this. First, is the fact
that praise sentences tend to couple multiple pos-
itive aspects into a single sentence as pointed out
in Section 6. So there is more use of intensifiers
with the adjectives. The second reason stems from
the fact that users tend to over emphasize positive
points and state negative points more in a matter
of fact fashion. The words ‘very’ and ‘really’ are
the top intensifier words used across all four cate-
gories.

10 Causal Transitions

As complaint and praise sentences contain expla-
nation of ‘why’ a particular topic is good or bad,

Category

% sentences
containing all

causal
transitions

% sentences
containing

‘because’ and
‘since’

PositiveOnly 16.60% 2.4%
Praise 23.80% 2.4%
NegativeOnly 16.40% 2.2%
Complaint 28.20% 4.6%

Table 7: Causal transitions used across categories.

there will be natural occurrences of cause and ef-
fect, known as causal transitions. For example,
the sentence ‘Seems like this phone is poorly de-
signed as the screen keeps blurring out and the
buttons keep getting stuck’ shows clear cause and
reason. Causal transition words include because,
since, therefore, as, as a result, for this reason,
consequently, thus and etc. We used 20 such words
covering cause and reason, effect and result as
well as consequence to understand if such words
have a stronger occurrence in one category than
another.

Table 7 shows percentage of sentences contain-
ing causal transitions within each category. No-
tice that while approximately 17% of the positive
only and negative only sentences use causal tran-
sitions, there is a much stronger relationship be-
tween causal transitions and the complaints cat-
egory with 28% of the sentences carrying causal
links. This tells us that complaints tend to have
more explicit description on what caused some-
thing to be bad or reaction in response to some-
thing negative. For example, within user reviews,
it would be more common to see an expression
such as ‘I returned the vacuum because it was bro-
ken’ as opposed to ‘I love the vacuum because it
works really well’. To further understand this be-
havior, we looked at occurrences of strong causal
expressions (i.e. sentences with ‘because’ and
‘since’) to validate that there indeed is more ex-
plicit use of causation in the complaints category.
Based on Table 7, we can see that there is clearly
a higher use of strong causal expressions in the
complaints category compared to the other three
categories.

11 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we sought to understand the lin-
guistic properties of complaints and praises which
we define as an informative subset of the more
general negative and positive polarity with rea-
sons or explanation on what makes a topic neg-113



ative/positive. Our study in the context of user re-
views has shown several interesting findings.

We first showed that, complaint and praise sen-
tences are in general longer and use more nouns
than adjectives compared to a positive only or a
negative only sentence. Even though subjective
sentences are assumed to contain nouns and ad-
jectives we now have evidence that nouns appear
more frequently than adjectives in more informa-
tive subjective sentences. We also showed that
praise sentences tend to use more adjectives and
intensifiers compared to complaint sentences. The
higher use of adjectives can be attributed to the
fact that people were more likely to compliment
several aspects of a topic within a single sentence
as opposed to complaints, where people explain
away the reason for the dislike or disapproval. In-
tensifiers play a more significant role in praise
sentences as users tend to over emphasize posi-
tive points. Our study also shows that there is
a stronger link between causation and complaints
compared to the other categories.

In the future, we would like to test the power of
some of the prominent features in our study to un-
derstand the value of these features in developing
a fine-grained sentiment classifier.

References
[Diao et al.2014] Qiming Diao, Minghui Qiu, Chao-

Yuan Wu, Alexander J Smola, Jing Jiang, and Chong
Wang. 2014. Jointly modeling aspects, ratings
and sentiments for movie recommendation (jmars).
In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pages 193–202. ACM.

[Ganesan and Zhai2012] Kavita Ganesan and ChengX-
iang Zhai. 2012. Opinion-based entity ranking. In-
formation retrieval, 15(2):116–150.

[Hu and Liu2004] Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004.
Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Pro-
ceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data min-
ing, pages 168–177. ACM.

[Kim and Hovy2006] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy.
2006. Automatic identification of pro and con
reasons in online reviews. In Proceedings of the
COLING/ACL on Main Conference Poster Sessions,
COLING-ACL ’06, pages 483–490, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

[Kim et al.2011] Hyun Duk Kim, Kavita Ganesan,
Parikshit Sondhi, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2011.
Comprehensive review of opinion summarization
(opinion mining survey).

[Lu et al.2009] Yue Lu, ChengXiang Zhai, and Neel
Sundaresan. 2009. Rated aspect summarization of
short comments. In Proceedings of the 18th inter-
national conference on World wide web, pages 131–
140. ACM.

[Pang and Lee2008] Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008.
Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Founda-
tions and trends in information retrieval, 2(1-2):1–
135.

[Pang et al.2002] Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivaku-
mar Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment
classification using machine learning techniques. In
Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Empirical
methods in natural language processing-Volume 10,
pages 79–86. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

[Pontiki and Manandhar2014] Maria Pontiki and
Suresh Manandhar. 2014. Semeval-2014 task 4:
Aspect based sentiment analysis.

[Pontiki et al.2015] Maria Pontiki, Dimitrios Galanis,
Haris Papageorgiou, Suresh Manandhar, and Ion
Androutsopoulos. 2015. Semeval-2015 task 12:
Aspect based sentiment analysis.

[Snyder and Barzilay2007] Benjamin Snyder and
Regina Barzilay. 2007. Multiple aspect ranking
using the good grief algorithm.

[Titov and McDonald2008] Ivan Titov and Ryan T Mc-
Donald. 2008. A joint model of text and aspect
ratings for sentiment summarization. Citeseer.

[Wang et al.2010] Hongning Wang, Yue Lu, and
Chengxiang Zhai. 2010. Latent aspect rating analy-
sis on review text data: a rating regression approach.
In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pages 783–792. ACM.

[Wang et al.2015] Linlin Wang, Kang Liu, Zhu Cao,
Jun Zhao, and Gerard de Melo. 2015. Sentiment-
aspect extraction based on restricted boltzmann ma-
chines. In Proceedings of ACL 2015.

[Wang2015] Hao Wang. 2015. Sentiment-aligned
Topic Models for Product Aspect Rating Prediction.
Ph.D. thesis, Applied Sciences: School of Comput-
ing Science.

[Wilson et al.2005] Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Paul Hoffmann. 2005. Recognizing contextual po-
larity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the conference on human language tech-
nology and empirical methods in natural language
processing, pages 347–354. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

114


