



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 315–323,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Experimental Study of Vowels in Nagamese, Ao and Lotha: Lan-
guages of Nagaland  

 
 

Joyanta Basu, Tulika Basu, Soma Khan, 
Madhab Pal, Rajib Roy 

Tapan Kumar Basu 

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing  

(CDAC), Kolkata 

Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Academy of Technology 

Salt Lake, Sector – V, Kolkata, India Aedconagar, Hooghly, West Bengal, India 
{joyanat.basu,tulika.basu, soma.khan, 

madhab.pal, rajib.roy}@cdac.in 

basutk06@rediffmail.com 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper describes the vowels characteris-

tics of three languages of Nagaland namely 

Nagamese, Ao and Lotha. For this study, nu-

cleus vowel duration, formant structure (1
st
 

and 2
nd

 formant i.e. F1 and F2) and intensity 

of vowels are investigated and analyzed for 

these languages. This paper includes the nasal 

context for different vowels and tries to exam-

ine its importance in different languages.  A 

detailed analysis is carried out for six vowels 

namely  for readout 
speech of Nagamese, Ao and Lotha. Result 

shows that the vowel duration and formants 

play important roles in differentiating vowels 

characteristics. On the other hand, intensity of 

vowels do not play significant role in the 

characteristics of the vowels across the lan-

guages is observed. This initial study unveil 

the importance of vowels characteristics and 

may help to do research and development in 

the area of language identification, synthesis, 

speech recognition of three north-eastern lan-

guages of Nagaland. 

1 Introduction 

Culture and language diversity is one of the inter-

esting phenomena in North-Eastern states of India. 

The seven states (i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 

Meghalaya, Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram and 

Tripura) except Sikkim of north-east India cover 

an area of 255,511 square kilometers (98,653 sq 

mi) i.e. about seven percent of India's total area. As 

of 2011 they had a population of 44.98 million, 

about 3.7 percent of India's total population. Alt-

hough there is great ethnic and religious diversity 

within the seven states, they bear similarities in the 

political, social and economic spheres (Wikipedia, 

2015). According to the 1971 census there are 

about 220 languages spoken in these states, be-

longing mainly to three language families, namely 

Indo Aryan, Sino-Tibetan and Austro-Asiatic. The 

Indo-Aryan is represented mainly by Asamiya and 

Bangla, Austro-Asiatic is represented mainly by 

Khasi and the Sino-Tibetan family of languages is 

represented by Tani group of languages (Apatani, 

Galo, Nyishi etc.), Angami, Chakesang, Kuki, Ma-

nipuri, Mizo, Kokborak etc.  

The entire North-east India is enclosed by major 

international borders of Bhutan, Nepal and China 

in the North and North-East, Bangladesh in South 

and West and Myanmar in East. This region is 

therefore very sensitive from the point of view of 

national security and national integrity.  

Among the eight states of north-east India, the 

states that share far east international borders with 

Myanmar i.e. Manipur and Nagaland are getting 

much importance now-a-days due to unrest social 

and political situations. Since the last decade, 

spread of recent communication mediums like mo-

biles, telephones and VoIP are supporting spoken 

communication in regional north-east languages. 

Speech data in these communications has become 

315



 

necessary for surveillance purposes. But detailed 

analysis on any speech data depends largely on 

pre-defined knowledge on the spoken language and 

availability of language resources. Unfortunately 

very little prior works have been done on the lan-

guages of Nagaland and Manipur.  

In this study, we are mainly concentrating on 

major languages of the Nagaland state.  These are 

Nagamese, Ao and Lotha. Apart from the basic 

language grammar, phonetic reader and dictionary 

very few linguistic resources are available for 

study and research purposes. Among the previous 

resources of Ao language, an important and detail 

study has been reported on the phonetic and pho-

nological description of the Mongsen dialect of Ao 

(Alexander R. Coupe, 2003). The study is well 

supported by experimental findings as well as au-

thor’s personal insights on the studied language.  

Lotha language is very rarely studied till date. Dif-

ferent aspects of Lotha language has been docu-

mented in (Chiang Chen Shan, 2011) which is the 

only available study on this language.  Nagamese, 

the communication language (lingua franca) of 

Nagaland is quite well studied since 1921 by J.H. 

Hutton. The first ever linguistic study of Nagamese 

has been reported by M. V. Sreedhar (1974) in 

“Naga Pidgin: A Sociolinguistic Study of Inter-

lingual Communication Pattern in Nagaland”. This 

was followed by “Standardized Grammar of Naga 

Pidgin” by Sreedhar himself in 1985. B K Boruah's 

“Nagamiz Kothalaga Niyom - A Primary Grammar 

on Nagamese” (1985) and “Nagamese: The Lan-

guage of Nagaland” (1993) are also some relevant 

studies to understand the basic structure and nature 

of Nagamese language. The last reported study on 

Nagamese language is “The structure of Nagamese 

the contact language of Nagaland” (2003) by Ajii 

Kumar Baishya of Assam University. 

However, the three languages Ao, Lotha and 

Nagamese were never studied together to frame 

out similarities or differences in phoneme charac-

teristics. Moreover except Ao language, unfortu-

nately very little work on acoustic analysis has 

been done so far in two other languages.  

2 Purpose of the Study 

Main purpose of the study is to find out vowels 

characteristics of the major languages of Nagaland 

i.e. Nagamese, Ao and Lotha. Vowels possess one 

of the defining structures of any language in the 

world. Their numbers, acoustic characteristics, par-

ticularly timbral ones need to be well defined for 

technology development (Tulika Basu and Arup 

Saha, 2011). For this work we have considered 

three important parameters of vowels like For-

mants, Nucleus Vowel Duration and Intensity. Nu-

cleus vowel is defined as the steady state of the 

vowel along with the two transitions (Rajib Roy, 

Tulika Basu, Arup Saha, Joyanta Basu, Shyamal 

Kr Das Mandal, 2008) as in figure 1.  

One way to objectively differentiate vowels is to 

examine the first two formant frequencies, namely 

1
st
 formant (F1) and 2

nd
 formant (F2), which 

roughly correlate with tongue height and tongue 

position respectively (G. E. Peterson and H. L. 

Barney. 1952). In general high first formant is as-

sociated with narrow tongue constriction near the 

glottis. Similarly second formant frequency is in-

creased as the constriction moves forward (K. N. 

Stevens and A. S. House. 1961). Using F1 and F2 

it is possible to properly place them in a vowel di-

agram.  

This study will help further for different applica-

tions like speech synthesis, language identification, 

speech recognition etc. in the target languages. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 Languages of Nagaland  

Nagaland is a state in Northeast India. It borders 

the state of Assam to the west, Arunachal Pradesh 

and part of Assam to the north, Myanmar to the 

east and Manipur to the south. The state capital is 

Kohima, and the largest city is Dimapur. It has an 

area of 16,579 square kilometres (6,401 sq mi) 

with a population of 1,980,602 as per the 2011 

Census of India. Nagaland is the home to 16 indig-

enous tribes namely Ao, Angami, Chang, Konyak, 

Lotha, Sumi, Chakhesang, Khiamniungan, Dimasa 

Kachari, Phom, Rengma, Sangtam, 

Figure 1. Nucleus Vowel Duration 

 
Nucleus Vowel /a/ 

316



 

Yimchunger,Kuki, Zeme-Liangmai (Zeliang) and 

Pochury as well as a number of sub-tribes. Each 

tribe is unique in character with its own distinct 

customs, language and dress. Nagaland is one of 

three states in India where most of the population 

is Christian (Wikipedia Nagaland).  

As per Grierson's classification system, Naga 

languages can be grouped into three groups-

Western, Central and Eastern Naga Groups. The 

Western Group includes Angami, Chokri and 

Kheza. The Central Naga group consists of Ao, 

Lotha and Sangtam, whereas Eastern Group com-

prises of Konyak and Chang. In addition, there are 

Naga-Bodo group illustrated by Mikir language, 

and Kuki group of languages illustrated by 

Sopvama (also called Mao Naga) and Luppa lan-

guages. These languages belong mostly to the Si-

no-Tibetan language family. Since most of these 

languages are mutually unintelligible, people de-

pend on a pidgin language called Nagamese for 

communication. English has been used as the offi-

cial language of the Nagaland state and it is quite 

popular among the educated mass of Nagaland. 

But Nagamese is used as the lingua franca among 

the various ethnic groups in the state. The lan-

guages of Nagaland state are not included in the 

scheduled list of twenty two languages in India, 

many of them spoken by dwindling number of 

speakers. This section presents a brief profile of 

major languages of the state. Figure 2 shows the 

languages map of Nagaland in different districts. 

Though, other dialects also exist in those districts, 

but from majority perspective they are not shown 

in the map.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

For this study we have selected three important 

languages of Nagaland i.e. Nagamese, Ao and 

Lotha. 

3.1 About Ao Language 

Ao is one of the important languages in Nagaland. 

Ao is spoken by a large number of people in the 

state. Mongsen, Chungli, Chanki etc. are promi-

nent among the Ao dialects. Among all the dia-

lects, Chungli is the widely spoken one and people 

of other Ao dialects can speak Chungli Ao but not 

vice versa. The inhabitants of the Mokokchung 

district mainly converse in this language. The 

vowel inventory of Chungli Ao is like this: 

/ɨ/, // (Bruhn Daniel, 2009). Nasality 
is not phonemic in Ao. It is a tonal language with 3 

contrasting lexical tones: high, mid and low. All 

are register tones.  

3.2 About Lotha Language 

The Lotha language is part of the Sino-Tibetan 

language family, spoken by approximately 166,000 

people in Wokha district, west-central Nagaland, 

India. It is centered in the small district of Wokha. 

This district has more than 114 villages such as 

Pangti, Maraju (Merapani), Englan, Baghty (Pakti) 

and others, where the language is widely spoken 

and studied. It is a medium of education up to the 

post-graduate level in the state of Nagaland. It is 

also the language in which the church sermons are 

preached. Lotha has seven dialects. They are Live, 

Tsontsu, Ndreng, Kyong, Kyo, Kyon and Kyou 

(Chiang Chen Shan. 2011). Lotha language has six 

vowels namely //. Nasality is 
not phonemic in Lotha. Like other Tibeto-Burman 

languages it is a tonal language with three register 

tones (Low, Mid, and High). 

 

Sl. No. 
Nagamese 

Vowels 
Ao Vowels 

Lotha 

Vowels 

1 / / / 
2    
3 /a:/   
4    
5  NA  
6    
7 NA ɨ/ NA 
Table 1. List of Vowels of Nagamese, Ao and Lotha   

Figure 2. Languages of Nagaland in different districts 

317



 

Above Table 1 shows the list of vowels in three 

languages. 

4 Experimental Data Set 

The present study aims at finding out acoustic 

characteristics of vowels of different languages of 

Nagaland from readout text for different applica-

tions of speech processing in respective languages. 

For this purpose, text material in each of the three 

languages has been prepared including digits, 

numbers, units and paragraphs on different topics. 

The text material contains around 120 words and 

60 sentences of different length. The text is read 

out by 15 native speakers from Nagaland in the age 

group between 20 to 40 years with 2 repetitions. 

All speakers are male speakers and English as their 

medium of primary education. Table 2 shows the 

detail Meta data of informants participated in this 

study.  

Sl. 

No 
Informant 

Native-

Language 

Edu- Quali-

fication 

Age 

(in yr) 

1 Speaker 1 Nagamese Secondary 30 

2 Speaker 2 Nagamese Secondary 24 

3 Speaker 3 Nagamese Secondary 35 

4 Speaker 4 Nagamese Secondary 32 

5 Speaker 5 Nagamese Secondary 31 

6 Speaker 6 Ao Secondary 32 

7 Speaker 7 Ao Secondary 30 

8 Speaker 8 Ao Secondary 32 

9 Speaker 9 Ao Secondary 30 

10 Speaker 10 Ao 
Higher-

Secondary 
35 

11 Speaker 11 Lotha Secondary 34 

12 Speaker 12 Lotha 
Higher-

Secondary 
32 

13 Speaker 13 Lotha Graduate 26 

14 Speaker 14 Lotha Primary 37 

15 Speaker 15 Lotha Secondary 33 

Table 2. Speakers’ Meta data Information 

5 Experimental Procedure  

Steps for experimental procedure are as follows: 

5.1 Data Collection  

For the experiment purpose, speech data has been 

collected from native speakers of Nagamese, Ao 

and Lotha. To avoid disfluencies in reading, in-

formants are instructed to read out the text material 

several times before final recording. Near about 3 

hrs of speech data has been collected using Praat 

(Praat Website, 2016) software. Speech data is being 

recorded in a less noisy studio environment with 

16 bit 22050 Hz digitization format.  

5.2 Data Transcription:  

Above collected speech data has been transcribed 

into phone level using Praat tool. It is worth men-

tioning here that tone is not considered in the pre-

sent study. For the present study, only Vowel (V) 

phonemes (like ) have been 
marked by the transcribers. For simplification and 

ease of understanding, following symbols are used 

by transcribers during transcription. Those are ‘u’, 

‘o’, ‘ac’, ‘a’, ‘e’, ‘i’ respectively. Transcribers are 

also instructed to mark the nasal contexts (N) of 

vowel occurrences. If a vowel is preceded by nasal 

consonants like  etc. then it is marked 
as N_V and if vowel is followed by nasal conso-

nants then it is marked as (V_N).  Then all phone 

level transcription files are saved as .TextGrid file 

format. Figure 3 shows the sample transcribed 

speech data using Praat tool. From the figure three 

panes can be observed. First one shows the time 

domain signal, second one shows the spectrograph-

ic view of time domain signal and final tier shows 

the phone level (only vowels) transcription bound-

ary marked manually by transcribers. Transcribers 

need to zoom in and zoom out the signal and play 

it repeatedly to perceptually identify the vowels.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3. Transcription using Praat Tool 

318



 

5.3 Extraction of duration, formants and in-
tensity of vowels 

Nucleus vowel duration, 1
st
 formant (F1), 2

nd
 for-

mant (F2) and intensity are calculated using Praat 

scripts for further analysis. All vowels are seg-

mented automatically using transcription output 

file i.e. from TextGrid file. These segmented files 

are required to test the perceptual appropriateness 

of different vowels by listeners.  

6 Result and Discussion 

Table 3 presents the number of vowel segments 

collected for analysis after transcriptions have been 

done. It has been observed that within our experi-

ment data, occurrence of vowel /a/ is highest in 

Nagamese. Similarly vowel /u/ in Ao and vowel /o/ 

in Lotha language has the highest occurrence. 
   

Sl. 

No. 
Vowels Nagamese Ao Lotha 

1  448 694 405 
2  569 NA 782 
3  578 670 605 
4  809 527 525 
5  576 579 576 
6  735 547 623 

Table 3. Vowel count in three languages under analysis 

6.1 Analysis of Nucleus Vowel Duration 

For present study on vowel duration, six vowels 

are considered including all vowel phonemes of 

Nagamese, Ao and Lotha languages. Those vowels 

(V) are /u/, /o/, /Ə/, /a/, /e/, /i/ i.e. ‘u’, ‘o’, ‘ac’, ‘a’, 

‘e’ and ‘i’ respectively. Using Praat scripts, nucle-

us vowel durations are extracted from transcription 

files. Vowels in Nasal context V_N and N_V are 

also analyzed in this study. 

6.1.1 Vowel duration in Nagamese 

Figure 4 shows the mean and +/- standard devia-

tion of duration for each vowel in Nagamese in-

cluding all contexts. It has been observed that 

nucleus vowel duration of Nagamese vowel /e/ i.e. 

‘e’ is higher than other vowels and on the other 

hand duration of vowel  i.e. ‘ac’ is lesser than 
the others.  

In Figure 5, nucleus vowel durations in preced-

ing and succeeding nasal contexts are shown sepa-

rately. It has been found that duration of vowels 

followed by nasal consonants i.e. V_N is always 

lesser than that of N_V and V. In all cases, dura-

tion of / i.e. ‘ac’ is less irrespective of nasal con-
text. Duration of /e/ i.e. ‘e’ is highest in V and 

N_V cases.  But duration of vowel /e/ i.e. ‘e’ is 

smaller than duration of /a/ i.e. ‘a’ in V_N. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.1.2 Vowel duration in Ao 

Vowel inventory of Ao consists of 

But the speech data which 
have used in this study does not contain any  
vowel. It is also interesting to note that though  
vowel is not included in the vowel inventory of Ao 

(be it in Chungli or Mongsen), in course of tran-

scription  vowel is found corresponding the 
grapheme ‘u’ like in words “tuko” which is pro-

nounced sometimes as  and sometimes as 
 by the native speakers of Chungli AO. This 
phenomenon is further supported by the previous 

 

Figure 5. Nucleus Vowel Duration of Nagamese with 

nasal context 

 
Figure 4. Nucleus vowel duration of Nagamese 

319



 

study on AO language where it has been men-

tioned that vowel  and  are in free variation in 
AO language (Alexander R. Coupe, 2003). 

From figure 6 it has been observed that nucleus 

vowel duration of Ao vowel /a/ i.e. ‘a’ is higher 

than other vowels and on the other hand duration 

of vowel  i.e. ‘ac’ is smaller than others.  
Vowel duration of Ao with nasal context has 

been shown in figure 7. All vowels followed by 

nasal consonants i.e. V_N are lesser in duration 

than that of N_V and V. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.1.3 Vowel duration in Lotha 

From figure 8 it has been observed that nucleus 

vowel duration of Lotha vowel /a/ i.e. ‘a’ is higher 

than other vowels like Ao language and on the oth-

er hand duration of vowel / i.e. ‘ac’ is smaller 
than others like Nagamese language.  

From figure 9, it has been found that duration of 

vowel followed by nasal consonants i.e. V_N are 

smaller than duration of N_V and V except /e/ i.e. 

‘e’. And in all the cases duration of /u/ i.e. ‘u’ is 

smaller irrespective of nasal context.  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.2 Analysis of Vowel Formants 

Formant analysis of the vowels in the three lan-

guages has been done including all contexts of 

their occurrence. 

6.2.1 Vowel Formants in Nagamese 

Figure 10 shows the F1 vs. F2 plot for Nagamese 

vowels. Six vowels have been observed and they 

are clustered in different zones. Zones of vowels 

/ and /a/ are overlapped. But value of F1 for 
vowel /a/ is higher than the F1 value of /. Some 
portion of /u/ and /o/ are also overlapped. But from 

then diagram it has been clearly identified the 

vowels like /i/ from /u/ or /e/ from / etc.   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9. Nucleus Vowel Duration of Lotha with nasal 

context 

 

Figure 8. Nucleus Vowels Duration of Lotha 

 

Figure 6. Nucleus Vowels Duration of Ao 

Figure 7. Nucleus Vowel Duration of Ao with nasal 

context 

 

320



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.2.2 Vowel Formants in Ao 

Figure 11 shows the general F1 vs. F2 plot of dif-

ferent vowels in Ao language. It has been observed 

that there is a great amount of overlap in both the 

formant frequencies of vowel  and . So in this 
study these two vowels are merged together and 

analyzed as a single vowel .   
From the F1 vs. F2 plot it has been clearly identi-

fied the vowels like /i/, /Values 
of and/are overlapped to some extent. 

6.2.3 Vowel Formants in Lotha  

Figure 12 shows the F1 vs. F2 plot of different 

vowels in Lotha language. In Lotha, six vowels 

have formed well separable clusters and thus they 

can be identified by F1 and F2 values. Only some 

cases it creates confusion for identifying the vow-

els /e/ and /. In Lotha /u/ and /o/ vowels can be 
clearly identified by their values. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 13 shows overall comparison of F1 vs. F2 

values of different vowels in Nagamese, Ao and 

Lotha languages. In the three languages 

(Nagamese, Ao and Lotha) F2 values have varied 

significantly for vowels /i/ and /e/ and mean F2 

value of Nagamese is higher than that of Ao and 

Lotha.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

On the other hand, F1 values have varied signif-

icantly for vowels ‘ac’ and ‘a’. From this F1 vs. F2 

comparison figure, all major vowels can be clearly 

identified by respective F1 and F2 values. 

Changes in vowel formant characteristics for na-

sal context are also studied.  Figure 14 and Figure 

15 is showing the occurrence frequency distribu-

tion of F1 and F2 values respectively for different 

vowels in Nagamese. It has been observed from 

figure 14 that, there is no significant change of 

vowel 1st formant F1 with V_N and N_V context. 

But some changes of vowel 2nd formant F2 can be 

observed in figure 15 for V_N and N_V context. 

F2 values for vowels /, /e/ and /i/ are showing 
 

Figure 11. F1 vs. F2 of Ao vowels 

 

Figure 10. F1 vs. F2 of Nagamese vowels 

 

Figure 13. Comparison of F1 vs. F2 for Nagamese, Ao 

and Lotha vowels 

 

Figure 12. F1 vs F2 of Lotha vowels 

321



 

different frequency distribution with two or three 

major peaks. After careful observations from data 

it has been found that these peaks are coming due 

to nasal contexts of vowels.  Frequency distribu-

tion of F1 and F2 for the other two languages Ao 

and Lotha has also been calculated and similar pat-

tern has been found in those cases. No effect of 

nasal context on F1 has been observed for Ao and 

Lotha also. But F2 plays important role in nasal 

context. F2 of Ao vowels /u/ and /i/ is found to be 

affected for nasal context. Similarly F2 of /e/ is 

affected in Lotha. 

6.3 Analysis of Vowel Intensity 

During this study intensity of different vowels of 

Nagamese, Ao and Lotha are analyzed. Figure 16 

shows the intensity wise graph of different vowels. 

It has been observed that there is no significant 

change in intensity of different vowels of the three 

languages. Intensity of some Ao vowels like u, o, 

ax, ac, a, i is smaller than that of Nagamese and 

Lotha. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper we have reported characteristics of 

vowels of three languages of Nagaland namely 

Nagamese, Ao and Lotha and carried out experi-

mental study to find out language specific features. 

In this paper nucleus vowel duration, formant (F1 

and F2) of vowels and intensity has been observed. 

The present study tried to find out significant in-

fluence on the nucleus vowel in presence of adja-

cent nasal phoneme i.e. preceding and succeeding 

nasal phoneme in all three languages. 

In conclusion, the following points can be summa-

rized for three languages of Nagaland: 

 Nucleus vowel duration of vowel /e/, /a/ 
and /a/ is higher for Nagamese, Ao and 

Lotha respectively. The duration of /e/ in 

Nagamese is highest than the others may 

be due to the fact that most of the 

Nagamese verbs end with ‘e’ vowel and 

the speakers try to lengthen it to indicate 

the clause boundary. 

 Similarly, duration of vowel 

/ is smaller for Nagamese, 
Ao and Lotha respectively. 

 In most of the cases duration of vowels 
followed by nasal consonants i.e. V_N is 

lesser than duration of N_V and V. 

 In overall comparison of mean F1 vs. F2 
all vowels are well separated in Nagamese, 

AO and Lotha. 

 Vowels  and  are in free variation in 
Ao language because in F1-F2 plane they 

overlapped. Therefore samples of the two 

vowels are merged together and analyzed 

as a single vowel in Ao language. 

 

Figure 16. Intensity of Different Vowels of three lan-

guages of Nagaland 

 
Figure 15. F2 of Nagamese Vowels with Nasal Context 

 
Figure 14.  F1 of Nagamese Vowels with Nasal Con-

text 

322



 

 In case of nasal context i.e. V_N and N_V 
no significant influence of F1 has been ob-

served for all three languages. But F2 

plays important roles in nasal context. In 

frequency distribution of F2 of all vowels 

multiple peaks have been observed due to 

nasal context. 

 No significant changes in intensity for dif-
ferent vowels are observed in all three lan-

guages. 

However, there is scope of further study on vowels 

characteristics with respect to other different con-

text like fricative, sibilants, plosives etc. This study 

may help the researches in the area of language 

identification, duration modeling for synthesis sys-

tem as well as speech recognition on languages of 

Nagaland. 

Acknowledgments 

This work is a part of ongoing initiatives on “De-

ployment of Automatic Speaker Recognition Sys-

tem on Conversational Speech Data for North-

Eastern states” under CDAC North-East grant. The 

authors are thankful to CDAC, Kolkata, India for 

necessary financial and infrastructural support. 

Authors like to thank user agency for enabling 

them to collect speech data on different languages 

under controlled environment at single place from 

a number of native speakers. They also like to 

thank Ms. Sushmita Nandi for her efforts in manu-

al verification of recorded speech data and tran-

scriptions. 

References  

Alexander R. Coupe. 2003. A Phonetic and Phonologi-

cal Description of Ao: A Tibeto-Burman Language of 

Nagaland North-East India (Pacific Linguistics, 

543), Publisher: The Australian National University 

(2003), ISBN-10: 0858835193, ISBN-13: 978-

0858835191 

Baishya, Ajit Kumar. 2004. The structure of Nagamese: 

The contact language of Nagaland, Silchar: Assam 

University (Doctoral dissertation).  

Bhim Kanta Boruah. 1993. Nagamese: the Language of 

Nagaland, Mittal Publications, New Delhi, India 

Boruah B.K.1993. Nagamese: The Language of Naga-

land, Mittal Publications, New Delhi.  

Bruhn Daniel. 2009. The Tonal Classification of 

Chungli AO Verbs, UC Berkeley Phonology Lab An-

nual Report 

Chiang Chen Shan. 2011. Language Documentation of 

Different Aspects of Lotha, a Tibeto-Burman lan-

guage of Nagaland, north-east India, Division of 

Linguistics and Multilingual Studies, Nanyang Tech-

nological University 

G. E. Peterson and H. L. Barney. 1952. Control Meth-

ods used in Study of Vowels, Journal of the Acousti-

cal Society of America, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 175-184 

K. N. Stevens and A. S. House. 1961. An Acoustical 

theory of vowel production and some of its Implica-

tions, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, vol.4 

Praat Website. 2016. http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/ 

Rajib Roy, Tulika Basu, Arup Saha, Joyanta Basu, 

Shyamal Kr Das Mandal. 2008. Duration Modeling 

for Bangla Text to Speech Synthesis System, Interna-

tional Conference on Asian Language Processing 

2008, Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 12-14, 2008 

Tulika Basu and Arup Saha. 2011. Qualitative And 

Quantitative Classification Of Bangla Vowel, O-

COCOSDA 2011 

Wikipedia Nagaland. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nagaland 

Wikipedia. 2015. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Sister_States 

 

  

 

323


