



















































A fine-grained corpus annotation schema of German nephrology records


Proceedings of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop,
pages 69–77, Osaka, Japan, December 11-17 2016.

A fine-grained corpus annotation schema of German nephrology records

Roland Roller?, Hans Uszkoreit?, Feiyu Xu?, Laura Seiffe?, Michael Mikhailov?3,
Oliver Staeck3, Klemens Budde3, Fabian Halleck3 and Danilo Schmidt3

?Language Technology Lab, DFKI, Berlin, Germany
{firstname.surname}@dfki.de

3Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany
{firstname.surname}@charite.de

Abstract

In this work we present a fine-grained annotation schema to detect named entities in German
clinical data of chronically ill patients with kidney diseases. The annotation schema is driven
by the needs of our clinical partners and the linguistic aspects of German language. In order to
generate annotations within a short period, the work also presents a semi-automatic annotation
which uses additional sources of knowledge such as UMLS, to pre-annotate concepts in advance.
The presented schema will be used to apply novel techniques from natural language processing
and machine learning to support doctors treating their patients by improved information access
from unstructured German texts.

1 Introduction

Long-term treatment and follow-up of chronically ill patients result in complex medical data and patient
records. Although such data is nowadays to a large extent digitalized in various hospital information
systems or clinical databases, information is mostly unstructured and difficult to access. Thus, reliable
methods to access useful information in clinical data would clearly support physicians. An information
extraction system could be applied in the clinical routine to analyze individual patient records for alarm-
ing symptoms, historical events, contraindications or side effects. Furthermore it could help to identify
subgroups of patients with special characteristics, identify patients for clinical studies or correlating
medication and symptoms in historical patient data. Automated information extraction could allow the
development of alert systems, which help the clinicians in their daily routine and thus would increase
patients safety. However, the first step towards any information extraction is the definition of information
of interest, such as diseases, medications or dosing size. This information is then defined within an anno-
tation schema and is used to manually annotate a gold standard corpus to train and evaluate information
extraction methods.

Unfortunately, manual annotation is time consuming (Kim et al., 2008) and expensive (Angeli et al.,
2014). In particular in the medical domain, expert knowledge is often required which makes the anno-
tation process even more difficult and costly. Therefore existing schemata and corpora could be used
in order to save time and effort for the annotation of new data. On the other hand, existing schemata
might not cover the information of interest. Furthermore, most of the existing and assessable clini-
cal data sets are in English language. The existing German-language clinical data sets are not freely
available. Consequently, we aim to create a new gold standard corpus for German data. This work in-
troduces an annotation schema for reports of the nephrology domain which is based on the requirements
of physicians in our project and is motivated by linguistic aspects of German language. The schema
takes into account that current German medical dictionaries (which often support named entity recogni-
tion) are much smaller than the English ones. Hence, we include annotations on a fine-grained level, in
particular in the context of compound words. Moreover, the annotation process includes an automatic
pre-annotation step to decrease the duration of manual annotation and to generally ease the annotation
process (Batista-Navarro et al., 2015; Kwon et al., 2014).

The paper is structured as follows: The next section presents related work. An overview of relevant
data sources is provided in Section 3. The following Section 4 introduces the annotation schema with a

69



range of different examples. The semi-automatic annotation process is reported in Section 5. The paper
finishes with results and future work.

2 Related Work

Information extraction from clinical data has become an important research topic in recent years. With
the increasing amount of medical data (such as clinical notes or discharge summaries), the development
of reliable text analytics tools could support physicians to better access patient data. However, annotated
data sets are required for the development and testing of information extraction methods. Most of the
existing annotated clinical data sets are in English language. There are only a few data sets that have
been created for non-English languages, such as for Swedish (Skeppstedt et al., 2014), French (Névéol
et al., 2015) or Polish (Mykowiecka et al., 2009). For German, only a few sources and clinical corpora
exist and will be introduced in the following.

The two most relevant sources for this work are described in Bretschneider et al. (2013) and Toepfer
et al. (2015). Bretschneider et al. (2013) focused on the classification of sentences in radiology reports
as either pathological and non-pathological based on the given findings. Toepfer et al. (2015) addressed
the extraction of fine-grained information from German transthoracic echocardiography reports. The
presented terminology involves three main types: objects, attributes and values. Unfortunately, both data
sets are not publicly available.

Another very interesting corpus is the FraMed corpus which is described in Wermter and Hahn (2004).
The authors present a German-language medical text corpus containing manually supplied sentence
boundary, token segmentation and part-of-speech (POS) tags. Due to the fact that the corpus cannot
be legally accessed by a third party, Faessler et al. (2014) present an freely available tool for segmenta-
tion and POS tagging for German clinical data, based on models trained on the FraMed corpus. Further
relevant sources for German clinical data are for instance the German Specialist Lexicon (Weske-Heck
et al., 2002) or the German MeSH1. A good overview is also provided in the work of Schulz et al. (2013).

3 Utilized Data Sources

This section presents the two data sources used for this work. Firstly, a biomedical knowledge source
is presented which is used to automatically pre-annotate data to reduce annotation time. Secondly, the
textual data which is used for the annotation is introduced and then analyzed by its (linguistic) charac-
teristics.

3.1 UMLS
The Unified Medical Language System2 (UMLS) is a large biomedical knowledge base containing mil-
lions of medical terms and relations between them. The core component, the Metathesaurus, unifies
more than 120 biomedical knowledge vocabularies, such as the Medical Subject Heading (MeSH), the
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) or the International Classification of Diseases,
Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM).

Medical concepts can be described in different ways with different spellings, different abbreviations
and also in different languages. UMLS unifies those variations using the Concept Unique Identifier
(CUI). Furthermore, UMLS links each CUI against at least one semantic type, such as ‘Finding’, ‘Sign
or Symptom’ for instance. Most of the concepts are defined in English. However, more than 200,000
German entries can be found3 in UMLS.

In this work, UMLS will be used for two different purposes. First of all, German concepts of the
Metathesaurus are used to pre-annotate data by aligning semantic types to concepts of our annotation
schema (see Section 5). Furthermore, unique CUIs should be assigned to annotated concepts in our
corpus (normalization against UMLS) at a later stage. Normalization helps to access data more effi-
ciently. Rather than searching for the string ‘Niereninsuffizienz’ (‘renal insufficiency’) we can use its

1http://www.dimdi.de/static/en/klassi/mesh_umls/mesh/index.htm
2https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
3UMLS 2016AA, including all German sources

70



UMLS-CUI C1565489 which includes different variations in German, such as ‘Insuffizienz der Niere’,
‘beeinträchtigte Nierenfunktion’ or ‘Nierenfunktionsbeeinträchtigung’.

3.2 Clinical text of the nephrology domain
The annotation task in this paper is conducted within the MACSS4 (Medical Allround-Care Service
Solutions) project, which focuses on improving the safety of patients after kidney transplantation. A
key focus of this project is to improve the communication with the patient via a mobile app and to
facilitate data exchange and bilateral communication between physicians. Another important goal of this
project is the improvement of drug safety by analysis of potentially dangerous drug-drug interactions. In
this context the text annotation aims to generate a corpus for the detection of correlated information in
historical patient data (e.g. by correlating medication and symptoms). In addition, we want to analyze
individual patient records in order to identify alarming symptoms, contraindications or side effects of
medications.

At the current project stage German discharge summaries and clinical notes of a hospital’s kidney
transplant department are annotated. The content of the data set has two peculiar characteristics com-
pared to clinical data of other domains: First, the topic in the documents is related to kidney transplant
patients and second, the patients are under a long-term treatment. Both types of documents (discharge
summaries and clinical notes) are generally written by medical doctors and have significant differences.
The clinical notes are rather short and are written by doctors during or shortly after a visit of a patient.
The currently used documents consider only those sections which are addressed to other physicians out-
side the hospital, such as family doctors or the physician who transferred the patient.

Discharge Summaries Clinical Notes
#documents available 118 1607
#words (total) 89691 68480
#sentences (total) 16068 11871
avg. words per document (std. deviation) 760.09 (208.62) 42.61 (35.74)

Table 1: Comparison of our Clinical Data Sources

Discharge summaries instead are written during a stay at the hospital. The document is more struc-
tured. It contains information about medical history, diagnosis, condition, medication etc. of the patient.
Discharge summaries contain much more text compared to clinical notes and are often written by physi-
cians. Furthermore, discharge summaries often contain longer and more well-formed sentences.

Table 1 provides a brief analysis of both document types. Discharge summaries contain a larger
average number of words per document compared to the clinical notes5. However, the standard deviation
of the avgerage word number per document shows that both document types have a large variation in text
length. Some clinical notes contain only a few words.

3.2.1 Data Characteristics
The clinical data of this project share the same characteristics as other clinical documents across the
world, such as syntactic shortened and reduced semantic complexity. Additionally, the texts contain a
large number of Greek- and Latin-rooted words. Often, only keywords are used, together with a lot of
abbreviations which are not entirely consistently used over the different texts/authors (Kim et al., 2011).
Spelling mistakes and indirect colloquial patient language (‘patient reports that legs were tickling’) might
occur. Besides, texts vary concerning writing style and information density. Due to the nature of German
language the documents are also rich in inflection forms and compounds.

Overall, especially linguistic characteristics are of great interest defining our annotation schema: we
assume that linguistic resources play a major role in the understanding of the structure of medical data.

4http://macss-projekt.de/
5The information is generated by applying a German tokenizer and a sentence splitter. All non alphabetical tokens are

removed.

71



The German language tends to have a complex sentence- and word structure. While the former varies
a lot between different texts and is therefore hard to generalize, the latter is worthy to be considered in
more detail.

First of all, characteristics of part-of-speeches (POS) and word formation processes like derivation
and composition seem to be important for a deeper understanding. Beside nouns also adjectives and
verbs support detailed textual information as presented in Example 1. The example shows, that crucial
information can be also expressed by an adjective (1a) or a verb (1b).

(1) a. [Depressive] Episode (‘depressive episode’)
b. Wir übernahmen den Patienten [intubiert] (‘we took over an intubated patient’)

In German the POS of a word can be easily changed by derivation processes (Fleischer, 2012) which
means, that given concepts are not limited to a specific word category. For this reason it is necessary to
not solely rely on the POS distribution and to keep concepts open to various POS. Example 2 illustrates
the described situation. ’Delirant’ and ’im Delirium’, both mean that the patient is in an acute confusional
state (‘delirium’). While the former is grammatically used as (predicative) adjective, the latter is used as
noun.

(2) a. Der Patient war [delirant] (‘the patient was delirous’)
b. Der Patient war im [Delirium] (‘the patient had delirium’)

The same situation applies to changes from noun to verb (or vice versa):

(3) a. Es erfolgte die [Sedierung] (‘sedation was undertaken’)
b. Wir [sedierten] den Patienten (‘we sedated the patient’)

Compounds like those presented in Example 4 are a very typical phenomenon of the German language
and work really productive: They can be built by nearly every POS, yet compounds can be formed by
other compounds. This grammar device is frequently used in our corpus.

(4) a. Niereninsuffizienz (‘Renal insufficiency’)
b. Aortenklappenstenose (‘Aortic valve stenosis’)

‘Niereninsuffizienz’ can be paraphrased as ‘Insuffizienz der Niere’ (literally: ‘insufficiency of the kid-
ney’). The given example shows that a fine-grained examination of lexemes help gaining more informa-
tion than a simple review of the surface does. In Example 4a, a body part in combination with a medical
condition might span a new and more specific medical condition, whereas the body part expresses the
location of the condition.

4 Annotation Schema

For this work information related to the patient, the disease pattern and the treatment are of interest. In
order to answer these superordinate questions, relevant concepts are created that structure the information
supporting entities: therefore, focus is on the elements that express medical conditions, their treatments,
and further diagnostic procedures. Consequently, the concepts ‘Medical Condition’, ‘Treatment’, and
‘Diagnostic/Lab Procedure’ are the most important and the most frequent ones. However, also other
concepts, such as ‘Body Part’ or ‘Medication’ for instance are important information and considered for
the annotation.

Besides further information such as time and location, negations/speculations and some structural
data is of interest. Thus, all those elements often serve as specification of the preceding concepts. The
development of the concepts took place by manually examining example corpora.

Table 2 presents the list of entities we currently annotate. The relevant entities are grouped into
different categories such as time information or person/body. Furthermore the table provides a brief
explanation of each entity. Note, Biomedical Chemistry is currently grouped into the category therapy.
However, depending on the context the concept can also occur in the category Person/Body.

72



Category Entity Explanation
Time Information Date Point in time; date

Temporal Course Temporal courses; other temporal information
Person/Body Person Mentions of individuals

Body Part Body parts; organs
Tissue Body’s own tissues
Body Fluids Body’s own fluids

Local specification Anatomical descriptions of position and direction
Process Process Body’s own biological processes
Condition State of Health Positive, wanted finding; contrary to Medical Condition

Medical Condition Symptom, Diagnosis and observation
Diagnostic/Lab Procedure All types of tests used to diagnose a disease or to assess the

patients’ state
Medical Specification Closer definition; describing lexemes, often adjectives
Degree State of degrees, e.g. degree of a tumor disease
Type Closer definition/specification

Therapy Medical Device Medical devices, utilities and material
Medication Drugs, medicine
Biological Chemistry Biochemical substances
Treatment Therapeutic procedures, treatments
Measurement Measurements and the corresponding units

Structure Structure Element Text structuring elements
Truth Modality Positive Explicitly positive lexeme

Modality Negation Negation particle
Modality Vagueness Vagueness expressing elements

Table 2: Relevant concepts

Medical Condition comprises a wide range of entities. In fact, entities describing findings, diseases
and syndromes are all covered by that single concept. Even professionals cannot always distinguish for
certain between a disease and a symptom, for instance in case of hypertension. Hypertension can be
categorized as a disease or as a symptom, e.g. of a chronic renal insufficiency. By normalizing concepts
to UMLS, a distinction can be achieved in later working steps, if required.

As mentioned above, the development of the concepts does not base on the lexeme’s grammatical
structure (e.g. the POS) but on its semantic value. Thus, also other aspects of the surface structure
may vary: the concept temporal course can occur as a word strings (5a), as a scheme for the dosing of
medication (5b), or as an prefix within a lexeme (5c).

(5) a. [Seit drei Tagen] (‘For three days’)
c. Urbason 4 mg [1 - 0 - 0 - 0] (‘Urbason 4 mg 1 - 0 - 0 - 0’)
b. [Post]extubationem (‘after the extubation’)

As illustrated in Section 3.2.1, concepts like Medical Condition are not limited to a certain POS. Con-
versely, there are some exceptions which appear exclusively in adjectival form: Medical Specification
and Local Specification occur only in describing, thus in adjectival position. They do not contain the
main information (the patient’s medical condition and treatments) but serve as further specification. The
concept State of Health is also a special case regarding its POS-structure. Due to its contrary meaning
to Medical Condition it might be assumed, that it occurs within the same position and same context.
However, State of Health is actually only used as adjective. Similar to that, the concept Type occurs
only in one certain position, namely as the first constituent of a compound, see Example 6:

(6) a. [Druck]schmerz (‘tenderness and/or pain on palpation’)

While most of the concepts base on their semantic value, Structure Element is an exception because
its use does not rely on its meaning but on its function. These entities occur as kind of headlines that
structure the texts. Additional information throughout the paragraph can be gained by accentuating these
elements. Further examples are given in Table 3.

73



Examples (German; English) Annotation
Sonographie der Leber (Ultrasound examination of the liver) Body part
Ovarialzyste (ovarial cyst) Body part
inhomogenem Nierenparenchym (inhomogeneous renal parenchyma) Tissue
laterales Weichteilrelease (lateral soft tissue release) Local specification
Sonographie der linken Niere (ultrasound examination of the left kidney) Local specification
Reaktion auf Licht (Reaction to light) Process
physiologische Darmgeräusche (physiologic bowel sounds) Process
Haut warm und trocken (skin warm and dry) State of Health
terminale Niereninsuffizienz (terminal renal insufficiency) Medical Condition
EKG vom 24.01.2000 (ECG from 24.01.2000) Diagnostic/Lab Procedure
Röntgen Thorax in zwei Ebenen (chest radiography in two projections) Diagnostic/Lab Procedure
chronische NTx-Glomerulonephritis (Chronic glomerulonephritis of the renal allo-
graft)

Medical Specification

Transplantatversagen nach chronischer NTx-Glomerulonephritis (Renal allograft fail-
ure after chronic glomerulonephritis of the renal allograft)

Medical Device

chronische Niereninsuffizienz Stadium III (Chronic kidney disease stage 3) Degree
Primärimplantation (primary implantation) Type
Transaminasenanstieg (Elevation of transaminases) Biological Chemistry
Wir übernahmen den Patienten sediert, intubiert und beatmet (We took over the se-
dated, intubated and mechanically ventilated patient.)

Treatment

Nephrektomie (Nephrectomy) Treatment
Tumorausdehnung beträgt 4,5 x 3 x 6 cm. (Tumor dimensions are 4,5 x 3 x 6 cm) Measurement
keine Ödeme (no oedemas) Modality Negative

Table 3: Annotation Schema - Concept Examples

4.1 Annotation Process
The annotation process aims at a detailed annotation level. This means, that the annotation attempts
to detect many information in the documents, but also to consider a fine-granularity. The following
example in Figure 1 motivates the granularity. The term ‘terminale Niereninsuffizienz’ (‘terminal renal
insufficiency’) will be annotated on different levels:

Figure 1: Annotation Granularity

First of all the complete term ‘terminale Niereninsuffizienz’ will be annotated as medical condition,
which is closest to the UMLS entry. Besides also ‘Niereninsuffizienz’ and ‘insuffizienz’ will be annotated
as Medical Condition in order to achieve a fine-granularity. Furthermore strings such as ‘terminale’
(‘terminal’) will be annotated as Medical Specification and ‘Niere’ (‘renal/kidney’) as Body Part.

There are different reasons for the detailed annotation level. Firstly, ‘terminale Niereninsuffizienz’ is
the most specific term which includes all other information. Often NER systems target the longest and
most specific match. However, UMLS might not cover necessarily all variants. Even more problematic
is the fact, that medical terms of interest might be not covered by the German subset of UMLS. A fine
granularity might help at a later stage to learn larger constructs (e.g. adjective + compound noun) which
are not in the dictionary.

The fine-granularity can be carried to extremes: Some Local Specifications provide special informa-
tion due to derivation processes, see Example 7:

(7) intrapulmonal (‘intrapulmonary’)

74



The first constituent of the lexeme, ‘intra-’ comes from a finite set of Latin-rooted prefixes which name
directional and locational information. ‘Pulmonal’ is also a Latin-rooted element which can be translated
as ‘concerning the lungs’ (‘pulmo’ is Latin for ‘lung’ and the suffix ‘-al’ indicates an adjective). In
combination with the prefix ‘intra’, which means ‘inside sth.’, the lexeme’s meaning is ‘inside the lungs’
what would be annotated as Local Specification. Since UMLS has no entry for the German lexeme, this
fine-grained analysis can provide a deeper understanding.

5 Semi-Automatic Annotation

The annotation is carried out by three students: two linguists, which are familiar with the domain and
one medical expert. The medical student is responsible to annotate data and to support the other two
students. The annotation task is conducted using the Brat6 annotator tool. As seen in (Batista-Navarro
et al., 2015) or (Kwon et al., 2014), an automatic pre-annotation can help to decrease the duration of
manual annotation and to generally ease the annotation process. For this reason an automatic annotation
step will be also included into this annotation. In the following the automatic pre-annotation and the
preliminary manual annotation will be described.

5.1 Pre-Annotation
To decrease the duration of manual annotation and to generally ease the annotation process, the corpus
is pre-annotated automatically7 beforehand. In this way, falsely tagged elements can be easily corrected
and missing annotations included.

The pre-annotation reads in the text documents and applies a tokenization. Currently up to four tokens
are considered and matched to the German and English subset of UMLS. Furthermore also substring
matches are allowed in order to detect the different components of compound words. The pre-annotation
can be divided into three parts: regex, dictionary-lookup and UMLS dictionary lookup. Concepts which
are less likely to be found in UMLS are covered by the first two steps. This information usually describes
descriptive information of main concepts.

The regex annotation covers the concepts Measurement, Date, Temporal Course, and Struc-
ture Element. Whereas the first three concepts include numbers, in combination with some measure-
ments or month, such as ‘mg’, ‘ml’ or ‘January’, the concept Structure Element detects text spans fol-
lowed by a colon (‘:’). These structuring elements usually define the topic of the following text or section
and can be used to build up relations to the concepts found in the follow-up text.

The dictionary lookup considers words which are less likely to be found in UMLS as single con-
cepts. Many of the concepts considered here are used to further specify concepts such as Body Part or
Medical Condition. In German, many of those concepts (in particular Medical Specification and Lo-
cal Specification) occur as adjectives or adverbs. In contrast to our approach, UMLS assigns those spec-
ifications directly into the surrounding concept, such as ‘akute Blutungsanaemie’ (‘acute haemorrhagic
anaemia’) or ‘papilläres Schilddrüsenkarzinom’ (‘papillary thyroid carcinoma’) and not necessarily as a
single concept. This dictionary is manually generated.

word substring
‘Empfehlungen’ (‘suggestions’) ‘Lunge’ (‘lung’)
‘Behandlung’ (‘Treatment’) ‘Hand’ (‘hand’)

Table 4: Substring Matching Errors

The UMLS dictionary lookup searches within a window of 4 tokens for German, stemmed German
and English words in UMLS. In order to avoid additional errors only capitalized words are considered
for English. This pre-annotation component bases on aligning semantic types of UMLS to concepts of
our annotation schema. The mapping schema is presented in Table 5. It means, that if a mention can
be found in UMLS, its semantic type is examined and if the type matches to one of our concepts, the

6http://brat.nlplab.org/
7The tool will be made available here: http://macss.dfki.de

75



Concept name STY-Name
Person Human; Patient or Disabled Group
Body Part Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component; Body Location or Region
Tissue Tissue
Body Fluids Body Substance
Local Specification Spatial Concept
Process Biologic Function; Physiologic Function; Organism Function; Mental Process; Organ or Tissue

Function; Cell Function
State of Health Qualitative Concept
Medical Condition Anatomical Abnormality; Congenital Abnormality; Acquired Abnormality; Finding; Sign or

Symptom; Pathologic Function; Disease or Syndrome; Mental or Behavioral Dysfunction; Neo-
plastic Process; Injury or Poisoning

Diagnostic/Lab Procedure Laboratory Procedure; Diagnostic Procedure
Medical Specification Organism Attribute; Clinical Attribute; Qualitative Concept
Medical Device Medical Device
Medication Clinical Drug; Pharmacologic Substance; Antibiotic
Biological Chemistry Biomedical or Dental Material; Biologically Active Substance; Hormone; Enzyme; Vitamin;

Immunologic Factor; Receptor; Organic Chemical; Nucleic Acid, Nucleoside, or Nucleotide;
Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein; Inorganic Chemical; Element, Ion, or Isotope; Gene or
Genome

Treatment Therapeutic or Preventive Procedure
Measurement Quantitative Concepts

Table 5: Mapping Semantic Types to our Annotation Schema

string will be pre-annotated. Additionally the annotation will be extended by its definitions (if defined in
UMLS) and its source vocabularies.

The substring matcher also relies on the UMLS dictionary lookup and searches for tokens longer than
3 characters in the German sources. The substring matcher produces various errors as seen in Table
4. However, during the annotation process models and exceptions will be updated to improve the pre-
annotation gradually.

Another component of the annotation is an additional synonym dictionary. During the annotation
process newly annotated and frequently occurring concepts should be examined in more detail. In this
case annotators search for synonyms or English translations in order to find a corresponding entry in
UMLS and to extend the German UMLS dictionary.

5.2 Current Annotation Process
At the current stage of the annotation, many files are annotated by at least two different annotators.
Annotation differences are then discussed together in a group in order to find the best solution and to
ensure a mutual understanding of the annotation task. Using the new annotations the pre-annotation can
be successively improved by including new knowledge and addressing frequent errors (such as described
in Table 4).

6 Results and Future Work

In this work we presented a fine-grained annotation schema for German clinical text, used for the domain
of nephrology. The schema is motivated by linguistic aspects and addresses the needs of clinicians and
medical professionals in our project. Furthermore we presented a semi-automatic annotation process in
order to ease the annotation procedure. After finishing the concept annotations, the corpus will be nor-
malized against UMLS and extended by relations. The corpus serves as baseline for further information
access of patient data in a hospitals’ transplant center.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Energy (BMWi) through
the project MACSS (01MD16011F).

76



References
Gabor Angeli, Julie Tibshirani, Jean Wu, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Combining Distant and Partial

Supervision for Relation Extraction. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), Doha, Qatar. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Riza Batista-Navarro, Jacob Carter, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2015. Semi-automatic curation of chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease phenotypes using argo. In Proceedings of the Fifth BioCreative Challenge Evaluation
Workshop, pages 403–408.

Claudia Bretschneider, Sonja Zillner, and Matthias Hammon. 2013. Identifying pathological findings in ger-
man radiology reports using a syntacto-semantic parsing approach. In Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on
Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 27–35, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Erik Faessler, Johannes Hellrich, and Udo Hahn. 2014. Disclose models, hide the data - how to make use of con-
fidential corpora without seeing sensitive raw data. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri,
Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, may. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Wolfgang Fleischer. 2012. Wortbildung der deutschen Gegenwartssprache. Walter de Gruyter.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from
literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1).

Youngjun Kim, John Hurdle, and Stphane M Meystre. 2011. Using UMLS lexical resources to disambiguate
abbreviations in clinical text. Annual Symposium proceedings, 2011:715–722.

Dongseop Kwon, Sun Kim, Soo-Yong Shin, Andrew Chatr-aryamontri, and W. John Wilbur. 2014. Assisting
manual literature curation for proteinprotein interactions using bioqrator. Database, 2014.

Agnieszka Mykowiecka, Małgorzata Marciniak, and Anna Kupść. 2009. Rule-based information extraction from
patients clinical data. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):923 – 936. Biomedical Natural Language
Processing.

Aurélie Névéol, Cyril Grouin, Xavier Tannier, Thierry Hamon, Liadh Kelly, Lorraine Goeuriot, and Pierre
Zweigenbaum. 2015. CLEF ehealth evaluation lab 2015 task 1b: Clinical named entity recognition. In Working
Notes of CLEF 2015 - Conference and Labs of the Evaluation forum, Toulouse, France, September 8-11, 2015.

Stefan Schulz, Josef Ingenerf, Sylvia Thun, and Philipp Daumke. 2013. German-language content in biomedical
vocabularies. In Working Notes for CLEF 2013 Conference , Valencia, Spain, September 23-26, 2013.

Maria Skeppstedt, Maria Kvist, Gunnar H. Nilsson, and Hercules Dalianis. 2014. Automatic recognition of
disorders, findings, pharmaceuticals and body structures from clinical text: An annotation and machine learning
study. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 49:148 – 158.

Martin Toepfer, Hamo Corovic, Georg Fette, Peter Klügl, Stefan Störk, and Frank Puppe. 2015. Fine-grained
information extraction from german transthoracic echocardiography reports. BMC Medical Informatics and
Decision Making, 15(1):1–16.

Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 2004. An annotated german-language medical text corpus. In Proceedings of
the Forth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Lisbon, Portugal.

Gesa Weske-Heck, Albrecht Zaiss, Matthias Zabel, Stefan Schulz, Wolfgang Giere, Michael Schopen, and Rüdiger
Klar. 2002. The german specialist lexicon. Proceedings AMIA Annual Symposium, pages 884–888.

77


