



















































Using the Web and Social Media as Corpora for Monitoring the Spread of Neologisms. The case of 'rapefugee', 'rapeugee', and 'rapugee'.


Proceedings of the 10th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-X) and the EmpiriST Shared Task, pages 35–43,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using the Web and Social Media as Corpora for Monitoring the Spread of
Neologisms. The case of rapefugee, rapeugee, and rapugee.

Quirin Würschinger, Mohammad Fazleh Elahi, Desislava Zhekova and Hans-Jörg Schmid
LMU Munich

80539 Munich, Germany
q.wuerschinger@lmu.de, fazleh.elahi@anglistik.uni-muenchen.de,

desi@cis.uni-muenchen.de, hans-joerg.schmid@anglistik.uni-muenchen.de

Abstract

This paper employs both a web-as-
corpus and a Twitter-as-corpus approach
to present a longitudinal case study of
the establishment of three recently coined,
synonymous neologisms: rapefugee, ra-
peugee and rapugee. We describe the
retrieval and processing of the web and
Twitter data and discuss the dynamics of
the competition between the three forms
within and across both datasets based
on quantitative summaries of the results.
The results show that various language-
external events boost the usage of the
terms both on the web and on Twitter, with
the latter typically ahead of the former by
some days. Beside absolute frequencies,
we distinguish between several special us-
ages of the target words and their effects
on the establishment process. For the web
corpus, we examine target words appear-
ing in the title of websites and metalin-
guistic usages; for the Twitter corpus, we
examine hashtag uses and retweets. We
find that the use of hashtags and retweets
significantly affects the spread of the neo-
logisms both on Twitter and on the web.

1 Introduction

Electronic mass communication offers unique op-
portunities for the study of new words and the
early phases of their establishment. Using the web
and social media like Twitter as corpora offers an
economical way of investigating whether newly
coined words are taken up by language users and
begin to spread and diffuse into other domains of
discourse. Such investigations require longitud-
inal studies which keep track of new occurrences

of neologisms on the web and/or in posts on Twit-
ter and other social media.

This paper presents a web-as-corpus and
Twitter-as-corpus study of the spread of three
recently coined words which emerged in 2015
and compete for encoding the same meaning:
rapefugee, rapeugee, and rapugee. All three target
words are formed by blending the source words
rape and refugee, and all three are mainly used
as derogatory propaganda terms by opponents of
policies that welcome asylum-seekers. We would
like to note that our work does not support, but
only explores and analyses the use of these terms,
equally applicable to any other neologism.

The approach chosen in this paper complements
an earlier study by Kerremans et al. (2012), who
investigated the competition between the mean-
ings of one polysemous neologism, viz. the verb to
de-tweet. Analyzing material collected by means
of a tailor-made webcrawler, the so-called Neo-
Crawler, the authors show how language users
gradually begin to converge on one meaning, ‘to
sign off (from Twitter)’, following a period where
different users associate different meanings with
the form and even explicitly promote them.

The current project addresses the mirror-image
situation where several synonymous forms com-
pete for encoding the same meaning. Investig-
ations of this type are important for understand-
ing how new words spread, because competition
between forms is one of the factors that influence
this process. Extending the methodology used in
(Kerremans et al., 2012) in a second direction,
we compare the data from the web with a second
dataset collected for the same period from Twitter.
We aim to provide a dense-data longitudinal ana-
lysis of the rivalry between these three recent neo-
logisms, both separately within the web and the
Twitter data and in comparison between these two

35



data sources. In the course of this, we discuss the
specific advantages and challenges involved in re-
trieving, processing and analyzing data from the
web and from Twitter respectively.

2 Related work

Efforts to investigate neologisms with the help of
web-based data have been stepped up consider-
ably over the past years. There are numerous
websites, run by dictionary publishers or based on
crowdsourced user-content, which list and define
new words and provide selected quotations, often
including the first known attestation. Prominent
examples are New Words by Merriam-Webster1,
About words by Cambridge University Press2,
UrbanDictionary3, and WordSpy: Dictionary of
New Words4. A comparable project for German
is Wortwarte5, which documents German neolo-
gisms based on newspaper data (Lemnitzer, 2011).

As far as research projects on neologisms which
apply the web-as-corpus method are concerned,
Bauer and Renouf (2000) investigate the contexts
of use for 5000 neologisms in a newspaper cor-
pus. Combining data from a newspaper corpus
and the web, Renouf (2007) analyzes the recent
productivity of prefixes such as techno- and cyber-
and traces the frequency development of four neo-
logisms in newspaper articles. Hohenhaus (2006)
investigates the word bouncebackability by means
of the web-as-corpus method. Paryzek (2008) re-
views different methods of retrieving neologisms
and extracts neologisms from a 45-million-word
corpus based on Nature. Veale and Butnariu
(2010) harvest neologisms from a corpus which
is derived from the English version of Wikipedia.
Like the study by Kerremans et al. (2012) men-
tioned above, Grieve et al. (2016) aim to unveil the
factors behind the emergence and success of neo-
logisms. This is also the question that motivates
the work presented in this paper.

3 Operationalizing the research question

As pointed out above, we aim at a comparative
longitudinal analysis of attestations of three syn-
onymous words on the web and on Twitter in or-

1http://nws.merriam-webster.com/
opendictionary

2https://dictionaryblog.cambridge.org/
category/new-words/

3www.urbandictionary.com
4http://www.wordspy.com/
5www.wortwarte.de

der to investigate the dynamics of the competi-
tion between them. To operationalize this research
question, the following types of data and data ana-
lyses must be provided by computational means:

• Absolute frequency counts of occurrences of the
three words on the web and on Twitter over
a defined period of time in a high temporal
solution (i.e. weekly/daily counts of newly ad-
ded occurrences). These counts are required
to obtain a measure of usage intensity as such
(cf. Stefanowitsch and Flach (forthcoming)).

• Relative frequency counts of the three words per
time interval (days of weeks), i.e. the frequency
of each word relative to the frequencies of the
other two for the same time interval. For ex-
ample, we detected a total number of 233 tokens
across all three formal variants in the web cor-
pus in the third week of January 2016. The
variant rapefugee amounts to 191 occurrences,
which corresponds to a relative frequency of
about 0.82. These relative frequency counts are
required to measure the current relative success
of the three forms to occupy the onomasiolo-
gical target space.

• A longitudinal analysis of the changes in abso-
lute and relative frequencies over time: this is
required to measure the dynamics of the tem-
poral development of relative success. Ex-
amples can be found in Figure 1 and Figure 3.

• Classificatory analyses of different usage types
of the three words which are suspected to have
differential effects on their chances of being
taken up again and thus being spread. Specific-
ally, what we are interested in are:

– single object-linguistic uses as opposed to
– metalinguistic uses of talking about the word

rather than actually using it (e.g. Whenever
people hear “refugee” they need to think
#rapefugee. (Tweet from 7 January 2016))

– multiple uses within one web page / tweet as
well as repetitions via retweets

– uses as hashtags on Twitter or as parts of titles
of web pages.

4 Data acquisition

4.1 Web as a corpus
We used the NeoCrawler (Kerremans et al., 2012)
to collect timestamped web pages containing

36



single multiple title metalinguistic total # words

rapefugee 169 849 125 59 273,961
rapeugee 122 281 24 3 627,077
rapugee 21 41 6 1 51,590

Table 1: Descriptive summary of data from the web corpus

tokens of the three neologisms on the web. In or-
der to have a comparable sample, we restricted the
search to the timespan in which the Twitter data
has been collected (see Section 4.2), namely from
October 19th, 2015 until March 16th, 2016. The
NeoCrawler uses Google searches for collecting
web pages, as this has several benefits for neolo-
gism research (Lewandowski, 2008; Kerremans et
al., 2012): Google provides the largest number of
indexed pages, its index is updated fastest in com-
parison to other search engines, and it provides
the web pages which are most relevant for a given
search string.

The NeoCrawler searches by means of an auto-
mated version of the processes carried out in
manual Google searches. The system builds a
search string6 defining values for a number of
parameters (such as language, date, token etc.).
There are several advantages of this approach over
other Google search APIs7, such as Custom Search
Engine or Google Site Search. While the main
functionality provided by Custom Search Engine
is to search across a set of sites specified, it can
also be configured to search the whole web. How-
ever, in that case, it provides a smaller number and
less relevant search results than a manual Google
search, which is not desirable if the project re-
quires maximum recall. Google Site Search is an
edition of Google Custom Search that provides ad-
ditional functionality, but does not solve the prob-
lem either. Therefore, neither of these APIs is suit-
able for our goal, as we need to search the whole
web in order to get as many relevant search results
as possible. The automated version of the Google
manual search implemented in the NeoCrawler
is an optimal fit for our purpose. However, a
large number of potential hits returned by Google
searches turn out to be either false positives (i.e.

6https://encrypted.google.com/search?
num=100&hl=en&lr=lang_en&start=0&tbs=
lr%3Alang_1en%2Ccdr%3A1%2Ccd_min%3A10%
2F01%2F2015%2Ccd_max%3A03%2F16%2F2016&q=
%22rapefugee%22

7https://developers.google.com/
custom-search/json-api/v1/overview

pages that do not contain the search token), duplic-
ate copies or otherwise useless pages. Therefore,
we extracted only the pages containing the search
token excluding duplicates and empty pages.

Following the operationalization procedure out-
lined in Section 3 above, we distinguished
between single (each page is counted as a single
occurrence independently of how often a neolo-
gism has been used on it) and multiple occurrences
per page (each token on the page is counted separ-
ately), and between special usage types (i.e. usage
in the title of a document) and metalinguistic us-
age (operationalized as uses in inverted commas).
Table 1 shows a summary of the web data.

A key requirement for the longitudinal analysis
of the temporal dynamics is to identify the cor-
rect timestamp of the web content that contains
a given token. However, due to the decentral-
ized nature of timestamps and the lack of standard
meta-data for time and date, reliable timestamps
are frequently not available for web documents.
In its previous version, the NeoCrawler extrac-
ted the remote timestamp of the retrieved doc-
ument using the CURL module for PHP, which
is a library for getting files from various Inter-
net protocols including HTTP/HTTPS. However,
since CURL relies on the Last-Modified header
value of the HTML page to extract the timestamp,
which is often missing, it was impossible to ex-
tract a timestamp from a large proportion of the
documents. Therefore, we have extended the Neo-
Crawler to extract the timestamp from the Google
search page directly, where Google provides the
timestamp of the content containing the token in-
stead of that of the last update of the web page.
Moreover, the NeoCrawler extracts both the abso-
lute (i.e. 12/01/2016) and the relative (i.e. a week
ago) timestamp found on the web page. It must be
conceded, however, that Google’s timestamps are
not always correct either, among other things be-
cause the location of the content and its respective
timestamp on the page is ambiguous, or because
there are several tokens added at different dates to

37



single multiple hashtag direct tweet retweet total # words

rapefugee 3,777 3,786 3,303 451 1,024 2,753 77,369
rapeugee 272 277 220 52 87 185 5,909
rapugee 92 92 88 4 22 70 1,740

Table 2: Descriptive summary of data from the Twitter corpus

the same page. In the latter case, only a single
timestamp is provided by Google. Results related
to the temporal development will be given in Sec-
tion 5 below.

4.2 Twitter as a corpus

Unlike the web, Twitter cannot be queried for past
events in an unlimited manner. Only the Firehose
Twitter API8, which is of highly limited access,
can be used to collect all public statuses. An open
access equivalent for part of this functionality is
the Twitter Streaming API9 which provides low
latency access to Twitter’s current global stream
of data (i.e. a sample of the current stream ful-
filling the query). However, the current Twitter
stream cannot aid us in our attempt to observe
how the three neologisms rapefugee, rapeugee and
rapugee have been used since the time of their
coining. The Twitter Search API, searches only
against a sampling of recent Tweets published in
the past seven days. Yet, the tokens have been in
use a lot longer than seven days.

The only way to query Twitter for older posts
is via using previously collected Twitter corpora.
Based on the fact that the neologisms of interest
are different blends of rape and refugee, we made
use of an extended version of the REFUGEE cor-
pus (Zhekova, 2016), which consists of tweets
that were collected from October 19th, 2015 until
March 16th, 2016 via the Twitter Streaming API
by tracking the token refugee. We assume that the
linguistic relation between the three neologisms
and refugee will result in a representative sample
of Twitter data containing these new words.

Another difference between Twitter and web
data is that the meta-information is readily avail-
able in Twitter. Unlike in the web data, all rel-
evant tweets are precisely timestamped. With
respect to token identification and classification
(single, multiple, metalinguistic use), we followed

8https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/
firehose

9https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/
overview

the same approach as for the web data. Addition-
ally, for the Twitter corpus, we observed the dif-
ference between direct vs. hashtag usage (i.e. No
rapefugees! vs. No #rapefugees!) and normal
tweets vs. retweets (i.e. No #rapefugees! vs. RT
No #rapefugees!). Table 2 provides a basic sum-
mary of the occurrences of the three neologisms in
the Twitter data.

5 Results

5.1 Web corpus

Usage intensity. In order to measure usage in-
tensity (Stefanowitsch and Flach, forthcoming),
we conduct absolute frequency counts of tokens
for all three types (rapefugee, rapeugee and
rapugee) in both datasets. We count multiple
tokens per type within one website or one tweet
separately. The counts are accumulated in weekly
intervals corresponding to each calendar week in
the timespan between October 19th, 2015 (i.e.
15 CW 43 – to be read as the 43rd calendar week
of 2015) and March 16th, 2016. Figure 1 presents
the absolute usage frequencies in the web corpus.

The graph shows a very small number of uses
of the three types before 16 CW 02, with a
maximum of 9 tokens of the form rapeugee in
15 CW 50. The period after New Year marks
a turning point, after which numbers rapidly
increase, with a maximum of 233 tokens in
16 CW 03.

The first attestation of any of the three tar-
get forms on the web is a single occurrence of
rapefugee on January 19, 2015 (15 CW 43 in Fig-
ure 1).

Only a few days later, however, the type ra-
peugee appears and initially supersedes the other
two types in popularity, representing an accumu-
lated 79 % of all tokens of all three types in the
period before the New Year turn. In 16 CW 02,
the numbers for all three types rise significantly,
indicating an increasing communicative need for
expressing the underlying concept ‘rape / refugee’.
The use of rapeugee rises considerably and re-

38



Figure 1: Absolute frequencies in the web corpus

mains fairly stable over the next few weeks. The
form rapugee, which had up to this point been
used only once, is used with moderate frequency
until it vanishes again in 16 CW 09. Lastly, the
form rapefugee shows the most radical increase by
far. It reaches a maximum of 211 new tokens on 30
different websites in 16 CW 04. After New Year’s
Eve it represents an accumulated 73 % of tokens
across all three types, making it the most dominant
form in this period.

Figure 1 indicates that the spread of words ex-
pressing the concept ‘rape / refugee’ seems to hap-
pen in several spurts which do not follow a linear
trend. Manual sample checks of the corpus data
reveal that these spikes are closely related to real-
life events in which refugees play an important
role. Most often these events were various sexual
harrassments, as we will exemplify further.

The first attestation of rapeugee we found is
from a forum of an extremist propaganda website
called Shitskin Plantation. On 29 October 2015,
the user canuckfmj used the title Denmark has a
rapeugee problem to publish the following post:
They want to give the new ‘migrants’ classes so
they don’t rape the locals and the livestock. Sorry
but classes aren’t going to help with these savages.
The post contains a hyperlink to another extrem-
ist website which strongly criticises the introduc-
tion of sexual education in courses for refugees
in Denmark. The use of the word rapeugee is
clearly related to this particular recent political de-
cision which serves as a trigger for coining the new
term. The author expresses their critical attitude
by questioning the adequacy of the neutral term
migrants by using it in metalinguistic quotes. In-
stead, the author chooses the new term rapeugee
to emphasize the propagated association between

‘refugees’ and ‘rape’. In the following week, the
new word seems to have already vanished again
with the decreasing relevance of the real-life con-
text, however, as we have not been able to find a
single attestion of rapeugee. Similar patterns and
connections to real-life events can be observed for
the other spikes of rapeugee before New Year’s
Eve.

The turning point in the web corpus data is
marked by the steep increase in the use of all three
tokens after New Year’s Eve and can be explained
in the same manner. However this time, the vari-
ant rapefugee is preferred by most speakers. Its
first attestation in 2016 is another blog post on a
right-wing extremist blog named Neoreactive. A
reader of the blog named Matt Bracken created
a post entitled: A Reader Says That The Cologne
#Rapefugee Attacks Are Just A Pep Rally For The
Coming Intifada In Europe. Again, the author ex-
plicitly refers to the events in Cologne on New
Year’s Eve, when German media reported sexual
assaults by refugees, and also instrumentalizes the
blend of rape and refugee for anti-refugee propa-
ganda.

The scale of the Cologne events and their pres-
ence in public media and in the Internet explain
the explosive increase and the longer-lasting ef-
fect displayed in Figure 1. The numbers of new
occurrences remain very high for a period of three
weeks before the popularity of the three terms
seems to run out of steam again after 16 CW 05.

The combination between such real-life triggers
and the specific, quite uniform propaganda mo-
tivation of associating refugees with rape can be
seen as the driving force behind the character-
istic spurts in the usage intensity of the terms il-
lustrated in Figure 1. These patterns are in line

39



with previous research by Kerremans (2015) who
classified comparable cases as ‘recurrent semi-
conventionalization’.

Usage types. As pointed out in Section 3, be-
sides measuring usage intensity as such, we ex-
amined different usage types of these words and
their effects on the establishment process more
closely.

Firstly, we investigated the tokens’ position on
the websites by counting tokens contained in titles
separately. Across all three types, a high pro-
portion of about 16 % of the tokens were used
in the titles of websites. This fits the presumed
motivation behind using the tokens as provocat-
ive propaganda terms in order to attract the read-
ers’ attention. We did not detect significant differ-
ences in usage frequencies regarding token posi-
tion between the three types.

Secondly, we examined whether tokens were
used in metalinguistic contexts. In these cases,
speakers reflect/talk about the terms rather than
just regularly using them. To identify these uses,
we extracted quoted instances of all formal vari-
ants (i.e. “rapefugee”, ‘rapugee’). In total, about
7 % of the tokens were metalinguistic usages. On
the one hand, we found that in most cases authors
used inverted commas to distance themselves from
the right-wing ideology behind the terms. For ex-
ample, the website of the New York Post, an estab-
lished conservative newspaper, published an art-
icle entitled German clash over ‘rapefugees’ who
carried out mass sex attack (10 January 2016) in
which they used the term rapefugee several times
with a metalinguistic function. The article does
not attack refugees, but the alarming growth of
right-wing German extremists using the term for
propaganda purposes. On the other hand, albeit in
a much smaller number of cases, the terms are also
sometimes used metalinguistically by anti-refugee
activists who consciously try to spread them as
propaganda terms. The results concerning meta-
linguistic uses indicate that they strongly differ
from objectlinguistic uses and that they provide
valuable information about the coinage and spread
of neologisms.

5.2 Twitter corpus

Usage intensity. Figure 2 provides an overview
of the Twitter data. In terms of usage intensity, the
overall pattern is similar to that of the web corpus.
The frequency of all three types remains relatively

low before New Year, shows a steep increase in
the first weeks of the new year and then declines
to a lower level after that. However, there are also
some differences.

First of all, there are no instances of rapefugee
or rapugee before the New Year turn. This means
that the dominance of rapeugee before New Year
is even stronger in the Twitter data. There are only
three weeks (15 CW 46 until 15 CW 48) that
contain any tokens at all, and they only amount
to a total of 15 tokens. Compared with the much
higher usage intensity after the turn to 2016, this
means an even steeper increase of use at the start
of January than in the web corpus.

Secondly, the NY increase starts off earlier than
in the web corpus. As a comparison of Figure 1
and Figure 2 shows, the turning point of usage in-
tensity for all types on Twitter precedes that on the
web by one week. This offset indicates that Twit-
ter is the medium in which this change can be first
observed. Being more flexible, social media are
apparently faster in reacting to noteworthy events
than web domains like blogs and forums.

The first tweet for rapefugee in 16 CW 01 in
our dataset is Refugee = rapist. Flüchtling =
Vergewaltiger. #Cologne #rapefugees, posted on
Wednesday, 6 January 2016, and directly followed
by its retweet. This tweet connects the neologism
to the 2016 New Year’s Eve sexual assaults in Co-
logne. Supposedly, these events were the trigger
for the highly rapid boost in usage intensity for
all three neologisms on Twitter. This is suppor-
ted by the analysis of further tweets: The most
frequent tweet for rapefugee in 16 CW 01 is RT
@DavidJo52951945: RT pictures from protest in
Germany against immigrant/refugee abuse gangs
#rapefugees https://t.co/USHsiXOtKZ, which oc-
curs 190 times during this week and also connects
it to the sexual assaults in Germany.

The tweet Where were the police water can-
nons when the Muslim rapeugees were terrorizing
Cologne on NYE?!? https://t.co/dRcTMY9UJm,
retweeted twice, is the most frequent tweet for ra-
peugee during 16 CW 01 – also connected to the
events in Cologne.

For rapugee, the two tweets during 16 CW 01:
@BBCBreaking @BBCWorld gangs of
men??? Refugee men – say it: #rapugee ht-
tps://t.co/AZK4fYLZLo and a modified version of
it, also relate it to these events.

The connection of the neologisms with the New

40



Figure 2: Absolute frequencies in the Twitter corpus

Year events and their respective usage intensity
and relative success indicate that important real-
life events play a significant role for the coin-
ing, rivalry and establishment of neologisms com-
peting for occupying the same onomasiological
space.

Usage types. With respect to usage types, a
first distinction can be drawn between tweets and
retweets. Retweets provide users with a very eco-
nomical and efficient way of sharing tweets by
other users with their own followers. As the ori-
ginal content is preserved and retweets are marked
with the prefix RT, this can essentially be con-
sidered a quoting mechanism. The average num-
ber of retweets per tweets for all three forms is
2.7. This affects the establishment of words in
at least two ways. On the one hand, it signific-
antly increases the number of people reading the
target words, which raises the chances that they
will retweet or actively use it too. On the other
hand, retweets are exact copies. So if the original
author chooses the variant rapefugee, this choice is
being replicated for all retweets. It is quite likely
that these factors have contributed to the success
of the form rapefugee on Twitter in the wake of
New Year’s Eve.

A second distinction can be drawn between
hashtags and direct, i.e. normal uses of words.
Hashtags are a second key feature of Twitter which
has the potential to cause new effects on the path-
ways of the establishment of new words. Users
can prefix words with # in order to turn them
into labels. These labels build a fluctuating sys-
tem tweeters use to refer to certain events or en-
tities. Across all three types, we observed that
87 % of the tokens were used as hashtags. The

very high proportion of tokens used as hashtags
can be explained by their presumed communic-
ative purpose. As was pointed out above, these
terms mainly serve propaganda functions as they
are used to label refugees as (potential) rapists.
The establishment of a label like #rapefugee con-
tributes to fixing the choice of the dominant vari-
ant.

5.3 Competition across both corpora

The composition and the sizes of the web cor-
pus (about 950,000 words) and the Twitter corpus
(about 85,000 words) differ greatly, which makes
it hard to compare competition effects across both
corpora. In order to measure the relative suc-
cess of the three forms, we therefore normal-
ized each type’s frequency measures by the total
frequency of all types within that dataset. The
rationale behind this procedure is that the three
forms lend themselves to encoding the same por-
tion of semantic space and are thus in onomasi-
ological competition. Even though the choice of
individual language users may be determined by
various factors such as whether they are familiar
with all three terms, what they have heard or read
just before (a priming effect possibly leading to the
large numbers of retweets), or what they have be-
come accustomed to (an entrenchment effect), this
proportional measure is a good indicator of the re-
lative success and spread of the three forms.

Figure 3 shows the relative counts for the
web data where rapeugee appears to be the pre-
dominant type of choice between 15 CW 43 and
16 CW 02. 16 CW 02 marks the turning-point of
the success of rapefugee. While rapugee still oc-
curs following this period, there is a clear prefer-
ence for the other two forms in the timespan from

41



Figure 3: Relative frequencies in the web corpus

Figure 4: Relative frequencies in the Twitter cor-
pus

16 CW 02 onwards, with an ongoing competition
between them whose outcome does not seem to be
determined at present.

In the Twitter data, which is visualized in Fig-
ure 4, the situation is considerably different. As
mentioned above, the turning point in the relat-
ive success of the three types is one week before
the one on the web, namely 16 CW 01. From this
point onwards rapefugee is clearly the predomin-
ant choice although the other two types are also
occasionally made use of.

Comparing the development in the web corpus
to the Twitter data suggests that Twitter might have
influenced the competition between the three com-
peting forms in both domains decisively. Firstly,
tweeters react to the events in Cologne on New
Year’s Eve more quickly than authors on the
web. Secondly, the early establishment of the
hashtag #rapefugee might have fuelled the in-
creasing dominance of this formal variant. This is
also supported by the fact that the type rapefugee
often appears with the Twitter prefix # on the
web in the early weeks of 2016, even though
the hashtag does not serve any technical labelling
function on the corresponding web pages. Thirdly,
the high number of retweets seems to have sup-
ported the increasing dominance of the variant
rapefugee. This is a particularly interesting find-
ing, because it indicates that social media provide
new ways of promoting the spread of new words.

What should be taken into consideration, how-

ever, is that all three of our target words are pro-
paganda terms, whose users aim to spread their
ideas and concepts. The people using these terms
seem to belong to a like-minded community shar-
ing the same communicative goals. This promotes
the uniform use of the terms and the high num-
ber of retweets. Further research into less ‘loaded’
words will have to show whether the establishment
process we observed is a special mechanism in the
present case.

6 Conclusion

We have investigated the competition between
three synonymous neologisms – rapefugee, ra-
peugee and rapugee – in a web and a Twitter cor-
pus over a period of 22 weeks and found that the
spread of the terms is closely related to preced-
ing real-life events. Most importantly, the sexual
assaults on New Year’s Eve in Cologne lead to a
steep increase in the use of these terms, mainly by
right-wing extremists. Overall, the form rapefugee
turned out to be the most likely candidate for es-
tablishment, although the final outcome remains
uncertain at the present stage.

Analyzing data from the Twitter corpus al-
lowed us to evaluate the web corpus’ results more
closely. We observed the same general devel-
opment of the three neologisms in both datasets.
Together with the language-external evidence of
real-life events, this can be regarded as a cross-
validation of both approaches. However, we also
found that certain communicative practices within
the Twitter domain, such as retweeting and hasht-
ags, significantly influence the establishment of
new words. Firstly, these mechanisms affected
the competition between the three formal vari-
ants within the Twitter domain. It was presum-
ably due to its high prominence in retweets and
as a hashtag, that the variant rapefugee took the
lead after New Year. Secondly, the Twitter do-
main seems to have influenced the use of the terms
on the web. While the observed one-week offset
could simply be due to the speed of social media,
the use of hashtags on the web clearly suggests a
causal explanation.

The results show that social media can be an im-
portant driving force in the coining of new words,
and that social media corpora are thus an import-
ant data source for their detection and observa-
tion. Yet, the comparison of results between both
datasets also shows that particular rules or conven-

42



tions on social media platforms like Twitter sig-
nificantly shape the linguistic behaviour of users
on that platform. Therefore, platform-specific fea-
tures and mechanisms like retweeting and hasht-
ags need to be taken into account to arrive at an ad-
equate interpretation of results. A big advantage of
using the web as a data source is its heterogeneity.
It provides a much broader set of linguistic vari-
eties, text types, authors and readers which makes
it a much more representative sample. Platforms
like Twitter might certainly often spark or react
more quickly to the establishment of new words,
yet their use on the heterogeneous and pervasive
World Wide Web provides a more balanced indic-
ation for their eventual conventionalization.

7 Future work

As we have shown, differences between the lin-
guistic behaviour of speakers on Twitter and on
the web significantly influence the spread of neo-
logisms in both domains. Given the heterogen-
eity of the Word Wide Web, it would be de-
sirable to further classify different domains-of-
discourse within the web corpus in order to ob-
serve how these sub-domains differ regarding the
use of neologisms. For example, our case study
indicates that the use of terms like rapefugee dif-
fers strongly between private domains like per-
sonal blogs and professional domains like news-
paper websites. While the former seem to func-
tion as a driving force in the early spread of the
term, the latter tend to use the term less frequently
and more critically, which is also reflected in the
increased proportion of metalinguistic uses.

For future work, automatic classifications of
domains-of-discourse for the web should thus be
implemented. When investigating a large set of
neologisms, this would allow to monitor in which
domains they first appear and whether and how
their use extends to other domains-of-discourse.
This promises very valuable information, as the
diffusion of neologisms across several domains
plays an important role in their conventionaliza-
tion process.

References
Laurie Bauer and Antoinette Renouf. 2000. Contex-

tual clues to word-meaning. International Journal
of Corpus Linguistics, 5:231–258.

Jack Grieve, Andrea Nini, and Diansheng Guo. 2016.

Analyzing lexical emergence in Modern American
English online. English Language and Linguistics.

Peter Hohenhaus. 2006. Bouncebackability. A web-
as-corpus-based study of a new formation, its inter-
pretation, generalization/spread and subsequent de-
cline. SKASE Journal of Theoretical Linguistics,
3:17–27.

Daphné Kerremans, Susanne Stegmayr, and Hans-
Jörg Schmid. 2012. The Neocrawler: identi-
fying and retrieving neologisms from the internet
and monitoring ongoing change. In Kathryn Allan
and Justyna A. Robinson, editors, Current Methods
in Historical Semantics, pages 59–96. Berlin: de
Gruyter Mouton.

Daphné Kerremans. 2015. A Web of New Words: A
Corpus-based Study of the Conventionalization Pro-
cess of English Neologisms. Frankfurt am Main:
Peter Lang.

Lothar Lemnitzer. 2011. Making sense of nonce
words. In Margrethe Heidemann Andersen and
Jörgen Nörby Jensen, editors, Sprognaevets Konfer-
enceserie 1, pages 7–18. Nye Ord. Kopenhagen.

Dirk Lewandowski. 2008. A three-year study on the
freshness of Web search engine databases. Journal
of Information Science, 34(6):817–831.

Piotr Paryzek. 2008. Comparison of selected meth-
ods for the retrieval of neologisms. Investigationes
Linguisicae, 16:163–181.

Antoinette Renouf. 2007. Tracing lexical productivity
and creativity in the British Media: ‘The Chavs and
the Chav-Nots’. Lexical Creativity, Texts and Con-
texts, pages 61–92.

Anatol Stefanowitsch and Susanne Flach. (forthcom-
ing). The corpus-based perspective on entrench-
ment. In Hans-Jörg Schmid, editor, Entrenchment
and the Psychology of Language Learning: How
We Reorganize and Adapt Linguistic Knowledge.
American Psychology Association and de Gruyter
Mouton, Boston, USA.

Tony Veale and Cristina Butnariu. 2010. Harvesting
and understanding on-line neologisms. Cognitive
perspectives on word formation, pages 399–418.

Desislava Zhekova. 2016. Using Contemporary Media
for the Humanities: The REFUGEE Twitter Corpus.
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. (submitted).

43


