



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 219–228,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

A computational analysis of Mahabharata

Debarati Das
UG student,Dept. of CSE

PES
Institute of Technology

Karnataka, India
Debarati.d1994

@gmail.com

Bhaskarjyoti Das
PG Student, Dept. of CSE

Visvesvaraya
Technological University

Karnataka, India
Bhaskarjyoti01

@gmail.com

Kavi Mahesh
Dean of Research and Director

KAnOE-Center for Knowledge Analytics
and Ontological Engineering
PES University, Bangalore

Drkavimahesh
@gmail.com

Abstract

Indian epics have not been analyzed com-
putationally to the extent that Greek epics
have. In this paper, we show how inter-
esting insights can be derived from the an-
cient epic Mahabharata by applying a va-
riety of analytical techniques based on a
combination of natural language process-
ing, sentiment/emotion analysis and so-
cial network analysis methods. One of
our key findings is the pattern of signif-
icant changes in the overall sentiment of
the epic story across its eighteen chapters
and the corresponding characterization of
the primary protagonists in terms of their
sentiments, emotions, centrality and lead-
ership attributes in the epic saga.

1 Introduction

Large epics such as the Mahabharata have a wealth
of information which may not be apparent to hu-
man readers who read them for the fascinating sto-
ries or spiritual messages they contain. Compu-
tational analysis of large texts can unearth inter-
esting patterns and insights in the structure, flow
of stories and dynamics of the numerous charac-
ters in the intricate stories that make up the epics.
Unfortunately, not much attention has been paid
to applying natural language processing and other
related techniques to carry out computational anal-
yses of Indian epics. In this work, we attempt
to carry out detailed analyses of the Mahabharata
epic.

Sentiment and social network analyses have
been applied mainly to structured texts such as
tweets, emails etc. to discover user sentiments
or important personalities. Comparatively literary
works are less subjected to computational anal-
ysis as there are no immediate business incen-
tives. However,similar techniques can be adopted

towards appreciating the literary work, to under-
stand underlying social network and to find or val-
idate literary truths. As literary text is built around
a social backdrop, it reflects the society the author
lives in and reveals a lot about the contemporary
social setting.

Unlike SMS and tweets, genre is important in
literary text. Amongst the past and recent liter-
ary genres, epics and novels have seen most of the
work in the Digital Humanity community as the
scope is typically large in terms of time, number
of events and characters to facilitate computational
analysis. The Greek epics Iliad and Odyssey,
the English epic Beowulf, novels such as Vic-
tor Hugo’s Les Miserable and works of William
Shakespeare are some of the examples. How-
ever, there is no major existing work around Indian
epics such as Ramayana and Mahabharata. Hence
we have chosen Mahabharata as the target text for
a computational analysis effort.

2 Related work

The first important step in computational analy-
sis of a literary text is to identify the protago-
nists. Next the relatedness of the protagonists can
be computed to form the underlying social net-
work. There are essentially two methods to cap-
ture social network from a literary text. One op-
tion is to capture all social events such as con-
versations assuming that all characters participat-
ing in a social event are socially related. This
method does not work well for narrative intensive
text. The other method assumes that all charac-
ters appearing in a given co-occurrence window
have some kind of social relations. This approach
ends up considering even insignificant characters
but works better for narrative based texts such as
epics. Newman and Girvan’s work (2004) to de-
tect the communities in Victor Hugo’s Les Mis-
erable is the first major effort to find the social
network from narratives. Sack (2012) deduced219



the plot from network by using concepts of struc-
tural balance theory. Elson et al.(2010) proposed
dialogue based method to extract social network.
Jayannavar et al. (2015) updated Elson’s approach
by broadening the scope of conversation to so-
cial events. Rydberg-Cox (2011) extracted so-
cial networks from Greek tragedies. Agarwal et
al.(2012) showed that a dynamic network analy-
sis can present more subtle facts. Beveridge and
Shan (2016) built the underlying social network
for the third book (“A storm of swords”) of the TV
series “Game of Thrones” with a co-occurrence
window of 15 words. Stiller et al. analyzed ten
of Shakespeare’s plays (2003) also based on the
co-occurrence logic. Carron and Kenna (2012)
provided a quantitative approach to compare net-
works. Mac Carron et al.(2014) did a structural
analysis of Iliad, English poem Beowulf and Irish
epic Tain Bo Cuailnge. P. J. Miranda et al.(2013)
has done a structural analysis of underlying so-
cial network of Homer’s Odyssey. Alberich et
al.(2002) have built a social network from Marvel
comics.

As Mahabharata is an epic, we must mention
Poetics by Aristotle and an excellent commentary
provided by Lucas (1968). Aristotle defined lit-
erary genres such as poetry, tragedy, comedy and
epic. Poetry mimics life. Tragedy is a type of po-
etry that showcase noble men and their noble qual-
ities as well as values. Epics such as Mahabharata
are a type of tragedy and are built around noble
men in the form of narratives. A tragedy typically
has a plot with a beginning, a middle and an end
and other constituents of the text are secondary to
the plot. The beginning of the plot typically is a
scenario of stability which gets disturbed by some
events. The middle is where the disequilibrium
comes in along with lot of events and actions by
the characters. All the events and actions are to-
wards achieving the end where the problem gets
resolved and stability sets in again. Plots have var-
ious constituents i.e. suffering, reversal, recogni-
tion of new knowledge, surprise. An epic is differ-
ent from a more recent literary genre like a novel
and will have lot of negative sentiment across its
breadth but in spite of that conveys a noble theme
in the minds of its audience.

One can measure sentence polarity by refer-
ring to some standard thesaurus where polar-
ity measures are preassigned by researchers.This
approach uses a resource like SentiWordnet

(http://sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it/). Alternatively, in
a supervised classification approach labelled data
sets from similar domains are utilised. How-
ever, this approach works where the training
dataset from similar domain is available and this
method is not suitable for sentiment analysis for
an epic. Emotion analysis finds causes of senti-
ment. Robert Plutchik(1980) defined the eight ba-
sic emotion types. Mohammad and Turney (2010)
created the NRC emotion lexicon which is an as-
sociation of a list of words with these eight basic
types of emotion and two types of sentiment. Mo-
hammad (2011) presented an emotion analyzer as
a visualization exercise of these emotions in liter-
ary text.

Table 1: Key Attributes of Mahabharata Text

Attributes Value Remarks
Size in
bytes

15,175 K English translation

Size in
bytes

13,947 K
After removing
comments

Number
of words

28,58,609 Using NLTK

Number
of unique
words

32,506 Using NLTK

Number
of sen-
tences

1,18,087 Using NLTK

Number
of chap-
ters

18 “parva”

Number
of char-
acters

210
appearing at least
10 times

For our research, we have used the
English translation of Mahabharata
available at Project Gutenberg site
(http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7864). This
is a translation by Kisari Mohan Ganguli done
between 1883-1896. Mahabharata is larger than
Iliad and Odyssey together, compiled many years
ago. This has 18 “parva”s or chapters and each
“parva” has many sections.

3 The methodology

Mahabharata is not dialogue heavy and is mostly
narrative. So, identifying relations between char-220



acters is done using co-occurrence algorithm with
window size of a sentence.The method we devised
for a comprehensive computational analysis of the
Mahabharata epic is as follows:

1. Pre-processing

- Filter out supporting texts such as tables
of content, publisher details and chapter
summaries.

- Separate the text into chapters (called
“parva”) using suitable regular expres-
sions.

- Separate each “parva” into sections
based on the structural elements in the
text.

2. Identifying characters

- Identify all proper nouns using POS tag-
ging

- Input a list of known characters of the
Mahabharata story (widely available on
the internet).

- Input a thesaurus of equivalent
names for the characters (also widely
known, e.g. Draupadi=Panchali, Ar-
juna=Phalguni etc.) to merge equivalent
names.

- Filter out a list of known place names
in ancient India and its neighbouring re-
gions.

- Apply a threshold to retain names whose
frequency is above a minimum value
(resulting in 210 characters for the Ma-
habharata story).

- Retain only those characters which are
in the top 30 percent of characters men-
tioned in a given parva (resulting in
about 70 characters overall). Same logic
is followed for both individual and cu-
mulative analysis of each parva.

The following steps are carried out separately
for each “parva” and also for the entire text.

3. Co-occurrence analysis

- Compute a co-occurrence matrix for
the identified characters using sen-
tence boundaries as windows of co-
occurrence.

- Build a social graph from the co-
occurrence matrix.

4. Network analysis

- Various network metrics are computed
for the social graph for each of the 18
“parva”s in both cumulative and stan-
dalone way viz. betweenness central-
ity, closeness centrality, degree central-
ity, size of maximal cliques, number of
detected communities, size of ego net-
works for main nodes, core periphery
analysis, density of the core and overall
network etc.

- Additionally various structural metrics
are computed for social graph viz. de-
gree assortativity, percentage size of gi-
ant component,average clustering coef-
ficient, average shortest path length etc.

5. Overall sentiment analysis

- Using syntactic meta data, phrases con-
taining noun, adjective, verb and ad-
verbs are identified.

- The above text is tokenized using stan-
dard NLP techniques.

- The tokens are POS (parts of speech)
tagged and tagged tokens are mapped to
synsets in Wordnet in a word sense dis-
ambiguation process.

- The sentiment scores are picked up from
SentiWordnet for each synset.

- Overall sentiment of the parva is derived
from these values by summing the con-
stituent sentiment scores.

6. Sentiment analysis for main characters

- Similarly sentiment analysis of each
protagonist is done by extracting the
sentences where the protagonist ap-
pears. This is done for each parva.

7. Emotion analysis

- Emotion analysis for the full text and
each of the protagonists is done with
the help of NRC word-emotion associ-
ation lexicon. After extracting the rele-
vant part of the corpus,the score is cal-
culated for each POS (part of speech)
tagged token for each emotion and fi-
nally summed up. The obvious limita-
tion with any lexicon based approach is
the limitation imposed by the size of the221



lexicon itself and this limitation does ap-
ply to our analysis as well.

We have used the Python, NLTK(Natural Lan-
guage Toolkit), various open source libraries
(TextBlob, Networkx, Stanford SNAP, Gephi) and
data analytics/visualization software Tableau in
our work.

4 Analysis of results

4.1 The protagonists

We have tried out 3 different approaches to iden-
tify the protagonists.

- Most frequently mentioned character: As
shown in Figure.1a, this method finds the
most frequent characters. However this
misses out the protagonists who are unfortu-
nately low on frequency but may be impor-
tant otherwise.

- Size of the ego network: Size of ego net-
work (number of nodes directly connected)
calculated from Mahabharata social network
produces different results. As shown in
Figure.1b, Kripa who is a teacher of the
princes, is topping the list. Chieftains like
Shalya, Virata, Drupada come towards the
top in this list. Kunti(mother of Pandavas),
Indra (the king of gods) and Narada (the
sage) are also in this list being well con-
nected!

- Centrality metrics: The betweenness,
eigenvector, closeness and degree centrality
are compared. Few observations can be made
out of this from Figure.2:

- Betweenness centrality differentiates
the main protagonists whereas other
centrality metrics are mostly equivalent.

- Arjuna, Karna, Krishna, Yudhisthira,
Bhisma, Kunti and Drona are the top
few in terms of all four centrality. They
are the most important protagonists.

- Some of the personalities with very
large ego network are having very low
betweenness centrality and not making
into the top list (Kripa, Shalya, Drupada,
Virata etc.) because their influence is
limited to one camp i.e. Kaurava or Pan-
dava. Their importance is mostly local.

- Amongst the princesses and queen
mothers, Kunti turns out to be the un-
derstated (in the existing literary anal-
ysis) power behind the scene (having a
large ego network and high centralities).
Her low eigenvector centrality leads to
false perception that she is not impor-
tant. Other main lady characters (Gand-
hari, Madri, Draupadi) are low on be-
tweenness as their influence is limited to
one camp.

4.2 The words say a lot
Word clouds show a marked difference be-
tween the protagonists as shown in Figure.3a to
Figure.3d. These are drawn by extracting adjec-
tives from respective corpus.

- Both Arjuna and Bhima are “mighty” and
“warrior”. But Arjuna has words like “great”,
“excellent”, “capable”, “celestial” whereas
Bhima has “terrible”, “fierce” etc. So Arjuna
is the best in his class whereas Bhima is a
mighty warrior with “terrible” anger.

- Bhisma has “invincible”, “principal”, “virtu-
ous” whereas Krishna has “celestial”, “beau-
tiful”, “illustrious”. So, Bhisma sounds more
like an invincible warrior famous for his
virtue, whereas Krishna is almost godly.

- For Duryodhana, “wicked”, “terrible” etc.
stand out whereas for Yudhisthira, “virtuous”
and “righteous” are key words. Both are
leaders of their respective camps but they are
poles apart.

4.3 Sentiments across the text
Mahabharata takes the readers through a roller
coaster ride of sentiment as shown in Figure.4.
“Aadi parva”(1) starts on a positive note but the
“Sabha parva” (2) brings lot of negativity with the
game of dice. “Vana parva”(3) is again positive
as Panadavs in spite of being in exile, make lot of
friends and have achievements. “Virat parva”(4)
is negative as the Pandavas have to live in disguise
doing odd jobs. “Udyog Parva” (5) is again pos-
itive with both sides are very hopeful of winning
war. After that as elders and leaders get killed in
the battle, it is a downward slide of sentiment with
Duryodhana’s death bringing in positive emotion
in “Shalya parva”(9). In “Stri parva” (11), the
destruction is complete and sentiment reaches the222



(a) Frequency of occurrence (b) Size of ego network

Figure 1: Finding protagonists by number of mention and ego network

Figure 2: Finding protagonists by comparing centrality metrics

(a) Arjuna word cloud (b) Bhima word cloud (c) Duryodhana word cloud (d) Yudhisthira word cloud

Figure 3: Words say a lot

223



Figure 4: Sentiment across “parvas” of Mahabharata

(a) comparing sentiment: Krishna, Dhritarashtra (b) comparing sentiment: Drona, Bhisma

Figure 5: Comparing the sentiments

(a) comparing sentiment: Kunti, Gandhari (b) comparing sentiment: Yudhisthira, Duryodhana

Figure 6: Comparing the sentiments
224



lowest level. The “Shanti parva” (12) brings in
peak of positive sentiment with coronation of Yud-
histhira and many achievements. After that, it is
again a downward slide of sentiments with many
deaths and even death of Lord Krishna. The senti-
ment sees an uptick in the last two “parva”s when
Pandavas leave for Himalayas and finally attain di-
vine status. Figure.5a to Figure.6b depict the net
sentiment of the main protagonists according to
the “parva”. It leads to some interesting observa-
tions.

- Warriors like Arjuna and Bhima have lot of
negativity around them.

- The leaders of the two warring camps Dury-
odhana and Yudhisthira are clear contrast
as Yudhisthira has lot of positive sentiment
around him.

- The gods like Indra and Agni have mostly
positivity around them as they are mostly
neutral on the ground.

- The eldest warrior, Bhisma is mostly neutral
whereas Drona is committed to one camp and
so is surrounded by negativity. Dhritarashtra,
though elder, is mostly surrounded by nega-
tive sentiments.

- The two queen mothers Gandhari and Kunti
are the sources of positive energy in both
camps. Though understated they play pivotal
roles. Compared to them, Draupadi is sur-
rounded by negative sentiment.

- Lord Krishna, when he is in the thick of war,
has negativity around him but once the battle
gets over and larger senses prevail, he brings
in sense of karma and lot of positive senti-
ments.

4.4 The emotions
We have analyzed the emotions both at the global
and the protagonist level as shown in Figure.7 to
Figure.9. Out of the eight basic emotion types,
anger and trust are the key ones as expected in a
tragedy that has an epic battle as the mainstay. An-
ticipation, disgust, fear, sadness come in almost
equal proportion. In the scheming world of Ma-
habharata, there is not much of surprise and joy is
kind of overshadowed by the other negative emo-
tions. If we consider the emotions for some of the
main protagonists, interesting conclusions can be
drawn.

- Amongst the key ladies, Kunti stands out by
the richness of positive emotion (trust and
joy) and is the bedrock of strength for the
Pandavas when they go through all their re-
versals of fate. Gandhari is relatively low
key whereas Draupadi displays all the neg-
ative emotions that are key ingredients of a
tragedy.

- Amongst the Pandava and Kaurava leaders
(Duryodhana and Yudhisthira), Yudhisthira
displays trust and joy more than any other
emotion. Probably that is why he is perceived
as a leader though there are many others with
much more bravery and heroics. The con-
trast between Duryodhana and Yudhisthira is
telling.

- Bhima and Duryodhana are very similar in
emotions i.e. anger, trust and fear. Arjuna
is quite unique and ambidextrous i.e. he dis-
plays enough of anger and fear and also large
quantity of trust and joy.

- Amongst the elders, Bhisma is a detached
persona and he does not show much of emo-
tion. Drona is more attached to one camp and
comparatively shows anger more than any
other emotion.

- Krishna shows tremendous amount of trust,
anticipation and joy in spite of all the
tragedies and it is no wonder that he is called
an incarnation of god.

4.5 Leadership analysis
We searched for leaders using two criteria viz.
high in positive sentiments and high in cen-
trality (degree and/or betweenness) as shown in
Figure.10. Our assumption is leaders are not only
centrally connected but they also show lot of pos-
itivity.

- It becomes very clear why Krishna is
supreme as he is the only one who is in the
high corner of this target quadrant.

- Closely following Krishna is Yudhisthira.
That explains why in spite of not being a
great warrior and known addiction for gam-
bling, Yudhisthira is so well respected.

- Going by the same yardstick for leadership,
Arjuna, Bhima, Drona, Karna are more of
achievers or doers rather than leaders.225



Figure 7: Emotions across the text

Figure 8: Emotion Analysis of Bhisma, Dhritarashtra, Drona and Krishna

Figure 9: Emotion Analysis of Arjuna, Bhima, Duryodhana, Karna, Yudhisthira

Figure 10: Leadership226



(a) Considering diameter, degree and edge

(b) Considering maximal cliques and density

Figure 11: Evolution of social network across par-
vas

- Bhisma is neither great in centrality nor in
positivity. He is more of a helpless specta-
tor apart from his hard to find commitment to
whatever promise he makes.

- Clearly Kaurava camp lacks in leadership.
Duryodhana, the Kaurava leader, shows the
lack of it and it is somewhat compensated by
the combined effort of the achievers in his
camp.

4.6 The social network of Mahabharata
- The “core periphery analysis” of the social

network reveals a core of size 52 and con-
sistently high density that remains compara-
ble to the overall density of the network i.e.
the plot is built around these members of the
core.

- Mahabharata is also the story of three camps
as proved by community detection tech-
niques using Louvain algorithm (Blondel et
al., 2008). They are the Kauravas, Pandavas
and the gods/sages who remained somewhat
neutral.

- The story of Mahabharata encompasses many
years before the battle, 18 days of battle
and around thirty six years after the battle.
The evolving social network of Mahabharata
across the parvas is analyzed using various
structural metrics viz. degree, average de-
gree, number of edges, number of maximal
cliques and density of the main core as well
as overall density. As shown in Figure.11a
and Figure.11b, various structural metrics of
the underlying social network tend to stabi-
lize towards the end after becoming desta-
bilised initially following Aristotelian frame-
work of stability-instability-stability.

- Mahabharata network comes out as a small
world network(small average shortest path
and large clustering coefficient). Transitiv-
ity measured is comparable to other random
graph of similar size such as Barabassi Al-
bert model. However, modularity is found to
be low (mostly 3 communities detected) com-
pared to some real world networks. Also the
high positive correlation coefficients for each
centrality pair, large giant component and
negative degree assortativity indicate large
fictional component in Mahabharata.

5 Discussion and conclusion

In this work, we have applied various Natural
Language Processing and Social Network Anal-
ysis techniques to come up with a computational
analysis of the “Mahabharata”. We have not only
validated what the literary critics have unearthed
about the epic but also augmented their findings
by discovering subtle facts. Protagonists are iden-
tified and analyzed using both statistical and so-
cial network parameters such as centrality and ego
network. The trajectory of sentiment and various
emotions across the length of the text for each pro-
tagonist are examined. The findings validate what
the literary critics have already found. Addition-
ally this analysis brings out some subtle facts i.e.
Kunti is understated in the existing literary analy-
sis but is seen to be playing a pivotal role as dis-
played by the sentiments, emotions, centrality and
large ego network size. We figured out the influ-
ence category of various protagonists in terms of
local or global influence.

The leadership analysis explains why Yud-
histhira is described in such glorious terms in spite
of his many weaknesses. We have also looked at227



leadership quotient of various protagonists by con-
sidering their position in the centrality-positivity
quadrants and have brought out the leadership
contrast between the warring camps in this epic.

The analysis also helps to explain why Mahab-
harata is an epic. Apart from the sheer number of
characters, events, diversity of emotion and sen-
timent, it is found to conform to the Aristotelian
definition of epics having the stability-instability-
stability transitions. The analysis of the struc-
tural metrics also indicate that Mahabharata is not
purely factual and has a large fictional component.

Clearly computational analysis of a literary text
does not make the literary analysis redundant. But
this provides an additional tool set for the students
of literature to validate and augment their find-
ings. The methods used can be easily replicated
for other texts.

As a next step, we plan to extend similar analy-
sis to the Indian epic Ramayana and perform simi-
lar structural analysis of the underlying social net-
works.

Acknowledgement

This work is supported in part by the World
Bank/Government of India research grant under
the TEQIP programme (subcomponent 1.2.1) to
the Centre for Knowledge Analytics and Ontolog-
ical Engineering (KAnOE http://www.kanoe.org)
at PES University, Bangalore, India.

References
Apoorv Agarwal, Augusto Corvalan, Jacob Jensen, and

Owen Rambow. 2012. Social network analysis of
alice in wonderland. In Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature, pages 88–96.

Ricardo Alberich, Joe Miro-Julia, and Francesc
Rosselló. 2002. Marvel universe looks almost
like a real social network. arXiv preprint cond-
mat/0202174.

Poetics Aristotle. 1968. Introduction, commentary and
appendixes by dw lucas. Oxford, 125:16.

Andrew Beveridge and Jie Shan. 2016. Network of
thrones. Math Horizons, 23(4):18–22.

Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud
Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. 2008. Fast un-
folding of communities in large networks. Jour-
nal of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment,
2008(10):P10008.

David K Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R
McKeown. 2010. Extracting social networks from

literary fiction. In Proceedings of the 48th annual
meeting of the association for computational lin-
guistics, pages 138–147. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Prashant Arun Jayannavar, Apoorv Agarwal, Melody
Ju, and Owen Rambow. 2015. Validating liter-
ary theories using automatic social network extrac-
tion. on Computational Linguistics for Literature,
page 32.

Pádraig Mac Carron and Ralph Kenna. 2012. Univer-
sal properties of mythological networks. EPL (Eu-
rophysics Letters), 99(2):28002.

P Mac Carron and R Kenna. 2014. Network analy-
sis of beowulf, the iliad and the táin bó cúailnge.
In Sources of mythology: Ancient and contemporary
myths. Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Interna-
tional Conference on Comparative Mythology (15–
17 May 2013, Tübingen), pages 125–141.

Pedro J Miranda, Murilo S Baptista, and Sandro E
de S Pinto. 2013. Analysis of communities
in a mythological social network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1306.2537.

Saif M Mohammad and Peter D Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Us-
ing mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 workshop on
computational approaches to analysis and genera-
tion of emotion in text, pages 26–34. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Saif Mohammad. 2011. From once upon a time
to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in novels
and fairy tales. In Proceedings of the 5th ACL-
HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cul-
tural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities,
pages 105–114. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. 2004. Find-
ing and evaluating community structure in networks.
Physical review E, 69(2):026113.

Robert Plutchik. 1980. A general psychoevolutionary
theory of emotion. Theories of emotion, 1:3–31.

Jeff Rydberg-Cox. 2011. Social networks and the lan-
guage of greek tragedy. In Journal of the Chicago
Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer
Science, volume 1.

Graham Sack. 2012. Character networks for narrative
generation. In Intelligent Narrative Technologies:
Papers from the 2012 AIIDE Workshop, AAAI Tech-
nical Report WS-12-14, pages 38–43.

James Stiller, Daniel Nettle, and Robin IM Dunbar.
2003. The small world of shakespeares plays. Hu-
man Nature, 14(4):397–408.

228


