



















































An LFG Account of Discontinuous Nominal Expressions


Proceedings of DiscoNLP 2016, pages 1–11,
San Diego, California, June 17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

An LFG Account of Discontinuous Nominal Expressions

Liselotte Snijders
Waseda University

Tokyo, Japan
liselottesnijders@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper presents an overview of an LFG
treatment of discontinuous nominal expres-
sions involving modification, making the
claim that cross-linguistically different types
of discontinuity (i.e. in Warlpiri and English)
should be captured by the same overall analy-
sis, despite being licensed in different ways.
LFG’s separation of grammatical functions
from phrase structural positions intuitively ac-
counts for discontinuous expressions, and its
use of glue semantics ensures that discontin-
uous and contiguous expressions receive the
same semantic analysis.

1 Introduction

Discontinuity of nominal expressions, a phe-
nomenon in which two or more parts of a seman-
tic nominal unit are non-adjacent in phrase struc-
ture, is prevalent in languages traditionally classified
as “non-configurational” (Hale, 1983), e.g. the Aus-
tralian languages Warlpiri, Wambaya, Jaminjung
(Simpson, 1991; Nordlinger, 1998; Schultze-Berndt
and Simard, 2012), Latin (Devine and Stephens,
2000; Spevak, 2010), Ancient Greek (Devine and
Stephens, 2006), and are also attested in a number
of Slavic languages, e.g. Russian (Sekerina, 1997;
Sekerina, 1999) and Polish (Siewierska, 1984). An
example of nominal discontinuity from Warlpiri is
shown in (1) (Simpson, 1991, p. 282):1

1This type of Warlpiri example has another interpretation,
which can be translated as ‘The childi is chasing it and iti is
small’ (Simpson, 1991). Based on Simpson’s work this appears
to be secondary predication rather than discontinuity, therefore
I only take the interpretation in (1) into account.

(1) Kurdu-ngku
child-ERG

ka
PRES

wajilipi-nyi
chase-NONPAST

wita-ngku
small-ERG
‘The small child is chasing it.’

In (1) a head noun is separated from a modifier,
but both parts map to the same grammatical function
(subject). The two parts of the discontinuous expres-
sion share the same case-marking. A similar type
of discontinuity involving modification is attested in
English, in the cases of relative clause extraposition
in (2a) and NP-PP split in (2b) (Kirkwood, 1977,
p. 55):2

(2) a. The man entered who I met yesterday.
b. A number of stories soon appeared

about Watergate.

A similar type of discontinuity is in fact also at-
tested in Warlpiri (Hale, 1976, p. 78):3

(3) Ngajulu-rlu
I-ERG

rna
AUX

yankirri
emu.ABS

pantu-rnu
spear-PAST

kuja-lpa
COMP-AUX

ngapa
water.ABS

nga-rnu.
drink-PAST

‘I speared the emu that was drinking
water.’

2Another type of discontinuity in English involving modifi-
cation is partial fronting, e.g. About Japan, the woman wrote
many books; additional examples are discussed in Section 6.

3Hale (1976) refers to this type of example as ‘adjoined rel-
ative clause’: it can also precede the sentence as a whole (some-
what like a hanging topic). It can also have a temporal reading:
‘I speared the emu while it was drinking water’.

1



Discontinuity of nominal expressions, whether of
the kind in which two words are marked with the
same case (as in (1)), or of the kind in which a mod-
ifier of an argument is postposed to follow the clause
(as in (2) and (3)) presents a challenge for syntactic
theory, as it requires the two or more parts of syn-
tactic information to be united in the semantics.

In this paper I illustrate how discontinuous
nominal expressions can be accounted for within
the Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) framework
based on previous work. With its constraint-based
nature and parallel architecture, LFG provides a
straightforward way of handling discontinuity by al-
lowing two or more separate parts of phrase struc-
tural information to map to the same functional
structure, and thereby to the same semantic struc-
ture. The focus of this paper is on nominal disconti-
nuity involving modification specifically (i.e. a head
and a modifier being separated), to limit the scope of
discussion, but Section 8 briefly addresses a differ-
ent type of discontinuity in comparison. I make the
claim that discontinuous nominal expressions (in-
volving modification) in typologically different lan-
guages (i.e. in Warlpiri and English) are instances
of the same phenomenon and therefore require the
same analysis, despite being licensed by somewhat
different phrase structure rules. I propose a defini-
tion that captures both types of discontinuity, and
illustrate that LFG is capable of accounting for the
different types in a straightforward fashion.

Overall I aim to illustrate LFG’s potential in con-
tributing to a potential implementation of discon-
tinuity in NLP systems, because of its straightfor-
ward account of discontinuity, not requiring any
special mechanisms. Discontinuous data is more
challenging for approaches which parse sentences
based on linear ordering, such as dependency gram-
mar and approaches relying on surface phrase struc-
ture configuration. LFG is computationally imple-
mentable and has been implemented in the XLE sys-
tem (Crouch et al., 2011). This paper thereby con-
tributes to potential enhancements of NLP tasks with
regards to discontinuity.

2 Lexical-Functional Grammar

Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) (Kaplan and
Bresnan, 1982) is a constraint-based syntactic

framework which posits a parallel architecture, sep-
arating information about grammatical functions
from phrase structural configuration. For this reason
it is well-suited to account for languages with rela-
tively free ordering of grammatical functions (e.g.
Warlpiri). LFG posits two syntactic levels: con-
stituent structure (c-structure) and functional struc-
ture (f-structure). C-structure encodes information
about linear precedence, dominance relations and
constituency, and is represented as a phrase structure
tree. F-structure hosts information about the gram-
matical functions of the predicate of a sentence (in-
cluding adjuncts), along with a range of morphosyn-
tactic information such as case, number, tense and
aspect. It is represented as an attribute-value ma-
trix. C-structure nodes are locally annotated with
information about grammatical functions and/or lex-
ical information. Each c-structure node is associated
with a particular f-structure, and a local annotation
on the c-structure node ensures the mapping of the c-
structure node to this f-structure via the φ function.
Specifically, the local annotation on a particular c-
structure node specifies the relation of the f-structure
associated with this node to the f-structure associ-
ated with its mother node. An example of this map-
ping for the simple sentence John walked is shown
in Figure 1.

In the annotations on c-structure, ↑ points to the
f-structure of the mother node and ↓ points to the f-
structure of the current node. The annotation ↑ = ↓
thus expresses that the f-structure of the mother node
is the same as the f-structure of its daughter node,
and the annotation (↑ SUBJ) = ↓ expresses that the
daughter node maps to the subject of its mother’s f-
structure. In English, this subject annotation is struc-
turally associated with the NP node that is in the
specifier of IP position (see Section 5). The gram-
matical functions SUBJ and OBJ (as well as a number
of other functions assumed in LFG, such as OBJθ and
OBLθ) are unique, e.g. a verb can only have one sub-
ject which it subcategorizes for. This subcategoriza-
tion is marked in the lexical annotation on walked
in Figure 1, (↑ PRED) = ‘walk<SUBJ>’, which states
that the predicate (PRED) value of this word is ‘walk’
and takes one argument, SUBJ. Adjuncts (ADJ) are not
unique, but map to a set, by means of the annotation
↓ ∈ (↑ ADJ), to be discussed in more detail in the next
section.

2



3 Discontinuity in LFG

3.1 Previous Work
Discontinuous nominal expressions have been ana-
lyzed in LFG by Simpson (1991) (Warlpiri), Kuhn
(1999; 2001) (German), Cavar and Seiss (2011)
(New-Shtokavian) and are discussed by Snijders
(2012; 2015).4 Simpson (1991) and Kuhn (1999;
2001) share a similar overall analysis in assuming
that two parts of a discontinuous nominal expression
map to the same f-structure. Here I focus on Simp-
son’s (1991) analysis. Simpson’s analysis for exam-
ple (1), adapted to fit with her more recently pro-
posed c-structure for Warlpiri (Simpson, 2007), is
shown in Figure 2 (leaving out lexical annotations).5

Crucially, the two parts of the discontinuous ex-
pressions both map to the f-structure of the subject
of the predicate. The annotation ↓ ∈ (↑ ADJ) on the
N node states that this node (↓) maps to the set of
adjuncts of the NP node (↑). Note that the object,
despite being absent in c-structure, is present in f-
structure as the verb requires an object: its PRED
value is ‘PRO’.

The overall f-structure for the contiguous example
is the same, as shown by the annotations on the c-
structure of the contiguous version of example (1),
shown in Figure 3. Unlike in English, in the Warlpiri
c-structures the subject annotation comes from the
case-marking, not from the structural position.

The example with the discontinuous expression
and the contiguous one thus have the same f-
structure, which is mapped to the same semantic
structure, as will be discussed in Section 7.

3.2 English Extraposition
Previous work in LFG does not discuss discontin-
uous nominal expressions in English, nor does it
provide an account of how discontinuity in differ-

4There is other work on long-distance dependencies in LFG
(e.g. Kaplan and Zaenen (1989), Clément et al. (2002) among
others), but this literature discusses cases of arguments appear-
ing outside the clause that they are part of (e.g. wh-fronting out
of embedded clauses). This is a different type of long-distance
dependency than the discontinuous nominal expressions dis-
cussed here, as the latter case involves two parts of the same
grammatical function being separated.

5It is generally assumed that adjective-like elements in
Warlpiri are of the N category (Hale, 1983; Simpson, 1991;
Hale et al., 1995).

ent languages is licensed in different ways. One
type of English discontinuity, extraposition, will
be addressed here, and I show that it requires the
same treatment as the discontinuity with two case-
marked nominals as found in Warlpiri, providing a
cross-linguistic definition of discontinuous nominal
expressions in Section 4. I show that any cross-
linguistic differences are due to differences in c-
structure rules (phrase structure rules).

Discontinuity involving extraposition and discon-
tinuity involving two words with the same case-
marking have in common the fact that two parts
of the same grammatical functions are not adja-
cent in phrase structure. In the instance of relative
clause extraposition in English, I propose to repre-
sent the extraposed clause by means of an adjoined
CP clause.6 The structure I propose for (2a) is shown
in Figure 4 with partial annotations. In the case of
(2b) we would instead have an adjoined PP.

I note a few differences between the type of dis-
continuity with two case-marked nominals (Figure
2) and the English extraposition one (Figure 4). Lin-
guistically, a difference is the type of categories that
may be separated from each other, i.e. in Warlpiri
two nominals, while in English an NP and a CP or
PP. A second point of linguistic variation is the po-
sition that the two or more parts of the discontin-
uous expression may appear in. In English this is
restricted, shown by the unacceptability of *A num-
ber of stories soon about Watergate appeared. In the
case of Warlpiri discontinuity in which the subparts
have the same case-marking, the placement of the
subparts is much freer, reflecting Warlpiri’s property
of free placement of grammatical functions.7

Another difference between the discontinuous ex-
pression in Warlpiri in Figure 2 and the English one
in Figure 4 is the type of annotation on the modifier:

6The CP does not form a constituent with the VP, as prepos-
ing of both is ruled out: *‘Entered who I saw yesterday, the
man’. For this reason adjunction to IP is appropriate.

7However, like word order, discontinuity is not random, but
is triggered by information structure, as discussed by De Jong
(1986) (Latin), Cavar and Seiss (2011) (New-Shtokavian) and
Schultze-Berndt and Simard (2012) (Jaminjung). A full discus-
sion of the information structure of discontinuous expressions is
beyond the scope of this paper. Also, recall that Warlpiri does
appear to have a type of extraposition as shown in (3), which
seems more restricted in its placement than the type of discon-
tinuity involving case-marked nominals.

3



IP

NP I′

(↑ SUBJ)=↓ ↑ = ↓
N VP
↑=↓ ↑ = ↓
John V

(↑ PRED) = ‘John’ ↑ = ↓
walked

(↑ PRED) = ‘walk<SUBJ>’
(↑ TENSE) = PAST









PRED ‘walk〈SUBJ〉’
TENSE PAST

SUBJ
[

PRED ‘John’
]









Figure 1: An illustration of c- to f-structure mapping.

IP

NP I′

(↑ SUBJ)=↓ ↑ = ↓
N I S

↑ = ↓ ↑ = ↓ ↑ = ↓
kurdu-ngku ka V NP
child-ERG PRES ↑=↓ (↑ SUBJ)=↓

wajilipi-nyi N
chase-NONPAST ↓∈(↑ ADJ)

wita-ngku
small-ERG

































PRED ‘chase〈SUBJ,OBJ〉’
TENSE PRES

SUBJ















PRED ‘child’
CASE ERG

ADJ







[

PRED ‘small’
CASE ERG

]





















OBJ
[

PRED ‘PRO’
]

































Figure 2: C- to f-structure mapping of a discontinuous expression.

IP

NP
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

N
↑=↓

kurdu
child

N
↓∈(↑ ADJ)

wita-ngku
small-ERG

I′

↑=↓

I
↑=↓

ka
PRES

S
↑=↓

V
↑=↓

wajilipi-nyi
chase-NONPAST

Figure 3: C-structure for a contiguous example, mapping to the
f-structure in Figure 2.

in the Warlpiri case both head and modifier map to
the same f-structure directly (subject of the predi-
cate by means of the annotation (↑ SUBJ) = ↓). In the
English case, the modifier maps to the f-structure of
the adjunct of the SUBJ, whereas the head maps to the
overall f-structure of the SUBJ. The annotations are
thus somewhat different, but the end result for both
examples is the same: both head and modifier are
contained within the f-structure of the subject. This

IP

IP
↑=↓

NP
(↑ SUBJ)=↓
D

the

N′

N

man

I′

↑=↓

VP

V

entered

CP
↓∈(↑ SUBJ ADJ)

who I met yesterday

Figure 4: C-structure for English relative clause extraposition.

is an important observation, as we would have the
same f-structure mapping even with different anno-
tations. For example, in the Warlpiri c-structure in
Figure 2, the annotations on the two NPs are both
(↑ SUBJ) = ↓, both mapping to the same f-structure,
but we could also imagine a set of annotations where
the adjunct has the annotation ↓∈ (↑ SUBJ ADJ). A
definition of discontinuity needs to abstract away
from this variation in annotation, which is reflected
in the definition proposed in the following section.

4



a.
X
↑=↓

Y
↑=↓

c.

X
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

Y
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

b.

X
(↑ OBJ)=↓

Z Y
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

Figure 5: Structures not fulfilling the conditions of definition
(4).

4 Definition of Discontinuity in LFG

In order to capture nominal discontinuity in a more
formal way, I propose the following definition:8

(4) Nominal discontinuous expressions:
Given two c-structure constituents X and Y, X
6= Y, {X, Y} form a discontinuous nominal
expression iff:

i. Neither X nor Y dominate the other; and
ii. X and Y map to the f-structure or

sub-f-structure of the same grammatical
function; and

iii. The yield of X is not string adjacent to the
yield of Y; and

iv. The constituent(s) that intervene(s)
between X and Y do(es) not map to the
f-structure or any sub-f-structure of the
grammatical function that X and Y map
to.

The key here is that the two parts of a discontin-
uous expression both map to the f-structure of the
same grammatical function, or to an f-structure that
is contained within the f-structure of this grammat-
ical function. Consider the partial structures shown
in Figure 5, all of which do not fulfill all conditions
of definition (4).

Condition (i) rules out structure (a) in Figure 5 as
being discontinuous; X and Y here map to the same
f-structure, but X dominates Y. Condition (ii) rules

8One reviewer points out that these conditions (especially
(i), (iii) and (iv)) do not confine to nominals. However, this
paper restricts itself to nominal expressions (involving modifi-
cation); extending the definition to other kinds of discontinuity
is briefly addressed in Section 8.

a.

X
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

Z
↑=↓

Y
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

b.

X
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

Z
↑=↓

Y
↓∈(↑ SUBJ ADJ)

Figure 6: Instances of discontinuous nominal expressions.

out the structure in Figure 5 (b) as an instance of
discontinuity. In this structure the yield of X is not
string adjacent to the yield of Y (in other words, the
edges of X and Y do not coincide), but X and Y do
not map to the f-structure (or sub-f-structure) of the
same grammatical function. Condition (iii) ensures
that there is an intervening element, and rules out the
structure in Figure 5 (c) as an instance of disconti-
nuity.

The structure in Figure 6 (a) fulfills all conditions
as listed in (4), including condition (iv). Finally, ac-
cording to condition (ii) in (4), the structure in Fig-
ure 6 (b) is also a case of discontinuity.

5 Constraining Discontinuity

The definition of nominal discontinuity in (4) cov-
ers both the type of nominal discontinuity attested
with two case-marked nominals (one of which mod-
ifies the other) and the type with an extraposed mod-
ifier clause. Their analysis is very similar in terms of
their c- to f-structure mapping, but the way in which
the two different types are licensed is somewhat dif-
ferent. The case-marked nominal type of discontinu-
ity is made possible by the assumption in LFG that
in languages like Warlpiri grammatical functions are
assigned lexically and not by phrase structure con-
figuration (Dalrymple, 2001; Bresnan et al., 2016).
Free assignment of grammatical functions enables
the existence of discontinuous expressions as in (1).9

Cases of English extraposition are more constrained
as grammatical functions are generally assumed to

9Again, this does not mean that discontinuity is uncon-
strained: it appears constrained by information structure. More-
over, there are languages which like Warlpiri have free assign-
ment of grammatical functions, but which lack discontinuous
nominal expressions in which two words with the same case-
marking are separated. We can say that Warlpiri has head op-
tionality, allowing for a modifier to appear without its head
nominal.

5



be assigned configurationally.
In LFG c-structure is licensed and constrained by

c-structure rules (phrase structure rules), assumed to
be static constraints on c-structure. In English, a
rule ensuring that the subject appears pre-verbally
and VP-externally is as follows:10

(5)
IP → NP I′

(↑ SUBJ) =↓ ↑=↓
The annotation on the NP ensures that if the NP

is present, it obligatorily hosts the subject.11 The
rule in (5) partly licenses the c-structure in Figure 1.
In Warlpiri, with no obligatory annotations for any
grammatical function, the c-structure rules are less
constrained in this dimension. An example is the IP
rule partly licensing the c-structures in Figures 2 and
3, where GF = ‘grammatical function’:12

(6) GF ≡ {SUBJ | OBJ }
IP → { NP | V } I′

(↑ GF) =↓ ↑=↓ ↑=↓
The node preceding I′ ranges over NP and V, as

either an NP or a V may appear preceding the AUX
constituent (which is in I position), as long as it bears
a focus function. The annotations on NP and V are
different. Relevant for the current discussion is the
annotation on the NP: it is unspecified for its gram-
matical function (in this case, it ranges over SUBJ and
OBJ, but this set can be extended depending on the
attested data). Assuming that all NPs in Warlpiri’s
c-structure rules have the same unspecified annota-
tion (↑ GF) = ↓, it is possible for an annotation for the

10The subject can also appear in Spec,CP position, for exam-
ple when it is a wh-word.

11I note‘if the NP is present’, as LFG adheres to the principle
of Economy of Expression, which states that all phrase structure
nodes are optional, unless required by independent principles
(Bresnan et al., 2016). An example of an independent principle
is satisfaction of subcategorization requirements, e.g. if the sub-
ject is expressed elsewhere in the c-structure (e.g. in Spec,CP)
then the NP node in (5) is absent.

12The reason for assuming an IP in Warlpiri (following
Austin and Bresnan (1996), Simpson (2007)) is the set posi-
tions of two types of constituents. The first is the verb-like
constituent referred to as AUX (‘auxiliary’) in the Warlpiri lit-
erature, like ka (glossed ‘PRES’) in (1), assumed to appear in
I position. The second is the constituent immediately preced-
ing the AUX, which Simpson (2007) assumes to always have a
focus discourse function (similarly, she assumes that Spec,CP
always hosts a topic function).

same GF to appear on two NPs, enabling discontinu-
ity (under the assumption that in Warlpiri syntactic
heads are optional). The actual annotation on the
NPs is determined lexically, by case-marking.

In English the situation is somewhat different.
Discontinuity of the kind shown in (2) and Figure
4 is licensed by the rule in (5) and a rule like the one
in (7) for adjunction of CP or PP to IP:

(7) XP ≡ {CP | PP }
IP → IP XP

↑=↓ ↓∈ (↑ GF ADJ)
The annotation on the XP, ↓∈ (↑ GF ADJ), maps to

the adjunct set of a GF function. Note that this GF
is not restricted to SUBJ, as we can have examples
like Mary mentioned the claim yesterday that John
is intelligent. Despite configurational assignment of
GFs in English, there is some nonspecificity in an-
notation here. It appears that Warlpiri adjoined rel-
ative clauses (as in (3)) can be licensed by a similar
rule with a similar annotation on an extraposed CP
(but with the difference that the clause can appear
on either side of the main IP). A more in-depth in-
vestigation of the data is needed to posit a specific
rule like this, but a generalized rule of extraposition
seems plausible and would be promising for a uni-
form approach to this type of discontinuity. Discon-
tinuity involving case-marked nominals and discon-
tinuity involving extraposition have somewhat dif-
ferent underlying mechanisms. We can say that dif-
ferent restrictions on annotations on c-structure rules
in the different constructions (and languages) lead
to very similar outcomes, namely that two parts of
c-structure which are non-adjacent can map to the f-
structure or sub-f-structure of the same grammatical
function.

6 More complex cases

There are other types of more complex cases of
nominal discontinuity involving modification in En-
glish, namely extraposition with embedding (in (8a))
(Müller, 2016, p. 443), extraction out of complex
NPs (in (8b)) and secondary predication (in 8c)):13

(8) a. Many proofs of the theorem appeared
that I wanted to think about.

13I thank the anonymous reviewer for suggesting to include
these examples in the paper.

6



b. Who did they take pictures of?
c. She watched him naked.

Extraposition with embedding ((8a)) is a more
complex version of example (2). The extraposed
clause can be assumed to either modify the head
many proofs or the modifier of the theorem. In the
first case, rule (7) applies, with GF = SUBJ. For the
latter case we need an extension of rule (7) to ensure
that the relative clause can map to the adjunct set of
the adjunct of the head, which can be achieved by
an additional possible annotation on the XP in (7) of
the form ↓∈ (ADJ ∈ ADJ GF ↑).

As for the type of discontinuity involving extrac-
tion from complex NPs ((8b)), this is captured by
the definition of discontinuity in (4) if we assume
that the first part (who) maps to the adjunct set of
the object, and that pictures of maps to the object.
The preposition of can by itself map to the adjunct
set of the object as well, meaning that both who and
of are part of the adjunct set.14 Therefore this type
of example does not contradict the generalizations
proposed.

The example of secondary predication in (8c) is
not covered by the definition of nominal discontinu-
ity in (4), as there is no intervening material between
him and naked. This construction appears very simi-
lar to relative clause extraposition in the sense that
a modifier follows the sentence as a whole. Un-
der the current approach this is not assumed to be a
case of discontinuity, even if the two adjacent words
him and naked do not form a syntactic constituent. I
leave this issue open for discussion.

An approach to discontinuity following the defi-
nition in (4) thus covers most cases, but in an imple-
mentation of this approach, one might need to con-
sider specific constructions individually to achieve
accurate results.

7 Mapping to Semantics

For completeness, I discuss how discontinuous nom-
inal expressions involving modification can be ana-
lyzed semantically. The c- to f-structure mapping
in LFG via the φ function ensures that a minimal

14However, this mapping does not ensure that who and of end
up as part of the same f-structure in this set; this issue will be
addressed in Section 8.

pair of sentences with or without a discontinuous ex-
pression have the same f-structure, as shown above.
Semantics in LFG is represented on the level of
s-structure. Following Dalrymple and Nikolaeva
(2011, p. 90), I assume that f-structure is mapped
directly to s-structure via the σ function. The di-
rect mapping ensures that sentences with the same f-
structure will receive the same semantics. A discon-
tinuous expression and a contiguous expression will
therefore have the same semantics, as also pointed
out by Dalrymple (2001). This is achieved by glue
semantics (Dalrymple et al., 1993; Dalrymple, 1999;
Dalrymple, 2001), the linguistic theory of semantic
composition commonly used in LFG, which relies
on linear logic. Glue semantics associates meaning
constructors, instructions on how to combine mean-
ings to form the meaning of the sentences, with lexi-
cal items (or in some cases with phrase structural po-
sitions). Semantic composition is therefore largely
separate from c-structure constituency, which is es-
pecially beneficial for the purpose of accounting for
discontinuous nominal expressions, as we want the
same semantic analysis for two different c-structural
configurations. For example, in the Warlpiri exam-
ple in Figure 2, the two subparts of the discontinuous
expression each contribute their own meaning con-
structors. Before looking at these, consider the f- to
s-structure mapping for the SUBJ (the discontinuous
expression) of example (1):

(9) s







PRED ‘child’

ADJ

{

[

PRED ‘small’
]

}







sσ

VAR v
[ ]

RESTR r
[ ]


λ.X.small(X) ∧ child(X): v ⊸ r

The f- to s-structure mapping of the head by itself
is very similar:

(10)
[

PRED ‘child’
]VAR v

[ ]
RESTR r

[ ]


λX.child(X): v ⊸ r

In (9), the subject’s f-structure is labelled s, and its
s-structure is labelled sσ. The s-structure sσ has two

7



kurdu
(↑ PRED) = ‘child’
λX.child(X) : (↑σ VAR) ⊸ (↑σ RESTR)
wita
(↑ PRED) = ‘small’
λP.λX.small(X) ∧ P(X):
[((ADJ ∈ ↑)σ VAR) ⊸ (( ADJ ∈ ↑)σ RESTR)] ⊸
[((ADJ ∈ ↑)σ VAR) ⊸ ((ADJ ∈ ↑)σ RESTR)]

Figure 7: Lexical entries for kurdu and wita.

attributes: VAR which has as its value an s-structure
labelled v and RESTR which has as its value an s-
structure labelled r. The attribute VAR represents a
variable of type e and RESTR is of type t and repre-
sents a restriction the variable of type e. For (9) the
restriction would state that the variable must range
over individuals that are both children and small.
For (10) the only restriction is that the variable must
range over individuals that are children. The no-
tation ⊸, the linear implication symbol of linear
logic, signifies that if there is an attribute VAR (v)
in the s-structure (↑σ) then there is also an attribute
RESTR (r) in that same s-structure.

The s-structure in (9) of the subject of example
(1) comes from the lexical entries of the two words
of the discontinuous expression, with the one en-
try restricting the other. These lexical entries are
shown in Figure 7, leaving out case marking. The
lexical entry of the head, kurdu (‘child’), states that
kurdu provides a value for the PRED attribute in the
f-structure, namely child. The second part of the
lexical entry of kurdu makes a statement about the
mapping to s-structure (signaled by the use of ↑σ
mapping to s-structure). It states the restriction on
the variable VAR: it must range over individuals that
are children. The lexical specification of the modi-
fier wita is somewhat more complicated. Here (ADJ
∈ ↑) refers to the f-structure of which ↑ (the ad-
junct) is a member (the set of adjuncts, or modifiers),
(ADJ ∈ ↑)σ refers to the s-structure corresponding to
that f-structure and ((ADJ ∈ ↑)σ VAR) refers to the
value of the VAR attribute of that s-structure. Like-
wise, ((ADJ ∈ ↑)σ RESTR) refers to the value of the
RESTR attribute of the s-structure (ADJ ∈ ↑)σ . Refer-
ring to these s-structures with the labels v and r, as
shown in the examples in (9) and (10), the meaning
constructor premises for the two individual words
of the discontinuous expression in example (1) are

[child] λX.child(X) : v ⊸ r
[small] λP.λX.small(X)∧ P(X) : [v ⊸ r] ⊸ [v ⊸ r]

Figure 8: Meaning constructors for kurdu and wita.

λX.child(X) : v ⊸ r
λP.λX.small(X) ∧ P(X) : [v ⊸ r] ⊸ [v ⊸ r]
λX.small(X) ∧ child(X) : v ⊸ r

Figure 9: Deduction of the meaning of the discontinuous ex-
pression.

shown in Figure 8, with the meaning constructors in
bold and brackets (with the glue semantics side on
the right).

From the meaning constructors for the two indi-
vidual words, one can deduce the meaning of the
overall expression as shown in Figure 9. The mean-
ing constructor for the modifier consumes the con-
tribution of the noun (v ⊸ r), and thereby provides
a new meaning, also associated with v ⊸ r. With-
out providing a full overview of glue semantics and
its use in LFG, this section has shown that by as-
sociating meaning constructors directly with lexical
items and not with phrase structural positions, one
can have the same semantic derivation for both con-
tiguous and discontinuous nominal expressions.

8 Remaining Issues

There are a few remaining issues left to be resolved
with regards to this approach to discontinuity. First,
one outstanding technical issue that was brought
up by Snijders (2012) is the problematic account
of discontinuous adjuncts. Discontinuous adjuncts
are found for example in Latin, (Bolkestein, 2001,
p. 255). In c-structure both parts of a discontin-
uous adjunct will be marked with the annotation
↓∈ (↑ ADJ), to ensure that both parts map to the ad-
junct set of the predicate. However, unlike SUBJ or
OBJ, ADJ is not a unique grammatical function. This
is apparent from the set notation. Any NP anno-
tated with the adjunct annotation will map to the
adjunct set, and in principle each NP will form its
own f-structure in this set. There is no clear way
to distinguish between the case in which two nomi-
nals (with the same case, number, gender, assuming
that this a constraining factor for discontinuity) form
two separate f-structure adjuncts (separate elements
of the adjunct set) or are part of the same adjunct
f-structure. The only constraining factor in this is
‘PRED clash’: grammatical functions (including ADJ)

8



IP

NP
(↑ SUBJ)=↓

N
↑=↓

er

I′

↑=↓

I
↑=↓

gab

VP
↑=↓

V′

↑=↓

NP
(↑ OBJ)=↓

den Kampf

V0

↑=↓

P̂
↑=↓

auf

Figure 10: C-structure for example (12a).

may only have one PRED value:

(11)












PRED ‘VERB〈SUBJ〉’
SUBJ

[

PRED ‘SUBJ’
]

ADJ

{

[

PRED ‘ADJ1’
]

,
[

PRED ‘ADJ2’
]

}













PRED clash ensures that two adjuncts which both
contribute a PRED value do not unify in f-structure.
Nonetheless, there is no straightforward way to dis-
tinguish between the two cases just described, and
to ensure that two parts of a discontinuous adjunct
map to the same f-structure (or sub-f-structure).

A second issue is that the definition in (4) cov-
ers discontinuous nominal expressions, but it does
not encompass other types of discontinuity, such as
the one created by ‘particle verbs’ (Ackerman, 1983;
Piñón, 1992; Lüdeling, 2001; Booij, 2002; Toivo-
nen, 2003; Forst et al., 2010).15 Consider an exam-
ple from German (Forst et al., 2010, p. 229):

(12) Er
he

gab
gave

den
the.ACC

Kampf
fight

auf.
up

‘He gave up the fight.’

I follow Toivonen’s (2003) analysis of verbal par-
ticles as non-projecting words, marked as P̂. Exam-
ple (12) then has the c-structure as shown in Figure

15Also, discontinuous nominal expressions not involving
modification but rather with a separated determiner and a noun,
as found for example in Latin (Devine and Stephens, 2006,
p. 524), have not been discussed. The semantic mapping for this
will be different than the mapping for modification described in
Section 7.

10. In this c-structure the two parts of the phrasal
verb both map to the same f-structure, namely the
overarching f-structure of the sentence (shown by
↑ = ↓). Aiming for a general definition of disconti-
nuity, this makes it seem appropriate to change con-
dition (ii) in the definition of discontinuity in (4) to
read ‘X and Y map to the same f-structure or its
sub-f-structure’, with no mention of a grammatical
function. However, this rephrasing makes inaccu-
rate predictions, because if we refer to the highest
f-structure level (the one of the whole sentence) and
its sub-f-structures, we refer to all of the f-structures
contained in the sentence.16 Making reference to all
f-structures in the definition of discontinuity makes
it impossible to make any point about discontinuity.
One solution is to change the phrasing of condition
(ii) to ‘X and Y map to the same f-structure’, but
under this condition the English structure in Figure
4 would not be an instance of a discontinuous ex-
pression, at least not with the annotations as shown.
However, we want the definition to cover both extra-
position and discontinuity like example (1), as ulti-
mately both are somewhat different instances of the
same mechanism.

9 Conclusion

This paper has illustrated an LFG approach to dis-
continuous nominal expressions involving modifica-
tion, i.e. by letting two (or more) c-structural con-
stituents map to the same (sub-)f-structure of a spe-
cific grammatical function. In this I follow Simpson
(1991), Kuhn (1999; 2001), while making the ex-
plicit claim that different types of discontinuity (e.g.
two constituents with the same case-marking or the
case of extraposed XPs) should be captured by the
same overall analysis, despite being licensed in dif-
ferent ways. Crucially, discontinuous expressions
and contiguous expressions receive the same map-
ping to semantics, enabled by glue semantics’ asso-
ciation of meaning constructors with lexical items,
not phrase structure. This paper has thereby aimed
to illustrate LFG’s potential in contributing to a po-
tential implementation of discontinuity in NLP sys-
tems.

16One reviewer suggests referring to immediate sub-f-
structures only, but the immediate sub-f-structures of the sen-
tence’s overarching f-structure include those of the arguments
of the predicate, and thereby of the sentence as a whole.

9



Acknowledgments

I gratefully acknowledge the JSPS for funding this
work. I also thank Jelke Bloem, Mary Dalrymple,
Ryo Otoguro, Marjolein Poortvliet and the anony-
mous reviewers for their useful suggestions.

References
Farrell Ackerman. 1983. Miscreant Morphemes:

Phrasal Predicates in Ugric. Ph.D. thesis, UC Berke-
ley.

Peter Austin and Joan Bresnan. 1996. Non-
configurationality in Australian Aboriginal languages.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 14(2):215–
268.

A. Machteld Bolkestein. 2001. Random Scrambling?
Constraints on Discontinuity in Latin Noun Phrases.
In C. Moussy, editor, De lingua Latina novae quaes-
tiones, pages 245–258. Peeters, Louvain.

Geert Booij. 2002. Separable Complex Verbs in Dutch:
A Case of Periphrastic Word Formation. In Nicole
Dehé, Ray Jackendoff, Andrew McIntyre, and Silke
Urban, editors, Verb-Particle Explorations, pages 21–
42. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.

Joan Bresnan, Ash Asudeh, Ida Toivonen, and Stephen
Wechsler. 2016. Lexical-Functional Syntax. Wiley
Blackwell, Chichester, West Sussex.

Damir Cavar and Melanie Seiss. 2011. Clitic Placement,
Syntactic Discontinuity and Information Structure. In
Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the LFG11 Conference, pages 131–151.
CSLI Publications.

Lionel Clément, Kim Gerdes, and Sylvain Kahane. 2002.
An LFG-Type Grammar for German Based on the Ty-
pological Model. In M. Butt and T.H. King, editors,
Proceedings of the LFG02 Conference, pages 116–
129. CSLI Publications.

Richard Crouch, Mary Dalrymple, Ronald M. Kaplan,
Tracy King, III Maxwell, John T., and Paula Newman.
2011. XLE Documentation. Palo Alto Research Cen-
ter (PARC), Palo Alto, CA.

Mary Dalrymple and Irina Nikolaeva. 2011. Objects and
Information Structure. Cambridge Studies in Linguis-
tics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat.
1993. LFG semantics via constraints. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Meeting of the EACL, pages 97–105,
Utrecht. European Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Mary Dalrymple, editor. 1999. Semantics and Syntax
in Lexical Functional Grammar: The Resource Logic
Approach. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Mary Dalrymple. 2001. Lexical-Functional Grammar,
volume 34 of Syntax and Semantics. Academic Press,
San Diego; London.

Andrew M. Devine and Laurence D. Stephens. 2000.
Discontinuous syntax: hyperbaton in Greek. Oxford
University Press, Oxford/New York.

Andrew M. Devine and Laurence D. Stephens. 2006.
Latin Word Order. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford/New York.

Martin Forst, Tracy Holloway King, and Tibor Laczkó.
2010. Particle Verbs in Computational LFGs: Is-
sues from English, German and Hungarian. In Miriam
Butt and Tracy Holloway King, editors, Proceedings
of the LFG10 Conference, pages 228–248. CSLI Pub-
lications.

Kenneth L. Hale, Mary Laughren, and Jane Simpson.
1995. Warlpiri syntax. In Joachim Jacobs, Arnim
von Stechow, Wolfgang Sternefeld, and Theo Venne-
mann, editors, Syntax. Ein internationales Handbuch
zeitgenössischer Forschung: An International Hand-
book of Contemporary Research, pages 1430–51. Wal-
ter de Gruyter, Berlin New York.

Kenneth L. Hale. 1976. The adjoined relative clause in
Australia. In R.M.W. Dixon, editor, Grammatical cat-
egories in Australian languages, pages 78–105. Aus-
tralian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, Canberra.

Kenneth L. Hale. 1983. Warlpiri and the Grammar of
Non-Configurational Languages. Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory, 1.1:5–47.

Jan R. De Jong. 1986. Hyperbaton en informatiestruk-
tuur. Lampas, pages 323–331.

Ronald M. Kaplan and Joan Bresnan. 1982. Lexical-
Functional Grammar: A Formal System for Grammat-
ical Representation. In Joan Bresnan, editor, The Men-
tal Representation of Grammatical Relations, pages
173–281. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ronald M. Kaplan and Annie Zaenen. 1989. Long-
Distance Dependencies, Constituent Structure and
Functional Uncertainty. In Mark Baltin and Anthony
Kroch, editors, Alternative Conceptions of Phrase
Structure, pages 17–42. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL. Reprinted in M. Dalrymple, R.M. Ka-
plan, J.T. Maxwell III and A. Zaenen, editors, Formal
Issues in Lexical-Functional Grammar, pages 137-
165, CSLI Publications, Stanford University, 1995.

H.W. Kirkwood. 1977. Discontinuous Noun Phrases in
Existential Sentences in English and German. Journal
of Linguistics, 13(1):53–66.

Jonas Kuhn. 1999. The syntax and semantics of split
NPs in LFG. In Francis Corblin, Carmen Dobrovie-
Sorin, and Jean-Marie Marandin, editors, Selected
papers from the Colloque de Syntaxe et Sémantique
à Paris (CSSP 1997), pages 145–166. Thesus, The
Hague.

10



Jonas Kuhn. 2001. Resource Sensitivity in the Syntax-
Semantics interface and the German Split NP Con-
struction. In T. Kiss and D. Meurers, editors,
Constraint-Based Approaches to Germanic Syntax.
CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.

Anke Lüdeling. 2001. On Particle Verbs and Similar
Constructions in German. CSLI Publications, Stan-
ford, CA.

Stefan Müller. 2016. Grammatical Theory: From trans-
formational grammar to constraint-based approaches.
Textbooks in Language Sciences 1. Language Science
Press, Berlin.

Rachel Nordlinger. 1998. Constructive Case: Evidence
from Australian Languages. CSLI Publications, Stan-
ford, CA. Revised version of 1997 Stanford University
dissertation.

Chris Piñón. 1992. The Preverb Problem in German and
Hungarian. In Proceedings of BLS, pages 395–408.

Eva Schultze-Berndt and Candide Simard. 2012. Con-
straints on noun phrase discontinuity in an Australian
language: The role of prosody and information struc-
ture. Linguistics, 50:1015–1058.

Irina Sekerina. 1997. The Syntax and Processing of
Split Scrambling Constituents in Russian. Ph.D. the-
sis, SUNY Graduate School and University Center.

Irina Sekerina. 1999. The Scrambling Complexity
Hypothesis and Processing of Split Scrambling Con-
stituents in Russian. Journal of Slavic Linguistics,
7(2):265–304.

Anna Siewierska. 1984. Phrasal Discontinuity in Polish.
Australian Journal of Linguistics, 4:57–71.

Jane Simpson. 1991. Warlpiri Morpho-Syntax: a Lexi-
calist Approach, volume 23 of Studies in Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht.

Jane Simpson. 2007. Expressing Pragmatic Constraints
on Word Order. In Annie Zaenen, Jane Simpson,
Tracy Holloway King, Jane Grimshaw, Joan Maling,
and Chris Manning, editors, Architectures, Rules, and
Preferences: Variations on Themes by Joan W. Bres-
nan, pages 403–427. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.

Liselotte Snijders. 2012. Issues Concerning Constraints
on Discontinuous NPs in Latin. In Miriam Butt and
Tracy Holloway King, editors, Proceedings of the
LFG12 Conference, pages 565–581. CSLI Publica-
tions.

Liselotte Snijders. 2015. The Nature of Configurational-
ity in LFG. Ph.D. thesis, University of Oxford.

Olga Spevak. 2010. Constituent Order in Classical
Latin Prose. Studies in Language Companion Se-
ries. John Benjamins Publishing Company, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia.

Ida Toivonen. 2003. Non-Projecting Words: A Case
Study of Swedish Particles. Studies in Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht.

11


