



















































Non-projectivity and valency


Proceedings of DiscoNLP 2016, pages 12–21,
San Diego, California, June 17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Non-projectivity and valency

Zdenka Uresova and Eva Fucikova and Jan Hajic
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranske nam. 25

11800 Prague 1, Czech Republic
{uresova,fucikova,hajic}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We describe results of investigation of a
specific type of discontinuous constructions,
namely non-projective constructions concern-
ing verbs and their arguments. This topic is
especially important for languages with a rela-
tively free word order, such as Czech, which is
the language we have primarily worked with.
For comparison, we have included some re-
sults for English. The corpora used for both
languages are the Prague Czech-English De-
pendency Treebank and the Prague Depen-
dency Treebank, which are both annotated at
a dependency syntax level as well as a deep
(semantic) level, including verbs and their va-
lency (arguments). We are using traditionally
defined non-projectivity on trees with full lin-
ear ordering, but the two levels of annotation
are innovatively combined to determine if a
particular (deep) verb -argument structure is
non-projective. As a result, we have identi-
fied several types of discontinuities, which we
classify either by the verb class or structurally
in terms of the verb, its arguments and their
dependents. In addition, we have quantita-
tively compared selected phenomena found in
Czech translated texts (in the PCEDT) to the
native Czech as found in the original Prague
Dependency Treebank.

1 Introduction

Non-projective constructions in general have long
been the subject of research in computational lin-
guistics, especially within the frameworks of various

dependency-based theories (Marcus, 1965; Hudson,
1994). In Czech, which is our focus here as a repre-
sentative of a (relatively) free-word order language
which frequently displays this phenomenon, we can
cite e.g., (Uhlı́řová, 1972), (Štı́cha, 1996), (Oliva,
2001) or (Petkevič, 1998; Petkevič, 2001). How-
ever, at that time, they did not have a syntactically
annotated corpus at their disposal, let alone a seman-
tically annotated one. Their works are thus rather
theoretical treatments with little confrontation with
real texts, even though these works have at least
laid very good basis for the treatment of projectivity
by defining (from various perspectives) what non-
projectivity actually is in terms of sentence structure
representation.

First treatment of non-projective constructions
based on an annotated corpus, namely in the an-
notation scenario of the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (PDT), was presented by Hajičová (2004) and
this issue was further elaborated by Havelka (2005)
where some properties of non-projective edges rel-
evant for the newly presented algorithms were dis-
cussed and a hint on finding all non-projective edges
using its output was given. Havelka (2007) fol-
lowed and focused on a refinement of the defini-
tions of non-projectivity (having found certain errors
in previously published definitions, among other
things) and introduced measures to further refine
the notion. In addition, he also showed how em-
pirical results corroborate theoretical results. All
of these works have focused on the basic proper-
ties of non-projectivity at the same level of linguis-

12



tic description (i.e., surface dependency syntax or
the deep, semantically-oriented “tectogrammatical”
representation as defined in the Prague Dependency
Treebank), i.e., the authors limited themselves to
only one syntactic layer at a time instead of try-
ing to define and investigate the phenomenon from
both perspectives, thus providing a more compact
approach. Hajičová et al. (2004) made an attempt
at classification of non-projective constructions on
these two levels separately.1 In our work, we are
trying to use both the surface and deep layer to-
gether to specify and investigate a “new breed” of
non-projectivity in a more holistic approach.

In Natural Language Processing, non-projectivity
has long been ignored, since the first tree-
banks, such as the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al.,
1993), have been annotated using parse trees (or,
phrase-structure-based annotation), which techni-
cally do not allow for direct representation of non-
projectivity, and the surrogate means (co-indexing
and traces, some of which can be considered to
represent non-projective constructions) have also
been largely ignored by syntactic parsers developed
(trained) on them. Only after the development of
dependency parsers has started using natively2 anno-
tated dependency treebanks (which naturally do con-
tain non-projectivities), non-projectivity has been fi-
nally seriously looked at from the parsing perspec-
tive (McDonald et al., 2005; Nivre and Nilsson,
2005; Nivre, 2006; Kuhlmann and Nivre, 2006;
Nivre, 2007; Hall and Nivre, 2008; Nivre, 2009;
Bohnet and Nivre, 2012; Björkelund and Nivre,
2015). Since such parsers work with the surface-
syntactic dependency trees, there was no specific at-
tention paid to the relation between deep syntax or
semantics and non-projectivity.

In our study, we describe the results of investigat-
ing non-projectivity of verbs and their arguments,
using two levels of description: for defining the
constructions of interest, i.e., verbs and their argu-
ments, we use the deep syntactic/semantic annota-

1The special linear ordering (which does not follow the sur-
face word order) of nodes at the tectogrammatical layer of anno-
tation of all PDT-style treebanks will be described in Sect. 2.2.2.

2By “natively” annotated dependency treebanks we mean
treebanks originally annotated manually using dependency
scheme and guidelines, as opposed to phrase-based treebanks
converted automatically to dependencies ex-post.

tion level of the available corpus, while for testing
non-projectivity using the standard definitions, we
use the ‘unquestionable’ linear ordering from the
surface dependency annotation which in turn fol-
lows the original word order. We believe this a novel
approach not found in previous studies.

2 The corpus and its annotation

2.1 The corpora used: Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank and the Prague
Dependency Treebank

Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank
(PCEDT) is a parallel, linguistically annotated
corpus (Hajič et al., 2012). The texts come from
the WSJ part of the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al.,
1993); the Czech side is their professional trans-
lation. The corpus consists of about one million
tokens (on each language side) in about 50 thousand
aligned sentence pairs. It is currently available from
the Linguistic Data Consortium3 as well as from
the LINDAT/CLARIN repository.4 This corpus
follows the multilayer annotation scenario used in
the original Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT).

The tectogrammatical annotation of these corpora
includes also links to two valency lexicons, the PDT-
Vallex (for Czech) and the EngVallex (for English).

The Czech valency lexicon, called PDT-Vallex,5

is publicly available as a part of the one-million-
word Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) version
2 published by the Linguistic Data Consortium.6 It
has been developed as a resource for valency anno-
tation in the PDT; it is based on the Functional Gen-
erative Description valency theory framework - for
details, see (Urešová, 2011b; Urešová, 2011a). The
EngVallex7 is a lexicon of English verbs, built on
the same grounds as PDT-Vallex. It was created by
a (largely manual) adaptation of an already existing
resource for English with similar purpose, namely
the PropBank Lexicon (Palmer et al., 2005; Kings-

3https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/
LDC2012T08

4http://hdl.handle.net/11858/
00-097C-0000-0015-8DAF-4

5http://hdl.handle.net/11858/
00-097C-0000-0023-4338-F

6http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2006T01
7http://hdl.handle.net/11858/

00-097C-0000-0023-4337-2

13



bury and Palmer, 2002), to the PDT labeling stan-
dards (see also (Cinková, 2006)).

2.2 PCEDT and PDT annotation

The PCEDT is annotated on both the Czech and the
English side using PDT-style of annotation. Every
sentence is annotated at three, explicitly interlinked
layers: morphology, dependency syntax (Hajič,
1998) and tectogrammatics (deep syntax/semantics).

2.2.1 Surface dependency syntax
The surface dependency syntax annotation in both

the PCEDT and the PDT (Hajič et al., 2004) as-
signs a node to each word and punctuation sym-
bol in the sentence. It is rooted in an extra node
holding the ID and other bookkeeping information
about the sentence. Heads are determined, when
in doubt, using the morphosyntactic argument: if a
node controls the morphosyntactic behavior of the
word directly related to it, for example by agree-
ment, morphosyntactic control constraints etc., it is
considered to be the head. All relations (edges in
the tree) are labeled by the type of the relation. In the
PDT (and PCEDT), there are a relatively few coarse-
grained types: Pred and Pnom for predicate and
the nominal part of a predicate in copula construc-
tions, respectively, then Sb, Obj and Adv for verb
dependents (Subject, Object, and Adverbials), and
Atr for all nominal modifiers. Auxiliaries are di-
vided into another set of types, such as AuxV (func-
tion word-verb), AuxP for prepositions (which are
heads) and AuxC for subordinate conjunctions, to
name the most important. There are also ‘structural’
labels for coordination, apposition and parenthetical
relation. An example is in Fig. 1.

Importantly, for the investigation of non-
projectivity, all the nodes are numbered by ordinal
numbers starting with 0 for the extra root node, 1
for the first word in the sentence in its surface word
order, etc., forming a total linear ordering of all the
nodes.

2.2.2 Deep syntax and semantics
The tectogrammatical annotation layer is based

on the Functional Generative Description theory
(Sgall et al., 1986). The structure of a sentence is
represented as a rooted tree (as it is at the surface
dependency level), with nodes bearing a number

of attributes describing their syntactic and seman-
tic properties. Edges are labeled by the (mostly se-
mantic) types of dependency relations, called ‘func-
tor’s. As opposed to the surface syntactic annota-
tion, function words and punctuation have no nodes
of their own; only content words are kept. How-
ever, in addition to the content words that have a sur-
face counterpart, there are also nodes which have no
surface counterpart (some types of restored ellipses,
such as surface-elided semantically obligatory verb
arguments etc.).

The set of ‘functors’ is different (and richer)
than the set of dependency relations at the surface
dependency level. While verb arguments are de-
scribed by five core argument functors (Actor (ACT)
and Patient (PAT) for the first two, and then the
more semantically defined Addressee (ADDR), Ef-
fect (EFF) and Origin (ORIG)), there is a set of
about 30 adverbial types (LOCation, DIR1ection
(from), DIR3ection (to), MANNer, ACMP for ac-
companiment, TWHEN, TSINce, THL (how long)
and several more for time adverbials, CAUSe, BEN-
eficiary, etc.). For nominal modifiers, RSTR and
DESC (restrictive and descriptive dependent) are
added. Nodes serving as structure descriptors (such
as coordination and aposition “heads”) are similar
to the ones used at the surface dependency layer of
annotation.

In addition, every verb (i.e., content verb) in the
treebank is disambiguated for its sense based on an
inventory of senses in the corresponding valency
lexicon (PDT-Vallex for Czech and EngVallex for
English, cf. Sect. 2.1). Its arguments as annotated
in the treebank correspond to the argument ‘slots’ as
recorded in the valency lexicons. Morphosyntactic
constraints on the individual arguments as recorded
in the lexicons have been checked and are consistent
with the treebank annotation of the corresponding
argument nodes.

Ordering of nodes in the tectogrammatical anno-
tation (also a total linear order) does not correspond,
however, to the surface word order, and thus any
non-projectivity seen in the tectogrammatical anno-
tation can only be judged relatively to the definition
of the “deep word order” and thus it has not been
used here (for its prevalent use, cf. (Hajičová et al.,

14



2004)).8

3 Definition of non-projectivity

3.1 Dependency syntax and non-projective
constructions

The definition of projectivity we are using is as fol-
lows (from (Hajičová et al., 2004) and (Havelka,
2005)):

Definition. A subtree S of a rooted dependency
tree T is projective if for all nodes a, b and c of the
subtree S the condition (P) holds:

(b↓a & b < a & c↓↓b→ c < a) or
(b↓a & b > a & c↓↓b→ c > a) (P)
where b↓a means that b is immediately dependent

on a, c↓↓b means that c is a descendant of b (i.e.,
transitively dependent), and < and > have the usual
meaning with respect to the linear ordering of nodes.

3.2 Measure of the degree of non-projectivity

Havelka (2005) introduces the notion of a gap as
a set of all nodes that ’cause’ an edge to be non-
projective, i.e., the head node of such an edge be-
ing a root of a non-projective tree. However, in our
work, we believe that the mere set of words, or even
their count, is too fine-grained to describe the ’de-
gree’ of non-projectivity, at least for the purposes
of this study on verb-headed constructions. There-
fore, we define a gap as the number of continuous
spans (rather than a number of all words) that ‘in-
terfere’ in (are not part of) the yield of the node, of
which the subtree rooted by it is being tested for non-
projectivity. We also use the phrase “be in the gap”
(for a word or node of a tree), if the projection of
that word based on its linear surface word order is
one of those that fall into that gap.

4 Finding non-projective constructions
and measuring their complexity

In our analysis of non-projective constructions re-
lated to verb and its arguments, we have used the
definition described in Sect. 3. However, since
we are interested in verbs and their arguments,

8According to the tectogrammatical annotation manual
(Mikulová et al., 2006), the linear order of the nodes in the tec-
togrammatical trees is given by the attribute dord, or “deep or-
der” which is defined independently of the surface word order
using so-called “contextual boundness” criterion.

which are annotated on the deep (tectogrammatical)
level, we have modified the definition combining the
two layers. The modified definition, named CLP
(Combined-Layer Projectivity), follows these three
rules for determining the necessary components of
the original definition:

• words (nodes for verbs, their arguments and
their dependents/descendants) are taken from
the tectogrammatical level;

• dependencies (i.e., the structure of the subtrees
of interest) are also taken from the tectogram-
matical level of annotation (used for determin-
ing the ↓ and ↓↓ relations in the definition (P));

• linear ordering is taken from the surface syntac-
tic level of annotation, using the surface node’s
(referred to by the lex.rf link from the tec-
togrammatical node) ord attribute, i.e., the
surface word order is used.

While we could have possibly used the surface
dependencies for determining non-projectivity, the
approach outlined above gives more adequate re-
sults since (a) we are focusing on verbs and their
arguments, which naturally occur at the deep layer
of annotation and (b) this annotation has been done
fully manually in all three corpora we use, while the
surface syntax has been generated automatically on
both sides of the PCEDT and thus is not reliable,
especially with regard to non-projectivity.9

To illustrate the gap measure as defined earlier,
Fig. 1 shows a non-projective construction with one
gap - the projection of the tree based on the linear
ordering of nodes (i.e., word order in the case of
surface dependency syntax) has two parts. In this
example, the word “To” (this) is an Object of the
verb “splnit” (to fulfill), and therefore, the subtree
rooted in “splnit” is non-projective, since the words
“je” (is) and “možno” (possible) are not descendants
of “splnit”, and they both constitute the one single
gap present in the projection of the “splnit”-rooted
subtree.

9In English, the number of non-projective constructions
posited by the surface dependency parser is negligible com-
pared to the number of non-projective constructions determined
by using the (manually annotated) tectogrammatical dependen-
cies as described in the above three bullets.

15



a-ln94202-3-p3s2

To

je

možno splnit

Obj

Pred

Pnom Sb

Cs: To.Obj je.Pred možno.Pnom splnit.Sb
En: (lit.) This.Obj is.Pred possible.Pnom to fulfill.Sb

En: This can be fulfilled

Figure 1: Simple non-projective construction, gap=1

The number of gaps can be easily computed for
every node in the surface dependency tree, by going
through all the nodes from its yield (i.e., through all
nodes which are descendants of the node in ques-
tion) and counting the gaps. However, one has to
be careful–subtrees with no gaps can still be non-
projective “inside”, i.e., some of their subtrees might
still be non-projective with gap count greater than
zero.

For the description of non-projectivity of verbs
and their arguments, we have thus computed the
non-projectivity of the argument-rooted subtrees
separately from the non-projectivity of the subtree
rooted by the verb in question, which might have
no gaps. On the other hand, if any of the argument-
rooted subtrees has the gap equal to zero, it is not rel-
evant to our goals whether there is a non-projectivity
“hidden” inside, for some of its subtrees. In other
words, we consider (verb-rooted) subtrees that have
either

• non-zero gap measure at the verb root, or
• non-zero gap measure at any of its arguments.

For simplicity, we will call these constructions
(and only these) non-projective, even though we are
aware of the fact that we are ignoring gap=0 con-
structions with embedded non-projectivity.

An important aspect of the extraction was that
we have used both layers of the PDT-style anno-

tation using the modified (CLP) definition as de-
scribed earlier: the identification of whether a word
is a verb or not, or whether a word is an argument
to a verb, has been performed at the tectogrammat-
ical level (using all content, i.e., non-auxiliary, non-
modal verbs, which had a link to the corresponding
Czech or English valency lexicon). Arguments to
such verbs have been identified using the valency
dictionary entry, which lists all arguments by their
function label (called “functor” in the tectogrammat-
ical annotation scheme, cf. (Mikulová et al., 2006)).
These labels have been matched to all immediately
dependent nodes on the verb in the tectogrammati-
cal annotation. However, for reasons already men-
tioned, we have used the inter-layer links that the
annotation scheme contains, and which connect the
nodes in the surface syntax dependency tree with the
tectogrammatical one(s) to retrieve the original word
order and use it as described in the third bullet in
(CLP).

This way, every construction of a verb and its ar-
gument(s)10 could be tested against the enhanced
(CLP) definition of non-projectivity.

5 Classification of verb-argument
non-projective constructions

We have extracted all examples of non-projective
constructions for verbs and their arguments from the
English and Czech sides of the PCEDT,11 and for
comparison also from the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (representing natively written Czech texts).

The overall number of non-projective construc-
tions on the surface syntactic level of annotation us-
ing the original (P) definition of projectivity and the
breakdown by the number of gaps is given in Ta-
ble 1. The total number of nodes at the dependency
syntax layer of the PCEDT is 1,173,766 on the En-
glish side and 1,151,150 on the Czech side. The to-
tal number of nodes counted in the PDT is 833,193
(only sentences annotated also at the tectogrammat-
ical layer have been used).

The small number of non-projective constructions
10Unless it is a NULL argument, which has no overt word in

the surface sentence as a counterpart; these have been ignored.
11For those verbs that are translations of an English verb con-

struction, to avoid constructions which might be too influenced
by the fact that they are translations of a syntactically very dif-
ferent one.

16



Lang. 0 gaps 1 gap 2 gaps >2 gaps
en 479 112 1 0
cs (tr.) 61,619 44,774 3,827 449
cs (nat.) 29,912 14,259 196 2

Table 1: Non-projective constructions in surface depndency
trees, overall counts

on the English side of the PCEDT (i.e., in the WSJ
texts) is caused by the fact the the parser has been
trained on non-native dependency annotation, and
thus almost always prefers projective constructions.

The highest number of gaps on the Czech side of
the PCEDT was 8, in five cases (and there was no
non-projective subtree with 7 gaps). Overall, there
is slightly below 10% of non-projective subtrees and
less than 5% with at least one gap.

In the PDT, the overall number of nodes at the de-
pendency syntax layer is 29,912, and as can be seen
from the last row of Table 1, the percentages for non-
projective nodes and for non-projective nodes with
at least one gap are 5.3% and 1.7%, respectively.

When the (CPL) definition is used, the num-
bers look differently (Tab. 2). The total number of
nodes at the tectogrammatical layer of the PCEDT
is 757,021 on the English side and 819,206 on the
Czech side. The total number of tectogrammatical
nodes in the PDT is 593,473.

Lang. 0 gaps 1 gap 2 gaps >2 gaps
en 11,328 5,561 15 0
cs (tr.) 9,702 4,503 21 0
cs (nat.) 9,186 4,848 53 2

Table 2: Non-projective constructions in PCEDT and PDT,
overall counts using the (CLP) definition

This table differs substantially from Tab. 1, giving
much more balanced figures due to the manual anno-
tation of the tectogrammatical layer. Based on these
observations, we have used only the (CLP) defini-
tion for our subsequent investigation.

5.1 Constructions involving a verb and its
argument

The overall number of verb tokens tested for non-
projectivity in the PCEDT was 92,840. Among
those, there are 2,352 cases (1,311 in English, 1,042
in Czech translations) where the non-projectivity in-
volves a verb and its argument (i.e., the verb is in the

gap of the non-projective subtree of its argument)
and 1,407 (932 in English, 476 in Czech) cases of
two arguments (i.e., one argument is in the gap a
non-projective subtree of another argument).

proč
CAUS
Proč

Dinkins
ACT
Dinkins

říkat
PRED
říká

kritik
ACT
kritik

kdy
MANN
vždycky

vyčkávat
EFF
vyčkává

Cs: Proč.CAUS Dinkins.ACT, řı́ká.PRED kritik.ACT,
vždycky.MANN vyčkává.EFF ...

En: (lit.) Why.CAUS Dinkins.ACT, says.PRED
the kicker.ACT, always.MANN waits.EFF ...

En: Why Dinkins always waits ..., says the kicker.

Figure 2: Non-projective construction, gap=1, verb in gap

An example of a Czech construction with non-
projectivity of a subtree rooted in a verb argument,
where the verb is in the gap, is shown in Fig. 2
(it uses the (P) definition on a surface dependency
tree). Here, the root verb of the subordinate clause
“vyčkává” waits, which is an argument (labeled Ef-
fect) of the matrix verb “řı́ká” says on the tectogram-
matical layer, dominates a non-projective substree,
since the subject has been fronted before the root
verb of the whole sentence. This is one of the
very typical cases of non-projective constructions,
where the main verb is a communication or a re-
ported speech verb (say, add, shout, remember, an-
swer, argue, go on, to name a few extracted from the
PCEDT).12

Another typical example of non-projective con-
structions in Czech involving a verb is a construc-
tion with a catenative13 (and modals or quasi-modal)
verb like “podařit”, “začı́t”, “zkusit”, “nechat” (lit.
“manage”, “start”, “try”, “let”), etc. The ar-
gument, which is often non-projective, is the Pa-
tient (PAT), typically expressed as infinitive, whose
first or second argument (Actor (ACT) or Patient

12Counting on a sample of 100 examples from the English
side of the PCEDT, 43 have been of this type.

13Catenative verbs are usually defined as those combining
with non-finite verbal forms, see e.g. (Palmer, 1974; Quirk et
al., 1985; Mindt, 1999; Leech et al., 2012).

17



(PAT)) is fronted “across” the verb. An example
is “domy.PAT nezkoušej.PRED prodávat.PAT bez
makléře.ACMP” (lit. “houses.PAT do-not-try.PRED
sell.PAT without an-agent.ACMP).14

t-shirt
ACT
T-shirts

appear.enunc
PRED
appeared

corridor
LOC
in the corridors

that
ACT
that

carry
RSTR
carried

En: T-shirts.ACT appeared.PRED in the corridors.LOC
that.ACT carried.RSTR ...

Cs (lit.): *Trička.ACT se objevila.PRED na
chodbách.LOC která.ACT nesla.RSTR ...

Cs: Na chodbách se objevila trička, která nesla ...

Figure 3: Non-projective construction with ACT’s dependent
(RSTR) branching non-projectively to the right, verb in gap

In English, in one of the rare cases where there is
no Czech non-projective counterpart, a construction
which gives rise to non-projectivity is a verb argu-
ment (typically Actor (ACT) expressed as Subject,
i.e., in active voice) preceding the verb, which is
then complemented by a time or location expression
and only then an relative clause dependent on the
argument is placed: “T-shirts.ACT appeared.PRED
in the corridors.LOC that.ACT carried.RSTR ...”
(Fig. 3). Here, in the tectogrammatical represen-
tation, “T-shirt” is the Actor (ACT), and argument
of “appear”, and the clause starting “that carried...”
depends on it. In the tree, the subtree rooted in
“T-shirt” is non-projective, since the verb “appear”
(and all the words from the location adverbial, i.e.,
“in the corridors”) form the gap. Another English
example involving a copula is “... opinion.ACT
is.PRED mixed.PAT on how much of a boost the

14In such constructions, a question might arise how the
shared argument between the head verb and the non-finite de-
pendent verb is treated: as has been described earlier, any node
elided on the surface (even if present at the tectogrammatical
layer) are ignored for non-projectivity considerations due to the
non-existence of its word order index, which we in no way try
to re-create.

market would get.RSTR” where the root “get” of
the relative clause depends on “opinion”, and there-
fore “opinion” heads a non-projective subtree with
the predicator“is (mixed)” falling in the gap.15 An-
other example is “... the plan.PAT is.PRED impos-
sible.PAT to accommodate.PAT”, where “plan” is a
dependent of “accommodate”, which itself is a de-
pendent of “is”, creating a non-projective subtree
rooted in “accommodate”.

In Czech, there are only a few constructions
which allow similar non-projectivity to the one just
described for English, typically containing the verb
“být” as a copula: “... dividendy.ACT jsou.PRED
splatné.PAT k 2. lednu.TWHEN z akciı́.RSTR ...”
(lit. ... dividends.ACT are.PRED payable.PAT
Jan.TWHEN 2 to stock.RSTR) where “akciı́” (lit.
shares depends on “dividendy” (lit. dividends), and
thus causes the non-projectivity of the subtree rooted
in “dividendy”, with the verb “jsou” (lit. are) in the
gap.

In English, but possible in Czech too16, is a
construction in which a verb argument is modi-
fied by two or more modifiers, with one imme-
diately following it in the surface word order but
the other being far right, after additional arguments
or adjuncts of the dominant verb, such as in: “A
total.ACT of 139 companies.RSTR raised.PRED
dividends.PAT in October.TWHEN, basically un-
changed.RSTR ...”, where “unchanged” is a depen-
dent of “total,” not the verb,17 putting the verb (and
some of the additional dependents of the verb, such
as “dividends” and “October”) in the gap of the non-
projective subtree rooted in “total”.

15One could argue that the subordinate clause could be con-
sidered Adverbial clause depending on the verb, in which case
there will be no non-projectivity. However, the distinction be-
tween “opinion on [clause] is mixed” and “opinion is mixed on
[clause]” has been considered to be in the information structure
rather than in syntax (Hajič et al., 2004), and thus the structure
in the PDT-style of annotation is the same. This argument holds,
due to morphosyntactic considerations such as agreement, more
firmly for Czech, but it was applied to English as well by anal-
ogy.

16Even though all cases that we have found in the PCEDT
have been translated using a completely different (and projec-
tive) constructiton.

17We are leaving aside the discussion whether annotating
“unchanged” as a dependent on “total” is adequate for the se-
mantic/tectogrammatical layer of annotation, but at the moment
this is how such Measure Phrases have been treated in PDT.

18



5.2 Constructions involving two or more
arguments

These cases are less frequent than the cases involv-
ing the verb being in the gap of the non-projective
argument-rooted tree, but they do exist.

Similar to the case of verb-argument non-
projectivy of the “T-shirts.ACT appeared.PRED in
the corridors.LOC that carried.RSTR ...”-type as de-
scribed in the previous section, is a construction
where a Patient (PAT) follows a verb, followed by
an adverbial (dependent on the verb), and only then
the attribute of the Patient follows: “ABC.ACT
signed.PRED an agreement.PAT with DEF.ADDR
under which shares will be acquired.RSTR ...”.
Since “with ...” is an argument (Addressee) of “sign”
at the tectogrammatical layer, and thus depends on
it, the subtree rooted in the deep object (PAT) argu-
ment “agreement” is non-projective. The type of this
argument-argument non-projectivity is PAT-ADDR
(the ADDR-labeled argument is projected to the gap
in the yield of the subtree rooted in “agreement”.

5.3 Left vs. right non-projective edges
It is well known that fronting or ’movement to the
left’ tends to create non-projective constructions. In
(Hajičová et al., 2004), it was only such moves that
have been investigated, due also to their relation to
information structure which was one of the foci in
that study.

However, in our study, we also wanted to in-
vestigate whether non-projective edges leading to
the right (both in Czech and English) are rare(r),
or whether they differ substantially from those left-
branching ones studied previously.

Lang. left (%) right (%)
en 1122 (64.93%) 606 (35.07%)
cs (tr.) 913 (68.96%) 411 (31.04%)
cs (nat.) 1,945 (79.85%) 491 (20.15%)

Table 3: Left- vs. right-branching non-projective subtrees
rooted in a verb argument

The statistics alone show two things: first, the
prevalence of left-branching non-projective edges is
much higher in the native Czech treebank (PDT)
than on Czech side of the PCEDT (which suggest
influence of non-projective constructions on trans-
lation), and second, that while left-branching does

prevail 2:1 or more over right-branching, the num-
ber of right-branching non-projectivities rooted at
verb arguments is substantial (and thus, worth fur-
ther studies).

6 Conclusions

We have described the results of investigation of
non-projective constructions involving verbs and
their arguments, using no predefined classification
scheme but an annotated material of the Prague
Czech-English Dependency Treebank and the origi-
nal Prague Dependency Treebank. We can summa-
rize our findings in a few main points:

• as a starting point, we have divided the corpus
material to those constructions that involve the
verb and at least one of its arguments vs. those
involving two or more arguments (and not the
verb itself), under the hypothesis that these
two cases will display different behavior; how-
ever, this proved not to be a crucial distinction
(“(a tak) transakce.PAT je.PRED přitom.TPAR
levnějšı́ provádět...” lit. (and so) trans-
action.PAT is.PRED at-the-same-time.TPAR
cheaper to perform vs. “(a tak) je.PRED
transakce.PAT přitom.TPAR levnějšı́ provádět”
lit. (and so) is.PPRED transaction.PAT at-
the-same-time.TPAR cheaper to perform, with
“transakce” depending on “provádět”);

• the most frequent case is the construction with
the communication/reporting verbs (verba di-
cendi and similar verbs) when used in the mid-
dle of the direct or report speech construction
they introduce;

• nominals used as arguments can have their at-
tribute(s) (whether expressed by a clause or as
prepositinal phrase) across other arguments or
adjuncts of the verb;

• as expected, certain types of non-projectivity
are due to the conventions used in the annota-
tion;

• when comparing native Czech with translated
Czech, the statistics on the direction of non-
projective branching rooted in a verb argu-
ment suggests that translators are probably in-
fluenced by the source English and do not use

19



left-branching non-projective constructions as
often as they appear in native Czech;

• we have independently confirmed that the fo-
cus on fronted or left-moved constructions in
(Hajičová et al., 2004) was right, but that
roughly 1/3 of non-projective constructions
rooted in a verb argument are right-branching
and thus not to be ignored in future research;

• certain types of verb-related non-projectivities
described in (Hajičová et al., 2004), such
as a nominal group in Czech with dislo-
cated RSTR (depending on a verb argu-
ment) (“společnou.RSTR máme.PRED ... zod-
povědnost.PAT”, lit. “common.RSTR we-
have.PRED ... responsibility.PAT), were not at-
tested in translated Czech (PCEDT), but have
been found in the PDT. The same holds for nu-
merals with a dislocated dependent.

In terms of future work, there are two possible di-
rections. In the technological area, the results (es-
pecially on English) confirm that non-projectivity
is indeed going to be a problem for (deep) parsers,
and that even surface dependency parsers should be
looked at again to see if improvements are possi-
ble based on error analysis using the classification
presented. On the theoretical side, we would like
to (a) continue to investigate the less frequent cases
which we have not included in this study, (b) involve
other features of the tectogrammatical annotation,
such as the information structure (topic/focus anno-
tation, and/or co-reference information) and (c) de-
fine the types of non-projective verb-argument con-
structions more formally, to allow for an automatic
classification, e.g., on a large corpus.

Acknowledgments

This work described herein has been supported by
the grant GP13-03351P of the Grant Agency of
the Czech Republic and by the LINDAT/CLARIN
Research Infrastructure projects, LM2010013 and
LM2015071 funded by the MEYS of the Czech Re-
public. It has also been using language resources
developed and distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN
project (http://lindat.cz).

We would like to thank to all the three review-
ers of the paper, who provided valuable comments;

specifically, we are grateful to the anonymous re-
viewer #2, whose in-depth review helped us to re-
alize and correct several important shortcomings of
the original version.

References

Anders Björkelund and Joakim Nivre. 2015. Non-
deterministic oracles for unrestricted non-projective
transition-based dependency parsing. In Proceedings
of the 14th International Conference on Parsing Tech-
nologies, pages 76–86.

Bernd Bohnet and Joakim Nivre. 2012. A transition-
based system for joint part-of-speech tagging and la-
beled non-projective dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 1455–1465.

Silvie Cinková. 2006. From propbank to engvallex:
Adapting the propbank-lexicon to the valency theory
of the functional generative description. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 2170–
2175, Genova, Italy. ELRA, ELRA.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Buráňová, Zdeňka
Urešová, Alevtina Bémová, Jan štěpánek, Petr Pajas,
and Jiřı́ Kárnı́k. 2004. Anotace na analytické rovině.
Návod pro anotátory. Technical Report TR-2004-23,
ÚFAL/CKL MFF UK, Prague.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie
Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký,
Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka
Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012. Announc-
ing Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012),
pages 3153–3160, Istanbul, Turkey. European Lan-
guage Resources Association.

Jan Hajič. 1998. Building a syntactically annotated cor-
pus: The prague dependency treebank. In Issues of
Valency and Meaning. Studies in Honour of Jarmila
Panevová (ed. Eva Hajičová). Karolinum, Charles
University Press, Prague, ISBN 80-7184-601-5.

Eva Hajičová, Jiřı́ Havelka, Petr Sgall, Kateřina Veselá,
and Daniel Zeman. 2004. Issues of projectivity in the
Prague Dependency Treebank. The Prague Bulletin of
Mathematical Linguistics, (81):5–22.

Johan Hall and Joakim Nivre. 2008. Parsing discontin-
uous phrase structure with grammatical functions. In
Advances in Natural Language Processing, 6th Inter-
national Conference, GoTAL 2008, Gothenburg, Swe-

20



den, August 25-27, 2008, Proceedings, pages 169–
180.

Jiřı́ Havelka. 2005. Projectivity in totally ordered rooted
trees: An alternative definition of projectivity and opti-
mal algorithms for detecting non-projective edges and
projectivizing totally ordered rooted trees. The Prague
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, (84):13–30.

Jiřı́ Havelka. 2007. Beyond projectivity: Multilin-
gual evaluation of constraints and measures on non-
projective structures. In Proceedings of the 45th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 608–615, Praha, Czechia. ÚFAL
MFF UK, Association for Computational Linguistics.

Richard Hudson. 1994. Discontinuous phrases in depen-
dency grammar. (6):89–124.

P. Kingsbury and M. Palmer. 2002. From Treebank to
Propbank. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2002), pages 1989–1993. Citeseer.

Marco Kuhlmann and Joakim Nivre. 2006. Mildly non-
projective dependency structures. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL)
Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 507–514.

Geoffrey N. Leech, Marianne Hundt, Christian Mair, and
Nicholas Smith. 2012. Change in Contemporary En-
glish. Cambridge University Press, New York.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large Annotated
Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. COMPUTA-
TIONAL LINGUISTICS, 19(2):313–330.

Solomon Marcus. 1965. Sur la notion de projectivité.
Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 11(2):181–192.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective dependency pars-
ing using spanning tree algorithms. In Proceedings of
Human Langauge Technology Conference and Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 523–530, Vancouver, BC, Canada. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Marie Mikulová, Alevtina Bémová, Jan Hajič, Eva
Hajičová, Jiřı́ Havelka, Veronika Kolářová, Lucie
Kučová, Markéta Lopatková, Petr Pajas, Jarmila
Panevová, Magda Razı́mová, Petr Sgall, Jan Štěpánek,
Zdeňka Urešová, Kateřina Veselá, and Zdeněk
Žabokrtský. 2006. Annotation on the tectogrammati-
cal level in the Prague Dependency Treebank. Annota-
tion manual. Technical Report 30, Prague, Czech Rep.

Dieter Mindt. 1999. Finite vs. Non-Finite Verb Phrases
in English. In Form, Function and Variation in En-
glish, pages 343–352, Frankfurt am Main. Peter Lang
GmbH.

Joakim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2005. Pseudo-projective
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 99–106.

Joakim Nivre. 2006. Constraints on non-projective de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the 11th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL), pages 73–80.

Joakim Nivre. 2007. Incremental non-projective depen-
dency parsing. In Proceedings of Human Language
Technologies: The Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL HLT), pages 396–403.

Joakim Nivre. 2009. Non-projective dependency parsing
in expected linear time. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and
the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP, pages 351–359.

Karel Oliva. 2001. Některé aspekty komplexity českého
slovnı́ho nepořádku. 3:163–172.

Martha Palmer, Dan Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 2005.
The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of seman-
tic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–106.

F. Palmer. 1974. The English Verb. Longman, London.
Vladimı́r Petkevič. 1998. Special Cases of Non-

Projective Constructions in the Syntax of Czech Sen-
tence. pages 61––66.

Vladimı́r Petkevič. 2001. Neprojektivnı́ konstrukce v
češtině z hlediska automatické morfologické disam-
biguace českých textů. In Čeština - univerzália a
specifika 3. Sbornı́k konference ve Šlapanicı́ch u Brna,
22.-24.11.2000 (eds. Zdeňka Hladká, Petr Karlı́k),
pages 197–205. MU Brno.

Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech,
and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar
of the English Language. Longman, London.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Dordrecht, Reidel, and Prague,
Academia, Prague.

František Štı́cha. 1996. Křı́ženı́ vět v češtině. Naše řeč,
79(1):26–31.

Ludmila Uhlı́řová. 1972. On the non-projective con-
structions in czech. The Prague Bulletin of Mathemat-
ical Linguistics, (3):171–181.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2011a. Valence sloves v Pražském
závislostnı́m korpusu. Studies in Computational and
Theoretical Linguistics. Ústav formálnı́ a aplikované
lingvistiky, Praha, Czechia.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2011b. Valenčnı́ slovnı́k Pražského
závislostnı́ho korpusu (PDT-Vallex). Studies in Com-
putational and Theoretical Linguistics. Ústav formálnı́
a aplikované lingvistiky, Praha, Czechia.

21


