



















































Machine Translation of Non-Contiguous Multiword Units


Proceedings of DiscoNLP 2016, pages 22–30,
San Diego, California, June 17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Machine Translation of Non-Contiguous Multiword Units

Anabela Barreiro1 and Fernando Batista1,2
(1) INESC-ID Lisboa, Portugal

(2) ISCTE-IUL, Instituto Universitário de Lisboa, Portugal
{anabela.barreiro, fernando.batista}@inesc-id.pt

Abstract

Non-adjacent linguistic phenomena such as
non-contiguous multiwords and other phrasal
units containing insertions, i.e., words that are
not part of the unit, are difficult to process
and remain a problem for NLP applications.
Non-contiguous multiword units are common
across languages and constitute some of the
most important challenges to high quality ma-
chine translation. This paper presents an
empirical analysis of non-contiguous multi-
words, and highlights our use of the Logos
Model and the Semtab function to deploy
semantic knowledge to align non-contiguous
multiword units with the goal to translate these
units with high fidelity. The phrase level man-
ual alignments illustrated in the paper were
produced with the CLUE-Aligner, a Cross-
Language Unit Elicitation alignment tool.

1 Introduction

Recently, in natural language processing (NLP),
there has been an increasing interest in multiword
units and in the problems they raise. Multiword
units, most commonly known as multiword expres-
sions1, have been defined by Baldwin and Kim
(2010) as "lexical items that: (a) can be decom-
posed into multiple lexemes; and (b) display lexi-
cal, syntactic, semantic, pragmatic and/or statistical
idiomaticity". Compositionality is the property that
makes the automatic processing of multiword units
particularly challenging. Multiword units occur very

1This term has also been designated inter alia as "multiword
lexical itens", "phraseological units" and "fixed expressions",
with slight variations in scope and meaning.

frequently with different degrees of compositional-
ity. Some represent free combinations, such as the
English noun phrase round table, (i.e., meeting),
some have opaque meanings, where the meaning of
the unit cannot be deduced from the meaning of its
individual constituents, such as piece of cake used
figuratively with the meaning of something easy to
do, or pay a visit equivalent to the verb visit. Trans-
lations of multiword units are often idiomatic and
unpredictable and a word-for-word translation may
result in poor quality translation (acid test). Addi-
tionally, in many cases, the idiom does not exist, or
exists with a different structural and lexical form, in
the target language (raining cats and dogs). Finally,
the morpho-syntactic properties of multiword units
allow, in some cases, the insertion of external ele-
ments into the unit (go for a [INSERTION] ride).

Notwithstanding the efforts undertaken to im-
prove multiword unit processing, lack of formaliza-
tion still triggers problems with the syntactic and se-
mantic analysis of sentences where multiwords oc-
cur and impairs the performance of NLP systems, af-
fecting especially machine translation (MT). When-
ever a multiword unit contains insertions, there is
a remote dependency that contributes to additional
difficulties in analysing and translating that multi-
word unit. The causes for poor quality translation of
lexical and semantico-syntactic phenomena, namely
cross-linguistic multiwords and other phrasal units,
can be summed up in three points:

1. Current methodologies rely mostly on statisti-
cal techniques to train and evaluate MT sys-
tems. Statistical machine translation (SMT)
models are built on the grounds of alignment

22



pairs acquired mostly automatically. Unsu-
pervised learning approaches adopted by SMT
systems use probabilistic alignments where lin-
guistic knowledge is still limited. Inability to
identify multiword units correctly often results
in translation deficiencies.

2. Shortcomings in current state of the art su-
pervised learning and manual word align-
ment standard practices, such as lack of pub-
licly available manual multilingual datasets,
and lack of linguistically motivated alignment
guidelines impose significant constraints on
translation quality, because they disregard non-
adjacent linguistic phenomena or syntactic dis-
continuity.

3. Current tools are incapable of assisting, in an
efficient way, human annotators in the task
of identifying correctly non-contiguous multi-
words and produce rules from them.

This paper discusses the aforementioned prob-
lems from an empirical point of view and provides
a solution for them in an experimental research
inspired in the Logos Model to machine transla-
tion (Scott, 2003; Barreiro et al., 2011).2 We use
the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005) to illustrate the
kind of linguistic knowledge that needs to be repre-
sented in future alignment tasks, with a special fo-
cus on the alignment challenges presented by non-
contiguous multiword units. The alignment exam-
ples in the paper were annotated with the CLUE-
Aligner tool (Barreiro et al., 2016). Even though
similar in name to the "clue alignment approach"
(Tiedemann, 2003; Tiedemann, 2011), mainly de-
voted to word-level alignment, our approach is the-
oretically and methodologically different with a fo-
cus on phrase alignment, contemplating multiwords
and linguistically-relevant phrasal units. In addition,
in our approach, CLUE is an acronym for "Cross-
Language Unit Elicitation", where a source and a
target language can correspond to the same language
as in the case of paraphrases.

2The Logos Model underlies both the commercial system
and its degraded open source version OpenLogos.

2 Addressing the Challenges

The first problem highlighted in section 1, has been
addressed by the creation of an empirical basis for
identifying support verb constructions in a corpus
and understand the impact of these multiword units
on translation quality. Barreiro et al. (2014) eval-
uated support verb constructions by two MT sys-
tems, OpenLogos and Google Translate, and con-
cluded that neither of these systems translates them
well. Overall, OpenLogos suffers from a weak lex-
icon, while Google Translate translation errors are
more of a structural nature. Although the transla-
tions are still problematic, the Logos Model presents
an advantage with regards to the SMT approach:
the Logos Model relies on deep semantico-syntactic
analysis to translate not only contiguous multiword
units, such as the support verb construction to draw
a distinction between, but also non-contiguous mul-
tiword units, such as the support verb construction
to bring [INSERTION] to a conclusion.

The second problem reported has been ap-
proached by the creation of manually annotated
alignments – the Gold CLUE4Translation – which
represent an important asset in the development
of MT systems. Supervised learning uses man-
ual alignments and aims at taking context, syn-
tax and other grammatical and semantic knowl-
edge into consideration. The Logos Model served
as inspiration to deploy this linguistic knowledge
into the alignment task through the identification
of translation relationships among words, multi-
words or phrasal units in bilingual parallel sen-
tences, i.e., sentence pairs that have been identified
as translation of each other. It also inspired the es-
tablishment of new linguistically-motivated align-
ment guidelines for pairs of translation units – the
CLUE4Translation Alignment Guidelines – that aim
to improve the quality of the (machine) translation of
multiword units, among other linguistic phenomena.

The third problem was tackled by the creation of
a solution for the annotation of non-contiguous mul-
tiwords and other phrasal units – the aforementioned
CLUE-Aligner3 – a web alignment tool that places a
special emphasis in the annotation of pairs of seman-
tically equivalent non-adjacent structures in mono-

3https://esperto.l2f.inesc-id.pt/esperto/
aligner/index.pl?

23



lingual and bilingual parallel sentences. The pairs
of non-contiguous multiword units and phrasal ex-
pressions can be used in rule development.

3 The Logos Model

The struggles of SMT with multiwords have been
reported in several research works (Barreiro et al.,
2013; Kordoni and Simova, 2014; Barreiro et al.,
2014; Semmar, 2012), among others. Multiword
units are a source of mistranslations not only by MT
systems, but also by professional translators, in part
because they are a source of various contextual nu-
ances, but also because they can be non-contiguous.

For example, verbal expressions such as the En-
glish prepositional verb to deal with take difference
senses (and translations) depending on contexts, typ-
ically their object or prepositional phrase comple-
ment. If the context of the verb is to deal with ques-
tions, as in example (1), then the French translation
should be s’occuper de (to be busy with). On the
other hand, if the context is he proved unable to
deal with the problem, then the translation should
be the translation of its paraphrase handle the prob-
lem. However, if the context is he refused to deal
with the problem, then the translation would be a
translation of the paraphrase analyse and try to solve
the problem. These different nuances are related to
the ambiguity and weakness of the verb deal and the
different meanings of the predicate-like nouns ques-
tions (issues, topics, interrogations, etc.) or prob-
lem (difficulty, exercise, etc.). It is the meaning of
these nouns that triggers the different translations of
deal, just like the verb take will have different trans-
lations depending on the predicate noun it supports
(walk, responsibility, comfort, etc.). Therefore, the
two slightly different meanings for problem in the
last two examples explain the distinct paraphrase:
handle in one case, and analyze and try to solve in
the other case.

In the Europarl corpus used in our exploratory
study not all translations are optimal and often trans-
lational equivalents are approximate rather than ex-
act. Therefore, the English prepositional verb to
deal with in example (1) is translated in the Ro-
mance languages as dedicarse a (engage in) in Span-
ish, the reflexive s’attacher a (focus on/stick to) in
French, and centrar-se em (concentrate/center (their

thoughts) on) in Portuguese. The different transla-
tions of deal are related to the idiomatic ways that
predicate nouns select their support verbs in differ-
ent languages: take a vow in English, but ‘make a
vow’ in the Romance languages (hacer in Spanish,
faire in French, and fazer in Portuguese).

(1) EN - our Asian partners prefer to deal with questions
which unite us

ES - nuestros socios asiáticos prefieren dedicarse a las
questiones que nos unen

FR - nos partenaires asiatiques préfèrent s’attacher à
([a+a]) ce qui nous unit
PT - os nossos parceiros asiáticos preferem centrar-se
unicamente nas ([em+as]) questões comuns

If the different nuances of a verbal expression are
difficult to capture even for translators, it is not sur-
prising that these expressions are poorly translated
by MT systems, unless these systems integrate se-
mantic or contextual knowledge and apply it to the
translation process, as illustrated in example (2).
The French MT output of example (1) by the Google
Translate (GT) system is a literal translation where
no context has been taken into consideration. How-
ever, the OpenLogos translation is correct and even
of a higher quality than that provided by a profes-
sional translator in the Europarl corpus (s’occuper
de is more precise than s’attacher a in that context).

(2) FR−GT - nos partenaires asiatiques préfèrent *traiter
avec des questions qui nous unissent
FR−OL - nos associés asiatiques préfèrent s’occuper des
questions qui nous unissent

The precision in the OpenLogos translation is as-
sociated with the application of a Semtab contex-
tual pattern-rule, which is a deep structure pattern
that matches on/applies to a great variety of surface
structures:

(3) deal(VI) with N(questions) = s’occuper de N4

This Semtab pattern-rule states that, when fol-
lowed by the direct object noun questions or a noun
of the same semantico-syntactic class, the verb is
translated as s’occuper de, overriding the default

4Here we only display the comment line of the Semtab rule,
not the rule itself or what it does in terms of the Logos language.
The rule notation is arcane due to its numeric representation and
it would take a larger effort to explain the use and meaning of
the distinct codes in the Logos Model.

24



Pattern #occurences #unique
bring [ ] to a conclusion 114 84
set [ ] in motion 162 140
play [ ] role 5165 1216
take [ ] interest in 360 163
keep [ ] informed about 77 58

Table 1: Statistics from a subset of Europarl.

dictionary translation for this verb. The power of this
rule is that it allows the translation system to recog-
nize and analyze multiword units, even when the el-
ements of the multiword units are non-contiguous.
The alignment of multiword units to feed a SMT
system needs to reflect these semantic nuances, in
a similar way to the way the Logos Model uses data-
driven pattern-rules to account for these nuances.5

This proves that alignments that mirror Semtab se-
mantic and contextual pattern-rules of the Logos
Model can help create new MT systems and improve
existing ones.

4 Alignment of Non-Contiguous
Multiwords Inspired by Logos

Non-contiguous multiword units are difficult to rec-
ognize and process causing many MT systems to
fail in providing the correct translations. For SMT
systems, non-contiguous multiword units represent
a significant challenge to a correct word and phrase
alignment (Shen et al., 2009).

The Europarl corpus contains a significant num-
ber of occurrences of non-contiguous multiword
units, such as the support verb constructions illus-
trated in subsections 4.1 – 4.5, which are a source
of translation errors due to incorrect alignment. Ta-
ble 1 shows the number of occurrences for five dif-
ferent cases of non-contiguous multiword units in a
subset of the Europarl corpus, containing about 47.4
million words, where the search was performed us-
ing all forms of each verb. The third pattern is the
most common type of multiword unit and also the

5Unlike rule-based MT models, the Logos Model is not rule-
driven, but data-driven, i.e., in Logos, patterns, not rules, do the
matching. So, in Logos, a rule refers to the action component
once a match is made. Like SMT, it is possible to apply the
same techniques to the data, which in the Logos Model is not
literal words but semantico-syntactic (SAL) patterns or entities.
This is the reason why it makes sense to train a machine learning
system to learn new SAL patterns based on alignments, instead
of on the conventionally used SMT patterns.

one with the highest spectrum of common usages.
About 83% of the forms occur more than once. The
fourth pattern occurs more than once 65% of the
times, revealing these commonly adopted construc-
tions appear in many different forms. On the other
hand, the first, second and fifth patterns occur only
once, 62%, 78% and 62% of the times, thus suggest-
ing that learning automatic models to deal with these
type of constructions may not be straightforward.

The remainder of this section discusses each case
taking into account the Logos Model and show-
ing how each alignment is represented in CLUE-
Aligner.

4.1 bring [ ] to a conclusion

In example (4), the English non-contiguous sup-
port verb construction bring [INSERTION] to a
conclusion places the predicate noun conclusion,
with its adnominal modifiers, ten words apart from
the support verb bring. The Spanish, French, and
Portuguese translation equivalents adopt different
stylistic variants and simpler surface structures (i.e.,
syntax) by transforming the support verb construc-
tion into semantically equivalent verbal construc-
tions, the single verb acelerar (speed up, acceler-
ate) in Spanish or the compound verbs faire avancer
(make advance) and apressar-se a apresentar (hurry
to present) in French and Portuguese, respectively.

(4) EN - I would urge the European Commission to bring the
process of adopting the directive to on additional pensions
to a conclusion

ES - insto a la comisión europea para que acelere la direc-
tiva sobre pensiones complementares

FR - j’insiste auprès de la comission européenne pour
faire avancer la directive sur les pensions complémen-
taires

PT - exorto a comissão europeia a apressar-se a apresen-
tar a directiva relativa as pensões complementares

This non-contiguous support verb construction,
with a remote placement of one of the components
of the unit, represents a difficult unit to align and
to translate. In general, statistical (or statistically-
based) MT systems translate fairly well contigu-
ous multiword units taking into account context
(surrounding word strings). However, purely sta-
tistical phrase-based MT systems translate poorly
multiwords that contain elements placed remotely

25



Figure 1: Alignment of bring [ ] to a conclusion

(long distance dependency), as illustrated in the Por-
tuguese translation of the support verb construction
by Google Translate in example (5), where the verb
is missing.

(5) PT−GT - Gostaria de exortar a Comissão Europeia a que
o processo de adopção da directiva para as pensões adi-
cionais *para uma conclusão.

Figure 1 represents the P-alignment of the non-
contiguous support verb construction bring [ ] to a
conclusion with its contiguous equivalent compound
verb apressar-se a apresentar in Portuguese.

The most common expression found in our sub-
set of the Europarl corpus is bring this matter to
a conclusion and the remaining expressions occur
very few times.

4.2 setting [ ] in motion

Often in translation, a non-contiguous expression
in a source language can be maintained in the tar-
get language or replaced by an equivalent but con-
tiguous expression that conveys the same meaning.
It can also be transformed into a simpler contigu-
ous syntactic structure, such as a single word. For
example, the Portuguese translation for the non-
contiguous English support verb construction set in
motion in example (6) is the single verb empreender
(undertake). Both Spanish and French maintain the
support verb constructions (llevar a cabo and met-
tre en chantier), but they are contiguous, having no
insertions. The presence of a non-contiguous ex-
pression in one of the sentences of the language pair
causes additional complexity to the alignment task,

Figure 2: Alignment of setting [ ] in motion

which we are able to solve with the Logos Model
approach.

(6) EN - many member states thus have the major task of set-
ting structural reform in motion
ES - he aquí por lo tanto una tarea de gran importancia
para que numerosos estados miembros lleven a cabo re-
formas estructurales

FR - il y a donc là une táche considérable pour beau-
coup d’états membres, celle de mettre en chantier des
réformes structurelles

PT - há, portanto, uma tarefa importante para muitos
estados-membros em empreender reformas estruturais

Figure 2 represents the alignment of the non-
contiguous support verb construction setting [ ] in
motion with the single verb empreender in Por-
tuguese.

4.3 play [ ] role
In some cases, the verbal expression is always ex-
pressed in the form of a support verb construction,
which is the case of play [INSERTION] role, be-
cause there is no semantically equivalent single verb.
The support verb can take several forms, i.e., the
construction can be stylistically different (Barreiro,
2009). Figure 3 exemplifies the adjective modifier
insertions increasingly predominant in the English
sentence. These insertions are excluded from the
English–Portuguese alignment pair play [ ] a role –
desempenham um papel and aligned separately.

4.4 take [ ] interest in
Non-contiguous prepositional verbs are aligned to-
gether with the preposition. Example (7) illustrates
the alignment of the English support verb construc-
tion take [ ] interest in with its semantically equiva-
lent prepositional verbs in the Romance languages.
In this support verb construction, the preposition in

26



Figure 3: Alignment of play [ ] role

is selected by the predicate noun interest, and not by
the support verb take. In the Romance languages,
the prepositions are selected by strong verbs: ocu-
parse [ ] de in Spanish, s’occuper [ ] des in French,
and debruçar-se [ ] sobre in Portuguese. The adjec-
tival insertion special aligns with the adverbial in-
sertions in the Romance languages: en especial in
Spanish, en particulier in French, and em especial
in Portuguese.

(7) EN - the committee on employment and social affairs
took a special interest in types of supplementary pension
funds

ES - la comisión de empleo y de asuntos sociales se ha
ocupado en especial de las modalidades de la asistencia
suplementaria a la tercera edade

FR - la commission de l’emploi et des affaires sociales
s’est en particulier occupée des ([de+les]) différentes
formes de retraite complémentaire

PT - a comissão do emprego e dos assuntos sociais
debruçou-se em especial sobre as possibilidades exis-
tentes para regimes complementares de reforma

Figure 4: Alignment of took [ ] interest in

Figure 4 represents the alignment of the non-
contiguous prepositional verb took [ ] interest in
with the corresponding reflexive prepositional verb
s’occuper de in French.

4.5 keep [ ] informed about

Prepositional adjectives align as internal elements
of support verb constructions. Example (8) illus-
trates the alignment of contiguous prepositional ad-
jectives, with the exception of Spanish. The prepo-
sitional adjective in Spanish contains an adverbial
insertion (periódicamente) between the adjective in-
formados and the preposition de. In English, French,
and Portuguese, the adverbs occur before the prepo-
sitional adjectives. Therefore, the contiguous prepo-
sitional adjective informed about in English aligns
with its semantically equivalent prepositional adjec-
tives informés des in French, and informados acerca
d(os) in Portuguese.

(8) EN - calling on the commission to keep us regularly
informed about recent developments

ES - pidiendo a la comisión que nos mantenga
informados periódicamente de lo que vaya ocurriendo

FR - appelant la commission à nous tenir régulièrement
informés des ([de+les]) derniers développements de ce
dossier

PT - em que se apela à comissão para que nos mantenha
regularmente informados acerca dos ([de+os]) progres-
sos que se forem realizando

Figure 5: Alignment of keep [ ] informed about

Figure 4 represents the alignment of the non-
contiguous support verb construction with a prepo-
sitional adjective keep [ ] informed about with its
Spanish equivalent mantenga informados de.

5 Advantages of the Logos Model

Former word alignment techniques, even when they
contemplated multiword unit alignments, were un-
able to present a consistent and efficient solution to
process non-contiguous expressions. The advantage
of the Logos Model with regards to non-contiguous

27



multiword units is its ability to relate constituents
that are apart (even very far apart) in the sentence.
Semtab is an effective way of analysing and trans-
lating words in context, especially when the context
is remote. In addition to this, Semtab also allows
generalizing between alternative forms of the same
multiword, phrase or expression. For example, it
presents the possibility of generalizing translations
of take a walk to translations of walk, if one of
these two is found in the training corpus. Similarly,
closed class items or highly frequent multiwords and
phrases might be learnt quickly and be translated
correctly by a SMT system, but open class items or
less frequent multiwords and phrases might present
more challenging problems that can be observed in
MT translations, but also in non-native speakerisms,
such as the choice of a support verb for a particular
support verb construction (e.g., make a visit or pay a
visit?), which can be robustely corrected by the use
of Semtab.

Independently of the MT approach, the most
important consideration with respect to multiword
units is that they should never be processed on a
word-for-word basis, because they represent atomic
semantico-syntactic and translation units and cannot
be broken down into constituent parts in any align-
ment process. Given that SMT translation quality
depends on the quality of the alignments, it is neces-
sary a better representation of multiword units, and
greater amounts of training data. Only a more gen-
eral representation and access to lexica will cause
an impact on unseen multiwords. Therefore, lin-
guistic knowledge "elicited" in the alignment pro-
cess and the use of a more refined alignment tool can
solve some of the problems related to multiword unit
alignment, when it is so relevant that these align-
ments mirror the unity of the expression.

6 Analysis of Preliminary Results

Taking into account the search performed in section
4 and the corresponding results summarised in Table
1, we have analysed the first 20 sentences extracted
from the subset corpus for each one of the multiword
cases. In order to assess the current translation qual-
ity of each one of the previously described cases, we
translated each sample using Google Translate and
performed an empirical evaluation of the achieved

results.
For the support verb construction bring [ ] to a

conclusion, we categorized all 20 translations as in-
correct, inadequate or non-optimal. Example (9) il-
lustrates a literal, unnatural Portuguese translation
trazer a uma conclusão for this support verb con-
struction, where a paraphrase of it, such as concluir
or terminar este dossier, represents a higher quality
translation.

(9) EN - The Council is full of good intentions to do all it can
to bring this dossier to a conclusion

PT−GT - O Conselho está cheio de boas intenções para
fazer todo o possível para *trazer este dossier a uma
conclusão

We also categorized all 20 translations of sen-
tences with the support verb construction set [ ] in
motion as incorrect. Example (10) illustrates a lit-
eral, incorrect translation estabeleceu [ ] em movi-
mento, instead of iniciou or pôs em marcha.

(10) EN - it was the Polish Solidarnosc movement which set
the downfall of the Soviet superpower in motion 20 years
ago

PT−GT - foi o movimento Solidarnosc polonês que
*estabeleceu a queda da superpotência soviética em
movimento há 20 anos

For the support verb construction play [ ] role, we
categorized 8 of the 20 translations as incorrect, in-
adequate or non-optimal. Example (11) illustrates a
literal, incorrect translation jogar o papel, instead of
desempenhar o papel.

(11) EN - the European Parliament is not prepared to simply
play the role of observer

PT−GT - o Parlamento Europeu não está preparado para
simplesmente *jogar o papel de observador

For the support verb construction take [ ] interest
in, we categorized 16 of the 20 translations as incor-
rect, inadequate or non-optimal. Example (12) illus-
trates the consequences that an incorrect approach
to non-contiguous support verb constructions (and
other multiword units) have over translation, which
is responsible for the incorrect agreement between
noun (interesse is masculine) and adjective (morna
is feminine), but also for the non-optimal transla-
tion of the support verb. A higher quality translation
would use the non-elementary support verbs mani-
feste or demonstre, in the present subjunctive instead

28



of in the infinitive form (unlike the incorrectly cho-
sen support verb form ter).

(12) EN - It is unacceptable for the Commission only to take a
lukewarm interest in a country
PT−GT - É inaceitável que a Comissão só a *ter um in-
teresse morna em um país

For the support verb construction keep informed
about, we categorized 9 of the 20 translations as in-
correct, inadequate or non-optimal. Example (13)
illustrates an incorrect translation tem [...] manteve
informados sobre for this support verb construction,
which should be translated as (que nos) tem mantido
informados, or (que nos) tem informado, among oth-
ers.

(13) EN - We have a Commissioner who has played and still
is playing a major role in this enlargement, who has con-
stantly kept us informed about what he was doing and
with whom we have clearly always been on the same
wavelength from a political point of view.

PT−GT - Temos um Comissário, que desempenhou e con-
tinua a desempenhar um papel importante no este alarga-
mento, que *tem constantemente nos *manteve infor-
mados sobre o que ele estava fazendo e com quem temos
claramente sido sempre no mesmo comprimento de onda
de um ponto de vista político

In addition to the lexical problems related to the
translation of non-contiguous multiword units, there
are also structural errors, such as lack of agreement
(e.g., para nos manter regular e estreitamente *in-
formado sobre; que o Parlamento *ser bem *in-
formados sobre) and incorrect word order (se con-
seguirmos *a adoptar e defini-lo em movimento),
among others.

Even though, we have analysed just a few cases,
the findings point to a general lack of quality in the
translation of non-contiguous support verb construc-
tions, which appear to be also true for other types of
non-contiguous multiword units and phrasal expres-
sions. A broader quantification of the phenomenon
would help validating our preliminary results. A
subsequent work could evaluate the performance of
hierarchical phrase-based, syntax-based, and neural
network translation models, which have the theoret-
ical capacity to learn non-contiguous expressions.

7 Conclusions and Future Directions

This paper aims to prove that standard MT systems
can benefit significantly by assuming a correct pro-

cessing of non-contiguous multiword units, which
current approaches are not exploring efficiently. The
amount of post-editing effort can be reduced by in-
creasing the quality of the alignments.

Non-contiguous support verb constructions pro-
cessing, recognition and translation is a challenging
problem when using alignment techniques. Some
methodologies are inefficient in the sense that they
violate the intrinsic property of the unit as an atomic
group of elements when aligning them individually
or when not respecting the correct boundaries of the
unit.

Another problem concerns manual multilingual
alignment scarcity and lack of linguistically rich
alignment guidelines. Previously proposed word
alignments guidelines cover cross-linguistic phe-
nomena superficially, excluding the important align-
ment challenges (and challenges to machine transla-
tion) presented by non-contiguous support verb con-
structions and other multiwords and phrasal units.

This paper presented the reasons why non-
contiguous correct and non-ambiguous alignment
is important, and showed how alignment chal-
lenges have been addressed in the Logos Model.
This model inspired us to create an alignment
methodology that allows the correct alignment of
non-contiguous multiwords and other phrasal units,
which we were able to represent graphically in
CLUE-Aligner, an alignment tool that handles non-
adjacent structures in an appropriate way.

A strategic follow-up of this experimental re-
search is to extract translation rules from manu-
ally annotated corpora and enhance an initially cre-
ated Gold standard of manual annotations of bilin-
gual alignment pairs to feed CLUE-Aligner, based
on alignment decisions documented in the work in
progress set of CLUE Alignment Guidelines. There-
fore, future work aims the enhancement of CLUE-
Aligner to align and extract automatically large
amounts of alignment pairs to be applied to MT case
studies, with an ultimate goal to improve transla-
tion applications. Linguistically-based alignments
extracted from good quality translation corpora can
contribute to increased precision and recall in SMT
systems, with the subsequent improvement of trans-
lation quality. They are also a valuable asset for ap-
plications that require monolingual paraphrases.

This paper could not be ended without without

29



underlining the great importance of paraphrases in
the translation process. Future machine transla-
tion requires paraphrastic knowledge that allows to
choose among possible translations, the best transla-
tion for a multiword unit or phrasal expression in the
particular sentence where it occurs (i.e., in context),
as illustrated in example (14).

(14) EN - It is time to bring this issue to a conclusion
EN - We must bring this episode to a conclusion

PT - Está na altura de resolver esta questão
PT - Chegou a hora de concluir este assunto
PT - Ponhamos um ponto final neste tema
PT - Temos de concluir este episódio.

Acknowledgements

This research work was supported by Fundação
para a Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT), under ref-
erence UID/CEC/50021/2013, project eSPERTo
– EXPL/MHC-LIN/2260/2013, and post-doctoral
grant SFRH/BPD/91446/2012. The authors wish to
thank Brigitte Orliac and Bud Scott for comment-
ing on the portion of this paper related to the Logos
Model.

References
Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword

Expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Processing,
Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group,
Boca Raton, FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.

Anabela Barreiro, Bernard Scott, Walter Kasper, and
Bernd Kiefer. 2011. OpenLogos Rule-Based Machine
Translation: Philosophy, Model, Resources and Cus-
tomization. Machine Translation, 25(2):107–126.

Anabela Barreiro, Johanna Monti, Brigitte Orliac, and
Fernando Batista. 2013. When Multiwords Go Bad
in Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Multi-word Units in Machine Translation and
Translation Technology, Machine Translation Summit
XIV.

Anabela Barreiro, Johanna Monti, Brigitte Orliac, Su-
sanne Preuss, Kutz Arrieta, Wang Ling, Fernando
Batista, and Isabel Trancoso. 2014. Linguistic Eval-
uation of Support Verb Constructions by OpenLo-
gos and Google Translate. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno,
Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings

of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), pages 35–40.
ELRA.

Anabela Barreiro, Francisco Raposo, and Tiago Luís.
2016. CLUE-Aligner: An Alignment Tool to Anno-
tate Pairs of Paraphrastic and Translation Units. In
Nicoletta Calzolari et al., editor, Proceedings of the
10th edition of the Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Conference (LREC 2016), pages –. ELRA.

Anabela Barreiro. 2009. Make it Simple with Para-
phrases: Automated Paraphrasing for Authoring Aids
and Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Universidade
do Porto, Portugal.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus
for Statistical Machine Translation. In Conference
Proceedings: the tenth Machine Translation Summit,
pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand. AAMT.

Valia Kordoni and Iliana Simova. 2014. Multiword ex-
pressions in machine translation. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, May. ELRA.

Bernard (Bud) Scott. 2003. The Logos Model: An His-
torical Perspective. Machine Translation, 18(1):1–72.

Dhouha Semmar. 2012. Identifying Bilingual Multi-
Word Expressions for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Proceedings of the Eight International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC12),
pages 23–25. ELRA.

Libin Shen, Jinxi Xu, Bing Zhang, Spyros Matsoukas,
and Ralph Weischedel. 2009. Effective use of lin-
guistic and contextual information for statistical ma-
chine translation. In EMNLP 09: Proceedings of the
2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 72–80.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2003. Combining clues for word
alignment. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (EACL), pages 12–17, Budapest,
Hungary.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2011. Bitext Alignment. Morgan and
Claypool.

30


