



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 275–284,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Effect of Syntactic Features in Bangla Sentence Comprehension  

 

Manjira Sinha 

Xerox Research Center 

India1 

manjira87@gmail.com 

Tirthankar Dasgupta 

TCS Innovation Lab, 

New Delhi1 

gupta.tirthankar@tcs.com 

Anupam Basu 

IIT Kharagpur 

anupambas@gmail.com 

 

  

Abstract 

Sentence comprehension is an integral 

and important part of whole text 

comprehension. It involves complex 

cognitive actions, as a reader has to work 

through lexical, syntactic and semantic 

aspects in order to understand a sentence. 

One of the vital features of a sentence is 

word order or surface forms. Different 

languages have evolved different systems 

of word orders, which reflect the cognitive 

structure of the native users of that 

language. Therefore, word order affects 

the cognitive load exerted by a sentence as 

experienced by the reader. Computational 

modeling approach to quantify the effect 

of word order on difficulty of sentence 

understanding can provide a great 

advantage in study of text readability and 

its applications. Plethora of works have 

been done in English and other languages 

to address the issue. However, Bangla, 

which is the fifth mostly spoken languages 

in the world and a relatively free word 

order language, still does not have any 

computational model to quantify the 

reading difficulty of a sentence. In this 

paper, we have developed models to 

predict the comprehending difficulty of a 

simple sentence according to its different 

surface forms in Bangla. In the course of 

action, we have also established that 

difficulty measures for English do not 

hold in Bangla. Our model has been 

validated against a number of user survey. 

                                                 
1 The work was done during the authors stay at IIT Kharagpur 
2  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bengali_language 

1 Introduction 

Complexity of a sentence is the amount of effort a 

user needs to put in order to understand or 

comprehend the sentence. Sentence complexity is 

an important factor in accessing text readability, 

language acquisition and language impairment. 

When a reader scans (generally left to right) a 

sentence, she first processes the syntax (structure 

and word organization) and semantics (meaning 

represented by the words) and then reduces them 

to a semantic whole to store in the memory (Levy, 

2013). The short-term memory of the reader 

engages in real time comprehension of a sentence. 

While processing a sentence, the short-term 

memory encounters two types of costs (Oya, 

2011): storage cost of the structure built in 

memory so far and the integration cost due to the 

proper insertion of the current word into that 

structure. Therefore, the integration complexity 

depends upon the relative positions of the entities 

to be connected, i.e., word order of the sentence.  

One of the important grammatical information for 

sentence interpretation is the word order as it 

determines the organizations of different 

grammatical features. It has great impact on the 

sentence complexity (Meltzer et al., 2010) as it 

influences both the storage and integration cost 

and expectation load. Different languages follow 

different construction rules to build sentences and 

thus different word orders. Research has been 

performed to the study effect of word ordering in 

sentence comprehension in languages like 

English, Finnish, German (SWINNEY, 1998; 

Weyerts et al., 2002; Kaiser and Trueswell, 2004). 

In this paper, the language concerned is Bangla. 

Bangla is a descendant of the Eastern Indo-Aryan 

language family 2 . Typologically, it is an 

inflexional analytic language. Syntax or Sentence 

structure of Bangla differs from English in many 

aspects. Bangla is a head final language where the 

275



principle word order is subject-object-verb 

(SOV). It is also a relatively free word-order 

language as it permits free word order in its 

constituent chunk or local word group level. Intra-

chunk reordering of words is not always 

permitted; different surface forms of the same 

sentence are possible, which are grammatically 

correct; some surface forms are easy to 

comprehend and some are difficult. Therefore, 

even simple sentences in Bangla (Chatterji, 1926) 

can have different surface forms with different 

comprehending complexities. Till date, there is no 

prominent study to computationally model the 

cognitive load associated with different word 

orders in Bangla.  

In this study, our objective is to develop models 

to quantify the influence of the syntactic and 

lexical properties of a sentence in sentence 

comprehension. We have considered simple 

sentences i.e. sentences having one finite verb3. 

Simple sentences in Bangla can contain many 

language specific constructs. We have explored 

the underlying factors responsible for the 

differences in complexity among different surface 

forms, such as relative order of subject(s) and 

object(s) with respect to the verb and organization 

of non-finite structures. First, we have conducted 

an empirical user survey, and then we have 

developed and enhanced our model to reflect the 

comprehending difficulty experienced by the 

readers efficiently. In the due course, we have 

demonstrated that although average dependency 

distance measure (ADD) (Oya, 2011) works well 

for English, it is not a good estimator of sentence 

difficulty in Bangla. Our proposed model takes 

into account both the relative position and number 

of unprocessed dependencies at an instant; it is 

unprocessed dependencies that give rise to 

expectation gaps in user’s cognition. Thus, it 

models both storage and integration costs on 

reader’s short-term memory in processing a 

sentence based on different surface forms. We 

have found high correlation among user 

preferences and model predictions. 

The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we 

have presented the related works in the area of 

sentence comprehension. In section 3 we have 

discussed the empirical experiments on Bangla 

sentence comprehension. Section 4 presents the 

model building and result analysis. Finally, in 

Section 5 we conclude the paper. 

                                                 
3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_sentence 

2 Related Works 

A handful of researches have been performed on 

sentence complexity and word order preference in 

sentence comprehension. Some approaches are 

based on dependencies such as placement of verbs 

in a sentence, position of subject and auxiliary 

verb in a sentence etc. Several psycholinguistic 

experiments have been performed to study the 

role of word order in sentence comprehension. 

Research on sentence comprehension difficulty 

have focused on aspects such as T-unit analysis 

based on (Bardovi-Harlig, 1992), graph-based 

approach such as average dependency distance 

(Oya, 2011), effect of referential processing, 

subject related clause (SRC) and object related 

clause (ORC) (Gordon et al., 2001), noun phrases 

(Gordon et al., 2004), singly nested versus doubly 

nested structures(Gibson, 2000; Vasishth and 

Lewis, 2006), effect of semantic context (Tyler 

and Marslen-Wilson, 1977), influence of 

hierarchy (Bornkessel et al., 2005), memory 

interference during language processing like 

expectation and surprisal (Levy, 2008; Hale, 

2006). 

The study on comprehension of garden-path 

sentences started in 1970 (Bever, 1970). 

Emphasis has also been given on the relationship 

between linguistic structures in a sentence and 

language learning (Lachter and Bever, 1988). 

Within a decade, Bayesian approach towards 

sentence comprehension based on probabilistic 

context free grammar (PCFG) (Jurafsky, 1996; 

Jurafsky, 2002) and competition integration 

model arrived (Spivey and Tanenhaus, 1998). A 

different version of competition-integration 

model was proposed later (Hare et al., 2003) to 

account for effects of semantic contexts and verb 

sense effects in sentential complement ambiguity 

resolution. 

Dependency Locality Theory (DLT) (Gibson, 

2000) has suggested that during sentence 

processing, working memory experiences two 

types of costs. A storage cost to keep in memory 

what has been encountered so far and an 

integration cost to assemble sentence components 

appropriately in order to understand the meaning. 

The more the distance between an upcoming word 

and the head it belongs too, the more are the costs. 

The theory explained the lower comprehension 

difficulty of SRC than ORC, difficulty of multiple 

center-embedded structures, ease of cross-

referential processing in center-embedded 

276



structure, heaviness effect and sentential 

ambiguities that were earlier explained using 

Active Filler Hypothesis (Clifton Jr and Frazier, 

1989). Inspired from DLT, average dependency 

distance based sentence complexity metric has 

been effective in English and Japanese (Oya, 

2011). 

Notable works on Sentence comprehension in 

Hindi have been done in recent times (Vasishth 

and Lewis, 2006). With the help of SPRT, it has 

been demonstrated that contrary to the findings in 

English that center embedding sentences always 

hinders sentence comprehension speed and 

efficiency, in certain cases for Hindi, a center 

embedded doubly nested structure can be 

beneficial to sentence comprehension depending 

on the nature of intervening discourse particle 

between a noun and corresponding verb such as 

adverb or prepositional phrase. The phenomenon 

has been termed as anti-locality effect. The word 

by word reaction time in sentence comprehension 

has been modeled by spreading activation theory 

(Anderson, 1983). A study on word by word 

reading pattern in Hindi has revealed that in head 

final structures like Hindi, strong expectation 

overcome the locality effect but not weak 

expectation (Husain et al., 2014). 

3 Empirical user study 

Given the subjective nature of text difficulty 

perception, in order to understand how the 

different cognitive processes vary across different 

user groups, two categories of users have been 

considered for each user study. The choice of 

participants represents average Indian population. 

Group 1 consists of 25 native users of Bangla in 

the age range 21-25 years, who are pursuing 

college level education and group 2 consists of 25 

native users in the age range 13 to 17 years. The 

former is referred to as the adult group and the 

latter is termed the minor group(refer to table 

1.1).In this thesis, only the variations in age and 

years of education have been taken into account. 

Therefore, I have not fixated on a specific social 

background and have considered a distribution 

over a moderate range. The Socio-Economic 

Classification (SEC) guideline by the Market 

Research Society of India (MRSI) 4 has been 

primarily used to determine the social background 

of the participants. MRSI has defined 12 socio-

economic strata: A1 to E3 in the decreasing order. 

                                                 
4 http://imrbint.com/research/The-New-SEC-system-

3rdMay2011.pdf 

The appropriate class index against a household is 

assigned by the output of a survey questionnaire 

collecting data on household items and the 

education level of the chief wage earner of the 

family. As can be viewed from the SEC 

distribution pie-chart (refer to figure 1.5) below, 

our user group ranges from classes B2 to D2 with 

only 3 persons from E1 section. The range 

represent medium to low social-economic 

sections. The monthly household income ranges 

from Rs. 4500 to Rs. 15000.  To capture the first-

language skill, each native speaker was asked to 

rate his/her proficiency in Bangla on a 1-5 scale 

(1: very poor and 5: very strong). The distribution 

has been presented in figure1.4. A significant 

section of the participants poses medium to poor 

native language skill. In the backdrop of a country 

like India it is not exceptional that a person 

pursuing graduation or higher education is from a 

medium to low economic background (primarily 

due to the comparatively low cost of education 

and a well in place reservation policy) and is not 

so proficient in the native language. 

 

Type Background Mean age 

(Standard 

deviation) 

Group 1 

(adult): 25 

native 

speakers of 

Bangla  

Education: 

pursuing 

graduation  

22.8 

(1.74)  

Socio Economic 

Classification: B2-

D2 

Group 2 

(minors): 

25 native 

speakers of 

Bangla  

Education: 

pursuing school 

education  

15 (1.24)  

Socio Economic 

Classification: B2-

D2 

 

Table 1.1: User details 

Figure1.1: Proficiency in Bangla  

277



 

No. Feature Cod

e 

1 Average  Dependency  Distance 

[Total distance among the 

dependencies in a sentence 

divided by number of 

dependencies] 

(AD

D)  

2 Total Word  Length [total length 

of words in a sentence in terms of 

visual units (akshars) 

(W

LN)  

3 Syllable  Count [total syllable 

count in a sentence] 
(SL

C)  

4 Sentence  Length [length of the 

sentence in terms of words] 
(SL

N)  

5 Number  of  Dependencies 

[number of dependencies in a 

sentence] 

(DC

T)  

6 Average  Word  Length [total 

word length divided by sentence  

length] 

(A

WL

)  

7 Average  number  of  Syllables 

[syllable count divided by 

sentence length] 

(AS

W)  

8 Number  of  Polysyllabic  

Words [number of words in a 

sentence with more than two 

syllables] 

(PS

W)  

9 Number of Juktakshars 

[number of consonant conjuncts 

in a sentence] 

(JU

K) 

10 Number of  Clauses [total 

number of dependent and 

independent clauses in a complex 

sentence] 

(CL

U)  

300 Bangla sentences (both simple and 

complex) were selected from a Bangla corpus of 

size 30 million words. The selection was done in 

a manner to accommodate many varieties of 

sentence constructions, such as the organization 

of nouns and verbs within a sentence, lexical 

combinations within the sentence such as 

presence of uncommon words that may be 

perceived as difficult to comprehend by the user, 

number of non-finite structures in a sentence, 

number of clauses etc. The sentence lengths vary 

from 5 to 25 words per sentence. 

The participants were asked to perform the 

following two tasks for each of the 300 sentences. 

Each participant was allowed maximum 2 

minutes time to rate each sentence. Rs.100/- were 

offered to each of them as a token of appreciation.  

 Rate the sentence on a ten point scale 
(1=easiest, 10=hardest) depending on its 

overall comprehension difficulty as perceived 

by the reader.  

 Mark words and phrases perceived as hard by 
the reader.  

Inter-annotator agreement was measured by 

Krippendorf’s alpha and it was found to be more 

than 0.7 for to each group. A paired t-test revealed 

significant difference (p<0.05) between the rating 

of two user groups. 

The primary sentence attributes studied with 

respect to the user ratings has been given below in 

table 1.3. features like, average dependency 

distance and number of dependencies have been 

studied due to their importance in sentence 

comprehension. 

4 Result analysis 

In the first step, we have studied the Spearman 

rank correlation coefficients between sentence 

features and user ratings. The coefficients have 

been shown in figure 1.3.  

From the above chart, it can be observed that 

total word length (in akshars), total syllable count 

and sentence length is highly correlated with the 

user ratings. However, the average word length 

and syllable distribution do not follow the same 

trend as user ratings. The same is true for 

dependencies in a sentence; while total number of 

dependencies posses a high correlation with user 

data, average dependency distance does not. 

These may be indicative of the fact that at 

sentential level, the overall syntactic nature of a 

sentence is important to the extent of effort 

required in comprehension rather than the average 

distribution of the features in a sentence. As 

expected, in Bangla, number of consonant 

conjuncts or jukta-akshars has a high correlation 

with user perception of difficulty. For complex 

Figure 1.2: Social and economic background of 
the users.  

Table 1.2: Sentence features studied with respect 
to users’ perception 

278



sentences, user ratings for sentences vary strongly 

with the number of clauses in the sentence as is 

evident from the correlation coefficient.  

 

From the above chart, it can be observed that 

total word length (in akshars), total syllable count 

and sentence length is highly correlated with the 

user ratings. However, the average word length 

and syllable distribution do not follow the same 

trend as user ratings. The same is true for 

dependencies in a sentence; while total number of 

dependencies posses a high correlation with user 

data, average dependency distance does not. 

These may be indicative of the fact that at 

sentential level, the overall syntactic nature of a 

sentence is important to the extent of effort 

required in comprehension rather than the average 

distribution of the features in a sentence. As 

expected, in Bangla, number of consonant 

conjuncts or jukta-akshars has a high correlation 

with user perception of difficulty. For complex 

sentences, user ratings for sentences vary strongly 

with the number of clauses in the sentence as is 

evident from the correlation coefficient.  

4.1 Models and regression 

In the next step, the effects of sentence attributes 

have been investigated with regression. At first, 

detail views of the effects of certain sentence 

attributes on comprehension difficulty have been 

shown with graphs from figure 1.4 to figure1.8.  

Only group 1 data has been shown as group 2 data 

also follow similar trends. 

From figure 1.3, it can be observed that the total 

word length in a sentence is highly correlated with 

the user feedback; in figure 1.4 below, we have 

plotted of word length of a sentence versus user 

rating and fitted the least square regression line. 

From the plot, it can be observed that user ratings 

have approximately a linear relationship with the 

total word length of a sentence and for a given 

value of word length the corresponding user 

ratings are scattered over a very small region 

around the mean. The regression line therefore has 

a high R^2 value signifying its goodness of fit. 

Figure 1.5 represents the relation between 

sentence length (x-axis) and user ratings (y-axis). 

It can be observed from the figure that for a given 

sentence length, the user ratings deflects heavily 

on both sides of the mean; this may be an 

indication that although sentence length is an 

important factor determining sentence 

comprehension complexity, but at the same time 

other factors also influence the comprehension 

load. We have explained the phenomena in the 

following section with some examples. The plot 

of average word length and average syllable 

length versus user ratings (figure 1.6 and 1.7) 

demonstrates that there is apparently no structured 

relation between these two features and user 

ratings. This corroborates the poor correlation 

coefficients obtained in figure 1.3. Another 

important attribute of a sentence is the average 

dependency distance (ADD). Although ADD has 

been found to explain the order of sentence 

complexity in English in different cases (Oya, 

2011), here, the plot of ADD versus user ratings 

(refer to figure 1.8) demonstrates no apparent 

relation between these two; the regression 

equation in figure 1.8 posses a low R^2 value 

signifying a poor fit.  

 

Figure 1.3: Relationship between total word 
length of sentence and user ratings for Group 1 

In the figure 1.4 below, the x-value of a point 

(represents a sentence) is the total word length and 

y-value is the user rating of the particular 

sentence. The similar description also applies for 

other figures. 

Next, we have considered different 

combinations of the features for predicting 

sentence complexity using regression with 225 

sentences for training and 75 for testing. Results 

corresponding to the optimal subsets have been 

presented below in the table 1.2.  

 

Figure 1.2: User rating versus sentence features 

279



 

Figure 1.4: Relationship between sentence length 
and user ratings for Group 1 

 

Figure 1.5: Relationship between average word 
length of sentence and user ratings for Group 1 

 

Figure 1.6: Relationship between average 
syllable per word and user ratings for Group 1 

 

Figure 1.7: Relationship between average 
dependency distance of sentence and user ratings 

for Group 1 

Below in table 1.3 are the RMSE values for 

model performances on the training data. From 

table 1.2 and table 1.3, it can be observed that 

model 4 for group 1 and model5 for group 2 have 

relative low error values and higher goodness of 

fit. Therefore, these models for the two groups can 

be used as predictive models for sentence 

complexity for the respective groups given the 

sentence features. Moreover, these two models 

have number of dependencies (DCT), total word 

length (WLN), total syllable length (SLC), 

number of consonant conjuncts (JUK) and 

number of clauses (CLU) as independent 

variables, these features have also found to posses 

high correlation with user data, therefore, the 

regression models further assert their contributory 

roles in sentence comprehension difficulty. 

4.2 Effect of lexical and grammatical choice 

Apart from the above mentioned syntactic and 

lexical features of a sentence, the difficulty of 

individual words also affects the comprehension 

complexity. To capture this aspect, participants 

were asked to mark the hard words in each 

sentence during experiment. Now, two outcomes 

are possible: the hard words will make the 

sentences difficult to comprehend and therefore 

they will get relatively higher user ratings than 

sentences having parameters such as same 

sentence length and word length; on the other 

hand, if the reader is able to infer the meaning 

from the context then the sentences will not be 

perceived as very difficult to comprehend. 

Examples of each of the two cases have been 

provided below in table 1.4 and 1.5 respectively. 

In table 1.4, some example sentences with hard 

words as marked by the readers (shown in bold), 

have been presented along with user ratings, 

sentence length and total word length. It can be 

observed that for both the groups these sentences 

have user ratings higher than the other sentences 

with the same sentence length and word length 

(for a correspondence of group 1 data please refer 

to figure 1.4 and 1.5 above, group 2 data also 

follow similar trend).  

In table 1.5 below, information about hard 

words such as their corpus frequency, akshar 

length, syllable length, number of consonant 

conjuncts and frequency of their commonly used 

synonym has been shown. It is apparent that all 

these words have significantly less corpus 

presence than their frequent synonyms and 

therefore are unfamiliar to the general readers. In 

table 1.5 below is another sets of sentences with 

hard words marked by the users (shown in bold), 

but they did not get high user ratings within the 

same sentence length or word length groups. 
280



Upon further enquiry, it has been revealed that in 

these sentences, the meaning of the hard words 

can be resolved from the sentential contexts (the 

supporting contexts has been underlined).

Model –Expression Group 1 Group 2 

R^2 Err R^2 Err 

Model 1 -0.033*DCT + 0.106*JUK+ 0.104*WLN + 1.185 0.57 0.97 0.55 1.10 

Model 2 0.114*DCT + 0.225*JUK + 0.137*SLN+ 1.312 0.59 0.81 0.63 0.92 

Model 3 -0.073*DCT -0.025*SLN + 0.081*WLN + 0.071*SLC -

0.015*PSW+ 1.120 

0.61 1.2 0.59 1.10 

Model 4 0.097*JUK  -0.051*SLC + 0.077*WLN + 0.044*CLU -

0.010*DCT+ 1.221 

0.67 0.91 0.60 1.30 

Model 5 -0.051*DCT + 0.095*JUK + 0.077*WLN + 0.103*CLU 

-0.008*SLC + 1.165 

0.61 1.1 0.65 0.87 

Table 1.2: Regression equations involving sentence features and user ratings (Err means RMSE (root 
mean square error) 

 Model Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 

Group 1 RMSE 1.2 1.1 0.97  0.79 0.85 

Group 2 RMSE 1.1 0.89 1.3 0.91 0.81 

No. Sentence (difficult words in bold) Rating Sentence 
length 

Word 
length Gr 1 Gr 2 

1. উভয়ে র োদন সম্বরণ কর েো চকু্ষ মুরিয়েন 
ubhYe rodana sambaraNa kariYA cakShu muchilena 
(Both of them hold their tears and wipe their eyes.) 

5.9 5.5 6 19 

2. ধাত্রীক্রাড়স্থ রিশু মো  সয়ে সয়ে কোাঁরদয়ে 
কোাঁরদয়ে রেে 
dhatrIkroRastha shishu mAra sange sange k.NAdite 
k.NAdite gela 
(Child went with the mother while crying in her 
nanny’s lap) 

6.8 6.5 8 21 

3. রকন্ত কোেক্রয়ম রসই আগলও রভয়েয়ি ধনেয়ে  
দরু্বার চোয়ে 
Kintu kAlakrame sei Agalao bhe.neche 
dhanatantrera durbAra cApe 
(That obstacle too has collapsed with time by the 
mounting pressure of capitalism) 

6.5 6.8 8 23 

4. ইরেহোয়স  বোাঁয়ক কখয়নো কখয়নো রসই সন্ধিক্ষক্ণর 
মুয়খোমুরখ হয়ে আম ো েোয়ক সহয়েই রূেোন্তয়   েগ্ন 
বয়ে রচনয়ে েোর  
Itihasera b.NAke kakhano kakhano sei 
sandhikShaNera mukhomukhi hale AmrA tAke 
sahajei rupAntarera lagna bale cinathe pAri 
(We can easily identify the beginning of change 
when we encounter that juncture in the turn of 
history) 

8 8.5 16 50 

Table 1.3: RMSE values for regression testing 

Table 1.4: Sentences with difficult words and their ratings 
281



 

Sentence Rating Sentence 
length 

Word 
length Group 

1 
Group 2 

র্াদল জড়ভরক্ের মে ঠায় সসই ভাক্র্ র্ন্ধসয়া 
আক্ে 
(bAdala jaRabharatera mata thAYa sei bhAbe 
basiYA Ache) 
Badal has been sitting still ever since. 

2.5 2.7 8 22 

সগারার ওষ্ঠপ্রাক্েঈষৎ একটু কক্ঠার হান্ধস সদখা 
ন্ধদল 
(GorAra oShthaprAnte IShat ekatu kathora hAsi 
dekhA dila) 
A brief and cruel smile appeared at the corners 
of Gora’s lips. 

2.9 3.2 8 22 

র্ৃক্ষলোকণ্টক সভদ কন্ধরয়া কলযাণী র্নমক্ধয 
প্রক্র্শ কন্ধরক্ে লান্ধগক্লন 
(brrikShalatAkanTaka bheda kariYA kalyANI 
banamadhye probesh karate lAgilena) 
Kalyani started entering the forest penetrating 
the thorny bushes.) 

4 3.4 8 29 

ন্ধকন্তু একটি দ্বাক্রও কপাট র্া অগবলনাই 
(kintu ekaTi dbAreo kapATa bA argala nAi) 
(No door has any knob or locking meachanism. 

2.6 2.1 7 17 

শুদ্ধা চারী ব্রাহ্মণ র্াঘক্ক খাাঁচায় আটক 
সদক্খন্ধেল 
(shuddhAcArI brAkShmaNa bAghake kh.NAcAYa 
ATaka dekhechila) 
The pious bramhin saw the tiger locked in a 
cage. 

2.5 2.7 6 20 

Word CF A

L 

SL N1 N2 

সম্বরণ(sambaraNa) 160 4 3 1 আটকান া(ATkAno) 603  

ধাত্রীক্রাড়স্থ 

(dhatrIkroRastha) 

1 5 5 3 ককানে(kole) 1728  

আগলও(Agalao) 59 4 3 0 বাাঁ ধ, বাাঁ ধা, বাাঁ ধ ( b.Nadh/b.NdhA/b.Ndhana) 510  

দুর্বার (durbAra) 140 3 2 2 প্রবে, প্রচণ্ড(prabala/ praconDa) 

5053/3093  

সন্ধিক্ষণ(sandhikSha

Na) 

16 4 3 2 সনে(sa.nYage) 147  

জড়ভরক্ের 

(jaRabharatera) 

2 6 6 1 স্থির(sthira) 4700 

ওষ্ঠপ্রাক্ে 

(oShthaprAnte) 

8 4 4 4 ক াাঁ নট(Th.NoTe)42 

রৃ্ক্ষলোকণ্টক 

(brrikShalatAkanTa

ka) 

1 7 6 4 কাাঁ টাব , কাাঁ টান াপ,কাাঁ টাগুল্ম,কাাঁ টাগাছ,কাাঁ টাতরু (k.NATAbana, 

k.NATAjhopa, k.NATAgulma, k.NATAgAcha, 

k.NATAtaru) 

Table 1.5: Sentences with difficult words where contextual resolve is possible 

282



 

অগবল (argala) 27 3 2 1 স্থিে(khila) 131 

শুদ্ধাচারী 

(shuddhAcArI) 

23 4 4 4 ধাস্থমিক(dhArmika) 135 

Sentences Rating Sentence 

length  

Word 

length 
Group 1  Group 2  

চুন্ধর করা মহা পাপ 

(curi karA mhApApa) 

[Stealing is a  grave sin/To steal is a grave sin]  

1.2 1.5 3 8 

পড়ার চচক্ে চলখা কঠিন 

(paRAra ceYe lekhA kathina) 

[Writing is harder than reading]  

1.9  1.3  4 10 

আমরা ন্ধজন্ধনস র্হন করার জনয র্যাগ র্যর্হার কন্ধর 

(AmrA jinisa bahana karARra janYa bYAga 

bYabahAra kari) 

[we use a bag to carry things] 

2.4 3.2 8 22 

দো কক্র ঘুন্ধমক্ে থাকা ন্ধিশুক্ক জান্ধগক্ো না 

(daYA kare ghumiYe thAkA shishuke jAgiYo nA) 

 [please, do not awake the sleeping baby]  

1.8 2.2 7 16 

Table 1.7: Sentences with different intransitive 

 

In these cases also the relevant information 

about the hard words has been provided in table 

1.6. 

In English, non-finite structures have been 

found to have effect on sentence comprehension 

(Error! Reference source not found.). Non-

finite structures are infinitive, gerund, participle, 

nonfinite complement, nonfinite adjunct etc. In 

Bangla, no such nonfinite structures like gerund, 

participle or infinitive exists. Verbs are used in 

different grammatical formats to serve the 

purpose of nonfinite forms (Thompson, 2012). To 

examine the effect of such grammatical properties 

on sentence comprehension in Bangla, some 

sentences with such non-finite verbs were 

included in the experimental data group (shown in 

table 1.7). However, no significant variations in 

user ratings have been observed against these 

sentences as compared to sentences with same 

length and word length. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper has presented studies on sentence 

comprehension in Bangla. In the first part of the 

paper, relations between sentence features and 

user ratings have been studied. Subsequently 

regression formulae based on sentence syntactic 

and lexical attributes have been developed for 

both user groups for predicting sentence 

comprehension difficulty in Bangla. In addition, 

case by case study of effect of difficult words and 

presence of non-finite structures on sentence 

comprehension has also been studied. It has been 

observed that the way difficult to understand 

words in a sentence affect the sentence 

comprehension complexity depends on whether a 

contextual resolve of the meaning of the sentence 

is possible or not. Non-finite structures have been 

found to have no significant effect on sentence 

comprehension difficulty in Bangla. However, 

due to the small size (1200 sentences) of 

dependency annotated corpus in Bangla, the set of 

possible dependencies is not exhaustive and the 

probability values for the dependency rules may 

not always accurately represent the familiarity 

encountered in practice. This is a limitation of the 

present approach. Moreover, dependency rules 

are not formulated as recursive productions in a 

PCFG, therefore, a hierarchical relation between 

the increase or decrease in probabilities from one 

word to other in a sentence has not possible.  

In future, it will be interesting to examine 

whether the accessibility hierarchy (Keenan and 

Comrie, 1977), observed to be true for English 

sentence comprehension, also holds in case for 

Table 1.6: Information about the difficult words (CF: Corpus frequency, AL: Akshar length, SL: 
Syllable length, N1: Number of jukta-akshars/ vowel diacritic, N2: Frequency of commonly used 

synonym) 

283



Bangla. Another important path of investigation 

will be the relative differences in reading behavior 

among sentences with different relative ordering 

of noun and verb. Lastly, the word by word 

reading time study has to be extended for other 

user groups as well. With this, the study overall 

sentence readability in Bangla ends; the next and 

also the last contributory paper in sentence 

complexity will present study on influence of 

word ordering of a sentence comprehension in 

Bangla. 

Reference 

1. Chatterji, S.-K. (1926). The origin and development of 

the Bengali language, volume 2. Calcutta University 

Press. 

2.  Levy, R. (2013). Memory and surprisal in human 

sentence comprehension. 

3. Meltzer, J. A., McArdle, J. J., Schafer, R. J., and Braun, 

A. R. (2010). Neural aspects of sentence 

comprehension: syntactic complexity, reversibility, and 

reanalysis. Cerebral cortex, 20(8):1853–1864. 

4. Oya, M. (2011). Syntactic dependency distance as 

sentence complexity measure. In Proceedings of the 

16th International Conference of Pan-Pacific 

Association of Applied Linguistics, pages 313–316. 

5. SWINNEY, D. A. (1998). The influence of canonical 

word order on structural processing. Syntax and 

semantics, 31:153–166. 

6. Weyerts, H., Penke, M., Münte, T. F., Heinze, H.-J., and 

Clahsen, H. (2002). Word order in sentence processing: 

An experimental study of verb placement in german. 

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 31(3):211–268. 

7. Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1992). A second look at t-unit 

analysis: Reconsidering the sentence. TESOL quarterly, 

26(2):390–395. 

8. Oya, M. (2011).Syntactic dependency distance as 

sentence complexity measure. In Proceedings of The 

16th Conference of Pan-Pacific Association of Applied 

Linguistics. 

9. Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., and Johnson, M. 

(2001).Memory interference during language 

processing.Journal of Experimental Psychology: 

Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(6):1411. 

10. Gibson, E. (2000). The dependency locality theory: A 

distance-based theory of linguistic complexity. Image, 

language, brain, pages 95–126. 

11. Vasishth, S. and Lewis, R. L. (2006). Argument-head 

distance and processing complexity: Explaining both 

locality and antilocality effects. Language, pages 767–

794. 

12. Tyler, L. K. and Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1977).The on-

line effects of semantic context on syntactic 

processing.Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 

Behavior, 16(6):683–692. 

13. Bornkessel, I., Zysset, S., Friederici, A. D., von Cramon, 

D. Y., and Schlesewsky, M. (2005). Who did what to 

whom? the neural basis of argument hierarchies during 

language comprehension. Neuroimage, 26(1):221–233. 

14. Hale, J. (2006). Uncertainty about the rest of the 

sentence.Cognitive Science, 30(4):643–672. 

15. Levy, R. (2008).Expectation-based syntactic 

comprehension.Cognition, 106(3):1126–1177. 

16. Bever, T. G. (1970). The cognitive basis for linguistic 

structures.1970, pages 279–362. 

17. Lachter, J. and Bever, T. G. (1988). The relation 

between linguistic structure and associative theories of 

language learning—a constructive critique of some 

connectionist learning models. Cognition, 28(1):195–

247. 

18. Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and 

syntactic access and disambiguation.Cognitive Science, 

20(2):137–194. 

19. Jurafsky, S. N. D. (2002). A bayesian model predicts 

human parse preference and reading times in sentence 

processing. Advances in neural information processing 

systems, 14:59. 

20. Spivey, M. J. and Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998). Syntactic 

ambiguity resolution in discourse: modeling the effects 

of referential context and lexical frequency. Journal of 

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 

Cognition, 24(6):1521. 

21. Hare, M., McRae, K., and Elman, J. L. (2003). Sense 

and structure: Meaning as a determinant of verb 

subcategorization preferences. Journal of Memory and 

Language, 48(2):281–303. 

22. Clifton Jr, C. and Frazier, L. (1989).Comprehending 

sentences with long-distance dependencies. In 

Linguistic structure in language processing, pages 273–

317. Springer. 

23. Kaiser, E. and Trueswell, J. C. (2004).The role of 

discourse context in the processing of a flexible word-

order language.Cognition, 94(2):113 – 147. 

284


