



















































When do we laugh?


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, pages 360–369,
Los Angeles, USA, 13-15 September 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

When do we laugh?

Ye Tian1, Chiara Mazzocconi2 & Jonathan Ginzburg2,3
1Laboratoire Linguistique Formelle (UMR 7110)

& 2CLILLAC-ARP (EA 3967) & 3Laboratoire d’Excellence (LabEx)—EFL
Université Paris-Diderot, Paris, France

tiany.03@gmail.com

Abstract

Studies on laughter in dialogue have pro-
posed resolving what laughter is about by
looking at what laughter follows. This
paper investigates the sequential relation
between the laughter and the laughable.
We propose a semantic/pragmatic ac-
count treating laughter as a gestural event
anaphor referring to a laughable. Data
from a French and Chinese dialogue cor-
pus suggest a rather free time alignment
between laughter and laughable. Laughter
can occur (long) before, during, or (long)
after the laughable. Our results chal-
lenge the assumption that what laughter
follows is what it is about, and thus ques-
tion claims which rely on this assumption.

1 Introduction

Studies about laughter in interaction have been
mainly focused on the acoustic or perceptual fea-
tures, and often observations of the events preced-
ing to it have been the base for claims concerning
what laughter is about. (Provine, 1993) made a
claim that has been subsequently adopted in much
of the literature: laughter is, for the most part, not
related to humour, because it is found to most fre-
quently follow banal comments. Similar reasoning
has been adopted by several other studies on the
kind of situations that elicit laughter. The deduc-
tion process in these studies rely on an important
yet untested assumption: what laughter follows is
what it is about. Our paper investigates this as-
sumption. We first briefly discuss previous stud-
ies on laughter in interaction; we then argue for
a semantic/pragmatic account in which we treat
laughter as a gestural event anaphora referring to
a laughable. We present a corpus study of laugh-
ables and evaluate our results against previous pro-
posals.

1.1 Studies on what laughter is about

In (Provine, 1993), the researcher observed nat-
ural conversations, and “when an observer heard
laughter, she recorded in a notebook the com-
ment immediately preceding the laughter and if
the speaker and/or the audience laughed, the gen-
der, and the estimated age of the speaker and the
audience [...]. A laugh episode was defined as
the occurrence of audible laughter and included
any laughter by speaker or audience that followed
within an estimated 1 s of the initial laugh event.
The laugh episode included the last comment by a
speaker if it occurred within an estimated 1 s pre-
ceding the onset of the initial laughter. A laugh
episode was terminated if an estimated 1 s passed
without speaker or audience laughter, or if either
the speaker or the audience spoke.”. They found
that “Only about 10-20% of episodes were esti-
mated by the observers to be humorous” (Provine,
1993), and thus derived the conclusion which is
now widely adopted in the literature: laughter
is, for the most part, not related to humour but
about social interaction. An additional conclusion
based on this study is that laughter never interrupts
speech but “punctuates” it occurring exclusively at
phrase boundaries.

Similarly, (Vettin and Todt, 2004) used exclu-
sively timing parameters – i.e., what precedes and
what follows the laugh (within a threshold of 3s) –
to distinguish 6 different contexts (see table 1) for
laughter occurrence to support claims about situa-
tions that elicit laughter.

1.2 Weaknesses

In (Provine, 1993), the author assumed that laugh-
ter always immediately follows the laughable. Not
only do the methods described above provide im-
precise data (timing information was estimated
during observation), it prevents the possibility of
recording any data where laughter does not follow
the laughable. In addition, even when the com-

360



Conversational
Parter

A participant’s laughter occurring immediately (up to 3s) after a
complete utterance of their conversational partner

Participant The participant laughed immediately (up to 3s) after his/her own
complete utterance

Short confirma-
tion

Participan’s laughter immediately (up to 3s) after a confirming
’mm’, ’I see’ or something comparable by himself or his conver-
sational partner

Laughter Participant’s laughter after a conversational partner’s laughter. With
an interval of less than 3s

Before utterance Participant’s laughter after a short pause (at least 3s) in conversation,
but immediately (up to 500ms) before an utterance by him/herself

Situation Laughter occurring during a pause in conversation (at least 3s), not
followed by any utterance. The laughter is attibuted to the general
situation and not to an utterance

Table 1: Vetting and Todt, 2004 - Context classification

ment that immediately precedes laughter is the
actual trigger for a laugh, and it is not “amus-
ing” in itself (i.e. it is a “banal comment”), it
doesn’t necessarily entail that the laughable is not
humourous. The funniness might arise from the
“banal comment” in relation to the previous utter-
ance, the context of the interaction, shared experi-
ences between the speakers, world knowledge and
cultural conventions. For example, in (1) “what’s
funny” resides in the implicit content that the ut-
terance refers to. In (2), the preceding utterance is
funny only in relation to the context.

(1) A: Do you remember that time?
B and A: < laughter/ >.
Laughable= the enriched denotation of ‘that time’.

(2) (Context: the speakers are discussing the plan of an
imagined shared apartment, and they have already
planned two bathrooms).
A: I want another bathroom. B: < laughter/ >
Laughable= “I want another bathroom”

(Vettin and Todt, 2004) is methodologically
more precise than (Provine, 1993), and they al-
low for the possibility that in addition to laughter
occurring after the laughable, a laughter may pre-
cede an utterance, or occur during an exophoric
situation. However, this analysis excludes laugh-
ters that occur in the middle of or overlaps with
an utterance, and it uses exclusively timing pa-
rameters to determine what laughter is about (as
illustrated in figure 1). For example, whether a
laugh is considered to be about the preceding ut-
terance or about the following utterance is decided
purely on the difference in the length of gaps with
the two utterances. Crucially, the conclusion is
also drawn assuming an adjacency relationship be-
tween laughter and laughable.

2 Laughter as an event anaphor

We argue that previous studies have ignored
analysing the laughable because they did not at-
tempt to integrate their account with an explicit

semantic/pragmatic module on the basis of which
content is computed.1 The sole recent exception
to this, as far as we are aware, is the account of
(Ginzburg et al., 2015), which sketches an infor-
mation state–based account of the meaning and
use of laughter in dialogue.

Taking this as a starting point, we argue that
laughter is a gestural event anaphor, whose mean-
ing contains two dimensions: one dimension about
the arousal and the other about the trigger or
the laughable. In line with (Morreall, 1983) we
think that laughter effects a “positive psychologi-
cal shift”, and the “arousal” dimension signals the
amplitude in the shift.2. The positive psycholog-
ical shift is triggered by an appraisal of an event
- the laughable l, and the second dimension com-
municates the type of the appraisal. (Ginzburg et
al., 2015) propose two basic types of meaning in
the laughable dimension: the person laughing may
express her perception of the laughable l as being
incongruous, or just that l is enjoyable (playful).
We propose that in addition, certain uses of laugh-
ter in dialogue may suggest the need for a third
possible type: expressing that l is a socially close
ingroup situation.

2.1 Formal treatment of laughter

Here we sketch a formal semantic and pragmatic
treatment of laughter. On the approach developed
in KoS (Ginzburg, 2012), information states com-
prise a private part and the dialogue gameboard
that represents information arising from publi-
cized interactions. In addition to tracking shared
assumptions/visual space, Moves, and QUD, the
dialogue gameboard also tracks topoi and en-
thymemes that conversational participants exploit
during an interaction (e.g., in reasoning about
rhetorical relations.). Here topoi represent general
inferential patterns (e.g., given two routes choose

1This is not the case for some theories of humour, e.g.,
that due to (Raskin, 1985), who offers a reasonably explicit
account of incongruity emanating from verbal content with-
out, however, attempting to offer a theory of laughter in con-
versation.

2The amplitudes in the shift depend on both the trigger
itself and on the individual current information/emotional
state. It is important to point out that laughter does not signal
that the speaker’s current emotional state is positive, merely
that there was a shift which was positive. The speaker could
have a very negative baseline emotional state (being very sad
or angry) but the recognition of the incongruity in the laugh-
able or its enjoyment can provoke a positive shift (which
could be very minor) The distinction between the overall
emotional state and the direction of the shift explains why
laughter can be produced when one is sad or angry.

361



the shortest one) represented as functions from
records to record types, and enthymemes are in-
stances of topoi (e.g., given that the route via Wal-
nut street is shorter than the route via Alma choose
Walnut street). An enthymeme belongs to a topos
if its domain type is a subtype of the domain type
of the topos.

(Ginzburg et al., 2015) posit distinct, though
quite similar lexical entries for enjoyment and in-
congruous laughter. For reasons of space in (3)
we exhibit a unified entry with two distinct con-
tents. (3) associates an enjoyment laugh with the
laugher’s judgement of a proposition whose situ-
ational component l is active as enjoyable; for in-
congruity, a laugh marks a proposition whose situ-
ational component l is active as incongruous, rel-
ative to the currently maximal enthymeme under
discussion. (3) makes appeal to a notion of an ac-
tive situation. This pertains to the accessible sit-
uational antecedents of a laughter act, given that
(Ginzburg et al., 2015) proposed viewing laughter
as an event anaphor. However, given the existence
of a significant amount of speech laughter, as we
discuss below, this notion apparently needs to be
rethought somewhat, viewing laughter in gestural
terms. This requires interfacing the two channels,
a problem we will not address here, though see
(Rieser, 2015) for a recent discussion in the con-
text of manual gesture.

(3)

phon : laughterphontype

dgb-params :



spkr : Ind
addr : Ind
t : TIME
c1 : addressing(spkr,addr,t)
MaxEud = e : (Rec)RecType

p =

[
sit = l
sit-type = L

]
: prop

c2 : ActiveSit(l)


contentenjoyment = Enjoy(spkr,p) : RecType
contentincongruity = Incongr(p,e,τ ) : RecType


The dialogue gameboard parameters utilised in

the account of (Ginzburg et al., 2015) are all
‘informational’ or utterance related ones. How-
ever, in order to deal with notions such as arousal
and psychological shift, one needs to introduce
also parameters that track appraisal (see e.g.,

(Scherer, 2009)). For current purposes, we men-
tion merely one such parameter we dub pleas-
antness that relates to the appraisal issue—in
Scherer’s formulation—Is the event intrinsically
pleasant or unpleasant?. We assume that this pa-
rameter is scalar in value, with positive and neg-
ative values corresponding to varying degrees of
pleasantness or unpleasantness.

This enables us to formulate conversational
rules of the form ‘if A laughs and pleasantness is
set to k, then reset pleasantness to k + θ(α)’, where
α is a parameter corresponding to arousal.

2.2 Research questions

The study is part of a broader project where we
analyse laughter using a multi-layered scheme
and propose a semantic/ pragmatic account of the
meaning and effects of laughter. The focus of the
current study is the positioning of laughter in rela-
tion to its laughable.

Our account suggests that resolving the laugh-
able is crucial for deriving the content of a laugh-
ter event. We hypothesize that laughter is not al-
ways adjacent to its laughable. Rather, the sequen-
tial distribution between laughter and laughable is
somewhat free, illustrated in Figure 2. We hypoth-
esize that laughter can occur before, during and
after the laughable, and that it is possible for inter-
vening materials to occur between a laughter event
and its laughable.

Figure 1: Temporal misalignment speech stream, laughter and laughable

In more detail, we make the following hypothe-
ses in relation to our research questions:

Q1: Does laughter always follow its laughable?

–If not, does laughter-laughable alignment
differ among different types of laughters?

We hypothesize that laughter can occur be-
fore, during or after the laughable; laughter
and laughable should not have a one-to-one
relationship: one laughable can be the refer-
ent of several laughter events.

–More specifically, laughter-laughable align-
ment may vary depending on at least the
source of the laughable (self or partner) and
whether it is speech laugh or laughter bouts.

362



Q2: Does laughter interrupt speech?

We hypothesize that laughter can occur both at
utterance boundaries and at utterance-medial
position.

Q3: Is laughter-laughable alignment pattern lan-
guage specific?

We hypothesize that language/culture influence
alignment and thus predict to find differences
between, in this case, French and Chinese.

3 Material and method

3.1 Corpus

We analyzed a portion of the DUEL corpus
(Hough et al., 2016a) The corpus consists of 30
dyads (10 per language)/ 24 hours of natural, face-
to-face, loosely task-directed dialogue in French,
Mandarin Chinese and German. Each dyad con-
versed in three tasks which in total lasted around
45 minutes. The three tasks used were:

1. Dream Apartment: the participants are told
that they are to share a large open-plan apart-
ment, and will receive a large amount of
money to furnish and decorate it. They dis-
cuss the layout, furnishing and decoration de-
cisions;

2. Film Script: The participants spend 15 min-
utes creating a scene for a film in which
something embarrassing happens to the main
character;

3. Border control: one participant plays the
role of a traveller attempting to pass through
the border control of an imagined country,
and is interviewed by an officer. The trav-
eller has a personal situation that disfavours
him/her in this interview. The officer asks
questions that are general as well as spe-
cific. In addition, the traveller happens to be
a parent-in-law of the officer.

The corpus is transcribed in the target language
and glossed in English. Disfluency, laughter,
and exclamations are annotated. The current pa-
per presents analysis of laughter in two dyads in
French and Chinese (3 tasks x 2 pairs x 2 lan-
guages).

3.2 Audio-video coding of laughter

Coding was conducted by the first and second au-
thors and by 2 trained, but naı̈ve to the aim of the
study, masters students: each video was observed
until a laugh occurred. The coder detected the ex-
act onset and offset in Praat (Boersma and others,
2002), and conducted a multi-layer analysis as ex-
plained shortly. A laugh was identified referring
to the same criteria used in (Nwokah et al., 1994),
based on the facial expression and vocalization de-
scriptions of laughter elaborated by (Apte, 1985)
and (Ekman and Friesen, 1975). Following (Ur-
bain and Dutoit, 2011) we counted laughter offset
(final laughter in-breath inhalation) as part of the
laughter event itself, thus resulting in laughter tim-
ings longer than other authors (Bachorowski and
Owren, 2001; Rothgänger et al., 1998).

All laughter events were categorised according
to different parameters: formal and contextual as-
pects, semantic meaning and functions (see Table
2). The formal and contextual level analysis in-
clude whether a laughter overlaps speech (speech
laugh), whether it co-occurs with or immediately
follows a partner’s laughter (dyadic/ antiphonal
laughter), and its position in relation to the laugh-
able. The semantic meaning level analysis include
perceived arousal and whether it contains an el-
ement of incongruity could be identified by the
coders. The function analysis codes the effect
of laughter on the interaction, and distinguishes
whether the effect is cooperative, i.e., promotes in-
teraction (e.g. showing enjoyment, smoothing) or
non-cooperative, i.e., in some way disaffects in-
teraction (e.g., mocking or evade questions). Due
to space constraints and current focus, we do not
provide a detailed explanation of the multi-level
laughter coding scheme, for which see (Mazzoc-
coni et al., 2016). Reliability was assessed by hav-
ing a masters student as a second coder for 10%
of the material observed. Percentage agreements
between the two coders for French and Chinese
data averaged respectively 87% and 87.76, with
an overall Krippendorff α (Krippendorff, 2012)
across all tiers of 0.672 and 0.636.

For the main analysis, we include in our analy-
sis both laughter and speech laughter (Nwokah et
al., 1999). In the current study we restrict our ob-
servations about the aspects pertaining to the form,
to the contextual distribution and positioning of a
laugh in relation to others’ laughter, the laughable
and laugher’s herself speech.

363



Figure 2: Laughter coding parameters

3.3 Identifying laughables
We consider as the laughable the event which, af-
ter appraisal, produces a positive psychological
shift in the laugher. We distinguish three different
kinds of laughable types: described events, met-
alinguistic stimuli and exophoric events. We also
mark whether they originated from the laugher
him/herself or by the partner.

(4) Described event A: il y a (un: + un) de mes potes?
idiot comme il est, qui (< p = pose > po- < /p >
qui pose) un steak sur le rebord (de: + du) balcon?
B:< laughter/ >. < laughspeech > ils sont bizarres
tes potes < /laughspeech >

(Translation) A: There is (one + one) of my buddies,
stupid as he is, who put a steak on the border of the:
of the balcony B: < laughter/ >. < laughspeech >
you have weird buddies < /laughspeech >

Laughable= “who put a steak on the border of the bal-
cony”: described event

(5) Metalinguistic stimuli B: Alors je viens pour
{euh} avoir mon passeport? pour Inra:schabella?
< laughter/ >

(Translation) B: So I’m here for, euh, having my pass-
port? for Inraschabella? < laughter/ >

Laughable= “Inraschabella” (linguistic form, laugh af-
ter laugher’s speech)

(6) Exophoric event The examiner is asking A to
move the arms because of technical issues A: move-
ment arms mimicking a robot B: < laughter/ > A:
< laughter/ >

Laughable=the way A moved his arms: exophoric
event

3.4 Audio-video coding of laughable
Every time a laugh was identified, coders would
mark on the Praat TextGrid, based on personal in-
ference, the laughable the laugh would refer to.

The time boundaries were marked, the content
(whether verbal or not) was annotated and an in-
dex was assigned in order to map laughter (or mul-
tiple laughters) and laughable. Laughables were
classified according to three main categories: de-
scribed, metalinguistic and exhophoric event. Re-
liability of type assignement was assessed by hav-
ing a masters student as a second coder for 10% of
the material observed. Percentage agreements be-
tween the two coders for French and Chinese aver-
aged 92.5% with a Krippendorff α (Krippendorff,
2012) of 0.77.

4 Results

In our data sample (summarized in Table2), laugh-
ter is very frequent, constituting 17% of the con-
versation duration in French and 7.2% in Chinese.
Each laughable is ”laughed about” more than once
(1.7 times in French and 1.4 times in Chinese).

French Chinese
Dialogue.dur 77min 85min
mean utterance.dur 1.8sec 1.5sec
No. laughter 436 221
laughter.dur 1.9s (sd .97) 1.4s (se .53)
No. laughable 256 158
laughable.dur 2.7s (sd 1.5) 2.8s (sd 2.1)
No.laughter per laughable 1.7 1.4

Table 2: Data summary

4.1 Does laughter always follow the
laughable?

To investigate the time alignment between laugh-
ter and laughable, we calculated “start of laugh-
ter minus start of laughable”, “end of laughter mi-
nus end of laughable”, and “start of laughter mi-
nus end of laughable”. If laughter always follow
the laughable, all three measurements should be
above zero. This was not the case. In both Chi-
nese and French, on average, laughter starts dur-
ing rather than after the laughable, and finishes af-

364



ter the laughable. In general, laughs in Chinese are
more likely to overlap with the laughable than in
French. The distribution varies over a wide range.
Table 3 summarizes the gaps between the bound-
aries of laughter and laughable, and figure 3 plots
specifically the gap between the end of the laugh-
able and the start of laughter. They show that it
is common for laughs to start before, during and
after the laughable. When a laugh has no overlap
with its laughable, they are not always adjacent to
each other (average utterance duration is under 2
seconds while the gap can be up to 10 seconds).
In the following example, the first two instances
of speech laugh refer to a laughable in a later ut-
terance.

(7) 那 个 老 师(要 他+要 求 小 诗) 用“不 约 而 同”造
句 子, 后 来 小 明< laughspeech >就 想 了 一
想< /laughspeech >, 然后说呃说呃这样吧?
< laughspeech >(我 就+小 诗)< /laughspeech >
就想了想说,呃:呃:我在路上碰见一个美女,然后我
就问她,约吗?< laughspeech > 然后美女说, 滚,我
们不约儿童< /laughspeech >.

(Translation) B: The teacher asked Xiaoshi to make
a sentence with ”bu yue er tong” (coinciden-
tally together). Xiaoshi < laughspeech > then
< laughspeech/ > thought about it, and said, uh,
< laughspeech > (I + Xiaoshi) < laughspeech/ >
thought about it and said, uh, uh I saw a pretty girl in
the street, and I asked her ”shall we go for a date?”, and
< laughspeech > the girl said “shouldn’t date chil-
dren” < laughspeech/ >. (note: “shouldn’t date chil-
dren” is phonologically identical to ”incidentally to-
gether”)

Laughable= “the girl said ‘shouldn’t date children’ ”

Based on whether laughter occurs entirely
outside or overlapping with the laughable, we
grouped the laughters into 4 alignment cate-
gories: “before”, “overlap”, “immediately after”
and “other after” (see figure 4). We found that in
both languages, laughters that immediately follow
(within 0.3s) the laughable constitute 30% . There
are more overlapping laughters in Chinese than in
French (χ2(1)=6.9, p= .008).

Fr Ch
(in seconds) mean sd range mean sd range
start.L-start.LB 2.2 2.4 -9.4 -13.7 1.3 2.3 -19.6 - 9.6
end.L-end.LB 1.4 2.3 -12.8 - 11.6 0.5 2.6 -24.6 - 5.2
start.L-end.LB -0.5 2.3 -13.9 - 8.4 -0.9 2.6 -25.1 - 3.0

Table 3: Time alignment of laughter (“L”) and laughable (“LB”)

4.2 Does laughter-laughable alignment differ
among different “types” of laughables
and laughters?

Our analysis mainly focuses on the distinction be-
tween self and partner produced laughables, and

Figure 3: Gap between laughable and laughter

Figure 4: laughters before, after or overlapping with laughable

between speech laugh and laughter bouts, pre-
sented separately below. Due to space constraints,
the effect of the rest of the tiers are not discussed.

4.2.1 Self vs. partner produced laughables
We coded whether the laughables are described
events, meta-linguistic, or exophoric events. In
our corpus described events are the common-
est (92% in French and 89% in Chinese), fol-
lowed by exophoric laughables (7% in French
and 10%). Metalinguistic (1% in both languages)
laughables are rare, so we grouped them with de-
scribed events in the current analysis. On aver-
age, there are more self-produced than partner-
produced laughables, supporting the idea that
speakers laugh more often than the audience. In-
terestingly, 3% of the laughables are jointly pro-
duced (one person finishing the other’s sentence,
or both saying roughly the same thing at the same
time) (see (8)). With the former two categories,
we also coded whether the laughable is produced
by the laugher or her partner, which allow us to
compare our results with studies of “speaker” or
“audience” laughter.

(8) (totally overlapping turns are italicized)

B: c’est une personne qui est aux toilettes
dans < laughter > des toilettes publiques A:
< laughter > X ah: oui: oui un mec qui parle a
cute‘ < laughter/ > B: dans < laughter > des
toilettes publiques voila sauf que l’autre il est au

365



telephone et l’autre il lui croit qu’il parle . C’est genant
< laughter/ >

(Translation) B: it is a person who is in the bathroom
in < laughter > in public bathroom A:< laughter >
Ah yes yes a guy who is talking in the next stall
< laughter/ > B: in < laughter > in public bath-
room exactly but the other is on the phone and the other
thinks he is speaking with him. That’s embarrassing
< laughter/ >

Laughable= “exactly but the other is on the phone and
the other thinks he is speaking with him”

We found that laughters about a partner-
produced laughable start later than those about a
self-produced laughable, but still the average start-
ing time is before the end of the laughable. With
partner-produced laughables, the average gap be-
tween the end of laughable and start of laughter is
-0.02s in French and -0.3s in Chinese, while with
self-produced laughables, the average gap is -0.7s
in French and -1.3s in Chinese.

4.2.2 Speech laugh vs. laughter bouts
Laughter frequently overlaps with speech. 36%
of laughter events in French and 47% of laughter
events in Chinese contain speech laughter. Speech
laughter is on average 0.3 seconds longer than
stand alone laughter bouts. Speech laughs over-
lap with the laughable more than laughter bouts.
52% of speech laughters in French and 70% in
Chinese overlap with the laughables. In compar-
ison, 33% of laughter bouts in French and 34%
in Chinese overlap with the laughable. The rea-
son why speech laugh more often overlap with the
laughables is likely to do with the difference in
function between speech laugh and laughter bouts.
Laughters that mark an upcoming laughable most
frequently overlaps with speech, and these laugh-
ter events are also ones that tend to stretch until
the middle or the end of the laughable. A more
detailed analysis of the function/effect of laughter
is reported in (Mazzocconi et al., 2016).

Notice that not all speech laughs overlap with
the laughable, suggesting that often, laughter
that co-occurs with speech is not about the co-
occurring speech (47.8% in French and 30% in
Chinese). In the following example, speaker B
says that she’ll take the bigger bedroom, and
laughs. Speaker A joins the laughter but starts a
new utterance.

(9) B: okay. les chambres maintenant A:alo:rs F euh:
bon évidemment F euh: B: je prends la plus grande
< laughter/ > A: c’est là < laughter > où il y a un
problème t’vois < /laughter >

(Translation) B: okay. the bedrooms now A: well
euh: well obviously euh: B: I take the bigger one
< laughter/ > A: It’s there < laughspeech > where
there is a problem you see < /laughspeech >

Laughable= “je prends la plus grande”

4.3 Does laughter interrupt speech?

We investigated whether laughter occurs at
utterance-medial positions when one party is
speaking, and when the partner is speaking.

Does laughter interrupt partners’ utter-
ances? Yes. We found that 51.8% of laughter
bouts in French and 56.7% of laughter bouts in
Chinese start during the partner’s utterances (not
necessarily laughables), for example:

(10) B: pour faire un mur de son quoi < laughspeech > en
fait c’est une < english > ra:ve < /english > notre
appartement < /laughspeech > A: < laughter/ >

(Translation) B: to create a sound barrier which
< laughspeech > in fact it is a rave, our apartment
< /laughspeech > A:< laughter/ >

Laughable= “in fact it is a rave, our apartment”

Does laughter interrupt one’s own utter-
ances?

We found 14 laughter bouts (5%) in French and
12 (8.6%) in Chinese that occurred in utterance-
medial positions. These proportions are sta-
tistically higher than zero: French χ2(1)=12.3,
p=.0004; Chinese χ2(1)=10.5, p=.001. Most of
these interruptions at not at phrase boundaries. For
example:

(11) 那你之前有没有啊:.有过什么... < laughter/ >
< laughter >犯罪记录吗?

(Translation) Do you have, uh, have any
< laughter/ > criminal records?

Laughable= “criminal records”

5 Discussion

The aim of the current study was to deepen the
little research available on the relation between
laughter, laughable and speech in natural conver-
sation, starting from the observation of their tem-
poral sequence and alignment. We investigated
three questions: whether laughter always follows,
or at least is adjacent to its laughable, as is com-
monly assumed; whether this sequential alignment
differ depending on differeht “types” of laughters;
and whether laughter always punctuates speech.
Our main findings are:

366



1. Time alignment between laughter and laugh-
able is rather free.
— Laughter and laughable does not have a
one-to-one relationship. A laughable can be
referred to by more than one laughters.
— Contrary to popular belief, only 30% of
laughters occur immediately after the laugh-
able. Laughters frequently start during the
laughable (more so with “speaker” laughter
than “audience“ laughter).
— Laughters can occur long before or long
after the laughable, and not be adjacent to
their laughable.
— Between 30 to 50 percent of speech laughs
do not overlap with the laughable, suggesting
that frequently laughs are not about the co-
occurring speech.
If looking just at laughter bouts, about 40%
occur immediately after the laughable.

2. Laughter-laughable alignment may differ de-
pending on the different “types” of laugh-
able and laughter. Specifically, laughters
about a partner-produced laughable (audi-
ence laughter) start later than those about a
self-produced laughable (speaker laughter).
Speech laughs occur earlier than laughter
bouts, and overlaps more with the laughable.

3. Comparing Chinese and French, the majority
of the patterns are similar, except that in Chi-
nese, laughs are more likely to overlap with
the laughable than in French. This provides
an initial indication that while certain aspects
of laughter behaviour are influenced by cul-
ture/language, generally we use laughter sim-
ilarly in interaction. 3

4. Laughter does interrupt speech: we often
laugh when others are speaking (half of all
laughter bouts) and occasionally we insert
stand-alone laughters mid-sentence (less than
10%). Moreover, very frequently laughter
overlaps speech (around 40% of all laugh-
ters).

The relatively free alignment between laughter
and speech seems analogous at a first approxima-
tion to the relation between manual gesture and
speech (Rieser, 2015). We propose to consider

3Of course a caveat to this conclusion is the small number
of speakers for each language. We will expand the study with
more speakers and more genres of interaction.

laughter as a verbal gesture, having an indepen-
dent channel from speech, with which it commu-
nicates through an interface.

5.1 Is laughter rarely about funny stimuli?

Our results discredit the method of inferring what
the laughter is about by looking at the elements
that immediately precede or follow it. Therefore,
previous conclusions using this method should be
revisited (Provine, 1993; Provine, 1996; Provine,
2001; Provine and Emmorey, 2006; Vettin and
Todt, 2004). One such conclusion is that because
they follow “banal comments”, laughter is mostly
about not about funny stimuli. We have shown
that the logic does not hold, as very often, those
preceding “banal comments” are not the laugh-
ables. And even if they are, the “funniness” or
incongruity may reside between the laughable and
something else, e.g., the context of occurrence,
world knowledge, cultural norms, experiences, in-
formational and intentional states shared between
interlocutors. For example, in the following ex-
change, the exchange seems rather banal, but in
fact, they are laughing about the exophoric situa-
tion that they are acting.

(12) A: Oh comment allez-vous? < laughter/ > B: ça va
et toi? tu vas bien? A : très bien merci:

(Translation) A: Oh how are you? < laughter/ > B:
fine and you? are you ok? A: very well thanks

Laughable= exophoric situation (they started acting)

Exactly what proportion of laughables contain
funny incongruity is a topic for further research.
For now, our results questions the validity of ex-
isting proposals on this score.

5.2 Laughter Punctuating Speech?

It has been suggested (notably by Provine) that
laughter bouts almost never (0.1%) disrupt phrases
but punctuate them (Provine, 1993; Provine, 1996;
Provine, 2001). He explains this finding on the ba-
sis of an organic constraint: laughter and speech
share the same vocal apparatus and speech has
“priority access”. Curiously enough, Provine has
always excluded speech-laughs from his investi-
gations, without any justification. A more recent
study on laughter in deaf ASL signers (Provine
and Emmorey, 2006) showed that signers rarely
laugh during their own utterances, where no com-
petition for the same channel of expression is
present. Provine and Emmory conclude that the

367



punctuation effect of laughter holds even for sign-
ers, and possibly is not a simple physical con-
straint that determines the placement of laughter
in dialogues, but due to a higher order linguistic
ordered structure (Provine, 2006).

On the surface, their findings in speakers and
signers are similar: speakers do not stop mid-
sentence to insert a laugh, and signers do not laugh
while signing a sentence. However, this “simi-
larity” may be a difference in disguise. We have
shown that speakers frequently overlap laughter
and speech. If it were indeed true that signers do
not laugh while signing, it raises the question why
speech laughter is common for speakers but rare
for signers. (Provine and Emmory, 2006) hypoth-
esised that the placement of laughter in dialogue is
controlled by a higher linguistic ordered structure,
where laughter is secondary to language. There-
fore, even when the two don’t occur in competing
channels, e.g., for signers, laughter still only oc-
curs at phrase boundaries.

We argue for a different explanation. Assum-
ing speech laughter data (laughter that overlaps
utterances) were not excluded in the ASL study
as they were in spoken dialogue studies, in deaf
signers, since the laughter is perceived only vi-
sually and involves marked facial movements, it
would interfere with the perception of the message
conveyed by language. In sign languages, body
and face movements constitute important com-
municative elements at all linguistic levels from
phonology to morphology, semantics, syntax and
prosody (Liddell, 1978; Campbell, 1999). Despite
the fact that emotional facial expressions can over-
lap with linguistic facial movements (Dachkovsky
and Sandler, 2009), a laugh, implying a signifi-
cant alteration of facial configuration (see identifi-
cation of a laughter episode) could be excessively
disruptive for the message aimed to be conveyed.
While in verbal language the laughter signal can
be completely fused in the speech as a paralinguis-
tic feature (Crystal, 1976) and used in a sophisti-
cated manner to enrich and facilitate communica-
tion, (Nwokah et al., 1999) report that not even
from an acoustic perspective is laughter secondary
to speech: when co-occurring the laugh indeed
does not resemble the speech spectral patterns nor
does the speech resemble the laughter ones, but
together they create a new idiosyncratic pattern.
Laughter is fully meaningful and communicative
in itself, universally across cultures, and the emo-

tional components that it carries are not secondary
to speech or trivial.

6 Conclusion and future work

Our study provides the first systematic analysis of
laughables, and demonstrates the existence of a
corpus, the DUEL corpus (Hough et al., 2016b) in
which less than a third of the laughs immediately
follow their referents. Instead, the laugh can oc-
cur before, during or after the laughable with wide
time ranges. In addition, laughter does “interrupt”
speech: we frequently start laughing in the middle
of an utterance of the interlocutor or of ourselves
(often speech-laugh). Our results challenge the as-
sumption that what laughter follows is what it is
about, and thus question previous claims based on
this assumption.

In future work, we will study to what extent
laughter-laughable alignment differs by the func-
tion/effect of laughter, and what the limit is for the
“free” alignment. This work may be useful for di-
alogue systems which allows a computer agent to
generate laughter at appropriate times depending
on the type and location of the laughable.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank three anonymous re-
viewers for SigDial 2016 for their very helpful
comments. We acknowledge the support of the
French Investissements d’Avenir-Labex EFL pro-
gram (ANR-10-LABX-0083) and the Disfluency,
Exclamations, and Laughter in Dialogue (DUEL)
project within the projets franco-allemand en sci-
ences humaines et sociales funded by the ANR
and the DFG.

368



References
Mahadev L Apte. 1985. Humor and laughter: An an-

thropological approach. Cornell Univ Pr.

Jo-Anne Bachorowski and Michael J Owren. 2001.
Not all laughs are alike: Voiced but not unvoiced
laughter readily elicits positive affect. Psychologi-
cal Science, 12(3):252–257.

Paul Boersma et al. 2002. Praat, a system for do-
ing phonetics by computer. Glot international,
5(9/10):341–345.

Ruth Campbell. 1999. Categorical perception of face
actions: Their role in sign language and in commu-
nicative facial displays. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Section A, 52(1):67–95.

David Crystal. 1976. Prosodic systems and intonation
in English, volume 1. CUP Archive.

Svetlana Dachkovsky and Wendy Sandler. 2009. Vi-
sual intonation in the prosody of a sign language.
Language and Speech, 52(2-3):287–314.

Paul Ekman and Wallace V Friesen. 1975. Unmask-
ing the face: A guide to recognizing emotions from
facial cues.

Jonathan Ginzburg, Ellen Breitholtz, Robin Cooper, Ju-
lian Hough, and Ye Tian. 2015. Understanding
laughter. In Proceedings of the 20th Amsterdam
Colloquium, University of Amsterdam.

Jonathan Ginzburg. 2012. The Interactive Stance:
Meaning for Conversation. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Julian Hough, Ye Tian, Laura de Ruiter, Simon Betz,
David Schlangen, and Jonathan Ginzburg. 2016a.
Duel: A multi-lingual multimodal dialogue corpus
for disfluency, exclamations and laughter. In 10th
edition of the Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference.

Julian Hough, Ye Tian, Laura de Ruiter, Simon Betz,
David Schlangen, and Jonathan Ginzburg. 2016b.
Duel: A multi-lingual multimodal dialogue corpus
for disfluency, exclamations and laughter. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC 2016.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2012. Content analysis: An intro-
duction to its methodology. Sage.

Scott K Liddell. 1978. Nonmanual signals and relative
clauses in american sign language. Understanding
language through sign language research, pages 59–
90.

Chiara Mazzocconi, Ye Tian, and Jonathan Ginzburg.
2016. Multi-layered analysis of laughter. In Pro-
ceedings of SemDial 2016 (JerSem), the 20th Work-
shop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue.

John Morreall. 1983. Taking laughter seriously.
SUNY Press.

Evangeline E Nwokah, Hui-Chin Hsu, Olga Dobrowol-
ska, and Alan Fogel. 1994. The development of
laughter in mother-infant communication: Timing
parameters and temporal sequences. Infant Behav-
ior and Development, 17(1):23–35.

Evangeline E Nwokah, Hui-Chin Hsu, Patricia Davies,
and Alan Fogel. 1999. The integration of laughter
and speech in vocal communicationa dynamic sys-
tems perspective. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 42(4):880–894.

Robert R Provine and Karen Emmorey. 2006. Laugh-
ter among deaf signers. Journal of Deaf Studies and
Deaf Education, 11(4):403–409.

Robert R. Provine. 1993. Laughter punctuates speech:
Linguistic, social and gender contexts of laughter.
Ethology, 95(4):291–298.

Robert R Provine. 1996. Laughter. American scientist,
84(1):38–45.

Robert R Provine. 2001. Laughter: A scientific inves-
tigation. Penguin.

V. Raskin. 1985. Semantic mechanisms of humor, vol-
ume 24. Springer.

Hannes Rieser. 2015. When hands talk to mouth. ges-
ture and speech as autonomous communicating pro-
cesses. SEMDIAL 2015 goDIAL, page 122.

Hartmut Rothgänger, Gertrud Hauser, Aldo Carlo Cap-
pellini, and Assunta Guidotti. 1998. Analysis of
laughter and speech sounds in italian and german
students. Naturwissenschaften, 85(8):394–402.

Klaus R Scherer. 2009. The dynamic architecture
of emotion: Evidence for the component process
model. Cognition and emotion, 23(7):1307–1351.

Jérôme Urbain and Thierry Dutoit. 2011. A pho-
netic analysis of natural laughter, for use in au-
tomatic laughter processing systems. In Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pages 397–
406. Springer.

Julia Vettin and Dietmar Todt. 2004. Laughter in con-
versation: Features of occurrence and acoustic struc-
ture. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 28(2):93–115.

369


