




































Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+12), pages 67–76,
Düsseldorf, Germany, June 29 - July 1, 2016.

Modelling the ziji Blocking Effect and Constraining Bound Variable
Derivations in MC-TAG with Delayed Locality

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko

University of Calgary
Craigie Hall C205, 2500 University Dr NW

Calgary, AB, Canada
dstorosh@ucalgary.ca

Abstract

MC-TAG derivations using delayed local-
ity (i.e. non set-local composition) have
been used to model long distance binding
in natural language. In this paper, I ex-
plore the possibility within Synchronous
TAG that tree sets composing via delayed
locality may have many possible syntac-
tic derivations for a single semantic form.
Using the Mandarin (Chinese) anaphor ziji
as a test case, I show that the blocking
effect which is described in other gener-
ative frameworks as a constraint on covert
movement can be modelled as arising from
constraints across possible derivation fam-
ilies for a given tree set. Further ob-
serving the interaction of ziji with other
bound variables in the language, I propose
that anti-locality effects in variable bind-
ing arise when a more specialized bound
variable is available. This has conse-
quences for the definition of a typology of
bound variables.

1 Variable Binding in STAG

Variable binding in Synchronous TAG (STAG) has
been modelled as a phenomenon which exploits
delayed locality. Building on the definition of
delayed-local derivations presented in Chiang and
Scheffler (2008), bound variables can be modelled
as multi-component sets (MCSs) in both the syn-
tax and semantics. As formulated in Storoshenko
and Han (2015), Figure 2 shows that the bound
variable obligatorily composes non-locally, with
the α components substituting into the argument
position of the predicate selecting the variable,
while the β components compose directly with the
antecedent. This is most crucial on the seman-
tics side, where the variable’s auxiliary tree com-

poses with the “scope part” of a STAG general-
ized quantifier, as in Figure 3. The bound vari-
able carries a function from 〈e,t〉 to 〈e,t〉 which ac-
complishes the variable binding, in a form similar
to Büring’s (2005) Binder Index Evaluation Rule.
On the syntax side, the β component acts as solely
an agreement check. The English bound variable
pronoun her is lexically specified for third person
feminine ϕ-features; in this case there is no gen-
der specification on a student, so the combination
goes through. For nominals with inherent gender
specification, for example every boy, the result-
ing feature clash would block the derivation. In
this way, agreement is treated as a purely syntactic
phenomenon, with no manifestation in the seman-
tics. As written, these trees could compose into a
sentence such as A student loves her father.

〈
αlove

αfather

αher

αa student

βher

α′love

α′father

α′her

β′a student

β′her

α′a student

〉

Figure 1: Derivation trees for A student loves her
father

Following the derivation trees in Figure 1, de-
layed locality is observed in the composition of
the members of the her MCS, while the only other
MCS present has composed tree-locally1 . Chi-
ang and Scheffler define a delay as the set of
derivation tree nodes including the members of the
MCS, and all nodes on a path between members
of the MCS, but excluding the common dominat-
ing node. Storoshenko and Han extend this notion
into a measure for the size of a delay by taking the
cardinality of that set. The derivations in Figure 1
will have a delay (d) value of four for the pronoun.

1Though the DP anchored by father could also be repre-
sented as a MCS.

67



〈
{
αher: DP

D

her

βher: DP*[3sgF]
} { α′her: e

xh

β′her: 〈e, t〉

〈e, t〉*〈〈e, t〉〈e, t〉〉

λPλz.[λxh.P (z)](z)

}
〉

Figure 2: Tree sets for bound variable pronoun her

〈αa student: 1 DP[3sg]
NP

N

student

D

a

{ α′a student: e
xs

β′a student: t

1 〈e, t〉

t*λxs

〈〈e, t〉t〉

t

t

P (y)

t

student(y)

∃y

λP

}
〉

Figure 3: Sample Quantifier Tree Set

Beyond referring to the delay as a whole, they fur-
ther define the length l of a delayed local MCS
combination as d − n, where n is the number of
MCS members. Thus, for the bound variable pro-
noun in the derivation trees of Figure 1, l=2. The
reason for applying this characterization of a de-
lay becomes clear when considering the quantifier
tree sets. As defined, even a tree-local MCS com-
bination will have a trivial delay consisting only of
its own derivation tree nodes, yielding a d value of
two, though the l value for this MCS combination
will be zero. This is a more intuitive match with a
singleton tree combination on the syntax side, as it
is not immediately obvious at a glance that the two
derivations are in fact isomorphic. With deriva-
tional isomorphism defined based on the equiva-
lency of l values for any given lexical item’s com-
binations on both sides of the STAG derivation, as
well as respecting all linked nodes, the quantifier’s
combination can be said to be maximally isomor-
phic (borrowing the term from Storoshenko and
Han (2015)), as l=0 in both cases. It is this notion
of “maximal” isomorphism that I will assume to
underlie all further claims of isomorphism.

2 Ziji and The Blocking Effect

The key data modelled in this paper all derive from
the behaviour of the Mandarin (Chinese) anaphor
ziji, described extensively in the literature since
Cole et al. (1990). In brief, there are five differ-
ent phenomena which need to be accounted for.
The first is the fact that ziji can allow both local
and long-distance antecedents, as shown in (1).

(1) Zhangsani
Zhangsan

renwei
think

[Lisij
Lisi

zhidao
know

[Wangwuk
Wangwu

xihuan
like

zijii/j/k .]]
self

‘Zhangsan thinks that Lisi knows that
Wangwu likes self.’

In this respect, ziji is not dissimilar to its Korean
cognate caki, which is discussed in Storoshenko
and Han (2015). Where the two diverge is in the
manifestation of the so-called blocking effect il-
lustrated in (2):

(2) Zhangsani
Zhangsan

renwei
think

[woj
I

zhidao
know

[Wangwuk
Wangwu

xihuan
like

ziji∗i/∗j/k .]]
self

‘Zhangsan thinks that I know that
Wangwu likes self.’

In this sentence where the subject of the middle
clause is a first person pronoun, ziji is restricted
not only to a third person antecedent, but only to
the most local one. Descriptively, the presence
of an intervening antecedent with mismatched ϕ-
features blocks the anaphor from binding by the
highest subject, even though that subject is also
third person. However, the situation is different in
the local domain:

(3) Zhangsani
Zhangsan

yiwei
thought

[woj
I

hui
will

ba
BA

nik
you

dai
take

hui
back

ziji∗i/j/k
self’s

de
DE

jia.]
home

‘Zhangsan thought I will take you back to
self’s house.’

68



As seen in (3), ziji is not inherently restricted to
third person antecedents (unlike caki and the En-
glish her from above). In the local domain, ziji
may be bound by either the first or the second
person antecedent. This is a more general prop-
erty of ziji, which can be bound by an antecedent
of any ϕ-feature value, within the constraints of
the blocking effect. For example, a version of (1)
where all clauses had first person subjects would
equally be grammatical. Finally, there is the obser-
vation that even when the blocking condition is re-
spected, ziji may not take a non-local non-subject
antecedent:

(4) Zhangsani
Zhangsan

gaosu
tell

Lisij
Lisi

[Wangwuk
Wangwu

piping-le
criticize-ASP

zijii/∗j/k .]
self

‘Zhangsan told Lisi that Wangwu criti-
cized self.’

Again unlike Korean, the anaphor may not take
Lisi as a potential antecedent. However, even
though Lisi is not considered a possible an-
tecedent, a first person pronoun in that position in-
duces a blocking effect, even though this was not
observed in the local domain. Based on these data,
the five different properties of ziji which need to be
modelled are enumerated again below:

1. Local and long distance antecedents are pos-
sible

2. ϕ-feature mismatch in a c-command chain
induces blocking across clauses

3. Any antecedent may be viable in the lowest
clause

4. The anaphor can in principle take any ϕ-
feature valued antecedent

5. Higher clause antecedents must be subjects

Sohng’s (2004) analysis of ziji follows the tradi-
tion of the original Cole et al. analysis in making
use of covert movement to capture all of the rel-
evant facts, accounting for the various differences
between Korean caki and Mandarin ziji as being
the result of the difference in ϕ-features between
the two. While the formal mechanisms here will of
course be different, STAG not having any notion
of covert movement to fall back on, the final anal-
ysis will draw on Sohng’s key insight. The intri-
cate pattern of data observed will be here be mod-
elled as an interplay between the mechanisms used
to capture agreement and a set of well-formedness
constraints on STAG derivations.

3 Modelling Core Cases

Above, I showed the agreement checking mecha-
nism that has been previously proposed for bound
variables in STAG: a feature value on the degen-
erate DP node which combines in the syntax with
the variable’s antecedent. However, this is not the
only agreement-checking mechanism which has
been proposed in the TAG literature. Working in
LTAG, Kallmeyer and Romero (2007) provide an
account for reflexive pronouns where agreement
is checked via a degenerate T′ node, part of the
MCS for the reflexive. The intuition here is that by
having agreement check with the functional pro-
jection of the verb, a tree-local derivation for the
reflexive is ensured. My proposal is simple: the
unique ϕ-feature deficiency of ziji versus caki is
derived by adding this additional degenerate node
to the syntax side of the bound variable’s MCS, as
in Figure 4.

Based on these MCS definitions, it is clear
where the notion of delay length will become rel-
evant, as there are asymmetric sets on the syntax
and semantic sides. Ultimately, the semantics will
define the minimum l value for any given deriva-
tion, as the delay needed for semantic composi-
tion will be directly determined by the intended
meaning of the sentence: α′ziji will substitute
at the appropriate argument position while β′ziji
will adjoin to the scope part of the desired an-
tecedent2 Between the two MCSs in Figure 4, I as-
sume the following symmetric compositions: αziji
and α′ziji will need to substitute at linked nodes,
while βzijiDP∗ and β′ziji will also be required to
adjoin into the tree sets of the antecedent. With
no matched component to force a fully isomor-
phic derivation via a linked node, βzijiT∗ is essen-
tially free to attach at any node with a matching
label, constrained only by the ϕ-feature value. I
will begin with the assumption that both adjoin-
ing sites must have no incompatible features, with
the α variables valued via unification with features
at the adjoining sites. However, to capture all the
facts within a single account, it will emerge that
the equivalence of the two feature unifications is
relaxed under certain structural relationships be-
tween the two agreeing members of the ziji MCS.
Moving forward, I will not be presenting any in-
formation on the semantic derivations, choosing
to focus exclusively on the syntax. Full STAG

2Proper names are assumed to also have generalized quan-
tifier scope parts to provide the necessary binding.

69



〈
{
αzijiDP DP

D

ziji

βzijiDP∗ DP*[φ = α] βzijiT ′∗ T′*[φ = α]
} {

α′ziji: e

xa

β′ziji: 〈e, t〉

〈e, t〉*〈〈e, t〉〈e, t〉〉

λPλz.[λxa.P (z)](z)

}
〉

Figure 4: Tree Sets for ziji

derivations in the syntax and semantics for many
of the predicates used here can be found in existing
work, and no changes in the mechanics of deriving
variable binding are being proposed in this paper.

For the sake of illustration, one syntactic pred-
icate tree appears in Figure 5. Predicates such as
renwei “think” and zhidao “know” will be simpler
transitive verbs, still recursive on C′, with all of
these able to either recursively join to each other,
or a CP-rooted embedded clause such as xihuan
“like” or piping “criticize” having a DP terminal
node at the object position which will be the sub-
stitution site for αziji. The ditransitive gaosu “tell”
is represented using a standard VP-shell structure.
The only crucial detail to note is that in a ditransi-
tive predicate, the T′ node is c-commanded by the
subject, but not the indirect object.

C′

TP

T′

vP

v′

VP

V′

C′*V

tj

Indirect Object DP↓

gaosuj

DP

ti

T

Subject DPi↓

C

Figure 5: Sample Embedding Predicate gaosu
“tell”

The three readings for (1) will emerge from the
DPs into which βzijiDP∗ and its associated seman-
tic tree adjoin. Multiplying this out by the three
clauses each with their own T′ nodes yields nine
possible derivation trees, three for each reading.
These are given in full in Figure 6, though all fur-
ther examples will be summarized as in Table 1.
In these tables, the l value for the semantic combi-

nation of ziji will correspond to the cell matching
the predicate of which ziji is an argument with the
intended antecedent for that reading; the leftmost
column in all cases.

Table 1: Tabular representation of Figure 6

T′* at: xihuan zhidao renwei
DP* at: Wangwu δ1: l=1 δ2: l=2 δ3: l=3

Lisi/Wo δ4: l=2 δ5: l=2 δ6: l=3
Zhangsan δ7: l=3 δ8: l=3 δ9: l=3

Based on this table, it is immediately clear that
not all possible derivations are licit. For the situa-
tion where Wangwu is the antecedent, placing the
βzijiT ′∗ in any clause higher than the one contain-
ing αziji will create a longer delay in the syntax
than the semantics, making δ2 and δ3 not (maxi-
mally) isomorphic STAG derivations. Conversely,
when Zhangsan is the antecedent, all placements
of βzijiT ′ yield a formally isomorphic derivation,
under the terms defined above. I label this set
of isomorphic derivations as a derivational fam-
ily: a set of isomorphic derivations (as defined by
sharing equal l values for all MCS compositions)
which yield identical semantic outputs. Remov-
ing spurious derivations yields the final set of pos-
sible derivations for (1) in Table 2. The lowest
antecedent is derived via a singleton derivation,
while the other two are represented with deriva-
tional families.

Table 2: Isomorphic Derivations for (1)

T′* at: xihuan zhidao renwei
DP* at: Wangwu δ1: l=1

Lisi δ4: l=2 δ5: l=2
Zhangsan δ7: l=3 δ8: l=3 δ9: l=3

Taking these same values for the blocking ef-
fect example in (2) yields the derivations in Table
3. However, two of the isomorphic derivations, δ4

70



δ1 xihuan

βzijiT ′αzijizhidao

renwei

Zhangsan

Lisi/Wo

Wangwu

βzijiDP

δ2 xihuan

αzijizhidao

βzijiT ′renwei

Zhangsan

Lisi/Wo

Wangwu

βzijiDP

δ3 xihuan

αzijizhidao

renwei

βzijiT ′Zhangsan

Lisi/Wo

Wangwu

βzijiDP

δ4 xihuan

βzijiT ′αzijizhidao

renwei

Zhangsan

Lisi/Wo

βzijiDP

Wangwu

δ5 xihuan

αzijizhidao

βzijiT ′renwei

Zhangsan

Lisi/Wo

βzijiDP

Wangwu

δ6 xihuan

αzijizhidao

renwei

βzijiT ′Zhangsan

Lisi/Wo

βzijiDP

Wangwu

δ7 xihuan

βzijiT ′αzijizhidao

renwei

Zhangsan

βzijiDP

Lisi/Wo

Wangwu

δ8 xihuan

αzijizhidao

βzijiT ′renwei

Zhangsan

βzijiDP

Lisi/Wo

Wangwu

δ9 xihuan

αzijizhidao

renwei

βzijiT ′Zhangsan

βzijiDP

Lisi/Wo

Wangwu

Figure 6: Derivation Trees for (1) and (2)

and δ8 (indicated in bold in the table), will result
in a feature clash as the βziji components will ad-
join at locations with different ϕ feature values.

Table 3: Isomorphic Derivations for (2)

T′* at: xihuan zhidao renwei
DP*: at Wangwu δ1: l=1

Wo δ4: l=2 δ5: l=2
Zhangsan δ7: l=3 δ8: l=3 δ9: l=3

This clash is what I propose to be at the root of
the blocking effect. Following on the definition
of a derivational family, I propose the Fully
Functional Family (FFF) constraint:

(5) FULLY FUNCTIONAL FAMILY (FFF): If
one member of a derivational family vio-
lates a syntactic constraint, all members of
the family are rendered infelicitous.

Applying this constraint to the set of derivations in
Table 3, only the derivation belonging to the most
local antecedent survives.

(3) presents a more complex situation. Here, the
lowest clause is a ditransitive, while ziji is further
embedded inside of a possessive DP structure. The
partial derivation for this this example is presented
in Figure 7. With three possible antecedents and

dai hui

jia

αziji

yiwei

Zhangsan

niwo

Figure 7: Partial Derivation Tree for (3)

two clauses, here there are six possible derivations,
presented in Table 4. Non-isomorphic derivations
have already been removed, and those creating a
feature clash are again bolded.

Table 4: Isomorphic Derivations for (3)

T′* at: dai hui yiwei
DP* at: Ni δ1: l=2

Wo δ3: l=2
Zhangsan δ5: l=3 δ6: l=3

Recall that the possible antecedents here were
ni and wo. The correct prediction is made for
Zhangsan, whose derivational family is elimi-
nated by virtue of the FFF, and for wo, where
the first person subject values T′ in the only iso-
morphic derivation. Note that a hypothetical δ4
would exist, where βzijiT ′∗ attaches to the higher
clause with a third person subject. However, that
derivation is not isomorphic, and does not survive
into the (singleton) family, avoiding the feature

71



clash. A similar δ2 would exist, but is also non-
isomorphic. The unexpected result here is that δ1
yields a feature clash, and yet the reading is gram-
matical.

Refining the definition of how a feature clash
results resolves this issue. The distinction to make
here is in the relationship of the elements in the fi-
nal derived syntax tree; I assume the higher clause
to be a transitive verb auxiliary tree recursive on
C′, while the embedded clause is a CP-rooted
ditransitive-like structure. In δ5, βzijiDP∗ is ad-
joined to the subject in the higher clause, at a po-
sition c-commanding βzijiT ′∗ adjoined to the T′

node of the lower clause. This c-command rela-
tionship, I claim, is required for the feature clash to
be triggered. Looking at δ1, an opposite relation-
ship occurs, where βzijiT ′∗ dominates βzijiDP∗.
Here, the features do not enter into the necessary
configuration to be checked, and δ1 is not actu-
ally a clash. To fully implement this would re-
quire a revision to the original ziji trees such that
it is not a formal part of the MCS that the two fea-
ture unifications must match: βzijiDP∗ would re-
ceive a value for its α, while βzijiT ′∗ would have
a distinct value β for its ϕ features, and the con-
straint described here would be that if βzijiDP∗ c-
commands βzijiT ′∗, then α = β.

This c-command relationship comes into play
when it comes to discussing (4) and the closely-
related (6):

(6) Zhangsani
Zhangsan

gaosu
tell

woj
I

Wangwuk
Wangwu

piping-le
criticize-ASP

ziji∗i/∗j/k .
self

‘Zhangsan told me that Wangwu criticized
self.’

Recall that (4) indicated that the non-subject is
not a possible antecedent, but having ziji bound
by Zhangsan was still possible. (6) has the same
structure, but replaces the indirect object with a
first person pronoun. Note that even though it is
not considered a viable antecedent, it still induces
a blocking effect. The partial derivation tree for
(4) and (6) is as in Figure 8. Again, with three po-
tential antecedents, and two clauses, there are six
possible derivations to consider. Table 5 presents
only the isomorphic families for (6).

In this case, the lowest antecedent is correctly
predicted to be fine, and the first person indirect
object is ruled out because in δ3 βzijiDP∗ will
c-command βzijiT ′∗ with mismatched ϕ-features.

piping

αzijigaosu

wo/LisiZhangsan

Wangwu

Figure 8: Partial Derivation Tree for (4) and (6)

Table 5: Isomorphic Derivations for (6)

T′* at: piping gaosu
DP* at: Wangwu δ1: l=2

Wo δ3: l=2 δ4: l=2
Zhangsan δ5: l=2 δ6: l=2

With one derivation ruled out, FFF will block all
derivations in the same family. What is not im-
mediately obvious is how δ5 and δ6 are also ruled
out. To fully lay out the issue, I also present the
derivations for (4) in Table 6. In this case, the data
conform with the prediction for Zhangsan, who is
a viable antecedent, but there is no obvious rea-
son that Lisi is ruled out. Given that δ3 is well-
formed and satisfies the c-command requirement
for feature checking, δ4 should be examined for
the cause of the unacceptability. The intuition here
is that as (4) most clearly shows the subject ori-
entation of ziji, that effect should fall out from the
one derivation where βzijiT ′∗ ends up in a position
to dominate βzijiDP∗. However, fully ruling out
this relationship would block exactly the config-
uration in the unexpectedly grammatical δ1 from
(3). So, just the right constraint which predicts
the grammaticality of (3) and (4) with the reported
readings, and possibly offer some insight into the
so-far unexplained blocking effect in (6) needs to
be found.

Looking at (3) and (4), the most obvious dif-
ference is that the first case dealt with a single-
ton family, while the unavailable Lisi reading of
(4) has two isomorphic derivations. An additional
structural constraint on the two degenerate nodes
of the syntactic ziji set obtains the correct result:
βzijiT ′∗ may only dominate βzijiDP∗ if there is no
other isomorphic derivation where the c-command
relationship which enables feature checking ob-
tains. Framing the constraint in this way allows an
escape hatch for ziji to have different properties in
the most local domain, as the lowest clause attach-
ment of βzijiT ′∗ will always reduce any derivation
with local binding of ziji to a singleton derivation
family, and any higher antecedent will always have

72



Table 6: Isomorphic Derivations for (4)

T* at: piping gaosu
DP* at: Wangwu δ1: l=2

Lisi δ3: l=2 δ4: l=2
Zhangsan δ5: l=2 δ6: l=2

a larger family of isomorphic derivations. This
constraint isolates exactly the derivations where
subject orientation and blocking appear to be sus-
pended. Applying this constraint to the derivations
in Table 6, δ4 will be ruled out, which in turn elim-
inates the derivational family associated with the
antecedent Lisi, following the FFF.

There is an additional consequence for (6). Fol-
lowing this new well-formedness constraint on the
combination of the βziji components, δ4 in Table
5 is also blocked. This leads to another situation
which has so far not been seen: one in which all
members of an isomorphic family of derivations
are separately ill-formed. My final proposal is that
this triggers another constraint between deriva-
tions: the Poisoned Path Principle, or PPP.

(7) POISONED PATH PRINCIPLE: If one iso-
morphic family consists entirely of ill-
formed derivations, no other family of the
same or greater l value is licit.

This principle captures the distinction between
(4) and (6) where the same derivations are licit in
one case but not the other. The distinction lies not
in those derivations, but in the status of another
family of derivations with the same l value. In (4),
it is actually the well-formedness of δ3 which al-
lows the δ5/δ6 family to survive.

This set of constraints yields the desirable result
of capturing the distinction between (4) and (6),
but other analytic options are available. Indeed,
(Huang et al., 2009) describe the distinctions be-
tween local and long-distance ziji as so intractable
that they suggest treating the two as distinct forms
with different properties. A reviewer points out
that following such a path would allow for a sim-
pler characterization of subject orientation in the
long distance domain as falling out from a require-
ment that βzijiDP∗ must c-command βzijiT ′∗. It
is also suggested that the blocking effect in (6) can
be captured by adding another component to the
ziji MCS which will check for agreement at some
position in the predicate tree where the indirect ob-
ject’s ϕ features are checked. While this certainly

has a precedent in the literature (Kallmeyer and
Romero use a similar device to check for agree-
ment with an indirect object), its use in this context
would be hard to stipulate. Assuming that all three
of βzijiDP∗, βzijiT ′∗, and the proposed βzijiV ′∗
would have to match in ϕ features, then a clash
would result if both βzijiT ′∗ and βzijiV ′∗ adjoined
at the highest clause in the derivation of the un-
grammatical matrix subject reading of (6). Recall-
ing that Storoshenko and Han (2015) uses a min-
imum l value to force long distance binding, then
a dedicated tree set for long distance ziji would
need a minimum l based on the distance between
βzijiDP∗ and αziji in the derivation tree, but the
position of βzijiV ′∗ does not change the l value.
As such, there is no way to force βzijiV ′∗ to at-
tach to the higher clause rather than the lower one
(which could potentially avoid the clash) short of
writing in a stipulation that βzijiV ′∗ and βzijiT ′∗
must have a relative l of zero with respect to each
other (tree local) and a relative l of one with re-
spect to βzijiDP∗ (in the same clause as the sub-
ject), all within an overall l of two for the whole
MCS (the anaphor is in an embedded clause). This
is just to say that no treatment of these data will be
devoid of stipulations somewhere in the account;
it is left to further debate which are more likely.
Furthermore, the local domain is no less complex,
as (3) has a close counterpart in which subject ori-
entation does obtain in the local domain:

(8) Wangwui
Wangwu

shuo
say

Zhangsanj
Zhangsan

zengsong
give

gei
to

Lisik
Lisi

yipian
one

guanyu
about

zijii/j/∗k
self

de
DE

wenzhang.
article

‘Wangwu says that Zhangsan gave an ar-
ticle about self to Lisi.’

Unlike in (3), the lower clause indirect object of
(8) cannot be an antecedent. So, just as a distinct
long-distance account would require some deriva-
tional stipulations, a dedicated local treatment of
ziji would need to be sensitive to the distinction
between a “true” ditransitive as in (8) and the so-
called ba-construction of (3).

In closing this discussion of the core analysis,
it’s worth pointing out that all of the cases dis-
cussed under the initially proposed analysis do
scale to longer sentences than those used here.
Looking at the core blocking example (2), it’s
clear to see how any reading where the antecedent
c-commands a ϕ-feature mismatched element will
incur a feature mismatch in one of its isomor-

73



phic derivations. Similarly, even though the con-
straints obviate blocking in the lowest clause, any
clause higher with a mismatched antecedent will
be blocked. In the case of (6), a mismatched non-
subject at any embedding level will have no viable
derivations: all attachments of βzijiT ′ in lower
clauses will incur feature mismatches because
they are c-commanded by the antecedent, while at-
tachments to the local clause or higher will all be
ruled out because βzijiT ′ will c-command its own
antecedent DP within a family where other iso-
morphic derivations are available. By the PPP, this
will block all antecedents in the same or higher
clauses. Conversely, in (4), only derivations where
βzijiT ′ attaches to a position c-commanding a
matched non-subject in an embedding clause will
be ruled out, while the lower attachments will be
felicitous derivations. While the FFF is triggered
to rule out the non-subject antecedent, the exis-
tence of some well-formed derivations will obvi-
ate application of the PPP, allowing other longer
derivation families to go through.

4 Interaction with Other Forms

When blocking occurs, and a bound variable use
of ziji is impossible, Mandarin is similar to English
in that it allows third person pronouns to act as
bound variables:

(9) Mei-ge
every-CL

reni
man

dou
all

renwei
think

[woj
I

piping-le
criticize-ASP

tai/∗j .]
he
‘Every man thought that I criticized him.’

I assume that bound variable ta will have tree sets
similar to English. Lacking the extra T′* compo-
nent, no blocking effect obtains, and the derivation
goes through. However, in the local domain, ta
may not be used:

(10) * Mei-ge
every-CL

ren
man

dou
all

piping-le
criticize-ASP

tai.
he

‘Every man criticized himself.’

Even though there should be nothing formally
constraining the use of ta in (10), native speakers
report ziji to be preferable in this context3. Ta is
also dispreferred in a non-blocking version of (9):

3The bimorphemic taziji is also acceptable, though re-
stricted only to local uses similar to English himself. A re-
viewer correctly points out that the example could be ruled
out by Condition B of the standard binding theory; the same
does not however apply to the bound ta in (11), which sug-
gests more than just Condition B would be at play. Further-
more, the only implementations of Condition B for TAG that

(11) Mei-ge
every-CL

reni
man

dou
all

renwei
think

taj
she

piping-le
criticize-ASP

ta.?i/∗j/k
he
‘Every man thought that she criticized
him.’

For the long distance bound variable reading in
(11), ziji is the clear choice, even though it would
be ambiguous between a local or long distance
reading. While it would be simple to character-
ize ta as an anti-local bound variable, examining
the full set of data suggests this to be an overstate-
ment. It is not merely that ta cannot be used as a
bound variable locally, the facts are that ta is only
ever used when no other form is available. One
could make the same claim about bound variable
uses of the English third person pronouns, which
are not used in local reflexive contexts. Keeping in
mind that TAG accounts of English reflexive pro-
nouns have treated them as tree-local derivations
(see for example Kallmeyer and Romero (2007)
and and Frank (2008), among others), one could
imagine a derivational economy account restrict-
ing uses of her: a derivation that yields the same
meaning without resorting to delayed locality is
available. Similarly, while isomorphic derivations
using either ta or ziji will have identical l values
in (10) and (11), the ambiguity introduced by the
fact ta also has a non-bound referential use may
block its use: the obligatorily bound ziji wins out.
Given that this paper argues for constraints over
sets of derivations, it is not unreasonable to pro-
pose that the same types of comparisons come into
play when selecting the optimal expression of a
desired meaning.

This reasoning calls for a re-examination the ty-
pological conclusions reached in Storoshenko and
Han (2015), where three types of bound variable
are defined: ones similar to ziji or caki which can
be used locally or long distance, ones restricted
to non-local uses formalized as an l value greater
than one, and finally ones restricted only to the
most local use where l=1. Firstly, that the present
paper explains the nonexistence of any bound vari-
ables with minimum l values of two or greater.
These would be hyper-anti-local bound variables
whose antecedents need to be two or more clauses

I am aware of (Champollion, 2008; Nesson, 2009) each make
different assumptions about the semantics of binding than are
made in this paper. Defining the full set of Chomskyan bind-
ing conditions in this particular version of STAG remains
a matter for further research, though see Storoshenko et al.
(2008) for discussion of Condition A as epiphenomenal.

74



removed. As seen here, this would amount to rul-
ing out entire families of derivations with smaller l
values, which would trigger the PPP. The account
for why non-subjects are not antecedents and yet
induce blocking with a feature mismatch is cap-
tured by exactly the derivational constraint which
would rule out such a bound variable. However,
one may wonder whether the anti-local category
exists at all, or should rather just be re-cast as an
epiphenomenon falling out from the fact that bet-
ter local derivations are available?

Still, there is no compelling reason to eliminate
the category of bound variable where l=1. While
it could be the case that apparent local bound
variables may warrant closer examination to see
whether a tree-local derivation is available, there
may be other cases where a certain MCS is forced
to make use of delayed locality, but is constrained
to using only as much as possible for a felicitous
composition. One possibility for such a case out-
side the realm of binding would be subextraction
in wh-movement:

(12) Whati did you take a picture of ti?

While it has been compellingly argued that wh-
extraction should be treated as tree-local move-
ment (Frank, 2002), such an analysis is untenable
for (12), as the trace is in a different lexical pro-
jection than the wh-word’s landing site. Treating
this wh-movement as a MCS consisting of the wh-
word and its trace would need a derivation with an
l value of one, but the use of such a MCS would
need to be held to that value, or else numerous sub-
jacency violations would become possible. This
analysis is held over for future work.

5 On Trans-Derivational Constraints

The analysis presented in this paper relies cru-
cially on a set of trans-derivational constraints
(TDCs) which run the risk of extending the gen-
erative capacity of the grammar. Here, I ad-
dress this concern by comparing the present anal-
ysis with that presented in Freedman (2012). In
that paper, two constraints are presented, along
with a proof that a TAG with restricted TDCs is
no more expressive than one without those con-
straints. The first constraint Freedman proposes is
the DERIVATIONAL COMPLEXITY CONSTRAINT
ON SEMANTIC INTERPRETATION or DCCSI: “A
derivation d producing meaning m is ruled out if
another shorter derivation d′ also produces m.”

The maximal isomorphism constraint I have as-
sumed to act as an initial filter on possible deriva-
tions has essentially this effect, militating against
derivations with identical semantic outputs but
larger l values in the syntactic derivation. This
seems to be a reasonable comparison class for
derivations where an uneven syntactic and seman-
tic MCS pairing is allowed to combine using de-
layed locality. The FFF proposed above uses a
subset of the same comparison class, the fam-
ily of maximally isomorphic derivations. The
second constraint Freedman proposes is a means
of limiting the comparison class for TDCs. His
LOCALITY CONSTRAINT ON COMPETITION dic-
tates that any two derivation trees may only be
compared if the are identical save for the daughters
of one node, which may be either excised or re-
placed. The comparisons within families required
by the FFF are similarly restricted in that they are
identical in all measures save for the position in
the tree of the βzijiT ′ component. Applying the
constraint symmetrically to the pair δ4 and δ5 in
Table 2, each derivation differs from the other by
the daughters of one node. Moving on to the PPP,
there is a similar constraint on comparison classes
when looking at the whole families being com-
pared. Examining the relevant derivations in Table
5, the δ3/δ5 and δ4/δ6 pairs differ only by the po-
sitions of αziji. While TDCs are definitely tools
to be used sparingly, restricting these constraints
to applying within families or at most between ad-
jacent families (allowing the PPP to apply transi-
tively) provides similar restrictions as those dis-
cussed by Freedman.

6 Conclusion

In this paper I have presented a model of the be-
haviour of the Mandarin long distance anaphor
ziji. By combining two well-formedness con-
straints on the relationship between elements in
the ziji MCS with two more global constraints on
derivation families, the blocking effect and certain
asymmetries between local and long distance do-
mains are captured. Furthermore, while the more
global constraints provide motivation for the ex-
isting claim that hyper-anti-local bound variables
should not exist, the existence of trans-derivational
constraints poses a new question of whether anti-
local bound variables are a bona fide category, or
merely epiphenomenal.

75



Acknowledgments

I would like to the TAG+ reviewers for their com-
ments and suggestions, all which have improved
the quality of this paper, and also the audiences
at Yale University and the University of Delaware
who heard preliminary versions of the work con-
tained here. This work was started at Yale un-
der SSHRC Postdoc Fellowship 756-2010-067,
and has been completed under a Faculty Start-Up
Grant from the University of Calgary. My thanks
also to Peng Han for providing some new data and
confirming judgements. All errors are my own.

References

Daniel Büring. 2005. Binding Theory. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Lucas Champollion. 2008. Binding theory in LTAG.
In Claire Gardent and Anoop Sarkar, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on
Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms,
pages 1–8.

David Chiang and Tatjana Scheffler. 2008. Flexi-
ble composition and delayed tree-locality. In Claire
Gardent and Anoop Sarkar, editors, Proceedings of
the 9th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining
Grammars and Related Formalisms, pages 17–24.

Peter Cole, Gabriella Hermon, and Li-May Sung.
1990. Principles and parameters of long-distance re-
flexives. Linguistic Inquiry, 21(1):1–22.

Robert Frank. 2002. Phrase Structure Composition
and Syntactic Dependencies. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Robert Frank. 2008. Reflexives and TAG seman-
tics. In Claire Gardent and Anoop Sarkar, editors,
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on
Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms,
pages 97–104.

Michael Freedman. 2012. Scope economy and TAG
locality. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related
Formalisms, pages 223–231.

James C.T. Huang, Yen-hui Audrey Li, and Yafei Li.
2009. The Syntax of Chinese. Cambridge University
Press.

Laura Kallmeyer and Maribel Romero. 2007. Reflex-
ives and reciprocals in LTAG. In Jeroen Geertzen,
Elias Thijsse, Harry Bunt, and Amanda Schiffrin,
editors, Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Computational Semantics, pages 271–
282.

Rebecca Nesson. 2009. Synchronous and Multicom-
ponent Tree-Adjoining Grammars: Complexity, Al-
gorithms, and Linguistic Applications. Ph.D. thesis,
Harvard University.

Hong-Ki Sohng. 2004. A minimalist analysis of X0

reflexivization in Chinese and Korean. Studies in
Generative Grammar, 14(3):375–396.

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko and Chung-hye Han. 2015.
Using Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammar to de-
rive the typology of bound variable pronouns. Jour-
nal of Logic and Computation, 25(2):371–403.

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko, Chung-hye Han, and David
Potter. 2008. Reflexivity in English: An STAG
analysis. In Claire Gardent and Anoop Sarkar, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the 9th International Work-
shop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related For-
malisms, pages 149–157.

76


