



















































Finding metaphorical triggers through source (not target) domain lexicalization patterns


Proceedings of The Fourth Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 1–9,
San Diego, CA, 17 June 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

Finding Metaphorical Triggers Through Source (Not Target) Domain 
Lexicalization Patterns 

Jenny Lederer 
San Francisco State University 

1600 Holloway Ave. San Francisco CA 94132 
lederer@sfsu.edu 

 
 

 

Abstract 

Some metaphorical mappings between source 
and target are obvious and appear in colloca-
tion patterns in natural language data. Howev-
er, other metaphors that structure abstract pro-
cesses or complex topics are trickier to inves-
tigate because the target domain is lexically 
divorced from the source.  Using metaphors 
for the economy as a case study, this paper in-
troduces new techniques to find metaphorical 
tokens when target and source relationships 
are nonobvious. Through novel methods, con-
stellations of source-domain triggers are iden-
tified in the data and evaluated for meta-
phoricity and keyness and then grouped ac-
cording to trigger potency. 

1 Introduction 

Collections of naturally occurring language data 
serve as repositories of metaphor and can be used 
to investigate lexical patterns indicative of concep-
tual metaphors. Since the introduction of sizable, 
computationally searchable corpora, metaphor re-
searchers and corpus linguists have begun to probe 
questions of quantitative validity (Deignan 2005). 
This movement toward measurable indicators of 
metaphorical salience has allowed for increasing 
focus on the detection and numeration of concep-
tual metaphors, which is seen as a mechanism to 
shield conceptual metaphor research from on-
going methodological criticism (Gibbs 2015). For 
some, the validity of Conceptual Metaphor Theory 
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980) rests on movement 
away from a fine-grained qualitative analysis of 
exemplary data to more robust experimental and 
quantitative measures designed to gauge salience 

and nuanced details of how conceptual metaphors 
are lexicalized and expressed in natural discourse 
(Gibbs 2011; Deignan 2012). 

Most analyses, however, are based on metaphor-
ical data that are easy to mine. That is, examining a 
corpus for metaphorical data in which both source 
and target domain language is paired and collocat-
ed is a straightforward process. But, this method is 
not possible for some metaphorical concepts due to 
the nature of how target domains are instantiated. 
When a target domain like the ECONOMY is under-
stood as a complex system and is based on multi- 
ple conceptual metaphors, direct lexical searches 
centered on target domain lexis will not recover all 
pertinent structural information about active source 
domains.  

In addition to providing metaphor researchers 
supplementary strategies to validate impression-
istic conclusions of model dominance, the methods 
modeled in this study offer several future lines of 
inquiry concerning the automated extraction of 
metaphorical data. The programmed extraction of 
metaphorical tokens is not only of interest to cor-
pus linguists and metaphor researchers but is also a 
focus of attention in natural language processing 
and computational linguistics (Babarczy et al 2010; 
Tang et al. 2010). A subgroup of these researchers 
is focused on the automatic detection of metaphor-
ical tokens in relation to the system of conceptual 
metaphors that structure a given language (cf. 
Shutova et. al. 2013; Dodge et al. 2015).  

In this study, I offer a new mining technique 
centered on source, rather than target, language. 
The conceptual metaphors used to understand the 
economy are overwhelmingly activated by a par-
ticular group of metaphorical tokens. That is, spe-
cific frames that structure the economy are linked 
to a subset of lexemes, which consistently appear 

1



 
 
 

 

metaphorically and occur more frequently in eco-
nomic discourse than in the general corpus. In this 
paper I will probe a subgroup of these metaphors 
including ECONOMY IS A SHIP and ECONOMY IS A 
WEATHER EVENT through an examination of source 
domain lexicalization patterns. I describe a sys-
tematic method of pulling common collocates of 
source domain labels from a general corpus, and 
then introduce new techniques to evaluate and 
group these metaphor triggers. In the case of the 
economy, a subset of source-domain triggers are 
habitually used metaphorically and occur more 
frequently in a corpus of economic discussion from 
The Economist magazine than in nonspecific Eng-
lish discourse. This relative frequency differential 
is assessed through a ‘keyness score’, which is a 
numerical measure of how frequent, on average, 
metaphorical triggers occur in the restricted corpus 
compared to the baseline corpus. Words that con-
sistently activate the metaphorical source domain 
fit into a category of ‘super triggers’ and can then 
be used to mine additional corpora for more meta-
phorical data. Background  
   For quite some time, metaphor analysts have 
been engaged in automated data extraction of one 
kind or another. In most cases, methodological ap-
proaches focus on target domain language. For in-
stance, Oster (2010) relies on collocation patterns 
in a nonspecific corpus to show which lexical units 
are most associated with metaphorical description 
of the emotion fear. Oster gathers co-occurrence 
information – the lexical units that most frequently 
collocate with fear – to find target-specific meta-
phorical expressions. She uses the results of collo-
cation searching to build a source-domain ontolo-
gy, arguing that the most “relevant” metaphors are 
those evoked by the highest number of linked lin-
guistic expressions (p.742). For example FEAR IS 
SOMETHING INSIDE THE BODY is evoked more fre-
quently than is FEAR IS AN ANTAGONIST. Some 
metaphors, however, such as FEAR IS FIRE are more 
creatively produced because they are linked to a 
larger set of linguistic expressions. In Oster’s ap-
proach, frequency information combines with lexi-
cal co-occurrence data to produce a source do-
main’s “productivity and creativity index” (p. 748) 
– additional parameters by which source domains 
can be compared. 
    Following a similar semi-automated approach, 
investigators working on the MetaNet project have 

engaged in a corpus-driven, lexical approach to re-
searching the alignment between target domain ex-
pressions, source domain frames, and the grammat-
ical constructions that blend the two (David, et al. 
2014; Stickles et al. 2014). Target and source word 
pairs, such as alleviate poverty, in which the source 
domain of DISEASE is evoked to understand the 
target domain POVERTY, are used to examine the 
frequency of one source domain in relation to an-
other. Through these source-target pairings, the 
frequency of activation of individual frames can be 
compared to other frames within the same source 
domain. For instance, in the British National Cor-
pus, Stickles et al. (2014) show how poverty is 
more frequently discussed as a disease than as a 
basic harm. And, when understood as a disease, 
speakers are more likely to discuss the treatment of 
the affliction of poverty than the diagnosis of the 
disease of poverty. Thus, at a macro level, the cor-
pus results lead to the conclusion that AFFLICTION 
and TREATMENT roles in the source domain are 
more salient than is the role of DIAGNOSIS (Stickles 
et al. 2014).  
   The commonality among most corpus-based ap-
proaches to metaphor research, whether through 
manual searching, sorting, and collection or semi-
automated searching based on collocation patterns, 
is the focus on the target domain. In all cases de-
scribed above, researchers use lexical items indica-
tive of the target domain to find instances of con-
ceptual metaphors. Oster’s collocations searches 
rested on the word fear in order to find semi-fixed 
expressions like fight fear. Likewise, the data min-
ing approach taken by Stickles et al. was to look 
for common collocates of the word poverty, such 
as spread, alleviate, and fight.  
   Many target domains, however, cannot be thor-
oughly investigated by searching a corpus for col-
locates of target lexemes because not all target lan-
guage occurs near or next to source domain trig-
gers. This is the case for metaphorical concepts 
that are fundamentally understood as processes not 
as entities, and most target domains, like the econ-
omy, are built on extremely complex conceptual 
ecology. Thus, the ease with which metaphorical 
structure can be exposed has to do with the rela-
tionship between source-domain language and the 
structural character of the target domain. When the 
target domain is cognitively complex and lexically 

2



 
 
 

 

divorced from the source, target-domain directed 
searching limits the extraction of relevant data.  
    Because of the constraints imposed by manual 
searching and the lexical division between source 
and target triggers, metaphor researchers in corpus 
linguistics have turned to alternative approaches 
(Koller et al., 2008; L'Hôte 2014; Demmen et. al. 
2015). Demmen et al. (2015) use a semi-automated 
corpus-based approach to research “violence meta-
phors” active in discourse on cancer. In their 
method, repeated source domain verbs like fight, 
battle, and struggle, identified through manual 
searching, are grouped according to pre-
determined semantic fields such as “warfare” or 
“damaging and destroying” (p.211).  These fields 
come from an adapted version of the UCREL2 
Semantic Analysis System (USAS) tagger (Rayson 
et al. 2004) in Wmatrix (Rayson 2008). Their iden-
tification of relevant semantic fields, and the lexis 
associated with each, yields additional search to-
kens such as destroy and shatter, which serve as 
supplementary source domain triggers used to lo-
cate further metaphorical tokens in cancer dis-
course. This focus on the identification of source-
domain language leads to a greater diversity of 
identified metaphorical lexis, feeding a systematic 
comparison of particular metaphorical tokens 
across groups of speakers and across genres of da-
ta. However, the use of pre-specified semantic do-
mains can constrain the types of search tokens 
yielded because the resulting lexis is, for the most 
part, homogenous in nature –sets of synonymous 
verbs. 
    Like these studies, my methodology moves 
away from a target lexis focus, querying metaphor-
ical language through a concentration on source 
language. However, the methods described below 
differ significantly from previous corpus-based ap-
proaches. Instead of relying on pre-specified se-
mantic fields in the collection of candidate meta-
phor triggers, I use corpus collocation patterns to 
gather candidate triggers. This methodology results 
in a frame-based collection of candidate search 
terms, as opposed to a definition-based collection, 
resulting in a more comprehensive compilation 
strategy. 

1.1 A Case Study: The Economy 
As a target domain, the economy, along with basic 
understandings of business and finance, have been 
well researched within metaphor analysis both in 
and out of academia.  Because the metaphors used 
to structure economic thinking are well under-
stood, it serves as a good case study to investigate 
the ways in which the metaphors are instantiated in 
natural discourse. All data referenced in this paper 
comes from a 2,084,650 token corpus built from 
the business and finance sections of The Economist 
magazine (2008-2015). 
    The economy, as a complex, abstract system, 
does not have a particularly unique metaphorical 
structure. Systems of all kinds, such as social or-
ganizations, governments, corporations, climate, 
and physical organisms are understood primarily 
through the same sets of metaphors. These meta-
phors all have one thing in common: The source 
domains represent different instantiations and 
elaborations of material structures vis-à-vis the 
primary metaphor ABSTRACT SYSTEMS ARE PHYSI-
CAL STRUCTURES. The structures that serve as sub-
cases of this superordinate metaphor, however, 
vary: abstract complex systems can be understood 
through several types of concrete structure includ-
ing machines, buildings, plants, and human bodies  
(Kövecses 2010: 156). 

1.2 Metaphors for the Economy 
The metaphors for the economy are varied and 
complex, as are the mapping within each meta-
phor. The partial metaphor list here comes from 
existing analyses (cf. McCloskey 1986; Boers 
1997; Boers & Demecheleer 1997; Skorczynska & 
Deignan 2006; Kövecses 2010; Shenker-Osorio 
2012). Illustrative data is from The Economist cor-
pus. 
 
ECONOMIC SYSTEMS ARE BUILDINGS  

 
after the early 1990s financial crash, in part because 

the government dealt swiftly with 
All three props have now collapsed. In particular, as 

America's housing bust 
 
MONEY IS LIQUID 

 
Footloose capital generates bubbles as it rushes in, 

some complain, only to generate crises 

3



 
 
 

 

 
ECONOMY IS A WEATHER EVENT 

 
Others blame deluges of a more metaphorical kind: 

floods of capital from abroad or floods of lending at 
home. 

The euro crisis casts a chill over a sunnier economic 
picture … 

 
ECONOMY IS A VEHICLE; ECONOMY IS A SHIP 

 
Conditions are undeniably frothy 

today's traders are in truly uncharted (and very cold) 
waters, and under 

The American economy is like a supertanker that, even 
in calm waters 

 
ECONOMY IS (AILING) HUMAN BODY 

 
economy sneezes, its trading partners catch a cold, 
are still in surgery, but today’s cure may well be the 

source of tomorrow’s ills 
 
The overlapping nature of these related source do-
mains helps explain the prevalence of lexical items 
that are compatible with more than one metaphor. 
Domain interdependence is hypothesized to, in 
part, explain how metaphorical lexis can activate 
more than one source domain, and the assignment 
of metaphorical tokens to one domain or another 
must be based on a close read of surrounding con-
text. 
 

 
 

Figure 1: Multiple, overlapping source domains structure 
economic discourse and reasoning 

2 Search Method 

Unlike the investigation of a lexically-encoded 
metaphorical concept such as fear or poverty (Os-
ter 2010; Stickles et al. 2014), a corpus approach 
directed at the economy cannot be comprehensive 

by searching for only target domain words such as 
economic, finance, and business because of the 
metaphorical complexity involved. Many source 
domain triggers in economic discourse are lexical-
ly removed from target domain language, and in 
this way, economic discourse mirrors the meta-
phorical disease language studied by Demmen et 
al. (2015) and Koller et al. (2008). Just as in these 
studies, I advocate for a new approach in which 
metaphors for the economy are investigated 
through the lexicalization patterns of the source 
domain. In this mixed-method approach, a small 
portion of the specialized corpus is qualitatively 
scanned for salient metaphors, and then quantita-
tively assessed by pulling source, not target, do-
main examples. However, unlike recently pub-
lished corpus studies, I adopt an approach that in-
tegrates corpus collocation patterns. Rather than 
using a semantic ontology to build a set of source 
domain triggers, I pull triggers by looking at com-
mon collocates of source domain labels. Through 
the Sketch Engine interface (Kilgarriff et al. 2014), 
I compiled a 2,084,650 token corpus of The Econ-
omist data taken from articles in the Business and 
Finance sections of issues published between 2008 
and 2015.  In order to partially automate the identi-
fication of source domain language in this special-
ized corpus, I used collocation searching in a base-
line corpus to identify source domain triggers (lex-
ical items that activate one or more source domains 
used to structure the target concept). In this proce-
dure, a source domain label serves as a collocation 
magnet to collect a list of frequent words associat-
ed with the specified domain. This method was 
employed to investigate source domains with tight 
constellations of lexical triggers. 
    To investigate the SHIP source domain, I 
searched the academic section of the Corpus of 
Contemporary American English (Davies 2008-) 
for the most frequent significant collocates of the 
word ship (9L, 9R; MI > 3). (An MI score is a sta-
tistical measure of lexical attraction in the corpus 
and an MI greater than 3.0 is interpreted as signifi-
cant (Cheng 2012).) To find weather-related lan-
guage, the same collocate search was carried out 
with the word weather. This technique produced a 
list of the 100 top collocates for each source do-
main label. These candidate source domain triggers 
were then evaluated for their metaphoricity (rate of 
metaphorical use) in relationship to economic dis-

4



 
 
 

 

course in the specialized corpus by manually scan-
ning concordance lines. 

3 Results 

The search method described above yielded a set 
of 100 potential source domain triggers for the two 
economic metaphors: ECONOMY IS A SHIP and 
ECONOMY IS A WEATHER EVENT.  

3.1 Seeding Source Domain Searches Using 
Common Collocates 

I have established three distinct categories to clas-
sify source domain triggers in the specialized cor-
pus. ‘Trigger lexeme’ is the term I use to indicate 
any lexical item in the specialized corpus that 
evokes one or more relevant source domains. 
Many words can function as trigger lexemes. Some 
are words very closely tied to a source domain 
frame; for example, the phrase on life support is di-
rectly tied to our understanding of hospitals, emer-
gency rooms, and very sick patients, and can be 
used to activate the metaphor ECONOMY IS (AIL-
ING) HUMAN BODY. Other words, however, acti-
vate one source domain, but that source domain 
structures more than one target. This would be the 
case for a word like circulation, which can be used 
to describe the movement of money (MONEY IS 
LIQUID) but can also be used as a source domain 
trigger for a different metaphor like IMMIGRATION 
IS THE FLOW OF WATER. Thus circulation is only 
counted as a trigger when used in metaphorical de-
scription of the economy. 
    ‘Significant trigger lexemes’ are lexical items 
that have a significant rate of use as a source do-
main trigger, quantified as a frequency of three or 
more metaphorical uses in reference to the target. 
These triggers must also be used in metaphorical 
reference to the target domain in at least 20% of 
the instances of total use, yielding a moderate to 
high rate of metaphoricity. 
    ‘Super trigger lexeme’ refers to lexical items 
unique to the specialized corpus with a significant 
rate of metaphorical use in reference to the speci-
fied target domain (over 20%). Uniqueness is 
measured by a disproportionate use in the special-
ized corpus compared to a baseline corpus. To 
quantify uniqueness, I ranked individual lexical 
items through a basic algorithm, which I call a 
‘keyness score’ (Ahmad 2005). In this measure, 

the frequency rate of the lexical item in the special-
ized corpus is divided by the frequency ratio of the 
item in a general corpus. Any item which occurs at 
a higher rate in the specialized corpus will measure 
at a keyness score greater than 1.0.  
 
keyness(term) =       Fspecial/Nspecial 

                    _______________ 
                    Fgeneral/Ngeneral 
 

Figure 2: ‘Keyness’ Formula (F=Frequency of item; 
N=Number of total tokens in corpus) 

 
This measure quantifies the relative frequency of a 
particular lexical item in the specialized corpus 
(compared to a baseline) and allows lexical items 
to be both ranked by their relative frequency and 
numerically compared to one another.  
 
3.1.1 The SHIP Source Domain 
 
Trigger lexemes reside on a scale of potency in 
their relationship to the source domain. Some trig-
gers loosely connect to the source domain, while 
others consistently evoke it. Figure 3 is comprised 
of a subset of the 100 top collocates of the lexical 
item ship in the academic section of COCA (9L, 
9R; MI > 3). These are all words that evoke the 
SHIP frame. But, again, there is wide variation in 
whether or not these collocates are used as source 
domain triggers for the metaphor ECONOMY IS A 
SHIP. 
 

 
 

Figure 3. Categorized triggers for ECONOMY IS A SHIP 
 
3.1.2 The WEATHER Source Domain 
 
Figure 4 is comprised of a subset of the 100 top 
collocates (9L, 9R; MI > 3) of the lexical item 
weather in the academic section of COCA. These 
are all words that evoke the WEATHER frame. But, 
again, there is wide variation in whether or not the-

5



 
 
 

 

se collocates are used as source domain triggers for 
the metaphor ECONOMY IS A WEATHER EVENT. 
 
 

 
Figure 4. Categorized triggers for ECONOMY IS A WEATHER 

EVENT 
 
Certain frequent lexical items in the discourse 
about weather such as the word snow are never 
used in metaphors for the economy; whereas, other 
words like vagaries, part of weather discourse but 
less frequent in general discourse, are consistently 
used with a metaphorical meaning in discussions 
of the economy. 
 
3.1.2 Limitations 
 
Even though source domain collocations yield a 
large quantity of metaphorical language, there are 
limits. Not all trigger lexemes can be found 
through this automated technique. Manually tag-
ging a subset of The Economist corpus reveals that 
there are robust source domain triggers that are not 
frequent collocates of their source frame labels. 
That is, there are trigger lexemes that come from 
our understanding of ships and weather, which do 
not frequently co-occur with the word ship and 
weather, and the fact that these triggers exist 
shows the limitations in using a methodology that 
exclusively relies on source frame collocation 
magnets. 

An additional obstacle to this automated ap-
proach is the great variability in how dense and 
connected the constellation of source domain trig-
gers is within a given source domain. In contrast to 
the source domains of WEATHER and SHIP, the 
source domain of an UNHEALTHY HUMAN BODY is 
a lexically diffuse conceptual domain. That is, 
there is no fruitful source domain label to use as a 
collocate magnet in COCA. Thus, the automated 

technique of using collocation patterns to find 
source domain seed language does not work here. 
In this case, source domain triggers have to be di-
rectly collected from The Economist corpus in or-
der to investigate the metaphor by searching for 
likely source domain triggers given the identified 
source frame. 

Standout source domain triggers among this set 
are the words healthy, recovery, contagion, and 
ailing. These lexemes, which occur frequently in 
the data, have high percentages of metaphorical 
use in reference to economic concepts and signifi-
cant keyness scores, meaning they are more fre-
quently represented in economic discourse than in 
academic English. 
 
 

 
Figure 5. Categorized triggers for ECONOMY IS AN (AILING) 

HUMAN BODY 
     
    We can, to some extent, explain super triggers 
through the overlapping of source domains, as was 
illustrated in Figure 1. Figure 6 contains all the su-
per triggers from the various metaphors investigat-
ed above. About half of the total super triggers are 
words are compatible with more than one source 
domain. 

Concepts like float, buoy, choppy, turbulent, and 
wave are central to our understanding of the 
movement of water, the performance of a ship on 
the water, and the effect of inclement weather on 
the water. When we think about navigating a ship 
through bad weather, these are concepts that come 
to mind. 
 

 
Figure 6. All collected super triggers for the three source do-

mains:  SHIP, WEATHER, HUMAN BODY 

6



 
 
 

 

    The motivated, yet semi-random, nature of this 
collection of super triggers should remind us that 
Conceptual Metaphor Theory is not predictive of 
how source domains will be lexicalized (Lakoff 
and Johnson 1980). Metaphorical mappings serve 
as a template to model the systematic nature of 
figurative language and metaphorical reasoning, 
and once conceptual metaphors are identified, the 
re-occurrence of specific source domains can be 
expected. But, there is no way to predict a priori 
exactly how a source domain will be evoked in 
natural discourse, nor is there a way to foresee 
what source domain language will be adopted into 
the speech community and used consistently as id-
iomatic jargon. 

3.2 Lexical Divorce 
Words evoking the target domain of metaphors for 
the economy are, of course, prevalent and frequent 
in economic discourse. There are 12 target triggers 
in the top 100 most frequent words in The Econo-
mist corpus. (Top 100 list includes both content 
and function words.) Not one source domain super 
trigger is in the top 100. 
 
Bank* Invest* Market* Firm* Debt* Financ* Rate* 
Price* Capital* Growth* Economy* Money* 
  

Figure 7. Twelve most frequent target lexemes 
 

    Lexical divorce between source and target is 
evaluated by the existence or absence of colloca-
tions of common source and target triggers. Source 
triggers are inevitably less frequent than target 
triggers because, while the target is invariable, the 
source domains are numerous. Thus, the source 
domain ‘super triggers’ identified in Figure 6 are 
not among the most frequent words used when dis-
cussing economic issues. The only source domain 
super trigger in the top 1000 most frequent words 
in The Economist corpus is recovery (rank: 425). A 
search of the top 5000 collocates of each target 
lexeme reveals few source domain super triggers 
co-occur near or next to these target words (9R, 
9L; MI>3.00). Of all source super triggers found 
through the source domain collocation searches de-
scribed above, only a small subset appear regularly 
or even semi-regularly near or next to a target do-
main word (within the 1000 most frequent collo-
cates). Figure 8 displays this distribution. Of the 37 

source domain super triggers, only 12 are even 
loosely collocated with the top twelve target do-
main triggers. 
 
 
Target  Source Domain Trigger Collocates in top 1000  
Trigger                 (9R, 9L; MI>3.00) 

            
Bank*      HEALTHY, RECOVERY 
Invest*    RECOVERY, FLOW, BUBBLE 
Market*  RECOVERY, BUBBLE, FROTH/Y, CALM, COOL 
Firm*   RECOVERY, FLOW 
Debt*   RECOVERY, BUBBLE, WAVE 
Financ*   RECOVERY, FLOW, BUBBLE 
Rate*   RECOVERY, FLOAT, FORECAST 
Price*   RECOVERY, BUBBLE 
Capital*  HEALTHY, FLOW, FLOOD, DRY 
Growth* HEALTHY, RECOVERY, FLOW, FORECAST 
Econ*   HEALTHY, RECOVERY, FLOW, BUBBLE, FORECAST 
Money*  RECOVERY, FLOW, BUBBLE, HOT, FLOOD 
 

Figure 8. Target lexemes paired with most frequent source 
domain triggers 

 
These patterns confirm that target domain directed 
searching may not be a particularly efficient or ef-
fective way of finding source domain language, 
certainly not an effective technique to find source 
domain triggers with high rates of metaphoricity 
that do not occur near or next to target language. 
The distribution also indicates that lexical divorce 
between source and target triggers is a significant 
obstacle to those automated extraction systems 
which rely on close collocations between source 
and target lexis.  

4 Conclusion 

Metaphor is treated differently across research 
fields. Corpus linguists tend to be interested in lex-
ical metaphors, defined as nonliteral lexis used in 
text. Cognitive linguists tend to be interested in 
conceptual metaphors –the hierarchical, abstracted 
system of metaphor. Researchers interested in nat-
ural language processing fall into both of these 
camps. But those of the latter school must contend 
with metaphorical source domain language that is 
lexically separated from target concept. This lexi-
cal divorce between source and target triggers is a 
substantial obstacle to automated metaphor identi-
fication systems because metaphor retrieval can’t 
be based exclusively on pairings of source and tar-
get words.   

7



 
 
 

 

    In this paper, I have demonstrated a methodolo-
gy to use nonrestricted corpus data to identify con-
stellations of source domain lexis that serve as po-
tential metaphorical triggers. This simple technique 
involves searching a baseline corpus for common 
collocates of identified source domain labels. Once 
collected, these lexemes associated with the source 
domain frame can then be evaluated for their met-
aphoricty –use in reference to the target concept- 
and their ‘keyness’ –relative frequency in topical 
discourse concerning the target domain. These two 
metrics allow for a systematic, comparative eval-
uation of source language along a scale of trigger 
‘potency’.  
    NLP efforts concerning metaphor can be fur-
thered through the identification of ‘significant’ 
and ‘super’ source domain triggers–lexical items 
that reliably evoke a robust conceptual metaphor.  
The effort to build ontologies of conceptual meta-
phor, necessary for any adequate computational 
model of semantic processing, should occur along-
side the identification of salient trigger language, 
and the construction of such systems will benefit 
from the methodologies outlined in this paper. 
 
References 
 
Ahmad, K. 2005.  “Terminology in text”, Tuscan Word 

Centre Workshop. Siena, Italy.  
Babarczy, A., Bencze I., Fekete I., & Simon, E. 2010. 

The automatic identification of conceptual metaphors 
in Hungarian texts: A corpus-based analysis. LREC 
2010 Workshop. Proceedings. 

Boers, F. 1997. "No Pain, No Gain" in a free market 
rhetoric: A test for cognitive semantics? Metaphor 
and Symbol, 12 (4): 231-241. 

Boers, F. , & Demecheleer, M. 1997. A few metaphori-
cal models in (western) economic discourse. Dis-
course and Perspective in Cognitive Linguistics, 115-
129. 

Cheng, W. 2012. Exploring Corpus Linguistics, Lan-
guage in Action. Routledge, England. 

David, O., Dodge, E., Hong, J., Stickles, E., and Sweet-
ser, E. 2014. Building the MetaNet metaphor reposi-
tory: The natural symbiosis of metaphor analysis and 
construction grammar. The 8th International Confer-
ence on Construction Grammar (ICCG 8), Osna-
brück, Germany. 

Davies, M. 2008- The Corpus of Contemporary Ameri-
can English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Avail-
able online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/. 

Deignan, A. 2005. Metaphor and Corpus Linguistics.  
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

Deignan, A. 2012. Figurative language in discourse. 
Cognitive Pragmatics. Hans-Jörg Schmid, ed., 437-
462. 

Demmen, J., Seminoi, E., Demjén, Z., Koller, V., Har-
die, A., Rayson, P. Payne, S. 2015. A computer-
assisted study of the use of violence metaphors for 
cancer and end of life by patients, family carers and 
health professionals. International Journal of Corpus 
Linguistics, 20(2): 205-231. 

Dodge, E., Hong, J., and Stickles, E. 2015. Deep seman-
tic automatic metaphor analysis. The Third Workshop 
on Metaphor in NLP. Denver, CO. 

Gibbs, R. W. 2009. Why do some people dislike concep-
tual metaphor theory? Cognitive Semiotics 5(1-2): 
14–36. 

Gibbs, R. W. 2011. Evaluating conceptual metaphor 
theory. Discourse Processes, 48(8): 529-562. 

Gibbs, R. W. 2015. Counting metaphors: What does this 
reveal about language and thought? Cognitive Se-
mantics (1): 55-177. 

Gibbs, R. W. Forthcoming. The Metaphor Wars.  
Kilgarriff, Adam, et al. 2014. The Sketch Engine: ten 

years on. Lexicography, 1–30. 
Koller, V., Hardie, A., Rayson, P., Semino, E. 2008 Us-

ing a semantic annotation tool for the analysis of 
metaphor in discourse. Metaphorik.de (15): 141-160.  

L'Hôte, E. 2014. Identity, Narrative and Metaphor : A 
Corpus-Based Cognitive Analysis of New Labour 
Discourse. London, Palgrave Macmillan. 

McCloskey, D. N. 1986. The rhetoric of economics. 
Brighton, UK: Wheatsheaf Books and Harvester 
Press. 

Omori, A. 2008. Emotion as a Huge Mass of Moving 
Water. Metaphor & Symbol, 23(2): 130-146. 

Oster, U. 2010. Using corpus methodology for semantic 
and pragmatic analyses: What can corpora tell us 
about the linguistic expression of emotions? Cogni-
tive Linguistics, 21(4): 727-763. 

Rayson, P., Archer, D., Piao, S., & McEnery, T. 2004. 
The UCREL semantic analysis system. In Proceed-
ings of the workshop on Beyond Named Entity 
Recognition Semantic labeling for NLP tasks in asso-
ciation with the 4th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), 
Lisbon, Portugal, 7–12.  

Rayson, P. 2008. From key words to key semantic do-
mains. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 
13(4): 519–549. 

Shenker-Osorio, A. 2012. Don't Buy It: The Trouble 
with Talking Nonsense about the Economy. Philadel-
phia, PA, PublicAffairs.  

Shutova, E., Teufel, S., and Korhonen, A. 2013. Statisti-
cal matphor processing. Computational Linguistics, 
39(2): 301-353. 

8



 
 
 

 

Skorczynska, H. Deignan, A. 2006. Readership and pur-
pose in the choice of economics metaphors. Meta-
phor and Symbol, 21(2): 87–104. 

Stickles, E., Dodge, E., and Hong, J. 2014. A construc-
tion-driven, MetaNet-based approach to metaphor 
extraction and corpus analysis. The 12th meeting of 
Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Language 
(CSDL 12), Santa Barbara, CA.  

Tang, X., Qu, W., Chen, X., & Yu, S. 2010. Automatic 
metaphor recognition based on semantic relation 
patterns. International Conference on Asian Lan-
guage Processing. 

 
 

9


