



















































Experiments on bridging across languages and genres


Proceedings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016), co-located with NAACL 2016, pages 7–15,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Experiments on bridging across languages and genres

Yulia Grishina
Applied Computational Linguistics

FSP Cognitive Science
University of Potsdam

grishina@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract

In this paper, we introduce a typology of
bridging relations applicable to multiple lan-
guages and genres. After discussing our anno-
tation guidelines, we describe annotation ex-
periments on the German part of our parallel
coreference corpus and show that our inter-
annotator agreement results are reliable, con-
sidering both antecedent selection and relation
assignment. In order to validate our theore-
tical model on other languages, we manually
transfer German annotations to the English
and Russian sides of the corpus and briefly
discuss first results that suggest the promise of
our approach. Furthermore, for the complete
exploration of extended coreference relations,
we exploit an existing near-identity scheme
to augment our annotations with near-identity
links, and we report on the results.

1 Introduction

High-quality coreference resolution is necessary to
establish coherence in discourse. In comparison
to recent large-scale annotation efforts for identity
coreference such as OntoNotes (Hovy et al., 2006),
it is now becoming more interesting to investigate
understudied coreference relations other than iden-
tity – namely, near-identity and bridging.

Bridging relations are indirect relations that can
only be inferred based on the knowledge shared by
the speaker and the listener. They encompass a wide
range of relations between anaphor and antecedent,
such as part-whole, or set membership. Additional
complexity arises when two expressions refer to ”al-
most” the same thing, but are neither identical nor

non-identical. In this case, we speak of near-identity,
which can be seen as a ‘middle ground’ between
identity and non-identity coreference (Recasens et
al., 2010).

The goals of the paper are: (i) to introduce a typo-
logy of extended coreference relations based on the
related work and experimental annotation rounds;
(ii) to validate our theoretical model by applying it
to a multilingual and multi-genre corpus; and (iii) to
explore the existing near-identity scheme using the
same dataset. Our primary interest lies in develop-
ing a domain-independent typology that would serve
as a basis for subsequent creation of larger annotated
resources for different languages and domains.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 sum-
marizes previous efforts of classifying bridging and
near-identity relations. Section 3 presents our cor-
pus annotation in detail. Section 4 discusses the re-
sults, and Section 5 concludes.

2 Previous annotation efforts

Bridging. The concept of bridging was initially in-
troduced by Clark (1975) who postulated that a def-
inite description can be implicitly related to some
previously mentioned entity. Clark makes a distinc-
tion between direct reference and indirect reference.
Direct reference is what we usually understand by
identity coreference, when two NPs share the same
referent in the real world.1 What we are interested
in (and what is called ‘bridging’ in the coreference
literature, as opposed to the identity relation) is indi-

1It is worth pointing out that reference to one or more mem-
bers of a set to the whole set is also seen by Clark as direct
reference.

7



rect reference. Clark names 3 classes of indirect ref-
erence: (i) indirect reference by association, (ii) in-
direct reference by characterization, and (iii) a sep-
arate group encompassing reasons, causes, conse-
quences and concurrences.

Since we only deal with noun phrase coreference
for the time being, we can not make use of the last
group, as the antecedent in that case is often an
event, not an object. The first two groups have much
in common: they are subdivided into necessary and
optional parts and roles respectively, e.g.:

(1) (a) During [the terrorist attack in Mumbai]
[the attackers] did not hide their faces.
(b) Daisy walked into [the office] and saw a
bunch of flowers on [the windowsill].

The difference between the two examples is that
in (1a) the attackers is an absolutely necessary role
of the mentioned event, while from (1b) we can infer
that the office has one windowsill (which is not nec-
essarily true for all the offices). Necessary and op-
tional components of entities or events vary in their
predictability by the listener from absolutely neces-
sary to quite unnecessary (Clark lists three levels of
‘necessity’ of this continuum).

The recent approaches to the annotation of bridg-
ing derive from two different annotation frame-
works. First, bridging can be annotated as a part
of the information structure (IS) of texts, along
with other information status categories. Second,
bridging can be seen as a separate category of tex-
tual coreference, besides identity and near-identity
coreference. We will deal with bridging on the
coreference level, but we consider both approaches
in the review of the related work.

Bridging at the IS level. Bridging is an individ-
ual subcategory among other categories of informa-
tion status, as introduced in the work of Nissim et
al. (2004), subsequently enhanced and applied by
Gardent et al. (2003), Ritz et al. (2008), Riester et
al. (2010) and Markert et al. (2012). Usually the
results are reported on the entire scheme and are
somewhat lower for the single categories. To our
knowledge, the highest agreement for the bridging
anaphor recognition in particular (κ = 0.6-0.7) was
reported by Markert et al. (2012), whose interpre-
tation of bridging is to some extent different from
the others (they do not restrict the annotation scope

to definite noun phrases, allowing indefinite NPs to
participate in bridging relations as well). However,
all these approaches treat the bridging category as
a whole, not making any distinctions between indi-
vidual subcategories. For our purposes here, this is a
more challenging task and the one we are primarily
interested in.

Bridging at the coreference level. Recent related
literature distinguishes between the following most
common types of bridging relations: part-whole, set
membership and generalized possession (Poesio et
al., 2004), (Poesio and Artstein, 2008), (Hinrichs
et al., 2005). In addition to these, in the Prague
Dependency Treebank, contrast was annotated as a
bridging relation as well (Nedoluzhko et al., 2009).
Baumann and Riester (2012) additionally annotated
cases of bridging-contained NPs, where the bridg-
ing anaphor is anchored to an embedded phrase, e.g.
[the ceiling of [the hotel room]]. However, these re-
lations seem to be underspecified in the sense that
part-whole is a very general relation; in contrast, we
are interested in a more fine-grained classification of
relations that could emerge from part-whole.

More specific relations are proposed in NLP ap-
proaches to extract bridging automatically. For ex-
ample, a more complex and detailed classification of
bridging relations was introduced in (Gardent et al.,
2003) who distinguished between 5 classes of bridg-
ing relations: set-membership, thematic (links an
event to an individual via a thematic relation defined
by the thematic grid of the event, e.g. murder - the
murderer), definitional (relation is given by the dic-
tionary definition of either the target or the anchor,
e.g. convalescence - the operation), co-participants,
and non-lexical (relation could be established due to
discourse structure or world knowledge).

For developing a rule-based system to resolve
bridging, Hou et al. (2014) used 8 relations that were
based on related literature and their document set,
which comprises 10 documents from the ISNotes
Corpus2, which contains the Wall Street Journal por-
tion of the OntoNotes corpus (Hovy et al., 2006):
building - part (room - the roof ), relative - person
(the husband – she), geopolitical entity - job title
(Japan – officials), role - organization, percentage

2http://www.h-its.org/english/research/nlp/download/
isnotes.php

8



NP (22% of the firms – 17%), set - member (reds
and yellows – some of them), argument taking NP I
(different instances of the same predicate in a docu-
ment likely maintain the same argument fillers; Ma-
rina residents - some residents), argument taking NP
II (an argument-taking NP in the subject position is a
good indicator for bridging anaphora, Poland’s first
conference - the participants).

Bridging was shown to be a very complex cat-
egory that poses difficulties for the annotators. It
includes the following subtasks: (a) recognizing
bridging anaphors and selecting their antecedents,
and (b) assigning appropriate bridging types. In
general, inter-annotator agreement for (a) tends to
be lower than for standard identity coreference; the
scores vary between 22 and 50% F1-score for selec-
ting bridging anaphors and antecedents (Poesio and
Vieira, 1998), (Poesio, 2004), (Nedoluzhko et al.,
2009). As for types of relations, not much was re-
ported lately. To our knowledge, only Nedoluzhko
et al. (2009) reported on the scores for four basic
relation types (average κ = 0.9). However, we are
not aware of any other agreement studies for more
complex relation sets.

In sum, corpus creation approaches to bridging
classification are quite coarse-grained, while applied
work (bridging resolution) tends to be very domain-
specific. Both paths are rather problematic if we
want to create reliable multi-genre annotated re-
sources with a fine-grained classification of bridging
relations.

Near-identity. The concept of near-identity has
been introduced by Recasens et al. (2010). The
near-identity relation is defined as a middle-ground
between identity and bridging, and it emerged out
of the inter-annotator disagreements while annotat-
ing identity coreference. Near-identity holds be-
tween two NPs whose referents are almost identi-
cal, but differ in one crucial dimension. Recasens
et al. (2010) introduce four main categories of near-
identity relations:

• name metonymy;

• meronymy;

• class;

• spatio-temporal function.

# DE
Sentences 598
Tokens 11894
Referring expressions 1395
Identity chains 273
Bridging pairs 432
Near-identity pairs 107

Table 1: Corpus statistics for German

Each of the categories includes several subcate-
gories (not mentioned in the list above). To our
knowledge, no large-scale near-identity annotation
on different text genres has been done so far. Re-
casens et al. (2010) reported the results of their sta-
bility study only for pre-selected NP pairs. In a
follow-up paper, Recasens et al. (2012) showed that
explicit near-identity annotation is a very difficult
task for the annotators, due to the infrequency of
the near-identity links in their corpus of newswire
texts, as identified by the annotators. The same an-
notation scheme was subsequently applied to anno-
tate the Polish Coreference Corpus by Ogrodniczuk
et al. (2014), however, the inter-annotator agreement
scores were quite low (κ = 0.22).

3 Corpus annotation

For the annotation, we used the parallel coreference
corpus from (Grishina and Stede, 2015) which con-
sists of texts in three languages (English, German,
Russian) and of three different genres (newswire,
narratives, medicine instruction leaflets). The Ger-
man part of the corpus, which already contained
identity coreference annotations, was given to the
annotators to add bridging and near-identity links.

In order to evaluate the applicability of our anno-
tation scheme for other languages and to speed up
the annotation process, we transferred the German
annotations to the English and Russian sides of the
corpus.

Corpus statistics are shown in Table 1. In this sec-
tion, we present statistics for German, including the
number of identity, near-identity and bridging links.
Details on the annotation transfer for the two other
languages are provided in Section 4.

3.1 Bridging scheme

We base our work on the main principle identified
by Clark (1975): We assume that the speaker intends

9



the listener to be able to compute the shortest possi-
ble bridge from the previous knowledge to the an-
tecedent which is therefore unique (determinate) in
the natural language discourse.

Hence, only definite descriptions can be annotated
as bridging anaphors. However, not all the definite
descriptions that appear in a text for the first time
have a bridging antecedent – some of them are def-
inite due to the common knowledge shared by the
speaker and the listener.

In our pilot experiments, we identified several
bridging categories, which were common across
genres, and applied them to annotate the corpus. Be-
low, we describe these categories and give typical
examples from different genres for each of them.

1. Physical parts - whole

One NP represents a physical part of the whole
expressed by the other NP.

• the militant organisation - the offices in
the whole country

• the telephone - the dial pad
• the knee - the bone

2. Set-membership

Sets can be represented by multiple entities or
events. One can refer to a certain subset or to
a single definite element of the set and bridge
from this subset or element to the whole col-
lection. We do not distinguish between sets
and collections, as is done in some of the re-
lated work. Sets are homogeneous and imply
that their elements are equal.

A. SET-SUBSET

• the European Union - the least developed
countries

• the patients - the patients treated with
Abraxane

B. SET-ELEMENT

• these studies - the main study
• Pakistan major cities - the most populous

city

3. Entity-attribute/function

An entity is a person or an object that has
certain attributes characterizing it and certain
functions it fulfills with respect to some other
entity.

A. ENTITY-ATTRIBUTE

• Kosovo - their current policy of rejection
• Mrs. Humphries - the monotonous voice

B. ENTITY-FUNCTION

This relation involves a bridge holding between
individuals with one of the related individuals
being described by his profession or function
with respect to the other (Gardent et al., 2003).

• Trends, the shop - Mr. Rangee, the owner
• Kosovo region - the government

4. Event-attribute

Core semantic frame elements of events are
commonly time and place, while optional ones
can include duration, participants, explanation,
frequency etc. From these frame elements one
can bridge to the event itself.

• the regional conflict - the trained fighters
• the attack - the security offices
• the surgical intervention - the operating

room

5. Location-attribute

As locations we consider geographical en-
tities that have permanent locations in the
world. Such locations exhibit different seman-
tic frames as compared to entities and events.

• the Balkans - the instability on the Balkans
• Germany - in the south
• Afghanistan - the population

6. Other

Other bridging relations (if any), that can not be
described using the categories presented above.

Bridging and near-identity relations are gener-
ally directed from right to left. Each markable
can have only one outgoing relation, but multiple

10



ingoing relations are allowed. Cataphoric bridg-
ing and near-identity relations (directed from left to
right) are allowed if the cataphoric antecedent is se-
mantically closer to the anaphor than the possible
anaphoric antecedent. Following (Baumann and Ri-
ester, 2012), we annotated BRIDGING-CONTAINED
NPs and marked them as such.

3.2 Near-identity scheme

We used the definitions provided by Recasens et
al. (2010) and made an attempt to apply them to
our texts. The annotators’ goal was to extend ex-
isting annotations on top of the identity corefer-
ence. We only chose the four top categories men-
tioned in Section 2, without distinguishing among
their subtypes. In order to differentiate between
the category of meronymy, which is common for
both near-identity and bridging3, we introduced the
principle of primacy, according to which, in case
of doubt, identity was preferred over near-identity
and near-identity over bridging. However, the an-
notations of our corpus exhibited a small number of
near-identical markables, which was not sufficient
to compute inter-annotator agreement. For that rea-
son, we merged the annotations from the first and the
second annotator and then analysed their distribution
according to the near-identity types across genres in
Section 4. It is worth pointing out that our results for
a multi-genre corpus conform to the results obtained
by Recasens et al. (2012).

3.3 Bridging agreement study

We carried out an agreement study with 2 annota-
tors – students of linguistics, native speakers of Ger-
man, with prior experience in other types of cor-
pus annotation tasks. All the markables in the texts
were manually pre-selected by the author of this pa-
per. The annotation guidelines were developed on 7
training documents, and 4 of them were given to the
annotators for training. During the pilot annotation
round, the annotators discussed the disagreements,
and necessary changes to the guidelines were made.
Inter-annotator agreement was measured on 5 doc-

3According to (Recasens et al., 2010), in near-identity,
meronymy can take place between two NPs that could be sub-
stituted by one another in the text, while in bridging these NPs
should be clearly different and could be linked only via a ‘part-
of’ relation.

Relation A1: # A1: % A2: # A2: %
Part-Whole 20 9.09 18 8.57
Set-Membership 2 0.92 19 9.05
Entity-Attr/F 146 66.36 109 51.91
Event-Attr 20 9.09 29 13.81
Location-Attr 29 13.18 33 15.71
Other 3 1.36 2 0.95

Table 2: General distribution of relations for A1 and A2

%
F1 anaphor recognition 64.0
F1 antecedent selection 79.0
κ Part-Whole 1.0
κ Set-Membership N/A
κ Entity-Attr/F 0.97
κ Event-Attr 0.96
κ Location-Attr 1.0

Table 3: Agreement between two annotators

uments, with A1 marking 220 and A2 marking 210
pairs as bridging. Table 2 shows the distribution of
the types of relations for the first (A1) and the sec-
ond annotator (A2).

We measured (i) F-1 score for anaphor recog-
nition (the number of common bridging anaphors)
and antecedent selection (the number of common
anaphor-antecedent pairs based on the commonly
recognized markables) and (ii) Cohen’s κ for indi-
vidual categories for those pairs that both annota-
tors agreed upon. Table 3 shows agreement results,
which we consider as overall reliable for bridging
when compared to related work on extended coref-
erence. We were able to achieve even higher agree-
ment scores on bridging categories (average κ =
0.98), introducing a wider range of relations than
Nedoluzhko et al. (2009). We do not give an agree-
ment score for set-membership, the reason for that
being data scarcity and the preference of A1 towards
other relations: A1 marked only about 0.1% of all
bridging pairs as set-membership, and did not agree
on antecedent selection with A2 for any of them,
therefore it was not possible to measure agreement
for this category.4

Table 4 shows the distribution of types for those
pairs that were labelled differently by both anno-
tators. The most controversial category is entity-
attribute/function, which correlates with this cate-

4One of the possible reasons for the low number of set-
membership pairs could be the fact that our scheme for identity
coreference includes discontinuous group markables.

11



Relation # %
Part-Whole 32 14.95
Set-Membership 21 9.81
Entity-Attr/F 95 44.39
Event-Attr 30 14.03
Location-Attr 32 14.95
Other 4 1.87

Table 4: Distribution of different pairs for A1 and A2

gory being the most frequent one; the other types
are almost equally disagreed upon. Particularly in-
teresting is that only 3% of all the different bridging
pairs are marked as near-identity pairs by the other
annotator; accordingly, these categories in general
do not intersect.

4 Discussion

4.1 Does bridging correlate with coreference
chains?

To answer this question, we first looked at the num-
ber of bridging anaphors that actually start a new
coreference chain further in the text. On average for
all the texts, only 17% of all the bridging anaphors
are being referred to later on. These chains are on
average 3.28 markables long, which is 1 markable
shorter than the average length of coreference chains
in the corpus (4.05). The most frequent relation
that starts a new chain is entity-attribute/function
(44%), followed by location-attribute (21%) and
event-attribute (18%).

Secondly, we were interested in whether bridg-
ing markables correlate with the prominent coref-
erence chains in the text. Our study showed that
56% of all the chains have bridging markables con-
nected to them. We computed the average lengths
of a target chain and a non-target chain for bridg-
ing, which is 6.1 markables and 2.4 markables, re-
spectively. These numbers show that a target ‘bridg-
ing’ chain is usually longer than an average chain in
the text (see above) while a ‘non-bridging’ chain is
shorter. The longest ‘bridging’ chain can reach up
to 22 markables, while the longest ‘non-bridging’
chain can only reach up to 9 markables.

We computed the correlation between the length
of identity chain and the number of bridging mark-
ables that are linked to this chain. Using Spearman’s
rank correlation coefficient, we found that there is
a strong correlation between the chain length and

Figure 1: Length of identity chains and number of their brid-
ging markables with Spearman’s ρ = 0.6595

the number of its bridges: 0.6595, with p-value of
1.35E-008. Figure 1 shows the relation between the
chain length and the number of its bridging mar-
kables.

4.2 How far can we bridge in the natural text?

Our guidelines do not limit the scope of the study at
any point, allowing annotators to bridge back over
an unlimited number of sentences if they find the
antecedent semantically close to the anaphor. How-
ever, we postulated several principles in order to set
priorities and help annotators resolve controversial
issues, one of them being the principle of SEMAN-
TIC RELATEDNESS: in case of multiple antecedent
candidates, pick the one that is more semantically re-
lated to the anaphoric (or cataphoric) markable. This
principle wins over the principle of PROXIMITY, ac-
cording to which one has to bridge to the nearest
semantically close antecedent in the text. For exam-
ple:

(2) [The telephone] rang. I came into [the of-
fice] and picked up [the receiver].

In this case, we link the telephone to the office and
the receiver to the telephone (because it is more se-
matically close), and not to the office (that is a closer
possible antecedent).

We computed the average bridging distance
(anaphora + cataphora), which is 20.55 tokens for
all texts,5 with the average sentence length being
24.87. The average distances for anaphora and cat-
aphora, if computed separately, are 30.96 and -3.6
tokens, respectively. It is worth noticing that the

5We excluded bridging-contained markables from this com-
putation.

12



Relation News Narrative Med. leaflets
Part-Whole 9.77 37.14 16.66
Set-Membership 3.9 0.0 10.0
Entity-Attr/F 58.3 62.85 72.22
Event-Attr 12.08 0.0 1.12
Location-Attr 14.33 0.0 0.0
Other 1.62 0.0 0.0
Metonymy 15.79 100.0 0.0
Meronymy 76.32 0.0 28.57
Spatio-temporal func. 7.89 0.0 71.43
Other 0.0 0.0 0.0

Table 5: Distribution of bridging and near-identity relations
across genres

furthest bridging antecedent was found 410 tokens
away from its anaphor.

Finally, our study has shown that distance does
not seem to correlate with prominence: Both longer
and shorter chains can have close and long-distance
bridging anaphors.

4.3 How transferable is bridging across
languages and genres?

One of the main goals of our study was to introduce
the classification of relations that could be applied
to various languages and domains. In the following,
we present the results of (a) analysis of bridging and
near-identity distribution across different genres and
(b) results of the experiment on manual transfer of
German annotations into English and Russian.

Different genres. Table 5 shows the percentage
of near-identity and bridging in the German part
of the corpus. Interestingly, all of the genres ex-
hibit a big proportion of entity-attribute/function re-
lations. However, in the newswire texts, other re-
lations are almost equally distributed, as opposed
to the medicine leaflets and the narratives. In nar-
ratives, we encountered a lot more part-whole rela-
tions than in the other genres.

As for near-identity, it is worth noticing that the
annotations of medical texts exhibited a very high
percentage (71.43) of spatio-temporal relations, the
reason for that being the specificity of the texts
(instruction leaflets). In narratives, we only found
metonymic relations, while medical texts did not
contain them. In the newswire texts, all types of
relations were found, with meronymy being the
most common one (76.32).

Relation DE EN RU
Part-Whole 13.27 10.11 12.77
Set-Membership 3.7 5.84 3.72
Entity-Attr/F 62.04 70.74 72.87
Event-Attr 7.41 2.66 3.72
Location-Attr 13.58 10.64 6.92

Table 6: Distribution of bridging relations across languages

Different languages. Taking German annotations
as a starting point, we annotated the English and
Russian sides of our parallel corpus. Table 6 shows
the distribution of different types of relations for
German, English and Russian.6 The resulting num-
ber of bridging anaphors for the English and Russian
sides of the corpus is 188 each, which is about 44%
of the total number of German bridging markables.

This ‘transfer’ of annotations across languages
posed additional difficulties in some cases. In par-
ticular, it was more difficult to transfer existing Ger-
man annotations across newswire texts, while for the
stories, all of the markables were successfully trans-
ferred. The majority of the NPs that could not be
transferred is explained by two reasons: (a) due to
our restriction on the definiteness status of bridging
markables; and (b) because they were already partic-
ipating in identity chains. Below, we give examples
for the first case in English and German:

(3) (a) Race relations in [the US] have been for
decades at the center of political debate, to
the point that racial cleavages are as impor-
tant as income as determinants of political
preferences and attitude.
(b) Die Beziehungen zwischen den Rassen
standen in [den USA] über Jahrzehnte im
Zentrum der politischen Debatte. Das
ging so weit, daß Rassentrennung genauso
wichtig wie [das Einkommen] wurde, um
politische Zuneigungen und Einstellungen
zu bestimmen.

In this example, we bridge from das Einkommen
to den USA, however, in the English part income is
indefinite and thus it is no bridging markable accord-
ing to our guidelines.

For Russian, the lack of articles impeded the iden-
tification of bridging markables and made the deci-

6We excluded medical texts from this distribution, as they
were available only for 2 languages.

13



sion on their definiteness much more complex. We
applied the following strategy in doubtful cases in
order to identify bridging markables: We used a sub-
stitution test, replacing the NP in question with the
corresponding genitive NP. If the test succeeded, we
considered the markable as a bridging anaphor, oth-
erwise the markable was not annotated. For exam-
ple:

(4) (a) Daisy was in [the office] when somebody
knocked on [the door].
(b) Дейзи была в [офисе], когда кто-то
постучал в [дверь].

In this example, the door in English is definitely
unique, while in Russian we need to apply our test
first: дверь офиса (the door of the office) is appro-
priate in this case, hence there is a bridging relation
between the two NPs.

The analysis of the resulting annotations has
shown that our guidelines are in general applicable
to the three languages in our corpus; even though
there are some differences across languages and
genres that we will investigate in more detail. In par-
ticular, the category of entity-attribute/function re-
quires a more careful analysis.

5 Conclusions

The focus of this study was to explore extended
coreference relations, namely near-identity and
bridging. Our primary goal was to introduce a
domain-independent typology of bridging relations,
which can be applicable across languages. We sub-
sequently applied our annotation scheme to a multi-
lingual coreference corpus of three genres, and for
near-identity relations we use the typology intro-
duced in the related work. Our scheme achieves re-
liable inter-annotator agreement scores for anaphor
and antecedent selection, and on the assignment of
bridging relations. The infrequency of near-identity
relations in our corpus leaves this part as a step for
the future work. We conducted a detailed analysis of
the nature of bridging relations in the corpus, focus-
ing on the distance between anaphor and antecedent.
Furthermore, we examined the correlation between
bridging and identity coreference and presented the
distribution of bridging and near-identity relations
across three different languages and genres.

In future work, we are interested in refining
our typology by introducing a set of possible sub-
relations, conducting a more detailed comparative
analysis of bridging relations across languages us-
ing annotation transfer, and exploring in detail
set-membership relation and the category of near-
identity on a larger amount of texts. We intend to
reconsider the definition of markables in our guide-
lines (which probably has to vary from language
to language), which was one of the main reasons
for markables being missed in the annotation trans-
fer. We aim at keeping our approaches applicable to
multilingual data and to different genres of text.

Our annotation guidelines and the annotated
corpus will be made available via our website
http://angcl.ling.uni-potsdam.de.

Acknowledgements

I thank Manfred Stede for his insight and exper-
tise, and the annotators Erik Haegert and Mathias
Bisping for their help with corpus annotation. I
am also grateful to Costanza Navaretta for our fruit-
ful discussions, and to the anonymous reviewers for
their suggestions on improving the paper. This work
was supported by a scholarship from the Friedrich
Wingert foundation.

References

Stefan Baumann and Arndt Riester. 2012. Referential
and lexical givenness: Semantic, prosodic and cogni-
tive aspects. Prosody and meaning, 25:119–162.

Herbert H Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Proceedings of
the 1975 workshop on Theoretical issues in natural
language processing, pages 169–174. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Claire Gardent, Hélène Manuélian, and Eric Kow. 2003.
Which bridges for bridging definite descriptions. In
Proceedings of the EACL 2003 Workshop on Linguis-
tically Interpreted Corpora, pages 69–76.

Yulia Grishina and Manfred Stede. 2015. Knowledge-
lean projection of coreference chains across languages.
In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Building and
Using Comparable Corpora, Beijing, China, page 14.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Erhard W Hinrichs, Sandra Kübler, and Karin Naumann.
2005. A unified representation for morphological,
syntactic, semantic, and referential annotations. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus

14



Annotations II: Pie in the Sky, pages 13–20. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Yufang Hou, Katja Markert, and Michael Strube. 2014.
A rule-based system for unrestricted bridging resolu-
tion: Recognizing bridging anaphora and finding links
to antecedents. In EMNLP, pages 2082–2093.

Eduard Hovy, Mitchell Marcus, Martha Palmer, Lance
Ramshaw, and Ralph Weischedel. 2006. OntoNotes:
the 90% solution. In Proceedings of the human lan-
guage technology conference of the NAACL, Compan-
ion Volume: Short Papers, pages 57–60. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Katja Markert, Yufang Hou, and Michael Strube. 2012.
Collective classification for fine-grained information
status. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 795–804. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Anna Nedoluzhko, Jiřı́ Mı́rovskỳ, Radek Ocelák, and Jiřı́
Pergler. 2009. Extended coreferential relations and
bridging anaphora in the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the 7th Discourse Anaphora
and Anaphor Resolution Colloquium (DAARC 2009),
Goa, India, pages 1–16.

Malvina Nissim, Shipra Dingare, Jean Carletta, and Mark
Steedman. 2004. An annotation scheme for informa-
tion status in dialogue. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC).

Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Mateusz Kopec, and Agata Savary.
2014. Polish coreference corpus in numbers. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 3234–3238.

Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric an-
notation in the ARRAU corpus. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).

Massimo Poesio and Renata Vieira. 1998. A corpus-
based investigation of definite description use. Com-
putational linguistics, 24(2):183–216.

Massimo Poesio, Rahul Mehta, Axel Maroudas, and
Janet Hitzeman. 2004. Learning to resolve bridg-
ing references. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, page 143. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Massimo Poesio. 2004. The MATE/GNOME proposals
for anaphoric annotation, revisited. In Proceedings of
the 5th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 154–162.

Marta Recasens, Eduard H Hovy, and Maria Antònia
Martı́. 2010. A typology of near-identity relations

for coreference (NIDENT). In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).

Marta Recasens, Maria Antònia Martı́, and Constantin
Orasan. 2012. Annotating near-identity from coref-
erence disagreements. In LREC, pages 165–172.

Arndt Riester, David Lorenz, and Nina Seemann. 2010.
A recursive annotation scheme for referential infor-
mation status. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC).

Julia Ritz, Stefanie Dipper, and Michael Götze. 2008.
Annotation of information structure: an evaluation
across different types of texts. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).

15


