



















































On the Evaluation of Dialogue Systems with Next Utterance Classification


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, pages 264–269,
Los Angeles, USA, 13-15 September 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

On the Evaluation of Dialogue Systems with Next Utterance Classification

Ryan Lowe1, Iulian V. Serban2, Mike Noseworthy1, Laurent Charlin3∗, Joelle Pineau1
1 School of Computer Science, McGill University
{ryan.lowe, jpineau}@cs.mcgill.ca,
michael.noseworthy@mail.mcgill.ca

2 DIRO, Université de Montréal
iulian.vlad.serban@umontreal.ca

3 HEC Montréal
laurent.charlin@hec.ca

Abstract

An open challenge in constructing di-
alogue systems is developing methods
for automatically learning dialogue strate-
gies from large amounts of unlabelled
data. Recent work has proposed Next-
Utterance-Classification (NUC) as a sur-
rogate task for building dialogue systems
from text data. In this paper we investigate
the performance of humans on this task to
validate the relevance of NUC as a method
of evaluation. Our results show three main
findings: (1) humans are able to correctly
classify responses at a rate much better
than chance, thus confirming that the task
is feasible, (2) human performance levels
vary across task domains (we consider 3
datasets) and expertise levels (novice vs
experts), thus showing that a range of per-
formance is possible on this type of task,
(3) automated dialogue systems built using
state-of-the-art machine learning methods
have similar performance to the human
novices, but worse than the experts, thus
confirming the utility of this class of tasks
for driving further research in automated
dialogue systems.

1 Introduction

Significant efforts have been made in recent years
to develop computational methods for learning di-
alogue strategies offline from large amounts of text
data. One of the challenges of this line of work is
to develop methods to automatically evaluate, ei-
ther directly or indirectly, models that are trained
in this manner (Galley et al., 2015; Schatzmann
et al., 2005), without requiring human labels or

∗This work was primarily done while LC was at McGill
University.

human user experiments, which are time consum-
ing and expensive. The use of automatic tasks
and metrics is one key issue in scaling the devel-
opment of dialogue systems from small domain-
specific systems, which require significant engi-
neering, to general conversational agents (Pietquin
and Hastie, 2013).

In this paper, we consider tasks and evaluation
measures for what we call ‘unsupervised’ dialogue
systems, such as chatbots. These are in contrast to
‘supervised’ dialogue systems, which we define as
those that explicitly incorporate some supervised
signal such as task completion or user satisfaction.
Unsupervised systems can be roughly separated
into response generation systems that attempt to
produce a likely response given a conversational
context, and retrieval-based systems that attempt
to select a response from a (possibly large) list
of utterances in a corpus. While there has been
significant work on building end-to-end response
generation systems (Vinyals and Le, 2015; Shang
et al., 2015; Serban et al., 2016), it has recently
been shown that many of the automatic evaluation
metrics used for such systems correlate poorly or
not at all with human judgement of the generated
responses (Liu et al., 2016).

Retrieval-based systems are of interest because
they admit a natural evaluation metric, namely the
recall and precision measures. First introduced
for evaluating user simulations by Schatzmann et
al. (2005), such a framework has gained recent
prominence for the evaluation of end-to-end di-
alogue systems (Lowe et al., 2015a; Kadlec et
al., 2015; Dodge et al., 2016). These models
are trained on the task of selecting the correct re-
sponse from a candidate list, which we call Next-
Utterance-Classification (NUC, detailed in Sec-
tion 3), and are evaluated using the metric of re-
call. NUC is useful for several reasons: 1) the
performance (i.e. loss or error) is easy to com-

264



pute automatically, 2) it is simple to adjust the
difficulty of the task, 3) the task is interpretable
and amenable to comparison with human perfor-
mance, 4) it is an easier task compared to genera-
tive dialogue modeling, which is difficult for end-
to-end systems (Sordoni et al., 2015; Serban et al.,
2016), and 5) models trained with NUC can be
converted to dialogue systems by retrieving from
the full corpus (Liu et al., 2016). In this case, NUC
additionally allows for making hard constraints on
the allowable outputs of the system (to prevent
offensive responses), and guarantees that the re-
sponses are fluent (because they were generated
by humans). Thus, NUC can be thought of both
as an intermediate task that can be used to eval-
uate the ability of systems to understand natural
language conversations, similar to the bAbI tasks
for language understanding (Weston et al., 2016),
and as a useful framework for building chatbots.
With the huge size of current dialogue datasets that
contain millions of utterances (Lowe et al., 2015a;
Banchs, 2012; Ritter et al., 2010) and the increas-
ing amount of natural language data, it is conceiv-
able that retrieval-based systems will be able to
have engaging conversations with humans.

However, despite the current work with NUC,
there has been no verification of whether machine
and human performance differ on this task. This
cannot be assumed; it is possible that no signifi-
cant gap exists between the two, as is the case with
many current automatic response generation met-
rics (Liu et al., 2016). Further, it is important to
benchmark human performance on new tasks such
as NUC to determine when research has outgrown
their use. In this paper, we consider to what extent
NUC is achievable by humans, whether human
performance varies according to expertise, and
whether there is room for machine performance
to improve (or has reached human performance
already) and we should move to more complex
conversational tasks. We performed a user study
on three different datasets: the SubTle Corpus of
movie dialogues (Banchs, 2012), the Twitter Cor-
pus (Ritter et al., 2010), and the Ubuntu Dialogue
Corpus (Lowe et al., 2015a). Since conversations
in the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus are highly tech-
nical, we recruit ‘expert’ humans who are adept
with the Ubuntu terminology, whom we compare
with a state-of-the-art machine learning agent on
all datasets. We find that there is indeed a signif-
icant separation between machine and expert hu-

Figure 1: An example NUC question from the
SubTle Corpus (Banchs, 2012).

man performance, suggesting that NUC is a useful
intermediate task for measuring progress.

2 Related Work

Evaluation methods for supervised systems have
been well studied. They include the PARADISE
framework (Walker et al., 1997), and MeMo
(Möller et al., 2006), which include a measure
of task completion. A more extensive overview
of these metrics can be found in (Jokinen and
McTear, 2009). We focus in this paper on unsu-
pervised dialogue systems, for which proper eval-
uation is an open problem.

Recent evaluation metrics for unsupervised di-
alogue systems include BLEU (Papineni et al.,
2002) and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005),
which compare the similarity between response
generated by the model, and the actual response of
the participant, conditioned on some context of the
conversation. Word perplexity, which computes a
function of the probability of re-generating exam-
ples from the training corpus, is also used. How-
ever, such metrics have been shown to correlate
very weakly with human judgement of the pro-
duced responses (Liu et al., 2016). They also suf-
fer from several other drawbacks (Liu et al., 2016),
including low scores, lack of interpretability, and
inability to account for the vast space of acceptable
outputs in natural conversation.

3 Technical Background on NUC

Our long-term goal is the development and de-
ployment of artificial conversational agents. Re-

265



cent deep neural architectures offer perhaps the
most promising framework for tackling this prob-
lem. However training such architectures typi-
cally requires large amounts of conversation data
from the target domain, and a way to automat-
ically assess prediction errors. Next-Utterance-
Classification (NUC, see Figure 1) is a task, which
is straightforward to evaluate, designed for train-
ing and validation of dialogue systems. They are
evaluated using the metric of Recall@k, which we
define in this section.

In NUC, a model or user, when presented with
the context of a conversation and a (usually small)
pre-defined list of responses, must select the most
appropriate response from this list. This list in-
cludes the actual next response of the conversa-
tion, which is the desired prediction of the model.
The other entries, which act as false positives, are
sampled from elsewhere in the corpus. Note that
no assumptions are made regarding the number of
utterances in the context: these can be fixed or
sampled from arbitrary distributions. Performance
on this task is easy to assess by measuring the
success rate of picking the correct next response;
more specifically, we measure Recall@k (R@k),
which is the percentage of correct responses (i.e.
the actual response of the conversation) that are
found in the top k responses with the highest rank-
ings according to the model. This task has gained
some popularity recently for evaluating dialogue
systems (Lowe et al., 2015a; Kadlec et al., 2015).

There are several attractive properties of this ap-
proach, as detailed in the introduction: the perfor-
mance is easy to compute automatically, the task
is interpretable and amenable to comparison with
human performance, and it is easier than genera-
tive dialogue modeling. A particularly nice prop-
erty is that one can adjust the difficulty of NUC
by simply changing the number of false responses
(from one response to the full corpus), or by alter-
ing the selection criteria of false responses (from
randomly sampled to intentionally confusing). In-
deed, as the number of false responses grows to
encompass all natural language responses, the task
becomes identical to response generation.

One potential limitation of the NUC approach
is that, since the other candidate answers are sam-
pled from elsewhere in the corpus, these may also
represent reasonable responses given the context.
Part of the contribution of this work is determining
the significance of this limitation.

What is your gender?
Male 56.5%

Female 44.5%
What is your age?

18-20 3.4%
21-30 38.1%
31-40 33.3%
41-55 14.3%
55+ 10.2%

How would you rate your fluency in English?
Beginner 0%

Intermediate 8.2%
Advanced 6.8%

Fluent 84.4%
What is your current level of education?

High school or less 21.1%
Bachelor’s 60.5%
Master’s 13.6%

Doctorate or higher 3.4%
How would you rate your knowledge of Ubuntu?
I’ve never used it 70.7%

Basic 21.8%
Intermediate 5.4%

Expert 2.7%

Table 1: Data on the 145 AMT participants.

4 Survey Methodology

4.1 Corpora
We conducted our analysis on three corpora that
have gained recent popularity for training dialogue
systems. The SubTle Corpus (Banchs, 2012) con-
sists of movie dialogues as extracted from subti-
tles, and includes turn-taking information indicat-
ing when each user has finished their turn. Un-
like the larger OpenSubtitles1 dataset, the Sub-
Tle Corpus includes turn-taking information in-
dicating when each user has finished their turn.
The Twitter Corpus (Ritter et al., 2010) contains
a large number of conversations between users
on the microblogging platform Twitter. Finally,
the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus contains conversa-
tions extracted from IRC chat logs (Lowe et al.,
2015a). 2 For more information on these datasets,
we refer the reader to a recent survey on dialogue
corpora (Serban et al., 2015). We focus our at-
tention on these as they cover a range of popu-
lar domains, and are among the largest available
dialogue datasets, making them good candidates
for building data-driven dialogue systems. Note
that while the Ubuntu Corpus is most relevant to
supervised systems, the NUC task still applies in
this domain. Models that take semantic informa-
tion into account (i.e., to solve the user’s problem)
can still be validated with NUC, as demonstrated

1http://www.opensubtitles.org
2http://irclogs.ubuntu.com

266



in Lowe et al. (2015b).
A group of 145 paid participants were re-

cruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT),
a crowdsourcing platform for obtaining human
participants for various studies. Demographic data
including age, level of education, and fluency of
English were collected from the AMT partici-
pants, and is shown in Table 1. An additional 8
volunteers were recruited from the student popu-
lation in the computer science department at the
author’s institution.3 This second group, referred
to as “Lab experts”, had significant exposure to
technical terms prominent in the Ubuntu dataset;
we hypothesized that this was an advantage in se-
lecting responses for that corpus.

4.2 Task description

Each participant was asked to answer either 30 or
40 questions (mean=31.9). To ensure a sufficient
diversity of questions from each dataset, four ver-
sions of the survey with different questions were
given to participants. For AMT respondents, the
questions were approximately evenly distributed
across the three datasets, while for the lab ex-
perts, half of the questions were related to Ubuntu
and the remainder evenly split across Twitter and
movies. Each question had 1 correct response, and
4 false responses drawn uniformly at random from
elsewhere in the (same) corpus. An example ques-
tion can be seen in Figure 1. Participants had a
time limit of 40 minutes.

Conversations were extracted to form NUC
conversation-response pairs as described in Sec. 3.
The number of utterances in the context were
sampled according to the procedure in (Lowe et
al., 2015a), with a maximum context length of
6 turns — this was done for both the human tri-
als and ANN model. All conversations were pre-
processed in order to anonymize the utterances.
For the Twitter conversations, this was extended
to replacing all user mentions (words beginning
with @) throughout the utterance with a place-
holder ‘@user’ symbol, as these are often repeated
in a conversation. Hashtags were not removed, as
these are often used in the main body of tweets,
and many tweets are illegible without them. Con-
versations were edited or pruned to remove offen-
sive language according to ethical guidelines.

3None of these participants were directly involved with
this research project.

4.3 ANN model
In order to compare human results with a strong
artificial neural network (ANN) model, we use
the dual encoder (DE) model from Lowe et
al. (2015a). This model uses recurrent neu-
ral networks (RNNs) with long-short term mem-
ory (LSTM) units (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997) to encode the context c of the conversa-
tion, and a candidate response r. More precisely,
at each time step, a word xt is input into the
LSTM, and its hidden state is updated according
to: ht = f(Whht−1+Wxxt), whereW are weight
matrices, and f(·) is some non-linear activation
function. After all T words have been processed,
the final hidden state hT can be considered a vec-
tor representation of the input sequence.

To determine the probability that a response r
is the actual next response to some context c, the
model computes a weighted dot product between
the vector representations c, r ∈ Rd of the context
and response, respectively:

P (r is correct response) = σ(c>Mr)

where M is a matrix of learned parameters, and
σ is the sigmoid function. The model is trained
to minimize the cross-entropy error of context-
response pairs. For training the authors randomly
sample negative examples.

The DE model is close to state-of-the-art for
neural network dialogue models on the Ubuntu Di-
alogue Corpus; we obtained further results on the
Movie and Twitter corpora in order to facilitate
comparison with humans. For further model im-
plementation details, see Lowe et al. (2015a).

5 Results

As we can see from Table 1, the AMT participants
are mostly young adults, fluent in English with
some undergraduate education. The split across
genders is approximately equal, and the majority
of respondents had never used Ubuntu before.

Table 2 shows the NUC results on each cor-
pus. The human results are separated into AMT
non-experts, consisting of paid respondents who
have ‘Beginner’ or no knowledge of Ubuntu ter-
minology; AMT experts, who claimed to have ‘In-
termediate’ or ‘Advanced’ knowledge of Ubuntu;
and Lab experts, who are the non-paid respondents
with Ubuntu experience and university-level com-
puter science training. We also presents results on
the same task for a state-of-the-art artificial neural

267



Number Movie Corpus Twitter Corpus Ubuntu Corpus
of Users R@1 R@2 R@1 R@2 R@1 R@2

AMT non- 135 65.9 ± 2.4% 79.8 ± 2.1% 74.1 ± 2.3% 82.3 ± 2.0% 52.9 ± 2.7% 69.4 ± 2.5%experts
AMT experts 10 — — — — 52.0 ± 9.8% 63.0 ± 9.5%
Lab experts 8 69.7 ± 10% 94.0 ± 5.2%∗ 88.4 ± 7.0% 98.4 ± 2.7%∗ 83.8 ± 8.1% 87.8 ± 7.2%
ANN model

machine 50.6% 74.9% 66.9% 89.6% 66.2% 83.7%(Lowe et al.,
2015a)

Table 2: Average results on each corpus. ‘Number of Users’ indicates the number of respondents for each
category. ‘AMT experts’ and ‘AMT non-experts’ are combined for the Movie and Twitter corpora. 95%
confidence intervals are calculated using the normal approximation, which assumes subjects answer each
question independently of other examples and subjects. Starred (*) results indicate a poor approximation
of the confidence interval due to high scores with small sample size, according to the rule of thumb by
Brown et al. (2001).

network (ANN) dialogue model (see (Lowe et al.,
2015a) for implementation details).

We first observe that subjects perform above
chance level (20% for R@1) on all domains,
thus the task is doable for humans. Second we
observe difference in performances between the
three domains. The Twitter dataset appears to have
the best predictability, with a Recall@1 approxi-
mately 8% points higher than for the movie dia-
logues for AMT workers, and 18% higher for lab
experts. Rather than attributing this to greater fa-
miliarity with Twitter than movies, it seems more
likely that it is because movie utterances are of-
ten short, generic (e.g. contain few topic-related
words), and lack proper context (e.g., video cues
and the movie’s story). Conversely, tweets are typ-
ically more specific, and successive tweets may
have common hashtags.

As expected, untrained respondents scored low-
est on the Ubuntu dataset, as it contains the most
difficult language with often unfamiliar terminol-
ogy. Further, since the domain is narrow, ran-
domly drawn false responses could be more likely
to resemble the actual next response, especially to
someone unfamiliar with Ubuntu terminology. We
also observe that the ANN model achieves similar
performance to the paid human respondents from
AMT. However, the model is still significantly be-
hind the lab experts for Recall@1.

An interesting note is that there is very little dif-
ference between the paid AMT non-experts and
AMT experts on Ubuntu. This suggests that the
participants do not provide accurate self-rating of
expertise, either intentionally or not. We also
found that lab experts took on average approx-
imately 50% more time to complete the survey
than paid testers; this is reflected in the results,

where the lab experts score 30% higher on the
Ubuntu Corpus, and even 5-10% higher on the
non-technical Movie and Twitter corpora. While
we included attention check questions to ensure
the quality of responses,4 this reflects poorly on
the ability of crowdsourced workers to answer
technical questions, even if they self-identify as
being adept with the technology.

6 Discussion

Our results demonstrate that humans outperform
current dialogue models on the task of Next-
Utterance-Classification, indicating that there is
plenty of room for improvement for these models
to better understand the nature of human dialogue.
While our results suggest that NUC is a useful
task, it is by no means sufficient; we strongly ad-
vocate for automatically evaluating dialogue sys-
tems with as many relevant metrics as possible.
Further research should be conducted into finding
metrics or tasks which accurately reflect human
judgement for the evaluation of dialogue systems.

Acknowledgements The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge financial support for this work by
the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
(SAIT) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC).

References
R. E. Banchs. 2012. Movie-dic: A movie dialogue

corpus for research and development. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Short Papers - Vol-
ume 2.
4Only the respondents who passed all attention checks

were counted in the survey.

268



S. Banerjee and A. Lavie. 2005. METEOR: An auto-
matic metric for mt evaluation with improved corre-
lation with human judgments. In ACL workshop on
intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for ma-
chine translation and/or summarization.

L. D. Brown, T. T. Cai, and A. DasGupta. 2001. Inter-
val estimation for a binomial proportion. Statistical
science, pages 101–117.

J. Dodge, A. Gane, X. Zhang, A. Bordes, S. Chopra,
A. Miller, A. Szlam, and J. Weston. 2016. Evaluat-
ing prerequisit qualities for learning end-to-end dia-
log systems. International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

M. Galley, C. Brockett, A. Sordoni, Y. Ji, M. Auli, C.
Quirk, M. Mitchell, J. Gao, and B. Dolan. 2015.
deltaBLEU: A discriminative metric for generation
tasks with intrinsically diverse targets. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Short Papers).

S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-
term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–
1780.

K. Jokinen and M. McTear. 2009. Spoken Dialogue
Systems. Morgan Claypool.

R. Kadlec, M. Schmid, and J. Kleindienst. 2015. Im-
proved deep learning baselines for ubuntu corpus di-
alogs. NIPS on Machine Learning for Spoken Lan-
guage Understanding.

C. Liu, R. Lowe, I. V. Serban, M. Noseworthy, L. Char-
lin, and J. Pineau. 2016. How not to evaluate your
dialogue system: An empirical study of unsuper-
vised evaluation metrics for dialogue response gen-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08023.

R. Lowe, N. Pow, I. Serban, and J. Pineau. 2015a. The
ubuntu dialogue corpus: A large dataset for research
in unstructured multi-turn dialogue systems. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGDIAL.

R. Lowe, N. Pow, I. V. Serban, L. Charlin, and J.
Pineau. 2015b. Incorporating unstructured textual
knowledge sources into neural dialogue systems. In
NIPS Workshop on Machine Learning for Spoken
Language Understanding.

S. Möller, R. Englert, K.-P. Engelbrecht, V. V. Hafner,
A. Jameson, A. Oulasvirta, A. Raake, and N. Rei-
thinger. 2006. Memo: towards automatic usability
evaluation of spoken dialogue services by user error
simulations. In INTERSPEECH.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu. 2002.
BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual
meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL).

O. Pietquin and H. Hastie. 2013. A survey on metrics
for the evaluation of user simulations. The Knowl-
edge Engineering Review.

A. Ritter, C. Cherry, and B. Dolan. 2010. Unsuper-
vised modeling of twitter conversations. In North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (NAACL).

J. Schatzmann, K. Georgila, and S. Young. 2005.
Quantitative evaluation of user simulation tech-
niques for spoken dialogue systems. In Proceedings
of SIGDIAL.

I. V. Serban, R. Lowe, L. Charlin, and J. Pineau.
2015. A survey of available corpora for build-
ing data-driven dialogue systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.05742.

I. V. Serban, A. Sordoni, Y. Bengio, A. C. Courville,
and J. Pineau. 2016. Building end-to-end dia-
logue systems using generative hierarchical neural
network models. In Association for the Advance-
ment of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2016, pages
3776–3784.

L. Shang, Z. Lu, and H. Li. 2015. Neural responding
machine for short-text conversation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02364.

A. Sordoni, M. Galley, M. Auli, C. Brockett, Y. Ji, M.
Mitchell, J. Nie, J. Gao, and B. Dolan. 2015. A
neural network approach to context-sensitive gener-
ation of conversational responses. In Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT 2015).

O. Vinyals and Q. Le. 2015. A neural conversational
model. ICML Deep Learning Workshop.

M. A. Walker, D. J. Litman, C. A. Kamm, and A.
Abella. 1997. Paradise: A framework for evalu-
ating spoken dialogue agents. In Proceedings of the
eighth conference on European chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 271–
280. Association for Computational Linguistics.

J. Weston, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, and T. Mikolov.
2016. Towards ai-complete question answering: A
set of prerequisite toy tasks. International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR).

269


