



















































Anaphoricity in Connectives: A Case Study on German


Proceedings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016), co-located with NAACL 2016, pages 41–46,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Anaphoricity in Connectives: A Case Study on German

Manfred Stede and Yulia Grishina
Applied Computational Linguistics

FSP Cognitive Science
University of Potsdam, Germany

stede|grishina@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract

Anaphoric connectives are event anaphors (or
abstract anaphors) that in addition convey a
coherence relation holding between the an-
tecedent and the host clause of the connective.
Some of them carry an explicitly-anaphoric
morpheme, others do not. We analysed the
set of German connectives for this property
and found that many have an additional non-
connective reading, where they serve as nomi-
nal anaphors. Furthermore, many connectives
can have multiple senses, so altogether the
processing of these words can involve substan-
tial disambiguation. We study the problem for
one specific German word, demzufolge, which
can be taken as representative for a large group
of similar words.

1 Introduction

The vast majority of the research on anaphoricity in
Computational Linguistics has been done on nomi-
nal anaphora; it is arguably the most important for
many purposes, and also the most frequent phe-
nomenon. Nonetheless, event anaphors1 are also
highly relevant for text understanding, but they have
proven to be much more difficult to resolve than
nominal anaphors; see, e.g., (Dipper and Zinsmeis-
ter, 2012). In this paper, we zoom in on a specific
subclass of event anaphors, namely on anaphoric
connectives: They pick up an abstract-object an-
tecedent from the previous context, and at the same
time signal a semantic or pragmatic coherence rela-
tion between that antecedent and their host clause.

1In this paper, we use event anaphora interchangeably with
abstract anaphora.

A principal distinction between ‘anaphoric’ and
‘structural’ connectives has been made by Webber
et al. (2003) in the context of Computational Lin-
guistics; similar observations have been made by
linguists working on the German ‘Handbook of con-
nectives’ (Pasch et al., 2003). While structural con-
nectives (conjunctions) take their arguments qua the
syntactic configuration they appear in, anaphoric
connectives (certain adverbials) pick up their ‘ex-
ternal’ argument (or the ‘Arg1’ in the terminology
of the Penn Discourse Treebank, PDTB) (Prasad et
al., 2008) by means of anaphora resolution. Often,
this argument is present in the clause preceding the
anaphoric adverbial, but it need not be; Prasad et al.
report that in the PDTB, 9% of the ‘Arg1’ arguments
of connectives in fact appear not in the same or in the
previous sentence, but farther away. For illustration,
here is a fictitious example:

(1) [Tom didn’t go to the café.]Arg1 It would close
soon anyway. [He chose to sit at the
beach]Arg2 [instead]conn.

In English, a few connective adverbials make their
anaphoricity explicit, as they contain a morpheme
that overtly refers backward: therefore, whereby
etc. In other languages, this phenomenon is more
widespread. In this paper, we will especially look
at German, where a large number of connectives
exhibit such a morpheme; Section 2 will provide
an overview. Afterwards, in Section 3, we present
a case study on one specific German word, which
can act both as a nominal anaphor and as an event
anaphor (in which case it is a connective) and
thus poses an additional ambiguity problem. Then,

41



Section 4 discusses the disambiguation task and
sketches a path toward a solution.

2 Anaphoric connectives in German

A connective, according to Pasch et al. (2003), is
a closed-class lexical item expressing a two-place
relation whose arguments denote eventualities and
can, in principle, be expressed as full sentences.
Connectives do not form a syntactically homoge-
neous class but contain both conjunctions (coordi-
nate or subordinate) and certain adverbials. Due to
this, they are usually regarded as a discourse phe-
nomenon, and there are not many comprehensive
linguistic studies that survey the connectives of a
language. A notable exception is the aforemen-
tioned handbook for German, which lists about 350
different connectives. In terms of machine-readable
lexicons, one for German connectives (DiMLex) had
been introduced by Stede (2002), which in its cur-
rent version2 contains 274 entries. For French, Lex-
Conn (Roze et al., 2012) is slightly bigger (328 en-
tries). For English, a list has been derived from the
PDTB corpus, consisting of 100 connectives.

Since our focus here is on German, we worked
with DiMLex and determined how many connec-
tives have an explicitly-anaphoric morpheme (as ex-
plained above). We found 11 different relevant pre-
fixes and suffixes, and their frequencies are: da-: 21,
-dessen: 17, wo-/wes-: 11, hier-: 7, -dem: 7, dem-:
6, des-: 4, -dann: 3, -dies: 2, dessen-: 1. Thus, in
total 79 connectives have one of the morphemes in
question, which amounts to 29%.3

We went through these explicitly-anaphoric con-
nectives and determined how many of them also
have a non-connective reading. This problem of
connective ambiguity had been quantified by Dip-
per and Stede (2006) as applying to 40% of the
words, on the basis of an earlier (smaller) version
of DiMLex. Many connectives have additional read-
ings as discourse particles, verb particles, or nominal
anaphors. Since our 79 connectives carry anaphoric

2https://github.com/discourse-lab/dimlex
3Most morphemes do not straightforwardly translate to En-

glish; they correspond to local, temporal, and event anaphors
in dative or genitive case. The phenomenon occurs in other lan-
guages as well; in Dutch, for instance, there are connectives like
daarom, daardoor, waardor; French examples are après ca, à
part ca.

morphemes, ambiguity can hold between nominal
anaphor and event anaphor (= connective). We
found that this applies to 40 words; for most of them,
their other function is that of a relative pronoun. For
example:

(2) Sie schenkte mir ein Buch, womit ich nichts
anfangen konnte.
‘She gave me a book, with which I could not
do anything.’

(3) [Sie schenkte mir ein Buch,]Arg1 [womit]conn
[sie mir einen großen Gefallen tat.]Arg2
‘She gave me a book, whereby she did me a
big favor.’

3 Case study: demzufolge

The 40 words that we identified in the previous sec-
tion are ambiguous between nominal anaphor and
event anaphor. In order to approach the tasks of (a)
determining the correct reading in a given context,
and (b) finding the antecedent (which for the event
anaphor reading corresponds to the Arg1 of the con-
nective), we decided to first inspect one word in de-
tail and chose demzufolge.

3.1 Different readings
A good way to map out the ambiguity of demzufolge
is to collect the variety of its English translations in a
parallel corpus. We used InterCorp4, where the first
50 hits yield the following: accordingly, as a result,
consequently, as a consequence, therefore, that (as
complementizer or relative pronoun), which (as rel-
ative pronoun), and the null translation. Making this
systematic, we see two broad classes of usages:

1. Nominal anaphor, a contracted form of dem
zufolge, which in German can be paraphrased as laut
dem (‘according to which’). We find two syntactic
forms:

(a) Introducing a relative clause:

(4) Ich las ein Buch, demzufolge die Welt in
diesem Jahr untergehen wird.
‘I read a book according to which the
world will collapse this year.’

(b) Free adverbial:
4https://ucnk.ff.cuni.cz/intercorp/

42



(5) Ich habe ein interessantes Buch gelesen.
Demzufolge wird die Welt in diesem Jahr
untergehen.
‘I read an interesting book. According
to it the world will collapse this year.’

2. Connective with two arguments that denote
eventualities. The online grammar grammis5 in
its ‘grammatical lexicon’ section states that it can
appear in three different positions, as modeled by
topological-field theory:6

• Vorfeld (pre-field):
(6) Peter war der beste Torschütze.

Demzufolge bekam er den Pokal.
‘Peter was the best goal scorer. Therefore
he received the tophy.’

• Mittelfeld (middle-field):
(...) Er bekam demzufolge den Pokal.

• Nullstelle (zero position):
(...) Demzufolge: Er bekam den Pokal.

Irrespective of the position, the coherence relation
being signalled is ‘cause-result’ (in the PDTB ter-
minology), and intuitively, we expect this to be the
only one; but see below for an exception. When con-
sidering various examples, it becomes clear that the
readings cannot be easily distinguished at the lin-
guistic surface. To explore this in depth, we thus
conducted a (small) corpus study.

3.2 Corpus Study
To investigate the ambiguity and its potential res-
olution in authentic contexts, we randomly col-
lected 140 instances of demzufolge (using a case-
insensitive search) from the DWDS corpus7. 50 are
from the print and online editions of the weekly pa-
per Die Zeit (1946-2014), and 90 from the ‘Kern-
korpus 20’, a genre-balanced corpus of 20th-century
German that includes narratives, non-fiction books,
scientific text, and some newspaper text. The ex-
tracted material for each instance was a window of

5http://hypermedia.ids-mannheim.de
6Very briefly, the finite verb and the other parts of the

predicate constitute the Satzklammer (‘sentence bracket’). The
middle-field is inside the bracket; the pre-field precedes the left
bracket; the zero position precedes the pre-field.

7www.dwds.de

three sentences, the second one of which contains
the target word demzufolge. Henceforth, we call the
two collections ‘zeit50’ and ‘kernel90’, respectively.

As our first step, to get an initial overview, one
author of this paper annotated kernel90: For each in-
stance of demzufolge we marked its antecedent and
identified the syntactic type. These are the frequen-
cies of the various antecedent types (we also indicate
the English translation equivalent of demzufolge):

• NP antecedent: 42 (47%)
Roles of demzufolge:

– relative pronoun ("according to which"):
33 (37%)

– other function ("therefore"): 9 (10%)
• VP antecedent ("therefore"): 19 (21%)
• S antecedent ("therefore"): 29 (32%)

Subtypes:
– one or more full sentences: 22 (24%)
– sentential complement: 4 (4%)
– sentences in coordinate structures: 2 (2%)
– subordinate sentence: 1 (1%)

The relatively balanced distributions between syn-
tactic antecedent types and also between read-
ings/translations (33 non-connectives; 57 connec-
tives) shows that disambiguation cannot be avoided
by means of a simple majority baseline.

Next, we were interested in inter-annotator agree-
ment regarding class (non-/connective), connective
sense (PDTB taxonomy) and extension of the two
arguments. One author of this paper and two trained
annotators, who are familiar with German connec-
tives but previously had not studied demzufolge in
particular, labelled the 50 instances in zeit50. We
can subsume the non-/connective decision under the
sense labeling, where a non-connective receives the
sense ‘none’. Another special label annotators could
use was ‘missing context’, indicating that a judge-
ment is not possible because of the restricted context
information available.

Results: With three annotators, there are 150 pairs
of annotations to be compared. 103 (69%) of the
decision pairs were completely identical (i.e., two
annotators agreed on the connective sense and on
the extensions of both arguments). For the senses,
there were 25 cases of pairwise disagreement, and
the vast majority (21) concerned the non-/connective

43



distinction. ‘Missing context’ was used on only one
instance (by two annotators). Among the connec-
tive senses, ‘cause-result’ was used 39 times, and
‘specialization’ four times. Given these two rela-
tions plus ‘none’ and ‘missing context’, we can see
sense labeling as a four-way classification task, and
we computed the chance-corrected Fleiss-κ for the
3 raters, which is 0.55.

The presence of the ‘specialization’ sense seems
to contradict our initial expectation of non-
ambiguity. But, upon reflection, ‘specialization’ in-
deed can be quite compatible with a causal or justi-
fying relation, so this is not an extraordinary finding.
To illustrate, here is one (abbreviated) instance that
received the ‘specialization’ sense:

(7) [Im ARD-Deutschlandtrend liegt Merkel in der
Wählergunst deutlich hinter ihren möglichen
Herausforderern Steinbrück und
Steinmeier.]Arg1 [Bei einer Direktwahl des
Regierungschefs würde sie [demzufolge]conn
im Duell gegen Steinbrück zurzeit mit 37 zu 48
Prozent klar unterliegen.]Arg2
‘In the ARD poll, Merkel clearly lags behind
her challengers Steinbrück and Steinmeier. In
a direct election of the chancellor, she would
thus currently lose to Steinbrück with 37
against 48 percent.’

When the disagreement on senses pertains to the
non-/connective reading, it – unsurprisingly – corre-
lates with disagreement on Arg1 extension. Over-
all, among the 150 pairs of instance annotations,
there are 32 disagreements on Arg1 extension, and
18 on Arg2 extension. Both of these disagreements
are largely restricted to the connective usage, which
illustrates the finding (also well-known from the
PDTB) that the extension of the spans of causal rela-
tions can be quite vague: Is the Arg1 just the preced-
ing clause or sentence, or more than that? For Arg2,
as indicated, disagreement is relatively rare. How-
ever, our results on argument extension are prelimi-
nary, as the annotators had only a three-sentence ex-
tract from the host texts to make their judgements.8

In a larger study, these annotations need to be done
on full texts.

8This is the reason why we did not measure chance-
corrected agreement on span extension, as it could be done for
example along the lines of (Krippendorf, 2004).

It is interesting to note that the non-/connective
distribution differs between zeit50 and kernel90. In
the former, the annotators labeled 34±2 instances as
non-connectives, i.e., 68%. In kernel90, the corre-
sponding figure is 37%. We attribute this difference
to the genres: zeit50, as stated earlier, is taken from
a newspaper, including its online edition, which to
a large extent presents "instant news" that often in-
volve citing other sources, so that the "according to
which" reading is much more prominent than the
"therefore" reading of demzufolge.

4 Toward disambiguation and resolution

Interpreting demzufolge and the 39 similar German
words involves two subproblems: Disambiguate the
reading (connective or non-connective), and resolve
the argument(s) – either the antecedent of the NP-
anaphor, or the two arguments of the connective.

For disambiguation, before embarking on full-
fledged feature-based classification, it is advisable
to check whether standard POS tagging can (par-
tially) solve the problem. To this end, we experi-
mented with two German taggers on the kernel90
set: clevertagger9, which is integrated in the ParZu
parser (Sennrich et al., 2009), and the tagger of the
MATE tools (Bohnet, 2010). Both were used with
their standard models, which for ParZu was trained
on the TüBa-D/Z treebank10 and for MATE on a
dependency-converted version of the TIGER tree-
bank11. They both make use of the STTS tagset12

but in different versions. For our purposes, it is rel-
evant that they use PROAV and PROP, respectively,
for the German pronominal adverbs (contractions of
a pronominal form and a preposition). Table 1 shows
the tag distribution for the four groups of antecedent
types; in each group, the top line gives the MATE re-
sults and the bottom line those of ParZu. The "other"
column conflates a few obvious mistaggings as finite
verb, adjective, etc. For the 29 instances with ‘S’
antecedents, both parsers failed to produce output in
some cases (MATE: 5, ParZu: 4).

9https://github.com/rsennrich/clevertagger
10http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/ascl/ressourcen/corpora/

tueba-dz.html
11http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/forschung/ressourcen/kor-

pora/tiger.en.html
12http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/forschung/ressourcen/

lexika/GermanTagsets.en.html

44



While we cannot really expect a tagger to dif-
ferentiate between the types of antecedents (thus
providing information for anaphora resolution), it
is worth testing whether it can predict the non-
/connective readings, which here means to split the
relative pronoun uses from all others (as shown at
the beginning of Sct. 3.2). It turns out that MATE
correctly identifies only 6 of 33 relative pronouns
(18%) as PRELS. ParZu tags 19 of them (58%) as
subordinating conjunctions (KOUS), which is the
wrong tag, yet it serves to distinguish them from
the connective usages. Closer inspection reveals that
5 of the 6 MATE-PRELS instances are also ParZu-
KOUS instances, so that for this task, on the whole
ParZu is the better tool. If we assume that the ra-
tios hold for demzufolge instances in general, then
the upshot of the experiment is: ParZu can partially
identify the non-/connective readings of demzufolge,
when we interpret the KOUS tag as non-connective
(with perfect precision, and recall of 19/33 = 58%),
and the PROP tag as connective, with a precision
of 50/61 (82%) and a recall of 50/57 (94%; count-
ing also the four failed parses). For many purposes,
this situtation will not be good enough, so that clas-
sifiers using "deeper" features, in the spirit of Pitler
and Nenkova (2009) have to be built.

Likewise, for the second problem of finding the
arguments – of the nominal anaphor or of the con-
nective – deeper features have to be used. Some
work on Arg1 identification for English reports re-
sults around 80% accuracy based on surface and
syntactic features (Elwell and Baldridge, 2008), but
it seems not likely that this can be reached for the
fairly complicated distinction between NPs, VPs,
and sentences for the German connectives we are
studying here. The most promising route might be to
aim for identifying just the heads of the antecedents,
as done for English, e.g., by Wellner and Puste-
jovsky (2007); also, it can help to consider semantic
features, as proposed by Miltsakaki et al. (2003) for
the anaphoric connective instead.

5 Summary and outlook

The distinction between structural and anaphoric
connectives is well-established, but for the
anaphoric ones it is an open question whether
those with an explicit anaphoric morpheme be-

antecedent PROAV KOUS PRELS other
PROP

NP (relpro)
22 6 5
11 19 3

NP (other)
9
8 1

VP
19
19

S
24
23 2

Table 1: kernel90 dataset: POS tags assigned to demzufolge by
the parsers MATE (first row in a cell) and ParZu (second row).

have differently from those that do not have one,
i.e., whether the group of anaphoric connectives
should be split in two for purposes of argument
identification. Entangled with this is the problem
of non-connective ambiguity: many explicitly-
anaphoric connectives also have a second reading
as nominal anaphors. As a step toward resolving
these issues, we started from a comprehensive
lexicon of German connectives and determined
that 79 of them have one of 11 different anaphoric
morphemes. Of the 79 words, 40 are ambiguous
between a connective and non-connective reading.
We selected demzufolge for a pilot study and built
a small corpus of 140 instances annotated with
connective senses and argument spans. Experiments
with POS taggers revealed that – at least for this
word – they can help only to a limited extent for
distinguishing the non-/connective readings.

Our next steps are to determine the parallelism
between demzufolge and the other connectives and
then to build sense/argument classifiers for groups
of similar connectives. Since there are no large an-
notated resources for German, we will also look into
the possibility of annotation projection, as suggested
by Versley (2010) for English-German or Laali and
Kosseim (2014) for English-French. For the connec-
tives we study, this might be difficult, since English
appears to have much fewer (explicitly-)anaphoric
connectives; but if projection can also be done
for AltLex instances (multi-word expressions in the
PDTB), this might be helpful.

45



Acknowledgements
We thank Tatjana Scheffler and Erik Haegert for
their help with corpus annotation, and the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable suggestions on im-
proving the paper.

References
Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast dependency

parsing is not a contradiction. In Proc. of the 23rd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), pages 89–97, Beijing, China, August.

Stefanie Dipper and Manfred Stede. 2006. Disambiguat-
ing potential connectives. In Miriam Butt, editor,
Proc. of KONVENS ’06, pages 167–173, Konstanz.

Stefanie Dipper and Heike Zinsmeister. 2012. Annotat-
ing abstract anaphora. Language Resources and Eval-
uation, 46(1):37–52.

Robert Elwell and Jason Baldridge. 2008. Discourse
connective argument identification with connective
specific rankers. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on
Semantic Computing (ICSC), Santa Clara/CA.

Klaus Krippendorf. 2004. Measuring the reliability of
qualitative text analysis data. Quality and Quantity,
38(6):787–800.

Majid Laali and Leila Kosseim. 2014. Inducing dis-
course connectives from parallel texts. In Proc. of the
25th International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING), Dublin/Ireland.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Cassandre Creswell, Katherine Forbes,
Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2003. Anaphoric
arguments of discourse connectives: Semantic proper-
ties of antecedents versus non-antecedents. In Proc.
of the 10 Conference of the European Chapter of the
ACL, Budapest.

Renate Pasch, Ursula Brauße, Eva Breindl, and
Ulrich Herrmann Waßner. 2003. Handbuch
der deutschen Konnektoren. Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin/New York.

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Using syntax to
disambiguate explicit discourse connectives in text. In
Proc. of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Pa-
pers, pages 13–16, Suntec, Singapore.

R. Prasad, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki, L. Robaldo,
A. Joshi, and B. Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse
Treebank 2.0. In Proc. of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
Marrakech, Morocco.

Charlotte Roze, Laurence Danlos, and Philippe Muller.
2012. Lexconn: A French lexicon of discourse con-
nectives. Discours, 10.

Rico Sennrich, Gerold Schneider, Martin Volk, and Mar-
tin Warin. 2009. A new hybrid dependency parser for
German. In C. Chiarcos, R. Eckart de Castilho, and
M. Stede, editors, From Form to Meaning: Processing
Texts Automatically. Proc. of the Biennial GSCL Con-
ference 2009, Tübingen. Narr.

Manfred Stede. 2002. DiMLex: A lexical approach to
discourse markers. In A. Lenci and V. Di Tomaso, edi-
tors, Exploring the Lexicon - Theory and Computation.
Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria.

Yannick Versley. 2010. Discovery of ambiguous and un-
ambiguous discourse connectives via annotation pro-
jection. In Proceedings of Workshop on Annotation
and Exploitation of Parallel Corpora (AEPC), Tartu,
Estonia.

Bonnie Webber, Matthew Stone, Aravind Joshi, and Al-
istair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and discourse structure.
Computational Linguistics, 29(4):545–587.

Ben Wellner and James Pustejovsky. 2007. Automati-
cally identifying the arguments of discourse connec-
tives. In Proc. of the 2007 Joint Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), pages 92–101, Prague, Czech Republic.

46


