



















































Pronoun Prediction with Linguistic Features and Example Weighing


Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 602–608,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Pronoun Prediction with Linguistic Features and Example Weighing

Michal Novák
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské náměstı́ 25, CZ-11800 Prague 1

mnovak@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We present a system submitted to the
WMT16 shared task in cross-lingual
pronoun prediction, in particular, to
the English-to-German and German-to-
English sub-tasks. The system is based
on a linear classifier making use of fea-
tures both from the target language model
and from linguistically analyzed source
and target texts. Furthermore, we apply
example weighing in classifier learning,
which proved to be beneficial for recall
in less frequent pronoun classes. Com-
pared to other shared task participants, our
best English-to-German system is able to
rank just below the top performing sub-
missions.

1 Introduction

Previous works concerning translation of pro-
nouns1 have shown that unlike other words, pro-
nouns require a special treatment. Context and tar-
get language grammar influence pronoun transla-
tion much more profoundly than the translation of
parts-of-speech carrying lexical information.

This paper presents a system for the WMT16
shared task of cross-lingual pronoun prediction
(Guillou et al., 2016),2 the task that looks at the
problem of pronoun translation in a more sim-
plified way. Here, the objective is to predict
a target language pronoun from a set of pos-
sible candidates, given source text, lemmatized
and part-of-speech-tagged target text, and auto-
matic word alignment. We address specifically the
sub-tasks of English-to-German and German-to-
English pronoun prediction.

1Summarized by Hardmeier (2014).
2http://www.statmt.org/wmt16/pronoun-task.

html

We take a machine learning approach to the
problem and apply a linear classifier. Our ap-
proach combines features coming from the target
language model with features extracted from the
linguistically analyzed source and target texts. We
also introduce training example weighing, which
aims at improving the prediction accuracy of less
populated target pronouns. All the source codes
used to build the system are publicly available.3

According to the WMT16 pronoun translation
shared task results (Guillou et al., 2016), our best
German-to-English system ranks in the middle of
the pack while our English-to-German systems
seem to be the poorest. However, after the shared
task submission deadline, we discovered an error
in post-processing of the classifier predictions on
the evaluation set for the English-to-German di-
rection. After correcting this error, our system
reaches the 2nd best result for this language di-
rection.

The paper is structured as follows. After intro-
ducing the related work in Section 7, we describe
three preprocessing components of our system that
enrich the input data with additional information
in Section 2. Section 3 then presents features ex-
tracted from the data whereas Section 4 gives more
details about the method used to train the model.
In Section 5, all our system configurations submit-
ted to the shared tasks are evaluated. Finally, we
examine the effect of individual features and ex-
ample weighing in Section 6 before we conclude
in Section 8.

2 Preprocessing components

The preprocessing stage combines three compo-
nents, each of them enriching the input data with
additional information: a target language model,
an automatic linguistic analysis of the source sen-

3https://github.com/ufal/wmt16-pronouns

602



tences, and a basic automatic analysis of the target
sentences.

2.1 Target language model

For language modeling, we employed the KenLM
Language Model Toolkit (Heafield et al., 2013), an
efficient implementation of large language models
with modified Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser and
Ney, 1995).

Lemmatized 5-gram models for English and
German have been supplied as a baseline system
by the organizers of the shared task. An integral
part of the baseline system is a wrapper script4

performing necessary preprocessing before the ac-
tual probability estimation. For instance, it selects
words which may possibly belong to the OTHER
class5 and it enables setting a penalty for pre-
ferring an empty word.6 We only adjusted the
wrapper script so that it fits into our processing
pipeline, making no modifications to the estima-
tion machinery.

2.2 Source language analysis

In the input data supplied by the task organiz-
ers, source text is represented as plain tokenized
sentences. We have processed the source texts
with tools obtaining additional linguistic analy-
sis. However, due to different availability of
these tools for English and German, the depth of
the analysis differs. We describe both analysis
pipelines separately in the following:

English. English source texts have been ana-
lyzed up to the level of deep syntax using the Treex
framework (Popel and Žabokrtský, 2010) incor-
porating several external tools. The processing
pipeline consists of part-of-speech tagging with
the Morče tool (Spoustová et al., 2007) depen-
dency parsing conducted by the MST parser (Mc-
Donald et al., 2005), semantic role labeling (Bo-
jar et al., 2016), and coreference resolution ob-
tained as a combination of Treex coreference mod-
ules and the Bart 2 toolkit (Versley et al., 2008;
Uryupina et al., 2012). Prior to the last step, all in-
stances of the pronoun it are assigned a probability

4https://bitbucket.org/yannick/discomt_
baseline/src

5The OTHER class comprise words, not necessarily pro-
nouns, that appear often enough in the context typical for pro-
nouns to be resolved but not enough to form their own class.
Furthermore, it can be an empty word if the source pronoun
has no target language counterpart.

6In all experiments, we used zero penalty.

of being anaphoric by the NADA tool (Bergsma
and Yarowsky, 2011).

German. We utilized the MATE tools7
(Björkelund et al., 2010) to perform part-
of-speech tagging, morphological analysis
(necessary to obtain grammatical categories
such as gender or number), and transition-based
dependency parsing (Bohnet and Nivre, 2012;
Seeker and Kuhn, 2012).

2.3 Target language analysis

In the data supplied by the task organizers, the for-
mat of the target language sentences differs from
the source language format. Not only are the target
words to be predicted replaced by a placeholder,
but all other tokens are also substituted with cor-
responding lemmas and coarse-grained part-of-
speech tags.

For this reason, we needed to simplify the anal-
ysis of target texts. The parsers used for source
texts do not accept the tagset used by the organiz-
ers. There are two possible solutions to fix this
disagreement: either running a part-of-speech tag-
ger producing tags that agree with the tagset re-
quired by the parser, or obtaining suitable part-
of-speech tags by a transformation of the origi-
nal tagset. However, both options are prone to er-
rors. In the former option, the tags produced in
this way would definitely be of low quality as only
a lemmatized text is available. This would cause
problems especially for German. The latter option
brings another problem. The original tagsets (12
tags in both English and German) are more coarse-
grained than the tagsets required by the parsers (44
and 53 tags in English and German, respectively),
which makes the transformation in this direction
difficult.

Due to these obstacles, we decided to abandon
any additional linguistic processing except for the
identification of noun genders. We consider gen-
der and number information one of the most valu-
able inputs for correct pronoun translation. While
the number information is hard to reconstruct from
a lemmatized text with part-of-speech tags having
no indication of grammatical number, gender can
be reconstructed from a noun lemma itself quite
satisfactorily. In each of the languages, we ap-
proached the task of obtaining gender for a given
noun in a different way.

7https://code.google.com/archive/p/
mate-tools/

603



English. The gender information was obtained
using the data collected by Bergsma and Lin
(2006).8 They used paths in dependency trees to
learn the likelihood of coreference between a pro-
noun and a noun candidate and then applied them
in a bootstrapping fashion on larger data to obtain
a noun gender and number distribution in different
contexts.

For the sake of simplicity, we filtered their list
only to single-word items. If we encounter a token
with a noun tag assigned in the target sentence, its
lemma is looked up in the list and assigned the
most probable gender, if any is found. Otherwise,
the neuter gender is assumed.

German. We run the MATE morphological
analysis separately for every lemma labeled as a
noun. If no gender information is obtained, the
noun is assigned the neuter gender.

3 Feature extraction

Having both the source and the target texts en-
riched with additional linguistic information, we
extract a set of instances that are later fed into into
our classifier. An instance is extracted for every
target-language pronoun (placeholder) to be clas-
sified represented by features that can be divided
into several categories:

Target language model features. Using the
KenLM with the wrapper supplied by the orga-
nizers, we obtain an estimated probability value
for every candidate pronoun. From this, we pro-
duce features describing the actual probability val-
ues for each candidate word, quantized into 9 bins.
Furthermore, features ranking the candidate words
by their probabilities, quantized in three different
ways, are extracted.

Source language features. The data supplied by
the organizers also contain automatic word align-
ment between the source and the target sentences.
Therefore, when extracting features for a given
placeholder in the target language, we are able to
do the same for its counterparts in the source lan-
guage. Deeper linguistic analysis performed for
the source language (see Section 2.2) allows us to
extract richer features than for the target language.

For every source counterpart of a target pronoun
placeholder, we extract its lemma, syntactic de-
pendency function, the lemma of its parent in the

8http://www.clsp.jhu.edu/~sbergsma/Gender/
Data/

dependency tree, and combinations of the previous
features. As the analysis of English goes deeper
than the surface syntax, we include the semantic
function of the source counterpart. If the counter-
part is an instance of the pronoun it, we add the
anaphoricity probability estimated by the NADA
detector, quantized in the same way as the proba-
bilities coming from the KenLM model.

Target language features. The lemma of a par-
ent verb of the target pronoun placeholder might
also be a valuable feature. Even though we have
not performed a syntactic analysis on the target
text (see Section 2.3), we are still able to approx-
imate it in several ways. The easiest option is
to list all verb lemmas that appear in a relatively
small context surrounding the placeholder (1, 3, or
5 words). Another approach is to project the par-
ent dependency relation from the source sentence
via word alignment. We also extract the part-of-
speech tags of the parents collected in this way,
since they might not be verbs due to possible er-
rors.

Antecedent features. The gender of an
anaphoric pronoun is often determined by the
gender of its antecedent. Same as with syntactic
trees, we have no information on coreference in
the target text. Again, we approximate it in two
ways. We project the coreference link via word
alignment and use the gender of the projected
antecedent. Note that this approach can be used
only in the English-to-German direction due to
missing coreference resolution for German. To
extract similar information also for the opposite
direction, we take advantage of the fact that the
task is defined for subject pronouns only. A
tendency of consecutive subjects to refer to the
same entity inspired us to include the gender of
the previous target language subject as a feature.
The indicator whether a word is a subject is again
projected via alignment from the source text.

4 Model

Pronoun prediction as specified by the organizers
is a classification task. We address it by machine
learning, building a linear model using the multi-
class variant of the logistic loss and stochastic gra-
dient descent optimization as implemented in the
Vowpal Wabbit toolkit.9 To train the model, we

9Available at https://github.com/JohnLangford/
vowpal_wabbit/wiki. Vowpal Wabbit has been chosen due

604



Dev Eval
Name Setting MACRO-R ACC MACRO-R ACC

EN-to-DE
baseline — 34.35 42.81 38.53 50.13
CUNI-primary weighted, passes: 5, L1: 3× 10−7 45.63 57.72 *54.37 *64.23
CUNI-contrastive unweighted, passes: 1, L1: 5× 10−6 42.54 63.51 *51.74 *71.80

DE-to-EN
baseline — 36.08 50.47 42.15 53.42
CUNI-primary weighted, passes: 1, L1: 0 56.47 68.35 60.42 64.18
CUNI-contrastive unweighted, passes: 5, L1: 0 51.62 70.59 56.83 65.22

Table 1: Our Systems submitted to the shared task and their performance compared to the baseline
system. The official measure of performance is macro-averaged recall (MACRO-R), while accuracy
(ACC) serves as a contrastive measure. Scores labeled by the * symbol differ from the official results of
the shared task (Guillou et al., 2016) as an error has been discovered after the task submission deadline.

run the learner over the training data with features
described in Section 3, possibly in multiple passes
and with various rates of L1 or L2 regularization.

Optimization with respect to the logistic loss
function is a widely used approximation of the
the accuracy measure. However, the official scor-
ing metric set by the task organizers is the macro-
averaged recall. Macro-averaging causes that im-
provements in recall for less frequent target pro-
nouns have a stronger effect than improvements
for more frequent pronouns. We address this is-
sue by weighing the training data instances based
on the target class. We weigh the classes in an in-
verse proportion to how frequently they appear in
the training data. The less frequent a pronoun is,
the heavier penalty is incurred if it is misclassified.

5 Submitted systems

We submitted four systems to the shared task – two
systems to each of the two sub-tasks: English-to-
German and German-to-English prediction. The
systems trained on the weighted examples are con-
sidered as primary while the unweighted systems
were submitted as contrastive.

Training examples have been extracted from all
the data supplied for training by the organizers.10

The same holds for the data designated for devel-
opment and evaluation testing.

The best combination of learning parameters
has been selected by a grid search with various

to its fastest throughput among all machine learning tools
known to us as well as due to the remarkable variety of op-
tions for learning, e.g. example weighing used in our exper-
iments. However, there are still options that are worth to be
examined in future experiments, for instance using other loss
functions, e.g. a hinge loss which is equivalent to the SVM
algorithm.

10http://data.statmt.org/wmt16/pronoun-task/

parameter settings on the development data. Ta-
ble 1 specifies the learning parameters used for all
systems submitted. It also shows macro-averaged
recall and accuracy measured on both the devel-
opment and the evaluation set Moreover, it and
compares the performance with the baseline sys-
tem based on the KenLM target language model
as supplied by the organizers (see Section 2.1).

Note that the scores of our English-to-German
systems achieved on the evaluation set are much
better than the scores presented in the official
results of the shared task Guillou et al. (2016).
An error that concerned merging of the classi-
fier output into the test data file for submission,
which was, however, discovered after the dead-
line for task submissions. According to the offi-
cial results, our German-to-English primary sys-
tem is ranked fourth among six participating pri-
mary systems. Our English-to-German primary
system, ranked last among nine systems in the of-
ficial results, would place as second if we took the
correct scores.

6 Feature ablation and weighing analysis

In order to assess the effect of individual feature
types, we carried out an additional experiment.
For both translation directions we trained models
on various subsets of the complete feature set. All
the models have been trained in both weighted and
unweighted scenarios.

The experiments were conducted with the fol-
lowing feature sets:

• all: the complete feature set as described in
Section 3

• -src: the complete feature set, excluding
source language features

605



Figure 1: The impact of feature ablation on per-class recall (see Section 6 for details), macro-averaged
recall (MACRO-R), and accuracy (ACC) in the four systems submitted to the shared task.

• -kenlm: the complete feature set, excluding
KenLM features

• -trg ante: the complete feature set, exclud-
ing features approximating the gender of the
antecedent of the target pronoun

• -trg par: the complete feature set, exclud-
ing features approximating the parent of the
target pronoun

Figure 1 shows the performance of weighted
and unweighted models for both translation direc-
tions if trained in all of the feature settings listed
above. The performance is measured by recall on
each of the target classes (solid color lines, whose
widths illustrate the frequency of the class in the
training data), as well as by micro-averaged recall,
which equals to overall accuracy for this task (dot-
ted line), and macro-averaged recall, which is the
official measure in the shared task (dashed line).

The graphs show that the impact of individual
feature categories on the macro-averaged recall is
generally higher in the German-English direction

and for weighted models. For instance, leaving
out the most valuable category of source language
features decreases the performance level by just
1 percentage point for the English-German un-
weighted model while degrading the performance
of the German-English model by 15 percentage
points. The graphs also show that the KenLM fea-
tures have the strongest effect on the final recall
values for the individual pronoun classes. A posi-
tive effect of English coreference resolution to de-
termining the correct gender of a German pronoun
can be also observed. Adding antecedent features
to English-to-German weighted system causes a
small recall increase of the pronoun sie with al-
most no degradation to other classes.

The impact of instance weighing turns out to
be more interesting. Focusing on scores for indi-
vidual classes, one can observe that the pronouns
that benefit from weighing the most are the less
frequent ones, i.e., man and er in German, there,
he, and she in English. On the other hand, the ef-
fect of weighing reduces performance in frequent

606



classes, such as OTHER, German sie, and En-
glish you. The only exception is the German pro-
noun es, whose recall rises for weighted models
even though it is one of the most frequent pronoun
classes. Overall, instance weighting fulfills our ex-
pectations: although it causes a decrease in recall
for frequent pronoun classes, it improves the offi-
cial macro-averaged recall score.

7 Related work

A similar problem was addressed in the Dis-
coMT 2015 shared task on pronoun translation
(Hardmeier et al., 2015) as a cross-lingual pro-
noun prediction subtask. It differed from the cur-
rent task in one main aspect: the manually trans-
lated target text was available in its surface form as
an input, i.e., it was neither machine-translated nor
lemmatized and part-of-speech-tagged at least as it
is in the WMT16 shared task. This aspect, far from
a real-world machine translation scenario, proba-
bly caused that none of the participants was able
to beat the baseline, the target language model.

Out of the DiscoMT 2015 shared task submis-
sions, the system by Wetzel et al. (2015) is most
similar to ours. On the source side (English in their
case), they extract morphological information as
well as coreference relations (they use Stanford
CoreNLP (Lee et al., 2013) whereas we apply
Bart 2 toolkit (Uryupina et al., 2012) for this task),
and they detect the anaphoricity of the it pronoun
using the NADA tool (Bergsma and Yarowsky,
2011). Another common feature is that both sys-
tems take advantage of the target language model.
Wetzel et al. (2015)’s maximum entropy classifier
Mallet (McCallum, 2002) uses the same logistic
loss function as we do with the Vowpal Wabbit
tool but the training data handling is different in
these two tools. Mallet is a batch learner, opti-
mizing over the whole data in a single step while
Vowpal Wabbit optimizes incrementally after ev-
ery example.

On the other hand, unlike us, Wetzel et al.
(2015) do not use any syntactic information. The
only syntax-based system in the DiscoMT 2015
shared task is the system of Loáiciga (2015). They
make use of the Fips rule-based phrase-structure
parser (Wehrli, 2007) whereas we acquire depen-
dencies and syntactic functions using the MST
parser (McDonald et al., 2005) and the MATE
tools (Seeker and Kuhn, 2012) on the source side
for English and German, respectively.

8 Conclusion

We presented our system submitted to the WMT16
shared task on cross-lingual pronoun prediction.
It is based on Vowpal Wabbit and uses features
from three sources: first, target language model
(which served as the baseline in the shared task),
second, the automatic linguistic analysis of the
source text up to the levels of syntax and corefer-
ence, and third, a basic morphological analysis of
the target text. Our systems were able to improve
on the baseline in both language directions, with
source language and target language model fea-
tures having the largest impact on the results. Fi-
nally, we employ instance weighing, which proved
to be a successful way to compensate for the dif-
ferences between learning loss function and the of-
ficial evaluation measure and to improve recall in
infrequent pronoun classes.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by GAUK grant
338915 of the Charles University, Czech Sci-
ence Foundation grant GA-16-05394S, the 7th
Framework Programme of the EU grant QTLeap
(No. 610516), and SVV project number 260 333.
This work has been using language resources de-
veloped and/or stored and/or distributed by the
LINDAT/CLARIN project No. LM2015071 of the
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the
Czech Republic.

References
Shane Bergsma and Dekang Lin. 2006. Bootstrapping

Path-Based Pronoun Resolution. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 33–40,
Sydney, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Shane Bergsma and David Yarowsky. 2011. NADA: A
Robust System for Non-referential Pronoun Detec-
tion. In Proceedings of the 8th International Con-
ference on Anaphora Processing and Applications,
pages 12–23, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Anders Björkelund, Bernd Bohnet, Love Hafdell, and
Pierre Nugues. 2010. A High-performance Syntac-
tic and Semantic Dependency Parser. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics: Demonstrations, pages 33–
36, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

607



Bernd Bohnet and Joakim Nivre. 2012. A Transition-
based System for Joint Part-of-speech Tagging and
Labeled Non-projective Dependency Parsing. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1455–1465, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ondřej Bojar, Ondřej Dušek, Tom Kocmi, Jindřich Li-
bovický, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, Roman Su-
darikov, and Dušan Variš. 2016. CzEng 1.6: En-
larged Czech-English Parallel Corpus with Process-
ing Tools Dockered. In Text, Speech and Dialogue:
19th International Conference, TSD 2016, Brno,
Czech Republic, September 12-16, 2016, Proceed-
ings. Springer Verlag. In press.

Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Preslav Nakov,
Sara Stymne, Jörg Tiedemann, Yannick Vers-
ley, Mauro Cettolo, Bonnie Webber, and Andrei
Popescu-Belis. 2016. Findings of the 2016 WMT
shared task on cross-lingual pronoun prediction. In
Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine
Translation (WMT16), Berlin, Germany. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Christian Hardmeier, Preslav Nakov, Sara Stymne, Jörg
Tiedemann, Yannick Versley, and Mauro Cettolo.
2015. Pronoun-Focused MT and Cross-Lingual Pro-
noun Prediction: Findings of the 2015 DiscoMT
Shared Task on Pronoun Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Workshop on Discourse in Ma-
chine Translation, pages 1–16, Lisbon, Portugal. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Christian Hardmeier. 2014. Discourse in Statistical
Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Uppsala Univer-
sity, Sweden.

Kenneth Heafield, Ivan Pouzyrevsky, Jonathan H.
Clark, and Philipp Koehn. 2013. Scalable Modified
Kneser-Ney Language Model Estimation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 690–696,
Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for M-gram language modeling. In In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing, volume 1, pages 181–184, Los
Alamitos, CA, USA. IEEE Computer Society Press.

Heeyoung Lee, Angel Chang, Yves Peirsman,
Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2013. Deterministic Coreference Resolution
Based on Entity-centric, Precision-ranked Rules.
Computational Linguistics, 39(4):885–916.

Sharid Loáiciga. 2015. Predicting Pronoun Transla-
tion Using Syntactic, Morphological and Contextual
Features from Parallel Data. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Discourse in Machine Trans-
lation, pages 78–85, Lisbon, Portugal, September.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mal-
let: A machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective Dependency Pars-
ing Using Spanning Tree Algorithms. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Human Language Tech-
nology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 523–530, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. Tec-
toMT: Modular NLP Framework. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Advances
in Natural Language Processing, pages 293–304,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Wolfgang Seeker and Jonas Kuhn. 2012. Making El-
lipses Explicit in Dependency Conversion for a Ger-
man Treebank. In Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, Istanbul, Turkey. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Drahomı́ra Spoustová, Jan Hajič, Jan Votrubec, Pavel
Krbec, and Pavel Květoň. 2007. The Best of Two
Worlds: Cooperation of Statistical and Rule-based
Taggers for Czech. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Process-
ing: Information Extraction and Enabling Technolo-
gies, pages 67–74, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Olga Uryupina, Alessandro Moschitti, and Mas-
simo Poesio. 2012. BART Goes Multilingual:
The UniTN/Essex Submission to the CoNLL-2012
Shared Task. In Joint Conference on EMNLP and
CoNLL - Shared Task, pages 122–128, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Yannick Versley, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, Massimo
Poesio, Vladimir Eidelman, Alan Jern, Jason Smith,
Xiaofeng Yang, and Alessandro Moschitti. 2008.
BART: A Modular Toolkit for Coreference Reso-
lution. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
on Human Language Technologies: Demo Session,
pages 9–12, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Eric Wehrli. 2007. Fips, a “Deep” Linguistic Mul-
tilingual Parser. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Deep Linguistic Processing, pages 120–127,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dominikus Wetzel, Adam Lopez, and Bonnie Webber.
2015. A Maximum Entropy Classifier for Cross-
Lingual Pronoun Prediction. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Discourse in Machine Transla-
tion, pages 115–121, Lisbon, Portugal. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

608


