








































Validating Bundled Gap Filling – Empirical Evidence for Ambiguity
Reduction and Language Proficiency Testing Capabilities

Niklas Meyer
Language Technology Lab

University of Duisburg Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Michael Wojatzki
Language Technology Lab

University of Duisburg Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Torsten Zesch
Language Technology Lab

University of Duisburg Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Abstract

Bundled gap filling exercises (Wojatzki et al.,
2016) were recently introduced as a promising
new exercise type to complement or even re-
place single gap-fill tasks. However, it is not
yet confirmed that the applied creation method
works properly and it is still to be investigated
if bundled gap-fill tests are a suitable method
for assessing language proficiency. In this pa-
per, we address both issues by varying the con-
struction methods and by conducting a user
study with 75 participants in which we also
measure externally validated language profi-
ciency. We find that the originally proposed
way to construct bundles is indeed minimiz-
ing their ambiguity, but that further investiga-
tion is needed to determine which aspects of
language proficiency they are actually measur-
ing.

1 Introduction

Gap filling tasks, also known as cloze tests (Taylor,
1953), are a frequently used for language learning
and proficiency testing. The test taker is asked to re-
store a word that has been omitted from a text or
sentence. However, people involved in designing
and scoring gap-fill tests are frequently confronted
with two major problems: ambiguity and lack of
automatability. Ambiguity means that in traditional
gap-fill tests frequently more than one word can be
used for a gap (Chavez-Oller et al., 1985). For exam-
ple, the gap in The kids have to their own lunch
could be filled with make, bring, prepare, or eat.
However, this fact is often not taken into considera-
tion when it comes to scoring and only one solution
is scored as correct. This can lead to high error rates,
even with native speakers (Klein-Braley and Raatz,
1982).

Alternatively, there are approaches which allow a
set of acceptable solutions, which can improve the
validity of gap-fill tests in terms of higher corre-
lations to other tests that measure language profi-
ciency (Brown, 1980). However, this comes at the
cost of a higher manual workload and higher sub-
jectivity. An extension of this idea is to weigh the
words according to their occurrence in the solutions
of participants (Darnell, 1968). However, it could
be shown that this scoring procedure has a negative
impact on the validity (Brown, 1980).

A way to address these problems is the use of
multiple answers, usually the correct solution along
with three distractors. The distractors can, however,
heavily influence the difficulty of the task. Addition-
ally, using distractors changes the nature of the task
from producing a solution to recognizing a solution
(Wesche and Paribakht, 1994).

Wojatzki et al. (2016) have recently introduced
bundled gap filling as an alternative form of gap-
filling exercises with a set of gaps in several differ-
ent sentences, all hiding the same single word. In
such an exercise, the learner is confronted with all
of the gaps in a bundle at the same time and asked
to find the single word to restore all of them cor-
rectly. Figure 1 shows examples for all three types
of exercises. Wojatzki et al. (2016) showed that the
generated bundles decrease ambiguity, but it is still
unclear whether the ambiguity reduction was due to
their selection procedure or whether any selection
of bundled sentences would achieve the same result.
Another issue is that in the user study by Wojatzki et
al. (2016) all participants had a very high language
proficiency level which leaves the question how well
bundles work for less proficient learners.

To further investigate these issues, we conducted
a user study aimed at comparing the effectiveness



Figure 1: Comparison of exercise types.

of different strategies for computing bundles. In ad-
dition, we investigated the relationship between the
proficiency level of the test takers and ability to cor-
rectly solve bundled gaps. We find that the bundle
creation algorithm used by Wojatzki et al. (2016)
is disambiguating bundles with a much higher ac-
curacy compared to selecting sentences by chance,
while under both conditions the difference to maxi-
mally ambiguous bundles is quite high. We also find
that the ability to solve bundled gap-fill tasks is in-
deed substantially correlated (r = .48) with the lan-
guage proficiency of the test takers as measured by
cTest scores (Klein-Braley and Raatz, 1982). How-
ever, the far from perfect correlation implies that fur-
ther investigation is needed in order to clarify which
aspects of language proficiency is measured by bun-
dled gap-fill tests.

2 Bundled Gap-Fill Exercises

In this section, we describe the principle behind bun-
dled gap-fill exercises in order to locate the part of
the algorithm that we wish to further validate.

The construction starts with selecting a target
word with the surrounding context, i.e. usually a
sentence. Depending on the type of exercise or test
to be generated the sentence can be taken from a
reading assignment, can be provided by a teacher,
or can also be a random sentence containing the tar-
get word. The algorithm then iteratively adds more
sentences to the bundle that contain the same target
word. In each iteration the one sentence is selected
that maximizes the probability of the target as gap
filler for the whole bundle. For the purpose of vali-
dating this selection, we propose to select sentences
at random and sentences that minimize the probabil-
ity as competing strategies. We closely replicate the
setup by Wojatzki et al. (2016) in our study in order
to maximize comparability with their results.

Probability of Gap Fillers We compute the prob-
ability of a word fitting the gap using an n-gram
language model trained over the two billion word
ukWaC English Web Corpus (Baroni et al., 2009).
We utilize FASTSUBS (Yuret, 2012) with addi-
tive smoothing (Chen and Goodman, 1999) for ef-
ficiently computing the probabilities.

Sentence Base & Target Words We use the GUM
corpus (Zeldes, 2016) to select bundle sentences,
and we also rely on the same target words as in the
original study: four adjectives (new, best, full, final),
four nouns (people, language, information, room),
and four verbs (make, want, add, give).

Bundle Construction In order to define a target
function for unambiguous bundles, Wojatzki et al.
(2016) defined the disambiguation level D(b) of a
gap bundle b as the log of the ratio between the prob-
ability of the target word t and the probability of the
most likely word w other than t:

D(b) = log
P (F (b) = t)

max
w∈V \{t}

P (F (b) = w)

The greater this ratio, the more probable is the tar-
get word compared to any other word, and the gap
bundle can thus be considered less ambiguous. This
mechanism is exemplified in Figure 2.

Given this setup, a bundle for a certain sentence
containing the target word is constructed by finding
another sentence that contains the target word and
which maximizes D(b) for the whole bundle:

gi+1 = argmax
g∈Gt\bi

(D(bi ∪ g)), (1)

where G is the sentence base and Gt is the set of
gaps in G hiding the target word t.

We call this original strategy MAXIMIZE as it
maximizes the disambiguation metric D(b). Only



Figure 2: Two cloze tests for the target word eat are combined into a bundled cloze test. The diagram illustrates log probability of
the possible solutions and how the disambiguation measure D(b) is improved when calculated over the joint distribution.

testing this strategy might hide the fact that ran-
domly selecting sentences with the target word are
also likely to increase the disambiguation level.
Therefore, we introduce a RANDOM configuration,
in which we randomly select sentences. To get better
insights into the range of values that the disambigua-
tion level can fall into, we introduce another config-
uration called MINIMIZE where we change argmax
to argmin in equation 1.

3 Experimental Setup

Given this setup, we can formulate the following re-
search hypotheses:

1. RANDOM Using randomly created bundles re-
sults in more ambiguous bundles compared
with the original MAXIMIZE setup.

2. MINIMIZE Using bundles that minimize D(b)
will lead to even more ambiguous bundles.

Additionally, we are interested in the influence of
the language proficiency level of test takers on the
success rate in the bundles. We assume that there
will be an effect that shows that higher scores are
obtained by people with greater proficiency in the
English language. We hope to show that the scores
in bundled gap-fill tests correlate highly with scores
in other language tests, such as the cTest. We can
thus formulate a third hypothesis:

3. PROFICIENCY There is a high correlation be-
tween a test taker’s language proficiency and
the score obtained when solving gap bundles.

3.1 User Study

To test our hypotheses, we conducted a user study.
The study was taken by 118 people of which 75
fully completed the study (52 female, 1 not spec-
ified/other gender). As we have three conditions
(MAXIMIZE, MINIMIZE, RANDOM, there are 25
participants per condition. The average age of the
participants was 22.8 (SD = 6.9, ranging from 19
to 67 years). Most of the participants were uni-
versity students currently enrolled at University of
Duisburg-Essen. Additionally, the language pro-
ficiency of the participants was measured using a
cTest that had to be solved after the bundles. For
that purpose, we used a cTest constructed by the lan-
guage teaching department of our university.

Participants were shown bundles with an increas-
ing number of sentences. They first saw one sen-
tence with the target word to be restored, then a sec-
ond, then a third, then a fourth. After each sentence,
they were asked to type in the word that (best) suits
the gap(s).

Since the GUM corpus is a comparatively small
corpus, there are few sentences containing rare
words and thus few possible combinations of these
sentences. Hence, from the 12 target words used



by Wojatzki et al. (2016), we excluded room and
give, as the bundles in all three experimental con-
ditions were almost identical. Note that in future
experiments, this problem could be solved by using
a larger corpus from which the bundle sentences are
selected.

4 Results & Discussion

In the following, we report and discuss the results of
our study.

4.1 Bundle Construction

We first compare the different conditions for creat-
ing bundles that are tested in our study: MAXIMIZE,
RANDOM, and MINIMIZE. For each condition, we
measure the success rate after showing 1, 2, 3, or 4
bundle sentences. A detailed overview of the results
per bundle is given in Figure 3, while Figure 4 shows
the aggregated results.

As the first sentence is the same under all three
conditions, we expect the success rate to be almost
the same. The achieved results are close enough to
argue that the three subgroups of participants are
comparable. For larger bundle sizes, we observe
that MAXIMIZE works best, MINIMIZE establishes
a lower-bound, and RANDOM is somewhere in be-
tween. This shows that the utilized disambiguation
measure is able to lower or increase the ambiguity
of a bundle (although we usually only want to lower
it). How well the RANDOM strategy is going to work
largely depends on the properties of the underlying
sentence base. If it contains a lot of similar contexts,
the success rate might be much closer to the MINI-
MIZE condition.

Because MAXIMIZE is the same strategy for con-
structing bundles as was used by Wojatzki et al.
(2016), we can compare our results with theirs.
However, in their study, all participants had a very
high proficiency level while this study was open to
participants with different English levels. This ex-
plains why our success rates are in general a bit
lower, but with the same trend of rising success rates
from 1 to 4 sentences in the bundle. In our study the
average success rate increases from .10 after only
seeing the first sentence to .52 after the fourth. This
is a close replication of the numbers from the origi-
nal study where the increase was from .27 to .78.

Statistical Significance In order to test whether
these differences are real differences and not statis-
tical noise, we statistically test our hypotheses. We
look at the overall success rates per participant af-
ter seeing all four sentences, and conduct a one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA), which indeed con-
firms both, the MAXIMIZE and the RANDOM hy-
pothesis (F (2, 72) = 8.93, p < .001). The dif-
ferences after seeing only one sentence are not sta-
tistically significant (p = .251). In order to deter-
mine which conditions have significantly different
arithmetic means, the two a-posteriori tests Scheffé
(1953) and Tukey-HSD (Tukey, 1949) were used.1

Both tests were significant for both combinations
(MAXIMIZE, MINIMIZE: Tukey-HSD and Scheffé
p < .001) and (MAXIMIZE, RANDOM: Tukey-HSD
p = .027, Scheffé p = .036), which further confirms
both research hypotheses.

4.2 Language Proficiency
As we have measured the language proficiency of
participants using a cTest, we can correlate the cTest
score with the bundle score (of the MAXMIZE con-
dition) to examine whether bundled gap-fill exer-
cises actually measure language proficiency. Fig-
ure 5 shows the corresponding scatterplot. The re-
sulting Pearson correlation is r = .48. This shows
that bundled gap-fill exercises can be used to mea-
sure language proficiency, but that both tests seem
to measure slightly different constructs. Further re-
search is needed to find out which aspects of lan-
guage proficiency are actually measured by bundled
gap filling exercises, and how bundles relate to other
established testing methods.

5 Future Work

Since bundled gap filling is a very recent paradigm,
there are various possibilities to deepen the under-
standing and the validation of the approach. In gen-
eral, we see three major strands of future research:
(i) an refinement of the approach itself, (ii) deter-
mining more influencing factors, and (iii) broaden-
ing the empirical evidence.

1An ANOVA can only implicate that there are generally dif-
ferences, but is unable to determine which versions show sig-
nificant differences. Scheffé and Tukey-HSD are the most fre-
quently used post-hoc tests with Scheffé being considered very
conservative in contrast to Tukey-HSD.



ne
w

pe
op

le

m
ak

e

la
ng

ua
ge

be
st

w
an

t

fu
ll

in
fo

rm
at

io
n

ad
d

fin
al

av
er

ag
e

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

M
A

X
IM

IZ
E

Su
cc

es
s

R
at

e

ne
w

pe
op

le

m
ak

e

la
ng

ua
ge

be
st

w
an

t

fu
ll

in
fo

rm
at

io
n

ad
d

fin
al

av
er

ag
e

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

R
A

N
D

O
M

Su
cc

es
s

R
at

e

ne
w

pe
op

le
ma

ke

lan
gu

ag
e

be
st

wa
ntful

l

inf
orm

ati
on ad

d
fin

al

av
era

ge
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

M
IN

IM
IZ

E
Su

cc
es

s
R

at
e

Single Gap Bundle2 Bundle3 Bundle4

Figure 3: Success rate per item



1 2 3 4
0

20

40

60

Number of sentences in gap

Su
cc

es
s

ra
te

%

MAXIMIZE
RANDOM
MINIMIZE

Figure 4: Comparison of strategies for creating bundles

2 4 6 8 10
0

10

20

30

40

Bundle Score

cT
es

tS
co

re

Figure 5: Influence of language proficiency on bundle scores

Refinement The approach for creating bundles
could be improved along different lines. First, a dif-
ferent, larger corpus should be used which we ex-
pect to lead to even better bundles. Recall, that in
the present study, we had to omit two target words
which could have been avoided by using a larger
corpus. Second, the probabilities of gap fillers have
been estimated with a count-based language model.
By nature, the used 5-gram model cannot incorpo-
rate a context bigger than four words around the
gap. However, longer dependencies may indeed
play a role when solving gap-fill tests (Bachman,
1982; Chihara et al., 1977). Consequently, future
research should clarify whether more advanced lan-
guage models which are capable of modeling long
range dependencies result in even better bundles.

Influencing Factors A number of properties were
found to influence the difficulty of gap-fill tests.
As bundled gap filling is based on regular gap-fill
tests, in future work it should be clarified whether
the identified factors also affect the bundled version.
The following properties have been shown to have
an effect on the difficulty of gaps: Brown (1989)
shows that the position of the gap in the sentence
and the readability of the passage have an influence
on the difficulty of the exercise. Characteristics of
the omitted word that affect the difficulty are the
length of the word (Abraham and Chapelle, 1992),
whether the word is a function word or a content
word (Kobayashi, 2002), the frequency of the word
in the language (Kobayashi, 2002), and the word ori-
gin (Brown, 1989). Consequently, in future work,
the set of target words should be systematically var-
ied with respect to the mentioned factors.

Broadening Empirical Evidence In order to
strengthen the empirical evidence, future work
should aim at creating larger data sets which are
closer to existing language learning or testing sce-
narios. For example, it should be investigated how
bundles relate to other state-of-the-art language pro-
ficiency tests. For this purpose, bundles need to be
introduced to a broader audience and to be integrated
into official testing methods. This can help to gener-
ate an extensive amount of new data that can further
verify bundled gap-filling and show their usefulness
in real life scenarios compared to other testing meth-
ods. Furthermore, it would be interesting to see how



well results could be reproduced for languages other
than English.

The presented results may be biased by the small
sample size of this study. Therefore, to further in-
vestigate bundled gap-filling and its differences to
the cTest, it seems necessary to increase the number
of test takers.

Last but not least, bundles are also a promising
tool for language learning. However, before bring-
ing bundled gap-filling to the classroom, the under-
lying implementation needs to be taken from proto-
type to production status. We are currently working
on an improved version that we plan to make pub-
licly available.

6 Conclusion

In this work, we have presented an empirical evalu-
ation of bundled gap filling (Wojatzki et al., 2016).
We confirm that the paradigm is capable of signif-
icantly reducing ambiguity in gap-fill exercises – a
major problem of this popular exercise type. More-
over, we provide evidence that the originally pro-
posed algorithm for creating bundles is well func-
tioning. As bundled gap-fill scores only moderately
correlate with the language proficiency of the par-
ticipants as measured by a cTest, further research is
required to determine the properties of bundles.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant No.
GRK 2167, Research Training Group “User-Centred
Social Media”. We thank the reviewers for their
valuable and encouraging feedback.

References
Roberta G. Abraham and Carol A. Chapelle. 1992. The

meaning of cloze test scores: An item difficulty per-
spective. The Modern Language Journal, 76(4):468–
479.

Lyle F Bachman. 1982. The trait structure of cloze test
scores. Tesol Quarterly, pages 61–70.

Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi, and
Eros Zanchetta. 2009. The {WaCky} wide web: a
collection of very large linguistically processed web-
crawled corpora. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 43(3):209–226.

James Dean Brown. 1980. Relative merits of four meth-
ods for scoring cloze tests. The Modern Language
Journal, 64(3):311–317.

James D. Brown. 1989. Cloze Item Difficulty. JALT
Journal, 11(1):46–67.

Mary Anne Chavez-Oller, Tetsuro Chihara, Kelley A.
Weaver, and John W. Oller. 1985. When are cloze
items sensitive to constraints across sentences? Lan-
guage Learning, 35(2):181–206.

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An Em-
pirical Study of Smoothing Techniques for Language
Modeling. Computer Speech & Language, 13(4):359–
393.

Tetsuro Chihara, John Oller, Kelley Weaver, and
Mary Anne Chavez-Oller. 1977. Are cloze items
sensitive to constraints across sentences? Language
learning, 27(1):63–70.

Donald K Darnell. 1968. The development of an english
language proficiency test of foreign students, using a
clozentropy procedure. final report.

Christine Klein-Braley and Ulrich Raatz. 1982. Der
C-Test: ein neuer Ansatz zur Messung allgemeiner
Sprachbeherrschung. AKS-Rundbrief, 4:23–37.

Miyoko Kobayashi. 2002. Cloze tests revisited: Ex-
ploring item characteristics with special attention to
scoring methods. The Modern Language Journal,
86(4):571–586.

Henry Scheffé. 1953. A method for judging all contrasts
in the analysis of variance. Biometrika, 40(1-2):87–
110.

Wilson L. Taylor. 1953. ”Cloze Procedure”: A New
Tool For Measuring Readability. Journalism Quar-
terly, 30(4):415–433.

John W Tukey. 1949. Comparing individual means in
the analysis of variance. Biometrics, pages 99–114.

Marjorie Wesche and Sima T. Paribakht. 1994. Enhanc-
ing Vocabulary Acquisition through Reading: A Hier-
archy of Text-Related Exercise Types. Paper presented
at the AAAL ’94 Conference.

Michael Wojatzki, Oren Melamud, and Torsten Zesch.
2016. Bundled gap filling: A new paradigm for un-
ambiguous cloze exercises. In Proceedings of the 11th
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Edu-
cational Applications, pages 172–181, San Diego, CA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Deniz Yuret. 2012. FASTSUBS: An efficient and exact
procedure for finding the most likely lexical substitutes
based on an n-gram language model. Signal Process-
ing Letters, IEEE, 19(11):725–728.

Amir Zeldes. 2016. The GUM Corpus: Creating Mul-
tilayer Resources in the Classroom. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, pages 1–32.



Appendix

These are the bundles that were used in the study for the MAXIMIZE condition. All conditions had the same
first sentences. Participants were first confronted with only the first sentence, then the second, third and
finally the fourth. In total, there were ten bundles.

add

1. Try not to make your words sound like utter and complete gibberish just a little extra than our
regular English language.

2. Put the cider vinegar into a small bowl and the soy milk .

3. the wet ingredients to the dry ingredients and beat together (by hand or with an electric hand-held
mixer).

4. Here ’s a great vegan cupcake recipe to use as a base for whatever flavored icing you want to to it.

best

1. They followed practices for anatomical preservation.

2. Just east of Broadway and continuing north and south is Oakland’s famous Chinatown, and that to get the real
essence of ”Chinatown,” Oakland rather than San Francisco is your bet.

3. To this day, about 10 or 12 of these World War II Japanese shipwrecks comprise what is considered one of the
dive sites in the world.

4. Here ’s a great vegan cupcake recipe to use as a base for whatever flavored icing you want to to it.

final

1. Not all were pleased with the choice of locations.

2. A thought.

3. The stampede at Islam’s most holy site happened at Jamarat Bridge, during an event where pebbles are thrown
at a pillar to represent the stoning of Satan as part of the rites of the Hajj.

4. Many people choose to leave out the green, which is lime if you’re using original Skittles, and purple, which
is grape in the original style, as they can create a weird taste combination or a less than appealing color for the

product.

information

1. First, people around the world are desperate for high quality how-to .

2. The city maintains several tourist offices, all of which can offer helpful on accommodation, free
maps, and bus connections.

3. I don’t have enough to answer this question, one way or the other.

4. The Visitors’ Center provides on the role of Fort Lee in the War.

language

1. Make sure that it is a that while speaking, you don’t get a literal knot in your tongue!

2. As they design their web pages for the newer browsers with advanced web technology and geared to the newest
web core markup HTML 5, they are forced to accommodate older out-of-date technology to
support IE6 users.

3. Be fluent in your own made up and start spreading this to your friends, family and strangers!

4. Write your own poem/novel/story with your own made up .



make

1. However, paying people to write and edit articles ultimately means that you have to one of two
sacrifices.

2. In the 1960s and 1970s, many 19th century neoclassical buildings, often small and private, were demolished to
way for office buildings, often designed by great Greek architects.

3. The single most costly thing we spend on is rent and advertising, those two together up the bulk
of what we spend.

4. You should sure that your clothing covers at least your shoulders and your knees and some places
may require that you wear ankle-length pants or skirts and long sleeved tops.

new

1. We took quite a few girls over there back then in 2005, leading into the World Cup in the Nether-
lands.

2. Athens today is ever evolving, forging a brand identity for the 21st century.

3. The Museum of Flight in Seattle, Washington was also proposed as another location for a shuttle, going so far as
to build a building to house an orbiter.

4. In March, a bundle of blueprints for a headquarters for the military’s counterterrorism unit were
found stuffed in the trash on a downtown street.

people

1. It emphasizes consumerism, the belief that success always goes to who merit it due to their abili-
ties, dedication and qualifications, and reinforces, rather than changes, existing ideas related to gender, ethnicity
and nationality.

2. On the other hand, this isn’t to say that you should necessarily make jokes at other ’s expense, as
this can make you seem mean and petty.

3. Telling good jokes is an art that comes naturally to some , but for others it takes practice and hard
work.

4. Moreover, electing a third-party governor represents a repudiation of politics as usual, and the major party legis-
lators will face changed constraints and incentives, meaning that much more is possible than many
assume, especially with strong leadership.

want

1. Why did she so badly to attend?

2. For instance, you might say something like: ”If you like those guys, you might to check out this
band called Manic Albatross - they’re like the Beatles, only darker.

3. How do you approach the difficult challenge of talking to the Palestinians when, in the end, they dont
Israel to exist.

4. ”We to thank all of the locations that expressed an interest in one of these national treasures,” said
Bolden to the gathered crowd which contained many KSC employees.

full

1. However, the fuselage trainer, that every astronaut including [former Museum of Flight CEO]
Bonnie Dunbar has been trained on, will soon call the Museum of Flight home.

2. Another thing non-locals don’t often realize is that Cleveland’s long history of industrial wealth has left it chock
of cultural riches as well as the beginnings of a ”sustainable city” movement.

3. If you buy too many boxes you can return the unused for a refund.

4. York is of magic and a wonderful place to bring children!


