










































Baltic Journal of Modern Computing, 2013, Vol.1, No.1


Baltic J. Modern Computing, Vol. 4 (2016), No. 2, 346-353 

A Comparative Study of Post-editing Guidelines 

Ke HU, Patrick CADWELL 

ADAPT Centre, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin, Ireland 

Ke.hu2@mail.dcu.ie, Patrick.cadwell2@mail.dcu.ie 

Abstract: With the popular use of machine translation technology in the translation industry, post-

editing has been widely adopted with the aim of improving target text quality. Every post-editing 

project needs to have specific guidelines for translators to comply with, since the guidelines may 

help clients and LSPs to set clear expectations, and save time and effort for translators. Different 

organizations make their own rules according to their needs. In this paper, we focus on comparing 

five sources of post-editing guidelines, and point out their overlaps and differences. 

Keywords: translation, light post-editing, full post-editing, post-editing guidelines   

1. Introduction 

Post-editing has been increasingly researched and implemented by Language Service 

Providers (LSPs) in recent years as a result of the productivity gains it can bring to 

translators (Guerberof, 2009; Federico et al., 2012; WEB, a). However, it has been noted 

that there are no widely accepted general or standard post-editing (PE) guidelines 

(DePalma, 2013; TAUS, 2016). Since needs vary, it seems that guidelines will never be 

general or standard. Therefore, this paper is not going to set a general standard to post-

editing guidelines (hereafter abbreviated as PE guidelines), but select, review and 

compare different PE guidelines which are representative (one set of guidelines 

produced by a resource centre for the translation industry, one by a LSP, and three by 

scholars). The research mainly focuses on the comparison of five proposals (O’Brien, 

2010; Mesa-Lao, 2013; Flanagan and Christensen, 2014; Densmer, 2014; TAUS, 2016).  

Since most organizations prefer to keep their PE guidelines for internal use only, we 

just have access to the ones that have been published, which are not many. Among them, 

we select the five proposals above as our focus because they have been published 

recently, are relatively complete and are proposed in terms of two categories: light (rapid 

or fast) post-editing and full (or heavy) post-editing. For the convenience of comparison, 

the five selected sets of PE guidelines are general rather than language dependent or 

aiming at specific contents. 

2. Different Levels of Post-editing 

According to ISO 17100:2015, post-editing means to “edit and correct machine 

translation output (ISO, 2015)”. Allen (2003) pointed out the distinction between 

different levels of post-editing. He first explained the determinant factors of the post-

editing level and proposed using inbound and outbound translation to categorize the 



 A Comparative Study of Post-editing Guidelines  347 

 

types and levels of post-editing. For the inbound one, there are two levels: MT with no 

post-editing (for browsing or gisting), and rapid post-editing. For the outbound one, 

which means the translation is for publication or wide dissemination, the three levels are 

MT with no post-editing, minimal post-editing and full post-editing. Apart from rapid 

and full post-editing, the two popular categories, the intermediate category of minimal 

post-editing was qualified as “fuzzy and wide-ranging (Allen, 2003:304)”. He then 

provided a number of case studies on post-editing as well as the PE guidelines of the 

European Commission Translation Service (ECTS), some of which were written by 

Wagner (1985). Wagner’s guidelines are general and apply to projects with severe time 

constraints. Her PE guidelines have been mentioned in the research of O’Brien (2010) 

and Mesa-Lao (2013). Belam (2003) proposed her “do’s and don’ts” PE guidelines 

under the categories of rapid and minimal post-editing. 

Rather than differentiating between guidelines for light and full post-editing, the 

Translation Automation User Society (TAUS) differentiated between two levels of 

expected quality, including “good enough” quality, and “human translation quality” 

(TAUS, 2016). However in this paper, for comparison purposes, we will still regard 

them as light and full PE guidelines, which are the two most popular post-editing levels. 

3. Definitions of Light and Full Post-editing 

It can be seen clearly that most people or organizations dealing with translation have 

very similar views about the two levels of post-editing. For light post-editing, it usually 

means the quality is good enough or understandable, while for full post-editing, “human-

like” is usually the key word. According to TAUS (2016), full post-editing should reach 

quality similar to “high-quality human translation and revision” or “publishable quality”, 

while light post-editing should reach a lower quality, often referred to as “good enough” 

or “fit for purpose”. As DePalma (2013), founder of Common Sense Advisory, put it:  

“Light post-editing converts raw MT output into understandable and usable, but not 

linguistically or stylistically perfect, text… A reader can usually determine that the text 

was machine-translated and touched up by a human… Full post-editing, on the other 

hand, is meant to produce human-quality output. The goal is to produce stylistically 

appropriate, linguistically correct output that is indistinguishable from what a good 

human translator can produce.” (DePalma, 2013, Online)  

Iconic, a MT company based in Dublin, categorizes light and full post-editing by 

answering three questions: what, when and result (WEB, a). It suggests that light post-

editing is for internal dissemination while full post-editing is for wide dissemination or 

certified documentation. 

4. Comparative Studies of PE Guidelines 

TAUS established PE guidelines in partnership with CNGL (Centre for Next Generation 

Localization) in 2010 with the hope that organizations could use the guidelines as a 

baseline and tailor them for their own purposes as they required. This is the first attempt 

at publicly available industry-focused PE guidelines. The guidelines start with some 

recommendations on reducing the level of post-editing required. TAUS highlighted two 

main criteria that determined the effort involved in post-editing: the quality of the MT 

raw output and the expected end quality of the content. They then proposed the 



348   Hu and Cadwell 

 

guidelines according to the different levels of expected quality. Flanagan and 

Christensen (2014) carried out a research project and tested the TAUS PE guidelines 

(2010) among translation trainees. Based on the result, they developed their own set of 

PE guidelines for use in class. They adopted the TAUS guidelines for light post-editing 

and proposed their tailored guidelines for full post-editing according to the TAUS 

baseline for translator training purposes. Recently in 2016, TAUS updated their PE 

guidelines to include a greater amount of detail than the previous set. The updated 

guidelines have been divided into five parts. In addition to an updated version of the 

previous guidelines, which constitutes its second part, the other four parts are as follows: 

evaluating post-editor performance, post-editing productivity, pricing machine 

translation PE guidelines and about the MT guidelines. For the purposes of this paper, 

we will only discuss the second part that elaborates on the PE guidelines of different 

levels. This part is almost a copy of the previous guidelines, but there is one specific 

difference in that it says “human translation quality” in the caption for the high level 

post-editing (although it still uses “quality similar or equal to human translation” in the 

body of the text).   

 At the 2010 AMTA conference, O’Brien presented a tutorial on post-editing. She 

first introduced the general PE guidelines of Wagner (1985), then the guidelines on light 

and full post-editing respectively. Mesa-Lao (2013) restated O’Brien’s general PE 

guidelines in his study. He reported his suggestions on how to decide whether a MT 

output should be recycled in post-editing or not. He also mentioned the rules of 

Microsoft (the “5-10 second evaluation” rule and the “high 5 and low 5” rule) on making 

these decisions in his research.  

Although LSPs possess their own tailored PE guidelines, very few have been 

released online. Lee Densmer, senior manager at Moravia, wrote down her PE guidelines 

in her blog at the website of Moravia. The guidelines may be her personal opinion but 

can represent the attitudes of Moravia to some extent. Similarly to Allen (2003), 

Densmer (2014) listed the determinant factors of post-editing levels. They both believed 

that the client and the expectation to the level of quality played important roles. Based on 

their date of publication, we could argue that determinant factors listed by Densmer are 

more related to modern technology. Let us take TM as an example. While the factors 

listed by Allen are more traditional, including the time of translation, the life expectancy 

and perishability of the information, Densmer pointed out that the key phrases for light 

post-editing were “factual correctness” and “good enough”, which are in line with 

TAUS. She argued that light post-editing was not an easy job for linguists, due to the 

fact that linguists had to try their best to turn a blind eye to those ‘minor’ errors. With 

reference to full post-editing, she indicated that “the effort to achieve human level 

quality from MT output may exceed the effort to have it translated by a linguist in the 

first place (Densmer, 2014)”, and Iconic (WEB, a) supports this assertion. In the end, she 

exposed the “shades of grey” which referred to the fact that many clients want the 

quality of full post-editing with the price and speed of light post-editing.     

Inspired by the categories used in the LISA QA Model (Localization Industry 

Standards Association Quality Assurance Model) and SAE (Society of Automotive 

Engineers) J2450 translation quality metric, we created Tables 1 and 2 as follows to 

compare the five proposals of PE guidelines. According to the variables in the left 

column, we listed all the corresponding requirements of the five proposals. There are 

some differences in terminology used by authors on PE, but these terms appear to refer 

to roughly the same concept, such as “accurate” and “correct”. If the guidelines did not 

mention the variable, the cell was left blank. 



 A Comparative Study of Post-editing Guidelines  349 

 

 

Table 1. Comparative study of light PE guidelines 

   
 
LIGHT  
POST-
EDITING 

 
TAUS (2016) 
(FlANAGAN & 
CHRISTENSEN, 
2014) 

 
O’BRIEN (2010) 

 
MESA-LAO 
(2013) 

 
DENSMER (2014) 

Accuracy TT communicates the 
same meaning as ST 

Important Important Factually accurate 

Terminology  No need to 
research 

No need to spend 
too much time 
researching if 
incorrect 

Be consistent  

Grammar May not be perfect Not a big concern No need to correct 
unless the 
information has 
not been fully 
delivered 

Correct only the most 
obvious errors 

Semantics Correct   Correct 

Spelling Apply basic rules Apply basic rules   

Syntax Might be unusual Can be ignored Do not change  

Style No need  No need  

Restructure No need if the 
sentence is correct 

 No need if can be 
understood 

Rewrite confusing 
sentences 

Culture Edit if necessary Edit if necessary   

Information Fully delivered    

Others Use as much raw MT 
output as possible  

Textual standards 
are not important; 
very high 
throughput 
expectation; low 
quality expectations 

No need to 
change a word if 
correct 

Fix machine-induced 
mistakes; delete 
unnecessary or extra 
machine-generated 
translation 
alternatives 

 

From Table 1, it can be seen that all proposals value the accuracy of the message and 

correctness of semantics by light post-editing, while grammar, syntax and style are not a 

big concern. O’Brien and Mesa-Lao believe that there is no need to spend too much time 

researching incorrect terminology, while Densmer contends that terminology should be 

consistent. TAUS, Flanagan and Christensen, and O’Brien hold that the spelling fixes 

should be applied with basic rules, and the text should adapt to the target culture. If the 

sentence is understandable or correct, most proposals express that it should not be 

restructured. O’Brien clearly points out the quality expectation for light post-editing is 

low. Densmer emphasizes machine-induced errors and translation alternatives in her 

guidelines.    

 

 

 

 



350   Hu and Cadwell 

 

Table 2. Comparative study of full PE guidelines 

 
 
FULL  
POST-EDITING 

 
TAUS (2016) 

 
O’BRIEN 
(2010) 

 
FLANAGAN & 
CHRISTENSEN 
(2014) 

 
MESA-LAO 
(2013) 

 
DENSMER (2014) 

Accuracy TT 
communicates 
same meaning 
as ST 

Important Important  Absolutely accurate 

Terminology Key 
terminology is 
correct 

Key 
terminology is 
correct 

Key terminology is 
correct 

Apply the 
term as used 
in the term 
database for 
any incorrect 
terminology 

Consistent and 
appropriate 

Grammar Correct Accurate Correct Correct Correct 

Semantics Correct  Correct Correct Correct 

Punctuation Correct Apply basic 
rules 

Apply basic rules  Correct 

Spelling Apply basic 
rules 

Apply basic 
rules 

Apply basic rules  Correct 

Syntax Normal  Correct  Make modifications 
in accordance with 
practices for the TL 

Style  Fine Ignore stylistic 
and textual 
problems 

 Not important Consistent, 
appropriate and 
fluent 

Restructure   No need if the 
language is 
appropriate 

No need if the 
sentence is 
semantically 
correct 

Rewrite confusing 
sentences 

Culture Edit if 
necessary 

Edit if 
necessary 

Edit if necessary  Adapt all cultural 
references 

Information Fully delivered Fully delivered Fully delivered   

Formatting Correct All tags are 
present and in 
the correct 
positions 

Ensure the same 
ST tags are 
present and in the 
correct positions; 

 Correct (including 
tagging) 

Others Basic rules 
apply to 
hyphenation; 
human 
translation 
quality 

Apply basic 
rules to 
hyphenation; 
high 
throughput 
expectation; 
medium 
quality 
expectations 

Use as much raw 
MT output as 
possible; ensure 
the untranslated 
terms belong to 
the client’s list of 
‘Do not translate’ 
terms 

No need to 
change a 
word if it is 
correct; 
accept the 
repetitive MT 
output 

Perfect faithfulness 
to the source text; fix 
machine-induced 
mistakes; delete 
unnecessary or extra 
machine-generated 
translation 
alternatives; cross-
reference 
translations against 
other resources; 
human translation 
quality 

 



 A Comparative Study of Post-editing Guidelines  351 

 

Regarding full post-editing, TAUS and Densmer expect that the quality should have 

no difference with human translation, and they emphasize the significance of fine style. 

However, O’Brien and Mesa-Lao do not agree with a need to pay much attention to the 

style. They expect the quality after full post-editing be medium rather than equal to 

translation from scratch. Should the quality after full post-editing be the same as human 

translation or maintain the traces of machine translation? We can see from Table 2, 

especially the “Others” row that the resource centre and LSP are more inclined to human 

translation quality than the scholars. If full post-editing should reach human translation 

quality, it still remains a question whether full post-editing is more pragmatic than 

translation from scratch in terms of cost. It is even debatable if post-editing can actually 

bring productivity gains, which leads to scepticism toward the benefits of post-editing. 

Guerberof (2009) and Federico et al. (2012) reported productivity gains in their research, 

while Gaspari et al. (2014) found that post-editing could lead to productivity losses over 

translation from scratch.   

The requirements of the full PE guidelines surpass the considerations of the light PE 

guidelines in terms of accuracy, semantics and culture in particular. Different from light 

PE guidelines, most full PE guidelines require the correctness of terminology, grammar, 

punctuation, syntax and formatting. 

 

5. Conclusions 

From this comparative study, we can see that the existing PE guidelines have many 

overlaps, especially for light post-editing. The main differences lie in the full PE 

guidelines and concern the requirement for style and the expected quality of the target 

text, which we believe depends on the use and type of the text.  

As we mentioned before, there are no standard PE guidelines. DePalma (2013) 

contends that clients should share with LSPs exactly what light and full post-editing is to 

be included before contracting for a job. Densmer (2014) also asserts that the quality 

levels, throughputs, and expectations must be defined in advance. We agree with their 

ideas and advise LSPs and their clients to discuss and create their own tailored PE 

guidelines together beforehand.   

In addition to the general PE guidelines above, there are other sources of PE 

guidelines which are either language-dependent or aim-specific. Such guidelines include, 

for example, the GALE PE guidelines (WEB, b), PE guidelines with a focus on Japanese 

(Tatsumi, 2010), ACCEPT’s guidelines for monolingual and bilingual post-editing 

(ACCEPT, 2011), language dependent (English-Spanish) PE guidelines (Rico and 

Ariano, 2014), PE guidelines for BOLT Machine Translation Evaluation (WEB, c), and 

PE guidelines for lay post-editors in an online community (Mitchell, 2015). 

 

 

 



352   Hu and Cadwell 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by the Science Foundation of Ireland (SFI) ADAPT project 

(Grant No.: P31021). The authors would also like to thank Dr. Sharon O’Brien for her 

helpful comments and suggestions. 

 

References 

ACCEPT. (2012). Seminar Material on Post-editing – Edition 2, available at  

         http://cordis.europa.eu/docs/projects/cnect/9/288769/080/deliverables/001-

D622SeminarMaterialonPostEditingEdition2.pdf 

Allen, J. (2003). Post-editing. Computers and Translations: A Translator’s Guide. 35, 297-317. 

Belam, J. (2003). “Buying up to falling down”: a deductive approach to teaching post-editing, In: 

Proceedings of MT Summit IX, Workshop on Teaching Translation Technologies and Tools 

(27 Sept. 2003, New Orleans, USA), pp 1-10. 

Densmer, L. (2014). Light and Full MT Post-Editing Explained, available at 

         http://info.moravia.com/blog/bid/353532/Light-and-Full-MT-Post-Editing-Explained 

DePalma, D. (2013). Post-editing in practice, available at  

         http://www.tcworld.info/e-magazine/translation-and-localization/article/post-editing-in-

practice/ 

Federico, M., Cattelan, A., Trombetti, M. (2012), Measuring user productivity in machine 

translation enhanced computer assisted translation, In: Proceedings of the Tenth Conference 

of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas, AMTA 2012 (28 Oct. – 1 Nov. 

2012, San Diego, USA). 

Flanagan, M., Christensen, T.P. (2014). Testing post-editing guidelines: how translation trainees 

interpret      them and how to tailor them for translator training purposes. The Interpreter and 

Translator Trainer, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 257-275. 

Gaspari, F. 2014, Perception vs Reality: Measuring Machine Translation Post-Editing 

Productivity, In: Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Post-Editing Technology and 

Practice at the 11th Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas, 

AMTA 2014 (22-26 Oct. 2014, Vancouver, Canada), pp. 60-72. 

Guerberof, A. (2009). Productivity and quality in MT post-editing, In: Proceedings of MT Summit 

XII-Workshop: Beyond Translation Memories: New Tools for Translators MT, AMTA 2009 

(26-30 Aug. 2009, Ottawa, Canada). 

ISO, ISO 17100:2015: Translation services – Requirements for translation services, available at 

        http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=59149 

Mesa-Lao, B. (2013). Introduction to post-editing – The CasMaCat GUI, available at 

        http://bridge.cbs.dk/projects/seecat/material/hand-out_post-editing_bmesa-lao.pdf 

Mitchell, L. (2015). The potential and limits of lay post-editing in an online community, In: 

Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine 

Translation, EAMT 2015 (11-13 May. 2015, Antalya, Turkey). 

O’Brien, S. (2010). Introduction to Post-Editing: Who, What, How and Where to Next?  Available 

at http://amta2010.amtaweb.org/AMTA/papers/6-01-ObrienPostEdit.pdf 

Rico-Pérez, C., Ariano-Gahn, M. (2014). Defining language dependent post-editing rules: the case 

of the language pair English-Spanish. In O'Brien, S., Balling, L.M., Carl, M., Simard, M., 

Specia, L., (eds.), Post-editing of machine translation: processes and applications. 

Newcastle, pp. 299-322. 



 A Comparative Study of Post-editing Guidelines  353 

 

Tatsumi, M. (2010). Post-editing machine translated text in a commercial setting: Observation 

and statistical analysis. PhD thesis, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland. 

TAUS. (2010). MT Post-editing Guidelines, available at 

         https://www.taus.net/academy/best-practices/postedit-best-practices/machine-translation-

post-editing-guidelines 

TAUS. (2016). TAUS Post-Editing Guidelines, available at  

         https://www.taus.net/think-tank/articles/postedit-articles/taus-post-editing-guidelines 

Wagner, E. (1985). Post-editing Systran - A challenge for Commission Translators, Terminologie 

et Traduction, no. 3, pp. 1-7. 

WEB (a). Post-Edited Machine Translation. http://iconictranslation.com/solutions/post_edited_mt/ 

WEB (b). Post Editing Guidelines for GALE Machine Translation Evaluation. 

         http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/gale/Translation/Editors/GALEpostedit_guidelines-3.0.2.pdf 

WEB (c). Post Editing Guidelines for BOLT Machine Translation Evaluation. 

         http://www.nist.gov/itl/iad/mig/upload/BOLT_P3_PostEditingGuidelinesV1_3_3.pdf 

 

 

Received May 2, 2016,  accepted May 8, 2016 

http://www.nist.gov/itl/iad/mig/upload/BOLT_P3_PostEditingGuidelinesV1_3_3.pdf

