



















































Annotating the Little Prince with Chinese AMRs


Proceedings of LAW X – The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 7–15,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating the Little Prince with Chinese AMRs

Bin Li, Yuan Wen, Lijun Bu, Weiguang Qu
School of Chinese Language and Literature

Nanjing Normal University
Nanjing, China

libin.njnu@gmail.com

Nianwen Xue
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University
Waltham, MA, USA

nwxue@brandeis.edu

Abstract

Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR)
is an annotation framework in which the
meaning of a full sentence is represented
as a rooted, acyclic, directed graph. In this
paper, we describe a pilot project in which
we develop specifications for the annota-
tion of a Chinese AMR corpus: the Chi-
nese translation of the Little Prince. The
interagreement smatch score between the
two annotators is 0.83. We also propose
to integrate alignment into Chinese AMR
annotation.

1 Introduction

Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) is an
annotation framework designed to capture the
“meaning” of a sentence with a single rooted,
acyclic1, directed graph (Banarescu et al., 2013),
departing from previous practices of performing
partial semantic annotation that focuses on one
component of the sentential meaning at a time. For
example, Propbank (Palmer et al., 2005; Xue and
Palmer, 2009) and NomBank (Meyers et al., 2004)
annotations focus on the predicate-argument struc-
ture of verbs and predicative or relational nouns.
The annotation is done on a predicate basis and
the resulting annotation may not necessarily form
a fully connected structure for the entire sen-
tence. The practice was necessary as a first attempt
to annotate a key aspect of sentential meaning
and contributed to a high-quality corpus that has
spurred research in automatic Semantic Role La-
beling (SRL) (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002; Pradhan
et al., 2004; Xue and Palmer, 2004; Palmer et al.,
2010) and downstream applications. This annota-
tion strategy has been adopted for the predicate-

1Technically, about 0.3% sentences are cyclic in AMR
(Banarescu et al., 2015).

argument structure annotation of other languages
as well (Xue and Palmer, 2009; Zaghouani et al.,
2012).

As we gain more insights on the sentence mean-
ing from annotating individual meaning compo-
nents, annotating the meaning for the entire sen-
tence becomes a logical next step. The AMR an-
notation project is such an attempt, along with
other similar efforts such as the Universal Depen-
dency annotation project (Nivre, 2015) and the Se-
mantic Dependency Parsing effort (Oepen et al.,
2014).

One salient characteristic of AMR annotation
is that it abstracts away from elements of sur-
face syntactic structure such as word order and
morpho-syntactic markers. Since word order
and morpho-syntactic variations account for much
of the cross-linguistic variations, this makes the
AMR annotation framework more portable across
languages, as the preliminary AMR annotation on
Chinese and Czech has demonstrated (Xue et al.,
2014).

Another consequence of such “decoupling”
from the syntactic structure of a sentence is that
the AMR annotation framework gives us more
freedom in how we handle cases of syntax-
semantic mismatch. Words that do not contribute
to the meaning of a sentence (e.g., infinitive “to”
in English) are left out of the AMR annotation.
In light verb constructions such as “take a bath”,
since the light verb “take” is semantically impov-
erished if not vacuous, it is also left out of the
AMR annotation. Some discontinuous construc-
tions such as “if. . . then” can be collapsed into a
single relation “:condition”.

With this freedom comes responsibility. Since
an annotator is free to drop a word or map dis-
continuous patterns onto single AMR concepts or
relations, for the sake of annotation consistency, it
is important to provide detailed annotation speci-

7



fications for how certain constructions are handled
so that they are consistently followed by all anno-
tators.

Since words that “do not carry meaning” are
left out of the AMR of a sentence, for purpose
of automatic AMR parsing, it is also important
to explicitly represent the correspondence between
word tokens in the sentence to the concepts and
relations in its AMR, that is, the alignment be-
tween the input sentence and its AMR presenta-
tion. In English AMR annotation (Banarescu et
al., 2013), this alignment is performed as a sep-
arate step and it is not integrated into AMR an-
notation itself. For example, to develop a word-
to-AMR-concept aligner as the first step of their
AMR parser, Flanigan et al. (2014) annotated the
alignment between word tokens and AMR con-
cepts and relations for a small corpus which they
use as the development set to extract alignment
rules. The alignment accuracy of this aligner is
about 90%. Pourdamghani et al. (2014) devel-
oped an EM-based aligner that yields similar per-
formance without any manual alignment. While
these aligners may seem to be very accurate, a
10% error rate in alignment imposes a serious lim-
itation on the overall AMR parsing accuracy.

In this paper we present the Chinese AMR
(CAMR) annotation specifications that we use
to annotate the Chinese translation of the Little
Prince, which has 1,562 sentences. The CAMR
annotation specifications are adapted from the
AMR specification for English (Banarescu et al.,
2015). We choose the Little Prince for our Chi-
nese AMR annotation experiments because its En-
glish translation has already been annotated with
AMRs and we can easily compare our AMR an-
notation with that of the English version for cross-
linguistic studies. We also propose an integrated
annotation approach in which the alignment step
is integrated into the CAMR annotation process
so that users of this corpus don’t have to create
their own alignment. We show that the alignment
process shares many of the characteristics of word
alignment across languages.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2 we present an overview of the AMR
annotation framework and the supporting lexical
resources that we use for CAMR annotation. Sec-
tion 3 describes how we extend AMR to handle
Chinese-specific constructions and discourse re-
lations in Chinese. In Section 4, we present re-

sults on our CAMR annotation experiments, and
analyze sources of disagreement. In Section 5,
we describe how we integrate word-to-concept
alignment into the CAMR annotation process, and
present a few alignment scenarios between word
tokens and CAMR concepts. Section 6 gives a
brief introduction of related work on the construc-
tion of semantic dependency databases. We con-
clude our paper in Section 7.

2 AMR Overview

In AMR annotation, each sentence is represented
as a rooted, directed, acyclic graph in which the
nodes are concepts and the edges are relations
between the concepts. The backbone of an AMR
graph is the predicate-argument structure of
verbal or nominal predicates, though syntactic
notions such as verbs and nouns are not part of
the AMR vocabulary. AMR draws this aspect
from the Proposition Bank (Palmer et al., 2005):
the core argument roles (Arg0-Arg5) are defined
in the PropBank frame files(Bonial et al., 2014),
together with the senses of the predicates as
different senses of a predicate have different
argument structures. In addition, AMR also anno-
tates named entities (person, location, company,
etc.), relations between entities, time expressions,
polarity and modality.

(1) The boy wants to go to New York.

w/want-01
:arg0 b/boy
:arg1 g/go-01

:arg0 b
:arg1 c/city

:wiki “New York”
:name (n/name :op1 “New” :op2 “York”)

AMR is a graph, not just a tree, because it al-
lows reentrancy. This happens when an argument
is shared by more than one predicate as in control
structures, or when there is coreference. For ex-
ample, in (1) boy serves as the Arg0 of want.01 as
well as Arg0 of go.01. This is illustrated by the
fact that the same concept ID b is used as an argu-
ment for both want.01 and go.01.

In CAMR annotation, we generally adopted
the vocabulary used for annotating English AMRs
(Banarescu et al., 2013). However, we used ar-
gument labels and the predicate senses that are de-
fined in the Chinese Proposition Bank (CPB) (Xue

8



and Palmer, 2009), which are very similar in con-
vention to that of the English Proposition Bank.
When developing the CAMR annotation specifica-
tions, most of our effort is expended on how to an-
notate some Chinese-specific constructions, which
we will describe in detail in Section 3. These con-
structions are described in syntactic terms and are
well recognized in Chinese linguistics.

3 Specifications for CAMR Annotation

When annotating CAMRs for the Little Prince
corpus, we generally adopt the tagset for the
(non-lexical) concepts and relations in the English
AMR specifications. In English AMR, there
are two types of concepts: lexical concepts that
are grounded to word tokens in a sentence, and
abstract concepts that are not linked to a specific
lexical item. The former are typically lemmatized
forms of word tokens with (e.g., go.01 in (1))
or without word sense (e.g., boy in (1)). The
latter are inferred from the context and are not
tied to a specific lexical item (e.g., city in (1)).
In the case of city, it can be viewed as a named
entity tag for “New York”, but not all abstract
concepts are named entity tags. There are also
labels for numbers, time expressions, dates, as
well as concepts that represent discourse relations.
We obviously cannot use the lexical concepts in
English AMR for CAMR annotation, but we have
generally adopted the abstract concepts in AMR.
Since Chinese has little inflectional morphology,
in most cases the lexical concepts are just the
words themselves.

(2)男孩 想 去纽约。
nanhai xiang qu niuyue
boy want go New York
“The boy wants to go to New York.”

x/想-01
:arg0 x1/男孩
:arg1 x2/去-01

:arg0 x1
:arg1 x3/city

:wiki “纽约”
:name (n/name :op1 “纽约”)

The AMR relations include semantic roles as
well as nominal relations. We use 6 labels for core
arguments (Arg0-Arg5, as they are defined in the
CPB frame files), and 42 labels for adjunctive ar-

guments and other semantic relations largely taken
from the English AMR vocabulary. As shown in
(2), the Chinese translation of “The boy wants to
go to New York” is annotated similarly to its En-
glish counterpart. Notice that city is a non-lexical
abstract concept that is not an actual word in the
sentence.

Even though we use the same annotation con-
ventions and mostly the same vocabulary as used
in the English AMR, we still need to specify how
to annotate Chinese-specific constructions that are
not in English so that these constructions are con-
sistently annotated. Due to the limitation of space,
we only describe six such constructions: the num-
ber and classifier construction, the serial-verb con-
struction, the headless relative construction, the
verb-complement (VC) construction, the split verb
construction, and reduplications. We will also dis-
cuss how to represent discourse relations in Chi-
nese AMR, an area where there are significant
adaptations.

3.1 Number and Classifier Construction

When a number modifies a Chinese noun or verb,
it is always followed by a classifier. A classifier
can be a measure like吨, which has an equivalent
word in English, “ton”. However, there is also
another type of classifier which does not have
an English equivalent. It serves as a cognitive
measure of things and its meaning is hard to
represent. The word只 in (3) is such an example.
It is also very idiosyncratic in the type of nouns
it can modify. For example 只 can be used to
modify sheep/goats or chickens, but not other
types of animals such as cows or pigs. They are
generally referred to as “individual classifiers”
in Chinese linguistics. As AMR is concerned
with the abstract meaning, we keep the measure
words in the AMR representation but leave out
the individual classifiers. Notice that the numbers
are also normalized to Arabic numerals.

(3)三 千 只 羊
san qian zhi yang
three thousand CL sheep
“3000 sheep”

x/羊
:quant 3000

9



3.2 Serial-Verb Construction

Serial-verb constructions are very common in
Chinese. They are characterized by having several
verbs in a sequence, but it is sometimes very hard
to determine the grammatical relations between
them. For example, one verb can modify another
or the two can be semantically equally important
as in a coordinate structure. We choose to avoid
making this hard decision for now for the sake
of consistent annotation and consider these verbs
to be in a coordination structure and create a
non-lexical “and” concept to connect them.

(4)他走 过去 说. . .
ta zou guoqu shuo
he walk over say
“He walked over and said. . . ”

a/and
:op1 x/走-01

:arg0 x1/他
:direction x2/过去

:op2 x3/说-01
:arg0 x1

3.3 Headless Relative Construction

Headless relative constructions are relative
constructions without an explicit noun head.
Syntactically it is realized as a relative clause
followed by 的(DE), a function word that serves
multiple purposes, one of which is as the marker
of a relative clause. The dropped noun head of
the relative clause could play any number of roles
with regard to the verb in the relative clause:
agent, patient, instrument, location, etc. When
annotating the AMR, we use an abstract concept
to represent the dropped noun head. In (5), for
example, the abstract noun head is a “person”,
and it is Arg0 of the verb跳舞(dance).

(5)跳舞 的 走 了。
tiaowu de zou le
dance DE leave COMPLETE
“The person who danced has left.”

x/走-01
:arg0 p/person

:arg0-of x1/跳舞-01

3.4 Verb-Complement Construction

A Verb-Complement (VC) construction is com-
posed of a verb followed by another verb that
indicates possibility, result, etc. The function
word 得(DE) can optionally come between those
two words. In AMR annotation, we make the
meaning of the construction explicit using abstract
concepts or relations. In (6), for example, the VC
construction has a modal meaning, represented
by “possible”, although there isn’t one word that
specifically means possible. This meaning comes
from the VC construction. In (7), there is a causal
relationship between the two verbs 跑(pao) and
丢(diu), represented as a “cause” relation between
the two verbs.

(6)买 得 起 房子。
mai de qi fangzi
buy DE rise house
“Can buy a house.”

p/possible
:arg0 x/买-01

:arg1 x1/房子

(7)它会 跑 丢 的。
ta hui pao diu de
it will run lost DE
“It will run and then get lost.”

x/会-02
:arg0 x1/丢-02

:arg1 x2/它
:cause x3/跑-01

:arg0 x2

3.5 Split Verb Construction

A “split verb” is a verb whose two parts can be
separated by other linguistic material. 帮忙(help)
is a typical example. When it is separated, it
takes the form of a verb (帮) followed by an
object (忙), separated by some modifiers. Its
syntactic representation is quite a paradox: on
the one hand, the semantics of the two parts are
not separable, and it simply means “help” in its
totality. On the other hand, it takes the form
of a verb-object construction, and needs to be
represented that way. AMR solves this paradox
by just representing the entire construction as one
concept, 帮忙, regardless of whether it is split or

10



not.

(8)地理学 帮 了 我 很 大 的 忙。
dilixue bang le wo hen da de mang
geography help PAST me very big DE business
“Geography helped me a lot”

x/帮忙-01
:arg0 x1/地理学
:arg1 x2/我
:degree x3/大

:degree x4/很

3.6 Reduplications

There are two types of reduplications in Chinese.
In the first type of reduplications (9a-9b), the
reduplicated form has roughly the same meaning
as the root form. The reduplication has either
an aspectual meaning that the root form does
not have (9a), or has its meaning intensified
(9b). For the moment, we do not represent such
subtle aspectual meanings or intensification. In
the second type, however, the reduplicated form
clearly adds meaning to its root form (9c-9d).
We annotate their actual meaning by adding an
abstract concept. The root form is in brackets in
the following examples:

(9a)看看 (看)
kankan (kan)
“take a look”

(9b)干干净净 (干净)
ganganjingjing (ganjing)
“very clean”

(9c)人人 (人)
renren (ren)
“every person”

(9d)他天天 (天) 跑步。
ta tiantian (tian) paobu
he everyday (day) run
“He runs everyday.”

x/跑步-01
:arg0 x1/他
:frequency x2/rate-entity-91

:arg3 x3/temporal-quantity :quant 1
:unit x4/天

3.7 Discourse Relations

One of the more significant adaptations to the
AMR annotation specifications in CAMR is how
discourse relations are annotated. Since for the
moment AMR is a sentence-level meaning rep-
resentation, here we only discuss intra-sentential
discourse relations to the exclusion of inter-
sentential relations.

(10)他专心 地 看 着, 随后 又 说:
ta zhuanxin de kan zhe suihou you shuo
he carefully DE watch ASP then also say

“我 不 要 。”
wo bu yao
I not want
“He looked at it carefully, then he said:‘I don’t

want it.’ ”

x/temporal
:arg1 x2/看-02

:arg0 x3/他
:manner x4/专心-01

:arg2 x5/说-01
:mod x6/又
:arg0 x3
:arg1 x8/要-04 :polarity -

:arg0 x3

In English AMR, discourse relations are rep-
resented with a combination of abstract concepts
(e.g., and, or, contrast.01) and relations (:cause,
:condition, :concession, :purpose). In CAMR, we
represent discourse relations with 10 concepts de-
fined in the Chinese Discourse TreeBank (CDTB)
(Zhou and Xue, 2015). These 10 discourse re-
lations include and, or, which are also used in
English AMR, but they also include causation,
condition, contrast, expansion, purpose, temporal,
progression, concession. Some of these discourse
relations, e.g., causation, condition, purpose, and
concession are treated as relations in AMR, and
others are not part of the AMR vocabulary (ex-
pansion, progression, and temporal). In particu-
lar temporal represents the temporal precedence of
a sequence of discourse segments while progres-
sion means one argument represents a progression
from the other, in extent, intensity, scale, etc. As
CDTB discourse relations are formally predicates
that take two or more discourse segments as their
arguments, the argument labels are meaningful as
well. (10) is an example of temporal relation.

11



The arguments are arranged in chronological or-
der, with Arg1 temporally preceding Arg2.

4 Annotation Experiments

We annotated all of the 1562 sentences in the
Chinese version of the Little Prince following
the CAMR specifications. Two linguistic under-
graduate students were trained to perform the an-
notation. Each completed the annotation for all of
the 1562 sentences, and the inter-agreement is cal-
culated by Smatch toolkit (Cai and Knight, 2013).
The overall Smatch score between the two annota-
tors is 0.83.2

We analyzed the annotated data from the two
annotators to see to what extent the graph repre-
sentation of the meaning of a sentence is neces-
sary. Out of the 1,562 sentences of the two an-
notated files, 576 and 548 of them have non-tree
CAMR graphs in Chinese version of the Little
Prince. This is in comparison with the 663 sen-
tences that have non-tree AMR graphs in the En-
glish version, which is sentence-aligned with the
Chinese version. The Pearson correlation of the
sentences having non-tree graphs is around 0.56,
indicating the bilingual semantic representation of
the same sentence pair is similar. When one Chi-
nese sentence has a non-tree graph structure, its
English translation does too.

We also analyzed the sources of disagreement
between the annotators. The causes of disagree-
ment between the annotators are mostly from two
sources. The first source of disagreement is that
the two annotators have different interpretations
of the same sentence. Disagreement also occurs
when either or both annotators missed some con-
cepts when annotating long sentences. The anno-
tation tool that they use does not keep track of
which words have been covered and which have
not, and this contributes to this problem. Another
issue with the annotation tool, which may or may
not lead to disagreement in annotation, is that the
annotator has to constantly shift between Chinese
and English input modes to type Chinese charac-
ters for lexical concepts and English alphabets for
abstract concepts. Motivated by the need to ad-
dress these shortcomings of the annotation tool, as
well as the need to incorporate word-to-concept
alignment in the CAMR annotation process, we
have redesigned the annotation framework, which

2The annotation data is available at http://www.cs.
brandeis.edu/˜clp/camr/camr.html.

we describe in detail in the next section.

5 Integrating Alignment to Annotation

When annotating the Little Prince, we followed
the English AMR approach in which the concepts
in CAMR are not aligned to word tokens in the
sentence. Since AMR abstracts away from surface
forms of a sentence, there is a non-trivial align-
ment problem between the AMR concepts and
word tokens in a sentence. Some word tokens are
considered to be devoid of meaning and are not
represented in the AMR. Words that are not rep-
resented in AMR include determiners such as “a”,
“an” and “the”, infinitive marker “to”. As we have
discussed in Section 3, individual measure words
are not represented in CAMR. On the other hand,
abstract concepts in AMR are not grounded to any
specific lexical item and are inferred from the con-
text. In some cases, one word token is analyzed
into multiple AMR concepts. For example, the
English word “teacher” is represented in a simi-
lar way to “person who teaches” in the AMR. In
other cases, multiple word tokens in a sentence
may represent a single AMR concept. These word
tokens do not even have to be contiguous. For
example, Chinese parallel discourse connective
因为(because). . .所以(therefore). . . is mapped to
one single discourse relation concept causation.
So other than straight-forward one-to-one map-
pings between word tokens and AMR concepts,
there are also complex alignment patterns such as
one-to-zero, zero-to-one, one-to-many and many-
to-one. In many ways, this is not too different from
the word alignment between two languages. As
we mentioned briefly above, having this alignment
is important to AMR parsing, which is a process of
mapping the input sentence to its AMR. Word-to-
concept alignment is essential to this process, not
unlike the role of word alignment to statistical ma-
chine translation.

The word-to-concept alignment is not inte-
grated into the English AMR, mainly out of con-
cern that it will slow down AMR annotation too
much and it’s too complex to provide annota-
tion to support for this. There was also hope
that the alignment can be learned in an unsu-
pervised manner with EM-based algorithms, just
like word alignment between different languages
can be learned automatically without the need for
manual annotation. Although this expectation has
been partially met in the work of Pourdamghani

12



et al. (2014), but we argue that an error rate of
around 10% is too much of a deficit in the AMR
parsing process, especially considering the level
of difficulty in syntactic parsing where there is no
alignment issue (or where there is perfect align-
ment between word tokens in the input sentence
and terminal nodes in its parser tree).

We propose an annotation approach in which
we integrate alignment with Chinese AMR
annotation. Its basic idea is to use the index of a
word token as the ID of the concept it aligns to
in the AMR representation, thus establishing the
alignment between the AMR concepts. We de-
velop an annotation tool that allows an annotator
to simply input the index of a word token in place
of a concept during the annotation process. The
tool will automatically retrieve the word token
based on its index and generate the concept as
well as the concept ID for it. This assumes that
the tool does automatic lemmatization, which
fortunately is very straightforward for Chinese
where there is little inflectional morphology and
the concepts are generally the same as their word
forms. The tool also allows the annotator to revise
the concept, and this is useful when a word does
have inflections in a limited number of cases or
when the word is misspelled. Words that do not
correspond to a concept will of course receive
no concept IDs and are not aligned. For abstract
concepts that do not correspond to any word
token, they are assigned IDs that have a value that
is higher than the number of word tokens in the
sentence. An example is given below. The IDs for
the concepts are prefaced with “x”. Note that the
city concept has an ID of “x5”, which does not
correspond to any word token in the sentence.

(2)男孩1想2 去3纽约4。
boy want go New York
“The boy wants to go to New York.”

x2/想-01
:arg0 x1/男孩
:arg1 x3/去-01

:arg0 x1
:arg1 x5/city

:wiki “纽约”
:name (n/name :op1 x4/“纽约”)

The annotation tool also keeps track of which
words in the sentence have been “covered” by the

AMR by highlighting words that the annotator has
created concepts for. This is an especially use-
ful feature when annotating long sentences, as it
is very easy for the annotator to miss some words.

In addition to one-to-one, one-to-zero, and
zero-to-one alignments, there are also one-to-
many and many-to-one alignments between
word tokens in a sentence and concepts in its
AMR. The following is the AMR for Example
(8) where one AMR concept is aligned to two
word tokens that are also discontinuous. This is
a case of split verbs that we discussed in Section
3. The word tokens are “帮. . .忙” and the AMR
concept is simply 帮忙. Its ID is a concatena-
tion of the indices of the two word tokens “x2 x8”.

(8)地理学1帮2 了3 我4很5 大6的7忙8。
geography help PAST me very big DE business

“Geography helped me a lot.”

x2 x8/帮忙-01
:arg0 x1/地理学
:arg1 x4/我
:degree x6/大

:degree x5/很

(11) is an example where one word is aligned
to multiple concepts. This usually happens when
the word has a complicated internal structure
and each morpheme corresponds to an AMR
concept. Chinese has very little derivational or
inflectional morphology, but compounding is a
highly productive morphological process.

(11)市场-分析-家1 说2

shichang-fenxi-jia shuo
market-analyze-expert say
“The market analyst says. . . ”

x2/说-01
:arg0 x1 5/家

: arg0-of x1 3 4/分析-01
:arg1 x1 1 2/市场

In (11), the compound word 市 场 分 析
家(market analyst) has 5 characters and corre-
sponds to three AMR concepts: 市场(market),
分析(analyze) and 家(expert). In this case, we
represent the alignment with the character offsets
within the compound word. Notice that the char-
acter offsets, unlike the word indices, are not pre-
fixed with “x” This is how we differentiate word

13



indices from character offsets. For example, the
concept ID for 市场 is “x1 1 2”, meaning that it
is aligned with the first two characters of the first
word. Similarly, 分析 is aligned with the third
and fourth character of the first word, and its ID
is “x1 3 4”. Finally, the ID for the concept 家 is
“x1 5”, meaning that it is aligned with the fifth
character of the first word.

In sum, this new annotation framework inte-
grates word-to-concept alignment to the entire
AMR annotation process. It also has the advan-
tage of being able to keep track of word tokens
that have been accounted for in the AMR (and
those that have not), and helping to address the
“missing word” problem in AMR annotation. In
CAMR annotation, the annotator needs to switch
back and forth between different input methods to
input the lexical concepts that are composed of
Chinese characters and the abstract concepts that
are in English alphabets. The new annotation tool
allows the annotator to use word indices and char-
acter offsets to input the lexical concepts and thus
avoids the need to shift input modes, thus improv-
ing annotation efficiency.

6 Related work

Other than the AMR annotation project, other ef-
forts aimed at annotating and parsing the seman-
tic representation of a sentence with a graph struc-
ture include the semantic dependency parsing ef-
fort of Oepen et al. (2014). The difference is that
the work of Oepen et al. (2014) does not abstract
away from the surface word order and “semanti-
cally empty” words, and as far as we know, does
not make use of abstract concepts as AMR does.

There are several efforts for constructing the
Chinese semantic dependency resources. Li et al.
(2004) reported parsing experiments on a one mil-
lion word Chinese corpus annotated with seman-
tic dependencies, but their dependency structure
is tree-based rather than graph-based. Chen and
Ji (2011) described a three thousand sentence cor-
pus annotated with semantic graphs. Corpora an-
notated with semantic graphs also include those
reported in Ding et al. (2014) and Zheng et al.
(2014). These semantic resources vary in the types
of semantic relations they use, but they all differ
from the work we report here in that they define
semantic relations between word tokens instead of
abstract concepts.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we present our effort in develop-
ing specifications as well as an annotation tool for
Chinese AMR (CAMR) annotation. We first anno-
tate all 1,562 sentences of the Chinese translation
of the Little Prince following the English AMR
annotation framework while developing annota-
tion guidelines to handle certain Chinese-specific
syntactic constructions. We show that while we
have achieved consistent annotation, there are
shortcomings with this annotation approach. We
then develop a new annotation tool and redesigned
our annotation framework to address these short-
comings. In the future we plan to annotate addi-
tional data with this new framework.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful for the comments of the
anoymous reviewers. This work is sup-
ported in part by National Natural Science
Funds of China(No.61272221, 61170181) and
Jiangsu University Philosophy and Social Science
Fund(No.2016SJB740004).

References
Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina

Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse, pages 178–186, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2015. Abstract Meaning Represen-
tation (AMR) 1.2.2 Specification. https://github.
com/amrisi/amr-guidelines/blob/master/amr.md.

Claire Bonial, Julia Bonn, Kathryn Conger, D. Hwang,
Jena, and Martha Palmer. 2014. Propbank: Seman-
tics of new predicate types. In The 9th edition of
the LanguageResources and Evaluation Conference,
pages 3013–3019, Reykjavik, Iceland, May.

Shu Cai and Kevin Knight. 2013. Smatch: an evalua-
tion metric for semantic feature structures. In Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers), pages 748–752, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bo Chen and Donghong Ji. 2011. Chinese seman-
tic parsing based on dependency graph and feature
structure. In International Conference on Electronic

14



and Mechanical Engineering and Information Tech-
nology, volume 4, pages 1731–1734, Aug.

Yu Ding, Yanqiu Shao, Wanxiang Che, and Ting Liu.
2014. Dependency graph based chinese seman-
tic parsing. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
8801:58–69.

Jeffrey Flanigan, Sam Thomson, Jaime Carbonell,
Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith. 2014. A discrim-
inative graph-based parser for the abstract meaning
representation. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 1426–1436.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245–2883.

Mingqin Li, Juanzi Li, Zuoying Wang, and Lu Dajin.
2004. A statistical model for parsing semantic de-
pendency relations in a chinese sentence. Chinese
Journal of Computers, 27(12):1679–1687.

Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, Brian Young,
and Ralph Grishman. 2004. The nombank project:
An interim report. In A. Meyers, editor, Proceed-
ings of the Workshop Frontiers in Corpus Annotation
at HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 24–31, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA, May 2 - May 7.

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a universal grammar for
natural language processing. Computational Lin-
guistics and Intelligent Text Processing, 9041:3–16.

Stephan Oepen, Marco Kuhlmann, Yusuke Miyao,
Daniel Zeman, Dan Flickinger, Jan Hajic, Angelina
Ivanova, and Yi Zhang. 2014. Semeval 2014 task
8: Broad-coverage semantic dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 63–72,
Dublin, Ireland, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and Dublin City University.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–105.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Nianwen Xue.
2010. Semantic role labeling. In Graeme Hirst, ed-
itor, Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nology Series. Mogan & Claypoole Publishers.

Nima Pourdamghani, Yang Gao, Ulf Hermjakob, and
Kevin Knight. 2014. Aligning english strings with
abstract meaning representation graphs. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
425–429, Doha, Qatar, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sameer Pradhan, Wayne Ward, Kadri Hacioglu,
James H. Martin, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Shal-
low semantic parsing using support vector machines.

In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference/North American chapter of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL),
Boston, USA.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2004. Shal-
low semantic parsing using support vector ma-
chines. In Proceedings of 2004 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Barcelona, Spain.

Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2009. Adding se-
mantic roles to the chinese treebank. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 15(1):143–172.

Nianwen Xue, Ondrej Bojar, Jan Hajic, Martha Palmer,
Zdenka Uresova, and Xiuhong Zhang. 2014. Not an
interlingua, but close: Comparison of english amrs
to chinese and czech. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente
Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan
Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), pages 1765–
1772, Reykjavik, Iceland, May. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Wajdi Zaghouani, Abdelati Hawwari, and Mona Diab.
2012. A pilot propbank annotation for quranic ara-
bic. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012 Work-
shop on Computational Linguistics for Literature,
pages 78–83, Montréal, Canada, June.

Lijuan Zheng, Yanqiu Shao, and Erhong Yang. 2014.
Analysis of the non-projective phenomenon in chi-
nese semantic dependency graph. Journal of Chi-
nese Information Processing, 28(6):41–47.

Yuping Zhou and Nianwen Xue. 2015. The chinese
discourse treebank: a chinese corpus annotated with
discourse relations. Language Resources & Evalua-
tion, 49(2):1–35.

15


