



















































Longitudinal Studies of Variation Sets in Child-directed Speech


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning, pages 44–52,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Longitudinal Studies of Variation Sets in Child-directed Speech

Mats Wirén, Kristina Nilsson Björkenstam, Gintarė Grigonytė and Elisabet Eir Cortes
Department of Linguistics

Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden

{mats.wiren, kristina.nilsson, gintare, elisabet.cortes}@ling.su.se

Abstract

One of the characteristics of child-directed
speech is its high degree of repetitious-
ness. Sequences of repetitious utterances
with a constant intention, variation sets,
have been shown to be correlated with
children’s language acquisition. To obtain
a baseline for the occurrences of variation
sets in Swedish, we annotate 18 parent–
child dyads using a generalised definition
according to which the varying form may
pertain not just to the wording but also to
prosody and/or non-verbal cues. To facili-
tate further empirical investigation, we in-
troduce a surface algorithm for automatic
extraction of variation sets which is eas-
ily replicable and language-independent.
We evaluate the algorithm on the Swedish
gold standard, and use it for extracting
variation sets in Croatian, English and
Russian. We show that the proportion of
variation sets in child-directed speech de-
creases consistently as a function of chil-
dren’s age across Swedish, Croatian, En-
glish and Russian.

1 Introduction

1.1 Background and motivation

Child-directed speech has many characteristics
that set it apart from adult-directed language, such
as shorter utterances, lower speech rate, fewer
disfluencies, lower syntactic complexity, greater
modulation of F0 and high repetitiousness (Broen,
1972). Here is an example of the latter property
from our data:1

1Translation of utterances from the MINGLE-3 corpus
(Björkenstam and Wirén, 2014) with parental speech to a
child aged 1;3 (compare Section 3).

You can put the animals there.
You can take the pig and the cat and put

them there.
Can you put them there?
Good.
Can you put the pig there too?

Sequences of such (partial) self-repetitions with a
constant intention have been called variation sets,
and have been shown to account for a large pro-
portion of the language that children hear (Küntay
and Slobin, 1996; Clark., 2009, p. 37).2

Why does this phenomenon occur? To some
extent, repetitiousness may serve simply to cap-
ture and maintain the child’s attention, but our
intuitions tell us that it is likely to also facili-
tate language learning for infants. For example,
it may allow for effective segmentation of pho-
netic material (Bard and Anderson, 1983), and it
has been shown to be a predictor of syntax growth
(Hoff-Ginsberg, 1986; Hoff-Ginsberg, 1990; Wa-
terfall, 2006). In a similar vein, investigating so-
cial and attentional cues in word learning, Frank
et al. (2012), point out that the temporal proximity
and continuity of repetitious language create sup-
portive contexts where partial understanding of in-
dividual utterances can lead to fuller understand-
ing.3

But variation sets have also been shown to ben-
efit artificial language learning. In an experiment
on this, Onnis et al. (2008) showed that adults ex-
posed to input with varation sets performed bet-
ter in phrase segmentation and phrase-boundary
judgement tasks than a control group who heard

2”Variation set” is actually a misnomer, since the idea is
that the order of individual utterances is important.

3It is also interesting to note that child-directed signing
shares many characteristics of child-directed speech, such as
prosodic exaggeration, lexical and syntactic simplification,
and repetition (Masataka, 2000), and these shared character-
istics include variation sets (Hoiting and Slobin, 2002).

44



the same input in scrambled order without varia-
tion sets. They note that “[f]rom a computational
standpoint, the key characteristic of variation sets
is that local mechanisms of alignment and compar-
ison allow even memory-limited learners to dis-
cover structure that they would otherwise miss”
(Onnis et al., 2008, p. 424).

1.2 Related work

Early studies of child-directed language dealing
with partial and exact repetition include Broen
(1972), Snow (1972), Kaye (1980) and Hoff-
Ginsberg (1986; 1990). For example, Broen (ibid.,
p. 29, 43) tracked “clusters of sequential sen-
tences” where “the meaning remains constant”.
Snow (ibid.) found more partial and exact repe-
titions to 2-year olds than to 10-year olds.

Küntay and Slobin (1996) introduced the term
”variation set”, by which they meant a contiguous
sequence of repetitions with varying form but con-
stant intention. They pointed out that the core of
a variation set (and the main vehicle for express-
ing the intention) is almost always a verb, with op-
tionally expressed arguments. (In the above exam-
ple from the MINGLE-3 corpus, this verb would
be ”put”.) The possible variations were taken to
be ”(1) lexical substitution and rephrasing, (2) ad-
dition and deletion of specific referential terms,
and (3) reordering of constituents” (Küntay and
Slobin, 2002, p. 6). Their definition did not in-
clude exact repetitions, however. Furthermore, it
appears that in order for a new utterance to be con-
sidered a member of a existing variation set, the
new utterance has to satisfy the above conditions
for all of the previous utterances taken to be in the
set.

Küntay and Slobin’s study was based on tran-
scripts of everyday interaction between a Turkish-
speaking mother and her child over a seven-month
period, during which the child was between 1;8
and 2;3 years. The finding was that 21% of the
utterances occurred within variation sets, and that
these sets were positively associated with chil-
dren’s acquisition of specific verbs. A follow-up
study of transcripts of another Turkish-speaking
mother and a child (at age 1;3 and 2;0 years)
showed how the communicative functions of the
variation sets changed as a function of age (Küntay
and Slobin, 2002).

Waterfall (2006) provided the first longitudi-
nal study of variation sets in English, based on

12 mother–child dyads with children between 1;2
and 2;6 years. Waterfall’s (2006, p. 21) defini-
tion of variation set is somewhat different from
Küntay and Slobin’s, though it is not clear what
effect that has in practice. Basically, she defines
a variation set as a sequence of utterances that be-
longs to the same conversational turn, that relates
to the same event or situation, that ”have similar
or related meanings”, and shares at least one noun
or verb. Again, it appears that these conditions
should hold between all utterances within the set,
and like Küntay and Slobin, she did not include
exact repetitions. Also, she allowed up to four
non-related intervening utterances in a variation
set. Waterfall found that children’s production of
nominal and verbal structures was correlated with
peaks in the parents’ use of that structure in vari-
ation sets. She also found a moderate decrease in
the proportion of utterances that are part of vari-
ation sets as a function of age, from 17% at 1;2
years to 12% at 2;6 years.

Attempts at automatic extraction of variation
sets naturally focus on form rather than func-
tion. Brodsky et al. (2007) suggest a simple def-
inition of a variation set as a sequence of utter-
ances where each successive pair of utterances
has a lexical overlap of at least one element, ex-
cluding words on a stoplist (which includes high-
frequency words). Variation sets are thus extracted
by comparing pairs of successive utterances for re-
peated words, resulting in sets with at least one
non-stoplisted word in common. Using an auto-
mated procedure of this kind, Brodsky et al. ob-
tain a proportion of 21.5% of the words in Water-
fall’s (2006) corpus occurring in variation sets, and
18.3% of the words in the English CHILDES col-
lection (MacWhinney, 2000). Similar studies have
been performed by Onnis et al. (2008) and Water-
fall et al. (2010). For example, when Onnis et al.
used an automated procedure based on Waterfall’s
(2006) criteria on the Lara corpus from CHILDES
(involving one child between 1;9 and 3;3 years),
they obtained a proportion of 27,9% of the utter-
ances being inside variation sets.

1.3 The problem

For the purpose of this work, we assume that vari-
ation sets play a role in language learning for in-
fants, but we are agnostic as to the precise na-
ture of this role. Rather, the aim is to investigate
the longitudinal behaviour of variation sets using a

45



definition which subsumes earlier work but where
the repetitiousness may also be, on the one hand,
semantic (with no or very little surface repetition)
and, on the other hand, prosodic or non-verbal
(while displaying exact repetition). To obtain a
baseline for the behaviour of this phenomenon in
Swedish, we develop a gold standard for variation
sets. To facilitate further empirical investigation,
we introduce a surface algorithm which we eval-
uate on the gold standard and apply to Croatian,
English and Russian.

2 Criteria for variation sets

2.1 Basic criteria

A starting-point for our work is Küntay and
Slobin’s (1996; 2002) definition, which takes vari-
ation sets to be sequences of utterances with the
same communicative intention but with small dif-
ferences in form. Basically, our definition sub-
sumes Küntay and Slobin’s, but we extend it in
certain ways. First, along with Brodsky et al.
(2007), we extract variation sets (whether manu-
ally in the gold standard or automatically using the
algorithm) by comparing successive pairs of utter-
ances: first–second, second–third, etc. Also, up to
two intervening utterances (such as interjections)
by the parent are allowed any time in a sequence
(similarly to Snow (1972, p. 251) and Brodsky et
al. (2007)). Furthermore, we allow for verbal input
from the child within variation sets. The rationale
for this is that our data covers the ages 0;7–2;9
years (see Section 3), and especially in the early
dyads the children are still learning to take turns.
As for constant intention, we make one exception
from this, following Küntay and Slobin (2002):
we include question–answer sequences where the
parent provides both the question and the answer
in variation sets.

2.2 Surface and semantic repetitiousness

A difference compared to previous work that we
are aware of is that we aim at capturing a continu-
ous scale of surface and semantic repetitiousness,
where, at one extreme, the repetitiousness may be
purely semantic without any surface similarity at
all. Here is an example of this from our data, with
approximate translations:

Titta här då!
(But look here!)

Har du sett vilka tjusiga byxor?

(Have you seen the fancy pants?)
Kolla!
(Look!)

The intention in each of these utterances is to make
the child look at the pants, but there is no overlap
whatsoever in form between the utterances.

 

Figure 1: Phonetic and prosodic analysis of a
repetition of the Swedish phrase ”Var är gummi-
ankan?” (”Where is the rubber duck?”), uttered by
a male speaker. The utterances are ordered with
the first utterance on top. The y-axis represents
frequency (semitones) and the x-axis represents
time (seconds). Black thick horizontal lines show
stylised intonation based on tonal perception.

2.3 Multimodal variation
Contrary to many previous studies of variation sets
(Küntay and Slobin, 1996; Küntay and Slobin,
2002; Waterfall, 2006), we include exact (verba-
tim) repetitions in our definition of variation sets.
This is motivated by the result of a study that we
made of three dyads in the multimodally anno-
tated MINGLE-3 corpus (see Section 3). When-

46



ever word-for-word repetition occurred in the writ-
ten transcript of the three dyads, we found consis-
tent patterns of prosodic variation in the parents’
speech, involving pitch, timing and/or stress, and
typically also variation of their non-verbal cues,
involving eye gaze direction, deictic gestures or
object manipulation.

Figure 1 shows a phonetic and prosodic analy-
sis of a variation set from our data with three exact
repetitions of the Swedish utterance ”Var är gum-
miankan?” (”Where is the rubber duck?”).4 The
vertical line indicates time-synchronized starts of
the repetitions. In the analysis window for each
repetition, a black thick horizontal line shows styl-
ized intonation based on tonal perception (per-
ceived pitch). A downwards tilted line means
falling intonation (from brighter to deeper voice),
upwards tilted means rising intonation. In the
background, the waveform and intensity (thin line)
can be seen. The annotation rows beneath each
repetition contains phonetic transcription in IPA
(top row) and syllable segmentation (second row).
The third row at the bottom contains an ortho-
graphic annotation.5

Here, the first utterance (shown at the top of
the figure) initially displays relatively flat intona-
tion, and then rising intonation with a peak on the
first syllable in the noun ”ankan” (”duck”), with
a fall on the last syllable. In contrast, the sec-
ond utterance has shorter duration and falling in-
tonation throughout. Finally, the third utterance
has completely flat intonation, with duration sim-
ilar to the first utterance but with a prolongation
of the first syllable, corresponding to the adverb
”var” (”where”).

Although this is just a small study, the fact that
variation is here being systematically manifested
through prosody and/or non-verbal cues when the
wording is constant fits well with our general im-
pression of exact repetitions. It is because of
this multimodal variation that we include verbatim
repetitions in variation sets.

3 Data

Our data consists of transcripts of Swedish child-
directed speech from the MINGLE-3 corpus

4The examples in this section are from the MINGLE-3
corpus (Björkenstam and Wirén, 2014), with approximate
English translations.

5The intonation analyses were done in Prosogram
(Mertens, 2004), and the figures were compiled from Proso-
gram and Praat (Boersma, 2001).

(Björkenstam and Wirén, 2014), consisting of 18
longitudinal dyads with three children (two girls,
one boy) recorded between the ages of 7 and 33
months with six dyads per child, all of which is
multimodally annotated. The complete duration of
the 18 dyads is 7:29 hours (mean duration 24:58
minutes). The video and audio recordings were
made from naturalistic parent–child interaction in
a recording studio at the Phonetics Laboratory at
Stockholm University (Lacerda, 2009). The chil-
dren were interacting alternately with their moth-
ers (10 dyads) and fathers (8 dyads). The sce-
nario was free play.6 The ELAN annotation tool
(Wittenburg et al., 2006) was used for transcrip-
tion of parent and child utterances, as well as
annotation of eye gaze, deictic gestures and ob-
ject manipulation (Björkenstam and Wirén, 2014).
The transcripts have been automatically annotated
with part-of-speech and morphosyntactic tags us-
ing Stagger (Östling, 2013), followed by manual
correction.

4 Creating a gold standard

The manual annotation of variation sets started
with analysis of four dyads, based on a guideline
according to the criteria in Section 2. The same
criteria were applied throughout all age groups.
The annotations were made in ELAN, using time-
lines to code the extensions of variations sets
across utterances, and taking into account both
verbal and non-verbal input from parent and child
from transcriptions, audio and video.

Each of the four dyads was annotated by two
coders independently. The resulting annotations
were merged, and a third annotator marked cases
of disagreement. This resulted in an interannota-
tor agreement (measured as set overlap between
annotators) of 78%. The remaining 14 dyads were
annotated by one annotator. During this phase, a
classification of communicative intention based on
the Inventory of Communicative Acts-Abridged
(Ninio et al., 1994) was added. This classifica-
tion was evaluated by comparing four representa-
tive dyads annotated by three independent annota-
tors, resulting in a Fleiss’s kappa of 0.63.

6Some of the data (transcripts and audio) is available
through the Swedish section of CHILDES as the Lacerda files
(MacWhinney, 2000).

47



Table 1: Results of the longitudinal study of Swedish variation sets (also used as gold standard in Table
3). The third row shows the proportions of child-directed utterances that are in variation sets. Each
figure is obtained by first calculating the proportion per dyad and then averaging the proportions over
all dyads in the respective age group. Boldface indicates statistically significant difference to boldfaced
neighbour (z-test of sample proportions; respectively, z = 8, p < 0.0001, z = 2.3, p < 0.02, z = 8.2,
p < 0.0001, two-tailed). The fourth row shows the proportions of exact repetitions within variation sets.
Each figure is obtained by first calculating the proportion per variation set and averaging over the dyad,
then averaging over all dyads in the respective age group.

Longitudinal study of Swedish variation sets Group 10;7–0;9
Group 2
1;0–1;2

Group 3
1;4–1;7

Group 4
2;3–2;9

Number of dyads 5 5 5 3
Number of child-directed utterances 1032 1421 1492 724
Proportion of utterances that are in variation sets 50% 34% 30% 14%
Proportion of exact repetitions in variation sets 24% 16% 13% 10%

5 Results: Gold standard variation sets

In order to obtain a baseline for how the proportion
of utterances that are in variation sets varied as a
function of age of the children, we grouped the
dyads according to child age in the following four
data sets:

Age group 1: 0;7–0;9 (7–9 months)
Age group 2: 1;0–1;2 (12–14 months)
Age group 3: 1;4–1;7 (16–19 months)
Age group 4: 2;3–2;9 (27–33 months)

As shown in Table 1, our gold standard displayed a
consistent decrease in the proportion of utterances
in variation sets over time, from 50% for age group
1 to 14% for group 4. The proportion of verbatim
repetitions in variation sets also decreased, from
24% for age group 1 to 10% for group 4.

6 Automatic extraction of variation sets

The method that we use for extracting variation
sets is deliberately surface-based to allow us to de-
termine how far this can bring us relative to our
gold standard, which is based on both surface and
semantic criteria. As mentioned above, the algo-
rithm performs a stepwise comparison of pairs of
successive utterances. The criterion for including
two successive utterances in a variation set is that
the difference between them (regarded as strings)
does not fall below a certain similarity threshold.
Additionally, following Brodsky et al. (2007) and
others, we allow for sequences of maximally two
intervening dissimilar utterances that do not obey
this condition.

For string comparison, we used Ratcliff–
Obershelp pattern recognition (Black, 2004) as
implemented in the Python module difflib.7

We refer to the variation-set extraction algorithm
using this as ”difflib ratio”, DLR.8 When com-
paring two strings, the matcher returns a value be-
tween 0 and 1. A value of 1 corresponds to an
exact repetition, and 0 corresponds to two utter-
ances without any overlap of words. By using this
value as a parameter, we can obtain a threshold
for the desired degree of similarity. The threshold
can either be selected arbitrarily, or learned from
evaluation against the gold standard variation sets.
When evaluated against the gold standard, the op-
timal similarity threshold was 0.55 (see Figure 2).

We experimented with including information
from the part-of-speech tagging of the transcripts
(see Section 3) in such a way that the pair of
strings compared consisted of both the words and
their part-of-speech tags. Our intuition was that
this might give us a more refined analysis, for
example, by distinguishing cases of homonymy.
This version of the algorithm turned out not to im-
prove performance, however (see Figure 2), and
was therefore dropped.

7https://docs.python.org/2/library/
difflib.html#module-difflib.

8We also experimented with another standard technique
for calculating string similarity, namely, edit distance, also
known as Levenshtein distance (Levenshtein, 1966). In the
end we found DLR to perform slightly better relative to the
gold standard, however.

48



0	  

0.1	  

0.2	  

0.3	  

0.4	  

0.5	  

0.6	  

0.1	   0.2	   0.3	   0.4	   0.5	   0.6	   0.7	   0.8	   0.9	   1	  

Precision	  

Recall	  

F-­‐score	  

Precision_POS	  

Recall_POS	  

F-­‐score_POS	  

Figure 2: Results of strict matching with the DLR similarity measure on raw (solid lines) and part-of-
speech tagged data (dotted lines). Similarity level thresholds on x-axis; precision, recall and F-score on
y-axis.

Table 2: Example variation set from the gold standard (utterance 3–4) and utterances exrqcted by the
algorithm (utterance 1–4).

Example utterances Member of Extracted by
gold set algorithm

1. Ska vi lägga ner nånting i i väskan då?
(Are we going to put something in in the bag then?)

– Yes

2. Va?
(Huh?)

– Yes

3. Ska du lägga ner kossan i väskan kanske?
(Are you going to put down the cow in the bag maybe?)

Yes Yes

4. Ska vi lägga ner kossan?
(Are we going to put down the cow?)

Yes Yes

7 Results: Automated extraction

7.1 Evaluation on Swedish gold standard

We evaluated the algorithm against the gold stan-
dard variation sets using two kinds of metrics,
which we refer to as strict and fuzzy matching.
Strict matching requires exact matching on the ut-
terance level of the extracted variation set and the
corresponding gold standard set, whereas fuzzy
matching allows for partial overlaps of the ex-
tracted variation set and the gold standard set. In
the example in Table 2, only utterance 3 and 4
are members of the gold standard variation set,
whereas the algorithm extracts utterances 1–4.
Hence, the strict matching metric treats this ex-
tracted set as a false positive, whereas the fuzzy
matching metric treats it as a true positive. As
for fuzzy matching, we need a way of calculat-
ing precision for different degrees of overlaps with
the gold set. The measure we have adopted for
this purpose is mean average precision (MAP), see

Croft et al. (2009, p. 313).

Table 3 summarizes the results of extraction
of variation sets relative to the gold standard ac-
cording to the strict and fuzzy metric. Strict
F-score reaches 0.56 and fuzzy F-score reaches
0.82 for age group 1, but F-scores gradually de-
crease with increasing age. Apparently, the varia-
tion displayed in the parents’ speech becomes less
amenable to surface methods as the children grow
older. An indirect sign of this increased complex-
ity in variation sets is that the proportion of exact
repetitions decreases as the children grow older, as
shown in Table 1.

7.2 Extraction of variation sets in Croatian,
English and Russian

To investigate the behaviour of variation sets in
other languages, we ran the algorithm with lon-

49



Table 3: Evaluation of the algorithm for automatic variation-set extraction against the Swedish gold
standard per age group.

String matching relative to gold standard Group 10;7–0;9
Group 2
1;0–1;2

Group 3
1;4–1;7

Group 4
2;3–2;9

Strict precision
Strict recall
Strict F-score

0.539
0.581
0.559

0.406
0.406
0.406

0.351
0.446
0.392

0.217
0.333
0.262

Fuzzy precision
Fuzzy recall
Fuzzy F-score

0.774
0.877
0.822

0.627
0.763
0.689

0.505
0.743
0.601

0.324
0.615
0.425

Table 4: Results of the algorithm for automatic variation-set extraction applied to Croatian, English and
Russian child-directed utterances from CHILDES. The rows show the number of utterances in each age
group, the average proportion of utterances that are in variation sets, and the average proportion of exact
repetitions in the variation sets, with figures having being calculated in the same way as in Table 1.

Language Features of the data set Group 10;7–0;9
Group 2
1;0–1;2

Group 3
1;4–1;7

Group 4
2;3–2;9

Croatian
Kovacevic

Total number of utterances 39 217 408 (no data)
Utterances in variation sets 85% 54% 50% –
Exact repetitions in variation sets 0.0% 8.5% 4.9% –

English (UK)
Lara

Total number of utterances (no data) (no data) 926 391
Utterances in variation sets – – 54% 44%
Exact repetitions in variation sets – – 7.8% 6.9%

Russian
Protassova

Total number of utterances (no data) (no data) 1088 545
Utterances in variation sets – – 35% 24%
Exact repetitions in variation sets – – 6.3% 4.6%

gitudinal corpora in Croatian,9 English10 and Rus-
sian from CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000).11 Al-
though it was not possible to find a perfect cor-
respondance with the age groups for Swedish,
Table 4 shows how the selection of languages
and transcripts from CHILDES partly matches the
Swedish data. As shown in Table 4, both the pro-
portion of variation sets and the proportion of ex-
act repetitions as far, as can be seen, decrease con-
sistently for Croatian, English and Russian.

8 Discussion

In our study of the Swedish gold standard, we
obtained statistically significant decreases in the
proportion of utterances within variation sets as
a function of age between all age groups, from

9Kovacevic: Vjeran, files 20 (0;10 years) 23 (1;2 years),
33 (1;7 years).

10Lara, files 1-09-13 (1;9 years), 2-06-00 (2;6 years).
11Protassova: Varv, files 01 (1;6 years), 04 (1;10 years), 06

(2;4 years).

50% for age group 1 to 14% for age group 4 (see
Table 1). These differences were also more con-
sistent than in Waterfall (2006), who obtained an
overall decrease from 17% for 1;2 years to 12%
for 2;6 years (ibid., p. 125). Waterfall’s age span
was shorter than ours,12 but its decrease was still
less pronounced within the comparable age in-
terval. It is also interesting to see that we ob-
tained the largest proportion of variation sets for
the youngest age group (0;7–0;9 years), which was
not covered by Waterfall.

The fact that we see larger age-related differ-
ences in our data does not seem to be attributable
to the inclusion of exact repetitions in our varia-
tion sets, judging from the proportiones of these
in Table 1. In any case, and as argued in Sec-
tion 2, the reason for extending the definition of
variation sets in this way is motivated by an in-

12Waterfall’s age group 1;2 roughly matches our group
2, 1:6 and 1;8 roughly match our group 3, and 2;2 and 2;6
roughly match our group 4. Our results for age group 1 are
new compared to previous studies, however.

50



depth analysis of a subset of these utterances in
our multimodally annotated corpus. We conjec-
ture that when an utterance is repeated verbatim,
there is instead multimodal variation that increases
the information and helps the child learn from the
utterance. As far as we know, our longitudinal fig-
ures on proportions of exact repetitions are also
the first that have been reported.

Our automatic algorithm for variation set ex-
traction is deliberately surface-based in order to
test how far this kind of method can bring us. An
independent advantage is that it is easily replica-
ble since it is based on a standard library for string
comparison. The algorithm reaches a fuzzy F-
score of up to 0.82 (strict: up to 0.56) relative to the
Swedish gold standard in spite of only using crite-
ria related to form. The F-score drops as a function
of age, however (see Table 3); we conjecture that
this is due to the relation between form and inten-
tion becoming less transparent with increased age.
That is, as the child develops and learns more lan-
guage, the parents’ variation gets more complex.
One way of handling this complexity would be by
generalizing the algorithm to recognize intention.

Since the algorithm only uses form-based cri-
teria, it is in principle also language-independent.
We obtain consistent decreases of the proportions
of utterances in variation sets also when we ap-
ply the algorithm to Croatian, English and Russian
corpora of child-directed language (see Table 4).
Although in this case we have no evaluations, it is
interesting to see that the behaviour corresponds
to what we expected.

9 Conclusion

We have investigated the longitudinal behaviour of
variation sets in child-directed speech according to
a generalised definition. Variation sets appear to
function as a device for effective communication
and learning with young children: the speaker re-
peats the same content while varying the wording,
prosody and/or non-verbal cues in order to max-
imise the chance of comprehension. With increas-
ing age and language comprehension, there is less
need for such repetitiousness.

Our study of Swedish covered a larger age span
and displayed a more consistent decrease than Wa-
terfall’s (2006) study of American English. Our
automatic algorithm seems to usefully approxi-
mate manual extraction of variation sets at least
for lower age groups, and an advantage is that the

algorithm is easily replicable. Applications of the
algorithm to Croatian, English and Russian dis-
played similar decreases in the proportions of ut-
terances in variation sets as a function of ages. We
also found that the proportions of exact repetitions
are similarly decreasing as a function of age for all
languages, and we have demonstrated how multi-
modal cues seem to provide other dimensions of
variation in these utterances.

Acknowledgements

This research is part of the project “Modelling the
emergence of linguistic structures in early child-
hood”, funded by the Swedish Research Council
as 2011-675-86010-31. We would like to thank
Lisa Tengstrand and Claudia Eklås Tejman for an-
notation work, and Annika Otsa for extracting and
preparing the CHILDES data. Finally, we would
like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for
valuable comments.

References
Ellen Gurman Bard and Anne H. Anderson. 1983. The

unintelligibility of speech to children. Journal of
Child Language, 10(2):265–292.

Kristina Nilsson Björkenstam and Mats Wirén. 2014.
Multimodal annotation of synchrony in parent-child
interaction. In Proceedings of The 10th Workshop
on Multimodal Corpora: Combining applied and
basic research targets, 2014, Reykjavik, Iceland,
May. ELRA.

Paul E Black. 2004. Ratcliff/obershelp pattern recog-
nition. Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Struc-
tures, 17.

Paul Boersma. 2001. Praat, a system for doing phonet-
ics by computer. Glot International, 5(9/10):341–
345.

Peter Brodsky, Heidi R. Waterfall, and Shimon Edel-
man. 2007. Characterizing motherese: On the com-
putational structure of child-directed language. In
Proc. 29th Cognitive Science Society Conference,
Nashville, TN.

Patricia A. Broen. 1972. The verbal environment of the
language-learning child. ASHA Monographs Num-
ber 17, American Speech and Hearing Association.
Washington D.C.

Eve V. Clark. 2009. First Language Acquisition. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

W. Bruce Croft, Donald Metzler, and Trevor Strohman.
2009. Search Engines: Information Retrieval in
Practice. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
USA.

51



Michael C. Frank, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Anne
Fernald. 2012. Social and discourse contributions
to the determination of reference in cross-situational
learning. Language Learning and Development,
00:1–24.

Erika Hoff-Ginsberg. 1986. Function and structure in
maternal speech: Their relation to the child’s de-
velopment of syntax. Developmental Psychology,
22(3):155–163.

Erika Hoff-Ginsberg. 1990. Maternal speech and the
child’s development of syntax: a further look. Jour-
nal of Child Language, 17:85–99.

Nini Hoiting and Dan I. Slobin. 2002. What a
deaf child needs to see: Advantages of a natural
sign language over a sign system. In R. Schul-
meister and H. Reinitzer, editors, Progress in sign
language research. In honor of Siegmund Prill-
witz/Fortschritte in der Gebärdensprachforschung.
Festschrift für Siegmund Prillwitz, pages 268–277.
Signum, Hamburg.

Kenneth Kaye. 1980. Why we don’t talk ‘baby talk’ to
babies. Journal of Child Language, 7:489–507.

Aylin C. Küntay and Dan I. Slobin. 1996. Listen-
ing to a turkish mother: Some puzzles for acquisi-
tion. In Social Interaction, Social Context, and Lan-
guage. Essays in the Honor of Susan Ervin-Tripp,
pages 265–286. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.

Aylin C. Küntay and Dan I. Slobin. 2002. Putting in-
teraction back into child language: Examples from
Turkish. Psychology of Language and Communica-
tion, 6:5–14.

Francisco Lacerda. 2009. On the emergence of early
linguistic functions: A biological and interactional
perspective. In K. Alter, M. Horne, M. Lindgren,
M. Roll, and J. von Koss Torkildsen, editors, Brain
Talk: Discourse with and in the brain, pages 207–
230. Media-Tryck, Lund, Sweden.

Vladimir I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable
of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. In
Soviet physics doklady, volume 10, pages 707–710.

Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project:
Tools for analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, Mahwah, NJ, 3 edition.

Nobuo Masataka. 2000. The role of modality and
input in the earliest stages of language acquisition:
Studies of japanese sign language. In C. Cham-
berlain, J. P. Morford, and R. I. Mayberry, editors,
Language acquisition by eye, pages 3–24. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.

Piet Mertens. 2004. The prosogram: Semi-automatic
transcription of prosody based on a tonal percep-
tion model. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2004,
pages 549–552, Nara, Japan.

Anat Ninio, Catherine E. Snow, Barbara A. Pan, and
Pamela R. Rollins. 1994. Classifying communica-
tive acts in children’s interactions. Journal of Com-
municative Disorders, 27:157–187.

Luca Onnis, Heidi R. Waterfall, and Shimon Edel-
man. 2008. Learn locally, act globally: Learn-
ing language from variation set cues. Cognition,
109(3):423–430.

Robert Östling. 2013. Stagger: an open-source part
of speech tagger for swedish. Northern European
Journal of Language Technology, 3:1–18.

Catherine E. Snow. 1972. Mothers’ speech to children
learning language. Child Development, 43(2):549–
565.

Heidi R. Waterfall, Ben Sandbank, Luca Onnis, and
Shimon Edelman. 2010. An empirical generative
framework for computational modeling of language
acquisition. Journal of Child Language, 37:671–
703.

Heidi R. Waterfall. 2006. A Little Change is a Good
Thing: Feature Theory, Language Acquisition and
Variation Sets. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Linguis-
tics, University of Chicago.

P. Wittenburg, H. Brugman, A. Russel, A. Klassmann,
and H. Sloetjes. 2006. Elan: a professional frame-
work for multimodality research. In Proceedings of
LREC 2006, Fifth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, pages 1556–1559,
Genoa, Italy, May. ELRA.

52


