



















































An Hymn of an even Deeper Sentiment Analysis


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, page 170,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Manfred Klenner 
Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich\\
Switzerland
klenner@cl.uzh.ch

 
An Hymn of an even Deeper Sentiment Analysis

A deeper understanding of what is going on in a given text is still one of the
most interesting and challenging goals in NLP. Sentiment analysis has recently 
started to contribute to this area. We no longer just try to predict the 
polarity of whole product reviews but to distinguish various perspectives 
inherent to a text, namely, what the author is telling us, how he implicitly or 
explictely evaluates it and what his text tells us about the attitudes the 
entities in the text hold towards each other (or towards the mentioned objects, 
situations, or opinions of others). Other perspectives not yet taken by our 
systems include the common-sense perspective (what follows from the behaviour of
an agent for his perception by the public) or the reader perspective: given that
I have  specified the pros and cons of my world view - which are the opponents 
and proponents of mine given the text at hand. Progress has been made in this 
direction. Sentiment inferences based on verb-specific polar lexicons and 
general inference rules have been proposed (see the work of Deng and Wiebe, for 
instance). Our preprocessing tools for the extraction of predicate argument 
structures or for semantic role labeling seem to be mature enough to support 
this kind of deep understanding reasonably well. 

This is most exciting, like any attempt to reap the benefits of a bit more 
semantics compared to attemps that just scratch the surface with crude and 
brute-force means. Sentiment analysis certainly is a field that takes advantage 
of lexical resources. For instance, verbs have proved to provide a lot of 
crucial information for fine-grained sentiment analysis taking the various 
perspectives into account that I mentioned.

Clearly, all the other problems need to be solved as well: aspect 
detection/induction, sentiment composition, sense disambiguation and so on. New 
techniques (deep learning), new theoretical stances (distributional semantics) 
might prove successful. If not, a shift towards a new playgroud is to be 
expected, e.g. the focus on emotions. Well, I am quite sure that all this will 
turn out to be very entertaining and - step by step - sucessful.

170


