



















































Automatic Generation of Student Report Cards


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 207–211,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Generation of Student Report Cards

Amy Isard
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Scotland, U.K.

amy.isard@ed.ac.uk

Jeremy Knox
School of Education

University of Edinburgh
Scotland, U.K.

jeremy.knox@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

The Learning Analytics Report Card (LARC)
is a pilot system which takes time-series data
from a student’s course-related activity in a
Virtual Learning Environment and generates
automatic textual summaries in real time. Stu-
dents are able to generate reports as often as
they like, and to choose which aspects of their
behaviour are included in each report. As
well as rating a student’s scores against set
standards, the generated texts make compar-
isons with the individual student’s previous
behaviour from the same course, and with the
average scores of their student cohort. In ad-
dition, we carry out sentiment analysis on the
student’s forum posts, and generate a sum-
mary using quantifiers. We report some stu-
dent reactions to initial trials of the system.

1 Introduction

The Learning Analytics Report Card (LARC)
project was an interdisciplinary pilot project at the
University of Edinburgh involving researchers in
Education and Computational Linguistics, as well as
Information Services. Its overall aim was to raise
students’ critical awareness of the ways in which
learning analytics (Ferguson, 2012) can intervene in
and mediate educational activity. The project ex-
plored the analysis and presentation through Natural
Language Generation (NLG) of data from the Moo-
dle Virtual Learning Environment1, which students
were using as part of a Distance Learning course.

Student involvement was incorporated at all
stages of the project. The design, development, and

1https://moodle.org

testing phases of LARC were informed by formal
student representation, motivated by a general con-
cern for ethical practices in data collection. Stu-
dents can experience learning analytics applied to
them as individuals as “snooping” (Parr, 2014), and
the LARC project aimed to avoid this by giving stu-
dents a chance to interact with their data. The stu-
dents taking part in the pilot project were studying
either “Understanding Learning in the Online Envi-
ronment” or “Digital Futures for Learning” and were
asked to provide feedback about the LARC system.
We intended that some of the generated texts would
be controversial, and would provoke strong reac-
tions from students, to cause them to consider as-
pects of data interpretation and ownership.

2 Related Work

Previous research has investigated the use of NLG
techniques to generate reports from time-series data
in a number of different domains (Sripada et al.,
2003b). These include medical data summariza-
tion in the BabyTalk Project, providing decision sup-
port in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (Gatt et al.,
2009; Hunter et al., 2011), and weather forecasts in
SUMTIME-MOUSAM (Sripada et al., 2003a).

There are also a number of systems which have
analysed data from Virtual Learning Environments,
presenting it to the students themselves or to their
institutions (Gašević et al., 2015), and global com-
panies such as Civitas2 and Knewton3 offer large-
scale data analytics solutions to educational institu-
tions and publishers. However, there are only a few

2https://www.civitaslearning.com/
3https://www.knewton.com/approach/platform

207



Figure 1: LARC user interface

systems which have made use of NLG in presenting
their data.

The SkillSum project generated reports for adult
students taking a basic skills test designed to check
their basic numeracy and literary skills (Reiter et al.,
2006; Williams and Reiter, 2008). It generated re-
ports which used language tailored to the reading
ability of the students, informing them whether or
not their skill levels were suited to adult education
courses in which they were interested. Our system
deals with different sorts of data, and provides a
more general report, rather than giving tailored ad-
vice on course choice.

The research of Gkatzia et al (2013) relates most
closely to the LARC project - they generated re-
ports based on time-series data from student lec-
ture attendance and weekly questionnaires, and used
reinforcement learning informed by the lecturers’
method of providing feedback to choose the con-
tent to be contained in the report. They also com-
pared students to their own past behaviours and to
the student cohort. Our work differs from theirs in
the nature of the data – the LARC data was all auto-
matically gathered from the Moodle platform – and
in the fact that we allow the students rather than the
software to choose what should be presented. In ad-
dition, our pilot system was entirely rule-based. We
also performed sentiment analysis on student forum
posts, and to our knowledge are the first to have pre-
sented the results of this analysis using NLG.

Your attendance has in general been excellent but this week you
logged on less often than usual.
You have mostly been very engaged with the course content and
this week you seemed more interested in the topic than usual.
You have usually been extremely social during the course but this
week you interacted less with others than usual. Most of your
forum posts were neutral in tone, some were positive, and none
were negative.
You are fairly concerned what others in the class think about you.
You are in the middle third of students for social interaction and
engagement, but the highest third of students for attendance.

Figure 2: LARC generated report with all 5 themes selected

3 User Interface

The LARC interface consists of a web form, acces-
sible to students when they log in through a secure
system. The interface is shown in Figure 1. The stu-
dents used check boxes to select one or more of the
five themes presented (described in Section 4), and
the week for which they would like their report to
be generated. They could generate a report as of-
ten as they wanted, and if they wished, they could
at any time generate a report for a previous week.
The data used to generate the LARC reports was au-
tomatically downloaded once a day from the Moo-
dle server into an SQL database, which was then ac-
cessed and analysed by the NLG software in order
to construct a report.

4 Report Themes

We chose five report themes, and values were set
by the course lecturer in order to quantify the stu-
dent’s performance. For attendance (weekly login
frequency), engagement (clicks on course pages)
and social (accesses of the course discussion forum),
(Table 1). For personal, we counted a student’s posts
to the course’s “Introductions” forum and clicks by
others on their profile. For performance we com-
pared the student’s performance to the average of the
student cohort (Section 5.2). In addition, we gener-
ated a summary of sentiment analysis carried out on
the student’s posts to the discussion forum (Section
5.3).

5 Report Generation and Contents

The report consisted of a short paragraph on each
of the selected themes, generated in real-time by a

208



XXXXXXXXTheme
Rating poor adequate good excellent

attendance <5 <10 <15 >=15
engagement <10 <25 <100 >=100

social <4 <8 <12 >=12

Table 1: Report Theme Values

Java-based system with custom templates. Figure 2
shows a sample report.

5.1 Individual Comparisons
For the attendance, engagement and social themes,
the student’s scores for the week selected were com-
pared to their average scores up to that point, and a
sentence containing a comparison between the two
was generated. The clause describing the student’s
general performance expresses the value judgments
as described in Section 4, and in the generated texts
the weekly score is compared to the previous aver-
age using Rhetorical Structure Theory similarity and
contrast relations (Mann and Thompson, 1998) (Ta-
ble 2). If the scores are identical, no comparison
is included. A contrast relation is expressed by the
conjunction “but” and a similarity relation by “and”.
For example, if the student’s average attendance was
12 (good, +), and the current week 18 (higher, +),
the generated sentence would be “Your attendance
has in general been good, and this week you logged
on more than usual” whereas if the average engage-
ment was 120 (excellent +) and the current week 80
(lower, -) we would generate “You have mostly been
very engaged with the course content but this week
you seemed less interested in the topic than usual”.

5.2 Cohort Comparisons
If a student selected the performance theme, we gen-
erated a sentence comparing their average perfor-
mance to their course cohort. We included compar-
isons on attendance, engagement and social if any
had been selected, or an average of all three if not.

We calculated the student’s position within the co-
hort, and assigned them to the bottom, middle, or
top third for each chosen theme. If more than one
theme was chosen, we aggregated all of the match-
ing positions, and combined the dissimilar ones with
similarity or contrast relations, as in the following
example “You are in the highest third of students for
attendance and engagement, but the lowest third for
social interaction.”

hhhhhhhhhhhhhRating
This Week vs Previous

higher (+) lower (-)

poor (-) contrast similarity
adequate (-) contrast similarity

good (+) similarity contrast
excellent (+) similarity contrast

Table 2: Individual Comparisons

5.3 Sentiment Analysis
To enable us to include a summary of the sentiments
expressed in the students’ forum posts, we experi-
mented with two sentiment analysis packages. The
first, part of the Stanford CoreNLP tools (Manning
et al., 2014), comes with a model trained on movie
review texts, which did not transfer well to our do-
main. Since we did not have any annotated data with
which to train our own model, we used the rule-
based Pattern system, (De Smedt and Daelemans,
2012) which generalized more successfully. We ob-
tained sentiment subjectivity and polarity ratings for
each blog post, which ranged between 1 and 0. For
each post, we considered the sentiment to be neutral
unless the subjectivity and polarity were both greater
than .2. These levels were set after initial testing and
are an aspect which we would hope to refine in fu-
ture versions of the system (Section 7).

5.4 Quantifiers
There is a large body of research on the theory and
use of quantifiers (Moxey and Sanford, 1986; Bos
and Nissim, 2006; Lappin, 2000), and Varges and
van Deemter (2005) give a theoretical handling of
generation, but we are not aware of existing sys-
tems which actually generate quantifiers. We based
our algorithm on recent research which investigated
which quantifiers human subjects found acceptable
when presented with an image of a bowl contain-
ing different numbers of blue and green candies
(Yildirim et al., 2013; Yildirim et al., 2016). They
found a high degree of individual variation and over-
lap but general consensus on some areas, having
analysed human subjects’ classification of “natural-
ness” for five quantifiers, and based on their results,
we used the quantifiers shown in Table 3 to describe
the results of our sentiment analysis (Section 5.3).
For example, if a student made 20 blog posts, of
which 13 (65%) were positive, 5 (25%) neutral and 2
(10%) negative the output would be “Many of your
blog posts were positive, some were neutral and few

209



all most many some few none
total >60% >40% >20% >1 0

Table 3: Generated Quantifiers

were negative”.

5.5 Filler Sentences
If the student did not select all of the themes, filler
sentences were added so that all reports would be
of similar length. Each theme has a set of four
sentences for each level of performance, so that if
a single theme is selected, there will still be five
sentences in the report. These sentences give gen-
eral guidance, for example “attendance is key to
achieving your aims on the course, and this an
area you could improve upon” and “engaging with
course content demonstrates your participation in
the course, and you are showing yourself to be
highly active”.

6 Initial Student Reactions

Student feedback was given throughout the dura-
tion of the course, and as a result some changes
were made before the trial ended, while others will
be considered in future. This feedback is anecdo-
tal and cannot be considered an evaluation, but we
were informed by some comments and changed the
structure of the output accordingly. Some feedback
was positive, but we have concentrated here on com-
ments which raised issues for us.

The initial version of the system presented only
the average behaviour of the students over all of the
preceding weeks, and therefore there was often no
change in a student’s report from one week to the
next if their behaviour had remained consistent. We
therefore introduced comparisons with the current
week, to make it clear that the data was being anal-
ysed on a weekly basis.

Some students wanted to see the numbers under-
lying the generated sentences, so at the end of the
pilot we introduced a data summary at the bottom of
the report We intend to present this in a more user-
friendly format, and integrate it with potential future
graphical representations

One student commented that “As a student, I like
friendly feedback” and wanted to see more “human
language” for example encouraging comments such
as “well done”. Several students mentioned their

worries about the ethics of learning analytics, with
comments such as “We should adopt an ethical ap-
proach when extracting conclusions from analytical
reports: they should be reviewed with caution” and
one quotes EDUCAUSE4 (a non-profit association
whose stated mission is to “advance higher educa-
tion through the use of information technology”),
saying “Even then the best evaluative algorithms can
result in misclassifications and misleading patterns,
in part because such programs are based on infer-
ences about what different sorts of data might mean
relative to student success”.

7 Future Work

As LARC was a pilot project, we did not have the
time or resources for all of the development that we
would have liked to carry out. We would like to add
several functionalities to the system:

• Allow the students to choose from multiple
report styles or personalities, which could be
more encouraging, or more critical.

• Investigate more alternative sentiment analysis
packages, and potentially allow the students to
compare the outputs on their forum posts.

• Add graphical elements to the report. We
would like to accompany the texts with visu-
alizations such as circle graphs or heat maps in
order to give a different view over the data.

We would also like to carry out formal user eval-
uations on various aspects of the generated texts:

• How the students rate the generated texts com-
pared to a fixed baseline, and hand-written re-
ports

• The use of the various quantifiers in describing
the sentiment of forum posts

• The use of the contrast/similarity comparisons
and the ordering of the various types of data
within them

Finally and most importantly, we would like to
continue our work to ensure that students understand
how their data are used, and are happy with the re-
sulting analyses.

4http://www.educause.edu

210



References
Johan Bos and Malvina Nissim. 2006. An Empirical

Approach to the Interpretation of Superlatives. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’06,
pages 9–17, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Tom De Smedt and Walter Daelemans. 2012. Pattern for
python. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
13(1):2063–2067.

Rebecca Ferguson. 2012. Learning analytics: drivers,
developments and challenges. International Journal
of Technology Enhanced Learning, 4(5/6):304.

Dragan Gašević, Shane Dawson, and George Siemens.
2015. Let’s not forget: Learning analytics are about
learning. TechTrends, 59(1):64–71.

Albert Gatt, Francois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter,
Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and Somayajulu
Sripada. 2009. From data to text in the neonatal in-
tensive care unit: Using NLG technology for decision
support and information management. Ai Communi-
cations, 22(3):153–186.

Dimitra Gkatzia, Helen Hastie, Srinivasan Janarthanam,
and Oliver Lemon. 2013. Generating student
feedback from time-series data using Reinforcement
Learning. Proceedings of the 14th European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation.

James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Reiter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Cindy Sykes, and Dave Westwa-
ter. 2011. Bt-nurse: computer generation of natu-
ral language shift summaries from complex heteroge-
neous medical data. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 18(5):621–624.

Shalom Lappin. 2000. An intensional parametric seman-
tics for vague quantifiers. Linguistics and philosophy,
23(6):599–620.

William Mann, C. and Sandra Thompson, A. 1998.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 3:243–281.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. In Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL) System Demonstrations, pages 55–60.

Linda M. Moxey and Anthony J. Sanford. 1986. Quanti-
fiers and Focus. Journal of Semantics, 5(3):189–206,
January.

Chris Parr. 2014. Lecturer calls for clar-
ity in use of learning analytics. Times
Higher Education Supplement, 6 Novebmer.
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/lecturer-
calls-for-clarity-in-use-of-learning-
analytics/2016776.article.

Ehud Reiter, Sandra Williams, and Lesley Crichton.
2006. Generating feedback reports for adults taking
basic skills tests. In Applications and Innovations in
Intelligent Systems XIII. Springer.

Somayajulu Sripada, Ehud Reiter, and Ian Davy. 2003a.
Sumtime-mousam: Configurable marine weather fore-
cast generator. Expert Update, 6(3):4–10.

Somayajulu G. Sripada, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Jin
Yu. 2003b. Generating English summaries of time
series data using the Gricean maxims. In Proceedings
of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 187–
196. ACM.

Sebastian Varges and Kees Van Deemter. 2005. Generat-
ing referring expressions containing quantifiers. Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Worskhop on Com-
putational Semantics.

Sandra Williams and Ehud Reiter. 2008. Generating ba-
sic skills reports for low-skilled readers. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 14(04).

Ilker Yildirim, Judith Degen, Michael K. Tanenhaus, and
T. Florian Jaeger. 2013. Linguistic variability and
adaptation in quantifier meanings. In Proceedings of
the Thirty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, pages 3835–3840.

Ilker Yildirim, Judith Degen, Michael K. Tanenhaus, and
T. Florian Jaeger. 2016. Talker-specificity and adap-
tation in quantifier interpretation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 87:128–143.

211


