



















































SimpleNLG-IT: adapting SimpleNLG to Italian


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 184–192,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

SimpleNLG-IT: adapting SimpleNLG to Italian

Alessandro Mazzei and Cristina Battaglino and Cristina Bosco
Dipartimento di Informatica

Università degli Studi di Torino
Corso Svizzera 185, 10149 Torino

[mazzei,battagli,bosco]@di.unito.it

Abstract

This paper describes the SimpleNLG-IT re-
aliser, i.e. the main features of the porting of
the SimpleNLG API system (Gatt and Reiter,
2009) to Italian. The paper gives some details
about the grammar and the lexicon employed
by the system and reports some results about
a first evaluation based on a dependency tree-
bank for Italian. A comparison is developed
with the previous projects developed for this
task for English and French, which is based on
the morpho-syntactical differences and simi-
larities between Italian and these languages.

1 Introduction

Natural Language Generation (NLG) involves a
number of elementary tasks that can be addressed by
using different approaches and architectures. A well
defined standard architecture is the pipeline pro-
posed by Reiter and Dale (Reiter and Dale, 2000).

In this approach, three steps transform raw data
into natural language text, that are: document
planning, sentence-planning and surface realization.
Each one of these modules triggers the next one ad-
dressing a distinct issue as follows. In document
planning the user decides the information content of
the text to be generated (what to say). In sentence-
planning, the focus is instead on the design of a
number of features that are related to the informa-
tion contents as well as to the specific language, as
the choice of the words. Finally, in surface realisa-
tion, sentences are generated according to the deci-
sions taken in the previous stages and by fulfilling
the morpho-syntactic constraints related to the lan-

guage specific features, like word order, inflection
and selection of functional words.

Surface realisers can be classified on the basis of
their input. Fully fledged realisers accept as input an
unordered and uninflected proto-syntactic structure
enriched with semantic and pragmatic features that
are used to produce the most plausible output string.
OpenCCG is a member of this category of realisers
(White, 2006). Indeed, OpenCCG accepts as input
a semantic graph representing a set of hybrid logic
formulas. The hybrid logic elements are indeed
the semantic specification of syntactic CCG struc-
tures defined in the grammar realiser. The semantic
graph under-specifies morpho-syntactic information
and delegates to the realiser many lexical and syn-
tactic choices (e.g. function words). Chart based
algorithms and statistical models are used to resolve
the ambiguity arising from under-specification.

In contrast, realisation engines are simpler sys-
tems which perform just linearisation and mor-
phological inflections of the proto-syntactic input.
As a consequence, realization engine presumes a
more detailed morpho-syntactic information as in-
put. A member of this category is SimpleNLG
(Gatt and Reiter, 2009). It assumes a complete
syntactic specification, but unordered and unin-
flected, of the sentence in the form of a mixed con-
stituency/dependency structure. Content and func-
tion words are chosen in input as well as modifiers
order. The greatest advantage of this system is its
simplicity, which allows to pay more efforts in the
previous stages of the NLG pipeline.

SimpleNLG was originally designed for English
but it has been successively adapted to German,

184



French, Brazilian-Portuguese and Telugu (Boll-
mann, 2011; Vaudry and Lapalme, 2013; de Oliveira
and Sripada, 2014; Dokkara et al., 2015). The first
contribution of this paper is the adaptation of Sim-
pleNLG for Italian1. The most challenging issues
under this respect of this project (see Sections 2 and
3) are: (1) the Italian verb conjugation system, that
cannot be easily mapped to the English system and
shows many idiosyncrasies; (2) the high complex-
ity of the Italian morphological inflections; (3) the
lack of a publicly available computational lexicon
suitable for generation. Nevertheless, the contribu-
tion of this paper goes beyond the adaptation of the
existing implementation to a novel language. We
applied indeed a treebank-based methodology (see
the monolingual and multilingual resources cited be-
low) for both evaluating our results (see sec. 4), and
describing in a comparative perspective the features
of the implemented grammar, referring to the dif-
ferences between Italian, French and English. This
makes the work more linguistically sound and data-
driven. We started our work from SimpleNLG-
EnFr1.1, that is an adaptation to French (Vaudry and
Lapalme, 2013) of the model developed for English
in (Gatt and Reiter, 2009). A property of our project
is multilingualism: by using the same architecture
of SimpleNLG-EnFr1.1 we are able to multilingual
documents with sentences in English, French and
Italian.

In porting SimpleNLG-EnFr1.1 to SimpleNLG-
IT, we created 10 new packages and modified 28
existing classes. The morphology and morphonol-
ogy processors needed to be written from scratch
because of the features that differentiate Italian with
respect to French and English. The Syntax proces-
sor needed to be adapted, especially for the man-
agement of noun and verb phrases and for clauses.
However, at this stage, we used the same orthog-
raphy processor of French. We needed to extend
the system with 33 new lexical features, necessary
for accounting verb irregularities (subjunctive, con-
ditional, remote past, etc.) and for processing the
superlative irregular form of the adjectives.

In the next Sections we survey the main features
of SimpleNLG-IT, in particular: in Section 2 we

1SimpleNLG-IT: https://github.com/
alexmazzei/SimpleNLG-IT

describe the grammar defined by the system, that
has been developed starting from the SimpleNLG-
EnFr1.1. grammar; in Section 3 we describe the
lexicon adopted, that has been built starting from
three lexical resources available for Italian; Sec-
tion 4 describes the evaluation of the system, which
is based on examples from both grammar books (Pa-
tota, 2006) and an Italian treebank (Nivre et al.,
2016); finally, Section 5 closes the paper with some
final considerations and pointing to future works.

2 From French to Italian grammar

In this Section we will focus on the generation of
constituents and on their order within the sentence
in Italian. In this achievement, the main reference
for Italian grammar is (Patota, 2006). In general,
it must be observed that Italian, like French, is fea-
tured by a rich inflection that is clearly attested by
Verbs, but also by the behavior of other grammati-
cal categories whose morphosyntactic features (e.g.
gender, number and case) are crucial for determin-
ing their syntactical order in the phrases to be gener-
ated. As stated above, our approach is based on that
adopted for French in (Vaudry and Lapalme, 2013),
which has been in turn inspired by that used for En-
glish (Gatt and Reiter, 2009). First of all, we devel-
oped therefore a comparison among Italian and these
other two languages in order to detect the main novel
features to be taken into account in the development
of SimpleNLG-IT. The parallel treebank ParTUT2

developed for Italian/French/English helped us in
this comparison.

In the rest of this Section we organize these fea-
tures in the main classes which did drive the pro-
cesses we implemented: morphology and syntax,
which are strictly interrelated because of the concor-
dance phenomena, and morphonology.

2.1 Morphology and syntax

2.1.1 Verb conjugation

Italian is featured by a complexity of inflection
which is typical of morphologically rich languages
and its richness, in this perspective, positively com-
pares with that of French. Nevertheless, in order to

2http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/
treebanks.html

185



develop a suitable model for Italian verbs, we dif-
ferentiate the implementation of SimpleNLG-IT un-
der this respect with that exploited in SimpleNLG-
FrEn1.1.

The main traits that we have assumed in this phase
of the project for modeling verbs are tense, progres-
sive and perfect, as can it be seen in the Table 1. The
opposition between the different features, i.e. per-
fect and imperfect, can be expressed by using dif-
ferent means in different languages. While in En-
glish aspect is especially relevant and strictly inter-
related with mood and tense, in Italian and other Ro-
mance languages derived from Latin several means
are available for expressing it, which vary from in-
flection, to lexical selection, to syntactic choice of
periphrastic forms and a system of moods richer
than that of English. On the one hand, the imper-
fect forms for present (I’m writing) and past (I was
writing) and the perfect forms for present (I have
written) and past (I had written) exploited in English
cannot always find a unique correspondence in Ital-
ian forms. On the other hand, while the progressive
form Io sto scrivendo surely corresponds to I’m writ-
ing, the form Io scrivo can be translated with I write
or I’m writing, and the second selection is preferred
in particular when a modifier is associated with the
verb, like in Io scrivo in questo momento (I’m writ-
ing in this moment).

In order to reproduce the complete Italian verb
conjugation system, we used the features TENSE3,
PERFECT, PROGRESSIVE (Table 1). More-
over we used the feature FORM to set the tenses
gerund, infinitive, subjunctive.

2.1.2 Noun phrase construction
The noun phrase may include, beyond the noun,

also specifiers (i.e. determiners) and modifiers (i.e.
adjectives and adverbs). For specifiers the main is-
sue to be dealt with consists in setting their mor-
phosyntactic features according to those of the noun,
assuming that their position within the noun phrase
is before the noun and the premodifiers. It can be ob-
served that Italian is more similar to French than to
English for what concerns specifiers, since in most
of cases nouns are mandatorily associated with spec-

3We add the values simple past, remote past,
plus past, plus remote past as possible values of the
feature TENSE.

Italian conjugation Tense PE PR
indicativo presente present F F

imperfetto past F F
futuro semplice future F F
futuro anteriore future T F

passato prossimo past T F
passato remoto remote-past T F

trapassato prossimo plus-past T F
trapassato remoto plus-remote-past T F

passato remoto remote-past T F
presente progressivo present F T
passato progressivo past F T
futuro progressivo future F T

condizionale presente present F F
condizionale passato past F F
congiuntivo presente present F F

congiuntivo imperfetto past F F
congiuntivo passato past T F

congiuntivo trapassato plus-past T F

Table 1: Relation between verb tenses and traits in Italian:
TENSE is a multi-value feature; PErfect and PRogressive are
two boolean features.

ifiers, while English nouns often occur without de-
terminers.

The canonical NP word order is spec >
preMod > noun > complements >
postMod, but we need to introduce a number of
new lexical features to account for the peculiar
adjective word order with adjective types. The
position that an adjective assumes with respect
to the noun varies indeed accordingly with its
type: ordinal, possessive and qualitative adjectives
usually precede the associated noun, while colour,
geografic and relation adjectives behave as noun’s
postmodifiers. See, e.g., la grande casa gialla
(the big yellow house) where the adjective big
is a qualitative adjective while yellow is a colour
adjective. Moreover, when more than one adjective
occurs, like a pre or postmodifier, a specific order
must be respected, e.g. possessive > ordinal >
qualitative is the canonical order for premodifiers.
See e.g. il mio primo grande viaggio (my first big
travel).

Finally, similar to SimpleNLG-EnFr1.1 we
treated interrogative and demonstrative adjectives
as specifiers, in contrast to the reference grammar
book, which considers them as modifiers.

186



2.1.3 Verb phrase and sentence construction
Among the main features to be taken into ac-

count in generating a sentence there is the order
of constituents, which can also strongly vary
according to language and typology of sentence.
For what concerns Italian, the word order in
declarative sentences, as reported in the study based
on the parallel treebank ParTUT developed for
Italian/French/English (Sanguinetti et al., 2013),
is featured by a larger variability with respect to
the other two languages, since the SVO order is
detected in 74.5% of Italian sentences, in 82.4%
of French sentences and in 88.5% of the English
ones. Nevertheless, observing that SVO is usually
tolerated in Italian in most of cases, at least for the
purpose of practical NLG applications, the SVO
order can be exploited. The conventional word order
adopted by SimpleNLG-IT in the construction of the
verbal phrase is auxiliarie(s) > premod
> verb > premod > complements >
postmod where the order of the complements is
direct-object > indirect-object >
other-complements. See e.g. ho spesso dato
libri a Mario in regalo ([I] often gave books to
Mario as present).

2.1.4 Negative sentences
In French, negative sentences are featured by the

canonical presence of the adverb pas after the verb
negated by the adverb ne (not). For instance in Je
ne mange pas les pommes (I don’t eat apples). In
Italian the negation adverb non (not) precedes the
verb and only in particular context a second negation
adverb can occur, but in order to express a particular
form of topicalization on the negation. See e.g. Io
non mangio mele (I don’t eat apples) and Io non ho
nemmeno mangiato la mela (I have not even eaten
the apple). In the implementation of SimpleNLG-
IT we modified therefore that made for French, by
considering non instead of ne and by allowing the
presence of a negation auxiliary when the user want
(instead of the adverb pas).

2.2 Morphonology

In this section we present the issues addressed for
making the generated linguistic expression compli-
ant with the morphonological tenets of Italian, like
e.g. elision, preposition-article contraction and the

fusion of clitics with other words.

2.2.1 Article elision
Elision affects all the Italian articles that precede

nouns and adjectives beginning with a vowel. Two
simple examples are: (1) l’uomo (the man) = lo
[Definite Article Masculine Singular] + uomo [Com-
mon Noun Masculine Singular] (2) un’interessante
proposta (an interesting proposal) = una [Undefined
Article Feminine Singular] + interessante [Qualita-
tive Adjective Feminine Singular] + proposta [Com-
mon Noun Feminine Singular]. We adapted with
specific rules the morphonological processor in-
troduced in SimpleNLG-EnFr1.1 to manage these
cases.

2.2.2 Preposition contraction
Similar to French and Brazilian Portuguese (de

Oliveira and Sripada, 2014), Italian provides a mor-
phophonological mechanism to contract the articles
and the prepositions which are associated with them
in prepositional articles. Among the ten Italian
proper prepositions (di (of), a (to), da (from), in
(in), con (with), su (on), per (for), tra (among), fra
(among)) only three do not contract with the article
(i.e. per, tra and fra). For instance, la casa della zia
(the house of-the aunt) = la [Definite Article Femi-
nine Singular] + casa [common noun feminine sin-
gular] + della [di [preposition] + la [definite article
feminine singular]] + zia [common noun feminine
Singular]. Also for this morphophonological phe-
nomenon we added some specific rules in the pro-
cessor.

2.2.3 Clitics
Clitics are pronouns that in particular cases in Ital-

ian can be included in the verb form, like in the fol-
lowing example: Dammi la mela (Give-me the ap-
ple). More complex forms of clitic-fusion are pos-
sible, e.g. Dammela (Give-me-it). However, con-
sidering that in most of cases the form with the clitic
separated from the verb is tolerated4, in this phase of
the project we decided to simplify clitic morphonol-
ogy management by applying fusion with the verb
only to the pronoun that play direct-object role: if
there are other pronouns they are managed by us-

4See the distinction between strong and weak pronouns in
(Patota, 2006).

187



ing prepositions. So, SimpleNLG-IT will generate
for the first example above the form Dai a me la
mela (Give me the apple), where the prepositional
phrase a me (to me) semantically and pragmatically
corresponds to the clitic -mi, while the second ex-
ample will be Dalla a me (Give-it to me) where the
direct objet clitic pronoun la (it [feminine singular])
is fused with the verb but the indirect object (a me)
is separated.

3 The SimpleNLG-IT lexicon

Each lexicon can be split in two major classes: open
and closed classes. The closed class, that is usually
composed by function words (i.e. prepositions, de-
terminers, conjunctions, pronouns, etc.) is one to
which new words are very rarely added. In contrast,
the open class, that is usually composed by lexical
words (i.e. nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs), is one
that accepts the addition of new words. We adopted
the same strategy of (Vaudry and Lapalme, 2013):
we built by hand the closed part of the Italian lexi-
con and we built automatically the open part by us-
ing available resources.

Additionally, even though, if several lexical cor-
pora are available for Italian, as the detailed map
of the Italian NLP resources produces within the
PARLI project shows5, unfortunately most of them
are designed to represent lexical semantics rather
than morphosyntactic relations. This makes them
not adequate for the sake of our task. In order to
build the open class of the Italian lexicon, which
is suitable for SimpleNLG-IT, we need both a large
coverage and a detailed account of morphological ir-
regularities, also considering their high frequency in
Italian. Moreover, in order to have good time exe-
cution performance in the realiser (cf. (de Oliveira
and Sripada, 2014)), a trade-off between the size
of the lexicon and its usability for our task must
be achieved, which consists in assuming a form of
word classification where fundamental Italian words
are distinguished from the less-fundamental ones. In
order to build a so designed lexicon, we decided to
merge the information represented in three existing
resources for Italian, namely Morph-it! (Zanchetta
and Baroni, 2005), the Vocabolario di base della lin-

5http://parli.di.unito.it/resources_en.
html

gua italiana (De Mauro, 1985) and, for a specific is-
sue, Wikipedia6. The difference between them can
be referred to both the reasons for which the au-
thors developed them and the adopted methodology
and approach. This makes these resources especially
useful for us, since they provide information rele-
vant for SimpleNLG-IT which are the same as ob-
served in different perspective, or complementing
each other.

The dataset of the Morph-it! project consists of
a lexicon organized according to the inflected word
forms, with associated lemmas and morphological
features (Zanchetta and Baroni, 2005). The lexicon
is provided by the authors as a text file where the
values of the information about each lexical entry
are simply separated by a tab key. It is in practice
an alphabetically ordered list of triples form-lemma-
features. An example of the annotation for the form
corsi (ran) is:

corsi correre-VER:ind past+1+s

where the features are PoS (VERb), mood of the
verb (indicative), tense (past), person (1), and
the number (singular). The last released version
of Morph-it! (v.48, 2009-02-23) contains 505, 074
different forms corresponding to 35, 056 lemmas.
It has been realized starting from a large newspa-
per corpus, nevertheless it is not balanced and a
small number of also very common Italian words
are not included in the lexicon, e.g. sposa (bride),
ovest (west) or aceto (vinegar). Morph-IT! repre-
sents extensionally the Italian language by listing all
the morphological inflections, i.e. adjective, verbs,
nouns inflections are represented as a list rather than
by using morphological rules. As a consequence the
lexicon is huge and using the whole Morph-IT! in
SimpleNLG-IT would cause time complexity prob-
lem.

The second main resource we exploited for pop-
ulating the SimpleNLG-IT lexicon is the “Vocabo-
lario di base della lingua italiana” (VdB-IT hence-
forth), a collection of 7, 000 words created by the
linguist Tullio De Mauro and his team (De Mauro,
1985)7. The development of this vocabulary has
been mainly driven by the distinction between the

6https://it.wikipedia.org
7The second edition of the vocabulary has been announced

(Chiari and De Mauro, 2014) and it is going to be released (p.c.).

188



foreach adverb ∈ Morph-IT! ∩ VdB-IT do
Add the adverb in normal form into L

end
foreach adjective ∈ Morph-IT! ∩ VdB-IT do

Add the adjective in normal form (masculine-singular) and
in feminine-singular, masculine-plural, feminine-plural
forms, into L

end
foreach noun ∈ Morph-IT! ∩ VdB-IT do

Add the noun in normal form (singular), the plural form, and
the gender into L

end
foreach verb ∈ Morph-IT! ∩ VdB-IT do

if the verb is irregular then
Add into L all the inflections for the indicativo
presente, congiuntivo presente, futuro semplice,
condizionale, imperfetto, participio passato, passato
remoto

else
if the verb is reflexive then

Set active the reflexive feature in the lexicon
end
if the verb is incoativo then

Set active the incoativo feature in the lexicon
end
Add the verb in normal form into L

end
end

Algorithm 1: The algorithm for building the lexi-
con L

most frequent words (around 5, 000) and the most
familiar words (around 2, 000). VdB-IT is therefore
organized in the following three sections:

• the vocabolario fondamentale (fundamental
vocabulary), which contains 2, 000 words fea-
tured by the highest frequency into a balanced
corpus of Italian texts (composed of novels,
movie and theater scripts, newspapers, basic
scholastic books); amore (love), lavoro (work),
pane (bread) are in this section.

• the vocabolario di alto uso (vocabulary of high
usage), which includes other 2, 937 words with
high frequency; ala (wing), seta (silk), toro
(bull) are in this section

• the vocabolario di alta disponibilità (vocabu-
lary of high availability), is composed of 1, 753
words not often used in written language, but
featured by a high frequency in spoken lan-
guage, which are indeed perceived as espe-
cially familiar by native speakers; aglio (gar-
lic), cascata (waterfall), passeggero (passen-
ger) are in this section.

This resource helps us in addressing the issues re-
lated to the comprehensibility and readability of the

PoS Number %
Adverb 146 2

Adjective 1333 19
Noun 4092 58
Verb 1451 21

(Irregular) (283) (4)
Total 7022 100

Table 2: Number of elements for the open categories in the
SimpleNLG-IT lexicon.

generated texts in the SimpleNLG-IT project: in-
deed by using only words from the vocabolario fon-
damentale we can be confident that we are gen-
erating outputs that will be considered as compre-
hensible for at least 66% of the Italian speakers
(De Mauro, 1985).

VdB-IT helped us to limit the size of the lexicon
but does not provide information about verb behav-
ior. We need instead to distinguish regular verbs,
that are inflected by using rules extracted from the
reference grammar, from the irregular ones. The
reference grammar reports a partial list of the prin-
cipal Italian irregular verbs, but we decided to use
the larger list of verbs reported in Wikipedia8. An-
other linguistic distinction for Italian verbs reported
in Wikipedia9 has been exploited in the lexicon: the
incoativi verbs have a special behavior in the present
time and need to be marked in the lexicon. In Algo-
rithm 1 we reported the algorithm for the creation
of the SimpleNLG-IT lexicon and in Table 2 we re-
ported some statistics about its composition.

4 SimpleNLG-IT Evaluation

NLG systems can be evaluated by using controlled
as well as real world examples: the former ex-
amples can be exploited in evaluating specific fea-
tures of the system, while the latter ones for test-
ing the usability of the system in an application
context. In order to provide a first but accurate
evaluation of SimpleNLG-IT, we decided to apply
both strategies. First, we test the system in the
generation of a number of sentences obtained from

8https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verbi_
irregolari_italiani

9https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verbi_
incoativi

189



SimpleNLG-ENFr1.1. Second, we considered 20
sentences from the Italian section of the Universal
Dependency Treebank (Nivre et al., 2016).

We first tested SimpleNLG-IT by running a
set of Junit Tests on 96 sentences extracted and
adapted from the reference grammar book and from
SimpleNLG-EnFr1.1 JUnit Tests. The tests cover
different sections of the Italian grammar: adjectives
order, different types of sentences (relative, interrog-
ative, coordinated, passive), verbs conjugation, cli-
tics, etc. are analyzed. For this test, the loading into
the memory of the lexicon took 1, 433 ms and the
test bundle run finished in 3, 145 ms on a computer
equipped with 8GB and i7 processor: all the test are
passed by SimpleNLG-IT.

In the second evaluation, we wanted to test if
SimpleNLG-IT is able to realize sentences from
real world. The Universal Dependency Tree-
bank (UD) is a recent project that aims to “cre-
ate cross-linguistically consistent treebank annota-
tion for many languages within a dependency-based
lexicalist framework” (Nivre et al., 2016). UD re-
leased freely available treebanks for 33 languages
(in this work, version 1.2). Each UD treebank is
split in three sections, train, dev and test, which
can be exploited in the evaluation of NLP/NLG sys-
tems. Indeed, for the evaluation of the SimpleNLG-
it we used the test section of the Italian UD tree-
bank (UD-IT-test). We chose 10 declarative sen-
tences and 10 interrogative sentences, which have
length up to ten words, from UD-IT-test. In Table 3
we report the sentences employed. We tried to gen-
erate each one of these sentences in SimpleNLG-
IT but, since the system can generate canned text,
we need to specify a number of rules that we re-
spect in order to convert the dependency structure
of the sentences into the SimpleNLG input struc-
ture: (i) We build a SimpleNLG input isomorphic
to the gold dependency tree. So, we use the corre-
sponding functions for subject, object, complement,
passive verbs etc. (ii) We do not use canned texts
and we do not provide information about word or-
der. So we do not use the insertPreModifier
and insertPostModifier functions. (iii) We
do not provide information about genre and number
for words in the lexicon. (iiii) We do not account for
the punctuation inside the sentence.

We obtained very different results for declara-

tive sentences and for interrogative sentences10. For
declarative sentences we have: two realized sen-
tences are identical to the gold (6, 7); four realized
sentences are different only in the word order re-
spect to the gold (1, 3, 8, 10); two realized sentences
are different only for clitics respect to the gold (2,
4); one realized sentence is different respect to the
gold since the verb is not present in the lexicon (9);
one realized sentence is different respect to the gold
since the a verb is not treated as irregular (5). In con-
trast, in interrogative sentences we have more prob-
lematic cases: one realized sentence is identical to
the gold (19); two realized sentences are different
only in the word order respect to the gold (14, 16);
one realized sentence is different respect to the gold
since the verb is not present in the lexicon (11); six
realized sentences are different respect to the gold
since the SimpleNLG is not able to apply a WH-
question to the specific argument (12, 13, 15, 17, 18,
20), i.e. the realiser is not able to produce HOW-
MANY, WHAT, WHICH questions on the object or
complements. Finally, we note that most word order
errors are caused by the SVO order that is adopted
in SimpleNLG-IT. Indeed, the sentences 1, 3, 8, 10,
14, 16 are grammatical but the gold sentences have
a different topic-focus information structure repre-
sented with a different word order.

5 Conclusions and future work

In this paper we presented the first version of
SimpleNLG-IT, a realisation engine for Italian. We
introduced with respect to previous implementations
a number of new features to account for the morpho-
logical and syntactical peculiarities of Italian. We
developed a new schema for encoding the Italian
verb tense system and a new lexicon by merging
two different lexical resources. We performed a first
evaluation of the system based on both controlled
and real word sentences.

In future work we intend to expand SimpleNLG-
IT by using information from UD-IT treebank. In
particular, we want to exploit the syntactic informa-
tion contained in the treebank in order: (1) to de-
cide the correct auxiliary verb to use in order to form
complex verb tense, (2) the word order of some ad-
jectives. Indeed, both such notions cannot be ac-

10Henceforth the numbers in parentheses refer to Table 3

190



ID Gold sentence Realized sentence
1 Chiedi al computer il tuo menù. (Ask to the computer your menu.) Chiedi il tuo menù al computer.
2 Dimmi dove si trova la compagnia DuPont. (Tell me where the DuPont company is.) Dici a me dove la compagnia Du Pont si trova.
3 È stato concordato un pacchetto di riforme. (It was arranged a reform package.) Un pacchetto di riforme è stato concordato.
4 Lui le regalò un porcellino salvadanaio. He gave her a piggy bank. Egli regalò a lei un porcellino salvadanaio.
5 È successo un quarto d’ora fa. (It happened fifteen minutes ago.) Ha successo un quarto d’ora fa.
6 Mai nessuna azzurra aveva conquistato un titolo iridato. (Never any Italian athletes

had won a world title.)
Mai nessuna azzurra aveva conquistato un titolo
iridato.

7 L’espropriazione è realizzata attraverso un atto amministrativo; (The expropriation is
carried out through an administrative act;)

L’espropriazione è realizzata attraverso un atto
amministrativo;

8 Non ho preclusioni ideologiche, spiega. (I have no ideological barriers, he explains.) Spiega non ho preclusioni ideologice.
9 Ogni fosso interposto tra due fondi si presume comune. (Each ditch interposed between

two funds is assumed to be shared.)
Ogni fosso interporre tra due fondi si presume
comune.

10 L’insieme di tutte queste operazioni viene chiamato stigliatura. (The set of all these
operations is called decortication.)

L’insieme di queste operazioni tutte è chiamato
stigliatura.

11 In che modo le Hawaii divennero uno stato? (How did Hawaii become a state?) Come le Hawai divenirono uno stato?
12 Quante fossette ha una pallina regolamentare da golf? (How many dimples does a

regular golf ball have?)
-

13 Da quante repubbliche era composta l’Unione Sovietica? (How many republics did
compose the USSR?)

-

14 E i soldi delle piramidi dove sono finiti? (And where did the money of the pyramids
go?)

Dove i soldi delle piramidi sono finiti?

15 Che cosa ha influenzato l’effetto Tequila? (What did influence the Tequila effect?) -
16 Quanto si stima che costeranno le stazioni spaziali internazionali? (How much is

estimated that will cost the international space stations?)
Quanto si stima che le stazioni spaziali inter-
nazionali costeranno?

17 Quali paesi ha visitato la first lady Hillary Clinton? (Which countries did the first lady
Hillary Clinton visit?)

-

18 In quale giorno avvenne l’attacco a Pearl Harbor? (Which is the date when Pearl
Harbor was attacked?)

-

19 Quando Panama si vide restituire il Canale di Panama? (When did Panama see to
return back the Panama Canal?)

Quando Panama si vide restituire il Canale di
Panama?

20 Da quale animale si ricava il veal? (From which animal do you get the veal?) -

Table 3: Ten sentences from the UD-IT-TEST: 1-10 are declarative sentences and 11-20 are interrogative sentences.

counted by using rules from grammar books but they
need an empirical approach. Finally, in order to have
a larger set of tests, we want to develop an algorithm
for automatically convert dependency tree of UD-IT
in SimpleNLG-IT input. In this way, we can use the
whole test section of the treebank as benchmark.

References

Marcel Bollmann. 2011. Adapting SimpleNLG to Ger-
man. In Proceedings of the 13th European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, pages 133–
138, Nancy, France, September. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Isabella Chiari and Tullio De Mauro. 2014. The New
Basic Vocabulary of Italian as a linguistic resource.
In Roberto Basili, Alessandro Lenci, and Bernardo
Magnini, editors, 1th Italian Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (CLiC-it), volume 1, pages 93–97.
Pisa University Press, December.

Tullio De Mauro. 1985. Guida all’uso delle parole.
Libri di base. Editori Riuniti.

Rodrigo de Oliveira and Somayajulu Sripada. 2014.
Adapting SimpleNLG for Brazilian Portuguese reali-

sation. In Proceedings of the 8th International Nat-
ural Language Generation Conference (INLG), pages
93–94, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Sasi Raja Sekhar Dokkara, Suresh Verma Penumathsa,
and Somayajulu Gowri Sripada. 2015. A Simple
Surface Realization Engine for Telugu. In Proceed-
ings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Generation (ENLG), pages 1–8, Brighton, UK,
September. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A Re-
alisation Engine for Practical Applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Generation (ENLG 2009), pages 90–
93, Athens, Greece, March. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Ginter,
Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Manning,
Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Na-
talia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman. 2016.
Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual treebank
collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation

191



(LREC 2016), Paris, France, may. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Giuseppe Patota. 2006. Grammatica di riferimento
dell’italiano contemporaneo. Guide linguistiche.
Garzanti Linguistica.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA.

Manuela Sanguinetti, Cristina Bosco, and Leonardo
Lesmo. 2013. Dependency and constituency in trans-
lation shift analysis. In Proceedings of the 2nd Con-
ference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing), pages
282–291, Prague (Czech Republic). Charles Univer-
sity in Prague, Matfyzpress.

Pierre-Luc Vaudry and Guy Lapalme. 2013. Adapting
SimpleNLG for Bilingual English-French Realisation.
In Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation, pages 183–187, Sofia,
Bulgaria, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Micheal White. 2006. Efficient realization of co-
ordinate structures in combinatory categorial gram-
mar. Research on Language and Computation,
2006(4(1)):39—75.

Eros Zanchetta and Marco Baroni. 2005. Morph-it! a
free corpus-based morphological resource for the ital-
ian language. Corpus Linguistics 2005, 1(1).

192


