



















































Applying Universal Schemas for Domain Specific Ontology Expansion


Proceedings of AKBC 2016, pages 81–85,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Applying Universal Schemas for Domain Specific Ontology Expansion

Paul Groth, Sujit Pal, Darin McBeath, Brad Allen and Ron Daniel
{p.groth, sujit.pal, d.mcbeath, b.allen, r.daniel}@elsevier.com

Elsevier Labs
1600 John F. Kennedy Boulevard, Suite 1800,

Philadelphia, PA

Abstract

Manually created large scale ontologies are
useful for organizing, searching, and repur-
posing content ranging from scientific papers
and medical guidelines to images. However,
maintenance of such ontologies is expensive.
In this paper, we investigate the use of univer-
sal schemas (Riedel et al., 2013) as a mech-
anism for ontology maintenance. We ap-
ply this approach on top of two unique data
sources: 14 million full-text scientific articles
and chapters, plus a 1 million concept hand-
curated medical ontology. We show that using
a straightforward matrix factorization algo-
rithm one can achieve 0.7 F1 measure on a link
prediction task in this environment. Link pre-
diction results can be used to suggest new rela-
tion types and relation type synonyms coming
from the literature as well as predict specific
new relation instances in the ontology.

1 Introduction

Scholarly information has been a key domain of in-
terest for the automated knowledge base construc-
tion (AKBC) community (Ororbia II et al., 2014). A
range of techniques have been applied to wide vari-
ety of tasks including: the construction of pathway
databases (Friedman et al., 2001), genomic knowl-
edge extraction (Poon et al., 2014); scientific ques-
tion answering (Clark et al., 2016), and scientific
entity search (Sinha et al., 2015).

In this work, we focus on augmenting an existing
rich domain specific ontology with additional infor-
mation. We show that existing well-known unsuper-
vised approaches can generate interesting input for

domain experts in their ontology maintenance task.
We apply these approaches to two unique resources:

• The full text of all 14 million documents (jour-
nal papers and book chapters) within Elsevier’s
ScienceDirect database. This covers over 24
major disciplines and over 2500 journals.
• The Elsevier Merged Medical Taxonomy (EM-

MeT) - a manually curated ontology contain-
ing nearly one million concepts, three million
synonyms, more than 30 relation types, and
more than three million instances of relations
between those concepts.

EMMeT is used within a number of Elsevier’s
search engines to provide structured search results.
For example, within Clinical Key (a literature search
engine for clinicians), a user may search for ”breast
cancer” but wants to know specific treatment proce-
dures for a particular sub type of the cancer (e.g. Ma-
lignant Neoplasm of the breast outer quadrant). EM-
MeT allows for the traversal from superclass to sub-
class to procedure to be made. However, the main-
tenance of EMMeT is a time consuming process
requiring domain experts (e.g. trained doctors) to
read the literature, update, and curate the ontology.
This includes not only the addition of new rela-
tions but also revising existing relations, adding new
synonyms and finding additional evidence for state-
ments within the ontology. We also aim to show that
automated approaches can provide a quick and rela-
tively high quality entry point that can augment cu-
rated knowledge bases. This work is an initial step
in applying automated knowledge base techniques
in this setting.

81



An important aspect of this work is that it shows
that a rather straightforward implementation of the
universal schema approach (Riedel et al., 2013) to
relation extraction can be effective in a domain spe-
cific setting. Prior work has used universal schemas
for more general encyclopedic knowledge bases
such as Freebase or TAC KBP datasets. Here, we
apply it to the medical domain. Our implementation
is built in the Spark distributed computing frame-
work (Zaharia et al., 2010). For a discussion and
comparison of universal schemas to other AKBC
methods, we refer the reader to Section 2 of (Verga
et al., 2015), which provides an excellent overview.

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

• a confirmation that the universal schema ap-
proach can be effective in a domain specific set-
tings; and

• an exemplar of how straightforward AKBC
methods can be applied using widely available
compute platforms.

We begin with a description of our system followed
by an set of initial experiments and then conclude.

2 System Description

Our CAT3-KB system consists of seven steps de-
picted in Figure 1: open information extraction, on-
tology ingestion, concept resolution, matrix con-
struction, matrix factorization, matrix completion,
and curation. We now describe these steps in turn.

Open IE ScienceDirect content consists of XML
representations of articles. From this XML, we ex-
tract the plain text of articles. These articles are
fed through a Spark-based reimplementation of Re-
Verb (Fader et al., 2011). At a high level, ReVerb
identifies relation phrases by looking for text spans
starting with a verb and ending with a preposition
(e.g. ”is the leading cause of”). Noun phrases be-
fore and after the span are used as the arguments
of the subsequent relation instance (i.e. fact). We
lemmatize all relations, and only keep relation types
that have more than 5 distinct argument pairs and
that occur more than 25 times. These parameters
are adjustable. From the original 14 million articles
(representing approximately 1 TB of text), 475 mil-
lion facts are returned. This amount of data is an

example of why it is helpful to employ a distributed
computing framework such as Spark.

Ontology Ingestion To combine the lemmatized
surface form relations from the prior step with an
imported ontology, we first ingest the ontology into
an annotation engine. We have developed the Solr
Dictionary Annotator (SoDA)1, a high performance
dictionary based annotation engine for Spark. SoDA
is specifically designed to support large dictionaries
such as EMMeT. Because of the diversity of scien-
tific content and the availability of large ontologies,
performing concept recognition type tasks using a
dictionary approach is often effective. Importantly,
this approach allows us to adjust our knowledge base
to different domains by ingesting different ontolo-
gies.

Concept Resolution In this stage, we run SoDA
against the noun phrase arguments of the lemma-
tized surface form relation instances. It matches the
arguments to concepts within the ingested ontology.
This process includes fuzzy string matching against
all the synonyms of the various concepts. The out-
put of this step is a knowledge graph consisting of
known concepts linked by both surface form relation
instances as well as by relations from the ontology.

The concept resolution step reduces the 475 mil-
lion Open IE facts to 46 million where both surface
form arguments match EMMeT concepts. We add
in the three million facts from EMMeT, giving us a
medical knowledge base of 49 million facts.

Matrix Construction Following (Riedel et al.,
2013), we construct a matrix from those 49 million
facts. The rows are the pairs of arguments in each
fact, and the columns are the lemmatized relations
(or the known relations from EMMeT). The cells
have binary values; one where the two arguments
are linked by that relation, zero where not. As de-
scribed later, our initial experiments use subsets of
this matrix.

Matrix Factorization (Riedel et al., 2013)
presents a number of models based on the universal
schema representation. A key insight of that work
was that these models could take advantage of tech-
niques from collaborative filtering. We apply this
insight directly and build a model using alternating

1https://databricks.com/blog/2016/02/10/how-elsevier-
labs-implemented-dictionary-annotation-at-scale-with-apache-
spark-on-databricks.html

82



Content

Universal 
schema

Surface form 
relations

Structured 
relations

Factorization 
model

Matrix 
Construction

Open 
Information 
Extraction

Entity 
Resolution

Matrix 
FactorizationKnowledge 

graph

Curation

Predicted 
relations

Matrix 
Completion

Taxonomy Triple Extraction

Concept
Resolution

Figure 1: The Architecture of CAT3-KB

least squares (ALS) to approximate the given uni-
versal schema as the product of two lower rank ma-
trices. Each relation is approximated by one factor
and each concept-concept pair is approximated by
another. In our setting, we use Spark’s existing par-
allel implementation of an implicit feedback version
of ALS with regularization. The number of itera-
tions, regularization, and implicit feedback baseline
confidence parameters are all set empirically. Those
settings are given later in the experimental section.

From our initial observations, results appear to be
robust to differing parameter settings but we have
yet to perform a full sensitivity analysis. The output
of this step are an Nxk and an Mxk factor matrices,
where N is the number of concept-concept pairs and
M is the number of lemmatized and EMMeT rela-
tions. The results described here are for k = 30.

Matrix Completion To generate a set of pre-
dicted relation instances, we approximate the orig-
inal matrix by multiplying the two matrix factors.
The resulting matrix is no longer binary; it has val-
ues between 0. and 1.0, inclusive. Therefore, we
need to determine a threshold where a score gener-
ated by the model should be considered to constitute
a relation instance.

To determine the threshold, we first perform ten-
fold cross validation on the input matrix. For each
fold we factorize and complete the matrix, then re-
port precision, recall and F1 measure between the
original and completed matrix. This comparison is
done for 11 different threshold values. Based on
these results, we select the threshold that maximizes
the F1 measure. After determining a threshold using
the cross validation described above, we run matrix
factorization across the entire input matrix and select
those facts that score above the threshold.

An important point to make is that we are predict-
ing new relations that do no explicitly appear in the
literature or in the input ontology. To clarify, while
just looking at the Open IE facts or input knowledge
graph relations is of interest, our goal here is to pre-
dict new links not within that knowledge graph.

Curation The final step is to provide the set of
predicted facts to experts for analysis and use in
their application. These may be used to refine the
input taxonomy through the addition of relations or
inserted back into the input knowledge graph.

3 Initial Experiments

We have conducted an initial set of tests with small
subsets of the input matrix so that we can eas-
ily examine the outputs manually and quickly iter-
ate. Two subsets were created, based on concepts
that appear frequently within in the Clinical Key
search logs. The two concepts were “glaucoma” and
“rheumatoid arthritis”. For each concept, we create
a small subset of the input graph by selecting the
rows which have the concept in the arg1 position,
and all columns that have any values in those rows.
For glaucoma, this results in a matrix with 173 rows
and 83 columns. The matrix is sparse2 containing
356 existing relation instances. The columns for the
EMMeT relations are relatively dense, the columns
for the surface form relations are relatively sparse.
We run 10 fold cross-validation on the input matrix
and try 11 different threshold values in each fold.
Results were averaged over the 10 folds and plotted
in Figure 2. We achieve a maximum F1 measure of
.71 at a threshold of 0.3, although F1 is not espe-
cially sensitive to the threshold. In our initial exper-

2The sparsity ratio is 1.

83



0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1

Sc
or
e

threshold

Precision,	   Recall,	  F1	  at	  11	  points	  of	  threshold

precision f1 recall

Figure 2: Performance in the glaucoma experiment

iments, we wanted to increase recall, so a threshold
of 0.08 was chosen.

The complete glaucoma subset was factorized,
completed, and thresholded. We found 22 rela-
tion instances that were not in the input knowledge
graph. Figure 3 depicts several interesting exam-
ples.3 We see synonymous surface forms (e.g. de-
velop following) as well as relations between glau-
coma and class concepts (e.g. age over 40). Note,
that in Figure 3 we replace the concept ids with their
preferred term from the EMMeT ontology.

For rheumatoid arthritis, the subset matrix had
258 rows by 70 columns and contained 465 known
relation instances. The best performing threshold for
F1 was slightly different than for the glaucoma ex-
ample - a threshold of 0.2 gave the maximum F1 of
0.75. Here too we found a number of interesting
and new relation instances. One that stood out in
the result set was the ability to predict a new rela-
tion instance that used an ontology relation, namely
(rheumatoid arthritis, emmet:isRiskFactor , amyloi-
dosis). In the input set of relations, the link between
arthritis and amyloidosis was that of causation and a
potential complication.

4 Conclusion

This work presents CAT3-KB - a system for auto-
mated knowledge based construction based on uni-
versal schemas and implemented using the Spark

3It is important not to take the results too literally. Glaucoma
is (probably) not the second leading cause of functional visual
field loss, although it is the second leading cause of blindness
in the US. This points out the need for human curation of the
results before they are included in an ontology like EMMeT.

distributed computing framework. A key attribute of
our system is that it is primarily unsupervised. Us-
ing straightforward AKBC techniques (open infor-
mation extraction, dictionary matching, and univer-
sal schemas), we were able to generate a 49 million
fact knowledge graph which combined knowledge
from medical text and from a large medical taxon-
omy. We were then able to perform link prediction
with subsets of that graph allowing us to produce
suggestions for ontology expansion.

We see the importance of this initial system, not
in advancing new algorithms, but in showing the ap-
plicability and reusability of state-of-the-art AKBC
methods over real world datasets.

There are a number of avenues for future work.
From a use case perspective, we have presented this
initial system to Elsevier’s in-house ontology team.
They were encouraged by the system and presented
several use cases that we think are of interest to the
AKBC community:

1. Querying over the ontology. This is a semantic
search problem in which the aim is to find exist-
ing relations for a given query. Given an exist-
ing relation like “emmet:hasCause”, the knowl-
edge base can provide many surface forms
that are synonymous. This will help ontology
browsing and also adding synonyms to the on-
tology.

2. Provide evidence to confirm existing ontology
relations. Medicine is particularly concerned
with being based in evidence. Being able to
link a particular fact with textual passages that
support it is valuable for credibility.

3. Provide evidence for new relation instances not
yet in an ontology. Being able to suggest that
two concepts should be linked by one of the on-
tology’s semantic types, and being able to back
that up with paragraph level text passages, is
a tremendous savings in the effort for ensuring
the ontology is grounded in the literature.

From a system’s perspective, our first step is to
perform larger experiments representing the entire
knowledge graph as a universal schema. We also in-
tend to implement more sophisticated models based
on the universal schema representation. Likewise, a

84



ARG1 REL ARG2
glaucoma developed many years after chronic inflammation of uveal tract
glaucoma develop following chronic inflammation of uveal tract
glaucoma can appear soon in family history of glaucoma
glaucoma can appear soon in age over 40
glaucoma is considered the second leading cause of functional visual field loss
glaucoma remains the second leading cause of functional visual field loss

Figure 3: Examples of new relation instances for glaucoma

comparison to other distant suppression mechanisms
would be informative. Additionally, we need to per-
form sensitivity analysis on our various parameter
settings. We also would like to explore the applica-
bility to other ontologies or combinations there of.
In the longer term, a key question we have is rank-
ing facts to be shown to experts.

In closing, we believe that AKBC methods have
matured to the extent where they can be a key as-
set for ontologist in the maintenance and creation of
large scale domain-specific ontologies.

Acknowledgements

We thank the reviewers for their important sugges-
tions and guidance on directions for future work.

References

Peter Clark, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sab-
harwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Turney, and Daniel
Khashabi. 2016. Combining retrieval, statistics, and
inference to answer elementary science questions.

Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1535–1545. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Carol Friedman, Pauline Kra, Hong Yu, Michael
Krauthammer, and Andrey Rzhetsky. 2001. Genies: a
natural-language processing system for the extraction
of molecular pathways from journal articles. Bioinfor-
matics, 17(suppl 1):S74–S82.

Alexander G. Ororbia II, Jian Wu, and Lee C. Giles.
2014. Citeseerx: Intelligent information extraction
and knowledge creation from web-based data. In
The 4th Workshop on AutomatedKnowledge Base Con-
struction, May.

Hoifung Poon, Chris Quirk, Charlie DeZiel, and David
Heckerman. 2014. Literome: Pubmed-scale genomic
knowledge base in the cloud. Bioinformatics.

Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Benjamin M. Mar-
lin, and Andrew McCallum. 2013. Relation
extraction with matrix factorization and universal
schemas. In Joint Human Language Technology Con-
ference/Annual Meeting of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(HLT-NAACL ’13), June.

Arnab Sinha, Zhihong Shen, Yang Song, Hao Ma, Darrin
Eide, Bo-June (Paul) Hsu, and Kuansan Wang. 2015.
An overview of microsoft academic service (mas) and
applications. In Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’15 Compan-
ion, pages 243–246, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Patrick Verga, David Belanger, Emma Strubell, Ben-
jamin Roth, and Andrew McCallum. 2015. Multilin-
gual relation extraction using compositional universal
schema. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06396.

Matei Zaharia, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Michael J.
Franklin, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. 2010. Spark:
Cluster computing with working sets. In Proceed-
ings of the 2Nd USENIX Conference on Hot Topics in
Cloud Computing, HotCloud’10, pages 10–10, Berke-
ley, CA, USA. USENIX Association.

85


