








































Proceedings of the Workshop on Grammar and Lexicon: Interactions and Interfaces,
pages 51–60, Osaka, Japan, December 11 2016.

On the Non-canonical Valency Filling  

 
Igor Boguslavsky 

A.A.Kharkevich Institute for Information Transmission Problems,  
Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia /  

Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain 
Bolshoy Karetny per. 19, build.1, Moscow 127051 Russia /  

Campus de Montegancedo,  
28660 Boadilla del Monte (Madrid) España. 

 
bogus@iitp.ru 

 
Abstract 

Valency slot filling is a semantic glue, which brings together the meanings of words. As regards the 
position of an argument in the dependency structure with respect to its predicate, there exist three 
types of valency filling: active (canonical), passive, and discontinuous. Of these, the first type is 
studied much better than the other two. As a rule, canonical actants are unambiguously marked in the 
syntactic structure, and each actant corresponds to a unique syntactic position. Linguistic information 
on which syntactic function an actant might have (subject, direct or indirect object), what its 
morphological form should be and which prepositions or conjunctions it requires, can be given in the 
lexicon in the form of government patterns, subcategorization frames, or similar data structures. We 
concentrate on non-canonical cases of valency filling in Russian, which are characteristic of non-
verbal parts of speech, such as adverbs, adjectives, and particles, in the first place. They are more 
difficult to handle than canonical ones, because the position of the actant in the tree is governed by 
more complicated rules. A valency may be filled by expressions occupying different syntactic 
positions, and a syntactic position may accept expressions filling different valencies of the same word. 
We show how these phenomena can be processed in a semantic analyzer. 

 

1    Introduction  

Discovering the predicate-argument structure of the sentence is an important step in constructing its 
semantic structure. Identifying arguments of predicates (or, in a different terminology, valency slot 
filling) is a semantic glue that combines the meanings of words together. It is in fact the main 
mechanism of meaning amalgamation.  

What information is needed to discover the predicate-argument structure of the sentence? First of 
all, one needs a dictionary that contains the following information for each argument-bearing word:  

(a) analytical definition of the meaning of the word should be given; among other things, it should 
represent all valency slots (by means of variables);  

(b) each valency slot should be assigned the information on how it can be filled; this information 
includes primarily the data on the syntactic position of the actant in the syntactic structure (subject, 
direct or indirect object), what prepositions or conjunctions are needed to introduce it and what lexico-
grammatical form it can have. This information is provided by subcategorization frames, government 
patterns and similar data structures.  

Besides the dictionary, for identifying the actants in the text, the syntactic structure of the sentence 
should be available, because different actants have different syntactic positions with respect to the 
predicate.  

This aspect – different syntactic positions of actants with respect to the predicate – did not receive 
sufficient attention in the literature, neither in linguistics nor in computational linguistics. To a large 
extent, only verbs and nouns are considered as argument-bearing words and subcategorization frames 
seem a sufficient tool to identify arguments in the sentence. However, other parts of speech, such as  
adjectives, adverbs, particles, conjunctions, and prepositions are equally entitled to be classed as 

51



argument-bearing words. Moreover, being non-prototypical predicates, they substantially enlarge our 
knowledge of the ways predicates use to instantiate their valencies.   

The paper is structured as follows. First, we will discuss different ways of valency filling paying 
special attention to the patterns that cannot be described by means of subcategorization frames 
(Section 2). Then we will present our case study – syntactic properties and non-canonical valency 
instantiation of the words edinstvennyj and tol’ko in Russian (Section 3). This is the main contribution 
of the paper. However, we would also like to show that this approach is implementable in a semantic 
analyser. With this aim in view, we will briefly introduce semantic analyser SemETAP (Section 4) and 
show how it treats these phenomena (Section 5). We will conclude in Section 6. 

2 Valency Slot Filling 

First of all, we have to draw the readers' attention to the fact that we understand the concepts of 
valency and actant somewhat broader than it is often done. Here we follow the tradition of the 
Moscow Semantic School (MSS), which in its turn, shares these notions with the Meaning – Text 
theory (Apresjan 1974, Mel'čuk 1974). For MSS, the starting point in defining the concept of valency 
is the semantic analysis of the situation denoted by the given word. Analytical semantic definition of a 
word, constructed according to certain requirements (Apresjan 1999), should explicitly present all 
obligatory participants of the situation denoted by this words. For a word L to have a certain valency 
slot it is necessary, though insufficient, that a situation denoted by L should contain a corresponding 
participant in the intuitively obvious way. Another condition is that this participant should be 
expressible in a sentence along with L in a systematic way (Mel’čuk 2004a, 2004b). A word or a 
phrase that denotes such a participant is said to fill (or, instantiate) the valency slot and is called an 
actant (or, argument).  

In this respect, all types of words that denote situations with obligatory participants (which we call 
predicates) – verbs, (some) nouns, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, particles etc. – are on equal 
footing and obey the same principles of description.  

Deciding on the set of valency slots is not the whole story. Besides that, one needs to exhaustively 
describe all the ways these slots can be filled and not only canonical ones. We lay special emphasis 
on describing the whole spectrum of possible syntactic realization of arguments, because non-
canonical valency filling significantly complicates the task of detecting arguments of the predicates.   

The MSS framework represents the sentence at various levels of representation. In particular, each 
sentence has a syntactic structure and a semantic structure. In the semantic structure of the sentence,  
predicates and their actants are always connected by predicate-argument relations directed from the 
predicate to the argument. For example, (1a) is represented as (1b): 

(1a) John bought a house.  
(1b) hasAgent(Buy, John), hasObject(Buy, House) 
In the syntactic structure it is not always that simple. The syntactic position of the actant with 

respect to its predicate may be more diverse, if we take into account all kinds of actant-bearing words 
and all possible syntactic realizations of the actants. From this point of view, we distinguish three 
types of valency slot filling: ACTIVE, PASSIVE, and DISCONTINOUS ones (Boguslavsky 2003). If a 
predicate subordinates its actant in the syntactic structure by means of an immediate dependency 
relation, we will say that such a valency filling is ACTIVE. This is the most typical (canonical) case. If a 
predicate is subordinated to its actant, we will say that the filling is PASSIVE. If there is no direct 
syntactic link between the predicate and the actant, the valency filling is DISCONTINOUS. 	

Let us give some examples. In (2) the verb to precede subordinates both its actants A1 and A2 (the 
subject and the object), and therefore the valency filling is active.      

(2) The workshop  [A1] precedes [L] the main conference [A2].  
Preposition before denotes the same situation as the verb to precede and therefore has the same 

valencies. However, in the syntactic structure, these valencies are filled in a different way. In (3), A1 
is filled passively, and A2 – actively:    

(3) The workshop [A1] before [L] the conference [A2]. 
Passive valency filling is characteristic for prepositions, conjunctions, adjectives, adverbs and 

particles. 

52



One of the valencies of the quantifiers, such as all, some, most, etc. is filled by the noun they are 
connected to and another one – by the verb, with which they do not have any direct syntactic link. 
Therefore, it is a case of a discontinuous valency filling: 

(4) Most [L] delegates [A1] supported [A2] the resolution.    
A regular source of the discontinuous valency filling are subject- and object-oriented adverbials. 

To give an example, let us compare sentences (5a) and (5b): 
(5a) John has a habit of getting up early. 
(5b) By habit, John got up early. 
Habit has two valencies – person Q (‘John’) and situation P (‘get up early’) – and both of them are 

instantiated both in (5a) and in (5b). However, in neither case is habit syntactically connected to John.  
As for (5a), actant Q of habit is detached from habit and connected to has because has is the value 

of Lexical Function Oper1 (in Melčukian sense). The functions of the Oper-Func family have a 
property of syntactically attracting some actants of their arguments. In (5b), actant Q of habit can only 
be the subject of the main verb (get up), and therefore habit instantiates valency Q in the 
discontinuous way. Cf. sentences (6a)-(6b) that show that by habit is subject-oriented and takes the 
subject of the main verb as its actant. In (6a) it is John’s habit that is referred to, and in (6b) it is 
Mary’s habit. 

(6a) By habit, John borrowed $100 from Mary. 
(6b) By habit, Mary lent $100 to John.    
Active valency filling is mostly typical for verbs and nouns and is particularly well fit for slot 

instantiation. First of all, actants are directly connected to the predicate. Besides, each valency slot has 
its own set of surface realizations. If a word has several valency slots, their means of realization, are, 
as a rule, clearly contrasting. Different actants are marked by different means – cases, prepositions, 
conjunctions. Different actants of the same word cannot intersect: no word can normally participate in 
the filling of different valencies of the same predicate at the same time. As a rule, there is a one-to-one 
correspondence between the actants and their syntactic positions. However, it may so happen that this 
correspondence does not hold, and a valency may be filled by expressions that occupy different 
syntactic positions. This is called diathesis alternation, or modification (Mel’čuk, Xolodovič 1970, 
Padučeva 2003, Partee 2005):  

(7a) The farmers loaded the truck with (the) hay. 
(7b) The farmers loaded (the/some) hay on the truck.  
However, these are relatively rare situations that do not undermine the general rule. It is in the 

nature of things that the actants are marked in the syntactic structure in an unambiguous way, and each 
actant corresponds, as a rule, to a unique syntactic position.  An attempt to extend this observation to 
passive and discontinuous valency slots reveals interesting surprises (Boguslavsky 2009).  The data 
presented below show that this one-to-one correspondence can be violated in a number of ways. We 
will see that a valency may be filled by expressions occupying different syntactic positions, and a 
syntactic position may accept expressions filling different valencies. Moreover, the same word can 
belong to more than one actant of the same predicate.  

Below, we will examine in detail two such words – the Russian adjective edinstvennyj and the 
particle tol’ko, both meaning ‘only’. These words are of considerable interest from the point of view 
of the valency filling typology.  

3 Case study: edinstvennyj – tol’ko ‘only’ 

From the point of view of the argument structure, it is very instructive to contrast two Russian 
words – particle tol’ko and adjective edinstvennyj, both of which basically mean ‘only’. In different 
contexts, a few other English words may be appropriate translations (only – single – sole – unique – 
alone), but for simplicity’s sake we will only use the basic equivalent ‘only’ in the glosses of the 
examples below. These words give us a rare opportunity to observe dramatic differences in terms of 
valency filling when the words are practically synonymous. Indeed, both words claim that a certain 
object is – in some aspect – unique (a more precise definition will be given below). Valency 
instantiation differences have the result that the sentences that have a similar structure behave 
differently, while sentences of different composition manifest identical valency filling patterns.  

53



 For example, in (8a) and (8b) the words edinstvennyj and tol’ko are interchangeable (up to the 
syntactically determined word order). In (9a) and (9b) replacing one word for the other drastically 
modifies the meaning of the sentence, and in (10a)-(10c) the relationship between edinstvennyj and 
tol’ko is even queerer: if one substitutes tol’ko for edinstvennyj in the same noun phrase, the sentence 
will become anomalous, but if one introduces tol’ko in a different noun phrase, the resulting sentence 
will be synonymous to the original one: 

(8a) Ivan edinstvennyj menja ponimaet. 
         lit. Ivan only me undertstands 
         'Only Ivan undertsands me' 
(8b) Menja ponimaet tol'ko Ivan. 
         lit. me understands only Ivan 
         'only Ivan understands me' 
(9a)  V uglu stojal edinstvennyj stul. 
          lit. in corner stood only chair 
          'There was only one chair in the corner' 
(9b) V ugly stojal tol'ko stul. 
          lit. in corner stood only chair 
          'There was only a chair in the corner' 
(10a) Edinstvennym drugom Ivana byl Petr. 
          lit. only friend of-Ivan was Peter 
          'Peter was the only Ivan's friend'  
(10b) *Tol'ko drugom Ivana byl Petr. 
          lit. only friend of-Ivan was Peter 
(10c) Drugom Ivana byl tol'ko Petr. 
          lit. friend of-Ivan was only Peter 
          'Peter was the only Ivan's friend' 
Another mystery of edinstivennyj which is also connected to the argument structure is related to the 

correspondence between edinstvennyj NP  and edinstvennyj iz NP ‘only of NP’. In (11a) edinstvennyj 
NP can be replaced by edinstvennyj iz NP without any semantic shift (cf. (11b)). In (12a) such a 
substitution results in an anomaly (cf. (12b)). 

(11a) Panteon – edinstvennoe antičnoe sooruženie, došedšee do našix dnej s nepovreždennym 
kupolom. 

         lit. Pantheon – only ancient building having-come to our days with intact cupola 
         'Pantheon is the only ancient building that has survived until now with the cupola intact’  
(11b) Panteon – edinstvennoe iz antičnyx sooruženij, došedšee do našix dnej s nepovreždennym 

kupolom. 
         lit. Pantheon – only of ancient buildings having-come to our days with intact cupola 
          'Pantheon is the only one of ancient buildings that has survived until now with the cupola 

intact’  
(12a) Ivan vybral edinstvennyj nadežnyj put'. 
         'Ivan chose the only reliable way' 
(12b) *Ivan vybral edinstvennyj iz nadežnyx putej. 
          '*Ivan chose the only one of the reliable ways  
 
To explain these facts, one should first give analytical definition of both words, that fixes their 

valencies, and then describe how they can be filled. 

3.1 Meaning and valency slots of edinstvennyj. 

A detailed analysis of valency instantiation of edinstvennyj and tol'ko can be found in 
(Boguslavsky 1996). Here we will only give a brief review with some refinements.  

Edinstvennyj is used in several syntactic contexts, and in each of them the valencies are filled in a 
different way. It is the copulative construction that is the most transparent from this point of view. 
Here all the valencies are filled by clearly distinguishable phrases:  

(13) Petr – edinstvennyj čelovek, kotoromu Ivan doverjaet. 

54



        'Peter is the only person whom Ivan trusts' 
Therefore this construction can be used as an input of the semantic definition:  
(14) Q jest' edinstvennyj R, kotoryj P 'Q is the only R which P' = ‘(Q is R which P); among all Rs 

there is no one except (this) Q, which would have property P’ 
Here, the parentheses enclose the part of the sentence meaning which serves as the context for 

edinstvennyj. In sentence (13), the subject 'Peter' fills valency Q, 'person' – valency R, and the clause 
'whom Ivan trusts' – valency P. Applying the definition (14) to (13), given these variable 
instantiations, will yield the following meaning: 'Peter is a person whom Ivan trusts; among all the 
(relevant) people, there is no other (= different from Peter) person whom Ivan trusts'.  

Valency P is obligatory in all contexts, R and Q are optional.  
As a rule, valency Q, is expressed by means of the copulative construction (cf. (13)) or another one 

which presupposes the copulative construction at a deeper level. Two characteristic constructions of 
this type are the appositive construction (cf. (15)) and the co-predicative one (cf. (16)):  

(15) Petr [Q], edinstvennyj čelovek, kotoromu Ivan doverjaet, znaet o nem vse. 
        'Peter [Q], the only person whom Ivan trusts, knows everything about him' 
(16) Petr [Q] edinstvennyj pol'zuetsja doveriem Ivana.  
        lit. Peter [Q] only enjoys trust of-Ivan 
        'Peter is the only one who enjoys Ivan's trust' 
In spite of the fact that edinstvennyj agrees with Petr in case, number and gender, as is proper for 

adjective + noun phrases in Russian, it is not its regular modifier, being syntactically linked to the verb 
rather than to the noun. This is what happens in general in co-predicative constructions, as opposed to 
the modificative ones. In co-predicative and modificative constructions, edinstvennyj fills its valencies 
quite differently. This becomes obvious if we compare the co-predicative phrase (17a) and the 
modificative one (17b):  

(17a) Angličanin edinstvennyj prišel vovremja. 
       lit. Englishman only came on-time  
       ‘the Englishman was the only one to come on time’ 
(17b) Edinstvennyj angličanin prišel vovremja.  
       lit. only Englishman came on-time 
      ‘the only Englishman came on time’ 
In both cases the Englishman is set off to other people according to some property, but these 

properties are quite different in (17a) and (17b). In (17a) no one else came on time, and in (17b) no 
one else was an Englishman.  

One should also take into account that there are two types of co-predicative constructions in 
Russian, which affects the valency instantiation of edinstvennyj: in the subject-copredicative 
construction (as in (17a)) the adjective refers to the subject of the sentence, while in the object-
copredicative construction (as in (18)) it refers to the object: 

(18) Ja ljublju ee edinstvennyju. 
        lit. I love her only 
         'I love only her' 
The thing that is interesting about the modificative construction (Adjective + Noun) is that the 

modified noun fills two valencies of edinstvennyj at a time – Q and P. If we come back to sentence 
(17b), we will see that in its semantic structure 'Englishman' occurs twice: 'besides (this) Englishman, 
there is no one who is an Englishman'. It is to be noted that these two occurrences of 'Englishman' 
differ in their referential status: in the position of Q the status is referential ('this Englishman'), while 
in the position of P it is predicative ('be an Englishman').  

The copulative construction manifests a similar case, if edinstvennyj is not a noun modifier. The 
subject also plays two roles with respect to edinstvennyj – Q and P. This becomes obvious if we 
compare (19a) and (19b): 

(19a) Holiday Inn – edinstvennaja gostinitsa na ostrove.  
        ‘Holiday Inn is the only hotel on the island’ 
(19b) Eta gostinitsa – edinstvennaja na ostrove.  
       lit. this hotel (is) only on island 
       ‘This hotel is the only one on the island’. 

55



In (19a), the actants of edinstvennyj are as follows: Holiday Inn = Q, hotel = P; island = R. All the 
valencies filled in (19a) are also filled in (19b). Both sentences say that a certain hotel is the only one 
on the island. Hence, the valencies P and Q that are filled in (19a) by different phrases in (19b) 
correspond to the single occurrence of hotel.     

Valency P is filled as follows: 
- if edinstvennyj is a co-predicate (cf. (17a) and (18)), valency P is filled by the 

predicate of the sentence;   
- if edinstvennyj is a modifier (cf. (20a) and (20b)) or a head of the elective construction 

(cf. (20c)) of a noun which has a restrictive attribute, valency P is filled by this attribute. 
(20a) edinstvennoe gosudarstvo [R], soxranivšee [P] svoju konstitutsiju 
      lit. only state [R] that-preserved [P] its constitution 
      ‘the only state to preserve its constitution’ = ‘among the states [R] there is no other that 

preserved [P] its constitution’ 
(20b) edinstvennoe kardinal’noe [P] sredstvo [R] ot golovnoj boli 
   ‘the only radical [P] remedy [R] for headache' = 'among remedies [R] there is no other that is 

radical [P]' 
(20c) edinstvennyj iz moix druzej [R], kto živet [P] za gorodom 
    lit. only of my friends [R] who lives [P] out of town 
    'the only one of my friends who lives out of town' = 'among my friends [R] there is no other who 

lives [P] out of town' 
Valency R  is filled either by a locative phrase (cf. edinstvennyj passažir v kupe 'the only passenger 

in the compartment'), or the elective prepositions iz 'of' and sredi 'among' (cf. edinstvennyj jurist sredi 
nas 'the only lawyer among us'), or by a modified noun, if it has a restrictive attribute (cf. (13), (20a), 
(20b)). 

One more actant configuration that arises due to the phrasal stress on edinstvennyj is noteworthy. 
Let us compare sentence (21a), in which edinstvennyj is pronounced with a neutral intonation, and 
(21b), where this word is stressed: 

(21a) My upustili edinstvennuju vozmožnost' perelomit' situatsiju. 
        lit. 'we missed only opportunity to reverse the situation’ 
        ‘we missed the unique opportunity to reverse the situation’ 
(21b) Eto neprijatno soznavat’, no, poxože, my vospol’zovalis’ ↓edinstvennym blagom svobody. 
       ‘It is frustrating to realize, but it seems we made use of only one asset of freedom’.  
In both cases, edinstvennyj is a noun phrase modifier without any restrictive attributes, which 

makes both sentences similar from the point of view of the valency instantiation rules presented 
above. However, sentence (21a) is interpreted as predicted: 'we missed an opportunity to reverse the 
situation; there was no other opportunity'. This interpretation is obtained with Q = opportunity, P = be 
an opportunity, and R not instantiated. In (21b), on the contrary, the modified noun phrase ('asset of 
freedom') fills valency R, P is instantiated by the predicate of the sentence ('make use'), and Q is not 
instantiated at all: 'we made use of an asset of freedom; of all the assets of freedom, there is no other 
one we made use of'. This dramatic shift in valency instantiation has been provoked by the phrasal 
stress that falls on edinstvennyj.  

3.2 Meaning and valency slots of tol’ko 

As mentioned above, particle tol'ko is synonymous with edinstvennyj (in one of its senses), but 
differs in its syntactic potential and valency instantiation patterns. First of all, tol'ko is a particle, while 
edinstvennyj is an adjective. Therefore their syntactic behaviours are quite different.  Tol'ko cannot 
occur in many syntactic contexts characteristic of edinstvennyj (cf., e.g. Eta gostinitsa edinstvennaja - 
*Eta gostinitsa tol'ko). On the other hand, tol'ko may be connected to a word of any part of speech and 
cannot have its own dependents (cf. edinstvennyj iz nas - *tol'ko iz nas).  

In most (but not all) contexts the following rule holds true: (a) valency Q is filled by the phrase to 
which tol'ko is subordinated syntactically and which it immediately precedes; (b) valency P is filled by 
a verb which is the head of the clause to which tol'ko belongs; (c) valency R is filled by phrases 
headed by prepositions iz 'of' and sredi 'among'.    

(22) Iz [R] vsego spiska literatury on soslalsja [P] tol'ko na knigu [Q] 1974 goda.  

56



        lit. of the whole list of references he referred only to the book of 1974 year 
       ‘of [R] the whole reference list he only referred [P] to the 1974 book [Q]’  
Now, we can come back to sentences (8)-(12) and explain the differences observed. 

3.3 Tol'ko vs. edinstvennyj: valency filling. 

In the light of what we learned of the argument properties of edinstvennyj and tol'ko, we can now 
explain the facts presented in (8)-(12) above.    

In sentences (8a) and (8b) edinstvennyj and tol'ko have different syntactic links: tol'ko depends on 
Ivan, and edinstvennyj is a co-predicate and depends on the predicate ponimaet 'understands'. 
Nevertheless, the sentences are synonymous, since edinstvennyj and tol'ko fill their valencies in the 
same way. Co-predicative constructions are the only1 context in which edinstvennyj fills valency P by 
the main VP, just as tol'ko does.   

In sentences (9a)-(9b), the situation is inverse: both words depend on the same noun (stul 'chair'), 
but valency P is filled in different ways. Therefore, the sentences are not synonymous.  

Sentences (10a)-(10c) contain a copulative construction. Edinstvennyj belongs to the predicative 
NP, and fills Q by the subject of the copula. Since tol'ko should be placed before actant Q, it is natural 
that, to preserve the synonymy, tol'ko should be moved to the subject NP. 

As opposed to edinstvennyj, tol'ko is a rhematizer and cannot be placed in the thematic position. 
Therefore, (10b) not only is non-synonymous with (10a), but is also ungrammatical. If we change the 
communicative perspective, sentence (10b) will become grammatical (Petr byl tol'ko drugom Ivana 
'Peter was only Ivan's friend (but not a brother)') but will remain non-synonymous with (10a).  

Let us now turn to sentences (11a) and (12a). In both cases, NP to which edinstvennyj is connected 
('ancient building' vs. 'way') has a restrictive attribute ('having come' vs. 'reliable'). According to the 
rules above, in both cases the NP fills valency R, and the attribute – valency P. An alternative way to 
fill R is use the iz 'of' + N group  ('of ancient buildings' vs. 'of the ways'). However, in (11b) the 
introduction of this construction leads to success, while in (12b) it doesn't.  

The fact is that the iz-group fills valency R as a whole. It cannot include extraneous elements. This 
is what happened in (12b). The group ‘of reliable ways’ contains the word ‘reliable’, which in fact fills 
valency P and not R: edinstvennyj nadežnyj put’ ‘the only reliable way’ means that there is no other 
way that is reliable. If we take this word out of the iz-group, the sentence will become quite correct: 

(23) Ivan vybral edinstvennyj iz putej, kotoryj byl nadežnym. 
       'Ivan chose the only of the ways that was reliable'  
As for sentence (11a), this problem does not arise, since the participle došedšee 'having-come' does 

not belong to the iz-group, but is connected directly to edinstvennyj. This follows from the fact that 
došedšee (nom, sg) does not agree in case and number with sooruženij 'buildings' (gen, pl) but with 
edinstvennoe (nom, sg). Otherwise, the sentence would be as ungrammatical as (12b): 

(24) *Panteon – edinstvennoe (nom, sg) iz antičnyx sooruženij (gen, pl) , došedšix (gen, pl) do 
našix dnej s nepovreždennym kupolom. 

         lit. Pantheon – only (nom, sg) ancient building (gen, pl) having-come (gen, pl) to our days 
with intact cupola. 

4. SemETAP semantic analyzer. 

The semantic analyzer SemETAP, under development in the Computational Linguistics lab of the 
Kharkevich Institute for Information Transmission Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, is 
aiming at performing semantic analysis based on both linguistic and extra-linguistic knowledge. This 
analyzer includes a wide-coverage linguistic processor capable of building coherent semantic 
structures for Russian, a knowledge-extensive lexicon, which contains a variety of types of lexical 
information, an ontology, which describes objects in the domain and their properties, a repository of 
ground-level facts, a set of common-sense axioms, and an inference engine (Boguslavsky 2011, 
Boguslavsky et al. 2013). The text is processed in three steps: 1) building of dependency syntactic 
structure (SyntS), 2) building of basic semantic structure (BSemS), and 3) building of extended 
																																																								
1 except for the cases of diathesis modification under phrasal stress – cf. above.  

57



semantic structure (ExtSemS). Most of the predicate-argument links are established in SyntS. Here 
belong all cases of the active (see above, Section 2) valency filling, which correspond to immediate 
dependency links between the predicate and the argument. Passive and discontinuous valency filling is 
performed at the level of BSemS. It is there that the actants discussed in the previous section are 
presented. ExtSemS is obtained by means of various semantic procedures based on common sense 
axioms, context data, ground-level facts, etc. A similar distribution of knowledge between the levels is 
adopted in the Onto-Sem approach (Nirenburg, Raskin 2004). 
 

5.  Non-prototypical valency filling in SemETAP    

Let us go back to our case study. For convenience, we will repeat below the sentences under 
discussion. 

(8a) Ivan edinstvennyj menja ponimaet. 
         lit. Ivan only me undertstands 
         'Only Ivan undertsands me' 
(8b) Menja ponimaet tol'ko Ivan. 
         lit. me understands only Ivan 
         'only Ivan understands me' 
(9a)  V uglu stojal edinstvennyj stul. 
          lit. in corner stood only chair 
          'There was only one chair in the corner' 
(9b) V ugly stojal tol'ko stul. 
          lit. in corner stood only chair 
          'There was only a chair in the corner' 
 
SyntSs of these sentences do not contain explicit information on the actants of edinstvennyj and 

tol'ko. SyntSs of (8a) and (8b) obtained by the ETAP parser are shown in Fig. 1 and 2. In (8a) 
edinstvennyj (word 2) is connected to the verb ponimaet ‘understands’ (word 4) by the subject-
copredicative dependency relation. In (8b) tol’ko (word 3) is linked to Ivan (word 4) by the restrictive 
dependency relation.  

 

 
 
Fig. 1. SyntS of (8a) Ivan edinstvennyj menja ponimaet                                                                                                     
 

 
 
Fig. 2 SyntS of (8b) Menja ponimaet tol'ko Ivan      
 

58



In spite of completely different SyntSs, synonymous sentences (8a) and (8b) get an identical 
BSemS shown in Fig. 3.  In this BSemS, both edinstvennyj and tol'ko have the same equivalent – 
Only.  Its actants Q, R and P, described in section 3, are connected to this concept by means of 
relations hasObject (for valency Q), hasSource (for valency R) and hasAttribute (for valency P).  

                                                                                           

 
 
Fig. 3 BSemS of both (8a) and (8b)  
 
SyntSs of sentences (9a) and (9b) are very similar. In both cases, edinstvennyj/tol’ko is connected 

to the same noun stul ‘chair’. However, as can be seen in Fig. 4 and 5, the BSemSs of these sentences 
are noticeably different. They differ in how valency P of these words is instantiated. In (9b) it is filled 
by the main verb: ‘there is nothing except the chair [Q] that is standing [P] in the corner’. In (9a), both 
Q and P are filled by the same concept – chair (leaving aside the difference in the referential status): 
‘there is nothing except the chair [Q] standing in the corner that is a chair [P]’.  

 
  

 
 
Fig. 4 BSemS of (9a) V uglu stojal edinstvennyj stul 
 

59



 
 
Fig. 5  BSemS of (9b) V uglu stojal tol’ko stul 

6    Conclusion 

Non-canonical valency filling received less attention, both in linguistics and in computational 
linguistics, than well-studied cases of active valency filling, when actants are directly subordinated to 
predicates in a dependency structure and different actants are always represented by non-intersecting 
phrases. We show that the inventory of valency filling is not restricted to that. Actants can be 
connected to predicates in different ways. They can subordinate their predicate and even have no 
direct connection with it. It is also possible that the same word participates in the filling of different 
valencies of the same predicate. We have shown how these phenomena can be handled in a semantic 
analyser.  

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the RSF grant 16-18-10422, which is gratefully acknowledged. 

References.  
Apresjan Ju.D. 1974. Leksicheskaja semantika. Nauka, Moscow. 
Apresjan Ju.D. 1999. Otechestvennaja teoreticheskaja semantika v konce XX stoletija. Izv. AN, serija lit. i 

jazyka, №  4. 
Boguslavsky I. 1996. Sfera dejstvija leksicheskix edinic. Shkola Jazyki russkoj kul’tury, Moscow. 
Boguslavsky I. 2003. On the Passive and Discontinuous Valency Slots. In: Proceedings of the 1st International 

Conference on Meaning-Text Theory, pp. 129-138. Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, June 16–18. 
Boguslavsky I. 2005. Valentnosti kvantornyx slov. In: Kvantifikativnyj aspekt jazyka. Moskva, p. 139-

165. 
Boguslavsky I. 2009. Enlarging the Diversity of Valency Instantiation Patterns and Its Implications // Lecture 

Notes In Artificial Intelligence. Logic, Language, and Computation: 7th International Tbilisi Symposium on 
Logic, Language, and Computation (TbiLLC’2007). Tbilisi, Georgia, October 1-5, 2007. Berlin; Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag. Р. 206-220. 

Boguslavsky I.M. 2011. “Semantic Analysis Based on Linguistic and Ontological Resources”; Proceedings of 
the 5th International Conference on the Meaning - Text Theory. Barcelona. Igor Boguslavsky and Leo 
Wanner (Eds.). P. 25-36, 2011. 

Boguslavsky I.M., V.G.Dikonov, L.L.Iomdin, S.P. Timoshenko. 2013. “Semantic representation for NL 
understanding”; Computational Linguistics and Intellectual Technologies. Papers from the Annual 
International Conference “Dialogue”. Issue 12(19), Мoscow, RGGU Publishers. P. 132-144. 

Mel’čuk I. 2004a. Actants in semantics and syntax I: actants in semantics, Linguistics,  42(1), 1-66. 
Mel’čuk I. 2004b. Actants in semantics and syntax II: actants in syntax, Linguistics, 42(2),  247-291. 
Mel’čuk I.A. and Xolodovič A.A. 1970. Zalog (Opredelenie. Ischislenie). Narody Azii I Afriki, nº 4, 111-124. 
Nirenburg, Raskin. 2004. Ontological Semantics. The MIT Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts. London, England.  
Padučeva E. 2003. Diathesis: some extended applications of the term. In: Proceedings of the 1st International 

Conference on Meaning-Text Theory. Paris, École Normale Supérieure, June 16–18.  
Partee B. 2005. Diathesis Alternations and NP Semantics. // East West Encounter: Second International 

Conference on Meaning – Text Theory. Jazyki slavjanskoj kultury. Moskva. 

60


