



















































Building a Cross-document Event-Event Relation Corpus


Proceedings of LAW X – The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 1–6,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building a Cross-document Event-Event Relation Corpus

Yu Hong1,2, Tongtao Zhang1, Tim O’Gorman3, Sharone Horowit-Hendler4,
Heng Ji1, Martha Palmer3

1Computer Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2Department of Computer Science, Soochow University

3Department of Linguistics, University of Colorado at Boulder
4Institute of Reading Development

Abstract

We propose a new task of extracting event-
event relations across documents. We
present our efforts at designing an anno-
tation schema and building a corpus for
this task. Our schema includes five main
types of relations: Inheritance, Expan-
sion, Contingency, Comparison and Tem-
porality, along with 21 subtypes. We also
lay out the main challenges based on de-
tailed inter-annotator disagreement and er-
ror analysis. We hope these resources can
serve as a benchmark to encourage re-
search on this new problem.

1 Introduction

The ultimate goal of Information Extraction (IE)
is to construct “Information Networks” (Li et al.,
2014) from unstructured texts. Most previous IE
work focused on constructing entity-centric Infor-
mation Networks where each node represents an
entity and each edge represents a relation. We pro-
pose a novel task to construct a new layer of event-
centric Information Networks across multiple doc-
uments, where each node is an event and the edges
capture the relations between two events. This
task can provide building blocks for many impor-
tant applications such as event knowledge base
population and temporal event tracking (Do et al.,
2012). The nodes can be extracted by existing
fine-grained event extraction approaches (Ji and
Grishman, 2008; Liao and Grishman, 2010; Hong
et al., 2011; Li et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014). How-
ever, little previous work can be directly exploited
to construct the edges.

In this paper we define a comprehensive schema
that includes multiple fine-grained event-event re-
lation types. Some types are similar to those
in discourse parsing (Soricut and Marcu, 2003).

However, event-event relations are fundamentally
different from discourse relations: (1) The input
consists of structured events instead of unstruc-
tured sentences. (2) For cross-document event
pairs, there are neither explicit textual clues nor
implicit information about the ordering of clauses
that might indicate the relation. Following this
schema, we annotated a cross-document event-
event relation corpus built on top of the Auto-
matic Content Extraction (ACE2005) 1 event an-
notations. We will define the task (Section 2),
describe the annotation schema (Section 3) and
present corpus statistics and annotation challenges
(Section 4).

2 Task Definition

In an event-event relation schema, events form a
crucial foundation because they serve as nodes and
are indispensable in event-centric information net-
works. We follow the definition of events in the
ACE guideline 2:
Event trigger: the main word which most clearly
expresses an event occurrence.
Event arguments: the entities, time expressions
and values that are involved in an event.
Event mention: a phrase or sentence within
which an event is described, including a trigger
and a set of arguments.
Event: a set of coreferential event mentions within
one document.

We define the event-event relation task as the
annotation of all applicable logical relations be-
tween two events. For example, as illustrated in
Figure 1, the following events are connected by
Condition and Temporality relations:
Event 1: Media tycoon Barry Diller on Wednes-
day quit as chief of Vivendi Universal Entertain-

1http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace
2https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/sites/www.ldc.upenn.edu/

files/english-events-guidelines-v5.4.3.pdf

1



Event 1 Event 2
Type End-Position Start Position

Trigger quit replace

Person Barry Diller Jean-Rene

Position chief chief executive

Organization Vivendi U.E. U.S. unit

Event2 Event1

Contingency.Condition
tt

Temporality.Before-After
oo

Figure 1: Examples of input and output

ment.
Event 2: Parent company chairman Jean-Rene
Fourtou will replace Diller as chief executive of
US unit.

This example reveals the fact that a successor
takes the place only after the time when (Tempo-
rality) and under the condition that (Condition)
the predecessor makes room for the successor.

3 Event-Event Relation Schema

Our event-event relation schema includes 5 main
Types – Inheritance, Expansion, Contingency,
Comparison and Temporality – along with 21 Sub-
types as shown in Table 1. Table 1 also demon-
strates Roles. Events involved in a relation play
certain roles. For example, an Attack event and an
Injure event in a Contingency.Causality will play
Cause and Result roles respectively. In the follow-
ing we will present a detailed definition of each
subtype.

3.1 Inheritance and Expansion

Inheritance relations include both traditional
Coreference relations as well as Subevent that
marks aggregation-to-component relations.
Reemergence connects recurrent events while
Variation summarizes the prototype of an event.

Expansion relations include Confirmation,
which encodes a concept-to-instance or “subset”
relation, and Conjunction and Disjunction, which
relate two subevents within a larger event, and
mark two subevents as playing similar (Conjunc-
tion) or dissimilar (Disjunction) roles within the
larger event. This kind of relation is useful, since
a larger event is often not explicitly mentioned.

The combination of these two kinds of relations
allow one to build hierarchical representations of
parts of an event network, as shown in Figure 2.

e4 e5 e6

e3 e2

e1

bombings marathon

Boston Marathon Bombings

oo
Conjunction

// oo
Conjunction

//
Sub-event
OOSub-event
55

Sub-event
ii

..
Sub-event

oo Conjunction //
Sub-event
OOConfirmation

OO
Confirmation

OO
oo Conjunction //

Sub-event
77

Sub-event
gg

————————————————-
e1 : 117th annual Boston Marathon;
e2 : winner crossed the finish line;
e3 : explosion near bystanders;
e4 : 1st explosion;
e5 : 2nd explosion;
e6 : the second bomb was placed at the finish line

Figure 2: A hierarchical event network

3.2 Contingency and Comparison

A Contingency relation indicates either an event
leading to the emergence (Causality) or serving
as a triggering condition (Conditional) of another
event.

Comparison relations indicate deeper logical
contrasts between relations. Opposition indicates
a relation in which two events are mutually con-
tradictory, and unlikely to be both true. This
has some similarity to Contrast.Opposition in the
Penn Discourse Treebank (Miltsakaki et al., 2004)
or specific annotations of opposition (Feltracco et
al., 2015; Takabatake et al., 2015). Negation indi-
cates that while two events could both be true, one
shows that the other is no longer true. Competition
shows that two events are contrasting versions of
the same underlying “event” (e.g., retreat versus
escape in disorder).

3.3 Temporality

Last but not least, we also define subtypes of Tem-
porality, which represents the temporal order of
events. Temporality has been an active research
topic for a long time. We arrange all categories
and normalize the subtype names from the pre-
vious work to constitute our Temporality schema.
Figure 3 illustrates the temporal relation subtypes.

In this work, we elaborate the subtypes Tem-
porality in comparison with conventional work by
introducing Meet, Start and Finish, which empha-
sizes the existence of time intervals among events.

The correct subtype of the Temporality rela-
tion has a great impact on the decision of whether
the Start-Position and End-Position events have a
Comparison.Opposite or a Contingency.Condition

2



Types Inheritance Expansion Contingency Contingency Temporality

Subtypes Reemergence Confirmation Comparison Condition Before-After Start
Roles Reference Generalization Superior Condition Before Included-Start

Resurgence Instantiation Inferior Emergence After Includes

Subtypes Sub-event Conjunction Concession Causality Vagueness Overlap
Roles Constituent Homology-1 Not-Achieved Cause Vague-1 Partially-Before

Synthesis Homology-2 Achieved Result Vague-2 Partially-After

Subtypes Variation Disjunction Negation Meet Equality
Roles Variance Heterology-1 Negator Before Contemporary-1

Semina Heterology-2 Initiator After Contemporary-2

Subtypes Coreference Opposite During Finish
Roles Occurrence Opponent-1 Includes Includes

Paraphrasing Opponent-2 Included-In Included-Finish

Table 1: Fine-grained event-event relations and roles.

ex
ey1Start

ey2Finish
ey3 ey3 ey3During

ey4 ey4Meet
ey5 ey5Before After

ey6Equal
ey7Overlap

ti ti+1 ti+2 ti+3 ti+4 ti+5 ti+6 ti+7 ti+8

Figure 3: Various temporal relation subtypes be-
tween event ex and event ey∗ (t is a time interval).

relation, and vice versa.

4 Corpus Annotation

Annotating event-event relations requires an anno-
tator to gain a global view of the overall scenario
or topic (e.g., MH17) before exhaustively annotat-
ing each event pair. In addition, our relation types
are more fine-grained than previous work such as
the Richer Event Descriptions (RED) (Ikuta et al.,
2014). There are no existing annotation tools to
meet these needs, so we developed a new annota-
tion tool to visualize trigger words, arguments and
contexts for each event pair to ensure that annota-
tors fully understand documents, background and
storyline.

We created an event-event relation corpus based
on gold standard events in ACE2005 newswire
documents and some additional news documents
about Malaysian Airline 17 (denoted as MH17).
Table 2 shows the detailed data statistics. Three
annotators (A1 & A2: graduate students, A3: a lin-
guist) annotate the documents independently. The
annotation results from A1 and A2 are assessed by
A3 and disagreement among the three annotators
is carefully evaluated and A3 determined the final

#Topics #Documents #Events #Pairs

Vivendi 3 22 231

Anwar 3 39 741

SARS 2 9 36

MH17 50 196 19,698

Single 67 597 4,904

Total 125 863 25,610

Table 2: Corpus statistics. Single denotes top-
ics that only contain one document, and cross-
document annotation is not available in those top-
ics. Pair indicates the number of pairs consisting
of two events from the same topic.

results.
Table 3 and 4 indicate that this is a very chal-

lenging task for annotators. We can see that the
major challenge for annotators is the determina-
tion of the existence of relations. Causality and
Condition stand as the most challenging types,
which require annotators to figure out the story-
line of documents and exploit background knowl-
edge. For example, the following two events are
from the same document but there are no explicit
connectives to indicate the conditional relation be-
tween them:
Event 1: Edward Snowden claimed he was trained
as a secret agent.
Event 2: The certification would also have given
him some of the skills he needed to escape
scrutiny.

A1 and A2 also tend to mistakenly label Sub-

3



Annotators κ Value

A1 and A2 0.1558

A2 and A3 0.1987

A1 and A3 0.1628

Table 3: Stats of Cohen’s kappa coefficient.

Transition of Correction # of Occurrences

unrelated→ Condition 142
unrelated→ Causality 72

Coreference→ unrelated 55
Conjunction→ unrelated 48

Causality→ unrelated 44

Table 4: Top 5 Error corrections.

event as Coreference. Such mistakes happen when
the arguments from one event appear as more spe-
cific and detailed entities (e.g., an attack in Bagh-
dad vs. an attack in Iraq). However, when the
event network becomes larger and more compli-
cated, errors can be propagated across types, e.g.,
incorrectly labeled Sub-event pairs will also trig-
ger Conjunction errors.

Moreover, we have attempted to align the inven-
tory here with other ongoing efforts to annotate
within-document event-event relations. Table 5
shows a mapping between a subset of the relations
proposed here and those used in the Richer Event
Descriptions (RED) (Ikuta et al., 2014). Other
similar resources – such as Penn Discourse Tree-
bank (Miltsakaki et al., 2004) – could also be used.

5 Related Work

The proposed schema covers event-event relation
types that have been widely studied: (Styler IV et
al., 2014; Bethard, 2013; Allen, 1983; Miller et al.,
2013; Pustejovsky and Stubbs, 2011; Pustejovsky
et al., 2005; UzZaman et al., 2013) also focused
on the relation types which are related to Tempo-
rality. Methods about extracting Coreference re-
lations have also been discussed and proposed in
(Chen and Ji, 2009; Chen et al., 2009; Bejan and
Harabagiu, 2010; Lee et al., 2012; Zhang et al.,
2015). (Do et al., 2011; Riaz and Girju, 2013;
Mirza and Tonelli, 2014) work on Causality re-
lation.

Similar event-event relation schema such as

This work RED

Inheritance
Subevent Contains-subevent

Coreference Identity

Continency
Cause Cause

Condition Precondition

Comparison
Opposite N/A

Concession N/A

Expansion Confirmation Set/Member

Temporality

Before, After Before

During Contains

Overlap Overlap

Equality Simultaneous

Start Begins-on

Finish Ends-on

Table 5: Mappings to RED (Ikuta et al., 2014)

RED (Ikuta et al., 2014) is in general more coarse-
grained and has fewer types and subtypes.

Event-event relations differ from textual en-
tailment (Dagan et al., 2013) or discourse rela-
tions (Soricut and Marcu, 2003; Miltsakaki et al.,
2004; Radev, 2000), which focus on the related-
ness between two sentences, by tackling a full
document or multiple documents. We adopted
some terminology (e.g., Causality and Expansion)
from the taxonomy of discourse relations (Milt-
sakaki et al., 2004). We focus on a wider scope of
cross-document events with richer and more fine-
grained structured event representations.

If we consider each event-event relation in-
stance as a frame (e.g., a contingency/causality
event-event relation is similar to the frame cau-
sation), the architecture of the Event Networks is
also similar to FrameNet (Baker and Sato, 2003)
and thus the ontological analysis and constraints
in (Ovchinnikova et al., 2010) are also applicable
to our task.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Our work will expand the research venue of IE
from entity-centric to event-centric. In the future
we will further expand the corpus3, and compare
and integrate with other within-document event-
event relation schemas such as RED. We also plan
to develop a pilot system using these resources.

3The annotated corpus is available at http://nlp.
cs.rpi.edu/data/event_relation.zip

4



Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the U.S. ARL NS-
CTA No. W911NF-09-2-0053, DARPA DEFT
No. FA8750-13-2-0041 and NSF IIS-1523198.
The views and conclusions contained in this doc-
ument are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the official policies, ei-
ther expressed or implied, of the U.S. Govern-
ment. The U.S. Government is authorized to re-
produce and distribute reprints for Government
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation
here on.

References
James F Allen. 1983. Maintaining knowledge about

temporal intervals. Communications of the ACM,
26(11):832–843.

Collin F. Baker and Hiroaki Sato. 2003. The framenet
data and software. In Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Cosmin Adrian Bejan and Sanda Harabagiu. 2010.
Unsupervised event coreference resolution with rich
linguistic features. In Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Steven Bethard. 2013. Cleartk-timeml: A minimalist
approach to tempeval 2013. In Proceedings of Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics, volume 2, pages 10–14.

Zheng Chen and Heng Ji. 2009. Graph-based event
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of Work-
shop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Zheng Chen, Heng Ji, and Robert Haralick. 2009.
A pairwise event coreference model, feature impact
and evaluation for event coreference resolution. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Events in Emerging
Text Types, pages 17–22. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ido Dagan, Dan Roth, Mark Sammons, and Fabio Mas-
simo Zanzotto. 2013. Recognizing textual entail-
ment: Models and applications. Synthesis Lectures
on Human Language Technologies, 6(4):1–220.

Quang Do, Yee Seng Chan, and Dan Roth. 2011. Min-
imally supervised event causality identification. In
Proceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Quang Xuan Do, Wei Lu, and Dan Roth. 2012. Joint
inference for event timeline construction. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 677–687.

Anna Feltracco, Elisabetta Jezek, and Bernardo
Magnini. 2015. Opposition relations among verb
frames. In Proceedings of the Workshop on EVENTS
at the Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Human Language.

Yu Hong, Jianfeng Zhang, Bin Ma, Jian-Min Yao,
Guodong Zhou, and Qiaoming Zhu. 2011. Using
cross-entity inference to improve event extraction.
In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1127–
1136, Portland, OR, USA.

Rei Ikuta, William F Styler IV, Mariah Hamang, Tim
OGorman, and Martha Palmer. 2014. Challenges of
adding causation to richer event descriptions. Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining event
extraction through cross-document inference. In
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, Columbus,
Ohio, USA.

Heeyoung Lee, Marta Recasens, Angel Chang, Mihai
Surdeanu, and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. Joint entity and
event coreference resolution across documents. In
Proceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Qi Li, Heng Ji, and Liang Huang. 2013. Joint event
extraction via structured prediction with global fea-
tures. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
73–82, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Qi Li, Heng Ji, Yu Hong, and Sujian Li. 2014.
Constructing information networks using one single
model. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empir-
ical Methods on Natural Language Processing.

Shasha Liao and Ralph Grishman. 2010. Using doc-
ument level cross-event inference to improve event
extraction. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 789–797, Uppsala, Sweden.

Timothy Miller, Steven Bethard, Dmitriy Dligach,
Sameer Pradhan, Chen Lin, and Guergana Savova.
2013. Discovering temporal narrative containers in
clinical text. In Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop
on Biomedical Natural Langua ge Processing.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind K Joshi, and
Bonnie L Webber. 2004. The penn discourse tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Paramita Mirza and Sara Tonelli. 2014. An analysis of
causality between events and its relation to tempo-
ral information. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

5



Ekaterina Ovchinnikova, Laure Vieu, Alessandro
Oltramari, Stefano Borgo, and Theodore Alexan-
drov. 2010. Data-driven and ontological analysis
of framenet for natural language reasoning. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation.

James Pustejovsky and Amber Stubbs. 2011. Increas-
ing informativeness in temporal annotation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Linguistic Annotation Workshop.

James Pustejovsky, Robert Knippen, Jessica Littman,
and Roser Saurı́. 2005. Temporal and event infor-
mation in natural language text. Language resources
and evaluation, 39(2-3):123–164.

Dragomir Radev. 2000. A common theory of infor-
mation fusion from multiple text sources, step one:
Cross-document structure. In Proceedings of Spe-
cial Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue.

Mehwish Riaz and Roxana Girju. 2013. Toward
a better understanding of causality between verbal
events: Extraction and analysis of the causal power
of verb-verb associations. In Proceedings of Special
Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue.

Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sentence
level discourse parsing using syntactic and lexi-
cal information. In Proceedings of the Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics on Human Language,
pages 149–156. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

William F Styler IV, Steven Bethard, Sean Finan,
Martha Palmer, Sameer Pradhan, Piet C de Groen,
Brad Erickson, Timothy Miller, Chen Lin, Guergana
Savova, et al. 2014. Temporal annotation in the
clinical domain. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2:143–154.

Yu Takabatake, Hajime Morita, Daisuke Kawahara,
Sadao Kurohashi, Ryuichiro Higashinaka, and
Yoshihiro Matsuo. 2015. Classification and acquisi-
tion of contradictory event pairs using crowdsourc-
ing. In Proceedings of the Workshop on EVENTS
at the Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Human Language.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczynski,
Marc Verhagen, James F. Allen, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 1: TempEval-3:
Evaluating Time Expressions, Events, and Tempo-
ral Relations. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 1–9.

Tongtao Zhang, Hongzhi Li, Heng Ji, and Shih-Fu
Chang. 2015. Cross-document event coreference
resolution based on cross-media features. In Pro-
ceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

6


