



















































Keynote - Modeling Human Communication Dynamics


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, page 263,
Los Angeles, USA, 13-15 September 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Keynote: Modeling Human Communication Dynamics 
Louis-Philippe Morency 

Carnegie Mellon University  - Language Technology Institute 

Pittsburgh, PA, United States 

morency@cs.cmu.edu 

 

Abstract: 
Human face-to-face communication is a little like a dance, in that participants continuously 
adjust their behaviors based on verbal and nonverbal cues from the social context. Today's 
computers and interactive devices are still lacking many of these human-like abilities to hold 
fluid and natural interactions. Leveraging recent advances in machine learning, audio-visual 
signal processing and computational linguistic, my research focuses on creating computational 
technologies able to analyze, recognize and predict human subtle communicative behaviors in 
social context. I formalize this new research endeavor with a Human Communication Dynamics 
framework, addressing four key computational challenges: behavioral dynamic, multimodal 
dynamic, interpersonal dynamic and societal dynamic. Central to this research effort is the 
introduction of new probabilistic models able to learn the temporal and fine-grained latent 
dependencies across behaviors, modalities and interlocutors. In this talk, I will present some of 
our recent achievements modeling multiple aspects of human communication dynamics, 
motivated by applications in healthcare (depression, PTSD, suicide, autism), education (learning 
analytics), business (negotiation, interpersonal skills) and social multimedia (opinion mining, 
social influence). 
Speaker's Bio: 
Louis-Philippe Morency is Assistant Professor in the Language Technology Institute at Carnegie 
Mellon University where he leads the Multimodal Communication and Machine Learning 
Laboratory (MultiComp Lab). He was formely research assistant professor in the Computer 
Sciences Department at University of Southern California and research scientist at USC Institute 
for Creative Technologies. Prof. Morency received his Ph.D. and Master degrees from MIT 
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. His research focuses on building the 
computational foundations to enable computers with the abilities to analyze, recognize and 
predict subtle human communicative behaviors during social interactions. In particular, Prof. 
Morency was lead co-investigator for the multi-institution effort that created SimSensei and 
MultiSense, two technologies to automatically assess nonverbal behavior indicators of 
psychological distress. He is currently chair of the advisory committee for ACM International 
Conference on Multimodal Interaction and associate editor at IEEE Transactions on Affective 
Computing. 
 

263


