



















































Designing Algorithms for Referring with Proper Names


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 31–35,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Designing Algorithms for Referring with Proper Names

Kees van Deemter
Computing Science Department, University of Aberdeen

k.vdeemter@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

Standard algorithms for attribute choice in the
generation of referring expressions have lit-
tle to say about the role of Proper Names
in referring expressions. We discuss the
implications of letting these algorithms pro-
duce Proper Names and expressions that have
Proper Names as parts.

1 Introduction

Reference – the production and comprehension of
referring expressions – has been studied intensively
throughout the cognitive sciences. Computational
Linguists are no exception, often paying particular
attention to the generation of referring expressions
(REs, (Krahmer and Van Deemter, 2012) for a sur-
vey). This area of Natural Language Generation is
known as Referring Expressions Generation (REG).
An important strand of REG focusses on “one-shot”
REs, which do not rely on any linguistic context
(precluding anaphoric and other attenuated REs);
these are also the primary focus of this paper.1

One of the classic algorithm coming out or REG
is the Incremental Algorithm (IA) (Dale and Reiter,
1996). Simplifying slightly, the IA starts by order-
ing properties in a sequence known as the Prefer-
ence Order. The algorithm starts with an empty RE,
then examines the first property from the Preference
Order. If this property is true of the referent r and
rules out one or more distractors, it is added to the
RE; otherwise it is not added, and the next prop-
erty in the Preference Order is examined. The al-
gorithm terminates when properties Pi1 , .., Pik have

1See, however, section 2.1 on the use of salience.

been selected that jointly identify the referent (i.e.,
[[Pi1 ]] ∩ ... ∩ [[Pik ]] = {r}). Different Preference
Orders tend to generate different REs, so finding a
good one is important.

Proper Names (PNs) are among the most widely
studied REs in cognitive science (see e.g., (van
Langendonck, 2007), passim; (van Deemter, 2016),
chapters 2 and 7), and a crucial area of applied
work in Information Extraction (e.g., (Jurafsky
and Martin, 2009) chapter 22 on Named Entities).
Yet REG2 has neglected PNs, presumably because
names could easily trivialise REG: suppose the KB
contained a set of people. If only one of the peo-
ple in the KB is named Obama, then it is easy to
identify him, by referring to him by his name. Since
PNs tend to make excellent REs, REG would be-
come trivial – so the presumed argument goes.

We argue that this line of reasoning misses some
important points and that PNs deserve more atten-
tion from researchers in REG.

2 Generating REs that contain a PN

Observe that:

– Name are often ambiguous. “Obama”, for
instance (not to mention “Smith”) could refer
to many different people.
– A referent can have many names (“Barack”,
“Obama”, “Barack Obama”, etc.) or none.
– A name can combine with other properties
and epithets, as in “Mr Barack Obama, Amer-
ica’s current president”.

2An early exception is the ad hoc treatment of PNs in (Wino-
grad, 1972)’s SRDLU; recently the possibility of a systematic
treatment was suggested as part of (van Deemter, 2014); an ex-
ploratory experimental study is (de Oliveira et al., 2015).

31



– A name can be part of an expression that
refers to another referent. The process is re-
cursive, e.g., “The height of the income of
Obama’s Secretary of State”.

So how might PNs be given a place in REG?

2.1 Incorporating Proper Names into REG
Received views of REG suggest that the process
contains two steps (Reiter and Dale, 2000): Step
1 decides what general syntactic type of RE to use
(e.g., a full description, a PN, a pronoun, or some
other type); once this decision is taken, Step 2 (dis-
cussed in section 1 above) makes more fine-grained
decisions, for example, in case of a full descrip-
tion, this step decides what properties should be ex-
pressed in the description. The observations of the
previous section make this two-step approach prob-
lematic, for example because (in some situations) no
PN may be available for a given referent, or because
PNs and descriptions must be combined (in other
situations). In what follows, we explore a radical
alternative, showing that if a suitable representation
scheme is used, it is possible to incorporate all deci-
sions related to PNs within Step 2.

Suppose each individual in the KB comes not just
with a number of descriptive properties but with 0
or more PNs as well, where a PN is regarded as a
property that is true of all individuals who bear this
name.

– (being named) Joe Klein is a property of all
individuals named Joe Klein
– (being named) Joe is a property of all those
individuals named Joe
– (being named) Klein is a property of all
those individuals named Klein

The idea that a PN can be viewed as a property of
its bearer deviates from a long tradition of work in
philosophy and logic that regards PNs as rigid des-
ignators (Kripke, 1980), yet it enjoys considerable
support. (Burge, 1973), for example, observes that
PNs can behave like common nouns, as in “There
are relatively few Alfreds in P”, and “An Alfred
joined the club today” (see (Larson and Segal, 1995)
and (Elbourne, 2005) for further support).

A simple KB containing PNs as well as ordinary
properties could look like this:

JOB: political commentator, commentator
NATIONALITY: American
NAMES: Mr Joe Klein, Joe Klein, Joe, Klein

Because longer versions of a person’s name are
applicable to only some of the individuals to whom
a shorter version is applicable, the values of the
NAMES attribute often subsume each other: all peo-
ple who are called Mr Joe Klein are also called Joe
Klein, and so on. These properties can be dealt
with using the mechanism for subsumption in the
Incremental Algorithm (which would also state that
all political commentators are commentators, for in-
stance) (Dale and Reiter, 1996).

Of course if Joe Klein is the only Joe in the room,
we can refer unambiguously to him saying “Joe”.
This is accounted for by making the REG algorithm
that operates on the KB above salience aware in one
of the standard ways, e.g., (Krahmer and Theune,
2002). Salience also suggests a way in which REG
can extend beyond one-shot REs to cover reference
in extended discourse or dialogue: if x is introduced
by means of the PN “Joe Klein” in a text, then if x
is the only Joe so far mentioned, then this makes x
the most salient of all Joe’s, licencing the short RE
“Joe”.

In short:

– Each object has an attribute NAMES.
– The set of values of NAMES can be empty
(no name is available), singleton (one name),
or neither (several names).
– A subsumption (i.e., subset) relation can be
defined among these values.
– Different objects can share some or all of
their names.

If names are the “canonical” way of referring to
an entity, then standard mechanisms could be in-
voked to favour names at the expense of other prop-
erties. One option is to Dale and Reiter’s Preference
Order (Dale and Reiter, 1996), making NAMES the
most highly preferred attribute in an Incremental Al-
gorithm. Alternatively, a new type of brevity-based
algorithm might be used that generates the RE that
contains the smallest number of syllables.3 Assum-
ing that PNs are brief (as they often are), this type
of approach would favour PNs, and it would favour
shorter PNs over longer ones (e.g., “Klein” over “Joe
Klein”). It would also predict that PNs are avoided

3Note that this approach would measure brevity as a surface
property of a string, unlike the Full Brevity algorithm of (Dale,
1989), which sees brevity as a semantic property, letting REG
choose the RE composed by the smallest number of properties.

32



where large sets are enumerated (compare the RE
“the citizens of China” with an enumeration of all
the elements of this set).

To see how REG could work in an Incremental
Algorithm, consider a simple KB, where each indi-
vidual has 1 name:

TYPE: woman {w1, w2, w3}, man {m1}, dog
{d1, d2}
NAMES: mary {w1}, shona {w2, w3}, rover
{d1}, max {m1, d2}
ACTION: feed {(w1, d1), (w2, d2), (w2, d1)}
AFFECTION: love {(w1, d1), (w3, d1)}

This approach generates REs such as:

d1: “Rover”
d2: “The dog called Max”
w3: “Shona, who loves a dog”

With the above representation scheme in place,
classic REG algorithms can be applied without mod-
ifications. However, the scheme does not allow PNs
to have properties (e.g., “is a posh name”, “has 5
characters” ,“is common in Scotland”). If names
are reified, then this becomes possible; what’s more,
PNs themselves could be referred to (e.g., “the name
his friends call him”): a name is just another object
linked (on the one hand) to the things it names and
(on the other hand) to the ways in which it manifests
itself in spelling, pronunciation, etc. For example,
n2 may name both a man and a dog, and it may be
written as “Max”:

Type: woman {w1, w2, w3}, man {m1}, dog
{d1, d2}, name {n1, n2, n3, n4}
Action: feed {(w1, d1), (w2, d2), (w2, d1)}
Affection: love {(w1, d1), (w3, d1)}
Naming: name {(d1, n1), (d2, n2),
(w1, n3), (w2, n4), (w3, n4), (m1, n2)}
Spelling: written {(n1, Rover), (n2, Max),
(n3, Mary), (n4, Shona)}

Standard REG algorithms can use this KB to gen-
erate “The name shared by a man and a dog” (i.e.,
“Max”). If n4 is Scottish, we obtain “women with
a Scottish name” as well. A slight drawback of this
approach, which treats names as objects, is that sub-
sumption can no longer be used to compare names.

2.2 Challenges facing this approach

This approach works, but it puts a spotlight on some
difficult issues, some of which affect the generation
of descriptive REs as well:
1. PNs are not always preferred. For example, if

the Director of Taxes is Mrs X, this does not mean
that “Contact the Director of Taxes” is always better
worded as “Contact Mrs X”, since her job title may
be relevant. The lack of a computational theory of
relevance affects all of REG but becomes very no-
ticeable in the choice between PNs and descriptions.
2. There is no reason for limiting reification to PNs.
Colours too could be reified, for example, to gener-
ate “the colour of grass”. The traditional dichotomy
between objects and properties limits the range of
REs that these algorithms can generate.
3. REG algorithms are ignorant about social rela-
tions between speaker, hearer, and referent. Con-
sider a couple with a son and a daughter. Speaking
to his mother, the son could say “my sister”, “your
daughter”, etc., yet in most situations a PN would be
better. Titles and epithets like “Dr” and “Aunt(y)”,
complicate matters further.
4. As elsewhere in REG, questions about over-
specification need to be faced. When, for example,
is it useful to add an appositive to a PN, as in “Mr
Barack Obama, America’s current president”? Fur-
thermore, Linguistic Realisation will have to decide
about the surface order of the PN and the appositive,
perhaps depending on whether the PN and/or the ap-
positive (by itself) refers uniquely.
5. If PNs are properties of the referent, then this
leaves room for expressing one and the same PN
with a different string. (For example, “Doctor” may
be worded as “Doctor”, “Dr.”, or “Dr”.) The desir-
ability of this use of Linguistic Realisation would
need to be investigated.
6. It is often difficult for the speaker to assess
whether the hearer knows who a given PN refers to.
The hearer may never have heard of Joe Klein, for
example, and this would cause the RE “Joe Klein”
to mis-fire. Lack of shared knowledge is a problem
for descriptive REs as well, but it is exacerbated in
the case of PNs, because names are highly conven-
tional: once I’ve learned what “red” means, I can
apply the word to any red object, but learning your
name does not teach me to apply this name to any-
one else.

The last point has important implications. Imag-
ine a programmer wanting to implement the algo-
rithm of section 2.1, aiming to mimic human lan-
guage use. If she decides to implement an Incre-
mental Algorithm, then how to choose its free pa-

33



Figure 1: A trial in the “people” part of the TUNA experiment

rameter, the Preference Order? She could learn one
via an elicitation experiment, but how does she find
a generic REG algorithm that works for all PNs?

Consider a scene from an experiment where
speakers referred to stimuli on a screen (van
Deemter et al., 2012). Participants called the man
in the top right “the man with the white beard”, etc.
They might have said “Samuel Eilenberg”, yet no-
one did, because participants didn’t know his name.
Participants could have been trained to be familiar
with every individual’s name, but this could easily
have primed the use of names at the expense of de-
scriptions; the same happens when names are visi-
ble as captions, as was done in (de Oliveira et al.,
2015) using fictitious names of geographical areas;
see also (Anderson et al., 1991). Such an approach
does not give reliable information on how REG al-
gorithms should choose between PNs and descrip-
tions. The problem is not just that PNs are conven-
tional, but that their conventional meaning can be
entrenched to different degrees, varying from short-
lived “conceptual pacts” (Brennan and Clark, 1996)
to names that are very widely known and used.

2.3 Lessons from situations where PNs are
avoided

Suppose someone asks “Who is Joe Klein?” (cf.,
section 2.2, point 6). Would it make sense to re-
spond “(He is) the author of the bestselling political
novel of the 1990s?” It depends on the importance
of this fact and how widely it is known.

To model answers to “Who is?” questions (see
(Boër and Lycan, 1986) for a theoretical study),

(Kutlak et al., 2013) designed a REG algorithm that
employs the following Heuristic: Based on the fre-
quency with which a name n co-occurs with a prop-
erty P , the Heuristic estimates how likely the propo-
sition P (n) is to be known by an arbitrarily chosen
hearer. Evaluation studies suggest that this Heuristic
goes a long way towards estimating how many peo-
ple know a fact, and the complete REG algorithm
(which involves 2 other heuristics) outperforms its
competitors in terms of its ability to generate de-
scriptions that allow hearers to guess correctly the
name of the referent. Although the authors focussed
on the WWW, the approach can use any corpus that
represents the ideas of a community (e.g., a com-
pany’s intranet).

This approach suggests a promising handle on the
conventionality of PNs. It allows us to estimate,
for example, the likelihood that a name like “Joe
Klein” is known by hearers to refer to the commen-
tator and novelist of that name, and this would al-
low us to limit the KB of section 2 to names that are
well enough known. We hypothesise that PNs have
a higher likelihood of being uttered as part of REs by
members of a community (e.g., users of the WWW)
the more frequently these PNs occur as names of this
referent in documents produced by that community.
Further experiments could flesh out how the use of
PNs depends on a number of factors, including the
Knowledge Heuristic. Essentially, PNs would be
treated as properties of a referent that may or may
not be known to the hearer, analogous to the descrip-
tive properties of (Kutlak et al., 2013).

3 Conclusion

We have shown how, given appropriate semantic
representations, standard attribute algorithms are
able to generate REs that contain PNs, thereby solv-
ing problems with the standard 2-step perspective on
REG that separates choosing the general syntactic
type of RE from more fine-grained decisions about
the content of the RE. However, our approach raises
difficult questions about the choices that a REG al-
gorithm needs to make between PNs and descriptive
REs. We argue that some of the trickiest questions
in this area may be solved if large corpora are em-
ployed as a source of insight into the degree to which
a PN is likely to be known by the recipient of the RE.

34



References

Anne A. Anderson, Miles Bader, Ellen Gurman Bard,
Elizabeth Boyle, Gwyneth Doherty, Simon Garrod,
Stephen Isard, Jacqueline Kowtko, Jan McAllister,
Jim Miller, Catherine Sotillo, Henry Thompson, and
Regina Weinert. 1991. The HCRC map task corpus.
Language and Speech, 34:351–366.

Steven E. Boër and William G. Lycan. 1986. Knowing
Who. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Susan Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Conceptual
pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 22(6):1482–1493.

Tyler Burge. 1973. Reference and proper names. The
Journal of Philosophy, 70:425–439.

Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1996. The role of the
gricean maxims in the generation of referring expres-
sions. In AAAI–96 Spring Symposium on Computa-
tional Models of Conversational Implicature.

Robert Dale. 1989. Cooking up referring expressions.
In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
68–75.

Rodrigo de Oliveira, Somayajulu Sripada, and Ehud Re-
iter. 2015. Designing an algorithm for generating
named spatial references. In Proceedings of 15th Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG-2015), pages 127–135, Brighton, UK.

Paul Elbourne. 2005. Situations and Individuals. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2009. Speech and
Language Processing (second edition). Pearson, Up-
per Saddle River, NJ.

Emiel Krahmer and Mariët Theune. 2002. Efficient
context–sensitive generation of descriptions in con-
text. In Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kibble, editors,
Information Sharing: Givenness and Newness in Lan-
guage Processing, pages 223–264, CSLI Publications,
CSLI, Stanford.

Emiel Krahmer and Kees Van Deemter. 2012. Compu-
tational generation of referring expressions: a survey.
Computational Linguistics, 38(1):173–218.

Saul Kripke. 1980. Naming and Necessity. Harvard Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Roman Kutlak, Kees van Deemter, and Chris Mellish.
2013. Generation of referring expressions in large do-
mains. In Proceedings of the workshop Production of
Referring Expressions, associated with the 35th Meet-
ing of the Cognitive Science Society.

Richard Larson and Gabriel Segal. 1995. Knowledge
and Meaning. An Introduction to Semantic Theory.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge University
Press.

Kees van Deemter, Albert Gatt, Ielka van der Sluis, and
Richard Power. 2012. Generation of referring expres-
sions: Assessing the incremental algorithm. Cognitive
Science, 36(5):799–836.

Kees van Deemter. 2014. Referability. In A. Stent and
S. Bangalore, editors, Natural Language Genetration
in Interactive Systems, pages 95–125. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Kees van Deemter. 2016. Computational Models of Re-
ferring: a Study in Cognitive Science. MIT Press, May
2016.

Willy van Langendonck. 2007. Theory and Typology of
Proper Names. Mouton de Gruyter, The Hague.

Terry Winograd. 1972. Understanding Natural Lan-
guage. Academic Press, New York.

35


