








































Microsoft Word - Towards error annotation in a learner corpus of Portuguese_READY.docx


 

1 

Towards error annotation in a learner corpus of Portuguese
 

Iria del Río1, Sandra Antunes1, Amália Mendes1 and Maarten Janssen2 
 

1 University of Lisbon – CLUL 
2 University of Coimbra – CELGA-ILTEC  

iagayo@gmail.com, sandra.antunes@clul.ul.pt,  
amalia.mendes@clul.ul.pt, maartenpt@gmail.com 

 
 
 

Abstract 

In this article, we present COPLE2, a new 
corpus of Portuguese that encompasses writ-
ten and spoken data produced by foreign 
learners of Portuguese as a foreign or second 
language (FL/L2). Following the trend to-
wards learner corpus research applied to less 
commonly taught languages, it is our aim to 
enhance the learning data of Portuguese L2. 
These data may be useful not only for educa-
tional purposes (design of learning materials, 
curricula, etc.) but also for the development of 
NLP tools to support students in their learning 
process. The corpus is available online using 
TEITOK environment, a web-based frame-
work for corpus treatment that provides sev-
eral built-in NLP tools and a rich set of func-
tionalities (multiple orthographic transcription 
layers, lemmatization and POS, normalization 
of the tokens, error annotation) to automati-
cally process and annotate texts in xml for-
mat. A CQP-based search interface allows 
searching the corpus for different fields, such 
as words, lemmas, POS tags or error tags. We 
will describe the work in progress regarding 
the constitution and linguistic annotation of 
this corpus, particularly focusing on error an-
notation. 

1 Introduction 

The COPLE2 corpus1 is a written and spoken 
learner corpus of Portuguese as a foreign or second 
language (FL/L2) that aims at providing empirical 
                                                                                                                
1 http://www.clul.ul.pt/en/research-teams/547 

data for the teaching and learning of this language. 
Several learner corpora have been compiled for 
English, such as the International Corpus of Learn-
er English (Granger et al., 2009), the Longman 
Learner's Corpus, or the Cambridge Learner Cor-
pus (Nicholls, 2003). The importance of such em-
pirical data has been increasingly recognized for 
studies in Second Language Acquisition and lan-
guage teaching/learning. Recently, we have seen a 
substantial growth in this area regarding other lan-
guages besides English. Concerning Romance lan-
guages, there are already some corpora and re-
sources for French (Delais-Roussarie & Yoo, 
2010), Spanish (Lozano, 2009) and Italian (Boyd 
et al., 2014). In the case of the Portuguese lan-
guage, there are also some initiatives in the compi-
lation of learner corpora. The corpus Recolha de 
dados de Aprendizagem do Português Língua Es-
trangeira2, that follows the precursor work devel-
oped in Leiria (2001), was compiled at the School 
of Arts and Humanities of the University of Lis-
bon, and includes 470 texts and 70,500 tokens. The 
Corpus de Produções Escritas de Aprendentes de 
PL23, compiled at the University of Coimbra, is 
constituted by 516 texts and 119,381 tokens. Final-
ly, the Corpus de Aquisição de L24, compiled at 
the New University of Lisbon, contains 281,301 
words, and it includes texts produced by adults and 
children, as well as a spoken subset. Following 
these previous projects, we believe that COPLE2 
corpus will contribute to broaden this emerging 

                                                                                                                
2 http://www.clul.ul.pt/pt/recursos/314-corpora-of-ple 
3 http://www.uc.pt/fluc/rcpl2/ 
4 http://cal2.clunl.edu.pt/  



 

2 

domain by enhancing the learning data of Portu-
guese. COPLE2 makes use of a large set of learner 
texts (from different mother tongues (L1s) and pro-
ficiency levels) and, in contrast to the corpora 
mentioned above, it is linguistically interpreted 
with information on lemma and POS. Furthermore, 
it provides rich TEI annotation of the actual writ-
ing, the normalization of the orthography and error 
corrections, as well as a powerful multilayer query 
options. 

We will first introduce the corpus and the inter-
face tool in sections 2 and 3, respectively: section 2 
presents the COPLE2 corpus, its design and the 
transcription process of written and spoken data, 
while section 3 gives an overview of the visualiza-
tion and search options provided by the interface 
tool. In section 4, we introduce the error annotation 
system, the tagset and the discussion about the dis-
tribution of errors. 

2 The COPLE2 corpus 

COPLE2 corpus is constituted by written and spo-
ken Portuguese learning data produced by students 
that attended Portuguese FL/L2 courses (annual or 
summer) at the School of Arts and Humanities of 
the University of Lisbon5, and by applicants to ac-
creditation exams, between 2010 and 2014. 

2.1 Corpus Design and Metadata 

The written subpart of COPLE2 currently contains 
966 free essays, in a total of 156,691 tokens, pro-
duced by 424 students that represent 14 different 
L1s. We only selected L1s that had a minimum of 
6 informants in our initial data set (cf. Table 1).  
 

 
L1 Inf. Texts L1 Inf. Texts 
Chinese 
English 
Spanish 
German 
Russian 
Japanese 
French   

129 
65 
52 
39 
25 
23 
23 

323 
142 
139 
76 
70 
50 
43 

Italian 
Dutch 
Tetum 
Polish 
Arabic 
Korean 
Romanian  

20 
11 
9 
8 
8 
6 
6 

34 
15 
22 
22 
13 
9 
8 

Table 1: Informants and texts of the written subcorpus. 
 

                                                                                                                
5 The corpus compilation is funded by Fundação para a Ciên-
cia e Tecnologia (UID/LIN/00214/2013), Fundação Calouste 
Gulbenkian (Proc. nr. 134655) and ADFLUL. 

Given the heterogeneous nature of the inform-
ants, we registered detailed metadata regarding 
both the learner and the task profiles. Thus, con-
cerning the learner’s profile, we established a set 
of 8 required fields: name, age (18-40 years old), 
gender, mother tongue, nationality, proficiency 
based on the Common European Framework of 
Reference for Languages6 (A1 (7%), A2 (40%), B1 
(31%), B2 (19%), C1 (3%)), knowledge of other 
foreign languages and period of time studying Por-
tuguese. 

The text profile includes fields on: genre (argu-
mentative (35,5%), narrative (17,5%), personal let-
ter (12,5%), formal letter (10,5%), informative 
(9,6%), dialogue (6,4%), message/e-mail (6,3%), 
retell a story (1,5%) and literary critic (0,2%)), top-
ic, task description (diagnostic test, mid-term or fi-
nal test, homework, accreditation exam), 
timebound or not, with access to reference books 
or not, number of tokens and date. 

Regarding the spoken subpart, the compilation 
of this subcorpus is still in progress. At the mo-
ment, 12 recordings are transcribed. The record-
ings consist on conversations between 2 or 3 learn-
ers of different proficiency levels moderated by the 
examiner, on topics such as: (i) presentation of the 
students; (ii) simulation of communicative situa-
tions; (iii) discussion of particular subjects, pre-
senting arguments and opinions. 

The metadata of the spoken task also encode in-
formation on the recording situation, such as: total 
time of the recording, total time of the segment that 
is transcribed and the location of the transcribed 
segment, acoustic quality, hidden or visible record-
ing, involvement of the evaluator (dialogue, mono-
logue or monologue with few interactions), spon-
taneous or planned, elicitation or non elicitation, 
social context (family, private, public, controlled 
environment) and channel (face to face, experi-
mental, media, phone conversations, etc.). 

Table 2 shows the current contents of the corpus 
per level and per modality. 

 
 
 
 

 

                                                                                                                
6 Council of Europe (2001). 



 

3 

Level Written Spoken Total 

Texts Tokens Texts Tokens Texts Tokens 

A1 72  6,438 10 18,803 82 25,241 
A2 382 49,761 0 0 382 49,761 

B1 305 53,042 0 0 305 53,042 
B2 181 39,665 1 3,010 182 42,675 

C1 26 7,785 1 3,970 27 11,755 

Total 966 156,691 12 25,783 978 182,474 

Table 2: COPLE2 design. 

2.2 Data Transcription 
The hand-written essays were first scanned and 
saved in pdf format, and then manually tran-
scribed. The transcriptions are encoded in TEI 
compliant XML (Burnard & Bauman, 2013). Each 
file is composed by a header (with the metadata 
mentioned above) and the transcription, as illus-
trated in Figure 1, below.   

 

 
Figure 1: Part of a written transcription following XML. 

 
The written transcriptions are very close to the 
original document in the sense that all the changes 
made by the student during the writing process 
(such as deletions, additions, transposition of seg-
ments, etc.) were also encoded. This information is 
extremely useful to assess, for instance, the diffi-
cult areas for the learning process according to the 
student’s L1, the discourse restructuring or errors 
triggered by homophone words. In addition, all the 
corrections and comments made by the teacher 
were also transcribed. Teacher’s feedback can be 
useful for future pedagogical studies and, as we 
will explain below, it constitutes a valuable support 
for error identification in the error annotation pro-
cess. All personal information (such as names, ad-

dresses, phone numbers) were anonymized (Hin-
richs, 2006). 

Regarding the spoken corpus, the recordings 
were transcribed following CHILDES (MacWhin-
ney, 2000) and C-ORAL-ROM (Cresti and Mone-
glia, 2005) guidelines, which favours a transcrip-
tion based on prosody. Thus, instead of punctua-
tion marks, we used symbols that represent intona-
tion. Also, all the speech disfluencies (such as 
fragmented words, false starts, filled pauses and 
other non-lexical utterances) were transcribed. All 
the transcriptions were text-to-sound aligned using 
the EXMARaLDA editor (Schmidt, 2012). 

3 TEITOK Interface Tool 

After completion of the transcriptions, all the files 
were imported into the Tokenized TEI Environ-
ment – TEITOK7 for visualization, linguistic anno-
tation and search functions (Janssen, 2012; 2016).  
This system makes it easy to display XML files, 
edit metadata and individual tokens, and perform 
complex searches through the corpus.  

The corpus was firstly automatically tokenized, 
which means that all lexical words and contracted 
words (such as prepositions contracted with arti-
cles, demonstratives, etc.) were identified (e.g. 
naquele = empreposition ‘in’ + aqueledemonstrative ‘that 
one’). The automatic POS annotation and lemmati-
zation were performed, using the Neotag tagger 
(Janssen, 2012), which was trained over a gold 
standard subset of the Reference Corpus of Con-
temporary Portuguese (Mendes et al., 2014). For 
error tagging purposes, as we will see in the next 
section, a normalized version (orthographic, lexical 
or syntactic) may be provided also for each token. 
Because learner errors affect automatic POS tag-
ging and lemmatization, default POS and lemma 
are normalized, that is, corrected when needed and 
stored at the first level of error annotation (ortho-
graphic). We will come back to this intersection of 
POS and error annotation in section 4. 

Afterwards, for the written subcorpus, TEITOK 
interprets the XML encoding (CSS rules define 
how to display the XML elements) to enable the 
visualization of different versions of the text: (i) 
the XML version; (ii) the transcription version 

                                                                                                                
7 http://alfclul.clul.ul.pt/teitok/site/index.php?action=about 



 

4 

(visualization close to the full information of the 
XML document); (iii) the student form, which cor-
responds to the final version intended by the stu-
dent; (iv) the corrected form, which displays the 
teacher corrections; (v) the error-annotated form; 
(vi) the image of the handwritten essay, on request. 
Each version has a specific separator, and all the 
changes made to the original student text are dis-
played in different colours. Figure 2 shows the 
teacher’s correction version, where the corrected 
words are in red. 
 

 
Figure 2: Visualization of the correction of a written essay. 

 
All this information can be also displayed when 
moving the mouse over the words in the text. Fig-
ure 3 shows a misspelled word with the respective 
correction and all the linguistic information. 
 

 
Figure 3: Highlighted word with linguistic information. 

 
Regarding the spoken transcriptions, EXMARaL-
DA files were converted into TEI format. The spo-
ken transcriptions are visualized as speech turns 
with a link to the audio sequence (cf. Figure 4). 
 

 
Figure 4: Visualization of a recording transcription. 

 
 

TEITOK allows for multi-token annotation 
(POS, lemma, error-annotation) with the possibil-
ity of using regular expressions when specific re-
placements have to be made. 

Finally, the TEITOK environment also provides 
corpus search facilities using CQP (Christ et al., 
1999). In the creation of the CQP corpus, various 
types of encoded information can be exported: 
metadata, POS, lemma, original orthography, nor-
malized orthography, error annotations and the 
teacher corrections. This way, searches can com-
bine all these different types of information, mak-
ing it possible to perform complex and powerful 
search queries (cf. Figure 5). 

 

 
Figure 5: TEITOK query system. 

 
The next step is to label the data following a typo-
logical scheme for error annotation (Tono, 2003; 
Nicholls, 2003; Dagneaux et al., 2005), as we de-
scribe in further detail below.  



 

5 

4 Error Annotation 

Error tagging is an important step in learner corpo-
ra annotation since it helps to identify problematic 
areas in the learning process (Granger, 2004). De-
spite this fact, error tagging is not always present 
in learner corpora. There can be many possible 
reasons for that, but we can identify at least two 
important causes: 
1. It is a high time-consuming task, that most of the 
times has to be performed manually. 
2. There is no standard for error tagging and, in 
general, taxonomies are a result of particular pro-
jects with specific interests (Díaz-Negrillo & Fer-
nández-Domíguez, 2006). As a consequence, an 
error taxonomy and an annotation paradigm have 
to be defined for each learner corpus and this is not 
a trivial task (Meurers, 2015), since it entails sev-
eral complex sub-tasks like: define what an error is 
and what types of errors are considered; decide 
which is the scope of a given error (one word vs. 
multiple words); determine if corrections are pro-
vided or not; etc.  

As we will show, in the case of COPLE2 we 
have tried to take advantage of the corpus architec-
ture and the possibilities that the TEITOK envi-
ronment offers to overtake the problems above.  

There are examples of learner corpora with error 
annotation for many languages but, to the best of 
our knowledge, none of the learner corpora for 
Portuguese offers error annotation. Therefore, error 
tagging in COPLE2 constitutes the first attempt of 
this type of encoding for the Portuguese language. 

4.1 Error annotation system in COPLE2 
The error annotation paradigm in COPLE2 exploits 
the possibilities provided by the TEITOK envi-
ronment. We have already described different lev-
els of annotation that TEITOK allows for each to-
ken in the corpus (student form of the token versus 
teacher form of the token). For error tagging, we 
have defined three linguistic levels of annotation: 
orthographical, grammatical and lexical. In all the 
cases, the annotation consists on the addition of the 
correct word form with its lemma and POS. The 
three levels can be filled for a given token at the 
same time.  

The first level is used if there is a spelling error 
in the student production. The orthographically 
corrected form (nform) is introduced, as well as the 
corresponding POS (pos) and lemma (lemma). 

Figure 6 below shows an example of an ortho-
graphical error, where the student wrote novedades 
instead of novidades (‘news’). 
 

 
Figure 6: Annotation of an orthographic error. 

 
As we have mentioned above, this first level con-
tains the default POS and lemma for each token, 
which are corrected (normalized) when needed. 
The second level operates if there is a grammatical 
error, that is: the word used by the student gener-
ates an ungrammatical utterance. Figure 7 shows 
an example: the student wrote um cidade (‘aMASC 
city’) instead of uma cidade (‘aFEM city’), there-
fore, there is an agreement error which is annotated 
in the token corresponding to um. The syntactically 
corrected form is introduced (reg) as well as the 
corresponding POS (spos). 
 

 
Figure 7: Annotation of a grammatical error. 

 
Note that in this case the field slemma is not anno-
tated. The reason is that there is inheritance be-
tween levels, from the bottom (orthographic data) 
to the top (lexical data), that is: form > nform > reg 



 

6 

> lex; pos > spos > lpos; lemma > slemma > llem-
ma, and only what is new has to be annotated. 
Therefore, if nform is empty, the system reads that 
its value is the same as form (there is no inher-
itance from the teacher’s correction, fform). If reg 
is filled in and lex is empty, the value for the lex is 
the same as for reg; and the same for the POS and 
the lemma. In the example in Figure 7, the value 
for slemma is the same as the value in lemma, and 
therefore slemma is empty. This is another ad-
vantage of the annotation system provided by 
TEITOK: the annotator only needs to annotate 
what is different, and not all the fields at each lev-
el.  

Finally, the third level is used if there is a lexi-
cal/semantic error in the student form, i.e., the 
word can be grammatically correct, but it is not the 
natural word that a native speaker would use. Fig-
ure 8 shows an example where the student used the 
word tropas (‘troops’) in a context where equipas 
(‘teams’) was more adequate. 

 

  
Figure 8: Annotation of a lexical error. 

 
Again, in Figure 8, only llemma is annotated, be-
cause its value is different from the one in lemma; 
lpos has the same value as pos and, therefore, it 
remains empty. 

The different levels provide also different visu-
alizations of the text, where the introduced correc-
tions replace the student forms. This way, it is pos-
sible to visualize the same text corrected at differ-
ent levels, from the closer version to the original 
(only orthographic corrections) to the most modi-
fied one (orthographical, grammatical and lexical 
corrections). 

The system described is a multi-tier annotation 
system, similar to the one presented in Rosen et al. 
(2013). Like in the Corpus of Czech as a Second 
Language, we define different levels of annotation 
that work bottom-up, where different representa-
tions of the learner form take place. As we can see, 
there is a hierarchy in the level of interpretation as-
sumed by the annotator at each tier, from errors 
with clear boundaries (orthographical and gram-
matical) to errors more open to interpretation (lexi-
cal ones), where it is sometimes hard to determine 
the “naturalness” of a given utterance. In our sys-
tem, we assume a target hypothesis (Meurers, 
2015) where the reference linguistic system is the 
target native language. At each tier, different trans-
formations are applied to produce the equivalent 
native language form: 
- Orthographical level: the operations at this level 
are restricted to the word form and to punctuation 
marks. Punctuation, spelling and word boundaries 
problems are fixed, trying to generate the closest 
native form to the learner form. We include at this 
level problems in inflectional or derivational suf-
fixes, like in the learner form estabilitamos, instead 
of estabelecemos ((we) ‘establish’). The final in-
terpreted form is a valid word in the native lan-
guage.  
- Grammatical level: the operations at this level are 
related to grammatical problems, that is, errors that 
go beyond the word and affect syntactic structures. 
Therefore, the annotator has to take into account 
the context surrounding the error. Examples are 
agreement problems (subject-verb, determiner-
noun, noun-modifier, etc.), problems in the verb 
form (incorrect verbal tense, mode, etc.), subcate-
gorization problems or problems in the POS selec-
tion. The final interpreted form allows for a gram-
matically correct structure in the learner produc-
tion. 
- Lexical level: the operations allowed at this level 
affect mainly meaning. The word used by the 
learner is orthographically and grammatically cor-
rect, but it is not the most natural choice for a na-
tive speaker (see above the example of tropas in 
Figure 8). 

Because it works at the level of the token, this 
annotation system does not work for errors that af-
fect more than one word, like word order errors or 
errors in multi-word expressions. For those cases, 
we will use stand-off annotation, which is already 
implemented in TEITOK (Janssen, 2016). 

 



 

7 

Currently, we are testing this annotation system, 
which seems intuitive and fast for the annotators. 
As part of the testing, we plan to perform inter-
annotator agreement evaluation, to check the de-
gree of confidence of the system. Considering the 
results showed by previous works like Rosen et al. 
(2013), we expect to find a relation between the 
annotator agreement and the level of interpretation 
allowed by the annotation tier (less interpretation 
at the orthographic and grammatical level, more in-
terpretation at the lexical level). For the identifica-
tion of errors, we plan to combine automatic and 
manual strategies, taking advantage of the infor-
mation already encoded in the corpus, for example, 
teacher’s corrections (always reviewed by a human 
annotator).  

4.2 Distribution of errors: preliminary data 
We do not have yet quantitative data about the to-
tal number of errors per type in the corpus but we 
have some indicative numbers from a pilot exper-
iment we performed when we were designing a pi-
lot taxonomy of errors. For this experiment we an-
notate 36 texts (7,073 tokens), trying to include all 
the languages in the corpus and, if possible, all the 
language levels. We found 591 errors (8.35% of to-
tal tokens), with the following distribution: 
 

Type of error Absolute Freq. Percent Freq. 

Orthographical 260 43.99 

Grammatical 305 51.61 

Lexical 26 4.4 

Total 591 100 

Table 3: Distribution of errors in a corpus sample. 
 
As we expected, the most common errors are 

grammatical ones, followed by orthographic errors. 
This tendency was also showed for French in the 
FRIDA corpus in Granger 2003. On the other 
hand, lexical errors seem to be not very frequent, 
especially if the annotator is not very strict with the 
lexical choices of the learner. 

4.3 Tagset of errors 
As a further step, we plan to introduce error codes 
for each error annotated following the system de-
scribed above. As we will see, the multi-tier error 

annotation will provide us automatically with the 
first level of information in the code, with a coarse-
grained error annotation of the token.  

We are working on the definition of the tagset 
that will be used, similar to the taxonomies de-
scribed in Tono, (2003), Nicholls (2003) or 
Dagneaux et al. (2005). So far, we have defined a 
pilot tagset that will be applied to the corpus to test 
its performance. The current tagset has 37 tags and 
it is structured in two levels of information: 
1 General linguistic area affected. 
2 Error category (and subcategories in some cases). 

For level 1 we consider the three linguistic areas 
that we have described above: Orthographic (in-
cludes spelling and punctuation errors), Grammati-
cal (includes agreement errors; errors affecting 
verb tense, mode, etc.) and Lexical (includes lexi-
cal choice errors; errors affecting derivational suf-
fixes; etc.). As we will show below, the use of the 
same general linguistic areas to classify the errors 
allows for transferring information between the 
multi-tier system and the code system. For level 2 
we have common categories like agreement or 
wrong POS. 

To design the tagset we performed the annota-
tion experiment that we referred above, identifying 
the errors in those 36 texts and defining the neces-
sary categories to annotate them. Besides the phe-
nomena we observed in the annotated sample, we 
included also other phenomena that we expect to 
find in the corpus, considering other tagsets devel-
oped for similar projects. When defining the error 
categories, we decided to be as general as possible, 
trying to avoid restricting ourselves to specific the-
oretical frameworks or being too detailed. We 
think that it is always easier to manage general cat-
egories that can be sub-specified in later stages 
than to apply from the beginning very detailed lin-
guistic categories. The tags we defined are posi-
tion-based tags, where the first letter corresponds 
to level 1 and the subsequent letters to level 2. For 
example, for agreement errors affecting gender, we 
have the tag “GAG” which stands for “Grammar + 
Agreement + Gender”. Since the error tag is added 
to the affected token/group of tokens in the xml, 
which include POS information, we do not include 
the POS information in the label. 

We expect that the tagset will provide a fine-
grained classification of errors, which in turn will 
allow for more specific queries concerning differ-
ent linguistic phenomena (agreement, word order, 



 

8 

use of incorrect POS, etc.). When possible, we will 
use all the information encoded for each token in 
COPLE2 to assign the error code automatically, 
comparing the original form from the student with 
the corrections (plus lemma and POS) introduced 
at the error annotation level. The first letter of the 
error code will be automatically assigned, taking 
into account the level where the error was annotat-
ed in the multi-tier system (orthographic, grammat-
ical or lexical). The subsequent letters correspond-
ing to the error type will be assigned automatically 
when possible. For example: if there is an annotat-
ed form at nform (orthographic tier) that means 
that there is an orthographic error. This allows for 
classifying automatically the error at the linguistic 
level, that is, to assign the first letter of the tag (S, 
in this case). But we can go further in some cases 
and assign also the error code letter(s). For exam-
ple, we have an error type for accentuation marks 
(also S at second position in the error tag). For this 
error type, we can compare the student form and 
the nform to check if the difference affects only 
accentuation marks and, in that case, assign the 
corresponding letters to the error code (SS). Of 
course, this automatic comparison cannot be per-
formed for the most complex error types, but in 
many cases it will save a lot of annotation time. 
This is a good example of the possibilities that 
COPLE2 offer to apply Natural Language Pro-
cessing techniques to the annotation process. 

We think that the information encoded at the er-
ror level (the three tiers described plus error codes) 
together with all the information already encoded 
in the corpus (metadata, student’s modifications, 
teacher’s corrections) will allow for complex and 
rich linguistic queries in COPLE2. Our aim is to 
encode and provide as much information as possi-
ble about different aspects of the learner corpus:  
- Writing process of the learner. 
- Corrections made by the teacher. 
- Error corrections with POS at lemma at different 
tiers plus error tags. 
- Metadata (type of text; age; language level; etc.). 
We expect that this information can be useful for 
researchers of different fields: General Linguistics, 
Language Acquisition, Foreign Language Teach-
ing and Learning, Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, etc. 
 

5 Final Remarks 

COPLE2 corpus is a new learner corpus for Portu-
guese that encompasses written and spoken data, 
with a rich XML encoding. For each text included 
in the corpus, it contains complete metadata (in-
formation about the author and the circumstances 
where the text was produced) and linguistic anno-
tation concerning POS, lemma and modifica-
tions/corrections done by the student and the 
teacher in the original text. Besides this, it will of-
fer soon error-annotation, being the first learner 
corpus of Portuguese with this type of encoding. 
Error tagging is an added-value in learner corpora, 
since it provides valuable quantitative (error statis-
tics) and qualitative (type of error) data that high-
light the learners’ difficulties. TEITOK’s architec-
ture (where each token contains all the linguistic 
information, following TEI) facilitates the error 
annotation process. Furthermore, using the CQP 
search functionality, error tagging information 
could be combined with the other linguistic fea-
tures encoded in the corpus, allowing for complex 
and rich linguistic searches in learner texts. By 
combining search queries, we can easily conduct 
studies based on Contrastive Interlanguage Analy-
sis (Granger, 1996, 2015), which allow for uncov-
ering distinctive features of specific L1 learners, as 
well as general errors across the learner population. 
Finally, COPLE2 will provide different visualiza-
tions of the learner text: text produced by the stu-
dent; version orthographically corrected; version 
grammatically corrected and version lexically cor-
rected. 

The TEITOK environment provides POS and 
lemma automatic annotation, along with a full set 
of functionalities for manual linguistic annotation, 
as well as visualization and powerful search op-
tions. Since it is a highly customizable tool, with a 
wide range of user-defined annotations, it has 
proven a valuable resource for corpus analysis.  

We believe that this corpus and tool constitute 
good resources for pedagogical foreign language 
learning/teaching analysis, since it provides empir-
ical data to: (i) identify general and specific errors 
in the learning of Portuguese L2; (ii) develop au-
tomatic tools for language learning, textbooks and 
other material targeting specific groups of students; 
(iii) implement teacher training materials; (iv) il-
lustrate the writing-speech interaction, which has 



 

9 

not been the subject of much analysis and has been 
insufficiently evaluated. 
 

References  
Boyd, A., J. Hana, L. Nicolas, D. Meurers, K. Wisniew-

ski, A. Abel, K. Schöne, B. Štindlová and C. Vettori.  
2014. The MERLIN corpus: Learner Language and 
the CEFR. In Proceedings of LREC, Reykjavik, Ice-
land. pp.1281--1288. 

Burnard, L. and S. Bauman. Eds. 2013. TEI P5: Guide-
lines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 
Text Encoding Initiative Consortium: Charlottesville, 
Virginia. 

Council of Europe. 2001. Common European frame-
work of reference for languages: Learning, teaching, 
assessment. Cambridge, U.K: Press Syndicate of the 
University of Cambridge. 

Cresti, E. and M. Moneglia. Eds. 2005. C-ORAL-ROM. 
Integrated Reference Corpora for Spoken Romance 
Languages. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benja-
mins Publishing Company. 

Christ, O., B. Schulze, A. Hofmann and E. Koenig. 
1999. The IMS Corpus Workbench: Corpus Query 
Processor (CQP): User's Manual. Institute for Natu-
ral Language Processing. University of Stuttgart. 
(CQP V2.2). 

Dagneaux, E., S. Denness, S. Granger, F. Meunier, J. 
Neff and J. Thewissen. Eds. 2005. Error Tagging 
Manual. Version 1.2. Centre for English Corpus Lin-
guistics. Université Catholique de Louvain. 

Delais-Roussarie E. and H. Yoo. 2010. The COREIL 
corpus: a learner corpus designed for studying phras-
al phonology and intonation. In K. Dziubalska-
Kołaczyk, M. Wrembel and M. Kul (Eds). Proceed-
ings of New Sound 2010. Poznan, Pologne, pp. 100--
105. 

Díaz-Negrillo, A. & Fernández-Domíguez, J. 2006. Er-
ror Tagging Systems for Learner Corpora. RESLA, 
19:83--102. 

Granger, S. 1996. From CA to CIA and back: An inte-
grated approach to computerized bilingual and learn-
er corpora. In K. Aijmer, B. Altenberg and M. Jo-
hansson (Eds.). Languages in Contrast. Text-based 
cross-linguistic studies. Lund Studies in English 88. 
Lund: Lund University Press, pp. 37--51. 

Granger, S. 2003. Error-tagged Learner Corpora and 
CALL: A Promising Synergy. CALICO Journal 20 
(3). Special issue on error analysis and error correc-
tion in computer-assisted language learning, pp. 465-
-480. 

Granger, S. 2004. Computer learner corpus research: 
current status and future prospects. In U. Connor & 
T. Upton (Eds.), Applied Corpus Linguistics: A Mul-

tidimensional Perspective (pp. 123-145). Amsterdam 
& Atlanta: Rodopi. 

Granger, S. 2015. Contrastive Interlanguage Analysis: a 
reappraisal. International Journal of Learner Corpus 
Research. Vol. 1:1. John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, pp. 7--24. 

Granger, S., E. Dagneaux, F. Meunier and M. Paquot. 
Eds. 2009. International Corpus of Learner English. 
Version 2. UCL: Presses Universitaires de Louvain. 

Hinrichs, L. 2006. Codeswitching on theWeb. English 
and Jamaican Creole in e-mail communication. Am-
sterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 

Janssen, M. 2012. NeoTag: a POS Tagger for Grammat-
ical Neologism Detection. In Proceedings of LREC 
2012, Istanbul, Turkey. 

Janssen, M. 2016. TEITOK: Text-Faithful Annotated 
Corpora. In Proceedings of LREC 2016, Portorož, 
Slovenia. 

Leiria, I. 2001. Léxico – aquisição e ensino do Portu-
guês Europeu língua não materna. PhD Dissertation. 
Faculdade de Letras da Universidade de Lisboa. 

Lozano, C. 2009. CEDEL2: Corpus Escrito del Español 
L2. In C. M. Bretones Callejas et al. (Eds). Applied 
Linguistics Now: Understanding Language and Mind 
/ La Lingüística Aplicada Hoy: Comprendiendo el 
Lenguaje y la Mente. Almería: Universidad de Alme-
ría, pp. 197--212. 

MacWhinney, B. 2000. The CHILDES Project: Tools 
for Analyzing Talk. 3rd Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates. 

Mendes, A., M. Généreux, I. Hendricks. 2014. Manual 
for the CRPC on the CQPweb interface. Manual 1.3. 
http://alfclul.clul.ul.pt/CQPweb/doc/CRPCmanual.v1
_2_en.pdf. 

Mendes, A., S. Antunes, M. Janssen and A. Gonçalves. 
2016. The COPLE2 Corpus: a Learner Corpus for 
Portuguese. In Proceedings of LREC 2016, Portorož, 
Slovenia. 

Meurers, D. 2015. Learner Corpora and Natural Lan-
guage Processing. In S. Granger, G. Gilquin and F. 
Meunier (Eds.). The Cambridge Handbook of Learn-
er Corpus Research. Cambridge University Press, pp. 
537--566. 

Nicholls, D. 2003. The Cambridge Learner Corpus –  
error coding and analysis for lexicography and ELT. 
In D. Archer, P. Rayson, A. Wilson and T. McEnery 
(Eds.). Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2003 
Conference. Lancaster University, pp. 572--581. 

Rosen, A., J. Hana, B. Štindlová & A. Feldman 2013. 
Evaluating and automating the annotation of a learner 
corpus. Language Resources and Evaluation pp. 1--
28. 

Schmidt, T. 2012. EXMARaLDA and the FOLK tools – 
two toolsets for transcribing and annotating spoken 



 

10 

language. In Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC). Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 236--40. 

Tono, Y. 2003. Learner corpora: Design, development 
and applications. In D. Archer, P. Rayson, A. Wilson 
and T. McEnery (Eds.), Proceedings of the Corpus 
Linguistics 2003 Conference. Lancaster University, 
pp. 800--809. 

 


