



















































Sentiment Analysis - What are we talking about?


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, page 1,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

Sentiment Analysis – What Are We Talking about?

- Intro Talk - 

 

 
Alexandra Balahur  

European Commission Joint Research Centre 

Institute for the Protection and Security of the Citizen 

Via E. Fermi 2749, Ispra (VA), Italy 

alexandra.balahur@jrc.ec.europa.eu 

 

 

 

 

 

Automatic affect detection and classification from 

text is a complex task in Natural Language Pro-

cessing, whose tackling requires not only the use of 

established methods in the field, but also the use of 

knowledge extracted from theories in Psychology, 

Cognitive Science, Social Psychology or Neuropsy-

chology.  

 

For the past decade, there has been a large amount 

of research done in the field. Nevertheless, many is-

sues remain to be tackled, starting from a common 

understanding of what we mean by the concepts in-

volved and integrating the research in the appropri-

ate context.  

 

In this intro talk, my aim is to give a broad overview 

of the issues involved in tackling the task, from the 

definition of the terms, to some of the tasks that 

have been defined and some of the methods em-

ployed.  

 

1. Introduction – terms definition: opinion, senti-

ment, belief, emotion, feeling, attitude, subjectivity 

versus objectivity. Affect theories in Psychology 

(main theories on emotion, main models of emo-

tion), Social Psychology (role of affect as social reg-

ulator), Cognitive Science (conceptual models of af-

fect) and recent findings in Neuropsychology (What 

happens in our brain when we feel emotion? Why 

do we feel certain emotions?). 

2. The three levels of affect analysis: text, author, 

reader 

3. Analysis of directly expressed affect and senti-

ment in different types of text (reviews, blogs, 

newspaper articles, microblogs, social network 

posts) – resources (dictionaries, annotated corpora), 

tasks and approaches 

4. Analysis of indirectly expressed affect and senti-

ment in text (what is the author trying to convey af-

fect-wise? How can we detect bias or subjective 

opinions of the author?)– resources, tasks and ap-

proaches.  

5. Analysis of implicit expressions of affect in text. 

Reader interpretations. The use of common-sense 

knowledge to detect the affective reaction of readers 

to texts. 

1


