



















































USFDa•Žs Phrase-level Quality Estimation Systems


Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 800–805,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

USFD’s Phrase-level Quality Estimation Systems

Varvara Logacheva, Frédéric Blain and Lucia Specia
Department of Computer Science

University of Sheffield, UK
{v.logacheva, f.blain, l.specia}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

We describe the submissions of the Uni-
versity of Sheffield (USFD) for the phrase-
level Quality Estimation (QE) shared task
of WMT16. We test two different ap-
proaches for phrase-level QE: (i) we en-
rich the provided set of baseline features
with information about the context of the
phrases, and (ii) we exploit predictions
at other granularity levels (word and sen-
tence). These approaches perform closely
in terms of multiplication of F1-scores
(primary evaluation metric), but are con-
siderably different in terms of the F1-
scores for individual classes.

1 Introduction

Quality Estimation (QE) of Machine Translation
(MT) is the task of determining the quality of
an automatically translated text without compar-
ing it to a reference translation. This task has
received more attention recently because of the
widespread use of MT systems and the need to
evaluate their performance on the fly. The prob-
lem has been modelled to estimate the quality of
translations at the word, sentence and document
levels (Bojar et al., 2015). Word-level QE can
be particularly useful for post-editing of machine-
translated texts: if we know the erroneous words in
a sentence, we can highlight them to attract post-
editor’s attention, which should improve both pro-
ductivity and final translation quality. However,
the choice of words in an automatically translated
sentence is motivated by the context, so MT er-
rors are also context-dependent. Moreover, as it
has been shown in (Blain et al., 2011), errors in
multiple adjacent words can be caused by a sin-
gle incorrect decision — e.g. an incorrect lexical
choice can result in errors in all its syntactic de-

pendants. The task of estimating quality at the
phrase level aims to address these limitations of
word-level models for improved prediction perfor-
mance.

The first effort to estimate the quality of trans-
lated n-grams (instead of individual words) was
described in (Gandrabur and Foster, 2003), but
there the multi-word nature of predictions was
motivated by the architecture of the MT system
used in the experiment: an interactive MT system
which did not translate entire sentences, but rather
predicted the next n word translations in a sen-
tence. An approach was designed to estimate the
confidence of the MT system about the prediction
and was aimed at improving translation prediction
quality.

The phrase-level QE in its current formulation
– estimation of the quality of phrases in a pre-
translated sentence using external features of these
phrases – was first addressed in the work of Lo-
gacheva and Specia (2015), where the authors
segmented automatically translated sentences into
phrases, labelled these phrases based on word-
level labels and trained several phrase-level QE
models using different feature sets and machine
learning algorithms. The baseline phrase-level QE
system used in this shared task was based on the
results in (Logacheva and Specia, 2015).

This year’s Conference on Statistical Machine
Translation (WMT16) includes a shared task on
phrase-level QE (QE Task 2p) for the first time.
This task uses the same training and test data as the
one used for the word-level QE task (QE Task 2):
the set of English sentences, their automatic trans-
lations into German and their manual post-editions
performed by professional translators. The data
belongs to the IT domain. The training set con-
tains 12,000 sentences, development and test sets
— 1,000 and 2,000 sentences, respectively. For
model training and evaluation, the words are la-

800



belled as “BAD” or “OK” based on labelling gen-
erated with the TERcom tool1: if an edit oper-
ation (substitution or insertion) was applied to a
word, it is labelled as “BAD”; contrarily, if the
word was left unchanged, it is considered “OK”.
For the phrase-level task, the data was segmented
also into phrases. The segmentation was given by
the decoder that produced the automatic transla-
tions. The segments are labelled at the phrase level
using the word-level labels: a phrase is labelled as
“OK” if it contains only words labelled as “OK”;
if one or more words in a phrase are “BAD”’, the
phrase is “BAD” itself. The predictions are done
at the phrase level, but evaluated at the word level:
for the evaluation phrase-level labels are unrolled
back to their word-level versions (i.e. if a three-
word phrase is labelled as “BAD”, it is equivalent
to three “BAD” word-level labels).

The baseline phrase-level features provided by
the organisers of the task are black-box features
that were originally used for sentence-level quality
estimation and extracted using the QuEst toolkit2

(Specia et al., 2015). While this feature set consid-
ers many aspects of sentence quality (mostly the
ones that do not depend on internal MT system
information and do not require language-specific
resources), it has an important limitation when ap-
plied to phrases. Namely, it does not take into
account the context of the phrase, i.e. words and
phrases in the sentence, either before or after the
phrase of interest. In order to advance upon the
baseline results, we enhanced the baseline feature
set with contextual information for phrases.

Another approach we experimented with is the
use of predictions made by QE models at other
levels of granularity: word level and sentence
level. The motivation here is twofold. On the one
hand, we use a wider range of features which are
unavailable at the phrase level. On the other hand,
the use of word-level and sentence-level predic-
tions can help mitigate the uncertainty of phrase-
level scores: there, a phrase is labelled as “BAD”
if it has any number of “BAD” words, so “BAD”
phrases can be of very different quality. We be-
lieve that information on the quality of individual
words and the overall quality of a sentence can
be complementary for phrase-level quality predic-
tion.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. We
1http://www.cs.umd.edu/˜snover/tercom/
2http://www.quest.dcs.shef.ac.uk/

quest_files/features_blackbox

describe our context-based QE strategy in Section
2. In Section 3 we explain our approach to build
phrase-level QE models using predictions of other
levels. Section 4 reports the final results, while
Section 5 outlines directions for future work.

2 Context-based model

The feature set used for the baseline system in the
shared task considers various aspects of a phrase.
It has features that allow to evaluate the likelihood
of its source and target parts individually (e.g.
probabilities of its source and target phrases as
given by monolingual language models), and also
the correspondences between the parts (e.g. the
ratio of numbers of punctuation marks and words
of particular parts of speech in the source and tar-
get sides of the phrase). However, this feature set
does not take into account the words surrounding
an individual phrase. This is explained by the fact
that the feature set was originally designed for QE
systems which evaluate the quality of automatic
translations at the sentence level. Sentences in
an automatically translated text are generally pro-
duced independently from each other, given that
most MT systems cannot take extra-sentential con-
text into account. Therefore, context features are
rarely used for sentence-level QE.

2.1 Features
In order to improve the representation of phrases,
we use a number of additional features (CON-
TEXT) that depend on phrases to the left and right
of the phrase of interest, as well as the phrase it-
self. The intuition behind these features is that
they evaluate how well a phrase fits its context.
Here we list the new features and the values they
can take:

• out-of-vocabulary words (binary) — we
check if the source phrase has words which
do not occur in a source corpus. The feature
has value 1 if at least one of source words is
out-of-vocabulary and 0 otherwise;

• source/target left context (string) — last
word of the previous source/target phrase;

• source/target right context (string) — first
word of the next source/target phrase;

• highest order of n-gram that includes the
first target word (0 to 5) — we take the n-
gram at the border between the current and

801



previous phrase and generate the combina-
tion of the first target word in the phrase
and 1 to 4 words that precede it in the sen-
tence. Let us denote the first word from
the phrase wfirst and the 4-grams from the
previous phrase p−4p−3p−2p−1. If the en-
tire 5-gram p−4p−3p−2p−1wfirst exists in
the target LM, the feature value is 5. If it
is not in the LM, n-grams of lower order
(from p−3p−2p−1wfirst to unigram wfirst)
are checked, and the feature value is the or-
der of the longest n-gram found in the LM;

• highest order of n-gram that includes the
last target word (0 to 5) — feature that
considers the n-gram wlastp1p2p3p4 (where
wlast is the last target word of the current
phrase and p1p2p3p4 is the opening 4-gram
of the next feature) analogously to the previ-
ous feature;

• backoff behaviour of first/last n-gram (0
to 1) — backoff behaviour of n-grams
p−2p−1wfirst and wlastp1p2, computed as
described in (Raybaud et al., 2011).

• named entities in the source/target (bi-
nary) — we check if the source and target
phrases have tokens which start with capital
letters;

• part of speech of the source/target
left/right context (string) — we check parts
of speech of words that precede or follow the
phrase in the sentence.

Some of these features (e.g. highest n-gram or-
der, backoff behaviour, contexts) are used because
they have been shown useful for word-level QE
(Luong et al., 2013), others are included because
we believe they can be relevant for understanding
the quality of phrases.

We compare the performance of the baseline
feature set with the feature set extended with con-
text information. The QE models are trained using
CRFSuite toolkit (Okazaki, 2007). We chose to
train a Conditional Random Fields (CRF) model
because it has shown high performance in word-
level QE (Luong et al., 2013) as well as phrase-
level QE (Logacheva and Specia, 2015) tasks.
CRFSuite provides five optimisation algorithms:
L-BFGS with L1/L2 regularization (lbfgs), SGD
with L2-regularization (l2sgd), Averaged Percep-
tron (ap), Passive Aggressive (pa), and Adaptive

Feature set
Baseline Extended

lbfgs 0.270 0.332
l2sgd 0.238 0.358
ap 0.316 0.355
pa 0.329 0.357
arow 0.292 0.315

Table 1: F1-multiplied scores of models trained on
baseline and extended feature sets using different
optimisation algorithms for CRFSuite.

Regularization of Weights (arow). Since these al-
gorithms could perform differently in our task, we
tested all of them on both baseline and extended
feature sets, using the development set.

Table 1 shows the performance of our CRF
models trained with different algorithms. We can
see that the extended feature set clearly outper-
forms the baseline for all algorithms. Passive-
Aggressive scored higher for the baseline feature
set and is also one of the best-performing algo-
rithms on the extended feature set. Therefore,
we used the Passive-Aggressive algorithm for our
subsequent experiments and the final submission.

2.2 Data filtering

Many datasets for word-level QE suffer from the
uneven distribution of labels: the “BAD” words
occur much less often than those labelled as “OK”.
This characteristic stems from the nature of the
word-level QE task: we need to identify erro-
neous words in an automatically translated text,
but the state-of-the-art MT systems allow produc-
ing texts of high enough quality, where only a few
words are incorrect. Since for the shared task data
the phrase-level labels were generated from word-
level labels, we run into the same problem at the
phrase level. Here the discrepancy is not so large:
the “BAD” labels make for 25% of all labels in
the training dataset for the phrase-level task. How-
ever, we believe it is still useful to reduce this dis-
crepancy.

Previous experiments with word-level QE
showed that the distribution of labels can be
smoothed by filtering out sentences with little or
no errors (Logacheva et al., 2015). Admittedly,
if a sentence has no “BAD” words it lacks infor-
mation about one of the classes of the problem,
and thus it is less informative. We thus applied the
same strategy to phrase-level QE: we ranked the

802



0 

0,1 

0,2 

0,3 

0,4 

0,5 

0,6 

0,7 

0,8 

0,9 

1000 3000 5000 7000 9000 

Sc
o

re
s 

Sentences in the training data 

F1-BAD 
F1-OK 
F1-mult 

Figure 1: Performance of the phrase-level QE
model with different numbers of training sen-
tences.

training sentences by their HTER score (ratio of
“BAD” words in a sentence) so that the worst sen-
tences are closer to the top of the list, and trained
our phrase-level QE model using only N top sen-
tences from the training data (i.e. only sentences
with larger number of errors).

Figure 1 shows how the scores of our phrase-
level models change as we add more training data.
We examine F1-scores for both “BAD” and “OK”
classes as well as their multiplication, which is the
primary metric for the task (denoted as F1-mult).
The flat lines denote the scores of a model that
uses the entire dataset (12,000 sentences): red for
F1-OK, blue for F1-OK, green for F1-mult. It
is clear that F1-BAD benefits from filtering out
sentences with less errors. The models with re-
duced data never reach the F1-OK score of the
ones which use the full dataset, but their higher
F1-BAD scores result in overall improvements in
performance. The F1-mult score reaches its maxi-
mum when the training set contains only sentences
with errors (9,280 out of 12,000 sentences), al-
though F1-BAD score is slightly lower in this case
than with a lower number of sentences. Since F1-
mult is our main metric, we use this version of the
filtered dataset for the final submission.

3 Prediction-based model

Following the approach in (Specia et al., 2015),
which makes use of word-level predictions at sen-
tence level, we describe here the first attempt to
using both word-level and sentence-level predic-
tions for phrase-level QE (W&SLP4PT).

Phrase-level labels by definition depend on the

quality of individual words comprising the phrase:
each phrase-level label in the training data is the
generalisation of word-level labels within the con-
sidered phrase. However, we argue that the quality
of a phrase can also be influenced by overall qual-
ity of the sentence.

We used the following set of features based on
predictions of different levels of granularity and on
the phrase segmentation itself:

• Sentence-level prediction features:

1. sentence score — quality prediction
score assigned for the current sentence.
Same feature value for all phrases in a
sentence.

• Phrase segmentation features:

2. phrase ratio — ratio of the length of the
current phrase to the length of the sen-
tence;

3. phrase length — number of words in the
current phrase.

• Word-level prediction features:

4/5. number of words predicted as
“OK”/“BAD” in the current phrase;

6/7. number of words predicted as
“OK”/“BAD” in the sentence.

Similarly to the context-based model described
in Section 2, we trained our prediction-based
model with the CRFSuite toolkit and the Passive-
Aggressive algorithm. The phrase segmentation
features are extracted from the data itself and
do not need any additional information. The
sentence-level score is produced by the SHEF-
LIUM-NN system, a sentence-level QE system
with neural network features as described in (Shah
et al., 2016). The word-level prediction fea-
tures are produced by the SHEF-MIME QE sys-
tem (Beck et al., 2016), which uses imitation
learning to predict translation quality at the word
level.

4 Results

We submitted two phrase-level QE systems: the
first one uses the set of baseline features enhanced
with context features, the second one uses the fea-
tures based on predictions made by word-level and

803



F1-BAD F1-OK F1-mult
W&SLP4PT 0.486 0.757 0.368
CONTEXT 0.470 0.777 0.365
BASELINE 0.401 0.800 0.321

Table 2: Performance of our official submissions
on the test set.

sentence-level QE models, plus the phrase seg-
mentation features. The performance of our of-
ficial submissions on the test set is given in Table
2.

For the prediction-based model, we used word-
level predictions from the MIME system with
β=0.3. While (Beck et al., 2016) reports bet-
ter performance with β = 1, we obtained slightly
lower performance both on F1-mult = 0.367 and
F1-OK = 0.739. Only F1-BAD was better = 0.497.

Even though the two systems are very differ-
ent in terms of the features they use, their perfor-
mance is very similar. The prediction-based model
is slightly better in terms of F1-BAD, whereas the
context-based model predicts “OK” labels more
accurately. Both systems outperform the baseline.

In terms of the F1-multiplied metric, our
prediction-based and context-based systems
ranked 4th and 5th (out of 10 systems) in the
shared task, respectively.

4.1 Model combination

Since both our models outperform the baseline
system, we also combined them after the offi-
cial submission to check whether further improve-
ments could be obtained. Surprisingly, we got
the exact same prediction performance as our
prediction-based model. This is because two fea-
tures of our prediction-based model – the number
of words predicted as “BAD”/“OK” in the current
phrase – have a strong bias and do most of the job
by themselves3. The reason of this behaviour lies
in the way both the training and test data have been
tagged for the phrase-level task. The labelling was
adapted from the word-level labels by assigning
the “BAD” tag to any phrase that contains at least
one “BAD” word. Consequently, during the train-
ing against gold standards labels, our model learns
to tag as “BAD” any phrase that contains at least

3We get the exact same scores either combining the
prediction-based features with the baseline features, both the
baseline and context features, or considering the number of
predicted “BAD” words in the current phrase as the only fea-
ture of our model.

F1-BAD F1-OK F1-mult
W&SLP4PT 0.389 0.727 0.283

+baseline 0.454 0.767 0.349
+context 0.473 0.772 0.366

BASELINE 0.401 0.800 0.321

Table 3: Performance for combinations of models
on the test set.

on “BAD” word in a systematic way.
After removing the features 4 and 5 from the

feature set, we retrained our prediction-based
model and its new performance is given in the first
row of Table 3. On its own, it performs worse than
the baseline, but by successively adding the base-
line and context features to it (without any data
filtering), it performs as well as our official sub-
missions in terms of F1-BAD and F1-multi, and
gets higher F1-OK.

5 Conclusion and future work

We presented two different approaches to phrase-
level QE: one extends the baseline feature set with
context information, another combines the scores
of different levels of granularity to model the
quality of phrases. Both performed similarly, al-
though the prediction-based strategy is more “pes-
simistic” regarding the training data. Both outper-
formed the baseline.

In future work, we further experiments to gather
a better understanding of these approaches. First,
additional feature engineering can be performed:
we did not check the usefulness of individual con-
text features, nor of the additional features used in
the prediction-based model. Secondly, the corre-
spondences between labels of different granulari-
ties can be further examined: for example, it is in-
teresting to see how the use of sentence-level and
word-level predictions can influence the prediction
of phrase-level scores.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the EXPERT (EU
FP7 Marie Curie ITN No. 317471, Varvara Lo-
gacheva) and the QT21 (H2020 No. 645452, Lu-
cia Specia, Frédéric Blain) projects.

References
Daniel Beck, Andreas Vlachos, Gustavo H. Paetzold,

and Lucia Specia. 2016. SHEF-MIME: Word-
level Quality Estimation Using Imitation Learning.

804



In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine
Translation, Berlin, Germany.

Frédéric Blain, Jean Senellart, Holger Schwenk, Mirko
Plitt, and Johann Roturier. 2011. Qualitative Analy-
sis of Post-Editing for High Quality Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the MT Summit XIII, pages
164–171, Xiamen, China.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Chris Hokamp,
Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz,
Matteo Negri, Matt Post, Carolina Scarton, Lucia
Specia, and Marco Turchi. 2015. Findings of the
2015 workshop on statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 1–46, Lisbon, Portugal.

Simona Gandrabur and George Foster. 2003. Confi-
dence estimation for translation prediction. In Pro-
ceedings of Seventh Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 95–102, Edmonton, Canada.

Varvara Logacheva and Lucia Specia. 2015. Phrase-
level quality estimation for machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2015 International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation, Da Nang, Vietnam.

Varvara Logacheva, Chris Hokamp, and Lucia Specia.
2015. Data enhancement and selection strategies for
the word-level quality estimation. In Proceedings of
the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 330–335, Lisbon, Portugal.

Ngoc Quang Luong, Benjamin Lecouteux, and Lau-
rent Besacier. 2013. LIG system for WMT13 QE
task: Investigating the usefulness of features in word
confidence estimation for MT. In Proceedings of
the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 386–391, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Naoaki Okazaki. 2007. Crfsuite: a fast implementa-
tion of conditional random fields (CRFs). Available
at http://www.chokkan.org/software/
crfsuite/.

Sylvain Raybaud, David Langlois, and Kamel Smaı̈li.
2011. This sentence is wrong. Detecting errors in
machine-translated sentences. Machine Translation,
25(1):1–34.

Kashif Shah, Fethi Bougares, Loic Barrault, and Lu-
cia Specia. 2016. Shef-lium-nn: Sentence level
quality estimation with neural network. In Proceed-
ings of the First Conference on Machine Translation,
Berlin, Germany.

Lucia Specia, G Paetzold, and Carolina Scarton.
2015. Multi-level translation quality prediction with
quest++. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and Seventh International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing of the Asian Federation of
Natural Language Processing: System Demonstra-
tions, pages 115–120.

805


