








































SweLLex: second language learners’ productive vocabulary

Elena Volodina1, Ildikó Pilán1, Lorena Llozhi1, Baptiste Degryse2, Thomas François2,3
1 University of Gothenburg, Sweden

2 Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium
3 FNRS Post-doctoral Researcher

elena.volodina@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

This paper presents a new lexical resource
for learners of Swedish as a second language,
SweLLex, and a know-how behind its cre-
ation. We concentrate on L2 learners’ pro-
ductive vocabulary, i.e. words that they are
actively able to produce, rather than the lex-
ica they comprehend (receptive vocabulary).
The proposed list covers productive vocabu-
lary used by L2 learners in their essays. Each
lexical item on the list is connected to its fre-
quency distribution over the six levels of pro-
ficiency defined by the Common European
Framework of Reference (CEFR) (Council of
Europe, 2001). To make this list a more re-
liable resource, we experiment with normal-
izing L2 word-level errors by replacing them
with their correct equivalents. SweLLex has
been tested in a prototype system for auto-
matic CEFR level classification of essays as
well as in a visualization tool aimed at explor-
ing L2 vocabulary contrasting receptive and
productive vocabulary usage at different lev-
els of language proficiency.

1 Introduction

The results of the Survey of Adult Competencies
(PIAAC, 2013), where literacy as a skill has been
assessed among the adult population (16-65 years)
has shown that on average Sweden scored among
the top 5 countries out of the 23 OECD partici-
pants. However, the national Swedish report claims
that the difference between the average literacy lev-
els of native (L1) born citizens compared to citizens
with an immigrant (L2) background is the largest

observed among all participating countries (OECD,
2013, p.6). The low literacy population in Swe-
den has three times higher risk of being unemployed
or reporting poor health. The results of the survey
point to an acute need to support immigrants and
other low-literacy groups in building stronger lan-
guage skills as a way of getting jobs and improving
their lifestyle (SCB, 2013, p.8).

A way of addressing the needs of immigrants as
well as L2 teachers would be to provide an exten-
sive amount of self-study materials for practice. This
could be achieved through the development of spe-
cific algorithms, but they generally heavily rely on
linguistic resources, such as descriptions of vocabu-
lary and grammar scopes per each stage of language
development, or (to avoid level-labeling) at least
a predefined sequenced presentation of vocabulary
and grammar so that automatic generation of learn-
ing materials would follow some order of increas-
ing complexity. To do this, as a first step, we need
to examine reading materials used in L2 courses
versus essays written during such courses, to study
what constitutes L2 learners’ lexical and grammati-
cal competence at various levels of proficiency.

Our study has addressed one sub-problem among
those outlined above, namely, a descriptive list of
productive vocabulary based on a corpus of L2
learner essays. We have combined corpus linguis-
tics methods, computational linguistics methods and
empiric analysis to secure a resource that could be
used both for L2 research as well as for teaching
and assessment purposes. As a preliminary step,
we have tested two methods of normalization of L2
word-level errors to see how that would improve the



quality of automatic annotation and the quality of
the list itself. The resource is not perfect; a number
of iterations for its improvement would be needed,
complemented with pedagogical experiments. How-
ever, this is a pilot study that helps us analyze and
improve the methodology, find out its weaknesses
and strengths and decide on the paths to take ahead.

The result of the study is a browsable inven-
tory of Swedish L2 productive vocabulary with fre-
quency distributions across CEFR levels. It is possi-
ble to browse the resource in parallel with its sis-
ter resource for L2 receptive vocabulary, SVALex
(François et al., 2016).

Below, we provide a short survey of lexical re-
sources for second language learners (Section 2),
present our experiments on normalization (Section
3.2), describe the resulting list (Section 4) and con-
clude by outlining future perspectives (Section 5).

2 Background

In developing L2 courses as well as designing
L2 tests, considerations about which vocabulary to
teach or assess are critical. According to the find-
ings within L2 research, to cope with reading com-
prehension tasks, a learner should understand 95-
98% of the text vocabulary (Laufer and Ravenhorst-
Kalovski, 2010). But which vocabulary should be
taught, and in which order?

Attempts to outline lexical items to concentrate on
in L2 context date back to Thorndike (1921). Sev-
eral approaches have been used since then to iden-
tify relevant vocabulary for L2 learners, such as re-
lying on expert intuitions (Allén, 2002), combin-
ing statistical insights with expert judgments (Hult
et al., 2010), and lately estimating frequencies from
corpus-based sources where several variations can
be found: domain-specific lists (Coxhead, 2000),
general purpose vocabulary (West, 1953), word fam-
ily frequencies (Coxhead, 2000), and lately sense-
based lists (Capel, 2010; Capel, 2012).

Most of the lists above, however, do not reflect the
order in which vocabulary should be taught or tested
for L2 learners, or at which level. An attempt to
cover that need was made in the English Vocabulary
Profile (Capel, 2010; Capel, 2012). For Swedish,
an effort to list receptive vocabulary useful for L2
learners was made in the European Kelly project

(Kilgarriff et al., 2014) and recently in the SVALex
list (François et al., 2016). While Kelly list is based
on web-texts whose primary target readers are first
language speakers; SVALex is based on the reading
comprehension texts used in coursebooks aimed at
L2 learners. Both lists, thus, cover receptive vocab-
ulary, i.e. vocabulary that L2 learners can under-
stand when exposed to it while reading or listening.
To complement the receptive repertoire with the pro-
ductive one, we have explored L2 learner essays.

3 Method

3.1 Source corpus

It is natural that any vocabulary list would reflect
the corpus it is based on. It is thus important to
know what constitutes the source corpus, in our case
the SweLL corpus. SweLL (Volodina et al., 2016b)
is a corpus consisting of essays written by learners
of Swedish as a second language, aged 16 or older.
It has been collected at three educational establish-
ments and covers the six CEFR levels: A1 (begin-
ner), A2, B1, B2, C1 and C2 (near-native profi-
ciency). However, C2 is heavily underrepresented.
Table 1 summarizes the distribution of essays (and
sentences and tokens) across the 6 CEFR levels.

Level Nr. essays Nr. sent Nr. tokens
A1 16 247 2084
A2 83 1727 18349
B1 75 2005 29814
B2 74 1939 32691
C1 89 3409 60455
C2 2 46 694

Total 339 9 373 144 087

Table 1: Number of essays, sentences, and tokens per CEFR
level in the SweLL corpus.

The SweLL corpus contains a number of variables
associated with the essays, including:

• learner variables: age at the moment of writ-
ing, gender, mother tongue (L1), education
level, duration of the residence stay in Sweden;

• essay-related information: assigned
CEFR level, setting of writing
(exam/classroom/home), access to extra



materials (e.g. lexicons, statistics), academic
term and date when the essays have been
written, essay title, and depending upon the
subcorpus - topics (SpIn, TISUS, SW1203),
genre (TISUS, SW1203), and grade (TISUS).

Another important characteristics of a corpus that
influences a word list derived from it is text topics.
In SweLL, the major part of the essays have been an-
notated for topics, with often several topics assigned
to the same essay. The topics are presented in Table
2 in decreasing frequency order.

Topic Nr essays
health and body care 117

personal identification 97
daily life 60

relations with other people 31
free time, entertainment 19

places 16
arts 15

travel 15
education 9

family and relatives 7
economy 4

Table 2: Number of essays per topic

Since the corpus is rather small, there is a bias
towards the dominating topics, something that we
intend to overcome in future updates of the list.

3.2 L2 text normalization
Standard corpus annotation follows a number of
steps, including tokenization, PoS-tagging, lemma-
tization and syntactic parsing. A project dealing
with learner language requires handling of texts ex-
hibiting a great amount of deviation from standard
Swedish. While texts with normative Swedish can
be relatively accurately annotated with existing au-
tomatic methods, annotating learner language with
the same tools is error-prone due to various (and of-
ten overlapping) orthographic, morphological, syn-
tactic and other types of errors, e.g.:

• segmentation problems: “jag har två kompisar
som hete S och P de är från Afghanistan också
jag älskar de för att när jag behöver hjälp de
hjälpar gärna mig och jag också hjälpa de.”

• misspelling variations: “sommern”, “kultor”

• unexpected morphological forms and agree-
ment errors: “Min drömar”

• word order errors: “Jag bara studera 4 ämne i
skolan och på fritiden träna jag på gym”

To tackle that problem, an extra step is of-
ten added to the annotation process before a stan-
dard annotation pipeline is applied, where deviat-
ing forms are rewriten to fit into the accepted norms
of the language. That step is often referred to as
normalization (Megyesi et al., 2016; Wisniewski et
al., 2013; Dickinson and Ragheb, 2013). Previous
error-normalization approaches include, among oth-
ers, finite state transducers (Antonsen, 2012) and a
number of systems, mostly hybrid, created within
the CoNLL Shared Task on grammatical error cor-
rection for L2 English (Ng et al., 2014).

A more practical reason for our normalization ex-
periments is based on the fact that after the ini-
tial collection of raw frequencies for SweLLex, we
noticed that there were 4,308 unique tokens which
were not assigned a lemma during the linguistic an-
notation. Figure 1 shows the distribution of non-
lemmatized items across all levels of proficiency.

Figure 1: Percent of non-lemmatized items per level, %

We examined a selection of the non-lemmatized
words (about 1000 tokens) and split those into five
categories. Table 3 shows some examples of the
five categories, including correct spelling and En-
glish translation where applicable.



Category Example (correct) Eng
Misspelling fotbol (fotboll) football
Compound arbetsstress job stress

Hyphenation för-söka (försöka) to attempt
Foreign word opportunity

Acronym fö (för övrigt) moreover

Table 3: Examples of word entries that failed to match against
SALDO morphology lexicon, by category

To reduce the number of non-lemmatized items,
especially in cases of misspellings and hyphen-
ation, we experimented with two normalization
approaches at the word level: pure Levenshtein
distance, and LanguageTool’s output combined
with candidate ranking strategies. Our hypothesis
has been that normalization should take care of the
word-level anomalies of learner language replacing
them with a standard variant, so that the automatic
annotation in the next step would be more accurate.

Approach 1: Levenshtein distance
As the first strategy for normalization we experi-

mented with pure Levenshtein distance (LD) as im-
plemented in NLTK (Bird, 2006)1. LD is a measure
for the distance between two strings. In our case,
this was the difference between the (possibly) mis-
spelled word and the (probable) target word. Out-
put suggestions were based on SALDO-morphology
lexicon (Borin et al., 2013), a full-form lexicon
where all inflected forms are listed alongside their
base forms and parts of speech. As such, in the cases
where the word form was not present in SALDO,
we chose the word form in SALDO morphology to
which the original word form in our source had the
shortest LD, selecting the first suggestion with the
shortest edit distance. Suggestions had to start with
the same letter, based on the assumption that a mis-
spelled word is likely to start with the same letter as
its corresponding correct lemma (Rimrott and Heift,
2005).

Analysis of 20 randomly selected corrections per
level has shown that apart from level A1, LD per-
formed quite well at the other levels (see Table 4).

Zooming into the observed cases, we could see
that our LD-based algorithm returns the right lemma

1http://www.nltk.org/

Level Correct/total
A1 7/20
A2 13/20
B1 13/20
B2 15/20
C1 16/20

Table 4: Number of correctly returned suggestions per level

in those cases where the edit distance equals 1.
Those cases include:

(1) substitution of one misspelled letter, e.g.:
ursprang*2 → ursprung (origin);

(2) deletion of an extra letter, e.g.: sekriva*→
skriva (to write), naman*→ namn (name);

(3) insertion of one missing letter, i.e.
sammanfata*→ sammanfatta (summarize).

However, when multiple misspellings occur in a
word, the performance of LD is rather poor. Also,
whenever a word is very short there will likely be
many lemmas that have a Levenshtein distance of 1
from the token, and the returned suggestion is often
incorrect.

In cases where the first letter is misspelled (e.g.
andå*→ ändå, anyway) our LD-based algorithm
fails to return a correct lemma.

Our analysis shows that Levenshtein distance
is applicable to normalization of writing at more
advanced levels of language proficiency, whereas
at the earlier stages it should be complemented by
a more complex approach, for example candidate
ranking based on word co-occurrence measures as
described below.

Approach 2: LanguageTool & candidate ranking
The second type of error normalization was based

on LanguageTool3 (LT) (Naber, 2003), an open-
source rule-based proof-reading program available
for multiple languages. This tool detects not only
spelling, but also some grammatical errors (e.g. in-
consistent gender use in inflected forms).

As a first step, we identified errors and a list
of one or more correction suggestions, as well as
the context, i.e. the surrounding tokens for the er-

2An asterisk (*) is added to (potentially erroneous) word
forms not found in the SALDO-morphology lexicon.

3www.languagetool.org



ror within the same sentence. When more than one
correction candidate was available, as an additional
step, we made a selection based on Lexicographers’
Mutual Information (LMI) scores (Kilgarriff et al.,
2004). LMI measures the probability of two words
co-occurring together in a corpus and it offers the
advantage of balancing out the preference of the
Mutual Information score for low-frequency words
(Bordag, 2008).

The choice of a correction candidate was based on
assuming a positive correlation between a correction
candidate co-occurring with a context word and that
word being the correct version of the learner’s in-
tended word. We checked LMI scores for each LT
correction candidate and the lemma of each avail-
able noun, verb and adjective in the context based
on a pre-compiled list of LMI scores. We have cre-
ated this list using a Korp API (Borin et al., 2012)
and a variety of modern Swedish corpora totaling to
more than 209 million tokens. Only scores for noun-
verb and noun-adjective combinations have been in-
cluded with a threshold of LMI ≥ 50. When avail-
able, we select the correction candidate maximizing
the sum of all LMI scores for the context words. In
the absence of LMI scores for the pairs of correc-
tion candidates and context words, the most frequent
word form in Swedish Wikipedia texts is chosen as
a fallback. Once correction candidates are ranked,
each erroneous token identified by LanguageTool is
replaced in the essays by the top ranked correction
candidate.

In absence of L2 Swedish learner data with error
annotations, we performed a small manual evalua-
tion. We checked 114 randomly chosen corrections
obtained with the approach described above, out of
which 84 were correct, corresponding to 73.68% ac-
curacy. Table 5 shows the amount of corrected to-
kens per CEFR level. Some of the corrections con-
cerned stylistic features such as inserting a space
after punctuation, which was especially common at
higher CEFR levels, thus a higher error percentage
at B2 and C1 levels is not necessarily an indication
of less grammatical texts.

The final variant of SweLLex was derived from
a version of the essays normalized with the second
approach.

# tokens % tokens
A1 204 9.7
A2 1118 6.0
B1 1650 5.5
B2 3526 10.8
C1 7511 12.4

Table 5: Amount of corrected tokens per CEFR level

3.3 Frequency estimation

Each entry in the final list is a base form (lemma)
and its part of speech. An entry can also be a multi-
word expression (MWE) which is identified during
the annotation process by matching potential MWEs
to entries in SALDO. Further, each entry is associ-
ated with its dispersed frequency in the corpus as a
total, frequency at each level of proficiency, as well
as for each individual writer ID. Besides, we have
connected each writer ID to their mother tongues
and have thus a possibility to analyze vocabulary per
level and L1.

To estimate frequencies, we used the same for-
mula as for SVALex list (François et al., 2016)
to ensure comparability between the two resources
aimed at the same language learner group. The fre-
quency formula takes into consideration dispersion
of vocabulary items across all learners in the cor-
pus (learner IDs), i.e. it compensates for any influ-
ences introduced due to overuse of specific vocab-
ulary by an individual learner (Francis and Kucera,
1982). Dispersion has become a standard approach
to frequency estimations, e.g. in projects such as En-
glish Vocabulary Profile and FLELex (Capel, 2010;
Capel, 2012; François et al., 2016).

4 Description of the resource

The resulting list contains in total 6,965 items. De-
spite the fact that SweLLex has been generated
from a normalized SweLL corpus (Volodina et al.,
2016b), about 1490 items could not be lemmatized.
In 526 cases it is due to compounds which are not
present in SALDO, the rest are the items that haven’t
been identified by LanguageTools. The statistics be-
low is provided for the rest of the list, i.e. excluding
the non-lemmatized items. We compare SweLLex
statistics with two other resources, SVALex and En-
glish Vocabulary Profile (EVP), to see:



Lev #items #new #MWE #hapax Doc.hapax examples #SVALex #EVP
A1 398 398 15 0 - 1,157 601
A2 1,327 1,038 82 12 i kväll ”tonight” 2,432 925
B1 2,380 1,542 206 36 fylla år ”have birthday” 4,332 1,429
B2 2,396 959 264 58 fatta beslut ”make a decision” 4,553 1,711
C1 3,566 1,545 430 152 sätta fingret ”put a finger on sth” 3,160 N/A
C2 145 7 12 1 i bakhuvudet ”in mind” N/A N/A

Table 6: Distribution of SweLLex entries per CEFR level, including the nr. of items, new items, multi-words expressions, and nr.
of document hapaxes per level. We also provide the number of new items for SVALex and EVP (Capel (2014)) for comparison

.

(1) trends between productive lists across two lan-
guages, Swedish & English (SweLLex versus EVP)

(2) and productive-receptive relation within the
same language (SweLLex versus SVALex).

Table 6 shows that the number of new items per
level follows the same pattern as in the English Vo-
cabulary Profile with (almost) comparable numbers
at all levels except for B2, where the number of new
items in SweLLex is twice as little as in the EVP re-
source. A hypothetical reason for that could be that
we have essays on a very limited number of topics at
B2 level (and levels above), which constraints learn-
ers from using more varied vocabulary. Since num-
bers at C1 and C2 levels are not available for EVP,
we cannot trace this trend at these levels. However,
it would be interesting to see whether the tendency
will change once we have collected essays on more
varied topics from these levels.

The trend in the receptive resource shows that the
number of items increases almost twofold between
A1 and A2 in both lists. However, between A2 and
B1 students are exposed to many more items than
they are able to use actively in writing, at least if
we rely on the numbers in SweLLex and SVALex.
At B2 we have a low point trend in SweLLex even
in comparison to receptive vocabulary, which indi-
rectly supports our previous hypothesis that essays
at B2 level have too few topics, influencing (and lim-
iting) the type of vocabulary that students use in their
essays. At C2 level we have only 2 essays, which
makes the numbers non-representative for analysis.

We can also see that the number of MWEs is
growing steadily between levels and can be viewed
as one of the most stable (and probably reliable)
characteristics of increasing lexical complexity be-

tween levels, despite essay topic variation per level.

A document hapax means that the item has been
used in one document only in the whole corpus.
Document hapaxes are potential candidates for be-
ing excluded from central vocabulary at that level.
We can, however, see from hapax examples that they
can be very good items to keep on the list, covering
such words as tonight, make a decision, etc. Deci-
sions on how to treat document hapaxes should fol-
low a more pedagogical approach.

A look at the ten most frequent words per level
shows that the most frequent word at A1 and A2
levels is the pronoun jag (Eng: “I”), which de-
notes that during the earlier levels, students grad-
ually learn how to talk about their daily lives and
people they associate with. This is also apparent
from the most used nouns: skola (Eng: “school”)
and kompis (Eng: “friend”). At level A2, we see that
more pronouns, han and vi (Eng: “he” and “we”),
are included among the top ten words. This indi-
cates that learners are starting to refer to other peo-
ple more frequently.

At the intermediate levels (B1 and B2), jag is
no longer the top frequent word, but rather vara
(Eng: “[to] be”). From this, we can assume that lan-
guage at these levels becomes more about describ-
ing things and probably moves beyond the personal
life prevalent at the A levels. Moreover, the verb
ha (Eng: “have”) is introduced among the most fre-
quent words at the B levels. In Swedish, ha is also
used as an auxiliary verb in order to form perfect
tenses. As such, the high frequencies of this word
may be because the students are more acquainted
with additional tenses.

An interesting addition to note at the C1



Figure 2: Distribution of the verb studera, Eng. ”to study”, in receptive and productive resources (screen capture from the website)

level is the presence of the lemma som (Eng:
“who/which/as/that”). This is a clear indication that
students have reached a relatively proficient lan-
guage level, being able to frequently construct sub-
ordinate clauses. These are only a few examples of
the most frequent words at each level, but they al-
ready show the students’ language progress. Our list
gives a potential to explore further lexical patterns
related to vocabulary progress.

Availability of resources of the two kinds - cover-
ing receptive and productive vocabulary - makes it
possible to contrast receptive and productive distri-
butions. Initially, we matched the two resources to
look into the overlaps and possible SweLLex items
that are not present SVALex. This yielded the results
shown in Table 7.

Resource #items #overlaps #missing
SVALex 15,861 3,591 3,226

SweLLex 6,965 3,591 12,060
Table 7: Comparison between SVALex and SweLLex lists

As we can see, SVALex is an extensive vocab-

ulary list, almost twice the size of SweLLex. Con-
sequently, it is not surprising that 12,060 entries
present in SVALex are missing from SweLLex. On
the other hand, there are 3,226 entries in SweLLex
which are not present in SVALex. Analysis of those
items is left for future work, but from the ini-
tial inspection, those consist mostly of the non-
lemmatized items (e.g. due to learner errors) and
compounds.

A more interesting insight can be gained by in-
specting distribution profiles of different items. Hy-
pothetically, learners are first exposed to an item
through reading, and afterwards start using it pro-
ductively in writing at a later level. Figure 2 supports
this trend. However, words can be expected to show
different trends, something that can be explored in
the browsable interface for the two resources4.

4http://cental.uclouvain.be/svalex/



5 Conclusions

The work presented is only the first step towards a
comprehensive description of the productive vocab-
ulary scope used by L2 Swedish learners at differ-
ent proficiency levels. We have looked into the lexi-
cal scope learners demonstrate at various levels pro-
ductively; two normalization methods at the word-
level in the context of L2 writing; initial comparison
between receptive and productive vocabulary. The
method of creating SweLLex needs to be comple-
mented by deeper empiric analysis and pedagogical
evaluation; extended by more advanced normaliza-
tion procedures.

There are multiple directions for future work, in-
cluding mapping SweLLex distributions to single
levels (ongoing work); identifying core versus pe-
ripheral vocabulary (must-know vs good-to-know
lexical competence); merging SVALex, SweLLex
and Kelly-list into a common resource; incorporat-
ing SweLLex into real-life applications and tools
aimed at L2 learners of Swedish. Another future
research direction consists in finding a way to au-
tomatically normalize errors stretching over two or
more words, as well as at the syntactic level, some-
thing that is planned to be addressed within L2 in-
frastructure efforts (Volodina et al., 2016a).

References

Sture Allén. 2002. Våra viktiga ord. Liber, Sweden.
Lene Antonsen. 2012. Improving feedback on L2

misspellings-an FST approach. In Proceedings of the
SLTC 2012 workshop on NLP for CALL; Lund; 25th
October; 2012, number 080, pages 1–10. Linköping
University Electronic Press.

Steven Bird. 2006. NLTK: the natural language toolkit.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Interactive
presentation sessions, pages 69–72. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Stefan Bordag. 2008. A comparison of co-occurrence
and similarity measures as simulations of context.
In International Conference on Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing and Computational Linguistics, pages 52–63.
Springer.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Johan Roxendal. 2012.
Korp - the corpus infrastructure of Språkbanken. In
LREC, pages 474–478.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.
2013. SALDO: a touch of yin to WordNet’s yang.

Language Resources and Evaluation, 47(4):1191–
1211.

A. Capel. 2010. A1–B2 vocabulary: insights and issues
arising from the English Profile Wordlists project. En-
glish Profile Journal, 1(1):1–11.

A. Capel. 2012. Completing the English Vocabulary Pro-
file: C1 and C2 vocabulary. English Profile Journal,
3:1–14.

Council of Europe. 2001. Common European Frame-
work of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teach-
ing, Assessment. Press Syndicate of the University of
Cambridge.

Averil Coxhead. 2000. A new academic word list.
TESOL quarterly, 34(2):213–238.

M. Dickinson and M. Ragheb. 2013. Annotation for
Learner English Guidelines, v. 0.1. Technical report.
Indiana University, Bloomington.

W. Francis and H. Kucera. 1982. Frequency analysis of
English usage. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston,
MA.

Thomas François, Elena Volodina, Ildikó Pilán, and
Anaı̈s Tack. 2016. SVALex: a CEFR-graded Lex-
ical Resource for Swedish Foreign and Second Lan-
guage Learners. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC 2016), Paris, France, may.

Ann-Kristin Hult, Sven-Göran Malmgren, and Emma
Sköldberg. 2010. Lexin - a report from a recycling
lexicographic project in the North. In Proceedings of
the XIV Euralex International Congress (Leeuwarden,
6-10 July 2010).

Adam Kilgarriff, Pavel Rychly, Pavel Smrz, and David
Tugwell. 2004. Itri-04-08 the Sketch Engine. Infor-
mation Technology, 105:116.

A. Kilgarriff, F. Charalabopoulou, M. Gavrilidou, J. B.
Johannessen, S. Khalil, S. J. Kokkinakis, R. Lew,
S. Sharoff, R. Vadlapudi, and E. Volodina. 2014.
Corpus-based vocabulary lists for language learners
for nine languages. Language resources and evalua-
tion, 48(1):121–163.

B. Laufer and G.C. Ravenhorst-Kalovski. 2010. Lexical
Threshold Revisited: Lexical Text Coverage, Learn-
ers’ Vocabulary Size and Reading Comprehension.
Reading in a foreign language, 22(1):15–30.

Beáta Megyesi, Jesper Näsman, and Anne Palmér. 2016.
The Uppsala Corpus of Student Writings: Corpus
Creation, Annotation, and Analysis. Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Daniel Naber. 2003. A rule-based style and grammar
checker. Master’s thesis, Bielefeld University, Biele-
feld, Germany.



Hwee Tou Ng, Siew Mei Wu, Ted Briscoe, Christian
Hadiwinoto, Raymond Hendy Susanto, and Christo-
pher Bryant, editors. 2014. Proceedings of the Eigh-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning: Shared Task. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland.

OECD. 2013. OECD Skills Outlook 2013. First Results
from the Survey of Adult Skills.

PIAAC. 2013. Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC).
Anne Rimrott and Trude Heift. 2005. Language learners

and generic spell checkers in CALL. CALICO journal,
pages 17–48.

SCB. 2013. Tema utbildning, rapport 2013:2, Den in-
ternationella undersökningen av vuxnas färdigheter.
Statistiska centralbyrån.

E.L. Thorndike. 1921. The teacher’s word book. Teach-
ers College, Columbia University, New York.

Elena Volodina, Beata Megyesi, Mats Wirén, Lena
Granstedt, Julia Prentice, Monica Reichenberg, and
Gunlög Sundberg. 2016a. A Friend in Need? Re-
search agenda for electronic Second Language infras-
tructure. In Proceedings of SLTC 2016, Umeå, Swe-
den.

Elena Volodina, Ildikó Pilán, Ingegerd Enström, Lorena
Llozhi, Peter Lundkvist, Gunlög Sundberg, and Mon-
ica Sandell. 2016b. SweLL on the rise: Swedish
Learner Language corpus for European Reference
Level studies. LREC 2016, Slovenia.

Ma West. 1953. A General Service List of English Words.
London: Longman, Green and Co.

Katrin Wisniewski, Karin Schöne, Lionel Nicolas, Chiara
Vettori, Adriane Boyd, Detmar Meurers, Andrea Abel,
and Jirka Hana. 2013. MERLIN: An online trilin-
gual learner corpus empirically grounding the Euro-
pean reference levels in authentic learner data. In ICT
for Language Learning 2013, Conference Proceed-
ings, Florence, Italy. Libreriauniversitaria. it Edizioni.


