



















































The Use of Second Life for Deception Detection Research


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 32–39,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Use of Second Life for Deception Detection Research

Stephen Kunath, Kevin McCabe
Center for the Study of Neuroeconomics

George Mason University
4400 University Drive, MSN 1B2

Fairfax. VA 22030, USA
skunath@gmu.edu, kmccabe@gmu.edu

Abstract

Detecting deception in natural language is a
problem amenable to economic analysis. Eco-
nomics typically assumes that individuals are
self-interested, which leads them to perform
actions in accord with their own goals. The
field of experimental economics emerged to
construct environments wherein human sub-
jects make decisions so as to test economic hy-
potheses. Experimental economists recently
have developed virtual worlds to better situ-
ate experiment subjects in more realistic envi-
ronments. Virtual word experiments represent
an exciting new area for deception research as
they offer insight into individuals both acting
out and communicating in accord with their
intentions. This paper describes the use of vir-
tual world experiments for economic research
incorporating the detection of deceptive indi-
viduals.

1 Introduction

The fields of linguistics and economics typically
assume different analytical techniques. Most peo-
ples experience in an undergraduate economics class
leaves them with the notion that the subject of eco-
nomics contains only graphs. People then reason-
ably conclude that graphical depictions of supply
and demand have little, if any, relation to speech
acts. A result of the presumed limited applicability
of economic modeling is that many do not realize
that the graphs suggest how real life exchange actu-
ally operates. At the same time, as anyone should
know, real life exchange requires some amount of

communication between buyer and seller. Com-
munication can take many forms from grunts and
clicks, to the use of a human language, to an au-
tomated exchange of data between information sys-
tems. Fundamentally though human language will
always play a necessary role in facilitating exchange
between groups or individuals either directly or by
helping different parties to negotiate the actual rules
of exchange themself.

Suggesting that language and communication
play some role in person to person exchange is cor-
rect but insufficiently descriptive. Language cer-
tainly plays a significant role in exchange as to effect
a meeting of the minds between individuals there
must be some common agreement concerning what
is being exchanged and why. Potential obstacles
can emerge during the communication phase of any
round of negotiating exchange. An initial problem
relates to the communicative sophistication of the
parties involved in an exchange. One speaker could
be a lawyer with an extensive background in negoti-
ation while the other party might be a well educated
layperson without specialized training. Differences
between the individuals’ verbal facility can lead to
confusion or a wariness to engage in exchange for
fear of manipulation. Another problem arises when
two parties have different knowledge of things in the
real world understood as an asymmetry of informa-
tion between individuals. For example, a baseball
card collector might know what a particular card is
worth and believe the person he is trading with is un-
sure about the actual value and so the collector might
offer a lower value than the market would suggest.
Individuals possessing better information can then

32



reap an economic reward by using private informa-
tion to their advantage.

The examples of problems found in exchange de-
scribed above relate to communicative facility and
information symmetry. When combined together
one can reasonably expect an advantage to more
well informed and verbally proficient exchange part-
ners. Throughout history individuals have attempted
to reduce the frequency of abuse in exchange by
standardizing contract language and practices to re-
duce the advantages provided by enhanced verbal fa-
cility. To reduce information asymmetry consumer
review services like CarFax collect and provide in-
formation to individuals about the actual history of
a car, for example. Information asymmetry and su-
perior communicative abilities, however, remain po-
tential sources of discrepancies between individu-
als when the subject of exchange is an infrequently
traded commodity. Unscrupulous parties can make
use of the presence of asymmetries and verbal profi-
ciency differences to deceive other people in an ex-
change.

2 Background

The ability to detect when other persons are be-
ing deceptive has always been a highly valued skill.
Anecdotes abound in literature and personal histo-
ries of moments when one person grows suspect
that another party was being deceptive. Detecting
deception remains a perpetual challenge though, as
it results from the fact that at any given time, one
cannot immediately verify a claim that an another
individual might make. Researchers have made
progress in developing techniques to detect decep-
tion by studying what deception looks like. Iden-
tifying the characteristics of deceptive communica-
tion involves looking at numerous examples of di-
alogue and selecting those statements that contain
deceptions. The modern study of deception has
adopted a data driven approach which has resulted
in many insights, but at the same time it has left
open the question of how to obtain useful example
data for research purposes. Different fields inves-
tigate deception using wholly different techniques
aiming towards different goals. Some might be more
interested in the contexts where deceptions can oc-
cur, while others might have more interest in the

language differences between truthful and deceptive
communications. One possible obstacle to progress
in understanding and detecting deception could be
the sheer number of different fields investigating the
question such as psychology, computational linguis-
tics, sociolinguistics, and economics. Each field
uses its own data, methods, and models for the prob-
lem and a result has been less of an interdisciplinary
approach than might otherwise be hoped for.

Much of the deception detection research investi-
gates techniques for constructing datasets contain-
ing useful examples of deceptive communication.
An obvious challenge constructing any deception
dataset involves correctly labelling instances of de-
ception and truth telling. Researchers have pre-
viously constructed datasets from online resources
(Gokhman et al., 2012) as well as having human
subjects intentionally engage in deceptive behavior
(Almela et al., 2012). A necessary first step in the
development of models of deceptive communication
involves collecting and constructing appropriate cor-
pora. It is crucial then that a deception corpus in-
cluding instances of deceptive communication must
also incorporate information concerning the actual
behavior and goals of individuals as made manifest
in their communication and also in their actions.
That is, an ideal deception corpus would include
both what a person said along with their motivation
for saying it and whether what they said was true.
Unfortunately, we cannot have complete knowledge
of the current state of an individual’s perspective on
the world and as such we will never be capable of
constructing an ideal corpus.

Absent an ideal corpus, insights from the field of
economics present some interesting possibilities on
the study of deception. For example, many people
find it perfectly reasonable to assume that deception
is a common part of many everyday transactions.
Since economics assumes people are self-interested,
one possible extreme assumption suggests people
will be deceptive whenever they feel it serves their
self-interest. Experience, however, suggests that
people are not deceptive at all times. Anecdotal evi-
dence instead suggests that individuals are more de-
ceptive when the consequences of their deception
are not severe or the probability of being caught is
low. In point of fact, some economists have broken
up deceptive behavior along the consequences that it

33



might produce (Gneezy, 2005). The key distinction
between different types of lies, as Gneezy suggests,
involves understanding who might benefit from the
deception. Deception then can be understood as ben-
efiting or harming no one, the deceiver, the deceived,
or some combination thereof. Here the economic
conclusion of a possible economic outcome to the
deceiver can then drive the communicative behav-
ior to facilitate achieving the benefit. Seeing that
there is an economic consequence to deception leads
to the possibility that further research into decep-
tion could benefit by integrating insights from eco-
nomics. Experimental economists have attempted
to model institution formation in a number of dif-
ferent types of experiments that could be suggest a
paradigm for further deception research (Kosfeld et
al., 2009).

3 Experimental Environments

In recent years experimental economists have devel-
oped ever more sophisticated environments to test
their models. One area that is particularly interest-
ing for its potential with helping with research in de-
ception involves the construction and use of virtual
world experiments. One recent study constructed a
virtual world to investigate the question of whether
the discovery of natural resources can negatively im-
pact a country (Al-Ubaydli et al., 2014). In their
paper Al-Ubaydli et al. built an environment for
their experiment subjects using Second Life. The
factors the researchers varied were the presence of a
resource in a particular country and how the subjects
were able to communicate. While the economic
question raised by the paper is interesting in its own
right, the concern here is the part of the experi-
ment that relates to controlling the subjects’ ability
to communicate. Al-Ubaydli et al. developed their
model with a particular emphasis on controlling the
ability of individuals to communicate based on the
notion that communication is an essential compo-
nent of institutional development and economic ex-
change.

Here it is worth considering that the term ‘institu-
tion’ carries a special meaning in economics. Gen-
erally it is meant to indicate the formal and informal
rules of a society including property rights and dis-
pute resolution (North, 1991). Economists suggest

that for a society or group of individuals to succeed
they must construct and maintain formal and infor-
mal institutions. If no one, for example, enforces
property rights, then one would expect that peo-
ple would alter their behavior to avoid issues aris-
ing from property questions like theft. Economists
agree that good institutions are essential for eco-
nomic flourishing, but then the next question is how
to construct effective institutions.

A reasonable first guess is that good institutions
involving humans do not appear randomly. Good
institutions necessarily require trust between the dif-
ferent members of a society as manifested in co-
operation and coordination. But trust, too, does
not emerge spontaneously. Ostrom investigated the
ingredients and steps for successful institutions to
emerge. In Ostrom’s view there must be both
communication channels between individuals and
some way to monitor compliance with rules (Os-
trom, 2000). Communication is an essential aspect
of monitoring since humans lack omniscience and
cannot therefore know when someone is not liv-
ing up to their side of an agreement. Unable to
monitor all events, individuals must construct con-
tracts whereby agreements are formed that require
performances by each party and penalties for non-
performance. In this agreement and performance
component, the possibility remains that either party
can deceive at any stage. That is, deception can oc-
cur when a party willingly agrees to something they
never intend to do. Individuals can agree to perform
their duties and then not do them, but they might re-
alize that absent effective monitoring they can sim-
ply report that they completed their tasks. Deception
can therefore occur during the negotiating involved
in constructing an agreement or it can happen af-
ter an agreement takes place where an individual de-
ceives as to what they have done.

The ability to verify that an individual is telling
the truth constrains the deceptive behavior of indi-
viduals especially in the presence of negative conse-
quences for deceiving. In the real world it is diffi-
cult for individuals to monitor everything related to
a particular agreement, but virtual worlds offer the
opportunity to monitor the actions of individuals and
compare them to whatever claims they make in their
communication. With this in mind, some of the tools
from experimental economics seem particularly well

34



suited to the problem of deception research as exper-
imental economists can construct environments and
incentives for subjects to deceive to enhance their
own benefits. Virtual world experiments can be used
for experiments that also allow rich communication
between players with the added benefit of being able
to monitor all player actions. Thereby the data pro-
duced by virtual world experiments provide both the
actual messages communicated by individuals and
also the insight into what actions an individual ac-
tually took. Appropriately constructed virtual world
experiments then can offer researchers an incredible
new tool to peer into deceptive behaviors and their
manifestation in communication.

4 Example Experiment

Figure 1: An overhead image of the Second Life Island

Coordinating activities between a group of people
is always difficult but can be especially challenging
when people have different incentives. This prob-
lem is further compounded when individuals are not
capable of precisely monitoring the activity of their
collaborators. To that end we have begun construct-
ing virtual world experiments that focus on collec-
tive action problems with the hope of getting use-
ful data on how people use communication to coor-
dinate towards socially optimal solutions. Our in-
terest concerns experimental designs where the in-
centives for the group and individual subjects are in

conflict. Creating experiments where subjects must
make choices between fulfilling their own incentives
or supporting the outcome of the group allows for
the possibility of deceptive behavior. Our experi-
ments are instrumented so we can record what a sub-
ject communicates and also all of their actions.

Figure 2: A depiction of the subjects’ houses, squares, and
weather defense stations, circles. Storms come from either the

north or east edge. The arrows depict the areas of the island that

would be protected by operating a weather defense station in

the presence of a storm coming from the appropriate direction.

Our lab conducted one experiment where eight
subjects are placed together on an island inside of
a virtual world constructed in Second Life. We re-
fer to the experiment as “Hurricane Island.” Each
subject is assigned a color and is referred to by that
color throughout the experiment. The island con-
tains eight separate houses and each subject is as-
signed to a particular house. Figure 1 provides an
overhead view of the island. The experiment sub-
jects earn money while they stay in their homes. In
our experiment the subjects could earn 40 cents per
minute while they were inside their homes. How-
ever, for the subjects to earn the full amount their
house must not become damaged. If a house does
become 50% damaged, for example, the subject
could only earn up to 20 cents a minute. The is-
land is subject to external events similar to natural

35



disasters, in this case hurricanes, that can damage
houses with some frequency throughout an exper-
iment session. Hurricanes appeared on the island
approximately every five minutes. Subjects could
defend either their house individually or portions of
the island by operating what was called a weather
defense station. Figure 2 shows the locations of the
subjects’ houses as well as the weather defense sta-
tions. In Figure 2 storms travel in only one of two
possible directions, North to South, or East to West.
Operating a weather defense station only provides
protection for the part of the island behind the lo-
cation of the station. So, for example, in Figure 2
operating the N3 weather defense station will only
be effective for storms coming from the North and
will only prevent damage from occurring to the Pur-
ple, Red, Blue, and Green houses.

Figure 3: A depiction of the 4 treatment types. The occupancy
requirement axis refers to the number of subjects that must oc-

cupy a weather defense station to make it operational. The hori-

zontal axis represents whether storms come just from the North

or come from both the North and East.

Since subjects are being paid to occupy their
houses, doing any other activity such as defending
their house individually, repairing their house after
it is damaged, or operating a weather defense station
represents a loss in earnings. Obviously, each sub-
ject could simply decide to defend their own home,

but this would mean that the group would not be ca-
pable of maximizing the groups total income. The
maximum social outcome can only occur when sub-
jects coordinate and have individuals protect the en-
tire island from the effects of the hurricanes by going
to the appropriate weather defense stations placed
on the island. Our research goal was to investigate
institution formation and so we constructed 4 sepa-
rate treatments for the experiment. We ran a total of
16 sessions across the four treatments and each ses-
sion lasted approximately 90 minutes. The differ-
ent treatments involved altering the number of orig-
inating directions of the storms and the occupancy
requirements for the weather defense stations. Fig-
ure 3 provides a graphical overview of the different
treatments. In Figure 3, coordination becomes more
complex when moving treatments in the diagonal di-
rection towards the lower right cell. The basic treat-
ment, as seen in the top left cell of Figure 3, involved
all storms coming from the same direction, North,
and requiring only one person in a weather defense
station to make it operational. More complex treat-
ments involved having storms that could originate
from one of two different directions and also requir-
ing that two subjects be inside a weather defense
station to make it operational. Moving from only
one person being necessary to operate a weather de-
fense station to two persons places a heavier burden
on coordination as now at least two people will not
be generating income in their houses and they must
also agree on what weather defense station to meet
at. Storms originating from two different directions
also increases the burden of coordinating as it would
require having the appropriate number of people in
two separate weather defense stations until the sub-
jects determine the direction of the storm.

An additional design concern related to the place-
ment of the weather defense stations on the island.
Each defense station protected the parts of the island
behind the station itself. Four weather defense sta-
tions were placed in different positions such that one
would have some defense stations that would only
protect a limited part of the island. It is important
to note that the weather defense stations were differ-
ent distances from each subject’s house. Any time
they spent defending their house, the island, repair-
ing their home, or traveling to a weather defense sta-
tion entailed that they were not producing anything

36



and thereby their possible payout would be reduced.
Since some weather defense stations were closer to
some houses it remained possible that some individ-
uals or groups could decide to only protect their area
of the island. The fact that distances were different
for each subject and those distances affected their
payout could dispose players to form groups to pro-
tect only limited parts of the island or it could dis-
pose a player to simply defend their own home.

Throughout the experiment subjects were able to
communicate with each other with the chat system
provided by Second Life. For the subjects to achieve
the optimal social outcome some amount of plan-
ning and cooperation is necessary between all the
subjects involved in the experiment. When the play-
ers in our experiment use the chat system every sub-
ject is able to read the message so there is no pri-
vate communication. One ideal solution solution to
achieve the social maximum would entail that sub-
jects find some way of rotating the responsibility of
operating the weather defense stations throughout
the experiment session. Analyzing the chat data in
the earlier parts of the experiment sessions we no-
ticed that subjects frequently attempt to cooperate
by identifying a rotation for operating weather de-
fense stations. There is no way, however, for each
subject to effectively monitor the behavior of other
subjects at all times. and this provides subjects with
the possibility of not fulfilling their responsibility.
This allows individuals to deceive others by agree-
ing to do something they have no intention of doing
or simply stating that they did something that oth-
ers cannot verify. In the context of this experiment
the subjects could only really determine that another
subject had not fulfilled their part of a coordination
program by experiencing damage to their houses.
At the same time, since the experiment is in a vir-
tual world we configured appropriate monitoring to
record the activities of subjects and then compared
those actions to whatever messages had been com-
municated. Comparing the log of subject messages
to the actions subjects actually performed allowed
us to identify different types of non-cooperative be-
havior including deception.

Due to the nature of the experiment and the
amount of time, groups of subjects used the early
minutes of the session to organize their operation of
the weather defense stations. A common strategy

Speaker Message
Yellow where was teal and orange
Yellow im getting damaged

Teal i hv covered
Purple me too

Red im getting damaged?
Yellow teal and orange you did not do it right
Purple wher s orange?
Yellow teal and orange were both supposed to

go to n1
Yellow everyone needs to read there messages

Teal i am at n1
Teal but no one came

Yellow orange fault
Teal orange are you there
Teal we all loose
Teal coz of you
Red earth to orange lol

Yellow orange hasnt sent a message the whole
time

Orange hey, look at ur manuals again and do
the math

Orange you stand a chance of making a lot
more by staying home and defending

Table 1: Example of session communications

37



Figure 4: Game theory predictions for storms originating from
the north. The players in the top part of the map have an in-

centive to defend at the N1 weather defense station and thereby

protect the whole island. Players in the lower part of the map

have an incentive to operate the N3 weather defense station and

only protect their part of the island.

that was employed was to have subjects rotate who
would take turns operating the weather defense sta-
tions. While the strategy was simple, it still meant
that enforcement was a challenge as individual sub-
jects could not verify that someone was operating
the weather defense station until it was too late. Ta-
ble 1 provides an example of communication from
an experimental session. In the experiment session
where the chat took place two subjects are required
to operate the weather defense station but only one
person has shown up. The orange player has not ful-
filled their obligation to operate the weather defense
station and is not being communicative with the
other subjects for an extended period of time. Even-
tually the orange player suggests that the reason for
their absence is due to a belief that they can have
a larger payout if they simply defend their homes
individually which is, in fact, incorrect. Since the
experiment was designed with different distances to
weather defense stations it is reasonable to assume
that some subjects would determine that only de-
fending a part of the island is in their best interest.

If one analyzes the layout of the experiment using
game theory, it becomes clear that different groups
of subjects have different incentives to defend only
parts of the island. Figure 4 shows the game theory
predictions for storms originating from the North.
The specific prediction for North originating storms
is that group in the upper half of the map has an in-
centive to operate the N1 weather defense station.
When the subjects in the upper part of the map op-
erate the N1 defense station they are both protecting
themselves and also creating a public good for the
players in the lower part of the map. One would
then predict that players in the lower portion of the
map would only be interested in operating the N3
weather defense station which would leave the play-
ers in the upper part of the map without any defense.
As the treatments become more complex with two
subjects required to operate a weather defense sta-
tion and two possible storm directions the benefits
derived from non-cooperative play increase. Cre-
ating incentives to not cooperate thereby indirectly
encourages the possibility of deceptive communica-
tion as subjects would be interested in having other
people provide weather defense for the island while
they free ride on the benefit.

5 Conclusion

This paper has provided an example showing how
the tools and techniques of experimental economics
can be used to construct situations where individuals
have an incentive to engage in deceptive communi-
cation with other subjects. Collecting both the com-
munication data and the actual actions of the individ-
ual subjects a virtual world experimental paradigm
can create new corpora for research into deception in
natural language. In order to assist further research
in this area we would like to release several exam-
ple experiments and tools we used to construct and
operate this experiment to the community so that re-
searchers can formulate and construct their own ex-
periments useful for research into deceptive behav-
ior. Our belief is that by leveraging economic the-
ory and techniques developed in experimental eco-
nomics researchers can construct different experi-
mental scenarios where subjects have incentives that
induce behaviors in individuals and create situations
where deception should occur. At the same time, by

38



making use of virtual world technology researchers
can be effectively omniscient and compare the com-
munication of individuals to their actions in the ex-
periment. To help others interested in constructing
a virtual world experiment we have begun to pro-
duce documentation and examples. The documen-
tation for this effort along with working code will
be available at http://gmucsn.github.io/
VirtualWorldExperimentTutorial

References
[Al-Ubaydli et al.2014] Omar Al-Ubaydli, Kevin Mc-

Cabe, and Peter Twieg. 2014. Can More Be Less? An
Experimental Test of the Resource Curse. Journal of
Experimental Political Science, 1(01):39–58, March.

[Almela et al.2012] Ángela Almela, Rafael Valencia-
Garc ’i a, and Pascual Cantos. 2012. Proceedings
of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to De-
ception Detection. pages 15–22. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

[Gneezy2005] Uri Gneezy. 2005. Deception: The Role
of Consequences. The American Economic Review,
95(1):384–394.

[Gokhman et al.2012] Stephanie Gokhman, Jeff Han-
cock, Poornima Prabhu, Myle Ott, and Claire Cardie.
2012. Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Deception Detection. pages 23–30. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

[Kosfeld et al.2009] Michael Kosfeld, Akira Okada, and
Arno Riedl. 2009. Institution Formation in Pub-
lic Goods Games. The American Economic Review,
99(4):1335–1355.

[North1991] Douglass C North. 1991. Institutions. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1):97–112.

[Ostrom2000] Elinor Ostrom. 2000. Collective Action
and the Evolution of Social Norms. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14(3):137–158.

39


