



















































Phrase Generalization: a Corpus Study in Multi-Document Abstracts and Original News Alignments


Proceedings of LAW X – The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 151–159,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Phrase Generalization: a Corpus Study in Multi-Document Abstracts and
Original News Alignments

Ariani Di-Felippo
Federal University of São Carlos
Language and Literature Dept.

Rod. Washington Luis, km 235 (SP-310)
São Carlos, SP 13565-905, Brazil

arianidf@gmail.com

Ani Nenkova
University of Pennsylvania

Computer and Information Science Dept.
3330 Walnut St.

Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
nenkova@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Content can be expressed at different lev-
els of specificity, varying the amount of
detail presented to the reader. The need
to transform specific content into more
general form naturally arises in summa-
rization, where people and machines need
to convey the gist of a text within im-
posed space constraints. Completely re-
moving sentences and phrases is one way
to reduce the level of detail. The bulk
of work on summarization content se-
lection and compression deal with these
tasks. In this paper, we present a cor-
pus study on a more subtle and under-
studied phenomenon: noun phrase gener-
alization. Based on multi-document news
and abstract alignments at the phrase level,
we arrive at a five category classification
scheme and find that the most common
category requires semantic interpretation
and inference. The others rely on lexical
substitution or deletion of details from the
original expression. We provide a system-
atic analysis, elucidating the capabilities
needed for automating the generation of
more general or more specific references.

1 Introduction

Summarization involves a number of complex
transformations to condense the gist of a text
into a short summary (Nenkova and McKeown,
2011). One of these transformations is changing
the amount of detail in the original news texts. Re-
moving entire sentences is one of the fairly well-
understood ways for changing the amount of de-
tail. Which sentences to remove can be decided
in a system’s content selection module by a num-
ber of competitive approaches (Gillick and Favre,

2009; Lin and Bilmes, 2011; Kulesza and Taskar,
2011). Similarly, one can perform sentence com-
pression, removing words or phrases from a sen-
tence in the original text to form a summary sen-
tence (Knight and Marcu, 2000; Riezler et al.,
2003; Turner and Charniak, 2005; McDonald,
2006; Galley and McKeown, 2007; Cohn and Lap-
ata, 2008) or perform sentence selection and com-
pression jointly (Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2011).

In this paper, we focus our attention on a much
finer level to study the changes of specificity on
the phrase level. The existence of these changes
have been documented in prior work (Jing and
McKeown, 2000; Marsi and Krahmer, 2010). Jing
and McKeown (2000) analyzed 30 single docu-
ment articles and their summaries and character-
ized the transformations performed on the original
text to form a summary. They did not give statis-
tics about the relative frequency of each trans-
formation operation but list “add descriptions or
names for people and organizations” and “substi-
tute phrases with more general or specific infor-
mation” as two of the summarization operations.
In a more recent study, Marsi and Krahmer (2010)
analyzed the phrase alignment between original
spoken news in a Dutch television news program
and the subtitles for the same broadcast. They
aligned the transcript and the subtitles and ana-
lyzed the transformations performed on the phrase
level. The authors distinguished five mutually ex-
clusive similarity relations in the corpus: equals
(the aligned phrases are identical), restastes (the
aligned phrases convey the same information but
with different wording), specifies (the subtitle
phrase is more specific than the transcript phrase),
generalizes (the subtitle phrase is more general
than the transcript phrase), and intersects (the
aligned phrases share some informational content,
but each also expresses some information not ex-
pressed in the other). The second most frequent

151



class is generalizes1. In about 14% of the
aligned phrases, the subtitle contained a more gen-
eral phrase than the original. Only a small percent-
age of specifies pairs is present: in about 3% of
the phrases the subtitles were more specific than
the transcripts.

Here we present an analysis of generalization
operations that occur in abstracts produced for
clusters of topically related news articles in Brazil-
ian Portuguese. In the vast majority of cases these
require transformations at the phrase level. We ob-
served five types of generalization: interpretation,
detail removal, class, role, and whole. Named en-
tity (NE) generalizations, in particular, belong to
four categories: detail removal (removing some
of the information contained in the original arti-
cle, similar to compression on the phrase level),
role (substituting a reference by name with a ref-
erence by the role the entity plays in the described
events), class (substituting a reference with a su-
perordinate concept, i.e. “swimmer – “athlete”) ,
and whole (a reference to a member of a group or
area is substituted by a reference to the whole, i.e.
“Jamaica” – “the Caribbean”. In each category, we
identified a set of syntactic-semantic operations
related to each type of named entities (person, or-
ganization, location and sports event). Such oper-
ations include substitutions and phrase reductions.
Their automation would require the development
of capabilities that are not available to current sys-
tems.

The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we introduce our corpus, ex-
plaining the manual alignment between the human
abstract and the multiple news text inputs, and the
pre-processing of such alignments. In Section 3,
we describe the analysis of the alignment pairs
containing generalization and the categorization of
each instance in according to the five-class typol-
ogy of transformations. Then, in Section 4, our fo-
cus relies on the generalization of phrases contain-
ing named entities. Specifically, we describe the
syntactic and semantic properties of such phrases
considering both the different types of generaliza-
tion and entities. In Section 5, we discuss what we
learned and close with discussion of perspectives
for automatic summarization.

1Equals is the most common relation between aligned
phrases, accounting for 67% of the alignments

2 The Corpus

We used the CSTNews (Cardoso et al., 2011) cor-
pus of multi-document abstracts and the associ-
ated news articles. The corpus comprises 50 clus-
ters of news texts in Brazilian Portuguese from a
range of categories: daily news (14), world (14),
domestic politics (10), sports (10) , economy (1),
and science (1). There are 140 documents in total
in the corpus.

Each cluster contains two or three news articles
on the same topic, with 42 sentences per cluster on
average. There are six manual multi-document ab-
stracts for each cluster. The abstract-writers were
instructed to produce abstracts of length equal to
30% of the longest article in the cluster. The re-
sulting abstracts were on average seven sentences
(132 words) long. CSTNews has annotated ver-
sions of the source texts and summaries in differ-
ent linguistic levels, e.g., intra- and inter-textual
discourse relations, classification of temporal ex-
pressions, semantic annotation of nouns and verbs,
and subtopic segmentation. The corpus also con-
tains alignments between each human abstract and
the source texts at the sentence level. Each sen-
tence in the abstract is associated with all of the
sentences in the original articles that support the
information expressed in the abstract.

For our work, we use the existing manual an-
notations, pairing sentences from the abstract with
their corresponding sentences in the original arti-
cle (Camargo et al., 2013). The annotators iden-
tified 1,007 alignments, involving 334 summary
sentences and 877 document sentences: 99.4% of
the summary sentences were aligned to some doc-
ument sentence and 42.43% of the document sen-
tences were aligned to some some summary sen-
tence.

In addition, for each pair of summary-original
sentences, annotators included labels describing
the sub-sentential relations between the sentences
in the pair. Among other tags, the annotators la-
beled when a summary sentence contained parts
that were more general or more specific than the
semantically corresponding part in the document
sentence. They however did not mark the exact
spans of text involved in the generalization.

The alignment in (1) shows an example of a
summary and document sentence that share infor-
mation and in which one can observe changes in
the specificity of reference. The summary sen-
tence has more general content, referring to “many

152



states” and “the operation” while the document
sentence has a list of Brazilian states and the name
of the police investigation (shown in bold).

(1) Summary: Mais de 300 policiais de [vários
estados] participaram d[a operação] (“More
than 300 officers from [many states] were
part of the operation”).
Document: Ao menos 300 policiais de
[Amapá, Distrito Federal, Mato Grosso,
Acre and Rondônia] participaram da
[Operação Dominó] (“More than 300 offi-
cers from [Amazonas, Distrito Federal, Mato
Grosso, Acre and Rondônia] were part of the
[Operação Dominó”]).

Overall, 13% of summary-document pairs in-
volved a generalization or a specification oper-
ation. There are 80 pairs tagged as containing
generalization and 47 pairs tagged as containing
specification (Camargo et al., 2013). The label
describes the change that occurred to transform
the document sentence into the summary sentence,
i.e. generalization means some information is ex-
pressed in more general terms in the summary sen-
tence than it was in the original document sen-
tence.

2.1 Pre-Processing Steps
With the aim categorizing the type of every gen-
eralization case in the summary-documents align-
ments, we performed two manual pre-processing
steps: (i) expansion and revision of the alignments
with generalization, and (ii) delimitation of the
generalization cases and indexing of the textual
spans involved in each case.

Abstracts contained both generalizations and
specifications of entities. Assuming that the un-
derlying process involved in modifying the ref-
erence is the same in both cases, we augment
our corpus of generalizations by “inverting” the
47 specification alignments to obtain 47 examples
of generalization, as illustrated in (2). The pair
is from a news article about the schedule of the
Brazilian men’s volleyball team. It was originally
tagged as specification, since the summary sen-
tence contains more detail than the original; it de-
tails that the team aim is to win “the gold medal”.
We swap the direction of the relation between the
sentences and consider the resulting sentences as
examples of generalization.

In this way, we obtained a set of 127 pairs of
aligned sentences with differences in the speci-

ficity of reference. Next, each alignment was man-
ually revised by the first author: 12 of them were
excluded because the author did not find clear por-
tions of the summary sentence that generalize in-
formation expressed in the original document. An
example of sentence that was excluded is given in
(3). The final set consists of a total of 115 aligned
pairs.

(2) Summary: O próximo objetivo da seleção
é [a medalha de ouro nos Jogos Pan-
Americanos do Rio] (“The next goal of the
team is [the gold medal in the Pan American
Games in Rio]”).
Document: O próximo objetivo é [os Jogos
Pan-Americanos do Rio] (“The next goal is
[the Pan American Games in Rio]”).

(3) Summary: A pressão argentina continuou
no segundo tempo, mas o Brasil fechou a
goleada com um gol marcado pela sua dupla
de volantes (“Argentina struggled to make
any impact in the 2nd half, but Brazil sealed
the victory with a goal made by one of its
midfields”).
Document: Os argentinos, com um time
repleto de craques favoritos ao tı́tulo, e
com campanha irrepreensı́vel até o momento,
pareciam não acreditar no que viam (“Ar-
gentina, a team full of stars and favorite to
win, could not believe what was happening”).

Next, we carried out an annotation of each pair
in order to answer two questions: (1) Which text
spans in the respective sentences are involved in
the generalization operation? (2) What is the
linguistic-level characterization of the spans? The
description captured the changes of content from
specific to general. Clause generalization was re-
stricted to cases where the summary noun phrase
(NP) generalizes a proposition. In order to an-
swer the questions, the spans were marked and
labeled according to the corresponding general-
ization level (C for clause, and P for phrase). If
the sentences had more than one case of gener-
alization, they were also numbered according to
the order of occurrence in the document, follow-
ing the notation C/P NUM. Examples of anno-
tated phrases and clauses are given in (4) and (5),
respectively. We extracted a total of 136 pairs
of specific-general phrases from the 115 sentence
alignments. There are more aligned phrases with

153



difference in specificity than aligned sentences be-
cause some sentence pairs contained more than
one case of phrase generalization case.

(4) Document: [O presidente dos EUA, George
Bush]P1, pediu que o Exército turco busque
[uma solução diplomática para a questão]P2
(“[President of the US, George Bush], asked
the Turkish Army to seek [a diplomatic solu-
tion to the issue]”)
Summary: [Washington]P1 e a Comissão
Européia também pedem [uma solução
diplomática]P2 (“[Washington] and Euro-
pean Commission also ask for a [diplomatic
solution]”)

(5) Document: Na Jamaica, [muitos estocaram
comida, água, lanternas e velas]C (“In Ja-
maica, many stock food, water, flashlights
and candles”)
Summary: [Muitos moradores e turistas estão
se preparando para a passagem do furação.
(“[Many locals and tourists prepare for the
hurricane]”)

3 Typology of Transformations

Further, we iteratively analyzed the types of the
136 cases of generalization to come up with cate-
gories that cover all examples in the corpus. We
converged on a classification scheme with five
categories: (i) Interpretation, i.e., generalization
based on sophisticated inferences over the source
text and additional information such as transform-
ing ”200 people were injured” to ”the human toll
was high”; (ii) Detail removal, i.e, generaliza-
tion by omitting details of a specific textual seg-
ment; (iii) Role, i.e., replacement of person en-
tities by their title or role; (iv) Class, i.e., sub-
stitution of a subordinate concept by a superordi-
nate one, and (v) Whole, i.e., concepts represent-
ing parts are replaced by concepts that indicate the
whole. The typology reveals that humans carry out
a variety of inferences based on rich world and do-
main knowledge to produce generic information.
Table 1 shows the distribution of the categories di-
vided by clause and phrase levels.

Interpretation is the most frequent category in
the corpus (45.6%) and the only one that oc-
curs in both clause and phrase levels. However,
83.8% of the cases (52 out of 62) occur at the
clause level and involve propositional generaliza-
tions. We show an example in (5). It involves

Category Phrase Clause Total
Interpretation 10 (7.4) 52 (38.2) 62 (45.6)
Detail removal 32 (23.5) 0 32 (23.5)
Role 18 (13.2) 0 18 (13.2)
Class 13 (9.6) 0 13 (9.6)
Whole 11 (8.1) 0 11 (8.1)
Total 84 (61.8) 52 (38.2) 136 (100)%

Table 1: Number and percentage of the generalizations

Category Noun Named entity Total
Interpretation 10 (11.9) 0 10 (11.9)
Detail removal 14 (16.7) 18 (21.4) 32 (38.1)
Role 2 (2.4) 16 (19) 18 (21.4)
Class 5 (6) 8 (9.5) 13 (15.5)
Whole 2 (2.4) 6 (10.7) 11 (13.1)
Total 33 (39.3) 51 (60.7) 84 (100)%

Table 2: Number and percentage of general NPs and NEs

an inference that “stocking food, water, flashlights
and candles” is a preparedness activity against hur-
ricane. Detail removal is the second most frequent,
with 32 instances (23.5%), followed by Role, with
18 instances (13.2%). The distribution of cases in
Class and Whole is quite similar, 13 (9.6%) and 11
(8.1%), respectively. Next, we turn our description
to generalizations that occur at the phrase level2,
specifically to those involving named entities.

4 Named Entity Generalization

We first computed the number of cases that involve
named entities or general NPs per category. Ta-
ble 2 shows the results.

Looking briefly at the 33 common noun pairs,
we found that Interpretation tends to be associated
with numbers (25%). The substitution of “about
300 buildings” with “many buildings” illustrates
this. Interpretation also results from different in-
ferences, e.g., when a cause (e.g., ‘the fog”) is re-
placed by its effect (e.g., “the bad weather”). The
Role case where “the 16 children and 14 adults”
was replaced with “the 30 hostages” is the only
one involving generation of a numeric expression.
Detail removal occurs by deleting noun adjuncts
(shown in italics) (e.g., “a university campus”) or
complements (e.g., “the inspection of income tax
declarations”).

Studying in detail the 51 generalizations involv-
ing NEs, we found four types of NEs: 26 per-
sons (51%), 16 organizations (31.4%), 7 locations
(13.7%), and 2 sports events (2%). We also identi-
fied sub-categories of generalization for three en-

2Appendix 1 (Table 4) provides examples of phrase gen-
eralizations.

154



Entity Category Sub-category Document Phrase Summary Phrase
Event (2) Class (2) – Name (2) Noun+Post-mod (2)

Island-to-region (1)
Location (7) Whole (4) City-to-state (1) Name (4) Name (4)

City-to-country (2)
Detail removal (3) – Pre-mod+Name (1) Noun (3)

Name (2)
Class (6) – Name (6) Noun (6)

Organization Detail removal (6) – Name (4) Noun (4)
(16) Name+Post-mod (2) Acronym (2)

Whole (4) Member-to-organization (4) Name (2) Noun (2)
Name (2) Noun (1), name (1)
Pre-mod+Full Name (6)
First Name (4)

Role (16) – Last name (3) Noun (16)
Pre-mod+First name (1)

People (26) Pre-mod+Last name (1)
Acronym (1)
Pre-mod+Full name (5) Noun (3), First name (2)

Detail removal (9) – Full name (3) First name (3)
Pre-mod+Last name (1) Noun (1)

Whole (1) Person-to-place (1) Pre-mod+Full name (1) Noun (1)

Table 3: Semantic and syntactic properties of named entity phrase generalization

tity types and some syntactic patterns in the transi-
tions, related to the type of the phrase head and the
occurrence of pre- and post-modifiers. The results
are shown in Table 3. The numbers in parenthe-
sis show how many times the given category and
syntactic form have occurred in the pairs.

The sports event generalizations consist in sub-
stituting the multi-word expression (MWE) phrase
“the American Cup” with two different general
NPs: “the continental competition” and “the oldest
soccer tournament”. These are the only instances
where the summary phrases include modification.
Thus, both general mentions put the referent in a
class and provide further details about it as well.

According to Table 3, there are three types of
Whole generalizations for locations that solely in-
volve names: (i) island-to-region, such as the
replacement of “Haiti” and “Dominican Republic”
with “the Caribbean”; (ii) city-to-state, such
as “Maceió, which was substituted by “Alagoas”,
and (iii) city-to-country, such as the replace-
ment of “Boston” with “United States”. There
is also one particular type of Detail removal by
deleting names from phrases of the form pre-
modifier + name (e.g., “the capital Kingston”) to
produce mentions whose head was the modifying
noun of the specific phrase (“the capital”). Lo-
cation names, specifically MWEs (e.g., “Interna-
tional Airport of São Paulo”) that are made up
of a place (possibly a MWE itself, such as “São
Paulo”) and additional information (e.g., “inter-
national”), are also replaced with common nouns

(“the airport”). The replacement of such proper
names with common nouns result from removal of
all the details about the referent description.

Organization names are mostly generalized
by means of common nouns that express
class or whole. The substitution of “Brazil”
with “the country” illustrates the Class cate-
gory. The Whole generalization occurs through
member-to-organization substitution, i.e., the
replacement of “the Military Police Shock Troop”
with “the police” illustrates this. The only case
of name generalization is the substitution of “the
Archdiocese of Los Angeles” with “the Catholic
Church”. There are also cases where names fol-
lowed by acronyms in parenthesis, such as “Na-
tional Institute of Social Security (INSS)”, are re-
duced to the acronym only.

It can be seen that document mentions to peo-
ple have different head types: full name, first
name, last name, and acronym. With the excep-
tion of acronyms, the heads usually occur with
two types of pre-modifiers (shown in italics): titles
(e.g.,“president of the Senate, Renan Calheiros”)
and roles (e.g., “the goalkeeper Vieri”). In gen-
eral, the document mentions are commonly re-
placed with common nouns only. The substitu-
tion of the first name “João Pedro” with “the sen-
ator” illustrates this. The summary writers also
chose the modifying noun (shown in italics) from
phrases of the form pre-modifier + name (e.g.,
“the goalkeeper Vieri”) for generalization, delet-
ing the last or fulll name (e.g., “the goalkeeper”).

155



The reduction of full name by deleting surname
(shown in italics) (e.g., “Renan Calheiros”), yield-
ing phrases containing first name only (e.g., “Re-
nan”), is another common type of operation. The
case that belong to the Whole category is the only
one involving two different types of named en-
tity. In particular, “President of the United States,
George Bush” was substituted by “Washington”,
in a person-to-place operation.

5 Discussion

This study provides an initial characterization for
phrase generalizations that arise in summarization.
It is evident that our results should be validated on
a larger sample of summarization data. Neverthe-
less our findings can be seen as a good start for
understanding the phenomenon. One of the prac-
tical outcomes from our work is the generalization
typology which can be applied for the analysis of
other data.

Interpretation is the most common category, re-
sulting from inferences over propositions and cov-
ering a variety of operations. Its automatic treat-
ment would be a major endeavor in natural lan-
guage processing research because it is at the in-
tersection of semantic interpretation and text gen-
eration.

Another challenge for summarization systems
is how to deal with mentions of numbers, which
form a special class of the interpretation transfor-
mation. We found that references to date, time,
and general quantities accounted for 25% (8 out
of 33 instances) of common noun phrase align-
ments in our corpus. Only in one case the nu-
meric expression was transformed in an alternative
numeric expression. All other phrases involving
numbers were lexicalized alternatively. Then the
task of a system would be to identify which refer-
ences to numbers should be generalized and how
to generate the generalization of numbers.

In our study, 61% of the generalizations involve
operations over specific mentions to named enti-
ties. These have been studied computationally in
the past, to predict the appropriate form of the
name in references to people (Siddharthan et al.,
2011) and to exploit the person name repetition in
the summary to find the salience of entities (Duni-
etz and Gillick, 2014). Neither of these prior stud-
ies analyzed reference to named entities by com-
mon noun, which we provided in the analysis of
our data, nor do they look at non-person refer-

ences. In fact, substituting names with generic
nouns was the most common operation in our data
and it calls for the development of new capabili-
ties, both to decide which entities should be men-
tioned generically and how to generate the refer-
ence itself.

Moreover, specific mentions to sports events,
locations and organizations do not include modi-
fication in 88% (22 out of 25) of the pairs. Spe-
cific mentions to people have an accompanying
description in around half the cases (57.6%). The
occurrence of a pre-modifying word that identify
the person’s title or role provides more details
about the referent. Thus, such mentions have a
higher level of specificity than other with name
only. Moreover, only few generic phrases contain
a name, and, when it occurs, the names have par-
ticular types, e.g., first name in the case of people,
and acronyms for organization.

On the operations concerning named entities,
we provide some insights for substitution and re-
duction approaches to obtain general phrases.

Substitution is the most common oper-
ation (76.5%) (out of 51 cases), and its
automatic process would require structured
knowledge that includes at least three re-
lationships: (i) is-a to express the rough
notion of “a kind of”, (ii) part-whole to ex-
press island-to-region, city-to-state,
city-to-country, member-to-organization,
and person-to-place, and (iii) instance-role,
for entities of the person category. Since such
knowledge is very particular to some domains,
specially global and local sports, politics, and
geography, we believe that it would possible to
model it in handcrafted lexicons. It could also be
derived automatically for some types of reference
(McKinlay and Markert, 2011; Mitchell et al.,
2015). In addition, modules to decide when
substitution is necessary or appropriate would be
needed.

Phrase reduction (i.e., deletion of words or
phrases) occurs in 23.5% of the cases (out of 51).
Although it is less frequent, detail removal in-
clude cases where specific phrases could be au-
tomatically converted into general in a more fea-
sible way. This observation is based on the fact
that summary phrases are made up of linguistic
material that came from the document phrases.
Thus, we can conceive phrase reduction as a sim-
ilar task to sentence compression, where the oper-

156



ations are learned by analyzing pair of sentences,
one from the source text, and other from human-
written abstracts such that they both have the same
content. Specifically, 4 reduction rules could be
defined: (i) removing pre-modifier from phrase
of the form modifier + location name, yielding a
common noun mention; (ii) removing name from
phrase of the form organization name + parentheti-
cal acronym, generating an mention with acronym
only; (iii) deleting name from phrase of the form
title/role + person name, producing a common
noun mention, and (iv) removing surname from
person full name, generating a first name mention.

We may also contribute for generating refer-
ences, since referring expressions in extracts can
be problematic because the sentences compiled
from different documents might contain too little,
too much, or repeated information about the ref-
erent. Our results show that 76.5% of the 51 gen-
eralizations with named entities (e.g., “the coach
Bernardinho”) are made solely with a common
noun phrase (without the inclusion of the entity’s
name) (e.g., “the coach”), and thus a task to be
considered is the generation of common noun ref-
erences to named entities. Such generation would
allow the production of a more natural summary.

We are aware of full coreference resolution is
a very difficult problem and there are no systems
that can reliably perform it on free texts. But we
believe that the availability of cross-document in-
formation can facilitate the resolution of common
noun phrases. This assumption is built on the
fact that most common nouns in summary phrases
were contained in the input texts. For example, the
head of the summary NP “the coach”, which gen-
eralizes the name “Bernardinho”, is contained in
a different sentence of the same input, as part of
the mention “the coach Bernardinho”. This means
that lexical overlap would indicate that these three
NPs refer to the same entity. Common noun gen-
eration would increase the genericity level of sum-
maries, and avoid the repetition of forms produced
by some rewriting methods (Siddharthan et al.,
2011).

6 Future work

Our research both provides a preliminary charac-
terization of generalization in document-summary
alignments and a discussion of some insights for
Natural Language Processing. For future work,
we plan to increase the sample of specific-generic

pairs by aligning the five new abstracts recently
added to each cluster of CSTNews in order to
validate our results. We could repeat the man-
ual alignment or use automatic methods (Agostini
et al., 2014). To identify the categories, we in-
tend to carry out a manual annotation with multi-
ple judges.

Moreover, we have been performing a manual
annotation of coreference chains that consist of
all the mentions of an entity in abstracts with
different lengths in two languages, Portuguese and
English. Our goal is to explore human preferences
in mention realization, and possible differences
across languages. We also aim at exploring
whether the abstract length has influence on the
syntactic forms and sequences of mentions, and
on the amount of information included in the
mentions.
Acknowledgment: We thank the State of
São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP)
(#2015/01450-5) for the financial support.

References

Verônica Agostini, Roque E.L. Condori, and Thiago
A. S. Pardo. 2014. Automatic alignment of news
texts and their multi-document summaries: Compar-
ison among methods. In Proceedings of the 11st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Process-
ing of Portuguese, pages 286–291, São Carlos, SP,
Brazil.

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Dan Gillick, and Dan Klein.
2011. Jointly learning to extract and compress. In
Proceedings of the 49th ACL/HLT - Volume 1, pages
481–490. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Renata T. Camargo, Verônica Agostini, Ariani Di-
Felippo, and Thiago A. S. Pardo. 2013. Manual typ-
ification of source texts and multi-document sum-
maries alignments. Procedia Social and Behavioral
Sciences, 95:498–506.

Paula C. F. Cardoso, Erick G. Maziero, Maria Lu-
cia R. Castro Jorge, Eloize M. R. Seno, Ariani Di-
Felippo, Lucia Helena M. Rino, Maria das Graas
V. Nunes, and Thiago Pardo. 2011. Cstnews -
a discourse-annotated corpus for single and multi-
document summarization of news texts in brazilian
portuguese. In Proceedings of the 3rd RST Brazilian
Meeting, pages 88–105, Cuiabá, MT, Brazil.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Sentence
compression beyond word deletion. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 137–144.

157



Jesse Dunietz and Dan Gillick. 2014. A new entity
salience task with millions of training examples. In
Proceedings of the European Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 2282–2287.

Michel Galley and Kathleen McKeown. 2007. Lexi-
calized markov grammars for sentence compression.
In HLT-NAACL, pages 180–187.

Dan Gillick and Benoit Favre. 2009. A scalable global
model for summarization. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Integer Linear Programming for Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 10–18.

Hongyan Jing and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2000. The
decomposition of human-written summary sentence.
In Proceedings of the 1st NAACL Conference, pages
178–185, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2000. Statistics-
based summarization - step one: Sentence compres-
sion. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth
Conference on on Innovative Applications of Arti-
ficial Intelligence, pages 703–710, Austin, Texas,
USA.

Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. 2011. Learning de-
terminantal point processes. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Seventh Conference Annual Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-11),
pages 419–427.

Hui Lin and Jeff Bilmes. 2011. A class of submodular
functions for document summarization. In Proceed-
ings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies - Volume 1, HLT ’11, pages 510–520.

Erwin Marsi and Emiel Krahmer. 2010. On the lim-
its of sentence compression by deletion. In Er-
win Marsi and M. Theune, editors, Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Generation, pages 45–66.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Ryan T McDonald. 2006. Discriminative sentence
compression with soft syntactic evidence. In EACL.

Andrew McKinlay and Katja Markert. 2011. Mod-
elling entity instantiations. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Recent Advances in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 268–274.

Tom M. Mitchell, William Cohen, Estevam Hruschka,
Partha Talukdar, Justin Betteridge, Andrew Carlson,
Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Matthew Gardner, Bryan
Kisiel, Jayant Krishnamurthy, Ni Lao, Kathryn
Mazaitis, Thahir Mohamed, Ndapa Nakashole, Em-
manouil Antonios Platanios, Alan Ritter, Mehdi
Samadi, Burr Settles, Richard Wang, Derry Wijaya,
Abhinav Gupta, Xinlei Chen, Abulhair Saparov,
Malcolm Greaves, and Joel Welling. 2015. Never-
ending learning. In Proceedings of the European
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
2302–2310.

Ani Nenkova and Kathleen McKeown. 2011. Auto-
matic summarization. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval, 5(2-3):103–233.

Stefan Riezler, Tracy H King, Richard Crouch, and An-
nie Zaenen. 2003. Statistical sentence condensa-
tion using ambiguity packing and stochastic disam-
biguation methods for lexical-functional grammar.
In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT’03, pages 118–
125.

Advaith Siddharthan, Ani Nenkova, and Kathleen
McKeown. 2011. Information status distinctions
and referring expressions: An empirical study of
references to people in news summaries. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 37(4):811–842.

Jenine Turner and Eugene Charniak. 2005. Super-
vised and unsupervised learning for sentence com-
pression. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 290–297.

.

158



Types Specific segment Generic segment
Interpret. cerca de 22 pessoas a maioria das vı́timas

(“about 22 of the victims”) (“the most victims”)

os primeiros 4 minutos de jogo the fourth minute of the match
(“the fourth minute of the match”) (“the begnning of the match”)

casas e viadutos destruı́dos grandes danos materiais
(“destroyed houses and viaducts”) (“great damage”)

dois terços das autuações de contribuintes as irregularidades mais comuns
(“two-thirds of the taxpayers’ infractions”) (“the most common infractions”)

(às) 11h40 (por) a manhã
(“at 11h40”) (“(in) the morning ”)

cerca de 300 edifı́cios vários edifı́cios
(“about 300 buildings”) (“several buildings”)

a polı́cia (“the police”) o governo (“the government”)
o nevoeiro (“the fog”) o mau tempo (“the bad weather”)
o ajuizamento de uma ação civil pública medidas necessárias
(“the filing of a public civil action”) (“necessary measures”)

Detail um campus universitário (an university campus) um campus (“a campus)
removal o goleiro Vieri (“the goalkeeper Vieri”) o goleiro (“the goalkeeper”)

as Ilhas Cayman (“the Cayman Islands”) as ilhas (“the islands”)
quase metade dos voos (“almost half of the flights”) metade dos voos (“half of the flights”)
a Operação Farrapos, da Polı́cia Federal a operação
(“the Federal Police’s “Operation Farrapos””) (“the operation”)

Instituto Nacional do Seguro Social (INSS) INSS
(“National Institute of Social Security (INSS)”) INSS
a pista principal do aeroporto (“the main runway”) uma das pistas (“one of the runways”)
a medalha de ouro nos Jogos Pan-Americanos os Jogos Pan-Americanos
(“the gold medal in the Pan-American Games”) (“the Pan American Games”)

o Aeroporto Internacional de Guarulhos o Aeroporto de Guarulhos
(“the International Airpot of Guarulhos”) (“the Guarulhos Airport”)

a capital Kingston (“the capital Kingston”) a capital (“the capital”)
falência de órgãos secundária à insuficiência cardı́aca insuficiência cardı́aca
(“organs failure secondary to heart disease”) (“heart failure”)

Role Peterka (*Roberto Peterka) um perito aposentado (“a retired expert”)
o advogado das supostas vı́timas, R. Boucher os advogados
(“the lawyer of the alleged victims, Boucher”) (“the lawyers”)

as 16 crianças e 14 adultos as 30 vı́timas
(“the 14 children and 14 adults”) (“the 30 hostages”)

uma quadrilha de altos funcionários públicos pessoas suspeitas
(“a group of high-level public officials (accused of fraud)” (“suspicious people”)

Class os Estados Unidos (“the United States”) o paı́s (“the country”)
o revólver (“the revolver/gun”) as armas (“the weapons”)
Abadia (*Juan Carlos Ramı́rez Abadı́a) o colombiano (“the Colombian”)
a queda (do avião) (“the crash”) o acidente (“the accident”)
a Schincariol (“the Schincariol”) a empresa (“the company”)

Whole Maceió (*capital of Alagoas) Alagoas (*Brazilian state)
a Arquidiocese de Los Angeles a Igreja Católica
(“The Archdiocese of Los Angeles”) (“The Catholic Church”)

o Depart. de Investigações sobre Crime Organizado a polı́cia
(“the State Department of Criminal Investigation”) (“the police”)

Table 4: Examples of phrase-level generalization from the CSTNews corpus (Appendix 1)

159


