



















































Exploring Autism Spectrum Disorders Using HLT


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 74–84,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

Exploring Autism Spectrum Disorders Using HLT
   
 
 

Julia Parish-Morris★, Mark Liberman◦, Neville Ryant◦, Christopher Cieri◦, Leila Bate-
man★, Emily Ferguson★, Robert T. Schultz★  

 
 

◦Linguistic Data Consortium. University of Pennsylvania 
3600 Market Street, Suite 810, Philadelphia, PA, 19104 USA 

 
★Center for Autism Research. Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 

3535 Market Street, Suite 860, Philadelphia, PA, 19104 USA 
 
 
 

Abstract 

The phenotypic complexity of Autism Spec-
trum Disorder motivates the application of 
modern computational methods to large col-
lections of observational data, both for im-
proved clinical diagnosis and for better scien-
tific understanding. We have begun to create a 
corpus of annotated language samples rele-
vant to this research, and we plan to join with 
other researchers in pooling and publishing 
such resources on a large scale. The goal of 
this paper is to present some initial explora-
tions to illustrate the opportunities that such 
datasets will afford. 

1 Introduction 

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a highly het-
erogeneous, brain-based developmental disorder 
affecting approximately 1.5% of the population 
(Christensen, 2016). Primary diagnostic indicators 
include impairments in social communication and 
reciprocity, as well as the presence of repetitive 
behaviors and restricted patterns of interests 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Despite 
significant symptom overlap in the core domains 
of social communication and repetitive behaviors, 
individuals diagnosed with ASD can look very dif-
ferent from one person to the next. Clinical presen-
tation varies substantially depending on age, con-
text, IQ, intervention history, and presence or ab-

sence of common comorbidities such as ADHD 
and anxiety disorder. The heterogeneous presenta-
tion with respect to overall severity and pattern of 
co-occurring conditions makes research aimed at 
improving treatments and isolating biological 
mechanisms much more complicated.  

The phenotypic heterogeneity of ASD contrib-
utes to conflicting research findings that paint a 
confusing picture in the literature. For example, 
depending upon the characteristics of a particular 
sample, groups of children with ASD can look as if 
they have face processing impairments or not 
(Weigelt, Koldewyn, & Kanwisher, 2012), percep-
tual processing biases or not (D’Souza, Booth, 
Connolly, Happé, & Karmiloff-Smith, 2015), and 
persistent social language differences or not (Fein 
et al., 2013). In response to reproducibility issues, 
one strategy has been to shift away from research 
based solely on a categorical conceptualization, 
such as schizophrenia, ADHD, and ASD, to a do-
main-based dimensional approach that cuts across 
traditional diagnostic categories. This approach to 
understanding mental disorder is explicitly encour-
aged by the National Institute of Mental Health 
through the Research Domain Criteria effort 
(RDoC; (Insel, 2014)). The RDoC approach is 
trans-diagnostic and grounded in the study of pro-
cess (where there is clear or emerging support on 
underlying biological processes), such as specific 
neural systems that relate to dimensions of behav-
ior in model systems and in humans.  

74



 
 
 

 

A complementary approach to improve repro-
ducibility is to focus on large sample sizes so as to 
be able to more easily generalize results to all indi-
viduals with autism. Most research groups lack the 
resources to obtain large samples, and thus pooled 
efforts and data sharing become key. Large sam-
ples also provide the statistical power necessary to 
control for a larger array of possible confounding 
variables. In an effort to increase data sharing and 
power to parse the heterogeneity of ASD, the Na-
tional Institutes of Health established the National 
Database for Autism Research (NDAR; (“National 
Database for Autism Research - Home,” n.d.)). 
This database provides de-identified data for large 
N secondary data analyses. However, aside from 
common characterization variables (see Bone, 
Goodwin, et al., 2014), NDAR will not have suffi-
cient data for more specialized needs such as hu-
man language technology research. 

In this paper, we describe a new opportunity for 
data sharing in a format designed to facilitate re-
search on speech and language in ASD, and ex-
plore the possibilities associated with this sort of 
database. The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 
Center for Autism Research (CAR) collected the 
samples analyzed here, and established a collabo-
rative project with the University of Pennsylvania 
Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC). We focus on 
recorded conversations that took place from 2008-
2015 during the course of clinical evaluations for 
autism. 

1.1 The Autism Diagnostic Observation 
Schedule 

The ADOS is a semi-structured, conversation- and 
play-based evaluation tool used by expert clini-
cians to help inform diagnostic decision-making. 
There are 4 versions of the ADOS, one of which is 
selected for administration based on an individu-
al’s language ability at the time of evaluation. 
Module 3 requires phrase speech, and includes a 
large section devoted to conversation. During this 
part of the evaluation, clinicians ask questions 
about social-emotional concerns. These questions 
are designed to elicit language or behavior that dif-
ferentiates individuals with social communication 
difficulties from those without (e.g., “What does 
being a friend mean to you? Do you ever feel lone-
ly?”). Importantly, the samples arising from this 

section are similar in form and content to samples 
used in past clinically-oriented HLT research. 

One benefit of targeting language produced dur-
ing the ADOS for HLT research is ubiquity; the 
ADOS is widely included in research-grade Gold 
Standard diagnostic evaluations, both inside and 
outside the United States, and is routinely recorded 
for clinical reliability purposes. Many of these au-
dio-video recordings are associated with clinical 
metadata such as age, sex, clinical judgment of 
ASD status, autism severity metrics, IQ estimates, 
and social/language questionnaires, as well as ge-
netic panels, brain scans, behavioral experiments, 
and infrared eye tracking. The quality of recording 
is variable, with a multitude of recording methods 
employed. A substantial number of these record-
ings have yet to be assembled into a large, sharea-
ble resource. We view this as a largely untapped 
opportunity for data sharing that could facilitate 
advancements in clinically oriented HLT research 
and autism research more broadly.  

1.2 The present study 
In 2013, CAR and the Linguistic Data Consortium 
(LDC) began a project aimed at analyzing ADOS 
recordings from more than 1200 toddlers, children, 
teens, and adults, most of which were ultimately 
diagnosed with ASD. These recordings are associ-
ated with rich characterization data in the form of 
interviews and questionnaires, cognitive and be-
havioral assessments, eye tracking, brain scans, 
and genetic tests. Our initial goal was to determine 
whether automated analysis of language recorded 
during the ADOS could predict diagnostic status, 
although our aims have since expanded to include 
identifying correlates of phenotypic variability 
within ASD. This second aim is particularly mean-
ingful in the clinical domain and in our search for 
causes of autism; if we can accurately and objec-
tively quantify the linguistic signal, we have a 
much better chance of reliably mapping it to real-
world effects and to connecting it with biological 
mechanisms.  

The current paper reports on our work-in-
progress, and provides preliminary results from a 
cohort of 100 children. We analyze a small subset 
of possible lexical and acoustic features in combi-
nation with clinical measures. Our goal is to spur 

75



 
 
 

 

interest in growing and sharing valuable resources 
like this one. 

2 Dataset  

To date, our corpus includes natural language sam-
ples from 100 participants engaged in the conver-
sation and reporting section of ADOS Module 3 
(mean length of recording ~20 minutes).  

2.1 Subjects 
Three diagnostic groups were included: ASD 
(N=65, mean age: 10 years), non-ASD mixed clin-
ical (N=18, mean age: 10.39 years), and typically 
developing (TD; N=17; mean age: 11.29 years). 
ASD is more common in males than females 
(Wing, 1981), and our clinical groups have more 
boys than girls (ASD: 75% male; non-ASD mixed 
clinical: 94% male; TD: 47% male). Mothers and 
fathers had a median post-high school educational 
level of 4 years (Bachelor’s degree) for the ASD 
and non-ASD mixed clinical groups, and 2 years 
(Associate’s degree) for the TD group. Median 
household income was $60,000-$99,000.  

The ASD group was determined to have an au-
tism spectrum disorder according to DSM-IV crite-
ria after a Gold Standard evaluation that included 
the ADOS, cognitive testing, parent interviews, 
and questionnaires. After undergoing the same rig-
orous evaluation as their peers with ASD, the non-
ASD mixed clinical group was determined not to 
meet diagnostic criteria. This group is highly het-
erogeneous, with some participants exhibiting sub-
threshold ASD symptoms and others diagnosed 
with anxiety or ADHD. Due to the small sample 
size of this group and the TD group, analyses 
should be interpreted with caution. The TD group 
had no reported history of ASD, no significant 
neurological history, no first-degree family mem-
bers with ASD, and did not meet clinical cutoffs on 
a common ASD screener (Social Communication 
Questionnaire; SCQ; (Rutter, Bailey, & Lord, 
2003)). 

2.2 Clinical measures 
Participants were administered a variety of behav-
ioral and cognitive tests during in-person visits at 
the Center for Autism Research. Parents completed 
questionnaires about their child’s social and behav-
ioral functioning either directly before or during 

the visit. Means, standard deviations, and ranges 
are provided in Table 1. 

Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule 
(ADOS; (Lord et al., 2012)). In addition to provid-
ing natural language samples, the ADOS is a 
scored instrument. Highly trained clinicians rate 
various aspects of children’s behavior on a scale of 
0-3 (higher = more autism-like). A subset of these 
ratings are combined using an algorithm that re-
sults in a total score for each of two domains: so-
cial affect (SA) and repetitive behaviors/restricted 
interests (RRB). Three comparison scores can also 
be calculated, which roughly index the severity of 
autism symptoms for a given child overall, in the 
social affect domain, and in the repetitive behav-
iors/restricted interests domain (see Table 1).  
 
Table 1. Means and standard deviations for cogni-
tive test scores, clinical observation ratings, and 
parent questionnaires. 
 

 ASD Non-ASD TD 

Full-scale IQ 105.31 (14.88) 
97.77 
(11.01) 

104.06 
(14.68) 

Verbal IQ 106.91 (14.41) 
100.78 
(12.64) 

108.24 
(14.07) 

Nonverbal IQ 105.94 (13.95) 
95.06 
(10.29) 

100.94 
(14.24) 

ADOS severity 
score 

6.49 
(2.47) 

2.72 
(1.56) 

1.47 
(0.94) 

ADOS SA severity 
score 

6.29 
(2.42) 

3.06 
(1.92) 

2.06 
(1.3) 

ADOS RRB severity 
score 

7.08 
(2.54) 

4.72 
(2.91) 

2.53 
(2.18) 

SRS t-score 80.6 (16.46) 
81.22 
(17.91) 

39.82 
(5.05) 

CCC-2 GCC  81.44 (14.13) 
77.24 
(14.84) 

115 
(8.24) 

CCC-2 SIDI  -9.75 (8.07) 
-5.7 
(12.68) 

5.4 
(6.01) 

 
Differential Abilities Scales – 2nd Edition 

(DAS-II; (Elliott, 2007)). Overall (full-scale) IQ, 
non-verbal IQ, and verbal IQ were assessed via the 
DAS-II. DAS-II IQ measures have a mean of 100. 

Children’s Communication Checklist – 2nd 
Edition (CCC; (Norbury, Nash, Baird, & Bishop, 
2004)). The CCC-2 is a norm-referenced parent re-

76



 
 
 

 

port questionnaire focused on aspects of structural 
and pragmatic language. The Global Communica-
tion Composite (GCC) is an overall measure of 
parent impressions of child communication compe-
tency, and the Social Interaction Difference Index 
(SIDI) score is designed to flag children in need of 
further evaluation for ASD or other disorders (neg-
ative scores indicate risk). 

2.3 Interviews 
Research reliable PhD-level clinical psychologists 
and/or psychology trainees administered the 
ADOS module 3 to all participants in quiet neutral 
rooms. Evaluations were videotaped using a single 
feed or PiP from 3 corner-mounted cameras, and 
audio was recorded through a ceiling microphone. 
After we obtained consent from participants to use 
their sessions for research purposes, entire video 
recordings were copied from their original media 
onto a shared file system accessible only to project 
members with current certifications for research on 
human subjects. Audio was extracted from the vid-
eo stream and saved in lossless FLAC format. Ex-
cept for extraction and format conversion, the data 
was identical to the original recording. 

The ADOS is a semi-structured interview, so 
questions from the conversation and reporting sec-
tion were occasionally spread throughout the entire 
interview (which lasts approximately 45-60 
minutes). More often, they were clustered together 
in a section that lasts ~20 minutes. A knowledgea-
ble member of study staff selected the largest 
chunk of continuous conversation and reporting 
questions for transcription and annotation.  

2.4 Transcription and annotation 
As described in a prior methods paper (Parish-
Morris et al., 2016), transcription teams at LDC 
and CAR created time aligned, verbatim, ortho-
graphic transcripts of the conversation and report-
ing section for each participant. The LDC tran-
scription team consisted of two junior and two sen-
ior transcribers, all college educated native speak-
ers of American English. The junior transcribers 
performed segmentation of the audio files into 
pause groups and transcription. The senior tran-
scribers corrected the initial transcripts and occa-
sionally did transcription from scratch. 

For this effort, LDC created a new transcription 
specification that resembles those used for conver-
sational speech. The principal differences are that 
the current specification requires that participants 
be labeled only by their role (Interviewer and Par-
ticipant) and that the boundaries between speech 
and non-speech be placed rather accurately be-
cause (inter-)turn duration is a factor of interest. 

After LDC established the transcription process 
and pilot results were found to be promising, CAR 
developed a team to extend the corpus and begin 
evaluating inter-annotator agreement. The CAR 
team consists of multiple pairs of college educated 
native speakers of American English that tran-
scribe the conversation and reporting section of the 
ADOS independently, a third more senior tran-
scriber responsible for comparing and adjudicating 
the work of the first two, and a fourth transcriber 
who compares CAR and LDC transcripts when the 
latter are available, and adjudicates remaining dis-
agreements. In this way, 4 transcribers and 2 adju-
dicators with complementary goals produce a 
“gold standard” transcript for analysis and for 
evaluation/training of future transcriptionists. 

2.5 Quality control  
LDC transcribed 52 files, and CAR transcribed 100 
including independent transcriptions of the 52 that 
LDC transcribed. A simple comparison of word 
level identity between CAR’s adjudicated tran-
scripts and LDC’s transcripts revealed 93.22% 
overlap on average, before a third adjudication re-
solved differences between the two. In the case of 
files that were transcribed by CAR only (N=48), 
pre-adjudication overlap in word-level compari-
sons between transcribers averaged 92.18%. We 
are confident that two or three complete transcrip-
tions plus one or two complete adjudications has 
resulted in a reliable data set. 

2.6 Forced alignment  
Segmentations for the transcribed turns of each 
ADOS evaluation were produced by forced align-
ment using an aligner trained on all turns in the 
corpus. The aligner was trained with the Kaldi 
ASR toolkit (Povey et al., 2011) using the 
CMUdict lexicon with stress markings removed; 
pronunciations for out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words 
were generated with the Sequitur G2P toolkit 

77



 
 
 

 

(Besacier, Barnard, Karpov, & Schultz, 2014) us-
ing a model trained on CMUdict. The acoustic 
frontend consisted of 13 mel frequency cepstral 
coefficient (MFCC) features extracted every 10 ms 
using a 25 ms Hamming window plus first and se-
cond differences; all features were normalized to 
zero mean and unit variance on a per-speaker ba-
sis. A standard 3-state Bakis model was used for 
all speech phones and a 5-state models allowing 
forward skips used to model non-speech 
phones  (silence, breaths, coughs, laughter, 
lipsmacks, and other non-speech vocalizations), 
untranscribable regions, and out-of-vocabulary 
words (words which were not in CMUdict and for 
which grapheme-to-phoneme transduction failed). 
To improve segmentation accuracy, special 1-state 
boundary models were inserted at each phone tran-
sition as in Yuan et al.  (2013). Acoustic  modeling 
was performed using a deep neural network con-
sisting of 4 layers of 512 rectified linear units with 
input consisting of an 11 frame context (5-1-5). 

Feature extraction. In this first analysis, we fo-
cused on child features (lexical and acoustic). 
Planned future analyses will assess interviewer fea-
tures, and integrate across both speakers to assess 
variables such as synchrony and accommodation. 

Word choice. Prior research suggests that indi-
viduals with ASD produce idiosyncratic or unusual 
words more often than their typically developing 
peers (Ghaziuddin & Gerstein, 1996; 
Prud’hommeaux, Roark, Black, & Van Santen, 
2011; Rouhizadeh, Prud’Hommeaux, Santen, & 
Sproat, 2015; Rouhizadeh, Prud’hommeaux, 
Roark, & van Santen, 2013; Volden & Lord, 
1991); and may repeat words or phrases (van 
Santen, Sproat, & Hill, 2013). Using a lexical fea-
ture selection approach (Monroe, Colaresi, & 
Quinn, 2008), we calculated the frequency of each 
word in a child’s transcript. We used this feature to 
classify samples as ASD or TD. 

Disfluency. Differential use of the filler words 
“um” and “uh” has been found across men and 
women, older and younger people, and in ASD 
(Irvine, Eigsti, & Fein, 2016; Lunsford, Heeman, 
& Van Santen, 2012; Wieling et al., 2016). Here, 
we compared the percentage of UM relative to 
UM+UH across groups.  

Speaking rate. In our pilot analysis, we found 
slower speaking rates in children with ASD vs. TD 
(Parish-Morris et al., 2016). We attempted to repli-

cate this finding in a larger sample by calculating 
the mean duration of each word produced by par-
ticipants in a speech segment (a stretch of speaking 
between silent pauses).  

Latency to respond. Children with ASD have 
been reported to wait longer before responding in 
the course of conversation (Heeman, Lunsford, 
Selfridge, Black, & Van Santen, 2010). To explore 
this feature in our own sample, we calculated the 
elapsed time between clinician and child turns.  

Fundamental frequency. Prior research has 
found that pitch variables distinguish language 
produced by children with ASD from language 
produced by typically developing children (Asgari, 
Bayestehtashk, & Shafran, 2013; Kiss, van Santen, 
Prud’hommeaux, & Black, 2012; Schuller et al., 
2013). Here we compared the prosody of partici-
pants by calculating mean absolute deviation from 
the median (MAD) as an outlier-robust measure of 
dispersion in F0 distribution. 

3 Preliminary analysis and results 

The analyses and figures below are meant to spur 
interest and give a hint as to potential avenues to 
explore using a larger data set. A subset (N=46) of 
the current sample was described in a forthcoming 
paper (Parish-Morris et al., 2016). 

3.1 Diagnostic classification 
We found that word choice alone served surpris-
ingly well to separate the ASD and TD groups. Na-
ïve Bayes classification, using leave-one-out cross 
validation and weighted log-odds-ratios calculated 
using the “informative Dirichlet prior" algorithm 
of Monroe et al. (2008), correctly classified 68% of 
ASD patients and 100% of typical participants. 
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis 
revealed good sensitivity and specificity using this 
classification metric, with AUC=85% (Figure 1).  

The 20 most “ASD-like” words in this analysis 
were: {nsv}, know, he, a, now ,no , uh, well, is, ac-
tually, mhm, w-, years, eh, right, first, year, once, 
saw, was (where {nsv} stands for “non-speech vo-
calization”, meaning sounds that with no lexical 
counterpart, such as imitative or expressive nois-
es). Of note, “uh” appears in this list, as does “w-”, 
a stuttering-like disfluency.  

At the other end of the scale, we found that the 
20 least “ASD-like” words in this analysis were: 

78



 
 
 

 

like, um, and, hundred, so, basketball, something, 
dishes, go, york, or, if, them, {laugh}, wrong, be, 
pay, when, friends. Here, the word “um” appears, 
as does the word “friends, and laughter. 

 
Figure 1. Receiver operating characteristic on 
word choice separates ASD from TD. 

 

 
As we discuss below, many linguistic and pho-

netic features showed systematic differences 
among the diagnostic groups, and feeding combi-
nations of these features into modern machine-
learning algorithms will certainly do an even better 
job of classifying the participants in our dataset 
than a simple “bag of words” model. However, we 
feel that focus on classification at this stage is 
premature, because of the previously-referenced 
phenotypic diversity and uneven diagnostic group 
sizes in our sample. Rather, we believe that similar 
analysis of much larger datasets will enable us to 
place individuals in a space with several significant 
dimensions of relevant variation, rather than trying 
to force them into discrete categories.  

3.2 Other feature differences 
Disfluency. We compared rates of um production 
across the ASD and TD groups (um/(um+uh)). The 
ASD group produced UM as 61% of their filled 
pauses (CI: 54%-68%), while the TD group pro-
duced UM as 82% of their filled pauses (CI: 75%-
88%). The minimum value for the TD group was 
58.1%, and 23 of 65 participants in the ASD group 
fell below that value. 

Given prior research showing sex differences on 
this variable (Wieling et al., 2016), we marked data 
points as originating from males or females for the 
purposes of visualization. Figure 2, plotting overall 

rate of filled pauses against the proportion of filled 
pauses that are UM, illustrates this interaction of 
sex and diagnostic category. This naturally raises 
the question of what other characteristics might al-
so be correlated with these differences; and it un-
derlines the opportunity to use data of this type to 
discover and explore new dimensions of relevant 
variation. 

 
Figure 2. Disfluencies in the ASD and TD groups. 

 
 
Speaking rate. A comparison of mean word dura-
tion as a function of phrase length revealed that TD 
participants spoke the fastest (overall mean word 
duration of 376 ms, CI 369-382, calculated from 
6891 phrases), followed by the non-ASD mixed 
clinical group (mean=395 ms; CI 388-401, calcu-
lated from 6640 phrases), followed by the ASD 
group with the slowest speaking rate (mean=402 
ms; CI: 398-405, calculated from 24276 phrases). 
 
  

79



 
 
 

 

Figure 3. Mean word duration as a function of 
phrase length differed among all three groups.  

 
 
Child latency to respond. Our analyses revealed 
that children with ASD were slower to respond to 
interviewer bids for conversation than TD partici-
pants, with children in the non-ASD mixed clinical 
group falling in the between. 
 
Figure 4: Cumulative distribution of response la-
tencies for three diagnostic categories. 

 
 

Fundamental Frequency. To compare the 
prosody of participants we examined an outlier- 
robust measure of dispersion in their F0 distribu-
tion: mean absolute deviation from the median 
(MAD). F0 contours were extracted for every 
ADOS session using an implementation of the 
Kaldi pitch tracking algorithm (Gharemani et al. 
2014) using a 10 ms step, 10 ms analysis window 
width, and search range of 50 to 600 Hz, with all 
frames identified as belonging to a voiced phone in 
the forced alignment retained. After then dropping 
frames from speech segments (as defined in Sec-

tion 2.7) of duration less than 500 ms and and 
longer than 5 seconds, F0 values were transformed 
from Hz to semitones using the  5th percentile of 
each speaker as the base, which served as input for 
computation of MAD. As depicted in the box-and-
whisker plot in Figure 5, MAD values for F0 are 
both higher and more variable within the ASD and 
non-ASD mixed clinical group than the TD group 
(ASD: median: 1.99, IQR: 0.95; non-ASD: medi-
an: 1.95, IQR: 0.80; TD: median: 1.47, IQR: 0.26). 
 
 
Figure 5: Median absolute deviation from median 
F0 in semitones relative to speaker’s 5th percentile. 

 

3.3 Correlations with clinical and demo-
graphic measures 

Our relatively large group of 65 children with ASD 
offered an opportunity to examine within-group 
correlations. Due to space constraints, we focus on 
disfluency and response latency. Future analyses 
with a larger sample will explore these relation-
ships in TD and non-ASD mixed clinical partici-
pants. 

Disfluency. We explored relationships between 
the percent of um/uh disfluencies that were “um”, 
and age/sex/IQ. No significant relationships were 
found with age or IQ (full-scale, verbal, or non-
verbal). As suggested by Figure 2, we found signif-
icant sex differences in “um” fillers. Males with 
ASD filled pauses with “um” instead of “uh” at 
significantly lower rates (M=56%) than females 
with ASD (M=75%; Welch’s t=-3.20, p=.003). 
This finding mirrors sex differences found in larger 
samples of typically developing adults (Wieling et 

80



 
 
 

 

al., 2016). More “um” use was also associated with 
lower ADOS severity scores (Spearman’s Rho=-
.25, p=.045; males and females did not differ on 
autism severity), but parent ratings of social and 
communication competence as measured by the 
CCC-2 were unrelated to “um” use. This discrep-
ancy could be due to the nature of the prolonged 
observation on the part of parents (judgments are 
based on years of observation, during which time 
parents may become used to their child’s disfluen-
cies) versus the short, time-constrained observa-
tions of clinicians.  

Child latency to respond. The mean length of 
transitions from interviewer to participant did not 
correlate with age or any measure of IQ, nor did it 
differ by participant sex. It did, however, correlate 
positively with overall ADOS calibrated severity 
scores (Pearson’s r =.28, p=.02). An examination 
of subscale severity scores suggests some measure 
of specificity; the social communication severity 
score of the ADOS correlated with response laten-
cy (Pearson’s r=.31, p=.01), while the repetitive 
behaviors/restricted interests severity score did not 
(Pearson’s r =.04, p=.73). As in the case of disflu-
encies, response latency did not correlate with par-
ent reports of social communication competence. 

3.4 Discussion 
Our preliminary exploration of this new data set 
indicates that word choice produced during ADOS 
evaluations can be used to differentiate children 
with ASD from typically developing children with 
good sensitivity and specificity. Using a variety of 
features, including word choice, inter-turn pause 
length, and fundamental frequency, we were able 
to characterize the linguistic signal at a highly 
granular level. Importantly, we not only found that 
these features discriminate groups, but also showed 
that certain features also correlate with clinical 
presentation. This relationship suggests language-
clinical connections that inform personalized ap-
proaches to social communication intervention.  

Classification sensitivity and specificity using 
word choice went down relative to prior work with 
a smaller pilot sample (AUC: 92%; (Parish-Morris 
et al., 2016)). This may be due to at least two fac-
tors that underline the need for a larger corpus than  
the one we have at present. First, we increased the 
variability of our ASD sample by adding more het-

erogeneous participants. Our first pilot sample 
consisted of carefully selected “clean” groups of 
children with classic ASD and typically developing 
controls, whereas the extension reported here was 
much more realistic and clinically unclear (e.g., we 
included ASD participants with a milder phenotype 
or clinical comorbidities). Second, participants in 
our first pilot groups were individually matched on 
a variety of characteristics (age, IQ, sex, parent ed-
ucation, income). Our extended sample tripled our 
ASD sample, did not increase our TD sample sig-
nificantly, and did not match individually. It is un-
usual for TD participants to be administered the 
ADOS evaluation in most labs, partly due to the 
expensive and time-consuming nature of the as-
sessment. Large, comparable samples from TD 
participants are essential to research in this area, 
and will require efforts to improve accessibility 
and reduce cost in future studies. 

4 Future directions 

4.1 New sources, more participants 
The ASD sample reported here is large relative to 
much prior work, but our analyses were nonethe-
less constrained by smaller comparison groups. We 
are actively annotating additional ASD samples 
from past studies conducted at the Center for Au-
tism Research, collecting new data from an ex-
panded age range in our lab (including preschool-
ers and adults), and seeking out collaborators who 
wish to contribute language samples to this collec-
tion. (Due to privacy laws, final transcripts and au-
dio recordings from this and all other collections 
must be carefully wiped of personally identifiable 
information prior to sharing, a process that is cur-
rently underway for the present sample.) In par-
ticular, we are searching for diverse, well-
phenotyped samples enriched for typically devel-
oping participants, participants with non-ASD clin-
ical diagnoses, and females with ASD.  

Fewer girls than boys are diagnosed with ASD 
(Christensen, 2016), and they have been historical-
ly understudied. Significant linguistic features in-
teract with sex, however (e.g., differences in the 
use of disfluencies such as um/uh), making this 
variable especially important to study. We aim to 
build a cohort of samples from females with and 

81



 
 
 

 

without ASD, to explore the effects of sex-
diagnosis interactions on language features.  

One immediate goal for our team is to begin tel-
ephone collection of ADOS-like samples. Re-
search-grade ADOS recordings, while retrospec-
tively ubiquitous, are not inexpensive or easy to 
obtain. At present, participants and families must 
meet with a highly trained clinician, often traveling 
long distances to do so. We are in the process of 
developing a protocol that can be administered 
over the telephone, with relatively untrained con-
versational partners. We aim to explore the relative 
classification and characterization value of this 
method versus rigorous lab-based ADOS record-
ings.  

4.2 Interviewer Analysis 
Our current analysis is far from comprehensive. 
Most notably, we constrained our analyses to child 
features. Given that the ADOS evaluation is a con-
versation, it is essential to analyze interviewer 
speech and language characteristics as well (Bone 
et al., 2012; Bone, Lee, Black, et al., 2014; Bone, 
Lee, Potamianos, & Narayanan, 2014). Future 
analysis plans include assessing dynamic relation-
ships between interviewer and child features over 
the course of the evaluation.  

4.3 Additional types of annotation 
We saw interesting patterns in the use of UM and 
UH emerge in the present analysis, and in the list 
of the most ASD-associated words, we saw one 
example of a fluent self-correction, namely the par-
tial word w-. This suggests that a more comprehen-
sive annotation of disfluencies, including their se-
mantic, morpho-syntactic, phonetic, and prosodic 
affinities, would be informative. 

Word frequencies were surprisingly diagnostic – 
perhaps the frequency of syntactic and semantic 
word categories will also be interesting, including 
things like parts of speech, negations, and contrac-
tions. It is likely to be worthwhile to distinguish 
the semantic categories of referents, e.g. to indi-
viduals, groups, places, and so on. Various other 
semantic categories may also be interesting – con-
creteness of reference, span of co-reference rela-
tions, definiteness and indefiniteness, and so on. 

We saw some signal in simple counts of turn 
length and speech-segment length – it is plausible 

that we would learn more from an analysis of syn-
tactic features such as clause length, depth of em-
bedding, frequency of various sorts of modifica-
tion, etc. Modern analysis techniques can make it 
relatively cheap to get high-quality analyses of this 
type.  

We could multiply examples almost indefinitely. 
Our main point in starting the list is that when we 
have a large body of sharable data of this type, 
then researchers with new ideas can add their own 
layers of annotation and explore the resulting pat-
terns. Modern techniques for tagging, parsing, and 
other sorts of analysis will make such explorations 
increasingly efficient – as long as a large body of 
appropriate data is available. 

Acknowledgments 
This project was supported by an Autism Science 
Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship awarded to J. 
Parish-Morris (Mentors: R.T. Schultz, M. Liber-
man, C. Cieri), by the NICHD funded Intellectual 
and Developmental Research Center grant (# U54 
HD86984, M Yudkoff, PI), a grant from 
the Pennsylvania Department of Health (SAP 
#  4100047863) to R. Schultz and by NIMH 
RC1MH08879 (R. Schultz, PI). We gratefully 
acknowledge all the children and families that par-
ticipated in our research, as well as the clinicians, 
staff, and students that collected/compiled data at 
the Center for Autism Research. 
  

82



 
 
 

 

References  
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic 

and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edi-
tion: DSM-5 (5 edition). Washington, D.C: American 
Psychiatric Publishing. 

Asgari, M., Bayestehtashk, A., & Shafran, I. (2013). 
Robust and accurate features for detecting and diag-
nosing autism spectrum disorders. In INTERSPEECH 
(pp. 191–194). Retrieved from 
http://www.cslu.ogi.edu/~zak/is13-autism.pdf 

Besacier, L., Barnard, E., Karpov, A., & Schultz, T. 
(2014). Automatic speech recognition for under-
resourced languages: A survey. Speech Communica-
tion, 56, 85–100. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2013.07.008 

Bone, D., Black, M. P., Lee, C.-C., Williams, M. E., 
Levitt, P., Lee, S., & Narayanan, S. (2012). Sponta-
neous-Speech Acoustic-Prosodic Features of Chil-
dren with Autism and the Interacting Psychologist. In 
INTERSPEECH. Retrieved from 
http://sail.usc.edu/~dbone/Bone_spontaneousProsody
_ADOS_IS2012.pdf 

Bone, D., Goodwin, M. S., Black, M. P., Lee, C.-C., 
Audhkhasi, K., & Narayanan, S. (2014). Applying 
Machine Learning to Facilitate Autism Diagnostics: 
Pitfalls and Promises. Journal of Autism and Devel-
opmental Disorders. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-
014-2268-6 

Bone, D., Lee, C.-C., Black, M. P., Williams, M. E., 
Lee, S., Levitt, P., & Narayanan, S. (2014). The Psy-
chologist as an Interlocutor in Autism Spectrum Dis-
order Assessment: Insights From a Study of Sponta-
neous Prosody. Journal of Speech Language and 
Hearing Research, 57(4), 1162. 
http://doi.org/10.1044/2014_JSLHR-S-13-0062 

Bone, D., Lee, C.-C., Potamianos, A., & Narayanan, S. 
(2014). An Investigation of Vocal Arousal Dynamics 
in Child-Psychologist Interactions using Synchrony 
Measures and a Conversation-based Model. In Fif-
teenth Annual Conference of the International Speech 
Communication Association. Retrieved from 
https://mazsola.iit.unimiskolc.hu/~czap/letoltes/IS14/
IS2014/PDF/AUTHOR/IS140377.PDF 

Christensen, D. L. (2016). Prevalence and Characteris-
tics of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Children 
Aged 8 Years—Autism and Developmental Disabili-
ties Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 
2012. MMWR. Surveillance Summaries, 65. Re-
trieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/ss/ss6503a1.h
tm 

D’Souza, D., Booth, R., Connolly, M., Happé, F., & 
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2015). Rethinking the concepts 
of “local or global processors”: evidence from Wil-

liams syndrome, Down syndrome, and Autism Spec-
trum Disorders. Developmental Science. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12312 

Elliott, C. D. (2007). Differential Ability Scales®-II - 
DAS-II. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment. Re-
trieved from 
http://www.pearsonclinical.com/education/products/1
00000468/differential-ability-scales-ii-das-ii.html 

Fein, D., Barton, M., Eigsti, I.-M., Kelley, E., Naigles, 
L., Schultz, R. T., … Tyson, K. (2013). Optimal out-
come in individuals with a history of autism: Optimal 
outcome in individuals with a history of autism. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54(2), 
195–205. http://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12037 

Ghahremani, P., BabaAli, B., Povey, D., Ried hammer, 
K., Trmal, J., & Khudanpur, S. (2014, May). A pitch 
extraction algorithm tuned for automatic speech 
recognition. In IEEE ICASSP 2014. 

Ghaziuddin, M., & Gerstein, L. (1996). Pedantic speak-
ing style differentiates Asperger Syndrome from 
High-Functioning Autism. 

Heeman, P. A., Lunsford, R., Selfridge, E., Black, L., & 
Van Santen, J. (2010). Autism and interactional as-
pects of dialogue. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual 
Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse 
and Dialogue (pp. 249–252). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Retrieved from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1944551 

Insel, T. R. (2014). The NIMH research domain criteria 
(RDoC) project: precision medicine for psychiatry. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 171(4), 395–397. 

Irvine, C. A., Eigsti, I.-M., & Fein, D. A. (2016). Uh, 
Um, and Autism: Filler Disfluencies as Pragmatic 
Markers in Adolescents with Optimal Outcomes from 
Autism Spectrum Disorder. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 46(3), 1061–1070. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2651-y 

Kiss, G., van Santen, J. P., Prud’hommeaux, E. T., & 
Black, L. M. (2012). Quantitative Analysis of Pitch 
in Speech of Children with Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders. In INTERSPEECH. Retrieved from 
http://20.210-193-
52.unknown.qala.com.sg/archive/archive_papers/inte
rspeech_2012/i12_1343.pdf 

Lord, C., Rutter, M., DiLavore, P. S., Risi, S., Gotham, 
K., & Bishop, S. L. (2012). Autism diagnostic obser-
vation schedule, second edition (ADOS-2). Torrance, 
CA: Western Psychological Services. 

Lunsford, R., Heeman, P. A., & Van Santen, J. P. (2012). 
Interactions Between Turn-taking Gaps, Disfluencies 
and Social Obligation. In INTERSPEECH 2012. 

  

83



 
 
 

 

Monroe, B. L., Colaresi, M. P., & Quinn, K. M. (2008). 
Fightin’ Words: Lexical Feature Selection and Evalu-
ation for Identifying the Content of Political Conflict. 
Political Analysis, 16(4), 372–403.  

National Database for Autism Research - Home. (n.d.). 
Retrieved April 7, 2016, from https://ndar.nih.gov/ 

Norbury, C. F., Nash, M., Baird, G., & Bishop, D. 
(2004). Using a parental checklist to identify diag-
nostic groups in children with communication im-
pairment: a validation of the Children’s Communica-
tion Checklist--2. International Journal of Language 
& Communication Disorders / Royal College of 
Speech & Language Therapists, 39(3), 345–364. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/13682820410001654883 

Parish-Morris, J., Cieri, C., Liberman, M., Bateman, L., 
Ferguson, E., & Schultz, R. T. (2016). Building Lan-
guage Resources for Exploring Autism Spectrum 
Disorders. Proceedings of the Language Resources 
and Evaluation Conference 2016. 

Povey, D., Ghoshal, A., Boulianne, G., Burget, L., 
Glembek, O., Goel, N., … others. (2011). The Kaldi 
speech recognition toolkit. In IEEE 2011 workshop 
on automatic speech recognition and understanding. 
IEEE Signal Processing Society. Retrieved from 
http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/192584 

Prud’hommeaux, E. T., Roark, B., Black, L. M., & Van 
Santen, J. (2011). Classification of atypical language 
in autism. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on 
Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics 
(pp. 88–96), ACL. 

Rouhizadeh, M., Prud’Hommeaux, E., Santen, J. V., & 
Sproat, R. (2015). Measuring idiosyncratic interests 
in children with autism. Presented at the 53rd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on 
Natural Language Processing of the Asian Federation 
of Natural Language Processing, ACL-IJCNLP 2015.  

Rouhizadeh, M., Prud’hommeaux, E. T., Roark, B., & 
van Santen, J. P. (2013). Distributional semantic 
models for the evaluation of disordered language. In 
HLT-NAACL (pp. 709–714). Citeseer. 

Rutter, M., Bailey, A., & Lord, C. (2003). SCQ: The So-
cial Communication Questionnaire. Los  Angeles, 
CA: Western Psychological Services. Retrieved from 
https://www.wpspublish.com/store/Images/Download
s/Product/SCQ_Manual_Chapter_1.pdf 

Schuller, B., Steidl, S., Batliner, A., Vinciarelli, A., 
Scherer, K., Ringeval, F., … others. (2013). The IN-
TERSPEECH 2013 computational paralinguistics 
challenge: social signals, conflict, emotion, autism.  

van Santen, J. P. H., Sproat, R. W., & Hill, A. P. (2013). 
Quantifying Repetitive Speech in Autism Spectrum 
Disorders and Language Impairment: Repetitive 
speech in ASD and SLI. Autism Research, 6(5), 372–
383. http://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1301 

Volden, J., & Lord, C. (1991). Neologisms and idiosyn-
cratic language in autistic speakers. Journal of Au-
tism and Developmental Disorders, 21(2), 109–130. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/BF02284755 

Weigelt, S., Koldewyn, K., & Kanwisher, N. (2012). 
Face identity recognition in autism spectrum disor-
ders: A review of behavioral studies. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(3), 1060–1084. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.12.008 

Wieling, M., Grieve, J., Bouma, G., Fruehwald, J., 
Coleman, J., & Liberman, M. (2016). Variation and 
change in the use of hesitation markers in Germanic 
languages. Language Dynamics and Change, Forth-
coming. 

Wing, L. (1981). Sex ratios in early childhood autism 
and related conditions. Psychiatry Research, 5(2), 
129–137. 

Yuan, J., Ryant, N., Liberman, M., Stolcke, A., Mitra, 
V., & Wang, W. (2013). Automatic phonetic segmen-
tation using boundary models. In INTERSPEECH 
2013. 

 
 

84


