



















































Bridging Corpus for Russian in comparison with Czech


Proceedings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016), co-located with NAACL 2016, pages 59–66,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Bridging Corpus for Russian in comparison with Czech

Anna Roitberg
IMPB of IPM RAS

School of Linguistics HSE RSU
Moscow, Russia

aroytberg@lpm.org.ru

Anna Nedoluzhko
Charles University in Prague

Malostranske nam. 25
CZ-11800 Prague

nedoluzko@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

In this paper, we present a syntactic approach
to the annotation of bridging relations, so-
called genitive bridging. We introduce the Ru-
GenBridge corpus for Russian annotated with
genitive bridging and compare it to the seman-
tic approach that was applied in the Prague
Dependency Treebank for Czech. We dis-
cuss some special aspects of bridging resolu-
tion for Russian and specifics of bridging an-
notation for languages where definite nomi-
nal groups are not as frequent as e.g. in Ro-
mance and Germanic languages. To verify the
consistency of our method, we carry out two
comparative experiments: the annotation of a
small portion of our corpus with bridging rela-
tions according to both approaches and finding
for all relations from the RuGenBridge their
semantic interpretation that would be anno-
tated for Czech.

1 Motivation

Anaphora plays an important role in understand-
ing textual cohesion and coherence. Clark (1975)
divides anaphoric relations into two classes, dis-
tinguishing direct and indirect anaphora. Direct
anaphora (coreference) takes place between lan-
guage expressions referring to the same discourse
entity. In the case of indirect interferences (also
called bridging), the antecedent is not mentioned but
associated with some expression in the previous text.
These are, for instance, relations between two peo-
ple – the woman and murdered – the murderer in
Clark’s Example (1) and (2) below:

(1) I met two people yesterday. The woman told me
a story. (Clark, 1975)

(2) John was murdered yesterday. The murderer got
away. (Clark, 1975)

Generaly speaking, a bridging relation can be un-
derstood as an inference about two non-coreferential
expressions introduced in a text that are related in
some particular way that is not explicitly stated, but
this relation contributes essentially to the text coher-
ence. This Clark’s definition of bridging relations,
as vague as it is, led to different notions of bridg-
ing being used in different approaches. For example,
in (Clark, 1975), non-identity semantic relations be-
tween entities are classified into three groups: in-
direct reference by association, indirect reference
by characterization and rhetorical relations. For the
time being, there is no generally accepted classifi-
cation of bridging relations. The basic principle ac-
cepted in most of the existing approaches is that a
list of bridging relations is based on types of seman-
tic relations. Thus, typical examples of bridging are
anaphoric relations between entities, which at the
same time are e.g. in meronymic relations as rep-
resented in Example (3).

(3) There were some fruits on the table. John took
an apple.

However, such interpretation sounds very vague. If
bridging relations are expected to rely on semantics,
we have at least two questions to answer before we
begin to apply a systematic classification or anno-
tation of language data. First, we have to decide
which kinds of relations we are interested in, how

59



detailed the classification should be and which rela-
tions should be ignored. Second, we have to delimit
the boundaries between semantic language-based re-
lations and the relations which are recognized based
on the world knowledge or extralinguistic context.
Both problems are complicated tasks, the final de-
cision mostly depends on the purpose of the anal-
ysis, amount of data and the resources available.
To avoid these problems, we decided to choose a
syntactic approach to bridging relations, instead of
the traditional semantic one. We annotate so-called
genitive bridging: the case where two elements (an
anchor/antecedent and a bridging element/anaphor)
can form a genitive construction, where the anchor is
marked with the genitive case in Russian. In Exam-
ple (4), the anchor is dom [house], the bridging ele-
ment is stenah [walls], and the genitive construction
that can be formed is stenah doma Gen [the walls of
the house].

(4) U nego byl milyj dom s plyuš’:om na stenah
(doma). [He has a nice house with ivy climbing
the walls (of the house).]

We believe that this approach will improve the con-
sistency of the annotated data and will allow us to
create a more reliable corpus for the prepared com-
putational experiments.

This work describes an ongoing project, with the
data annotated within the new syntactic approach
(RuGenBrigde corpus). To the best of our knowl-
edge, this approach has not been applied to any
large-scale data annotation yet, so we do not have
any corroboration of its reliability. To prove the ad-
vantages of our approach, it is necessary to (i) pro-
vide the empirical verification of the quality of our
annotation scheme through double annotation and
measuring the inter-annotator agreement and (ii) to
compare our annotations to other bridging annota-
tion approaches. This paper addresses the second
task. We decided to compare our annotations to
bridging relations annotation in the Prague Depen-
dency Treebank (PDT, Bejček et al., (2013)). There
are several reasons for this choice:

• PDT is one of a restricted number of corpora
with a large-scale annotation of bridging rela-
tions;

• The texts in PDT are in Czech, which is a
Slavic language with many structural (gram-
matical and syntactic) similarities, e.g. it has
the similar declination system, so the genitive
bridgings are expected in the same way as in
Russian; like Russian, Czech lacks the gram-
matical category of definiteness;

• The bridging annotation approach used in PDT
is claimed to be purely semantic (Zikánová et
al., 2015), thus the comparison is especially in-
teresting;

• The number and the types of bridging relations
applied in PDT is an average compared to state-
of-the-art bridging approaches applied.

The paper is structured as follows: after observing
the related work in 1.1, we present the RuGenBrigde
corpus for Russian (Section 2) and bridging annota-
tion in Czech (Section 3); we compare the annota-
tion schemes in Section 4. Further, in Section 5, we
describe two experiments that have been carried out
on the Russian texts: (i) the application of Czech and
Russian annotation schemes on the same texts and
(ii) the annotation of all pairs from RuGenBrigde
corpus with possible PDT bridging relations marks.
We discuss the results in Section 6.

1.1 Related work

There are two main annotation approaches. The
first (and more popular) is based on semantic con-
straints on bridging relations. This approach is close
to Clark’s reference by association. Such bridg-
ing interpretation is used in the studies of Asher
and Lascarides (1998), applying the segmented dis-
course representation theory to bridging relations,
corpus annotations by M. Poesio for English and
Italian (cf. Poesio (2000), Poesio et al. (2004); Poe-
sio and Arstein (2008)), M. Recasens (Recasens
et al., 2007) for Spanish and Catalan, Zikánová et
al. (2015) for Czech; the semantic approach is also
used in Lüngen (2008), Gardent (2003) and so on.
The typical relations of the semantic approach are
meronymic part–whole and set–subset relations, co-
hyponymy (mother – father as family members),
relations of belonging (e.g. a person and his/her
clothes), relations between the situation and its par-

60



ticipants (murder – murderer), some symptomatic
relations (fever – illness) and so on.

Alternatively, there are a few corpora, where there
are no strict semantic constraints on bridging re-
lations, and all types of ”associative” relations be-
tween nominal groups are taken into account. This
approach is realized e.g. in (Hou et al., 2013).

It should also be noted that usually the term bridg-
ing relation is used for definite nominal groups, see
e.g. (Löbner, 1998) or (Poesio and Artstein, 2008).
However, the same kind of implicit anaphoric link-
ing is also possible with indefinite or quantifying
or even generic nominal groups, cf. distribution
statistics in (Hou et al., 2013). For instance, in Ex-
ample (5), a bridging relation can be observed be-
tween the Czech generic nominal group nový VW
Golf [the new VW Golf]1 and an indefinite nominal
group jednı́m novým golfem [one of the new Golfs]
(one arbitrary car of this category).

(5) Nový VW Golf je vybaven motorem o sı́le 110
kW... Dostali jsme možnost se jednı́m novým
golfem projet. (PDT, cit. from (Zikánová et al.,
2015) [The new VW Golf is equipped with an en-
gine power 110 kW... We had an opportunity to
ride in one of the new Golfs.]

2 Annotation of bridging relations in
Russian

Here, we present a new corpus RuGenBrigde, the
first corpus annotated with bridging relations for
Russian. We develop this corpus for training and
testing automatic bridging detection and resolution
systems. In the present stage of the project, RuGen-
Brigde consists of 207 news texts2 (35,841 tokens),
most texts contain 100 - 250 words each. The corpus
was annotated with automatic part of speech tagging
by FreeLing.3 The bridging cases were annotated
manually using BRAT annotation tool4.

2.1 Bridging in genitive constructions

Unlike most approaches defining bridging relations
in terms of semantic and pragmatic categories, in the

1Golf is a type of car made by Volkswagen.
2News from www.polit.ru site
3http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/
4http://brat.nlplab.org

Russian corpus, we use rather syntactic than seman-
tic criteria. We focus mainly on the cases of bridging
in genitive construction, so-called, genitive bridg-
ing. This is the case where the dependent nominal
group of the construction is marked with the gen-
itive case in Russian, the head NP has no case re-
strictions. For instance, in Example (6), there is a
genitive bridging relation between voditel’ [driver]
and avtobus [bus] , because it is understood as vodi-
tel’ avtobusa Gen [the driver of the bus].

(6) V avtobuse nachalsya pozhar. Voditel’ (avto-
busa) sam potušil ogon’. [The fire broke out in
the bus. The driver (of the bus) put out the fire
by himself.]

In fact, we capture bridging relations in genitive con-
structions if an anaphor of bridging pair may have a
dependent NP in genitive case, but it is mostly not
expressed in the sentence because the potential de-
pendent NP was used recently earlier in the text and
it is still actualized in the mind of the reader. For ex-
ample, by driver in Example (6), an addressee can
easily infer that the driver of the bus mentioned in
the previous sentence is meant.

The most typical semantics of Russian genitive
constructions is the ‘part–whole’ relation in a broad
sense, where the whole is marked by genitive case
(glaza ubijcy Gen [eyes of the murderer]). Other
frequent cases are expressions, where a head is a
deverbal noun with a genitive participant vybory
prezidenta Gen [elections of the president], measure
nouns barel’ nefti Gen [barrel of oil] etc.

2.2 Annotation scheme for Russian
Nouns or nominal groups are subjects to annotation.
We adhere to the principle of the minimum possible
markable: if possible, annotators tag a bare noun,
the whole noun phrase is annotated only in the case
when it is the minimum possible name of the entity.
Thus, in my beautiful dog, the markable dog is an-
notated, but in The Ministry of Justice, the whole
phrase is annotated as a markable because all the
words compose the name of the organization.

In RuGenBridge, the following types of bridging
relations are annotated:

1. Bridging relations in genitive constructions
(type BRIDGE). See Examples (4) and (6)

61



above. There are 362 cases of type BRIDGE
in our corpus.

2. We also annotate some cases which are very
close to the genitive bridging, but genitive
construction in Russian is not possible there,
for purely syntactic reasons. We use NON-
GEN mark for such pairs, see the relation be-
tween Russian Federation and Syberia in Ex-
ample (7). This type is especially common with
the named entities. There are just 8 cases of
NON-GEN in our corpus.

(7) Pravitel’stvo Rossijskoj Federacii vneslo
na rassmotrenie (...) Etot proekt takže
sposobstvuet razvitiju Sibiri. [The Govern-
ment of the Russian Federation brings a
bill (...) This bill also promotes the devel-
opment of Syberia.]

It should be noted, that our annotation scheme
is oriented on the language properties of Russian,
primarily on the properties of Russian genitive con-
structions. The ability to form a genitive construc-
tion is a very important criterion for the annotators
by marking bridging relations in the corpus; in fact,
they are guided by it. So, in Example (8) below5

we annotate the bridging relation bag – mum, be-
cause sumka mamy Gen [mum’s bag] is grammati-
cal in Russian; the link bag – supermarket would not
be annotated, because *sumka supermarketa Gen”
[*supermarket’s bag] is ungrammatical.

(8) The mum came from a supermarket and got lost
in her Facebook. The bag is still in the doorway.

The statistics of the annotated types in RuGenBrigde
is presented in Table 2 in Section 5.2, together with
the results of comparison experiments.

Apart from the annotation of bridging relations,
three most frequent types of annotated NPs are
manually marked with special labels in our cor-
pus: (i) GEO (157 cases) for all geographic names
(Moscow, Atlantic Ocean, Thailand etc.), (ii) ORG
(35 cases) for official organizations, both proper and
current names (ministry, policy, LifeNews etc.) and
(iii) POST (22 cases) for political positions (pres-

5We thank our reviewer for this example.

ident, deputy etc.). The ORG mark in RuGen-
Bridge is comparable to the NORP (Nationality, Or-
ganizations and Political organizations) category in
OntoNotes (Stoyanov et al., 2011), but we do not in-
clude Nationalities, e.g. we do not mark Swedes as
ORG in Example (9).

(9) Swedes usually drink coffee in the morning.

3 Annotation of bridging relations in
Czech

Bridging relations in Czech are annotated on the
Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT). This is a
large-scale annotation on ca. 50000 sentences of
news texts. Apart from bridging, other textual phe-
nomena (syntactic structure, ellipsis, coreference,
discourse relations, information structure, etc.) are
annotated, see (Poláková et al., 2013). The clas-
sification of bridging relations in PDT is based on
semantic and pragmatic principles. The annotation
preserves distinctions between the following groups:
(1) meronymy relations between a part and a whole
(subtypes PART-WHOLE and WHOLE-PART, as
e.g. in face – eyes), (2) the relation between a set and
its subsets or elements of the set (subtypes SUBSET-
SET and SET-SUBSET, as in a group of students –
some students – a student), (3) the relation between
an entity and a singular function on this entity (sub-
types P-FUNCT and FUNCT-P, as in company – di-
rector) (4) the relation between coherence-relevant
discourse opposites (type CONTRAST, as in black
flags – white flags), (5) non-coreferential explicit
anaphoric relation (type ANAPH, as in first world
war – at that time) and (6) further underspecified
group REST consisting of six other bridging sub-
types (e.g. relations between family members, event
– argument, locality – inhabitant, etc.).

Unlike in RuGenBrigde, bridging relations in
PDT connect not only the individual nominal groups
but the whole coreference chains. Thus, once pos-
tulating a bridging relation between two elements of
different coreference chains, it should not be marked
again for coreferential expressions later in text. An-
other significant distinction is the principle of the
maximum possible markables (all dependency sub-
trees of antecedent and bridging elements are con-
sidered to be markables).

62



4 Comparison of annotation schemes

The difference of annotation schemes is immedi-
ately related to the scope and nature of the corpora.
Our goal here is not to compare the corpora: it is
useless to compare a big and richly annotated cor-
pus with a small and a focused one, which is still in
the early stage of its development. Thus, the com-
parison concerns only the relevant points.

4.1 Characteristics of markables
The first relevant point concerns properties of mark-
ables and the scope. The scope is different: RuGen-
Brigde chooses the minimum and PDT the maxi-
mum scope of the markables. On the other hand,
both approaches consider some referential adjec-
tives as markables, first of all those which are de-
rived from locational nouns (e.g. USA – American).
Only referential and abstract nouns can be annotated
in the Czech corpus, non-referential nouns are not
concerned. For example, such nouns as measures,
points etc. are considered to be non-referential, so
bridging relations can not be marked in pairs like
barrel – oil or point – share price. Opposite to
this, in the Russian corpus, both referential and non-
referential nouns can take part in bridging relations.
So, in examples like (10) below, bridging relations
will be marked in Russian corpus and will not be
marked in Czech corpus.

(10) Oil futures contracts rose by 1.79% and settled
at $45.54 per barrel (of oil) on Friday.

4.2 Inventory of relations
Bridging annotation in the Czech corpus is a part of
discourse level annotation, the semantics of relations
was taken into account (Nedoluzhko and Mı́rovskỳ,
2011) and the corpus is meant to be multi-purpose.
The Russian corpus is primarily aimed to create
training and testing data for an automatic resolution
system. For this reason, semantic classification of
relations is not so important. Nevertheless, syntactic
constraints inevitably produce some semantic con-
strains. For instance, the Russian genitive construc-
tion is typically used for marking possessive rela-
tions (broadly defined). The most common exam-
ples of this construction include: sumka mamy [the
mom’s bag], stena doma [the wall of the house],
hvost kota [cat’s tail] and so on. On the other hand,

examining the list of the most frequent genitive con-
struction examples in Russian National Corpus6, we
can observe three groups of non-possessive cases:
(i) the first group consists of expressions with nouns
derived from verbs: uvol’nenie nachal’nika [termi-
nation of the boss], pohorony aktera [funeral of an
actor]; (ii) the second group contains expressions
with measure words, e.g. liter, kilogram; and (iii) the
third group represents mostly government positions,
such as ministr inostrannyh del [foreign secretary,
lit. minister of foreign affairs].

Hence, we cannot say that the genitive constraint
is identical to the possessive constraint: there is
a finite list of semantic relations between the an-
chor and the bridging element. Moreover, this set
of possible semantic relations seems to be compa-
rable to some types of Czech bridging relations.
The bridging anaphora of types PART-WHOLE
(WHOLE-PART) and SET-SUB (SUB-SET) are of-
ten the cases of general possession, and FUNCT-P
(P-FUNCT) are often the cases of government posi-
tions.

5 The experiments - application of the
PDT and RuGenBrigde schemes

Starting the annotation of Russian corpus, we sup-
posed that elements of annotated pairs will form se-
mantic relational classes similar to those annotated
within semantic approaches to bridging relations as
the result. So, we expected to catch such cases as
part–whole (krysha doma Gen [roof of the house])
or possessive (sumka mamy Gen [mom’s bag]) re-
lations. With such a result, systematic syntactic ap-
proach could reflect the semantic aspect of bridging
relations. To test this hypothesis, we decided to ap-
ply a semantically oriented annotation scheme to the
Russian texts. For the reasons stated in Section 1, we
have chosen the PDT annotation scheme. In what
follows, we describe two experiments in application
of the PDT scheme for Russian.

5.1 Experiment 1: application of PDT and
RuGenBrigde schemes for a subset of
RuGenBrigde

In the first experiment, we have annotated 8 docu-
ments in Russian with the PDT and RuGenBrigde

6http://www.ruscorpora.ru

63



schemes in parallel with two annotators. One anno-
tator used the PDT semantic approach and another
annotator used the syntactic approach of the RuGen-
Brigde corpus. Contrary to the expectative closeness
of semantics between the relation sets, there is a very
low coincidence between the annotated pairs. The
results are shown in Table 1.

Czech annotation
scheme
TOTAL 69
CONTRAST 6
FUNCT-P 3
P-FUNCT 11
PART-WHOLE 3
SET-SUB 5
SUB-SET 13
WHOLE-PART 18
REST 10

Russian annotation
scheme
TOTAL 22
BRIDGE 22

Table 1: Comparison of Russian and Czech annotation schemes
on 8 documents from RuGenBrigde

We have 69 bridging pairs with the PDT annota-
tion scheme and only 22 with the Russian one. Fur-
thermore, there are only 7 coincidence cases where
anchor and bridging element of the pair are the same,
notably that 3 (of the 7) cases belong to one sentence
(man and his body parts).

One of the reasons for such difference is that gen-
itive bridging in Russian corpus is allowed in only
one direction, where the bridging element (to which
the genitive form of the anchor can be potentially
added) follows the anchor in text. In Czech, both di-
rections (e.g. PART WHOLE and WHOLE PART)
are possible. The second reason is that relations be-
tween proper names (e.g. Washington – USA) are
allowed in the PDT scheme and are very seldom in
RuGenBrigde. There is only one class of these re-
lations: names of regions may be linked with name
of countries, as in case of Moscow region – Russia
described in Section 2.2 above).

The results of the experiment evidence that the se-
mantic approach is more broad-based than our gen-
itive syntactic approach. However, we believe that
syntactic approach could be more systematic and
clear for annotation, thus presenting a more reliable
data for automatic resolution systems. To test this
statement we are intending to annotate our data with
more annotators in the near future. On the other

hand, this experiment displayed that syntactic ap-
proach brights out specific bridging relation types,
which are not identified in the semantic approach.
For this reason, we decided to conduct another ex-
periment and to examine the cases, which seem to
be difficult to catch while applying a semantic anno-
tation scheme.

5.2 Experiment 2: application of the PDT
types to all possible RuGenBrigde genitive
bridgings

This experiment is aimed to find out which semantic
relations are more frequent among the cases of gen-
itive bridging. As another task, we want to distin-
guish and classify the cases that are not overlapped
by the set of PDT semantic relations.

In this experiment, we checked out all cases of
genitive bridging in the RuGenBrigde corpus, and
for all pairs where it was possible, we added the re-
lations that would be annotated within the PDT an-
notation framework. As the result, for 430 bridg-
ing pairs annotated with genitive bridging (types
BRIDGE, COREF-BRIDGE or NON-GEN), we
have 165 pairs annotated with the PDT tags and 265
pairs remained without the PDT tags. Table 2 shows
the numerical results of the experiment.

Czech annotation
marks
AllPDT 152
PART-WHOLE 73
P-FUNCT 55
SET-SUBSET 8
REST 16

Russian annotation
marks
AllRuGenBridge 370
BRIDGE 362
NON-GEN 8

Table 2: All relation marks for Russian RuGenBridge pairs

As shown in Table 2, PART-WHOLE (house –
roof) and FUNCT-P (Russia – prime-minister) are
significantly more frequent than other PDT rela-
tions. 218 pairs which were not annotated with PDT
marks can be further sub-classified into the follow-
ing groups:

1. Anchors are geographical names, bridging ele-
ments (56 pairs) can be further divided into two
subclasses:

(a) something is located in this geographic
object (Moscow – hospitals), or

64



(b) something is concerned with this geo-
graphic object (Russia – budget).

2. Among the rest 162 pairs, we detected the fol-
lowing types:

(a) object – its possessor (flat – landloard),

(b) object – something belonging to this ob-
ject, but not the part of the object (aero-
drome – airplane),

(c) expressions with the names of measures
(oil – barrel),

(d) collocations, mostly deverbative nouns
(rates – increase).

The measure group (2c) reflects the Russian
language-specific feature: measure words require
genitive dependents, so this bridging relation can be
really considered as purely syntactic. Most of ex-
amples in the last group (2d) are of syntactic nature
(more detail in Section 6).

6 Discussion

Let us now analyze some characteristics of bridg-
ing relations which make the output of the syntac-
tic annotation approach. Looking at the seman-
tics of expressions taking part in the bridging re-
lations in ReGenBridge, we can see that there is a
significant number of antecedents referring to geo-
graphic names: among the total of 370 cases, 135
antecedents (36,5% of all bridging relations in the
corpus) are marked with the GEO label. These are
mostly names of the countries and the relations can
be often interpreted as part-whole bridging relations
in the Prague annotation scheme (e.g. country – part
of this country, region, etc. make up 41 cases, or
31% of GEO antecedents). Another frequent cor-
relation between the GEO antecedents in the PDT
bridging types is the type FUNCT, these are often
relations between the name of the country and some
unique function on it, e.g. USA - ministry of foreign
affairs (34 cases, or 25% of GEO antecedents in our
corpus). We note that the relations where GEO la-
bels in genitive bridging annotation correspond to
PART-WHOLE and FUNCT-P in PDT primarily re-
flect the world knowledge. This speaks against the
purity of the Prague semantic annotation. On the

other hand, as mentioned above, the borderline be-
tween the world knowledge and semantics is quite
fuzzy.

The remainder cases of the GEO antecedents (59
cases) could not be annotated with any of the PDT
bridging types.7 Looking at these pairs in more
detail, we can see that the anaphoricity between
the entities is not given by a semantic relation, but
rather by a textual structure and referent activation
practices. Typically for the news genre, events are
located in a specific place that is introduced once
and remains activated for the whole description (e.g.
once introducing Russia, we speek about budget,
hospitals and schools there without repetitions like
hospitals of Russia, schools of Russia and so on).
In this way, redundant repetitions are avoided, and
this also speaks for the discourse origin of bridging
anaphora.

Considering genitive bridgings which did not find
any semantic interpretation within the PDT annota-
tion scheme (218 out of 370 cases), we notice that
anaphoricity of many pairs is given by situational
relationships within the texts. These relations do not
have semantic nature, so they can be hardly included
in any dictionaries of ontologies. On the other hand,
they are not purely pragmatic. They are text-given:
being introduced at the beginning, they are further
used as known and accepted. In this respect, the gen-
eral phenomenon of bridging relations (and our gen-
itive bridging is a subset of them) can be considered
to be deictic and may be related to the category of
definiteness or contextual boundness of expressions
in text, where the variables are also introduced and
further used in text as known.

An additional interesting point that is given by
the comparison of genitive bridging approach to the
PDT annotation scheme is that it gives the possibil-
ity to test the consistency of the PDT annotation.
In some cases, we found problematic the border-
lines between SET-SUBSET and FUNCT bridging
types (cf. the problematic point of uniqueness in
parliament – deputies (no annotation to parliament)
parliament – premier (P-FUNCT to parliament, be-
cause premier in the parliament is unique)). Also,
we met a number of cases which were not annotated

7These are mostly the cases of multiple objects located in
a place marked with a GEO antecedent, e.g. Russia – schools,
banks, hospitals, parks, etc.

65



in PDT, however they could be interpreted in terms
of PDT semantic relations, for example the pair de-
fendant – criminal case was not annotated although
it can be considered as ‘event – argument’ and an-
notated within the REST subtype. Additionally, we
found that the pairs ‘a geographic name – something
located there’ are very common, but such cases were
not included in the PDT annotation scheme.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced the syntactic approach
to bridging annotation and presented some prelim-
inary investigations on its semantic interpretation.
The comparison has shown that genitive bridging
provides an opportunity to find out new functional
types of bridging relations with respect to textual
structure. We believe that this approach is more
consistent than semantic annotation of bridging, be-
cause it is based on formal criteria and it does not re-
quire fixing a borderline between semantics and the
world knowledge. However, the paper presents the
ongoing research which is in the first half of its de-
velopment. Our immediate goals for the future work
are (i) to annotate the existing corpus with two an-
notators and a supervisor, and to measure the inter-
annotator agreement, (ii) to extend the corpus and
analyze bridging cases attested and (iii) to develop a
system for genitive bridging resolution based on the
information in the corpus.

Acknowledgments

The study was supported by the Russian Founda-
tion for Basic research (grant No. 15-07-09306),
the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (grant
16-05394S) and Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports (grant LH14011).

References

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 1998. Bridging.
Journal of Semantics, 15(1):83–113.

Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlı́na
Jı́nová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová, Marie
Mikulová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Jarmila
Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda Ševčı́ková, Jan
Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová. 2013. Prague Depen-
dency Treebank 3.0. Data/software. [cit. 2015 07 22].

Herbert H Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Proceedings of
the 1975 workshop on Theoretical issues in natural
language processing, pages 169–174. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Claire Gardent, Hélène Manuélian, and Eric Kow. 2003.
Which bridges for bridging definite descriptions. In
Proceedings of the EACL 2003 Workshop on Linguis-
tically Interpreted Corpora, pages 69–76.

Yufang Hou, Katja Markert, and Michael Strube. 2013.
Global inference for bridging anaphora resolution. In
HLT-NAACL, pages 907–917.

Sebastian Löbner. 1998. Definite associative anaphora.
manuscript) http://user. phil-fak. uniduesseldorf. de/˜
loebner/publ/DAA-03. pdf.

Harald Lüngen. 2008. RRSet-Taxonomy of rhetori-
cal relations in SemDok. Interne Reports der DFG-
Forschergruppe, 437.

Anna Nedoluzhko and Jiřı́ Mı́rovskỳ. 2011. Annotating
extended textual coreference and bridging relations in
the Prague Dependency Treebank. Annotation man-
ual. Technical report, (44).

Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric An-
notation in the ARRAU Corpus. In LREC.

Massimo Poesio, Rahul Mehta, Axel Maroudas, and
Janet Hitzeman. 2004. Learning to resolve bridg-
ing references. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, page 143. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Massimo Poesio. 2000. Annotating a corpus to develop
and evaluate discourse entity realization algorithms:
Issues and preliminary results. In LREC.

Lucie Poláková, Jirı́ Mı́rovskỳ, Anna Nedoluzhko,
Pavlı́na Jı́nová, Sárka Zikánová, and Eva Hajicová.
2013. Introducing the Prague Discourse Treebank 1.0.
In IJCNLP, pages 91–99.

Marta Recasens, M Antonia Martı, and Mariona Taulé.
2007. Text as scene: Discourse deixis and bridging re-
lations. Procesamiento del lenguaje natural, 39:205–
212.

Veselin Stoyanov, Uday Babbar, Pracheer Gupta, and
Claire Cardie. 2011. Reconciling ontonotes: Unre-
stricted coreference resolution in ontonotes with rec-
oncile. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared
Task, pages 122–126. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Šárka Zikánová, Eva Hajičová, Barbora Hladká, Pavlı́na
Jı́nová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Lucie
Poláková, Kateřina Rysová, Magdaléna Rysová, and
Jan Václ. 2015. Discourse and Coherence. From the
Sentence Structure to Relations in Text, volume 14 of
Studies in Computational and Theoretical Linguistics.
Charles University in Prague, Praha, Czechia.

66


