




































Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+12), pages 112–120,
Düsseldorf, Germany, June 29 - July 1, 2016.

Parasitic Gaps and the Heterogeneity of Dependency Formation in STAG

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko

Department of Linguistics, Languages and Cultures
The University of Calgary

dstorosh@ucalgary.ca

Robert Frank

Department of Linguistics
Yale University

bob.frank@yale.edu

Abstract

This paper presents an account of par-
asitic gaps in Synchronous TAG, mak-
ing use of the more flexible semantic
derivations that derive from the proposal
in Frank and Storoshenko (2012) to add
separate scope components to all predi-
cates. We model parasitic gaps as deriving
from a TAG analog of sidewards move-
ment (Nunes, 2004), where the licensing
wh-phrase combines first with the domain
containing the parasitic gap, which then
combines with the main clause domain
via tree-local multi-component combina-
tion. Such tree-local derivations are pos-
sible only because of the manipulations
of scope available in the semantics. The
phenomenon explored here not only shows
the continued role of the syntax in con-
straining syntactic dependencies, but also
demonstrates the potential for derivations
which are syntactically well-formed, but
are rendered impossible due to the im-
proper binding of the parasitic gap vari-
able.

1 Overt and Covert Dependencies in

TAG

Frank and Storoshenko (2012) propose a new
conception of the semantic side of a syn-
chronous TAG. Following proposals beginning
with Kallmeyer and Joshi (1999), where the repre-
sentation of quantifiers in TAG consists of a multi-
component set including both a scope component
and a variable component, Frank and Storoshenko
advocate a similar division for the trees headed
by lexical predicates. Specifically, they propose
that the semantics of each lexical head includes a
predicate component, in which each of the predi-

〈
TP

T′

VP 3

DPi↓ 1V

criticized

T

DP↓ 2

{
t 2 3

〈e,t〉 3

t

〈e,t〉

t*λx′

1 e↓

λy′

2 e↓

t

e

y′

〈e,t〉

e

x′

〈e,〈e,t〉〉

criticize

}
〉

〈 NP
PP

DP↓ 1P

at

NP*

{
t 1

〈e,t〉

t*λz′

1 e↓

〈e,t〉

〈e,t〉

e

z′

〈e,〈e,t〉〉

at

∧〈e,t〉

}
〉

Figure 1: STAG elementary tree pairs following
Frank and Storoshenko (2012).

cate’s arguments is saturated by a variable, and a
scope component, in which each of the variables
introduced in the predicate component is lambda
bound and the operator is saturated by a substitu-
tion node. It is substitution into the scope com-
ponent, then, which accomplishes the saturation
of the arguments of the predicate. Examples of
such representations for the transitive verb criti-
cize and the preposition at are given in Figure 1.
The inclusion of a quantifier-like scope compo-
nent in the elementary semantic object associated
with a lexical predicate has a number of salutary
consequences. It predicts, for instance, that lex-
ical predicates can themselves introduce quantifi-
cational force over their arguments. We see this in
cases of passivization, where the suppressed sub-
ject is existentially quantified. That such a subject
must be present in the semantics is supported by
its capacity to control into purpose clauses:

(1) The boat was sunk [PRO to collect the insur-
ance]

In a number of languages, including ASL (Petro-
nio, 1995), Gun-djeyhmi, and Warlpiri (Evans,

112



1995), affixes on the verb can impose collective
or distributive interpretations over certain argu-
ments, suggesting the presence of a quantifier in
the scope component that quantifies over that argu-
ment. In English, a similar phenomenon is found
with “stubbornly distributive predicates”: a plural
subject of such a predicate must receive a distribu-
tive interpretation, so that (2) can only mean that
each of the boxes is large, and not that the collec-
tion of boxes is large.

(2) The boxes are large.

Again, this interpretational requirement can be
represented through the presence of a universal
quantifier in the scope component of predicates
like large which takes the semantics of the subject
to delimit its domain of quantification.

What motivated Frank and Storoshenko to make
this proposal, however, was the fact that the scope-
predicate conception of semantic tree sets allows
for tree-local MCTAG derivations of cases of sco-
pal interpretations such as (3), in which the quan-
tifier scopes out of an adjunct.

(3) Donald criticized three groups from every
state. (∀ > 3, 3 > ∀)

Such examples had been taken by Nesson and
Shieber (2008) to motivate the adoption of more
powerful regimens of TAG derivation. Without
the separate scope component, the tree local intro-
duction of a quantifier every state into from’s el-
ementary tree would leave the quantifier stranded
inside of the modifier’s semantics. With the re-
vised representation, however, the quantifier can
be tree-locally adjoined into the scope component.
The two components of the preposition can then
adjoin into the scope component of the quantifier
three groups, with the location of the adjoining
determining the relative scope of the two quanti-
fiers. To complete the derivation, the two compo-
nents of the object quantifier can adjoin into the
scope component of criticized, which we assume
will combine with its own predicate component.

Given the increased derivational flexibility of-
fered by this new conception of semantic elemen-
tary trees, one might wonder whether it under-
mines previous work in TAG that derives locality
in movement from constraints on how trees can
combine. Starting with Kroch and Joshi (1985)
and continuing to Frank (2002) and beyond, it has
been argued that the impossibility of extraction
from syntactic islands such as (4) derives from the

nature of elementary trees coupled with the way in
which TAG derivations proceed.

(4) *Which state did Donald criticize the man
who was from t?

Roughly speaking, this example is blocked be-
cause there is no way for the wh-phrase which
state to end up at the front of the clause if it is
inserted into the elementary tree representing the
relative clause of which it is an argument. Could
the flexibility afforded by scope-predicate seman-
tic trees somehow undermine these results?

An easy, but ultimately less than satisfying, re-
sponse to this question asserts that such flexibil-
ity doesn’t arise for overt syntactic movement be-
cause there is no compelling motivation for the
split of syntactic elementary trees on par with that
which has been proposed for semantic elementary
trees. Yet, even if such a split were in fact de-
sirable for the syntax, it turns out that examples
like (4) would still be blocked. To derive (4) in
a massively multi-component syntax, which state
could be inserted into an upper component asso-
ciated with the relative clause. At the next step
in the derivation, where the relative clause is at-
tached to the elementary tree associated with the
nominal man, the lower component of the relative
must attach directly to the lower component of the
nominal, since that is its surface position. By tree-
locality, this would force the higher component
of the relative, containing the wh-phrase which
state, into the DP structure as opposed to a puta-
tive higher component of the DP, leaving it unable
to reach the left peripheral position of the clause.
Similar arguments can be constructed for the other
“strong islands” that have been shown to derive
from the TAG derivation. In short, the creation of
overt syntactic dependencies are more constrained
than their covert counterparts because the fact that
the derivation needs to produce the correct order-
ing of phonological material constrains the deriva-
tion to involve the lower components.

In the remainder of this paper, we will examine
another class of syntactic dependencies, involv-
ing parasitic gaps, which have not be widely ex-
plored in the TAG literature (but cf. Frank (1991)).
These gaps are interesting because while they are
licensed by an overt syntactic dependency, the par-
asitic gap does not, we claim, involve the dis-
placement of any element in the syntax (cf. Chom-
sky (1982)), and is instead modulated through de-
pendencies formed on the semantic side of the

113



derivation. As a result, parasitic gaps permit
greater derivational flexibility than the dependen-
cies found in usual cases of overt wh-movement.

2 Parasitic Gaps

Parasitic Gap (PG) constructions are broadly de-
fined as a set of sentences in which one trace or
gap left behind by an A′ extraction is only licit
when another such gap exists in the sentence (En-
gdahl, 1983). An example of this appears in (5):

(5) Which papers did Bill file without
Carl reading p?

In this example, extraction from the object posi-
tion of file is independently well-formed, though
it is not possible to extract the object of reading in
the adjunct clause on its own.

(6) *? Which papers did Bill file the grades
without Carl reading p?

PGs can also occur inside infinitival adjuncts, as in
(7), where the arguments of the matrix and adjunct
clauses are identified.

(7) Which papers did Carl file without
reading p?

As has been widely discussed, PGs are able to be
able to occur in other (strong) island contexts, such
subject islands, so long as there is an additional,
independently well-formed instance of extraction.

(8) a. Which boy did [Mary’s talking to

p] bother ?

b. What car did [the attempt to repair

p] ultimately break ?

There are three main analytical puzzles posed
by PGs. First, how does a single wh-phrase bind
multiple gaps? Second, how is the appearance
of the PG dependent on the occurrence of an-
other? Finally, how does the existence of one well-
formed filler-gap dependency license another one
that crosses an island boundary. In the follow-
ing sections, we present an analysis of PG con-
structions in STAG, that provides an solution to
both of these puzzles. We demonstrate that the
distribution of well-formed parasitic gaps is deter-
minable by a combination of syntactic factors and
constraints on the semantic derivation of the PG
which are only made possible once the scope trees
introduced in the previous section are used. In do-
ing so, we also show that our analysis accounts
for a number of previously observed properties of
PGs.

3 An Analysis of PGs

Before proceeding with the analysis of PGs, we
will first sketch our assumptions concerning the
analysis of of wh-movement. The elementary tree
sets required are given in Figure 2. We represent
local wh-extraction in the matrix clause as a tree-
internal movement on the syntax side. We assume
a syntactic constraint on the moved substitution
site at the specifier of CP requiring a wh-phrase.
However, there is no semantic consequence asso-
ciated with this movement: the semantic compo-
nents of the matrix clause are as expected under
the split scope tree analysis: arguments are substi-
tuted into a scope component that includes lambda
operators that bind variables in the argument posi-
tion of the predicate.1 The semantic effect of wh-
extraction derives from the tree set associated with
the wh-phrase, which has the same basic form as a
generalized quantifier. For the proper names, we
are using simple type e intepretations in the in-
terests of space, though nothing crucially hinges
on avoiding a GQ analysis of these nominals as
well. To derive a simple case of clause-bound wh-
movement, such as Which papers did Bill file?,
on the syntax side of the derivation, the DP Bill
will substitute into the specifier of TP subject po-
sition, and the wh-phrase which papers will sub-
stitute into the specifier of CP. The semantic side
will proceed as is standard for sentences involving
quantifiers: the wh-phrase’s tree set will substitute
and adjoin into the scope component of the file set,
while the e-type tree associated with Bill will sub-
stitute into the higher substitution site. This will
yield a two part derived tree set, which combines
together at the conclusion of the derivation.

To derive a PG-containing sentence, such as
(5), we will make use of a synchronous multi-
component tree set for the adjunct clause shown on
the bottom of Figure 2. This tree set has two com-
plications relative to the split-scope adjunct rep-
resented shown above in Figure 1. On the syntax
side, because this sentence involves extraction, the
object position of the verb in the adjunct clause is
filled by a trace. However, because the antecedent
for this trace is not within this elementary tree,
we represent the antecedent via a “degenerate” DP
tree, into which the filler of this gap will ultimately

1Note that the VP-adjoined adverbial modifier is con-

strained via link 3 to take a scope position above the ab-
stractor for the object, but below the subject. We return to the
reason for this assumption below.

114



〈
CP

C′

TP

T′

VP 3

DP

ti

V

file

T

DP↓ 2

C

did

1 DPi↓
{

t 1 2

〈e,t〉

t 3

〈e,t〉

t*λx′′

1 e↓

λy′′

2 e↓

t

e

y′′

〈e,t〉

e

x′′

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.file(y, x)

} 〉
〈 DP

NP

N

papers

D

which

{ t
t*t

x〈e,t〉

paper

Whx e

x

}
〉

〈 DP

Bill

e

bill′

〉 〈 DP

Carl

e

carl′

〉

〈
{

DPi↓ 4 VP

CP

TP

T′

VP

DP

ti

V

reading

T

DP↓ 5

C

without

VP*

} {
t 4 5

〈e,t〉

t

〈e,t〉

t*λx′

4 e↓

λy′

5 e↓

t

t

t

e

y′

〈e,t〉

e

x′

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.read(y, x)

¬

∧t* e

x′

} 〉

Figure 2: Elementary trees for (5)

substitute. On the semantic side, we follow the
assumption made in the previous paragraph con-
cerning the semantics of wh-movement, namely
that it is not encoded in the tree of the predicate
taking the wh-argument. In this case, however, the
antecedent of the gap is not present in the same
syntactic elementary tree, and consequently is not
syntactically local. We take this to be an indica-
tion that this extraction can only be licensed in
the context of another licensing gap. We encode
that requirement semantically, by introducing an
additional e-type variable in the semantic tree set,
which will need to combine in the same domain as
the adjunct.

To derive (5), we follow an analysis that is
reminiscent of the sideward movement analysis in
Hornstein and Nunes (2002) and Nunes (2004).
Under this analysis, the wh-phrase originates in
the adjunct (island) clause, moves to the argument
position of the matrix predicate, and then on to the
canonical position for wh-phrases, specifier of CP.
This analysis directly accounts for the first of the
PG puzzles mentioned above: a single wh-phrase
can bind multiple gaps, since that phrase moves
through both gap positions. Under the TAG ver-
sion of this idea, we begin by combining the with-
out reading adjunct tree set with both of its ar-

guments: the Carl DP, which substitutes into the
subject position, and the wh-phrase which papers,
which substitutes into the degenerate DP compo-
nent. In the semantics, the unique e component
of Carl will substitute into the higher substitution
site of the scope tree; the components of the wh-
phrase will combine tree-locally into the same ad-
junct scope tree, the scope component adjoining
to the root of the adjunct’s scope tree, and the e
component substituting into the lower substitution
position. The derived tree set is shown in Figure 3.

This derived MCS now combines tree-locally
with the matrix predicate’s elementary tree, not
only modifying the predicate, but also filling the
argument position of the moved DP in the syn-
tax, and saturating its e-type substitution node in
the semantics. This semantic combination is fully
tree-local with all components of the adjunct com-
bining into the scope tree for the matrix predi-
cate, bringing along the binder of the wh-variable.
Following the constraint that the two t-recursive
components of the adjunct MCS must combine at
the interior t node of the matrix clause scope tree,
there is only one possible result where all variables
are properly bound, shown in Figure 4.

As noted above, our analysis is similar to the
sideward movement analysis in Minimalism, treat-

115



〈
{ DPi

NP

N

papers

D

which

VP

CP

TP

T′

VP

DP

ti

V

reading

T

DP

Carl

C

without

VP*

} { t
t

〈e,t〉

t

〈e,t〉

t*λx′

e

x

λy′

e

carl′

t

x〈e,t〉

paper

Whx

t

t

t

e

y′

〈e,t〉

e

x′

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.read(y, x)

¬

∧t* e

x′

} 〉

Figure 3: Derived tree set for adjunct clause in (5)

did file

without reading

which papersCarl

Bill

t

〈e,t〉

t

t

〈e,t〉

t

〈e,t〉

t

t

t

e

y′

〈e,t〉

e

x′

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.read(y, x)

¬

∧t

〈e,t〉

t

e

y′′

〈e,t〉

e

x′′

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.file(y, x)

λx′′

e

x′

λx′

e

x

λy′

e

carl’

t

x〈e,t〉

paper

Whx

λy′′

e

bill’

Figure 4: Derivation tree and derived semantic tree for (5)

ing the wh-phrase as combining directly with the
adjunct, with the degenerate DP node in our syn-
tactic MCS for the adjunct simulating the move-
ment. However, the semantic form is quite simple,
with the extra variable going from the adjunct to
the matrix clause in reminiscent of the treatment of
control into embedded clauses proposed by Nes-
son (2009), where one clause’s elementary tree
provides the arguments for another. Adopting this
mechanism allows us to dispense with the need
to posit null operators and the operation of chain
composition, as proposed in Chomsky (1986) and
widely assumed in more recent work on the topic.
This flexibility is derived largely from the treat-
ment of wh-dependencies as inherently quantifica-
tional, with no semantic effect on the predicates
within which extraction takes place.

It is interesting to note that Nesson’s treatment
of control, which can be thought of as the inspira-
tion for this this treatment of PGs, does not gen-
eralize to cases of adjunct control, as in examples
like (7). The problem concerns the directionality
of the derivation: if the adjunct adjoins into the
matrix clause, the adjunct elementary tree set can
provide arguments for the matrix, as it does in our
PG analysis. However, the reverse cannot hap-
pen: the matrix clause cannot provide arguments
which substitute into the adjunct.2 To analyze ad-
junct control, then, we are forced to depart from an
analysis where the two dependencies run in oppo-
site directions, with control from the matrix into

2This might be possible if we relax constraints on TAG
derivations, to permit flexible composition (Joshi et al., 2008;
Chiang and Scheffler, 2008). We put this possibility aside
here.

116



the adjunct for the subject but movement of the
wh-object from the adjunct into the matrix clause.
We see two possible resolutions of this conflict.
On one of these, we would treat adjunct control in
a manner similar to parasitic gaps, with the puta-
tive controller forming part of the adjunct clause’s
tree set. This would in essence involve an adop-
tion of sidewards movement for adjunct control,
as proposed by Hornstein (1999). Alternatively,
we could embrace a semantic treatment of adjunct
control. By taking the adverbial modifier’s inter-
pretation to be of type 〈e,t〉, with abstraction over
the subject argument, combining such a predicate
with the matrix VP, also of type 〈e,t〉, via predicate
modification, we get the effect of subject control,
as both predicates with be asserted to hold of the
same entity.3 We will not choose among these op-
tions in the remainder of the paper.

Before closing this section, we note that the
present analysis accounts for another constraint on
PG constructions, specifically their limitation to
argument wh-words:

(9) a. * Why did you leave when Bill
walked in p?

b. ?* with whom did you drive to school
before going to the concert p??

While the sentence in (9a) may be understood as
asking for the reason leaving at the time of Bill’s
arrival, there is no way to interpret it as including
a PG, where the same reason would also hold for
Bill’s walking in. The same applies in (9b), where
the question can ask about companions on the way
to school, but not both going to the school and the
concert. The contrast here follows because the ad-
verbial clause tree set will not have the degener-
ate DP node into which the adjunct wh-phrase can
substitute, as the position for such an adjunct is
not licensed by the thematic structure of the verb
in the adverbial.

4 Locality in Parasitic Gaps

The multi-component analysis set forth in the pre-
vious section allows extraction from an adjunct
in a way that is not possible with non-multi-
component TAG. Indeed, the impossibility of such
extraction had been used to provide support for the
TAG treatment of extraction, as it derives island

3Nissenbaum (1998) makes use of predicate modification
in his semantic treatment of adjunct parasitic gaps, but uses it
to ensure identity of the binders of the licensing gap and PG.

constraints (Kroch, 1987; Frank, 2002). By grant-
ing ourselves this additional flexibility, we might
worry that those results would fall away. Note,
however, that there are substantial constraints on
the use of such an island-violating derivation. First
of all, the syntactic tree set containing the degener-
ate DP node will be constrained to substitute into
an A′-position, as it is the host of a wh-phrase,
meaning that it will be possible only in the pres-
ence of an instance of extraction. Furthermore, un-
der the assumption that all multi-component com-
bination is tree-local, we will ensure that the para-
sitic gap dependency is local to the licensing de-
pendency. That is, the parasitic gap-containing
adjunct must combine tree-locally with the clause
inside of which the licensing extraction holds, in
order for the substitution of the wh-phrase and ad-
junction of the modifier to take place in a tree-local
fashion.

Note that this analysis does not prevent us from
deriving examples in which the parasitic gap oc-
curs within an embedded clause in the adjunct.

(10) Which papers did Bill file [without
believing that Carl had read p]?

To do so, we need only adjoin a C′-recursive tree
headed by the verb believe into the adjunct tree,
thereby “stretching” the PG dependency across the
clausal boundary. If the PG is contained within
an island (within the adjunct), no such derivation
is possible. And indeed it has been known since
Kayne (1983) that such instances of PGs are im-
possible:

(11) a. * Which papers did Bill file with-
out Carl meeting [the guy who wrote

p?] (Complex NP)

b. * Which papers should we read be-
fore [talking about p] becomes dif-
ficult ? (Subject Island)

Our analysis predicts this pattern exactly.
There is however a kind of case that poses a po-

tential difficulty for our analysis. This involves an
example like (12), where an additional clause in-
tervenes between the licensing gap and the surface
position of the wh-phrase.

(12) Which papers did you predict that I
would file without reading p?

This example is ambiguous, with readings possi-
ble where without is modifying either predict or
reject, and the PG is licensed in both cases. These

117



readings can be easily diagnosed by the controller
of the adjunct clause: when it is you, attachment is
high, and when it is I, attachment is low.4

Using the standard TAG analysis of successive
cyclic wh-movement, the lower reading can be de-
rived straightforwardly. As before, the adjunct-
wh complex (corresponding to the lexical mate-
rial which papers and without reading) is adjoined
to the embedded clause’s elementary tree (headed
by file), as does the matrix clause (represented by
the trees in Figure 5), at C′, thereby displacing the
wh-phrase from its position at the edge of the em-
bedded clause.

〈
C′

TP

T′

VP

C′*V

predict

T

5 DP↓

C
{

t 5

〈e,t〉

t*λz′

5 e↓

t

〈e,t〉

t*〈t,〈e,t〉〉

λpλz.predict(z, p)

e

z′

} 〉

Figure 5: Elementary trees for predict (low attach-
ment of adjunct)

Deriving the lower attachment of (12) is con-
siderably less straightforward. Doing so using the
same set of trees would require a non-local deriva-
tion: While the adjunct would need to be adjoined
into the matrix clause’s tree set, the wh-phrase,
and associated variable in the semantics would
need to composed into the embedded clause’s tree
set. In order to avoid such non-locality, we make
use of the derivation of wh-extraction proposed
in Kroch (1989) and Frank and Kroch (1995)
to analyze cases of ‘long movement’ out of wh-
islands. Specifically, we assume the alternative
multi-component sets for the embedding predicate
predict, shown in Figure 6. On the syntactic side,
the tree is extended to a full CP (as opposed to C′),
including a substitution site for the wh-phrase.

An immediate concern is that this substitution
node appears to violate TAG version of the theta
criterion (Frank, 2002), according to which all
substitution nodes must be part of a chain that re-
ceives a θ-role. However, we note the exceptional
nature of this position, as defined by the links in
the tree. Unlike the case in Figure 2, where the ad-

4We note that either of the treatments of control sketched
above correctly capture this correlation between locus of at-
tachment and controller.

junct is not required to fill the CP specifier (though
it is able to do so), here the links are constructed
such that it must do so (cf. the co-indexation of the
specifier of CP and the VP). This means that the
phrase substituting here must come from an ad-
junct in which it will already have received a role.
Further constraints on the usage of this tree set are
seen on the semantic side: the scope part of pre-
dict has been extended to provide a substitution
site for the variable associated with the new DP,
though instead of binding an argument of predict,
the binder binds a type e tree in the new seman-
tic MCS. On both the syntactic and semantic sides
of the derivation, tree local combination into the
file tree will complete the derivation. Because the
predict tree set has an extra DP node and an extra
variable, it will saturate an argument position in
the clause it embeds, it guarantees a licensing gap
for the PG it supports. As with the earlier cases,
we see all variable dependencies moving in paral-
lel through the derivation. The adjunct passes both
the controlling subject and the wh-phrase through
to the matrix clause via adjoining, and when the
matrix clause adjoins into the embedded clause, it
passes the wh-dependency on again.

As we already noted above, multi-component
tree sets like the one in Figure 6 were first pro-
posed in the analysis of extractions from (weak)
wh-islands, and were taken to be the only path
for such a derivation in a language like English
where the lower CP could not host multiple wh-
phrases in its specifier(s). If this is correct, our cur-
rent analysis makes the prediction that instances
of long movement will only permit the high at-
tachment of the PG-containing adjunct. Frank and
Kroch (1994) argued that this was correct for ex-
traction out of DP, on the basis of examples like
(13a), and we believe that it is also the case for
extraction from (some) wh-islands:5

(13) a. Which building did the mayori report
on [ Trump’sj renovation of ] [after

5Frank (1991) reaches a different conclusion concerning
extraction from wh-islands, on the basis of examples like the
following:

(1) Which cari did Billj understand how the mechanick had
fixed [without PROj/k dismantling p ]

This example appears to permit the lower attachment inter-
pretation to a considerably greater degree than (13b). We do
not at present have an explanation for why the presence of an
argument as opposed to adjunct wh-phrase in the embedded
specifier of CP should lead to this difference. We leave this
for future work.

118



〈
{ CP

C′

TP

T′

VP 6

CP*V

predict

T

5 DP↓

C

6 DPi↓

DP

ti

}
{

t 5 6

〈e,t〉

t

〈e,t〉

t*λx′

6 e↓

λz′

5 e↓

t

〈e,t〉

t*〈t,〈e,t〉〉

λpλz.predict(z, p)

e

z′

e

x′

} 〉

Figure 6: Elementary trees for predict (high attachment of adjunct)

PROi/∗j previously abandoning p]?

b. Which cari did Billj understand whok
had fixed [without PROj/∗k disman-
tling p ]

Such contrasts provide support for the treatment of
high attachment we have provided, as well as for
the analysis of PGs that we have presented.

5 Anti-C-Command and Beyond

We turn finally to another property that has been
attributed to parasitic gap constructions. In the
original paper on the topic, Engdahl contrasts
cases like (7) with the anomalous (14).

(14) * Which article got filed before Carl
read p?

Engdahl argues that the crucial distinction be-
tween these cases concerns the fact that the li-
censing gap in the well-formed case does not c-
command the parasitic gap, whereas it does so in
the ill-formed case. This anti-command condi-
tion has been widely assumed to be a restriction
on parasitic gaps. Our present analysis captures
this quite simply by forcing the adjunct’s seman-
tic content to adjoin into the matrix clause’s scope
tree at a position which can bind objects, but not
subjects. Rather than building anti-c-command
into the syntax, here we are deriving the same re-
sult from the semantics.

We also note that our approach captures another
contrast relating to the use of PG constructions
noted by Phillips (2006):

(15) a. Which car did the attempt to fix

p ultimately destroy ?

b. * Which platform did the reporter
that criticized p ultimately endorse

?

In neither case does the licensing gap c-command
the PG, and yet there is a clear and strong contrast
in judgments. While space prohibits a full anal-
ysis, the prior discussion provides the necessary
insights. Though an STAG analysis of nominal-
izations is well outside the scope of this paper, it
is plausible that to fix should be assimilable to the
kind of infinitival adjunct present in (7). In con-
trast, in the case of the relative clause, our account
is going to mirror the account for (4) where local-
ity of the composition of the relative clause will be
key. Of course, here we are dealing with a covert
contrast not derived from overt movement, so the
better analogy is to note that just as the relative
clause is a scope island (versus the control case),
the relative clause here remains a legitimate island
for the parasitic gap.

In closing the paper with these examples, we
note that parasitic gap constructions provide an
ideal example of the theoretical possibilities af-
forded by STAG. The pairing of synchronized
derivations does nothing to weaken the power of
existing semantic constraints on a derivation, but
does make it possible to allow semantics an equal
opportunity to rule out syntactically well-formed
derivations. This is a welcome result as it opens
up new analyses for cases where seemingly well-
formed syntactic derivations are ruled out based
on a semantic contrast.

Acknowledgments

We thank Mark Steedman and the anonymous
TAG+ reviewers for their helpful comments which
helped us significantly in the development of this
analysis.

119



References

Emmon Bach, Eloise Jelinek, Angelika Kratzer, and
Barbara H. Partee, editors. 1995. Quantification in
Natural Languages. Springer.

David Chiang and Tatjana Scheffler. 2008. Flexi-
ble composition and delayed tree-locality. In Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on
Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms
(TAG+9), pages 17–24, Tübingen.

Noam Chomsky. 1982. Some Concepts and Conse-
quences of the Theory of Government and Binding.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Noam Chomsky. 1986. Barriers. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Elisabet Engdahl. 1983. Parasitic gaps. Linguistics
and Philosophy, 6:5–34.

Nick Evans. 1995. A-quantifiers and scope in Mayali.
In Bach et al. (Bach et al., 1995), pages 207–270.

Robert Frank and Anthony Kroch. 1994. Nominal
structures and structural recursion. Computational
Intelligence, 10(4):453–470.

Robert Frank and Anthony Kroch. 1995. Generalized
transformations and the theory of grammar. Studia
Linguistica, 49(2):103–151.

Robert Frank and Dennis Ryan Storoshenko. 2012.
The shape of elementary trees and scope possibil-
ities in STAG. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tional Workshop on Tree Adjoinining Grammars and
Related Formalisms (TAG+11), Paris.

Robert Frank. 1991. Parasitic gaps and locality condi-
tions. In Proceedings of the 27th Regional Meeting
of the Chicago Linguistics Society, pages 167–181.
University of Chicago.

Robert Frank. 2002. Phrase Structure Composition
and Syntactic Dependencies. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Norbert Hornstein and Jario Nunes. 2002. On asym-
metries between parastici gap and across-the-board
constructions. Syntax, 5(1):26–54.

Norbert Hornstein. 1999. Movement and control. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 30(1):69–96.

Aravind K. Joshi, Laura Kallmeyer, and Maribel
Romero. 2008. Flexible composition in LTAG:
Quantifier scope and inverse linking. In Harry Bunt
and Reinhard Muskens, editors, Computing Mean-
ing, volume 3, pages 233–256. Springer, Dordrecht.

Laura Kallmeyer and Aravind K. Joshi. 1999. Fac-
toring predicate argument and scope semantics: Un-
derspecified semantics with LTAG. In Paul Dekker,
editor, Proceedings of the 12th Amsterdam Collo-
quium, pages 169–174, Amsterdam. Institute for
Logic, Language and Computation.

Richard S. Kayne. 1983. Connectedness. Linguistic
Inquiry, 14(2):223–249.

Anthony Kroch and Aravind K. Joshi. 1985. The lin-
guistic relevance of tree adjoining grammar. Techni-
cal Report MS-CS-85-16, Department of Computer
and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylva-
nia.

Anthony Kroch. 1987. Unbounded dependencies and
subjacency in a tree adjoining grammar. In Alexis
Manaster-Ramer, editor, The Mathematics of Lan-
guage, pages 143–172. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.

Anthony Kroch. 1989. Asymmetries in long distance
extraction in a tree adjoining grammar. In Mark
Baltin and Anthony Kroch, editors, Alternative Con-
ceptions of Phrase Structure, pages 66–98. Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Rebecca Nesson and Stuart Shieber. 2008. Syn-
chronous vector tree adjoining grammars for syntax
and semantics: Control verbs, relative clauses, and
inverse linking. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and
Related Formalisms, pages 73–80.

Rebecca Nesson. 2009. Synchronous and Multicom-
ponent Tree-Adjoining Grammars: Complexity, Al-
gorithms, and Linguistic Applications. Ph.D. thesis,
Harvard University.

Jon Nissenbaum. 1998. Derived predicates and the
interpretation of parasitic gaps. In Kimary Shahin,
Susan Blake, and Eun-Sook Kim, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 17th West Coast Conference on Formal
Linguistics, pages 507–521. Stanford: CSLI.

Jairo Nunes. 2004. Linearization of Chains and Side-
ward Movement. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Karen Petronio. 1995. Bare noun phrases, verbs and
quantification in ASL. In Bach et al. (Bach et al.,
1995), pages 603–618.

Colin Phillips. 2006. The real-time status of island
phenomena. Language, 82(4):795–823.

120


