



















































An Unsupervised System for Visual Exploration of Twitter Conversations


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 60–65,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Unsupervised System for Visual Exploration of Twitter Conversations

Derrick Higgins, Michael Heilman, Adrianna Jelesnianska and Keith Ingersoll
Civis Analytics

dhiggins@civisanalytics.com

Abstract

Social media provides a wealth of information
regarding users’ perspectives on issues, pub-
lic figures and brands, but it can be a time-
consuming and labor-intensive process to de-
velop data pipelines in which those perspec-
tives are encoded, and to build visualizations
that illuminate important developments. This
paper describes a system for quickly devel-
oping a model of the conversation around an
issue on Twitter, and a flexible visualization
system that allows analysts to interactively ex-
plore key facets of the analysis.

1 Introduction

This paper introduces a visualization system de-
signed to support deep analysis of Twitter conversa-
tions that persist over a long period of time (as well
as inform decisions concerned with recent develop-
ments). Given a set of tweets that define the con-
versation to be modeled (and which may be selected
by arbitrary criteria including keywords, users, and
time frames of interest), Civis Analytics’ web-based
system provides a rich and interactive set of visual-
izations that illustrate

• the major themes of discussion and user per-
spectives,

• communities of users engaged in the conversa-
tion (and their centrality to it),

• how strongly users and user groups address par-
ticular themes,

• the activity of themes and user groups over
time, and

• the activity of themes and user groups in differ-
ent geographical regions.

We anticipate that an analyst can use this tool to
quickly develop a high-level understanding of the
dynamics of a given issue on Twitter, to drill down
into the specifics of how particular users and tweets
contribute to changes in the conversation, and to
develop informed strategies for outreach or inter-
vention. The tool takes advantage of current re-
search in topic modeling and community analysis,
and can easily incorporate domain-specific knowl-
edge where it is available.

2 Related Work

Civis’ system for visualizing the dynamics of social
media conversations builds upon prior research in a
number of areas.

2.1 Data processing technologies
First, there are a number of enabling technologies
that are used to transform the unstructured data
stream from Twitter into a structured representation
that our system can use as the basis for visualization.

One such technology is topic modeling – unsu-
pervised identification of major themes in a set of
text documents. Since its introduction (Blei et al.,
2003), topic modeling has been tailored to perform
better on short texts such as microblogs. For exam-
ple, the Dirichlet Multinomial Mixture Model (Yin
and Wang, 2014) modifies the standard LDA model
to constrain all words of a text to be generated by

60



the same mixture component (topic), and the Biterm
Topic Model (Yan et al., 2015) combines adjacent
terms to provide richer information about the subject
of a short text. The topic modeling method incorpo-
rated into the Civis social listening tool builds upon
this research to provide meaningful topic groupings
on short texts, but currently does not make use of
any tweet metadata such as author or time frame.

Similarly, much progress has been made in re-
cent years in adapting sentiment analysis to mi-
croblog data. Promising methods include hybrid
topic-sentiment models (Xiang and Zhou, 2014),
the incorporation of tweet metadata into the model
(Vosoughi et al., 2015), and the application of
word sense disambiguation as a pre-processing step
(Sumanth and Inkpen, 2015).

Finally, our visualization tool makes use of graph-
based community analysis. We use the Louvain al-
gorithm (Blondel et al., 2008) on the friend-follower
graph to find coherent user communities in a Twitter
conversation; a survey of modern methods for com-
munity analysis is given by Malliaros and Vazirgian-
nis (2013).

While the current version of the Civis visualiza-
tion tool includes topic modeling, community infer-
ence, and sentiment analysis, it is agnostic as to the
source of these data layers. Our data abstraction
layer guarantees that the visualization too will work
as long as the relevant model can assign numeric val-
ues to tweets (or, in the case of community analysis,
categories to users).

2.2 Visualization research
We also build on previous work that has developed
interfaces for visualizing microblog metadata de-
rived using natural language tools. Xie et al. (2013)
use high-frequency bar charts to demonstrate the ac-
tivity associated with “bursty” topics identified by
their algorithm, while Malik et al. (2013) conduct
user studies to refine a Twitter topic exploration tool
with multiple information displays.

In the area of sentiment analysis, many dash-
boards have been developed to show the time course
of opinion associated with a particular topic or key-
word. Hao et al. (2011) develop a system with more
engaging displays than the standard line chart, in-
cluding heatmaps embedded within calendars, and
activity maps.

The tool we will present in our demonstration dif-
fers from these previous interfaces primarily in the
flexibility it allows for faceting the analysis accord-
ing to NLP-related features, location, user commu-
nity, and time.

3 System Overview

Civis Analytics’ system for visualizing conversa-
tions on Twitter is intended to allow an analyst
to quickly develop a model of the most important
themes of discussion on an issue, the parties in-
volved in the conversation, and trends across time
and space.

In our live demonstration of the system, we will
show how it can be used to analyze a wide variety of
issues, including climate change, data science, and
education. To provide a clearer indication of the type
of views the system supports, though, we focus here
on an analysis of the 2015-16 US Presidential pri-
mary campaign. The dataset for our analysis con-
sists of approximately 15 million tweets posted be-
tween May, 2015 and February, 2016. These tweets
were selected to include references to one or more
of the Republican or Democratic candidates for the
presidency (by name or using a strongly associated
hashtag).

We applied a version of topic modeling adapted
to short texts to infer a set of 44 topics, which are
not mutually exclusive. Some of these topics are
associated with particular candidates, while others
are related to issues or events in the campaign. An
analyst manually labeled these topics by inspect-
ing the words and tweets most strongly associated
with each, and the resulting topic definitions are in-
cluded in our visualization tool for reference; Fig-
ure 1 demonstrates how topic-word associations are
shown to users for the first 5 topics in our set (alpha-
betically).

We also selected a set of the most-active and
most-followed users in the conversation for com-
munity analysis. We automatically inferred a set
of three communities of users, which roughly cor-
respond to political orientation (“Conservatives”,
“Progressives”, and “Media”, with the last group
also including some political centrists). In our vi-
sual interface, these user groupings can be explored
using an interactive graph that shows user clusters

61



projected into two dimensions (cf. Figure 2). The
2D projection is done using the t-SNE algorithm
(van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008) so that users
with similar friend-follower relationships generally
appear near one another. Users can interactively ex-
plore the graph to identify key users in each commu-
nity and access their profiles.

The Civis interface also allows users to access
more information about particular Twitter accounts
that are relatively central to the network for a partic-
ular issue (using a network centrality measure such
as PageRank). We hypothesize that accounts with
a central position in the friend-follower network re-
stricted to a particular issue are likely to be impor-
tant, and perhaps influential figures in the relevant
Twitter community. As shown in Figure 3, the avail-
able metadata about these key accounts includes the
number of followers, how active they are on a given
issue, and their relative engagement across topics.

Our system also supports sentiment analysis; Fig-
ure 4 demonstrates the average sentiment polarity
of tweets overlaid on the graph of relationships be-
tween Twitter users. While the activity of particular
topics is often strongly indicative of sentiment on its
own, the sentiment layer may sometimes encode in-
dependent information as well.

Figure 4: Overlay of sentiment on to user exploration view

Finally, given base data associated with each
tweet regarding topics, sentiment, and user commu-
nities, the Civis social listening tool provides mul-
tiple visualizations that allow users to explore the

inter-relationships among these variables (including
crosstabs, maps, and time series charts). Figure 5
shows a sample line chart displaying the time course
of activation of the Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton
and Black Lives Matter topics, restricted to the sub-
set of Twitter users who are classified as belonging
to the Progressive community.

4 Discussion and Future Work

The Civis social listening tool provides a flexible en-
vironment in which an analyst can interactively ex-
plore selected dimensions of a Twitter conversation.
We hope it will inspire future research on visualiza-
tion techniques for social media, and we anticipate
extending the tool in a number of directions in the
near future.

First, we plan to extend the set of case studies we
have developed in order to test and demonstrate its
functionality. We have built out analyses of the 2016
US Presidential Primary, climate change, and data
science, but we would like to extend this set to in-
clude a more diverse set of topic areas.

Second, we plan to conduct more formal usability
studies to establish which parts of the interface are
most useful, and which users may find confusing or
superfluous.

Finally, we hope to broaden the source data be-
hind the tool to include other social media platforms
and text sources. Print news stories, blog posts, and
data feeds from Instagram all represent extensions
that could provide additional context for analysts to
exploit, given the right tools for summarization of
their content.

62



Figure 1: Visualization of words most strongly associated with selected topics

Figure 2: Interface for exploration of users and communities engaged in Twitter conversation (using a two-dimensional projection
of friend-follower links)

63



Figure 3: List of most influential accounts from the Conservative community in the Presidential Primary analysis

Figure 5: Visualization of trends in the Civis social listening interface, illustrated using the activity of Progressive users on the
Bernie Sanders (top), Hillary Clinton (middle) and Black Lives Matter (bottom) topics

64



References

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:993–1022, March.

Vincent D. Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lam-
biotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. 2008. Fast un-
folding of communities in large networks. Jour-
nal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
2008(10):10008+, July.

Ming C. Hao, Christian Rohrdantz, Halldor Janetzko,
Umeshwar Dayal, Daniel A. Keim, Lars-Erik Haug,
and Meichun Hsu. 2011. Visual sentiment analysis on
Twitter data streams. In IEEE VAST, pages 277–278.
IEEE Computer Society.

Sana Malik, Alison Smith, Timothy Hawes, Panagis Pa-
padatos, Jianyu Li, Cody Dunne, and Ben Shneider-
man. 2013. TopicFlow: visualizing topic alignment of
Twitter data over time. In Jon G. Rokne and Christos
Faloutsos, editors, ASONAM, pages 720–726. ACM.

Fragkiskos D. Malliaros and Michalis Vazirgiannis.
2013. Clustering and community detection in directed
networks: A survey. Physics Reports, 533(4):95 –
142. Clustering and Community Detection in Directed
Networks: A Survey.

Chiraag Sumanth and Diana Inkpen. 2015. How much
does word sense disambiguation help in sentiment
analysis of micropost data? In Proceedings of the
6th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Sub-
jectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages
115–121, Lisboa, Portugal, September. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing high-dimensional data using t-SNE. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 9:2579–2605.

Soroush Vosoughi, Helen Zhou, and deb roy. 2015. En-
hanced Twitter sentiment classification using contex-
tual information. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Senti-
ment and Social Media Analysis, pages 16–24, Lis-
boa, Portugal, September. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Bing Xiang and Liang Zhou. 2014. Improving Twitter
sentiment analysis with topic-based mixture modeling
and semi-supervised training. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages
434–439, Baltimore, Maryland, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Wei Xie, Feida Zhu, Jing Jiang, Ee-Peng Lim, and
Ke Wang. 2013. TopicSketch: Real-time bursty topic
detection from twitter. In Hui Xiong, George Karypis,
Bhavani M. Thuraisingham, Diane J. Cook, and Xin-

dong Wu, editors, ICDM, pages 837–846. IEEE Com-
puter Society.

Xiaohui Yan, Jiafeng Guo, Yanyan Lan, Jun Xu, and
Xueqi Cheng. 2015. A probabilistic model for bursty
topic discovery in microblogs. In The Twenty-Ninth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Jianhua Yin and Jianyong Wang. 2014. A Dirich-
let multinomial mixture model-based approach for
short text clustering. In Proceedings of the 20th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’14, pages
233–242, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

65


