



















































Information structure, syntax, and pragmatics and other factors in resolving scope ambiguity


Proceedings of the Workshop on Grammar and Lexicon: Interactions and Interfaces,
pages 1–6, Osaka, Japan, December 11 2016.

Information structure, syntax, and pragmatics and other factors in 

resolving scope ambiguity 

Valentina Apresjan 

National Research University “Higher School of Economics”  

20 Myasnitskaya Ulitsa, Moscow 101000, Russia  

Vinogradov Russian Language Institute 

Volkhonka 18/2, 119019 Moscow 

valentina.apresjan@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

 
The paper is a corpus study of the factors involved in disambiguating potential scope ambiguity in 

sentences with negation and universal quantifier, such as I don’t want talk to all these people, which 

can alternatively mean ‘I don’t want to talk to any of these people’ and ‘I don’t want to talk to some of 

these people’. The relevant factors are demonstrated to be largely different from those involved in 

disambiguating lexical polysemy. They include the syntactic function of the constituent containing all 

(subject, direct complement, adjunct), as well as the deepness of its embedding; the status of the main 

predicate and all with respect to the information structure of the utterance (topic vs. focus, given vs. 

new information); pragmatic implicatures pertaining to the situations described in the utterances.     
  

1 Introduction 

Scope ambiguity is a wide-spread phenomenon, which is fairly well described in the studies of 

semantics-syntax interface. However, in actual communication we rarely experience difficulties in 

assigning correct scope to operators in the contexts which allow potential ambiguity. Unlike lexical 

polysemy, which is more frequently resolved by semantic factors, i.e. semantic classes of collocates, 

one of the crucial factors in resolving scope ambiguity is pragmatics. Consider  the adverb 

accidentally, which presupposes an action and asserts its non-intentionality; cf. I didn’t cut my finger 

accidentally = ‘I cut my finger [presupposition]; it was not intentional [assertion]’.  

Accidentally can have wide scope readings as in (1), where it has scope over the verb and the 
modifier of time, and narrow scope readings as in (2) where it has scope only over the complement: 

 

(1)  The house was accidentally [burnt in 1947]   
 

(2) We accidentally planted [potatoes] 

 

Wide scope readings refer to purely accidental events and narrow scope readings denote mistaken 

intentional actions.  

The readings are determined by pragmatics: We accidentally planted [potatoes] favors narrow 

scope, since in a plausible world, planting is deliberate; therefore, the mistake concerns only a certain 

aspect of this action. On a linguistic level, it means that the adverb accidentally affects only one 

argument of this verb (the object – the planting stock).  
On the other hand, The house was accidentally [burnt in 1947] favors wide scope, since house-

burning is normally unintentional; as for the possibility of a deliberate reading, an arson meant for a 

particular year is pragmatically implausible.  
The discussion is mostly devoted to pragmatic and other factors that are at play in the interpretation 

of scope ambiguities in the combination of the universal quantifier all with negation. It is well-known, 

that in certain sentences with all and not, negation can have scope either over the verb, or over all, as 
in (1) and (2): 

 

(3) I did not [see] all these people ≈ I saw none of those people 

(not has scope over the verb) 

1



 
 

(4) I did not see [all] these people ≈ I saw some of these people (not has scope over the universal 
quantifier) 

 

Thus, the surface structure with negation, a verb and a quantifier phrase not V all X can be 
interpreted as either as (5) or (6) depending on whether negation has scope over the verb or over the 

universal quantifier.    

 
(5) not V all X = not [V] all X (of all Xs, it is true that they are not V)  

 

(6) not V all X = not V [all X] (it is not true that all Xs are V = some Xs are V and some Xs are not 

V) 

 

Yet cases where both interpretations are equally feasible are quite rare. In the majority of cases, 

context provides sufficient clues as to the choice of the intended reading; cf. 

 

(7) I don’t believe all this bullshit he [tells] me (≈ ‘I don’t believe anything of what he tells me’, 

negation has scope over the VP) 

 

(8) I don’t agree with [all he says] but many things sound reasonable (≈ ‘I agree with part of what 

he says’, negation has scope over the quantifier phrase)  

 

2 Methods and material  

The paper employs corpus methods. The material comes from the parallel Russian-English and 

English-Russian corpus, which is a sub-corpus of the Russian National Corpus (ruscorpora.ru). It 

counts 24,675,890 words and comprises 19-21 century Russian and English literature (mostly novels), 
as well as a certain amount of periodicals, in translations. Parallel literary corpus has been chosen 

because there is plentiful context to verify the correctness of the reading, which is further facilitated by 

the presence of the translation or the original. The use of a parallel corpus also enables one to conduct 
a contrastive study of the factors involved in disambiguation. These factors have been found to be the 

same for Russian and English, although English sentences with scope ambiguity of this type are on the 

whole more typical of English than for Russian, which favors constituent negation.  

The search query has been formulated as not + v + all, with the distances set at 3 words. All 

contexts that preclude ambiguous readings in principle, such as various idiomatic expressions (not at 

all, all of it, at all costs, after all, all the more, not only…but also etc.); combinations of all with 
numerals (all four), deeply embedded clauses (They told them not to stop running until they got all the 

way back to Tokyo) have been excluded from the search. Total useful results yielded 147 hits.  

 

3 Results and discussion 

The distribution of the interpretations is as follows:  

 

• 82 readings where not has scope over the universal quantifier, such as You haven’t told me 

[all] ≈ ‘You have told me part of what you know’; I haven’t eaten [all] the apples she bought 

‘I have eaten some of the apples that she bought’;  

 

• 58 readings where not has scope over the matrix verb or another constituent, such as I don’t 

[give a heck] about all these idiots ≈ ‘I don’t give a heck about any of these idiots’; I didn’t 

come all the way from Alabama [to hear you say that] ≈ ‘I came all the way from Alabama for 

another reason’;   

 

 

2



•  7 ambiguous readings.   

 

As appears from these data, the actual ambiguity is indeed rather rare, though the distribution of the 

interpretations is not exactly balanced. Contexts when the universal quantifier does not fall into the 

scope of negation are less frequent, and can therefore be assumed more marked in terms of semantic, 

pragmatic, syntactic and communicative conditions.  

 

4 Factors at play in scope disambiguation 

The following factors appear to be relevant in the choice of interpretation: 

 

• Information structure of the utterance, namely whether all is in the topic or in the focus;   

 

• Semantic structure of the utterance, namely, whether the universal quantifier is presupposed;    

 

• Syntactic structure of the utterance, namely whether there is a “competing” constituent that 

can “attract” negation in lieu of the universal quantifier; 

 

• Conventional implicatures, namely what are the normal pragmatic expectations in the 

situations that are introduced by verbs and quantifier phrases.    
 

Besides the factors listed above, there are some basic syntactic considerations that affect the 

possible readings; they are listed below.   
If all is part of the subject, it usually requires constituent negation rather than sentence negation. 

Sentences like (9) are considerably less frequent that phrases like (10).    

 

(9) ?All Russians are not gloomy 

 

(10) Not all Russians are gloomy (V. Nabokov, Pale Fire) 

 

So, it seems to be that the universal quantifier has to be to the right of negation in order to be able to 

fall into its scope.  
And in that case, it is most easily affected by negation if it is a direct complement to the syntactically 

negated verb, as in (11):  

 
(11) He didn’t like all his students ‘He liked only some of his students’ 

 

If all is part of the the adjunct, it is less accessible to negation, since certain adjuncts can move 

around more freely and can be fronted and topicalized, so (12) is more likely to be interpreted with 

negation scoping over the verb: 

 

(12) He didn’t talk to me all this time ≈ All this time, He didn’t talk to me  

‘The entire time, he didn’t talk to me’ 
 

Also, if the constituent containing all is deeply embedded, it prevents negation from affecting the 

universal quantifier: 

 

(13)  “Well…” and here Clyde hesitated and stumbled, quite as if he had not been instructed as to 

all this beforehand (Theodore Dreiser, An American Tragedy) ≈ ‘He had been instructed as to all this 

beforehand, but hesitated and stumbled as though he hadn’t’ 

 

On the whole, all is most flexible as part of direct complements and adjuncts and in this syntactic 

function allows, in principle, both scope interpretations. The factors influencing these interpretations 

are examined below.  

3



 

5 Information structure of the utterance 

5.1 Both all and the matrix verb are part of the Topic 

When both all and the matrix verb are part of the Topic, they are normally presupposed, and not 

asserted, and therefore, do not fall under negation; cf. discussion in Hajičova (1973). Thus, in the 

utterances where the universal quantifier all and the matrix verb are in the topic, negation has scope 

over the remaining constituent, usually the verbal adjunct: 

  

(14) I have not said all this ǁ [in order to annoy you] 

 

In (9), the fact of saying certain things (I have said all this) is Topic, and the purpose of this speech 

act (not in order to annoy you) is Focus. Negation, as a typical focalizing component, does not affect 
the topic part, and therefore, all and the matrix verb remain presupposed and outside of the scope of 

the negative operator. Syntactically, adding a constituent that can “attract” negation helps create 

conditions for this type of information structure and interpretation. Negation shifts both from the 

universal quantifier and from the matrix verb to the purposive adjunct. Compare (14) with (15) which 

can only be interpreted as ‘I have said some things but not all’, where all is in the Focus and negated: 

 

(15) I  have not said ǁ [all]    
 

In the absence of a contracted proposition in order to annoy you a non-negated quantifier reading is 

not available.   
A subtype of sentences with this information structure are phrases with another universal quantifier 

which creates a target for constituent negation. In sentences like (16) and (17) both the verb and the 

all-phrase are in the topic and the negated quantifier forms a contrastive focus.    
 

(16)  She had not [ONCE] [contrastive Focus] thought of him all the morning [Topic] [Leo 

Tolstoy. Anna Karenina (parts 5-8) (Constance Garnett, 1911)] 

 

(17) And not [a CREATURE] [contrastive Focus] coming near us all the evening! [Topic] [Jane 

Austen. Persuasion (1816)] 

 

5.2 All is given information, the matrix verb is new information
1
 

In this type of sentences, all constitutes given information, although it is usually part of the Focus, 

along with the verb; it is presupposed and does not fall into the scope of negation. However, the matrix 

verb, which is either non-factive or is placed in a non-veridical context (Giannakidou 1998) constitutes 

new information and is not presupposed. Therefore, negation has scope over the matrix verb, but not 

over the universal quantifier: 

 

(18) I'm not [going] all the way to Huntingdon to celebrate the ruby wedding of two people I have 

spoken to once for eight seconds since I was three (Helen Fielding,  Bridget Jones's Diary (1996)]  ≈ 

‘All the way to Huntington to celebrate the ruby wedding… [given information, presupposition]; I am 

not going [new information, assertion]’ ≈ ‘I am not going to Huntington at all for the ruby wedding’ 
 

The choice between interpretation in phrases like (18), on the one hand, and (19), on the other, 

frequently depends on the sentence type. Veridical contexts, like (19), license the factual interpretation 

                                                             
1
 For this type of sentences, it is more meaningful to distinguish between given information and new information. Universal 

quantifier all is given, it belongs to the background knowledge, and the verb is new. As for Topic-Focus structure, because 

sentences in this type are usually non-veridical, they tend to consist entirely of focalized information; cf. I don’t know what to 

do with all this food (information about the food is presented as known to the listener, yet it forms part of the focus together 

with the verb).  

4



of the verb, which is conducive to its placement in the presupposition and topic. Non-veridical 
contexts, like (18), license the non-factual interpretation of the verb, which inhibits its placement in 

the presupposition and topic. If the context in (18) were changed to veridical, as in (19), the entire 

semantic and informational structure would be changed; cf.  
 

(19) I have not come all the way to Huntingdon [Topic] // [to celebrate the ruby wedding of two 

people I have spoken to once for eight seconds since I was three] [Focus] ≈ ‘I have come all the 

way to Huntington, but not for the purpose of celebrating the ruby wedding’ 

 

5.3 All is in the Focus, the matrix verb is part of the Topic 

In this type of sentences, the matrix verb and the rest of the sentence are in the topic, while all forms a 

contrastive focus. The verb is presupposed and does not fall into the scope of negation, whereas all is 

asserted and becomes target for negation, attaining the interpretation ‘some’. Consider the following 
sentences: 

 

(20)  The right rim of the casket had not fallen [ALL] [contrastive Focus] the way to the floor and 
was still propped partially on its supports [Dan Brown. Angels and Demons (2000)] [‘The rim had 

fallen part of the way’] 

 

(21) They could not watch [ALL] [contrastive Focus] places [ALWAYS] [contrastive Focus] 

[Isaac Asimov. The Gods Themselves (1972)] [‘They watched some places some of the time, or all 

places some of the time, or some places all of the time’] 

 

This type of information structure is fairly frequent. It can be explained by the existence of pragmatic 

implicatures shared by the speaker and the hearer that allow the speaker to rely on this common 
background to draw contrast between the natural expectations and the actual situation. Some of these 

implicatures are considered in the section below. 

 

6 Pragmatic implicatures 

While in some cases the likelihood of a particular scope interpretation is determined by syntactic or 
information structure of an utterance, sometimes these considerations are overridden by pragmatic 

factors, most frequently by conventional pragmatic implicatures. An interesting case of pragmatic 

implicatures is provided by time expressions. The following examples demonstrate a certain pragmatic 

difference which determines different scope interpretations: 

 

(22) I haven’t [slept] all night [‘The whole night, I haven’t slept’] 

 

(23) I haven’t slept [all] day [‘I slept only part of the day’] 

 
There are different conventional implicatures concerning night and day, and they involve different 

pragmatic expectations: people usually sleep the greater part of the night, and do not sleep at all during 

the day. Saying that one did not sleep part of the night would not be particularly informative because 
people often sleep only the bigger part of the night, but not the whole night. This is proved by 

sentences like I slept the whole night today, stating this as a somewhat unusual occurrence. Thus, 

sleeping the whole night (very good night sleep) and not sleeping the whole night (total insomnia) are 
both noteworthy occurrences.  

As for (23), it also describes an unusual situation, but it sets a different pragmatic context. It cannot 

be interpreted as (22), meaning that the speaker had day insomnia; since during the daytime people are 

expected to be active, an emphatic statement of their inability to sleep during this time would be 

pragmatically uninformative, thus violating Gricean maxims. The only way it can be plausibly 

interpreted is as a disproval of the interlocutor’s conjecture that the speaker has slept all day, with the 

background knowledge that the speaker has slept at least some time during the day. Therefore, all is 

necessarily focused and emphasized and thus becomes available for negation.   

5



To generalize, in context when all is part of a time expression, the interpretation is determined by 
pragmatic factors. Sleepless nights constitute a substantial part of this context type, with only negated 

verb readings available. As for the remaining contexts, for negated verb readings, the pragmatic 

implicature is as follows: 
 

(24)  It is unusual when there is no action V at all during the entire time period T, but also unusual 

if action V takes the entire time period T     

 

Consider phrases like He had not [thought] of her all evening; Her bed [had] not [been made] all day, 

They [had] not [spoken] all day to illustrate this type of implicature and the consequent scope reading.   
 

For negated quantifier readings, the pragmatic implicature is as follows: 

 
(25) It is normal that action V is taking place during some of the time period T   

 

Consider phrases like The concert couldn’t have detained you [all] this time, I don’t want to be 
explaining myself [all] the time, I simply cannot work [all] the time to illustrate this type of implicature 

and the consequent scope reading.   

 

7 Conclusion 

To conclude, the scope of negation over universal quantifier is determined by a range of factors. The 

preliminary “sifting” of contests shows the syntactic function of the constituent containing all to be the 

factor influencing scope interpretation. The next level of analysis demonstrates the role of information 

structure in selecting the plausible reading. Finally, in a variety of contexts scope disambiguation is 

triggered by conventional pragmatic implicatures.  

 

Acknowledgments 

 
This paper was funded by the grant of the Russian Scientific Fund, project 16-18-02054.  

 

References 

Giannakidou, A. 1998. Polarity Sensitivity as (Non)veridical Dependency. John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam-Philadelphia.  

 

Hajičova, E. 1973. Topic, Focus and Generative Semantics. Kronberg/Taunus: Scriptor.  

  

6


