



















































SHEF-Multimodal: Grounding Machine Translation on Images


Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 660–665,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

SHEF-Multimodal: Grounding Machine Translation on Images

Kashif Shah, Josiah Wang, Lucia Specia
University of Sheffield

211 Portobello Street, Sheffield, UK
{kashif.shah,j.k.wang,l.specia}

@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

This paper describes the University of
Sheffield’s submission for the WMT16
Multimodal Machine Translation shared
task, where we participated in Task 1 to
develop German-to-English and English-
to-German statistical machine translation
(SMT) systems in the domain of image
descriptions. Our proposed systems are
standard phrase-based SMT systems based
on the Moses decoder, trained only on the
provided data. We investigate how image
features can be used to re-rank the n-best
list produced by the SMT model, with the
aim of improving performance by ground-
ing the translations on images. Our sub-
missions are able to outperform the strong,
text-only baseline system for both direc-
tions.

1 Introduction

This paper describes the University of Sheffield’s
submission for a new WMT16 Multimodal Ma-
chine Translation shared task. The task is aimed
at the generation of image descriptions in a target
language, given an image and one or more descrip-
tions in a different (source) language. We partici-
pated in Task 1, which takes a source language de-
scription and translates it into the target language,
supported by information from images. We sub-
mitted systems for the translation between English
and German in both directions.

Multimodal approaches for various applications
related to language processing have been gaining
wider attention from the research community in
recent years. The main motivation is to investi-
gate whether contextual information from various
sources can be helpful in improving system per-
formance. Multimodal approaches have been ex-

plored in various tasks such as image and video
description, as well as question answering about
images (see Section 4). However, not much work
has been done to explore multimodality in the con-
text of machine translation. Whilst a large num-
ber of approaches have been developed to improve
translation quality, they concern solely textual in-
formation. The use of non-textual sources such as
images and speech has been largely ignored par-
tially because of the lack of datasets and resources.
This shared task provides an interesting opportu-
nity to investigate the effectiveness of information
from images in improving the performance of ma-
chine translation systems.

The main objective of our proposed system is
to explore how image features can be used to re-
rank an n-best list of translations from a stan-
dard phrase-based Statistical Machine Translation
(SMT) system. This is in contrast to existing
work (Elliott et al., 2015) that uses image features
jointly with image descriptions to train a Neu-
ral Network-based translation model. The dataset
provided for this shared task contains short seg-
ments with simple grammar and repetitive vocab-
ulary. Therefore, it is expected that a standard
phrase-based SMT system can already produced
reasonably good quality translations.

The intuition behind our approach is that image
features may help further improve the translation
of image descriptions, for example disambiguat-
ing words with multiple senses, when these alter-
natives are available in the n-best list produced by
the SMT model. This approach also has the advan-
tage over joint visual-textual alternatives in that
the translation model itself is learnt independently
from images, and thus does not require dataset-
specific images at training time to generate candi-
date translations. In fact, images are only used at
test time for n-best list re-ranking, and the visual
classifier is pre-trained on a generic image dataset.

660



We use image features from a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) along with standard
Moses features to re-rank the n-best list. We also
propose an alternative scheme for the German-to-
English direction, where terms in the English im-
age descriptions are matched against 1,000 Word-
Net synsets, and the probability of these synsets
occurring in the image estimated using CNN pre-
dictions on the images. The aggregated probabili-
ties are then used to re-rank the n-best list, with
the intuition that the best translations will con-
tain words representing these entities. Our sub-
missions that re-rank the n-best translations with
image vectors are able to marginally outperform
the strong, text-only baseline system for both di-
rections.

In Section 2 we describe the procedure to ex-
tract image features. In Section 3 we explain the
experiments along with their results. We finally
give a brief overview of related work in Section 4,
before presenting some conclusion and future di-
rections (Section 5).

2 Image features

Image features were extracted using the 16-layer
version of VGGNet (VGG-16) (Simonyan and
Zisserman, 2014), which is a Deep Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) pre-trained on 1,000 ob-
ject categories of the classification/localisation
task of the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recog-
nition Challenge (ILSVRC) (Russakovsky et al.,
2015). More specifically, we used MatCon-
vNet (Vedaldi and Lenc, 2015) to extract the fi-
nal fully-connected layer (FC8) of VGG-16 af-
ter applying the softmax function. The 1,000-
dimensional vector from this layer provides class
posterior probability estimates for 1,000 object
categories, each corresponding to a distinct Word-
Net concept (synset).

The 1,000 dimensional vector were used as fea-
tures in our systems to re-rank the top-n output
translations from the SMT model (Section 3.2).
Each feature is an estimate of the probability that
a given object category is depicted in the image.
Note that the posterior probability estimates for
VGGNet are not perfect (the top-5 error rate was
7.3% in the ILSVRC2014 challenge, where a pre-
diction is considered correct if the correct cate-
gory is within the top 5 guesses), and we expect
such errors to propagate downstream to the trans-
lation task. Moreover, the classifiers are tuned

to the 1,000 categories of ILSVRC, and many
categories may not be relevant to the Flickr30K
dataset (Young et al., 2014) that is used for this
task, and vice-versa, that is, many of the ob-
jects in the Flickr30K dataset may not exist in the
ILSVRC dataset. This implies that the classifica-
tion error in our dataset is probably much higher.

3 Experiments

3.1 Data

The data used for the shared task is a version of
the Flickr30K dataset. For the translation task, the
Flickr30K dataset was extended in the following
way: for each image, one of the English descrip-
tions was selected and manually translated into
German by a professional translator. The resulting
parallel data and corresponding images for train-
ing are divided into training, development and test
sets. As training and development data, 29,000
and 1,014 triples were provided, respectively, each
containing an English source sentence, its German
human translation and corresponding image. As
test data, set of 1,000 tuples containing an English
description and its corresponding image was pro-
vided. More details about the shared task data can
be found in (Elliott et al., 2016).

3.2 Training

Both our submissions are based on the Moses
SMT toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007) to build phrase-
based SMT models. They are constructed as fol-
lows: First, word alignments in both directions are
calculated using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2000).
The phrases and reordering tables are extracted us-
ing the default settings of the Moses toolkit. The
parameters of Moses were tuned on the provided
development set, using the MERT (Och, 2003) al-
gorithm. 4-gram back-off language models were
built using the target side of the parallel corpus.
Training was performed using only the data pro-
vided by the task organisers, and so systems for
both directions were built in the constrained set-
ting.

We extracted the 100 best translations with our
SMT model and re-ranked them using the image
features described in Section 2, along with the
standard Moses features. We used an off-the-shelf
tool 1 to re-rank the n-best translations. More

1https://github.com/moses-smt/
mosesdecoder/tree/master/scripts/
nbest-rescore

661



specifically, we performed following steps:

• We ran our Moses decoder to generate 100-
best lists for each translation in the develop-
ment set.

• We extracted and added following image fea-
ture scores to the already existing feature val-
ues for each translation in the n-best list:

– prob: Aggregated probability estimates
of entities being depicted in the image
and also being mentioned in the candi-
date translations. Here, we match terms
occurring in the English candidate trans-
lations to the 1,000 synsets of ILSVRC,
and estimate the probability of these
synsets occurring in the image using the
CNN predictions. In cases where more
than one entity is matched, we average
the probabilities of all matched synsets.
The intuition is that the top translations
should mention the entities depicted in
the image, while lower ranked transla-
tions will have fewer entities mentioned,
and thus a lower probability score over-
all. This feature is used only in the de-
en direction since we only have access
to the English version of WordNet.

– vec: 1,000-dimensional FC8 vector
from the CNN for both en-de and de-en
directions. As mentioned in Section 2,
each element in the vector corresponds
to the posterior probability estimate of
a WordNet synset, with the vector sum-
ming to 1 after applying the softmax
function. Note that each element in the
vector is considered as an independent
score, with its weight learnt during re-
ranking.

• We ran the optimiser K-best MIRA (Cherry
and Foster, 2012) to learn new weights for
all features in the n-best list. The opti-
miser creates a new config file that contains
new weights for each feature. The choice of
MIRA to learn new weights over MERT is
based on the fact that MIRA is known to per-
form better than MERT for larger feature sets
in terms of efficiency and performance.

• We used the original config file to generate
100-best lists for the test set.

Lang. Train Dev Test BLEU Meteor

en-de 29000 1014 1000 0.383 0.576
de-en 29000 1014 1000 0.434 0.363

Table 1: Datasets size and results of a baseline sys-
tem on the development set.

Lang. Score Re-Rankprob Re-Rankvec

en-de
BLEU - 0.386
Meteor - 0.580

de-en
BLEU 0.431 0.437
Meteor 0.360 0.366

Table 2: Results on the development set after re-
ranking.

Lang. System Meteor Meteor-norm

en-de
Baseline 0.525 0.573

Re-Rankvec 0.526 0.574

de-en
Baseline 0.363 0.398

Re-Rankvec 0.365 0.401

Table 3: Results on the test set: Baseline Moses vs
Re-ranking approach.

• We added the above mentioned image fea-
tures to the test n-best list.

• Finally, we re-scored the 100-best list using
the re-scoring weights file and extracted the
top best translation for each source segment.

For our experiments, we used the same tuning
set to train the re-ranker that was used to optimise
the Moses decoder original features. We note that
it could be better to use a distinct tuning set than
the one on which the decoder weights were opti-
mised.

3.3 Results
The results of our submissions for the German-
English and English-German tasks are sum-
marised in Tables 1, 2 and 3. Table 1 shows
our baseline Moses systems (text-only) along with
training, development and test data sizes. Ta-
ble 2 presents our results with re-ranking on the
development set. The system Re-Rankprob uses
the decoder features with additional aggregated
probability estimates features, while the system

662



Re-Rankvec uses decoder features along with the
1,000-dimensional vector produced by VGGNet.

It can be observed that re-ranking with a 1,000-
dimension image vector improves over the base-
line for both directions, whereas posterior prob-
ability feature degrades the result. Note that al-
though all (n-best) translation hypotheses for a
given source description get the same image fea-
ture values (1,000 dimension image vector), the
combination of the decoder features with these im-
age vectors make the optimiser produce different
discriminative weights, which may lead to better
translation choices.

We submitted a system for each translation di-
rection with vector features as the official sub-
missions. It can be seen in Table 3 that our sys-
tems were able to improve over the baseline in the
official metrics in both directions, although only
marginally. Moreover, both systems are among
the top three systems in the official ranking that
outperform the strong Moses SMT baseline. The
output of our systems is significantly different
from that of the baseline: 260 out of the 1,000
segments differ between the baseline and the re-
ranking approach. Figure 1 shows some exam-
ples of English-to-German translations for the test
set from our proposed system using VGGNet FC8
features for re-ranking (Re-Rankvec), in compari-
son to translations by the Moses baseline. In all
cases, the translations produced by the two sys-
tems are different. In the first example, the Moses
baseline translation, although not entirely correct,
can be considered more accurate. In the second
example, both translations are accurate, but that
produced by the re-ranking approach matches ex-
actly the reference. Finally, in the third example,
the translation by the re-ranking approach is sig-
nificantly better, and also much closer to the ref-
erence. An interesting observation is the fact that
while the baseline system does not produce any
translation that is exactly the same as the refer-
ence, the re-ranking approach produces 37 trans-
lations that are exactly the same as the reference
translations. A better understanding on the dif-
ferences between the baseline and re-ranking ap-
proaches would require more systematic human
evaluation, which we plan to do in the future.

4 Related work

In computer vision, considerable progress has
been made in the field of visual object recogni-

tion in recent years, especially since the CNN-
based AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) convinc-
ingly won the ILSVRC2012 challenge by a large
margin compared to its closest rival. Progress
in image classification (“what does this picture
depict?”) has since improved from strength to
strength, from an error rate of 16.4% (correct la-
bel in top 5 guesses) by AlexNet down to 3.6%
by ResNet (He et al., 2015) in the 2015 challenge.
Despite the high success rate, there is still much
work to be done in the object classification and lo-
calisation challenge (“what object category does
this picture depict and where?”) and the object
detection challenge (“find all instances of this ob-
ject category in all images, if any”), although the
performance for these has also improved tremen-
dously in recent years.

With the improved performance of object clas-
sifiers/detectors, there has also been increased in-
terest in applying these classifiers/detectors to var-
ious downstream tasks, especially those that in-
volve multiple modalities. For example, CNNs
has been used in conjunction with Recurrent Neu-
ral Networks (RNN) (Mikolov et al., 2010) to gen-
erate image descriptions, e.g. (Karpathy and Fei-
Fei, 2015; Donahue et al., 2015; Vinyals et al.,
2015). Other multimodal tasks that have been ex-
plored include video description generation (Chen
and Dolan, 2011; Yu and Siskind, 2013), visual
question answering (Antol et al., 2015; Ren et al.,
2015; Malinowski et al., 2015), multilingual im-
age question answering (Gao et al., 2015), and
multimodal translation of image descriptions (El-
liott et al., 2015). Whilst the work of Elliott et al.
(2015) focuses on learning multimodal image de-
scription translation in a joint fashion using CNNs
and RNNs, our work uses a conventional phrase-
based SMT decoder combined with features ex-
tracted from a CNN for re-ranking.

5 Conclusions

We presented the development of our SMT sys-
tems that incorporate image features for the first
German-English and English-German WMT Mul-
timodal Machine Translation shared task. In the
official evaluation, the English-German system
was ranked third according to the Meteor score,
while the German-English system was ranked
first, although there were only two other systems
for this direction. Small but consistent improve-
ments over than a strong text-only SMT baseline

663



EN A young brunette woman eating and drinking something.
DE (Baseline) Eine junge Frau mit braunen Haaren und isst und trinkt etwas .
DE (Re-Rankvec) Ein junger brünette Frau isst und trinkt etwas .
Reference Eine junge brünette Frau isst und trinkt etwas.

EN A black boy is sitting in the sand.
DE (Baseline) Ein dunkelhäutiger Junge sitzt im Sand .
DE (Re-Rankvec) Ein schwarzer Junge sitzt im Sand .
Reference Ein schwarzer Junge sitzt im Sand.

EN A man with a black vest holding a model airplane
DE (Baseline) Ein Mann in einer schwarzen Weste und einem Modellflugzeug
DE (Re-Rankvec) Ein Mann mit einer schwarzen Weste hält einem Modellflugzeug
Reference Ein Mann mit einer schwarzen Weste hält ein Modellflugzeug

Figure 1: Example English-to-German (EN–DE) output translations for Re-Rankvec on the test set, com-
pared against the Moses baseline (before re-ranking).

system were found in both directions.
Our initial set of experiments can be improved

in many directions. For instance, it would be in-
teresting to explore incorporating image features
directly into the decoding step and tuning the
weights along with Moses parameters. It is also
worth investigating other layers of image mod-
els instead of the final fully-connected layer to
be used with textual features. Finally, increasing
the size of n-best to re-rank translations could in-
crease the chances of achieving better results by
providing the re-ranker with more variety in terms
of alternative translations.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the QT21 (H2020
No. 645452, Lucia Specia), Cracker (H2020 No.
645357, Kashif Shah) and the ERA-NET CHIST-
ERA D2K 2011 VisualSense (ViSen) project (UK
EPSRC Grant EP/K019082/1, Josiah Wang).

References

Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick,
and Devi Parikh. 2015. Vqa: Visual question an-
swering. In International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV).

David L. Chen and William B. Dolan. 2011. Collect-
ing highly parallel data for paraphrase evaluation. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 190–
200, Portland, Oregon, USA, June.

Colin Cherry and George Foster. 2012. Batch tun-
ing strategies for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL HLT ’12, pages 427–436, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jeffrey Donahue, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Sergio Guadar-
rama, Marcus Rohrbach, Subhashini Venugopalan,
Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. 2015. Long-term
recurrent convolutional networks for visual recogni-
tion and description. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recogni-
tion.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, and Eva Hasler. 2015.
Multi-language image description with neural se-
quence models. CoRR, abs/1510.04709.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and
Lucia Specia. 2016. Multi30K: Multilin-
gual English-German Image Descriptions. CoRR,
abs/1605.00459.

Haoyuan Gao, Junhua Mao, Jie Zhou, Zhiheng Huang,
Lei Wang, and Wei Xu. 2015. Are you talking to a
machine? dataset and methods for multilingual im-
age question answering. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, pages 2287–2295.

664



Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2015. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385.

Andrej Karpathy and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. Deep visual-
semantic alignments for generating image descrip-
tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the ACL on
interactive poster and demonstration sessions, pages
177–180. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hin-
ton. 2012. Imagenet classification with deep con-
volutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C. J. C.
Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
25, pages 1097–1105. Curran Associates, Inc.

Mateusz Malinowski, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mario
Fritz. 2015. Ask your neurons: A neural-based
approach to answering questions about images. In
2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, ICCV 2015, Santiago, Chile, December 7-
13, 2015.

Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafit, Luks Burget, Jan Cer-
nock, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010. Recurrent
neural network based language model. In Takao
Kobayashi, Keikichi Hirose, and Satoshi Nakamura,
editors, INTERSPEECH, pages 1045–1048. ISCA.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved
statistical alignment models. In Proceedings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
440–447, Hongkong, China, October.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 160–167. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Mengye Ren, Ryan Kiros, and Richard S. Zemel.
2015. Exploring models and data for image ques-
tion answering. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 28: Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 2015, Decem-
ber 7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pages
2953–2961.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause,
Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, An-
drej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein,
Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. Ima-
geNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV),
115(3):211–252.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2014. Very
deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. CoRR, abs/1409.1556.

Andrea Vedaldi and Karel Lenc. 2015. Matconvnet –
convolutional neural networks for matlab. In Pro-
ceeding of the ACM Int. Conf. on Multimedia.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural im-
age caption generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recogni-
tion.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to
visual denotations: New similarity metrics for se-
mantic inference over event descriptions. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2:67–78, February.

Haonan Yu and Jeffrey Mark Siskind. 2013. Grounded
language learning from video described with sen-
tences. In Proceedings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL).

665


