



















































Multi30K: Multilingual English-German Image Descriptions


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 70–74,
Berlin, Germany, August 12 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multi30K: Multilingual English-German Image Descriptions

Desmond Elliott

d.elliott@uva.nl

Stella Frank
ILLC, University of Amsterdam

s.c.frank@uva.nl

Khalil Sima’an

k.simaan@uva.nl

Lucia Specia
University of Sheffield

l.specia@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

We introduce the Multi30K dataset to
stimulate multilingual multimodal re-
search. Recent advances in image descrip-
tion have been demonstrated on English-
language datasets almost exclusively, but
image description should not be limited
to English. This dataset extends the
Flickr30K dataset with i) German trans-
lations created by professional translators
over a subset of the English descriptions,
and ii) German descriptions crowdsourced
independently of the original English de-
scriptions. We describe the data and out-
line how it can be used for multilingual im-
age description and multimodal machine
translation, but we anticipate the data will
be useful for a broader range of tasks.

1 Introduction
Image description is one of the core challenges at
the intersection of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) (Bernardi et al.,
2016). This task has only received attention in a
monolingual English setting, helped by the avail-
ability of English datasets, e.g. Flickr8K (Hodosh
et al., 2013), Flickr30K (Young et al., 2014), and
MS COCO (Chen et al., 2015). However, the pos-
sible applications of image description are useful
for all languages, such as searching for images
using natural language, or providing alternative-
description text for visually impaired Web users.

We introduce a large-scale dataset of images
paired with sentences in English and German as
an initial step towards studying the value and the
characteristics of multilingual-multimodal data1.

1The dataset is freely available under the Creative Com-
mons Attribution NonCommercial ShareAlike 4.0 Inter-
national license from http://www.statmt.org/wmt
16/multimodal-task.html.

Multi30K is an extension of the Flickr30K dataset
(Young et al., 2014) with 31,014 German transla-
tions of English descriptions and 155,070 indepen-
dently collected German descriptions. The trans-
lations were collected from professionally con-
tracted translators, whereas the descriptions were
collected from untrained crowdworkers. The key
difference between these corpora is the relation-
ship between the sentences in different languages.
In the translated corpus, we know there is a strong
correspondence between the sentences in both lan-
guages. In the descriptions corpus, we only know
that the sentences, regardless of the language, are
supposed to describe the same image.

A dataset of images paired with sentences in
multiple languages broadens the scope of multi-
modal NLP research. Image description with mul-
tilingual data can also be seen as machine trans-
lation in a multimodal context. This opens up
new avenues for researchers in machine transla-
tion (Koehn et al., 2003; Chiang, 2005; Sutskever
et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015, inter-alia) to
work with multilingual multimodal data. Image–
sentence ranking using monolingual multimodal
datasets (Hodosh et al., 2013, inter-alia) is also
a natural task for multilingual modelling.

The only existing datasets of images paired
with multilingual sentences were created by pro-
fessionally translating English into the target lan-
guage: IAPR-TC12 with 20,000 English-German
described images (Grubinger et al., 2006), and
the Pascal Sentences Dataset of 1,000 Japanese-
English described images (Funaki and Nakayama,
2015). Multi30K dataset is larger than both of
these and contains both independent and translated
sentences. We hope this dataset will be of broad
interest across NLP and CV research and antici-
pate that these communities will put the data to use
in a broader range of tasks than we can foresee.

70



1. Brick layers constructing a wall.

2. Maurer bauen eine Wand.

1. The two men on the scaffolding are
helping to build a red brick wall.

2. Zwei Mauerer mauern ein Haus
zusammen.

1. Trendy girl talking on her cellphone
while gliding slowly down the street

2. Ein schickes Mädchen spricht mit
dem Handy während sie langsam die
Straße entlangschwebt.

(a) Translations

1. There is a young girl on her cell-
phone while skating.

2. Eine Frau im blauen Shirt telefoniert
beim Rollschuhfahren.

(b) Independent descriptions

Figure 1: Multilingual examples in the Multi30K dataset. The independent sentences are all accurate
descriptions of the image but do not contain the same details in both languages, such as shirt colour
or the scaffolding. In the second translation pair (bottom left) the translator has translated “glide” as
“schweben” (“to float”) probably due to not seeing the image context (see Section 2.1 for more details).

2 The Multi30K Dataset
The Flickr30K Dataset contains 31,014 im-
ages sourced from online photo-sharing websites
(Young et al., 2014). Each image is paired with
five English descriptions, which were collected
from Amazon Mechanical Turk2. The dataset con-
tains 145,000 training, 5,070 development, and
5,000 test descriptions. The Multi30K dataset ex-
tends the Flickr30K dataset with translated and in-
dependent German sentences.

2.1 Translations

The translations were collected from professional
English-German translators contracted via an es-
tablished Language Service in Germany. Fig-
ure 1 presents an example of the differences be-
tween the types of data. We collected one trans-
lated description per image, resulting in a total of
31,014 translations. To ensure an even distribu-
tion over description length, the English descrip-
tions were chosen based on their relative length,
with an equal number of longest, shortest, and me-
dian length source descriptions. We paid a total
of e23,000 to collect the data (e0.06 per word).
Translators were shown an English language sen-
tences and asked to produce a correct and fluent
translation for it in German, without seeing the im-
age. We decided against showing the images to
translators to make this process as close as possi-
ble to a standard translation task, also making the
data collected here distinct from the independent

2http://www.mturk.com

descriptions collected as described in Section 2.2.

2.2 Independent Descriptions

The descriptions were collected from crowdwork-
ers via the Crowdflower platform3. We col-
lected five descriptions per image in the Flickr30K
dataset, resulting in a total of 155,070 sentences.
Workers were presented with a translated version
of the data collection interface used by (Hodosh et
al., 2013), as shown in Figure 2. We translated the
interface to make the task as similar as possible to
the crowdsourcing of the English sentences. The
instructions were translated by one of the authors
and checked by a native German Ph.D student.

185 crowdworkers took part in the task over a
period of 31 days. We split the task into 1,000
randomly selected images per day to control the
quality of the data and to prevent worker fatigue.
Workers were required to have a German-language
skill certification and be at least a Crowdflower
Level 2 Worker: they have participated in at least
10 different Crowdflower jobs, have passed at least
100 quality-control questions, and have an job ac-
ceptance rate of at least 85%.

The descriptions were collected in batches of
five images per job. Each image was randomly
selected from the complete set of 1,000 images for
that day, and workers were limited to writing at
most 250 descriptions per day. We paid workers
$0.05 per description4 and prevented them from

3http://www.crowdflower.com
4This is the same rate as Rashtchian et al. (2010) and El-

71



Figure 2: The German instructions shown to crowdworkers were translated from the original instructions.

submitting faster than 90 seconds per job to dis-
courage poor/low-quality work. This works out at
a rate of 40 jobs per hour, i.e. 200 descriptions
per hour. We configured Crowdflower to automat-
ically ban users who worked faster than this rate.
Thus the theoretical maximum wage per hour was
$10/hour. We paid a total of $9,591.24 towards
collecting the data and paying the Crowdflower
platform fees.

During the collection of the data, we assessed
the quality both by manually checking a subset of
the descriptions and also with automated checks.
We inspected the submissions of users who wrote
sentences with less than five words, and users with
high type to token ratios (to detect repetition). We
also used a character-level 6-gram LM to flag de-
scriptions with high perplexity, which was very ef-
fective at catching nonsensical sentences. In gen-
eral we did not have to ban or reject many users
and overall description quality was high.

2.3 Translated vs. Independent Descriptions

We now analyse the differences between the trans-
lated and the description corpora. For this anal-
ysis, all sentences were stripped of punctuation
and truecased using the Moses truecaser.pl5

script trained over Europarl v7 and News Com-
mentary v11 English-German parallel corpora.

Table 1 shows the differences between the cor-
pora. The German translations are longer than
the independent descriptions (11.1 vs. 9.6 words),
while the English descriptions selected for trans-

liott and Keller (2013) paid to collect English sentences.
5https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesde

coder/blob/master/scripts/recaser/trueca
se.perl

lation are slightly shorter, on average, than the
Flickr30k average (11.9 vs. 12.3). When we com-
pare the German translation dataset against an
equal number of sentences from the German de-
scriptions dataset, we find that the translations
also have more word types (19.3K vs. 17.6K), and
more singleton types occurring only once (11.3K
vs. 10.2K; in both datasets singletons comprise
58% of the vocabulary). The translations thus have
a wider vocabulary, despite being generated by a
smaller number of authors. The English datasets
(all descriptions vs. those selected for translation)
show a similar trend, indicating that these differ-
ences may be a result of the decision to select sim-
ilar numbers of short, medium, and long English
sentences for translation.

2.4 English vs. German

The English image descriptions are generally
longer than the German descriptions, both in terms
of number of words and characters. Note that
the difference is much less smaller when measur-
ing characters: German uses 22% fewer words
but only 2.5% fewer characters. However, we
observe a different pattern in the translation cor-
pora: German uses 6.6% fewer words than En-
glish but 17.1% more characters. The vocabulary
of the German description and translation corpora
are more than twice as large as the English cor-
pora. Additionally, the German corpora have two-
to-three times as many singletons. This is likely
due to richer morphological variation in German,
as well as word compounding.

72



Sentences Tokens Types Characters Avg. length Singletons

Translations
English

31,014
357,172 11,420 1,472,251 11.9 5,073

German 333,833 19,397 1,774,234 11.1 11,285

Descriptions
English

155,070
1,841,159 22,815 7,611,033 12.3 9,230

German 1,434,998 46,138 7,418,572 9.6 26,510

Table 1: Corpus-level statistics about the translation and the description data.

3 Discussion
The Multi30K dataset is immediately suitable
for research on a wide range of tasks, including
but not limited to automatic image description,
image–sentence ranking, multimodal and multi-
lingual semantics, and machine translation. In
what follows we highlight two applications in
which Multi30K could be directly used. For more
examples of approaches targeting these applica-
tions, we refer the reader to the forthcoming re-
port on the WMT16 shared task on Multimodal
Machine Translation and Crosslingual Image De-
scription (Specia et al., 2016).

3.1 Multi30K for Image Description

Deep neural networks for image description typi-
cally integrate visual features into a recurrent neu-
ral network language model (Vinyals et al., 2015;
Xu et al., 2015, inter-alia). Elliott et al. (2015)
demonstrated how to build multilingual image de-
scription models that learn and transfer features
between monolingual image description models.
They performed a series of experiments on the
IAPR-TC12 dataset (Grubinger et al., 2006) of im-
ages aligned with German translations, showing
that both English and German image description
could be improved by transferring features from
a multimodal neural language model trained to
generate descriptions in the other language. The
Multi30K dataset will enable further research in
this direction, allowing researchers to work with
larger datasets with multiple references per image.

3.2 Multi30K for Machine Translation

Machine translation is typically performed using
only textual data, for example news data, the Eu-
roparl corpora, or corpora harvested from the Web
(CommonCrawl, Wikipedia, etc.). The Multi30K
dataset makes it possible to further develop ma-

chine translation in a setting where multimodal
data, such as images or video, are observed along-
side text. The potential advantages of using multi-
modal information for machine translation include
the ability to better deal with ambiguous source
text and to avoid (untranslated) out-of-vocabulary
words in the target language (Calixto et al., 2012).
Hitschler and Riezler (2016) have demonstrated
the potential of multimodal features in a target-
side translation reranking model. Their approach
is initially trained over large text-only translation
copora and then fine-tuned with a small amount
of in-domain data, such as our dataset. We expect
a variety of translation models can be adapted to
take advantage of multimodal data as features in
a translation model or as feature vectors in neural
machine translation models.

4 Conclusions
We introduced Multi30K: a large-scale multilin-
gual multimodal dataset for interdisciplinary ma-
chine learning research. Our dataset is an exten-
sion of the popular Flickr30K dataset with descrip-
tions and professional translations in German.

The descriptions were collected from a crowd-
sourcing platform, while the translations were col-
lected from professionally contracted translators.
These differences are deliberate and part of the
larger scope of studying multilingual multimodal
data in different contexts. The descriptions were
collected as similarly as possible to the original
Flickr30K dataset by translating the instructions
used by Young et al. (2014) into German. The
translations were collected without showing the
images to the translators to keep the process as
close to a standard translation task as possible.

There are substantial differences between the
translated and the description datasets. The trans-
lations contain approximately the same number of

73



tokens and have sentences of approximately the
same length in both languages. These properties
make them suited to machine translations mod-
els. The description datasets are very different in
terms of average sentence lengths and the number
of word types per language. This is likely to cause
different engineering and scientific challenges be-
cause the descriptions are independently collected
corpora instead of a sentence-level aligned corpus.

In the future, we want to study multilingual
multimodality over a wider range of languages, for
example beyond Indo-European families. We call
on the community to engage with us on creating
massively multilingual multimodal datasets.

Acknowledgements
DE and KS were supported by the NWO Vici grant
nr. 277-89-002. SF was supported by European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under grant agreement nr. 645452. We
are grateful to Philip Schulz for checking the Ger-
man translation of the worker instructions, and to
Joachim Daiber for providing the pre-trained true-
casing models.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In ICLR.

Raffaella Bernardi, Ruken Cakici, Desmond Elliott,
Aykut Erdem, Erkut Erdem, Nazli Ikizler-Cinbis,
Frank Keller, Adrian Muscat, and Barbara Plank.
2016. Automatic description generation from im-
ages: A survey of models, datasets, and evalua-
tion measures. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search, 55:409–442.

Iacer Calixto, Teo E. de Campos, and Lucia Specia.
2012. Images as context in statistical machine trans-
lation. In Second Annual Meeting of the EPSRC
Network on Vision & Language.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakr-
ishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
C. Lawrence Zitnick. 2015. Microsoft COCO cap-
tions: Data collection and evaluation server. CoRR,
abs/1504.00325.

David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based
model for statistical machine translation. In ACL,
pages 263–270.

Desmond Elliott and Frank Keller. 2013. Image De-
scription using Visual Dependency Representations.
In EMNLP, pages 1292–1302.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, and Eva Hasler. 2015.
Multi-language image description with neural se-
quence models. CoRR, abs/1510.04709.

Ruka Funaki and Hideki Nakayama. 2015. Image-
mediated learning for zero-shot cross-lingual docu-
ment retrieval. In EMNLP, pages 585–590.

Michael Grubinger, Paul D. Clough, Henning Muller,
and Thomas Desealers. 2006. The IAPR TC-12
benchmark: A new evaluation resource for visual in-
formation systems. In LREC.

Julian Hitschler and Stefan Riezler. 2016. Multi-
modal pivots for image caption translation. CoRR,
abs/1601.03916.

Micah Hodosh, Peter Young, and Julia Hockenmaier.
2013. Framing Image Description as a Ranking
Task: Data, Models and Evaluation Metrics. Jour-
nal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:853–899.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
NAACL, pages 48–54.

Cyrus Rashtchian, Peter Young, Micha Hodosh, and
Julia Hockenmaier. 2010. Collecting image annota-
tions using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. In NAACL-
HLT Workshop on Creating Speech and Language
Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.

Lucia Specia, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and
Desmond Elliott. 2016. A shared task on multi-
modal machine translation and crosslingual image
description. In First Conference on Machine Trans-
lation.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. V Le.
2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neural
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 27, pages 3104–3112. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural im-
age caption generator. In CVPR.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun
Cho, Aaron C. Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Richard S. Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show,
attend and tell: Neural image caption generation
with visual attention. CoRR, abs/1502.03044.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micha Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to vi-
sual denotations: New similarity metrics for seman-
tic inference over event descriptions. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

74


