



















































Automatic Annotation of Structured Facts in Images


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 1–9,
Berlin, Germany, August 12 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Annotation of Structured Facts in Images

Mohamed Elhoseiny1,2, Scott Cohen1, Walter Chang1, Brian Price1, Ahmed Elgammal2
1Adobe Research 2Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University

Abstract

Motivated by the application of fact-level
image understanding, we present an auto-
matic method for data collection of struc-
tured visual facts from images with cap-
tions. Example structured facts include
attributed objects (e.g., <flower, red>),
actions (e.g., <baby, smile>), interac-
tions (e.g., <man, walking, dog>), and
positional information (e.g., <vase, on,
table>). The collected annotations are in
the form of fact-image pairs (e.g.,<man,
walking, dog> and an image region con-
taining this fact). With a language ap-
proach, the proposed method is able to col-
lect hundreds of thousands of visual fact
annotations with accuracy of 83% accord-
ing to human judgment. Our method au-
tomatically collected more than 380,000
visual fact annotations and more than
110,000 unique visual facts from images
with captions and localized them in im-
ages in less than one day of processing
time on standard CPU platforms. We will
make the data publically available.

1 Introduction

People generally acquire visual knowledge by ex-
posure to both visual facts and to semantic or
language-based representations of these facts, e.g.,
by seeing an image of “a person petting dog” and
observing this visual fact associated with its lan-
guage representation . In this work, we focus on
methods for collecting structured facts that we de-
fine as structures that provide attributes about an
object, and/or the actions and interactions this ob-
ject may have with other objects. We introduce
the idea of automatically collecting annotations
for second order visual facts and third order vi-

sual facts where second order facts <S,P> are at-
tributed objects (e.g., <S: car, P: red>) and single-
frame actions (e.g., <S: person, P: jumping>),
and third order facts specify interactions (i.e.,
<boy, petting, dog>). This structure is helpful for
designing machine learning algorithms that learn
deeper image semantics from caption data and al-
low us to model the relationships between facts.
In order to enable such a setting, we need to col-
lect these structured fact annotations in the form
of (language view, visual view) pairs (e.g., <baby,
sitting on, chair> as the language view and an im-
age with this fact as a visual view) to train models.

(Chen et al., 2013) showed that visual con-
cepts, from a predefined ontology, can be learned
by querying the web about these concepts using
image-web search engines. More recently, (Div-
vala et al., 2014) presented an approach to learn
concepts related to a particular object by query-
ing the web with Google-N-gram data that has the
concept name. There are three limitations to these
approaches. (1) It is difficult to define the space of
visual knowledge and then search for it. It is fur-
ther restricting to define it based on a predefined
ontology such as (Chen et al., 2013) or a particu-
lar object such as (Divvala et al., 2014). (2) Using
image search is not reliable to collect data for con-
cepts with few images on the web. These methods
assume that the top retrieved examples by image-
web search are positive examples and that there
are images available that are annotated with the
searched concept. (3) These concepts/facts are not
structured and hence annotations lacks informa-
tion like “jumping” is the action part in <person,
jumping >, or “man’ and “horse” are interacting in
<person, riding, horse >. This structure is impor-
tant for deeper understanding of visual data, which
is one of the main motivations of this work.

The problems in the prior work motivate us to
propose a method to automatically annotate struc-

1



Figure 1: Structured Fact Automatic Annotation

tured facts by processing image caption data since
facts in image captions are highly likely to be lo-
cated in the associated images. We show that
a large quantity of high quality structured visual
facts could be extracted from caption datasets us-
ing natural language processing methods. Cap-
tion writing is free-form and an easier task for
crowd-sourcing workers than labeling second- and
third-order tasks, and such free-form descriptions
are readily available in existing image caption
datasets. We focused on collecting facts from the
MS COCO image caption dataset (Lin et al., 2014)
and the newly collected Flickr30K entities (Plum-
mer et al., 2015). We automatically collected more
than 380,000 structured fact annotations in high
quality from both the 120,000 MS COCO scenes
and 30,000 Flickr30K scenes.

The main contribution of this paper is an ac-
curate, automatic, and efficient method for ex-
traction of structured fact visual annotations from
image-caption datasets, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Our approach (1) extracts facts from captions as-
sociated with images and then (2) localizes the
extracted facts in the image. For fact extrac-
tion from captions, We propose a new method
called SedonaNLP for fact extraction to fill gaps
in existing fact extraction from sentence methods
like Clausie (Del Corro and Gemulla, 2013). Se-
donaNLP produces more facts than Clausie, es-
pecially <subject,attribute> facts, and thus en-
ables collecting more visual annotations than us-
ing Clausie alone. The final set of automatic an-
notations are the set of successfully localized facts
in the associated images. We show that these facts
are extracted with more than 80% accuracy ac-
cording to human judgment.

2 Motivation

Our goal by proposing this automatic method is to
generate language&vision annotations at the fact-
level to help study language&vision for the sake of

structured understanding of visual facts. Existing
systems already work on relating captions directly
to the whole image such as (Karpathy et al., 2014;
Kiros et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2015; Xu et al.,
2015; Mao et al., 2015; Antol et al., 2015; Mali-
nowski et al., 2015; Ren et al., 2015). This gives
rise to a key question about our work: why it is
useful to collect such a large quantity of structured
facts compared to caption-level systems?

We illustrate the difference between caption-
level learning fact-level learning that motivates
this work by the example in Fig 1. Caption-level
learning systems correlate captions like those on
top of Fig. 1(top-left) to the whole image that in-
cludes all objects. Structured Fact-level learning
systems are instead fed with localized annotations
for each fact extracted form the image caption; see
in Fig. 1(right), Fig. 6, and 7 in Sec. 6. Fact
level annotations are less confusing training data
than sentences because they provide more precise
information for both the language and the visual
views. (1) From the language view, the annota-
tions we generate is precise to list a particular fact
(e.g., <bicycle,parked between, parking posts>).
(2) From the visual view, it provide the bounding
box of this fact; see Fig 1. (3) A third unique
part about our annotations is the structure: e.g.,
<bicycle,parked between, parking posts> instead
of “a bicycle parked between parking posts”.

Our collected data has been used to develop
methods that learn hundreds of thousands of im-
age facts, as we introduced and studied in (Elho-
seiny et al., 2016a). The results shows that fact-
level learning is superior compared to caption-
level learning like (Kiros et al., 2015), as shown in
Table 4 in (Elhoseiny et al., 2016a) (16.39% accu-
racy versus 3.48% for (Kiros et al., 2015)). It fur-
ther shows the value of the associated structure in
the (16.39% accuracy versus 8.1%) in Table 4(El-
hoseiny et al., 2016a)). Similar results also shown
on a smaller scale in Table 3 in (Elhoseiny et al.,

2



2016a).

3 Approach Overview
We propose a two step automatic annotation of
structured facts: (i) Extraction of structured fact
from captions, and (ii) Localization of these facts
in images. First, the captions associated with
the given image are analyzed to extract sets of
clauses that are considered as candidate <S,P>,
and <S,P,O> facts.

Captions can provide a tremendous amount
of information to image understanding systems.
However, developing NLP systems to accu-
rately and completely extract structured knowl-
edge from free-form text is an open problem.
We extract structured facts using two methods:
Clausie (Del Corro and Gemulla, 2013) and Se-
dona( detailed later in Sec 4); also see Fig 1.
We found Clausie (Del Corro and Gemulla, 2013)
missed many visual facts in the captions which
motivated us to develop Sedona to fill this gap as
detailed in Sec. 4.

Second, we localize these facts within the im-
age (see Fig. 1). The successfully located facts
in the images are saved as fact-image annotations
that could be used to train visual perception mod-
els to learn attributed objects, actions, and inter-
actions. We managed to collect 380.409 high-
quality second- and third-order fact annotations
(146,515 from Flickr30K Entities, 157,122 from
the MS COCO training set, and 76,772 from the
MS COCO validation set). We present statistics
of the automatically collected facts in the Experi-
ments section. Note that the process of localizing
facts in an image is constrained by information in
the dataset.

For MS COCO, the dataset contains object an-
notations for about 80 different objects as pro-
vided by the training and validation sets. Although
this provides abstract information about objects
in each image (e.g., “person”), it is usually men-
tioned in different ways in the caption. For the
“person” object, “man”, “girl”, “kid”, or “child”
could instead appear in the caption. In order to lo-
cate second- and third-order facts in images, we
started by defining visual entities. For the MS
COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014), we define a visual
entity as any noun that is either (1) one of the MS
COCO dataset objects, (2) a noun in the WordNet
ontology (Miller, 1995; Leacock and Chodorow,
1998) that is an immediate or indirect hyponym of
one of the MS COCO objects (since WordNet is

searchable by a sense and not a word, we perform
word sense disambiguation on the sentences using
a state-of-the-art method (Zhong and Ng, 2010)),
or (3) one of scenes the SUN dataset (Xiao et al.,
2010) (e.g., a “restaurant”). We expect visual enti-
ties to appear either in the S or the O part (if exists)
of a candidate fact. This allows us to then localize
facts for images in the MS COCO dataset. Given
a candidate third-order fact, we first try to assign
each S and O to one of the visual entities. If S
and O elements are not visual entities, then the fact
is ignored. Otherwise, the facts are processed by
several heuristics, detailed in Sec 5. For instance,
our method takes into account that grounding the
plural ”men” in the fact <S:men, P: chasing, O:
soccer ball > may require the union of multiple
”man” bounding boxes.

In the Flickr30K Entities dataset (Plummer et
al., 2015), the bounding box annotations are pre-
sented as phrase labels for sentences (for each
phrase in a caption that refers to an entity in the
scene). A visual entity is considered to be a phrase
with a bounding box annotation or one of the SUN
scenes. Several heuristics were developed and ap-
plied to collect these fact annotations, e.g. ground-
ing a fact about a scene to the entire image; de-
tailed in Sec 5.

4 Fact Extraction from Captions

We extract facts from captions using
Clausie (Del Corro and Gemulla, 2013) and
our proposed SedonaNLP system. In contrast to
Clausie, we address several challenging linguistic
issues by evolving our NLP pipeline to: 1)
correct many common spelling and punctua-
tion mistakes, 2) resolve word sense ambiguity
within clauses, and 3) learn a common spatial
preposition lexicon (e.g., “next to”, “on top of”,
“in front of”) that consists of over 110 such
terms, as well as a lexicon of over two dozen
collection phrase adjectives (e.g., ”group of”,
”bunch of”, ”crowd of”, ”herd of”). For our
purpose, these strategies allowed us to extract
more interesting structured facts that Clausie
fails at which include (1) more discrimination
between single versus plural terms, (2) extracting
positional facts (e.g., next to). Additionally,
SedonaNLP produces attribute facts that we
denote as <S, A>; see Fig 4. Similar to some
existing systems OpenNLP (Baldridge, 2014)
and ClearNLP (Choi, 2014), the SedonaNLP

3



Figure 3: Accumulative Percentage of SP and SPO
facts in COCO 2014 captions as number of verbs
increases

platform also performs many common NLP
tasks: e.g., sentence segmentation, tokenization,
part-of-speech tagging, named entity extraction,
chunking, dependency and constituency-based
parsing, and coreference resolution. SedonaNLP
itself employs both open-source components such
as NLTK and WordNet, as well as internally-
developed annotation algorithms for POS and
clause tagging. These tasks are used to create
more advanced functions such as structured
fact annotation of images via semantic triple
extraction. In our work, we found SedonaNLP
and Clausie to be complementary for producing a
set of candidate facts for possible localization in
the image that resulted in successful annotations.

Varying degrees of success have been achieved
in extracting and representing structured triples
from sentences using <subject, predicate, object>
triples. For instance, (Rusu et al., 2007) de-
scribe a basic set of methods based on travers-
ing the parse graphs generated by various com-
monly available parsers. Larger scale text mining
methods for learning structured facts for question
answering have been developed in the IBM Wat-
son PRISMATIC framework (Fan et al., 2010).
While parsers such as CoreNLP (Manning et al.,
2014) are available to generate comprehensive de-
pendency graphs, these have historically required
significant processing time for each sentence or
have traded accuracy for performance. In contrast,
SedonaNLP currently employs a shallow depen-
dency parsing method that runs in some cases 8-
9X faster than earlier cited methods running on
identical hardware. We choose a shallow approach
with high, medium, and low confidence cutoffs af-
ter observing that roughly 80% of all captions con-

Figure 4: Examples of caption processing and
<S,P,O> and <S,P> structured fact extractions.

sisted of 0 or 1 Verb expressions (VX); see Fig. 3
for MSCOCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014). The top
500 image caption syntactic patterns we observed
can be found on our supplemental materials (El-
hoseiny et al., 2016b). These syntactic patterns
are used to learn rules for automatic extraction for
not only <S,P,O>, but also <S,P>, and <S,A>,
where <S,P>, are subject-action facts and <S,A>
are subject-attribute facts. Pattern examples and
statistics for MS COCO are shown in Fig. 5.

In SedonaNLP, structured fact extraction was
accomplished by learning a subset of abstract
syntactic patterns consisting of basic noun, verb,
and preposition expressions by analyzing 1.6M
caption examples provided by the MS COCO,
Flickr30K, and Stony Brook University Im2Text
caption datasets. Our approach mirrors exist-
ing known art with the addition of internally-
developed POS and clause tagging accuracy im-
provements through the use of heuristics listed

4



Figure 2: SedonaNLP Pipeline for Structured Fact Extraction from Captions

Figure 5: Examples of the top observed Noun (NX), Verb (VX), and Preposition (IN) Syntactic patterns.

below to reduce higher occurrence errors due to
systematic parsing errors: (i) Mapping past par-
ticiples to adjectives (e.g., stained glass), (ii) De-
nesting existential facts (e.g., this is a picture of a
cat watching a tv.), (iii) Identifying auxiliary verbs
(e.g., do verb forms).

In Fig. 4, we show an example of extracted
<S,P,O> structured facts useful for image anno-
tation for a small sample of MS COCO captions.
Our initial experiments empirically confirmed the
findings of IBM Watson PRISMATIC researchers
who indicated big complex parse trees tend to have
more wrong parses. By limiting a frame to be only
a small subset of a complex parse tree, we reduce
the chance of error parse in each frame (Fan et al.,
2010). In practice, we observed many correctly
extracted structured facts for the more complex
sentences (i.e., sentences with multiple VX verb
expressions and multiple spatial prepositional ex-
pressions) – these facts contained useful informa-
tion that could have been used in our joint learn-
ing model but were conservatively filtered to help
ensure the overall accuracy of the facts being pre-
sented to our system. As improvements are made
to semantic triple extraction and confidence eval-
uation systems, we see potential in several areas
to exploit more structured facts and to filter less
information. Our full <S,P,O> triple and related

tuple extractions for MS COCO and Flickr30K
datasets are available in the supplemental mate-
rial (Elhoseiny et al., 2016b).

5 Locating facts in the Image

In this section, we present details about the sec-
ond step of our automatic annotation process in-
troduced in Sec. 3. After the candidate facts are
extracted from the sentences, we end up with
a set Fs = {f il }, i = 1 : Ns for statement
s, where Ns is the number of extracted candi-
date fact f il , ∀i from the statement s using ei-
ther Clausie (Del Corro and Gemulla, 2013) or
Sedona-3.0. The localization step is further di-
vided into two steps. The mapping step maps
nouns in the facts to candidate boxes in the im-
age. The grounding step processes each fact asso-
ciated with the candidate boxes and outputs a fi-
nal bounding box if localization is successful. The
two steps are detailed in the following subsections.

5.1 Mapping

The mapping step starts with a pre-processing step
that filters out a non-useful subset of Fs and pro-
duces a more useful set F∗s that we try to lo-
cate/ground in the image. We perform this step
by performing word sense disambiguation using
the state-of-the-art method (Zhong and Ng, 2010).

5



The word sense disambiguation method provides
each word in the statement with a word sense in
the wordNet ontology (Leacock and Chodorow,
1998). It also assigns for each word a part of
speech tag. Hence, for each extracted candidate
fact in Fs we can verify if it follows the expected
part of speech according to (Zhong and Ng, 2010).
For instance, all S should be nouns, all P should be
either verbs or adjectives, and O should be nouns.
This results in a filtered set of facts F∗s. Then,
each S is associated with a set of candidate boxes
in the image for second- and third-order facts and
each O associated with a set or candidate boxes
in the image for third-order facts only. Since en-
tities in MSCOCO dataset and Flickr30K are an-
notated differently, we present how the candidate
boxes are determined in each of these datasets.

MS COCO Mapping: Mapping to candidate
boxes for MS COCO reduces to assigning the S for
second-order and third-order facts, and S and O for
third-order facts. Either S or O is assigned to one
of the MSCOCO objects or SUN scenes classes.
Given the word sense of the given part (S or O),
we check if the given sense is a descendant of
MSCOCO objects senses in the wordNet ontology.
If it is, the given part (S or O) is associated with
the set of candidate bounding boxes that belongs
to the given object (e.g., all boxes that contain the
“person” MSCOCO object is under the “person”
wordnet node like “man”, ’girl’, etc). If the given
part (S or O) is not an MSCOCO object or one of
its descendants under wordNet, we further check
if the given part is one of the SUN dataset scenes.
If this condition holds, the given part is associated
with a bounding box of the whole image.

Flickr30K Mapping: In contrast to MSCOCO
dataset, the bounding box annotation comes for
each entity in each statement in Flickr30K dataset.
Hence, we compute the candidate bounding box
annotations for each candidate fact by searching
the entities in the same statement from which the
clause is extracted. Candidate boxes are those that
have the same name. Similarly, this process as-
signs S for second-order facts and assigns S and O
for second- and third-order facts.

Having finished the mapping process, whether
for MSCOCO or Flickr30K, each candidate fact
f il ∈ F∗s, is associated with candidate boxes de-
pending on its type as follows.

<S,P> : Each f il ∈ F∗s of second-order type
is associated with one set of bounding boxes biS ,

which are the candidate boxes for the S part. biO
could be assumed to be always an empty set for
second-order facts.

<S,P,O> : Each f il ∈ F∗s of third-order type
is associated with two sets of bounding boxes biS
and biS as candidate boxes for the S and P parts,
respectively.

5.2 Grounding

The grounding process is the process of associat-
ing each f il ∈ F∗s with an image fv by assigning
fl to a bounding box in the given MS COCO im-
age scene given the biS and b

i
O candidate boxes.

The grounding process is relatively different for
the two dataset due to the difference of the entity
annotations.

Grounding: MS COCO dataset (Training
and Validation sets)

In the MS COCO dataset, one challenging as-
pect is that the S or O can be singular, plural, or
referring to the scene. This means that one S could
map to multiple boxes in the image. For example,
“people” maps to multiple boxes of “person”. Fur-
thermore, this case could exist for both the S and
the O. In cases where either S or O is plural, the
bounding box assigned is the union of all candi-
date bounding boxes in biS . The grounding then
proceeds as follows.

<S,P> facts:
(1) If the computed biS = ∅ for the given f il ,

then f il fails to ground and is discarded.
(2) If S singular, f iv is the image region that with

the largest candidate bounding box in biS .
(3) If S is plural, f iv is the image region that with

union of the candidate bounding boxes in biS .
<S,P, O> facts:
(1) If biS = ∅ and biO = ∅, f il fails to ground

and is ignored.
(2) If biS 6= ∅ and biO 6= ∅, then bounding

boxes are assigned to S and O such that the dis-
tance between them is minimized (though if S or O
is plural, the assigned bounding box is the union of
all bounding boxes for biS or b

i
O respectively), and

the grounding is assigned the union of the bound-
ing boxes assigned to S and O.

(3) If either biS = ∅ or biO = ∅, then a
bounding box is assigned to the present object (the
largest bounding box if singular, or the union of all
bounding boxes if plural). If the area of this region
compared to the area of the whole scene is greater
than a threshold th = 0.3, then the f iv is associ-

6



Table 1: Human Subject Evaluation by MTurk workers %

Dataset (responses) Q1 Q2 Q3
yes no Yes No a b c d e f g

MSCOCO train 2014 (4198) 89.06 10.94 87.86 12.14 64.58 12.64 3.51 5.10 0.86 1.57 11.73
MSCOCO val 2014 (3296) 91.73 8.27 91.01 8.99 66.11 14.81 3.64 4.92 1.00 0.70 8.83

Flickr30K Entities2015 (3296) 88.94 11.06 88.19 11.81 70.12 11.31 3.09 2.79 0.82 0.39 11.46
Total 89.84 10.16 88.93 11.07 66.74 12.90 3.42 4.34 0.89 0.95 10.76

Table 2: Human Subject Evaluation by Volunteers % (This is another set of annotations different from
those evaluated by MTurkers)

Volunteers Q1 Q2 Q3
yes No Yes No a b c d e f g

MSCOCO train 2014 (400) 90.75 9.25 91.25 8.75 73.5 8.25 2.75 6.75 0.5 0.5 7.75
MSCOCO val 2014 (90) 97.77 2.3 94.44 8.75 84.44 8.88 3.33 1.11 0 0 2.22

Flickr30K Entities 2015 (510) 78.24 21.76 73.73 26.27 64.00 4.3 1.7 1.7 0.7 1.18 26.45

ated to the whole image of the scene. Otherwise,
f il fails to ground and is ignored.

Grounding: Flickr30K dataset The main dif-
ference in Flickr30K is that for each entity phrase
in a sentence, there is a box in the image. This
means there is no need to have cases for single and
plural. Since in this case, the word “men” in the
sentence will be associated with the set of boxes
referred to by “men” in the sentences. We union
these boxes for plural words as one candidate box
for “men”

We can also use the information that the object
box has to refer to a word that is after the sub-
ject word, since subject usually occurs earlier in
the sentence compared to object. We union these
boxes for plural words.

<S,P> facts:
If the computed biS = ∅ for the given f il , then

f il fails to ground and is discarded. Otherwise, the
fact is assigned to the largest candidate box in if
there are multiple boxes.

<S,P, O> facts: <S,P, O> facts are handled
very similar to MSCOCO dataset with two main
differences.

a) The candidate boxes are computed as de-
scribed for the case of Flickr30K dataset.

b) All cases are handled as single case, since
even plural words are assigned one box based on
the nature of the annotations in this dataset.

6 Experiments
6.1 Human Subject Evaluation

We propose three questions to evaluate each anno-
tation: (Q1) Is the extracted fact correct (Yes/No)?
The purpose of this question is to evaluate errors
captured by the first step, which extracts facts by
Sedona or Clausie. (Q2) Is the fact located in the
image (Yes/No)? In some cases, there might be a

fact mentioned in the caption that does not exist in
the image and is mistakenly considered as an an-
notation. (Q3) How accurate is the box assigned to
a given fact (a to g)? a (about right), b (a bit big),
c (a bit small), d (too small), e (too big), f (totally
wrong box), g (fact does not exist or other). Our
instructions on these questions to the participants
can be found in this url (Eval, 2016).

We evaluate these three questions for the facts
that were successfully assigned a box in the im-
age, because the main purpose of this evaluation
is to measure the usability of the collected annota-
tions as training data for our model. We created
an Amazon Mechanical Turk form to ask these
three questions. So far, we collected a total of
10,786 evaluation responses, which are an evalua-
tion of 3,595 (fv, fl) pairs (3 responses/ pair). Ta-
ble 2 shows the evaluation results, which indicate
that the data is useful for training, since≈83.1%
of them are correct facts with boxes that are either
about right, or a bit big or small (a,b,c). We further
some evaluation responses that we collected from
volunteer researchers in Table 2 showing similar
results.

Fig. 6 shows some successful qualitative results
that include four extracted structured facts from
MS COCO dataset (e.g., <person, using, phone>,
<person, standing>, etc). Fig 7 also show a nega-
tive example where there is a wrong fact among
the extracted facts (i.e., <house, ski>). The
main reason for this failure case is that “how” is
mistyped as “house”; see Fig 7. The supplemen-
tary materials (Elhoseiny et al., 2016b) includes all
the captions of these examples and also additional
qualitative examples.

7



6.2 Hardness Evaluation of the collected data

In order to study how the method behave in both
easy and hard examples. This section present
statistics of the successfully extracted facts and re-
late it to the hardness of the extraction of these
facts. We start by defining hardness of an ex-
tracted fact in our case and its dependency on the
fact type. Our method collect both second- and
third-order facts. We refer to candidate subjects
as all instances of the entity in the image that
match the subject type of either a second-order
fact <S,P> or a third-order fact <S,P,O>. We
refer to candidate objects as all instances in the
image that match the object type of a third-order
fact <S,P,O>. The selection of the candidate sub-
jects and candidate objects is a part of our method
that we detailed in Sec 5. We define the hardness
for second order facts by the number of candidate
subjects and the hardness of third order facts by
the number of candidate subjects multiplied by the

Figure 6: Several Facts successfully extracted by
our method from two MS COCO scenes

Figure 7: An example where one of the extracted
facts are not correct due to a spelling mistake

number of candidate objects.
In Fig 8 and 9, the Y axis is the number of facts

for each bin. The X axis shows the bins that corre-
spond to hardness that we defined for both second
and third order fats. Figure 8 shows a histogram
of the difficulties for all Mturk evaluated examples
including both the successful and the failure cases.
Figure 9 shows a similar histogram but for but for
subset of facts verified by the Turkers with Q3 as
(about right). The figures show that the method is
able to handle difficulty cases even with more than
150 possibilities for grounding. We show these re-
sults broken out for MSCOCO and Flickr30K En-
tities datasets and for each fact types in the supple-
mentary materials (Elhoseiny et al., 2016b).

Figure 8: (All MTurk Data) Hardness histogram
after candidate box selection using our method

Figure 9: (MTurk Data with Q3=about
right)Hardness histogram after our candidate
box selection

7 Conclusion
We present a new method whose main purpose
to collect visual fact annotation by a language
approach. The collected data help train visual
system systems on the fact level with the diver-
sity of facts captured by any fact described by
an image caption. We showed the effectiveness
of the proposed methodology by extracting hun-
dreds of thousands of fact-level annotations from

8



MSCOCO and Flickr30K datasets. We verified
and analyzed the collected data and showed that
more than 80% of the collected data are good for
training visual systems.

References
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-

garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zitnick,
and Devi Parikh. 2015. Vqa: Visual question an-
swering. In ICCV.

Jason Baldridge. 2014. The opennlp project. URL:
http://opennlp.apache.org/index.html,(accessed 2
February 2014).

Xinlei Chen, Ashish Shrivastava, and Arpan Gupta.
2013. Neil: Extracting visual knowledge from web
data. In ICCV.

Jinho D Choi. 2014. Clearnlp.

Luciano Del Corro and Rainer Gemulla. 2013.
Clausie: clause-based open information extraction.
In WWW.

Santosh K Divvala, Alireza Farhadi, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2014. Learning everything about any-
thing: Webly-supervised visual concept learning. In
CVPR.

Mohamed Elhoseiny, Scott Cohen, Walter Chang,
Brian Price, and Ahmed Elgammal. 2016a. Sher-
lock: Scalable fact learning in images.

Mohamed Elhoseiny, Scott Cohen, Walter Cheng,
Brian Price, and Ahmed Elgammal. 2016b.
Autoomatic annotation of structured facts in
images- supplementary materials. https://
www.dropbox.com/s/22m6jxvtqhhg10q/
supplementary.zip?dl=0. [Online; ac-
cessed 19-Nov-2015].

SAFA Eval. 2016. Safa eval instructions.
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/
u/479679457/Sherlock_SAFA_eval_
Instructions.html. [Online; accessed
02-March-2016].

James Fan, David Ferrucci, David Gondek, and Aditya
Kalyanpur. 2010. Prismatic: Inducing knowledge
from a large scale lexicalized relation resource. In
NAACL HLT. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Andrej Karpathy, Armand Joulin, and Fei Fei F Li.
2014. Deep fragment embeddings for bidirectional
image sentence mapping. In Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems, pages 1889–1897.

Ryan Kiros, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Richard S
Zemel. 2015. Unifying visual-semantic embed-
dings with multimodal neural language models.
TACL.

Claudia Leacock and Martin Chodorow. 1998. Com-
bining local context and wordnet similarity for word
sense identification. WordNet: An electronic lexical
database.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context. In ECCV. Springer.

Mateusz Malinowski, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mario
Fritz. 2015. Ask your neurons: A neural-based
approach to answering questions about images. In
ICCV.

Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The stanford corenlp natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages
55–60.

Junhua Mao, Wei Xu, Yi Yang, Jiang Wang, and Alan
Yuille. 2015. Deep captioning with multimodal re-
current neural networks (m-rnn). ICLR.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database
for english. Communications of the ACM.

Bryan Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris Cervantes, Juan
Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svetlana Lazeb-
nik. 2015. Flickr30k entities: Collecting
region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-
to-sentence models. In ICCV.

Mengye Ren, Ryan Kiros, and Richard Zemel. 2015.
Exploring models and data for image question an-
swering. In NIPS.

Delia Rusu, Lorand Dali, Blaz Fortuna, Marko Grobel-
nik, and Dunja Mladenic. 2007. Triplet extraction
from sentences. In International Multiconference”
Information Society-IS.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural im-
age caption generator.

Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista Ehinger, Aude
Oliva, Antonio Torralba, et al. 2010. Sun database:
Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In
CVPR.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Aaron Courville,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and tell: Neural image
caption generation with visual attention. In ICML.

Zhi Zhong and Hwee Tou Ng. 2010. It makes sense:
A wide-coverage word sense disambiguation system
for free text. In ACL.

9


