



















































Summarizing Multi-Party Argumentative Conversations in Reader Comment on News


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Argument Mining, pages 12–20,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Summarizing Multi-Party Argumentative Conversations in Reader
Comment on News

Emma Barker and Robert Gaizauskas
Department of Computer Science

University of Sheffield
{e.barker, r.gaizauskas}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

Existing approaches to summarizing
multi-party argumentative conversations
in reader comment are extractive and fail
to capture the argumentative nature of
these conversations. Work on argument
mining proposes schemes for identifying
argument elements and relations in text
but has not yet addressed how summaries
might be generated from a global anal-
ysis of a conversation based on these
schemes. In this paper we: (1) propose
an issue-centred scheme for analysing
and graphically representing argument
in reader comment discussion in on-line
news, and (2) show how summaries
capturing the argumentative nature of
reader comment can be generated from
our graphical representation.

1 Introduction

A very common feature of on-line news is a reader
comment facility that lets readers comment on
news articles and on previous readers’ comments.
What emerges are multi-party conversations, typ-
ically argumentative, in which, for example, read-
ers question, reject, extend, offer evidence for, ex-
plore the consequences of points made or reported
in the original article or in earlier commenters’
comments. See, e.g. The Guardian on-line.

One problem with such conversations is that
they can rapidly grow to hundreds or thousands of
comments. Few readers have the patience to wade
through this much content, a task made all the
more difficult by lack of explicit topical structure.
A potential solution is to develop methods to sum-
marize comment automatically, allowing readers
to gain an overview of the conversation.

Various researchers have already proposed
methods to automatically generate summaries of
reader comment (Khabiri et al., 2011; Ma et al.,
2012; Llewellyn et al., 2014). These authors adopt
broadly similar approaches: first reader comments
are topically clustered, then comments within
clusters are ranked and finally one or more top-
ranked comments are selected from each cluster,
yielding an extractive summary. A major draw-
back of such summaries is that they fail to capture
the essential argument-oriented nature of these
multi-way conversations, since single comments
taken from clusters do not reflect the argumenta-
tive structure of the conversation. I.e. such sum-
maries do not identify the issues about which com-
menters are arguing, the alternative viewpoints
commenters take on the issues or key evidence
supporting one viewpoint or another, which a truly
informative summary must do.

By contrast, researchers working on argument
mining from social media, including reader com-
ment and on-line debate, have articulated vari-
ous schemes defining argument elements and re-
lations in argumentative discourse (e.g. Ghosh et
al. (2014), Habernal et al. (2014), Swanson et
al. (2015)). If such elements and relations could
be automatically extracted then they could poten-
tially serve as a basis for generating a summary
that better reflects the argumentative content of
reader comment. Indeed, several of these authors
have cited summarization as a motivating applica-
tion for their work. However, to the best of our
knowledge none have proposed how, given a for-
mal analysis of an conversation in response to a
news article, one might produce a summary of that
conversation. This is a non-trivial issue.

In this paper we make two main contributions.
First (Section 2) we present a light-weight ana-
lytical framework consisting of various argument
elements and relations, specifically developed to

12



capture argument in reader comments and news
and we show, via an example, how an analysis
using this framework may be graphically repre-
sented. Secondly (Section 3), we make propos-
als for how summaries that capture the argument-
oriented character of reader comment conversa-
tions could be derived from the graphical repre-
sentation of the argument structure of a set of com-
ments and the article, as presented in Section 2.

2 A Framework for Characterising
Argument in Comment on News

2.1 Issues, Viewpoints and Assertions

From an idealised perspective, commenters ad-
dress issues, hold viewpoints on issues and make
assertions, which serve many purposes including
directly expressing a viewpoint and providing ev-
idence for an assertion (or viewpoint). Of course
reader comments may also have other functions,
e.g. expressing emotions or making jokes, but here
we are primarily interested in their argumentative
content. We expand on these terms as follows1:

Assertions A comment typically comprises one
or more assertions – propositions that the com-
menter puts forward and believes to be true. Each
assertion has a particular role in the local dis-
course. We find relations between assertions made
within a comment, between assertions made in dif-
ferent comments and between assertions in com-
ments and assertions in the article. Key relations
between assertions include: rationale (one pro-
vides evidence to support another); agree/disagree
(one agrees or disagrees with another).

Viewpoints Disagreement or contention be-
tween comments is a pervasive feature of reader
comment and news. When an assertion made by
one comment is contradicted by or contends i) an
assertion expressed in another comment, or ii) an
assertion reported in or entailed by something re-
ported in the news article, each opposed assertion
expresses a viewpoint. It follows that whether or
not an assertion expresses a viewpoint is an emer-
gent property of the discourse and only relative to
the local discourse; it is not an inherent feature of
the assertion itself.

1We would like to thank one our reviewers for pointing
out close similarities between the framework we describe
here and the IBIS framework of Kunz and Rittel (1970). In
particular they share the ideas that issues are questions, are
key primitive elements in a theory of argumentative discourse
and emerge dynamically and recursively in argument.

Issues Implicitly related to notion of viewpoint
is that of issue. We can think of an issue as a ques-
tion or problem to which there are two or more
contending answers. The space of possible an-
swers is the set of related but opposed viewpoints
expressed in the comment set. I.e. an issue is that
which a viewpoint is a viewpoint on.

Issues may be expressed in various ways, e.g.
(1) via a “whether or not”-type expression, e.g.
whether or not to lower the drinking age; (2) via
a yes-no question, e.g. Should Britain leave the
EU?; (3) via a “which X?”-type expression when
there are more than two alternatives, e.g. Which
was the best film of 2015?. However, issues are
rarely explicitly articulated in reader comments or
in the initial news article. Rather, as the dialogue
evolves, a set of assertions made by commenters
may indicate a space of alternative, opposed view-
points, and an issue can then be recognised.

Sub-issues frequently emerge within the discus-
sion of an issue, i.e. issues have a recursive nature.
When evidence proposed as support for a view-
point on an issue is contended, the two contending
comments, which may in turn attract further com-
ments, become viewpoints on a new issue, sub-
ordinate to the first. Sub-sub-issues may arise be-
low sub-issues and so on.

2.2 A Graphical Representation

In the previous sub-section we defined the key
concepts in our approach to analysing argument
in comment on news. To demonstrate how they
can be used to analyse a particular news article
plus comment set we propose a graphical repre-
sentation of the argument structure, with indices
that anchor the representation in textual elements.
A graphical approach is well-suited to the task of
identifying structural relations between elements
in a scheme, particularly when some of the ele-
ments are abstractions not themselves directly rep-
resented in the text (as is widely recognised in
the argumentation community (Reed et al., 2007;
Conklin and Begeman, 1988)).

We introduce our graphical representation via
an example. Figure 1 shows an extract from a
Guardian news article about the controversy sur-
rounding a town council’s decision to reduce the
frequency of bin collection, and 11 (of 248) com-
ments posted in response to the article. Figure 2
shows a partial depiction of the issues, viewpoints
and rationales and argumentative structure in this

13



[S0] Rubbish? [S1] Bury council votes to collect wheelie bins just once every three weeks
[S2] Locals fear the new move will lead to an increase in fly-tipping and attract foxes and vermin, but the council insists it will
make the borough more environmentally friendly. [S3] Is it just a desperate cost cutting measure? . . .
[S4] A council in Greater Manchester is to be the first in England to start collecting wheelie bins only once every three weeks,
scrapping the current fortnightly collection. [S5] The controversial decision was unanimously passed by councillors in Bury on
Wednesday night, despite fears fly tipping would increase. [S6] One councillor who voted for the motion accused her opponents
of “scaremongering” after they warned rubbish would pile up and attract vermin. [S7] Another argued the money saved could
be spent on more social workers.
[S8] It affects the grey bins used for general household waste which can’t be recycled . . . [S9] The Labour-run council claims
the move is part of a strategy to turn Bury into a “zero waste borough”, boost recycling and save money on landfill fees . . . [S10]
Many residents feel it is simply a desperate cost saving measure, after the town hall was told to make more than £32m of cuts
over the next two years . . .

Id Poster Reply Comment
1 A I can’t see how it won’t attract rats and other vermin. I know some difficult decisions have to be made

with cuts to funding, but this seems like a very poorly thought out idea.
2 B 2→ 1 Plenty of people use compost bins and have no trouble with rats or foxes.
3 C 3→ 2 If they are well-designed and well-managed- which is very easily accomplished.

If 75% of this borough composted their waste at home then they could have their bins collected every
six-weeks. It’s amazing what doesn’t need to be put into landfill.

4 D 4→1 It won’t attract vermin if the rubbish is all in the bins. Is Bury going to provide larger bins for families
or provide bins for kitchen and garden waste to cut down the amount that goes to landfill? Many people
won’t fill the bins in 3 weeks - even when there was 5 of us here, we would have just about managed.

5 E 5→ 1 Expect Bury to be knee deep in rubbish by Christmas it’s a lame brained Labour idea and before long
it’ll be once a month collections. I’m not sure what the rubbish collectors will be doing if there are
any. We are moving back to the Middle Ages, expect plague and pestilence.

6 F Are they completely crazy? What do they want a new Plague?
7 G 7→6 Interesting how you suggest that someone else is completely crazy, and then talk about a new plague.
8 H 8→7 Do you think this is a good idea? We struggle with fortnightly collection. This is tantamount to a

dereliction of duty. What are taxpayers paying for? I doubt anyone knew of this before casting their
vote.

9 I 9→8 I think it is an excellent idea. We have fortnightly collection, and the bin is usually half full or
less[family of 5].. Since 38 of the 51 council seats are held by Labour, it seems that people did vote
for this. Does any party offer weekly collections?

10 G 10→8 I don’t think it’s a good idea. But..it won’t cause a plague epidemic.
11 G 11→9 I live by myself, so my bin is going to be smaller ..but I probably have more bin-space-per-person. And

I recycle everything I can possibly recycle, and make sure nothing slips through the net. Yet I almost
fill my bin with food waste and the odd bit of unrecyclable packaging in a fortnight.. How are you
keeping your bin so empty?

Figure 1: Part of a news article (top) and comments responding to it (bottom). Comments are taken from
two threads in sequence but some intermediate comments have been omitted. Full article and comments
at: http://gu.com/p/4v2pb/sbl.

example as a directed graph.
Nodes in the graph represent issues, viewpoints

or assertions. Issues are distinguished by italics,
e.g. Is reducing bin collection to once every 3
weeks a good idea? Nodes inside dashed boxes
are implicit parts of the argument, i.e. are not di-
rectly expressed in the comments or article but are
implied by them and allow other nodes which are
explicit to be integrated into the overall argument
structure. Nodes are labelled with abstract glosses
of content explicitly or implicitly mentioned in
the article, with repeated content represented only
once. For nodes that are expressed or signalled
in the news article or comments, a list of article
sentence [sn] and comment [cn] indices is given,
grounding the argument graph in the text.

Relations between nodes are indicated by di-
rected edges in the graph. Orange edges indicate
that the assertion at the tail of arrow is a viewpoint

on the issue at the head, e.g. [less frequent collec-
tion] “will attract vermin” or “will not attract ver-
min”. Blue edges indicate the assertion at the tail
provides a rationale for the assertion at the head.

To create such a graph manually is a labori-
ous process of iterative refinement: (1) Look for
textual units expressing contention in the article.
When spotted, formulate initial glosses of opposed
viewpoints. (2) Read the comments in turn, by
thread, looking for textual units expressing con-
tention between comments or comments and the
article. When spotted, formulate/refine glosses for
opposed viewpoints (will attract vermin/won’t at-
tract vermin) and propose a potential issue. (3)
Group similar and related comment together – re-
quires re-reading earlier content to assess similar-
ity and may result in refining earlier glosses of
viewpoints and issues. (4) As rationale relations
are recognised, add these in beneath viewpoint or

14



	  

Is	  reducing	  bin	  collection	  to	  once	  every	  3	  
weeks	  a	  good	  idea?	  	  
[c8]	  

Yes, it is a good idea 
 [s1, s5, s6, c9] 

if there are larger bins 
for larger households 
and bins for garden and 
kitchen waste [c4]  
 

No, it is a bad idea  
[s2, c1, c6, c8, c10] 

Will attract vermin  
[s2, s6, c1, c5] 

Will lead to 
rubbish piling up 
outside the bins 
[s6, c5] 

Will see 
increase in 
fly tipping 
[s2, s5] 

2

Will not attract 
vermin [s6 c4] 
c4 

Compost bins (which 
contain food and aren’t 
collected) don’t attract 
rats and foxes [c2] 

Will save landfill 
fees [s9] 

1

Will encourage 
recycling [s9] 

Will save money, 
which can be 
spent on other 
council services 
[s7] 

2

Key:	  	  
issues	  in	  italics	  

viewpoint	  on	  issue	  	  
rationale/grounds	  
implicit/supressed	  	  

	  	  	  
	  

Will	  less	  frequent	  
collection	  lead	  to	  
rubbish	  piling	  up?	  

if people compost  
correctly   [c3]    

Households will produce more 
rubbish in 3 weeks than can fit 
in the bin 

Just a cost 
cutting 
measure 
[s10] 

Will	  3	  weeks	  worth	  of	  
rubbish	  fit	  in	  the	  
household	  bin?	  	  

Will not lead to 
rubbish piling up 
outside the bins 
[S6] 

1

Will	  less	  frequent	  bin	  
collection	  attract	  
vermin?	  

Will make the 
borough more 
environmentally 
friendly   
[s2, s9] 

 3 weeks of rubbish can fit in the bin  
[c3,c4] 

Personal testimony: 
commenters struggle 
with fortnightly 
collection, some 
recycling everything 
[c8, c11] 

Personal testimonies: 
family of 5 could 
manage; bin only half 
full after two weeks 
[c4, c9] 

 if bins are well 
designed and well 
managed  
[c3] 

Figure 2: Argument graph for the article and comment subset shown in Figure 1

rationale nodes already in the graph. Implicit as-
sertions or viewpoints may need to be added to
capture the structure of the argument (e.g. house-
holds will produce more rubbish in 3 weeks than
can fit in the bin). This should only be done when
necessary to integrate parts of the argument that
are explicit (i.e. not all implicit assertions need to
be made explicit).

3 Generating Summaries from
Argument Graphs

Argument graphs show the issues raised, view-
points taken and rationales given across a (possi-
bly very large) set of comments. Such a graph re-
veals the argumentative structure of the comment
set in relation to the article, something that should
be reflected in any argument-oriented summary.
But clearly it contains far too much information
to appear in a summary. How, then, can we use
the graph structure and the information it contains
to produce a summary?

The argument graph itself could be used as a
visual presentation mechanism for the argumenta-
tive content of the comments and article. The user

could, e.g., be allowed to expand or collapse nodes
on demand, starting from the top-most issues(s)
and viewpoints. While this is a promising line of
work, here we focus on how to generate a textual
summary from an argument graph. In the next sub-
section we discuss features of the graph one could
take into account to generate a summary. Then
we present two heuristic algorithms for generating
summaries that exploit these features and illustrate
the output of one of them by using it (manually) to
produce a summary from an extended version of
the argument graph presented in Figure 2. Finally,
we compare that summary with a human summary
of the same article and comments produced in a
less prescriptive way.

3.1 Features for Summarization

Given an argument graph as presented in Section
2.2, a summarization algorithm could exploit both
quantitative features of nodes in the graph as well
as structural relations between nodes.

Features of issue nodes to use include:

Issue Index Count Number of comments or arti-
cle sentences explicitly mentioning the issue.

15



Issue Textual Gloss of Issue Issue Max Sub Sub Total
Id Index Issue Node Issue Index

Count Depth Count Count Count
1 Is reducing bin collection to once every 3 weeks a good idea? 1 7 31 7 58
2 Will less frequent bin collection attract vermin? 0 6 21 5 38
3 Will less frequent collection lead to rubbish piling up? 0 4 15 3 24
4 Will 3 weeks of rubbish fit in the bin? 0 4 13 2 21
5 Will reducing collection encourage recycling? 0 3 10 2 13
6 Can people recycle/compost more rubbish than they do? 0 2 7 1 11
7 Are vermin attracted by the type of rubbish in the black/grey bin? 0 1 2 0 5
8 Do people in flats have composting facilities? 0 1 2 0 4

Table 1: Issues in Bin Collection Article and First 30 Comments

Id Is- Textual Gloss of Viewpoint on Issue VPt Total Evid. Total Max Evid.
sue Index Index Count Evid. VPt Nodes

Count Count Count Depth Contd
1 1 No it is a bad idea 6 21 3 7 4 4
2 1 Yes it is a good idea 4 14 3 7 4 2
3 2 Will attract vermin 4 12 2 4 3 3
4 2 Will not attract vermin 3 19 3 10 5 4
5 3 Will lead to rubbish piling up 2 5 1 2 2 1
6 3 Will not lead to rubbish piling up 1 12 1 6 4 2
7 4 3 weeks of rubbish can fit in the bin 2 11 3 5 3 1
8 4 3 weeks of rubbish cannot fit in the bin 0 3 1 1 1 0
9 5 Reducing collection will encourage recycling 1 6 2 3 2 1

10 5 Reducing collection will not encourage recycling 0 5 1 3 2 2
11 6 People don’t recycle/compost everything they can 3 4 1 2 1 0
12 6 People recycle/compost everything they can already 1 5 2 2 1 1
13 7 Black/grey bins contain the type of rubbish that at-

tracts vermin
3 3 0 0 0 0

14 7 Black/grey bins contain packaging that does not at-
tract vermin

2 2 0 0 0 0

15 8 People in flats don’t have composting facilities 3 3 0 0 0 0
16 8 People in flats have composting facilities 1 1 0 0 0 0

Table 2: Viewpoints (VPts) in Bin Collection Article and First 30 Comments

Maximum Issue Depth Count of all levels below
an issue.

Sub-Node Count Count of all viewpoint and ra-
tionale nodes below the issue node. including
points of contention.

Sub-Issue Count Count of all issues below a
given issue.

Total Index Count Count of all indices on the is-
sue itself and all sub-nodes.

Maximum Issue Depth, together with the Sub-
node Count give a broad indication of the struc-
tural character of the argument. A shallow depth
score of say 2, with a high number of nodes sug-
gest that there are lots of different reasons given
for supporting or not supporting something, but
no complex case given to explain or justify the
support for these positions. Sub-issue Count is in-
dicative of the degree of contention on an issue and
Total Index Count indicates the volume of explicit
comment relating to an issue, i.e. is an indication
of the number of participants in the conversation
saying things related to the issue. Table 1, which

is meant to be indicative only, shows these counts
for a version of the argument graph of Figure 2 ex-
tended to include 30 comments (two full threads).

Features of viewpoint nodes to use include:

Viewpoint Index Count Count of the indices of
comments or article sentences that directly
support the viewpoint.

Viewpoint Total Index Count Count of all in-
dices on the viewpoint, both direct and indi-
rect; i.e. indices on the viewpoint and indices
on all rationale nodes supporting the high
level viewpoint (excludes indices on nodes
contending any of the lower level rationales).

Evidence Count Count of the number of ratio-
nale nodes directly below a viewpoint.

Total Evidence Count Count of all nodes play-
ing a role in supporting the viewpoint.

Maximum Viewpoint Depth Count of the levels
of rationale given below the viewpoint.

Evidence Nodes Contended Count of the num-
ber of direct contentions to rationales sup-
porting a viewpoint.

16



Viewpoint Index Count shows the strength of
direct support for a viewpoint. Viewpoint Total
Index Count provides an indication of both di-
rect support for the viewpoint and support for the
supporting arguments. Together, Evidence Count,
Total Evidence Count and Maximum Viewpoint
Depth indicate the structural complexity and de-
tail of the supporting case. Evidence Nodes Con-
tended indicates the degree to which rationales for
a viewpoint are contended by counter arguments.
Table 2 shows these counts for the extended ver-
sion of the argument graph shown in Figure 2.

Table 2 defines measures relating to the position
and popularity of issue and viewpoint nodes in an
argument graph. The same measures can be calcu-
lated for evidence nodes.

3.2 Algorithms for Summarization
The counts specified in the previous section to-
gether with the structure of the argument graph can
be used in many different ways to generate sum-
maries. Here we mention just two as an indication
of the space of possibilities. 2

Simple Issue-oriented Summarizer One sim-
ple baseline is to list issues discussed, up to the
summary length limit, ordered by whichever quan-
titative measure for issues is felt to best indicate
significance. Choosing an ordering measure like
Total Index Count places value on the number of
commenters discussing the issue; choosing Sub-
Node Count favours more elaborated arguments
and Sub-Issue Count favours issues that give rise
to more contention. In the example shown in Ta-
ble 1 the various measures all correlate closely so
the choice of which measure to use is arbitrary;
however this need not always be the case.

2One important technical observation should be made In
the example above the argument graph is a connected graph
in which there is a unique issue node (the root issue): (1)
to which all other nodes are connected either via viewpoint
or rationale relations or via issues arising from contention of
a rationale node otherwise related to the root issue, and (2)
none of whose viewpoint nodes are rationales for other nodes
in the argument. In Figure 2, e.g., while no issue node has
a parent, the issue Is reducing bin collection to once every 3
weeks a good idea? is unique in that none of its viewpoint
nodes is a rationale for any other node in the graph. In the
general case, comment sets can give rise to multiple, unre-
lated root issues. We do not discuss such cases here, i.e. we
assume the graph to be summarised is a connected graph with
a single root issue. However, the algorithms discussed below
could easily be extended to accommodate the more general
case, e.g. by distributing the total summary length between
each root-dominated sub-graph, possibly allowing “larger”
sub-graphs, as determined by one of the measures above, a
greater proportion of overall summary length.

Algorithm 1 Single Issue Summarizer
Require: An argument graph G; issue I in G;

comparison functions fS(., .), fE(., .) for or-
dering viewpoint and rationale nodes respec-
tively; a measure ThresholdE on evidence
nodes

1: Summary ← []
2: Summary += I
3: S← list of the viewpoints on I ordered by fS
4: for each viewpoint s in S do
5: Summary += s
6: Rs← list of rationales for s ordered by fE
7: for each rationale node rs in Rs do
8: if fE(ThresholdE , rs) then
9: Summary += rs

10: end if
11: end for
12: end for

Simple Argument-Oriented Summarizer The
simple issue-oriented approach ignores informa-
tion about viewpoints and rationales and about
which sub-issues relate to which specific dominat-
ing issues. A more interesting approach to sum-
marization should take this into account. One way
to do this is shown in Algorithm 1, which out-
lines the logic for selecting the content for inclu-
sion in an argument-oriented summary of one is-
sue. Given an argument graph and an issue, the
algorithm starts by including the issue in the sum-
mary, then for each viewpoint on the issue adds
that viewpoint in an order defined over some fea-
ture of viewpoints (e.g. Total Index Count). As
each viewpoint is added, evidence nodes for the
viewpoint are added, ordered by some node fea-
ture (e.g. Evidence Nodes Contended), provided
their count on this feature exceeds a threshold.

Algorithm 1 only summarizes a single issue. It
could be used to generate a high level summary
of an argument graph by calling it with the root
node. Or, it could be extended to cover more
of the graph in various ways. For example, af-
ter line 9, when the decision to add an evidence
node rs to the summary has been made, rs could
be checked to see if it is a viewpoint on a issue,
i.e. if it has been contended. If yes, it could be
added to a list SubI of sub-issues to report in the
summary. After line 12, SubI could be sorted by
some measure of importance and, possibly, thresh-
olded or truncated to shorten it. The algorithm

17



Summary 1 (97 words) Many commenters were unhappy
with the less frequent collections; some were struggling al-
ready with the fortnightly collection and were concerned
with vermin or overflowing bins. A few commenters, how-
ever, countered that black bins were for non-food waste that
would not attract vermin. Other commenters thought fewer
collections were manageable if people recycled their food
waste, garden waste, and any other recycleable materials.
Few commenters, however, pointed out the lack of com-
posting facilities for those living in some areas or flats. The
council should provide more education and services in these
areas to encourage more people to recycle.

Summary 2 (112 words) The central issue discussed was
whether reducing bin collection to once every 3 weeks is a
good idea. Some argued it was a bad idea because it would
lead to vermin being attracted and to an increase in flying
tipping. Others argued it was a good idea as it would save
money that could be spent on other council services and
would make the borough more environmentally. Whether
the proposal would lead to vermin being attracted was de-
bated. Some argued they would because the proposal would
lead to rubbish piling up in the streets. Others argued it
would not as the proposal would not lead to rubbish piling
up in the streets.

Figure 3: A human authored summary (Summary 1) and a potential automatic summmary (Summary 2)
of the first 30 comments on the Bury Bin Collection Article

could then be called recursively on each of the is-
sues in SubI or SubI could be returned and added
to an agenda maintained by a higher level control-
ling algorithm, which calls Algorithm 1 iteratively
on each of the issues in its agenda. Of course the
summary must not exceed its length limit.

The algorithm only selects the content for in-
clusion in a summary and ignores details of how it
is to be realised. A more or less mechanical sur-
face realisation process could be used to generate a
summary like that shown in Figure 3, Summary 2.
In this summary for the extended argument graph
underlying Tables 1 and 2, we assume the root is-
sue has been summarised (sentences 1-3) and that
one further issue (2) has also been chosen for in-
clusion using the sort of extension to the algorithm
described in the last paragraph (sentences 4-6).

3.3 Comparison with Human Summaries

Figure 3 shows a human-authored summary of the
first 30 comments on the bin collection article, cre-
ated as part of a corpus of gold standard reader
comment summaries (SENSEI Project, 2016).
Annotators created the gold standard summaries
using a novel 3 stage method: (1) each comment
in the source set is annotated with a label (i.e.
a mini-summary of the main points in the com-
ment); (2) related labels are sorted into groups that
the annotator believes will be helpful for writing
an overview summary and a group label is pro-
duced to indicate common content in the group;
(3) based on the analysis and annotations created
in stages (1) and (2), an overview summary is writ-
ten, which should identify the main points raised
in the discussion, different views, areas of consen-
sus, the proportion of comments addressing a topic
or sharing a view, and strong feelings shown.

The human summary sentences shown above
correspond very closely to elements in the graph-

ical representation of the same 30 comments and
while the summary addresses only a subset of the
graph nodes, it does not introduce any additional
content. This is a promising, if weak, form of val-
idation as it suggests that summaries read off our
argument graph using the algorithm of the last sec-
tion are very similar to those produced by humans,
given only modest direction. Further compari-
son of our gold standard human summaries with
graphical representations of the same source texts
might provide additional insights into how to re-
fine algorithms for summary content selection.

4 Related Work

In recent years various authors have begun work
on argument mining in on-line discussion forums
(e.g., Cabrio and Vilatta (2012); Boltužić and
Šnajder (2014); Swanson et al. (2015)) and reader
comment on news (e.g., Sobhani et al. (2015);
Carstens and Toni (2015); Sardianos et al. (2015)).
While sharing some features, such as allowing
multiple participants to exchange views, make
claims and supply supporting arguments, these
two sources of argumentative discourse also ex-
hibit notable differences. For instance, in on-
line discussion forums such as debatepedia.org or
convinceme.net, debates are topically organized or
tagged with key words, e.g. climate change, and
a debate is typically framed by a starting motion
or question and an example of a supporting or
counter statement (similar to our notion of issue
and viewpoint). In reader comment this structured
information is missing and the debate is framed
solely by a document (the article), with issues, as
we define them, rarely explicitly signalled in the
article or comments. Thus, the task of structur-
ing the debate by discovering the issues, which our
framework addresses, is a challenge of particular
importance for reader comment.

18



Many authors propose models of argumentation
and associated annotation schemes, e.g. Ghosh et
al. (2014), Swanson et al. (2015), Carstens and
Toni (2015). These models/schemes specify a set
of argumentative elements and relations between
them and, as noted by Peldszus and Stede (2013),
approaches to argument mining typically address
the subtasks of identifying, classifying and relat-
ing argumentative discourse units (ADUs) accord-
ing to the types of ADU and argumentative rela-
tion specified in whatever model/scheme has been
adopted. Our framework too relies upon defining
and operationalising the identification of similar
argument elements and relations (viewpoints and
rationales in our case). However, with the excep-
tion of Kunz and Rittel (1970) we are not aware of
any argumentation model that puts the notion of
issue in the form of a question at the centre of the
model and organises argument elements and rela-
tions around it.

Aside from differences in the text type ad-
dressed (reader comment rather than on-line de-
bate) and the prominence given to notion of issue
in our anaytical framework, our principal differ-
ence to other work in argument mining is the task
we focus on: summarization. Some authors have
cited summarization as a motivating end-user task,
e.g. Swanson et al. (2015) and Misra et al. (2015).
However, both these works aim at summarising
an argument on a single topic like “gun control”
across multiple dialogues and do not address the
summarization of single, multi-party argumenta-
tive conversations that may address multiple is-
sues, such as those found in reader comments. To
the best of our knowledge no one has addressed
the form that an end-user overview summary of
reader comment might take or how it might be
generated from the abstract representation of an
argument, as we do in this paper.

5 Discussion and Future Work

In this paper we have defined notions of issue,
viewpoint and assertion as part of a framework
for analysing argumentative conversations such
as those that appear in response to news arti-
cles in on-line news. We introduced a graph-
ical representation for representing these argu-
ment elements and relations between them, such
as viewpoint-on holding between viewpoints and
issues and rationale-for holding between asser-
tions and viewpoints/other assertions. We also dis-

cussed how an argument graph can be used to gen-
erate summaries of argumentative conversations,
proposing features that could be extracted from an
argument graph to assist in selecting content to be
summarised and sketching two basic summariza-
tion algorithms suggestive of the space of possible
algorithms that could be developed.

We are fully aware that our analytical frame-
work, graphical representation and proposals for
summarization algorithms are theoretical prelimi-
naries and, while grounded in extensive observa-
tion and analysis of data, need to be implemented
and empirically evaluated to be validated. This
forms the core of our current and future work.
Specifically we need to further develop, imple-
ment and evaluate (1) methods for reliably ex-
tracting an argument graph from news articles and
comments (2) summarization algorithms of the
sort outlined above. Building argument graphs is
the greater of these challenges and is perhaps best
approached by factoring it into sub-tasks, such as
candidate assertion detection, argumentative rela-
tion detection and issue identification. Candidate
assertion detection involves segmenting the text
into clauses that could play a role in the argument.
Argumentative relation detection involves identi-
fying various relations between candidate asser-
tions, such as identity, disagreement or contradic-
tion and evidence or support. Issue identification
involves detecting a disagreement or contradiction
relation between assertions and establishing suf-
ficient supporting argumentation for the opposed
assertions and/or repetition across multiple partic-
ipants in the conversation to deem them an issue.
Building components to carry out these sub-tasks
is likely to require the creation of annotated re-
sources for training and testing. Existing super-
vised learning techniques can then be brought to
bear. As well as implementing our proposals, fur-
ther work should be carried out to refine and val-
idate our analytical framework, e.g., by getting
multiple analysts to generate argument graphs for
a corpus of comment sets.

While these challenges are substantial we be-
lieve the proposals made in this paper provide a re-
alistic framework to progress work on summariza-
tion of multi-party argumentative conversations.

Acknowledgements The authors would like to
thank the European Commission for supporting
this work, carried out as part of the FP7 SENSEI
project, grant reference: FP7-ICT-610916.

19



References
Filip Boltužić and Jan Šnajder. 2014. Back up your

stance: Recognizing arguments in online discus-
sions. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Ar-
gumentation Mining, pages 49–58.

Elena Cabrio and Serena Villata. 2012. Combining
textual entailment and argumentation theory for sup-
porting online debates interactions. In The 50th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference, pages
208–212.

Lucas Carstens and Francesca Toni. 2015. Towards
relation based argumentation mining. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation Min-
ing, pages 29–34, Denver, CO, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jeff Conklin and Michael L. Begeman. 1988. gIBIS:
A hypertext tool for exploratory policy discussion.
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 6(4):303–331.

Debanjan Ghosh, Smaranda Muresan, Nina Wacholder,
Mark Aakhus, and Matthew Mitsui. 2014. Analyz-
ing argumentative discourse units in online interac-
tions. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Ar-
gumentation Mining, pages 39–48.

Ivan Habernal, Judith Eckle-Kohler, and Iryna
Gurevych. 2014. Argumentation mining on the web
from information seeking perspective. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Frontiers and Connections
between Argumentation Theory and Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 26–39.

Elham Khabiri, James Caverlee, and Chiao-Fang Hsu.
2011. Summarizing user-contributed comments. In
Proceedings of The Fifth International AAAI Con-
ference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM-11),
pages 534–537.

Werner Kunz and Horst W. J. Rittel. 1970. Issues as el-
ements of information systems. Working Paper No.
131, Institute of Urban and Regional Development,
Univ. of California, Berkeley, Calif.

Clare Llewellyn, Claire Grover, and Jon Oberlander.
2014. Summarizing newspaper comments. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM 2014, pages
599–602.

Zongyang Ma, Aixin Sun, Quan Yuan, and Gao Cong.
2012. Topic-driven reader comments summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM international
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement, CIKM ’12, pages 265–274.

Amita Misra, Pranav Anand, Jean E. Fox Tree, and
Marilyn Walker. 2015. Using summarization to dis-
cover argument facets in online idealogical dialog.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 430–440.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2013. From ar-
gument diagrams to argumentation mining in texts:
A survey. International Journal of Cognitive Infor-
matics and Natural Intelligence (IJCINI), 7(1):1–31.

SENSEI Project. 2016. The SENSEI corpus of human
summaries of reader comment conversations in on-
line news. Available from: nlp.shef.ac.uk/sensei/.

Chris Reed, Douglas Walton, and Fabrizio Macagno.
2007. Argument diagramming in logic, law and arti-
ficial intelligence. Knowledge Engineering Review,
22(1):87–109.

Christos Sardianos, Ioannis Manousos Katakis, Geor-
gios Petasis, and Vangelis Karkaletsis. 2015. Argu-
ment extraction from news. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 56–
66.

Parinaz Sobhani, Diana Inkpen, and Stan Matwin.
2015. From argumentation mining to stance clas-
sification. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Argumentation Mining, pages 67–77.

Reid Swanson, Brian Ecker, and Marilyn Walker.
2015. Argument mining: Extracting arguments
from online dialogue. In Proceedings of the SIG-
DIAL 2015 Conference, pages 217–226.

20


