



















































Annotating the discourse and dialogue structure of SMS message conversations


Proceedings of LAW X – The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 180–187,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating the discourse and dialogue structure of SMS message
conversations

Nianwen Xue, Qishen Su, Sooyoung Jeong
Brandeis University

Computer Science Department
{xuen,qsu,jeong}@brandeis.edu

Abstract

In this paper we present a framework
for annotating the discourse and dialogue
structure of SMS message conversations.
The annotation specifications integrate el-
ements of coherence-based discourse re-
lations and communicative acts in con-
versational speech. We present annota-
tion experiments that show reliable anno-
tation can be achieved with this annotation
framework.

1 Introduction

With the pervasive use of mobile devices, Short
Message Service (SMS) has been used widely in
day-to-day communications. In many cases SMS
messages have taken the place of traditional tele-
phone conversations, and have become the pre-
ferred method for people to communicate with one
another. SMS messages are by definition short,
and due to its asynchronous nature, a participant
does not have to wait to respond before another
participant finishes. As a result, it is often the case
that the conversation does not alternate in a rigid
manner between participants.

The relations between the messages in an SMS
conversation are in some ways very similar to
those between utterances in conversational speech,
where a conversant may agree or disagree with,
respond to, or indicate understanding (or non-
understanding) of an utterance by another speaker.
To the extent that they are similar, the relations
between SMS messages can be characterized in
terms of the dialogue annotation framework de-
scribed in (Core and Allen, 1997). The dialogue
structure of the SMS “conversations” also tends
to be more complex than that of speech conversa-
tions as a result of the more complex turn-taking
patterns in SMS messages.

SMS message conversations are also different
from conversational speech in that they are primar-
ily in text form. Text within a single message also
demonstrates the kind of discourse coherence that
is typical of written text.

In this paper we describe a framework for anno-
tating the discourse and dialogue structure of SMS
message conversations. Based on the linguistic
characteristics of SMS messages, we design an an-
notation framework that integrates elements of di-
alogue and discourse annotations, and report ex-
periments that show reliable annotation with this
framework.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we describe our annotation framework
in detail. In Section 3 we report results on anno-
tation experiments that show reliable annotation,
and we will also discuss sources of disagreement.
In Section 4 we discuss related work. We conclude
our paper and describe future work in Section 5.

2 Annotation framework

In this section, we describe key elements of our an-
notation framework. We first describe basic units
of our annotation, and then discuss how the basic
units relate to each other to form a dialogue struc-
ture. Finally we present the set of relations we use
in interpreting this structure.

2.1 Units of annotation

The basic units of annotation are individual text
messages. The SMS messages are usually short,
and most of the messages consist of single sen-
tences, but there are a small and yet significant
proportion of messages that consist of multiple
sentences. In our current round of annotation, we
do not analyze relations between the sentences in-
side one message, but we leave that possibility
open for future rounds of annotation. Compared

180



with discourse annotation of newswire text (Carl-
son et al., 2001; Prasad et al., 2008), determining
the text units to perform annotation on is a rela-
tively simple task, due to the fact that there is a
natural boundary between text messages.

2.2 Structure of the SMS message
conversations

Due to the asynchronous nature of SMS message
conversations, individual messages are often “out
of order”, and determining which message relates
to which is a substantial part of the annotation.
This aspect of the annotation is different from the
annotation of newswire texts or even conversa-
tional speech, where the “normal” order is gener-
ally maintained, although in conversation speech,
there are often interruptions that break the normal
pattern of turn-taking (Stolcke et al., 2000). Al-
though there are some exceptions, in general, we
assume that one message is only related to one
previous message.1 We call the message we are
annotating the “anaphor”, and the previous mes-
sage that it relates to the “antecedent”. Because
the messages are “scrambled”, the antecedent of
a message is not always the immediately previ-
ous one, although it is in most cases. In addition,
the antecedent of a message may not always be
from a different participant. A participant may re-
spond to a prior message by another participant,
or continue his/her own line of thought without re-
sponding to an outstanding message from the other
participant. A short snippet of an SMS message
conversation is presented in Figure 1. On the left
side of the figure is a graph that shows how the
messages are connected. Each message is identi-
fied by a numerical number followed by a letter
indicating the ID of the participant. For exam-
ple, “7b” indicates message No 7 by participant
“b”. As should be clear from the graph, some
messages (e.g., 7b,12b,14a, 15b,16a, 17b) are not
linked to an immediately previous message, and
some messages are connected to a previous mes-
sage by the same participant. The graph shares
many properties of a dependency tree in that there
is a single root, and each anaphor is connected to
one antecedent. It also more constrained than a
dependency tree at the syntactic level in that the
antecedent is always before the anaphor. The de-
pendency tree is non-projective, since if all the

1The assumption always holds except for a negligible
number of cases where one message responds to multiple pre-
vious messages.

arcs are drawn one one side, there will be crossing
edges. These properties are important in fashion-
ing a strategy for parsing this structure automati-
cally, a topic that is out of the scope of this paper.
Linking each message to its antecedent message is
the first step of our annotation project.

2.3 Relations between the messages

The second aspect of our annotation is to label
the edges in graph, that is, to determine the re-
lationship between each pair of connected mes-
sages. When annotating these relations, we make
the distinction between same-participant message
pairs and different-participant message pairs. The
relations we use to label same-participant mes-
sage pairs are drawn from the discourse relations
defined in the Penn Discourse TreeBank (Prasad
et al., 2008), but some PDTB relations are non-
existent in the SMS data. For example, we did not
find cases of temporal relations in our SMS con-
versation data. This makes senses, since there is
not much narrative text in SMS messages as there
is in newswire such as Wall Street Journal articles
in the PDTB and as a result, temporal relations
are mostly unnecessary. On the other hand, there
are also relations not covered in the PDTB. For
example, there are cases where a participant uses
another message to complete a previous message,
presumably because s/he hit the “send” button in
the middle of a message and later had to complete
that message. There are also messages used to cor-
rect spelling mistakes of a previous message from
the same participant. Such cases are not attested
in carefully edited newswire text but they need to
be accounted for in our annotation. The complete
list of same-participant relations are presented in
Table 3.

The different-participant relations are drawn
from DAMSL (Core and Allen, 1997), a coding
scheme for annotating communication acts in con-
versational speech. DAMSL is a multilayer an-
notation framework that annotates both forward
and backward communicative functions. Since we
focus on the relation between the current mes-
sage and its antecedent, we limit ourselves to
mostly annotating backward communicative func-
tions. The set of different-participant relations are
provided in Table 2. Two of our labels, direc-
tives:request and directives:suggestion may bear
some resemblance to the forward communicative
functions in DAMSL, but they are used to label

181



root

1a When does the ring come into the picture? you holding it off for a while

2-6b ......

7b if we were going to stay in DC then I would say it is a lot closer

8a why would it be harder if you guys are thinking about going to NYC??

9a you guys would be doing this all together?

10b but i have no idea if i am going to be able to handle NYC

11a true

12b and she might not want to come back to DC if i hate it there

13b i know that doesn’t make a lot of sense

14a you think she would choose the city over you? I doubt that

15b but pretty much no matter what happens there are going to be some sacrificest

16a I mean totally cool either way

17b no i dont think she would choose anything over me

18b and i wouldnt do either

19b which is why the situation is blurry

initiation

continuation

response

response

continuation

response

response

continuation

continuation

response

continuation

continuation

response

continuation

continuation

Figure 1: The SMS message as a dependency tree. The suffixes “a” and “b” on the tree nodes are the two
participants. Messages in boxes have non-local (not immediately before) antecedents.

requests or suggestions in the context of a previ-
ous message. The following example is a case of
directive:suggestion:

(1) A: I’m hungry.

B: let’s go get some food!

It is important to note that unlike DAMSL, the tar-
gets of our annotation project are not individual
utterances but are relations between pairs of mes-
sages. When labeling the backward communica-
tive functions of an utterance in DAMSL, the an-
tecedent of the utterance is assumed to be the im-
mediately previous one, but we cannot make this
assumption in our annotation.

There is a third group of labels that don’t fit
nicely into either group of same-participant or

different-participant labels. Those labels are used
to label messages that initiate a new topic, get at-
tention, or fulfill a social obligation. These mes-
sages are explained in Table 4.

3 Annotation Experiments

The SMS data we performed our annotation
experiments on are drawn from an LDC collec-
tion of SMS and Chat Messages collected under
the DARPA BOLT program. Two annotators per-
formed four rounds of annotation, working on the
same documents so that inter-annotator agreement
(IAA) statistics can be computed. We started with
an initial set of guidelines. After each round of an-
notation, the annotators met and discussed cases
of disagreement. If the differences are due to un-

182



Label Description
Agreement:Acceptance Acceptance refers to a positive response to proposals, requests,

and suggestions, or agreement to assertions. Common key words
of acceptance are “yes”, “ok”, “alright”, etc.

Agreement:Rejection Rejection indicates a negative response to proposals, requests,
and suggestions, or disagreement to assertions. Rejection is of-
ten signaled by words like “no” or “nah”.

Understanding:Acknowledgment Acknowledgment signals a participant’s understanding of a pre-
vious message. Cue words or phrases for Acknowledgment in-
clude “ok”, “I understand”, “yes”, “I know”, “I see”, etc. Ac-
knowledgment may also contain words or short phrases that ex-
press sentiment such as happiness, excitement, sadness, anger.
These words or phrases can be laughing words (such as “haha”
and “lol”), words that express surprise or excitement (such as
“omg” or “yay”) and appreciation (such as “awww”), profanity
(such as “what the hell”), or emoticons.

Understanding:Non-
Understanding

Non-understanding is used when a participant seeks clarification
by asking clarification questions.

Directive:Request This relation is used when a participant asks another participant
to perform certain action. The immediate information or context
of Request, as opposed to Derivative Request, comes from the
other participant’s message.

Directive:Suggestion This relations is used when a participant offers another partici-
pant an idea or plan for consideration. The immediate informa-
tion or context of Suggestion, as opposed to Derivative Sugges-
tion, comes from the other participant’s message.

Question This relation is used to mark requests of information and clarifi-
cation. Unlike the clarification questions mentioned previously,
this type of question does not signal non-understanding. Instead
it is a general request for additional information. The immedi-
ate information or context of Question, as opposed to Derivative
Question, comes from the other participant’s message.

Answer:Answer An answer provides complete or partial information to a ques-
tion in a previous text message.

Answer:Hold A participant sometimes signals their acknowledgment of a
question, but does not provide an answer to it. Moreover, if
a participant responds to another participant’s question with a
question, such a response is considered as Hold

Feedback This type of relation is used when a participant provides infor-
mation in response to another participant’s message that is nei-
ther a question nor a directive.

Figure 2: Dialogue Only Labels

clear instructions in the guidelines or unclear dis-
tinctions in the tagset, the guidelines are revised
before the next round of annotation starts. We
made sure that the document sizes and the num-
ber of messages that we annotate in each round
stay constant so that we can observe the trend in
the agreement statistics after each round of anno-

tation. Before we discuss the IAA, we first present
the distribution of the distances between each mes-
sage and its antecedent in Table 5. The distance is
computed by pooling the two sets of annotations
by the two annotators. The results show that over-
all there is a distance of 1 for only 77.97% of the
message pairs, meaning that the antecedent mes-

183



Label Description

Contingency:Cause

Cause indicates that the situations in two text messages influ-
ence each other causally, and they are not in a conditional rela-
tion.(Group, 2008) This type of relation is used when the argu-
ment of the previous message is the result, and that of the follow-
ing message is the cause.

Contingency:Result

Similar to the Cause relation, Result also indicates that the two
arguments have a causal relation, and that they are not in a con-
ditional relation. Result is used when the argument of a given
message is the result caused by the situation of a previous mes-
sage.

Contingency:Condition
Two text messages are in a conditional relation when the argu-
ment of one message is the condition and that of the other mes-
sage is the consequence.

Expansion:Elaboration

A text message is considered as an elaboration of a previous one,
when the current message clarifies or elaborates on the informa-
tion that the previous message conveys. This relation can apply to
two or more messages that are connected by conjunctions “and”
and “but”.

Expansion:Derivative Question

This type of relation concerns with requests of information and
clarification, similar to Question. However, the immediate infor-
mation or context of Derivative Question, as opposed to Question,
derives from the same participant’s own messages.

Expansion:Derivative Suggestion

This type of relation is used when a participant provides another
participant an idea or plan for consideration of a future action,
and its information or context derives immediately from the same
participant’s own messages.

Expansion:Derivative Request
This elation is used when a participant asks another participant to
perform certain action, but its immediate information or context
derives from the same participant’s messages.

Expansion:Concession

This type of discourse relation is used to highlight prominent
differences between two text messages. More specifically, “the
highlighted differences are related to expectations raised by one
argument which are then denied by the other”(Group, 2008).

Expansion:Alternative
This discourse relation is used when two text messages describe
alternative situations. ‘or”, “instead” and “otherwise” are com-
mon cue words for this relation.

Expansion:Completion
Occasionally when a participant uses two or more messages to
complete a sentence, and Completion is used to describe the rela-
tion between these messages.

Reflexive Feedback
This relation is used when a participant answers their own ques-
tions or responds to their own statements (such as laughing at
their own joke).

Correction
Correction is generally concerned with correcting wrong infor-
mation from a previous text message, such as typos.

Figure 3: Non-Dialogue Only Labels

sage is the immediately previous message in only
77.97% of the cases. For the remaining 22.03%
of the cases, the antecedent is not the immedi-

ately previous message, indicating there is a sig-
nificant proportion of messages that do not follow
the “normal” order of turn-taking. The amount

184



Label Description
Topic Introduction It is used when a participant initiates a new topic in a new or existing

conversation.
Attention Getter An Attention Getter is a word or phrase used to attract the attention of

another participant. It can be words like “Hey”, “Oh”, “Ah”, etc., or the
name of the other speaker.

Social Obligation This type of discourse relation is used when a participant complies with
certain social norms or obligations, such as apologies, acceptance or rejec-
tion of apologies, appreciation, greetings, farewell, etc. When a participant
is signaling their desire for ending a conversation, that message is consid-
ered farewell, and is thus labeled as Social Obligation.

Other Occasionally, a participant might send an empty message, and in that
case, the relation of the empty message to its immediate previous message
should be annotated as Other. Other is also used when a given message
is nonsensical in relation to any previous message, or when the relation
between two messages are not formalized in any of the categories above.

Figure 4: Dialogue and Non-Dialogue Labels

of “scrambling” is even higher between different-
participant message pairs, where one participant is
responding to a message of another participant.

The inter-annotator agreement statistics for the
four rounds of annotation are presented in Table
1. Column 4 shows the agreement on connec-
tions only, which is computed as the percentage
of messages that are linked to the same antecedent
for both annotators. Column 5 shows the agree-
ment on relations, which is computed as the pro-
portion of message pairs that are annotated with
the same relation, out of the total number of con-
nections that both annotators agree on. So this cal-
culation factors out connections that the two an-
notators have disagreements on. Column 6 shows
the Cohen’s Kappa on relation agreement. The
results show the agreement on connections stays
relatively stable between rounds, indicating this
aspect of the annotation is rather intuitive, and
does not benefit from additional rounds of train-
ing. In contrast, there is significant improvement
in the agreement on relations as guidelines are re-
fined and the distinction between the relations are
clarified. The final column shows the agreement
on both connections and labels. The agreements
statistics are lower, indicating a cumulative effect,
but overall, it shows that reliable annotation can be
achieved.

The inter-annotator agreement (IAA) statistics
on connections are calculated with equation 3

P =
Na
Nt

where Na is the total number of same connections,
and Nt is the total number of connections. The
inter-annotator agreement for connections with la-
bel is calculated similarly: Na is the total number
of same connections with the same label.

The Cohen’s Kappa score for labels on the same
connections is calculated as follows:

K =
Po − Pe
1− Pe

where Po is the sum of probabilities of choosing
the same label, and Pe is the probability of choos-
ing the same label by chance,

Pe =
∑

P ai × P bi

where P ai and P
b
i are the probabilities of annotator

A and annotator B choosing label i, respectively.
Pe is the sum of the products of P ai and P

b
i for all

labels.

3.1 Examples of Inter-annotator
Disagreement

There are two main types of disagreement between
the annotators: disagreement on connections and
disagreement on relations. Disagreement on con-
nections happens when, given a message, the an-
notators disagree on which previous message is
its antecedent. Disagreement on relations occurs
when the annotators disagree on the relation be-
tween a given pair of messages.

185



Distance 1 2 3 4 and greater
Dialogue Links 73.30% 17.08% 5.72% 3.88%
Non-dialogue
Links

84.22% 11.18% 3.22% 1.36%

Dialogue and
Non-dialogue
Combined

77.97% 14.56% 4.65% 2.80%

Figure 5: Distance Distributions

Number of
Files

Number of
Messages

Agreement
on connec-
tions

Agreement
on relations

Kappa on
relations

Agreement
on both

Round 1 10 898 0.886 0.697 0.649 0.618
Round 2 14 873 0.886 0.722 0.680 0.640
Round 3 10 893 0.848 0.838 0.826 0.710
Round 4 10 890 0.867 0.881 0.875 0.764

Table 1: Inter-Annotator agreement statistics

Message ID Timestamp Participant ID Content

m0007 2010-08-24 19:22:45 UTC 153902
Charming is the audience’s subjective
interpretation

m0008 2010-08-24 19:22:49 UTC 153901
so you can choose to be condescend-
ing?

m0009 2010-08-24 19:23:02 UTC 153902 Yes
m0010 2010-08-24 19:23:06 UTC 153901 but you cannot choose to be charming
m0011 2010-08-24 19:23:14 UTC 153902 You can attempt to be charming

Figure 6:

Disagreement on connections Although deter-
mining which message is connected to which pre-
vious message is intuitive for the most part, dis-
agreement does happen when a message has more
than one possible and meaningful connection. For
instance, message m0010 in Figure 6 can be a re-
sponse to message m0009 or an extension of mes-
sage m0008. This is one of the cases on which the
two annotators disagree.

Disagreement on Relations Certain words or
phrases are generally ambiguous and prone to
causing confusion and disagreement on labeling.
For example, the word “yeah” or the phrase “I
know” can either signal acknowledgment or ex-
press agreement. Disagreement on labeling of-
ten occurs when such words or phrases can be
interpreted either way in a given context. Mes-
sage m0053 in Figure 7 can be either acknowledg-
ment or agreement of the assertion in their previ-
ous message, and either interpretation makes sense
in this context.

4 Related work

There has been relatively little work on annotat-
ing the discourse and dialogue structure of SMS
conversations. The work that is most similar to
ours is that of (Perret, 2015), where they anno-
tated the discourse structure of multi-party dia-
logues using a corpus collected from an on-line
version of the The Settlers of Catan game. They
argue that multi-party dialogues need to be mod-
eled with a graph structure and adopted an anno-
tation scheme in the SDRT framework (Asher and
Lascarides, 2003). In our annotation, since we are
dealing with SMS dialogues that involve two par-
ticipants, we did not find a graph structure to be
necessary. We opted for a simpler (non-projective)
dependency structure that is easier to model algo-
rithmically. In fact, (Perret, 2015) developed an
automatic discourse parser based on the Maximum
Spanning Tree, a tree-based dependency parsing
algorithm (McDonald, 2006) instead of a graph-
based algorithm. We also make a distinction be-

186



Message ID Timestamp Participant ID Content
m0051 2015-02-27 13:45:13 UTC 152252 It’s so stupid Sofie

m0052 2015-02-27 13:45:36 UTC 152252
I just feel like the general public should
take an art class

m0053 2015-02-27 13:45:36 UTC 152212 i know

Figure 7: Disagreement on relations

tween same-participant and different-participant
relations, and argue SMS message conversations
need to be modeled with an annotation framework
based on both discourse coherence and dialogue
structures.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we presented a framework for anno-
tating the discourse and dialogue structure of SMS
message conversations. The annotation specifica-
tions integrate elements of coherence-based dis-
course relations and dialogue structure in conver-
sational speech. We conducted annotation experi-
ments that show reliable annotation. Future work
includes additional annotation based on this an-
notation framework and producing sufficient data
that can be used to train a statistical parsing model.

Acknowledgment

We gratefully acknowledge a Faculty/Student Col-
laborative Research Grant from the Office of the
Dean of College of Arts and Science Dean’s at
Brandeis University that has supported the first
and third author of this paper. All errors and short-
comings are that of the authors of course.

References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 2003. Logics of

Conversation. Cambridge University Press.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen
Okurowski. 2001. Building a discourse-tagged cor-
pus in the framework of rhetorical structure theory.
In Proceedings of the Second SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue - Volume 16, SIGDIAL ’01,
pages 1–10, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mark G Core and James Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs
with the damsl annotation scheme. In AAAI fall sym-
posium on communicative action in humans and ma-
chines, pages 28–35. Boston, MA.

The PDTB Research Group. 2008. The PDTB 2.0.
annotation manual. Technical Report IRCS-08-01,
page 28.

Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative Training and
Spanning Tree Algorithms for Dependency Parsing.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.

Stergos Afantenos Eric Kow Nicholas Asher Jérémy
Perret. 2015. Discourse parsing for multi-party
chat dialogues. In Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, Lisbon, Portugal.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bon-
nie Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank
2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2008), Marrakech, Morocco.

Andreas Stolcke, Noah Coccaro, Rebecca Bates, Paul
Taylor, Carol Van Ess-Dykema, Klaus Ries, Eliza-
beth Shriberg, Daniel Jurafsky, Rachel Martin, and
Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational linguistics, 26(3):339–373.

187


