



















































Exploratory Analysis of Social Media Prior to a Suicide Attempt


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 106–117,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploratory Analysis of Social Media Prior to a Suicide Attempt

Glen Coppersmith
Qntfy

glen@qntfy.com

Kim Ngo
Qntfy, University of Notre Dame

kim@qntfy.com

Ryan Leary
Qntfy

ryan@qntfy.com

Anthony Wood
Qntfy

tony@qntfy.com

Abstract

Tragically, an estimated 42,000 Americans
died by suicide in 2015, each one deeply af-
fecting friends and family. Very little data and
information is available about people who at-
tempt to take their life, and thus scientific ex-
ploration has been hampered. We examine
data from Twitter users who have attempted
to take their life and provide an exploratory
analysis of patterns in language and emotions
around their attempt. We also show differ-
ences between those who have attempted to
take their life and matched controls. We find
quantifiable signals of suicide attempts in the
language of social media data and estimate
performance of a simple machine learning
classifier with these signals as a non-invasive
analysis in a screening process.

1 Introduction

Mental health poses a sizable challenge by any met-
ric. An estimated 1 in 4 Americans will contend with
a mental health condition in a given year (National
Institutes of Health, 2013). Around 1% of people die
by suicide, 2.7% attempt suicide, 3.1% make a plan
for suicide, and 9.2% are challenged with suicidal
ideation (Nock et al., 2008). Tragically, this means
roughly 4.8 million Americans alive today will die
by suicide, placing suicide among the top ten lead-
ing causes of death in the United States (Sullivan
et al., 2013). Worldwide, it is the leading cause of
death for women age 15-19 and the second leading
cause of death for teenagers (World Health Organi-
zation and others, 2014). What’s worse, the rates of
suicide seem to be increasing, up 28% in the civilian

population of the United States between 1999 and
2010 (Sullivan et al., 2013).

Despite the magnitude of the challenge posed by
suicide, we have a relatively sparse understanding
of what precisely gives rise to suicide risk. To pre-
vent suicides, we need a better understanding of the
underlying phenomena relating to both the immedi-
ate risk of suicide (or acute suicidal risk) and the
long term risks. For both cases, data is extremely
sparse, never in real time, and subject to some bias.
Few objective measures exist to measure outcomes,
and those that do exist tend to have poor temporal
resolution (measured in weeks or months) and are
labor intensive. Optimizing intervention efficacy or
policy-level strategies is difficult without such data.

Here we explore a novel dataset of social media
data from users who have attempted to take their
own life. This kind of data has not previously been
available in sufficient quantities or at this granular-
ity, so we provide broad intuition and interpretation
of trends, rather than testing specific hypotheses.
Our primary contributions are: [1] We find quantifi-
able signals of suicide, with sufficient performance
and scalability to warrant consideration as part of a
screening process. [2] We provide intuition about
the data via simple visualizations of linguistic con-
tent of users prior to a suicide attempt. [3] We use
automatic emotion classification to uncover interest-
ing patterns in the emotional composition of posts
made by users in the time around a suicide attempt.
[4] Where possible, we tie these phenomena back
to existing psychological research. This paper de-
liberately only scratches the surface of the possible
insight encoded in data related to suicide attempts.

106



Quantifying Mental Health: Thanks to the use
of vital signs like temperature and blood pressure,
cross correlation of various easy-to-observe symp-
toms and the rapid measurement of blood chemistry,
the diagnosis of physical illness has improved radi-
cally since 1900. Mental and behavioral healthcare
has not benefited in the same way from binary diag-
nostics. In part, this may be because physical health
conditions manifest irrespective of whether the pa-
tient is in a diagnostic healthcare setting, while men-
tal health conditions manifest when a person inter-
acts with the rest of their world, making measure-
ment in a laboratory difficult. Social media may
seem, at first, to be a strange data source for study-
ing mental health, but there are myriad quantifiable
signals within social media that capture how a per-
son interacts with their world. We suggest that data
collected in the “white space” between visits with
healthcare professionals may be part of a rigorous,
scalable, and quantified diagnostic approach to men-
tal and behavioral illness. Language, in particular,
has proven to be a potent lens for the analysis of
mental health, as evidenced by the wide usage of
the Linguistic Inquiry Word Count (Tausczik and
Pennebaker, 2010; Pennebaker et al., 2007; Pen-
nebaker et al., 2001) and the depth of publications
at the Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psy-
chology workshops (Resnik et al., 2014; Mitchell et
al., 2015a; Hollingshead and Ungar, 2016).

Mental Health through Social Media: Social
media data is necessarily stored in formats con-
ducive to analysis via computer. This allows for
larger sample sizes and higher frequency than any-
thing ever before possible. Collecting the ordinary
language of thousands of users over weeks, months
or years has become trivial in comparison to the pa-
per based analysis methods of the past.

Work examining mental health conditions that
affect a large number of people has prolifer-
ated, especially depression (Coppersmith et al.,
2015b; Schwartz et al., 2014; Resnik et al., 2013;
De Choudhury et al., 2013a; De Choudhury et al.,
2013b; Rosenquist et al., 2010; Ramirez-Esparza et
al., 2008; Chung and Pennebaker, 2007). Similarly,
common psychological phenomena, like personal-
ity factors and psychological well-being are now
well-studied through emprical analysis of social me-

dia data (Schwartz et al., 2013b; Park et al., 2015;
Schwartz et al., 2013a). These approaches and sur-
vey methods were sufficient to support analysis of
relatively common conditions, but are not as effec-
tive for rarer ones.

Coppersmith et al. (2014a) introduced methods
for examining public data which allowed for more
scalable creation of data sets, thus permitting the ex-
amination of rarer conditions. Post traumatic stress
and schizophrenia are two examples of conditions
significantly rarer than depression, whose analysis
are possible by these techniques (Coppersmith et al.,
2014b; Mitchell et al., 2015b). Suicide and suici-
dal ideation were more difficult to obtain data for,
but some population-level analysis was enabled by
anonymous suicide help fora (Kumar et al., 2015;
Kiciman et al., 2016). Additionally, Robertson et al.
(2012) investigated the role that social media has in
suicide clusters (among people in disparate geogra-
phies connected online).

At the individual level, techniques similar in na-
ture to Coppersmith et al. (2014a) can provide social
media data for users prior to a suicide attempt of suf-
ficient size to allow linguistic analysis (Coppersmith
et al., 2015c; Wood et al., 2016). Coppersmith et
al. (2015c) was able to automatically separate users
who would attempt to end their life from neurotyp-
ical controls and further tie signals explicitly back
to the psychometrically validated Linguistic Inquiry
Word Count categories and existing psychological
theories. Furthermore, they found slight but measur-
able differences between those who would attempt
to end their life and those challenged by depression
without suicidal ideation. The operative question
has been: are there quantifiable markers in an indi-
vidual’s social media content that indicate their cur-
rent or future risk of acute suicidal crisis?

Biases: The existing methods for assessing the
events surrounding suicidal crisis resulting in a sui-
cide attempt are heavily susceptible to recall bias
and context bias (Shiffman et al., 2008). People are
more likely to remember negatively charged infor-
mation when they are in a negative mood (Clark and
Teasdale, 1982), as when asked to reconstruct infor-
mation about a suicide attempt. The available infor-
mation about the events leading up to a suicide at-
tempt are generally based on the self report of peo-

107



I’m so glad I survived my suicide attempt to see the wedding today.
I was so foolish when I was young, so many suicide attempts!
I have been out of touch since I was hospitalized after my suicide attempt last week.
It’s been half a year since I attempted suicide, and I wish I had succeeded
I’m going to go commit suicide now that the Broncos won... #lame
It is going to be my financial suicide, but I NEEEEEEEEEED those shoes.

Figure 1: Fictitious example tweets of genuine statements of a suicide attempt (top), genuine statements indicating a time (middle)
and disingenuous statements (bottom).

ple who survived one or more attempts or the re-
constructions of events provided by friends or fam-
ily members after a traumatic loss. All of these is-
sues pose serious problems for accurate recall, com-
pounded by the effects of biases. Contrastively, so-
cial media streams are biased in other ways, often
towards self presentation, but recorded in the mo-
ment.

Often, treatment progress is assessed using
weekly or monthly questionnaires or interviews that
require retrospection on the part of the patient. How-
ever, retrospective self-report measures are notori-
ously context dependent and highly influenced by
momentary accessible information. Furthermore,
the commonly reported tendency toward “backfill-
ing” that often happens when written journals are
employed in a therapeutic context is worth noting
(Stone et al., 2003). When a patient is asked to keep
a paper journal in the space between office visits,
they frequently backfill the entries just prior to their
appointment from (biased) memory, to please their
therapist or appear compliant. Thus, several weeks
of mood journaling may be compiled in the waiting
area before their visit rather than as they naturally
occur. All of these issues pose a problem for re-
constructing events surrounding suicidal crisis and
make wider generalizations more challenging, bor-
ding on speculative. Ideally, analysis of personal
social media data in conjunction with more tradi-
tional methods may offset the short comings of each
method in isolation.

2 Data

We examine data from people who publicly state on
Twitter that they have tried to take their own life, and
provide enough evidence for the casual observer to
determine the date of their suicide attempt. Specif-
ically, we have 554 users who stated that they at-
tempted to take their life, 312 of which give an in-

dication of when their latest attempt was. The exact
date of their attempt was available for 163 users, and
125 of them had data available prior to the date of
their attempt. We do not include any users who have
marked their profile as private, and for each user we
examine only their public data, which does not in-
clude any direct messages or deleted posts.

For each user, a human annotator examined their
tweets and verified that [1] the user’s statement of
attempting to take their life appeared genuine1 [2]
the user is speaking about their own suicide attempt,
and [3] that the suicide attempt could be localized in
time. See Figure 1 for example tweets.

We estimate the age and gender of each user who
attempted to take their life to provide aggregate de-
mographic information from the users in the dataset
(see Figure 2) and to allow us to directly control for
variability due to age and gender in our analysis. De-
mographic estimates were derived from the authored
content of each user via lexica magnanimously pro-
vided by the World Well-Being Project (Sap et al.,
2014). Though imperfect (91.9% accuracy for gen-
der, r = 0.83 correlation for age), these estimates
are informative in aggregate. Notably, there are sig-
nificantly more women in our data than men, and
almost all users are between the age of 15 and 29.
This indicates that we do not have a representative
sample of the demographics on Twitter, with polling
indicating that 37% of adults aged 18 to 29 and 12%
of those in middle age are on Twitter (Duggan et al.,
2015). Since the older demographic, also at risk for
suicide, does not show up in our sample, it suggests
that we are primarily capturing the youth at risk for
suicide, perhaps because they are more likely to dis-
cuss the subject openly.

1Previously, annotators have shown high agreement for dif-
ferentiating between genuine and disingenuous statements in-
volving mental health conditions, κ = 0.77 (Coppersmith et
al., 2015c).

108



15 20 25 30 35
Age

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

C
o
u
n
t

Female Mean Age Male Mean Age

Figure 2: Histogram of the ages of users who attempted to take
their life. Females are in green, and males in blue. The mean

age of each gender is denoted by vertical lines.

Figure 3: Vennclouds visualizing the differences in language
usage between the groups examined here. The top cloud com-

pares users who attempt to take their life (left) with neurotyp-

icals (right). The bottom compares users who attempt to take

their life prior to (left) and after (right) their attempt. Larger

words occur more frequently in the corpus.

For each user who has attempted to take their life,
we draw an age- and gender-matched control from a
large pool of random English users. We find a user
of the same estimated gender and the smallest differ-
ence in esitmated age. It is likely that 4-8% of these
(assumed) neurotypical control users have or will try
to take their life, given the rates of suicide attempts
in the population (Nock et al., 2008). This contam-
ination will only serve to weaken our models and
obscure trends. We make no attempt to remedy this
and the results should be treated as lower bounds.

3 Exploration of Language Data

First, we visualize the linguistic differences in our
populations via simple and straightforward methods

20
09

-0
4-

17

20
11

-0
6-

22

20
12

-0
1-

18

20
12

-0
6-

07

20
12

-1
0-

04

20
13

-0
1-

12

20
13

-0
4-

22

20
13

-0
7-

31

20
13

-1
1-

08

20
14

-0
2-

16

20
14

-0
5-

27

20
14

-0
9-

04

20
14

-1
2-

13

20
15

-0
3-

23

20
15

-0
7-

01

20
15

-1
0-

09
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Figure 4: Proportion of tweets containing an emoji (y-axis), by
date (x-axis). Neurotypicals in green, users prior to their suicide

attempt in blue and after their attempt in red.

to provide intuition about the sort of information
available and glean insight as to how this data might
relate to existing psychological theory. In all cases,
we compare (1) users who have tried to take their life
to their matched neurotypical controls and (2) users
prior to and after they attempt to take their life.

Vennclouds: Figure 3 show Vennclouds compar-
ing word usage in our populations. As explanation,
consider the top Venncloud which compares users
prior to their attempt to take their life (left) with
neurotypicals (right). This examines language at the
level of tokens, which here is either a single word,
emoticon, or symbol. Each token can only show up
once in the visualization, so if the token is used with
higher probability by neurotypical users, it is dis-
played on the right. If it is used with higher proba-
bility by users who tried to take their life (only ex-
amining data prior to that attempt), it is displayed
on the left. Tokens that occur with approximately
the same probability are displayed in the middle.
For a more detailed description, see Coppersmith
and Kelly (2014). A few interesting phenomena
emerge from this simple analysis: [1] neurotypicals
use emoticons and emoji with much higher proba-
bility than a user prior to a suicide attempt (also see
Figure 4), [2] users are more likely to talk about sui-
cide after an attempt than before it, [3] users prior
to a suicide attempt use more self-focused language,
replicating similar findings in those challenged with
depression (Chung and Pennebaker, 2007; Copper-
smith et al., 2014a; Coppersmith et al., 2015a), [4]
users prior to a suicide attempt are more likely to
employ automatic means of tracking their followers
(as most uses of the token “followers” are from the
automatic output of these applications).

Figure 4 indicates that neurotypicals (green) use

109



emoticons and emoji with a higher frequency than
those who attempt suicide, before (blue) or after
(red) that attempt. For each day where we have
at least 10 tweets, we calculate the proportion of
tweets for each group that contains an emoticon or
an emoji. Interestingly, neurotypicals and people
who attempt suicide seem to adopt emoji around the
same time, starting in 2012, but neurotypicals use
them more.

4 Methods

We are primarily concerned with drawing two com-
parisons here. First, what observable differences ex-
ist between users who attempt to take their life and
the rest of the (neurotypical) population? Second,
what observable differences exist between users
prior to and after a suicide attempt?

Preprocessing: The processing of unedited lan-
guage data prior to the application of any machine
learning or visualization techniques often have sig-
nificant effects on the outcome. Here, for each tweet
we replace all usernames in the text with the sin-
gle token “@”, and replace all URLs with the sin-
gle token “*”. For example “Check out https:
//OurDataHelps.org powered by @Qntfy !
:)” would be “Check out * powered by @ ! :)” af-
ter preprocessing. All emoticons and emoji remain
intact and are treated as single characters. While
many types of linguistic analysis examine the con-
tent and topics of documents, we are equally inter-
ested in content and context. Here, we diverge from
most natural language processing, which often dis-
miss many very frequently used words as uninterest-
ing, and remove them from analysis (sometimes re-
ferred to as “filler” or “stop” words). Previous work
has demonstrated (and frequently replicated) that
some of these words (e.g., first person and third per-
son pronouns) hold psychological meaning, and thus
should be included in analysis (Pennebaker, 2011;
Chung and Pennebaker, 2007). Likewise, lemma-
tizing or stemming words may also remove infor-
mation about how the author experiences the world,
such as whether their language is future- or past-
focused.

Character Language Models: For classification,
we prefer simple, straightforward methods that pro-

Figure 5: Confusion matrix for emotion classifier, denoting the
proportion of tweets from the emotion on the row that are mis-

classified as the emotion on the column. Diagonals (represent-

ing correct classifications) have been removed to better illus-

trate the misclassifications. Thus, sadness is most frequently

misclassified as loneliness while fear and anxiety are most con-

fusable.

vide scores at a per-tweet level. Here, we use char-
acter n-gram language models followed by logistic
regression via scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011).
These models are particularly appropriate for so-
cial media given their robustness to creative spelling,
missing spaces, and other eccentricities that result
from short, unedited text (Coppersmith et al., 2014b;
McNamee and Mayfield, 2004). We use character
n-grams up to length 5 (so tokens might include
“suici” and “uicid”). Spaces, punctuation, emoti-
cons, emoji, and generic username and url tokens
(“@” and “*” respectively) are included as char-
acters. Logistic regression allows us to learn how
strongly each of these character n-gram tokens are
associated with the populations examined. We use
this method to: [1] compare those who attempted
to take their life against neurotypicals, [2] compare
language before and after a suicide attempt, and [3]
n-way classification of emotions. All performance
measures are calculated via 10-fold cross validation.

Emotional States: To estimate emotional states
from social media posts, we collected a novel cor-
pus with automatically induced emotion labels, as
inspired by Mohammad (2012). These methods
might be used to detect emotional states that indi-

110



cate high risk for suicidal crisis. Detection of hy-
pomanic states (associated with multiple attempts)
(Bryan et al., 2008) and elevated levels of guilt or
shame have been found among some populations at
risk for suicide (Ray-Sannerud et al., 2012). Hash-
tags provide implicit labels of emotion (excluding
any tweet that also has #SARCASM or #JK) – a tweet
that contains #ANGER is labeled anger, but not one
that contains #ANGER #SARCASM. We diverged
from past work and focused on emotions more di-
rectly related to suicide and psychological phenom-
ena, as well as an automatically-induced no emotion
category. We used up to 40,000 tweets from each
label, selected from a random Twitter sample col-
lected during 2015. For each tweet, we removed the
hashtag label from the text, and trained a character
n-gram language model.

Inclusion of a no emotion label calls for a slightly
more complicated training procedure, as these train-
ing tweets were selected simply because they lacked
an explicit emotional hashtag. Many of the tweets
in this category do express an emotion. Creating
no emotion training data using tweets that lack an
explicit emotion hashtag results in the no emotion
label being particularly contaminated by tweets ex-
pressing emotions. This, in turn leads the classifier
to frequently misclassify emotional tweets as having
no emotion. This would skew the performance of the
classifier when used beyond training and skew the
estimates of accuracy of the classifier (since many
tweets labeled and evaluated as no emotion actually
have emotional content). Thus, we employ semi-
supervised learning to decrease the effect of this
contamination: We train the model once with 40k
random tweets we label as no emotion, then use this
initial model to score each of a second set of no emo-
tion tweets. Any tweet in this second set of ostensi-
bly no emotion tweets that is classified by the inital
model as having any emotion is removed, since it is
likely to be a contaminating emotion-bearing tweet.
A random (second) subset of 40k tweets are then se-
lected from those that remain. The model we use for
analysis is trained with this cleaner (second) set of
40k no emotion tweets.

Emotion classification from statements in isola-
tion is a very difficult task, even for humans, as evi-
denced by low inter-annotator agreement (e.g., 47%
agreement between three annotators in Purver and

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

False Alarm Rate

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

T
ru

e
 P

o
si

ti
v
e
 R

a
te

Figure 6: ROC curve for separating users who attempted to
take their life from matched neurotypicals.

Battersby (2012)). Additionally, the emotions that
are conveyed are also often mixed, making a single
label insufficiently descriptive. For further analysis
of performance and errors of the emotion classifier,
see the Technical Appendix.

Briefly, we assessed classification accuracy of this
8-way classifier with 10-fold cross validation, with
a resulting F1 of 53. While not directly compara-
ble, reported state of the art results for 2- and 6-
way classification range between 45 and 65 (though
some treat the task as a multi-level classification
problem, emotion-detection followed by emotion-
discrimination, reporting F1 separately and further
complicating comparisons) (Mohammad and Kir-
itchenko, 2015; Purver and Battersby, 2012). The
confusion matrix for all the emotions examined can
be found in Figure 5.

5 Results

We demonstrate that quantifiable signals relevant to
suicide can be found in social media data with sim-
ple analysis, then put them in the context of perfor-
mance in a realistic setting. We use techniques con-
ducive to introspection to facilitate comparison with
existing psychological literature.

Quantifiable Signals: To find quantifiable signals
of suicide risk, we build character n-gram language
models to separate users who have attempted to take

111



their life from their matched neurotypicals. Specifi-
cally, we examine only data prior to each user’s sui-
cide attempt. A ROC curve denoting the tradeoff
between false alarms (neurotypical users misidenti-
fied as at risk to take their life) and true hits (users
who will attempt to take their life, identified as such)
can be seen in Figure 6.

For a single point of performance for comparison,
note that at roughly 10% false alarms, we correctly
identfy about 70% of those who will try to take their
life. Extrapolating from this likely performance in
the real world is not entirely straightforward, but a
worthy exercise. We can assume that in our neu-
rotypical population of 15-29 year olds, 4-8% of
users will (or have) tried to take their life (Nock et
al., 2008; Kann et al., 2014). Thus, the size of the
neurotypical population is likely to be more than ten
times the size of the at-risk population.

If we were to use this simple method to screen
1000 people aged 15-29, we would expect 40-80 of
them (4-8%) to attempt to take their life at some
point in time. For simplicity, we will use 6% or
60 users. If we were to randomly select users for
additional screening, we would expect that 6% of
them will go on to try to take their life – a hit rate
of 6%. Straightforward application of the example
operating point to 1000 person population would be
expected to yield 42 (70% of 60) at risk individuals
and 94 (10% of 940) neurotypical flagged for addi-
tional screening – a hit rate of 30%.

Our sample of neurotypicals are likely contami-
nated by users who have or will attempt to take their
life, so our estimates of false-alarms may be inflated
due to this contamination. In the best-case scenario,
these at-risk neurotypical users were flagged cor-
rectly, so we reduce our false alarm estimates ac-
cordingly. Thus an upper-bound on our performance
would be if we consider that 6% of the neurotypi-
cal population is currently classified as false alarms,
but are actually true hits. Factoring them out would
yield a false alarm rate of just 4%, so this optimistic
operating point would identify the same 42 at-risk
people as above, and 38 (4% of 940) neurotypical
users for additional screening – a hit rate of 58%.

In sum, a screening tool for people aged 15-
29 based on these simple methods could identify a
group for additional screening for which between
30 and 60% would be at risk for a suicide attempt.

While more optimization remains to be done, this
strongly suggests that technology-assisted screening
is within the realm of the possible.

Emotional Posts: We scored each tweet with an
emotion classifier, and examined the relative com-
position of each user’s tweets by week, for three
months on either side of a user’s suicide attempt.
Figure 7 shows the percentage of each user’s tweets
each week that contained a given emotion. Time (by
week) on the x-axis and percentage of tweets with
that emotion on the y-axis. The day of the suicide
attempt and the week following it are included at
x = 0, indicated by the dotted vertical line. The
colored dot indicates the median percentage across
all users who attempted to take their life, and the er-
ror bars indicate one standard deviation above and
below the median. The equivalent median from the
neurotypical population is included as a solid hori-
zontal line, with one and two standard errors above
and below indicated by dashed and dotted horizontal
lines respectively. The median emotional percentage
of the users who attempted to take their life for the
three months prior to a suicide attempt is indicated
by a colored horizontal line left of 0. Similarly, for
the three months after the attempt.

Since our analysis is largely exploratory, and not
hypothesis-driven, it behooves us to take results that
might otherwise be considered statistically signif-
icant with a higher degree of skepticism. A rea-
sonable guideline for interpreting these plots to ac-
count for the many comparisons made is to consider
differences where the error bars are entirely non-
overlapping. While other more subtle differences
may exist, they should be the subject of more prin-
cipled and hypothesis-driven experiments. With that
lens, some stark differences remain.

Interestingly, while users appear to have a
markedly higher incidence of tweets tagged with
anger and sadness prior to the attempt, they fall to
levels more in line with neurotypicals after an at-
tempt. A few weeks prior to the suicide attempt
there is a marked increase in the percentage of sad-
ness tweets and then a noticeable increase in anger
and sadness the week following the suicide attempt
(to include the day of the attempt). Some examples
of tweets from the day of the suicide attempt and
tagged as anger or sadness are shown in Figure 8,

112



My parents admitted they ignore my mental health, I am so pissed off now.
I’m only good for being a verbal punching bag.
Why can’t I find my damn pills so I can just fucking overdose?
I listed reasons I should die and reasons I should not die. I had no reasons not to die. I found 7 reasons to die.
two people next to each other in the same room can be in totally separate places, one of the saddest truths
I’m totally pathetic even the scars from my attempts are pathetic

Figure 8: Example tweets labeled with anger (top) and sadness (bottom) from the day of a suicide attempt.

as an illustration of what signals may be driving that
change. In some of these tweets, the depth of emo-
tion is more complex than is captured by these sim-
plistic labels – some indicate that the author is angry
at themselves and the situation they find themselves
in, perhaps in line with the guilt and shame found
by Bryan et al. (2013).

Contrasting anger and sadness, the percentage of
fear and disgust tweets appear in line with neurotyp-
icals prior to their attempt, yet they decrease to lev-
els below neurotypicals after the attempt. They also
appear to have a consistently lower amount of tweets
that convey loneliness, which decreases further af-
ter their attempt. There are a number of apparent
single-week shifts away from neurotypical or away
from the users who have attempted to take their life,
though drawing conclusions on any of them would
be prematurely speculative. These should serve as
grist for more directed studies in the future. No in-
teresting trends were observed for anxiety so it was
omitted for brevity.

People who attempt to take their life tend to have
a higher overall proportion of tweets estimated to be
emotional, and that proportion tends to increase af-
ter their attempt. Intriguingly, this finding seems (at
first blush) at odds with the results from the Ven-
nclouds and Figure 4, where users who attempted
suicide used emoticons and emoji less frequently
than neurotypicals. Taken together, these might in-
dicate that though users who attempt suicide express
more emotion, they do so with words rather than
emoticons or emoji – perhaps suggesting a depth of
emotion that are not adequately served by the vast
array of emoji.

Volume: Finally, some interesting changes in the
overall volume of activity are illustrated in Figure 9.
Users who attempt to take their life generate tweets
at a level higher than neurotypicals prior to their at-
tempt, but after their attempt appear to return to lev-

els commensurate with neurotypicals. One possible
explanation for this might be an implicit or explicit
call for help, though deeper analysis is certainly re-
quired.

6 Caveats and Limitations

When drawing conclusions from this work, there are
some caveats and limitations to keep in mind, any
of which may affect the generalizability of the find-
ings – all suggesting future, more controlled stud-
ies. All the people investigated here survived their
suicide attempt, so there may be systematic differ-
ences between those in our dataset and those who
die by suicide. Similarly, we have no verification
of the attempts of these users, though the data has
face validity with existing research on suicide. The
data explored here is primarily from women aged
15-29. While this is a group at elevated risk for
suicide, their behavior, motivations, and stressors
are likely significantly different from other at-risk
groups (e.g., transgendered individuals or middle-
aged males). Furthermore, these users self identify
and present themselves as challenged with a highly
stigmatized issue in a very public manner. It is clear
this is a subpopulation separate from neurotypical
controls. We cannot be sure, however, exactly how
different this population might be from the larger co-
hort who has attempted to take their life.

7 Conclusion

The caveats above notwithstanding, we have pro-
vided an empirical analysis of the language usage
of people prior to a suicide attempt, to be used as
grist for further exploration and research. Ideally,
even these simple analyses can provide a foundation
for non-invasive screening and interventions to pre-
vent suicides. However, significant challenges exist
in applying this technology broadly in ways that pre-
serve privacy and maintain a high standard of care

113



0

5

10

15
%

anger

0

5

10

15

%

sadness

0

5

10

15

%

fear

0

5

10

15

%

disgust

0

5

10

15

%

loneliness

0

5

10

15

%

joy

-10 -5 0 5 10

Week relative to suicide attempt

0

20

40

60

80

100

%

all emotions

Figure 7: Emotion-labeled tweets from users who tried to take
their life.

-10 -5 0 5 10

Week relative to suicide attempt

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

N
u
m

b
e
r 

o
f 

T
w

e
e
ts

Figure 9: Volume of tweets from users who tried to take their
life (dots), surrounding their suicide attempt. All features of the

plot are equivalent to those in Figure 7.

using limited clinical resources. Despite the po-
tential lives saved, the general population may not
be amenable to its use given the perceived cost to
privacy, as reaction to the Samaritan’s Radar2, sug-
gests. However, opt-in continual analysis of social
media data may be a reasonable method for ecolog-
ical momentary assessment and for monitoring psy-
chological and behavioral state over time. For fur-
ther discussion of the ethics, privacy, and practical
considerations around interventions using this kind
of technology, see Wood et al. (2016).

Suicide is a large and looming challenge, claim-
ing a tragic number of lives each year. Given the
societal stigma, discrimination, and prejudice asso-
ciated with it, finding data to better understand the
risk of suicide has been a consistent challenge. Our
analysis here suggests some future directions for ex-
ploration, along with providing some quantified in-
sight into the phenomena of acute suicidal risk. It
is a small but important step towards improved out-
comes and lives saved.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank April Foreman, Bart
Andrews, Bill Schmitz and the #SPSM community
for their continued intellectual and emotional con-
tributions to the improvement and empowerment of
suicide prevention. We would also like to thank the
anonymous reviewers for improving the quality of
this manuscript, and the organizers of CLPsych for
their contributions to this research community.

2http://www.samaritans.
org/how-we-can-help-you/
supporting-someone-online/
samaritans-radar

114



References
Craig J Bryan, Leigh G Johnson, M David Rudd, and

Thomas E Joiner. 2008. Hypomanic symptoms
among first-time suicide attempters predict future mul-
tiple attempt status. Journal of clinical psychology,
64(4):519–530.

Craig J Bryan, Chad E Morrow, Neysa Etienne, and Bob-
bie Ray-Sannerud. 2013. Guilt, shame, and suicidal
ideation in a military outpatient clinical sample. De-
pression and anxiety, 30(1):55–60.

Cindy Chung and James Pennebaker. 2007. The psycho-
logical functions of function words. Social Communi-
cation.

David M Clark and John D Teasdale. 1982. Diurnal vari-
ation in clinical depression and accessibility of mem-
ories of positive and negative experiences. Journal of
abnormal psychology, 91(2):87.

Glen Coppersmith and Erin Kelly. 2014. Dynamic word-
clouds and Vennclouds for exploratory data analysis.
In Association for Computational Linguistics Work-
shop on Interactive Language Learning and Visualiza-
tion, June.

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, and Craig Harman.
2014a. Quantifying mental health signals in Twitter.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Computa-
tional Linguistics and Clinical Psychology.

Glen Coppersmith, Craig Harman, and Mark Dredze.
2014b. Measuring post traumatic stress disorder in
Twitter. In Proceedings of the 8th International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, Craig Harman, and
Kristy Hollingshead. 2015a. From ADHD to SAD:
Analyzing the language of mental health on Twitter
through self-reported diagnoses. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical
Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Re-
ality, Denver, Colorado, USA, June. North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, Craig Harman, Kristy
Hollingshead, and Margaret Mitchell. 2015b.
CLPsych 2015 shared task: Depression and PTSD on
Twitter. In Proceedings of the Shared Task for the
NAACL Workshop on Computational Linguistics and
Clinical Psychology.

Glen Coppersmith, Ryan Leary, Eric Whyne, and Tony
Wood. 2015c. Quantifying suicidal ideation via lan-
guage usage on social media. In Joint Statistics Meet-
ings Proceedings, Statistical Computing Section. JSM.

Munmun De Choudhury, Scott Counts, and Eric Horvitz.
2013a. Social media as a measurement tool of depres-
sion in populations. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM
International Conference on Web Science.

Munmun De Choudhury, Michael Gamon, Scott Counts,
and Eric Horvitz. 2013b. Predicting depression via
social media. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
(ICWSM).

Maeve Duggan, Nicole B Ellison, Cliff Lampe, Amanda
Lenhart, and Mary Madden. 2015. Social media up-
date 2014. Pew Research Center, 19.

Kristy Hollingshead and Lyle Ungar, editors. 2016. Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Computational Linguis-
tics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Sig-
nal to Clinical Reality. North American Association
for Computational Linguistics, San Diego, California,
USA, June.

Laura Kann, Steve Kinchen, et al. 2014. Youth risk be-
havior surveillance – united states, 2013.

Emre Kiciman, Mrinal Kumar, Glen Coppersmith, Mark
Dredze, and Munmun De Choudhury. 2016. Dis-
covering shifts to suicidal ideation from mental health
content in social media. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM.

Mrinal Kumar, Mark Dredze, Glen Coppersmith, and
Munmun De Choudhury. 2015. Detecting changes
in suicide content manifested in social media follow-
ing celebrity suicides. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
conference on Hypertext and hypermedia. ACM.

Paul McNamee and James Mayfield. 2004. Character
n-gram tokenization for European language text re-
trieval. Information Retrieval, 7(1-2):73–97.

Margaret Mitchell, Glen Coppersmith, and Kristy
Hollingshead, editors. 2015a. Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical
Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Real-
ity. North American Association for Computational
Linguistics, Denver, Colorado, USA, June.

Margaret Mitchell, Kristy Hollingshead, and Glen Cop-
persmith. 2015b. Quantifying the language of
schizophrenia in social media. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical
Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Re-
ality, Denver, Colorado, USA, June. North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Saif M. Mohammad and Svetlana Kiritchenko. 2015.
Using hashtags to capture fine emotion categories from
tweets. Computational Intelligence, 31(2):301–326.

Saif Mohammad. 2012. #emotional tweets. In *SEM
2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
putational Semantics – Volume 1: Proceedings of the
main conference and the shared task, and Volume 2:
Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012), pages 246–255,

115



Montréal, Canada, 7-8 June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

National Institute of Mental Health National Insti-
tutes of Health. 2013. Statistics: Any disorder
among adults. http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
statistics/1ANYDIS\_ADULT.shtml. [On-
line; accessed 2013-03-05].

Matthew K Nock, Guilherme Borges, Evelyn J Bromet,
Jordi Alonso, Matthias Angermeyer, Annette Beau-
trais, Ronny Bruffaerts, Wai Tat Chiu, Giovanni
De Girolamo, Semyon Gluzman, et al. 2008.
Cross-national prevalence and risk factors for suicidal
ideation, plans and attempts. The British Journal of
Psychiatry, 192(2):98–105.

Gregory Park, H Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C Eich-
staedt, Margaret L Kern, Michal Kosinski, David J
Stillwell, Lyle H Ungar, and Martin EP Seligman.
2015. Automatic personality assessment through so-
cial media language. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 108(6):934.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vin-
cent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexandre Passos,
David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, and Matthieu
Perrot Édouard Duchesnay. 2011. scikit-learn: Ma-
chine learning in Python. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

James W. Pennebaker, Martha E. Francis, and Roger J.
Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
LIWC2001. Erlbaum Publishers, Mahwah, NJ.

James W. Pennebaker, Cindy K. Chung, Molly Ireland,
Amy Gonzales, and Roger J. Booth. 2007. The de-
velopment and psychometric properties of LIWC2007.
LIWC.net, Austin, TX.

James W. Pennebaker. 2011. The secret life of pronouns.
New Scientist, 211(2828):42–45.

Matthew Purver and Stuart Battersby. 2012. Experi-
menting with distant supervision for emotion classi-
fication. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, EACL ’12, pages 482–491,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Nairan Ramirez-Esparza, Cindy K. Chung, Ewa
Kacewicz, and James W. Pennebaker. 2008. The psy-
chology of word use in depression forums in English
and in Spanish: Testing two text analytic approaches.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International AAAI Confer-
ence on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

Bobbie N Ray-Sannerud, Diana C Dolan, Chad E Mor-
row, Kent A Corso, Kathryn E Kanzler, Meghan L
Corso, and Craig J Bryan. 2012. Longitudinal out-
comes after brief behavioral health intervention in an

integrated primary care clinic. Families, Systems, &
Health, 30(1):60.

Philip Resnik, Anderson Garron, and Rebecca Resnik.
2013. Using topic modeling to improve prediction
of neuroticism and depression. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 1348–1353.

Philip Resnik, Rebecca Resnik, and Margaret Mitchell,
editors. 2014. Proceedings of the Workshop on Com-
putational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From
Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA, June.

Lindsay Robertson, Keren Skegg, Marion Poore, Sheila
Williams, and Barry Taylor. 2012. An adolescent sui-
cide cluster and the possible role of electronic commu-
nication technology. Crisis.

J. Niels Rosenquist, James H. Fowler, and Nicholas A.
Christakis. 2010. Social network determinants of de-
pression. Molecular psychiatry, 16(3):273–281.

Maarten Sap, Greg Park, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, David J. Stillwell, Michal Kosinski,
Lyle H. Ungar, and H. Andrew Schwartz. 2014. De-
veloping age and gender predictive lexica over social
media. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 1146–1151.

H. Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski, Richard E. Lu-
cas, Megha Agrawal, Gregory J. Park, Shrinidhi K.
Lakshmikanth, Sneha Jha, Martin E. P. Seligman, and
Lyle H. Ungar. 2013a. Characterizing geographic
variation in well-being using tweets. In Proceedings
of the 8th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media (ICWSM).

H. Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski, Stephanie M. Ra-
mones, Megha Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal Kosin-
ski, David Stillwell, Martin E. P. Seligman, and
Lyle H. Ungar. 2013b. Personality, gender, and age
in the language of social media: The open-vocabulary
approach. PLOS ONE, 8(9).

H. Andrew Schwartz, Johannes Eichstaedt, Margaret L.
Kern, Gregory Park, Maarten Sap, David Stillwell,
Michal Kosinski, and Lyle Ungar. 2014. Towards as-
sessing changes in degree of depression through Face-
book. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Com-
putational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology.

Saul Shiffman, Arthur A Stone, and Michael R Hufford.
2008. Ecological momentary assessment. Annu. Rev.
Clin. Psychol., 4:1–32.

Arthur A Stone, Saul Shiffman, Joseph E Schwartz,
Joan E Broderick, and Michael R Hufford. 2003.

116



Patient compliance with paper and electronic diaries.
Controlled clinical trials, 24(2):182–199.

E Sullivan, Joseph L Annest, F Luo, TR Simon, and
LL Dahlberg. 2013. Suicide among adults aged 35–
64 years, united states, 1999–2010. Center for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention, Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report.

Yla R. Tausczik and James W. Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: LIWC and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of Language and
Social Psychology, 29(1):24–54.

Anthony Wood, Jessica Shiffman, Ryan Leary, and Glen
Coppersmith. 2016. Discovering shifts to suicidal
ideation from mental health content in social media.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM.

World Health Organization et al. 2014. Preventing sui-
cide: A global imperative. World Health Organiza-
tion.

117


