



















































Towards a Formal Representation of Components of German Compounds


Proceedings of the 14th Annual SIGMORPHON Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology, pages 104–109,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a Formal Representation of Components of German
Compounds

Thierry Declerck
DFKI GmbH

D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
&

Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities
A-1010 Vienna, Austria
declerck@dfki.de

Piroska Lendvai
Dept. of Computational Linguistics

Saarland University
D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
piroska.r@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper presents an approach for
the formal representation of compo-
nents in German compounds. We as-
sume that such a formal representa-
tion will support the segmentation and
analysis of unseen compounds that
feature components already seen in
other compounds. An extensive lan-
guage resource that explicitly codes
components of compounds is Ger-
maNet, a lexical semantic network
for German. We summarize the Ger-
maNet approach to the description of
compounds, discussing some of its
shortcomings. Our proposed exten-
sion of this representation builds on
the lemon lexicon model for ontolo-
gies, established by the W3C Ontol-
ogy Lexicon Community Group.

1 Introduction

The motivation for our study is the assumption
that the availability of a formal representation
of components in German compound words
can help in the detection, processing and anal-
ysis of new unseen compounds. Compound-
ing in German is a productive process to cre-
ate (new) words, and these typically consist of
lexical items partly seen in other compounds
already. Our aim is to create a formal repre-

sentation of such components in German, in
order to facilitate the segmentation and possi-
bly the generation of compound words.

Several German lexical resources feature
designated elements to mark up entries as
compounds, whereas they typically lack ele-
ments that would represent the components of
compounds.

One of the most fully-fledged resource
of German compound nouns is GermaNet
(Hamp and Feldweg, 1997; Kunze and Lem-
nitzer, 2002), a lexical semantic net for Ger-
man following the principles of the Princeton
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). The approach
of GermaNet to the encoding of elements of
compounds within the lexical-semantic net is
described in (Henrich and Hinrichs, 2011).
Additionally to this representation of com-
pounds, GermaNet offers a freely available
list of 66,047 nominal compounds split to
their modifier(s) and head, in a tab-delimited
(tsv) format1. Table 1 shows few examples
taken from this list, while Example ?? shows
the encoding of the compound Rotsperre (’red
card suspension’) within the XML represen-
tation of the GermaNet lexical semantic net-
work.

Based on the GermaNet description of com-
pounds, several studies on annotating and sys-

1http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/
GermaNet/documents/compounds/split_
compounds_from_GermaNet11.0.txt

104



tems on processing compounds have been
proposed (Hinrichs et al., 2013; Santos, 2014;
Dima et al., 2014; Dima and Hinrichs, 2015).

Compound Modifier(s) Head
Rotschopf rot Schopf
Rotschwanz rot Schwanz
Rotschwingel rot Schwingel
Rotspecht rot Specht
Rotsperre rot Sperre
Rotstich rot|Rot Stich
Rotstift rot Stift
Rotstiftaktion Rotstift Aktion

Table 1: Examples from the GermaNet list of
nominal compounds.

The few examples listed in Table 1 show
that GermaNet describes explicitly only im-
mediate constituents of compounds, but is
also reflecting the recursive nature of com-
pounds that have more than two constituent
parts, as can be seen with the words Rots-
tift (’red pencil’) and Rotstiftaktion (’cutback’,
’reduce spending’). In this case a tool can eas-
ily split Rotstiftaktion into rot, Stift and Ak-
tion, on the basis of the segmentation of Rots-
tift.

We note also that one compound can have
more than one modifier, as in the case of Rot-
stich (’tinge of red’), where we have both an
adjectival (rot) and a nominal (Rot) modifier.
GermaNet marks the different part-of-speech
(PoS) properties of the components being in
the modifier position by using different cases:
Upper case marks a noun (as this is the case
for all the listed compounds), while lower case
marks either a verb or an adjective.

We observe also that the modifier rot is of-
ten repeated (in fact much more often then in
this slice taken from the list: there are also
many compounds ending with the component
rot).

In the following sections we present first

the GermaNet formal representation of com-
pounds in the full context of the lexical se-
mantic net. Then we suggest our extensions to
the GermaNet representation, utilizing mod-
ules of the lemon2 approach to the encoding
of lexical data.

2 Representation of Compounds in
the GermaNet lexical semantic net

The structure of a GermaNet entry containing
the compound word Rotsperre (’red card sus-
pension’) is shown in Example 1. The rele-
vant information is to be found in the XML
elements rendered in bold face.

<s y n s e t c l a s s =” Geschehen ”
c a t e g o r y =”nomen” i d =” s21159 ”>

< l e x U n i t i d =” l29103 ”
s t y l e M a r k i n g =” no ”
a r t i f i c i a l =” no ”
namedEn t i t y =” no ” s o u r c e =”
c o r e ” s e n s e =” 1 ”>

<or thForm>R o t s p e r r e< /
o r thForm>

<compound>
<m o d i f i e r c a t e g o r y =”

A d j e k t i v ”> r o t< /
m o d i f i e r>

<head>S p e r r e< / head>
< / compound>

< / l e x U n i t>
<p a r a p h r a s e>beim F u s s b a l l< /

p a r a p h r a s e>
< / s y n s e t>

Example 1: A compound lexical unit in
GermaNet: Rotsperre (’red card suspension’)

In this formal representation, the PoS of the
modifier element of the compound (rot, ’red’)
is explicitly given, while this is not the case
for the head, as the PoS of the head element
of a compound is identical to the PoS of the
whole compound. However, we advocate that
explicitly encoding the PoS information of the

2The lexicon model for ontologies (lemon)
is resulting from the work of the W3C On-
tology Lexicon Community Group; https:
//www.w3.org/community/ontolex/wiki/
Final_Model_Specification.

105



head component can be necessary; for exam-
ple if a tool would access only the repository
of components. In this case, the tool would
have to infer the PoS information of the head
component from the compounds in which it
occurs, adding thus an additional processing
step, which can be avoided if the PoS of the
head component is explicitly marked.

As already observed for the list of com-
pounds in the tsv format, the GermaNet entry
displays here the adjective modifier in lower-
case. In this case we are loosing the informa-
tion about the original use of the word form.
We suggest to introduce an additional feature
in which the original form of the component
is preserved.

By observing the list of compounds pro-
vided by GermaNet, we noted that the mod-
ifier component of Rotsperre keep recurring
in other compounds. This is for sure also
the case for the head components. For ex-
ample, the component Sperre (’suspension’,
’block’, ...) is repeated in the related word
Gelbsperre (’yellow card suspension’). Such
productively recurring components would be
beneficial to have encoded in a repository so
that they are included only once in a lexicon,
possibly with links to the different compo-
nents they can be combined with, depending
on their related senses.

The use of a modifier in a compound can
play a disambiguation role. While we can eas-
ily establish a relation between the reduced
set of senses of the compound and the set of
senses of the head of the compound, we have
no immediate information on the synsets asso-
ciated to the modifier of the compound. This
is an information we would also like to explic-
itly encode.

Further, we consider the encoding of the
Fugenelement (’connecting element’) that is
often used in the building of compounds; e.g.
the s in Führungstor (’goal which gives the

lead’). GermaNet does not include this infor-
mation in its XML representation.

Finally, we notice that the ordering of com-
ponents is not explicitly encoded.

In order to remedy the above issues, we
suggest to adopt the recently published spec-
ifications of the lemon model. In the follow-
ing section, we describe this model and our
suggested representation of GermaNet com-
pounds.

3 The lemon Model

The lemon model has been designed using
the Semantic Web formal representation lan-
guages OWL, RDFS and RDF3. It also makes
use of the SKOS vocabulary4. lemon is
based on the ISO Lexical Markup Frame-
work (LMF)5 and the W3C Ontology Lexicon
Community Group proposed an extension of
the original lemon model6, stressing its mod-
ular design.

The core module of lemon, called ontolex,
is displayed in Figure 1. In ontolex, each
element of a lexicon entry is described inde-
pendently, while typed relation markers, in the
form of OWL, RDF or ontolex properties, are
interlinking these elements.

Additionally to the core module of lemon,
we make use of its decomposition module,
called decomp7, designed for the representa-
tion of Multiword Expression lexical entries,
and which we use for the representation of
compound words.

3See respectively http://www.w3.
org/TR/owl-semantics/, https:
//www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/, and
https://www.w3.org/RDF/

4https://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
5See (Francopoulo et al., 2006) and http://www.

lexicalmarkupframework.org/
6See (McCrae et al., 2012)
7http://www.w3.org/community/

ontolex/wiki/Final_Model_
Specification

106



Figure 1: ontolex, the core module of lemon.
Figure created by John P. McCrae for the
W3C Ontolex Community Group.

Figure 2: decomp, the decomposition module
of lemon. Figure created by John P. McCrae
for the W3C Ontolex Community Group.

The relation of decomp to the core mod-
ule, and more particularly to the class on-
tolex:LexicalEntry, is displayed in Figure 2.
Components of a compound (or a multi-
word) entry are pointed to by the prop-
erty: decomp:constituent. The range of
this property is an instance of the class de-
comp:Component.

Taking again Rotsperre (’red card suspen-
sion’) as an example, and which is built of two
components, we make use two times of the de-
comp:constituent property, the current values
of it being :Rot comp and :sperre comp
(see the corresponding RDF code given below

in the entries (1-3), which are instances of the
class ontolex:Component. This way we
can encode the surface forms of the compo-
nents, as they are used in compounds.

The relation between the
ontolex:Component instances (the
surface forms of the components occurring in
the compounds) and the ontolex:Word in-
stances (the full lexical entries corresponding
the surface form of the components) follows
the schema for the relation between the two
classes ontolex:LexicalEntry and
ontolex:Component, which is graph-
ically shown in Figure 2. For our example
Rotsperre, as shown in the entries (1-3)
below, the elements Rot and sperre are in-
stances of the class ontolex:Component,
and as such sperre can be linked/related
to other compounds like Löschsperre
(’deletion block’) or to the (semantically
more closely related) Gelbsperre (’yel-
low card suspension’). The property
decomp:correspondsTo links the com-
ponents to the lexical entries that encode all
the lexical properties of those surface forms
used in the compound word.

A simplified representation of the com-
pound entry Rotsperre and of its components
is displayed below, in (1-3). In the entry (1)
we use rdf 1 and rdf 28 for marking the
order of the two components in the compound
word. We assume that information on the po-
sition of the elements can be relevant for the
interpretation of the compound.

(1) :Rotsperre lex
rdf:type ontolex:LexicalEntry ;
lexinfo:partOfSpeech lexinfo:noun ;
rdf: 1 :Rot comp ;
rdf: 2 :sperre comp ;

8As instances of the property
rdfs:ContainerMembershipProperty,
see http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/ for
more details.

107



decomp:constituent :Rot comp ;
decomp:constituent :sperre comp ;
decomp:subterm :Sperre lex ;
decomp:subterm :rot lex ;
ontolex:denotes
<https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/
Q1827> .

Entries (2) and (3) below show the en-
coding of the instances of the class
decomp:Component:

(2) :Rot comp
rdf:type decomp:Component ;
decomp:correspondsTo :rot lex .

(3) :sperre comp
rdf:type decomp:Component ;
decomp:correspondsTo
:Sperre lex .

The proposed approach to the representa-
tion of elements of compounds seems intuitive
and economical, since one component can be
linked to a large number of other components,
and, next to decomposition, can also be used
for the generation of compound words, taking
into account the typical position such compo-
nents are taking in known compounds.

In the compound entry (1) we also make
use of the property decomp:subterm. This
property links the compound to the full lexical
information associated to its components, in-
cluding the senses of such components. The
motivation of the lemon model is the determi-
nation of senses of lexical entries by reference
to ontological entities outside of the lexicon
proper. We can thus easily extend the repre-
sentation of the compound word with sense in-
formation, by linking the components and the
compound word to relevant resources in the
Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud. The sense of
:Rot comp is given by a reference to http:
//de.dbpedia.org/page/Rot, where
additional associations of red with political

parties or sports clubs, etc. can be found.
The same holds for :sperre comp, which
can be linked to the LOD resource http:
//de.dbpedia.org/page/Sperre.

Additionally, for the sense of the com-
plete compound word we link to the LOD re-
source: https://www.wikidata.org/
wiki/Q1827, with the specific meaning of
suspension from a sports game. The senses
repository for Sperre can look as displayed in
the lexicalSense entries (4) and (5).

(4) :sperre sense1
rdf:type ontolex:LexicalSense ;
rdfs:label “A sense for the German
word ‘Sperre”’@en ;
ontolex:isSenseOf :Sperre lex ;
ontolex:reference
<http://de.dbpedia.org/resource/Lock>
.

(5) :sperre sense2
rdf:type ontolex:LexicalSense ;
rdfs:label “A sense for the German
word ‘Sperre”’@en ;
ontolex:isSenseOf :Sperre lex ;
ontolex:reference
<http://de.dbpedia.org/resource/
Wettkampfsperre> .

Our current work includes associat-
ing GermaNet senses as values of the
ontolex:LexicalSense property.
We are also encoding connecting ele-
ments (Fugenelemente with the help of the
ontolex:Affix class.

4 Conclusion

We presented an approach for the formal rep-
resentation of elements that occur in com-
pound words. Our motivation is to provide
rules for computing compound words on the
basis of their components.

108



Acknowledgments

Work presented in this paper has been sup-
ported by the PHEME FP7 project (grant No.
611233) and by the FREME H2020 project
(grant No. 644771). The author would like to
thank the anonymous reviewers for their very
helpful comments.

References
Corina Dima and Erhard Hinrichs. 2015. Auto-

matic noun compound interpretation using deep
neural networks and word embeddings. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Computational Semantics, pages 173–183,
London, UK, April. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Corina Dima, Verena Henrich, Erhard Hinrichs,
and Christina Hoppermann. 2014. How to
tell a schneemann from a milchmann: An
annotation scheme for compound-internal re-
lations. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference
Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland,
may. European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA).

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Monica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Y Pet, and
Claudia Soria. 2006. Lexical markup frame-
work (lmf. In In Proceedings of LREC2006.

Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. Ger-
manet - a lexical-semantic net for german. In In
Proceedings of ACL workshop Automatic Infor-
mation Extraction and Building of Lexical Se-
mantic Resources for NLP Applications, pages
9–15.

Verena Henrich and Erhard W. Hinrichs. 2011.
Determining immediate constituents of com-
pounds in germanet. In Galia Angelova, Kalina

Bontcheva, Ruslan Mitkov, and Nicolas Ni-
colov, editors, RANLP, pages 420–426. RANLP
2011 Organising Committee.

Erhard Hinrichs, Verena Henrich, and Reinhild
Barkey. 2013. Using partwhole relations for
automatic deduction of compound-internal re-
lations in germanet. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 47(3):839–858.

Claudia Kunze and Lothar Lemnitzer. 2002. Ger-
manet - representation, visualization, applica-
tion. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC-2002), Las Palmas, Canary Is-
lands - Spain, May. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA). ACL Anthology
Identifier: L02-1073.

John P. McCrae, Guadalupe Aguado de Cea, Paul
Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck,
Asunción Gómez-Pérez, Jorge Gracia, Laura
Hollink, Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, Dennis Spohr,
and Tobias Wunner. 2012. Interchanging lex-
ical resources on the semantic web. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 46(4):701–719.

Pedro Bispo Santos. 2014. Using compound lists
for german decompounding in a back-off sce-
nario. In Workshop on Computational, Cogni-
tive, and Linguistic Approaches to the Analysis
of Complex Words and Collocations (CCLCC
2014), pages 51–55.

109


