



















































Keynote - More than meets the ear: Processes that shape dialogue


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, page 54,
Los Angeles, USA, 13-15 September 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Keynote 
 More than meets the ear: Processes that shape dialogue 

Susan E. Brennan 
Stony Brook University 

Departments of Psychology, Computer Science, and Linguistics 
Stony Brook, NY, United States 

susan.brennan@stonybrook.edu 
 

Abstract: What is dialogue, anyway—language produced in alternating turns by two or more 
speakers?  A way to collaboratively accomplish a task or transaction with an agent, whether 
human or computer?  An interactive process by which two people entrain and coordinate their 
behaviors and mental states?  A corpus that can be analyzed to answer a research question?  The 
ways in which researchers conceptualize dialogue affect the assumptions and decisions they 
make about how to design an experiment, collect or code a corpus, or build a system.  Often such 
assumptions are not explicit.  Researchers may decide to characterize, stage, control, or entirely 
ignore such potentially key factors as the task two people are charged with, their identities, their 
common ground, or the medium in which dialogue is conducted. 
Such decisions, especially when left implicit, can affect the products and processes of dialogue in 
substantial but unanticipated ways; in fact, they can change the results of an experiment.  As one 
example, spoken dialogue experiments often use a simulated partner or confederate in the role of 
speaker or addressee; just how the confederate is deployed reflects the researcher's explicit 
theory and implicit assumptions about the nature of dialogue.  As another example, sometimes 
experiments place people in infelicitous situations; this can change the kind of language game 
people think they're playing.  I will cover some implicit assumptions about the nature of dialogue 
that affect the risks researchers take, and highlight pairs of studies that have found different 
results, perhaps due to these assumptions. 
 
Speaker's Bio: Susan Brennan is Professor of Psychology in the Cognitive Science Program at 
Stony Brook University (State University of New York), with joint appointments in the 
Departments of Linguistics and Computer Science. She received her Ph.D. in Cognitive 
Psychology from Stanford University with a focus on psycholinguistics; her M.S. is from the 
MIT Media Lab, where she worked on computer-generated caricature and teleconferencing 
interfaces; and her B.A. is in cultural anthropology from Cornell University. She has worked in 
industry at Atari Research, Hewlett-Packard Labs, and Apple Computer. Her research interests 
span language processing in conversation, joint attention, partner-specific adaptation during 
interactive dialogue, the production and comprehension of referring expressions, lexical 
entrainment, discourse functions of prosody and intonation, speech disfluencies, multimodal 
communication, social/ cognitive neuroscience, natural language and speech interfaces to 
computers, spoken dialogue systems, and repair in human and human-computer dialogue. She 
has used eye-tracking both as a method for studying the incremental comprehension and 
production of spontaneous speech and as a channel in computer-mediated communication. A 
currently funded project is "Communication in the Global University: A Longitudinal Study of 
Language Adaptation at Multiple Timescales in Native- and Non-Native Speakers." She is 
temporarily on leave from Stony Brook University in order to serve as Program Director for 
NSF's oldest program, the Graduate Research Fellowship Program in the Division of Graduate 
Education. 

54


