Los Angeles, USA, 13-15 September 2016. c(cid:13)2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, pages 228–231,

228

Selection method of an appropriate response

in chat-oriented dialogue systems

Hideaki Mori

Kyoto Institute of Technology

/ Matsugasaki Sakyo-ku
Kyoto 6068585 Japan

mori@ii.is.kit.ac.jp

Abstract

Chat functionality is currently considered
an important factor in spoken dialogue
systems. In this paper, we explore the ar-
chitecture of a chat-oriented dialogue sys-
tem that can continue a long conversa-
tion with users and can be used for a long
time. To achieve this goal, we propose
a method combining various types of re-
sponse generation modules, such as a sta-
tistical model-based module, a rule-based
module, and a topic transition-oriented
module. The core of this architecture is a
method for selecting the most appropriate
response based on a breakdown index and
a willingness index.

1 Introduction

In recent years, there have been some research and
development case studies on open-domain chat di-
alogue systems. The merit of chat functionality
in a dialogue system is to encourage the daily use
of the system so as to accustom the user to the
speech interface. Moreover, chat dialogue func-
tionality can give a user a sense of closeness to the
system, especially for novice users of the speech
interface. Considering this situation, the require-
ments of a chat dialogue system are (1) to main-
tain a longer dialogue without a breakdown of the
conversation and (2) to maintain the long duration
of use. We call the property of the ﬁrst require-
ment as “continuous” and that of the second as
“long-term.” The aim of this paper is to propose
a framework for realizing a continuous and long-
term chat-oriented dialogue system.

In previous research studies on chat dialogue
systems, the central theme of these studies is how
to generate an appropriate and natural response
to the user’s utterance (Higashinaka et al., 2014),

Masahiro Araki

Kyoto Institute of Technology

/ Matsugasaki Sakyo-ku
Kyoto 6068585 Japan
araki@kit.ac.jp

(Xiang et al., 2014). There was little effort to real-
ize both continuous and long-term features in chat-
oriented dialogue systems.

The chat dialogue system’s robustness to re-
spond to any user utterance is a key function-
ality that must be implemented to make it con-
tinuous. Therefore, a statistical response gener-
ation method is used in recent chat-oriented di-
alogue systems. Moreover, appropriateness and
naturalness of the response are required. To re-
alize these functionalities, Higashinaka et al. pro-
posed a method for evaluating the coherence of the
system utterance to judge the latter’s appropriate-
ness(Higashinaka et al., 2014).

On the other hand, a chat system with a long-
term feature should have the ability to keep the
user interested and not bored. For example, it
should be able to provide a new topic in a chat
based on the recent news or seasonal event.
It
should also be able to develop a current topic for
the dialogue by bringing up related topics. In gen-
eral, it is difﬁcult to realize such a topic shift in
a statistical method. The rule-based method or a
hybrid of rule and statistics is appropriate for im-
plementing such functionalities.

Because of this difference in methods in im-
plementing a suitable functionality for a continu-
ous and long-term chat dialogue system, it is dif-
ﬁcult to realize the aforementioned functionalities
in one response generation module. Such module
could be complex and difﬁcult to maintain. There-
fore, it is reasonable to implement the elemental
functionalities in separate modules and combine
them to generate one plausible response for the
purpose of the continuous and long-term chat dia-
logue.

In this paper, we propose a framework for chat-
oriented dialogue systems that can continue a
long conversation with users and that can be used
for a long-term. To achieve this goal, we pro-

229

pose a combination method of various types of
response generation modules, such as a statisti-
cal model-based module, rule-based module, and
topic transition-oriented module. The core of this
architecture is a selection method of the most ap-
propriate response based on the breakdown index
and willingness index.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we explain the architecture of combin-
ing multiple response generation modules. In Sec-
tion 3, we describe a selection method of the most
appropriate response from several hypotheses. In
Section 4, the demo description shows the details
of the demonstration system. Finally, we conclude
the paper in Section 5.

2 Response generation method

To realize a continuous chat dialogue, the system
needs to be robust to various user utterances. Sta-
tistical methods (Sugiyama et al., 2013) (Banchs
and Li, 2012) are popular in realizing the robust
response generation. These methods can also gen-
erate a high-quality response in terms of appropri-
ateness and naturalness. On the ﬂip side of this
strength, the system response tends to be conﬁned
to the expectations and, sometimes, the user con-
siders it boring. As a result, the appropriateness
and naturalness are not necessarily connected with
the long-term use of the system.

Occasional and sometimes unexpected topic
shift could make the chat interesting, but it re-
quires a different response generation algorithm
aiming for an appropriate and natural response.

Keeping the interest of the user in the chat sys-
tem for a long-term requires changing the behavior
of the system. If the system’s utterance is gradu-
ally matching the user’s preference, the user can
feel a sense of closeness to the system. Such be-
havior is difﬁcult to implement using the statistical
method only. Some type of control by handwrit-
ten rule is required to begin the conversation with
a new topic from the system side. In addition, the
functionality of delivering the news ﬁltered by the
user’s preference can encourage the daily use of
the system. Such dialogue does not require robust
dialogue management. The simple pattern is ben-
eﬁcial for both the user and the system.

As a result, the requirement of a continuous and
long-term chat dialogue system is “to generate an
appropriate and natural response as a majority be-
havior, but sometimes the system may generate

an unexpected but interesting response and, some-
times, may start the chat by following the user’s
preference and recent news/topics.” It is natural to
divide the aforementioned, sometimes conﬂicting,
functionality into individual speciﬁc modules and
select the most plausible response among the can-
didates. Figure 1 shows our proposed architecture
for realizing multiple response generations and the
selection method. In the architecture, we used the
following three chat dialogue systems:

• Rule-based system: This chat system is based
on the ELIZA type system (Weizenbaum,
1966).

• Statistical model-based system: This one
uses the NTT chat dialogue API (Yoshimura,
2014).

• Topic transition-oriented system: This one
is implemented with a sequence-to-sequence
model (Sutskever et al., 2014). First, the sys-
tem extracts topics from user utterances and
generates the nearest topic utterance in the
word embedded space made by Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013). By doing this, the chat
system aims to generate a response that has
related but unexpected contents.

The rule-based system can reply naturally when
the rules match the user utterance appropriately,
but it does not have a wide coverage. The sta-
tistical model-based system can respond to var-
ious topics, but sometimes it replies inappropri-
ately. The topic transition-oriented system tends to
generate unnatural responses, but sometimes it can
generate appropriate ones and stimulate the user’s
willingness to chat effectively. We try to realize a
continuous and long-term chat-oriented dialogue
system by using the good aspects of these mod-
ules.
3 Evaluation method of the system

response

As a result of the requirements discussed in Sec-
tion 2, we created the following two evaluation in-
dices:
Breakdown Index (BI):

This index determines how natural the system
utterance is.

Willingness Index (WI):

This one determines how the user’s willing-
ness is stimulated.

230

Figure 1: Proposed architecture for realizing mul-
tiple response generation modules, and the selec-
tion method.

To create an estimator for the BI, we used a
chat-oriented dialogue corpus collected by the di-
alogue task group of Project Next NLP, Japan1.
We collected training data from this corpus based
on bag-of-words (unigram) from 1000 utterances
(10 * 100 dialogues), which have breakdown an-
notations by 24 participants for each utterance,
and used a linear-kernel support vector machine
(SVM) as the regressor for the target value.

To create an estimator for the WI, we calculated
the similarity between user-system utterance and
tweet-reply pair, and use the similarity as the WI.
According to the online research2 to Japanese user
(1,496 people) who use Twitter one day a week or
more, the top three purposes of using Twitter are
”collecting infomation about their own hobbies”,
”as a pleasure”, and ”communicating with their
friends and family”. Thus, Japanese users mainly
use Twitter for pleasure and communicating with
familier person. Therefore We calculating similar-
ity by using twitter copus as WI.

The method of calculating WI shows as fol-
lows. First, we applied NFKC (Normalization
Form Compatibility Composition) to the sentences
and removed inappropriate tweets such as tweets
from bots. We collected about 205k tweet pairs
and built the model based on the Paragraph Vec-

Figure 2: Architecture of the demonstration sys-
tem.

tor model (Le and Mikolov, 2014). Paragraph
Vector is an unsupervised algorithm that learns
ﬁxed-length feature representations from variable-
length pieces of texts, such as sentences, para-
graphs, and documents. We used the Paragraph
Vector model for vectorizing sentences and esti-
mated the semantic similarity by calculating the
cosine similarity. We get 10-best tweets which
similar to user utterance, calculate similarity be-
tween the reply and system utterance, and use the
maximum value as WI.

Finally,

the proposed system calculates the
weighted sum of BI and WI, and selects the utter-
ance that has the highest weighted sum as a ﬁnal
output. The weight is set to optimize the system
output by using development test set.

4 Demo description

Our chat-oriented dialogue system was imple-
mented based on the proposed method described
in Sections 2 and 3. Figure 2 shows the archi-
tecture of the demonstration system. This system
aims to select the most appropriate response by
considering its naturalness and willingness. The
proposed chat-oriented dialogue system works on
a Japanese sentence only. Therefore, the demon-
stration system translates Japanese sentences to
English ones using the Microsoft Translator API
and shows the dialogue in both Japanese and En-
glish.

5 Conclusion

1https://sites.google.com/site/

projectnextnlp/english-page

2http://www.opt.ne.jp/news/pr/detail/

id=2341

In this work, we propose a selection method of the
most appropriate response by considering its nat-
uralness and willingness. Both a breakdown index

231

and a willingness index, which are related to con-
tinuous and long-term functionality, respectively,
contribute to deciding what a good utterance is in
a chat dialogue. In future work, we plan to con-
duct an experimental evaluation on the continuous
and long-term use of the chat dialogue system.

References
Rafael E Banchs and Haizhou Li. 2012. IRIS: a chat-
oriented dialogue system based on the vector space
model.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2012 System
Demonstrations, pages 37–42. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Toyomi Meguro, Kenji Ima-
mura, Hiroaki Sugiyama, Toshiro Makino, and
Yoshihiro Matsuo. 2014. Evaluating coherence in
open domain conversational systems.
In INTER-
SPEECH, pages 130–134.

Quoc V. Le and Tomas Mikolov.

Dis-
tributed Representations of Sentences and Docu-
ments. http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4053. Mon, 02 Jun
2014 08:30:36 +0200.

2014.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efﬁcient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. ICLR Workshop.

Hiroaki Sugiyama, Toyomi Meguro, Ryuichiro Hi-
gashinaka, and Yasuhiro Minami. 2013. Open-
domain utterance generation for conversational di-
alogue systems using web-scale dependency struc-
tures. In The 14th annual SIGdial Meeting on Dis-
course and Dialogue, pages 334–338.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, pages 3104–3112.

Joseph Weizenbaum. 1966. ELIZA―a computer pro-
gram for the study of natural language communica-
tion between man and machine. Communications of
the ACM, 9(1):36–45.

Yang Xiang, Yaoyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Zhou, Xiao-
long Wang, and Yang Qin.
2014. Problematic
Situation Analysis and Automatic Recognition for
Chinese Online Conversational System. CLP 2014,
page 43.

Takeshi Yoshimura. 2014. Casual Conversation Tech-
nology Achieving Natural Dialog with Computers.

