



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, page 1,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Keynote Lecture-1
Practical Use of Machine Translation in International Organizations

Bruno Pouliquen
World Intellectual Property Organization, Switzerland

bruno.pouliquen@wipo.int

We propose to present  our experience in statistical  machine translation,  in WIPO (World Intellectual
Property Organization) and in other international organizations. Special focus will be given to the recent
introduction of Neural Machine Translation in production. 
WIPO has  developed  its  own MT tool,  initially  based  on  open-source  Moses  (phrase-based  SMT -
PBSMT), more recently based on open-source for Neural Machine Translation (NMT), namely Nematus
and AmunMT. The PBSMT tool, trained on different documents, has been successfully installed in the
UN (United Nations) and in other international organizations (ITU, IMO, FAO, WTO, ILO, WTO, TGF
and FAO).  The tool is fully data-driven and has been trained on various language pairs. For example, in
the  patent  domain,  it  allows  users  to  understand a  patent  written  in  a  language  they  do  not  master
(languages  covered:  English,  German,  Spanish,  French,  Portuguese,  Russian,  Chinese,  Korean  and
Japanese; Arabic  to be added soon). The tool is also used for dissemination, as a “translation accelerator”
and used by WIPO (and other UN agencies) by translators to help them in their daily work.
It should be noted that our tool has always better automatic metrics (BLEU) for every comparison we did
against general translation tool (Google) using PBSMT. The recent NMT is also clearly better (for patent
texts) than GNMT (the recently published Neural machine translation engine released by Google). 
The tool has now reached maturity and is successfully used in production: by translators in UN since 5
years and by users of WIPO search engine PATENTSCOPE since 6 years. NMT for Chinese has been put
in production in September in WIPO. We plan to release NMT for most of the language pairs soon.

1


