



















































Design of Word Association Games using Dialog Systems for Acquisition of Word Association Knowledge


Proceedings of AKBC 2016, pages 86–91,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Design of Word Association Games using Dialog Systems
for Acquisition of Word Association Knowledge

Yuichiro Machida†,1 Daisuke Kawahara† Sadao Kurohashi† Manabu Sassano‡
†Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University

‡Yahoo Japan Corporation

machida@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, {dk, kuro}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, msassano@yahoo-corp.jp

Abstract

We present a design for acquiring word asso-
ciation knowledge of high quality on the basis
of a game with a purpose (GWAP). We eval-
uate automatically acquired word associations
using a word association game as a GWAP. In
the word association game, a player is given a
set of associated words as a hint and is asked
to answer a word that can be associated with
the hint. If many players can answer the cor-
rect keyword, we judge the set of associated
words to be of high quality. This word associ-
ation game was implemented in a smartphone-
based dialog system, which has been installed
into more than one million smartphones. Our
analysis of numerous game logs demonstrated
that our framework can effectively select word
associations of high quality.

1 Introduction

In recent years, semantic analysis has received atten-
tion as an active research area in natural language
processing (NLP). It is indispensable to build lan-
guage resources for accurate semantic analysis. One
such resource is word associations, e.g., “glass” has
an association with “fragile,” “cup,” and “reflect.”
Compiling large-scale word association knowledge
of high quality is important to capture the semantic
relations among words in texts, enabling deep and
accurate discourse analyses. Hereafter, we designate
the target word as keyword2. Words with which the

1The first author is now affiliated with Recruit Lifestyle Co.,
Ltd.

2A keyword can be a word or a phrase, but we call both
“keywords.”

keyword has an association are designated as asso-
ciated words.

There are manually crafted resources of word as-
sociations, such as thesauri and ontologies, which
have been compiled by lexicographers and which
have contributed to many studies in NLP. However,
it takes long times and high costs to create a large
thesaurus. Furthermore, it is difficult to update it
continuously to adapt to neologisms and the chang-
ing use of a word.

To reduce the creation cost, methods for automat-
ically acquiring word associations from a large cor-
pus have been studied (e.g., (Lin, 1998; Mikolov
et al., 2013)). Although such methods can acquire
large-scale resources of word associations, they tend
to have lower precision than manually created ones,
which would harm the performance of subsequent
NLP applications.

To cope with potential difficulties existing both in
manual methods and automatic ones, it is necessary
to combine the two methods, taking their respective
benefits. This paper presents a method for compil-
ing large-scale word association knowledge of high
quality by evaluating automatically acquired word
associations manually, not by linguistic experts but
by the wisdom of crowds.

To make use of the wisdom of crowds, crowd-
sourcing has been employed widely (e.g., (Snow et
al., 2008; Kawahara et al., 2014)). Crowdsourc-
ing is a low-cost service that enlists numerous hu-
man workers to make judgments that are difficult for
computers.3 However, costs are still high when we

3In this paper, we refer to microtask crowdsourcing as
“crowdsourcing.”

86



conduct a very large-scale task by aggregating many
small-cost microtasks. We employ a game with a
purpose (GWAP) (von Ahn, 2006) to use the wis-
dom of crowds. GWAP dispatches tasks as a game,
and thus it is the process by which a game play im-
plicitly corresponds to the execution of another task.
Since game players do not want money but instead
want fun, the use of GWAP engenders greater cost
reductions than crowdsourcing.

We perform a word association game using a di-
alog system on smartphones as GWAP. We evalu-
ate the quality of automatically acquired Japanese
word associations based on logs obtained from game
players. For example, if players correctly an-
swer the keyword “glass” for the given associated
words “fragile,” “cup,” and “reflect,” these associ-
ated words can be regarded as high quality for the
keyword. We use such a game to evaluate automati-
cally acquired word associations at no cost.

2 Related Work

In recent years, crowdsourcing has been used for
data construction and evaluation in NLP (e.g.,
(Snow et al., 2008; Hill et al., 2015; Schnabel et
al., 2015)). Snow et al. (2008) demonstrated that
annotations by crowdworkers have almost identical
quality with those by experts in various NLP tasks.
The motivation of crowdworkers in crowdsourcing
is monetary.

Another type of wisdom of crowds is GWAP,
for which a player’s motivation differs from that of
crowdsourcing. Their motivation is “enjoying the
game.” Therefore, we need not pay for the players,
and can reduce the number of low-quality or dishon-
est workers. Many approaches using GWAP have
been proposed in the field of NLP, such as anaphora
resolution (Hladká et al., 2009), paraphrasing (Poe-
sio et al., 2013), constructing semantic network
(Lafourcade, 2007), and word sense disambiguation
(Venhuizen et al., 2013). However, they are de-
signed in a text-based style. Text-based games are
probably less enjoyable for players.

Some studies have specifically examined non-
text-based games, i.e., video games (Vannella et al.,
2014; Jurgens and Navigli, 2014). Video games are
familiar for ordinary people and are much more en-
joyable than text-based games. For example, Van-

nella et al. (2014) developed a video game to val-
idate the associations between images and senses.
They reported that the annotation quality using the
video game is better than crowdsourcing. The en-
joyable game design improves the quality of annota-
tions by crowds. However, because playing a video
game requires a certain amount of time, it is a bit dif-
ficult to play it in one’s spare-time. Furthermore, de-
veloping an attractive video game would be a time-
consuming task.

Our word association game works on a dialog sys-
tem to encourage player motivation. The game pro-
gresses interactively, so that many players can play
easily. Moreover, we need not spend much time to
develop it because the game system is simple.

3 Automatic Acquisition of Word
Associations

We first explain our model for acquiring word asso-
ciations. Then, we describe a method for clustering
the acquired word associations to efficiently make
questions for the word association game.

3.1 Definition and Collection of Word
Associations

In general, many relations exist among words, such
as hypernym-hyponym relations and part-whole re-
lations. However, we do not care about the kind of
relation but the strength between words. Matsuo et
al. (2006) used pointwise mutual information (PMI)
and chi-square as the strength measures of relations,
and acquired associated words using graph cluster-
ing. Our method is based on this method, but uses
word frequencies and PMI as the strength measures
as proposed by Shin and Kurohashi (2014). We used
a Japanese Web corpus of 4.2 million sentences and
Japanese Wikipedia to acquire associated words for
nouns, verbs, and adjectives.

3.2 Clustering Word Associations

Next, we cluster the acquired associated words ac-
cording to their basic meanings. By clustering as-
sociated words, we can not only structure associated
word knowledge, but also efficiently produce ques-
tions for the word association game to evaluate the
acquired associated words. Presume that there is a
fruit cluster like {fruit, banana, orange, · · ·} among

87



associated words of “apple.” We can evaluate the
quality not from all words in the fruit cluster but only
from a few words in the cluster. We can reduce the
number of questions for a keyword using clustering.
We perform clustering based on the Girvan-Newman
algorithm (Girvan and Newman, 2002).

4 Design of Word Association Game

To evaluate the quality of a set of automatically ac-
quired word associations, we designed a word asso-
ciation game.

Our key idea is that humans can associate a given
set of associated words with a keyword or its similar
words if these associated words are of high quality.
For example, if players answer the keyword “glass”
or its similar word “window” for the given associ-
ated words “fragile,” “cup” and “reflect,” these asso-
ciated words can be regarded as high quality for the
keyword. Based on this idea, we conduct a word as-
sociation game in which a player is given a set of au-
tomatically acquired associated words as a hint and
is asked to answer a word that can be associated with
the hint. We compare the answers of players with
the keyword, and judge that the acquired associated
words are of high quality if many answers are the
keyword or similar words.

In this way, we do not evaluate the quality of
each associated word for a keyword. We instead
acquire large-scale word association knowledge of
high quality verified as a whole. By using this strat-
egy, we do not require a large number of annotations,
i.e., game plays, for the quality judgment of a key-
word. For keywords that are judged to be of low
quality using our method, it is possible to conduct
another stage of crowdsourcing to evaluate each as-
sociated word.

The word association game operates on a dialog
system on a smartphone application as shown in Fig-
ure 1. We adopted a dialog system as a platform be-
cause enjoyment of conversations can promote game
plays and vice versa. We developed a word asso-
ciation game as a dialog chatting function in Ya-
hoo! Onsei Assist (Yahoo Japan’s Voice Assistant,
hereinafter YOA),4 which is a spoken dialog smart-
phone application provided by Yahoo Japan.

4http://v-assist.yahoo.co.jp/

Figure 1: Word association game. Blue balloons show utter-
ances of the player. All utterances of the player and the system

are translated into English.

4.1 Method for Making Word Association
Game

The word association game is executed as follows.

1. If a player utters a sentence such as “連想ゲー
ムしよう” (Let’s play a word association game)
in the mode of normal dialog processing, the
word association game is booted up.5

2. A keyword is selected randomly from a pool of
keywords.

3. One noun cluster, verb cluster, and adjective
cluster of associated words are randomly se-
lected.

4. A question is created using two words as a hint
in order of the degree of association in each se-
lected cluster (six words in total).

5. A player utters an answer to the question.
6. The answer is judged. If it corresponds to the

keyword, the game ends and YOA returns to the
mode of normal dialog processing; otherwise
steps 3 and 4 are called again to add more hints
to the question.

7. The player utters an answer to the revised ques-
tion.

8. The answer is judged. In any case, the game
ends and YOA returns to the mode of normal
dialog processing.

5It was announced to YOA users that they can play a word
association game.

88



For our experiment, we selected 100 keywords
ranked between 3,000 and 10,000 in order of word
frequency on the Web. Of these, we manually
judged that 85 keywords have a high-quality set of
associated words; 15 keywords do not.6 These man-
ual labels are used as a gold standard set in Section
5.2. Since high enjoyment for a game requires a
somewhat high ratio of keywords with high-quality
associated words, we set this ratio as high in our
first-phase experiment for evaluation purposes. To
practically operate the game, we would be able to
lower the ratio to around half using keywords eval-
uated to be of high quality at the moment and key-
words without evaluation.

4.2 Answer Judgment

At steps 6 and 8 in the procedure described above,
the player answer is judged automatically as one
of the following three classes: “Exact,” “Near” and
“Bad.” When the answer of the player is the same
as the keyword, the judgment is “Exact.” When
the answer is similar to the keyword, the judgment
is “Near.” Similarity between words is calculated
based on distributional/distributed similarity (Lin,
1998; Mikolov et al., 2013). The answer of a player
is judged as “Near” if its similarity to the keyword is
greater than a threshold.

5 Evaluating Word Associations with the
Word Association Game

We evaluated word associations by analyzing game
logs of our word association game. The word asso-
ciation game has been operating since the middle of
December 2014. To date, 87 keywords out of 100
have been used for the game. We analyzed game
logs of approximately a month and a half.

From the game logs of our word association
game, we can obtain the utterance time, player ID,
and utterance contents of each player. Table 1 lists
statistics of game logs for a month and a half.

5.1 Method for Aggregating Answers

To evaluate a set of associated words for a keyword,
we adopted five answers that are highly ranked in

6In the experiment, 87 keywords out of these 100 were ac-
tually used for the word association game because of the speci-
fications of YOA.

Player IDs 9,997
Plays 19,438
Exact 6,930
Near 4,470
Bad 10,895

Mode response interval 20.0s
Average plays per player 1.9

Max plays per player 59
Table 1: Statistics of game logs of a month and a half.

human annotation
appropriate inappropriate

Game log appropriate 70 6inappropriate 6 5

Table 2: Comparison with human annotations.

order of frequency in the answers for the keyword.
The purpose of this is to exclude unintentional ut-
terances and errors of speech recognition caused by
spoken dialog. We calculated precision for a key-
word using its five answers as follows:

precision =
|Exact | + |Near |

|Exact | + |Near | + |Bad | ,

where |Exact | denotes the frequency of answers
judged as “Exact.” |Near | and |Bad | are defined in
the same way.

We evaluated the quality of word associations in
terms of the precision defined above. We judged the
associated words of a keyword to be of high qual-
ity if its precision is higher than 0.3, and vice versa.
This threshold was set empirically by considering
the remaining noises of speech recognition and sim-
ilar words that failed to be recognized.

5.2 Acquired Evaluations of Word Associations
We obtained automatic judgments for the target 87
keywords by aggregating answers. We compared
these automatic judgments with the gold standard
labels described in Section 4.1. Table 2 reports this
comparison. We achieved a precision of 0.92, a re-
call of 0.92, and an F-score of 0.92. From these re-
sults, we can see that the quality of automatically ac-
quired word associations can be evaluated precisely
using our word association game.

5.3 Analysis of Word Associations with High
Precision

High precision basically means high quality of as-
sociated words for a keyword. Table 3 shows play-

89



keyword question examples players’ answers prec

event

site, live, information, various
inform, festival, boost

special, big, official, latest event:41
party:19

concert:16
festival:12

sports festival:9

0.907memorial, plan, information, various
enjoy, fun, festival, boost

one-man, great, safety
memorial, plan, information, various

inform, festival, boost
special, big, official, latest

ice cream

chocolate, cake, ice, milk
taste, smell, serve with, bake
delicious, sweet, fresh, plenty ice cream:55

cake:33
ice:32

pudding:19

soft ice cream:17

0.891milk, fresh cream, dessert, yogurt
mix, melt, eat, make

dense, smooth, cold, hot
chocolate, cake, milk, fresh cream

taste, smell, mix, melt
delicious, sweet, dense, smooth

Table 3: Examples of players’ answers with high precision. All
keywords, question examples, and players’ answers are trans-

lated into English. Bolded words and underlined words are

judged as “Exact” and “Near,” respectively.

ers’ answers for some keywords that have high pre-
cision. Players’ answers for the keyword “アイス
クリーム” (ice cream) include similar words to the
keyword, such as “ケーキ” (cake), “アイス” (ice),
and “プリン” (pudding). Since the set of associ-
ated words includes appropriate associated words,
the high precision actually indicates the quality of
associated words. Although “ソフトクリーム” (soft
ice cream) included in the players’ answers is a sim-
ilar word to the keyword, it cannot be identified as
“Near.” It is necessary to increase the coverage of
similar word identification in future studies.

Furthermore, it is possible to acquire new associ-
ated words from players’ answers with high preci-
sion. In Table 3, players’ answers for the keyword “
イベント” (event) include “パーティー” (party), “
コンサート” (concert) and “運動会” (sports festival)
in addition to the keyword itself. Although “パーテ
ィー” (party) and “コンサート” (concert) were au-
tomatically acquired as associated words, “運動会”
(sports festival) was not acquired but an appropriate
associated word. In this way, we can acquire novel
associated words from the word association game.

5.4 Analysis of Word Associations with Low
Precision

Table 4 shows players’ answers for some keywords
that have precision lower than 0.3. We can see that
the low precision means low quality of associated

keyword question examples players’ answersprec

line

distance, horse, curve, leg
reach, loop, get away from, go past

vertical, zigzag, long, fast horse race:101
leg:7

horse:7
race track:6
marathon:5

0.0count, length, distance, horse
face, run, reach, loop

simple, round, vertical, zigzag
count, length, curve, leg

face, run, get away from, go past
simple, round, long, fast

theme

lecture, this, work, exhibition
along, mistake, summarize, drill down

forever, important, familiar, main university,29
space,10

STAP cell,10
ocean,7

chemical,6

0.0lecture, this, common, discussion
along, mistake, tackle, learn

forever, important, various, wide range of
research, paper, lecture, this
decide, draw, along, mistake

ambitious, deep, forever, important

Table 4: Examples of players’ answers with low precision. All
keywords, question examples, and players’ answers are trans-

lated into English.

words for a keyword. For example, the keyword “
直線” (line) has low precision. Its players’ answers
were not similar to the keyword but were words that
are related to horse racing. Actually, the associated
words for this keyword, such as “距離” (distance)
and “コーナー” (curve), can be readily associated
with horse racing. Therefore, they are unsuitable for
associated words for “直線” (line).

Furthermore, players’ answers with low precision
help not only find associated words of low quality
but also analyze errors in the method for acquiring
associated words. The above associated words were
associated with horse racing because the domain of
the Web corpus was biased to horse racing. In this
way, we can speculate about the contexts of the ac-
quired associated words, which correspond to error
analysis of the acquisition method.

6 Conclusion

We have presented a method for compiling large-
scale word association knowledge of high quality.
We first automatically acquire and cluster word as-
sociations. Then we evaluate these by taking advan-
tage of GWAP. The framework used for evaluating
word associations is implemented as a word associ-
ation game operating on a smartphone-based dialog
system. Our analysis of a large volume of game logs
has indicated that our framework can extract word
associations of high quality effectively.

90



References

Michelle Girvan and Mark E. J. Newman. 2002. Com-
munity structure in social and biological networks.
Proc. of National Academy of Sciences, 99(12):7821–
7826.

Felix Hill, Roi Reichart, and Anna Korhonen. 2015.
SimLex-999: Evaluating semantic models with (gen-
uine) similarity estimation. Computational Linguis-
tics, 41(4):665–695.

Barbora Hladká, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, and Pavel Schlesinger.
2009. Play the language: Play coreference. In Proc.
of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 209–212.

David Jurgens and Roberto Navigli. 2014. It’s all fun
and games until someone annotates: Video games with
a purpose for linguistic annotation. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:449–
464.

Daisuke Kawahara, Yuichiro Machida, Tomohide Shi-
bata, Sadao Kurohashi, Hayato Kobayashi, and Man-
abu Sassano. 2014. Rapid development of a cor-
pus with discourse annotations using two-stage crowd-
sourcing. In Proc. of COLING2014, pages 269–278.

Mathieu Lafourcade. 2007. Making people play for
Lexical Acquisition with the JeuxDeMots prototype.
In SNLP’07: 7th International Symposium on Natu-
ral Language Processing, page 7, Pattaya, Chonburi,
Thailand.

Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proc. of COLING-ACL98, pages
768–774.

Yutaka Matsuo, Takeshi Sakaki, Kôki Uchiyama, and
Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2006. Graph-based word clustering
using a web search engine. In Proc. of EMNLP2006,
pages 542–550.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Gregory S.
Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed rep-
resentations of words and phrases and their composi-
tionality. In Proc. of Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 26, pages 3111–3119.

Massimo Poesio, Jon Chamberlain, Udo Kruschwitz,
Livio Robaldo, and Luca Ducceschi. 2013. Phrase de-
tectives: Utilizing collective intelligence for internet-
scale language resource creation. ACM Trans. Inter-
act. Intell. Syst., 3(1):3:1–3:44.

Tobias Schnabel, Igor Labutov, David Mimno, and
Thorsten Joachims. 2015. Evaluation methods
for unsupervised word embeddings. In Proc. of
EMNLP2015, pages 298–307.

Yoshiharu Shin and Sadao Kurohashi. 2014. Graph-
based representation of documents based on nominal
related words knowledge and its applications. In Proc.
of NLP2014 (in Japanese), pages 1007–1010.

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast—but is it
good?: Evaluating non-expert annotations for natural
language tasks. In Proc. of EMNLP2008, pages 254–
263.

Daniele Vannella, David Jurgens, Daniele Scarfini,
Domenico Toscani, and Roberto Navigli. 2014. Vali-
dating and extending semantic knowledge bases using
video games with a purpose. In Proc. of ACL2014,
pages 1294–1304.

Noortje J. Venhuizen, Valerio Basile, Kilian Evang, and
Johan Bos. 2013. Gamification for word sense la-
beling. In Proc. of 10th International Conference on
Computational Semantics (IWCS 2013), pages 397–
403.

Luis von Ahn. 2006. Games with a purpose. IEEE Com-
puter, 39(6):92–94.

91


