



















































Representing Support Verbs in FrameNet


Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Multiword Expressions, pages 72–77,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Representing Support Verbs in FrameNet 

 
Miriam R. L. Petruck 

1249 Center St, Suite #600 
Berkeley, CA 94704 

miriamp@icsi.berkeley.edu 

Michael Ellsworth 
1249 Center St, Suite #600 

Berkeley, CA 94704 
infinity@icsi.berkeley.edu 

 
  

 

Abstract 

This paper presents FrameNet’s approach 
to the representation of Support Verbs, as 
but one type of multiword expression 
(MWE) included in the database. In addi-
tion to motivating and illustrating Fra-
meNet’s newly consistent annotation 
practice for Support Verb constructions, 
the present work advocates adopting a 
broad view of what constitutes a 
multiword expression. 

1 Introduction 

Natural Language Processing (NLP) research has 
been interested in the automatic processing of 
multiword expressions, with reports on and tasks 
relating to such efforts presented at workshops 
and conferences for over ten years (e.g. ACL 
2003, LREC 2008, COLING 2010, EACL 2014, 
NAACL 2015). Overcoming the challenge of 
automatically processing MWEs remains quite 
elusive because of the difficulty in recognizing 
and interpreting such forms. Primarily concerned 
with the mapping of meaning to form via the 
theory of Frame Semantics (Fillmore 1985, 
2012), FrameNet represents MWEs from the per-
spective of their semantic heads. 

Existing statistical approaches to acquiring 
MWEs (e.g. Villavicencio et al. 2007, Bannard 
2005, Nakov 2013) only offer partial solutions to 
the problem of MWEs. Many, if not most, such 
approaches focus on identifying MWEs, and do 
not address the meaning of the MWEs. In the 
specific case of noun compounds, Nakov (2013) 
addressed meaning with a fixed set of relation-
ships between members of the compound or by 
specifying a more explicit paraphrase (Nakov 
and Hearst 2013). Other efforts have focused on 
the meaning of verb particle constructions, by 
distinguishing between meaning classes of parti-

cles (Cook and Stephenson 2006). Salehi et al. 
(2015) tested newer methods using word 
embeddings in English and German for com-
pound nouns and verb particle combinations. 
These studies focused on predicting MWEs, and 
have not been assessed for the method’s utility 
on vector meaning representations for MWEs. In 
contrast, the FrameNet analysis of MWEs treats 
all known kinds of multi-word expressions in 
English and offers a description of their meaning 
with the same powerful Frame Semantics system 
that FN uses for single words. 

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 describes FrameNet briefly; Section 3 
provides background to MWEs, also discussing 
MWEs in FrameNet and specifically support 
verb constructions. Section 4 presents the termi-
nology that FN uses in its representation of sup-
port verbs, and includes an example. Finally, 
Section 5 offers concluding remarks. 

2 Background to FrameNet 

FrameNet (FN) is a knowledge base with unique 
information about the mapping of meaning to 
form in the vocabulary of contemporary English 
through the theory of Frame Semantics (Fillmore 
1985, 2012, Fillmore and Baker 2010). 

At the heart of Frame Semantics is the seman-
tic frame, i.e. an experience-based schematiza-
tion of the language user’s world that allows in-
ferences about participants and objects in and 
across events, situations, and states of affairs. To 
date, FN has characterized more than 1,200 
frames, nearly 13,500 lexical units (LUs), de-
fined as a pairing of a lemma and a frame, and 
over 202,000 manually annotated sentences that 
illustrate the use of each. 

A FN frame definition includes a description 
of a prototypical situation, along with a specifi-
cation of the frame elements (FEs), or semantic 
roles, that uniquely characterize that situation. 
FN distinguishes three types of FEs, core, pe-

72



ripheral, and extrathematic, where core FEs 
uniquely define a frame. Thus, FrameNet defines 
the Revenge1 frame as an AVENGER perform-
ing a PUNISHMENT on an OFFENDER as a re-
sponse to an INJURY, inflicted on an IN-
JURED_PARTY. These five are core FEs in the 
Revenge frame. Peripheral FEs, such as TIME 
and PLACE, capture aspects of events more gen-
erally. Extrathematic FEs situate an event against 
the backdrop of another state of affairs; concep-
tually these FEs do not belong to the frame in 
which they occur. Example (1) shows a FN 
analysis of verb avenge.v; beyond FEs, FN anno-
tates phrase type and grammatical information.2 
 

1. [Sam AVENGER/NP/External] avenged [his  
 brother INJURED_PARTY/NP/Object] [after the  
 incident TIME/PP/Dependent]. 
 
In (1), Sam, the AVENGER, is a NP and functions 
as the external; his brother, the INJURED_PARTY, 
is a NP and serves the grammatical function ob-
ject; after the incident, the TIME, is a PP depend-
ent. FN lexical entry reports include a table of 
valence patterns that displays the automatically 
summarized results of FE, grammatical function 
and phrase type annotation, as given in Figure 1. 
 

 
Figure 1: Partial Valence Table 

 for revenge.v 
 
Note that the red arrow in Figure 1 indicates the 
valence pattern of Example (1). 

The FN hierarchy of frames links frames to 
each other via a number of frame-to-frame rela-
tions. For example, inheritance is a relation 
where for each FE, frame relation, and semantic 
characteristic in the parent, the same or a more 
specific analogous entity exists in the child. 
Thus, to illustrate, Revenge inherits Re-

                                                
1 The names of FN frames appear in Courier New 
typeface. An underscore appears between each word 
of a frame name of more than one word; FN only 
capitalizes the first word of the name. 
2 FN uses external for subjects, including of raising 
Vs, and a limited set of grammatical functions. 

wards_and_punishments, which in turn 
inherits Response, as well as Intention-
ally_affect as Figure 2 depicts.3 
 

 
Figure 2: Inheritance Relations in FN 

 
While FN provides frame-specific semantic an-
notation, its powerful nature becomes most evi-
dent when leveraging the larger frame hierarchy, 
linked through its frame-to-frame relations, of 
which the local frame is a part. 

Not surprisingly, the Revenge frame pro-
vides the background knowledge structure for 
defining and understanding a number of MWEs. 
The following support verb constructions are 
instances of MWEs defined in terms of Re-
venge: get even.v, get back.v, take revenge.v, 
and exact revenge.v; details appear in Section 3. 

3 Multiword Expressions 

3.1 Background 
Multiword expressions manifest in a range of 
linguistic forms (as Sag et al. (2002), among 
many others, have documented), including: noun 
+ noun compounds (e.g. fish knife, health hazard 
etc.); adjective + noun compounds (e.g. political 
agenda, national interest, etc.); particle verbs 
(shut up, take out, etc.); prepositional verbs (e.g. 
look into, talk into, etc.); VP idioms, such as kick 
the bucket, and pull someone’s leg, along with 
less obviously idiomatic forms like answer the 
door, mention someone’s name, etc.; expressions 
that have their own mini-grammars, such as 
names with honorifics and terms of address (e.g. 
Rabbi Lord Jonathan Sacks), kinship terms (e.g. 
second cousin once removed), and time expres-
sions (e.g. August 9, 1929); support verb con-
structions (e.g. verbs: take a bath, make a prom-
ise, etc; and prepositions: in doubt, under review, 
etc.). Linguists address issues of polysemy, com-
positionality, idiomaticity, and continuity for 
each type of MWE mentioned here. 

While native speakers use MWEs with ease, 
their treatment and interpretation in computa-
                                                
3 See, for instance, Petruck and de Melo (2012) for an 
overview of all of FN’s frame-to-frame relations. 

73



tional systems requires considerable effort due to 
the very issues that concern linguists. 

3.2 Multiword Expressions in FrameNet 
Although not stated explicitly, Fillmore (2006) 
suggests that linguists and NLP researchers must 
consider a very broad view of MWEs instead of 
limiting the scope of their study to those that fit 
some analytic or classificatory definition.  

While FrameNet includes MWEs in its lexi-
con, it does not analyze any of them internally. 
For example, given the (noun + noun) MWE fish 
bowl, FN does not offer an analysis of the rela-
tionship between fish and bowl, the two nouns in 
the compound when that compound is the focus 
of the analysis. However, FN does provide se-
mantico-syntactic information about the use of 
MWEs. Consider the sentence Smedlap bought a 
large fish bowl, where the (bold-faced) target, 
i.e. the compound noun, evokes the Contain-
ers frame, with the core FE CONTAINER and 
several peripheral FEs, including TYPE. A FN 
analysis of the sentence indicates that the adjec-
tive phrase a large is a grammatical dependent of 
the LU fish bowl, and is annotated with the FE 
TYPE. 

2. Smedlap bought [a large TYPE]  
 [fish bowl CONTAINER]. 

 
In contrast, if the target LU is the head noun of 

a noun + noun compound, as in fish bowl, FN 
annotates the modifier of that compound with the 
FE that the modifier instantiates, here USE, thus 
yielding the analysis in (3). Note that both bowl 
and fish bowl evoke Containers, with analy-
sis of each employing the same set of FEs. 

 
3. Smedlap bought a [fish USE]  
 [bowl CONTAINER]. 
 

The different analyses in (2) and (3) are a result 
of the different target LUs in each example. 

Table 1, below, lists the types of MWEs found 
in FrameNet, and provides examples of each.4 
 
 
 
 

                                                
4 FrameNet also includes support nouns and support 
adjectives, which the authors believe to be of limited 
interest to the larger computational linguistics audi-
ence. 

 Examples 
MWE Type  

Compound Noun fish bowl 
Verb + Particle take off 

bring out 
put on 

Support 
Constructions 

 

  
Support Verb 

make a decision 
say a prayer 
find solace 

 
Support  

Preposition 

in possession 
under attack 
at large 

Table 1: MWE Types in FrameNet 
 

3.3 Support Verbs in FrameNet 
This section briefly describes support verbs, very 
broadly defined (e.g. give advice, find solace, 
make a decision), including plain support verbs, 
as well as Melcuk’s (1996) lexical functions 
(e.g., causatives), and the discrepancy between 
the syntactic heads and semantic heads of such 
forms.  Since FN has included  

Both Meaning Text Theory (MTT) and Frame 
Semantics (FS) are interested in characterizing 
the lexical structure of support verb constructions 
(as in Table 1), despite the different approaches 
of each theory. In MTT, lexical functions de-
scribe collocations that serve a range of pur-
poses, including, for instance, MAGN, for collo-
cations that emphasize the extremeness of an-
other word (e.g. red hot) and CAUS for colloca-
tions that express the causation of a word (e.g. 
give a heart attack). Both theories want to de-
scribe (a) the verb and the nominal syntactic 
head of the verb’s dependent; (b) the way that 
the situation or frame that the noun evokes re-
ceives expression in the support construction; 
and (c) how the syntactic dependents of the verb 
match the semantic roles in the frame that the 
noun evokes. Some of the shared goals for ana-
lyzing support verb constructions motivated ex-
ploring the possibility of aligning them (Bou-
veret and Fillmore 2008), but numerous practical 
matters, such as different sets of terminology and 
methodology, precluded any such alignment.   

Still, a brief overview of the key differences in 
the two approaches will illuminate the flexibility 
of the FrameNet approach. MTT models a lim-
ited set of syntactic and semantic relationships 
between parts of a MWE. Though MTT allows 
for some multiword expressions involving syn-

74



tactic and semantic relations beyond these rela-
tionships, they do not form part of the larger sys-
tem. In contrast FrameNet handles all types of 
meaning relations through its use of frames. The 
two approaches are complementary in that FN 
does not model the syntactic relation between the 
parts of MWEs in a general way, other than the 
annotation of the syntactic head of the MWE and 
its part-of-speech.  

The support verb construction considered here 
is but one linguistic form that shows the discrep-
ancy between a syntactic and a semantic head. 
For example, consider bottle of champagne, 
where bottle may refer to a measure (e.g. They 
drank a bottle of champagne to celebrate), or it 
may indicate a container (e.g. He broke the bottle 
of champagne over the newly painted boat). Re-
gardless of linguistic form, such discrepancies 
present a challenge to NLP, specifically natural 
language understanding (NLU). NLU systems 
must know that breaking a bottle is possible, but 
breaking champagne is not. Thus, success in 
NLP depends, in part, on systems that include the 
means to resolve the discrepancy between syn-
tactic and semantic heads. 

4 Representing Support Vs in FrameNet 

This section motivates FrameNet’s approach to 
the representation of support verbs, introduces 
the terminology that FN uses in their representa-
tion, illustrating each, and providing an example 
that shows the advantage of exploiting FN in-
formation for these constructions.  

4.1 Motivating FrameNet’s Approach 
FrameNet began as a lexicography project, and 
to a large extent remains such, with more atten-
tion to the needs of NLP recently than in early 
phases of the project. As such, FN considered 
lexicographic factors to determine its approach to 
representing support verb construction. Never-
theless, FN views the features that it uses in its 
annotation as showing promise for NLP. 

4.2 Terminology 
Table 2 displays all possible combinations of the 
three features that characterize different types of 
lexically relevant governors, be they supports (as 
defined in FN), or not. What follows first is a list 
of features that characterize the relationship be-
tween governing and governed words in general: 
specifically, we define Bleached, FE-supplying, 
and Idiosyncratic. Then, this section provides a 
description of the labels that FrameNet uses for 

particular combinations of these features, i.e. 
Support, Copula, Controller, and Governor. In 
the examples that follow, underlining identifies 
the dependent word with annotation to discuss. 
 

 Bleached Non-Bleached 
 +FE -FE +FE -FE 
+ Idio. Supp Supp 
- Idio. Cop Ctrlr Gov 

Table 2: Terminology for Lexically  
Relevant Governors 

 
• Bleached: Bleached indicates that the gov-

ernor does not contribute significant con-
tent semantics to the combination of gov-
ernor and governed word (e.g. she took re-
venge, there was rain). In Non-Bleached 
cases, added frame annotation models the 
added meaning from the governor. 

• FE: FE-supplying (or not) indicates that 
syntactic dependents of the governing 
word fill semantic roles of the governed 
word (e.g. they gave me a shock).  

• Idio: Idiosyncratic covers lexical material 
whose combination is not predictable from 
the general meaning of the individual 
words (e.g. the US lifted the sanctions). 

 
These three features underlie the annotation la-
bels that FN employs: 

 
• Cop: Copula is for annotating BE, and 

copula-like verbs (e.g. seem happy, appear 
smart). 

• Ctrlr: Controller identifies the verb whose 
subject or object is also the subject or ob-
ject in the dependent clause (e.g. attempt a 
rescue). 

• Gov: Governor identifies a word that is 
used in a prototypical way with a depend-
ent, but without any unusual meaning or 
any supplying of an FE to its dependent 
(e.g. wear boots) 

• Supp: Support identifies words that would 
not mean the same thing without their syn-
tactic dependent (e.g. take a bath). 

 
In Table 2, above, the highlighted cell indi-

cates the situation where FrameNet annotates the 
support item (here, a verb or a preposition) as a 
separate target, and the combination of Supp + 
Target is not quite equivalent semantically to the 
Target alone. (See the example (5).) Regular 
supports (exact in exact revenge) need no further 
analysis and FN does not annotate them further. 

75



4.3 Example 
Consider example (4), where the analysis focuses 
on the support verb expression took a dirt nap.5 
 

4. Horatio PROTAGONIST [took Supp a dirt nap]. 
 

FN characterizes dirt nap, the target of analy-
sis, in terms of the Dead_or_alive frame, 
defined as a situation in which a PROTAGONIST is 
in the dynamic, maintained state of being alive or 
has exited that state. FN records Horatio, the 
syntactic subject of the verb took as the PRO-
TAGONIST, and marks took with the label Supp. 
By characterizing took a dirt nap in terms of its 
semantic head, dirt nap, FN provides needed in-
formation about the participants in the event that 
the support verb expression describes. Independ-
ent of the task, e.g. translation, summarization, 
search, etc., any NLP system must know that 
Horatio is the participant who is dead. FrameNet 
provides that information. 

Characterizing MWEs for identification and 
representation in NLP requires systematizing the 
kinds of combinations that exist. FN provides an 
elaborate classification system that informs 
downstream tasks whether the syntactic head or a 
syntactic dependent is the most important part of 
a MWE semantically. Importantly, FN provides a 
unified way to represent the meaning of all types 
of combinations. This approach includes partially 
compositional cases, as in (5), where the curly 
brackets identify the support verb construction. 
 

5. Officials {lifted Supp [Oslo’s EVALUEE] 
  penalty}. 

 
In example (5), Oslo’s fills the EVALUEE role of 
Rewards_and_Punishments, which the 
noun penalty evokes. Additionally, the support 
verb lift evokes another frame, i.e. the 
Cause_to_end frame,with two core FEs, 
AGENT and PROCESS. In this second frame, the 
noun officials fills the AGENT role and the NP 
Oslo’s penalty fills the PROCESS role, shown in 
example (6), below. 
 

6. [Officials AGENT] {lifted Supp [Oslo’s 
 penalty PROCESS]}. 

 

                                                
5 Given the goal of this work, while recognizing the 
metaphor, we provide no analysis for dirt nap, or fur-
ther information about its being a compound noun. 

Also, in the definitions of LUs that only evoke 
the frame with certain dependents, e.g. lift.v here, 
FN records the semantic type Support_only_LU.  
At present, no automatic NLP method captures 
the complexity of information that FN character-
izes. As such, in conjunction with automated se-
mantic parsing (Das et al. 2014), FN holds great 
potential for use in NLP tasks that depend on 
processing support verb constructions, as one 
type of MWE. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper has provided a brief overview of 
multiword expressions in FrameNet focusing on 
one type of such expression, namely support verb 
constructions. In addition, the present work has 
achieved its goals of motivating, presenting, and 
illustrating FrameNet’s current policy and newly 
consistent practice of representing support verb 
construction. Importantly, the paper also shows 
that FrameNet offers crucial information about 
the meaning of support verb constructions. Sta-
tistical approaches, which tend to focus on the 
identification of MWEs in text, do not provide 
such information. 

Acknowledgments 

FrameNet’s treatment of multiword expressions, 
including support verbs, draws significantly upon 
Fillmore (2006). 

The authors are grateful to the FrameNet team 
for the numerous discussions about the ideas and 
annotation conventions presented in this work. 

References 
C. Bannard. 2005. Learning about the meaning of 

verb particle constructions from corpora. Computer 
Speech and Language Special Issue on MWEs 
19(4): 467–478. 

M. Bouveret and C. J. Fillmore. 2008.  Matching 
Verbo-nominal Constructions in FrameNet with 
Lexical Functions in MTT. In E. Bernal and J. De-
Cesaris (Eds.). Proceedings of the 13th EURALEX 
International Congress, pp. 297-308. 

P. Cook and S. Stevenson. 2006. Classifying Particle 
Semantics in English Verb-Particle Constructions. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Ex-
pressions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying 
Properties. ACL: Sydney, 45–53. 

D. Das, D. Chen, A. F. T. Martins, N. Schneider, and 
N. A. Smith. 2014. Frame-semantic parsing. Com-
putational Linguistics 40.1: 9–56 

76



C. J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of 
understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6.2: 222-
254. 

C. J.  Fillmore. 2006. Multiword Expressions: An 
Extremist Approach, Unpublished PPT. ICSI and 
University of California, Berkeley, CA. 

C. J. Fillmore. 2012. Encounters with Language. 
Computational Linguistics. 38.4: 701-718. 

C. J. Fillmore and C. Baker. 2010. A Frames Ap-
proach to Semantic Analysis. In B. Heine and H. 
Narrog (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic 
Analysis. Oxford: OUP, pp. 791-816. 

I. A. Mel’čuk, I. 1996. Lexical Functions: A Tool for 
the Description of Lexical Relations in a Lexicon. 
In L. Wanner (ed.), Lexical functions in lexicogra-
phy and natural language processing, Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins, pp. 37-102. 

P. Nakov. 2013. On the interpretation of noun com-
pounds: Syntax, semantics, and entailment, Natural 
Language Engineering 19.3: 291-330. 

P. Nakov and M. A. Hearst. 2013. Semantic Interpre-
tation of Noun Compounds Using Verbal and 
Other Paraphrases, ACM Transactions on Speech 
and Language Processing, special issue on 
Multiword Expressions, 10.3, Article 13. 

M. R. L. Petruck and G. de Melo. 2012. Precedes: A 
Semantic Relation in FrameNet, Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Language Resources for Public Se-
curity Applications at the 8th Conference on Inter-
national Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC), Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 45-49. 

J. Ruppenhofer, M. Ellsworth, M. R. L. Petruck, C. R. 
Johnson, and J. Scheffczyk. 2010. FrameNet II: 
Extended Theory and Practice. Web Publication: 
framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/book. 

I. A. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake, and D. 
Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions: A pain in 
the neck for NLP. In Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Text Processing 
and Computational Linguistics (CICLing-2002), 
Berlin: Springer, pp.1-15. 

B. Salehi, P. Cook, and T. Baldwin. 2015. A Word 
Embedding Approach to Predicting the Composi-
tionality of Multiword Expressions. In Proceedings 
of the Annual Conference of the North American 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Denver, 
pp. 977–983. 

A. Villavicencio, V. Kordoni, Y. Zhang, M. Idiart, 
and C. Ramisch. 2007. Validation and evaluation 
of automatically acquired multiword expressions 
for grammar engineering. In Proceedings of the 
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing and Computational 
Natural Language Learning, pp. 1034–1043, Pra-
gue: ACL. 

 

77


