



















































The Naming Sharing Structure and its Cognitive Meaning in Chinese and English


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Semantics-Driven Machine Translation, pages 13–21,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

The Naming Sharing Structure and its Cognitive Meaning                       

in Chinese and English

 

 

 
Shili Ge, Rou Song  

Guangdong Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Research & Service,  

Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China 510420 

 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This research puts forward two concepts, the 

Naming Sharing Structure (NSS) and the 

Naming-Telling clause (NT clause). By trans-

forming linear text into a plane structure, we 

discovered five construction patterns of NT 

clause for the NSS. The constructions of NT 

clauses are order-preserving, non-

transgressive, and syntactically well-formed. 

These features of NT clause can be explained 

from the point of view of cognition. 

1 NT Clause and Naming Sharing Struc-
ture 

Indo-European languages are verb centered in syn-

tactical and semantic analysis, and are analyzed in-

to SVO or verb argument structure (e.g. Pollard & 

Sag 1994, Dalrymple 2001, and Carnie 2013). This 

approach is not as suitable to Chinese since many 

Chinese clauses are subject- or verb-less. Moreo-

ver, basically many Chinese verbs can also func-

tion as nouns (Shen, 2013). On the other hand, 

Chinese is a topical language, so it is more conven-

ient to analyze Chinese clauses from the perspec-

tive of a topic-comment structure. Topic refers 

here to the similar concept as used in Systemic 

Functional Grammar (SFL; Halliday, 1994), but 

“subject”, the traditional term, is also used together 

with a few adverbial and predicative components, 

so the concept of topic used here is more general. 

We refer to this type of topic as a ’naming‘. In 

combination, a naming (i.e. a reference) and a ‘tell-

ing’, which predicates or explains the naming, 

comprise an NT clause. When more than one tell-

ing shares the same naming, these NT clauses ac-

tually form a naming-centered syntactical structure, 

which referred to as Naming Sharing Structure 

(NSS). The NSS is distinctively different from 

verb-centered structure. This study is aimed at dis-

covering the structural patterns of NSS and dis-

cusses its cognitive meaning and applicability. 

The two-dimensional schema of NSS is illus-

trated in Section 2, and the shape of the schema 

can intuitively show the formal properties of NSS. 

In Section 3 and 4, examples of NSS in Chinese 

and English texts are illustrated respectively, and 

their patterns of constructing NT clauses are pre-

sented. The cognitive meaning of NSS is discussed 

in Section 5 and a conclusion offered in section 6. 

2 The Newline-Indent Schema and the 
Naming Sharing Structure 

Example 1 (Qian Zhongshu Fortress Besieged) 

高松年发奋办公，夙夜匪懈，精明得真是睡
觉还睁着眼睛，戴着眼镜，做梦都不含糊的。

摇篮也挑选得很好，在平成县乡下一个本地财

主家的花园里，面溪背山。 
Translation:  

Kao Sung-nien worked furiously day and night 

without rest. He was so keen he literally slept with 

his eyes wide open and his glasses on, so that he 

was never lazy even in his dreams. The cradle had 

been very well chosen. It was the garden of a local 

millionaire, in the countryside of the P'ing-ch'eng 

district; it faced a stream with mountains in the 

13



 
 
 

 

background. (Translated by Jeanne Kelly and Na-

than K. Mao, 2003) 

This example includes the eight punctuation 

clauses c1-c8. A punctuation clause (P-clause) is a 

text segment which is separated from the surround-

ing context by a comma, semicolon, period, ex-

clamation mark, or question mark (See Song, 

2013). All the P-clauses in this ex-ample, except 

for the first one, share components from their pre-

vious P-clauses to make sense. Following each 

punctuation mark, a carriage-return and newline 

mark is inserted, so that every P-clause takes up 

one line. Then the clause is indented right after its 

shared components. The left schema in Figure 1 is 

called Newline-Indent Schema (NIS). It transforms 

linear text into two dimensional plane structure 

which shows intuitionally the components in the 

previous context of a P-clause that should be sup-

plemented at the beginning of the P-clause. 

 

 
Figure 1:  The Chinese Naming Sharing Structure and NT Clause illustrated with NIS. 

 

In the right of Figure 1, the supplemented result 

of every P-clause is listed. They are complete nam-

ing-telling structures, referred to as NT clauses. 

3 Chinese NSS and patterns constructing 
NT clauses  

3.1 Stack Pattern 
 

In example 1, the pattern in which NT clauses are 

constructed is called Stack Pattern, since the left 

end of every line is treated as the stack bottom and 

the right end as the stack top, and the construction 

of NT clause is exactly a process of pop and push 

of a stack as shown in Figure 2. 

 
Figure 2:  An iterating process of NT Clause constructed by Stack Pattern. 

 

 

 

14



 
 
 

 

3.2 Back Position Pattern 

Example 2 (Zhang Xianliang Geezer Xing and his 

dog) 

户口不迁来，再没有个娃娃，女人迟早得回

老家， 
Translation: 

Her Hukou is not official reregistered, and with 

no children, the woman will go back hometown 

sooner or later, 
 

 
Figure 3:  Back Position Pattern of Chinese. 

 

In this example, the first two P-clauses are both 

lack of the subject “女人”(woman), which ap-
pears at the beginning of the third P-clause. In or-

der to construct NT clauses of these two P-clauses, 

“女人”(woman) has to be supplemented based 

on the later context. Hence, the pattern is named 

Back Position Pattern. 

3.3 New Branch Pattern 

Example 3 (Qian Zhongshu Fortress Besieged) 

他把带到银行里偷空看的书翻开，每个字都
认识，没一句有意义。听见外面跑堂招呼客人

的声音，心就直提上来。 
Translation: 

He opened the book he had brought to the bank 

to read during his spare time but not a single sen-

tence made any sense. When he heard the waiter 

greeting a customer outside, his heart fluttered. 

(Translated by Jeanne Kelly and Nathan K. Mao, 

2003) 
 

 
Figure 4:  New Branch Pattern of Chinese. 

 

Both P-clause 2 and 3 in the examples lack the 

naming “带到银行里偷看的书”(the book he 
had brought to the bank to read during his spare 

time), instead of “他把带到银行里偷看的书”
(He does the book he had brought to the bank to 

read during his spare time). This is like placing a 

sluice between “他把”(He does) and “带到银

行里偷看的书”(the book he had brought to the 
bank to read during his spare time) (the sluice is 

represented with mark ‖ ). The components on 
the left of the sluice is not in the naming while on 

the right is the naming for the following two P-

clauses. This naming is like a new branch growing 

on a tree trunk, hence we refer to it as New Branch, 

and the pattern New Branch Pattern. 

3.4 Influx Pattern 

Example 4 (Qian Zhongshu Fortress Besieged) 

他们都是上了年纪，有孩子的人， 
Translation: 

They’re older and have kids. (Translated by 

Jeanne Kelly and Nathan K. Mao, 2003) 
 

 
Figure 5:  Influx Pattern of Chinese. 

 

In this example, not only the second P-clause 

lacks a naming in its beginning, but the first P-

clause also lacks an ending“的人”(person) from 
the tail of the second P-clause should follow it. 

This is just like that the utterance flow starts from 

“他们都是”(They all are) into two tributaries 

“上了年纪”(older) and “有小孩子” (have 

kids), then the two tributaries flow to “的人”
(person). Hence we name the pattern Influx Pattern. 

3.5 Enclosed Chunk Pattern 

The previous patterns are based on geometrical 

structure. When mentioning direct quotation, the 

construction of NT clause needs another kind of 

pattern to distinguish different layers of utterance. 

Example 5 (Jin Yong The Deer and the Caul-

dron) 

查伊璜心想：“我连吴六奇的名字也没听见
过，为何送礼于我？” 当下沉吟不语。 

Translation: 

“I've never even heard this man's name before,” 

Zha thought. “Whatever should he be sending me 

a present for?” He remained rapt in thought and 

made no response. （Translated and edited by 

John Minford, 1999） 

15



 
 
 

 

 
Figure 6:  Enclosed Chunk Pattern of Chinese. 

 

This example contains a direct quotation de-

scribing psychological activity. Its inside (indicat-

ed by the dotted line frame) and outside segments 

each form a NSS, respectively. And each of NSS 

constructs NT clauses according to its own pattern. 

Since their internal structure is enclosed from their 

outside contexts, we refer to this pattern as the En-

closed Chunk Pattern. 

We annotated NSS for texts with different Chi-

nese styles. Each text is annotated from beginning 

to end, resulting in about 40,000 NT clauses in to-

tal. We found that the five patterns of NT clause 

construction account for 97% of P-clause in Chi-

nese texts. 

4 The English NSS and the patterns of 
constructing NT clauses  

4.1 English NT Clauses 

Some English sentence (texts separated by period,  

exclamation mark, question mark) are larger, and 

of more complex structures than Chinese, but they 

still can be separated into several NT clauses, 

based on relationship of naming and telling. The 

English NT clause can be classified into an SV 

clause – consisting of subject and predicate –, and 

a non-SV clause, where the latter may consist of 

the following: 

 antecedent+relative clause 

 NP+ post-modifying nonfinite verb phrase 
(past participle phrase, present participle 

phrase and infinitive phrase) 

 NP+ post-modifying declarative preposi-
tion phrase 

 NP+ post-modifying adjective phrase 

 NP+ post-modifying noun phrase (apposi-
tion and other explanatory NP) 

 Verbal object + verbal complement 
Example 6 (Wall Street Journal) 

Documents filed with the Securities and Ex-

change Commission on the pending spinoff dis-

closed that Cray Research Inc. will withdraw the 

almost $ 100 million in financing it is providing 

the new firm if Mr. Cray leaves or if the product-

design project he heads is scrapped .  

The relationship of naming-telling in this long 

sentence can be shown in the following NIS: 

 

 
Figure 7:  Naming Sharing Structure in English text. 

 

In Example 6, the parts enclosed in the black 

brackets, the object clause of “disclose”, is an en-

closed chunk. The token on the right side of double 

slash, which is at the right end of each line, repre-

sents the type of this line, which is naming, telling, 

or NT clause. They stand for: 

 NNM：NP as naming 

 ED：past participle phrase as telling 

 PP：preposition phrase as telling 

 PRD： the predicate in SV structure as telling 

 PRD-： the predicate in SV structure as tell-
ing, but lacks object clause  

 SV：SV structure as NT clause 

 WO：relative clause as telling，antecedent 
as object of the relative clause 

All the above categories of telling can be sup-

plemented by naming just as in Chinese, which 

come exactly from the line right above: 

16



 
 
 

 

  

 
Figure 8:  NT clauses in English text. 

 

4.2 Patterns constructing the English NT 
clause  

Using the texts from the Wall Street Journal, we 

have built an English corpus containing nearly 

2,000 English sentences, which were separated into 

about 6,000 NT clauses. These NT clauses are con-

structed through the Stack Pattern, the Back Posi-

tion Pattern, the New Branch Pattern, the Influx 

Pattern, and the Enclosed Chunk Pattern. These 

five patterns account for more than 99% of the NT 

clauses in the corpus. In Figure 8, each line is an 

NT clause, except that line 1 and line 8 are only 

namings. Line 5 and line 7 are SV type of NT 

clauses; line 2, line 3, line 4, and line 10 are con-

structed according to the Stack Pattern, whereas 

line 6 and line 9 to the New Branch Pattern; from 

line 5 to 10, there is an Enclosed Chunk. In the fol-

lowing examples, NT clauses constructed through 

the Back Position Pattern and the Influx Pattern are 

illustrated. 

Example 7 (Wall Street Journal) 

As being so fragile and minute, they will require 

special robotic handling equipment . 

The naming-telling relationship in this text can 

be illustrated by the NIS: 
 

 
Figure 9:  The Back Position Pattern in English. 

 

In this figure, the preposition phrase in line 1 

should take the subject “they” of line 2 as its nam-

ing. 

Example 8 (Wall Street Journal) 

Workers dumped large burlap sacks of the im-

ported material into a huge bin, poured in cotton 

and acetate fibers and mechanically mixed the dry 

fibers in a process used to make filters. 

The naming-telling relationship in this text can 

be illustrated by NIS: 

 

 
Figure 10:  The Influx Pattern in English. 

 

17



 
 
 

 

Line 1 and line 2 need to share the same tail of 

telling in line 3 “in a process used to make filters”, 

thus the NT clause can be constructed by Influx 

Pattern, which is to connect the tail of the line 3 to 

the end of line 1 and line 2. At the same time, the 

last two lines need a supplementary naming from 

line 1‘s subject. 

In our English corpus, 99% of NT clauses can 

be constructed by these five patterns. 

5 The nature of the NT clause in Chinese 
and English texts and the explanation 

from a cognitive perspective  

The following statistics are from: 

 Chinese corpus, 187 long texts with 30,963 
NT clauses; 

 English corpus, 93 short texts with 4,819 NT 
clauses. 

Except for the types of NT clauses listed above, 

these NT clauses include a few subject ellipsis 

clause and incompletable clauses. Subject ellipsis 

clauses can be supplemented with a subject, while 

for an incompletable clause, it is impossible to 

supplement missing components. 

5.1 Broad Coverage  

Within this study, the Chinese and English texts 

can be covered by NT clauses, i.e. a text can be 

dissected into sequences of NT clauses, each word 

belongs to at least one NT clause, and a text is the 

combination of NT clauses. In the Chinese corpus, 

there are 2,044 incompletable clauses, 547 subject 

ellipsis clauses, with a total of 2,591 clauses, 

which accounts to 8.3% of the NT clauses; in the 

English corpus, there are 32 incompletable clauses, 

accounting to 0.66% of NT clauses, without any 

subject ellipsis clauses.  

From a cognitive perspective, naming in an NT 

clause is a target of cognition, while telling is the 

content of cognition. Therefore, the NT clause is a 

basic cognition unit. The fact that NT clauses cov-

er the whole text means that complex cognition 

forms are made up of basic cognition forms. 

5.2 Order-preservation  

The original texts in both the Chinese and the Eng-

lish corpus are one-dimensional structures. The 

NIS is an intermediate form of dissecting original 

texts into NT clauses, and has a two-dimensional 

structure. This process keeps the word sequence in 

the original text intact. To be more specific, for 

any two words, such as A and B, if A is to the left 

of B in the original text, then in the NIS, A is either 

to the left of B or above B, or vice versa. 

Both the speech stream and text stream of natu-

ral language are linear. The words enter short-term 

memory of the human brain by their original order. 

Long-distance adjustment of word order is very 

hard because the capacity of the short-term 

memory is very limited. Order-preservation suits 

the limitations of brain cognition. 

5.3 Non-transgressiveness   

Naming is topic by and large, and one naming can 

be explained by several tellings. Under most cir-

cumstances, if one new naming-telling relationship 

occurs, replacing the old naming-telling relation-

ship, then the component in the old naming-telling 

relationship cannot be shared as a naming by an-

other telling following the new relationship. In an-

other words, the component in the old naming-

telling relationship cannot build another naming-

telling relationship which trespasses on the new 

naming-telling relationship. 

It is acceptable to say “他衣服笔挺，面料很

讲究，鼻梁上架着一副金丝眼镜。” (His 
clothes are immaculate, and made of fine material, 

with a pair of gold-framed glasses resting on the 

ridge of his nose.), but not “他衣服笔挺，鼻梁

上架着一副金丝眼镜，面料很讲究。”  (His 
clothes are immaculate, with a pair of gold-framed 

glasses resting on the ridge of his nose, made of 

high fine material.） This is because the naming 

“衣服” (clothes) in the first line cannot trespass 

on the naming-telling relationship of the “鼻梁上” 
(on the ridge of his nose) as a naming. Therefore, 

the naming “衣服”(clothes) cannot be shared by 
the third P-clause in the second example. 

 

 
Figure 11:  The non-transgressiveness of naming-telling rela-

tionship in Chinese. 
 

Naming-telling relationship in English has the 

same property. 

18



 
 
 

 

Example 9 (by the researcher) 

It is acceptable to say “John has a son working 

in China, and Mary has a daughter studying in the 

USA.”, but it is not acceptable to say “John has a 

son, and Mary has a daughter studying in the USA, 

working in China.” This is because the naming “a 

son” cannot trespass the naming-telling relation-

ship of the naming “Mary” and “daughter” to be 

shared by “working in China”. 
 

 
Figure 12:  The non-transgressiveness of naming-telling rela-

tionship in English. 
 

In our corpus of 30,963 Chinese NT clauses, 

there are 83 instances of trespassing, which ac-

counts to 0.3%; 4,819 English NT clauses show 

only 4 instances of trespassing, accounting to 0.1%. 

99% of both Chinese and English NT clauses do 

not trespass. For the few instances of trespassing 

NT clauses, they offer pragmatic background in-

formation. In example 10, the naming in line 1 and 

the telling in line 5 form a NT clause. This NT 

clause trespasses on the NT clause in line 4 which 

expresses the reason of the line 3. 

Example 10 (Wall Street Journal) 
 

 
Figure 13:  An example of trespassing on the naming-telling 

relationship. 
 

The cognitive mechanism of the brain needs to 

process all tellings of a naming before going on to 

process the next naming and its tellings, so it is not 

likely for several tellings of different namings be 

processed all at the same time. The non-

transgressiveness of the naming-telling relationship 

suits such constraint on cognition. 

5.4 Syntactic well-formedness  

Both in the Chinese or the English corpus, a part of 

NT clauses constitutes a grammatical SV structure, 

i.e., they are syntactically well-formed, and, while 

another part of the NT clauses is not syntactically 

well-formed. 

In our corpus, 1,963 Chinese NT clauses (out of 

30,963) are not syntactically well-formed, which 

makes up for 6.3%; while 2,463 English NT claus-

es (out of 4,819) are not syntactically well-formed, 

which accounts for 51.1%. 

A part of the Chinese NT clauses is not syntacti-

cally well-formed, because when a naming is con-

nected with its one telling sharing it and constructs 

an NT clause, the punctuation between them is dis-

carded, causing some semantic relationship mark-

ers to be missing or redundant. Adding or deleting 

such markers can ensure the syntactical well-

formedness. For instance, in this sentence “邯郸

市在河北省南部，京广铁路穿城而过。” 
(Handan is in the south of Hebei province, Jing-

Guang railway passes through the city), the second 

P-clause corresponds to the NT clause “邯郸市京

广铁路穿城而过” (Handan Jing-Guang railway 
passes through the city). The semantic relationship 

between “邯郸市” (Handan) and “京广铁路” 
(Jing-Guang railway) is not clear, resulting in an 

awkward clause. We can add “有” (in…there is) 
to express existential meaning, thus forming the 

clause “邯郸市有京广铁路穿城而过” (In Han-
dan, there is the Jing-Guang railway passing 

through the city), which is syntactically correct. 

Since Chinese grammatical rules are not as strict as 

English ones, Chinese NT clauses have a lower ra-

tio of ungrammaticality. 

In English, the syntactical well-formedness 

problem in NT clauses is also due to the connec-

tion of naming and telling which may result in the 

missing and redundancy of some connective com-

ponent. For example, if the telling is a nonrestric-

tive verb phrase, it usually needs to add an auxilia-

ry “be” to ensure syntacticality. Since English is 

more rule-governed than Chinese, English has far 

higher proportion of syntacticality problems. 

Even though both Chinese and English NT 

clauses may exhibit problems in syntactical well-

formedness, based on the above analysis, these 

problems can be solved by adding or deleting some 

connective component in a finite range. Therefore, 

all English and Chinese NT clause are syntactical 

by and large. By this analysis, in human cognition, 

an NT clause can be processed simply as a com-

19



 
 
 

 

mon clause, this attribute meeting the feasibility of 

NT clause cognition. 

5.5 Distribution of NT clause construction 
patterns  

In section 3 and 4, we listed five patterns of the NT 

clause for both Chinese and English. Among them, 

the Enclosed Chunk Pattern represents relation be-

tween two groups of NT clauses. Therefore, the 

NT clause can be classified into following six cat-

egories: the original SV structure, constructed with 

a Stack Pattern, Back Position Pattern, New 

Branch Pattern, or Influx Pattern, and others. 

According to statistics in our corpus, the num-

bers and the proportions of the six categories in 

Chinese and English are following: 
 

Pattern 
Chinese English 

No. Per.(%) No. Per.(%) 

Original 11970 38.70 2420 50.20 

Stack 16449 53.10 515 10.70 

Back 

Position 
162 0.50 145 3.00 

New Branch 1056 3.40 1723 35.80 

Influx 650 2.10 13 0.30 

Other 676 2.20 3 0.10 

NT clause total 30963 100 4819 100 

Table 1:  The distribution of NT clause constructing pat-

terns in Chinese and English. 

 

All the NT clauses in the category of “other” are 

instances of ellipsis which cannot be covered by 

our patterns. Among the 676 Chinese NT clauses, 

547 are subjectless, and 129 are without middle 

parts; in English, three instances are have no mid-

dle parts. All these ellipses are related to specific 

patterns that are not discussed further in the present 

study. 

For both Chinese and English, there are only a 

few instances of “other” categories. The Stack Pat-

tern, Back Position Pattern, New Branch Pattern 

and Influx Pattern cover the majority of non-

original SV structure NT clauses. Thus, the four 

patterns are essential for the NT clause. Section 3 

of this study presents the NT clause construction 

mechanism of the Stack Pattern. This pattern can 

be assumed as one kind of human cognition mech-

anism. In Chinese, it is not uncommon that one 

naming goes with dozens of tellings. A naming can 

be connected with a telling which follows after 

dozens of P-clauses. This phenomenon is surpris-

ing, considering that the human brain has only 7±2 

units of short term memory. However, if the hu-

man brain does follow the Stack Pattern to process, 

old tellings are discarded constantly, and the nam-

ing is always stored in our short term memory to 

form a connection with the telling, then this phe-

nomenon is no longer strange. Therefore, the Stack 

Pattern is a reasonable explanation of cognitive 

brain function for the NT clause. Similarly, the 

Back Position Pattern, New Branch Pattern and In-

flux Pattern can be explained in ways which are 

not covered in detail in this study. 

As shown in the above table, both the Back Po-

sition Pattern and Influx Pattern have a low fre-

quency in either corpus. Considering this from a 

cognitive perspective, the Back Position Pattern 

cannot complete the cognition of the NT clause 

right after the occurrence of a telling; instead, the 

telling has to be stored temporarily to await its 

naming. At the same time, in the Influx Pattern, the 

front part of the telling occur first, and this part al-

so has to be stored first to await its later part. These 

two processing patterns of NT clauses both pose 

high demands on time and space, and therefore 

their low frequency in the corpora is perhaps una-

voidable. 

As shown in the table, both the Chinese and 

English NT clause demonstrate different frequen-

cies for these four patterns. The Chinese NT clause 

shows higher proportions for the Stack Pattern and 

the Influx Pattern than English, while the New 

Branch Pattern and the Back Position Pattern are 

lower than in English. This frequency difference is 

attributed to grammatical difference. Taking the 

Stack Pattern as an example, the Chinese expres-

sion usually moves from bigger concepts to small-

er concepts, which is suitable to the progressively 

layered structure of the Stack Pattern. In contrast, 

the English expression moves from smaller con-

cepts to bigger concepts, which is not suitable for 

the Stack Pattern. To take another example, for the 

New Branch Pattern, the English NT clause takes 

relative clause, preposition phrase or non-

restrictive verbal phrase as its telling, and usually 

they have obvious markers causing less cognitive 

burden on the brain; however, Chinese does not 

have similar markers, so in most cases, it has to re-

20



 
 
 

 

ly on semantic coordination to distinguish its 

meaning, and thus exhibits a heavier cognitive load. 

6 Conclusion 

This study puts forward the concepts of NT clause, 

dividing linear texts into a two-dimensional plane 

structure, and drawing up five patterns for con-

structing the NT clause. Through the annotation of 

corpus, this study discovered that both Chinese and 

English texts are formed through combinations of 

NT clauses according to these five patterns. The 

construction of the NT clause is order-preserving, 

non-transgressive, and syntactically well-formed. 

These features of the NT clause can be explained 

by appealing to cognitive mechanisms. 

In the fields of linguistics and computational 

linguistics, the theories and methods of clause 

complex, topic and zero anaphora are related to our 

study. The kernel of our contribution is the discov-

ery of formal patterns for constructing the NT 

clause. Based on these patterns, a syntactic plat-

form suiting to both Chinese and English can be 

built. On the platform the MT of long sentences is 

decomposed to three steps: NT clause parsing in 

source language, translation of NT clauses, and as-

sembling the NT clauses in target language. These 

steps are independent of each other. In this proce-

dure, the first and third steps involve only one lan-

guage and only the second step involves two lan-

guages. Moreover, the NT clauses handled in the 

second step have smaller scale and simpler struc-

tures than long sentence, so that they may be trans-

lated easier. This method, expected to ease the dif-

ficulties of long sentences in MT, will be discussed 

in another paper. 

Acknowledgments 

This research is sponsored by fund of Center for 

Translation Studies, Guangdong University of For-

eign Studies (CTS2014-13) and supported by In-

novative School Project in Higher Education of 

Guangdong, China (GWTP-LH-2015-10) and Na-

tional Natural Science Foundation of China 

(61171129). 

References  

Carnie, Andrew. 2013. Syntax: A Generative Introduc-

tion, 3rd ed. Blackwell Publishing Ltd., West Sussex. 

Dalrymple, Mary. 2001. Lexical Functional Grammar, 

volume 34 of Syntax and Semantics. Academic Press, 

New York. 

Halliday, M.A.K. 1994. Introduction to Functional 

Grammar, 2nd ed. Edward Arnold, London. 

Pollard, Carl & Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-driven phrase 

structure grammar. University of Chicago Press, 

Chicago. 

Shen, Jiaxuan. 2013. Can predicates be nominals? For-

eign Studies, 2013, 1(1): 1-13. 

Song, Rou. 2013. Stream model of Generalized Topic 

Structure in Chinese text. Studies of the Chinese 

Language, 2013(6): 483-494. 

 

 

21


