



















































A Discourse-Annotated Corpus of Conjoined VPs


Proceedings of LAW X – The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 22–31,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Discourse-Annotated Corpus of Conjoined VPs

Bonnie Webber* Rashmi Prasad† Alan Lee] Aravind Joshi]
*University of Edinburgh †University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee ]University of Pennsylvania

Edinburgh UK Milwaukee WI Philadelphia PA
bonnie.webber@ed.ac.uk prasadr@uwm.edu [aleewk, joshi]@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

English grammars indicate a variety of re-
lations holding between conjoined VPs.
VPs conjoined by and evince such senses
as Result, Temporal Sequence and Con-
cession. Although all these senses are
ones associated with discourse relations,
conjoined VPs have not been fully in-
cluded in discourse annotation. Because
of the value of discourse-annotated cor-
pora for developing approaches to auto-
mated sense recognition, we have added
their annotation to the Penn Discourse
TreeBank. This paper describes how to-
kens were identified; how the process of
span and sense annotation was modified
and extended in order to keep the annota-
tion of intra-sentential multi-clausal struc-
tures consistent with the rest of the corpus;
and what the resulting corpus looks like,
in terms of token frequency and common
sense patterns.

1 Introduction

As frequently noted, discourse relations can hold
within a sentence (i.e., intra-sententially) as well
between larger units of text. Interest in automat-
ically recognizing intra-sentential discourse rela-
tions (Joty et al., 2015) has recently grown e.g. to
support Statistical Machine Translation (Guzmán

et al., 2014) or Question Answering (Prasad and
Joshi, 2008; Mannem et al., 2010). We have
therefore started to expand the annotation of intra-
sentential discourse relations in the Penn Dis-
course TreeBank (Prasad et al., 2008; Prasad et
al., 2014), starting with conjoined VPs.

According to English grammar (Huddleston and
Pullum, 2002), conjoined VPs can have senses
other than simply Conjunction (and), Disjunc-
tion (or), and Contrast (but). Huddleson & Pul-
lum note that X and Y may, for example, convey:

• Consequence (X and therefore Y), as in
(1) Scopes was convicted and fined $100

. . . [wsj 0946]

• Temporal Sequence (X and then Y), as in
(2) Tripoli says Rome kidnapped 5,000 Libyans and

deported them as forced labor. [wsj 0990]

• Concession (despite X, Y), as in
(3) Blacks and Hispanics currently make up 38% of

the city’s population and hold only 25% of the
seats on the council. [wsj 1137]

• Temporal Inclusion (X while Y), as in
(4) . . . the government can ensure the same flow

of resources and reduce the current deficit.
[wsj 1131]

Although all of these are senses usually asso-
ciated with discourse relations, we have found
only one corpus in which conjoined VPs have

22



been fully treated as a locus of discourse coher-
ence. This is a ∼53K-word corpus of home re-
pair instructions (Subba and Di Eugenio, 2009)
that was annotated according to guidelines in (Kim
and Eugenio, 2006). The corpus contains ∼540
conjoined verb phrases and conjoined verbs an-
notated with either generic senses such as Gen-
eral:Specific, Comparison, Restatement, etc. or
senses specific to the domain of instructions, such
as Criterion:act and Criterion:wrong-act (de-
pending on whether the specified action is appro-
priate or sub-optimal if the criterion holds). In fu-
ture work, we will consider this sense annotation
in more depth.

With respect to the RST Corpus (Carlson et al.,
2003), its annotation guidelines1 call for the seg-
mentation of some but not all coordinated VPs into
separate EDUs (Section 2.5.2), with only those
segmented into EDUs being annotated with RST
relations. With respect to the 2007 SDRT corpus,
its annotation manual2 specifies that coordinated
VPs are only treated as separate discourse seg-
ments “when they either include a discourse par-
ticle or contain discourse structure within (at least
one of) the coordinated constituents”.

Because of the value of corpora annotated for
discourse coherence for developing approaches to
automated sense recognition, we decided to ex-
pand the Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB2) to
include discourse relations associated with con-
joined VPs and to package up these new annota-
tions, along with some related annotation already
in the PDTB2 (see below), for early release of
a conjoined VP sub-corpus. This paper thus de-
scribes how we identified tokens to be included in
the sub-corpus (Section 2); how we modified and
extended the process of span and sense annotation
used in the PDTB2 in order to produce annotation
of intra-sentential multi-clausal structures that was
consistent with the rest of the PDTB2 (Sections 3–
4); and what the resulting sub-corpus looks like, in
terms of inter-annotator agreement prior to adjudi-
cation, and then final token frequency and com-
mon sense patterns after adjudication was com-
plete (Section 5).

1https://www.isi.edu/∼marcu/discourse/tagging-ref-
manual.pdf

2http://timeml.org/jamesp/annotation manual.pdf

2 Creating a Corpus of Conjoined VPs

2.1 Identifying Conjoined VPs
We took as our goal, to annotate every token in the
Penn Wall Street Journal (WSJ) corpus that was
analyzed as a conjoined VP in the Penn Treebank
syntactic annotation of the corpus.3 However, as
Maier and colleagues have noted (2012), coordi-
nation is not reliably annotated in the PTB (or any
other large treebank, for that matter). They note,
in particular, that punctuation used to separate ele-
ments of a conjoined structure is annotated no dif-
ferently than punctuation used for other purposes.
In response, they have developed an algorithm for
enhancing the annotation of punctuation used in
conjoined structures.

The two-step process we used for identifying
conjoined VPs did not make use of this algorithm
per se, but something similar, focussed on con-
joined VPs:

• Search the PTB parses for all sister VPs sep-
arated by a conjunction, conjunction phrase
(e.g. rather than) or punctuation, and an op-
tional adverbial.

• For each such pair of sisters, pre-annotate
the righthand VP as Arg2 of a potential dis-
course relation. If a conjunction or conjunc-
tion phrase appears between the two sister
VPs, the type of the token was taken to be
Explicit and the conjunction or conjunction
phrase was labelled as the connective. If the
sister VPs were separated by punctuation, the
token type was taken to be Implicit. Later,
during sense annotation (cf. Section 4), this
type could be changed to AltLex (alterna-
tive lexicalization), if the annotators identi-
fied material in either Arg1 or Arg2 that made
the insertion of an implicit connective seem
redundant. In some cases, Arg1 could be pre-
annotated as well.

This process of pre-annotation produced false pos-
itives and false negatives, as well as true positives,
all of which are informative with respect to under-
standing what the corpus contains.

2.1.1 False Positives (FPs)
FPs derive from two aspects of PTB analyses.
The first involves ambiguous punctuation, as al-

3The Penn WSJ Corpus comprises the texts underlying
both the Penn TreeBank (PTB) and the PDTB2.

23



ready noted (Maier et al., 2012), where VPs sepa-
rated by comma-punctuation are not actually con-
joined. The second involves tokens of argu-
ment/adjunct cluster coordination (Mouret, 2006;
Steedman, 1989; Steedman, 2000), also called
non-constituent conjunction, that are analyzed as
conjoined VPs in the Penn TreeBank, but whose
righthand conjunct lacks a verb, as in
(5) “I pay a lot to the farmer and five times the state salary

to my employees,” he says [wsj 1146]

where corresponding pairs of direct and indirect
objects of pay have been coordinated, and
(6) She adopted 12 of assorted races, naming them the

Rainbow Tribe, and driving her husband first to despair
and then to Argentina. [wsj 1327]

where corresponding pairs of adverb and PP have
been coordinated. Since they were relatively easy
to recognize manually, we decided to simply ex-
clude all such verbless VPs from the corpus.

2.1.2 False Negatives (FNs)
FNs comprise the ∼170 sequences that were ana-
lyzed in the Penn TreeBank as conjoined S-nodes
with null subjects. These were discovered after
completing the annotation of pre-annotated con-
joined VPs, when we turned our attention to intra-
sentential conjoined clauses. The tokens pre-
annotated for this task were sister S-nodes sepa-
rated by a conjunction, conjunction phrase (e.g.
rather than) or punctuation, and an optional ad-
verbial. Among the pre-annotated sister S-nodes
were ones with (co-indexed) null subjects, as was
the case with sentences such as the following:
(7) He joined the firm in 1963 and bought it from the

owners the next year. [wsj 0305]

(8) The company said its directors, management and
subsidiaries will remain long-term investors and
won’t tender any of their shares under the offer.
[wsj 0308]

(9) The NAM embraces efforts, which both the adminis-
tration and the medical profession have begun, to mea-
sure the effectiveness of medical treatments and then
to draft medical-practice guidelines. [wsj 0314]

Since these were incorrectly analyzed according
to the Penn TreeBank Guidelines (Marcus et al.,
1993) and do not actually differ from the tokens
already included in the corpus, we decided to in-
clude them.

On the other hand, we decided to exclude to-
kens containing conjoined verbs that should pos-
sibly have been analyzed as conjoined VPs, such
as exist and fight in

( (S (RB Then)
(NP-SBJ (-NONE- *) )
(VP
(VP (VB take)

(NP (DT the) (VBN expected) (NN return) ))
(CC and)
(VP (VB subtract)

(NP (CD one) (JJ standard) (NN deviation) )))
(. .) ))

Figure 1: PTB Parse Tree for Ex. 13, showing its
resemblence to the analysis of conjoined VPs

(10) The wonder is not that the resistance has failed to top-
ple the Kabul regime , but that it continues to exist and
fight at all. [wsj 2052]

We did not discover such tokens until late in the
annotation process, and we lacked the resources
to manually review them. It would be possible to
return in the future and find and annotate them.

2.1.3 True Positives (TPs)
TPs identified through this pre-annotation process
included conjoined tensed VPs (Ex. 11), conjoined
adjunct VPs (Ex. 12), and conjoined imperative
sentences (Exs. 13–14), which are parsed in the
Penn TreeBank as conjoined VPs (Figure 1).
(11) It employs 2,700 people and has annual revenue of

about $370 million. [wsj 0007]

(12) But many owners plan to practice frugality – crossing
out the old code and writing in the new one until their
stock runs out. [wsj 1270]

(13) Then take the expected return and subtract one stan-
dard deviation. [wsj 1564]

(14) Be careful boys; use good judgment. [wsj 0596]

2.2 Discourse Adverbials
As can be seen from the presence of then in Ex. 9,
conjoined VPs can themselves contain discourse
adverbials. As with all discourse adverbials, ones
that appear in Arg2 of a conjoined VP can link to
material elsewhere in the text, as in Ex. 15
(15) Separately, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commis-

sion turned down for now a request by Northeast seek-
ing approval of its possible purchase of PS of New
Hampshire. Northeast said it would refile its request
and still hopes for an expedited review by the FERC
. . . [wsj 0013]

While the discourse adverbial still shares its Arg2
with the conjoined VP, its Arg1 has been taken to
be the FERC turning down its request for approval
of its possible purchase of PS of New Hampshire,
which appears in the previous sentence.

Although such adverbials can link to material
in previous sentences, the far more common sit-
uation (occurring in 229/230 of the VP conjuncts

24



in the Penn Wall Street Journal Corpus that con-
tain discourse adverbials) is for such adverbials
to link with the first argument Arg1 of the con-
joined VP. When they do, they serve as an explicit
signal of one or more discourse relations holding
between the two arguments. Among the anno-
tated discourse adverbials from the PDTB2 found
in conjoined VPs are instead, still, then, etc. – e.g.,
(16) He could develop the beach through a trust, but instead

is trying to have his grandson become a naturalized
Mexican so his family gains direct control. [wsj 0300]

(17) This year, Mr. Wathen says the firm will be able to
service debt and still turn a modest profit [wsj 0305]

(18) In the engine department, several companies displayed
experimental models that within a decade could pro-
vide power equal to today’s engines and yet take up
only half the space, . . . [wsj 0956]

As such, we decided to add these tokens to the
conjoined VP sub-corpus, so that one would be
able to compare relations between conjoined VPs
signalled with an explicit discourse adverbial with
relations between them that were left implicit.

3 Labelling Arguments and their Spans

3.1 Changes to argument labelling
Early in the new annotation task, we realized that
if we strictly followed the conventions used ear-
lier in labelling arguments in the PDTB2, some
span labels would be inconsistent. Here we de-
scribe what we did to overcome the problem in a
way that would avoid any inconsistency.

Arguments were labelled in the PDTB2 accord-
ing to the following two-part convention.

• For spans linked by an explicit discourse con-
nective (called explicit relations), Arg2 was
the argument to which the connective was at-
tached syntactically, and the other was Arg1.
This allowed the arguments to subordinating
conjunctions to be labelled consistently, inde-
pendent of the order in which the arguments
appeared. The same was true for coordinat-
ing conjunctions, whose argument order is al-
ways the same, and for discourse adverbials,
whose Arg1 always precedes the adverbial,
even when Arg1 is embedded in Arg2, as in
(19) A farmer who was kicked by his donkey would

nevertheless not take revenge.

• For spans linked by adjacency (called im-
plicit discourse relations), Arg1 was always
the first (lefthand) span and Arg2, the second
(righthand) span.

Blindly applying these same conventions intra-
sententially produced inconsistent labelling be-
cause of (1) variability in where an explicit con-
nectives can attach within a sentence; and (2) the
ability of marked syntax to replace explicit con-
nectives.

The first problem can be illustrated with paired
connectives like not only . . . but also. Here, both
members of the pair may be present (Ex. 20), or
just one or the other (Ex. 21 and Ex. 22):
(20) Japan not only outstrips the U.S. in investment flows

but also outranks it in trade with most Southeast Asian
countries . . . [wsj 0043]

(21) The hacker was pawing over the Berkeley files but also
using Berkeley and other easily accessible computers
as stepping stones . . . [wsj 0257]

(22) Not only did Mr. Ortega’s comments come in the
midst of what was intended as a showcase for the re-
gion, it came as Nicaragua is under special interna-
tional scrutiny . . . [wsj 0655]

A labelling convention that requires Arg2 to be
the argument to which the explicit connective at-
taches will choose a different argument for Arg2
in Ex. 21 than in Ex. 22, and an arbitrary argument
in the case of Ex 20, when semantically, the left-
hand argument is playing the same role in all three
cases, as is the righthand argument.

The second problem can be illustrated with
preposed auxiliaries, which signal that a Condi-
tional relation holds between the clause with the
preposed auxiliary (as antecedent) and the other
clause (as consequent). As with subordinating
clauses, the two clauses can appear in either order:
(23) Had the contest gone a full seven games, ABC

could have reaped an extra $10 million in ad sales
. . . [wsj 0443]

(24) . . . they probably would have gotten away with it, had
they not felt compelled to add Ms. Collins’s signature
tune, “Amazing Grace,” . . . [wsj 0207]

But since there is no explicit connective in either
clause, if position is used to label Arg1 and Arg2,
the result will again be inconsistent.

A solution that addresses both these issues,
while not requiring any change to existing labels
in the PDTB 2.0 is the following:

• The arguments to inter-sentential discourse
relations remain labelled by their position:
Arg1 is first (lefthand) argument and Arg2,
the second (righthand) argument.

• With intra-sentential coordinating structures,
the arguments are also labelled by their po-
sition: Arg1 is first argument and Arg2, the
second one.

25



• With intra-sentential subordinating struc-
tures, Arg1 and Arg2 are determined syntac-
tically. The subordinate structure is always
labelled Arg2, and the structure to which it is
subordinate is labelled Arg1.

3.2 Changes to span-labelling
In PDTB2 annotation, the arguments to relations
are text spans. But the text span(s) that make up an
argument are required to subsume at least one full
clause, including parts of the clause that might not
be relevant to the relation. While this continues to
be the guideline for annotating non-coordinating
constructions, for coordinating constructions, the
guideline has been changed such that annotators
are asked to annotate just the conjuncts, which in
the case of conjoined VPs is not a whole clause.
Thus, in Ex. 7, Arg1 subsumes only joined the firm
in 1963, and not the subject he. The same goes for
Ex. 11.

A second change involves relevance: Annota-
tors were told that material that contributes seman-
tically to both arguments of a conjoined VP should
be omitted, so that it is not taken to be specific to
one argument or the other. The result is that spans
in the corpus may not completely match the spans
of VPs in the Penn TreeBank. For example, in
(25) UAL . . . reversed course and plummeted in off-

exchange trading after the 5:00 p.m. EDT announce-
ment. [wsj 1305]

the PTB takes reversed course as being conjoined
with plummeted in off-exchange trading after the
5:00 p.m. EDT announcement, even though both
reversing course and plummeting happened in off-
exchange trading after the 5:00 p.m. EDT an-
nouncement. Recognizing this, the annotators
changed the second conjunct to plummeted.

Annotators were also told that the spans of both
arguments should be parallel — both bare in-
finitives, or to-infinitives, or tensed clauses, etc.
So in Ex. 9, since Arg2 is the to-infinitive then
to draft medical-practice guidelines, selected as
Arg1 would be the to-infinitive to measure the ef-
fectiveness of medical treatments.

Also common among conjoined VPs are attri-
bution phrases such as said and added in Ex. 26
and declare in Ex. 27. When annotating implicit
relations on conjoined VPs, annotators were told
to retain only those attributions that contribute to
the semantics of the relation (as in Ex. 27, where
the Purpose of declaring something a pesticide is
so that it can be pulled from the marketplace). In

Ex. 26, neither said nor added contribute to the
Concession relation that is taken to hold, so an-
notators omitted them from the spans of Arg1 and
Arg2.
(26) The company, based in San Francisco, said it had to

shut down a crude-oil pipeline in the Bay area to check
for leaks but added that its refinery in nearby Rich-
mond, Calif., was undamaged. [wsj 1884]

(27) Give the EPA more flexibility to declare a pesticide an
imminent hazard and pull it from the marketplace.
[wsj 0964]

The final thing to say here about attribution is that
where an annotator takes the same relation to hold
between attribution phrases as between content of
attribution, we ask that the relation be annotated
between the latter, indicating the minimal spans
that give rise to the particular relational sense.

4 Labelling Relation Senses

4.1 Changes to the Relation Hierarchy
We have extended and simplified the PDTB2 re-
lation hierarchy, producing a new PDTB3 rela-
tion hierarchy (Figure 2). Some of the changes
(such as restricting Level-3 relations to differences
in directionality, eliminating rare and/or difficult-
to-annotate senses, and replacing separate senses
with features that can be added to a given sense)
are meant to simplify annotation (Section 4.1.1).
Other changes are additions to the relation hierar-
chy motivated by the intra-sentential relations we
have been annotating, including ones associated
with conjoined VPs (Section 4.1.2).

4.1.1 Simplifying the relation hierarchy
Although the hierarchy retains the same four
Level-1 relations, relations at Level-3 now only
encode directionality and so only appear with
asymmetric Level-2 relations.4 Those Level-3 re-
lations in the PDTB2 that did not convey direc-
tionality were either moved to Level-2 — Substi-
tution (renamed from the PDTB2 Chosen Alter-
native) and Equivalence — or eliminated due to
their rarity or the difficulty they posed for anno-
tators — in particular, those under the Level-2 re-
lations of Contrast, Condition and Alternative
(now renamed Disjunction).

With respect to directionality, annotating ad-
ditional intra-sententential discourse relations has
called attention to asymmetric Level-2 relations

4A sense relation < is symmetric iff <(Arg1, Arg2) and
<(Arg2, Arg1) are semantically equivalent. If a relation is
not symmetric, it is asymmetric.

26



Figure 2: PDTB3 Relation Hierarchy. Only asymmetric relations are specified further at Level-3, to
capture the directionality of the arguments. Superscript symbols on Level-2 senses indicate features for
implicit beliefs (+/-β) and speech-acts (+/-ζ) that may or may not be associated with one of the defined
arguments of the relation. Features are shown on the relation in the table here only for clarity, but should
not be seen as a property of the relation, rather of the arguments.

whose arguments have been found to occur in ei-
ther order (rather than the single order assumed in
the PDTB2). In particular, the argument convey-
ing the condition in Condition relations can be ei-
ther Arg2 (as was the case throughout the PDTB2)
or Arg1 as in Ex. 28, while the argument convey-
ing the “chosen alternative” (now called “substi-
tute”) in Substitution relations can be either Arg2
(as was the case throughout the PDTB2) or Arg1,
as in Ex. 29. In the case of the rare relation called
Exception, it was not previously noticed that in
some of the tokens so annotated, the exception
appeared in Arg2, while in the rest, the excep-
tion appeared in Arg1. The difference is now sup-
ported with a distinct Level-3 type in each direc-
tion (Exs. 30–31).

(28) Arg1-as-cond: Call Jim Wright’s office in downtown
Fort Worth, Texas, these days and the receptionist
still answers the phone, ”Speaker Wright’s office.
[wsj 0909]

(29) Arg1-as-subst: ”The primary purpose of a railing is to
contain a vehicle and not to provide a scenic view,”
[wsj 0102]

(30) Arg1-as-excpt: Twenty-five years ago the poet Richard
Wilbur modernized this 17th-century comedy merely by
avoiding ”the zounds sort of thing,” as he wrote in
his introduction. Otherwise, the scene remained Ce-
limene’s house in 1666. [wsj 1936]

(31) Arg2-as-excpt: Boston Co. officials declined to com-
ment on Moodys action on the units financial perfor-
mance this year except to deny a published report
that outside accountants had discovered evidence of
significant accounting errors in the first three quar-
ters results. [wsj 1103]

Level-2 pragmatic relations have been removed
from the PDTB2 and replaced with features that
can be attached to a relation token to indicate
an inference of implicit belief (epistemic knowl-
edge) or of a speech act associated with argu-
ments, rather than with the relation itself. Fig-
ure 2 shows the relations for which these features
have so far been found to be warranted, based on
the empirical evidence found during annotation.
Ex. 32 shows an implicit Cause.Result relation
but one where the result Arg2 argument is the
(speaker’s/writer’s) belief that the deadline could
be extended. Arg2 is therefore annotated with a
+belief feature because the belief is implicit. Sim-
ilarly, Ex. 33 shows a Concession.Arg2-as-denier
relation, but what’s being denied (or cancelled) is
the speech act associated with Arg2, and this is
annotated as a feature on Arg2 because it is im-
plicit.
(32) That deadline has been extended once and Implicit=so

could be extended again. [wsj 2032]
(33) He spends his days sketching passers-by, or trying to.

[wsj 0039]

Also simplifying the PDTB2 hierarchy is re-
moval of the List relation, which does not appear
semantically distinguishable from Conjunction.
And the names of two asymmetric PDTB2 rela-
tions have been changed to bring out commonali-
ties. In particular, Restatement has been renamed
Level-of-detail, with its Specification and Gen-
eralization subtypes in the PDTB2 now just taken
to be directional variants renamed Arg2-as-detail

27



and Arg1-as-detail, respectively; and the sub-
types of Concession, opaquely called Contra-
expectation and Expectation, have been renamed
to reflect simply a difference in directionality:
Arg1-as-denier and Arg2-as-denier.

4.1.2 Augmenting the relation hierarchy
Additional senses found to be needed for an-
notating conjoined VPs include Manner under
Expansion (both Level-3 directions), and Nega-
tive Condition and Purpose under Contingency
(with both Level-3 directions for each). The new
symmetric Level-2 relation of Similarity (under
Comparison) was added because of its obvious
omission from the PDTB2 as the complement of
the symmetric relation Contrast.

Definitions and examples for these new rela-
tions are given in Table 1.

Note that the entire PDTB2 is being mapped to
senses in the revised relation hierarchy, not just the
conjoined VP sub-corpus. Most often, the map-
ping is simply 1:1. Where the mapping is 1:N
or M:N, manual review has been required, with
further adjudication to ensure both agreement and
consistency. When the PDTB3 is released to the
public in September 2017, we will record the fre-
quency with which each PDTB2 sense has been
replaced by a specific PDTB3 sense.

4.2 Sense labelling of conjoined VP tokens
The VPs presented to annotators were conjoined
either lexically or by punctuation. The annotators
were given guidelines for assigning sense relations
that depended on the particular configuration in-
volved — specifically:

1. An explicit conjunction can have a single
sense, which can be Conjunction (Ex. 34),
or something else (Ex. 35-36).
(34) The concept may be simple: Take a bunch

of loans, tie them up in one neat package,
and sell pieces of the package to investors.
(Expansion.Conjunction) [wsj 1635]

(35) These active suspension systems electronically
sense road conditions and adjust a car’s
ride (Contingency.Purpose.Arg2-as-goal)
[wsj 0956]

(36) Stocks closed higher in Hong Kong, Manila,
Singapore, Sydney and Wellington, but were
lower in Seoul. (Comparison.Contrast) [wsj
0231]

2. The arguments to an explicit conjunction can
also be linked by an additional relation, con-
veyed implicitly (Ex. 37-38) or by an ex-
plicit discourse adverbial. (Such adverbials

were taken to have been already annotated in
PDTB2.) To indicate an additional implicit
relation, annotators created a new annotation
token for the same two conjuncts, inserted an
appropriate implicit connective and labeled
it with the sense(s) they inferred. Argument
spans of the explicit and the implicit relation
were not required to be the same, so annota-
tors could adjust the spans of the new token
if needed.
(37) We’ve got to get out of the Detroit mentality and

Implicit=instead be part of the world mental-
ity,” declares Charles M. Jordan, GM’s vice pres-
ident for design . . . (Expansion.Conjunction,
Expansion.Substitution.Arg2-as-subst)
[wsj 0956]

(38) . . . Exxon Corp. built the plant
but Implicit=then closed it in 1985.
(Comparison.Concession.Arg2-as-denier,
Temporal.Asynchronous.Precedence)
[wsj 1748]

3. If inserting an implicit connective was per-
ceived as redundant, appropriate material in
Arg2 could be annotated as AltLex (Ex. 39),
as done elsewhere in the PDTB2 (Prasad et
al., 2010).
(39) His policies went beyond his control

and resulted . . . in riots and distur-
bances. (Expansion.Conjunction, Con-
tingency.Cause.Result) [wsj 0290]

The second guideline above points to a new fea-
ture of our discourse annotation: While multiple
relations were annotated in the PDTB2 as holding
between identical or overlapping argument spans,
all were associated with either multiple explicit
connectives or multiple inferred relations. What is
new in the annotation of conjoined VPs is the pos-
sibility of an explicit relation co-occurring with
ones that are inferred (implicit relations). We ex-
pect to identify more of these in other syntactic
contexts.

5 Corpus Characteristics

For annotation, the pre-annotated tokens were di-
vided into 25 batches. After a batch was anno-
tated by two annotators, inter-annotator agreement
was calculated (see below), and then adjudication
was carried out, for the annotators and authors to
reach agreement. Annotated tokens of discourse
adverbials in Arg2 of the conjoined VPs were im-
ported from the PDTB2 (Section 2.2), with sense
labels automatically updated to reflect the revised
relation hierarchy (Section 4) if there was a 1:1

28



Similarity: One or more similarities between Arg1 and
Arg2 are highlighted with respect to what each argument
predicates as a whole or to some entities it mentions.

. . ., the Straits Times index is up 24% this year, so investors
who bailed out generally did so profitably. Similarly, Kuala
Lumpur’s composite index yesterday ended 27.5% above
its 1988 close. [wsj 2230]

Negative Condition: One argument describes a situation
presented as unrealized (the antecedent or condition), which
if it doesn’t occur, would lead to the situation described by
the other argument (the consequent).

Arg1-as-negcond: In Singapore, a new law requires smok-
ers to put out their cigarettes before entering restaurants,
department stores and sports centers or face a $250 fine.
[wsj 0037]

Purpose: One argument presents an action that an agent un-
dertakes with the purpose (intention) of achieving the goal
conveyed by the other argument.

Arg1-as-goal: She ordered the foyer done in a different plaid
planting, and Implicit=for that purpose made the landscape
architects study a book on tartans. [wsj 0984]

Manner: The situation described by one argument presents
how (i.e., the manner in which) the situation described by
other argument has happened or is done.

Arg1-as-manner: He argued that program-trading by
roughly 15 big institutions is pushing around the markets and
Implicit=thereby scaring individual investors. [wsj 0987]

Table 1: New relations in PDTB3

mapping between a discontinued PDTB2 sense la-
bel and its corresponding new PDTB3 label. If
there wasn’t a 1:1 mapping, the sense label was
left empty and the annotation tool would flag the
token as requiring a new sense label. The span
annotations of each token were also modified to
accord with the new span guidelines (Section 3.2).

The corpus comprises 3372 conjoined VPs an-
notated with a single sense and 1261 annotated
with multiple senses. Each discourse relation is
recorded as an annotation token, with multi-sense
conjoined VPs recorded as either two linked an-
notation tokens (each with one or more senses) or
as a single annotation token with multiple senses.
In total, the corpus comprises 5894 annotation to-
kens.

Prior to adjudication, inter-annotator agreement
(IAA) on sense annotation (full agreement on one
or more senses) was 74%. Partial agreement on at
least one sense was 74.3%. IAA on both senses
and argument spans was 69.8%. Partial IAA on at
least one sense and span was 70.1%. Of the 658
sense disagreements, the most common involved
Contrast and Concession.Arg2-as-denier (127/658
=19.3%). We did not consider as disagreements,
cases where only one annotator reported an addi-
tional inferred sense: On review, the other annota-
tor acknowledged simply not noticing it.

5.1 Single-sense Conjoined VPs

Of the 3372 single-sense relations in the corpus,
2962 are lexically-conjoined VPs (2933 Explicit
conjunctions and 29 Explicit adverbials) and 410
are punctuation-conjoined VPs.

Among these single-sense relations, Expan-
sion.Conjunction is the most common sense, but
other senses occur fairly often as well, as shown in

Table 2 for Explicit conjunctions and Table 3 for
punctuation-conjoined relations.

The most common single-sense Explicit con-
nectives are and, but and or. While explicit and
has Expansion.Conjunction as its most common
sense, its senses still show the kind of variability
noted in Section 1, as shown in Table 4. The most
common Implicit connectives are and, then and or.
Also relatively frequent is the use of not as an Al-
tLex with the sense of Substitution, as in Ex. 29.

5.2 Multi-sense Conjoined VPs

As noted in Section 4.2, more than one sense may
hold between the arguments of a conjoined VP, ei-
ther through inference or through the presence of
an explicit discourse adverbial in Arg2.

The corpus contains 214 Explicit adverbials
linked to an Explicit conjunction, sharing their ar-
guments. Table 5 shows the distribution of these
Explicit conjunction+adverbial pairs and Table 6
their associated sense pairings.

Annotators also inferred multiple senses on
conjoined VPs in the absence of an explicit ad-
verbial. In most cases, such inferences are anno-
tated either as a separate Implicit or AltLex tokens
linked to a token containing the Explicit conjunc-
tion, while multiple senses could also be recorded
on a single annotation token. Annotators inferred
53 different Implicit connectives or AltLex text
spans in these cases, the most common being then,
therefore/as a result, thereby and instead. There
are 1047 such multi-sense conjoined VPs in the
corpus, with the main sense pairings shown in Ta-
ble 7.

In total, the corpus contains 1261 multi-sense
conjoined VPs. In most cases, these multi-sense
relations are annotated via the linking of two or

29



Sense Frequency
Expansion.Conjunction 2113
Comparison.Concession.Arg2-as-denier 320
Expansion.Disjunction 219
Contingency.Purpose.Arg2-as-goal 106
Comparison.Contrast 93
OTHER 82
TOTAL 2933

Table 2: Sense distribution of single-sense
lexically-conjoined conjunctions

Sense Frequency
Expansion.Conjunction 290
Temporal.Asynchronous.Precedence 51
Expansion.Substitution.Arg2-as-subst 14
Expansion.Disjunction 14
Expansion.Equivalence 12
OTHER 29
TOTAL 410

Table 3: Sense distribution of single-sense
punctuation-conjoined VPs

more tokens, with these links explicitly marked in
the annotation files.

6 Future Work

We plan to release the corpus in two forms, for the
Linguistic Annotation Workshop in August 2016.
For researchers with access to the Penn TreeBank,
the corpus will be available as stand-off annota-
tion. For those lacking access to the Penn Tree-
Bank, we will provide a limited version of the
corpus containing just those sentences that con-
tain conjoined VPs, with annotation of their spans
and senses. While we will be continuing to fur-
ther enrich the PDTB, the goal of this early re-
lease of a corpus of conjoined VPs is to encour-
age research targetted at shallow discourse parsing
of these constructions, given how common they
are and how useful recognition of the relations ex-
pressed in them might prove.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) under grants RI 1422186
and RI 1421067.

References
Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen

Okurowski. 2003. Building a discourse-tagged cor-
pus in the framework of Rhetorical Structure The-

Sense Frequency
Expansion.Conjunction 2032
Contingency.Purpose.Arg2-as-goal 106
Expansion.Manner.Arg2-as-manner 18
Expansion.Substitution.Arg1-as-subst 5
OTHER (4) 8
TOTAL 2169

Table 4: Common senses of Explicit and

Connective Frequency
and + then 71
and + thus 18
and + also 15
and + later 11
and + therefore 10
OTHER (e.g. but+also, but+instead) 89
TOTAL 214

Table 5: Distribution of Explicit conjunction and
adverbial pairs

Sense Frequency
Conjunction + Precedence 94
Conjunction + Result 44
Conjunction + Conjunction 19
Conjunction + Arg2-as-denier 14
Arg2-as-denier + Precedence 9
OTHER 34
TOTAL 214

Table 6: Distribution of sense pairs associated
with Explicit conjunction and adverbial pairs

Sense Frequency
Conjunction + Result 402
Conjunction + Precedence 378
Conjunction + Arg2-as-subst 51
Conjunction + Arg2-as-detail 44
Result + Arg1-as-manner 41
OTHER 131
TOTAL 1047

Table 7: Distribution of sense pairs inferred on an
explicit conjunction

30



ory. In Jan van Kuppevelt and Ronnie Smith, edi-
tors, Current Directions in Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 85–112. Kluwer.

Francisco Guzmán, Shafiq Joty, Lluı́s Màrquez, and
Preslav Nakov. 2014. Using discourse structure
improves machine translation evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics), pages 687–698,
Baltimore, Maryland, June.

Rodney Huddleston and Geoffrey Pullum. 2002.
The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.

Shafiq Joty, Giuseppe Carenini, and Raymond Ng.
2015. CODRA: A novel discriminative framework
for rhetorical analysis. Computational Linguistics,
41:385–435.

Su Nam Kim and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2006. Cod-
ing scheme for instructional corpus: Identifying seg-
ments, relations and minimal units. Technical re-
port, University of Illinois at Chicago, March.

Wolfgang Maier, Sandra Kübler, Erhard Hinrichs, and
Julia Kriwanek. 2012. Annotating coordination in
the Penn Treebank. In Proceedings, 6th Linguistic
Annotation Workshop, pages 166–174, Jeju, Repub-
lic of Korea.

Prashanth Mannem, Rashmi Prasad, and Aravind Joshi.
2010. Question generation from paragraphs at
UPenn: QGSTEC system description. In Proceed-
ings, Third Workshop on Question Generation.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn TreeBank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Francois Mouret. 2006. A phrase structure approach to
argument cluster coordination. In Stephan Müller,
editor, Proceedings, 13th International Conference
on Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, pages
247–267.

Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi. 2008. A discourse-
based approach to generating why-questions from
texts. In Proceedings, Workshop on Question Gen-
eration Shared Task and Evaluation Challenge.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0.
In Proceedings, 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 2961–
2968, Marrakech, Morocco.

Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber.
2010. Realization of discourse relations by other
means: Alternative lexicalizations. In Proceedings,
International Conf. on Computational Linguistics
(COLING).

Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, and Aravind Joshi.
2014. Reflections on the Penn Discourse TreeBank,
comparable corpora and complementary annotation.
Computational Linguistics, 40(4):921–950.

Mark Steedman. 1989. Constituency and coor-
dination in combinatory grammar. In M. Baltin
and A. Kroch, editors, Alternative Conceptions of
Phrase Structure, pages 201–231. University of
Chicago Press.

Mark Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process. MIT
Press.

Rajen Subba and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2009. An effec-
tive Discourse Parser that uses Rich Linguistic Infor-
mation. In Proceedings, NAACL-HLT2009, pages
566–574.

31


