



















































Data Resource Acquisition from People at Various Stages of Cognitive Decline -- Design and Exploration Considerations


Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (LOUHI), pages 28–36,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

Data Resource Acquisition from People at Various Stages of Cognitive 
Decline – Design and Exploration Considerations

 
 

Dimitrios Kokkinakis 
Department of Swedish 

University of Gothenburg 
Sweden 

dimitrios.kokkinakis@gu.se 

Kristina Lundholm Fors 
Department of Swedish 

University of Gothenburg 
Sweden 

kristina.lundholm@gu.se 

Arto Nordund 
Department of Psychiatry 

and Neurochemistry 
University of Gothenburg 

Sweden 
arto.nordlund@gu.se 

 

 
 

Abstract 

In this paper we are introducing work in pro-
gress towards the development of an infra-
structure (i.e., design, methodology, creation 
and description) of linguistic and extra-linguis-
tic data samples acquired from people diag-
nosed with subjective or mild cognitive impair-
ment and healthy, age-matched controls. The 
data we are currently collecting consists of var-
ious types of modalities; i.e. audio-recorded 
spoken language samples; transcripts of the au-
dio recordings (text) and eye tracking measure-
ments. The integration of the extra-linguistic 
information with the linguistic phenotypes and 
measurements elicited from audio and text, 
will be used to extract, evaluate and model fea-
tures to be used in machine learning experi-
ments. In these experiments, classification 
models that will be trained, that will be able to 
learn from the whole or a subset of the data to 
make predictions on new data in order to test 
how well a differentiation between the afore-
mentioned groups can be made. Features will 
be also correlated with measured outcomes 
from e.g. language-related scores, such as word 
fluency, in order to investigate whether there 
are relationships between various variables. 

1 Introduction 

Current state-of-the-art diagnostic measures for 
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) are invasive, expensive, 
                                                                                                            
1 Currently in e.g. Sweden (Nordberg et al., 2014) only 30% 
of all Alzheimer's disease receive a complete memory inves-
tigation, diagnosis and symptomatic drugs, the rest of the 
cases are assigned the codes UNS, “unspecified dementia”. 

and time-consuming. There is a consensus on the 
need for the identification of the disease in its earli-
est manifestations by applying non-invasive and/or 
cost-effective methods that could aid the identifica-
tion of subjects in the preclinical or early clinical 
stages. Efficient tools that could be applied in rou-
tine dementia screening in primary care settings for 
identifying subjects who could be appropriate for 
further cognitive evaluation and dementia diagnos-
tics1, could provide the specialist centres the oppor-
tunity to engage in more demanding, advanced in-
vestigations, care and treatment. New paths of re-
search traced to acquire further knowledge about 
AD and its subtypes as well as tools based on the 
exploration of several complementary modalities 
and parameters, such as speech analysis and/or eye 
testing (cf. Laske et al., 2014, for a review) could be 
examined and incorporated into established neuro-
psychological, memory and cognitive tests in order 
to investigate fairly unexplored features that may 
be used as potential biomarkers for AD. This paper 
describes some efforts underway to acquire, assess, 
analyze and evaluate linguistic and extra-linguistic 
data from people with subjective (SCI) and mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and healthy, age-
matched controls. 

The SCI, the MCI, and the Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) are on a spectrum of disease progression. Sub-
jective cognitive impairment (SCI) is a common di-
agnosis in elderly people, sometimes suggested to 
be associated with e.g. depression, stress or anxiety, 

28



 

but also a risk factor for dementia (Jessen et al., 
2010). On the other hand, mild cognitive impair-
ment (MCI) is a prodromal state of dementia 
(Ritchie & Touchon, 2010), in which someone has 
minor problems with cognition (e.g., problems with 
memory or thinking) but these are not severe 
enough to warrant a diagnosis of dementia or inter-
fere significantly with daily life, but still the diffi-
culties are worse than would normally be expected 
for a healthy person of their age. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 presents related work from the Computa-
tional Linguistic/Natural Language Processing 
(CL/NLP) field in the domain of dementia, with fo-
cus on classification and prediction methodologies 
using mainly spoken language (including tran-
scribed data) as well as eye tracking measures. Sec-
tions 3 and 4 provide a description of the protocol 
used in the project. Section 3 briefly discusses the 
Gothenburg MCI-study (from which the current 
project is recruiting its subjects) and also the ethical 
issues related to the project, while Section 4 pre-
sents the material and design of the various experi-
mental tasks and the procedure for data collection. 
Post-processing of acquired data is also discussed in 
Section 4 while Section 5 provides a brief outline of 
the features we plan to extract from the data and the 
algorithms to use for classification and statistical 
analysis. Finally, in Section 6, the conclusions and 
future work are presented. 

2 CL/NLP and the area of Dementia 

A prerequisite for identifying dementia in its earliest 
stages is a reliable cognitive examination (Nordlund 
et al., 2010). Particularly for clinicians, language 
plays an important role in diagnosis and investiga-
tions include inquiries about the use of language in 
various forms. New findings aim to provide a com-
prehensive picture of cognitive status and promising 
results have recently thrown more light on the im-
portance of language and language (dis)abilities as 
an essential factor that can have a strong impact on 
specific measurable characteristics that can be ex-
tracted by automatic linguistic analysis of speech 

                                                                                                            
2 See e.g. the three “Computational Linguistics and Clinical 
Psychology” workshops (<http://clpsych.org/>); the LREC 
workshop on “Resources and Processing of linguistic and 
extra-linguistic data from people with various forms of cog-
nitive/psychiatric impairments”, RaPID (<https://spraak-

and text (Ferguson et al., 2013; Szatloczki et al., 
2015). The work by Snowdon et al. (2000), “The 
Nun Study”, was one of the earliest studies which 
showed a strong correlation between low linguistic 
ability early in life and cognitive impairment in later 
life by analyzing autobiographies of American nuns 
and could predict who could develop Alzheimer's 
Dementia by studying the degradation of the idea 
density (that is, the average number of ideas ex-
pressed in 10 words; Chand et al., 2010) and syntac-
tic complexity in the nuns’ autobiographical writ-
ings. 

Since then, the body of research and interest in 
CL/NLP research in the area of processing data 
from subjects with mental, cognitive, neuropsychi-
atric, or neurodegenerative impairments has grown 
rapidly2. Automatic spoken language analysis and 
eye movement measurements are two of the newer 
complementary diagnostic tool with great potential 
for dementia diagnostics (Laske et al., 2014). Fur-
thermore, the identification of important linguistic 
and extra-linguistic features such as lexical and syn-
tactic complexity, are becoming an established way 
to train and test machine learning classifiers that can 
be used to differentiate between subjects with vari-
ous forms of dementia and healthy controls or be-
tween different types of dementia subjects (Lagun 
et al., 2011; Roark et al., 2011; Olubolu Orimaye et 
al., 2014; Rentoumi et al., 2014). 

Although language is not the only diagnostic fac-
tor for cognitive impairment, several recent studies 
(Yancheva et al., 2015) have demonstrated that au-
tomatic linguistic analysis, primarily of speech sam-
ples, produced by people with mild or moderate 
cognitive impairment compared to healthy individ-
uals can identify objective evidence and measurable 
(progressive) language disorders. Garrard & 
Elvevåg (2014) comment that computer-assisted 
analysis of large language datasets could contribute 
to the understanding of brain disorders. Although, 
none of the studies presented in the special issue of 
Cortex vol. 55 moved “beyond the representation of 
language as text” and therefore finding reliable 
ways of incorporating features, such as prosody and 

banken.gu.se/eng/rapid-2016>); various papers in the work-
shop series on “Speech and Language Processing for Assis-
tive Technologies”, SLPAT (<http://www.slpat.org/>) and 
the seven Louhi: Workshops on Health Text Mining and In-
formation Analysis (<https://louhi.limsi.fr/2016/>). 

29



 

emotional connotation, into data representation re-
mains a future challenge, the editors acknowledged 
that current research indicates that “the challenges 
of applying computational linguistics to the cogni-
tive neuroscience field, as well as the power of these 
techniques to frame questions of theoretical interest 
and define clinical groups are of practical im-
portance”. Nevertheless, studies have shown that a 
steady change in the linguistic nature and the degree 
of symptoms in speech and writing are early and 
could be identified by using language technology 
analysis (Mortimer et al., 2005; Le et al., 2011). 
New findings also show a great potential to increase 
our understanding of dementia and its impact on lin-
guistic degradation such as loss of vocabulary, syn-
tactic simplification, poor speech content and se-
mantic generalization. Analysis of eye movement is 
also a relevant research technology to apply, and 
text reading by people with and without mild cogni-
tive impairment may give a clear ruling on how 
reading strategies differ between these groups, an 
area that has so far not been researched to any sig-
nificant extent in this particular domain (Fernández 
et al., 2013, 2014; Molitor et al., 2015). With the 
help of eye-tracking technology the eye movements 
of participants are recorded while suitable stimuli is 
presented (e.g., a short text; cf. section 4.3). 

3 The Gothenburg MCI-study and Re-
lated Ethical Issues 

The ongoing Gothenburg mild cognitive impair-
ment study (Nordlund et al., 2005; Wallin et al., 
2016) is an attempt to conduct longitudinal in-depth 
phenotyping of patients with different forms and de-
grees of cognitive impairment using neuropsycho-
logical, neuroimaging, and neurochemical tools. 
The study is clinically based and aims at identifying 
neurodegenerative, vascular and stress related dis-
orders prior to the development of dementia. All pa-
tients in the study undergo baseline investigations, 
such as neurological examination, psychiatric eval-
uation, cognitive screening (e.g., memory and 
visuospatial disturbance, poverty of language and 
apraxia), magnetic resonance imaging of the brain 
and cerebrospinal fluid collection. At biannual fol-
low-ups, most of these investigations are repeated. 

                                                                                                            
3 According to the instructions provided by the Swedish eth-
ical review board <http://www.epn.se/media/1210/infor-
mation_for_research_participants.pdf>. 

The overall Gothenburg MCI-study is approved by 
the local ethical committee review board (reference 
number: L091–99, 1999; T479-11, 2011); while the 
currently described study by the local ethical com-
mittee decision 206-16, 2016). The project aims at 
gathering a rather homogeneous group of partici-
pants with respect to age and education level (50 
with SCI/MCI and 50 controls). Written informed 
consent is obtained from all participants in the study 
while the exclusion and inclusion criteria are speci-
fied according to the following: 
 
Inclusion criteria 

 Age 50-79 years 
 Swedish as a first language and not speak-

ing languages other than Swedish before 
the age of 5 

 Comparable education length of the partic-
ipants 

 No apparent organic cause of symptoms 
 Research subjects have read information 

about the research project3 and approved 
voice recording and eye movement meas-
urements 

 
Exclusion criteria 

 Participants have dyslexia or other reading 
difficulties 

 Participants have deep depression 
 Participants have an ongoing abuse of any 

kind 
 Participants suffer from serious psychiatric 

or neurological diseases such as Parkin-
son's, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or 
have/had a brain tumor 

 Participants do not understand the question 
or the context in the selection process 

 Participants have poor vision (that cannot 
be corrected by glasses or lenses), cataract, 
nystagmus, or cannot see and read on the 
computer screen 

30



 

 Participants decline participation during 
telephone call or later at the recording site 

 Participants decline signing the paper of 
informed consent 

 Recordings or eye movement measure-
ments are technically unusable. 

4 Material and Design of Experiments 

The purpose of the acquisition of the data (audio re-
cordings, transcriptions4 and eye tracking measure-
ments) is to facilitate feature extraction in machine 
learning experiments (see Section 5). 

4.1 Audio Recordings 
For the acquisition of the audio signal we use the 
Cookie-theft picture (see Figure 1) from the Boston 
Diagnostic Aphasia Examination (BDAE; 
Goodglass & Kaplan, 1983) which is often used to 
elicit speech from people with various mental and 
cognitive impairments. During the presentation of 
the Cookie Theft stimuli (which illustrates an event 
taking place in a kitchen) the subjects are asked to 
tell a story about the picture and describe everything 
that can be observed while the story is recorded. For 
the task the original label of the cookie jar is trans-
lated and substituted from the English "COOKIE 
JAR" to the Swedish label "KAKBURK". The pic-
ture is considered an “ecologically valid approxima-
tion” to spontaneous discourse (Giles et al., 1996). 

 
Figure 1: The Cookie Theft picture 

                                                                                                            
4 Since some of the features to be extracted (e.g. part-of-
speech and syntactic labels from the transcriptions) are lan-
guage-dependent it requires the use of a language-specific 
infrastructure (in our case Swedish), for that reason we plan 
to use available resources; cf. Ahlberg et al. (2013); possible 
modifications to the transcribed language are also envisaged. 

We chose to use the Cookie Theft picture5 since it 
provides a standardized test that has been used in 
various studies in the past, therefore comparisons 
can be made based on previous results, e.g. with re-
search on the DementiaBank database or other col-
lections (MacWhinney, 2007; Williams et al., 2010; 
Fraser & Hirst, 2016). Moreover, in order to allow 
the construction of a comprehensive speech profile 
for each research participant, the speech task also 
includes reading aloud a short text from the Interna-
tional Reading Speed Texts collection (IReST; 
Trauzettel-Klosinski et al., 2012) presented on a 
computer screen. As a matter of fact, two texts are 
used from this collection, in connection to the eye 
tracking experiment (see next section), but only one 
of those texts is read aloud and thus combined with 
eye-tracking recording; cf. Meilán et al., 2012 and 
2014 for similar “reading out” text passage experi-
ments. IReST is a multilingual standardized text 
collection used to assess reading performance, for 
multiple equivalent texts for repeated measure-
ments. Specifically in our project we use the Swe-
dish IReST translations, namely texts “one” and 
“seven” (Öqvist Seimyr, 2010). For the audio cap-
ture of both we use a H2n Handy recorder6 while the 
audio files are saved and stored as uncompressed 
audio in .wav 44.1 kHz/16 bit format. Recordings 
are carried out in an isolated environment in order 
to avoid noise. 

4.2 Verbatim Transcriptions  
The textual part of the infrastructure consists of 
manually produced transcriptions of the two audio 
recordings previously described. The digitized 
speech waveform will be semi-automatically 
aligned with the transcribed text. During transcrip-
tion, special attention will also be paid to non-
speech acoustic events including speech dysfluen-
cies consisting of filled pauses a.k.a. hesitation 
(“um”), false-starts, repetitions as well as other fea-
tures such as laughing. A very basic transcription 
manual is also produced which will help the human 
transcribers accomplish a homogeneous transcrip-
tion. Furthermore, for the transcription the PRAAT 
application (Boersma & Weenink, 2013) is used. 

5 The Cookie theft picture, but with written descriptions of 
it, has also been used in a few studies with Swedish subjects 
(cf. Tyche 2001; Cromnow & Landberg, 2009; Landfeldt & 
Söderbäck, 2009). In all these studies the analysis was based 
on narrative writing of the Cookie theft picture. 
6 From ZOOM Corp. <https://www.zoom-na.com/sv>. 

31



 

4.3 Eye-Tracking 
The investigation of eye movement functions in 
SCI/MCI, and any differences or changes in eye 
movements that could be potentially detected for 
those patients is of great importance to clinical AD 
research. However, until now, eye tracking has not 
been used to investigate reading for MCI-persons in 
a much larger scale, possibly due to the number of 
procedural difficulties related to this kind of re-
search. On the other hand, the technology has been 
applied in a growing body of various experiments 
related to other impairments such as autism (Yaneva 
et al., 2016; Au-Yeung et al., 2015) and dyslexia 
(Rello & Ballesteros, 2015). For the experiments we 
use EyeLink7 1000 Desktop Mount with monocular 
eye tracking with head stabilization and a real-time 
sample access of 1000Hz. Head stabilization pro-
vides an increased eye tracking range performance. 
The participants were seated in front of the monitor 
at a distance of 60-70 cm. While reading, the eye 
movements of the participants are recorded with the 
eye-tracking device while interest areas around each 
word in the text are defined by taking advantage of 
the fact that there are spaces between each word in 
the text. The eye-tracking measurements are used 
for the detection and calculation of fixations, sac-
cades and backtracks. Fixation analyses is con-
ducted within predefined Areas of Interest (AOI); in 
our case each word is an AOI. 

4.4 Comparison over a Two-Year Span  
The previously outlined experiments/recordings 
will be repeated two years after the first recording 
taking place during the second half of 2016. This 
way we want to analyze whether there are any dif-
ferences and at which level and magnitude between 
the two audio and eye-tracking recordings. Namely, 
compare and examine whether there any observa-
ble, greater, differences/decline on some features 
and which these could be. We are aware that more 
longitudinal data samples over a longer time period 
would be desirable but at this stage only a single 
repetition is practically feasible to perform. In other, 
longitudinal experiments, e.g. in investigating the 
nature and progression of the spontaneous writing, 
patterns of impairment were observed in patients 
with Alzheimer's disease over a 12-month period, 

                                                                                                            
7 From SR Research Ltd. <http://www.sr-research.com/>. 

these were dominated by semantic errors (Forbes-
McKay et al., 2014). 

5 Envisaged Analysis and Features 

The envisaged analysis and exploration intends to 
extract, evaluate and combine a number of features 
from the three modalities selected to be investi-
gated. These are speech-related features, text/tran-
scription-related features and eye tracking-related 
features. 

5.1 Speech-related Features 
A large number of acoustic features have been pro-
posed in the literature which pinpoints of the im-
portance of distinguishing between vocal changes 
that occur with normal aging and those that are as-
sociated with MCI (and AD). We expect that our 
spoken samples will show different features de-
pending on whether they are produced spontane-
ously (when talking about the Cookie theft picture) 
or they consist of read aloud speech. Reliable and 
robust acoustic features that might differentiate spo-
ken language in SCI/MCI and healthy controls re-
mains an ongoing challenge but the technology de-
velops rapidly. Roark et al. (2011) used 21 features 
in supervised machine learning experiments (using 
Support Vector Machines) from 37 MCI subjects 
and equally many controls (37/37). Features from 
both the audio and the transcripts included: pause 
frequency, filled pauses, total pause duration and 
linguistic variables such as Frazier and Yngve 
scores and idea density, while best accuracy with 
various feature configurations were 86.1% for the 
area under the ROC curve. Pause frequency has 
been identified as a feature differentiating spontane-
ous speech in patients with AD from control groups 
(Gayraud et al., 2011), and may also be used to dis-
tinguish between mild, moderate and severe AD 
(Hoffman et al., 2010). Meilán et al. (2014) used 
AD subjects and spoken data (read loud and clear 
sentences on a screen). They used acoustic measures 
such as pitch, volume and spectral noise measures. 
Their method was based on linear discriminant anal-
ysis and their results could characterize people with 
AD with an accuracy of 84.8%. Yancheva et al. 
(2015) used spoken and transcriptions features pro-
vided from the DementiaBank (Cookie theft de-
scriptions) using 393 speech samples (165/90). 

32



 

They extracted and investigated 477 different fea-
tures both lexicosyntactic ones (such as syntactic 
complexity; word types, quality and frequency) and 
acoustic ones (such as Melfrequency cepstral coef-
ficients – MFCC, including mean, variance, skew-
ness, and kurtosis; pauses and fillers; pitch and for-
mants and aperiodicity measures) and semantic ones 
(such as concept mention) in order to predict Mini 
Mental State Examination (MMSE8) scores with a 
mean absolute error of 3.83 while with individuals 
with more longitudinal samples the mean absolute 
error was improved to 2.91, which suggested that 
the longitudinal data collection plays an important 
role. König et al. (2015) looked also at MCI and AD 
subjects (23/26) and examined vocal features (si-
lence, voice, periodic and aperiodic segment length; 
mean of durations) using Support vector machine 
(SVM). Their classification accuracy of automatic 
audio analyses was 79% between healthy controls 
and those with MCI and 87% between healthy con-
trols and those with AD; and between those with 
MCI and those with AD, 80%. Tóth et al. (2015) 
used also SVM and achieved 85.3% F-score (32 
MCI subjects and 19 controls) by starting with eight 
acoustic features extracted by applying automatic 
speech recognition (such as speech tempo i.e. 
phones per second) and extending them to 83. Fi-
nally, Fraser et al. (2016) also looked at the Demen-
tiaBank and using 240 samples of AD and 233 from 
healthy controls, extracted 370 features, such as lin-
guistic variables from transcripts (e.g., part-of-
speech frequencies; syntactic complexity and gram-
matical constituents), psycholinguistic measures 
(e.g., vocabulary richness) and acoustic variables 
from the audio files (e.g., MFCC). Using logistic re-
gression, Fraser et al. could obtain a classification 
accuracy of 81% in distinguishing individuals with 
AD from those without based on short samples of 
their language on the Cookie Theft picture descrip-
tion task. 

5.2 Text/Transcription-related Features 
Many of the previous studies combine both acoustic 
features and features from the transcriptions; cf. the 
supplementary material in Fraser et al. (2016). 
Some of the most common features and measures 
from transcribed text follow the lexicon-syntax-se-

                                                                                                            
8 MMSE is a brief screening test that quantitatively estimates 
the severity and progression of cognitive impairment and 

mantics continuum. These measures include (i) lex-
ical distribution measures (such as type-token ratio, 
mean word length, long word counts, hapax le-
gomena, hapax dislegomena, automated readability 
index and Coleman-Liau Index; also lexical and 
non-lexical fillers or disfluency markers, i.e. “um”, 
“uh”, “eh”) and out-of-vocabulary rate (Pakhomov 
et al., 2010). (ii) syntactic complexity markers (such 
as frequency of occurrence of the most frequent 
words and deictic markers; [context free] produc-
tion rules, i.e. the number of times a production rule 
is used divided by the total number of productions; 
dependency distance, i.e. the length of a dependency 
link between a dependent token and its head, calcu-
lated as the difference between their positions in a 
sentence; parse tree height, i.e. is the mean number 
of nodes from the root to the most distant leaf; depth 
of a syntactic tree, i.e. the proportion of subordinate 
and coordinate phrases to the total number of 
phrases and ratio of subordinate to coordinate 
phrases; noun phrase average length and noun 
phrase density, i.e. the number of noun phrases per 
sentence or clause; words per clause); and (iii) se-
mantic measures (such as the idea or propositional 
density, i.e. the operationalization of conciseness – 
the average number of ideas expressed per words 
used; the number of expressed propositions divided 
by the number of words; a measure of the extent to 
which the speaker is making assertions, or asking 
questions, rather than just referring to entities etc.). 

5.3 Eye Tracking-related Features 
Eye tracking data has been used in machine learning 
methods in the near past that take advantage of eye 
dynamics biomarkers (Lagun et al; 2011) with good 
indication that they can aid the automatic detection 
of cognitive impairment (i.e., distinguish healthy 
controls from MCI-patients). Several studies pro-
vide evidence and suggest that eye movements can 
be used to detect memory impairment and serve as 
a possible biomarker for MCI and, in turn, AD (Fer-
nández et al., 2013). Basic features we intend to in-
vestigate in this study are fixations (that is the state 
the eye remains still over a period of time); saccades 
(that is the rapid motion of the eye from one fixation 
to another) and backtracks (that is the relationship 
between two subsequent saccades where the second 
goes in the opposite direction than the first); for a 

also cognitive changes over time (Tombaugh & McIntyre, 
1992). 

33



 

thorough description of possible eye-tracking re-
lated features cf. Holmqvist et al., 2015:262. Sac-
cades are of particular interest because they are 
much related to attention and thus, they are likely to 
be disturbed by cognitive impairments associated 
with neurodegenerative disorders (Anderson et al., 
2013). Note that there are many assumptions behind 
the use of eye tracking technology for experiments 
designed for people with MCI. For instance, the 
longer the eye gaze fixation is on a certain word, the 
more difficult the word is for cognitive processing, 
therefore the durations of gaze fixations could be 
used as a proxy for measuring cognitive load (Just 
& Carpenter, 1980). Molitor et al. (2015) provide a 
recent review on the growing body of literature that 
investigates changes in eye movements as a result 
of AD and the alterations to oculomotor function 
and viewing behavior. 

5.4 Correlation Analysis 
We intend to further perform correlation analysis 
with the features previously outlined and the results 
from various measures from language-related tests 
performed in the Gothenburg MCI-study, tests 
which are applied for assessing possible dementia. 
Typically, clinicians use tests such as Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE), linguistic memory 
tests and language tests. Such tests include the token 
test, subtest V, which is a test of syntax comprehen-
sion; the Boston naming test and the word fluency 
FAS test (the number of words initiated by the let-
ters F, A, and S). This investigation intends to iden-
tify whether there are variables/features (highly) 
correlated with i.e. the MCI class, yet uncorrelated 
with each other i.e. the healthy controls or SCI. 

6 Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper we have introduced work in progress 
towards the design and infrastructural development 
of reliable multi-modal data resources and a set of 
measures (features) to be used both for experimen-
tation with feature engineering and evaluation of 
classification algorithms to be used for differentiat-
ing between SCI/MCI and healthy adults, and also 
as benchmark data for future research in the area. 
Evaluation practices are a crucial step towards the 
development of resources and useful for enhancing 
progress in the field, therefore we intend to evaluate 
both the relevance of features, compare standard al-
gorithms such as Support vector machine and 

Bayesian classifiers and perform correlation analy-
sis with the results of established neuropsychologi-
cal, memory and cognitive tests. We also intend to 
repeat the experiments after two years in order to 
assess possible changes at each level of analysis. 
We believe that combining data from three modali-
ties could be useful, but at this point we do not pro-
vide any clinical evidence underlying these assump-
tions since the analysis and experimentation studies 
are planned for year 2 of the project (2017). There-
fore, at this stage, the paper only provides a snap-
shot of the current stage of the work. 

Acknowledgments 

This work has received support from Riksbankens 
Jubileumsfond - The Swedish Foundation for Hu-
manities and Social Sciences, through the grant 
agreement no: NHS 14-1761:1. 

References  
Malin Ahlberg et al. 2013. Korp and Karp – a bestiary of 

language resources: the research infrastructure of 
Språkbanken. Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Confer-
ence of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA). 
Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85. 

Tim J. Anderson and Michael R. MacAskill. 2013. Eye 
movements in patients with neurodegenerative disor-
ders. Nat Rev Neurology 9: 74-85. doi:10.1038/nrneu-
rol.2012.273. 

Sheena K. Au-Yeung, Johanna Kaakinen, Simon Liv-
ersedge and Valerie Benson. 2015. Processing of Writ-
ten Irony in Autism Spectrum Disorder: An Eye-
Movement Study. Autism Res. 8(6):749-60. doi: 
10.1002/aur.1490. 

Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2013. Praat: doing 
phonetics by computer [Computer program]. Version 
6.0.19, retrieved in Aug. 2016 from 
<http://www.praat.org/>. 

Vineeta Chand, Kathleen Baynes, Lisa M. Bonnici and 
Sarah Tomaszewski Farias. 2012. A Rubric for Ex-
tracting Idea Density from Oral Language Samples 
Analysis of Idea Density (AID): A Manual. In Curr 
Protoc Neurosci. CHAPTER: Unit10.5. 
doi:10.1002/0471142301.ns1005s58. 

Karolina Cromnow and Tove Landberg. 2009. Skriftliga 
beskrivningar av bilden ”Kakstölden”. Insamling av 
referensvärden från friska försökspersoner. Master’s 
Thesis. Department of Clinical Sciences, division of 
Speech and Language Pathology. Karolinska Institute, 
Sweden. (In Swedish). 

Alison Ferguson, Elizabeth Spencer, Hugh Craig and 
Kim Colyvas. 2014. Propositional Idea Density in 

34



 

women’s written language over the lifespan: Comput-
erized analysis. Cortex 55. 107-121. 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.05.012 

Gerardo Fernández, Pablo Mandolesi, Nora P. Rotstein, 
Oscar Colombo, Osvaldo Agamennoni and Luis E. 
Politi. 2013. Eye Movement Alterations During Read-
ing in Patients With Early Alzheimer Disease. Investi-
gative Ophthalmology & Visual Science. Vol.54, 
8345-8352. doi:10.1167/iovs.13-12877. 

Gerardo Fernández, Jochen Laubrock, Pablo Mandolesi, 
Oscar Colombo and Osvaldo Agamennoni. 2014. Reg-
istering eye movements during reading in Alzheimer’s 
disease: difficulties in predicting upcoming words. J 
of Clin & Experimental Neuropsychol. 36(3):302–16. 

Katrina Forbes-McKay, Mike Shanks and Annalena Ven-
neria. 2014. Charting the decline in spontaneous writ-
ing in Alzheimer's disease: a longitudinal study. Acta 
Neuropsychiatrica. Vol. 26:04, pp 246-252 doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/neu.2014.2. 

Kathleen C. Fraser and Graeme Hirst. 2016. Detecting 
semantic changes in Alzheimer’s disease with vector 
space models. LREC Workshop: RaPID (Resources 
and ProcessIng of linguistic and extra-linguistic Data 
from people with various forms of cognitive/psychiat-
ric impairments). Pp. 1-8. Portorož Slovenia. 

Kathleen C. Fraser, Jed A. Meltzer and Frank Rudzicz. 
2016. Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease in Narrative Speech. J of Alzheimer’s Disease 49 
(2016) 407–422. IOS Press. doi:10.3233/JAD-150520 

Peter Garrard and Brita Elvevåg. 2014. Special issue: 
Language, computers and cognitive neuroscience. 
Cortex 55; 1-4. DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2014.02.012. 

Frederique Gayraud, Hye-Ran Lee and Melissa Barkat-
Defradas. 2011. Syntactic and lexical context of 
pauses and hesitations in the discourse of Alzheimer 
patients and healthy elderly subjects. Clinical Linguis-
tics & Phonetics, 25(3), 198–209. doi: 
10.3109/02699206.2010.521612. 

Elaine Gilles, Karalyn Patterson and John R. Hodges. 
1996. Performance on the Boston Cookie Theft pic-
ture description task in patients with early dementia of 
the Alzheimer’s type: missing information. Aphasiol-
ogy. Vol. 10:4. Pp. 395-408. 

Harold Goodglass and Edith Kaplan. 1983. The Assess-
ment of Aphasia and Related Disorders. 2nd edition. 
Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 

Ildikó Hoffmann, Dezso Nemeth, Cristina D Dye, Mag-
dolna Pákáski, Tamás Irinyi and János Kálmán. 2010. 
Temporal parameters of spontaneous speech in Alz-
heimer’s disease. J of Speech-Language Pathology, 
12(1), 29–34. doi: 10.3109/17549500903137256. 

Kenneth Holmqvist, Marcus Nyström, Richard Anders-
son, Richard Dewhurst, Halszka Jarodzka, and Joost 
van de Weijer. 2015. Eye Tracking - A comprehensive 
guide to methods and measures. OUP. 

Frank Jessen et al. 2010. Prediction of dementia by sub-
jective memory impairment: effects of severity and 
temporal association with cognitive impairment. Arch. 
Gen. Psychiatry, 67(4):414–422. doi:10.1001/arch-
genpsychiatry.2010.30. 

Marcel A. Just and Patricia A. Carpenter. 1980. A theory 
of reading: from eye fixations to comprehension. Psy-
chological review, 87(4):329-354. 

Alexandra König, Aharon Satt, Alexander Sorin, Ron 
Hoory, Orith Toledo-Ronen, Alexandre Derreumaux, 
Valeria Manera, Frans Verhey, Pauline Aalten, Phillipe 
H. Robert and Renaud David. 2015. Automatic speech 
analysis for the assessment of patients with predemen-
tia and Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: 
Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring. 1:112–
124. Elsevier. 

Dmitry Lagun, Cecelia Manzanares, Stuart M. Zola, Eliz-
abeth A. Buffalo and Eugene Agichtein. 2011. Detect-
ing cognitive impairment by eye movement analysis 
using automatic classification algorithms. J Neurosci 
Methods. 201(1): 196–203. 

Erik Landfeldt and Emma Söderbäck. 2009. Predicerar 
skriftliga bildbeskrivningar demens? - En retrospektiv 
studie. Master’s Thesis. Department of Neuroscience, 
Division of Speech and Language Pathology. Uppsala 
university. Sweden. (In Swedish). 

Christoph Laske et al. 2014. Innovative diagnostic tools 
early detection of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s & 
Dementia. 1-18. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.06.004. 

Xuan Le, Ian Lancashire, Graeme Hirst, and Regina 
Jokel. 2011. Longitudinal Detection of Dementia 
through Lexical and Syntactic Changes in Writing: A 
Case Study of Three British Novelists. J of Literary 
and Linguistic Computing. 26 (4): 435-461 

Brian MacWhinney. 2007. The Talkbank Project. In Cre-
ating and Digitizing Language Corpora. J.C. Beal 
(eds). Pp. 163–180. Springer. 

Juan JG. Meilán, Francisco Martínez-Sánchez, Juan 
Carro, José A. Sánchez and Enrique Pérez. 2012. 
Acoustic Markers Associated with Impairment in Lan-
guage Processing in Alzheimer’s Disease. Spanish 
Journal of Psychology. Vol. 15:2, 487-494 
dx.doi.org/10.5209/rev_SJOP.2012.v15.n2.38859 

Juan JG. Meilán, Francisco Martínez-Sánchez, Juan 
Carro, Dolores E. López, Lymarie Millian-Morell and 
José M. Arana. 2014. Speech in Alzheimer’s Disease: 
Can Temporal and Acoustic Parameters Discriminate 
Dementia? Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
2014;37:327–334. doi: 10.1159/000356726 

Robert J. Molitor, Philip C. Ko and Brandon A. Ally. 
2015. Eye Movements in Alzheimer’s Disease. J of 
Alzheimer’s Disease 44, 1–12. doi:10.3233/JAD-
141173. IOS Press. 

35



 

James A. Mortimer, Amy R. Borenstein, Karen M. Go-
sche and David A. Snowdon. 2005. Very Early Detec-
tion of Alzheimer Neuropathology and the Role of 
Brain Reserve in Modifying Its Clinical Expression. J 
Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 18(4): 218–223. 

Agneta Nordberg et al. 2014. Alzheimerdrabbade ges inte 
samma rätt som andra sjuka. Publiced 26/7/2014 in 
Dagens Nyheter Debatt: http://www.dn.se/debatt/ 
alzheimerdrabbade-ges-inte-samma-ratt-somandra-
sjuka/ (In Swedish) 

Arto Nordlund, Sindre Rolstad, Per Hellström, Magnus 
Sjögren, Stefan Hansen and Anders Wallin. 2005. The 
Goteborg MCI study: mild cognitive impairment is a 
heterogeneous condition. J Neurol Neurosurg Psych. 
76(11): 1485–1490. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2004.050385. 

Arto Nordlund et al. 2010. Cognitive profiles of incipient 
dementia in the Goteborg MCI study. Dement Geriatr 
Cogn Disord. 30(5):403-10. doi: 10.1159/000321352. 

Sylvester Olubolu Orimaye, Jojo Sze-Meng Wong and 
Kren J. Golden. 2014. Learning Predictive Linguistic 
Features for Alzheimer’s Disease and related Demen-
tias using Verbal Utterances. Workshop on Computa-
tional Ling. & Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic 
Signal to Clinical Reality. 78–87. Maryland, USA. 

Serguei VS Pakhomov, Glenn E. Smith, Susan Marino, 
Angela Birnbaum, Neill Graff-Radford, Richard Ca-
selli, Bradley Boeve and David Knopman. 2010. A co-
mputerized technique to assess language use patterns 
in patients with frontotemporal dementia. J Neuroling. 
23(2):127–144.doi:10.1016/j.jneuroling.2009.12.001. 

Luz Rello and Miguel Ballesteros. 2015. Detecting Read-
ers with Dyslexia Using Machine Learning with Eye 
Tracking Measures. Proceedings of the 12th Web for 
All Conference W4A. Florence, Italy. doi: 
10.1145/2745555.2746644. 

Vassiliki Rentoumi, Ladan Raoufian, Samrah Ahmed and 
Peter Garrard. 2014. Features and Machine Learning 
Classification of Connected Speech Samples from Pa-
tients with Autopsy Proven Alzheimer's Disease with 
and without Additional Vascular Pathology. J of Alz-
heimer’s Disease 42. IOS Press. S3–S17. doi: 
10.3233/JAD-140555. 

Karen Ritchie and Jacques Touchon. 2010. Mild cogni-
tive impairment: conceptual basis and current noso-
logical status. The Lancet. Vol. 355:9199. Pp. 225–
228. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(99)06155-3. 

Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, John-Paul Hosom, 
Kristy Hollingshead, and Jeffrey Kaye. 2011. Spoken 
Language Derived Measures for Detecting Mild Cog-
nitive Impairment. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang 
Processing. 19(7): 2081–2090 

David A. Snowdon, Lydia Greiner and William R. 
Markesbery. 2000. Linguistic ability in early life and 

the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease and cere-
brovascular disease. Findings from the Nun Study. An-
nals of the New York Acad of Sciences. 903:34-8. 

Greta Szatloczki, Ildiko Hoffmann, Veronika Vincze, 
Janos Kalman and Magdolna Pakaski. 2015. Speaking 
in Alzheimer’s disease, is that an early sign? Im-
portance of changes in language abilities in Alz-
heimer’s disease. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience. 
Vol 7, article 195. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00195. 

Tom N. Tombaugh and Nancy J. McIntyre. 1992. The 
Mini-Mental State Examination: A Comprehensive 
Review. Progress in Geriatrics. Vol. 40:9, pp. 922–
935 doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1992.tb01992.xView/. 

Laszló Tóth, Gábor Gosztolya, Veronika Vincze, Ildiko 
Hoffmann, Gráta Szatloczki, Edit Biro, Fruzsina 
Zsura, Magdolna Pákáski and János Kálmán. 2015. 
Automatic Detection of Mild Cognitive Impairment 
from Spontaneous Speech using ASR. Proceedings of 
Interspeech. Dresden, Germany. 

Susanne Trauzettel-Klosinski, Klaus Dietz and the IReST 
Study Group. 2012. Standardized Assessment of 
Reading Performance: The New International Reading 
Speed Texts IReST. Investigative Ophthalmology & 
Visual Science. Vol. 53:9. The Association for Re-
search in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc. 

Olof Tyche. 2001. Subtila språkstörningar hos patienter 
med diagnosen MCI (Mild Cognitive Impairment) Del 
I: utifrån den tematiska bilden “Kakstölden”. KI, 
Sweden (In Swedish). 

Anders Wallin et al. 2016. The Gothenburg MCI study: 
Design and distribution of Alzheimer's disease and 
subcortical vascular disease diagnoses from baseline 
to 6-year follow-up. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 
36(1):114-31. 

Caroline Williams, Andrew Thwaites , Paula Buttery, 
Jeroen Geertzen, Billi Randall, Meredith Shafto, 
Barry Devereux and Lorraine Tylera. 2010. The Cam-
bridge Cookie-Theft Corpus: A Corpus of Directed 
and Spontaneous Speech of Brain-Damaged Patients 
and Healthy Individuals. 7th Language Resources and 
Evaluation Conference, LREC. Pp. 2824-2839. Malta. 

Victoria Yaneva, Irina Temnikova and Ruslan Mitkov. 
2016. Corpus of Text Data and Gaze Fixations from 
Autistic and Non-autistic Adults. Proceedings of the 
10th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference 
(LREC), pp. 480-487. Portorož, Slovenia. 

Maria Yancheva, Kathleen Fraser and Frank Rudzicz. 
2015. Using linguistic features longitudinally to pre-
dict clinical scores for Alzheimer’s disease and related 
dementias. 6th Workshop on Speech and Language 
Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), pp. 
134–139, Dresden, Germany. 

Gustaf Öqvist Seimyr. 2010. Swedish IReST translation. 
The Bernadotte Laboratory, Karolinska institute, Swe-
den. 

36


