



















































Bridging Relations in Polish: Adaptation of Existing Typologies


Proceedings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016), co-located with NAACL 2016, pages 16–22,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Bridging Relations in Polish: Adaptation of Existing Typologies

Maciej Ogrodniczuk
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences

Jana Kazimierza 5
01-248 Warsaw, Poland

maciej.ogrodniczuk@ipipan.waw.pl

Magdalena Zawisławska
Institute of Polish Language

Warsaw University
Krakowskie Przedmieście 26/28

00-927 Warsaw, Poland
zawisla@uw.edu.pl

Abstract

The paper attempts at presenting initial veri-
fication of existing approaches to annotation
of bridging relations by proposing a compiled
model based on schemata used in previous an-
notation projects and testing its validity on
a corpus of Polish. The categorization fea-
tures structural relations, dissimilation, anal-
ogy, reference to label, class, entailment and
attribution. Multiple categories can be as-
signed to model situations where several as-
pects of the relation play a part. The rela-
tions are organized hierarchically which al-
lows varied granularity of processing depend-
ing on computational needs. The classifica-
tion is confronted with existing annotation of
other-than-identity relations in a portion of
Polish Coreference Corpus. Results of man-
ual annotation involving two annotators and
adjudicator are presented. Findings from the
process are intended to facilitate development
of annotation guidelines of a new reference-
related project.

1 Introduction

The term bridging (bridging anaphora, indirect
anaphora, associative anaphora) refers to relations
between non-coreferential expressions that influ-
ence the text coherence. In most cases these expres-
sions are nominal (and we will limit our analysis to
such cases in this paper), although bridging between
events can be also distinguished.

Several classifications of bridging relations are
available, both in theoretical approaches (Clark,
1975; Prince, 1981; Löbner, 1996; Asher and
Lascarides, 1998) and previous annotation projects
(Poesio et al., 1997; Poesio, 2000; Gardent et al.,
2003; Poesio et al., 2004; Poesio and Artstein,
2008). Another source of inspiration can be found
in ontologies such as Cyc (Lenat, 1995) or lexical
databases such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) Yet
there seem to be no consensus over general classi-
fication of such phenomenon.

In the article we attempt to compile the exist-
ing taxonomies of bridging relations into a common
model, validate it on corpus data and present find-
ings from the process which are planned to help de-
velop annotation guidelines for the new project in-
volving annotation of referential relations in Polish.

2 Related Work

Clark’s classic classification of indirect implicature
(Clark, 1975) lists set membership, indirect refer-
ence by association (necessary/probable/inducible
parts) indirect reference by characterization (neces-
sary/optional roles), reason, cause, consequence and
concurrence.

Poesio, Vieira and Teufel’s classification (Poe-
sio et al., 1997) is composed of six classes:
synonymy/hyponymy/meronymy, names, compound
nouns, events, discourse topic and inference.

Gardent et al. (2003) summarize bridging
relations identified in the literature listing 13 cat-

16



egories (set–subset, set–element, event–argument,
individual–function, individual–attribute, whole–
part, whole–piece, individual–stuff, collection–
member, place–area, whole–temp.subpart,
location–object and time–object) and propose
their own approach applied in annotation of PA-
ROLE corpus, limited to: set membership (inclusion
relation), thematic relation (thematic roles such as
agent, patient etc.), definitional relation (attribute,
meronymy etc.), co-participant relation and non-
lexical relation (defined by discourse structure or
world knowledge).

Poesio and Artstein’s annotation scheme for AR-
RAU (Poesio and Artstein, 2008) allows part–of,
set–membership and converse relation, which prob-
ably results from successful annotation of such lim-
ited number of relations in GNOME (Poesio, 2000)
and VENEX corpora (Poesio et al., 2004). The so-
lution is similar to Recasens’ annotation in CESS-
ECE corpus (Recasens et al., 2007), using 3 basic
relations and rest type with no further subtype spec-
ification.

Irmer’s classification (Irmer, 2010) splits indirect
references into mereological (part-of, member-of )
and frame-related (thematic, causal, spatial, tempo-
ral) and offers a useful comparison of four other
analyzed classifications (Winston et al., 1987; Iris,
1988; Vieu and Aurnague, 2007; Kleiber, 1999)
which seem to differ in detail only.

Greek Coreference and Bridging Team’s annota-
tion guidelines (GCBT: Greek Coreference & Bridg-
ing Team, 2014) use contrast, possession–owner,
two predicate relations, entity–property and object–
function apart from traditional set–subset and part–
whole relations. Other relations (spatial, temporal,
generic–specific, thematic or situational association)
are represented as rest.

Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) in its
present 3.0 version (Zikánová et al., 2015, chap-
ter 4) uses six bridging relation types: part–whole,
set–subset/element, entity–singular function, con-
trast (linking coherence-relevant discourse oppo-
sites), non-coreferential explicit anaphoric relation
and rest (further unspecified group with location–
resident, relations between relatives, author–work,
event–argument and object–instrument).

3 Compilation of Typology of Bridging
Relations

The proposed initial classification unifying exist-
ing approaches is depicted in Figure 1. Each main
branch represents the intended relation type; leaf re-
lations are specified as examples only.

3.1 Metareference
The relation allows to model relations such as has–
model, has–name or has–label. This covers e.g.
PDT’s meta-linguistic reference, a subtype of non-
cospecifying anaphoric relation.

(1) Byłem wczoraj w restauracji „Smaczna
rybka”, ale ich ryby mi w ogóle nie
smakowały.
‘I was yesterday in a restaurant called ”Deli-
cious Fish” but I didn’t like their fish at all.’

3.2 Class
Class-instance relation, for some seen as of priv-
ileged nature, is represented similarly to standard
part–whole or set–member, so reference between
class and instance can be modelled in a unified man-
ner.

(2) Kobiety mają prawo do takiej wolności.
Dlatego dobrze, by Ewa przekonała się, że
nie wszystko musi być tak, jak było w rodzin-
nym domu.
‘Women have the right to such freedom. It
is all right then for Eve to get convinced that
not everything must be as it was in her fam-
ily home.’

3.3 Temporal Relation
Temporal relation will be used to represent near-
identical temporal aspects of the object (e.g. ‘pre-
war Warsaw’ and ‘Warsaw of today’). Note that
traditional temporal expressions such as anaphoric
references to the time when the antecedent situation
takes place (e.g. ‘this time’ and an event; a subtype
of PDT’s non-cospecifying anaphoric relation) will
not be marked as temporal bridging relations (due to
nominal intention of the current typology).

(3) Warszawa jest pięknym miastem, ale
przedwojenna Warszawa była jeszcze

17



Figure 1: Bridging relations: compiled version

bridging

metareference

has–name
has–label
has–model

class

class–instance

temporal structural

aggregation

set–subset
set–element

composition

whole–part
whole–portion
whole–substance

functional

object–function

analogical

similarity contrast

object–co-hyponym

attribution

piękniejsza.
‘Warsaw is a beautiful city, but pre-war
Warsaw was even more beautiful.’

3.4 Structural Relation
Structural or meronymic relations are probably the
least controversial part of the taxonomy, start-
ing with Clark’s necessary/probable/inducible parts
through standard aggregation (set–subset, set–
element) and composition (whole–part) to relations
introducing inseparability such as whole–portion
(also called segment, e.g. ‘cake/slice’) or whole–
substance (e.g. ‘cake/flour’). A ready-to-use sub-
classification of meronymic relations can be found
e.g. in (Winston et al., 1987).

(4) Dobrze się czuję jako matka synów. Mój
pierwszy syn nazywa się Adam.
‘I am feeling good as a mother of sons. My
first son is Adam.’

3.5 Functional Relation
The basic function–object relation (as e.g. in
PDT), causal relations from literature, Clark’s nec-
essary/optional role and Gardent’s thematic relation
can be interpreted as functional relations. Most
PDT’s ‘other’ relations such as location–resident,
event–argument or author–work are also regarded as
functional.

Clark’s indirect reference by characterization also
falls into this category, though it is mostly used for
events and not objects.

The most interesting aspect of the functional re-
lation is its correspondence with Recasens’ near-
identity (Recasens et al., 2012). In our opinion such

weak near-identity cases as representation (e.g. be-
tween a manuscript and its content printed in a book)
should be modelled as functional relations.

(5) Intencja konkursu nie jest literacka, ale
socjologiczna. Jeśli w wyniku wyłonią się
jakieś talenty, będzie bardzo dobrze.
‘Intention of the contest is not literary but
sociological. If any talents emerge as a
result, we will be very fine.’

3.6 Analogical Relation
Both similarity relations (signaled by such as etc.)
and contrast relations are intended to be marked as
analogical.

(6) Jego głowa była ogromna. Jak wielki balon.
‘His head was enormous. Like a big
balloon.’

3.7 Attribution
Attribution is a type introduced to represent relations
between an object and someone’s opinion on the ob-
ject (i.e., what is believed, doubted etc.) or indicate
incomplete certainty about the nature of identity be-
tween two mentions.

(7) — Jak się nazywa mąż Ani?
— Chyba Michał.
‘— What’s the name of Anna’s husband?
— Michał, I guess.’

In most projects this relation is annotated as coref-
erence, but in general case (e.g., when several clash-
ing opinions are represented in one discourse) such
approach seems to be inappropriate.

18



M
et

ar
ef

er
en

ce

C
la

ss

Te
m

po
ra

l

A
gg

re
ga

tio
n

C
om

po
si

tio
n

Fu
nc

tio
na

l

Si
m

ila
ri

ty

C
on

tr
as

t

A
tt

ri
bu

tio
n

C
or

ef
er

en
ce

Pr
ed

ic
at

e

O
th

er

A
L

L

1 Metareference 1 2 2 1 6

2 Class 1 15 7 1 1 25

3 Temporal 2 2 4

4 Aggregation 1 15 70 3 1 3 5 3 2 103

Composition 1 8 1 2 2 14

5 Functional 3 5 1 9 2 1 3 1 25

6 Similarity 4 4

Contrast 6 6

7 Attribution 2 2

8 Coreference 9 12 2 3 2 6 11 1 2 48

Predicate 1 1 4 3 9

Other 1 1 1 1 1 4 9

ALL 3 48 2 106 16 15 8 1 15 21 9 11 255

Table 1: Results of the annotation experiment.

4 From Quasi-identity To Bridging
Relations

The proposed classification was initially validated
on the Polish Coreference Corpus (Ogrodniczuk et
al., 2015, chapter 8). During its annotation, apart
from marking direct identity-of-reference, annota-
tors were asked to identify ‘quasi-identity’ relations,
i.e. relations distorting or distinguishing proper-
ties of an object, metaphorical relations between
substance and container, set-element relations and
other relations not characterized by identity or non-
identity. Over 5100 instances of such relations were
marked, making a useful resource for corpus-based
investigation of bridging.

4.1 Preliminary Corpus-based Verification

Randomly selected 5%, i.e. 255 relations, were re-
viewed to provide material for evaluation of the pro-
posed taxonomy. The process was carried out by
two annotators previously involved in classification

of quasi-identity relations in the Polish Coreference
Corpus. Cases incompatible with the current pro-
posal of the typology were marked as ‘other’ with
three subtypes: 1) coreference, for cases where orig-
inal annotators of the Polish Coreference Corpus set
quasi-identity type to a direct coreferential relation
by mistake, 2) predicate, where relation was used to
link mention with a predicate noun, and 3) error, for
cases when no relation could be identified reason-
ably.

The results of this experiment are presented in Ta-
ble 1. The annotation agreement was 0.50 (Cohen’s
κ = 0.36) which indicates that the typology is not
precise enough to be used efficiently in practice.

The prevailing share of structural relations (60%)
is compatible with Gardent’s findings (Gardent et
al., 2003, Figure 5) where 52% of the investigated
relations were of meronymic type.

19



Figure 2: Bridging relations: updated version

bridging

metareference class dissimilation

temporal contextual

structural

aggregation composition

entailment analogical

similarity contrast

attribution

4.2 Error Analysis
The probable causes of divergence in the annotation
are: 1) too extensive annotation categories, 2) too
vague definition of some categories, 3) too many
non-classified phenomena, 4) confusion of the coref-
erence, near-identity and other semantic relations.

Some categories distinguished at the beginning
turned out to be too extensive. Almost 44% exam-
ples were classified as of the set category. On the
other hand, this category includes very diverse ex-
amples which calls for its division into subcategories
in the prospective annotation.

The definitions of the predicative and attribution
classes were not clear enough which led to confu-
sion. Other difficult pairs were: class and set, class
and function, class and meta.

In the proposed classification the category other
was included for all doubtful examples. The an-
notations had shown that too many examples were
classified as other and that there are quite distinct
categories like: causality, connection of content or
dissimilation.

In some cases making the distinction between def-
initeness and indefiniteness is virtually impossible.
For example, when previous part of the text includes
information on a merger of companies A and B and
then someone comments that the idea of a merger of
companies is cost-justified, it depends on interpreta-
tion whether it refers to this particular merger (and
in such case makes an composition relation between
companies and A) or it refers to a general statement
which makes A an instance of companies referred to
in the subsequent statement. Such cases are a fre-
quent cause of disagreement in our annotation.

The data shows numerous coreferential links
which are reported as other since only non-
coreferential relations should be present in the an-
notated set. This can be explained with problems
related to distinguishing other-than-coreferential re-

lations from different linguistic means of expressing
proper coreference, particularly in the initial phase
of the annotation. A common observed mistake
was treating mentions from indirect speech as non-
coreferential with their direct speech equivalents —
despite their identical reference targets.

Functional category calls for subclassification;
several cases were commented as being best defined
by WordNet’s entailment relation (e.g. to sleep is
entailed by to snore); a few others were marked as
metonymy (e.g. Ottawa meaning Canada, also con-
fused with a simple part–whole relation).

Temporal category needs to be confronted with
Recasens’ near-identity which defines more aspects
of dissimilation.

5 Updated Version of the Typology

5.1 The Revised Model

Figure 2 presents the revised version of the typol-
ogy of bridging relations based on findings from the
annotation process. Contextual dissimilation can be
used in cases when different realization or represen-
tation is being referred to in the process of refocus-
ing (Fauconnier, 1994); entailment is mostly effect
which corresponds to reason–cause relation (war–
occupation, manure–smell, competition–result etc.)
while function groups general role-casting relations
such as place–inhabitant, writer–work etc.

Within the most coarse-grained and abundantly
represented aggregation subclass several evident
subcategories were identified: collection, group and
hyponymy–hypernymy. Collections are ad hoc sets
of generally unrelated objects, e.g. shopping items
while elements of a group are related, e.g. members
of the same organization. Hyponyms are collections
of objects related by a common hypernym (e.g. ani-
mals vs. monkeys, elephants etc.)

Table 2 presents statistics of different relations ob-
20



served in the analyzed set (after adjudication and
conversion of annotation results to the new typol-
ogy).

Relation facet Count
Structural 122

Aggregation 105
Collection 7
Group 63
Hyponymy 35

Composition 17
Class 44
Entailment 14

Effect 8
Function 6

Attribution 13
Analogical 5

Similarity 3
Contrast 2

Metareference 3
Dissimilation 2

Temporal 1
Contextual 1

Error 52
Coreference 17
Apposition 11
Predicate 9
Other 15

Table 2: Post-adjudication statistics of bridging re-
lations.

5.2 Transitivity of Facets
An important aspect of referential associations
which does not seem to be covered by existing ap-
proaches is transitivity of basic relations, i.e. ability
to maintain a more distant but still decodable rela-
tion than just atomic link between a pair of referents.
To illustrate the case, Example 8 shows a mixture of
aggregation and composition: the link between a set
and part of one element in the set is clear to under-
stand yet reasonably complex: my sons → my son
→ my son’s broken leg. Example 9 shows a similar
mixture of functional relation and attribution.

(8) Moi synowie uwielbiają niebezpieczną
jazdę na desce. Nawet złamana noga
nie zniechęciła ich do startu w kolejnych

zawodach.
‘My sons love risky skateboarding. Even
the broken leg did not discourage them
from entering the next competition.’

(9) Oto Jean. Niektórzy mówią, przyszły
prezydent Francji.
‘This is Jean. Some say, the future president
of France.’

6 Conclusions

The presented unified classification of bridging rela-
tions intends to be an initial step towards annotation
of referential relations on a larger scale. The typol-
ogy covers only relations available in existing mod-
els and preliminarily annotated data but several other
aspects of referentiality should be verified against
the corpus, e.g. the issue of definiteness, negation
or natural ambiguity.

The experiment confirmed that clear identifica-
tion of types of bridging relations is a difficult task,
particularly when fine-grained distinctions are intro-
duced. This leads to conclusion that shallow seman-
tics is probably insufficient to describe such a com-
plex phenomenon as reference. A new annotation
guidelines taking into account discourse structure,
lexical-semantic models and extra-linguistic knowl-
edge are currently under preparation.

Acknowledgements

The work reported here was carried out within
the research project financed by the Polish
National Science Centre (contract number
2014/15/B/HS2/03435).

References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. 1998. Bridging.

Journal of Semantics, 15(1):83–113.
Herbert H. Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Proceedings of

the 1975 Workshop on Theoretical Issues in Natural
Language Processing, TINLAP 1975, pages 169–174,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Gilles Fauconnier. 1994. Mental Spaces: Aspects of
Meaning Construction in Natural Language. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA; London, May.

21



Claire Gardent, Hélène Manuélian, and Eric Kow. 2003.
Which bridges for bridging definite descriptions? In
Proceedings of the EACL 2003 Workshop on Linguis-
tically Interpreted Corpora, pages 69–76.

GCBT: Greek Coreference & Bridging Team. 2014.
Coreference & Bridging Annotation Guidelines.

Madelyn Anne Iris. 1988. Problems of the Part-Whole
Relation. In Martha Evens, editor, Relational Models
of the Lexicon, pages 261–288. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA.

Matthias Irmer. 2010. Bridging Inferences in Discourse
Interpretation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Leipzig.

Georges Kleiber. 1999. Associative anaphora and part-
whole relationship: The condition of alienation and the
principle of ontological congruence. Journal of Prag-
matics, 31(3):339–362.

Sebastian Löbner. 1996. Definite associative anaphora.
In S. Botley, editor, Approaches to Discourse
Anaphora: Proceedings of the Discourse Anaphora
and Resolution Colloquium (DAARC 96), pages 28–
39, Lancaster University.

Douglas B. Lenat. 1995. Cyc: A large-scale invest-
ment in knowledge infrastructure. Commun. ACM,
38(11):33–38, November.

Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Katarzyna Głowińska, Mateusz
Kopeć, Agata Savary, and Magdalena Zawisławska.
2015. Coreference in Polish: Annotation, Resolution
and Evaluation. Walter De Gruyter.

Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric An-
notation in the ARRAU Corpus. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mari-
ani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008),
pages 1170–1174, Marrakech, Morroco. European
Language Resources Association.

Massimo Poesio, Renata Vieira, and Simone Teufel.
1997. Resolving Bridging References in Unrestricted
Text. In Operational Factors in Practical, Robust
Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted Texts, pages 1–
6.

Massimo Poesio, Rodolfo Delmonte, Antonella Bristot,
Luminita Chiran, and Sara Tonelli. 2004. The
VENEX corpus of anaphora and deixis in spo-
ken and written Italian. Unpublished manuscript.
Available at cswww.essex.ac.uk/poesio/
publications/VENEX04.pdf.

Massimo Poesio. 2000. The GNOME annotation
scheme manual. Technical report, University of Es-
sex, United Kingdom.

Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-
new information. In P. Cole, editor, Syntax and se-
mantics: Vol. 14. Radical Pragmatics, pages 223–255.
Academic Press, New York.

Marta Recasens, Antònia Martí, and Mariona Taulé.
2007. Where Anaphora and Coreference Meet. An-
notation in the Spanish CESS-ECE Corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of RANLP 2007, Borovets, Bulgaria, pages
504–509.

Marta Recasens, Antònia Martí, and Constantin Orasan.
2012. Annotating Near-Identity from Corefer-
ence Disagreements. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, may. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Laure Vieu and Michel Aurnague. 2007. Part-of rela-
tions, functionality and dependence. In Michel Aur-
nague, Maya Hickmann, and Laure Vieu, editors, The
categorization of spatial entities in language and cog-
nition, volume 20 of Human Cognitive Processing,
pages 307–336. John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Morton E. Winston, Roger Chaffin, and Douglas J. Her-
rman. 1987. A Taxonomy of Part-Whole Relations.
Cognitive Science, 11(4):417–444.

Šárka Zikánová, Eva Hajičová, Barbora Hladká, Pavlína
Jínová, Jiří Mírovský, Anja Nedoluzhko, Lucie
Poláková, Kateřina Rysová, Magdaléna Rysová, and
Jan Václ. 2015. Discourse and Coherence. From the
Sentence Structure to Relations in Text. Institute of
Formal and Applied Linguistics.

22


