



















































Empirical Determination of Basic Heuristics for Narrative Content Planning


Proceedings of the INLG 2016 Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 19–26,
Edinburgh, September 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Empirical Determination of Basic Heuristics for Narrative Content Planning

Pablo Gervás
Instituto de Tecnologı́a del Conocimiento

Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain

pgervas@ucm.es

Abstract

Stories are sequential in nature but they are
used to package human experience that in-
volves many things happening at the same
time, to several people or in several locations.
The mechanics of this packaging process con-
stitute an instance of content planning that has
not ben addressed in sufficient detail in exist-
ing NLG work. The present paper reviews a
number of traditional stories in the light of the
basic concepts of narratology that would be in-
volved in the decisions involved in planning
the content for tellings of these stories, pro-
poses a number of basic principles to under-
stand what is happening, and explores a possi-
ble way in which these principles may trans-
late to basic heuristics for narrative content
planning.

1 Introduction

Stories are a fundamental vehicle used by people to
communicate and understand their environment. An
interesting point is that, although stories are gen-
erally sequential in nature,1 they are often used to
package human experience that is, in its original
form, anything but sequential. Complex sets of
events involving many characters over many loca-
tions – which do not correspond to an ordered se-
quence of events but rather to a cloud of events that

1Stores are linear in the sense that there is only a single path
through them, by reading the words and sentences in the or-
der they appear in the page. Non-linear narratives – such as
branching storylines, choose-your-own-adventure books or hy-
pertext works – exist as cultural artifacts, but they do not share
the importance that linear stories have as vehicles of human ex-
perience.

may overlap in time and space – are routinely con-
verted into narrative discourse in the form of novels,
short stories, or films. The mechanics of this process
constitute the basic skill that novelists and film mak-
ers exhibit. Although there has been some debate as
to whether writers first come up with a world and
then tell about it or directly invent the story with the
world being implicitly built during reading (Dehn,
1981) a computational model of the task involved in
each of these options would be a useful tool. Work
on cognitive models of writing has addressed the
process of text composition, but these efforts fo-
cus on the elementary composition of text structure
(Flower and Hayes, 1981) or the creativity affect-
ing the ideas to be included (Sharples, 1999), rather
than the story structure. Although these are worthy
research topics, and there are a number of additional
issues that are indeed significant from an psycho-
logical perspective, the mechanics that underlie the
transcription processes involved may provide impor-
tant insights on the composition processes.

Recent efforts in the field of natural language gen-
eration have addressed the formalization of the ba-
sic representational elements that are involved in
these process (Gervás, 2012; Gervás, 2014) but have
stopped short of identifying specific heuristics that
might be involved in the process.

The present paper reviews a number of traditional
stories in the light of the basic concepts of narratol-
ogy that would be involved in the decisions involved
in planning the content for tellings of these stories,
proposes a number of basic principles to understand
what is happening, and explores a possible way in
which these principles may translate to basic heuris-

19



tics for narrative content planning.

2 Related Work

The outlined programme requires the introduction of
basic concepts of narratology and brief discussion of
how they have been addressed in related studies.

2.1 Narrative

An important distinction is made in studying narra-
tive between the content of a story as it would have
taken place in the real world – or an imagined one
– and the way that an author chooses to present it.
The content of the story is exhaustive in detail and
all of its ingredients is fixed in time and space. The
way this content is presented by a given author in-
volves selecting only particular aspects to mention,
and telling those aspects in a particular linear or-
der. There are several ways of understanding and
referring to this distinction (see (Abbot, 1986) for
details), but for simplicity we will refer to the ex-
haustive content as the fabula of the story and to the
particular way of telling it as the discourse chosen
for it.

This distinction forces the consideration of two
different reference frames for time: the time in
which events happened in the fabula – which we will
refer to as story time –, and the point in the sequence
of the discourse in which the corresponding events
are mentioned – which we will refer to as discourse
time. The way in which story time and discourse
time differ, and the way in which they relate to one
another is traditionally known as chronology (Ab-
bot, 1986).

Discourse is linear and fabula usually is not. A
fabula may involve a world where only one action
takes place at a time, none of these actions over-
laps with the next, and each action is immediately
perceptible by an agent that was focusing on the
preceding one. But such cases are extremely rare.
More complex fabulae require discourse to break
the telling of events that happen simultaneously into
separate segments of discourse (sometimes known
as narrative threads), where each thread follows a
different character as they go through different ex-
periences over the same period of story time. This
is known as focalization (Genette, 1980). When dis-
course needs to change focalizer to go back in time

or go to a different location, these changes may need
to be explicitly marked as contexualizations of the
new thread with respect to the preceding one, in or-
der to help the reader make the correct interpretation
(Gervás, 2014).

2.2 Narrative Planning in Natural Language
Generation

The mechanics that this paper sets out to clarify cor-
respond to the particular instantiation of the content
planning task (Reiter and Dale, 2000) for the case
when the content to be conveyed is a fabula and the
text to be generated is a discourse, in the sense de-
scribed above. With respect to prior work in the field
of NLG, the present paper focuses on the task de-
scribed as narrative planner in Callaway’s work on
narrative prose generation (Callaway, 2002), which
focused on narrative realization rather than narrative
planning. It also correlates reasonably well with ef-
forts to generate discourse to describe sports events
(Lareau et al., 2011; Bouayad-Agha et al., 2011;
Allen et al., 2010) if the events that took place in
the corresponding games are considered the fabula.
The present work addresses the task in more detail
by considering aspects such as characters and pro-
tagonism. Also related is work on the automatic
generation of cinematic visual discourse (Jhala and
Young, 2010), which shares the goal of identifying
the best linear sequence of restricted views to con-
vey a given content (or fabula). Where cinematic
visual discourse focuses on restricted views as deter-
mined but the part of a scene that can be covered by a
camera take, the present paper focuses on restricted
views as determined by focalization on a given char-
acter – and telling only what that character might
have perceived.

A set of elementary data structures to capture
some of the concepts of narrative composition as de-
scribed in section 2.1 has been proposed in (Gervás,
2012; Gervás, 2014). This work introduced con-
cepts of a fibre – the restricted view of a given fab-
ula as perceived by a given focalizer character –, and
the tasks of heckling a fabula into fibres and splicing
a selection of those fibres into a single linear dis-
course.

20



1 Mother pig tells boys to build
2 Pig1 builds house of straw
3 Pig2 builds house of sticks
4 Pig3 builds house of bricks
5 Wolf blows house of straw away
6 Pig1 runs to house of sticks
7 Wolf blows house of sticks away
8 Pigs 1 & 2 run to house of bricks
9 Wolf fails to blow house and leaves

10 Pigs and their mother rejoice

Table 1: Story of the Three Little Pigs

2.3 Narrative Planning in Cognitive Models of
Writing

The classic model of the writing task from a cogni-
tive point of view (Flower and Hayes, 1981) focuses
on the production of informative documents, with
little attention devoted to the particular case of nar-
rative discourse. The work of (Sharples, 1999) ad-
dresses writing as a task of creative design, focusing
on the interplay between following an initial set of
constraints and revising those constraints as a result
of reflection on partial results obtained during dis-
course production. Such a high-level abstract view
of the process is clearly relevant for narrative gener-
ation, but the particular case of narrative discourse
as considered here was not considered.

3 Empirical Study of How Known Stories
are Planned

In order to understand how the mechanics of build-
ing a discourse for a given fabula operate, we turn to
the analysis of two traditional stories. For each one,
we try to infer what the fabula for the story might
be, and correlate that with the discourse as we have
come to know it. From his comparison, we hope to
obtain insights on the decisions that need to be taken
and the heuristics that may be employed to inform
them.

3.1 The Three Little Pigs

The story of the Three Little Pigs (outlined in Table
1) provides an interesting example of how the pro-
cess of content planning moves from a fabula to a
discourse. In this case, the fabula would be a record
of the activity of every character from the start of the
story to the end. A sketch of this would correspond
to the representation given in Figure 1a, which pro-

vides a graphical depiction of the fabula. Here you
can follow all characters as they move around the
story world and interact with one another. This rep-
resentation is accurate but does not correspond to
the version of the story that everybody knows. Be-
cause that corresponds to one possible discourse that
“tells” this fabula. This discourse is captured in the
representation given in Figure 1b. Rather than tell
what happpens to all characters at each point in time,
the discourse focuses on a small subset of the action
– that perceived by the characters that are more rel-
evant to the story at that point. Where the actions
relevant to the story at a given time point occur too
far apart to be perceived by the same characters, the
discourse focuses first on one possible location, and
then moves back in time to focus on a different loca-
tion. An example of this occurs in the second time
point of the story, where the discourse tells in se-
quence how each little pig builds a different house,
even though all the houses are built over the same
time period.

This corresponds to the traditional concept of fo-
calization: at time point 2, the discourse focalises
respectively on each of the three little pigs as they
build their houses.

There are a number of additional interesting fea-
tures to be observed in this story. First, there is a
significant portion of the fabula that is not present in
the discourse. The activity of the pig’s mother from
time point 1 – when she send off her sons into the
world – to time point 9 – when she joins them to cel-
ebrate their survival –, the activity of little pigs num-
ber two and three from they build their own house
to the time they are asked to harbour their harassed
brothers fleeing from the wolf, or the activity of the
wolf whenever he is not threatening the little pigs,
are not covered by the discourse.

We have no way of knowing – from the story as
it is traditionally told – whether nothing happens to
these character over those periods of time. We can
only infer that nothing happens to them that is rele-
vant to the story. This is an important point that can
later be translated into useful heuristics for content
planning.

Two important issues can be pointed out. First,
the story is about the three little pigs: other char-
acters such as the mother or the wolf only come
into the story as they interact with the main charac-

21



(a) Fabula. Story time flows left to right and top to bottom. (b) Discourse (marked out over the fabula). Discourse time
marked in Arabic numerals

Figure 1: Fabula and discourse for the story of the Three Little Pigs

1 Mother send LRRH to Granny
2 LRRH sets off through forest
3 Wolf send LRRH on ‘‘short cut’’
4 LRRH lingers to pick flowers
5 Wolf reaches Granny first
6 Wolf devours Granny
7 LRRH arrives at Granny’s
8 Wolf devours LRRH
9 Hunter arrives at Granny’s

10 Hunter kills Wolf and victims emerge

Table 2: Story of the Little Red Riding Hood

ters. The discourse follows one or more of the pigs
throughout the story. Second, even the main charac-
ters of the story may be ignored for a period of time
if nothing relevant to the overall outcome is happen-
ing to them over that period.

3.2 Little Red Riding Hood

A similar analysis may be carried out for the story of
Little Red Riding Hood (outlined in Table 2). Fab-
ula and discourse for this story are shown in Figure
2. In this case, a larger set of different characters is
involved, and the protagonist of the story is a sin-
gle character, Little Red Riding Hood herself. The
discourse indeed follows her most of the time – dis-
course segments 1 to 4, then briefly in 7, and finally
in 10. But discourse segments 5 to 6 and 8 to 9 fol-
low the wolf instead. This is a refinement to our pre-
vious analysis in that it introduces secondary char-
acters that need to be followed over part of the time
for the story of the protagonist to make sense. Here,

what happens to the wolf over the periods when the
girl is not present is relevant to the story. This is
because what happens to the wolf is partly shared
with the girl and partly shared with characters that
are closely related to the girl – the way in which
wolf replaces the grandmother to then impersonate
her in front of the girl. If this part of the fabula is not
told, the story as seen from the point of view of the
girl would not make sense. So the discourse needs to
focalise on him over the periods where these events
take place.

4 Identifying Abstract Principles from the
Case Studies

The stories analysed above may be taken as evidence
suggesting that a number of basic principles may be
at play in the structuring of discourses from fabulas.
Although the data set under consideration is cleary
insufficient to draw any significant conclusions, a
preliminary analysis of it may yield formative in-
sights that can be used to construct baseline imple-
mentations of this task of narrative content planning
or narrative composition.

An important point to consider is that any such
principles would ideally be relevant not only for
planning but also for interpreting narrative dis-
course. The interplay between interpretation and
composition – with estimates of what a reader might
interpret being used by writers to inform compo-
sition – has already been addressed as a plausible
model in (Gervás and León, 2016), and tentative im-

22



(a) Fabula. Story time flows left to right and top to bottom. (b) Discourse (marked out over the fabula). Discourse time
marked in Arabic numberals

Figure 2: Fabula and discourse for the story of Little Red Riding Hood

plementations were presented in (Gervás, 2014).

4.1 Basic Principles of Narrative Economy
The telling of stories is an instance of generic sit-
uation of communication involving a speaker, who
tells the story, and an audience, who listens to the
story. The audience may be made up of one or sev-
eral listeners, and these may be specific people or a
generic public. In all cases, the process as a whole is
governed by a number of implicit assumptions that
help speakers and listeners to optimise the process-
ing required of them to take part. It would be help-
ful if we could identify some of these assumptions
and formulate them as principles to govern our at-
tempts to model human storytelling abilities. Such
principles could be considered as particular instanti-
ations of Gricean principles (Grice, 1975) governing
exchanges between two agents.

When composing a story, a synthetic speaker may
apply these principles to guide any decisions it needs
to make. It would do so under the assumption that
a listener (whether synthetic or authentic) would ap-
ply similar principles to the process of interpreting
the resulting story. For the present purposes, we will
focus on the case where there is a single listener.
Extension to situations where there are multiple lis-
teners may be considered as future work. Also, we
consider principles applicable to a situation where
a given fabula is available to the speaker and not
available to the listener, and in which the goal for
the listener to become aware of this fabula by inter-

preting a discourse based on it composed by speaker.
The implicit task for the speaker is to construct the
discourse that most economically satisfies this goal.
The precise definition of economy may require fur-
ther investigation, but some baseline definitions can
be provided below.

The following basic principles may be postulated.
Principle of Focalized Perception: The listener

will best understand a discourse describing a part of
the fabula if it is phrased in terms of what a particular
character might perceive.

Principle of Faithful Reporting: If the fabula
contains an event involving a character that has al-
ready been mentioned in the discourse, that event
should be mentioned in the discourse.

Principle of Temporal Congruity: The ordering
of events as they appear in the discourse should fol-
low as closely as possible the ordering of events in
the fabula.

These principles have been stated at a high level
of abstraction, but more pragmatic considerations
may be derived from them. For instance, the Prin-
ciple of Focalized Perception leads directly to the
presentation of narrative discourse as a sequential
combination of narrative threads – or fibres, in the
terminiology proposed by (Gervás, 2014) – focal-
ized on different characters. For the more traditional
concepts of story, the focalizer for the most relevant
thread in a given story can be considered the pro-
tagonist. This underlies the conventions applied by

23



both speakers and listeners in a basic storytelling sit-
uation. The Principle of Faithful Reporting is ap-
plied by speakers to optimise the length of the dis-
course by making no mention of certain characters
when nothing is happening to them over long peri-
ods of time. The same principle is applied by lis-
teners, allowing them to assume that if no action has
been mentioned for a given character over a given
period of time, that character has remained in the
same conditions as it was when last mentioned. The
Principle of Temporal Congruity is applied when en-
coding a temporal sequence, by allowing the speaker
to simply enumerate the events on the assumption
that, unless explicitly mentioned, the order of pre-
sentation matches with the order of occurrence. This
reduces the need for temporal discourse markers or
connectors to situations where divergences from this
baseline occur. This generally happens when the
discourse switches to a different narrative thread –
which may require going back in time to where a
different character was abandoned in favour of the
focalizer of the thread that has just been reported –
or sometimes when fragments from the same thread
are presented in non-chronological order in the dis-
course (as in flashbacks or flashforwards on a given
character).

4.2 Basic Heuristics for Content Planning

This reduced set of principles can now be used to
produce a corresponding set of heuristics for narra-
tive content planning.

A synthetic speaker faced with the task of con-
structing a discourse for a given fabula should:

1. identify the character in the fabula most likely
to work as a protagonist

2. establish the narrative thread that focalises on
this protagonist

3. for any additional characters – other than the
protagonist – that appear in the resulting set of
threads

(a) identify points in the discourse where
these characters suffer changes of state
due to events that are not covered by the
set of thread already included in the dis-
course

(b) find the minimal span of narrative thread
that would ensure coverage of those events
if added to the discourse

(c) splice this minimal span into the discourse

This heuristic-driven procedure is designed to op-
erationalise the application of the stated principles as
a reference baseline. They should lead to discourses
that satisfy the principles in an elementary fash-
ion, while requiring for their application no complex
sources of knowledge. The relation between the pro-
cedure and the described principles is discussed be-
low.

Points 1, 2 and 3.b arise from application of the
Principle of Focalised Perception. Point 3.a is driven
by the need to satisfy the Principle of Faithful Re-
porting. Point 3.c would need to take into consider-
ation the Principle of Temporal Congruity either by
inserting the additional span of narrative threads at
a time of the discourse where the principle is satis-
fied, or by inserting additional temporal markers in
the discourse to indicate where deviations from the
expected chronology occurr.

4.3 Testing the Application of the Heuristics on
the Studied Cases

The acceptability of the heuristic-driven procedure
can be tested by checking that applying them to the
known fabulae for the stories we have considered
in detail does indeed lead to discourses that satisfy
the basic principles. If the resulting discourses also
match the known discourses for these stories this
might be considered as reinforcement for the valid-
ity of these heuristics as a baseline.

The case of the Three Little Pigs is very basic
if one allows for the three pigs to act collectively
as protagonist. Then the story arises naturally from
following them through the story, separating int dif-
ferent narrative threads when they split apart, rejoin-
ing when they meet again, and ordering the resulting
thread spans according to the Principle of Temporal
Congruity.

The case of Little Red Riding Hood can be dis-
cussed over the fabula and discourse presented in
Figure 2. The valid choice for protagonist is the girl.
Adding the thread for the girl to the draft discourse
would result in a discourse covering discourse points
1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 10. Application of point 3 of the

24



heuristics would identify relevant events involving
the grandmother, the wolf and the hunter that are not
covered yet. Adding the thread of the wolf from fab-
ula time point 4 to fabula time point 5 would cover
all the events relevant to the grandmother and some
of those by the wolf. Adding the thread for the
grandmother would miss out fabula time point 5 –
she has already been eaten by the wolf then – so this
seems more economical. The events corresponding
to discourse points 8 and 9 may covered by adding
the thread for fabula time points 7 and 8 for either
the wolf or the hunter. In each case, the choice re-
sults in a different result for discourse point 9, one
focusing on the wolf and one on the hunter.

In both cases, the principles outlined are satis-
fied by the resulting discourses. The discourses also,
within minimal variation generally match the known
presentation of the stories.

5 Discussion

It is clear from the discussion above that there is
more to narrative content planning than the elemen-
tary principles outlined so far. In the original story
of Little Red Riding Hood, the span of thread to ex-
plain the presence of the wolf is not inserted into the
discourse until it becomes apparent to the girl that
she is not facing her grandmother. This seems to vi-
olate the principles as outlined. However, this type
of operation may be considered as an exploitation
of the principles by the speaker, where the explana-
tion is withheld until the last possible moment, to
enhance the surprise that it creates when it arrives.

Another important point to note is that the sto-
ries considered so far are very simple in nature, in
as much as the additional spans that have to be in-
serted are very short. Further work is required to ex-
plore how principles such as those stated here might
extend to more complex stories, where threads cov-
ering several time points need to be combined to-
gether. Specific principles would be required to gov-
ern how such longer threads are broken down into
smaller fragments to allow focalization to switch
back and forth between them over long time peri-
ods. This practice is well established, for instance,
in TV series following multiple characters.

Regarding the relation with previous work, the
principles and the heuristic-driven procedure out-

lined would be applicable in an implemented sys-
tem for narrative composition such as the one de-
scribed in (Gervás, 2014). They would rely on simi-
lar operations of heckling to identify the set of narra-
tive threads corresponding to the fabula under con-
sideration, and they would provide content specific
guidance during the splicing process which is only
generically described in the original description of
the system.

With respect to efforts to generate discourse to de-
scribe sports events (Allen et al., 2010), the present
paper addresses the task at a slightly lower level of
detail in terms of how the fabula is described. Some
of the techniques presented in (Lareau et al., 2011;
Bouayad-Agha et al., 2011) may be employed to
identify the equivalent of a fabula for a given sports
event. In that case, the principles and the procedure
outlined here could be applicable to the task of con-
structing a discourse for such a fabula.

The issue of identifying the correct order in which
to present the events of a story has been addressed
in detail in (Shimorina, 2016). This work differs
from the issues discussed in the present paper in
that it considers the input to have already the form
of a sequence. In this way, it addresses the prob-
lem of ordering events in the discourse for a story
more in terms of selecting possible relative order-
ings for a given already linearised discourse. The
present paper tackles the problem from one step fur-
ther back than this, and considers temporal ordering
in the context of the problem of linearization and the
selection of appropriate focalizers. With respect to
the introduction of markers for temporal ordering,
there should be some interaction between the strate-
gic decisions of content planning and the tactical de-
cisions of surface realization. This will be addressed
in further work.

6 Conclusions and Further Work

The study of well-known stories in terms of the basic
concepts of fabula and discourse highlights the im-
portance of focalization and chronology as tools for
content planning. Based on elementary insights ex-
tracted from this study, a number of basic principles
have been postulated that would apply to the task of
constructing an acceptable discourse from a given
fabula. These principles have been operationalised

25



into a heuristic-driven procedure for addressing the
task planning the content for a discourse that ade-
quately describes the given fabula. The given proce-
dure results in discourses that satisfy the basic prin-
ciples and roughly match with the discourses known
for the stories that have been considered.

The principles and procedures described in this
paper are a tentative initial approach to bring to-
gether the terminological and conceptual frame-
works of narratology and natural language genera-
tion. The paper combines the narratological view of
a story – as a narrative with a fabula, a discourse, and
focalization and chronology establishing the relation
between one and the other – and the NLG view of
content that needs to be planned into a discourse.
These two views describe the same operation but are
very rarely combined into a single view of the prob-
lem. By bringing them together, this paper attempts
to exploit the synergies that arise. A major contribu-
tion is the formulation of the problem in terms that
are reasonably specific – events, state changes, char-
acters, protagonism – that allow for broad interpre-
tation in the context of possibly different empirical
settings or natural language generation systems.

Three different further efforts beyond the work
described here can be foreseen. First, larger num-
ber of existing stories should be studied for further
insights into how their corresponding fabulae relate
to the discourses used to convey them. It may also
consider cases where more than one discourse is
available for what is nominally the same story. This
would allow consideration of explicit choices made
by writers in creating the different versions of the
discourse. Second, more complex stories, as out-
lined in section 5, should be considered, with a view
to extending or refining the set of principles pro-
posed here. Third, the procedure should be imple-
mented in existing story generation systems to test
its applicability over different representations of sto-
ries and specific domains.

References

S. Abbot. 1986. Narrative. Cambridge University Press.
N. D. Allen, J. R. Templon, P.S. McNally, L. Birnbaum,

and K.Hammond. 2010. Statsmonkey: A data-driven
sports narrative writer. In Computational Models of
Narrative: AAAI Fall Symposium 2010.

N. Bouayad-Agha, G.Casamayor, and L. Wanner. 2011.
Content selection from an ontology-based knowledge
base for the generation of football summaries. In Proc.
ENLG 2011, pages 72–81.

C. B. Callaway. 2002. Narrative prose generation. Arti-
ficial Intelligence, 139(2):213–252.

Natalie Dehn. 1981. Story generation after tale-spin.
In Ann Drinan, editor, Proceedings of the 7th interna-
tional joint conference on artificial intelligence (IJCAI
1981), 24-28 August 1981, pages 16–18, Menlo Park,
CA, USA. AAAI.

L. Flower and J.R. Hayes. 1981. A cognitive process
theory of writing. College Composition and Commu-
nication, 32(4):365–387.

G. Genette. 1980. Narrative discourse : an essay in
method. Cornell University Press.

P. Gervás and C. León. 2016. Intgrating purpose and
revision into a computational model of literary gener-
ation. In Mirko Degli Espositi, Eduardo G. Altmann,
and François Pachet, editors, Creativity and Univer-
sality in Language. Springer.

P. Gervás. 2012. From the fleece of fact to narrative
yarns: a computational model of narrative composi-
tion. In Proc. Workshop on Computational Models of
Narrative 2012.

P. Gervás. 2014. Composing narrative discourse for sto-
ries of many characters: a case study over a chess
game. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 29(4),
08/14.

H. P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole
and J. L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and Semantics: Vol.
3: Speech Acts, pages 41–58. Academic Press, San
Diego, CA.

A. Jhala and R. M. Young. 2010. Cinematic visual
discourse: Representation, generation, and evaluation.
IEEE Trans. on Comp. Int. and AI in Games, 2(2):69–
81.

F. Lareau, M. Dras, and R. Dale. 2011. Detecting inter-
esting event sequences for sports reporting. In Proc.
ENLG 2011, pages 200–205.

E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Language
Generation Systems. Cambridge University Press.

M. Sharples. 1999. How We Write: Writing As Creative
Design. Routledge, June.

A. Shimorina. 2016. Generating Stories from Different
Event Orders: A Statistical Approach. Master’s thesis,
University of Malta, Malta.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by FP7 projects
WHIM (Grant Agreement 611560) and PROS-
ECCO (Grant Agreement 600653).

26


