



















































Identification, characterization, and grounding of gradable terms in clinical text


Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 17–26,
Berlin, Germany, August 12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identification, characterization, and grounding of gradable terms
in clinical text

Chaitanya Shivade†, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe§, Eric Fosler-Lussier†, Albert M. Lai∗
†Department of Computer Science and Engineering,

§Department of Linguistics,
∗Department of Biomedical Informatics,

The Ohio State University, Columbus OH 43210, USA.
shivade@cse.ohio-state.edu, mcdm@ling.ohio-state.edu

fosler@cse.ohio-state.edu, albert.lai@osumc.edu

Abstract

Gradable adjectives are inherently vague
and are used by clinicians to document
medical interpretations (e.g., severe reac-
tion, mild symptoms). We present a com-
prehensive study of gradable adjectives
used in the clinical domain. We auto-
matically identify gradable adjectives and
demonstrate that they have a substantial
presence in clinical text. Further, we show
that there is a specific pattern associated
with their usage, where certain medical
concepts are more likely to be described
using these adjectives than others. Inter-
pretation of statements using such adjec-
tives is a barrier in medical decision mak-
ing. Therefore, we use a simple prob-
abilistic model to ground their meaning
based on their usage in context.

1 Introduction

Expressions used in a language are said to be
vague if they do not convey a precise meaning.
Sentences using vague expressions do not give rise
to precise truth conditions (Kennedy, 2007). Con-
sider the following sentence: “The patient was
maintained on a high dose of insulin.” Interpret-
ing such statements is a problem since it is un-
clear what was the exact amount of insulin used.
Gradability (Sapir, 1944; Lyons, 1977) is a seman-
tic property that allows a word to describe the in-
tensity of a measure in context, and thus enables
comparative constructs. In the above example,
the word high is said to be gradable since it con-
veys the meaning associated with the measure -
amount.

Gradable adjectives inherently possess a degree
of vagueness and are used in a language to express
epistemic uncertainties (Kennedy, 2007; Frazier et

al., 2008). While judgments are strong in extreme
cases, there exist borderline cases, where it is dif-
ficult to ascribe an adjective. In the above exam-
ple, some amounts of insulin would be considered
as a high dose by all, other amounts would never
be considered a high dose, but there is a middle
range where it can be difficult for even experts to
judge, if it is a high dose. This is because, differ-
ent experts may have differing thresholds for what
constitutes a high dose.

Broadly, gradable adjectives can be classified
into two categories based on their interpretation
as measure functions (Bartsch, 1975; Kennedy,
1999). Adjectives such as tall, heavy, expensive
can be viewed as measurements that are clearly as-
sociated with a numerical quantity (height, weight,
cost). In contrast, adjectives like clever, beauti-
ful, naive are more complex and underspecified for
the exact feature being measured. Gradable adjec-
tives have been the focus of several recent studies
(de Melo and Bansal, 2013; Ruppenhofer et al.,
2014) in the NLP community. Gradablity is prop-
erty not limited to adjectives and also extends to
other parts of speech such as adverbs (Shivade et
al., 2015; Ruppenhofer et al., 2015) (e.g., slightly,
marginally), nouns (e.g., joy, euphoria), and also
verbs (e.g., drizzling, pouring).

In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study
of gradable adjectives used in clinical text. Using
a method proposed by Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe
(2000), we identify the gradable adjectives in our
dataset of clinical notes. We found that these ad-
jectives have a substantial presence (30%) in our
data. Further, we show that there is a specific pat-
tern in which gradable adjectives are used: some
medical concepts are more likely to be modified
by these adjectives than others. Finally, we focus
on a specific subset of gradable adjectives asso-
ciated with measurements of numerical quantities
and demonstrate the use of a simple computational

17



model to ground their meaning.

2 Dataset preparation

We used 58,880 clinical notes on Chronic Lym-
phocytic Leukemia (CLL), 2,652 notes on prostate
cancer (PC) and 14,378 notes on Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) repre-
senting three different cohorts from our institution
as a corpus for our study. Thus we had a total of
75,910 notes with an average word count of 1,476
words per note. In addition, we also had access to
8,192 echocardiograms, which are cardiology re-
ports mostly containing semi-structured data with
few lines of free text (avg. word count = 64). All
clinical notes were from adult patients collected
for a period from 2005 to 2010 with necessary ap-
proval of the institutional review board at our in-
stitution.

These notes are written by healthcare profes-
sionals communicating different aspects of patient
care and therefore correspond to different note
types. For instance, “Progress Notes” are writ-
ten by physicians documenting periodic develop-
ments in the condition of patients, their diagno-
sis, and treatment. “Operative Notes” are written
by surgeons documenting the pre-operative diag-
nosis, description of the procedure, and the post-
operative condition. Our corpus consists of notes
belonging to 98 different note types. The name of
each note type is mentioned in the first few lines of
a templated document header and often has multi-
ple lexical variations. For instance, a “Progress
Note” can be an “Inpatient Progress Note” or an
“Outpatient Progress Note.” These names were
manually normalized to 18 note types, and con-
firmed by a physician for correctness. Each note
from our dataset was thus mapped to one of these
normalized types.

Clinical notes have a typical structure: the con-
tent is often organized in sections (e.g., “History
of Present Illness” followed by “Physical Exami-
nation” and ending with “Assessment and Plan”).
The beginning of a section is formatted as distinct
text with the section name in capital letters fol-
lowed by a newline characted. We used a sim-
ple rule-based system to identify section headers
and map the contents of a note to these sections.
As with note types, section names also had mul-
tiple lexical variations (e.g., “Physical Examina-
tion” can be “Physical Exam” or “Physical Assess-
ment” or simply “Exam”). Our corpus had 587

section names which were normalized to 17 note
sections with a physician’s approval.

3 Identification of gradable adjectives

First, we want to automatically identifiy gradable
adjectives in our corpus. We reimplemented the
method described in (Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe,
2000), a log linear regression model that learns the
weights associated with two features: 1) Number
of times an adjective is used in comparative and
superlative constructs, and 2) Number of times an
adjective is modified by terms that intensify or di-
minish the semantic meaning of adjectives (mostly
adverbs such as very, little, somewhat, etc. and
a few nouns such as bit, etc.). Hatzivassiloglou
and Wiebe (2000) manually created a list of 73
such terms. Their model was generated using the
1987 Wall Street Journal Corpus (Marcus et al.,
1993) and tested on a hand curated gold standard
dataset of 453 adjectives (235 gradable and 218
non-gradable) created using the Collins Birming-
ham University International Language Database
dictionary, which is annotated for gradable and
non-gradable adjectives.

We developed a logistic regression model with
the two features described above. For the first fea-
ture, a morphology analysis component was devel-
oped to identify inflections of adjectives from their
base form. This consisted of identifying adjectives
in their comparative form using simple parts-of-
speech tagging (Toutanova et al., 2003) and reg-
ular expression based rules. Although the test
set used in (Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000) is
available, the list of 73 noun phrases and adverbial
modifications is not. We therefore compiled this
list using ten fold cross validation to capture the
second feature. In each fold of training, we found
all the adverbs and nouns modifying the gradable
adjectives using the Stanford Dependency Parser
(version 2.0.4) (de Marneffe et al., 2006). We de-
termined the best subset by choosing an optimal
threshold for the (k = 81) most frequent modifiers
through cross validation. This gave us the second
feature for gradability.

Although the method was developed on
newswire text, we found that it worked surpris-
ingly well for our clinical corpus. We trained the
model on clinical notes and evaluated it on the
test set published by Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe
(2000). Of the 453 adjectives in that gold standard
test set, we found that 61 adjectives (e.g. wealthy,

18



Study Corpus Gradable Non-gradable Precision Recall F-Score

H & W(2000) 1987 WSJ 235 218 94.15 82.13 87.73
Our study Clinical notes 217 175 99.51 84.32 91.34

Table 1: Performance of gradable adjective identification on the test set from Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe
(2000).

zesty) were not present in our corpus, resulting in a
total of 392 adjectives (217 gradable and 175 non-
gradable). Table 1 outlines (does not compare) the
performance of classification in the two studies.
Since the F-score of our model is reasonably high,
we use it to identify the gradable adjectives in our
corpus. In addition to the 392 adjectives present
in the test set, the model identifies 1,709 gradable
adjectives in our data. These were domain-specific
words such as therapeutic, retroperitoneal, ede-
matous, common adjectives such as acute, febrile,
gentle, pale, and also some interesting compo-
sitions such as well-nourished, low-normal, and
near-complete.

4 Usage characterization

Vagueness induced by gradable adjectives has
been studied by researchers in the past. We want to
investigate how frequently such language appears
in clinical notes, and if there are certain situations
where these terms are more likely to be used. In
the following sections, we show that not only do
gradable adjectives have a substantial presence in
clinical text, but there is also a definite pattern in
their usage.

4.1 Presence of gradable adjectives

Using the model described in the previous sec-
tion, we found all gradable adjectives present in
our corpus. The percentage of adjectives identi-
fied as gradable in the notes across the 18 nor-
malized note types was calculated. This percent-
age is fairly consistent across different note types,
µ = 30.85%, σ = 4.9%.

In addition to examining the distribution of
gradable adjectives across notes types, we per-
formed a finer analysis by calculating their per-
centage across different sections in a note. The
percentage of adjectives identified as gradable
across the 17 normalized sections was calculated.
Again, it if fairly consistent (µ = 31.45%, σ =
6.2%) across different sections.

4.2 Usage pattern

In this section, we present statistics that char-
acterize the usage of gradable adjectives in de-
scribing medical concepts of different semantic
types in clinical notes. The Unified Medical Lan-
guage System (UMLS) (Lindberg et al., 1993) is
a repository of multiple biomedical vocabularies
and standards, developed by the US National Li-
brary of Medicine. A major component of the
UMLS is the Semantic Network which assigns
a semantic type to every concept. A semantic
type is a high-level category (e.g., “Sign or Symp-
tom,” “Pharmacological Substance,” “Plant,” “En-
zyme”) analogous to named-entity types and there
are 133 such semantic types in the 2013AA ver-
sion of the UMLS.

MetaMap (Aronson, 2001) is a program that can
map words from free text documents to concepts
from the UMLS. Using the Stanford Dependency
Parser, we identified medical concepts that were
modified by a gradable adjective in our corpus
and looked up their semantic types. For example:
in extreme fatigue, the gradable adjective extreme
modifies the term fatigue which has the semantic
type “Sign or Symptom,” while in severe steno-
sis, the adjective severe modifies the term steno-
sis which has the semantic type “Disease or Syn-
drome.”

We hypothesized that gradable adjectives mod-
ify certain nouns more often than others. In order
to test this hypothesis, we calculated how often
nouns of a particular semantic type are modified
by gradable adjectives. These frequencies were
calculated for the three sets of clinical notes cor-
responding to three different diagnoses (CLL, PC,
and MRSA) in our corpus. Nouns from a certain
semantic types were very frequently described us-
ing gradable adjectives (e.g., “Finding,” “Thera-
peutic or Preventive Procedure,” “Disease or Syn-
drome”), and hence had high frequency values in
all three datasets. Similarly, nouns from a few se-
mantic types were never described by gradable ad-
jectives (e.g., “Reptiles,” “Professional Society”).

19



Dataset CLL PC MRSA

CLL 1.00 0.93 0.90
PC 0.93 1.00 0.91
MRSA 0.90 0.91 1.00

Table 2: Spearman’s Correlation between clinical
notes for semantic type modification by gradable
adjectives.

We confirmed this by sampling each dataset into
five equal folds and repeating the frequency calcu-
lations. The observations for frequency variations
were consistent for every fold across each dataset.
We performed a simple add-one Laplace smooth-
ing to account for low frequency semantic types
across datasets. Since the size of the three datasets
were significantly different, we normalized the
frequencies by the sum of frequencies across all
semantic types within each dataset. The normal-
ized frequency values represent the probability of
a semantic type being modified by gradable adjec-
tives in a dataset. We computed the Spearman’s
correlation for these 133 probabilities across each
pair of datasets and found that there was a high
correlation between them (Table 2). This high cor-
relation across all three diagnoses suggests a defi-
nite pattern for the usage of gradable adjectives in
clinical text.

5 Probabilistic Modeling

Gradable adjectives are widely studied as im-
plicit or explicit measurements of certain quanti-
ties (Bartsch, 1975; Kennedy, 1999). Moreover,
they also participate in a scale. For example, the
adjectives (warm < hot < scorching) represent a
scalar relationship and implicitly measure temper-
ature. While judgments to associate an adjective
with extreme values are very strong, those for bor-
derline cases are difficult. In the above example,
certain values of temperature are definitely warm
and others are definitely considered hot (and yet
not scorching). But there is always a set of values
in between which can be either warm or hot. In
order to capture this intuition, we created a proba-
bilistic model using Bayes rule:

P (grad|num) = P (num|grad) · P (grad)
P (num)

(1)
where grad represents the gradable term and num
the numerical value.

Figure 1: Probabilistic modeling of adjectives de-
scribing systolic function.

Clinicians frequently document their assess-
ments for a patient along with evidence to support
their claim, e.g., “Mild anemia, Hgb 8.2.”
This sentence has a medical concept “anemia” be-
ing described by a gradable adjective mild on the
basis of the measurement of a numerical value -
hemoglobin. For several medical concepts, we ex-
tracted using regular expressions, instances where
an assessment for a medical concept was made us-
ing a gradable term, along with a numerical ev-
idence to support the claim. Specifically, we in-
dexed all sentences using Lucene and searched for
ones containing the medical term (e.g. anemia)
and the quantity of interest (e.g. hemoglobin).
Finally, numerical values and adjectives were ex-
tracted using regular expressions. In the following
subsections, we demonstrate that we can ground
the meaning of gradable terms using the above
model.

5.1 Systolic Function

Systolic function is a measure of how well the
lower left pumping chamber of the heart sends
blood to the rest of the body. It is measured using
a numerical quantity called left ventricular ejec-
tion fraction (LVEF) which is documented in an
echocardiogram. There is variation among physi-
cians defining the precise threshold for a normal
ejection fraction (Sanderson, 2007). While normal
values range from 55 to 65, values less than 30
imply that the systolic function is severely com-
promised. We extracted LVEF values from the
echocardiogram reports and their corresponding
descriptions of systolic function. Posterior prob-
abilities P (gradable|LV EF ) were calculated us-
ing equation (1) which resulted in a plot as shown
in Figure 1.

From the 8,192 echocardiogram reports, we
found six gradable adjectives in association with

20



LVEF values. While the adjectives severe, mild
and moderate are associated with systolic dys-
function, the adjectives low-normal, normal and
hyperdynamic are associated with systolic func-
tion. Although there is discussion in the clinical
community regarding qualitative descriptions for
ejection fraction (Radford, 2005), there is varia-
tion in these recommendations. Moreover, certain
terms though used frequently (e.g. low-normal)
are never a part of such guidelines.

An interesting observation can be made regard-
ing Figure 1, drawing an analogy from the concept
of WordNet dumbbells (Sheinman et al., 2012).
A WordNet dumbbell is a representation involv-
ing an antonym pair (e.g. small and large) as two
ends of a semantic scale with semantically similar
adjectives arranged in a radial fashion around each
adjective. The antonym acting as a centroid and its
synonyms as members of a cluster represent words
that most likely participate in the same scale. For
example, the antonym pair (small, large) results
in the dumbbell with clusters (small, tiny, pocket-
size, smallish) and (large, gigantic, monstrous,
huge) at the two ends. WordNet dumbbells have
been used in the past (Sheinman et al., 2013; de
Melo and Bansal, 2013) to group gradable adjec-
tives belonging to the same scale. It can be seen
that the analogous dumbbell consisting of (severe,
mild, moderate) and (low-normal, normal, hyper-
dynamic) can be constructed using the modified
terms systolic dysfunction and systolic function
respectively.

The model captures essential aspects of grad-
ability very well. The scalar relationships (severe
< moderate < mild) and (low-normal < normal
< hyperdynamic) can be inferred by imposing an
order on the mean values for the posterior dis-
tributions of these adjectives. Strong judgments
for extreme cases and uncertainty for borderline
cases can be observed in the form of flat peaks for
specific intervals and overlapping distributions for
mid-range values.

5.2 Anemia

Hemoglobin is a protein in the red blood cells
(RBCs) that contains iron and carries oxygen from
the lungs to the rest of the body. Anemia is a
blood disorder, operationally defined as a reduc-
tion in the hemoglobin content of blood caused by
a decrease in the RBCs below a reference inter-
val of healthy individuals. The range of normal

Figure 2: Probabilistic modeling of descriptions
for anemia.

hemoglobin values for the laboratories at our in-
stitution is from 11.7 to 15.5. We found the two
adjectives severe and mild to be most commonly
used for describing anemia. A number of notes
also mentioned anemia with no modifier at all.
Figure 2 shows the posterior probabilities calcu-
lated for the three modifications of anemia: mild,
no adjective, and severe using the model outlined
in equation 1.

It is interesting to note that when physicians re-
fer to anemia without an adjective, it is neither
severe nor mild, and has a value in between. As
with systolic function, we can infer the ordinal re-
lationship (severe anemia < anemia < mild ane-
mia), considering the mean values for the poste-
rior distributions of these adjectives. Also, strong
judgments for extreme values and uncertainty for
borderline cases are evident through flat peaks and
overlapping distributions respectively. We also
found the adjective moderate being used in our
data for describing anemia for hemoglobin values
between mild and severe. However, it had few oc-
currences and hence we did not include moderate
in our model. Other adjectives such as significant,
marked, slight and pernicious were also found in
the data but with low frequency counts.

5.3 Platelet count

Platelets (also known as thrombocytes) are color-
less blood cells that help the process of blood clot-
ting. There are about 150,000 to 450,000 platelet
per microlilter of blood in the human body (Erkurt
et al., 2012). While the condition resulting from
a lower than normal platelet count is known as
thrombocytopenia, the condition resulting from a
higher than normal platelet count is referred to
as thrombocytosis. Since the notion of low and
high counts is gradable, we treat equivalent de-
scriptions of thrombocytopenia and thrombocyto-

21



Figure 3: Probabilistic modeling of descriptions
for variations in platelet count.

sis as gradable. In addition we also extracted in-
stances of clinical notes where the platelet count
was referred to as normal. Using these three de-
scriptions, we applied the Bayes rule explained in
Equation 1.

Figure 3 shows posterior probabilities calcu-
lated for these three descriptions of platelet count.
As with previous examples, we can infer the or-
dinal relationship (thrombocytopenia < normal <
thrombocytosis) by considering the mean values of
their posterior distributions.

5.4 Renal Function

Creatinine is a chemical made by the body and is
used to supply energy to the muscles. Creatinine
is removed from the body by the kidneys and re-
leased through urine. If kidney function (or re-
nal function) is not normal, creatinine level in the
body increases (Israni and Kasiske, 2011). Ab-
normal renal function is referred to through differ-
ent terminologies such as renal insufficiency, re-
nal failure, and renal dysfunction. The vagueness
introduced by the use of these gradable terms is
also evident in clinical literature. Hsu and Cher-
tow (2000) in their paper titled “Chronic renal con-
fusion: insufficiency, failure, dysfunction, or dis-
ease” propose a set of laboratory values to classify
patients as mild, moderate and advanced degrees
of chronic renal insufficiency to “facilitate com-
munication among nephrologists and other physi-
cians and provide a framework for comparison of
populations.” It should be noted that linguistic am-
biguity is not the only reason for this confusion
and also has medical explanations which are be-
yond the scope of discussion of our work.

This problem was acknowledged by the med-
ical community. More than 30 new definitions
were proposed (Bellomo et al., 2004) and a new
standard is now in place (Khwaja, 2012). How-

Figure 4: Probabilistic modeling of descriptions
for variations in creatinine.

ever, our data is older (from 2005 to 2010) and
has frequent occurrences of these terms. We
extracted instances for the gradable terms “nor-
mal renal function,” “renal failure,” “renal insuffi-
ciency,” “renal failure” and the corresponding cre-
atinine values mentioned by physicians in the text.
Further, we computed posterior probabilities for
P (gradable|creatinine) using our model (Figure
4). The range of normal creatinine values is be-
tween 0.60 to 1.10 for the laboratories at our in-
stitution. In comparison with other examples dis-
cussed so far, it can be seen from the plot that
there is a greater confusion in the use of these
terms. This is especially evident in the interval
[2,3]. Again, this confirms with the property of
uncertainty for borderline cases. However, an or-
dering (normal < dysnfunction < insufficiency <
failure) can still be inferred.

5.5 Evaluation

We evaluated the model to determine if it fits the
data well. Using leave one out cross validation,
we tested if the model was able to predict the ad-
jective for a given numerical value. The gradable
mentioned in each text extract was regarded as the
gold standard prediction label. While creating a
model, we ensured that there were at least three
data points for each measurement value of the nu-
merical quantity present in the data. This allowed
us to compute priors for all values in the data. In
practice, one would either need large amounts of
data or employ smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 1995)
to ensure prior calculations for all numerical val-
ues are possible. Accuracy is calculated across
all gradable terms for each medical concept as de-
scribed in previous sections (Table 3). The models
achieve fairly high accuracies which demonstrates
that our model fits the data well.

22



Medical Number of Accuracy
concept data points (%)

Systolic function 10,201 90.4
Anemia 12,711 88.3
Platelet count 14,234 94.6
Renal function 16,309 74.8

Table 3: Evaluation of probabilistic models to pre-
dict gradable terms for numerical values in the
data.

6 Limitations and future work

We illustrated through examples that gradable
terms in clinical text can be effectively analyzed
through data using a simple probabilistic model.
The model is developed for cases where the use of
gradable terms is dependent on a single numerical
quantity. We included analysis of descriptions for
heart function and kidney function. Similar analy-
sis can be conducted for liver function which mea-
sures the amount of bilirubin in the body. Com-
mon tests such as body mass index, blood pres-
sure and heart rate can also be analyzed in this
way. Such a data-driven approach can help in cre-
ation of a standard terminology and avoid confu-
sions (Hsu and Chertow, 2000).

However, context sensitivity is an important
characteristic of gradable adjectives (Kennedy,
2007). Thus, “John is a tall boy” and “John is
a tall basketball player” convey different mean-
ings despite using the same gradable adjective for
the same person (van Rooij, 2011). Similarly, the
gradable description of a medical concept may not
always be dependent on a single numerical quan-
tity. For example, there is a slight variation in the
upper limit of normal (ULN) values for creatinine
with gender. The ULN for males is 1.3 while that
for females is 1.2 at our institution. Similarly, the
lower limit of normal for hemoglobin in males is
11.7 while that for females is 13.2. These varia-
tions are small in magnitude. However, this is a
problem in cases where the dependency on other
variables is much more pronounced. We illustrate
this through an example.

Bone Marrow Cellularity (BMC) is the volume
ratio of hematopoietic cells (blood cells that give
rise to other blood cells) and fat. Pathologists per-
form a bone marrow analysis and use the three
adjectives hypocellular, normocellular, and hyper-
cellular to describe the sample. However, BMC

Figure 5: Dependency of gradable terms for BMC
on age.

is largely dependent on age of the patient. It is
100% for newborn infants and reduces with age
in adults (Muschler et al., 2001). Therefore, the
notion of hypocellular, normocellular, and hyper-
cellular also varies with age. We extracted BMC
values and associated adjectives from our data.
Figure 5 shows the likelihood plot of BMC val-
ues against associated age of patients with three
different colors for the adjectives hypocellular,
hypercellular, and normocellular. Although the
three gradable descriptions are linearly separa-
ble, P (gradable|BMC) cannot be modeled using
Equation 1, which ignores the age of the patient.

Time is a very common variable that often plays
an important role in clinical assessments. This is
most evident in blood sugar values for diabetic
patients that vary with every hour depending on
times of food consumption. Temporal adjectives
are frequently found as descriptions of medical
concepts. Some of the commonly found tempo-
ral adjectives in our data include acute, chronic,
recent, progressive, worsening, stable, persistent,
and continued.

Clinical notes are created and read by differ-
ent individuals associated with the hospital. Vi-
tal decisions such as clinical trial recruitment, ad-
herence to treatment guidelines, etc. are made by
healthcare professionals based on their interpre-
tation of these clinical narratives. Introducing
automation in these processes is an active area
of NLP research (Demner-Fushman et al., 2009).
This decision making becomes challenging if lan-
guage used in the clinical notes is vague and does
not deliver a precise meaning. Our work is a small
step to illustrate that gradability and its associated
vagueness is an important aspect of clinical text
which can be modeled through data. Creating a
single model that can flexibly incorporate multiple
variables and yet capture the properties of grad-

23



able adjectives can be an interesting line of re-
search for the future.

7 Related Work

The phenomenon of adjectival modification in
biomedical discourse has also been a subject of
interest. Through empirical observations, Chute
and Elkin (1997) classified frequent modifiers for
medical concepts into two types: clinical modi-
fiers (e.g., chronic, severe, acute) and administra-
tive qualifiers (e.g., history of, no evidence of, sta-
tus post). Bodenreider and Pakhomov (2003) ex-
tended this idea and compared adjectival modifica-
tions in biomedical literature and patient records.
They found that while patient records contain
markers for uncertainty (e.g., possible, probable)
and non-specific symptoms (e.g., low back pain,
discomfort), scientific articles are precise about at-
tributes of organisms or age-groups (e.g., human,
canine, neonatal).

Adjectives have been studied extensively in
computational linguistics. WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) classifies adjectives into two broad cate-
gories: descriptive and relational. Descriptive
adjectives (e.g., big house, heavy bag) ascribe
the value of an attribute to a noun, while rela-
tional adjectives (e.g., atomic bomb, dental hy-
giene) do not. Among the various distinctions be-
tween descriptive and relational adjectives, rela-
tional adjectives are typically not gradable (Fell-
baum, 1998).

Although association between adjectives and
numerical quantities has been a topic of research
in some studies (Aramaki et al., 2007; Davidov
and Rappoport, 2010; Iftene and Moruz, 2010),
very few studies have investigated grounding the
meaning of adjectives to numerical quantities. de
Marneffe et al. (2010) investigated the problem of
interpreting implied answers to yes/no questions
when the response is not explicit. Specifically,
they investigated question-answer pairs in which
the question contains an adjective and the answer
contains a numerical measure. For example, pre-
dicting the correct yes/no answer in (1) involves
interpreting a numerical quantity (age) with re-
spect to the gradable adjective little.

1. Q. Are your kids little?
A. I have a 7 year-old and a 10 year-old.

The authors created logistic regression models for
each adjective by querying the web with appropri-
ate keywords (“little kids”) and its antonyms (“not

little kids”), so that both positive and negative in-
stances can be learned.

Narisawa et al. (2013) explore a closely related
problem of learning numerical common sense for
the task of RTE in Japanese text. They study a
broad set of cases that require semantic inference
over numerical expressions. They query the web
to gather instances of pairs of numerical quanti-
ties and corresponding contexts and propose two
approaches. The distribution based approach con-
cludes the numerical quantity to be large or small
if it appears in the top or bottom five percent of
the distribution generated for the numerical quan-
tity and normal if it is in between. The cue-based
approach relies on explicit textual cues (e.g., as
large as, only) for associating a judgment about a
numerical expression.

8 Conclusion

We empirically evaluated use of gradable adjec-
tives in clinical documents. We reimplemented a
previously published model for identifying grad-
able adjectives in newswire text and found that
it performs surprisingly well with our clinical
data. These adjectives have a substantial presence
in clinical notes across multiple types of docu-
ments, written by different healthcare profession-
als. Analysis of the frequencies of these adjec-
tives and their association with clinical concepts
from UMLS revealed that there is a specific pat-
tern for their usage. Finally, we showed that a
simple Bayesian model can be used effectively to
ground the meaning of gradable terms when they
are used to describe medical concepts involving
measurement of numerical quantities. Our data-
driven approach can help in development of clini-
cal standards in situations where there is a need to
establish a precise relationship between adjectives
and measurements.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Courtney Hebert and
Kelly Regan for their help in this work. Re-
search reported in this publication was supported
by the National Library of Medicine of the Na-
tional Institutes of Health under award number
R01LM011116. The content is solely the respon-
sibility of the authors and does not necessarily rep-
resent the official views of the National Institutes
of Health.

24



References
Eiji Aramaki, Takeshi Imai, Kengo Miyo, and

Kazuhiko Ohe. 2007. UTH: SVM-based Semantic
Relation Classification using Physical Sizes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 464–
467.

Alan R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomed-
ical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap
program. In Proceedings of the Annual AMIA Sym-
posium, pages 17–21.

Renate Bartsch. 1975. The grammar of relative adjec-
tives and comparison. In Formal Aspects of Cogni-
tive Processes, pages 168–185. Springer.

Rinaldo Bellomo, Claudio Ronco, John A Kellum,
Ravindra L Mehta, Paul Palevsky, and ADQI work-
group. 2004. Acute renal failure–definition, out-
come measures, animal models, fluid therapy and
information technology needs: the Second Interna-
tional Consensus Conference of the Acute Dialy-
sis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Critical care,
8(4):R204–R212.

Olivier Bodenreider and Serguei V. Pakhomov. 2003.
Exploring adjectival modification in biomedical dis-
course across two genres. In Proceedings of the ACL
2003 Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedicine.

Christopher G. Chute and Peter L. Elkin. 1997. A
clinically derived terminology: qualification to re-
duction. In Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall
Symposium.

Dmitry Davidov and Ari Rappoport. 2010. Extraction
and approximation of numerical attributes from the
web. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 1308–1317.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating Typed
Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. In
Proceedings of LREC, pages 449–454.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Christopher Potts. 2010. “Was it good?
It was provocative”. Learning the meaning of scalar
adjectives. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 167–176.

Gerard de Melo and Mohit Bansal. 2013. Good, Great,
Excellent: Global Inferences of Semantic Intensi-
ties. Transactions of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, 1(July):279–290.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Wendy W. Chapman, and
Clement J. McDonald. 2009. What can natural lan-
guage processing do for clinical decision support?
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):760–72,
Oct.

Mehmet Ali Erkurt, Emin Kaya, Ilhami Berber,
Mustafa Koroglu, and Irfan Kuku. 2012. Throm-
bocytopenia in adults: review article. Journal of
Hematology, 1(2-3):44–53.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Lyn Frazier, Charles Clifton, and Britta Stolterfoht.
2008. Scale structure: Processing minimum stan-
dard and maximum standard scalar adjectives. Cog-
nition, 106(1):299–324.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce M. Wiebe.
2000. Effects of adjective orientation and grad-
ability on sentence subjectivity. In Proceedings of
the 18th Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 299–305.

Chi-yuan Hsu and Glenn M. Chertow. 2000. Chronic
renal confusion: insufficiency, failure, dysfunction,
or disease. American Journal of Kidney Diseases,
36(2):415–418.

Adrian Iftene and Mihai-Alex Moruz. 2010. UAIC
participation at RTE-6. In Proceedings of the Text
Analysis Conference (TAC 10).

Ajay K. Israni and Bertram L. Kasiske. 2011. Labora-
tory assessment of kidney disease: glomerular filtra-
tion rate, urinalysis, and proteinuria. In Brenner and
Rector’s The Kidney, volume 9, pages 1585–619. El-
sevier.

Christopher Kennedy. 1999. Projecting the adjective:
the syntax and semantics of gradability and compar-
ison. Routledge.

Christopher Kennedy. 2007. Vagueness and grammar:
the semantics of relative and absolute gradable ad-
jectives. Linguistics and Philosophy, 30(1):1–45,
March.

Arif Khwaja. 2012. KDIGO clinical practice guide-
lines for acute kidney injury. Nephron Clinical
Practice, 120(4):c179–c184.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of ICASSP, pages 181–184.

Donald A Lindberg, Betsy L Humphreys, and Alexa T
McCray. 1993. The unified medical language
system. Methods of Information in Medicine,
32(4):281–291.

John Lyons. 1977. Semantics (Volumes I & II). Cam-
bridge CUP.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a Large Anno-
tated Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

George F. Muschler, Hironori Nitto, Cynthia A.
Boehm, and Kirk A. Easley. 2001. Age-and gender-
related changes in the cellularity of human bone
marrow and the prevalence of osteoblastic progen-
itors. Journal of Orthopaedic Research, 19(1):117–
125.

25



Katsuma Narisawa, Yotaro Watanabe, Junta Mizuno,
Naoaki Okazaki, and Kentaro Inui. 2013. Is a 204
cm Man Tall or Small ? Acquisition of Numerical
Common Sense from the Web. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 382–391.

Martha J. Radford. 2005. ACC/AHA Key Data
Elements and Definitions for Measuring the Clin-
ical Management and Outcomes of Patients With
Chronic Heart Failure. Journal of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology, 46(6):1179–1207, sep.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Wiegand, and Jasper
Brandes. 2014. Comparing methods for deriving in-
tensity scores for adjectives. In 14th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 117–122.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Jasper Brandes, Petra Steiner, and
Michael Wiegand. 2015. Ordering adverbs by their
scaling effect on adjective intensity. In Proceedings
of RANLP, pages 545–554.

John E Sanderson. 2007. Heart failure with a normal
ejection fraction. Heart, 93(2):155–158.

Edward Sapir. 1944. Grading, A Study in Semantics.
Philosophy of Science, 11(2):93–116.

Vera Sheinman, Takenobu Tokunaga, Isaac Julien, Pe-
ter Schulam, and Christiane Fellbaum. 2012. Refin-
ing WordNet adjective dumbbells using intensity re-
lations. In Sixth International Global Wordnet Con-
ference, pages 330–337.

Vera Sheinman, Christiane Fellbaum, Isaac Julien, Pe-
ter Schulam, and Takenobu Tokunaga. 2013. Large,
huge or gigantic? Identifying and encoding intensity
relations among adjectives in WordNet. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 47(3):797–816, January.

Chaitanya Shivade, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Eric
Fosler-Lussier, and Albert M. Lai. 2015. Corpus-
based discovery of semantic intensity scales. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 483–493.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 173–180. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Robert van Rooij. 2011. Vagueness and Linguis-
tics. In Giuseppina Ronzitti, editor, Vagueness: A
Guide, chapter Vagueness, pages 123–170. Springer
Netherlands.

26


