



















































Applying Universal Dependency to the Arapaho Language


Proceedings of LAW X – The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 171–179,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Applying Universal Dependency to the Arapaho Language

Irina Wagner1, Andrew Cowell1, Jena D. Hwang2
1University of Colorado Boulder, Department of Linguistics; 2IHMC

{irina.wagner, james.cowell}@colorado.edu, jhwang@ihmc.us

Abstract

This paper discusses the use of Universal
Dependency for annotations of a Native
North American language Arapaho (Algo-
nquian). While some relations of the uni-
versal dependency perfectly correspond
with those in Arapaho, language specific
annotations of verbal arguments elucidate
problems of assuming certain syntactic
categories across languages. By critiquing
the influence of grammatical structures of
major European and Asian languages in
establishing the UD framework, this paper
develops guidelines for annotating a poly-
synthetic agglutinating language and sets
a path to developing a more comprehen-
sive cross-linguistic approach to syntactic
annotations of language data.

1 Introduction

The recent initiatives to create a cross-linguistic
scheme of annotation rely on Universal Depen-
dency (UD) as a system of describing the syntactic
connection between words (Nivre, 2015; de Marn-
effe et al., 2014). While research shows this anno-
tation type is effective not only for monolingual
parsers but also cross-linguistically across mul-
tiple platforms, the universality of this approach
is based on the assumptions of similar syntac-
tic structures of major, often European, languages
(McDonald et al., 2013). Without doubt, those
are also the languages that receive predominant at-
tention in the computational sphere, the languages
whose technological presence requires a thorough
analysis and annotation. However, if the goal of
natural language processing is truly to develop
a universal cross-linguistic strategy for annotat-
ing and analyzing linguistic data, it is important
to attend to lesser described languages that may
present strikingly different syntactic structures and
dependencies.

Applying the UD rules while annotating the data
from the Arapaho (Algonquian) language, several
specific features were observed to fall outside of
the charted labels. Since the language does not
have a fixed word order and allows discontinuous
constituency, dependencies on the previous word
were avoided and re-analyzed. The most problem-
atic dependency distinction in this language is the
variation in relations between a verb and its argu-
ments. This paper examines the correlation of the
dependency relations in the UD scheme and their
practical application for the Arapaho data. Us-
ing the UD framework, we create guidelines for
annotating this data. In considerations of space,
this paper primarily focuses on the argument struc-
tures defined by the UD and their correspondences
to the Arapaho syntactic patterns. An additional
discussion of non-verbal roots and topicality prob-
lematizes some of the common assumptions in dis-
counting pragmatic features while analyzing syn-
tactic dependencies.

In the following pages, we first provide a short
note on the Arapaho language and the procedures
of annotations (2); discuss issues of mapping the
labels for subject, objects, and noun modifiers of
the UD onto the Arapaho dependencies (3); define
the mechanism of analysis of non-verbal roots (4);
and suggest further ways of developing these an-
notation guidelines (5).

2 Arapaho data and annotations

Arapaho is an Algonquian poly-synthetic aggluti-
nating language spoken by less than 200 people in
the Wind River Indian Reservation in Wyoming.
Because the language is in critical condition, there
have been attempts at documenting and preserving
it. A large transcribed and annotated spoken cor-
pus has been created and parts of it are now avail-
able in the Endangered Languages Archive1. A

1http://elar.soas.ac.uk/deposit/0194

171



total of around eighty thousand lines transcribed,
translated, and grammatically analyzed is avail-
able for further processing. The current attempts
at establishing the dependency scheme for this lan-
guage initiate the new type of analysis of this data
to allow machine processing.

2.1 Some features of the Arapaho language
The current paper largely relies on the previous de-
scription of the Arapaho grammar by Cowell and
Moss (2008). There are several intriguing features
of the grammar, but the ones most relevant to this
study are its complex verbal morphology, split se-
mantic and syntactic transitivity, and the system of
obviation.

2.1.1 Verbal complexity
As is observed in many other poly-synthetic lan-
guages, Arapaho verbs are highly complex and
mark multiple grammatical and semantic features.
So, in example (1), a single verb demonstrates in-
corporation of not only the usual tense, aspect,
mode, person, and number features, but also the
manner of action and an incorporated object.

(1) he’ih’ii-xoo-xook-bix-ohoe-koohuut-oo-no’
“Their hands would go right through them and appear
on the other side.”

A single verb can be a full clause conveying a full
thought. Verbal prefixes code grammatical as well
as many semantic features, inhibiting the depen-
dency analysis since this framework only consid-
ers the relations between individual words.

2.1.2 Transitivity
The category of verbal transitivity is both syntactic
and semantic (Cowell and Moss, 2008). To under-
stand how many arguments are allowed in a verb’s
frame, one must examine both the morphological
and the semantic structure of a verb. So, while
semantically a verb to’oo3ei “to hit things” may
appear transitive, grammatically it is intransitive,
requiring only one argument, the subject, as in
too’oo3einoo “I am hitting (unspecified) things.”
The transitivity of a verb is expressed in its inflec-
tion which must agree in person and number with
its arguments. Truly transitive verbs carry inflec-
tions agreeing with both of its arguments:
(2) Nih-to’ow-oo-t

PST-hit-3/4-3S
nuhu’
this

hinen-ino
man-OBV.PL

“He hit these men”

Even though only one of the two arguments ap-
pears in the sentence, the verb nihto’owoot “s/he

hit him/her” is marked to agree both with the se-
mantic agent and undergoer of the verb. This se-
mantic distinction in the arguments is not observed
in intransitive and semi-transitive verbs. Because
such verbs demonstrate morphological agreement
only with one nominal2, other nominals are con-
sidered outside of the argument structure of a verb
even if they specify the semantic patient or theme.

(3) nih’ii-koo-ko’uyei-3i’
PST.IMPF-REDUP-pick things-3PL

biino
chokecherries

“They were picking chokecherries.”

So in the example (3), the noun biino “chokecher-
ries” is not reflected in verbal morphology, but
corresponds with its semantics by specifying the
object of picking. Being outside of the argument
structure of this verb, syntactically the noun is bet-
ter understood as a verbal adjunct specifying the
manner of action, while semantically it is still the
patient. So the designation of the relationship be-
tween such arguments and verbs as dobj of the uni-
versal dependencies is wrong because it does not
consider verbal morphology, whereas the label of
nmod would not account for its semantic role.

2.1.3 Obviation
Unlike many languages, Arapaho does not rely
on word order or case markers to disambiguate
between overt nominals; rather it uses a system
of obviation that incorporates a distinction based
on animacy along with the combination of ver-
bal morphosyntax and pragmatics to mark partic-
ular grammatical roles. This system clearly dis-
tinguishes between two third person referents by
marking one of them (a less salient one in the
discourse) as obviative and leaving the other ref-
erent unmarked (proximate). In Algonquian lan-
guages, the obviation is argued to be a pragmatic
feature structuring discourse outside of a single
clause (Goddard, 1984). Verbal morphology also
shows agreement with these categories: the transi-
tive verb inflection clearly marks which argument
is acting on the other. So, instead of the usual three
persons, Arapaho has four, with the fourth person
being the obviative argument. In the example be-
low, the obviative argument is the noun hiinoon
“his mother” which corresponds with the verbal
subjunctive inflection -eihok “4th person acting on
3rd singular.”

2We use phrases “nominal” and “nominal expression” to
refer to nouns, noun phrases and nominalized verbs that func-
tion as noun phrases.

172



(4) Hohou,
thank you

hee3eihok
say to s.o.-4/3S.SUBJ

hiinoon
his/her mother

3eeyokooxuu.
Tipi-pole Child
“Thank you,” his mother said to Under-the-Tipi-Pole
Child.

As it is observed in this example, obviation does
not correspond with the semantic or the syntac-
tic role of an argument. Neither it depends on the
transitivity of a verb. Rather, obviative status lines
up with the semantic role of an obviative coded in
verbal morphology. Based on this feature of tran-
sitivity and obviation, the current paper suggests
employing the semantic labels in marking the syn-
tactic relations.

2.2 Annotation procedures

We are not aware of previous attempts at de-
pendency annotations with other Algonquian lan-
guages; however, dependency grammar has been
one of the theoretical approaches in Algonquian
syntax. The guidelines discussed below were cre-
ated based on the annotations of a small set of Ara-
paho narratives. In the first phase of the project,
the dependency relations were outlined based on
annotations of a sample of several traditional nar-
ratives, totaling at about two thousand lines3.
The annotators, one fluent non-native speaker and
three graduate students in Linguistics well famil-
iar with Arapaho language structure, were given
a protocol established without the considerations
of the UD framework but based purely on the Al-
gonquian syntax patterns. Several problems us-
ing these syntax patterns clarified and specified the
dependency relations, leading to the creation of a
new set of labels.

In the second phase of the project, these new la-
bels were further standardized based on the prin-
ciples of the Stanford Dependencies (de Marneffe
and Manning, 2008). Using this new set of rela-
tions, the annotations of the previous phase were
converted and a total of 3616 lines of elicited per-
sonal and traditional oral narratives as well as 593
lines of conversational data were newly annotated.
The disfluency of the conversational data indicated
major issues with this annotation scheme which
prompted us to turn to the UD-based system. The
guidelines presented here have been used to re-
mark the previous annotations of the data used in
the second phase. No special software to perform

3What we call “lines” here refers to a ToolBox line which
represent a single clause, or a complete thought.

the annotations has been used thus far, and all of
the annotations are stored in a spreadsheet format.

Because the language is critically endangered,
the resources available for this type of work are
extremely limited. Importantly, it is not just that
there are fewer recorded texts and conversations,
but there are also fewer trained individuals able
to perform any type of language annotation. So,
during this particular project, most of the anno-
tations were done by the first two authors of the
paper with Andrew Cowell being the language
expert due to his experience and acquired profi-
ciency in the language. Over the course of six
months, authors met regularly to discuss the anno-
tations, solve the occurring issues, introduce and
update labels. As a result, all of the current an-
notations are single annotated. The next part of
the project includes more manual annotations us-
ing the guidelines proposed here as well as double
annotations of at least a portion of the data to es-
tablish the inter annotator agreement. Having al-
ready annotated a few thousand lines of narratives,
the focus of the following work will be on conver-
sational data followed by machine learning.

3 Mapping the UD scheme

Out of the forty dependencies proposed by the
UD, thirty Arapaho dependencies have one-to-one
correspondence. Additional seventeen specifica-
tions and relations have been added to describe
language-specific instances. The final scheme of
Arapaho’s nominal argument dependencies is pre-
sented in Table 1. Some of the dependencies were
not used in the Arapaho scheme because such de-
pendencies merely do not exist in this language.
So, for example, the language does not have a
grammatical category of an adjective; therefore,
the dependency amod has not been used; instead
descriptive verbs are analyzed as relative clauses,
acl. Example (5) demonstrates the relative clause
dependency where verb modifies the noun in the
same manner that an adjective would.

(5)

niibe’ei’i siikoocei’ikuu3oo nihnohkokoo’ohuni’i.
VII NI VII

acl

nii-be’ei-’i
IMPF-red-0PL

siikoocei’ikuu3oo
rubber item

nih-nohk-okoo’ohuni-’i.
PST-INSTR-sealed with stiff object-0PL
“They would be sealed with the red rubber gasket.”

In addition, there are no relative pronouns in the
language, so the dependency relation marker is

173



also obsolete in the current scheme. Similarly,
there is no category of a number or numeral; in-
stead the number can be expressed by a verb or a
particle, at which instance it is analyzed just like
other particles with the dependency of advmod to
the word that it modifies. In sum, omitted UD rela-
tions are the ones that are either expressed by some
other dependency or non-existent in the Arapaho
language.

Several UD dependencies perfectly line up with
the Arapaho scheme. So such relations as noun
modifiers, adverbial modifiers, adverbial clauses,
determiners, appositives, relative clauses, case
markers, and a few more have a direct correspon-
dence. For example, an adverbial clause in Ara-
paho is very similar, if not the same, as adver-
bial clauses described for other languages in the
UD. Arapaho adverbial clauses, as it is seen in
the example below, lack a distinct word introduc-
ing it; instead, the head of an adverbial clause ex-
hibits particular morphological markers indicating
its dependency. So in the example (6) this distinc-
tion is made by the subjunctive mode indicating
that the verb bih’iyoohok “when it is dark” is a de-
pendent of the main verb of the sentence.

(6)

Bih’iyoohok ce’no’useeni’.
VII VAI

advcl

Bih’iyoo-hok
dark-SUBJUNCT

ce’-no’usee-ni’.
back-arrive-1PL

“When it’s dark, we’ll come back.”

In general, dependencies between function words
and content words mirror the same dependencies
in the UD framework, and most of these depen-
dency labels are used.

The most complicated dependency relations
tend to be between the content words, and espe-
cially the relations between the verb and its argu-
ments. From the UD scheme, only one of such
relations matches the Arapaho scheme with some
modifications: nsubj and csubj correspond to sub-
jects of intransitive verbs and transitive inanimate
verbs. Similarly, subjects of passive verbs also
correspond to the nsubjpass and csubjpass depen-
dencies. Additional provisions are made in Ara-
paho scheme to account for the obviation status.
In the following section, we discuss all of the pro-
visions and additions made to the argument depen-
dencies.

3.1 Subjects
While there is some correspondence between the
UD’s nsubj and subjects in Arapaho, it is, nonethe-
less, problematic to analyze subjects based purely
on syntax since there is no syntactic features that
would index the particular verbal arguments. Be-
cause nominals can take any position in the sen-
tence and because they are not marked by a case
corresponding with its syntactic role, the only cer-
tain way of finding a subject is in the person and
number verbal agreement. The proximate and ob-
viative distinction also does not clarify the syntac-
tic role of the nominal, so with transitive verbs, the
proximate form can be either agent or undergoer,
and thus roughly correspond to either subject or
object in English. In other words, the distinction
of subject is not really important in the Arapaho
language, especially with transitive verbs, and a
relationship that is based on obviation would mark
the dependencies more clearly. In response to this,
the current dependency scheme adopted the UD
dependency of nsubj and csubj with the additional
marker :obv to index the obviative arguments of
intransitive verbs expressed in the verbal morphol-
ogy. The proximate counterparts are not marked.
In the example (7), the obviative noun agreeing
with the verb is such subject.

(7)

no’useeni3 nuhu’ koo’ohwuu.
VAI DET NA

nsubj:obv

no’usee-ni3
arrive-4S

nuhu’
this

koo’ohw-uu.
coyote-obv.

“This coyote came.”

Similarly, the nsubj and csubj dependency is also
used for animate arguments of transitive inanimate
verbs (VTI) and inanimate arguments of intran-
sitive inanimate verbs (VII). However, transitive
verbs exhibit a double marker on indicating both
the proximate and obviative participants, as well
as the direction of action (agential relationship)
between the two. The proximate participant can
be either agent or patient, as can the obviative par-
ticipant. So, an additional label employing the se-
mantic distinction, nagent (nominal agent) is in-
troduced.

(8)

hiniisonoon heenei’itowuuneit.
NA VTA

nagent:obv

hi-niisonoon
3S-father.obv

heen-ei’itowuun-eit.
REDUP-tell s.o.-4/3S

His father tells him.

174



UD Arapaho Dependencies Notes
nsubj nsubj(:obv) Nominal subjects of VII, VAI, and VTI verbs.
csubj csubj(:obv) Clausal subjects of VII, VAI, and VTI verbs.
nsubjpass nusubjpass(:obv) 3
csubjpass csubjpass(:obv) 3

7

agent Proximate agent of VTA expressed by a noun.
nagent:obv Obviative agent of VTA expressed by a clause.
nagent:oblique(:obv) Oblique agents of passive verbs

7

cagent Proximate agent of VTA expressed by a clause.
cagent:obv Obviative agent of VTA expressed by a clause.
cagent:oblique(:obv) Oblique agents of passive verbs

dobj
dobj Inanimate nominals as objects of VTI
dobj:under Animate proximate nominals, undergoers of VTA
dobj:under:obv Animate obviative undergoers of VTA

iobj iobj Secondary objects of VTA not expressed in the verb
ccomp ccomp Additional specification of dependency (e.g., dobj, dobj:under, iobj, nmod) is

required
xcomp 7

nmod
nmod Adjuncts of verbs
nmod:impobj Implied objects of VAI.O, VAI.T, and incorporated verbs
nmod:objad Objects of adverbial particles and some verbal prefixes
nmod:instr Objects of instrumental particles and instrumental verbal prefixes

Table 1: Mapping of the UD argument labels and Arapaho nominal argument labels.

The following example further demonstrates the
mismatch between subject and agent in Arapaho.
Here, the verb is in passive voice, and the “sub-
ject” of the verb is “my grandfathers.” However,
this “subject’ is obviative, and it is the oblique
agent (“my father”) which is proximate.

(9)

Neisonoo nihcihwonbiineihini3i nebesiiwoho’.
NA VAI.PASS NA

nagent:oblique nsubjpass:obv

ne-isonoo
1S-father

nih-cih-won-biin-eihi-ni3i
PST-to here-ALLAT-give-PASS-4PL

ne-besiiwoho’
1S-grandfathers.obv

“My grandfathers were given (sth) by my father”

Since the verb is passivized and thus intransitive,
only one argument is reflected in its morphology,
the obviative subject nebesiiwoho’ “my grandfa-
thers.” The label of nagent is kept with an addi-
tional marker :oblique to indicate that the argu-
ment neisonoo “my father” is not expressed in ver-
bal morphology. Importantly, such oblique agents
are different from noun modifiers, which are dis-
cussed further in the paper, because they specify
the actor of the verb rather than its manner.

The subject relationship is not clearly defined
in the Arapaho language. Instead, it is possible
to talk about nominal expressions that are indexed
by verbal morphology either as sole arguments of

(syntactically) intransitive verbs or agential argu-
ments (proximate or obviative) of the transitive
animate verbs. We propose to account for this
distinction as well as the distinction in obviation,
which is clearly marked in nominal and verbal
morphology.

3.2 Objects

The prototypical objects of transitive verbs do not
easily fit the dobj relation in Arapaho. This is
primarily because Arapaho verbs commonly un-
dergo complex secondary derivation to produce
verb stems which allow one to promote an an-
imate argument to a core argument, marked in-
flectionally on the verb disregarding its semantic
role. Thus, benefactives, recipients, goals, and
even themes are typically the “object” marked in-
flectionally on the verb. Conversely, other argu-
ments that would be classic “direct” objects in En-
glish are demoted, and not marked inflectionally
on the verb. On the other hand, because the pro-
moted animate argument is marked inflectionally,
it can also easily be dropped from overt mention
in the sentence, while unmarked items are much
more likely to be mentioned explicitly.

Thus, when the manual for universal dependen-
cies notes that dobj is the most patient-like argu-
ment of a verb, this is in direct tension with the ten-
dencies of Arapaho transitive verb dependencies.

175



Additionally, when it notes that “if there is just one
object, it should be labeled dobj, regardless of the
morphological case or semantic role that it bears”
(UniversalDependencies.org, 2014), this raises ad-
ditional problems, since the actual ‘object’ marked
on the Arapaho verb is highly likely not to appear
in the sentence. The only exception and full corre-
spondence to the UD’s definition of the direct ob-
ject is the inanimate object of an inanimate transi-
tive verb (VTI):

(10)

niico’ontonounowoo nuhu’ niinen.
VTI DET NI

dobj

nii-co’on-tonoun-owoo
IMPF-always-use-1S

nuhu’
this

niinen.
piece of fat

“I always use this fat.”

Because the verb is transitive inanimate, it requires
two arguments, only one of which (the animate
agent) is marked inflectionally. The second ar-
gument can only be expressed by an inanimate
noun and can either precede or follow the verb.
So the overt nominal in the example above rep-
resents a prototypical direct object for transitive
inanimate verbs. Meanwhile, transitive animate
verbs can have up to three arguments (e.g., ditran-
sitive verbs), with the two animate arguments be-
ing expressed inflectionally on the verb. So tech-
nically, ditransitive constructions may have only
one overt nominal not corresponding to either of
the person markers in verbal inflection. Accord-
ing to the UD definition cited above, such a nom-
inal should be considered a direct object. In the
following example, the true “object” of the Ara-
paho verb is “you,” (since it is in imperative form)
while “your eyes” is not marked on the verb, and
is thus from the perspective of Arapaho grammar
an oblique form.

(11)

Cihneeneeciihi hesiiseii.
VTA NI

dobj

Cih-nee-neeciih-i
EMPH.IMPER-REDUP-lend-1S.IMPER

he-siiseii
2S-eyes

“Lend me your eyes.”

There is no direct agreement between the sec-
ondary object hesiiseii “your eyes” and the verb.
Ideally, this should be represented by iobj relation
which emphasizes the indirect syntactic relation
between the verb and the nominal.

Furthermore, objects of a transitive animate
verb (VTA) and transitive inanimate verb (VTI) are

different from the point of view of the grammar4

and their respective part of speech designation5.
Hence, a further specification of the dobj is nec-
essary for transitive verbs. To stay consistent with
the labels proposed for the nagent and cagent re-
lations, the additional labels employed are :under
and :obv.

(12)

Neisonoo nihcihwonbiinoot nebesiiwoho’.
NA VTA NA

nsubj:agent dobj:under:obv

ne-isonoo
1S-father

nih-cih-won-biin-oot
PST-to here-ALLAT-give-3S/4

ne-besiiwoho’
1S-grandfathers.obv

“My father came to give [me] to my grandfather.”

In the example (12), the object clearly marked
on the verb is the fourth person, or the obvia-
tive. Specifying this dependency relation disam-
biguates between the nominals and enables the
correct translation of the sentence.

So, in the current scheme the distinction be-
tween different types of objects is further clari-
fied. The iobj is reserved only for the secondary
objects of the ditransitive verbs which show no
verbal agreement. Meanwhile, the dobj is used to
mark the dependency relation between the transi-
tive inanimate verb and its object, which is also
not specified in the verbal morphology. Label
dobj:under with the additional specification of ob-
viation indicates the dependency relation between
transitive animate verbs and the undergoers speci-
fied in the verbal morphology.

3.3 Noun Modifiers
The dependency relation of noun modifier corre-
sponds rather well to the noun modifiers in Ara-
paho. It is primarily used for the disambigua-
tion between direct or indirect objects of transi-
tive verbs and the implied, incorporated objects,
or otherwise, adjuncts.

Having argued that some overt nominals of tran-
sitive animate nouns play a role of a secondary, or
indirect object, we now also argue that such label
in the same context can be inappropriate as well.
Using the UD rules for distinguishing the depen-
dency in the example below would lead to analyz-
ing the nominal koxouhtiit “handgame” as a direct
object of the main verb. But as one can see from

4VTI objects are not reflected in verbal morphology.
5Only the animate nominal expressions (NA) can be the

objects of VTA.

176



the translation, it would also lead to a wrong anal-
ysis. Similarly, the indirect object analysis would
also be incorrect. Indeed, annotating this noun as
an oblique or an adjunct, nmod, is the only way of
ensuring the correct analysis and translation.

(13)

Ceebe’eiheinoo koxouhtiit
VTA NI

nmod

ceebe’eih-einoo
IC.beat-3S/1S

koxouhtiit.
handgame

“He beats me in handgame.”

When adjuncts are used with semi-transitive verbs,
the nmod relation is further suffixed with :ob-
jim to note that the noun modifier further speci-
fies the under-specified objects of semi-transitive
verbs. Essentially, while these nominals are an-
alyzed and marked as noun modifiers, for a suc-
cessful translation they need to be marked as di-
rect objects, which we have argued against in the
previous section. In order to avoid the incorrect
translation as well as incorrect analysis, the label
nmod:objim is used. In the following example, the
noun bei’ci3ei’i “money” semantically is the ob-
ject of the semi-transitive verb. However, as we
argue, marking it as direct or indirect object would
violate the principles of Arapaho syntax.

(14)

neeyeih’oonotooneenou’u bei’ci3ei’i.
VAI.O NI

nmod:objim

neeyeih-’oonotoonee-nou’u
IC.try-REDUP-borrow things-12.ITER

bei’ci3ei’i.
money

“Whenever we try to borrow money.”

In addition, some of these implied or incorpo-
rated objects with overt nominal expressions can
be modified by an adverbial particle similar to a
preposition in English.

(15)

nih’iinou’oo3i’ neci’ hi3oobei’i’
VAI NA PART

casenmod:objad

nih-’iinou’oo-3i’
PST-float around-3PL

nec-i’
water-LOC

hi3oobei’-i’
under sth-LOC

“They were floating around under the water”

In the example above, particle hi3oobei’i’ “un-
der” is a dependent of the adjunct neci’ “water-
LOC.” This relation is reflected in the locative
case marker on the noun showing a direct depen-
dency with the particle. The Arapaho dependency

scheme additionally distinguishes the instrumental
case since there are special case markers defined
by an adverbial or an adverbial prefix. So where
the prefixes hi’-, nohk-, and nii3- are present or
where the corresponding adverbial particles ap-
pear, the nominal adjunct is considered to be in-
strumental (nmod:instr). So in example (5), the
relation between the head of the relative clause si-
ikoocei’iikuu3oo “rubber item” and the main verb
is nmod:instr.

Finally, an additional dependency poss, posses-
sor modifier, is being used for possessive construc-
tions with an overt possessor. Similar to Finnish
(Tsarfaty, 2013; Haverinen et al., 2014), in Ara-
paho, it is possible to distinguish between the sub-
ject and the object of a possession. However, un-
like in other languages, no special genitive con-
struction exists to mark this type of relation. In-
stead, the possessor and possessed appear side-by-
side. The possessed in such constructions has a
third (or fourth) person possessive marker. So in a
phrase nii’ehihi’ hi-siiseii “little bird his-eyes” the
possessor is “little bird” since the possessive pre-
fix hi- “his” directly references this third person.
The dependency relation marked here is possessor
nominal modifying another nominal.

The examples above demonstrate that not all of
the arguments that may semantically appear sim-
ilar to the dependencies established in UD are the
same in Arapaho. While under-specification of the
semantic relationships can be beneficial in estab-
lishing some commonalities cross-linguistically, it
can also result in misrepresentation of some of
the relations and lowered efficiency in machine
learning (Lipenkova and Souček, 2014). The ma-
jor underspecification for the Arapaho language
is the omission of proximate-obviative distinction:
while we realize that it could potentially be prob-
lematic in cross-linguistic applicability, omitting
this distinction disregards one of the main fea-
tures of Algonquian syntax, and renders automatic
translation of English transitive verbs into Ara-
paho effectively impossible.

4 Non-verbal roots

Adopting the relation of a root as the independent
word in a clause or sentence allows us to avoid
issues arising from securing the root node with
verbs. So, like in the UD scheme, our annota-
tions do not attach the node of a root to a partic-
ular part of speech even though they are usually

177



represented by verbs. The main reason for doing
this is avoiding the potential analysis of what is
not there (Nivre, 2015; Hajicova et al., 2015; Os-
borne and Liang, 2015). In our annotations, the
root often represents a pragmatically independent
word, as for example in predicative type construc-
tions (Cowell and Moss, 2008). Such construc-
tions are used to topicalize one of the verbal ar-
guments or the manner of action (i.e., verbal par-
ticles) similar to existential constructions in other
languages. However, instead of marking the pred-
icate as a root of the sentence as it is done in the
Russian TreeBank (de Marneffe et al., 2014), the
topicalized nominal or the particle is the root in
Arapaho. The relation between the root and the
predicate is backreference:

(16)
Ni’ook he’ne’nih’iisih’it.
NAME VAI.PASS

root
backref

Ni’ook
Puffy Eyes

he’ne’-nih-’iisih’i-t
that-PST-how named-3S

“Puffy Eyes, that is how he is named.”

In example (16), the argument of the verb
he’ne’nih’iisih’it “that is how he is named” is not
realized overtly, and the verbal prefix ne’- “that
is” references back to the topical argument, mak-
ing the verb actually a dependent of it. Were we to
analyze distinct morphological elements, this pre-
fix would act as a copula between the two. Over-
all, the reasoning for treating such topicalized el-
ements (which sometimes may take other than the
clause-initial position) comes from the combina-
tion of the pragmatics and morphology: nearly all
of the verbal clauses with prefixes ne’- “that” and
nee’ees- “that is how” are backreference depen-
dents of such roots.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we demonstrate the use of Univer-
sal Dependency scheme with a language typolog-
ically different from the ones often included in
machine-learning technologies. In using the UD
framework, several unmentioned issues stemming
from the reliance on the word order were noticed.
For example, in the current annotation scheme,
we reanalyzed the relationship of parataixis to ac-
count for verbs of citations, so that dependency
would be traced from such a verb to the root of
the whole clause. Similarly, the discourse marker
dependencies were modified to include and ana-
lyze interjections. Unfortunately, it is outside of

the scope of the paper to discuss these issues, but
we hope that expanding this project to annotat-
ing conversational data and applying the annotated
data to machine learning methods will further re-
veal some additional insights on analysis of dis-
continuous constituency.

In critiquing the UD, we, nonetheless, want to
stress the eloquence of such an approach. Unlike
the phrase structure annotations, UD allows us to
account for the inconsistent phrase structures and
dislocated tokens so often encountered in the Ara-
paho language. At the same time, however, we
argue that to adequately account for the many lin-
guistic nuances in annotations of such a morpho-
logically and syntactically complex language like
Arapaho, it is often necessary to include the se-
mantic and pragmatic levels of analysis.

Acknowledgments

This research is funded by the National Endow-
ment for the Humanities grant, project number
1551671 “Arapaho Lexical Database and Dictio-
nary.” We are especially thankful to the Northern
Arapaho tribe for allowing us to conduct the work
with their language.

References
Andrew Cowell and Alonzo Moss. 2008. The Arapaho

Language. Westview Press, Boulder.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. Stanford typed dependencies manual.
Revised: April 2015:1–22.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-
talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Uni-
versal Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic ty-
pology. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), pages 4585–4592.

Ives Goddard. 1984. The obviative in Fox narrative
discourse. In William Cowan, editor, Papers of the
Fifteenth Algonquian Conference, pages 273–286.
Carleton University Ottawa.

Eva Hajicova, Marie Mikulova, and Jarmila
Panevova. 2015. Reconstructions of Deletions
in a Dependency-based Description of Czech:
Selected Issues. In Proceedings of the Third In-
ternational Conference on Dependency Linguistics
(Depling 2015), pages 131–140, Uppsala, Sweden.

Katri Haverinen, Jenna Nyblom, Timo Viljanen,
Veronika Laippala, Samuel Kohonen, Anna Missilä,
Stina Ojala, Tapio Salakoski, and Filip Ginter. 2014.

178



Building the essential resources for Finnish: the
Turku Dependency Treebank. Language Resources
and Evaluation, pages 1–39.

Janna Lipenkova and Milan Souček. 2014. Converting
Russian Dependency Treebank to Stanford Typed
Dependencies Representation. In Proceedings of the
14th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 143–
147, Gothenburg, Sweden. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang, Os-
car Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria Bertomeu
Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013. Universal De-
pendency Annotation for Multilingual Parsing Ryan.
In ACL 2013 - 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of
the Conference, pages 92–97, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a universal grammar for
natural language processing. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfor-
matics), 9041:3–16.

Timothy Osborne and Junying Liang. 2015. A Sur-
vey of Ellipsis in Chinese. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Dependency Lin-
guistics (Depling 2015), pages 271–280, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Reut Tsarfaty. 2013. A Unified Morpho-Syntactic
Scheme of Stanford Dependencies. Proceedings of
the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 578–584.

UniversalDependencies.org. 2014. Univer-
sal dependency relations (single document).
http://universaldependencies.org/
u/dep/all.html.

Appendix: Abbreviations

0PL inanimate plural
12 first person plural inclusive
3S/4 or 1PL/2PL the first number indicates the person and num-

ber acting on the following person and number
(he to him; we to you.pl)

ALLAT allative
DET determiner
DETACH detached adverbial prefix
DIM diminutive
EMPH emphatic
FUT future tense
IC phonological initial change
IMPER imperative
IMPF imperfect
ITER iterative
LOC locative
NA animate noun
NAME name
NARRPAST narrative past tense
NI inanimate noun
PART particle
PASS passive voice
PL plural
PST past tense
REDUP reduplication
REL relative prefix
S singular
SELFBEN self-benefactive
VAI animate intransitive verb
VAI.O animate intransitive verb with an implied ob-

ject
VAI.PASS animate intranstive passive verb
VAI.T animate intransitive verb with a specific im-

plied object
VII inanimate intransitive verb
VTA transitive verb with animate object
VTI transitive verb with inanimate object

179


