



















































Domain Adaptation of Polarity Lexicon combining Term Frequency and Bootstrapping


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 137–146,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Domain Adaptation of Polarity Lexicon combining Term Frequency and
Bootstrapping

Salud M. Jiménez-Zafra, M. Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia,
M. Dolores Molina-Gonzalez and L. Alfonso Ureña-López

Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Jaén (Spain)
Campus Las Lagunillas, E-23071, Jaén, Spain

{sjzafra, maite, mdmolina, laurena}@ujaen.es

Abstract

In this paper we study several approaches to
adapting a polarity lexicon to a specific do-
main. On the one hand, the domain adapta-
tion using Term Frequency (TF) and on the
other hand, the domain adaptation using pat-
tern matching with a BootStrapping algorithm
(BS). Both methods are corpus based and start
with the same polarity lexicon, but the first
one requires an annotated collection of doc-
uments while the second one only needs a
corpus where it looks for linguistic patterns.
The performance of both methods overcomes
the baseline system using the general polar-
ity lexicon iSOL. However, although the TF
approach achieves very promising results, the
BS strategy does not give as much improve-
ment as we expected. For this reason, we have
combined both methods in order to take ad-
vantage of the positive aspects of each one.
With this new approach the results obtained
are even better that those with the systems ap-
plied individually. Actually, we have achieved
a significant improvement of 11.50% (in terms
of accuracy) in the polarity classification of
the movie reviews with respect to the re-
sults achieved with the general purpose lexi-
con iSOL.

1 Introduction

Sentiment Analysis (SA) is a discipline that com-
bines Natural Language Processing (NLP) and data
mining techniques to deal with the subjectivity in
textual information. Several tasks have been stud-
ied but perhaps Polarity Classification is the most

well known that focuses on determining the seman-
tic orientation of a document: positive, negative or
neutral.

Although different approaches have been applied
to the field of polarity classification, the mainstream
basically consists of two major methodologies. On
the one hand, the Machine Learning (ML) approach
that is based on using a collection of data to train the
classifiers (Pang et al., 2002). On the other hand,
the approach based on Semantic Orientation (SO)
that does not need prior training but takes into ac-
count the orientation of words, positive or negative
(Turney, 2002). In this paper we focus on semantic
orientation in order to tackle one of the open issues
related to polarity classification: domain adaptation.

Our main goal is to propose a method for auto-
matically adapting a general polarity lexicon to a
specific domain. Specifically, we are going to work
with the movie domain because, as several papers
demonstrate, this is a very difficult domain to deal
with and adapt in SA (Turney, 2002; Taboada et al.,
2009; Molina-González et al., 2015b). In addition,
we will focus on Spanish since we consider that a
language other than English is a more challenging
task in the NLP area in general, and in SA in partic-
ular, due to the scarcity of resources.

Different methods have been proposed for tack-
ling the domain adaptation problem by automati-
cally generating polarity lexicons. One of the pri-
mary studies related to SA is (Blitzer et al., 2007).
They note that the polarity of a particular word
can carry opposing sentiments depending on the
domain, so the general purpose lexicon should be
adapted to the specific domain in order to improve

137



the effectiveness. Two main approaches to creat-
ing polarity lexicons automatically have been stud-
ied: dictionary-based and corpus-based. Dictionary-
based approaches use external resources such as the-
saurus or dictionaries in order to enrich a set of polar
terms by aggregating new subjective words (Esuli
and Sebastiani, 2006; Hu and Liu, 2004; Molina-
González et al., 2013). On the other hand, corpus-
based approaches also start from a set of polar terms
but instead of using dictionaries, which are domain
dependant and usually difficult to find in some lan-
guages, they try to integrate external knowledge
from document collections (Hatzivassiloglou and
McKeown, 1997; Turney, 2002; Molina-González
et al., 2015b).

In this paper we investigate two corpus-based
methods used to adapt a polarity lexicon to a specific
domain. On the one hand, domain adaptation using
Term Frequency (TF) and on the other hand, domain
adaptation using pattern matching with a BootStrap-
ping algorithm (BS). Both methods are corpus based
and start with the same polarity lexicon, but the first
one requires an annotated collection of documents
while the second one only needs a corpus where it
seeks the specific patterns. The performance ob-
tained with both methods significantly overcomes
the baseline system using the general polarity lexi-
con. Finally, we propose an approach that combines
both domain adaptation methods and the results ob-
tained are even better that those with the systems ap-
plied individually.

Most studies usually start with a very small set of
polar terms and then apply some methods to extract
and append new subjective words to the original list.
However, in this paper we use a very large general
lexicon as our starting point. Specifically, in the
two approaches presented in the paper, we have used
as seed the Spanish polarity lexicon iSOL (Molina-
González et al., 2013). This lexicon has been suc-
cessfully applied in several studies, showing a very
good performance in Spanish SA (González et al.,
2015a; Martı́nez-Cámara et al., 2014; Cruz et al.,
2014). In addition, we have carried out our exper-
iments with the Spanish movie corpus MuchoCine
(Cruz et al., 2008).

Regarding the domain approaches applied, the
first one is based on the Term Frequency (TF) in an
annotated corpus. This approach has already been

applied in previous studies using different domains
(Molina-González et al., 2015b; Molina-González
et al., 2014; González et al., 2015c). However, al-
though in all the cases the results are improved, we
have noted that some polar terms are wrongly added
and sometimes some noise is introduced into the
systems. Thus, in this paper we investigate a new
method that not only adds new words but also, if
some terms are detected to be highly subjective, they
are eliminated from the adapted lexicon. This is the
second approach used in this paper and it is based on
detecting patterns in a corpus and applying a boot-
strapping algorithm in order to enrich and clean the
polarity lexicon. We will call this approach Boot-
Strapping (BS). One of the best points of this second
method is that we do not need any annotated corpus
to adapt the system. We only need a polarity lexicon
and a corpus of documents. From this corpus, we
extract patterns using the information in the lexicon
and we apply the bootstrapping algorithm in order
to append or eliminate polar terms from the origi-
nal lexicon. In this paper we only look for patterns
including adjectives, because according to several
studies this kind of word is the best clue to express
subjectivity in documents (Wiegand et al., 2013).

As we will show in Section 5, the results obtained
with the TF approach are very promising although
the method requires an annotated corpus. On the
other hand, although the results with the BS strat-
egy also surpass the baseline system with the gen-
eral opinion lexicon, the improvement is lower than
we would hope. For this reason, we have decided to
combine both methods in order to take advantage of
them. Thus, we first apply the TF approach obtain-
ing a new adapted polarity lexicon. This new list is
used as the seed of polar terms for the BS algorithm.
In this way, our method not only appends terms that
are adapted to the domain but it also eliminates polar
terms that can be considered highly subjective in this
specific domain. The results achieved with this com-
bined method improve on the performance of both
approaches when they are applied individually.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows:
The following section presents a review of the main
methods of domain adaptation, focusing mainly on
the corpus-based approaches and commenting on
some studies that deal with Spanish. Section 3 in-
troduces the methodology of adaptation based on

138



term frequency and Section 4 presents domain adap-
tation using bootstrapping. Section 5 exhibits the re-
sources employed and shows the results obtained. In
addition, we propose the combination of both meth-
ods in order to achieve an improvement in the final
system. Section 6 discusses the different results ob-
tained and analyses the systems proposed showing
their advantages and disadvantages. Finally, in Sec-
tion 7 conclusions and future work are presented.

2 Background

In this paper we focus on Spanish domain adapta-
tion. We follow two different corpus based methods
and then we combine both of them. Our work is
based on the papers briefly described below.

2.1 Methods using Bootstrapping (BS)

One of the first learning studies to extract linguis-
tic patterns for determining the polarity of sentences
was (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997). They
consider only adjectives and using a large corpus
classify the new extracted terms as positive or neg-
ative. Turney (2002) follows the same approach
but includes adverbs along with adjectives, and uses
Pointwise Mutual Information and Information Re-
trieval to estimate the semantic orientation. Riloff
et al. (2003) present a bootstrapping algorithm that
learns subjective nouns from an unannotated cor-
pus. The approach uses two high precision classi-
fiers (HP-Subj and HP-Obj) to automatically iden-
tify subjective and objective sentences. These clas-
sifiers give very high precision but low recall. The
extracted sentences are then added to the training
data to learn patterns. The learned patterns are then
used to automatically identify more subjective and
objective sentences. The bootstrapping algorithm
increases the recall of the final system while high
precision is maintained.

Regarding the studies dealing with Spanish doc-
uments, (Vázquez et al., 2012) is one of the first
works applying a bootstrapping algorithm to dis-
cover new subjective adjectives in a Spanish corpus,
following the same approach as Hatzivassiloglou
and McKeown (1997). However, they use a small
set of polar seeds that they have previously shown
to be domain independent (Vázquez and Bel, 2012).
Actually, they introduce the concept of “highly sub-

jective adjectives” as those adjectives which can be
considered not only positive for one domain and
negative for another (“predictable steering” in car
domain vs “predictable plot” in movie domain), but
which could also change their prior polarity even
within the same domain (“antique car” can be pos-
itive for a classic person and negative for a modern
person).

Our method using a bootstrapping algorithm is
based on this idea of “highly subjective adjectives”.
We first identify and extract the adjectives learned
by the linguistic patterns, but before being included
in the original lexicon, we first check whether the
adjective must be eliminated or included in a set of
“highly subjective adjectives”.

2.2 Methods using Term Frequency (TF)

The method based on term frequency proposed in
this paper has already been applied, although the
domain and corpora used are different. For exam-
ple, the proposed approach in (Du et al., 2010) is
based on the idea that a word must be negative (or
positive) if it appears in many negative (or posi-
tive) documents, among other assumptions. The au-
thors select three datasets of different domains, and
from the relationships between them, they generate
two labelled sentiment lexicons (domain indepen-
dent and domain dependent) for each domain. In
(Dehkharghani et al., 2012) a method is proposed
for building a domain-dependent polarity classifica-
tion system. The hotel and movie domains are se-
lected by the authors. Each review is represented
by a set of domain-independent features and a set
of domain-dependent ones. The domain indepen-
dent features are extracted from SentiWordNet (Bac-
cianella et al., 2010). To build the set of domain-
dependent features the authors propose taking the
lexicon built by Hu and Liu (2004) and choosing
those positive/negative words that occur in a sig-
nificant number of positive/negative reviews of the
training corpus used for the experimentation.

For Spanish domain adaptation, Garcı́a et al.
(2012) develop a polarity classification system based
on the use of a list of opinion words generated by
the authors. The corpus used for the evaluation is a
set of hotel reviews written in Spanish and gathered
from TripAdvisor. The method consists of counting
the number of positive and negative words that ap-

139



pear in the text. Molina-González et al. (2014) pro-
pose a method taking as a base the iSOL lexicon and
then enrich it with the most frequent words in pos-
itive/negative reviews from a Spanish corpus in the
tourism domain (subset of SFU corpus1). They im-
plement an automatic method to determine the best
ratio between positive and negative words in order
to integrate them into the new adapted lexicon. The
system is tested on a different corpus of Spanish ho-
tel reviews composed of more than 32,000 opinions.
The results obtained improve greatly on the result
with other general purpose lexicon. Afterward, the
same approach is extended to the 8 different do-
mains present in the Spanish SFU corpus (Molina-
González et al., 2015b). In this paper we have ap-
plied the same approach as Molina-González et al.
(2014), but instead of focusing on the tourism do-
main we have applied the method to the movie do-
main. We have also carried out several experiments
in order to determine the best ratio between positive
and negative terms to consider polar terms.

3 Domain adaptation based on
Bootstrapping

The bootstrapping algorithm implemented in this
paper follows the approach described in (Vázquez
et al., 2012) that proposes the use of a bootstrap-
ping method to automatically create lists of polar ad-
jectives relevant for a domain and to detect “highly
subjective adjectives” (that is, adjectives that could
change their polarity even in the same domain). It is
a corpus-based method that only needs a set of lin-
guistic patterns extracted from a corpus and a seed
polarity lexicon. The hypothesis of this algorithm is
that there are some linguistic patterns that provide
evidence of the semantic orientation of the words,
and therefore this information can be iteratively used
to identify the polarity of new words. The patterns
selected by Vázquez et al. (2012) are the ones corre-
sponding in Spanish to those presented in Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown (1997) where the authors hy-
pothesize that the conjunction “and” (“y”/“e”) joins
adjectives of the same orientation while the conjunc-
tion “but” (“pero”/“aunque”) joins adjectives of dif-
ferent orientation. As seed words, they use a set of

1https://www.sfu.ca/˜mtaboada/download/
downloadCorpusSpa.html

28 positive and 7 negative adjectives that five human
annotators manually labeled as domain independent
(Vázquez and Bel, 2012). They test the effectiveness
of the proposed approach over a set of 200 Span-
ish documents manually tagged with the polar ad-
jectives that should be in the final polarity lexicon.
From all the adjectives labeled by the bootstrapping
algorithm (67% of the total are identified), 97.6% of
the positive adjectives and 71.5% of the negatives
adjectives are correctly tagged. The authors validate
the method and obtain promising results, but they do
not test the generated sentiment lexicon in the task of
polarity classification, therefore we have decided to
use it in our experimentation to check how it works.

The bootstrapping algorithm operates as follows.
In first place, all the pairs of adjectives that match
with any of the patterns defined (adj1 “y”/“e” adj2,
adj1 “pero”/“aunque” adj2) are extracted from the
training corpus. After this, the following process is
iteratively repeated until there are no changes (inser-
tion or removal) in the polarity lexicon.

For each pattern found, if any of the adjectives is
in the seed polarity lexicon we proceed as follows:

• If the adjectives are joined by “y”/“e” and the
polarity of one of them is unknown (that is, the
adjective is not in the polarity lexicon yet), then
the unknown adjective has the same semantic
orientation as the other adjective and conse-
quently it is added to the polarity lexicon with
its corresponding polarity.

• If the adjectives are connected by “y”/“e” and
the polarity of the two is known; if both have
the same polarity all is well, but if they have
opposite polarity (positive adj “y”/“e” negative
adj, negative adj “y”/“e” positive adj), the two
adjectives will be added to the list of highly
subjective adjectives and both will be removed
from the polarity lexicon.

• If the adjectives are joined by the conjunc-
tion “pero”/“aunque” and the polarity of one
of them is unknown, then the unknown adjec-
tive has the opposite semantic orientation as
the other adjective and consequently it is added
to the polarity lexicon with its corresponding
polarity.

140



• If the adjectives are joined by “pero”/“aunque”
and the polarity of the two is known; if
both have opposite polarity all is well, but
if they have the same polarity (positive adj
“pero”/“aunque” positive adj, negative adj
“pero”/“aunque” negative adj), the two adjec-
tives will be added to the list of highly subjec-
tive adjectives and both will be removed from
the polarity lexicon.

We first applied this approach directly using the
35 adjectives proposed by Vázquez and Bel (2012)
over the MuchoCine Corpus. However, the results
were very poor and, thus, we decided to start from
the iSOL lexicon as seed for the BS algorithm.

The main advantages of this approach are that it
does not need a corpus previously tagged with the
semantic orientation of each text, it can be applied
to any domain and it not only adds adjectives to the
seed sentiment lexicon but also cleans it by remov-
ing the highly subjective adjectives. However, we
also find some disadvantages. It only takes into ac-
count one part of speech, the adjective. Furthermore,
it removes an adjective if it appears in a contradic-
tory construction2 without considering that the ad-
jective could appear in more correct constructions
than in those that are contradictory. For example, a
user can make a mistake and write “clean and dirty”,
then the algorithm will remove both adjectives from
the positive and negative lists respectively, but if it
took into account that there are a great quantity of
correct constructions for the adjective “dirty” (for
example, “dirty and ugly”, “dirty and dusty”. . . ) it
should not be removed from the negative list. Thus,
we should consider other parameters before remov-
ing a specific polar term.

4 Domain adaptation based on Term
Frequency

In order to implement the Term Frequency approach,
we have followed the same assumptions as Du et
al. (2010). According to this strategy, a word must
be negative (or positive) if it appears in many neg-
ative (or positive) documents. Therefore, we have
implemented an automatic method to determine the

2Positive adj + “y”/“e” + negative adj; negative adj + “y”/“e”
+ positive adj; positive adj “pero”/“aunque” + positive adj; neg-
ative adj + “pero”/“aunque” + negative adj

groups of terms in order to integrate them into the
new adapted lexicons. The groups of words are se-
lected using the following equation:

polarity(word) =















pos if (f− = 0 ∧ f+ ≥ n) ∨ ( f+
f− ≥ n)

neg if (f+ = 0 ∧ f− ≥ n) ∨ ( f−
f+

≥ n)
(1)

Where f+ is the absolute frequency of the occur-
rences of a given word in positive reviews and f− is
the absolute frequency of the occurrences of a given
word in negative reviews. Therefore, n is the ratio
between the amount of positive and negative words.

The main advantage of this method is its simplic-
ity and quick implementation. Nevertheless, we find
several disadvantages. On the one hand, the task
of finding available corpora labelled with polarity
at the document level is sometimes difficult, partic-
ularly for certain domains and languages. On the
other hand, the inclusion in the adapted lexicon of
all types of words without any discrimination, de-
pending only on a ratio, sometimes introduces noise
that does not improve the result in polarity classifi-
cation.

5 Experimental framework and results

We tested two corpus-based approaches and the
combination of them for the domain adaptation of
a polarity lexicon in Spanish. The list of opinion
words taken as a starting point was iSOL (Molina-
González et al., 2013). iSOL is a Spanish polarity
lexicon generated from the automatic translation of
the Bing Liu Lexicon (Hu and Liu, 2004) and the
manual revision of it. It is composed of 2,509 posi-
tive and 5,626 negative words.

For the adaptation of this lexicon and for test-
ing the TF and BS approaches we used the Spanish
MuchoCine corpus (MC) (Cruz et al., 2008). This
dataset consists of 3,878 movie reviews collected
from the MuchoCine website. The reviews are writ-
ten by web users, therefore the sentences found in
the reviews may include spelling mistakes or infor-
mal expressions and they may not always be gram-
matically correct. The dataset contains about 2 mil-
lion words and an average of 546 words per review.
The opinions in the corpus are rated on a scale from
1 to 5. A rank of 1 means that the opinion is very

141



bad and 5 means very good. Reviews with a rating
of 3 can be categorized as “neutral”, which means
that the user considers the movie is neither bad nor
good. In our experiments the neutral reviews were
not taken into account, the opinions with ratings of
1 or 2 were considered as negative and those with
ratings of 4 or 5 as positive (in total 1,351 positive
and 1,274 negative reviews). The 60% of these re-
views (781 positive and 794 negative reviews) were
employed for the domain adaptation of iSOL and the
remaining 40% (570 positive and 480 negative re-
views) were used for testing the resultant lists in the
task of polarity classification.

In order to apply the method based on frequency
(TF), the punctuations and the stopwords of the doc-
uments were first removed. After this, the absolute
frequency of each word in the positive and nega-
tive reviews was determined. Subsequently, several
experiments were carried out to add to iSOL those
words of the corpus that verify Equation 1, consid-
ering different ratios in order to fix the best ratio be-
tween positive and negative terms to consider polar
terms.

In the case of the approach based on bootstrap-
ping (BS), the documents were first tokenized and
splitted into sentences and each token was tagged
with its pertinent part of speech, using Freeling3

(Carreras et al., 2004). Afterwards, the pairs of ad-
jectives that matched with any of the defined pat-
terns were extracted using regular expressions. Fi-
nally, two experiments were performed. In the first
one, the bootstrapping algorithm was applied using
as seed the opinion lexicon iSOL, and in the second
the opinion lexicon resultant from applying the TF
method with the best ratio (eSOLMovie) was em-
ployed as seed.

In order to evaluate the experiments we used the
traditional measures employed in text classification:
precision (P), recall (R), F1 and Accuracy. On the
other hand, to calculate the polarity (p) of a review
(r) with each lexicon, we take into account the total
number of positive words (#positive) and the total
number of negative words (#negative) within the re-
view, according to the following strategy:

3http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/

polarity(review) =











1 if (#positive > #negative)

−1 if (#positive ≤ #negative)
(2)

As the baseline of our experimentation we took
the general purpose lexicon iSOL, in order to adapt
it to the movie domain with the proposed approaches
and with the combination of them. The result of
the polarity classification of the documents follow-
ing the strategy defined previously and using iSOL
is of 62.95%, in terms of accuracy.

Regarding the Term Frequency methodology, we
first carried out different experiments in order to
determine the best ratio to use in our final exper-
iment combining both strategies. Thus, after test-
ing several ratios we determined that the best one
is obtained using the ratio n=4 (Figure 1). There-
fore, this lexicon was taken as the seed list for the
combined experiment with bootstrapping. Table 1
shows the results obtained over the MC corpus using
iSOL (domain independent) and eSOLMovien lexi-
cons (adapted to the movie domain with the ratios
n=3,4,5,6).

Figure 1: Improvement of the Accuracy respect to iSOL with

the different eSOLMovien lexicons.

In relation to the Bootstraping strategy, it found
1,841 “y”/“e” patterns and 39 “pero”/“aunque” pat-
terns and it was tested using iSOL and eSOLMovie4

as seeds. The experiment with iSOL detected 292
highly subjective adjectives, inserted 659 adjectives,
removed 110 adjectives and converged in 5 iter-
ations, achieving 63.71% of accuracy in the po-
larity classification of the corpus. On the other
hand, the experiment with eSOLMovie4 detected
296 highly subjective adjectives, appended 626 ad-
jectives, deleted 228 adjectives and converged in 4
iterations, achieving 70.19% of accuracy. Table 2

142



Resource Macro-P Macro-R Macro-F1 Accuracy Improvement Improvement
Macro-F1 Accuracy

iSOL 62.59% 62.28% 62.43% 62.95% - -
eSOLMovie3 70.51% 60.51% 65.13% *57.43% 4.32% -8.77%
eSOLMovie4 69.74% 68.39% 69.06% *69.43% 10.62% 10.29%
eSOLMovie5 67.40% 66.16% 66.77% *67.24% 6.95% 6.80%
eSOLMovie6 65.56% 65.09% 65.33% 65.81% 4.65% 4.54%

Table 1: Results obtained using the different lexicons eSOLMovien.
An asterisk (*) means significantly different according to the Chi-square test (α = 0.05) compared to the result with the baseline approach (iSOL).

Resource Macro-P Macro-R Macro-F1 Accuracy Improvement Improvement
Macro-F1 Accuracy

iSOL 62.59% 62.28% 62.43% 62.95% - -
iSOL+Bootstrapping 63.63% 62.55% 63.09% 63.71% 1.06% 1.21%
eSOLMovie4 69.74% 68.39% 69.06% *69.43% 10.62% 10.29%
eSOLMovie4+Bootstrapping 70.45% 69.22% 69.83% *70.19% 11.85% 11.50%

Table 2: Results obtained with the different approaches.

shows the results achieved in the classification at
the document level of the MC corpus using iSOL
(domain independent) adapted to the movie domain
with the BS approach, with the TF method (using
the best ratio) and with the combination of both
strategies (the bootstrapping algorithm over eSOL-
Movie4).

6 Results analysis

Table 3 shows a summary of the results obtained and
Table 4 presents the total number of positive and
negative polar terms inserted and eliminated from
the original lexicon after applying each method. As
we can see, the results obtained with the TF method
(eSOLMovien) are very promising. It improves the
accuracy of the classification with respect to the gen-
eral purpose lexicon (iSOL) by 10.29%, inserting
only 132 positive words and 126 negative words (Ta-
ble 3 and 4). However, the restriction of this ap-
proach is that we need a corpus previously tagged
with the polarity of the documents. Moreover, this
strategy only appends new words to the original lex-
icon and sometimes the new terms introduce noise
(for example, we consider that the words “fácil”
(easy) and “rápido” (fast) could not be indicators of
negative opinion in the movie domain, see Table 5).

Therefore, we also decided to conduct experi-
ments with a technique based on bootstrapping that
does not require an annotated corpus and that not
only appends words but also removes some of them.
The application of the BS approach for the adap-

tation of iSOL to the movie domain also achieves
an improvement in the classification (iSOL + boot-
strapping) over the baseline (iSOL), although this
improvement is not as great as we expected (it is
only about 1.21%, see Table 3). We think that one
of the reasons could be that in this approach we have
only used patterns for the extraction of adjectives,
while the TF method appends a word independently
of its PoS. Furthermore, we think that the fact of not
only inserting but also removing adjectives would be
promising but if we take a look at some of the words
removed (Table 5), there are adjectives that a priori
it seems they should not have been eliminated (for
example, the adjectives “agradable” (pleasant) and
“espectacular” (spectacular) of the positive list).

Due to this fact, we decided to combine both
methods in order to take advantage of them.
Thereby, the list generated with the TF method
(eSOLMovie4) was used as input in the BS algo-
rithm and the resultant list (eSOLMovie4 + Boot-
strapping) was employed for the classification of the
movie reviews, achieving an improvement with re-
spect to the baseline (iSOL) of 11.50%, in terms of
accuracy (Table 3). Moreover, the results obtained
with this combined method improve on the perfor-
mance of both approaches (iSOL + bootstrapping
and eSOLMovie4) when applied individually.

7 Conclusions and future work

In this paper we have presented two corpus-based
approaches for the domain adaptation of a polarity

143



Resource #positive #negative Accuracy Improvement
words words Accuracy

iSOL 2509 5626 62.95% -
iSOL+Bootstrapping 2743 5839 63.71% 1.21%
eSOLMovie4 2641 5752 *69.43% 10.29%
eSOLMovie4+Bootstrapping 2857 5934 *70.19% 11.50%

Table 3: Results summary.

Resource #positive words #negative words #positive words #negative words
inserted inserted removed removed

iSOL+Bootstrapping 339 320 105 105%
eSOLMovie4 132 126 - -%
eSOLMovie4+Bootstrapping 326 300 110 118%

Table 4: Total of positive/negative words inserted into iSOL and removed from iSOL with the different approaches.

iSOL+Bootstrapping eSOLMovie4 eSOLMovie4+Bootstrapping

Example of positive Relevante(relevant), amena(pleasant), Debut(debut), imprescindible(essential), Orgulloso(proud), llamativa(striking),
words inserted azul(blue), humilde(humble), peliculón(great movie), cruda(crude), anecdótica(anecdotal), original(original),

útlima(last), expectante(expectant), sorprendente(surprising), impactante(impressive), atrapadora(trapping), breve(short),
destacable(remarkable), talentosa(talented)... cruel(cruel), catelera(billboard)... familiar(familiar), desgarrador(heartbreaking)...

Example of negative Maquiavélica(machiavellian), asquerosilla(disgusting), Fallida(failed), previsible(foreseeable), Cansino(tiresome), aburridı́simo(very boring),
words inserted simplona(simpleton), peculiar(peculiar), montón(be an average), secuela(sequel), gigantes(giants), claustrofóbica(claustrophobic),

repelente(repellent), extraordinaria(axtraordinary), exceso(excess), experimento(experiment), intrascendente(trivial), asfixiante(stifling),
predecible(predictable), horroroso(horrifying)... fácil(easy), rápido(fast)... bochornosa(embarrassing), tétrica(gloomy)...

Example of positive Sensacional(sensational), poderoso(powerful), Cruel(cruel), brillante(brilliant),
words removed interesante(interesting), agradable(pleasant), aceptable(acceptable), recomendable(recommendable),

espectacular(spectacular), consistente(consistent), rico(rich), espectacular(spectacular),
primera(first), realista(realistic)... accesible(accessible), vital(vital)...

Example of negative Violentos(violents), extraña(strange), Rápido(fast), fácil(easy),
words removed amenazante(threatening), sangrienta(bloody), perverso(perverse), gris(grey),

despiadado(ruthless), terrible(terrible), trágica(tragic), misteriosa(mysterious),
enfermo(sick), doloroso(painful)... última(last), inesperado(unexpected)...

Table 5: Examples of the words inserted into iSOL and removed from iSOL in the different experiments.

lexicon. Both methods are language independent
and can be applied to any domain. One of them, the
based on term frequency (TF), needs a corpus pre-
viously tagged with the polarity of the documents
and the other one, the based on a bootstrapping al-
gorithm (BS), does not require an annotated corpus,
it only needs as input a set of patterns and a seed
sentiment lexicon. The TF approach achieves very
promising results while the BS strategy, although
it improves on the baseline system with the gen-
eral purpose lexicon, does not improve as much as
we expected. Due to this fact we have combined
both methods, in order to take advantage of the pos-
itive aspects of each of them. With this new lexi-
con we have achieved an improvement of 11.50%
(in terms of accuracy) in the polarity classification
of the movie reviews with respect to the results
achieved with the general purpose lexicon iSOL.

In future work, we consider adding some im-
provements to the domain adaptation approach
based on bootstrapping in order to solve one of the

main disadvantages detected and to strengthen its
main advantage. Thus, we plan to consider a differ-
ent approach to remove an adjective from the senti-
ment lexicon, for example, if two adjectives are in
contradictory constructions before removing them it
could be a good idea to check the number of cor-
rect and contradictory constructions in which each
of them appear, and remove them only if the number
of contradictory constructions exceeds the number
of correct constructions in a threshold. We also plan
to check, before adding a new adjective to the senti-
ment lexicon, its polarity according to other impor-
tant lexical resources (such as SentiWordNet using
Multilingual Central Repository (Gonzalez-Agirre
et al., 2012) to map sentiment labels to Spanish).
Moreover, we will incorporate new patterns to the
algorithm in order to extract polar words with an-
other PoS (not only adjectives) such as nouns, verbs
and adverbs.

144



Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by a Grant
from the Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y De-
porte (MECD - scholarship FPU014/00983) and
REDES project (TIN2015-65136-C2-1-R) from the
Ministerio de Economı́a y Competitividad.

References

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In
LREC, volume 10, pages 2200–2204.

John Blitzer, Mark Dredze, Fernando Pereira, et al. 2007.
Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and blenders:
Domain adaptation for sentiment classification. In
Proceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the asso-
ciation of computational linguistics, volume 7, pages
440–447, Prague, Czech Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Xavier Carreras, Isaac Chao, Lluis Padró, and Muntsa
Padró. 2004. Freeling: An open-source suite of lan-
guage analyzers. In LREC.

Fermı́n L Cruz, José A Troyano, Fernando Enriquez,
and Javier Ortega. 2008. Clasificación de documen-
tos basada en la opinión: experimentos con un cor-
pus de crıticas de cine en español. Procesamiento de
Lenguaje Natural, 41.

Fermı́n L Cruz, José A Troyano, Beatriz Pontes, and
F Javier Ortega. 2014. Building layered, multilingual
sentiment lexicons at synset and lemma levels. Expert
Systems with Applications, 41(13):5984–5994.

Rahim Dehkharghani, Benin Yanikoglu, Dilek Tapucu,
and Yucel Saygin. 2012. Adaptation and use of
subjectivity lexicons for domain dependent sentiment
classification. In Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW),
2012 IEEE 12th International Conference on, pages
669–673. IEEE.

Weifu Du, Songbo Tan, Xueqi Cheng, and Xiaochun
Yun. 2010. Adapting information bottleneck method
for automatic construction of domain-oriented senti-
ment lexicon. In Proceedings of the third ACM inter-
national conference on Web search and data mining,
pages 111–120. ACM.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiword-
net: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 6, pages
417–422. Citeseer.

Aitor Garcı́a, Sean Gaines, Maria Teresa Linaza, et al.
2012. A lexicon based sentiment analysis retrieval
system for tourism domain. Expert Syst Appl Int J,
39(10):9166–9180.

Aitor Gonzalez-Agirre, Egoitz Laparra, and German
Rigau. 2012. Multilingual central repository version
3.0. In LREC, pages 2525–2529.

M Dolores Molina González, Eugenio Martı́nez Cámara,
and M Teresa Martı́n Valdivia. 2015a. Crisol: Base
de conocimiento de opiniones para el español. Proce-
samiento del Lenguaje Natural, 55:143–150.

M Dolores Molina González, Eugenio Martı́nez Cámara,
M Teresa Martı́n Valdivia, and Salud M Jiménez Zafra.
2015c. esolhotel: Generación de un lexicón de opinión
en español adaptado al dominio turı́stico. Proce-
samiento del Lenguaje Natural, 54:21–28.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R McKeown.
1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. In Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics and eighth
conference of the european chapter of the association
for computational linguistics, pages 174–181. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the Tenth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’04, pages
168–177, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Eugenio Martı́nez-Cámara, M Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia,
M Dolores Molina-González, and José M Perea-
Ortega. 2014. Integrating Spanish lexical resources
by meta-classifiers for polarity classification. Journal
of Information Science, page 0165551514535710.

M Dolores Molina-González, Eugenio Martı́nez-Cámara,
Marı́a-Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia, and José M Perea-
Ortega. 2013. Semantic orientation for polarity clas-
sification in Spanish reviews. Expert Systems with Ap-
plications, 40(18):7250–7257.

M Dolores Molina-González, Eugenio Martı́nez-Cámara,
M Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia, and L Alfonso Urena-
López. 2014. Cross-domain sentiment analysis us-
ing Spanish opinionated words. In Natural Language
Processing and Information Systems, pages 214–219.
Springer.

M Dolores Molina-González, Eugenio Martı́nez-Cámara,
M Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia, and L Alfonso Ureña-
López. 2015b. A Spanish semantic orientation ap-
proach to domain adaptation for polarity classification.
Information Processing & Management, 51(4):520–
531.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing - Volume 10, EMNLP ’02, pages
79–86, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

145



Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. 2003.
Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the seventh confer-
ence on Natural language learning at HLT-NAACL
2003-Volume 4, pages 25–32. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, and Manfred Stede. 2009.
Genre-based paragraph classification for sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Confer-
ence: The 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 62–70. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?:
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classi-
fication of reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL ’02, pages 417–424, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Silvia Vázquez and Núria Bel. 2012. A classification
of adjectives for polarity lexicons enhancement. In
Calzolari N, Choukri K, Declerck T (et al.), editors.
Proceedings of the Eight International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12),
pages 3557–3561.

Silvia Vázquez, Muntsa Padró, Núria Bel, and Julio Gon-
zalo. 2012. Automatic extraction of polar adjectives
for the creation of polarity lexicons. In Kay M, Boitet
C, editors. Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters:
24th International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics COLING 2012; 2012 December 8-15; Mum-
bai, India. Mumbai: The COLING 2012 Organizing
Committee; 2012. p. 1271-1280., pages 1271–1280.
ACL (Association for Computational Linguistics).

Michael Wiegand, Manfred Klenner, and Dietrich
Klakow. 2013. Bootstrapping polarity classifiers with
rule-based classification. Language resources and
evaluation, 47(4):1049–1088.

146


