



















































Prediction of Key Patient Outcome from Sentence and Word of Medical Text Records


Proceedings of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop,
pages 86–90, Osaka, Japan, December 11-17 2016.

Prediction of Key Patient Outcome from Sentence and Word of Medical
Text Records

Takanori Yamashita1, Yoshifumi Wakata1, Hidehisa Soejima2, Naoki Nakashima1,
Sachio Hirokawa3

1Medical Information Center, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan
2Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan

3Research Institute for Information Technology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
{t-yama, wakata, nnaoki}@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

hidehisa-soejima@saiseikaikumamoto.jp, hirokawa@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

The number of unstructured medical records kept in hospital information systems is increasing.
The conditions of patients are formulated as outcomes in clinical pathway. A variance of an
outcome describes deviations from standards of care like a patient’s bad condition. The present
paper applied text mining to extract feature words and phrases of the variance from admission
records. We report the cases the variances of “pain control” and “no neuropathy worsening” in
cerebral infarction.

1 Introduction

1.1 background
Many medical institutes have been accumulating large amounts of medical data. Medical data include
structured numerical data and unstructured text data. Unstructured text data is a wide variety of expres-
sions. However, those data are essential, since those free texts are written by medical staff who actually
take care of the patients. Therefore, analyzing medical text is expected to improve medical process and
the clinical decision support (Meystre, 2008; Zhua, 2013).

There is previous text mining research on medical records. (Mowery, 2012) applied SVM (Support
Vector Machine) to partition the emergency reports into SOAP (Weed, 1969) segments. The prediction of
the disease or a cancer classification to the discharge summaries was studied in (Suzuki, 2008; Nguyen,
2010). (Coden, 2009) construct the model that automatically populates pertinent parts of a structured
cancer representation from text pathology reports. These are mainly classification and performance
evaluation. On the other hand, there are not many contents to which specific sentence and word appeared
the symptom and the condition are provided.

1.2 Clinical pathway
A clinical pathway determines standard medical procedures for an inpatient with respect to each disease
and to each medical treatment. This is also expected to improve medical management by advancing
standardization. The Japanese Society for Clinical Pathway1 promotes the construction of a standard
electronic clinical pathway aiming at the standardization of medical treatment and improvement in med-
ical processes.

”All variance outcome oriented clinical pathway” is a series of medical treatment units which consist
of three layers of (a) outcome, (b) assessment and (c) task (Figure 1). Doctors or nurses in medical
practice keep records of their tasks and assessments of patients’conditions. The variance is recorded in
an outcome layer when a patient’s condition doesn ’t achieve the criteria of an assessment layer. Thus,
we can grasp abnormal condition of the patient and the change of medical intervention plan (Nakashima,
2007).

The present paper applied text mining and machine learning to admission records to extract the words
that represent outcome variance (patient condition) and evaluated the prediction performance. Further-
more, we considered the patient condition related to the outcome variance from extracted feature words
and sentences.

1http://www.jscp.gr.jp

86



Figure 1: The 3-layer structure of Clinical Pathways

2 Data and Method

2.1 Admission Text Records

In this paper, we analyzed the admission records of 1,222 patients to whom clinical pathway of cerebral
infarction was applied in Kumamoto-Saiseikai Hospital in April 2014 – January 2016.

The clinical pathway of cerebral infarction has set 14 outcomes (Table 1). “no paralysis” and “no
depressed level of consciousness” cover the large part of variances. However, we focus in the present
paper on “pain control” and “no neuropathy worsening”, since they are considered clinically important.
In order to analyze the 1,222 admission records, we constructed a search engine of the textual records.
We used GETA2 system available at NII GETA project. Using this search engine, we tried extraction of
the words that may serve as a determinant of outcome variance.

Outcome Variance count
no Paralysis 1026
no depressed level of Consciousness 734
Dietary intake 522
Vital stable 513
Pain control * 456
no Neuropathy worsening * 356
Circulatory dynamics stable 157
no Urination disorder 133
Respiratory status stable 122
no Chest Infection symptom 14
no Side effect symptom 12
keep Rest 6
no Dyscoria symptom 4
no Imbalance syndrome symptom 1

Table 1: Outcome in clinical pathway of Cerebral Infarction (*: target in this study)

2.2 Classification by Support Vector Machine and Feature Selection

We applied SVM to predict if an admission record is in the outcome variance. The specific procedure is
as follows. All admission records are vectorized after morphological analysis using medical dictionary

2http://geta.ex.nii.ac.jp/geta.html

87



(about 80,000 words). If a patient’s record contains the outcome, it is labeled as positive example.
In contrast, the cases which have no mark are used as negative data. Then the classification model is
constructed using SVM (SVM-light (Joachims, 1999)).

we applied the model to the imaginary sentence that consists of a single word wi. We used the predicted
score of the sentence as the score(wi) of the word.

The score(wi) denotes the SVM score of a word wi obtained by applying the model to the imaginary
document that contains only the word. In (Sakai, 2012), the score(wi) was used for the feature selection.
In the present paper, we propose another two measures to evaluate the importance of each word. The first
measure score(wi) ∗ df(wi) is obtained as the product of the document frequency df(wi) of the word.
The second measure log(score(wi) ∗ df(wi)) is product of the log of the document frequency of the
word and the score. Those measures are defined as “w.o, d.o, l.o”. Furthermore, the measure for which
the absolute value was used “w.a, d.a, l.a” was established and 6 measures were used because there was
also score of negative in SVM.

Then, we applied the model to all sentences to evaluate the score of each sentences. The top scored
sentences were chosen as typical sentences of the outcome variance. We highlighted the feature words
in those sentences to help interpreting the meaning of the sentence with focused feature words.

3 Result

3.1 Feature Words and Feature Sentences

Table 2 lists the top 30 positive words as feature words for the outcomes of ”pain” and ”neuropathy
worsening”. Table 2 shows feature sentences that contain such feature words. There are many sen-
tences of “pain” that contain “dizzy”, “headache”, “nausea”, “fibroid” and “aneurysm”. The sentences
of “neuropathy worsening” often shows “paralysis”, “right face” and “difficulty talking”.

Outcome Feature words Feature setences
Pain dizzy(132), hypalgesia(14),

aneurysm(181)*, headache(81)*,
nifedipine(67), nausea(61), fi-
broid(27), right angular(53),
calcification(68), pravastatin(23),
hemianopsia(94)

dizzy when body move, severe nausea.
Feeling badness, a headache and dizziness appear
suddenly.
found aneurysm in cavernous sinus.
anamnesis: fibroid, gallstone(postoperation), high
blood pressure, irregular pulse.

Neuropathy
worsening

paralysis(205), right face(106),
renal failure(60), right knee(10),
hypalgesia(14), sick sinus syn-
drome(15), Right facial paral-
ysis(88), difficulty talking(165),
flexion(65)*

When getting up, the paralysis of a right hand finger
appeared and was also felt by the right face again.
With the paralysis senses in mandibular nerve area
of right face.
The paralysis sense of the right face, the right fore-
arm and the right thigh back side.
Difficulty talking appeared.
Forgetfulness and slow talking appeared.

Table 2: Feature words and sentences by SVM (* possibility or impossibility, presence or absence)

3.2 Feature Selection

The top N of positive words and negative words (or the top 2N of the absolute value) were selected to
construct a model, and then we evaluated the prediction performance. We varied the number of words
N (N=1,2,…,10,20,…, 100,200,…). We used 5-fold cross validation in the evaluation experiment. The
prediction performance was evaluated by Accuracy and F-measure.

The baseline Accuracy of “pain” that uses all words is 0.58. The Accuracy is obtained 0.64 at N=9
(l.o, l.a), and then the best of Accuracy is attained 0.77 at N=700 (w.o, w.a) as shown in Figure 2. The
baseline F-measure of “pain” that uses all words is 0.39. The F-measure is obtained 0.55 at N=30, and is
attained 0.65 at N=100 (w.o, w.a) and 0.81 at N=700 (w.o, w.a) as shown in Figure 3.

88



The baseline Accuracy of “neuropathy worsening” that uses all words is 0.61. The Accuracy obtained
0.70 at N=3 (d.o, d.a) and around 0.75 at N=100 (6 measures), and then is attained 0.85 at N=700 (w.o,
w.a) as shown in Figure 4. The baseline F-measure of “neuropathy worsening” that uses all words is
0.33. The best of F-measure is attained 0.60 at N=100 (w.o) and 0.75 at N=700 (w.o, w.a) as shown in
Figure 5. The measure of Score and Score*Df made high performance.

Figure 2: Accuracy(Pain) Figure 3: F-measure(Pain)

Figure 4: Accuracy(Neuropathy worsening) Figure 5: F-measure(Neuropathy worsening)

4 Conclusion

This present paper reported the extraction of feature words and typical sentences that describe the pa-
tient condition from the free texts. “dizzy”, “headache” and “nausea” are extracted as feature words of
“pain”. “paralysis”, “difficulty talking” and “right face” are extracted as feature words of “neuropathy
worsening”. These words make sense from a clinical viewpoint. Furthermore, the Accuracy with less
than 10 words was better for the prediction performance than F-measure with it by feature selection in
both the cases.

In the present paper, we considered feature sentences that contain those feature word and then inter-
preted context of the sentence. As the result, we succeeded in extracting the part of the patient’s site
and the typical condition of the patient from feature words and feature sentences. Then, it will enable
early care to critical indicator. We plan to analyze other outcomes and other cases. We aim to estab-
lish a method of medical text mining that can perform clinical evaluation for the improvement medical
processes.

Acknowledgements

This research is partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grand Number 15H02778

89



References
Meystre SM. Savova GK. Kipper-Schuler KC and Hurdle JF. 2008. Extracting information from textual documents

in the electronic health record: a review of recent research Yearbook of medical informatics, 128–144.

Zhua F. Patumcharoenpolc P. Zhanga C. Yanga Y. Chang J. Meechai A. Vongsangnak W and Shen B. 2013.
Biomedical text mining and its applications in cancer research Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 46(2):200–
211.

Nakashima N. Okada H. and Gouchi A. 2007. Hospital Information System and Clinical Pathways Japan journal
of medical informatics, 27(1):21–28 (in Japanese).

Sakai T. and Hirokawa S. 2012. Feature Words that Classify Problem Sentence in Scientific Article Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications & Services, 360–367.

Yamashita T. Wakata Y. Hamai S. Nakashima Y. Iwamoto Y. Flanagan B. Nakashima N and Hirokawa S. 2015.
Presumption Model for Postoperative Hospital Days from Operation Records International Journal of Computer
& Information Science, 1(16):50–59.

Mowery D. Wiebe J. Visweswaran S. Harkema H and Chapman WW 2012. Building an automated SOAP classi-
fier for emergency department reports Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 45(1):71–81.

Suzuki T. Yokoi H. Fujita S and Takabayashi K 2008. Automatic DPC code selection from electronic medical
records: Text mining trial of discharge summary Methods of Information in Medicine, 47(6):541–548.

Nguyen AN. Lawley MJ. Hansen DP. Bowman RV. Clarke BE. Duhig EE and Colquist S 2010. Symbolic rule-
based classification of lung cancer stages from free-text pathology reports Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 17(4):440–445.

Coden A. Savova G. Sominsky I. Tanenblatt M. Masanz J. Schuler K. Cooper J. Guan W and de Groen PC 2009.
Automatically extracting cancer disease characteristics from pathology reports into a Disease Knowledge Rep-
resentation Model Journal of Biomedical informatics, 42(5):937–949.

Weed LL 1969. Medical Records, Medical Education, and Patient Care. Cleaveland Western Reserve University

Joachims T, 1999. Making large-scale support vector machine learning practical Advances in kernel
methods,169–184

90


