



















































The Effect of Negators, Modals, and Degree Adverbs on Sentiment Composition


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, pages 43–52,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Effect of Negators, Modals, and Degree Adverbs
on Sentiment Composition

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad
National Research Council Canada

{svetlana.kiritchenko,saif.mohammad}@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

Abstract

Negators, modals, and degree adverbs can sig-
nificantly affect the sentiment of the words
they modify. Often, their impact is modeled
with simple heuristics; although, recent work
has shown that such heuristics do not capture
the true sentiment of multi-word phrases. We
created a dataset of phrases that include vari-
ous negators, modals, and degree adverbs, as
well as their combinations. Both the phrases
and their constituent content words were an-
notated with real-valued scores of sentiment
association. Using phrasal terms in the created
dataset, we analyze the impact of individual
modifiers and the average effect of the groups
of modifiers on overall sentiment. We find
that the effect of modifiers varies substantially
among the members of the same group. Fur-
thermore, each individual modifier can affect
sentiment words in different ways. Therefore,
solutions based on statistical learning seem
more promising than fixed hand-crafted rules
on the task of automatic sentiment prediction.

1 Introduction

Sentiment associations are commonly captured
in sentiment lexicons—lists of associated word–
sentiment pairs (optionally with a score indicat-
ing the degree of association). They are mostly
used in sentiment analysis (Pontiki et al., 2014;
Rosenthal et al., 2015), but are also beneficial in
stance detection (Mohammad et al., 2016a; Moham-
mad et al., 2016b), literary analysis (Hartner, 2013;
Kleres, 2011; Mohammad, 2012), detecting person-
ality traits (Grijalva et al., 2015; Mohammad and
Kiritchenko, 2015), and other applications.

Manually created sentiment lexicons are espe-
cially useful because they tend to be more accurate
than automatically generated ones; they can be used
to automatically generate large high-coverage lexi-
cons (Tang et al., 2014; Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006);
they can be used to evaluate different methods of
automatically creating sentiment lexicons; and they
can be used for linguistic analysis such as examining
how modifiers (negators, modals, degree adverbs,
etc.) impact overall sentiment. However, most exist-
ing manually created sentiment lexicons tend to pro-
vide only lists of positive and negative words with
very coarse levels of sentiment (Stone et al., 1966;
Wilson et al., 2005; Mohammad and Turney, 2013).
The coarse-grained distinctions may be less useful in
downstream applications than having access to fine-
grained (real-valued) sentiment association scores.

Manually created sentiment lexicons usually in-
clude only single words. Yet, the sentiment of a
phrase can differ markedly from the sentiment of
its constituent words. Sentiment composition is the
determining of sentiment of a multi-word linguistic
unit, such as a phrase or a sentence, from its con-
stituents. Lexicons that include sentiment associa-
tions for phrases as well as for their constituents are
useful in studying sentiment composition. We refer
to them as sentiment composition lexicons (SCLs).

We created a sentiment composition lexicon for
phrases formed with negators (such as no and can-
not), modals (such as would have been and could),
degree adverbs (such as quite and less), and their
combinations. Both the phrases and their constituent
content words were manually annotated with real-
valued scores of sentiment association using a tech-

43



nique known as Best–Worst Scaling, which provides
reliable annotations. We refer to the resulting lexi-
con as Sentiment Composition Lexicon for Negators,
Modals, and Degree Adverbs (SCL-NMA). The lexi-
con is also known as SemEval-2016 General English
Sentiment Modifiers Lexicon.1

We calculate the minimum difference in senti-
ment scores of two terms that is perceptible to na-
tive speakers of a language. For sentiment scores
between -1 and 1, we show that the perceptible dif-
ference is about 0.07 for English speakers. Know-
ing the least perceptible difference helps interpret
the impact of sentiment composition. For example,
we can determine whether a modifier significantly
impacts the sentiment of the word it composes with
by calculating the difference in sentiment scores be-
tween the combined phrase and the constituent, and
checking whether this difference is greater than the
least perceptible difference.

We use the phrasal terms in the created lexicon to
analyze the impact of common modifiers on the sen-
timent of the terms they modify. We measure the ef-
fect of individual modifiers as well as the average ef-
fect of the groups of modifiers on overall sentiment.
We show that the sentiment of a negated expression
(such as not w) on the [-1,1] scale is on average
0.926 points less than the sentiment of the modified
term w, if the w is positive. However, the sentiment
of the negated expression is on average 0.791 points
higher than w, if the w is negative. Similar analy-
sis for modals and degree adverbs shows that they
impact sentiment less dramatically than negators.
Furthermore, the impact of modifiers substantially
varies even within a group, e.g., the average change
in sentiment score brought by the negator ‘will not
be’ is 0.41 larger than the change introduced by the
negator ‘never’. Likewise, each individual modifier
can affect sentiment words in different ways. As a
result, in automatic sentiment prediction solutions
based on statistical learning seem more promising
than fixed hand-crafted rules.

1This lexicon was first introduced in (Kiritchenko and Mo-
hammad, 2016a) where we investigated the applicability and re-
liability of the Best–Worst Scaling annotation technique in cap-
turing word–sentiment associations. In this paper, we provide
further details on the creation of the lexicon and present anal-
ysis of how negators, modals, and degree adverbs impact the
sentiment of the words they modify.

In related work (not described here), we also cre-
ated a sentiment composition lexicon for another
challenging category of phrases—phrases that in-
clude at least one positive word and at least one neg-
ative word (Kiritchenko and Mohammad, 2016b).
We call such phrases opposing polarity phrases.
Both lexicons have been used as official test sets in
SemEval-2016 Task 7 ‘Determining Sentiment In-
tensity of English and Arabic Phrases’ (Kiritchenko
et al., 2016).2 The lexicons are made freely available
to the research community.3

2 Related Work

Sentiment Lexicons: There exist a number of man-
ually created lexicons that provide lists of positive
and negative words, for example, General Inquirer
(Stone et al., 1966), Hu and Liu Lexicon (Hu and
Liu, 2004), and NRC Emotion Lexicon (Mohammad
and Turney, 2013). Only a few manually created
lexicons provide real-valued scores of sentiment as-
sociation (Bradley and Lang, 1999; Warriner et al.,
2013; Dodds et al., 2011). None of these lexicons,
however, contain multi-word phrases. Manually cre-
ated sentiment lexicons can be used to automati-
cally generate larger sentiment lexicons using semi-
supervised techniques (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006;
Turney and Littman, 2003; Mohammad et al., 2013;
De Melo and Bansal, 2013; Tang et al., 2014). (See
Mohammad (2016) for a survey on manually created
and automatically generated affect resources.)

Automatically generated lexicons often have real-
valued sentiment association scores, are larger in
scale, and can easily be collected for a specific do-
main; therefore, they were found to be more bene-
ficial in downstream applications, such as sentence-
level sentiment prediction (Kiritchenko et al., 2014).
However, any analysis of the relationship between
the sentiment of a phrase and its constituents is less
reliable when made from an automatically generated
resource as opposed to when made from a manu-
ally created resource (as automatically generated re-
sources are less accurate). In this work, we pro-
vide an extensive analysis of the impact of differ-
ent modifiers on sentiment based on reliable fine-
grained manual annotations.

2http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2016/task7/
3http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html

44



Contextual Valence Shifters: Negators, modals,
and degree adverbs impact the sentiment of the word
or phrase they modify and are commonly referred
to as contextual valence shifters (Polanyi and Zae-
nen, 2004; Kennedy and Inkpen, 2005; Jia et al.,
2009; Wiegand et al., 2010; Lapponi et al., 2012).
Conventionally, the impact of contextual valence
shifters is captured by simple heuristics. For exam-
ple, negation is often handled by reversing the polar-
ities of the sentiment words in the scope of negation
(Polanyi and Zaenen, 2004; Kennedy and Inkpen,
2005; Choi and Cardie, 2008) or by shifting the sen-
timent score of a term in a negated context towards
the opposite polarity by a fixed amount (Taboada
et al., 2011). However, such heuristics do not ade-
quately capture the true sentiment of multi-word ex-
pressions (Zhu et al., 2014). Liu and Seneff (2009)
relax the assumption of a fixed shifting margin and
estimate these margins for each modifier separately
from data. Kiritchenko et al. (2014), on the other
hand, estimate the impact of negation on each indi-
vidual sentiment word through a corpus-based sta-
tistical method. Ruppenhofer et al. (2015) automat-
ically rank English adverbs by their intensifying or
diminishing effect on adjectives using ratings meta-
data from product reviews.
Annotation techniques: A widely used method of
annotation for obtaining numerical scores is the rat-
ing scale method—where one is asked to rate an
item on a five-, ten-, or hundred-point scale. While
easy to understand, rating items on a scale is not nat-
ural for people. It is hard for annotators to remain
consistent when annotating a large number of items.
Also, respondents often use just a limited part of
the scale reducing the discrimination among items
(Cohen, 2003). To obtain reliable annotations, the
rating scale methods require a high number of re-
sponses, typically 15 to 20 (Warriner et al., 2013;
Graham et al., 2015). A more natural annotation task
for humans is to compare items (e.g., whether one
word is more positive than the other). Most com-
monly, the items are compared in pairs (Thurstone,
1927; David, 1963). In this work, we use Best–Worst
Scaling—a technique that exploits the comparative
approach to annotation while keeping the number of
required annotations small (Section 3.2). It has been
shown to produce reliable annotations of terms by
sentiment (Kiritchenko and Mohammad, 2016a).

Term Sentiment
score

favor 0.653
would be very easy 0.431
did not harm 0.194
increasingly difficult -0.583
severe -0.833

Table 1: Example entries with real-valued sentiment scores
from SCL-NMA.

3 Creating SCL-NMA

We now describe the term selection process and
the Best–Worst Scaling annotation technique used
to create the Sentiment Composition Lexicon for
Negators, Modals, and Degree Adverbs. Table 1
shows a few example entries from the lexicon. We
also describe how we calculated the minimum dif-
ference in sentiment scores of two terms that is per-
ceptible to native speakers of a language.

3.1 Term Selection

General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966) provides a
list of 1,621 positive and negative words from Os-
good’s seminal study on word meaning (Osgood et
al., 1957). These are words commonly used in ev-
eryday English. We include all of these words. In
addition, we include 1,586 high-frequency phrases
formed by the Osgood words in combination with
simple negators such as no, don’t, and never, modals
such as can, might, and should, or degree adverbs
such as very and fairly.4 The eligible adverbs are
chosen manually from adverbs frequently occurring
in the British National Corpus (BNC)5. Each phrase
includes at least one modal, one negator, or one ad-
verb; a phrase can include several modifiers (e.g.,
would be very happy). The modifiers and the phrases
are chosen in such a way that the full set includes
several phrases for each Osgood sentiment word and
includes several phrases for each modifier. In total,
sixty-four different (single or multi-word) modifiers
are selected. The final list contains 3,207 terms.

4The complete lists of negators, modals, and de-
gree adverbs used to create this dataset are available at
http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html#NMA.

5The British National Corpus, version 3 (BNC XML
Edition). 2007. Distributed by Oxford University
Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium.
http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/

45



3.2 Best–Worst Scaling
Best–Worst Scaling (BWS), also sometimes referred
to as Maximum Difference Scaling (MaxDiff), is
an annotation scheme that exploits the comparative
approach to annotation (Louviere and Woodworth,
1990; Cohen, 2003; Louviere et al., 2015). Annota-
tors are given four items (4-tuple) and asked which
item is the Best (highest in terms of the property of
interest) and which is the Worst (least in terms of the
property of interest). These annotations can then be
converted into real-valued scores and also a ranking
of items as per their association with the property
of interest through a simple counting procedure: For
each item, its score is calculated as the percentage of
times the item was chosen as the Best minus the per-
centage of times the item was chosen as the Worst
(Orme, 2009; Flynn and Marley, 2014). The scores
range from -1 to 1. Further details on Best–Worst
Scaling and its application to the task of sentiment
annotation can be found in (Kiritchenko and Mo-
hammad, 2016a).

3.3 Annotation process
The complete list of 3,207 terms was randomly sam-
pled (with replacement) to create 6,414 (2 x 3,207)
4-tuples that satisfy the following criteria:

1. no two 4-tuples have the same four terms;

2. no two terms within a 4-tuple are identical;

3. each term in the term list appears approxi-
mately in the same number of 4-tuples;

4. each pair of terms appears approximately in the
same number of 4-tuples.

Next, the set of 4-tuples was annotated through a
crowdsourcing platform, CrowdFlower. The anno-
tators were presented with four terms (single words
and multi-word phrases) at a time, and asked which
term is the most positive (or least negative) and
which is the most negative (or least positive).6 Each
4-tuple was annotated by ten respondents. We deter-
mined accuracy of every annotator on a small set of
check questions labeled by the authors of this paper.
We discarded all annotations provided by an anno-
tator if their accuracy on these check questions was
less than 70%.

6The full set of instructions to annotators is available at
http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html#NMA.

3.4 Quality of Annotations

Let majority answer refer to the option chosen most
often for a question. 80% of the responses to the
Best–Worst questions matched the majority answer.

We also tested the reliability of the aggregated
scores by randomly dividing the sets of ten re-
sponses to each question into two halves and com-
paring the rankings obtained from these two groups
of responses. The Spearman rank correlation coef-
ficient between the two sets of rankings was found
to be 0.98. (The Pearson correlation coefficient be-
tween the two sets of sentiment scores was also
0.98.) Thus, even though annotators might disagree
about answers to individual questions, the aggre-
gated scores produced by applying the counting pro-
cedure on the Best–Worst annotations are remark-
ably reliable at ranking terms by sentiment.

3.5 Least Perceptible Difference in Sentiment

In psychophysics, there is a notion of least percep-
tible difference (aka just-noticeable difference)—the
amount by which something that can be measured
(e.g., weight or sound intensity) needs to be changed
in order for the difference to be noticeable by a hu-
man (Fechner, 1966). Analogously, we can measure
the least perceptible difference in sentiment. If two
words have close to identical sentiment associations,
then it is expected that native speakers will choose
each of the words about the same number of times
when forced to pick a word that is more positive.
However, as the difference in sentiment starts get-
ting larger, the frequency with which the two terms
are chosen as most positive begins to diverge. At one
point, the frequencies diverge so much that we can
say with high confidence that the two terms do not
have the same sentiment associations. The average
of this minimum difference in sentiment score is the
least perceptible difference for sentiment.

To calculate the least perceptible difference, we
first build a plot of the relationship between ’differ-
ence in the sentiment scores between two terms’ and
‘agreement among annotators’ when asked which
term is more positive. For each term pair w1 and w2
such that d = score(w1 )− score(w2 )≥ 0, we count
the number of Best–Worst annotations from which
we can infer that w1 is more positive than w2 and
divide this number by the total number of annota-

46



Figure 1: Human agreement on annotating term w1 as
more positive than term w2 for pairs with difference in
scores d = score(w1 ) - score(w2 ). The x-axis represents
d. The y-axis plots the avg. percentage of human an-
notations that judge term w1 as more positive than term
w2 (thick line) and the corresponding 99.9%-confidence
lower bound (thin blue line).

tions from which we can infer either that w1 is more
positive than w2 or that w2 is more positive than w1.
(We can infer that w1 is more positive than w2 if in
a 4-tuple that has both w1 and w2 the annotator se-
lected w1 as the most positive or w2 as the least pos-
itive. The case for w2 being more positive than w1
is similar.) This ratio is the human agreement for w1
being more positive than w2. To get more reliable
estimates, we average the human agreement for all
pairs of terms whose sentiment differs by d ± 0.01.
Figure 1 shows the resulting average human agree-
ment. The thin blue line in the Figure depicts the
99.9%-confidence lower bounds on the agreement.
The least perceptible difference is the point starting
at which the lower bound consistently exceeds 50%
threshold (i.e., the point starting at which we observe
with 99.9% confidence that the human agreement is
higher than chance). The least perceptible differ-
ence when calculated from SCL-NMA is 0.069. In
the next section, we use the least perceptible differ-
ence to determine whether a modifier significantly
impacts the sentiment of the word it composes with.

4 Impact of Negators, Modals, and Degree
Adverbs on Sentiment

SCL-NMA contains many phrases formed by differ-
ent types of modifiers—negators, modals, and de-
gree adverbs. Thus, this lexicon is a good resource
for studying the impact of these types of modifiers
on sentiment. In the following, we compare the sen-

timent score of single-word term w with the sen-
timent score for phrase mod w, where mod is a
modifier from a particular group (negator, modal,
or degree adverb). Table 2 shows the average ef-
fect of different modifier groups on sentiment. The
columns show the average change in sentiment score
between w and mod w, the number of pairs (of w and
mod w) used to determine the average, the number
of phrases mod w whose sentiment score is greater
(↑) or less (↓) than the score of w by at least 0.069
(the least perceptible difference). Since the impact
of modifiers can be different depending on the sen-
timent of the modified word w, we present separate
analyses for when w is positive and when w is neg-
ative. For the analysis in this section only, a word is
considered positive if it has a sentiment score greater
than or equal to 0.3, and considered negative if its
sentiment score is less than or equal to -0.3.7

Observe that the most change in sentiment is
caused by negation; it consistently decreases the
scores of positive words, and increases the scores
of negative words. The average score difference is
substantial for both positive words (0.926 points)
and negative words (0.791 points). Modals also
tend to decrease the scores of positive words, and
increase the scores of negative words, though to a
much smaller extent than negators. As with nega-
tors, modals affect positive words more strongly
than they do negative words. Degree adverbs show
less consistency than negators and modals; they can
both heighten or lower the sentiment of a word.
Moreover, the same adverb can behave differently
with different words from the same sentiment group
(positive or negative). Therefore, we report the av-
erage absolute differences in scores for this modifier
group. These average differences are substantially
smaller than the ones reported for modals and nega-
tors; the effect of degree adverbs is minor. Besides,
in contrast to modals and negators, for a large per-
centage of degree adverb phrases (for 35% of the
positive-word phrases and for 37% of the negative-
word phrases), the sentiment scores do not differ
from the scores for the corresponding single words
by the least perceptible difference (0.069 points). In
the subsections below, we further examine the im-

7This threshold is somewhat arbitrary, and is chosen to dis-
card neutral terms from the analysis, whose sentiment tends not
to change much with these modifiers.

47



Table 2: The impact of different modifier groups on sentiment. ‘Avg. diff.’ is the average difference between the score of mod w
and w. ‘# pairs‘ is the number of pairs (of w and mod w) used to determine the average. ‘# score ↑ (↓)‘ indicates the number of
phrases for which score(mod w) is greater (less) than score(w) by at least 0.069 (the perceptible difference).

Modifier Group On positive words On negative words
Avg. diff. # pairs # score ↑ # score ↓ Avg. diff. # pairs # score ↑ # score ↓

negators -0.926 265 1 264 0.791 71 71 0
modals -0.317 258 9 231 0.238 72 54 8
degree adverbs (abs. diff.) 0.201 435 106 212 0.166 163 42 68

Figure 2: The impact of negators on sentiment. The x-
axis is score(w), the sentiment score of a term w; the
y-axis is score(mod w), the sentiment score of a term
w preceded by a negator. Each dot corresponds to one
phrase mod w. The black line shows an average effect of
the negators group. The dashed red line shows the revers-
ing polarity hypothesis score(mod w)= −score(w).

pact of each modifier category on the sentiment of its
scope. Also, we provide rankings of different nega-
tors, modals, and degree adverbs as per the average
change in sentiment score between w and mod w.
This would allow linguists and other researchers to
better understand the behavior of different modifiers.

4.1 Negation

There exist two common approaches to incorpo-
rate the impact of negation in automatic systems:
(1) reversing polarity hypothesis, where the senti-
ment score of a word ‘score(w)’ is replaced with
‘−score(w)’; and (2) shifting hypothesis, where the
sentiment score of a word ‘score(w)’ is reduced by a
fixed amount: ‘score(w)−sign(score(w))× b’. We
will show that neither hypothesis accurately captures
the impact of negation. We will also present an anal-
ysis of the overall impact of negation and the impact
of individual negators (aka negation triggers).

In our dataset, the negators are formed by ‘no’
negation words like no, not, never, and nothing in
combination with auxiliary and modal verbs. Fig-
ure 2 shows the overall impact of negation on sen-
timent of single words. Each dot in this figure cor-
responds to one negated phrase ‘negator w’. The
x-axis corresponds to score(w) (the sentiment score
of a word w); the y-axis is score(mod w) (the sen-
timent score of a word w preceded by a negator).
The black line shows an average effect of negation.
The dashed red line shows the reversing polarity
hypothesis: score(mod w)= −score(w). Observe
that on average negators tend to substantially down-
shift the sentiment of positive words turning them
into negative expressions. On the other hand, the
scores of negative terms increase, but to a smaller
extent than the scores of positive words. Words
with high absolute sentiment values tend to expe-
rience the greatest shift. This is true for both posi-
tive and negative words. However, this shift is sub-
stantially smaller than is proposed by the revers-
ing polarity hypothesis. Overall, the reversing po-
larity hypothesis fit is rather poor. The shifting
hypothesis does not explain the data either. An-
other observation is that words with similar senti-
ment scores can form negated phrases with very dif-
ferent sentiment scores (appearing as columns of
dots in the graph). This is mostly due to the ef-
fect of different negators. However, the same nega-
tor can sometimes have different effect on words
with similar sentiment. For example, the three
words easy, good, and better all have similar sen-
timent scores: score(easy) = 0.598, score(good) =
0.556, score(better) = 0.486. Yet, the correspond-
ing negated phrases formed with the same nega-
tor never range from negative (score(never good) =
− 0.542), to slightly negative (score(never easy) =
− 0.112), to positive (score(never better) = 0.666).

48



Table 3: The impact of negators on sentiment.

Modifier Avg. diff. # pairs # score ↑ # score ↓
On positive words
will not be -1.066 9 0 9
cannot -1.030 12 0 12
did not -0.978 13 0 13
not very -0.961 14 0 14
not -0.959 45 0 45
no -0.948 29 0 29
was no -0.939 14 0 14
will not -0.935 11 0 11
was not -0.928 29 0 29
have no -0.917 8 0 8
does not -0.907 13 0 13
could not -0.893 12 0 12
would not -0.869 11 0 11
had no -0.862 7 0 7
would not be -0.848 15 0 15
may not -0.758 6 0 6
nothing -0.755 6 0 6
never -0.650 7 1 6

On negative words
will not 0.878 5 5 0
does not 0.823 5 5 0
was not 0.786 10 10 0
no 0.768 8 8 0
not 0.735 14 14 0

Next, we investigate the effect of individual nega-
tors. Table 3 shows the impact of negation triggered
by different negators. The majority of the negation
triggers have a large effect on both positive and neg-
ative words; the absolute difference in scores be-
tween a negated phrase and the corresponding sen-
timent word is 0.8-1.0 points on positive words and
0.7-0.9 points on negative words. The greatest shift
in sentiment on positive words was observed for the
modifier will not be, and on negative words for mod-
ifier will not. The weakest effect is caused by may
not, nothing, and never. Verb tenses seem not to
affect the behavior of negators significantly. For ex-
ample, the average change in sentiment caused by
not and by was not differs only by 0.03-0.05 points.
The modal verbs will and can form strong nega-
tion phrases will not, will not be, and cannot that
showed the most change in sentiment. Other modal
verbs, such as could, would, and may, form negation
phrases with smaller effect on sentiment.

Figure 3: The impact of modals on sentiment. The x-axis
is score(w), the sentiment score of a term w; the y-axis is

score(mod w), the sentiment score of a term w preceded by

a modal verb. Each dot corresponds to one phrase mod w. The

black line shows an average effect of the modals group. The

dashed red line shows the function score(mod w) = score(w).

4.2 Modals

In our dataset, the modal modifiers are formed by
modal verbs can, could, should, would, may, might,
and must in combination with auxiliary verbs. Fig-
ure 3 demonstrates the overall impact of modals on
sentiment. One can observe that on average modals
have a smoothing effect on sentiment: they make
negative words less negative and positive words less
positive. Words with high absolute sentiment val-
ues tend to experience the greatest shift; though, this
shift is still quite small (around 0.4 points).

The effect of individual modal modifiers on pos-
itive and negative words is shown in Table 4. The
most influential modal modifier is would have been.
It consistently downshifts sentiment by a signifi-
cant margin (about 0.5 points). Modifiers involving
modals could, and might also affect sentiment in a
consistent and noticeable way for both positive and
negative words. Modals can and would form mod-
ifiers that have the smallest effect on sentiment of
positive and negative words (with the exception of
the modifier would have been).

4.3 Degree Adverbs

As mentioned earlier, the average differences in sen-
timent caused by degree adverbs are quite small;
many differences are negligible. Furthermore, these
modifiers are less consistent than negators and
modals; there are many degree adverbs that increase

49



Table 4: The impact of modals on sentiment.

Modifier Avg. diff. # pairs # score ↑ # score ↓
On positive words
would have been -0.491 12 0 12
could -0.390 16 1 15
might -0.387 14 0 14
may -0.384 14 1 13
should be -0.365 22 0 22
could be -0.342 14 0 13
must -0.338 12 0 11
should -0.314 14 0 12
may be -0.300 20 2 18
might be -0.298 14 2 10
must be -0.287 19 0 17
would -0.284 16 0 15
can be -0.283 18 2 15
would be -0.261 29 0 25
can -0.208 16 1 13
would be very -0.186 8 0 6

On negative words
could 0.351 5 5 0
could be 0.268 8 7 1
might be 0.256 5 5 0
can be 0.249 6 4 0
would be 0.224 12 7 2
can 0.200 5 4 0
may be 0.169 8 5 2

the sentiment intensity of some words from one class
(positive or negative) and decrease the sentiment in-
tensity of other words from the same class. For ex-
ample, certainly heightens the sentiment intensity
of positive word important (by about 0.21 points),
but lowers the sentiment intensity of another positive
word hope (by about 0.31 points). We found that the
only degree adverb in our set that affects sentiment
to a large extent (0.835 points) is less; it consistently
and significantly decreases the sentiment intensity of
positive words. In fact, it acts as negator and reduces
the sentiment intensity of positive words to a degree
similar to that of negators. There are a few other
modifiers that consistently reduce the sentiment in-
tensity of positive words by a significant amount:
was too, too, probably, fairly, and relatively. Only
one intensifier, highly, consistently and significantly
increase the sentiment of positive words. The sen-
timent of negative words is significantly lowered by
intensifiers extremely and very very.

4.4 Interactive Visualization
As part of this project, we created an interactive vi-
sualization for SCL-NMA.8 The visualization has
several components that allow to investigate the ef-
fect of sentiment modifiers on individual words as
well as to inspect the complete set in one scatter plot.
The groups of modifiers are color-coded for ease of
exploration. The full information for a phrase, in-
cluding the sentiment scores of the phrase and its
constituent content word, can be viewed by hover-
ing over the point in the graph with the mouse. The
scatter plot can be filtered to show phrases that in-
clude only a particular type of the modifiers (nega-
tors, modals, or degree adverbs). All the compo-
nents are linked together so that by clicking on a
point in one component one can highlight or filter
the corresponding points shown in the other compo-
nents. We hope that the users will find this visual-
ization very helpful in exploring aspects of the data
they are interested in.

5 Conclusions

We created a real-valued sentiment lexicon of
phrases that include a variety of common sentiment
modifiers such as negators, modals, and degree ad-
verbs. Both phrases and their constituent content
words are annotated manually using the Best–Worst
Scaling technique. We showed that the obtained an-
notations are reliable—re-doing the annotation with
different sets of annotators produces a very similar
ranking of terms by sentiment. We use the annota-
tions for the phrases to present an extensive analy-
sis of how negators, modals, and degree adverbs im-
pact the sentiment of other words in their scope. We
demonstrate that these modifiers affect sentiment in
complex ways so that their effect cannot be easily
modeled with simple heuristics. In particular, we
observe that the effect of a modifier is often deter-
mined not only by the type of the modifier (whether
it is a negator, modal, or degree adverb) but also by
the modifier word and the content word themselves.
The created lexicon is made freely available to the
research community to foster further research, es-
pecially towards automatic methods for sentiment
composition and towards a better understanding of
how sentiment is composed in the human brain.

8www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/SCL.html#NMA

50



References
Margaret M Bradley and Peter J Lang. 1999. Affective

norms for English words (ANEW): Instruction manual
and affective ratings. Technical report, The Center for
Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2008. Learning with com-
positional semantics as structural inference for subsen-
tential sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 793–801.

Steven H. Cohen. 2003. Maximum difference scaling:
Improved measures of importance and preference for
segmentation. Sawtooth Software, Inc.

Herbert Aron David. 1963. The method of paired com-
parisons. Hafner Publishing Company, New York.

Gerard De Melo and Mohit Bansal. 2013. Good,
great, excellent: Global inference of semantic inten-
sities. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 1:279–290.

Peter Sheridan Dodds, Kameron Decker Harris, Isabel M.
Kloumann, Catherine A. Bliss, and Christopher M.
Danforth. 2011. Temporal patterns of happiness and
information in a global social network: Hedonomet-
rics and Twitter. PloS One, 6(12):e26752.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. SENTI-
WORDNET: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of the 5th Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
pages 417–422.

Gustav Fechner. 1966. Elements of psychophysics. Vol.
I. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

T. N. Flynn and A. A. J. Marley. 2014. Best-worst scal-
ing: theory and methods. In Stephane Hess and An-
drew Daly, editors, Handbook of Choice Modelling,
pages 178–201. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Yvette Graham, Nitika Mathur, and Timothy Baldwin.
2015. Accurate evaluation of segment-level machine
translation metrics. In Proceedings of the Annual Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the ACL
(NAACL), pages 1183–1191.

Emily Grijalva, Daniel A. Newman, Louis Tay, M. Brent
Donnellan, P.D. Harms, Richard W. Robins, and Taiyi
Yan. 2015. Gender differences in narcissism: A meta-
analytic review. Psychological bulletin, 141(2):261–
310.

Marcus Hartner. 2013. The lingering after-effects in the
reader’s mind – an investigation into the affective di-
mension of literary reading. Journal of Literary The-
ory Online.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 168–
177, New York, NY, USA.

Lifeng Jia, Clement Yu, and Weiyi Meng. 2009. The
effect of negation on sentiment analysis and retrieval
effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Con-
ference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM), pages 1827–1830, New York, NY, USA.

Alistair Kennedy and Diana Inkpen. 2005. Sentiment
classification of movie and product reviews using con-
textual valence shifters. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on the Analysis of Informal and Formal Infor-
mation Exchange during Negotiations (FINEXIN), Ot-
tawa, Ontario, Canada.

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. 2016a.
Capturing reliable fine-grained sentiment associations
by crowdsourcing and best–worst scaling. In Pro-
ceedings of The 15th Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL), San Diego, California.

Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif M. Mohammad. 2016b.
Sentiment composition of words with opposing polar-
ities. In Proceedings of The 15th Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (NAACL), San Diego, California.

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, and Saif M. Mo-
hammad. 2014. Sentiment analysis of short infor-
mal texts. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
50:723–762.

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Saif M. Mohammad, and Moham-
mad Salameh. 2016. SemEval-2016 Task 7: De-
termining sentiment intensity of english and arabic
phrases. In Proceedings of the International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval), San Diego,
California, June.

Jochen Kleres. 2011. Emotions and narrative analysis:
A methodological approach. Journal for the Theory of
Social Behaviour, 41(2):182–202.

Emanuele Lapponi, Jonathon Read, and Lilja Ovrelid.
2012. Representing and resolving negation for senti-
ment analysis. In Proceedings of the 12th IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Data Mining Workshops,
pages 687–692.

Jingjing Liu and Stephanie Seneff. 2009. Review senti-
ment scoring via a parse-and-paraphrase paradigm. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 161–169.

Jordan J. Louviere and George G. Woodworth. 1990.
Best-worst analysis. Working Paper. Department of
Marketing and Economic Analysis, University of Al-
berta.

Jordan J. Louviere, Terry N. Flynn, and A. A. J. Marley.
2015. Best-Worst Scaling: Theory, Methods and Ap-
plications. Cambridge University Press.

51



Saif M. Mohammad and Svetlana Kiritchenko. 2015.
Using hashtags to capture fine emotion categories from
tweets. Computational Intelligence, 31(2):301–326.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2013. Crowd-
sourcing a word–emotion association lexicon. Com-
putational Intelligence, 29(3):436–465.

Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiaodan
Zhu. 2013. NRC-Canada: Building the state-of-the-
art in sentiment analysis of tweets. In Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval), Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Parinaz Sob-
hani, Xiaodan Zhu, and Colin Cherry. 2016a. A
dataset for detecting stance in tweets. In Proceed-
ings of 10th edition of the the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC), Portorož, Slovenia.

Saif M. Mohammad, Parinaz Sobhani, and Svetlana Kir-
itchenko. 2016b. Stance and sentiment in tweets. Spe-
cial Section of the ACM Transactions on Internet Tech-
nology on Argumentation in Social Media, Submitted.

Saif M Mohammad. 2012. From once upon a time
to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in mail and
books. Decision Support Systems, 53(4):730–741.

Saif M. Mohammad. 2016. Sentiment analysis: Detect-
ing valence, emotions, and other affectual states from
text. In Herb Meiselman, editor, Emotion Measure-
ment. Elsevier.

Bryan Orme. 2009. Maxdiff analysis: Simple counting,
individual-level logit, and HB. Sawtooth Software,
Inc.

Charles E Osgood, George J Suci, and Percy Tannen-
baum. 1957. The measurement of meaning. Univer-
sity of Illinois Press.

Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. 2004. Contextual va-
lence shifters. In Proceedings of the Exploring At-
titude and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications
(AAAI Spring Symposium Series).

Maria Pontiki, Harris Papageorgiou, Dimitrios Galanis,
Ion Androutsopoulos, John Pavlopoulos, and Suresh
Manandhar. 2014. SemEval-2014 Task 4: Aspect
based sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Se-
mEval), Dublin, Ireland.

Sara Rosenthal, Preslav Nakov, Svetlana Kiritchenko,
Saif Mohammad, Alan Ritter, and Veselin Stoyanov.
2015. SemEval-2015 task 10: Sentiment analysis in
Twitter. In Proceedings of the 9th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval), pages 450–
462, Denver, Colorado.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Jasper Brandes, Petra Steiner, and
Michael Wiegand. 2015. Ordering adverbs by their
scaling effect on adjective intensity. In Proceedings
of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP), pages 545–554, Hissar, Bulgaria.

Philip Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
Daniel M. Ogilvie, and associates. 1966. The General
Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis.
The MIT Press.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based meth-
ods for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguis-
tics, 37(2):267–307.

Duyu Tang, Furu Wei, Bing Qin, Ming Zhou, and Ting
Liu. 2014. Building large-scale Twitter-specific senti-
ment lexicon: A representation learning approach. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING), pages 172–182.

Louis L. Thurstone. 1927. A law of comparative judg-
ment. Psychological review, 34(4):273.

Peter Turney and Michael L Littman. 2003. Measuring
praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orientation
from association. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 21(4).

Amy Beth Warriner, Victor Kuperman, and Marc Brys-
baert. 2013. Norms of valence, arousal, and domi-
nance for 13,915 English lemmas. Behavior Research
Methods, 45(4):1191–1207.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A sur-
vey on the role of negation in sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Spec-
ulation in Natural Language Processing (NeSp-NLP),
pages 60–68, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Human Language Technology and Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 347–354,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Xiaodan Zhu, Hongyu Guo, Saif Mohammad, and Svet-
lana Kiritchenko. 2014. An empirical study on the
effect of negation words on sentiment. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 304–313, Balti-
more, Maryland, June.

52


