



















































WMT2016: A Hybrid Approach to Bilingual Document Alignment


Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 724–727,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

WMT2016: A Hybrid Approach to Bilingual Document Alignment

Sainik Kumar Mahata1, Dipankar Das2, Santanu Pal3
1JIS College of Engineering, Kalyani, India

2Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India
3Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken, Germany

sainik.mahata@gmail.com,
ddas@cse.jdvu.ac.in, santanu.pal@uni-saarland.de

Abstract

Large aligned corpora are required for any
computer aided translation system to be-
come effective. In this scenario, bilin-
gual document alignment has gained ut-
most importance in recent days. We at-
tempt a simple yet effective approach to
align URLs (Uniform Resource Locator)
within two documents in two languages
as a part of WMT2016 Bilingual Docu-
ment Alignment Shared Task. Our ap-
proach includes the processing of URLs
and their embedded texts, which serves as
the main matching criterion. In order to
align the text initially, we have used Gale-
Church algorithm, dictionary based trans-
lation and Cosine Similarity that in turn
helps us to achieve better results in the
alignment task.

1 Introduction

Bilingual document alignment has gained ut-
most importance these days [Brown et al.1991,
Warwick et al.1990, Gale and Church1991, Kay
and Röscheisen1993, Simard et al.1992, Ku-
piec1993,Matsumoto et al.1993,Dagan et al.1999,
Church1993]. Research on calculating similarity
of bilingual comparable corpora is attracting more
attention [Vu et al.2009, Pal et al.2014, Tan and
Pal2014]. Growth of monolingual data in differ-
ent languages has made the task for aligning doc-
uments difficult [Jagarlamudi et al.2011]. What
makes the problem more critical is the fact that
one sentence in one language can correspond to
many sentences in a different language [Wu1994].
For any translation system to work correctly and
efficiently, it has to be fed with a large paral-
lel corpora. Such corpora are very hard to find
[Smith et al.2010] since it involves serious man-
ual labour and cost. To eliminate the high cost,

computer aided sentence alignment of two differ-
ent corpora has become very desirable. The pres-
ence of such computer aided aligned corpora aids
in many Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks
such as Machine Translation, Word Sense Disam-
biguation as well as Cross Lingual Information
Extraction [Patry and Langlais2005].

In our current task, we have worked on the data
provided by WMT shared task1, which had web
crawls of 203 websites and were extracted in both
English and French. The task was to extract 1-
1 pairings of English and French URLs that has
the same content but in respective languages. The
data contained URLs followed by the text in each
of the URLs. The task was to extract the text from
both the English and French URLs and align them
using our alignment algorithm. After alignment
of the text, the URLs to which the text belongs
to were also aligned. Our algorithm makes use of
concepts given by [Gale and Church1991], trans-
lation of words using a dictionary created by Any-
malign package [Lardilleux et al.2012] and the
concept of Cosine Similarity. The following sec-
tion will document the algorithm. Working of the
algorithm will be shown in Section 2, followed by
the results in Section 3.

2 Proposed System

2.1 Text and URL Extraction

The given .lett files are opened and the URL as
well as the texts are extracted. The extracted text
and URLs are given IDs so that it becomes easy to
align the URLs after aligning the texts. The pro-
cess is shown in Figure 1.

2.2 Text Selection using Algorithm proposed
by Gale-Church

In their paper [Gale and Church1991], Gale and
Church suggested that the source sentence and its

1http://www.statmt.org/wmt16/bilingual-task.html

724



Figure 1: Text and URL extraction

Figure 2: Text Selection according to size, using algorithm proposed by Gale and Church

translated sentence have the same length.
This idea forms the basis of our proposed sys-

tem. We have found out the length of the source
English sentence, that have been extracted from a
URL pair, and have found matches in all the target
French sentences, extracted from the same URL
pair. This results in one-to-many relationship be-
tween the English and French sentences. The vari-
ance in this step is kept as 2, which means if the
length of the French sentences exceeds or falls be-
hind the length of the English sentence by a dif-
ference 2, when compared to the source English
sentence, they are also included as a match with
the English sentence. This step is shown in Figure
2, where the first sentence is the source English
sentence and the corresponding French sentences
are the ones with the same length, or length greater
than or less than by a value of 2, as compared to
the length of the source English sentence.

2.3 Dictionary creation using Anymalign
Algorithm

WMT2016 provided us with a large English-
French parallel corpus. We executed the Anyma-
lign algorithm on this corpus to find out the word
alignments. The alignments with a matching prob-
ability of more than or equal to 0.75 were kept
as higher probability results in good translation.
The rest of the alignments were discarded. This
data served as our dictionary. The snapshot of the
dictionary containing the source English words in
the left column and the target French words in the

Figure 3: Dictionary creation using Anymalign al-
gorithm

right column is shown in Figure 3.

2.4 Sentence matching using dictionary

For each of the words in the source English sen-
tence, its corresponding translations are found out
using the dictionary produced in the previous step.
The words found were then matched with words
in the various French sentences that we obtained
using the concept provided by Gale and Church.
The French sentences, with matched words equal
to the length of the source English sentences or
less by a factor of 2, were kept and the rest were
discarded. This means that for an English sentence
of 10 words, French translation for each of the En-
glish words were found out using the dictionary
produced in the previous step.

If a French sentences with all the 10 words
matching to the translated words was found, it was
kept. Also, if there was a French sentence con-

725



Figure 4: Sentence matching with the derived dictionary

Figure 5: Exact Text Translation finding with Cosine Similarity

taining 10 words, but only 8 words words were
matching to the translated words, it was also kept.
French sentences with less number of matchings
were discarded. This process is shown in Figure
4.

2.5 Exact Text Translation finding with
Cosine Similarity

Out of the French sentences extracted in the pre-
vious step, Cosine Similarity is found out with re-
spect to the source English sentence. The French
sentence with the highest Cosine Similarity score
is selected as the exact translation of the source
English sentence. This process is shown in Figure
5.

2.5.1 Cosine Similarity
Cosine similarity is particularly used in positive
space, where the outcome is neatly bounded in [0,
1]. The formula used in our approach is as follows.

Similarity = cos(Θ) =
A.B

‖A‖ ‖B‖

=

∑n
i=1AiBi√∑n

i=1Ai
2
√∑n

i=1Bi
2

(1)

Where A and B are the source English sentence
and the one of the target French sentences, respec-
tively.

2.6 URL matching
The URL of the source English sentence is then
matched the URL of the extracted French sentence
with reference to the ID that was given in the first
step. We can see from Figure 5 that the French
sentences when compared to the source English
sentence ”Message to Gilbert Blin” have cosine
similarity scores appended to it. From the above
figure we see that ”Presnt par Gilbert Blin”, has
the highest cosine similarity score. So, this can

be treated as the exact translation of the source
English sentence. We also see that an ID ”(1)”
is appended to the English sentence and an ID
”(6)” is appended to the French sentence. From
Figure 1, we can find out that, since the English
sentence ID is ”(1)”, it belongs to the web-
page ”http://academiedesprez.org/mailgb.php”
and since the ID of the French sen-
tence is ”(6)”, it belongs to the webpage
”http://academiedesprez.org/eng/musicales5eng.
htm”. Thus, we can mark it as the exact alignment.

3 Evaluation

WMT 2016 provided us with a baseline system
that finds 119979 extracted pairs after enforcing
the 1-1 rule. Our proposed system when exe-
cuted on the test data, found out 48 extracted
pairs of URLs after enforcing the 1-1 rule. This
gave our proposed system a percent recall value of
1.998335.

Systems Extracted pairs
WMT2016 Baseline 119,979

Proposed System 48
Percent Recall 1.998335

Table 1: Evaluation of proposed system with base-
line system provided by WMT2016.

4 Conclusion

The paper presents a hybrid approach to bilingual
document alignment to the shared task proposed
by WMT2016. We have developed an approach
that uses the concept given by Gale and Church
with respect to length of source-translated sen-
tences, translation of words using a dictionary cre-
ated by Anymalign and the concept of Cosine Sim-
ilarity. Our approach was able to extract 48 pairs
of URLs with a percent recall of 1.998335.

726



References
Peter F. Brown, Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert L. Mer-

cer. 1991. Aligning sentences in parallel corpora.
In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’91,
pages 169–176, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Kenneth Ward Church. 1993. Char align: A program
for aligning parallel texts at the character level. In
In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–
8.

I. Dagan, K. Church, and W. Gale, 1999. Natural
Language Processing Using Very Large Corpora,
chapter Robust Bilingual Word Alignment for Ma-
chine Aided Translation, pages 209–224. Springer
Netherlands, Dordrecht.

William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1991. A
program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora.
In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’91,
pages 177–184, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi, Hal Daumé, III, and
Raghavendra Udupa. 2011. From bilingual
dictionaries to interlingual document representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies: Short Papers - Vol-
ume 2, HLT ’11, pages 147–152, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Martin Kay and Martin Röscheisen. 1993. Text-
translation alignment. Comput. Linguist.,
19(1):121–142, March.

Julian Kupiec. 1993. An algorithm for finding noun
phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. In
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting on Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’93,
pages 17–22, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Adrien Lardilleux, Franois Yvon, and Yves Lepage.
2012. Hierarchical sub-sentential alignment with
Anymalign. pages 279–286, Trento, Italy.

Yuji Matsumoto, Hiroyuki Ishimoto, and Takehito Ut-
suro. 1993. Structural matching of parallel texts.
In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’93,
pages 23–30, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Santanu Pal, Partha Pakray, and Sudip Kumar Naskar.
2014. Automatic building and using parallel re-
sources for smt from comparable corpora. Proceed-
ings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to
Translation (HyTra)@ EACL, pages 48–57.

Alexandre Patry and Philippe Langlais, 2005. Au-
tomatic Identification of Parallel Documents With
Light or Without Linguistic Resources, pages 354–
365. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidel-
berg.

Michel Simard, George F. Foster, and Pierre Isabelle.
1992. Using cognates to align sentences in bilingual
corpora. In in Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Theoretical and Methodologi-
cal Issues in Machine Translation, pages 67–81.

Jason R. Smith, Chris Quirk, and Kristina Toutanova.
2010. Extracting parallel sentences from com-
parable corpora using document level alignment.
In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, HLT
’10, pages 403–411, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Liling Tan and Santanu Pal. 2014. Manawi: Using
multi-word expressions and named entities to im-
prove machine translation. Proceedings of the Ninth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
201–206.

Thuy Vu, Ai Ti Aw, and Min Zhang. 2009. Feature-
based method for document alignment in compa-
rable news corpora. In Proceedings of the 12th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, EACL ’09,
pages 843–851, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Susan Warwick, Jan Hajič, and Graham Russell. 1990.
Searching on tagged corpora: Linguistically moti-
vated concordance analysis.

Dekai Wu. 1994. Aligning a parallel english-chinese
corpus statistically with lexical criteria. In Proceed-
ings of the 32Nd Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’94, pages 80–87,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

727


