



















































Argumentative texts and clause types


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Argument Mining, pages 21–30,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Argumentative texts and clause types

Maria Becker, Alexis Palmer, and Anette Frank
Leibniz ScienceCampus Empirical Linguistics and Computational Language Modeling

Department of Computational Linguistics, Heidelberg University
Institute of German Language, Mannheim

{mbecker,palmer,frank}@cl.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract

Argumentative texts have been thoroughly
analyzed for their argumentative structure,
and recent efforts aim at their automatic
classification. This work investigates lin-
guistic properties of argumentative texts
and text passages in terms of their seman-
tic clause types. We annotate argumenta-
tive texts with Situation Entity (SE) classes,
which combine notions from lexical aspect
(states, events) with genericity and habit-
uality of clauses. We analyse the correla-
tion of SE classes with argumentative text
genres, components of argument structures,
and some functions of those components.
Our analysis reveals interesting relations
between the distribution of SE types and
the argumentative text genre, compared to
other genres like fiction or report. We also
see tendencies in the correlations between
argument components (such as premises
and conclusions) and SE types, as well as
between argumentative functions (such as
support and rebuttal) and SE types. The ob-
served tendencies can be deployed for au-
tomatic recognition and fine-grained classi-
fication of argumentative text passages.

1 Introduction

In this study we annotate a corpus of short argu-
mentative texts with semantic clause types drawn
from work in theoretical linguistics on modes of
discourse. The aim is to better understand the lin-
guistic characteristics of argumentative text pas-
sages. Our study suggests that these clause types,
as linguistic features of argumentative text pas-
sages, could be useful for automatic argument min-
ing – for identifying argumentative regions of text,
for identifying premises and conclusions/claims, or

for classifying the argumentative functions served
by premises.

Specifically, this is an empirical investigation
of the semantic types of clauses found in argu-
mentative text passages, using the inventory of
clause types developed by Smith (2003) and ex-
tended in later work (Palmer et al., 2007; Friedrich
and Palmer, 2014). Situation entity (SE) types
describe how clauses behave in discourse, and as
such they are aspectual rather than ontological cat-
egories. Individual clauses of text evoke differ-
ent types of situations (for example, states, events,
generics, or habituals), and the situations evoked
in a text passage are linked to the text type of
the passage. For more detail see Section 2. Fur-
thermore, SE types are recognizable (and annotat-
able) through a combination of linguistic features
of the clause and its main verb, and models have
recently been released for their automatic classifi-
cation (Friedrich et al., 2016).

Our approach is the first we know of to link
clause type to argumentative structure, although
features of the verb have been widely used in pre-
vious work for classifying argumentative vs. non-
argumentative sentences. For example, Moens et
al. (2007) include verb lemmas and modal auxil-
iaries as features, and Florou et al. (2013) find that,
for Greek web texts related to public policy issues,
tense and mood features of verbal constructions are
helpful for determining the role of the sentences
within argumentative structures.

Our analysis is performed on German texts. Tak-
ing the argumentative microtext corpus (Peldszus
and Stede, 2015a) as a set of prototypical argumen-
tative text passages, we annotated each clause with
its SE type (Section 3).1 In this way we are able to
investigate which SE types are most prevalent in
argumentative texts and, further, to link the clause

1The segmentation of microtexts into clauses is discussed
in Section 3.2.

21



type (via SE label) to the argumentation graphs
provided with the microtext corpus (Section 4). We
additionally provide SE annotations for a number
of non-argumentative (or at least only partially ar-
gumentative) German texts, in order to contrast SE
type distributions across these text types.

This annotation case study addresses the follow-
ing questions:

1. Do argumentative text passages differ from
non-argumentative text passages with respect
to clause type?

2. Do particular clause types correlate with par-
ticular elements in the argumentation graphs?

3. Do particular clause types correlate with par-
ticular functions of argument components?

Recently, systems have been developed for au-
tomatically deriving full argumentative structures
from text. Peldszus and Stede (2015b) present a
system for automatic argument structure prediction,
the first for the microtext corpus. The linguistic fea-
tures used by the system include discourse connec-
tives, lemmas and parts-of-speech, verb morphol-
ogy, and dependency patterns. Stab and Gurevych
(2016) develop an end-to-end argument structure
parser for persuasive texts. The parser performs the
entire task pipeline, including segmentation of texts
into argumentative vs. non-argumentative compo-
nents, using sequence labeling at the token level
in order to accurately model sentences containing
multiple argument components. The features used
vary with the particular task, with structural, syn-
tactic, lexical, and lexico-syntactic, as well as dis-
course connective, features.

None of these systems have investigated seman-
tic features from the perspective of the clause.
We propose, based on the outcomes from our anno-
tation and analysis, that SE types are worth explor-
ing as features for argument mining.

2 Theoretical background

The phrase situation entity refers to the fact that
clauses of text evoke situations within a discourse.
For example, the previous sentence describes two
situations: (i) the meaning of situation entity, and
(ii) what clauses of text do, in general. The second
situation is embedded as part of the first. Notions
related to SE type have been widely studied in the-
oretical linguistics (Vendler, 1957; Verkuyl, 1972;
Dowty, 1979; Smith, 1991; Asher, 1993; Carl-
son and Pelletier, 1995, among others) and have

seen growing interest in computational linguistics
(Siegel and McKeown, 2000; Zarcone and Lenci,
2008; Herbelot and Copestake, 2009; Reiter and
Frank, 2010; Costa and Branco, 2012; Nedoluzhko,
2013; Friedrich and Pinkal, 2015, for example).

2.1 Situation entity types
We directly follow Friedrich and Palmer (2014) for
the inventory of SE types, described below.

The inventory of SE types starts with states and
events, including a subtype of events for attribu-
tional statements. REPORT-type clauses such as (3)
do not necessarily refer to an actual event of speak-
ing but rather indicate a source of information.

1. STATE (S) Armin has brown eyes.
2. EVENT (E) Bonnie ate three tacos.
3. REPORT (R) The agency said applications

had increased.

Phenomena such as modality, negation, future
tense, and conditionality, when coupled with an
EVENT-type clause, cause a coercion to STATE.
In brief, such phenomena refer to actual or poten-
tial states of the world rather than actual events.
Several examples appear below.

• E→ S: Carlo should get the job.
• E→ S: Darya did not answer.
• E→ S: If he wins the race, . . .

An important distinction for argumentative texts,
as we will see, is between generic sentences and
generalizing sentences, or habituals. While the
former predicate over classes or kinds, the latter
describe regularly-occurring events, such as habits
of individuals.

4. GENERIC SENTENCE (GEN): Birds can fly. /
Scientific papers make arguments.

5. GENERALIZING SENTENCE (GS):
Fei travels to India every year.

The next category of SE types is broadly referred
to as Abstract Entities. This type of clause presents
semantic content in a manner that draws attention
to its epistemic status. We focus primarily on a
small subset of constructions - factive and proposi-
tional predicates with clausal complements. Of
course a wide range of linguistic constructions
can be used to convey such information, and to
address them all would require a comprehensive
treament of subjective language. In the examples

22



below, the matrix clause is in both cases a STATE,
and the embedded clause (in italics) is both an
EVENT and either a FACT, PROPOSITION, or RE-
SEMBLANCE-type situation entity. Note that in the
RESEMBLANCE case, it is unclear whether or not
the embedded event took place.

6. FACT (F): Georg knows that Reza won the
competition.

7. PROPOSITION (P): Georg thinks that Reza
won the competition.

8. RESEMBLANCE (RES): Reza looks like he
won the competition.

The first sentence of this section, for example,
would be segmented and labeled as shown below.

(i) The phrase situation entity refers to the fact
[S]

(ii) that clauses of text evoke situations within a
discourse. [F, GEN]

The first segment is a STATE, and the embedded
clause is both a FACT, by virtue of being the
complement clause following the fact that, and
a GENERIC SENTENCE, by virtue of predicating
over a class of entities (clauses of text).

Finally, the labels QUESTION and IMPERATIVE
are added to allow complete annotation of texts.
Although they fulfill important and varied rhetori-
cal functions, neither of these clause types directly
evoke situations.

9. QUESTION (Q): Why do you torment me so?
10. IMPERATIVE (IMP): Listen to this.

2.2 Discourse modes
The inventory of SE types is motivated by theoreti-
cal work (Smith, 2003; Smith, 2005) which aims
to determine which specific linguistic features of
text passages allow human readers to distinguish,
e.g. narrative passages from argumentative pas-
sages. Smith identifies five modes of discourse:
Narrative, Description, Report, Information, and
Argument/Commentary. Each mode is linked to
linguistic characteristics of the clauses which com-
pose the passages.
The set of SE types outlined above allows a com-
plete, comprehensive description of these five dis-
course modes. The discourse modes approach is
related to that of Argumentative Zoning (Teufel,
2000; O’Seaghdha and Teufel, 2014), in which
linguistic features of scientific texts are used to dis-
tinguish genre-specific types of text passages, such

as Methods or Results. Going back to discourse
modes, Smith’s claim, supported by manual tex-
tual analysis, is that different modes show different
characteristic distributions of SE types.

Previous work shows that this claim is supported
at the level of genre (Palmer and Friedrich, 2014),
taking genre as an approximation of discourse
mode. This approximation is problematic, though,
because texts of any genre are in fact composed
of multiple text passages which instantiate differ-
ent discourse modes. In this study we focus down
to the level of the text passage, offering the first
empirical analysis of argumentative text passages
from the perspective of clause types. The analy-
sis looks at German texts, both contrasting purely
argumentative texts with mixed texts and, further,
analyzing the correlations between SE annotations
and argument structure graphs.

3 Data

In this section we describe the corpus of texts we
annotate with SE types and the process used for
annotating the texts. Section 3.3 presents the first
step of the analysis, comparing the distribution of
SE types in the argumentative microtexts to those
for texts from other genres.

3.1 Argumentative microtext corpus

Our data includes the whole argumentative micro-
text corpus (Peldszus and Stede, 2015a) which con-
sists of 112 German texts.2 Each microtext is a
short, dense argument written in response to a ques-
tion on some potentially controversial topic (e.g.
”Should intelligence services be regulated more
tightly by parliament?”). The writers were asked
to include a direct statement of their main claim
as well as at least one objection to that claim. The
texts, each of which contains roughly 5 argumen-
tative segments (and no irrelevant segments), were
first written in German and professionally trans-
lated into English.

An example text from the corpus appears in Ta-
ble 1, segmented into argumentative discourse
units (ADUs) as in the original corpus version.

The texts in the corpus are manually annotated
according to a scheme based on Freeman’s theory
of the macro-structure of argumentation (Freeman,
1991; Freeman, 2011) for representing text-level
argumentation structure. This scheme represents

2https://github.com/peldszus/
arg-microtexts

23



SE German/English

GS Die Geheimdienst müssen dringend stärker vom Parlament kontrolliert werden,
Intelligence services must urgently be regulated more tightly by parliament;

S das sollte jedem nach den Enthüllungen von Edward Snowden klar sein.
this should be clear to everyone after the disclosures of Edward Snowden.

S Die betreffen zwar vor allem die britischen und amerikanischen Geheimdienste,
Granted, those concern primarily the British and American intelligence services,

GEN aber mit denen arbeiten die Deutschen Dienste bekanntermaßen eng zusammen.
but the German services evidently do collaborate with them closely.

GS Deren Werkzeuge, Daten und Knowhow wird schon lange zu unserer Überwachung genutzt.
Their tools, data and expertise have been used to keep us under surveillance for a long time.

Table 1: Sample microtext (micro b005), both German and English versions, with SE labels.

an argument, consisting of one conclusion and
one or more premises, as a “hypothetical exchange”
(Peldszus and Stede, 2013a) between the propo-
nent and the opponent, who respectively defend
or question a specific claim. Note that Peldszus and
Stede (2013a) use the term “argument” to describe
the complex of premises put forward in favor of
a conclusion, while premises and conclusions are
propositions expressed in the text.

The microtexts are segmented into “elementary
units of argumentation” (sometimes called ADUs
as above), which consist of either the conclusion
or a single premise. Each ADU corresponds to a
structural element in an argument graph (Figure 1).
In these texts, conclusions are only associated with
the proponent, but premises can be associated with
either the proponent or the opponent.

Round nodes in the graph are proponent nodes
(premises or conclusions) while square ones are
opponent nodes (premises only). In addition, sev-
eral different supporting and attacking moves (also
called “argumentative functions” of a segment
(Peldszus and Stede, 2013b)) are labelled and rep-
resented by the arcs connecting the nodes. The
most frequent argumentative functions are:

• support: a premise supporting a conclusion
• rebuttal: a premise which attacks a conclu-

sion or premise by challenging the acceptabil-
ity of the proposition being attacked
• undercut: a premise which attacks by chal-

lenging the acceptability of an inference be-
tween two propositions

The argument graph for our sample text appears
in Figure 1. Here we see that the second segment

supports the conclusion (first segment), while the
third segment undercuts segment two. This under-
cutting move itself is then undercut by the fourth
segment (a proponent node), which is in turn sup-
ported by segment five.

3.2 Annotation process
The granularity of situation-evoking clauses is dif-
ferent from that of ADUs, requiring that the texts
be re-segmented prior to SE annotation. Table 3
illustrates a microtext with more SE segments than
ADUs. For segmentation we use DiscourseSeg-
menter (Sidarenka et al., 2015), a python pack-
age offering both rule-based and machine-learning
based discourse segmenters.3 After preprocessing
texts with the Mate Tools,4 we use DiscourseSeg-
menter’s rule-based segmenter (edseg), which
employs German-specific rules to determine the
boundaries of elementary discourse units in texts.
Because DiscourseSegmenter occasionally over-
split segments, we did a small amount of post-
processing. On average, one ADU contains 1.16
SE segments. Table 2 shows the number of seg-
ments of each type, as well as the distribution of
both argument components and SE types over the
segments.

In addition to labeling each segment with its
SE type, we also annotate three important verb-
or clause-level features: (a) lexical aspect (dy-
namic/stative) of the main verb, (b) whether the
main referent of the clause is generic or non-

3https://github.com/WladimirSidorenko/
DiscourseSegmenter

4http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
forschung/ressourcen/werkzeuge/matetools.
html

24



Figure 1: Argument graph for sample microtext (micro b005), with SE labels added.

#texts=112 #ADUs=576 #SE Segs=668

concl./premise 112 / 464 state 212 (0.32) generic 320 (0.48) question 10 (0.01)

prop./opp. 451 / 125 event 57 (0.09) generalizing 67 (0.10) resemblance 2 (0.00)

Table 2: Microtext corpus used for this analysis (percentages in brackets). ADUs are the argument
component segments in the original data; SE Segs are situation entity segments.

German/English (+SE-Labels)

CONCL. Alternative Heilpraktiken sollten genauso wie ärztliche Behandlungen bezuschusst werden, (GEN)
Alternative treatments should be subsidized in the same way as conventional treatments,

PREMISE weil beide Wege zur Verhinderung, Minderung oder Heilung einer Krankheit führen könnten. (GEN)
since both methods can lead to the prevention, mitigation or cure of an illness.

PREMISE Zudem müsste es im Sinne der Krankenkassen liegen, (GEN) \\ Naturheilpraktiken als ärztliche Behandlung
anzuerkennen, (GEN)
Besides it should be in the interest of the health insurers \\ to recognize alternative medicine as treatment,

PREMISE da eine Chance der Genesung besteht. (ST)
since there is a chance of recovery.

PREMISE Es spielt dabei doch keine Rolle, (GS) \\ dass die Behandelnden nicht den Ärzte-Status” tragen. (GEN)
It doesn’t matter after all \\ that those who administer the treatment don’t have ’doctor status’.

Table 3: Sample microtext (micro b010), both German and English versions, with SE labels.

generic, and (c) whether the clause is habitual (a
pattern of occurrences), episodic (a fixed number of
occurrences), or static (an attribute, characteristic,
or quality). Using these feature values in a deci-
sion tree has been shown to improve human agree-
ment on the SE type annotation task (Friedrich and
Palmer, 2014).

Annotators and annotator training. Each text
was annotated by two trained (but novice) student

annotators and one expert annotator. Following
Mavridou et al. (2015), with a modified and trans-
lated version of an existing SE annotation man-
ual,5 student annotators were trained on a set of
longer texts from different genres, automatically
segmented as described above: fiction (47 seg-
ments), reports (42 segments), TED talks (50 seg-

5www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/
sitent/page.php?id=resources

25



ments), and commentary (127 segments).

Inter-annotator agreement. We compute agree-
ment separately for SE type and for the three fea-
tures introduced above, as shown in Table 4 (re-
ported as Cohen’s Kappa). Numbers in brackets
represent IAA for the training texts.

level Observed Chance Cohen’s
Agreement Agreement Kappa

Main Referent 0.62 (0.76) 0.50 (0.57) 0.23 (0.45)
Aspect 0.84 (0.91) 0.50 (0.52) 0.69 (0.81)
Habituality 0.68 (0.70) 0.26 (0.27) 0.57 (0.58)

Situation Entity 0.52 (0.61) 0.21 (0.22) 0.40 (0.50)

Table 4: Inter-annotator agreement on microtexts
(and training texts).

The table shows that the IAA for our training set
is (slightly) better than the IAA we gained for the
microtexts. The best results we obtained in the
category Aspect (0.69 K), the worst in the category
Main Referent (0.23 K).

Error Analysis. As reported by several studies
(Peldszus and Stede, 2013b), the annotation of ar-
gumentative texts is a difficult task for humans.
Our annotators often disagreed about the gener-
icity of the Main Referent (binary: generic/non-
generic). The SE-labels that caused most dis-
agreement among the annotators are STATE vs.
GENERIC SENTENCE (39% of all disagreements
regarding SE-type), followed by STATE vs. GEN-
ERALIZING SENTENCE (22%).
This first annotation round suggests that we might
benefit from:

1. adapting the SE annotation scheme for
(purely) argumentative texts; and

2. training annotators specifically to deal with
(purely) argumentative texts.

Given the relatively low agreement, for the anal-
ysis we produce a gold standard annotation by re-
annotating all segments for which the two student
annotators disagree about the SE type label. This
third annotation is done by an expert annotator (one
of the authors). For the segments which needed re-
annotation, the expert annotator agreed with one of
the two student annotators regarding SE label 87%
of the time.

3.3 Distributions
One key claim of Smith (2003) is that text pas-
sages in different discourse modes have different

Figure 2: Distribution of SE types in all genres.

Figure 3: Distribution of SE types in microtexts.

predominant SE types. We investigate this claim
by comparing the distribution of SE types in the
microtext subcorpus to those in the training texts
(see Figure 2). The microtexts (Figure 3), which
can be described as ‘purely’ argumentative texts,
are characterized by a high proportion of generic
and generalizing sentences and very few events,
while reports and talks, for example, contain a high
proportion of states. Fiction is characterized by
a high number of events. The genre commentary,
which contains many argumentative passages but
is not as ‘purely’ argumentative as the microtexts,
is most likely to be comparable to the microtexts.
This finding suggests that SE types could be helpful
for modeling argumentative regions of text.

4 Analysis

Extraction of argument graphs. As a next step,
we look at the correspondences between SE type
labels and various aspects of the argument graph
components (ADUs):

• conclusion vs. premise
• proponent premise vs. opponent premise
• support vs. attack by rebuttal vs. attack by

undercut

26



Figure 4: Correlations between SE types and argu-
ment components.

Figure 5: Correlations between SE types and con-
clusions/premises.

For this analysis, we match the ADU segments
extracted from the argument graphs to the situa-
tion segments produced by our own segmentation
routine. Because the segments of the microtext cor-
pus (ADUs) sometimes contain several situation
segments, it can happen that several SE labels are
assigned to one ADU. The results of these analyses
are presented below.

4.1 Correlations between SE types and
argument components

The mapping of the two sets of annotations
reveals interesting correlations between SE types
and argument components. Figure 4 shows the
overall distribution of SE types over specific
argument components. First, conclusions are
almost exclusively either GENERIC SENTENCES
(48%) or STATES (44%), while premises also
consist of GENERALIZING SENTENCES (12%)
and EVENTS (10%).
An example of a generic conclusion is given below:

GEN: Nicht jeder sollte verpflichtet sein, den
Rundfunkbeitrag zu bezahlen. (Translation: Not
everyone should be obliged to pay the TV & radio

Figure 6: Correlations between SE types and pro-
ponent/opponent argument components.

licence.)

Figure 5, where all premises are contrasted with
all conclusions, shows this difference even more
clearly. The STATE label is more frequent for con-
clusions (44%) than for premises (29%). On the
other hand, premises contain 10% EVENT labels,
while there are only 3% EVENT labels in the set of
conclusions.

The SE types also correspond to the distinc-
tion between premises that support a conclusion
(“pro”-label) and premises that attack a conclusion
(“opp”-label), as Figure 6 indicates. First, propo-
nent ADUs contain more GENERIC SENTENCE
labels (52%) than opponent units (42%). Further-
more, the STATE and EVENT labels are more fre-
quent within opponent units (32% and 14%), while
they make up only 29% and 8% in proponent units.

To illustrate this, below we show an extract
of an argument consisting of a stative opponent
premise (in bold face) attacking a conclusion:

Die Krankenkassen sollten Behandlungen beim
Natur- oder Heilpraktiker nicht zahlen, es sei denn
der versprochene Effekt und dessen medizinis-
cher Nutzen sind handfest nachgewiesen.
(Translation: Health insurance companies should
not cover treatment in complementary medicine
unless the promised effect and its medical benefit
have been concretely proven.)

Of course, the corpus on which these investiga-
tions are carried out is quite small, and the phenom-
ena we observe can be interpreted solely as tenden-
cies. Nevertheless, we hypothesize that the preva-
lence of the GENERIC SENTENCE and GENERAL-
IZING SENTENCE labels, as well as the absence
(or rareness) of the EVENT label are indicators for

27



Figure 7: Correlations between SE types and argu-
mentative functions

argumentative text passages. Furthermore, such
prevalences (or also rarenesses) can be interpreted
as indicators for particular argument components
such as proponent premises or conclusions.

4.2 Correlations between SE types and
argumentative functions

There are also some interesting correlations be-
tween SE types and the argumentative functions of
premises. In this study we focus on the three most
frequent functions in our data, namely support, re-
buttal and undercut. Table 5 gives an overview of
their distribution within the microtexts.

function pro/opp n

support proponent 250
support opponent 13

rebut proponent 12
rebut opponent 96

undercut proponent 51
undercut opponent 12

Table 5: Distribution of argumentative functions
within the microtexts.

It is worth mentioning that the rebuttals in the
microtext corpus seem to differ slightly from all of
the other segments in terms of the frequency of the
label GENERIC SENTENCE. While this is by far
the most frequent label in the microtexts (overall
frequency of 48%), here it has only a frequency of
42%, followed by the label STATE with a frequency
of 32% (see Figure 7). Rebuttals are less strongly
biased toward GENERIC SENTENCES, compared to
other argumentative functions. In contrast, support-
ing and undercutting moves are characterized by an
above-average number of GENERIC SENTENCES

Figure 8: Correlations between SE types and argu-
mentative functions with regard to pro/opp

(51% and 56%).
To give a better idea of how rebuttals of different

SE types look, below we show two examples, one
a STATE and the other one GENERIC SENTENCE:

Die Krankenkassen sollten Behandlungen beim
Natur- oder Heilpraktiker nicht zahlen, es sei
denn der versprochene Effekt und dessen medi-
zinischer Nutzen sind handfest nachgewiesen.
(STATE)
(Translation: Health insurance companies
should not cover treatment in complementary
medicineunless the promised effect and its
medical benefit have been concretely proven.)

Ja, seinen Müll immer ordentlich zu trennen
ist nervig und mühselig. [...] Aber immer noch
wird in Deutschland viel zu viel Mll produziert.
(GENERIC SENTENCE)
(Translation: Yes, it’s annoying and cumbersome
to separate your rubbish properly all the time.
[...] But still Germany produces way too much
rubbish.)

Finally, Figure 8 shows the distribution of SE
types among the different argumentative functions,
separated into proponent and opponent premises.

According to this distribution, support moves,
for example, can be distinguished by SE type
into premises supporting the opponent and those
supporting the proponent. While proponent sup-
port premises contain clearly more GENERIC SEN-
TENCES (52%) than STATES (29%), the number
of GENS and STATES within opponent support
premises is almost equal (32% and 31%).

The following is a generic premise that supports
the proponent, contrasted with a STATE premise
supporting the opponent:

28



Mit der BA-Arbeit kann man jedoch die Inter-
essen und die Fachkenntnisse besonders gut zeigen.
Schlielich ist man nicht in jedem Fach sehr gut.
(GENERIC SENTENCE)

(Translation: With a BA dissertation one can,
however, demonstrate interests and subject matter
expertise particularly well. After all one doesn’t
excel in every subject.)

Es bleibt jedoch fragwürdig, ob die tatsächliche
Durchführung derartiger Kontrollen auch gle-
ichzeitig zur stärkeren Einhaltung von Gesetzen
fhrt, denn jetztendlich liegt diese Entscheidung
in den Händen des jeweiligen Regierungschefs.
(STATE)

(Translation: Yet it remains questionable
whether the actual implementation of such super-
vision would at the same time lead to a stronger
observance of laws, as ultimately this decision
is in the hands of the respective government
leaders.)

These results suggest that SE types could be
helpful even for a finer-grained analysis of argu-
mentative functions. Nonetheless we would reiter-
ate here that our results are based on a small dataset
only and need to be confirmed by further experi-
ments. Therefore, annotations of larger texts with
a mixture of argumentative and non-argumentative
passages are already underway.

5 Conclusion

This paper presents an annotation study whose goal
is to dig into the usefulness of semantic clause types
(in the form of situation entity labels) for mining
argumentative passages and modeling argumenta-
tive regions of text. This is the first study to label
argumentative texts (microtexts, in this case) with
situation entity types at the clause level. We have
explored the correlation of SE classes with argu-
mentative text genres, particularly in comparison
to non-argumentative texts. We have also looked at
the correlations between SE types and both specific
argument components (premise vs. conclusion, pro-
ponent vs. opponent) and specific argumentative
functions (support, rebuttal, undercut).

We do our analysis on German texts, but we fully
expect that the results should carry over to other
languages, as the link between SE type distribution
and discourse mode has been shown to hold cross-

linguistically. Due to the small dataset, our results
can be interpreted solely as tendencies which have
to be confirmed by more extensive studies in the
future. Nonetheless there is some evidence that
the observed tendencies can be deployed for auto-
matic recognition and fine-grained classification of
argumentative text passages.

In addition to the ongoing annotation work
which will give us more data to analyze, we intend
to cross-match SE types with the newly-available
discourse structure annotations for the microtext
corpus (Stede et al., 2016). We would additionally
explore the role of modal verbs within this inter-
section of SE type and argument structure status.
The end goal of this investigation, of course, is to
deploy automatically-labeled SE types as features
for argument mining.

Acknowledgments

We want to thank Michael Staniek for building
up the annotation tool and preprocessing the texts.
Sabrina Effenberger and Rebekka Sons we thank
for the annotations and their helpful feedback on
the annotation manual. We would also like to thank
the reviewers for their insightful comments and
suggestions on the paper.
This research is funded by the Leibniz Science-
Campus Empirical Linguistics and Computational
Language Modeling, supported by Leibniz Asso-
ciation grant no. SAS-2015-IDS-LWC and by the
Ministry of Science, Research, and Art of Baden-
Württemberg.

References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract objects

in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Gregory N. Carlson and Francis Jeffry Pelletier, editors.
1995. The Generic Book. University of Chicago
Press.

Francisco Costa and António Branco. 2012. Aspec-
tual type and temporal relation classification. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 266–275. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

David Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar. Reidel.

Eirini Florou, Stasinos Konstantopoulos, Antonis
Kukurikos, and Pythagoras Karampiperis. 2013. Ar-
gument extraction for supporting public policy for-
mulation. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on

29



Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social
Sciences, and Humanities.

James B. Freeman. 1991. Dialectics and the
Macrostructure of Argument. Foris.

James B. Freeman. 2011. Argument Structure: Repre-
sentation and Theory, volume 18 of Argumentation
Library. Springer.

Annemarie Friedrich and Alexis Palmer. 2014. Situ-
ation entity annotation. In Proceedings of the Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop VIII.

Annemarie Friedrich and Manfred Pinkal. 2015.
Discourse-sensitive Automatic Identification of
Generic Expressions. In Proceedings of the 53rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), Beijing, China, July.

Annemarie Friedrich, Alexis Palmer, and Manfred
Pinkal. 2016. Situation entity types: automatic clas-
sification of clause-level aspect. In Proceedings of
ACL 2016.

Aurelie Herbelot and Ann Copestake. 2009. Anno-
tating genericity: How do humans decide? (A case
study in ontology extraction). Studies in Generative
Grammar 101, page 103.

Kleio-Isidora Mavridou, Annemarie Friedrich, Melissa
Peate Sorensen, Alexis Palmer, and Manfred Pinkal.
2015. Linking discourse modes and situation enti-
ties in a cross-linguistic corpus study. In Proceed-
ings of the EMNLP Workshop LSDSem 2015: Link-
ing Models of Lexical, Sentential and Discourse-
level Semantics.

Marie-Francine Moens, Erik Boiy, Raquel Mochales
Palau, and Chris Reed. 2007. Automatic detection
of arguments in legal texts. In Proceedings of ICAIL
2007.

Anna Nedoluzhko. 2013. Generic noun phrases and
annotation of coreference and bridging relations in
the Prague Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings
of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop and In-
teroperability with Discourse, pages 103–111.

Diarmuid O’Seaghdha and Simone Teufel. 2014. Un-
supervised learning of rhetorical structure with un-
topic models. In Proceedings of COLING.

Alexis Palmer and Annemarie Friedrich. 2014. Genre
distinctions and discourse modes: Text types differ
in their situation type distributions. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Frontiers and Connections be-
tween Argumentation Theory and NLP.

Alexis Palmer, Elias Ponvert, Jason Baldridge, and Car-
lota Smith. 2007. A sequencing model for situation
entity classification. In Proceedings of ACL.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2013a. From ar-
gument diagrams to argumentation mining in texts:
A survey. International Journal of Cognitive Infor-
matics and Natural Intelligence (IJCINI), 7(1):1–31.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2013b. Ranking
the annotators: An agreement study on argumenta-
tion structure. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic
Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with Dis-
course, pages 196–204, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2015a. An an-
notated corpus of argumentative microtexts. In Pro-
ceedings of the First European Conference on Argu-
mentation: Argumentation and Reasoned Action.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2015b. Joint
prediction in MST-style discourse parsing for argu-
mentation mining. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Nils Reiter and Anette Frank. 2010. Identifying
Generic Noun Phrases. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 40–49, Uppsala, Sweden,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Uladzimir Sidarenka, Andreas Peldszus, and Manfred
Stede. 2015. Discourse Segmentation of German
Texts. Journal for Language Technology and Com-
putational Linguistics, 30(1):71–98.

Eric V. Siegel and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2000.
Learning methods to combine linguistic indica-
tors: Improving aspectual classification and reveal-
ing linguistic insights. Computational Linguistics,
26(4):595–628.

Carlota S. Smith. 1991. The Parameter of Aspect.
Kluwer.

Carlota S Smith. 2003. Modes of discourse: The local
structure of texts, volume 103. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Carlota S Smith. 2005. Aspectual entities and tense
in discourse. In Aspectual inquiries, pages 223–237.
Springer.

Christian Stab and Iryna Gurevych. 2016. Parsing ar-
gumentation structures in persuasive essays. arXiv
preprint, under review, April.

Manfred Stede, Stergos Afantenos, Andreas Peldszus,
Nicholas Asher, and Jeremy Perret. 2016. Parallel
discourse annotations on a corpus of short texts. In
Proceedings of LREC.

Simone Teufel. 2000. Argumentative zoning: Infor-
mation extraction from scientific text. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh.

Zeno Vendler, 1957. Linguistics in Philosophy, chapter
Verbs and Times, pages 97–121. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, New York.

H.J. Verkuyl. 1972. On the Compositional Nature of
the Aspects. Reidel.

Alessandra Zarcone and Alessandro Lenci. 2008.
Computational models of event type classification in
context. In Proceedings of LREC2008.

30


