



















































Automatic Reports from Spreadsheets: Data Analysis for the Rest of Us


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 244–245,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Reports from Spreadsheets: Data Analysis for the Rest of Us

Pablo Ariel Duboue
Textualization.com

White Plains, New York, USA

Abstract

The current interest in data acquisition and
analysis has resulted in a large number of solu-
tions available to the public. However, anyone
other than professionals in the field can find it
difficult to make sense of this sea of data. This
demo showcases a tool that produces general
static reports (as opposed to query or intention
based systems of past NLG interest) of com-
bined text and graphics given any spreadsheet
sent by email.

1 Introduction

The current interest in data acquisition and analy-
sis has resulted in a large number of solutions avail-
able to the public (Microsoft Power BI,1, Pentaho,2

etc.). However, anyone other than professionals in
the field can find it difficult to make sense of this sea
of data. Report generation from tabular data has a
long tradition in NLG (Fasciano and Lapalme, 1996;
Kerpedjiev et al., 1997; Yu et al., 2007; Hunter et al.,
2012). However, these systems assume that a knowl-
edgeable user can guide the system with explicit
communicative intentions in the form of queries or
emphasis in particular columns or relations (Fas-
ciano, 1996; Labbé et al., 2015). How to fulfill
those expectations when confronted with a novice
user can span whole research projects in smart User
Interfaces. Instead, in this demo we present a tool
that produces general static reports of combined text
and graphics given any spreadsheet. Our tool incor-
porates concepts of surprise, popularized from the

1http://powerbi.microsoft.com/
2http://pentaho.com

KDD community (Guillet and Hamilton, 2007) and
employed lateraly in other NLG systems (Molina et
al., 2011).

Our system is based on the ANA architecture (Ku-
kich, 1983): fact generation, message generation,
content planning and tactical generation. It takes any
spreadsheet in Excel, CSV and OpenDocument for-
mat sent by email3 and produces a OpenDocument
text document with a textual description of the data
and embedded graphs, a form of multimedia gener-
ation (André, 2000).

It addresses two traditional conditions in report
generation (Kittredge and Polguere, 2000): a pri-
mary interest in objective or fixed type data and a
conceptual summarization over said data. Two other
conditions are approximated (a temporal dimension
in the data, which is attempted using a number of
heuristics) or left for potential follow up consult-
ing engagements (recurrent situation of communi-
cation).

Similar to (Molina et al., 2011), we seek to sum-
marize relevant facts with explanatory descriptions
and graphical information. However, we have a dif-
ferent main goal which is to provide an overview
of any tabular data without extra domain knowledge
provided by the user. We also share the secondary
goal of producing reports that are informative and
persuasive, useful for non-expert users and have a
uniform style.

2 Structure of the Demo

Our demo shows a number of spreadsheets (Fig-
ure 1 (a), adapted from Foreman (2013)) from which

3To the address get@thedatareport.com

244



(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Input data, adapted from Foreman (2013); (b) Example output.

the audience can change the data with a provided
OpenCalc instance running in the machine. Then the
spreadsheet will be submitted to the system and the
resulting multi-page report will be shown and dis-
cussed (Figure 1 (b)).

Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank the reviewers and
Annie Ying for comments and references.

References

Elisabeth André. 2000. The generation of multimedia
presentations. Handbook of natural language process-
ing, pages 305–327.

Massimo Fasciano and Guy Lapalme. 1996. Postgraphe:
a system for the generation of statistical graphics and
text. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, pages 51–60.

Massimo Fasciano. 1996. Génération intégrée de textes
et de graphiques statistiques. Université de Montréal.

John W Foreman. 2013. Data smart: using data science
to transform information into insight. John Wiley &
Sons.

Fabrice Guillet and Howard J Hamilton. 2007. Quality
measures in data mining, volume 43. Springer.

James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Reiter,
Somayajulu Sripada, and Cindy Sykes. 2012. Au-
tomatic generation of natural language nursing shift
summaries in neonatal intensive care: Bt-nurse. Ar-
tificial intelligence in medicine, 56(3):157–172.

Stephan Kerpedjiev, Giuseppe Carenini, Steven F Roth,
and Johanna D Moore. 1997. Autobrief: a multimedia
presentation system for assisting data analysis. Com-
puter Standards & Interfaces, 18(6):583–593.

Robert I Kittredge and Alain Polguere. 2000. The gener-
ation of reports from databases. Handbook of natural
language processing, pages 261–304.

Karen Kukich. 1983. Design of a knowledge-based re-
port generator. In Proc. of ACL.

Cyril Labbé, Claudia Roncancio, and Damien Bras.
2015. A personal storytelling about your favorite data.
In Proc. of ENLG 2015, September.

Martin Molina, Amanda Stent, and Enrique Parodi.
2011. Generating automated news to explain the
meaning of sensor data. In International Symposium
on Intelligent Data Analysis, pages 282–293. Springer.

Jin Yu, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Chris Mellish.
2007. Choosing the content of textual summaries of
large time-series data sets. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 13(01):25–49.

245


