





































Post Retraction Citations in Context 

Gali Halevi1 and Judit Bar-Ilan2 

1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA 
gali.halevi@mssm.edu 

2Department of Information Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel 
Judit.Bar-Ilan@biu.ac.il 

Abstract. In this paper we explore post retraction citations to retracted papers. 
The reasons for retractions in our sample were data manipulation, small sample 
size, scientific misconduct, and duplicate publication by the authors. We found, 
that the huge majority of the citations are positive, and the citing papers usually 
fail to mention that the cited article was retracted. Retracted articles are freely 
available at the publishers’ site, which is probably a catalyst for receiving more 
citations. 

1 Introduction 

Studies on retracted articles show that the amount of retracted articles has increased in 
relative measure to the overall increase in scientific publications [1, 2]. Although re-
tracting articles helps purge the scientific literature of erroneous or unethical research, 
citations to such research present a real challenge. Citing articles that were retracted 
especially due to plagiarism, data falsification or any other unethical practices interferes 
with the process of eliminating such studies form the literature and research.  There are 
two types of retraction citations; citations that a retracted article received prior to its 
retraction and citations that are received post retraction and despite retraction notices 
[3, 4]. Both types of citations put the scientific process in jeopardy, especially when 
they are cited as legitimate references to previous work. Some studies on retracted ar-
ticles have shown that retracted articles that received a high number of citations pre-
retraction are more likely to occur additional citations post-retraction [4, 5]. A good 
example is described in a study by [6] who studied the case of Scott S. Reuben who 
was convicted of fabricating data in 25 of his studies which resulted in mass retractions 
of his articles. The authors of the study have shown that the popularity of Reuben’s 
articles did not diminish post-retraction even 5 years after the retractions have been 
made.  Another phenomenon that was identified in the literature is of authors’ self-
citing their retracted articles and thus contributing to the perception that their retracted 
work is valid [7]. 

In this study we sought out to find the context around post-retraction citations with 
the main purpose of finding out whether they are negatively, positively or neutrally 
mentioned. In this case study we present a sample of five retracted articles that have 
post-retraction citations tracked in 2015 and 2016.  

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

23



2 Data collection  

ScienceDirect, Elsevier’s full text database was accessed in October 2014. The database 
was queried for the term “RETRACTED” in the article title and its retraction notice. In 
ScienceDirect, each retracted article is preceded with the word “RETRACTED”. In 
addition, each Elsevier journal incorporates a retraction notice which explains who re-
tracted article and the reason for retraction. This allowed us to manually code each 
article in our dataset with an additional field “retracted by” that represented the person/s 
requesting the retraction.  

A total of 1,203 results retrieved from which 988 were retracted articles. The results 
excluded were retraction notices, duplicates and papers whose original titles included 
the word "retracted". 

For this study we selected the five top articles that were cited most (more than 20 
times) since 2015. This way we made sure that the papers all cite retracted articles 
(since they were all retracted before October 2014). The reason for this decision is that 
the retraction date of many of the retracted articles is unknown. For each article we 
extracted the citing documents and analyzed the ones appearing in 2015 and 2016. 
Overall, we analyzed located 125 citing documents and analyzed 109 of them; 16 doc-
uments were unavailable to us mostly because they appear in books to which we did 
not have access.  Each citing document was inspected to identify the precise mention 
of the retracted article within the text. Each mention was categorized as follows: 

 Positive: A positive citation indicates that the retracted article was cited as legitimate 
prior work and its findings used to corroborate the author/s current study.  

 Negative: A negative citations indicates that the authors mentioned the retracted ar-
ticle as such and its findings as inappropriate. 

 Neutral: A neutral citation indicates that the retracted article was mentioned as a 
publication that appears in the literature and does not include judgement on its va-
lidity. 

3 Findings 

3.1 Case study 1: Donmez, G., Wang, D., Cohen, D. E., & Guarente, L. (2010). 
RETRACTED: SIRT1 Suppresses β-Amyloid Production by Activating 
the α-Secretase Gene ADAM10. Cell, 142(2), 320-332. 

This article was published in 2010 in Cell and retracted in 2014 due to irregularities in 
graphs and data misrepresentation in the images. Although the graphs and images did 
not have any bearing on the validity of the results, according to the retraction notice, 
the editors stated that “…the level of care in figure preparation in Donmez et al. falls 
well below the standard that we expect, and we are therefore retracting the paper”.   

We conducted an individual content analysis of the most recent 36 citations which 
were tracked in 2015 and 2016. We were able to analyze 32 citing articles in context. 
Our results show that the citations are mostly positive (see Fig. 1). One negative men-
tion was found in a letter to the editor of Journal of Korean Medical Science written 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

24



“giving the above article as an example of how altered graphics are causing bias in the 
biomedical field and result in numerous articles being retracted” [8].  

 In this case, the editor indicated that the actual results of the study were valid, and 
this could be the reason for the continuous citations of the article. In one other case, 
although the article was cited positively in the paper, in the reference list it was noted 
that the article was retracted. 

 

 
Fig. 1. Citations in context for the Donmez et al. article 

3.2 Case 2: Séralini, G. E., Clair, E., Mesnage, R., Gress, S., Defarge, N., 
Malatesta, M., & De Vendômois, J. S. (2012). RETRACTED: Long term 
toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and a Roundup-tolerant genetically 
modified maize. Food and chemical toxicology, 50(11), 4221-4231.  

This article, published in 2012 was the subject of a debate surrounding the validity of 
the findings, use of animals and even accusations of fraud. Its publication and retraction 
process have resulted in the “Séralini affair” which became a big media news item. The 
article described a 2-year study of rats which were fed genetically modified (GM) crops 
and showed increased tumors. The study, which was also scrutinized by government 
agencies, received major media attention that resulted in the creation of a social move-
ment against GM food. The demand to label of all GM foods is still underway. Despite 
the accusation of fraud and fabrication of results, the editors found no such evidence to 
that effect. However, the article was retracted because of the “low number of animals” 
used in this study which lead to the conclusion that “no definitive conclusions can be 
reached with this small sample size”. 

This article was cited 109 times since its publication in 2012 with 23 citations tracked 
after its retraction (2015-2016) out of which 18 citing articles were accessible to us. As 
can be seen in Fig. 2 post-retraction citations are divided. Although more citations are 
seen to be negative, the positive and neutral ones are also present. The negative citations 
mostly point to the media frenzy around the results. Positive mentions appear in similar 
studies which claim that concerns raised by the GM study are valid and the dangers of 
GM foods to humans should be studied further.  

 

4 1 1

30

0

20

40

NA Negative Neutral Positive

N
um

be
r 

of
 

ci
tin

g 
ar

tic
le

s 
20

15
-2

01
6 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

25



 
Fig. 2. Citations in context for the Séralini et al. article 

The study was republished in 2014 by Environmental Sciences Europe [9]. The re-
publication of the study stirred another controversial discussion in the scientific com-
munity with several scientists writing letters expressing their concerns regarding the 
appearance of the same study in another journal [10]. 

The republished article received 17 citations in 2015 and 2016.  The vast majority 
of them being positive mentions (see Fig. 3). In addition, some criticism towards the 
peer-review practices of the retracting editors were also detected [10]. The one negative 
mention of the re-published article was criticism towards the media frenzy around the 
topic and the inability of the scientific community to refute invalid results. The authors 
state that “Although scientists have investigated each GMO crisis and reached scientific 
and rational conclusions, they have less ability to disseminate information than the me-
dia, so the public is not promptly informed of their rational and objective viewpoints as 
experts" [11, p.134].   

 

 
Fig. 3. Citations in context for the republished Séralini et al. article 

3.3 Case 3: Mukherjee, S., Lekli, I., Gurusamy, N., Bertelli, A. A., & Das, D. 
K. (2009). RETRACTED: Expression of the longevity proteins by both 
red and white wines and their cardioprotective components, resveratrol, 
tyrosol, and hydroxytyrosol. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 46(5), 
573-578.  

The leading author of the paper, Dipak Das and his lab at the University of Connecticut 
Health Sciences Center were the subject of an ethical investigation by the university. 
The results of the university’s investigation led to the retraction of all of Dr. Das' papers 
due to scientific misconduct and data manipulation. This particular paper was investi-
gated by the journal’s ethics committee along with an additional paper that appeared in 

5
7

5
6

0
2
4
6
8

NA Negative Neutral Positive

N
um

be
r 

of
 

ci
tin

g 
ar

tic
le

s  
20

15
-2

01
6

2 1 1

13

0

5

10

15

NA Negative Neutral Positive

N
um

be
r 

of
 

ci
tin

g 
ar

tic
le

s 
20

15
-2

01
6 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

26



the same journal. The retraction notice states that the journal’s ethics committee “ana-
lyzed the data presented, and then further concluded that …. on re-examination of these 
two FRBM (Free Radical Biology and Medicine) papers that they contain clear evi-
dence of obvious cutting, pasting and manipulation of data in experimental blots.” The 
article, which was retracted in 2012, received 85 citations since its publication in 2009, 
21 of which occurred in 2015 through March 2016. All 17 citing accessible citing arti-
cles referred to the article’s findings as legitimate. For example, “Plants containing 
resveratrol, a potent antioxidant, has been used widely in the treatment of various ail-
ments” [12 p.1286] or “Recent studies have also shown that red wine upregulates the 
protein expression of sirtuin “[13, p.1213].  

3.4 Case 4: Walumbwa, F. O., Wang, P., Wang, H., Schaubroeck, J., & Avolio, 
B. J. (2010). RETRACTED Psychological processes linking authentic 
leadership to follower behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(5), 901-914. 

This article was retracted in 2014 due to serious data manipulation and falsification. In 
the retraction notice of this article, the editors of the journal went to great lengths to 
examine and re-examine the statistical claims made by the authors using the services of 
three separate methodologists. Following the methodologists’ findings of irregularities 
in the reported data and falsification of results, and the authors’ lack of proper response 
to their findings, the article was retracted from the journal. However, the article contin-
ued to be cited despite the lengthy and detailed retraction notice.  

A close examination of the post retraction citations (2015- March 2016 – 24 citations 
of which 23 were analyzed) shows that all citations were positive citations, meaning 
that the citing authors used findings from this article to support their findings. The sub-
ject of “authentic leadership” is popular in management studies and has seen a surge in 
publications since 2012. This could explain the overall positive citations of the article.  

3.5 Case 5: Li, C., Tao, X. M., & Choy, C. L. (1999). RETRACTED: On the 
microstructure of three-dimensional braided preforms. Composites Science 
and Technology, 59(3), 391-404.  

This article, published in 1999 was retracted due to an identical version which was 
published 2 years earlier. In the retraction notice the editors state that “The article du-
plicates significant parts of a paper that had already appeared in [J China Textil Univ, 
1997, 14(3), 8-13]”.  The authors in this case re-used data they already published on 
and re-published it in a different journal. However, this article has been cited even in 
recent years despite being retracted for many years. A content analysis of the 18 out of 
the 21 recently citing articles from 2015 and 2016 shows that this article is being re-
ferred to mostly in positive context or mentioned as a legitimate piece in the literature. 
Here too, there is one paper that cites the article positively in the text, but in the refer-
ences it appears as retracted.  

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

27



4 Discussion and Conclusions 

As can be seen from the examples above, retracted articles continue to be cited years 
after retraction and despite retraction notices being posted on publishers’ platforms.  

In some cases, the continuous citations rates could be the result of general interest 
by the public or media. For example, the Séralini article evoked an ongoing public de-
bate regarding the safety of GM foods which resulted in a call to label all such food. 
This could explain the continuing interest in the study and its citations. The article was 
also republished and thus continues to be cited despite of the fact that the authors did 
not modify it. In the case of the Mukherjee article, again, public interest could explain 
its continuing citations. Resveratrol was hailed by the media as an important supple-
ment that could ensure longevity and good health and is an off the counter supplement 
available in vitamin shops. Finally, the Walumbwa article which describes ‘authentic 
leadership’ and followers’ dynamic is also a topic of media and business management 
interest. With numerous management books published on this topic it has been accepted 
as a management style encouraged by corporations.   

In other cases, the reason for retraction does not deter others from citing the article. 
For example, the Donmez article (case study 1 above) was retracted because of poor 
graphing and data representation. However, the editors do state in the retraction notice 
that these faults do not apply to the results of the study, even though on PubPeer [14] 
there was an extensive discussion on problems with the article. The editors’ approval 
of the results could be the reason for the continuing citations to the article. The Li arti-
cle, as another example, re-used data and thus violated the originality rule of scientific 
publishing. However, the data itself was not refuted by the editors and the article that 
was published first seems to be inaccessible. 

Regardless of the reasons speculated for the post-retractions citations, the fact that 
invalid and falsified research is continuing to appear as valid research is concerning. 
We recommend that publishers use reference checks to all submitted articles to detect 
citations of retracted articles and remove them or at least request an explanation from 
the authors for citing a retracted paper in a positive or neutral manner. This explanation 
should clearly appear in the paper. In addition, we would recommend the deletion of 
retracted articles from publishers’ websites. Currently, at least for the major publishers: 
Elsevier, Springer Nature and Wiley, but possibly a general practice, retracted articles 
are not only available on the publishers' site, but they are freely available, without the 
need for a subscription or for a one-time payment. While leaving a retraction notice, 
the article itself should not appear on platforms such as ScienceDirect or others. Alt-
hough versions of these articles may appear elsewhere, the journal websites should not 
carry these versions and make it difficult for authors to download, read and conse-
quently cite retracted articles.  

5 Acknowledgement 

The first author was supported by EU COST Actions PEERE (TD1306) and KnowEs-
cape (TD1210). 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

28



References 

1. Cokol, M., Ozbay, F., & Rodriguez-Esteban, R. (2008). Retraction rates are on the rise. 
EMBO Reports, 9(1), 2–2. http://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7401143vements. Science and 
engineering ethics, 1-10.  

2. Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2014). What studies of retractions tell us? Journal of Microbi-
ology & Biology Education, 15(2), 151. 

3. Unger, K., & Couzin, J. (2006). Even retracted papers endure. Science, 312(5770), 40-41. 
4. Campanario, J. M. (2000). Fraud: retracted articles are still being cited. Nature, 408(6810), 

288-288.  
5. Redman, B. K., Yarandi, H. N., & Merz, J. F. (2008). Empirical developments in retrac-

tion. Journal of Medical Ethics, 34(11), 807-809.  
6. Bornemann-Cimenti, H., Szilagyi, I. S., & Sandner-Kiesling, A. (2015). Perpetuation of re-

tracted publications using the example of the Scott S. Reuben Case: Incidences, reasons and 
possible improvements. DOI 10.1007/s11948-015-9680-y 

7. Madlock-Brown, C. R., & Eichmann, D. (2015). The (lack of) impact of retraction on cita-
tion networks. Science and Engineering Ethics, 21(1), 127-137.  

8. Seifirad, S., Haghpanah, V., Wang, S. Y., Chan, W. P., Shin, H. K., Choi, C. W., ... & 
Hwang, J. H. (2015). Clothes don't make the man: Well-favored figures are game-changers 
in the biomedical publication. Journal of Korean Medical Science, 30, 1713. 

9. Séralini, G. E., Clair, E., Mesnage, R., Gress, S., Defarge, N., Malatesta, M., ... & de Ven-
dômois, J. S. (2014). Republished study: long-term toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and a 
Roundup-tolerant genetically modified maize. Environmental Sciences Europe, 26(1), 1-14. 

10. Loening, U. E. (2015). A challenge to scientific integrity: A critique of the critics of the 
GMO rat study conducted by Gilles-Eric Séralini et al. (2012). Environmental Sciences 
Europe, 27(1) doi:10.1186/s12302-015-0048-3 

11. Xia, J., Song, P., Xu, L., & Tang, W. (2015). Retraction of a study on genetically modified 
corn: Expert investigations should speak louder during controversies over safety. BioSci-
ence Trends, 9(2), 134-137. doi:10.5582/bst.2015.01047 

12. Pangeni, R., Sahni, J. K., Ali, J., Sharma, S., & Baboota, S. (2014). Resveratrol: review on 
therapeutic potential and recent advances in drug delivery. Expert opinion on drug delivery, 
11(8), 1285-1298. 

13. Romain, C., Bresciani, L., Gaillet, S., Feillet-Coudray, C., Calani, L … Rouanet, J-M. 
(2014). Moderate chronic administration of Vineatrol-enriched red wines improves meta-
bolic, oxidative, and inflammatory markers in hamsters fed a high-fat diet. Molecular Nu-
trition & Food Research. 58(5), 1212-1215. 

14. PubPeer (2013). SIRT1 suppresses beta-amyloid production by activating the alpha-secre-
tase gene ADAM10. Retrieved from https://pubpeer.com/publications/20655472 

 

 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

29


	editorial
	paper1
	paper2
	paper3
	paper4
	paper5
	Making Sense of Massive Amounts of Scientific Publications: the Scientific Knowledge Miner Project

	paper6
	paper7
	paper8
	Delineating Fields Using Mathematical Jargon

	paper9
	paper10

