



















































Genre classification for a corpus of academic webpages


Proceedings of the 10th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-X) and the EmpiriST Shared Task, pages 90–98,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Genre classification for a corpus of academic webpages

Erika Dalan
University of Bologna
erika.dalan@unibo.it

Serge Sharoff
University of Leeds

s.sharoff@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

In this paper we report our analysis of
the similarities between webpages that are
crawled from European academic web-
sites, and comparison of their distribu-
tion in terms of the English language va-
riety (native English vs English as a lingua
franca) and their language family (based
on the country’s official language). After
building a corpus of university webpages,
we selected a set of relevant descriptors
that can represent their text types using
the framework of the Functional Text Di-
mensions. Manual annotation of a random
sample of academic pages provides the ba-
sis for classifying the remaining texts on
each dimension. Reliable thresholds are
then determined in order to evaluate pre-
cision and assess the distribution of text
types by each dimension, with the ultimate
goal of analysing language features over
English varieties and language families.

1 Introduction

English is increasingly regarded as the language of
international communication in professional and
institutional settings. In particular, it is the main
language used by the European universities to
communicate to their audience outside of their
own country. English language communication
is both a strategic choice for enhancing competi-
tiveness and prestige, with the ultimate goal of at-
tracting international students, and a transparency
requirement imposed by the European Higher Ed-
ucation Area (EHEA).1 At the same time, one can
expect that the strategies used for communication
vary according to culture and language factors.
For instance, British and Irish universities may

1http://www.ehea.info/.

adopt specific practices that differ from the ones
of their counterparts on the continent, which are
likely to be using ELF, English as Lingua Franca
(Mollin, 2006). Differences may occur on at least
two levels. First, on the higher level of genres
and second, on the level of language patterns that
are used to fulfil specific communicative func-
tions. As regards the former, and with reference
to university websites, related work has mainly fo-
cused on single genres, rather than the whole web-
site. Some of these genres include About us pages
(Caiazzo, 2011), Academic Course Descriptions
or ACDs (Gesuato, 2011), international student
prospectuses (Askehave, 2007), module descrip-
tions (Bernardini et al., 2010) and mission state-
ments (Morrish and Sauntson, 2013). Fewer stud-
ies have described university websites as a stand-
alone unit, probably because of their high variabil-
ity in terms of text types and genres. Based on a
case study carried out on a small sample of uni-
versities (Dalan, 2015), both native English and
ELF websites comprise five main textual functions
- i.e. desctiptions, narratives, instructions, infor-
mation and opinions – and a set of more structured
genres such as FAQs, news and news archives, fo-
rums, descriptions of research projects, personal
homepages (PHPs) and many others. Further-
more, some texts belong to proper academic do-
mains (e.g. research papers and abstracts), others
to institutional domains (the vast majority of run-
ning text) and others are derived from professional
settings following the marketization of higher ed-
ucation (e.g. testimonials and Why choose us
pages).

This wealth of genres and text types makes uni-
versity websites a sort of a colony of genres that
deserves to be further studied in terms of its tex-
tual functions.

As for language choices, Saichaie (2011) has
investigated university websites using critical dis-

90



course analysis. By analysing a sample of 12 US
colleges, he notes a standardisation in the use of
promotional language practices, in such a way that
generic images tend to be delivered, regardless
of how prestigious universities are. Ferraresi and
Bernardini (2013) conducted a case study on the
use of modal and semi-modal verbs by academic
institutions in Europe and noted that native En-
glish texts show higher frequencies of modal verbs
as compared to ELF university webpages. Modals
of permission, possibility and ability seem to be
used more widely in native texts as compared to
ELF texts. It is still unclear whether these obser-
vations may be related to other variables as well,
such as the set of genres mentioned above. Dif-
ferent institutional practices between native En-
glish and ELF countries may influence the qual-
ity and quantity of pages associated with specific
functions. Therefore, finding a reliable method for
classifying academic pages may help overcome or
minimize biases related to genre variability. Auto-
matic classification of university web-based gen-
res is a fundamental preliminary step for compar-
ing native English and ELF language patterns, as
well as a thriving research area in itself that needs
to be further explored.

In this paper, we will discuss the methods used
for corpus collection (Section 2), a typology used
for classifying our texts (Section 3), present the
experimental setup (Section 4), analyse the results
(Section 5) and discuss further research directions
(Section 6).

2 Corpus collection

As mentioned in the Section 1, the final aim of
this corpus is to compare communicative strate-
gies of ELF and native English countries in uni-
versity websites. Due to a lack of standards and
best-practices as regards translation, localisation
or drafting of online contents in English within the
ELF community (Costales, 2012; Palumbo, 2013),
only high-ranked universities are considered for
inclusion in the corpus, in the attempt of obtaining
a golden sample. Furthermore, texts in the gold
standard are more easily comparable considering
that these universities are evidently involved in the
international scene. Therefore, a few design crite-
ria were defined to collect a sample of academic
webpages. Criteria for corpus building include the
full list of European countries and a selection of
universities based on the total number of universi-

ties per country listed in the QS World University
Rankings.2 The top 30% of universities in each
country was chosen, fixing a maximum of ten. The
procedure for text collection followed the pipeline
described in the acWaC project (Bernardini and
Ferraresi, 2013), including post-processing tech-
niques developed in the WaCky project (Baroni
and Bernardini, 2006). Corpus building consists
of three steps: a) retrieving a list of seed URLs,
i.e. university English homepages; b) crawling
university websites starting from the list of URLs;
c) post-processing data, annotation and indexing.

As concerns the first step, due to the relatively
limited number of universities included in this cor-
pus, English homepages of ELF universities were
identified manually. The list of URLs was then
used to run a crawl of university websites, starting
from homepages down to level two, by following
webpages internal links. The third step includes
boilerplate removal, de-duplication and language
identification. The whole process discarded 10%
of universities overall, either because homepages
could not been fetched or because they were re-
moved during language identification processes.
A set of metadata was also defined, in order to
account for internal categorisation and to register
contextual information. The list of metadata com-
prises:

• webpage URL and university English home-
page;

• university extended name and main domain;
• QS World University overall ranking and QS

World University score associated with the
number of international students;

• status (public/private) and size (s/m/l/xl), as
registered in the ranking;

• family of the country official language (e.g.
Germanic in Norway and Romance in Italy);

• variety of English (either native in the UK
and Ireland or ELF);

• level of crawling (from 0 to 2, where 0 is the
homepage).

The final corpus contains approximately 20M
tokens and 35K texts produced in 91 universities,
78 of which represent ELF countries whereas 13
represent the countries with native English. Ta-
ble 1 and Table 2 provide descriptive statistics
of the final corpus, split by language variety and

2http://www.topuniversities.com/qs-world-university-
rankings

91



ELF Native EN Total
Tokens 9,375,739 11,813,692 21,189,431
Texts 17,383 17,562 34,945
Universities 78 13 91
Countries 27 2 29

Table 1: Corpus statistics by English language variety (ELF and native English).

language family (Table 2 refers to ELF countries
only).

3 Text typology

The webpages in the corpus can express several
functions at the same time. For example, typical
About us pages include informative descriptions,
‘Description of a thing’ according to the Web text
classification scheme (Egbert et al., 2015), as well
as promotional materials (‘Informational Persua-
sion’). In order to deal with such variation we
adapted the typology based on Functional Text Di-
mensions (FTD) (Forsyth and Sharoff, 2014) by
selecting the following dimensions relevant to the
academic webpages collected for this study:

A7, instruct To what extent does the text aim at
teaching the reader how something works?

A8, hardnews To what extent does the text ap-
pear to be an informative report of events re-
cent at the time of writing?

A9, legal To what extent does the text lay down a
contract or specify a set of regulations?

A12, compuff To what extent does the text pro-
mote a product or service?

A14, scitech To what extent does the text serve as
an example of academic research?

A16, info To what extent does the text provide in-
formation to define a topic?

A21, narrate To what extent does the text de-
scribe a chronologically ordered sequence of
events?

Application of this procedure leads to a com-
pact description of each text as scoring on some
of the dimensions. For example, some About us
webpages are strictly informational (A16),3 some

3https://www.cam.ac.uk/public-engagement/about-us

are narrative (A21),4 while others combine infor-
mation with promotion.5

We have annotated a subset of 897 web-
pages, randomly sampled from the main corpus.
Due to limited resources, annotation was done
by one annotator only. However, other stud-
ies which used the FTD annotation categories
listed above demonstrated reasonable interannota-
tor agreement levels, with Krippendorff’s α rang-
ing from 0.78 to 0.97 for different FTDs (Sharoff,
2015).

Sampling was done by selecting the ten pages
for each university randomly.6 To balance the
lack of information required to perform a strati-
fied sample and the need for a representative sam-
ple of most text types, we have manually analysed
URLs to make sure that specific portions of the
website did not dominate over other portions. If
URLs were skewed towards a portion of a web-
site (e.g. www.bg.ac.rs/en/bodies/), more pages
were taken from other uncovered sections. Each
webpage was annotated using a scale from 0 to 2,
with 0 meaning that the descriptor is not present
at all, 0.5 meaning that it is present to a small
extent, 1 meaning that it is partly present and 2
meaning that it is strongly characterised by a spe-
cific descriptor. This four-value scale has proven
successful in a number of experiments (Forsyth
and Sharoff, 2014) and was deemed an acceptable
trade-off between precision and confidence for an-
notation. In order to get cleaner text types for
training purposes, pages containing two or more
text types in separate areas were split into differ-
ent texts. On the other hand, proper hybrid pages,
i.e. those fulfilling multiple functions simultane-
ously, were given a strong value in each applicable
attribute. This resulted in a training corpus of 931

4http://www.sci.u-szeged.hu/english/brief-history/about-
us

5http://wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/business-school/
6Given that the corpus includes 91 universities, there

should be at least 910 pages to code. However, two universi-
ties comprise less than 10 pages overall. Specifically, Univer-
sity of Rome Tor Vergata in Italy and University of Innsbruck
in Austria contain two and five pages respectively.

92



Country Language Family Tokens Texts
Germany Germanic 1,269,884 2,674
Switzerland Germanic-Romance 807,456 1,845
Netherlands Germanic 801,244 1,767
Denmark Germanic 779,139 1,382
Finland Uralic 771,860 1,263
Sweden Germanic 680,928 1,258
France Romance 633,523 1,155
Italy Romance 620,940 1,059
Spain Romance 603,882 941
Russia Slavic 530,522 722
Belgium Germanic-Romance 408,088 657
Norway Germanic 283,059 554
Austria Germanic 185,224 352
Czech Republic Slavic 183,370 324
Estonia Uralic 176,162 299
Portugal Romance 117,919 234
Slovenia Slavic 95,309 161
Latvia Baltic 72,568 123
Poland Slavic 63,443 111
Romania Romance 58,915 111
Hungary Uralic 55,437 96
Belarus Slavic 46,291 83
Serbia Slavic 40,606 81
Lithuania Baltic 36,552 44
Ukraine Slavic 30,632 39
Greece Hellenic 14,881 30
Slovakia Slavic 7,905 18

Table 2: Corpus statistics by country and language family (ELF countries only).

texts. Drawing on experience from earlier annota-
tion experiments, this number is sufficiently large
to contain a representative picture of variation in
academic webpages.

The annotation process produced a numeric
data matrix in which each row corresponds to
an observation and each column corresponds to a
functional descriptor. Many texts score on several
dimensions. Legal and instructional texts tend to
be more recognizable, whereas informative, pro-
motional and narrative pages show a higher de-
gree of overlapping. Texts dealing with academic
research very often score on the hardnews dimen-
sion as well, since they are often presented in the
form of news bites.

The annotation matrix is used to retrieve a set
of positive and negative examples for each FTD,
to be used as a training set for experimenting au-
tomatic classification of the entire corpus. The
amount of the positive examples for each FTD in

the training corpus is listed in Table 3.

4 Automatic genre classification

Classification of texts according to their gen-
res can be achieved by extracting a range of
higher-level features, such as combinations of
POS tags, parse trees or rhetorical relations (San-
tini et al., 2010). However, lower-level features
based on character n-grams offer a surprisingly
efficient method for detecting genres without re-
quiring heavy linguistic resources (Kanaris and
Stamatatos, 2007). In a comparative evaluation,
their performance can exceed what is achieved by
resource-heavier approaches. For example, pure
n-grams can successfully generalise dates (.*day
for yesterday, today, Friday), which are typical
in reporting, nominalisations (.*tion) or passives
(.*ed by), which are typical in scientific discourse
(Sharoff et al., 2010).

The frequencies of character n-grams can be di-

93



rectly used as features in algorithms of Machine
Learning. However, many classification methods
use kernels as a mechanism for comparing the
similarity between objects described by the fea-
tures in order to build a model separating their
classes. String Kernels (Lodhi et al., 2002) is one
of such methods, which measures the similarity
between webpages represented as the distance be-
tween their character n-grams.

In this study, we experimented with classifica-
tion using Support Vector Machines (Smola and
Schölkopf, 2004) or Relevance Vector Machines
(Tipping, 2001). The advantage of RVM is the
ability to produce a small number of Support Vec-
tors, leading to better learning generalisation in
the case of relatively sparse data, for example,
only 25 positive examples have been identified for
A9 (legal texts). The task is to predict whether a
webpage features strongly in each FTD. The com-
monly used F1 measure is reported in Table 3 with
cross-validation for detecting the FTDs.

Once we produced reliable classifiers for each
dimension, we applied them to the entire corpus
of academic webpages. To establish which pages
score on each dimension with minimal noise out-
side the training set, we experimented with reli-
able thresholds to achieve the desired precision.
Table 3 shows the composition of the corpus in
terms of the number of pages for which the pre-
dicted score is greater than or equal to each thresh-
old and the corresponding percentage in the final
corpus as opposed to the manually annotated train-
ing corpus described in Section 3.

On the whole, post-hoc evaluation shows that
classification by n-grams is highly efficient in
terms of precision, considering that at least 80%
of pages above the threshold perfectly or widely
match each specific dimension. Note that the
proportion of pages that score on one dimen-
sion exclusively is very close to the one obtained
from manual annotation, except for A16 dimen-
sion. The latter, however, diverges from other
dimensions in that any university webpage tends
to contain some degree of informational content,
which may lead this dimension to be considered
as a ‘safety margin’ and, eventually, to be over-
represented in human annotation. Overall, approx-
imately 50% of pages in the training set and 40%
in the final corpus were classified as scoring high
on one function, which is an encouraging result
if we consider that online content is increasingly

evolving, producing new genres and hybrid pages
(Santini, 2007; Bruce, 2011).

5 Differences between language varieties

We also calculated the relative frequencies of
pages that score above each threshold in order to
assess their distribution across language varieties
(ELF and native English) and language families
(as registered in our metadata). Native English and
ELF texts are equally distributed over all dimen-
sions, apart from A16, which seems slightly more
typical of ELF texts.

Looking more closely at the distribution of texts
by language family (Figure 1) at least one as-
pect becomes immediately clear. Instructional
(A7) and promotional (A12) functions are the only
ones showing a medium-to-high number of pages;
moreover, promotional texts are detected even in
those countries that include very few pages in the
original corpus, such as the Baltic and Hellenic
ones, counting 144 and 30 texts respectively (Ta-
ble 2). Although this may be partly related to auto-
matic selection of pages during crawling and post-
processing, the high relative frequency of promo-
tional pages may suggest that when it comes to
providing contents in English language, promo-
tional texts are given priority over plain informa-
tion, and in some cases, over instructional pages as
well. A12 texts comprise very typical promotional
genres, such as the ones already mentioned above
(Why choose us pages, About us pages, mission
statements, Welcome pages), as well as other texts
belonging to various website sections, for instance
research projects, visiting students and interna-
tional strategies, descriptions of university facili-
ties and departments, student life, sport and many
others. Hard-news pages (A8) are also spread
over the majority of language families, whereas
legal texts (A9) appear to be relatively rare. Le-
gal pages are slightly more frequent in Ireland and
the UK where they tend to be associated with pri-
vacy policies.7 Moving on to the A16 dimen-
sion, i.e. plain information, Romance languages
seem to be separated from ELF Germanic, ELF
Germanic-Romance and native English texts;8 the
former are placed between the second and fourth
quartile, whereas the latter are spread below the
second quartile. Greece does not include any in-
formational pages, while Uralic and Slavic coun-

7http://www.ucc.ie/en/ocla/comp/data/dataprotection/
8Native English texts are of Germanic origin as well.

94



A7 A8 A9 A12 A14 A16 A21
% in training set 8.4 5.0 3.2 8.5 6.3 13.6 5.5
F-measure 0.95 0.92 0.96 0.85 0.93 0.79 0.94
% in final corpus 13.9 6.3 0.5 10.2 3.9 3.3 1.1
N. of pages 4,737 2,168 190 3,492 1,353 1,127 383

Table 3: Manual annotation of the training set and final corpus.

Figure 1: Distribution of texts by language variety and language family.

95



tries are closer to the Romance ones. Examples of
informational texts include lists of items,9 descrip-
tions of university services and administrative of-
fices.10

Pages reporting academic research (A14) are
less evenly distributed. Switzerland is the coun-
try with the highest number of texts representing
academic research, whereas Hellenic and Baltic
countries have next to no pages in the corpus on
this dimension. Finally, narrative texts - i.e. pages
describing chronologically ordered events - place
themselves between legal and research pages,
showing higher frequencies in Slavic, Uralic and
Baltic regions, and a very high peak in Greece.
Genres from this dimension include university his-
tory in Greece,11 the description of historical fig-
ures in Romania,12 Professors academic careers in
Ukraine and the description of university muse-
ums in Estonia.13

By exploiting URL strings, one can also detect
typical website sections in order to analyse a) how
language is used in the same dimensions across
English varieties and families and b) how language
is used across different dimensions. For instance,
when searching the string why among pages that
score highly on the A12 dimension, 78 texts are
retrieved overall, each of them matching the genre
Why choose us. Although no systematic analysis
of language features has been performed yet, some
interesting patterns emerge when analysing these
pages by language variety. Besides native English
and ELF dissimilarities that have already been ob-
served in previous studies (Bernardini et al., 2010)
- e.g. a larger use of second person pronouns by
native English universities - from the point of view
of content, Why choose us texts produced in Ire-
land and the UK make more frequent references to
help and support, as compared to ELF pages. On
the other hand, in ELF texts there is repeated men-
tion of the international and European perspec-
tive that seems to be less common among native
English countries. As far as the second type of
analysis is concerned, searching the string mission
among texts that score highly on A16 and A12 di-
mensions will yield two completely different text

9http://www.bsu.by/en/main.aspx?guid=134021
10http://www.unibo.it/en/university/campuses-and-

structures/urp-public-relations-office/services-urp
11http://www.ntua.gr/history en.html
12http://150.uaic.ro/personalitati/biologie/ioan-

borcea/?lang=en
13http://www.univ.kiev.ua/en/geninf/adm/Zacusilo/

types. Example 1 and Example 2 below are two
excerpts of mission statements taken, respectively,
from the University of Vienna14 and from Impe-
rial College London.15 As predicted by automatic
classification, Example 1 scores highly on the A16
dimension, whereas Example 2 scores on the A12
dimension.

(1) The International Office serves as an
information hub and service facility in the
field of internationalisation and international
relations at the University of Vienna. We
support and advise members of the
university in all international agendas, in
particular in relation to requests for bilateral
cooperation projects. The International
Office is also involved in the implementation
of the internationalization strategy of the
University of Vienna.

(2) The Graduate School plays a key role in
delivering the postgraduate student
experience as well as with postgraduate
education, policy and strategy development.
The Graduate School enriches the
postgraduate student experience by
delivering a tailored programme of
professional skills training which enhances
the professional impact and helps to ensure
personal ambitions are realised.

Although both texts are placed on the same
website section named mission or our mission,
from an internal perspective they are different.
Example 1 adopts language patterns that usually
characterise administrative texts (serves as, in re-
lation to requests, implementation of ), whereas
Example 2 employs positive loaded words that are
very typical of evaluative language (key, enrich,
enhance, ambitions realised) and mission state-
ments as well (Morrish and Sauntson, 2013). Be-
sides confirming the performance of classification
based on n-grams, these two examples raise some
issues related to the efficiency of reflexive cate-
gories (Sinclair and Ball, 1996), especially when
university webpage titles refer to genre, rather than
topic.

14http://zid.univie.ac.at/en/about-us/vision-mission/
15https://www.imperial.ac.uk/study/pg/graduate-

school/about-us/mission-statement-/

96



6 Conclusions and further research

This paper reports an experiment on automatic
classification and analysis of a corpus of univer-
sity webpages in terms of genres by using string
kernels with the aim of exploring the distribu-
tion of genres across English varieties and En-
glish language families. Classification by n-grams
has proven successful in terms of precision. Post-
hoc evaluation showed that more than 80% of
pages above the reliability thresholds match the
predicted dimension.

Instructional and promotional webpages have
the largest share in our corpus across all language
varieties, such as English native and ELF. How-
ever, variation is higher when considering each
language family. In a few cases, variation may be
related to country-specific aspects and how univer-
sities wish to present themsleves internationally,
for instance Greece focusing on university history
and Switzerland showing the highest number of
texts related to academic research. Universities lo-
cated in a country where the official language is
of Romance origin exhibit the highest number of
plain information, partially due to the descriptions
of university offices and services. The informa-
tional dimension seems to be quite uncommon in
ELF-Germanic and Native English texts, where it
reaches its lowest levels, i.e. Ireland, the UK, Bel-
gium and Denmark.

Automatic classification of university web gen-
res enables comparison of genres across dimen-
sions and language varieties. Although findings
have not been generalised to the full set of our
data, they form the basis for future systematic
analysis across text types, genres and English lan-
guage varieties in university websites. In the fu-
ture, we plan to carry out clustering to identify
hybrid texts and genre categories that score on
more than one functional dimension simultane-
ously, such as info-promotional pages and news
describing academic research. Other plans include
investigating the relation between text types and
other linguistic or contextual information, such as
university world ranking. Finally, this work also
carries applied implications for developing and
improving communicative strategies based on the
analysis of typical features of highly-ranked uni-
versities, as suggested by the examples provided
at the end of the previous section.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Silvia Bernardini for her exten-
sive comments on the earlier drafts.

References
Inger Askehave. 2007. The impact of marketization

on higher education genres: The international stu-
dent prospectus as a case in point. Discourse Stud-
ies, 9:723–742.

Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini, editors. 2006.
Wacky! Working papers on the Web as Corpus.
GEDIT, Bologna.

Silvia Bernardini and Adriano Ferraresi. 2013. The
academic Web-as-Corpus. In Proceedings of the 8th
Web as Corpus Workshop, Lancaster.

Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi, and Federico
Gaspari. 2010. Institutional academic English
in the European context: a web-as-corpus ap-
proach to comparing native and non-native lan-
guage. In Professional English in the European con-
text: The EHEA challenge, pages 27 – 53. Peter
Lang, BERNA.

Ian Bruce. 2011. Evolving genres in online domains:
the hybrid genre of the participatory news article. In
Alexander Mehler, Serge Sharoff, and Marina San-
tini, editors, Genres on the Web: Text, Speech and
Language Technology. Springer.

Luisa Caiazzo. 2011. Hybridization in institutional
language: Exploring we in the ’about us’ page
of university websites. In Srikant Sarangi, Vanda
Polese, and Giuditta Caliendo, editors, Genre(s)
on the move. Hybridization and discourse change
in specialized communication, pages 243–260. Edi-
zioni Scientifiche Italiane, Napoli.

Alberto Fernndez Costales. 2012. The international-
ization of institutional websites: The case of uni-
versities in the European Union. In A. Pym and
D. Orrego-Carmona, editors, Translation Reasearch
Projects 4. Intercultural Studies Group, Terragona.

Erika Dalan. 2015. Classifying university websites:
A case study. Poster session presented at Corpus
Linguistics 2015, Lancaster, July.

Jesse Egbert, Douglas Biber, and Mark Davies. 2015.
Developing a bottom-up, user-based method of web
register classification. Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology.

Richard Forsyth and Serge Sharoff. 2014. Document
dissimilarity within and across languages: a bench-
marking study. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
29:6–22.

Sara Gesuato. 2011. Course descriptions: Com-
municative practices of an institutional genre.

97



In Srikant Sarangi, Vanda Polese, and Giuditta
Caliendo, editors, Genre(s) on the move. Hybridiza-
tion and discourse change in specialized commu-
nication, pages 221–241. Edizioni Scientifiche Ital-
iane, Napoli.

Ioannis Kanaris and Efstathios Stamatatos. 2007.
Webpage genre identification using variable-length
character n-grams. In Proceedings of ICTAI.

Huma Lodhi, Craig Saunders, John Shawe-Taylor,
Nello Cristianini, and Chris Watkins. 2002. Text
classification using string kernels. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 2:419–444.

Sandra Mollin. 2006. English as a lingua franca: A
new variety in the new expanding circle? Nordic
Journal of English Studies, 5(1):41–57.

Liz Morrish and Helen Sauntson. 2013. Business-
facing motors for economic development: an ap-
praisal analysis of visions and values in the mar-
ketised uk university. Critical Discourse Studies,
10(1):61–80.

Giuseppe Palumbo. 2013. Divided loyalties? Some
notes on translating university websites into English.
CULTUS, 6:95–109.

Kem Saichaie. 2011. Representation on college and
university websites: An approach using critical dis-
course analysis. Ph.D. thesis, University of Iowa.

Marina Santini, Alexander Mehler, and Serge Sharoff.
2010. Riding the rough waves of genre on the
web. In Alexander Mehler, Serge Sharoff, and Ma-
rina Santini, editors, Genres on the Web: Compu-
tational Models and Empirical Studies. Springer,
Berlin/New York.

Marina Santini. 2007. Characterizing genres of web
pages: Genre hybridism and individualization. In
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on System Sciences, pages 71 –
81, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society.

Serge Sharoff, Zhili Wu, and Katja Markert. 2010.
The Web library of Babel: evaluating genre collec-
tions. In Proc. of the Seventh Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, LREC 2010, Malta.

Serge Sharoff. 2015. Approaching genre classification
via syndromes. In Proc Corpus Linguistics, Lan-
caster.

John Sinclair and Jackie Ball. 1996. Preliminary rec-
ommendations on text typology. Technical Report
EAG-TCWG-TTYP/P, Expert Advisory Group on
Language Engineering Standards document.

Alex J Smola and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2004. A tu-
torial on support vector regression. Statistics and
computing, 14(3):199–222.

Michael E Tipping. 2001. Sparse Bayesian learning
and the Relevance Vector Machine. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 1:211–244.

98


