



















































Annotation and Analysis of Discourse Relations, Temporal Relations and Multi-Layered Situational Relations in Japanese Texts


Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Asian Language Resources,
pages 10–19, Osaka, Japan, December 12 2016.

Annotation and Analysis of Discourse Relations, Temporal Relations
and Multi-layered Situational Relations in Japanese Texts

Kimi Kaneko
Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan
kaneko.kimi@is.ocha.ac.jp

Saku Sugawara
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
sakus@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Koji Mineshima
Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan
mineshima.koji@ocha.ac.jp

Daisuke Bekki
Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan

bekki@is.ocha.ac.jp

Abstract

This paper proposes a methodology for building a specialized Japanese data set for recognizing
temporal relations and discourse relations. In addition to temporal and discourse relations, multi-
layered situational relations that distinguish generic and specific states belonging to different
layers in a discourse are annotated. Our methodology has been applied to 170 text fragments
taken from Wikinews articles in Japanese. The validity of our methodology is evaluated and
analyzed in terms of degree of annotator agreement and frequency of errors.

1 Introduction

Understanding a structured text, such as a newspaper or a narrative, substantially involves the tasks of
identifying the events described and locating them in time. Such tasks are crucial for a wide range of NLP
applications, including textual entailment recognition, text summarization, and question answering. Ac-
cordingly, the task of specifying temporal information in a single text or multiple texts (cross-document
event ordering) has been widely used and developed as a temporal evaluation task (Pustejovsky et al.,
2009; UzZaman et al., 2012; Minard et al., 2015).

Currently, most work on temporal information processing focuses on relatively simple temporal struc-
tures, such as linear timelines. However, understanding the rich temporal content of newspapers and
other similar texts often requires accounting for more complex, multi-dimensional information, includ-
ing not only temporal and causal relations, but also intentional discourse relations (Asher and Lascaridas,
2003).

As an illustration, consider the mini-discourse of Figure 1:

(A) The Independence Day in the United States is annually celebrated on July 4th,
(B) and fireworks shows are held in various parts of the United States at night on that day.
(C) Because my friend invited me to the fireworks show in New York City,
(D) I saw fireworks in Brooklyn Bridge Park on the night of July 4th this year.

Figure 1: Example of discourse units A-B-C-D involving multi-dimensional temporal relations.

In this example, the temporal relation between units (A) and (B), that is, the relation of A-temporally-
subsuming-B, can be specified using the temporal expressions on July 4th and at night on that day; sim-
ilarly, the relations between (C) and (D), that is, C-temporally-preceding-D, and C-causally-explaining-
D, can be specified by the presence of the discourse connective because, which explicitly indicates the
causal relations.

Beyond these temporal and causal relations, however, a certain kind of temporal relation, as illustrated
in the light gray and dark gray squares of Figure 2, occurs between the eventualities (i.e., events or states)
described in (A)-(B), on the one hand, and those described in (C)-(D), on the other. A crucial observation
is the following: Units (A) and (B) do not describe a specific eventuality (event or state) in a particular
past, present or future time, but, instead, describe general facts of the entities mentioned (Independence
Day, etc.); however, units (C) and (D) describe specific events occurring in a particular past time; in
particular, (D) introduces an event temporally subsumed under the interval described in (B). We say that

10



the (A)-(B) sequence describes a situation in the United States at the same general level, whereas the
(C)-(D) sequence describes a situation at a specific level; however, (B)-(C) and (B)-(D) shift the layer of
the situation from a general to a specific one. Thus, even in a single text, it is crucial to identify multiple
levels of a situation described (at a general or a specific level) for a proper understanding of temporal
information. We call such a (dis)continuity of a situation or a scene consisting of multiple eventualities
(events or states) a multi-layered situational relation.

Figure 2: Multi-dimensional temporal information extracted from text in Figure 1.

The primary contribution of this paper is to introduce a new annotation schema refining and enriching
previous work on temporal and discourse relation annotation schemata (Asher and Lascaridas, 2003;
Kaneko and Bekki, 2014) using multi-dimensional situational relations. On the basis of the proposed
method, we report a pilot annotation study of temporal and discourse relations for Japanese news texts,
show an evaluation based on degree of inter-annotator agreement, and discuss the results of the annotation
experiments and future work.

2 Background and Related Work

In this section, we introduce some existing studies on the annotation of temporal and discourse relations.
We hypothesize that some of the difficulties in annotating temporal relations in texts stem from a failure to
distinguish between two types of verbal/adjectival expressions in natural language, namely, individual-
level predicates and stage-level predicates, a distinction that has been well-studied in the literature on
formal semantics (Krifka et al., 1995). This distinction plays a key role in distinguishing between specific
and general levels of situations described in a text. We give an overview of this distinction, which serves
as necessary background for the methodology proposed in this paper.

Several specification languages for event and temporal expressions in natural language texts have been
proposed, including the annotation specification language TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a); in addi-
tion, annotated corpora, such as TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al., 2003b) and the AQUAINT TimeML Cor-
pus, have been developed. Using TimeML as a base, Asahara et al. (2013) proposed a temporal relation
annotation scheme for Japanese and used it to annotate event and temporal expressions in the Balanced
Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (BCCWJ) (Maekawa et al., 2014). More specifically, based
on the framework of TempEval (Pustejovsky et al., 2009; UzZaman et al., 2012; Minard et al., 2015),
Asahara et al. (2013) limited target pairs that were annotated temporal relations to the following four
types of relations: (i) DCT: relations between a document creation time and an event instance, (ii) T2E:
relations between temporal expressions and an event instance within one sentence, (iii) E2E: relations
between two consecutive event instances, and (iv) MAT: relations between two consecutive matrix verbs
of event instances. They classified event expressions into seven types, including OCCURRENCE and
STATE, with respect to which the annotation agreement rates were calculated. They reported that among
the seven types of event instances, those pairs containing an expression classified as STATE showed much
lower degrees of inter-annotator agreement (0.424) than relations between other event instances. They
argued that this difficulty was because recognition of the time interval boundaries for state expressions

11



was relatively difficult for annotators.
We hypothesize that the difficulty in recognizing time interval boundaries of states (start and end

points of states) stems from the fact that the term “state” has the following two senses: (i) perma-
nent/stable properties of individuals and (ii) transient/episodic states applying to a particular stage of
an individual. The distinction between (i) and (ii) has long been noticed in the linguistics literature; a
predicate expressing a permanent/stable property of an individual is called an individual-level predicate,
while that expressing a transient/episodic state applying to a particular stage of an individual is called a
stage-level predicate (Carlson, 1977; Milsark, 1979; Krifka et al., 1995; Kratzer, 1995; Fernald, 2000;
Ogawa, 2001). Note here that a predicate expressing a temporal and episodic event is also classified as a
stage-level predicate.

For example, (1a), (1b), and (1c) are sentences containing an individual-level predicate (being a pro-
fessor of mathematics), a stage-level predicate for an event (gave a lecture), and a stage-level predicate
for a state (was standing during the lecture), respectively.

(1) a. Susan is a professor of mathematics. INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL/STABLE STATE
b. Today she gave a lecture to her students on geometry. STAGE-LEVEL/EPISODIC EVENT
c. She was standing during the lecture. STAGE-LEVEL/EPISODIC STATE

It seems that those examples containing an individual-level predicate cause the most difficulty in time-
interval boundary recognition. For instance, it would be difficult to determine the start and end points
for being a professor of mathematics in (1a) on the basis of the text; although it is meaningful to ask
when Susan became a professor of mathematics, the information about such a temporal boundary is not
the main point of statement (1a). Using the terminology introduced in Section 1, (1a) does not describe
a specific eventuality (event or state), but states a general state (property) of Susan. In contrast, (1b) and
(1c) introduce a temporal event or state with specific temporal boundaries. Thus, (1b) and (1c) report a
continuous situation consisting of temporal events and states, while (1a) is a comment, on the individual
appearing in that situation, from a different level; that is, a level that is distinguished from the level of
the situation described.

It has been noticed in the literature that the distinction between individual-level predicates and stage-
level predicates depends on the context of use (McNally, 1998; Jäger, 2001). In the following examples,
the predicate is an olympic swimmer is used to deliver a temporal and transient state in (2a) extending
to (2b), whereas in (3a) it expresses a stable property of John providing background information for
understanding (3b).

(2) a. John is an olympic swimmer.
b. He will retire this spring and take up the post of head coach of the junior team.

(3) a. John is an olympic swimmer.
b. He participated in this olympics and was awarded a gold medal.

This means that whether a given predicate is interpreted as individual-level or stage-level often cannot
be determined without reference to the surrounding context.

This example also suggests that discourse relations (rhetorical relations), such as BACKGROUND and
NARRATION, play a crucial role in determining the distinction between individual-level and stage-level
interpretations of predicates (that is, the layer of a situation in our terms) and, for that matter, in deter-
mining temporal relations between events/states.

With regard to discourse relations, various theories and specification languages have been proposed
in the literature, including Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1987), Segmented
Discourse Representation Theory (SDRT) (Asher and Lascaridas, 2003), and many others (Carlson et
al., 2001; Polanyi et al., 2004; Baldridge et al., 2007; Kaneko and Bekki, 2014). Also, annotated
corpora based on them have been released, including, most notably, the Penn Discourse TreeBank
(PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2005). To our knowledge, however, no label set has been proposed so far that
makes a connection between discourse relations and individual/stage-level distinctions and thereby takes
into account the relationship between temporal relations and discourse relations.

12



In fact, the difference in discourse interpretation resulting from the use of individual-level and stage-
level predicates is not described by these previous theories of discourse relations. For instance, theories
such as RST (Mann and Thompson, 1987) and SDRT (Asher and Lascaridas, 2003) use the discourse
relation BACKGROUND to describe the relation between an event description and a state description.
However, such an account fails to describe the difference exemplified in (2) and (3) because, in both
cases, the first sentence describes a state in the standard sense, whereas the second sentence introduces a
set of events.

PDTB (Prasad et al., 2005; Prasad et al., 2014) adopts a lexically grounded annotation method, in
which annotators are asked to examine lexical items explicitly signaling discourse relations; when such a
lexical item is absent, but a particular discourse relation is inferable for adjacent sentences, annotators are
asked to find a lexical item that could serve as an explicit signal for the corresponding discourse relation.
A particular label (ENTREL) is annotated when no explicit or implicit lexical item is found for adjacent
sentences, but the second sentence serves to provide some further description of an entity mentioned in
the first sentence (cf. entity-based coherence in Knott et al., 2001). This ENTREL label is the majority
class label in PDTB. However, similarly to RST and SDRT, PDTB fails to capture the difference exem-
plified in (2) and (3), since in both examples, the second sentence provides further information about the
entity (John) in the first sentence.

The ultimate objective of this work is to combine discourse relations, temporal relations, and multi-
layered situations triggered by different types of predicates (stage-level and individual-level) in text, and,
thereby, to improve existing annotation schemata for discourse and temporal information. We analyze
how these different dimensions interact with one another by conducting annotation experiments.

3 Annotation Schema

We present a methodology for annotating discourse relations, temporal relations, and multi-layered sit-
uational relations. We limit target pairs for which discourse relations are annotated to (i) main and
subordinate clauses in a single sentence and (ii) two consecutive sentences. For temporal relations and
multi-layered situational relations, the pair of propositions in each unit is also annotated. By a propo-
sition, we mean a tensed predicate (e.g., hold, invite, and see in Figure 1) denoting either an event or a
(generic or specific) state. In the case of a discourse unit consisting of several propositions, such as a
complex sentence, we focus on the proposition in the main clause.

The result of annotating the sample text in Figure 1 is shown below.

A-B : [NARRATION(A,B), SUBSUMPTION(A,B),
SAME SITU(A,B)]

B-C : [BACKGROUND(B, C), PRECEDENCE(C, B),
SUBSUMPTION SITU(B, C)]

B-D : [BACKGROUND(B, D), SUBSUMPTION(B, D),
SUBSUMPTION SITU(B, D)]

C-D : [EXPLANATION(C, D), PRECEDENCE(C, D),
SAME SITU(C,D)]

Figure 3: Result of tagging text in Figure 1. Figure 4: Corresponding discourse graph.

In Figure 3, for each pair (X,Y ) of discourse units, we annotate a triple of relations X-Y : [D,T, S],
where D is a discourse relation, T is a temporal relation, and S is a multi-layered situational relation
between X and Y . These relations are annotated for each pair of discourse units from (A) to (D) in Figure
1. Figure 4 depicts a corresponding discourse graph that indicates the discourse relations and multi-
layered situations in Figure 3. Discourse units belonging to the same layer (A-B and C-D) are positioned
vertically, whereas those belonging to different layers (B-C and B-D) are positioned horizontally.

The remainder of this section is structured as follows. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we deal with temporal
relations and multi-layered situational relations, respectively. In Section 3.3, we introduce discourse
relations, and describe constraints that these three types of relations impose on one another.

13



Label Description BCCWJ-TimeBank’s
Labels

TEMP REL(A,B)

PRECEDENCE(A,B) end time (A)＜ start time (B) before, after, meets,
In other words, eventuality A temporally precedes eventuality B. met by

OVERLAP(A,B) start time (A)＜ start time (B)＜ end time (A)＜ end time (B) overlapped by,
In other words, eventuality A temporally overlaps with eventuality B. overlaps

SUBSUMPTION(A,B) start time (A)＜ start time (B) & end time (B)＜ end time (A) finishes, finished-by,
In other words, eventuality A temporally subsumes eventuality B. during/is included, starts,
Either start times or end times between two eventualities may be simultaneous. started-by, contains/includes

SIMULTANEOUS(A,B) Start time (A) = start time(B) & end time (B) = end time (A) equal/identity
In other words, eventuality A is simultaneous with eventuality B.

NO TEMP REL(A, B) There is no temporal relation between eventuality A and eventuality B. vague

Table 1: Temporal relations and their correspondence to temporal relations in BCCWJ-TimeBank.

Label Description Example
SUBSUMPTION SITU(A,B) The layer of situation in which A holds is more general A: The Olympic Games are held every four years.

than the one in which B holds. B: Tom participated in this Olympic Game.
SAME SITU(A,B) A and B hold in the same situational layer. A: I went to the university.

A pair of specific eventualities, or a pair of B: I took a class.
propositions acting as individual-level predicates.

Table 2: Multi-layered situational relations.

3.1 Temporal Relations

On the basis of TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a) and BCCWJ-TimeBank (Asahara et al., 2013),
we use temporal relations: PRECEDENCE, OVERLAP, SUBSUMPTION, and SIMULTANEOUS. When no
temporal relations are found, NO TEMP REL is annotated. When any of the temporal relations (PRECE-
DENCE, OVERLAP, SUBSUMPTION, or SIMULTANEOUS) applies, but temporal relations are underspeci-
fied, TEMP REL is annotated. Table 1 summarizes definitions of the temporal relations, and shows their
correspondence to BCCWJ-TimeBank temporal relations. Each temporal relation can be defined as a re-
lation between the start time and the end time of two eventualities. We assume that, for all eventualities,
the start time of an eventuality e is earlier than its end time.

For each temporal relation, the order of arguments A and B can be reversed; thus, for propositions A
and B with which a temporal relation is to be annotated, each temporal relation allows two possibilities;
for example, PRECEDENCE(A,B) and PRECEDENCE(B,A). On the basis of these assumptions, the
temporal locations of two events described by BCCWJ-TimeBank temporal relations can be reduced to
the ones summarized in Table 1.

3.2 Multi-Layered Situational Relations

On the basis of the distinction between individual-level predicates and stage-level predicates as discussed
in Section 2, we define multi-layered situational relations as relative differences between layers describ-
ing situations. The definition is summarized in Table 2.

For a pair of propositions A and B, multi-layered situational relations are classified into two types.
First, SUBSUMPTION SITU(A,B) indicates that A describes an individual-level, generic situation,
whereas B describes a stage-level, more specific situation; hence, they belong to different layers. More
specifically, we determine that the relation SUBSUMPTION SITU(A,B) holds if (i) the main predicate in
the proposition A is an individual-level predicate describing a generic state, including stable properties
of individuals, and (ii) the main predicate in proposition B is a stage-level predicate describing a more
specific situation (event or state). In most cases, the generic state (situation) described in A serves as
background knowledge for understanding B. The multi-layered situational relations annotated in Figure
3 contain two instances of this relation, SUBSUMPTION SITU(B, C) and SUBSUMPTION SITU(B,D).

Secondly, the relation SAME SITU(A,B) indicates that eventualities described in A and B belong to
the same layer. There are two possibilities: Both A and B describe a stage-level, specific situation, or
both A and B describe an individual-level, generic situation.

For tests distinguishing between individual-level and stage-level predicates in a given context, we use

14



Label Description Typical connectives
ALTERNATION(A,B) “A or B”: A and B denote alternative situations. または（or）
BACKGROUND(A,B) B describes the background situation of A. そのとき（then）
CHANGE(A,B) “A. By the way, B”: Relation for switching a topic. ところで、さて
CONSEQUENCE(A,B) “If A then B”: A is a condition of B. ならば（if ∼ then ...）
CONTRAST(A,B) “A but B”: B contrasts with A. しかし（but）
ELABORATION(A,B) B describes a part of A in detail. –
EXPLANATION(A,B) A is a cause, and B is its effect. ので、から（because）
NARRATION(A,B) A and B occur (Alternatively, are described) in sequence, そして、それから（and）

and have a common topic. A and B hold in the same situational layer.
INSTANCE(A,B) “A; for example, B”: B describes an instance of A. 例えば（for example）
PARALLEL(A,B) A and B have similar semantic structures, 同時に（at the same time）

such as “It is hot in summer. It is cold in winter.” かつ（and）
Alternatively, an A is simultaneous with B.

RESTATEMENT(A,B) B is a paraphrase of A. つまり（namely）

Table 3: Discourse relations.

two linguistic clues/tests proposed in the literature (Kageyama, 2006). The first clue concerns the type
of predicates: The following predicates (typically, appearing in the simple present tense) tend to be
interpreted as individual-level predicates (Carlson, 1977).

(4) a. Stative verbs, such as know, love, hate, etc. (cf. hit, run, etc.)
b. Predicative, post-copular NPs, such as be a professor and be an Olympic athlete
c. Adjectives, such as intelligent, tall, blue, etc. (cf. drunk, available, etc.)

Secondly, a stage-level predicate can be modified by an adverbial expression, such as in a hurry; a
locative modifier, such as in the car; or a temporal modifier, such as just for now or today; whereas
an individual predicate cannot (Kratzer, 1995). Thus, the following sentences, understood in a normal
context, are anomalous:

(5) a. *Susan is a professor {in a hurry, in the car}.
b. *John knows Latin {in his office, today}.

In addition to the information provided by discourse relations introduced in the next subsection, these
linguistic tests and clues are used to distinguish between individual-level (generic/stable) states and stage-
level (specific/transient) states.

3.3 Discourse Relations
On the basis of the labels for discourse relations proposed in Kaneko and Bekki (2014), which draw
on the classifications in PDTB (Prasad et al., 2005) and SDRT (Asher and Lascaridas, 2003), we use
discourse relations, as summarized in Table 3. See Kaneko and Bekki (2014) and Asher and Lascaridas
(2003) for more details on the definition of each discourse relation.

As mentioned in Sections 1 and 2, there is a set of discourse relations imposing constraints on tem-
poral relations and multi-layered situational relations. Table 4 shows the manner in which temporal
relations, multi-layered situational relations, and discourse relations constrain one another. By annotat-
ing discourse relations together with multi-layered situational relations, we can narrow down the range
of candidates for temporal relations to be annotated. Correspondences between our labels and those pre-
sented in Kaneko and Bekki (2014) and SDRT (Asher and Lascaridas, 2003) are also shown in Table
4.

4 Results and Discussion

We applied our methodology to 90 sentences from Japanese Wikinews articles2 in June and July 2016.
The sentences were decomposed by one annotator, and labels were assigned to the decomposed segments

2https://ja.wikinews.org

15



Our Discourse Relation Multi-layered Situational Temporal Restriction Discourse Relation Discourse Relation
Relation Restriction in Kaneko and Bekki (2014) in SDRT

ALTERNATION(A, B) – – ALTERNATION(A,B) ALTERNATION(A,B)
BACKGROUND(A,B) SAME SITU(A, B) SUBSUMPTION(A,B) BACKGROUND(A,B) BACKGROUND(A,B)

SUBSUMPTION SITU(A,B) – COMMENTARY(A,B) COMMENTARY(A,B)
CONSEQUENCE(A,B) SAME SITU(A, B) TEMP REL(A, B) CONSEQUENCE(A,B) CONSEQUENCE(A,B)
CONTRAST(A,B) – – CONTRAST(A,B) CONTRAST(A,B)
ELABORATION(A,B) SAME SITU(A, B) SUBSUMPTION(A,B) ELABORATION(A,B) ELABORATION(A,B)
EXPLANATION(A,B) SAME SITU(A, B) TEMP REL(A, B) EXPLANATION(A,B) EXPLANATION(A,B)

RESULT(A,B)
NARRATION(A, B) SAME SITU(A, B) TEMP REL(A, B) NARRATION(A,B) NARRATION(A,B)

ADDITION(A,B)
CHANGE(A,B) – – INTRODUCTION(A,B) NARRATION(A,B)
INSTANCE(A,B) SUBSUMPTION SITU(A,B) – INSTANCE(A,B) –
PARALLEL(A,B) SAME SITU(A, B) – PARALLEL(A,B) PARALLEL(A,B)
RESTATEMENT(A,B) SAME SITU(A, B) – COMMENTARY(A,B) COMMENTARY(A,B)

Table 4: Restrictions that types of relations impose on one another, and correspondences between our
methodology, Kaneko and Bekki (2014), and SDRT.

by two annotators. We used the labels presented in Section 3, and assigned “unknown” in cases where
pairs could not be labeled. The agreement for 170 pairs generated from 90 pairs and their corresponding
Kappa coefficients are presented in Table 5.

Label type Agreement Kappa coefficient
Discourse relations 0.69 0.56
Temporal relations 0.74 0.35

Multi-layered situational relations 0.91 0.49
Mean 0.78 0.48
Total 0.89 0.86

Table 5: Agreement and Kappa coefficients in annotations.

The agreement was computed as follows:

Agreement = Matching labels/Total labels

Kaneko and Bekki (2014), which used the same set of discourse relations as ours, reported an agreement
rate of 0.67 and a Kappa coefficient of 0.57 for discourse relations. Since they computed the agreement
by using annotated sentence data, their results are not directly comparable with ours. Nevertheless, the
similarity of the values suggests that our method is comparable to that in Kaneko and Bekki (2014) in
terms of agreement.

Table 6 shows the distribution of labels for segments in our study, and compares it with that presented
in Kaneko and Bekki (2014). We can see from Table 6 that NARRATION was assigned most frequently,
both in our study and in Kaneko and Bekki (2014). The number of assignments of SUBSUMPTION SITU
by two annotators showed that they judged that there were some points in texts in which the situation
layer had been switched.

The number of pairs for which labels tagged by two annotators were different was 52 for discourse
relations, 44 for temporal relations, and 17 for multi-layered situational relations. Table 7 shows the error
distribution in this annotation experiment.

Of the 52 pairs for which the two annotators assigned different discourse relations, BACKGROUND
and NARRATION were assigned to 14 pairs, NARRATION and PARALLEL to 7 pairs, and NARRATION and
EXPLANATION to 7 pairs. One reason that the two annotators assigned different annotations was that
we did not impose constraints on BACKGROUND, NARRATION or PARALLEL with respect to assignment
of temporal relations and situational relations. These three relations have been known to be difficult

3The distribution of labels in Kaneko and Bekki (2014) has been computed on the basis of Table 4.

16



Label Segments
Kaneko and Bekki (2014) Ours

ALTERNATION 0 0 ∩ 1 = 0
BACKGROUND 7 24 ∩ 29 = 19

CHANGE 8 7 ∩ 1 = 1
CONSEQUENCE 2 1 ∩ 2 = 1

CONTRAST 6 12 ∩ 14 = 12
ELABORATION 23 8 ∩ 5 = 3
EXPLANATION 10 20 ∩ 15 = 13

NARRATION 69 89 ∩ 80 = 65
INSTANCE 6 0 ∩ 0 = 0
PARALLEL 0 7 ∩ 9 = 4

RESTATEMENT – 0 ∩ 0 = 0
UNKNOWN – 0 ∩ 1 = 0

total 128 170
Annotator 1 ∩ Annotator 2 = Match count

Label Segments
Ours

TEMP REL 14 ∩ 57 = 7
PRECEDENCE 88 ∩ 60 = 45

OVERLAP 7 ∩ 1 = 0
SUBSUMPTION 28 ∩ 38 = 16

SIMULTANEOUS 30 ∩ 3 = 3
NO TEMP REL 2 ∩ 7 = 0

UNKNOWN 0 ∩ 3 = 0
total 170

SUBSUMPTION SITU 18 ∩ 17 = 10
SAME SITU 150 ∩ 152 = 143
UNKNOWN 0 ∩ 1 = 0

total 170
Annotator 1 ∩ Annotator 2 = Match count

Table 6: Distribution of labels for segments in Kaneko and Bekki (2014) and in our study3.

Annotator-1’s label Annotator-2’s label Frequency Annotator-1’s label Annotator-2’s label Frequency
Discourse relation Others

BACKGOUND NARRATION 14 PRECEDENCE SUBSUMPTION 3
SIMULTANEOUS SUBSUMPTION 1
SUBSUMPTION NO TEMP REL 1

SUBSUMPTION SITU SAME SITU 4
PARALLEL NARRATION 7 SIMULTANEOUS NO TEMP REL 1

PRECEDENCE SUBSUMPTION 1
EXPLANATION NARRATION 7 –
BACKGOUND ELABORATION 6 SIMULTANEOUS SUBSUMPTION 2

SUBSUMPTION SITU SAME SITU 1
CHANGE NARRATION 4 PRECEDENCE SUBSUMPTION 1

SUBSUMPTION SITU SAME SITU 1
temporal relation Others

PRECEDENCE SUBSUMPTION 13 BACKGOUND NARRATION 3
SUBSUMPTION SITU SAME SITU 1

SIMULTANEOUS SUBSUMPTION 7 BACKGOUND ELABORATION 2
SUBSUMPTION SITU SAME SITU 2

PRECEDENCE OVERLAP 6 –
Multi-layered situational relation Others

SUBSUMPTION SITU SAME SITU 15 BACKGOUND NARRATION 4
TEMP REL NO TEMP REL 4

Table 7: Error distribution in annotation exercise (excerpted).

to distinguish by use of a test involving insertion of a lexical item, which was used in the annotation
schema of PDTB. Thus, it seems necessary to define temporal and situation constraints more precisely,
or to introduce label sets for which any insertion test would be applicable.

Regarding temporal relations for which the two annotators assigned different labels, PRECEDENCE and
SUBSUMPTION were assigned to 13 pairs, SIMULTANEOUS and SUBSUMPTION to 7 pairs, and PRECE-
DENCE and OVERLAP to 6 pairs. There are several possible reasons for these discrepancies. First, these
seem to be cases in which we cannot precisely recognize time intervals, such as (B) and (D) in Figure
1; in this case, (B) and (D) only contain temporal information for on the night of July 4th, and therefore,
SIMULTANEOUS can be assigned to this pair, as well as SUBSUMPTION. In addition, for the 6 pairs
that had labeling inconsistencies between PRECEDENCE and OVERLAP, the two annotators labeled the
same discourse relations and the same multi-layered situational relations. With these points in mind, our
methodology should reflect partial (in)consistencies of decision, such as “we can only determine that the
two eventualities temporally overlap, although their start and end point are unknown” or “we can only

17



determine the order between the starting points of the two eventualities, although the exact time intervals
of the two eventualities are ambiguous.”

For multi-layered situational relations, 15 pairs were assigned SUBSUMPTION and SAME SITU. These
errors were mainly caused by ambiguity in the examples and lack of constraints imposed on discourse
relations and temporal relations, as shown in Table 4. A refinement of constraints is necessary to improve
the quality of annotation.

5 Conclusion

This paper proposed a methodology for building a specialized Japanese dataset for recognizing temporal
relations and discourse relations. We introduced multi-layered situational relations triggered by distinc-
tions between individual-level and stage-level predicates in text, as well as constraints imposed by each
type of relation. We conducted annotation experiments in which we applied our methodology to 170
pairs of text fragments from Japanese Wikinews articles. We compared our method with that of Kaneko
and Bekki (2014) in terms of agreement. In future work, we intend to address the issues discussed in
Section 4. We also plan to build an inference model suited for the methodology presented in this work.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers at ALR12 for insightful comments. This work was
supported by a Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Research Fellows, Grant Number 15J11737 and the JST CREST
program, Establishment of Knowledge-Intensive Structural Natural Language Processing and Construc-
tion of Knowledge Infrastructure.

References
M. Asahara, S. Yasuda, H. Konishi, M. Imada, and K. Maekawa. 2013. BCCWJ-timebank: Temporal and event

information annotation on Japanese text. In the 27th Pacific Asia Conference of Language Information and
Computation, pages 206–214.

N. Asher and A. Lascaridas. 2003. Logics of Conversation: Studies in Natural Language Processing. Cambridge
University Press.

Jason Baldridge, Nicholas Asher, and Julie Hunter. 2007. Annotation for and robust parsing of discourse structure
on unrestricted texts. In Zeitschrift für Sprachwissenschaft 26.2, pages 213–239.

Lynn Carlson, John Conroy, Daniel Marcu, Dianne O’Leary, Mary Okurowski, Anthony Taylor, and William
Wong. 2001. An empirical study of the relation between abstracts, extracts, and the discourse structure of texts.
In Proceedings of the DUC-2001 Workshop on Text Summarization.

Greg N Carlson. 1977. Reference to Kinds in English. Garland.

Theodore Fernald. 2000. Predicates and Temporal Arguments. Oxford University Press.

Gerhard Jäger. 2001. Topic-comment structure and the contrast between stage level and individual level predicates.
Journal of Semantics, pages 83–126.

Taro Kageyama. 2006. Property description as a voice phenomenon. In Masayoshi Shibatani and Taro Kageyama,
editors, Voice and Grammatical Relations: In Honor of Masayoshi Shibatani, pages 85–114. John Benjamins.

K. Kaneko and D. Bekki. 2014. Toward a discourse theory for annotating causal relations in Japanese. In the 28th
Pacific Asia Conference of Language Information and Computation, pages 460–469.

Angelica Kratzer. 1995. Stage-level and individual-level predicates. In Francis Jeffry Pelletier and Greg N
Carlson, editors, The Generic Book, pages 125–175. The University of Chicago Press.

Manfred Krifka, Francis Pelletier, Greg Carlson, Alice ter Meulen, Godehard Link, and Gennaro Chierchia. 1995.
Genericity: An introduction. In Francis Jeffry Pelletier and Greg N Carlson, editors, The Generic Book, pages
1–124. The University of Chicago Press.

18



Kikuo Maekawa, Makoto Yamazaki, Toshinobu Ogiso, Takehiko Maruyama, Hideki Ogura, Wakako Kashino,
Hanae Koiso, Masaya Yamaguchi, Makiro Tanaka, and Yasuharu Den. 2014. Balanced corpus of contemporary
written Japanese. Language Resources and Evaluation, 48(2):345–371.

W. C. Mann and S. Thompson. 1987. Rhetorical structure theory: A theory of text organization. Technical report,
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute.

Luise McNally. 1998. The stage/individual distinction and (in)alienable possession. In Susan Rothstein, editor,
Events and Grammar, pages 293–307. Springer Netherlands.

Gary Milsark. 1979. Existential Sentences in English. Gerland.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Manuela Speranza, Eneko Agirre, Itziar Aldabe, Marieke van Erp, Bernardo Magnini, and
Ruben Urizar German Rigau. 2015. SemEval-2015 task 4: Timeline: Cross-document event ordering. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015).

Yoshiki Ogawa. 2001. The stage/individual distinction and (in) alienable possession. Language, pages 1–25.

L. Polanyi, C. Culy, M. Van Den Berg, G. L. Thione, and D. Ahn. 2004. A rule based approach to discourse
parsing. In SIGDIAL Vol. 4.

R. Prasad, A. Joshi, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki, and B. Webber. 2005. The Penn discourse treebank as a
resource for natural language generation. In the Corpus Linguistics Workshop on Using Corpora for Natural
Language Generation, pages 25–32.

Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, and Aravind Joshi. 2014. Reflections on the Penn discourse treebank, comparable
corpora, and complementary annotation. Computational Linguistics, 40(4):921–950.

James Pustejovsky, José M Castano, Robert Ingria, Roser Sauri, Robert J Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, Graham
Katz, and Dragomir R Radev. 2003a. TimeML: Robust specification of event and temporal expressions in text.
New directions in question answering, 3:28–34.

James Pustejovsky, David Day, Lisa Ferro, Robert Gaizauskas, Patrick Hanks, Marcia Lazo, Roser Sauri, Andrew
See, Andrea Setzer, and Beth Sundheim. 2003b. The TIMEBANK corpus. In Corpus Linguistics, pages
647–656.

James Pustejovsky, Marc Verhagen, Xue Nianwen, Robert Gaizauskas, Mark Hepple, Frank Schilder, Graham
Katz, Roser Sauri, Estela Saquete, Tommaso Caselli, Nicoletta Calzolari, Kiyong Lee, and Seohyun Im. 2009.
TempEval2: Evaluating events, time expressions and temporal relations. In SemEval-2010 Task Proposal.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, James Allen, Leon Derczynski, Marc Verhagen, and James Pustejovsky. 2012.
TempEval-3: Evaluating events, time expressions, and temporal relations. In SemEval-2013 Task Proposal.

19


