



















































A Global Analysis of Emoji Usage


Proceedings of the 10th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-X) and the EmpiriST Shared Task, pages 82–89,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Global Analysis of Emoji Usage

Nikola Ljubešić
Dept. of Knowledge Technologies

Jožef Stefan Institute
Jamova cesta 39

SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
nikola.ljubesic@ijs.si

Darja Fišer
Faculty of Arts

University of Ljubljana
Aškerčeva cesta 2

SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
darja.fiser@ff.uni-lj.si

Abstract

Emojis are a quickly spreading and rather
unknown communication phenomenon
which occasionally receives attention
in the mainstream press, but lacks the
scientific exploration it deserves. This
paper is a first attempt at investigating the
global distribution of emojis. We perform
our analysis of the spatial distribution of
emojis on a dataset of ∼17 million (and
growing) geo-encoded tweets containing
emojis by running a cluster analysis
over countries represented as emoji
distributions and performing correlation
analysis of emoji distributions and World
Development Indicators. We show that
emoji usage tends to draw quite a realistic
picture of the living conditions in various
parts of our world.

1 Introduction

Emojis, pictograms that have recently gained a
worldwide momentum, are considered to be a fur-
ther development of emoticons, pictorial repre-
sentations of facial expressions using punctuation
marks. While the first days of emoticons go as
far as the 19th century (Fitzgerald, 2016), emo-
jis were developed in the late 1990s by Shige-
taka Kurita for Japanese mobile phone providers.
The difference between emoticons and emojis is
that, while emoticons primarily express emotional
states, emojis offer a wider spectrum of concepts
such as animals, plants, weather, sports, food etc.

Emojis have been present in the Unicode stan-
dard for some time now, with the first Unicode
characters explicitly intended as emoji added to
Unicode 5.2 in 2009. At that point a set of 722
characters was defined as the union of emoji char-
acters used by Japanese mobile phone carriers

(Davis and Edberg, 2015). Additional emoji char-
acters followed in later updates, so that the cur-
rent version 8.0 comprises 1624 emoji characters
(Unicode Consortium, 2016). The current popu-
larity of emojis is primarily due to the inclusion of
emoji characters on the iOS and Android mobile
platforms.

So far, emojis have primarily attracted main-
stream media interest, the most prominent being
the Word of the Year nomination handed by Ox-
ford University Press in 2015 for the “Face With
Tears of Joy” emoji. For this nomination Ox-
ford University Press partnered with the company
SwiftKey which is the author of the currently most
detailed analysis of Emoji usage around the world
(SwiftKey, 2015).

Despite their popularity, however, emojis are
still a poorly researched communication phe-
nomenon as only a few study have focused on it.

Kralj Novak et al. (2015b) inspect the sentiment
of emojis by manually annotating 70,000 tweets
written in 13 European languages. Their work
has resulted in the Emoji Sentiment Ranking lex-
icon (Kralj Novak et al., 2015a) consisting of 751
emoji characters with their corresponding senti-
ment distribution. The data the sentiment distri-
butions were calculated on are also available for
download (Mozetič et al., 2016).

Pavalanathan and Eisenstein (2016) investigate
the relationship between emojis and emoticons,
showing that Twitter users who adopt emojis tend
to reduce their usage of emoticons in comparison
with the matched users who do not adopt emojis.

In this paper we will try to answer the following
questions:

1. How popular are emojis in different parts of
the world?

2. Does emoji usage differ in various parts of
the world?

82



3. Does emoji usage in specific parts of the
world reflect local living conditions?

We will answer these questions by performing
the following analyses over large collections of
geo-encoded tweets:

• estimating the probability of emoji occur-
rence in a tweet given the country,

• clustering countries represented as emoji
probability distributions,

• calculating correlation between World Devel-
opment Indicators and distributions of spe-
cific tweets across countries.

The remainder of the paper is structured as fol-
lows: Section 2 describes the two datasets used in
the analyses while the remaining sections address
our three questions: Section 3 gives an analysis of
the popularity of emojis in different parts of the
world, Section 4 gives an analysis of the spatial
distribution of specific tweets, while in Section 5
we present the results of our correlation analysis
over specific emojis and the World Development
Indicators.

2 The datasets

2.1 Data collection

Our analyses in this paper are performed on two
datasets of tweets collected through the Public
Twitter Stream API1.

The first dataset consists of tweets that have lon-
gitude and latitude encoded, regardless of whether
they contain emojis. This dataset’s sole purpose
was to estimate the probability of an emoji occur-
rence in a specific part of the world. This dataset
was collected during a period of 21 days and con-
tains 12,451,835 tweets. We refer to this dataset
as the Twitter dataset.

The second dataset consists of tweets that have
longitude and latitude encoded and that contain
emojis. The purpose of this dataset was to esti-
mate the probability distribution of specific emo-
jis in different parts of the world. Since we need
more data to estimate the probability of an oc-
currence of a specific emoji than the probability
of the overall emoji occurrence, this dataset was
collected throughout a much longer period of 5

1https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/
public

months (and is still running) and currently con-
tains 17,458,001 tweets. We refer to this dataset
as the Emoji dataset.

2.2 Removing overrepresented users

A frequent problem when analysing data from so-
cial networks is the problem of bias towards users
with higher productivity, especially since the most
productive users tend to be bots with a frequent
and specific, if not static, content production.

We apply three methods of removing users with
frequent or temporally regular activity. All three
methods are run on our Emoji dataset which con-
tains tweets of 2,623,645 users. The identified
overrepresented users are then removed both from
the Twitter and the Emoji dataset.

The first method removes users who produced
on average more than 10 tweets with emojis per
day. With that approach we removed 42 users, the
user with the highest emoji productivity posting on
average 509 tweets per day, the second one posting
72 tweets per day.

Given that most of our later analyses are based
on comparing emoji distributions on country level,
our second method removes tweets of users that
have contributed more than 10% of the tweets that
contain emojis in a specific country. Through this
procedure we assure that the emoji distribution in
a specific country is not heavily influenced by a
single user.

We perform this procedure in an iterative man-
ner, removing in each iteration all users that con-
tribute to a specific country more than 10% of all
its data points. After each iteration the distribu-
tions of user contributions given the country are
recalculated. We should note that with this proce-
dure we remove all users from countries that had
ten or fewer contributors. With this method we re-
moved 260 users.

The third method focuses primarily on remov-
ing bots by calculating the time between two post-
ings and removing all users for which the three
most frequent time spans between postings, cal-
culated in seconds, cover more than 90% of their
overall production. This method removed overall
16 users from our datasets.

While the precision of all the three presented
methods is very high, our assumption is that we
still suffer from recall issues. Our plan is to focus
on the problem of removing overrepresented / non-
human users in more detail in future work.

83



3 Overall emoji popularity

The analyses in this section are primarily focused
on how popular emojis are on Twitter. The first
part of the analyses looks at the world as a whole,
while the second one focuses on the distribution
across countries.

Given that for these analyses we need both
tweets with and without emojis, we perform all
analyses in this section on our Twitter dataset.

3.1 Global analysis

Emojis are present in nearly a quarter of the tweets
in the dataset (19.6%) and are used by well over a
third of the users (37.6%). In this and the follow-
ing analyses that are focused on users we take un-
der consideration only the users with 100 or more
tweets in our dataset as for the remaining users we
do not have enough data gathered to produce sta-
ble estimates. There are 8,489 such users in our
Twitter dataset.

While we have already reported that 62.4%
of the users do not use emojis, investigating the
probability distribution of using emojis in a tweet
among the remaining users shows that half of them
use emojis in up to 10% of the tweets while 75%
use them in not more than 30% of the tweets.
However, the distribution shows a surprisingly
thick tail: while 5% of emoji users insert them in
every second tweet, 2% of users post less than one
emoji-less tweet in ten.

In the following analyses we investigate the
differences between the emoji-using and emoji-
abstaining users regarding their number of tweets,
the number of tweets they have favourited, their
number of followers and friends (users that a user
follows). We compare the distributions of the four
variables among the two types of users with the
Wilcoxon test as neither of the variables is nor-
mally distributed. The null hypothesis assumes
that the median of the two distributions is zero.
We always perform a one-tailed test.

By performing our tests on the median we ad-
ditionally eliminate the impact of outliers which
is very beneficial given that our procedures for re-
moving highly active and temporally regular users
described in Section 2.2 were focused on emoji-
producing users only.

The emoji-producing users have significantly
more followers (median 595 vs. 402) and friends
(median 438 vs. 288), produce more tweets (me-
dian 18280 vs. 12020) and favourite more tweets

(median 1760 vs. 1). All the obtained p-values
lie in the range p < 0.001. One should bear in
mind that all the users taken under consideration
are highly active on Twitter, producing in the time
span of 21 days on average five or more tweets per
day.

We have also investigated the dependence of the
amount of emojis a user produces and the remain-
ing four variables we have at our disposal, but
none of the correlations were strong enough to be
worth reporting.

Finally, looking into the number of emojis per
tweet we find that single emojis occur in 45% of
the emoji-containing tweets, two emojis make for
25% of the tweets, three emojis 15%, four emojis
7%, five emojis 3% and tweets with more than five
emojis make 5% of all emoji-containing tweets.
This distribution shows that in more than half of
the tweets emojis occur with other emojis which
makes a co-occurrence analysis as a method for
obtaining an insight in the meaning of emojis (or
rather the similarity of their meanings) very ap-
pealing.

3.2 Per-country analysis

In this subsection we investigate the popularity of
emojis on a per-country basis. We quantify the
emoji popularity in a specific country by calcu-
lating the percentage of geo-encoded tweets that
contain emojis. By calculating the percentage of
the tweets containing emojis, and not the over-
all amount of the emojis produced on Twitter, we
neutralise the differences in popularity of Twitter
among different countries.

Emoji density by country is given in Figure
1. The highest density of tweets can easily be
observed in Indonesia (46.5% of tweets contain-
ing emojis) and the neighbouring third-ranking
Philippines (34.6%). In South America the king
of emojis, overall ranking second, is Paraguay
(37.6%), followed by Argentina, overall ranking
sixth (30.7%). In Africa emojis are most popular
in the north, with Algeria ranking fourth (33.5%),
Egypt ranking seventh (30.4%) and Libya ranking
eight (29.7%). In the Arab peninsula Qatar comes
first (overall ranking fifth, 32.6%), followed by
UAE (ranking 10th, 27.1%). The two highest
ranking European countries are Latvia (24.4%)
and Spain (24.1%), followed by the Czech Repub-
lic, Portugal and the Russian Federation. Interest-
ingly, Japan, the home of emojis, is ranked 163rd

84



0 0.466

Figure 1: Emoji density per country measured as the percentage of tweets containing emojis

with only 7% of tweets containing emojis. The
United States of America, the country responsi-
ble for making the pictograms widely popular, is
just doing slightly better, ranking 152nd with 10%
of tweets containing emojis. The highest ranking
North American state is Mexico (21.8%) in 37th
position.

Regarding the density of tweets on the con-
tinent level, Asia has the highest density with
26.3% tweets containing emojis, South America
comes second with 20.9%, followed by Europe
(16.7%), Africa (14.9%), Australia (13.7%) and
North America (11.5%).

One has to stress right here that although the
dataset used for estimating this distribution is
rather large, it is still collected from one source
only and therefore reflects the sociodemographic
specificities of Twitter users of a specific country.
Investigating the reliability of these estimates cal-
culated on one social network only is left for future
work.

4 Popularity of specific emojis

In this section we move from analysing the overall
popularity of emojis to analysing the popularity of
specific emojis. Again we start with a global anal-
ysis, continuing with a per-country one.

This set of analyses is performed on the Emoji
dataset as here we are not interested in the prob-
ability of emoji occurrence, but the probability of

specific emojis among all of them. To estimate
these probabilities we do not require tweets that
do not contain emojis.

4.1 Global analysis

The overall frequency distribution of emojis shows
that the most frequent emoji on Twitter since De-
cember 2015, with around 2.6 million occurrences
in our Emoji dataset, is the “Face with tears of joy”

, representing 6.7% of all emoji occurrences.
The second most frequent emoji is the “Smil-
ing face with heart-shaped eyes” (3.72%), on
third place we find the “Emoji modifier Fitzpatrick
type-1-2” 2 (2.3%), position 4 is taken by “Smil-
ing face with smiling eyes” (2.1%), and posi-
tion 5 by “Face throwing a kiss” (2.1%).

We give a full list of encountered emojis with
their frequency and popularity across countries in
a separate publication we call The Emoji Atlas.3

4.2 Per-country analysis

In this set of analyses we are interested in how
popular specific emojis are in individual coun-
tries. We therefore calculate the probability dis-
tribution of specific emojis for each country. We
discard all the countries having less than 5000 data

2There are 5 emoji modifiers that define the skin tone of
the emoji. In our analyses we consider these modifiers to be
entities by themselves to achieve better generalisation both
among modifiers and emojis.

3http://nlp.ffzg.hr/data/emoji-atlas/

85



Figure 2: Results of the k-means algorithm on countries represented through the emoji probability dis-
tribution

points from our analyses as the estimated distribu-
tion of the 1282 emojis found in our data below
this threshold would be quite unreliable. While
defining this frequency threshold we were not only
lead by the number of variables to be determined,
but also by the percentage of countries left for our
analysis, aiming at a decent global coverage. By
applying the defined threshold we were left with
108 out of 233 countries from which we collected
tweets in the 5-month period.

To obtain a first insight into the similarities and
differences of emoji distributions among countries
we ran the K-means clustering algorithm on coun-
tries, each country represented by the emoji proba-
bility distribution only. We ran the algorithm mul-
tiple times on different numbers of clusters and
concluded for the 4-cluster division as presented
in Figure 2 to be most explanatory. Additionally,
this clustering result has proven to be very stable.

We refer to the light red cluster covering North
America, Western Europe, the Russian Federation,
and Australia as the “first world” cluster.

We call the blue cluster, covering most of South
America, India and China, Eastern Europe, Mo-
rocco, Algeria and Tunisia the “second world”
cluster.

The light blue cluster covering three African
states (Angola, Nigeria and Sudan), Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, Pakistan, Nepal and the Philip-
pines is referred to as the “third world” cluster.

The lilac cluster covering the remaining African
states with enough coverage we call the “fourth
world” cluster.

While most of the clustering decisions, besides
a few that should be inspected more carefully (like
Chile belonging to the “first world” cluster), are
self-explanatory, we were quite puzzled by the
clustering algorithm to pick out Angola, Nigeria
and Sudan from the Sub-Saharan Africa and at-
tach them to the cluster of less-fortunate Arab and
Asian states. A short online search pointed to their
common attribute: they have oil. The question re-
mains whether the shift in the emoji distribution is
due to better living conditions of the local popu-
lation in comparison to most other African states
or to the impact of the oil exploiters on the Twitter
emoji production.

We analyse the difference between each cluster
and the remaining world by calculating one arith-
metic mean emoji vector for the cluster in ques-
tion and another arithmetic mean emoji vector for
the remaining clusters. We then subtract the clus-
ter vector from the remaining world vector and in-
spect the 20 lowest dimensions, i.e. emojis that
are most distinctive for the cluster in question.
The twenty most distinctive emojis per cluster are
given in Table 1.

Interestingly, different to all other clusters, the
most distinctive emojis in the “first world” clus-
ter are not face emojis, the first one occurring on

86



cluster most distinctive emojis
“first world”
“second world”
“third world”
“fourth world”

Table 1: Twenty most distinctive emojis by cluster

position 19, the “Sleeping face” emoji . The
two most distinctive emojis in the “first world”
cluster are Emoji modifiers Fitzpatrick type 1-2

and 3 . The list is continued with a series
of weather conditions like the sun and snow

, natural occurrences like “Palm tree” , differ-
ent types of flowers (“Cherry blossom” , “Hibis-
cus” ), “Sparkles” , and celebration symbols
such as “Party popper” and “Christmas tree”

. The interesting feature of this cluster is that
it lacks direct emotions represented by face emo-
jis that make the most distinctive emojis in all the
remaining clusters.

The most distinctive “second world” cluster
emojis are a series of happy faces like “Face
throwing a kiss” , “Smiling face with sun-
glasses” , “Smiling face with open mouth and
smiling eyes” , “Smiling face with heart-shaped
eyes” , “Winking face” and “Kissing face
with closed eyes” . They are interrupted with a
“Kiss mark” , “Thumbs up sign” , “Sparkling
heart” etc.

The 20 emojis most typical of the “third world”
cluster contain some happy faces such as “Smiling
face with heart-shaped eyes” and “Face with
tears of joy” , but also unhappy ones, such as
“Loudly crying face” , “Sleepy face” , “Un-
amused face” and “Expressionless face” .
Here the “Person with folded hands” makes its
first appearance in our analyses.

Besides two rather happy emojis, “Face with
tears of joy” and “Smiling face with open
mouth and cold sweat” , the “fourth world”
cluster is specific for a series of unhappy faces
such as “Loudly crying face” , “Unamused
face” , “Crying face” and “Weary face” .
In addition to these face emojis the “Fire” ,
“Person raising both hands in celebration” and
“Dancer” emojis are very distinctive as well.
A series of emojis depicting people’s hands like
“Raised hand” , “White down pointing back-
hand index” , “White right pointing backhand
index” and “White up pointing backhand in-

dex” are also very specific. The list then con-
tinues with a series of music-related emojis like
“Multiple musical notes” , “Headphone” ,
“Microphone” and “Musical note” (the last
two not making the top 20 emojis), the Emoji
modifiers Fitzpatrick type 5 and 6 and “Per-
son with folded hands” .

While skin modifiers make the list of most dis-
tinctive emojis in three out of four clusters, their
presence does not significantly affect the cluster-
ing results as the same cluster structure was ob-
tained when these modifiers were removed from
our dataset.

To wrap-up, the “first world” cluster seems
emotionally empty (or at least inexplicit) with al-
most no face emojis and only two general celebra-
tory emojis, the “second world” cluster is highly
positive with most distinctive emojis being the
happy face emojis. The dominating emojis in the
“third world” cluster are a series of unhappy faces
and the praying emoji, while the “fourth world”
cluster adds a series of hand symbols (for which
we do not have an explanation yet) and rather ba-
sic symbols like fire, dance, music and celebration.

The already mentioned Emoji Atlas contains
a full list of countries with their corresponding
emoji distributions as well as a full list of emo-
jis with their country distributions. We are confi-
dent that this resource will be of great use for less
technically-oriented researchers who do not have
the opportunity to compile and process such big
datasets. Additionally, as we continue to run the
data collection procedure, we will regularly up-
date the resource and, with time, add the temporal
component as well.

5 Emojis and development indicators

In the last set of experiments we look into the cor-
relation between the spatial representation of each
emoji and a selection of World Development In-
dicators of the World Bank.4 Our spatial repre-

4http://data.worldbank.org

87



sentation of an emoji consists of probabilities of
the emoji given a country which makes it compa-
rable to the World Development Indicators since
they are calculated by country as well.

For this initial analysis we have selected World
Development Indicators for which we were intu-
itively expecting results with a straight-forward
explanation: “Life expectancy at birth, total
(years)”, “Total tax rate (% of commercial prof-
its)”, “Trade in services (% of GDP)” and “GDP
per capita (current US$)”. Future work should in-
clude a wider set of Indicators.

For each indicator we calculate the Pearson cor-
relation coefficient with each of the emojis and
rank them by absolute value, inspecting all emo-
jis with a correlation higher than 0.4.

We again remove data from countries with less
than 5000 tweets with emojis as we consider the
probability distribution of 1282 emojis calculated
on such little data to be insufficient for a good es-
timate.

5.1 Life expectancy

The first indicator we take into account is the “Life
expectancy at birth, total (years)” indicator.5

The emoji with absolutely the highest correla-
tion with this indicator is the frequently mentioned
“Face with tears of joy” emoji (-0.675), sur-
prisingly with a negative sign, meaning that the
higher the life expectancy, the lower the usage of
the emoji. We have already observed this emoji to
be heavily used in our “third world” and “fourth
world” clusters.

The second and fourth absolutely highest corre-
lations are the Emoji modifiers Fitzpatrick type 3
(0.596) and type 1-2 (0.578), both occurring more
frequently as life expectancy rises. The third po-
sition is taken by the “Confused face” emoji (-
0.585), the fifth by the “Person with folded hands”

(-0.549), both occurring, as expected, more fre-
quently as life expectancy shrinks.

“Dog face” and “Hot beverage” are fol-
lowing emojis with positive correlation, while
the strong ones with negative correlation are
“Dancer” , “Fire” , “Baby symbol” and
“Person raising both hands in celebration” , all
of which have a correlation coefficient higher than
0.5 which is considered to be a strong correlation.

5http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SP.DYN.LE00.IN

5.2 Tax rate
The second indicator we consider is the “Total tax
rate (% of commercial profits)” indicator.6

The only two emojis with a correlation above
0.4 are “Thumbs down sign” (0.467) and “Pout-
ing face” (0.461).

5.3 Trade
Our third indicator is the “Trade in services (% of
GDP)” indicator.7

The three emojis with the highest correlation
to this indicator are “Slot machine” (0.626),
“Game die” (0.584) and “Speedboat”
(0.579). Interestingly, there are no emojis with a
high and negative correlation with this indicator.

5.4 GDP per capita
Our last indicator is the “GDP per capita (current
US$)” indicator.8

The three emojis with the strongest correla-
tion are “Emoji modifier Fitzpatrick type-3”
(0.593), “Fork and knife with plate” (0.592)
and “Bottle with popping cork” (0.565). Fur-
ther positively strongly correlating emojis are
“Airplane” and “Cooking” .

The emojis with the strongest negative correla-
tion are “Unamused face” (-0.428) and “Crying
face” (-0.419).

6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented a worldwide spatial
study of emoji usage by analysing a large dataset
of geo-encoded tweets containing emojis. We de-
picted the popularity of emojis on Twitter around
the world showing that they are most popular in
South-Eastern Asia and South America, while in
the USA (that technically enabled the rise of emo-
jis) and Japan (the origin of emojis) the usage fre-
quency on Twitter is multiple times lower.

Inspecting the specificities of the countries re-
garding the usage of different emojis, our country
clustering results differentiate between the “first
world” cluster the most distinctive features of
which are rather emotionally empty, the “second
world” cluster which is specific for highly pos-
itive emotions, the “third world” cluster which

6http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
IC.TAX.TOTL.CP.ZS

7http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
BG.GSR.NFSV.GD.ZS

8http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NY.GDP.PCAP.CD

88



contains both positive and negative emotions, and
the “fourth world” cluster which is predominantly
negative with additional, rather basic concepts like
fire, dance, music and hand gestures.

Finally, by performing a correlation analysis be-
tween emoji distributions across countries and a
series of the World Development Indicators we
have shown that emojis with the strongest corre-
lation clearly describe the indicator in question
which allows us to conclude that emoji usage is in-
dicative of the living conditions in different parts
of the world.

However, all our results are to be perceived by
having in mind that only one social network was
used for building our datasets which opens the nat-
ural question of data representativeness as (1) not
all people use a specific social network and (2) dif-
ferent sociodemographic groups use the same so-
cial network in different countries. Nevertheless,
this study objectively depicts the state in our social
network of choice.

Our future work goes in three directions. The
first one is investigating the impact of using only
one social network on the final results.

The second direction goes towards the under-
standing of the meaning of emojis and using them
for tasks like sentiment identification, emotion de-
tection etc. For unsupervised modelling of the
emoji meaning we primarily consider distribu-
tional models and emoji co-occurrence. We also
wish to investigate semantic shifts of emojis across
space. By continuous data collection, the tempo-
ral dimension becomes a relevant focus of interest
with a series of similar research questions.

The third direction is aimed at understanding
how emojis are included in natural language syn-
tax.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the Swiss National Science Founda-
tion grant IZ74Z0 160501 (ReLDI), and the Slove-
nian Research Agency within the national basic
research project “Resources, Tools and Methods
for the Research of Nonstandard Internet Slovene”
(J6-6842, 2014-2017).

References
Mark Davis and Peter Edberg. 2015. Unicode emoji.

Technical report, Unicode Consortium. http://
unicode.org/reports/tr51/.

Britney Fitzgerald. 2016. Did Abra-
ham Lincoln pioneer emoticons? 1862
speech may offer clues. http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/2012/09/19/
abraham-lincoln-emoticons_n_
1893411.html.

Petra Kralj Novak, Jasmina Smailović, Borut Sluban,
and Igor Mozetič. 2015a. Emoji Sentiment Rank-
ing 1.0. Slovenian language resource repository
CLARIN.SI.

Petra Kralj Novak, Jasmina Smailović, Borut Sluban,
and Igor Mozetič. 2015b. Sentiment of Emojis.
PLoS ONE, 10(12).

Igor Mozetič, Miha Grčar, and Jasmina Smailović.
2016. Twitter sentiment for 15 European lan-
guages. Slovenian language resource repository
CLARIN.SI.

Umashanthi Pavalanathan and Jacob Eisenstein. 2016.
Emoticons vs. Emojis on Twitter: A Causal Infer-
ence Approach. In AAAI Spring Symposium on Ob-
servational Studies through Social Media and Other
Human-Generated Content.

SwiftKey. 2015. SwiftKey Emoji Report, April 2015.
Technical report. https://goo.gl/9QXoEn.

The Unicode Consortium. 2016. Full emoji data.
http://unicode.org/emoji/charts/
full-emoji-list.html.

89


