



















































Emotions and NLP: Future Directions


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, page 180,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Emotions and NLP: Future Directions

Carlo Strapparava
FBK-irst, Trento, Italy,
strappa@fbk.eu

Emotions are not linguistic entities but they are
conveniently expressed through the language. Feel-
ings influence actions, thoughts and of course our
way of communicate.

It was more than twelve years ago that we de-
veloped WordNet-Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti,
2004), and I remember that at that time several peo-
ple questioned about the utility and even the possi-
bility of studying emotions using computational lin-
guistics techniques. In the recent years, nonethe-
less there has been a flourishing interest in automat-
ically detecting and generating emotions in texts,
with many valuable research contributions by the
community. The space here is too short to think
to even shortly mention and review them. Anyway
I would like to indicate which directions are more
promising in my opinion.

Finer grained emotions. It seems that in the
modern life only the high intensity of few emo-
tions is addressed and matters. The successful use
of traditional sentiment analysis, where the focus
is on classifying just along positive/negative dimen-
sion, slants people toward this attitude. However it
is valuable the acquaintance with fine-grained emo-
tions: nuances here are important, with a completely
different effect. People should be well-educated to
the nuances of emotions and benefit from them, and
NLP should help about this issue.

Event based emotions. Emotions are elicited by
significant and specific events, and events are signif-
icant when they touch on one or more of the con-
cerns of the people. Even considering the traditional
sentiment analysis, it is a good idea to investigate a
more holistic approach, combining the detection of
implicit polarity with the expression of opinions on

events. For example we proposed CLIPEval, a task
based on a dataset of events annotated as instanti-
ations of pleasant and unpleasant events (Russo et
al., 2015). Research efforts along this direction will
be fruitful. This holds even more when we consider
emotion classification. I think that psychological re-
search and cognitive science can help substantially.

Cultural differences from corpora. Even an ex-
cellent human translator has problems in carrying
over the target language all the culture-related as-
pects that go with words. If the focus is on emotion-
related aspects, the matter is even subtler. The re-
lation of a word to emotion concepts may depend
on ideology and in general on cultural aspects that
can be inferred from extensive word usage rather
than from what can be found in dictionaries. Of
course it also depends on genres, different periods
of text production, sociolinguistic characteristics of
the text originators and so on. Thus I think that
cross-language computational studies are challeng-
ing, compelling, and they can also have an impor-
tant applicative value, for example when addressing
topics such as emotions, negotiation and conflict.

References
I. Russo, T. Caselli, and C. Strapparava. 2015. Semeval-

2015, task 9: Clipeval implicit polarity of events. In
Proceedings of SemEval 2015.

C. Strapparava and R. Mihalcea. 2014. Affect detection
in texts. In R.A. Calvo et al., editor, The Oxford Hand-
book of Affective Computing. Oxford University Press.

C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti. 2004. WordNet-Affect:
an affective extension of WordNet. In Proc. of 4th

International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2004).

180


