



















































Processing Dialectal Arabic: Exploiting Variability and Similarity to Overcome Challenges and Discover Opportunities


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects,
page 42, Osaka, Japan, December 12 2016.

Processing Dialectal Arabic: Exploiting Variability and Similarity to
Overcome Challenges and Discover Opportunities

(invited talk)

Mona Diab
Department of Computer Science

George Washington University
mtdiab@email.gwu.edu

Abstract

We recently witnessed an exponential growth in dialectal Arabic usage in both textual data and
speech recordings especially in social media. Processing such media is of great utility for all
kinds of applications ranging from information extraction to social media analytics for political
and commercial purposes to building decision support systems. Compared to other languages,
Arabic, especially the informal variety, poses a significant challenge to natural language pro-
cessing algorithms since it comprises multiple dialects, linguistic code switching, and a lack of
standardized orthographies, to top its relatively complex morphology. Inherently, the problem of
processing Arabic in the context of social media is the problem of how to handle resource poor
languages. In this talk I will go over some of our insights to some of these problems and show
how there is a silver lining where we can generalize some of our solutions to other low resource
language contexts.

Biography

Mona Diab is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science, George Washington Uni-
versity (GW). She is the founder and Director of the GW NLP lab CARE4Lang. Before joining GW,
She was Research Scientist (Principal Investigator) at the Center for Computational Learning Systems
(CCLS), Columbia University in New York. She is also co-founder of the CADIM group with Nizar
Habash and Owen Rambow, which is one of the leading reference points on computational processing
of Arabic and its dialects. Her research interests span several areas in computational linguistics/natural
language processing: cross linguistic modeling and multilingual processing, computational lexical se-
mantics, social media processing, information extraction & text analytics, machine translation, resource
building, and computational socio-pragmatics. She has a special interest in low resource language pro-
cessing with a focus on Arabic dialects.

42


