



















































Creating and Characterizing a Diverse Corpus of Sarcasm in Dialogue


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, pages 31–41,
Los Angeles, USA, 13-15 September 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Creating and Characterizing a Diverse Corpus of Sarcasm in Dialogue

Shereen Oraby∗, Vrindavan Harrison∗, Lena Reed∗, Ernesto Hernandez∗,
Ellen Riloff † and Marilyn Walker∗
∗ University of California, Santa Cruz

{soraby,vharriso,lireed,eherna23,mawalker}@ucsc.edu
† University of Utah

riloff@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
The use of irony and sarcasm in social
media allows us to study them at scale for
the first time. However, their diversity has
made it difficult to construct a high-quality
corpus of sarcasm in dialogue. Here, we
describe the process of creating a large-
scale, highly-diverse corpus of online
debate forums dialogue, and our novel
methods for operationalizing classes of
sarcasm in the form of rhetorical questions
and hyperbole. We show that we can use
lexico-syntactic cues to reliably retrieve
sarcastic utterances with high accuracy.
To demonstrate the properties and quality
of our corpus, we conduct supervised
learning experiments with simple features,
and show that we achieve both higher
precision and F than previous work on
sarcasm in debate forums dialogue. We
apply a weakly-supervised linguistic
pattern learner and qualitatively analyze
the linguistic differences in each class.

1 Introduction

Irony and sarcasm in dialogue constitute a highly
creative use of language signaled by a large range
of situational, semantic, pragmatic and lexical
cues. Previous work draws attention to the use
of both hyperbole and rhetorical questions in con-
versation as distinct types of lexico-syntactic cues
defining diverse classes of sarcasm (Gibbs, 2000).

Theoretical models posit that a single seman-
tic basis underlies sarcasm’s diversity of form,
namely “a contrast” between expected and expe-
rienced events, giving rise to a contrast between
what is said and a literal description of the ac-
tual situation (Colston and O’Brien, 2000; Part-
ington, 2007). This semantic characterization has
not been straightforward to operationalize compu-
tationally for sarcasm in dialogue. Riloff et al.

(2013) operationalize this notion for sarcasm in
tweets, achieving good results. Joshi et al. (2015)
develop several incongruity features to capture it,
but although they improve performance on tweets,
their features do not yield improvements for dia-
logue.

Previous work on the Internet Argument Cor-
pus (IAC) 1.0 dataset aimed to develop a high-
precision classifier for sarcasm in order to boot-
strap a much larger corpus (Lukin and Walker,
2013), but was only able to obtain a precision of
just 0.62, with a best F of 0.57, not high enough
for bootstrapping (Riloff and Wiebe, 2003; Thelen
and Riloff, 2002). Justo et al. (2014) experimented
with the same corpus, using supervised learning,
and achieved a best precision of 0.66 and a best
F of 0.70. Joshi et al. (2015)’s explicit congruity
features achieve precision around 0.70 and best F
of 0.64 on a subset of IAC 1.0.

We decided that we need a larger and more di-
verse corpus of sarcasm in dialogue. It is difficult
to efficiently gather sarcastic data, because only
about 12% of the utterances in written online de-
bate forums dialogue are sarcastic (Walker et al.,
2012a), and it is difficult to achieve high reliability
for sarcasm annotation (Filatova, 2012; Swanson
et al., 2014; González-Ibáñez et al., 2011; Wallace
et al., 2014). Thus, our contributions are:

• We develop a new larger corpus, using sev-
eral methods that filter non-sarcastic utter-
ances to skew the distribution toward/in favor
of sarcastic utterances. We put filtered data
out for annotation, and are able to achieve
high annotation reliability.

• We present a novel operationalization of both
rhetorical questions and hyperbole to develop
subcorpora to explore the differences be-
tween them and general sarcasm.

• We show that our new corpus is of high qual-
ity by applying supervised machine learning
with simple features to explore how different

31



corpus properties affect classification results.
We achieve a highest precision of 0.73 and a
highest F of 0.74 on the new corpus with ba-
sic n-gram and Word2Vec features, showcas-
ing the quality of the corpus, and improving
on previous work.

• We apply a weakly-supervised learner to
characterize linguistic patterns in each cor-
pus, and describe the differences across
generic sarcasm, rhetorical questions and hy-
perbole in terms of the patterns learned.

• We show for the first time that it is straight-
forward to develop very high precision clas-
sifiers for NOT-SARCASTIC utterances across
our rhetorical questions and hyperbole sub-
types, due to the nature of these utterances in
debate forum dialogue.

2 Creating a Diverse Sarcasm Corpus

There has been relatively little theoretical work on
sarcasm in dialogue that has had access to a large
corpus of naturally occurring examples. Gibbs
(2000) analyzes a corpus of 62 conversations be-
tween friends and argues that a robust theory of
verbal irony must account for the large diversity
in form. He defines several subtypes, including
rhetorical questions and hyperbole:

• Rhetorical Questions: asking a question
that implies a humorous or critical assertion
• Hyperbole: expressing a non-literal meaning

by exaggerating the reality of a situation

Other categories of irony defined by Gibbs
(2000) include understatements, jocularity, and
sarcasm (which he defines as a critical/mocking
form of irony). Other work has also tackled joc-
ularity and humor, using different approaches for
data aggregation, including filtering by Twitter
hashtags, or analyzing laugh-tracks from record-
ings (Reyes et al., 2012; Bertero and Fung, 2016).

Previous work has not, however, attempted
to operationalize these subtypes in any concrete
way. Here we describe our methods for creat-
ing a corpus for generic sarcasm (Gen) (Sec. 2.1),
rhetorical questions (RQ), and hyperbole (Hyp)
(Sec. 2.2) using data from the Internet Argument
Corpus (IAC 2.0).1 Table 1 provides examples of
SARCASTIC and NOT-SARCASTIC posts from the
corpus we create. Table 2 summarizes the final
composition of our sarcasm corpus.

1The IAC 2.0 is available at https://nlds.soe.ucsc.edu/iac2,
and our sarcasm corpus will be released at
https://nlds.soe.ucsc.edu/sarcasm2.

Generic Data

1 S I love it when you bash people for stating opinions and no facts
when you turn around and do the same thing [...] give me a break

2 NS The attacker is usually armed in spite of gun control laws. All
they do is disarm the law abiding. Not to mention the lack of
enforcement on criminals.

Rhetorical Questions

3 S Then why do you call a politician who ran such measures lib-
eral? OH yes, it’s because you’re a republican and you’re not
conservative at all.

4 NS And what would that prove? It would certainly show that an an-
imal adapted to survival above the Arctic circle was not adapted
to the Arizona desert.

Hyperbole

5 S Thank you for making my point better than I could ever do!!
It’s all about you, right honey? I am woman hear me roar right?
LMAO

6 NS Again i am astounded by the fact that you think i will endanger
children. it is a topic sunset, so why are you calling me demented
and sick.

Table 1: Examples of different types of SARCAS-
TIC (S) and NOT-SARCASTIC (NS) Posts

Dataset Total Size Posts Per Class

Generic (Gen) 6,520 3,260

Rhetorical Questions (RQ) 1,702 851

Hyperbole (Hyp) 1,164 582

Table 2: Total number of posts in each subcorpus
(each with a 50% split of SARCASTIC and NOT-
SARCASTIC posts)

2.1 Generic Dataset (Gen)

We first replicated the pattern-extraction experi-
ments of Lukin and Walker (2013) on their dataset
using AutoSlog-TS (Riloff, 1996), a weakly-
supervised pattern learner that extracts lexico-
syntactic patterns associated with the input data.
We set up the learner to extract patterns for both
SARCASTIC and NOT-SARCASTIC utterances. Our
first discovery is that we can classify NOT-
SARCASTIC posts with very high precision, rang-
ing between 80-90%.2

Because our main goal is to build a larger,
more diverse corpus of sarcasm, we use the high-
precision NOT-SARCASTIC patterns extracted by
AutoSlog-TS to create a “not-sarcastic” filter. We
did this by randomly selecting a new set of 30K
posts (restricting to posts with between 10 and
150 words) from IAC 2.0 (Abbott et al., 2016),
and applying the high-precision NOT-SARCASTIC

2We delay a detailed discussion of the characteristics
of this NOT-SARCASTIC classifier, and the patterns that we
learn, until Sec. 4 where we describe AutoSlog-TS and the
linguistic characteristics of the whole corpus.

32



patterns from AutoSlog-TS to filter out any posts
that contain at least one NOT-SARCASTIC cue. We
end up filtering out two-thirds of the pool, only
keeping posts that did not contain any of our high-
precision NOT-SARCASTIC cues. We acknowl-
edge that this may also filter out sarcastic posts,
but we expect it to increase the ratio of sarcastic
posts in the remaining pool.

We put out the remaining 11,040 posts on Me-
chanical Turk. As in Lukin and Walker (2013), we
present the posts in “quote-response” pairs, where
the response post to be annotated is presented in
the context of its “dialogic parent”, another post
earlier in the thread, or a quote from another post
earlier in the thread (Walker et al., 2012b). In the
task instructions, annotators are presented with a
definition of sarcasm, followed by one example
of a quote-response pair that clearly contains sar-
casm, and one pair that clearly does not. Each task
consists of 20 quote-response pairs that follow the
instructions. Figure 1 shows the instructions and
layout of a single quote-response pair presented to
annotators. As in Lukin and Walker (2013) and
Walker et al. (2012b), annotators are asked a bi-
nary question: Is any part of the response to this
quote sarcastic?.

To help filter out unreliable annotators, we cre-
ate a qualifier consisting of a set of 20 manually-
selected quote-response pairs (10 that should re-
ceive a SARCASTIC label and 10 that should re-
ceive a NOT-SARCASTIC label). A Turker must
pass the qualifier with a score above 70% to par-
ticipate in our sarcasm annotations tasks.

Our baseline ratio of sarcasm in online debate
forums dialogue is the estimated 12% sarcastic
posts in the IAC, which was found previously by
Walker et al. by gathering annotations for sarcasm,
agreement, emotional language, attacks, and nas-
tiness from a subset of around 20K posts from the
IAC across various topics (Walker et al., 2012a).
Similarly, in his study of recorded conversation
among friends, Gibbs cites 8% sarcastic utterances
among all conversational turns (Gibbs, 2000).

We choose a conservative threshold: a post is
only added to the sarcastic set if at least 6 out of
9 annotators labeled it sarcastic. Of the 11,040
posts we put out for annotation, we thus obtain
2,220 new posts, giving us a ratio of about 20%
sarcasm – significantly higher than our baseline
of 12%. We choose this conservative threshold
to ensure the quality of our annotations, and we
leave aside posts that 5 out of 9 annotators label as
sarcastic for future work – noting that we can get
even higher ratios of sarcasm by including them
(up to 31%). The percentage agreement between

Figure 1: Mechanical Turk Task Layout

each annotator and the majority vote is 80%.
We then expand this set, using only 3 highly-

reliable Turkers (based on our first round of anno-
tations), giving them an exclusive sarcasm quali-
fication to do additional HITs. We gain an addi-
tional 1,040 posts for each class when using ma-
jority agreement (at least 2 out of 3 sarcasm labels)
for the additional set (to add to the 2,220 original
posts). The average percent agreement with the
majority vote is 89% for these three annotators.
We supplement our sarcastic data with 2,360 not-
sarcastic posts from the original data by (Lukin
and Walker, 2013) that follow our 150-word length
restriction, and complete the set with 900 posts
that were filtered out by our NOT-SARCASTIC fil-
ter3 – resulting in a total of 3,260 posts per class
(6,520 total posts).

Rows 1 and 2 of Table 1 show examples of posts
that are labeled sarcastic in our final generic sar-
casm set. Using our filtering method, we are able
to reduce the number of posts annotated from our
original 30K to around 11K, achieving a percent-
age of 20% sarcastic posts, even though we choose

3We use these unbiased not-sarcastic data sources to avoid
using posts coming from the sarcasm-skewed distribution.

33



to use a conservative threshold of at least 6 out of
9 sarcasm labels. Since the number of posts being
annotated is only a third of the original set size,
this method reduces annotation effort, time, and
cost, and helps us shift the distribution of sarcasm
to more efficiently expand our dataset than would
otherwise be possible.

2.2 Rhetorical Questions and Hyperbole
The goal of collecting additional corpora for
rhetorical questions and hyperbole is to increase
the diversity of the corpus, and to allow us to ex-
plore the semantic differences between SARCAS-
TIC and NOT-SARCASTIC utterances when partic-
ular lexico-syntactic cues are held constant. We
hypothesize that identifying surface-level cues that
are instantiated in both sarcastic and not sarcastic
posts will force learning models to find deeper se-
mantic cues to distinguish between the classes.

Using a combination of findings in the theoreti-
cal literature, and observations of sarcasm patterns
in our generic set, we developed a regex pattern
matcher that runs against the 400K unannotated
posts in the IAC 2.0 database and retrieves match-
ing posts, only pulling posts that have parent posts
and a maximum of 150 words. Table 3 only shows
a small subset of the “more successful” regex pat-
terns we defined for each class.

Cue # Found # Annot % Sarc
Hyperbole

let’s all 27 21 62%
i love it when 158 25 56%
oh yeah 397 104 50%
wow 977 153 44%
i’m *
shocked|amazed|impressed

120 33 42%

fantastic 257 47 36%
hun/dear*/darling 661 249 32%
you’re kidding/joking 132 43 28%
eureka 21 12 17%

Rhetorical Questions and Self-Answering
oh wait 136 121 87%
oh right 19 11 81%
oh really 62 50 50%
really? 326 151 30%
interesting. 48 27 15%

Table 3: Annotation Counts for a Subset of Cues

Cue annotation experiments. After running a
large number of retrieval experiments with our
regex pattern matcher, we select batches of the re-
sulting posts that mix different cue classes to put
out for annotation, in such a way as to not allow
the annotators to determine what regex cues were
used. We then successively put out various batches
for annotation by 5 of our highly-qualified anno-
tators, in order to determine what percentage of

posts with these cues are sarcastic.
Table 3 summarizes the results for a sample set

of cues, showing the number of posts found con-
taining the cue, the subset that we put out for an-
notation, and the percentage of posts labeled sar-
castic in the annotation experiments. For exam-
ple, for the hyperbolic cue “wow”, 977 utterances
with the cue were found, 153 were annotated, and
44% of those were found to be sarcastic (i.e. 56%
were found to be not-sarcastic). Posts with the cue
“oh wait” had the highest sarcasm ratio, at 87%.
It is the distinction between the sarcastic and not-
sarcastic instances that we are specifically inter-
ested in. We describe the corpus collection process
for each subclass below.

It is important to note that using particular cues
(regex) to retrieve sarcastic posts does not result
in posts whose only cue is the regex pattern. We
demonstrate this quantitatively in Sec. 4. Sar-
casm is characterized by multiple lexical and mor-
phosyntactic cues: these include the use of in-
tensifiers, elongated words, quotations, false po-
liteness, negative evaluations, emoticons, and tag
questions inter alia. Table 4 shows how sarcastic
utterances often contain combinations of multiple
indicators, each playing a role in the overall sar-
castic tone of the post.

Sarcastic Utterance
Forgive me if I doubt your sincerity, but you seem like a troll to me. I
suspect that you aren’t interested in learning about evolution at all. Your
questions, while they do support your claim to know almost nothing, are
pretty typical of creationist “prove it to me“ questions.
Wrong again! You obviously can’t recognize refutation when its printed
before you. I haven’t made the tag “you liberals“ derogatory. You liber-
als have done that to yourselves! I suppose you’d rather be called a social
reformist! Actually, socialist is closer to a true description.

Table 4: Utterances with Multiple Sarcastic Cues

Rhetorical Questions. There is no previous work
on distinguishing sarcastic from non-sarcastic uses
of rhetorical questions (RQs). RQs are syntac-
tically formulated as a question, but function as
an indirect assertion (Frank, 1990). The polarity
of the question implies an assertion of the oppo-
site polarity, e.g. Can you read? implies You
can’t read. RQs are prevalent in persuasive dis-
course, and are frequently used ironically (Schaf-
fer, 2005; Ilie, 1994; Gibbs, 2000). Previous work
focuses on their formal semantic properties (Han,
1997), or distinguishing RQs from standard ques-
tions (Bhattasali et al., 2015).

We hypothesized that we could find RQs in
abundance by searching for questions in the mid-
dle of a post, that are followed by a statement, us-
ing the assumption that questions followed by a
statement are unlikely to be standard information-

34



seeking questions. We test this assumption by ran-
domly extracting 100 potential RQs as per our def-
inition and putting them out on Mechanical Turk
to 3 annotators, asking them whether or not the
questions (displayed with their following state-
ment) were rhetorical. According to majority vote,
75% of the posts were rhetorical.

We thus use this “middle of post” heuristic to
obviate the need to gather manual annotations for
RQs, and developed regex patterns to find RQs
that were more likely to be sarcastic. A sample of
the patterns, number of matches in the corpus, the
numbers we had annotated, and the percent that
are sarcastic after annotation are summarized in
Table 3.

Rhetorical Questions and Self-Answering
So you do not wish to have a logical debate? Alrighty then. god bless you
anyway, brother.
Prove that? You can’t prove that i’ve given nothing but insults. i’m defend-
ing myself, to mackindale, that’s all. do you have a problem with how i am
defending myself against mackindale? Apparently.

Table 5: Examples of Rhetorical Questions and
Self-Answering

We extract 357 posts following the intermediate
question-answer pairs heuristic from our generic
(Gen) corpus. We then supplement these with
posts containing RQ cues from our cue-annotation
experiments: posts that received 3 out of 5 sar-
castic labels in the experiments were considered
sarcastic, and posts that received 2 or fewer sar-
castic labels were considered not-sarcastic. Our
final rhetorical questions corpus consists of 851
posts per class (1,702 total posts). Table 5 shows
some examples of rhetorical questions and self-
answering from our corpus.
Hyperbole. Hyperbole (Hyp) has been studied
as an independent form of figurative language,
that can coincide with ironic intent (McCarthy
and Carter, 2004; Cano Mora, 2009), and previ-
ous computational work on sarcasm typically in-
cludes features to capture hyperbole (Reyes et al.,
2013). Kreuz and Roberts (1995) describe a stan-
dard frame for hyperbole in English where an ad-
verb modifies an extreme, positive adjective, e.g.
“That was absolutely amazing!” or “That was
simply the most incredible dining experience in
my entire life.”

Colston and O’Brien (2000) provide a theoret-
ical framework that explains why hyperbole is so
strongly associated with sarcasm. Hyperbole ex-
aggerates the literal situation, introducing a dis-
crepancy between the “truth” and what is said, as
a matter of degree. A key observation is that this is

a type of contrast (Colston and Keller, 1998; Col-
ston and O’Brien, 2000). In their framework:

• An event or situation evokes a scale;
• An event can be placed on that scale;
• The utterance about the event contrasts with

actual scale placement.

Figure 2: Hyperbole shifts the strength of what
is said from literal to extreme negative or positive
(Colston and O’Brien, 2000)

Fig. 2 illustrates that the scales that can be
evoked range from negative to positive, undesir-
able to desirable, unexpected to expected and cer-
tain to uncertain. Hyperbole moves the strength
of an assertion further up or down the scale from
the literal meaning, the degree of movement cor-
responds to the degree of contrast. Depending on
what they modify, adverbial intensifiers like to-
tally, absolutely, incredibly shift the strength of the
assertion to extreme negative or positive.

Hyperbole with Intensifiers

Wow! I am soooooooo amazed by your come back skills... another epic
fail!
My goodness...i’m utterly amazed at the number of men out there that are
so willing to decide how a woman should use her own body!

Oh do go on. I am so impressed by your ’intellectuall’ argument. pfft.
I am very impressed with your ability to copy and paste links now what this
proves about what you know about it is still unproven.

Table 6: Examples of Hyperbole and the Effects
of Intensifiers

Table 6 shows examples of hyperbole from our
corpus, showcasing the effect that intensifiers have
in terms of strengthening the emotional evaluation
of the response. To construct a balanced corpus of
sarcastic and not-sarcastic utterances with hyper-
bole, we developed a number of patterns based on
the literature and our observations of the generic
corpus. The patterns, number matches on the
whole corpus, the numbers we had annotated and
the percent that are sarcastic after annotation are
summarized in Table 3. Again, we extract a small
subset of examples from our Gen corpus (30 per

35



class), and supplement them with posts that con-
tain our hyperbole cues (considering them sarcas-
tic if they received at least 3/5 sarcastic labels, not-
sarcastic otherwise). The final hyperbole dataset
consists of 582 posts per class (1,164 posts in to-
tal).

To recap, Table 2 summarizes the total number
of posts for each subset of our final corpus.

3 Learning Experiments

Our primary goal is not to optimize classifi-
cation results, but to explore how results vary
across different subcorpora and corpus proper-
ties. We also aim to demonstrate that the qual-
ity of our corpus makes it more straightfor-
ward to achieve high classification performance.
We apply both supervised learning using SVM
(from Scikit-Learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011)) and
weakly-supervised linguistic pattern learning us-
ing AutoSlog-TS (Riloff, 1996). These reveal dif-
ferent aspects of the corpus.

Supervised Learning. We restrict our supervised
experiments to a default linear SVM learner with
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) training and
L2 regularization, available in the SciKit-Learn
toolkit (Pedregosa et al., 2011). We use 10-fold
cross-validation, and only two types of features:
n-grams and Word2Vec word embeddings. We
expect Word2Vec to be able to capture semantic
generalizations that n-grams do not (Socher et al.,
2013; Li et al., 2016). The n-gram features in-
clude unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams, including
sequences of punctuation (for example, ellipses
or “!!!”), and emoticons. We use GoogleNews
Word2Vec features (Mikolov et al., 2013).4

Table 7 summarizes the results of our super-
vised learning experiments on our datasets us-
ing 10-fold cross validation. The data is bal-
anced evenly between the SARCASTIC and NOT-
SARCASTIC classes, and the best F-Measures for
each class are shown in bold. The default W2V
model, (trained on Google News), gives the best
overall F-measure of 0.74 on the Gen corpus for
the SARCASTIC class, while n-grams give the best
NOT-SARCASTIC F-measure of 0.73. Both of
these results are higher F than previously reported
for classifying sarcasm in dialogue, and we might
expect that feature engineering could yield even
greater performance.

4We test our own custom 300-dimensional embeddings
created for the dialogic domain using the Gensim li-
brary (Řehůřek and Sojka, 2010), and a very large corpus
of user-generated dialogue. While this custom model works
well for other tasks on IAC 2.0, it did not work well for sar-
casm classification, so we do not discuss it further.

Form Features Class P R F

Gen N-Grams S 0.73 0.70 0.72
NS 0.71 0.75 0.73

W2V S 0.71 0.77 0.74
NS 0.75 0.69 0.72

RQ N-Grams S 0.71 0.68 0.70
NS 0.70 0.73 0.71

W2V S 0.67 0.72 0.69
NS 0.70 0.64 0.67

Hyp N-Grams S 0.68 0.63 0.65
NS 0.66 0.71 0.68

W2V S 0.57 0.56 0.57
NS 0.57 0.59 0.58

Table 7: Supervised Learning Results for Generic
(Gen: 3,260 posts per class), Rhetorical Questions
(RQ: 851 posts per class) and Hyperbole (Hyp:
582 posts per class)

Figure 3: Plot of Dataset size (x-axis) vs Sarc. F-
Measure (y-axis) for the three subcorpora, with n-
gram features

On the RQ corpus, n-grams provide the best
F-measure for SARCASTIC at 0.70 and NOT-
SARCASTIC at 0.71. Although W2V performs
well, the n-gram model includes features involv-
ing repeated punctuation and emoticons, which
the W2V model excludes. Punctuation and emoti-
cons are often used as distinctive feature of sar-
casm (i.e. “Oh, really?!?!”, [emoticon-rolleyes]).

For the Hyp corpus, the best F-measure for
both the SARCASTIC and NOT-SARCASTIC classes
again comes from n-grams, with F-measures of
0.65 and 0.68 respectively. It is interesting to note
that the overall results of the Hyp data are lower
than those for Gen and RQs, likely due to the
smaller size of the Hyp dataset.

To examine the effect of dataset size, we com-

36



pare F-measure (using the same 10-fold cross-
validation setup) for each dataset while holding
the number of posts per class constant. Figure 3
shows the performance of each of the Gen, RQ,
and Hyp datasets at intervals of 100 posts per class
(up to the maximum size of 582 posts per class
for Hyp, and 851 posts per class for RQ). From
the graph, we can see that as a general trend, the
datasets benefit from larger dataset sizes. Interest-
ingly, the results for the RQ dataset are very com-
parable to those of Gen. The Gen dataset eventu-
ally gets the highest sarcastic F-measure (0.74) at
its full dataset size of 3,260 posts per class.

Weakly-Supervised Learning. AutoSlog-TS is
a weakly supervised pattern learner that only re-
quires training documents labeled broadly as SAR-
CASTIC or NOT-SARCASTIC. AutoSlog-TS uses
a set of syntactic templates to define different
types of linguistic expressions. The left-hand
side of Table 8 lists each pattern template and
the right-hand side illustrates a specific lexico-
syntactic pattern (in bold) that represents an in-
stantiation of each general pattern template for
learning sarcastic patterns in our data.5 In addi-
tion to these 17 templates, we added patterns to
AutoSlog for adjective-noun, adverb-adjective and
adjective-adjective, because these patterns are fre-
quent in hyperbolic sarcastic utterances.

The examples in Table 8 show that Colston’s
notion of contrast shows up in many learned pat-
terns, and that the source of the contrast is highly
variable. For example, Row 1 implies a contrast
with a set of people who are not your mother.
Row 5 contrasts what you were asked with what
you’ve (just) done. Row 10 contrasts chapter 12
and chapter 13 (Hirschberg, 1985). Row 11 con-
trasts what I am allowed vs. what you have to do.

AutoSlog-TS computes statistics on the strength
of association of each pattern with each class, i.e.
P(SARCASTIC | p) and P(NOT-SARCASTIC | p),
along with the pattern’s overall frequency. We
define two tuning parameters for each class: θf ,
the frequency with which a pattern occurs, θp, the
probability with which a pattern is associated with
the given class. We do a grid-search, testing the
performance of our patterns thresholds from θf =
{2-6} in intervals of 1, θp={0.60-0.85} in inter-
vals of 0.05. Once we extract the subset of pat-
terns passing our thresholds, we search for these
patterns in the posts in our development set, clas-
sifying a post as a given class if it contains θn={1,

5The examples are shown as general expressions for read-
ability, but the actual patterns must match the syntactic con-
straints associated with the pattern template.

Pattern Template Example Instantiations

1 <subj> PassVP Go tell your mother, <she> might be inter-
ested in your fulminations.

2 <subj> ActVP Oh my goodness. This is a trick called se-
mantics. <I> guess you got sucked in.

3 <subj> ActVP Dobj yet <I> do nothing to prevent the situation

4 <subj> ActInfVP I guess <I> need to check what website I
am in

5 <subj> PassInfVP <You> were asked to give us your expla-
nation of evolution. So far you’ve just ...

6 <subj> AuxVP Dobj Fortunately <you> have the ability to ...

7 <subj> AuxVP Adj Or do you think that <nothing> is capable
of undermining the institution of marriage?

8 ActVP <dobj> Oh yes, I know <everything> that [...]

9 InfVP <dobj> Good idea except we do not have to elect
<him> to any post... just send him over
there.

10 ActInfVP <dobj> Try to read <chptr 13> before chptr 12, it
will help you out.

11 PassInfVP <dobj> i love it when people do this. ’you have to
prove everything you say, but i am allowed
to simply make <assertions> and it’s your
job to show i’m wrong.’

12 Subj AuxVP <dobj> So your answer [then] is <nothing>...

13 NP Prep <np> There are MILLIONS of <people> saying
all sorts of stupid things about the president.

14 ActVP Prep <np> My pyramidal tinfoil hat is an antenna for
knowledge and truth. It reflects idiocy and
dumbness into deep space. You still have not
admitted to <your error>

15 PassVP Prep <np> Likelihood is that they will have to be left
alone for <a few months> [...] Sigh, I won-
der if ignorance really is blissful.

16 InfVP Prep <np> I masquerade as an atheist and a 6-day cre-
ationist at the same time to try to appeal to
<a wider audience>.

17 <possessive> NP O.K. let’s play <your> game.

Table 8: AutoSlog-TS Templates and Example In-
stantiations

2, 3} of the thresholded patterns. For more detail,
see (Riloff, 1996; Oraby et al., 2015).

An advantage of AutoSlog-TS is that it sup-
ports systematic exploration of recall and preci-
sion tradeoffs, by selecting pattern sets using dif-
ferent parameters. The parameters have to be
tuned on a training set, so we divide each dataset
into 80% training and 20% test. Figure 4 shows
the precision (x-axis) vs. recall (y-axis) tradeoffs
on the test set, when optimizing our three parame-
ters for precision. Interestingly, the subcorpora for
RQ and Hyp can get higher precision than is pos-
sible for Gen. When precision is fixed at 0.75, the
recall for RQ is 0.07 and the recall for Hyp is 0.08.
This recall is low, but given that each retrieved
post provides multiple cues, and that datasets on
the web are huge, these P values make it possible
to bootstrap these two classes in future.

37



Prob. Freq. Pattern and Text Match Sample Post
Sarcastic Example Patterns

1.00 8 Adv Adv (AH YES) Ah yes, your diversionary tactics.
0.91 11 Adv Adv (THEN AGAIN) But then again, you become what you hate [...]
0.83 36 ActVP Prep <NP> (THANKS FOR) Thanks for missing the point.
0.80 20 ActVP <dobj> (TEACH) Teach the science in class and if that presents a problem [...]
0.80 10 InfVP <dobj> (ANSWER) I think you need to answer the same question [...]
0.79 114 <subj>ActVp (GUESS) So then I guess you could also debate that algebra serves no purpose
0.78 18 ActVP <dobj> (IGNORE) Excellent ignore the issue at hand and give no suggestion
0.74 27 Adv Adv (ONCE AGAIN) you attempt to once again change the subject
0.71 35 Adj Noun (GOOD IDEA) ...especially since you think everything is a good idea

Not-Sarcastic Example Patterns
0.92 25 Adj Noun (SECOND AMENDMENT) the nature of the Second Amendment
0.90 10 Np Prep <NP> (PROBABILITY OF) the probability of [...] in some organism
0.88 42 ActVP <dobj> (SUPPORT) I really do not support rule by the very, very few
0.84 32 Np Prep <NP> (EVIDENCE FOR) We have no more evidence for one than the other.
0.79 44 Np Prep (THEORY OF) [...] supports the theory of evolution [...]
0.78 64 Np Prep <NP> (NUMBER OF) minor differences in a limited number of primative organisms
0.76 46 Adj Noun (NO EVIDENCE) And there is no evidence of anything other than material processes
0.75 41 Np Prep <NP> (MAJORITY OF) The majority of criminals don’t want to deal with trouble.
0.72 25 ActVP <dobj> (EXPLAIN) [...] it does not explain the away the whole shift in the numbers [..]

Table 9: Examples of Characteristic Patterns for Gen using AutoSlog-TS Templates

Figure 4: Plot of Precision (x-axis) vs Recall (y-
axis) for three subcorpora with AutoSlog-TS pa-
rameters, aimed at optimizing precision

4 Linguistic Analysis

Here we aim to provide a linguistic characteriza-
tion of the differences between the sarcastic and
the not-sarcastic classes. We use the AutoSlog-TS
pattern learner to generate patterns automatically,
and the Stanford dependency parser to examine
relationships between arguments (Riloff, 1996;
Manning et al., 2014). Table 10 shows the number
of sarcastic patterns we extract with AutoSlog-TS,
with a frequency of at least 2 and a probability
of at least 0.75 for each corpus. We learn many
novel lexico-syntactic cue patterns that are not
the regex that we search for. We discuss specific
novel learned patterns for each class below.

Generic Sarcasm. We first examine the different
patterns learned on the Gen dataset. Table 9 show
examples of extracted patterns for each class. We

observe that the NOT-SARCASTIC patterns appear
to capture technical and scientific language, while
the SARCASTIC patterns tend to capture subjec-
tive language that is not topic-specific. We ob-
serve an abundance of adjective and adverb pat-
terns for the sarcastic class, although we do not
use adjective and adverb patterns in our regex re-
trieval method. Instead, such cues co-occur with
the cues we search for, expanding our pattern in-
ventory as we show in Table 10.

Dataset # Sarc
Patterns

# NotSarc
Patterns

Generic (Gen) 1,316 3,556

Rhetorical Questions (RQ) 671 1,000

Hyperbole (Hyp) 411 527

Table 10: Total number of patterns passing
threshold of Freq ≥ 2, Prob ≥ 0.75

Rhetorical Questions. We notice that while the
NOT-SARCASTIC patterns generated for RQs are
similar to the topic-specific NOT-SARCASTIC pat-
terns we find in the general dataset, there are
some interesting features of the SARCASTIC pat-
terns that are more unique to the RQs.

Many of our sarcastic questions focus specifi-
cally on attacks on the mental abilities of the ad-
dressee. This generalization is made clear when
we extract and analyze the verb, subject, and
object arguments using the Stanford dependency
parser (Manning et al., 2014) for the questions in
the RQ dataset. Table 11 shows a few examples of
the relations we extract.
Hyperbole. One common pattern for hyperbole

38



Relation Rhetorical Question

realize(you,
human)

Uhm, you do realize that humans and
chimps are not the same things as dogs, cats,

horses, and sharks ... right?

recognize(you) Do you recognize that babies grow and live
inside women?

not read(you) Are you blind, or can’t you read?

get(information) Have you ever considered getting scientific
information from a scientific source?

have(education) And you claim to have an education?

not have(dummy,
problem)

If these dummies don’t have a problem
with information increasing, but do have a

problem with beneficial information
increasing, don’t you think there is a

problem?

Table 11: Attacks on Mental Ability in RQs

involves adverbs and adjectives, as noted above.
We did not use this pattern to retrieve hyperbole,
but because each hyperbolic sarcastic utterance
contains multiple cues, we learn an expanded class
of patterns for hyperbole. Table 12 illustrates
some of the new adverb adjective patterns that are
frequent, high-precision indicators of sarcasm.

We learn a number of verbal patterns that we
had not previously associated with hyperbole, as
shown in Table 13. Interestingly, many of these
instantiate the observations of Cano Mora (2009)
on hyperbole and its related semantic fields: creat-
ing contrast by exclusion, e.g. no limit and no way,
or by expanding a predicated class, e.g. everyone
knows. Many of them are also contrastive. Ta-
ble 12 shows just a few examples, such as though
it in no way and so much knowledge.

Pattern Freq Example
no way 4 that is a pretty impresive education you

are working on (though it in no way
makes you a shoe in for any political

position).
so much 17 but nooooooo we are launching missiles

on libia thats solves alot .... because we
gained so much knowledge and learned

from our mistakes
oh dear 12 oh dear, he already added to the gene

pool
how much 8 you have no idea how much of a

hippocrit you are, do you
exactly what 5 simone, exactly what is a gun-loving

fool anyway, other than something you...

Table 12: Adverb Adjective Cues in Hyperbole

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We have developed a large scale, highly diverse
corpus of sarcasm using a combination of linguis-
tic analysis and crowd-sourced annotation. We use
filtering methods to skew the distribution of sar-
casm in posts to be annotated to 20-31%, much
higher than the estimated 12% distribution of sar-
casm in online debate forums. We note that when

Pattern Freq Example
i bet 9 i bet there is a university thesis in there

somewhere
you don’t see 7 you don’t see us driving in a horse and

carriage, do you
everyone
knows

9 everyone knows blacks commit more
crime than other races

I wonder 5 hmm i wonder ware the hot bed for
violent christian extremists is

you trying 7 if you are seriously trying to prove
your god by comparing real life things

with fictional things, then yes, you have
proved your god is fictional

Table 13: Verb Patterns in Hyperbole

using Mechanical Turk for sarcasm annotation, it
is possible that the level of agreement signals how
lexically-signaled the sarcasm is, so we settle on a
conservative threshold (at least 6 out of 9 annota-
tors agreeing that a post is sarcastic) to ensure the
quality of our annotations.

We operationalize lexico-syntactic cues preva-
lent in sarcasm, finding cues that are highly in-
dicative of sarcasm, with ratios up to 87%. Our
final corpus consists of data representing generic
sarcasm, rhetorical questions, and hyperbole.

We conduct supervised learning experiments to
highlight the quality of our corpus, achieving a
best F of 0.74 using very simple feature sets. We
use weakly-supervised learning to show that we
can also achieve high precision (albeit with a low
recall) for our rhetorical questions and hyperbole
datasets; much higher than the best precision that
is possible for the Generic dataset. These high pre-
cision values may be used for bootstrapping these
two classes in the future.

We also present qualitative analysis of the dif-
ferent characteristics of rhetorical questions and
hyperbole in sarcastic acts, and of the distinctions
between sarcastic/not-sarcastic cues in generic
sarcasm data. Our analysis shows that the forms
of sarcasm and its underlying semantic contrast in
dialogue are highly diverse.

In future work, we will focus on feature engi-
neering to improve results on the task of sarcasm
classification for both our generic data and sub-
classes. We will also begin to explore evaluation
on real-world data distributions, where the ratio
of sarcastic/not-sarcastic posts is inherently unbal-
anced. As we continue our analysis of the generic
and fine-grained categories of sarcasm, we aim to
better characterize and model the great diversity of
sarcasm in dialogue.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by NSF CISE RI 1302668,
under the Robust Intelligence Program.

39



References
Robert Abbott, Brian Ecker, Pranav Anand, and Mari-

lyn Walker. 2016. Internet argument corpus 2.0: An
sql schema for dialogic social media and the corpora
to go with it. In Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Conference, LREC2016.

Dario Bertero and Pascale Fung. 2016. A long short-
term memory framework for detecting humor in di-
alogues. In North American Association of Compu-
tational Linguistics Conference, NAACL-16.

Shohini Bhattasali, Jeremy Cytryn, Elana Feldman,
and Joonsuk Park. 2015. Automatic identification
of rhetorical questions. In Proc. of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Short Papers).

Laura Cano Mora. 2009. All or nothing: a seman-
tic analysis of hyperbole. Revista de Lingüı́stica y
Lenguas Aplicadas, pages 25–35.

Herbert L. Colston and Shauna B. Keller. 1998. You’ll
never believe this: Irony and hyperbole in express-
ing surprise. Journal of psycholinguistic research,
27(4):499–513.

Herbert L. Colston and Jennifer O’Brien. 2000. Con-
trast and pragmatics in figurative language: Any-
thing understatement can do, irony can do better.
Journal of Pragmatics, 32(11):1557 – 1583.

Elena Filatova. 2012. Irony and sarcasm: Corpus
generation and analysis using crowdsourcing. In
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
LREC2012.

Jane Frank. 1990. You call that a rhetorical question?:
Forms and functions of rhetorical questions in con-
versation. Journal of Pragmatics, 14(5):723–738.

Raymond W. Gibbs. 2000. Irony in talk among
friends. Metaphor and Symbol, 15(1):5–27.

Roberto González-Ibáñez, Smaranda Muresan, and
Nina Wacholder. 2011. Identifying sarcasm in twit-
ter: a closer look. In Proc. of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, volume 2, pages 581–586.

Chung-hye Han. 1997. Deriving the interpretation of
rhetorical questions. In The Proc. of the Sixteenth
West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, WC-
CFL16.

Julia Hirschberg. 1985. A Theory of Scalar Impli-
cature. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania,
Computer and Information Science.

Cornelia Ilie. 1994. What else can I tell you?: a
pragmatic study of English rhetorical questions as
discursive and argumentative acts. Acta Universi-
tatis Stockholmiensis: Stockholm studies in English.
Almqvist & Wiksell International.

Aditya Joshi, Vinita Sharma, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2015. Harnessing context incongruity
for sarcasm detection. In Proceedings of the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, volume 2, pages 757–762.

Raquel Justo, Thomas Corcoran, Stephanie M Lukin,
Marilyn Walker, and M Inés Torres. 2014. Extract-
ing relevant knowledge for the detection of sarcasm
and nastiness in the social web. Knowledge-Based
Systems.

Roger J. Kreuz and Richard M. Roberts. 1995. Two
cues for verbal irony: Hyperbole and the ironic
tone of voice. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity,
10(1):21–31.

Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Visualizing and understanding neural models
in nlp. In North American Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics Conference, NAACL-16.

Stephanie Lukin and Marilyn Walker. 2013. Really?
well. apparently bootstrapping improves the perfor-
mance of sarcasm and nastiness classifiers for online
dialogue. NAACL 2013, page 30.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In ACL (System Demon-
strations), pages 55–60.

Michael McCarthy and Ronald Carter. 2004. ”there’s
millions of them”: hyperbole in everyday conversa-
tion. Journal of Pragmatics, 36(2):149–184.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 3111–3119.

Shereen Oraby, Lena Reed, Ryan Compton, Ellen
Riloff, Marilyn Walker, and Steve Whittaker. 2015.
And thats a fact: Distinguishing factual and emo-
tional argumentation in online dialogue. 2nd Work-
shop on Argument Mining, NAACL HLT 2015, page
116.

Alan Partington. 2007. Irony and reversal of evalua-
tion. Journal of Pragmatics, 39(9):1547–1569.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gael Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, Edouard Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-
learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Radim Řehůřek and Petr Sojka. 2010. Software
Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Cor-
pora. In Proc. of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New
Challenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–50.

40



Antonio Reyes, Paolo Rosso, and Tony Veale. 2013.
A multidimensional approach for detecting irony in
twitter. Data Knowl. Eng., 47(1):239–268, March.

Antonio Reyes, Paolo Rosso, and Davide Buscaldi.
2012. From humor recognition to irony detec-
tion: The figurative language of social media. Data
Knowl. Eng., 74:1–12.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. In Proc. of
the 2003 conference on Empirical methods in natu-
ral language processing-Volume 10, pages 105–112.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ellen Riloff, Ashequl Qadir, Prafulla Surve, Lalin-
dra De Silva, Nathan Gilbert, and Ruihong Huang.
2013. Sarcasm as contrast between a positive sen-
timent and negative situation. In Proc. of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP 2013).

Ellen Riloff. 1996. Automatically generating extrac-
tion patterns from untagged text. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial In-
telligence (AAAI-96), pages 1044–1049.

Deborah Schaffer. —2005—. Can rhetorical questions
function as retorts? : Is the pope catholic? Journal
of Pragmatics, 37:433–600.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree-
bank. In Proc. of the 2013 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1631–1642.

Reid Swanson, Stephanie Lukin, Luke Eisenberg,
Thomas Chase Corcoran, and Marilyn A Walker.
2014. Getting reliable annotations for sarcasm in
online dialogues. In Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference, LREC 2014.

Michael Thelen and Ellen Riloff. 2002. A bootstrap-
ping method for learning semantic lexicons using
extraction pattern contexts. In Proc. of the ACL-02
Conference on Empirical Methods In Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 214–221.

Marilyn Walker, Pranav Anand, Robert Abbott, and
Jean E. Fox Tree. 2012a. A corpus for research
on deliberation and debate. In Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, LREC2012, pages 812–
817.

Marilyn A. Walker, Pranav Anand, Rob Abbott, Jean
E Fox Tree, Craig Martell, and Joseph King. 2012b.
That’s your evidence?: Classifying stance in on-
line political debate. Decision Support Systems,
53(4):719–729.

Byron C. Wallace, Do Kook Choe, Laura Kertz, and
Eugene Charniak. 2014. Humans require context to
infer ironic intent (so computers probably do, too).

In Proc. of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 512–516.

41


