



















































Computable News Ecosystems: Roles for Humans and Machines


Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on Computing News Storylines, pages 1–8,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Computable News Ecosystems: Roles for Humans and Machines

David Caswell

Reynolds Journalism Institute, Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, MO

Abstract

Two contrasting paradigms for structuring
news events and storylines are identified and
described: the automated paradigm and the
manual paradigm. A specific manual news
structuring system is described, and the high-
level results of three reporting experiments
conducted using the system are presented. In
light of these results I then compare automated
and manual approaches and argue that they are
complementary. A proposal for integrating au-
tomated and manual techniques within a struc-
tured news ecosystem is presented, and rec-
ommendations for integrated approaches are
provided.

1 Introduction

News is produced and consumed within local, na-
tional and global ecosystems. These ecosystems are
made up of large numbers of diverse organizations
and individuals, playing a variety of roles: news-
papers, news websites, television channels, wire
services, aggregators, specialty publishers, sources,
freelance reporters, bloggers, social media contrib-
utors, advertisers, business and government intelli-
gence organizations, individual news consumers and
many others. These ecosystem participants collec-
tively create, remix, exchange, distribute and con-
sume vast quantities of information, almost entirely
as discrete blocks of natural language in the form of
text articles or scripted video segments.

News ecosystems are currently being disrupted
by the internet-driven democratization of publishing
and the resulting commodification of text and video

(Anderson et al., 2014). This commodification has
damaged the economic foundations of news produc-
ers, but it has also dramatically increased the depth
and breadth of news available to consumers. Un-
fortunately it is difficult for news consumers to take
full advantage of this increased quantity of news, be-
cause of the difficulty of converting the information
content of large numbers of text articles or video
segments into coherent narratives necessary for hu-
man understanding (Holton and Chyi, 2012). Over-
whelming quantities of text articles and the resulting
sense-making challenge for news consumers have
been partially addressed by search, personalized ar-
ticle ranking, collaborative filtering, social media
curation and other approaches, however, while use-
ful, these technologies have not solved the text over-
load problem.

A new approach to this sense-making challenge
is emerging. It proposes replacing the text article
as the primary ‘unit of news’ with new informa-
tion artifacts that are aligned with human models
of narrative coherence but which are also directly
computable. These information artifacts are typi-
cally forms of structured ‘storylines’, in which news
events and narratives are recorded as structured rep-
resentations based on ontologies of semantic frames
or event abstractions, each containing well-defined
semantic roles. Actual news events can then be in-
stantiated by ‘filling in’ these semantic roles with
references to nodes within knowledge graphs. These
structured records of events are then organized into
storyline structures that exhibit characteristics of co-
herent narratives, such as semantic zoom, differen-
tial value of events and networked interconnection.

1



By structuring news and making it directly avail-
able for computation it becomes possible to develop
novel news products that are more efficient vehi-
cles for human understanding than corpora of text
articles, including summarizations, interactive inter-
faces, personalized news delivery, query tools, ques-
tion answering, analytics, etc.

The most common paradigm proposed for this
new approach is one of automation, specifically
of automated reading (Strassel et al., 2010). This
paradigm holds that the source of news events and
narratives is in vast corpora and continuous streams
of text articles, and that the creation of structured
news storylines requires systematically examining
those text articles with various natural language pro-
cessing tools in order to automatically identify and
de-duplicate news events across documents, and or-
ganize those events into structured storylines based
on common locations, characters and entities. The
automation paradigm is well-aligned with the cur-
rent preference within software development for sta-
tistical and machine learning approaches to knowl-
edge engineering tasks. This paradigm is also
aligned with many previous research projects on
computational narratives (Mani, 2013)(Chambers
and Jurafsky, 2008)(Zarri, 2009), which often as-
sumed text as the source of narratives and sought the
representation of those text narratives as their objec-
tive.

This position paper proposes a different
paradigm. I describe the operation and evalua-
tion of a manual structured news platform, called
‘Structured Stories’, and I draw on that experi-
ence to examine the potential for human editorial
workflows in directly structuring news. I argue that
human editorial judgement is essential for creating
and maintaining high-quality structured storylines
and can be feasibly applied at ecosystem scales.
The paper also reviews both paradigms from an
ecosystem perspective, and identifies complemen-
tary opportunities for both approaches within a
computable news ecosystem.

2 Automated Structuring of News

The automated construction of structured storylines
from corpora of text articles is challenging because
of the absence of any theory of natural language that

might formalize the recovery of meaning across doc-
uments, or even across sentence boundaries within a
single document (Hauser et al., 2002). Without such
a theory the event and narrative information con-
tained within natural language text must be extracted
indirectly, using an array of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) tools. This extraction typically re-
quires identifying discrete news events from refer-
ences to action within text, capturing those events
and their participants as semantic frames and asso-
ciated semantic roles, de-duplicating the events from
other references found in other texts, and then orga-
nizing the structured events in context within struc-
tured storylines using time, location, common enti-
ties or cause-and-effect relationships. None of these
steps is trivial and errors compound across all steps,
but NLP tools such as frame parsers and named en-
tity recognition (NER) have substantially improved
the state of the art.

Automated news reading systems have been at-
tempted in university environments since the 1970s
(Cullingford, 1978), however practical, scalable
products capable of constructing structured story-
lines from corpora or streams of news articles have
only recently been achieved. Two of these systems,
GDELT and EventRegistry (Kwak and An, 2016),
are essentially databases of news events structured
using relatively coarse ontologies of event abstrac-
tions and semantic roles, and supporting only sim-
plified storylines based on time, location or com-
mon entities. A third system, called NewsReader,
supports more complex storylines, including causal
chains, and also includes information about pre- and
post-event ‘states’ within its ontology (Rospocher et
al., 2016).

These pioneering systems have successfully
demonstrated that it is possible to automatically read
large corpora or streams of text news articles, indi-
viduate discrete news events, and organize them into
explorable structured storylines. These structured
storylines are clearly useful and can be deployed at
scale, but they convey only a tiny fraction of the
information available from storylines conveyed us-
ing natural language, and they are also subject to
a range of errors. The resolution and quality of
these structured events and storylines will improve
as the NLP technologies upon which they depend
improves, however there may be limits to resolution

2



and quality achievable from statistical NLP tech-
niques (Hovy, 2016), and those limits may be sub-
stantially below levels necessary for these structured
storylines to replace natural language text as units of
news within news ecosystems.

3 Manual Structuring of News

‘Structured writing’ is an alternative to the auto-
mated reading paradigm for generating structured
news storylines. The structured writing paradigm
holds that the source of news events and narratives
is in human editorial judgement - existing under-
standing that resides in the minds of skilled and in-
formed journalists or analysts. Like automated read-
ing systems, structured writing systems provide an
ontology of event abstractions with which to struc-
ture news events and assemble storylines, but they
require human operators, using dedicated interfaces
and tools, to decide which news events to encode
as structure, which entities fill the semantic roles
within those events, and how those events are or-
ganized into storylines. Although they have simi-
lar utility, and are based on similar structured rep-
resentations, structured writing systems differ from
automated reading systems in that they exhibit ad-
vantages and disadvantages associated with human-
centered workflows.

The Structured Stories platform (Caswell, 2015)
is an example of a structured writing system. This
platform was designed primarily as a knowledge
representation system for general news, at a level of
semantic granularity substantially finer than repre-
sentation schemes designed for automated systems,
such as NewsReader’s Events and Situations On-
tology, or GDELT’s ontology. The semantic foun-
dation used in the Structured Stories ontology is
FrameNet (Baker, 2008), and the additional seman-
tic resolution is added by enabling controlled exten-
sion of the FrameNet ontology to form journalistic
‘event frames’. Actual news events are then instanti-
ated by assigning knowledge graph references to the
semantic roles within these event frames. The plat-
form provides an organization scheme for arranging
structured events into structured narratives, includ-
ing a recursive ‘sub-narrative’ mechanism to provide
semantic zoom and a differential value mechanism
for detail management. The resulting structured

narratives are assembled from references to events,
forming a multi-dimensional graph from common
events, common characters, common entities, com-
mon locations, etc. Event entry by human reporters
is achieved using a simplified sequential user inter-
face that is initiated by the selection of a verb and
completed by sequential menu selections that en-
able the reporter to assign references to the seman-
tic roles, provide time/duration, location, etc. The
consumption of structured storylines from the Struc-
tured Stories database is enabled by a range of inter-
active techniques, including timelines, flowcharts,
image slideshows, bullet points and text articles gen-
erated using natural language generation technol-
ogy. These interactive techniques are delivered via
different user interfaces, including a database man-
agement interface, an image-centered interface and
a mobile interface.

The feasibility of using human reporters to report
directly into the Structured Stories platform was as-
sessed during 2015 and early 2016 in three major
reporting projects employing a total of 10 reporters.
All of these projects reported real-world news, and
reporters were not substantially restricted in what
they could choose to report. One was conducted
as a stand-alone project with full-time reporters un-
der the guidance of a senior editor (Caswell et al.,
2015), one was conducted at a major school of jour-
nalism, and one was conducted in the newsroom of
a major media company. In aggregate this assess-
ment generated about 120 individual structured sto-
rylines, containing about 2300 structured events en-
coded using about 530 event frames and involving
about 1100 different participants (characters, enti-
ties, locations, etc.). The level of semantic granular-
ity of the structured events was loosely equivalent to
that of the primary events reported in informational
articles in a regional newspaper (typically 2-3 events
per article), and therefore the assessment produced
the event information equivalent of approximately
920 de-duplicated text articles. By comparison the
Wall Street Journal produces about 240 articles per
day (Meyer, 2016), many of which substantially du-
plicate events across articles.

This experience of manually reporting structured
events into the Structured Stories platform produced
several high-level results. The granularity of the
event representation scheme was sufficient to cap-

3



ture almost all news events that the reporters wanted
to report, suggesting that FrameNet is now rela-
tively comprehensive and that the extension to event
frames is relatively practical. All reporters were
able to individuate discrete news events, to struc-
ture those events appropriately and to assemble sto-
rylines from those structured events, however there
was wide variability in the ability of reporters to do
so. Of the ten reporters three adapted very quickly to
the process and became very productive within days,
four adapted more slowly, requiring experience and
feedback to gradually achieve a moderate level of
productivity, and three were unable to adapt and
remained at a relatively low level of productivity.
Based on post-project interviews it appears that the
determining factor in a reporter’s ability to adapt to
the structuring of news may be their general comfort
with abstraction. The actual structuring of events
by reporters using the user interface appeared to be
relatively easy, typically requiring only 1-2 minutes
per event, however the reporting and decision mak-
ing about events and their semantic roles and charac-
teristics was much more time-consuming. Some re-
porters described experiencing significant boredom
in approaching journalism in this way, and some
described a loss of satisfaction in being ‘arrangers’
of news rather than originators of news using tradi-
tional journalistic practices. Nonetheless most re-
porters saw promise in the technique and thought
that it might appeal to some journalists, especially
with improvements to the user interface and to the
editorial workflow.

Other examples of manual systems for structur-
ing news exist. A major research effort has been
ongoing at the BBC since 2010, centered on their
News Storyline Ontology (Rissen et al., 2013). This
ontology is simpler than the Structured Stories on-
tology and is intended to be eventually used by re-
porters as part of regular journalism operations at the
BBC, and as part of broader recording of the global
news activity by the BBC Monitoring team. An-
other example is Circa (Coddington, 2015), a San
Francisco-based news start-up that was founded in
2010 and closed in 2015 and which used a 10-person
editorial team to manually structure journalism into
discrete ‘atomic units’ of news, including events,
and assemble those ‘atoms’ into structured story-
lines. Other, similar, attempts at manually struc-

turing events exist outside of journalism, includ-
ing the Nano-publication movement (Mons and Vel-
terop, 2009), which seeks to complement or replace
scientific publishing using text papers with much
more granular ‘nano publications’ expressed as RDF
triples, from which large-scale networked knowl-
edge structures can be assembled. Nano-publication
assumes ‘crowdsourced’ structuring of research re-
sults, in which researchers manually structure their
own results. Each of these projects is exploring the
feasibility of manually creating and curating reposi-
tories of semantically-structured storyline-like infor-
mation artifacts that originate directly as structure
rather than as features extracted from text.

The efficiency of data entry into the Struc-
tured Stories platform and into other manual news-
structuring systems could be substantially improved
in several ways. There is a large and growing body
of news that is already available as structured data
and which could be mapped into structured events
and storylines, including sports news, financial news
and increasingly large portions of political news.
There are novel techniques based on Controlled Nat-
ural Language (Schwitter, 2010) that may enable
structured events and storylines to be entered us-
ing forms of written language that are more fa-
miliar to journalists and analysts. There are also
clearly opportunities for at least partial automation
of event identification and individuation, using tools
and techniques developed for fully-automated news
structuring.

4 Comparison

The automatic and manual paradigms for structuring
news are complementary. The underlying knowl-
edge representation schemes with which they record
structured news events and storylines are broadly
similar, and the approaches can therefore be con-
sidered as different input mechanisms to a sin-
gle structured news database. The advantages of
each method generally address the disadvantages of
the other, suggesting that integrating manual and
automated approaches is desirable. Similar ap-
proaches, which combine machine learning with hu-
man decision-making and oversight, are sometimes
called ’human-in-the-loop’ (HITL) systems and are
increasingly being applied in commercial environ-

4



ments (Bridgwater, 2016).
The primary advantage of manual news structur-

ing is that it enables the application of human edito-
rial judgement in event entry and in the creation and
editing of storylines. This has numerous benefits,
including the ability to substantially increase the se-
mantic granularity of the represented news events,
the ability to avoid and correct errors, the ability
to anticipate the needs of consumers, the ability to
easily handle unusual events or storyline situations,
the ability to handle ambiguity, easily de-duplicate
events, etc. The primary disadvantage of manual
news structuring is the limited scale at which struc-
turing can be done - i.e. the number and breadth
of events and storylines that can be structured - and
the lack of consistency with which structuring can
be done. Other disadvantages arise from the cul-
tural and workflow challenges inherent in using rel-
atively high-skill human reporters or analysts to per-
form relatively unsatisfying tasks, as observed in the
Structured Stories reporting experiments.

The primary advantage of automated news struc-
turing is the scale of news structuring that can be
achieved and the consistency by which that struc-
turing can be done. It is possible, for example,
to continually scan the entire global news stream,
about 5 million text news articles per day (Weden-
berg and Sjberg, 2014), and to detect, de-duplicate
and structure major news events for insertion into
storylines. The challenges of building and deploy-
ing automated news structuring tools are significant,
however. There are a series of technical challenges
in key tasks, including event detection, assignment
of semantic roles, de-duplication of events and or-
ganization of structured events into storylines. Each
of these can be done, but only with relatively high
error rates and at relatively simplistic semantic gran-
ularity of the structured events. Storylines produced
by automated systems are relatively simplistic and
may not be engaging enough for broad communica-
tion of news to consumers beyond decision-makers
with strong information needs. Furthermore, as the
economic basis of professional news organizations
erodes, automated news structuring approaches are
facing a rapid deterioration in the quality of the cor-
pus of text news articles from which they source
news events. This reduction in corpus quality is oc-
curring simultaneously with an increase in the quan-

tity of digital text artifacts, thereby forcing auto-
mated systems to detect less semantic signal embed-
ded in more semantic noise.

A comparison of automated and manual ap-
proaches to structuring news also reveals differing
assumptions about the nature of storylines, and of
stories generally. The automated approach loosely
assumes that storylines are objective features that al-
ready exist in reality (or at least in the source cor-
pus) and that must be found or discovered. The
manual approach loosely assumes that storylines are
necessarily human-created artifacts, with a human
purpose, and that therefore there cannot be a story
without an author or authors. This is an impor-
tant distinction, because it determines whether com-
putational storylines are mechanisms that are pri-
marily useful for search in text corpora or mecha-
nisms that are primarily useful for the storage and
communication of human understanding. An auto-
mated approach to structuring news is essentially a
kind of search engine, albeit one that can deliver
unusual and valuable results and therefore aid hu-
mans in building understanding. In contrast a news
structuring method that is subject to human editing,
judgement and oversight could directly accumulate
the understanding of skilled and informed journal-
ists and analysts and could refine that understanding
over time.

5 Computable News as an ecosystem

It is useful to consider the end-to-end creation, man-
agement and use of structured news storylines as an
ecosystem, or at least as a highly modular system,
because such a view encourages the application of
automated or manual techniques as appropriate to
the common objective of managing news as struc-
tured semantic data rather than as collections of text
articles. The possible ecosystem described below
(and shown in Figure 1) is hypothetical only regard-
ing the integration of its various components, each
of which have already been developed, deployed and
evaluated in various stand-alone experimental and
commercial systems.

A structured news ecosystem would be centered
on a single schema for representing news events and
storylines as structure, deployed either as multiple
interconnected news databases or possibly as a sin-

5



gle centralized news database. A wide variety of
sources and methods for capturing news events as
structure and for entering them into structured sto-
rylines within those databases would be deployed,
including manual, semi-automated and entirely au-
tomated methods. Manual methods could include
sequential user interfaces, such as that used in Struc-
tured Stories, controlled natural language interfaces,
managed crowdsourcing similar to Wikipedia’s edi-
torial process and the use of task marketplaces such
as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Semi-automated
methods could include workflows that automatically
parse events and semantic roles from text, and pre-
sented them to human reporter/analysts for verifica-
tion. Fully automated methods would include the
automated parsing of simple, easily-identified events
from text in web corpora, the detection of events
in raw structured data and the mapping of events
from existing structured event data. These various
input methods would be only loosely coupled to the
data repository, and new sources of structured news
events would be integrated as they were developed.

Regardless of the sources of structured news data,
it would be necessary for the resulting structured
news database(s) to be under human editorial super-
vision. This is essential for detecting and respond-
ing to errors, for handling unusual events or situ-
ations, for enabling the use of events of finer se-
mantic granularity than could be handled automat-
ically, for applying judgement about sub-narratives
and detail management, for assessing and manag-
ing the various event input methods, and for ensur-
ing the coherence of storylines. The burden of such
supervision could be managed using various auto-
mated processes and analytical tools while retaining
human editorial authority over the overall structured
dataset.

The methods of using and consuming structured
news events and storylines from a news database
would also be varied and modular. Simple interac-
tive interfaces, such as lists, timelines, flowcharts,
slideshows, cards, etc. would be necessary, as would
basic query and search tools. The available semantic
structure would also enable advanced interactive in-
terfaces, especially ’chat bot’ interfaces that deliver
detailed question-answering. Other advanced inter-
faces could also be integrated, such as on-demand
text articles produced using Natural Language Gen-

Figure 1: An integrated structured news ecosystem.

erations (NLG) tools (Graefe, 2016), automatically
generated comics, or on-demand video segments
produced using automated video production tools
(Kay, 2015).

All of these components already exist and have
been deployed in experimental and commercial sys-
tems, therefore the technical challenges of assem-
bling an integrated manual/automated structured
news ecosystem would primarily involve integra-
tion. The human factor and cultural challenges
would probably be more difficult, however there is
substantial motivation within existing news organi-
zations to find new ways of automating, bundling
and exploiting news. These organizations already
have a trained workforce of many tens of thousands
of skilled reporters and editors, and it appears from
the Structured Stories reporting experiments that
portions of this workforce may have the analytical
and abstraction skills necessary to transition to new
‘meta-journalism’ or ‘meta-editorial’ roles within a
structured news environment.

6 Conclusions

The existing text-based news ecosystem is failing for
both producers and consumers of news, and novel
structured and automated approaches to news are re-
quired. The assumption that news events and story-
lines originate in natural language text and that au-
tomated reading is the sole method available to ac-
cess and structure those events and storylines is lim-
iting. Lessons from the Structured Stories reporting
experiments, and from other manual news structur-

6



ing projects, have shown that applying human ed-
itorial judgement to structured news environments
is feasible, and can potentially address some of the
weaknesses of fully automated systems. Integration
of automated and manual approaches to structuring
news could enable a structured news ecosystem that
exhibits the advantages of each method.

Facilitating the development of a structured news
ecosystem requires viewing computable news func-
tionality as modular, with manual, semi-automated
and automated components. Integration of these
modular components within an ecosystem will re-
quire standards - particularly a standard representa-
tion schema for structured news events and story-
lines, and standard interfaces for event entry mod-
ules and for storyline consumption modules. Ad-
dressing the human factors challenges of an inte-
grated structured news ecosystem will require de-
velopment of the abstraction skills of reporters, ed-
itors and analysts and enabling journalists to prac-
tice their profession at a higher level of abstraction.
These are not simple challenges, however the experi-
ence of building and evaluating both automated and
manual news structuring systems has demonstrated
that they are achievable.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to acknowledge support for
the Structured Stories project from the Reynolds
Journalism Institute at the Missouri School of Jour-
nalism, The Reporter’s Lab at Duke University and
the Online News Association Challenge Fund.

References

C.W. Anderson, Emily Bell, and Clay Shirky. 2014. Post
industrial journalism: Adapting to the present. Tech-
nical report, Tow Center for Digital Journalism, New
York, NY.

Collin Baker. 2008. Framenet, present and future.
Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Global Interoperability for Language Resources.

Adrian Bridgwater. 2016. Machine learning needs a
human-in-the-loop. Forbes, March.

David Caswell, Frank Russell, and Bill Adair. 2015. Ed-
itorial aspects of reporting into structured narratives.
Proceedings of the 2015 Computation + Journalism
Symposium.

David Caswell. 2015. Structured narratives as a frame-
work for journalism: A work in progress. Proceedings
of the Sixth International Workshop on Computational
Models of Narrative.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Unsuper-
vised learning of narrative event chains. In Proceed-
ings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 789–797. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mark Coddington. 2015. Telling Secondhand Stories:
News Aggregation and the Production of Journalistic
Knowledge. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX.

Richard Edward Cullingford. 1978. Script application:
Computer understanding of newspaper stories. Tech-
nical report, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Andreas Graefe. 2016. Guide to automated journalism.
Technical report, Tow Center for Digital Journalism,
New York, NY.

Marc Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and Tecumseh Fitch.
2002. The faculty of language: What is it, who has
it, and how did it evolve? Science, 298:1569–1579.

Avery E. Holton and Hsiang Iris Chyi. 2012. News and
the overloaded consumer: Factors influencing infor-
mation overload among news consumers. Cyberpsy-
chology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15:619–
624, November.

Eduard Hovy. 2016. Filling the long tail. Keynote pre-
sentation of the 2nd Spinoza Workshop: Looking at
the Long Tail, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, June.

Hilary Kay. 2015. This is how text-to-video technology
works. Technical report, Wibbitz Inc.

Haewoon Kwak and Jisun An. 2016. Comparison of
widely used world news datasets: Gdelt and eventreg-
istry. Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Web and Social Media.

Inderjeet Mani. 2013. Computational Modeling of Nar-
rative. Morgan and Claypool, San Rafael, CA.

Robinson Meyer. 2016. How many stories do newspa-
pers publish per day? The Atlantic.

Barend Mons and Jan Velterop. 2009. Nano-publication
in the e-science era. Workshop on Semantic Web Ap-
plications in Scientific Discourse.

Paul Rissen, Helen Lippell, Matt Chadburn, Tom Leitch,
Dan Brickley, Michael Smethurst, and Sebastien
Cevey. 2013. News storyline ontology.

Marco Rospocher, Marieke van Erp, Piek Vossen, Antske
Fokkens, Itziar Aldabe, German Rigau, Aitor Soroa,
Thomas Ploeger, and Tessel Bogaard. 2016. Build-
ing event-centric knowledge graphs from news. Web
Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World
Wide Web, 37:Pages 132–151.

7



Rolf Schwitter. 2010. Controlled natural languages for
knowledge representation. Proceedings of the 23rd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1113–1121.

Stephanie Strassel, Dan Adams, Henry Goldberg,
Jonathan Herr, Ron Keesing, Daniel Oblinger, Heather
Simpson, Robert Schrag, and Jonathan Wright. 2010.
The darpa machine reading program - encouraging lin-
guistic and reasoning research with a series of read-
ing tasks. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10). European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA), may.

Kim Wedenberg and Alexander Sjberg. 2014. Online
inference of topics: Implementation of lda topic mod-
eling using an online variational bayes inference algo-
rithm to sort news articles. Technical report, Uppsala
Universitet, Uppsala, Sweden, February.

Gian Piero Zarri. 2009. Representation and Manage-
ment of Narrative Information. Springer-Verlag, Lon-
don, United Kingdom.

8


