



















































Abstract Coreference in a Multilingual Perspective: a View on Czech and German


Proceedings of the Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2016), co-located with NAACL 2016, pages 47–52,
San Diego, California, June 16, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Abstract Coreference in a Multilingual Perspective:
a View on Czech and German

Anna Nedoluzhko
Charles University in Prague

Malostranske nam. 25
CZ-11800 Prague, Czech Republic

nedoluzko@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski
Saarland University

A2.2 University Campus
D-66123, Saarbrücken, Germany

e.lapshinova@mx.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

This paper aims at a cross-lingual analysis
of coreference to abstract entities in Czech
and German, two languages that are typologi-
cally not very close, since they belong to two
different language groups – Slavic and Ger-
manic. We will specifically focus on coref-
erence chains to abstract entities, i.e. verbal
phrases, clauses, sentences or even longer text
passages. To our knowledge, this type of re-
lation is underinvestigated in the current state-
of-the-art literature.

1 Introduction

The main aim of this study is to enhance knowledge
on abstract coreference in a multilingual perspec-
tive. One of the examples of abstract coreference
in German is given in (1). Here, the anaphoric pro-
noun dies [this] referes to the whole preceding sen-
tence and not to nominal phrases (NPs) or pronouns,
which are analysed in most studies on coreference.

(1) Gleichzeitig brauchen wir mindestens eine
Verdoppelung des Wohlstands. Wenn wir
die Armutsgegenden der Erde anschauen,
weiß jeder sofort, dass dies das Min-
deste an moralischer Herausforderung ist.
[At the same time, we need to double the current
level of prosperity. One look at the poor regions
throughout the world is enough to make any-
one realize that this is the most urgent moral
challenge we face].

Although there exists a number of analyses of such
cases (see Section 2), the majority of studies are
monolingual or they do not include Germanic and
Slavic languages. Information on differences be-
tween Czech and German in terms of abstract coref-
erence will be beneficial to contrastive linguistics,
translation studies and multilingual natural language
processing.

The paper is organised as follows: related work
and the definition of the phenomena under analysis
are presented in Section 2, data and research ques-
tions are detailed in Section 3, followed by the anal-
ysis in Section 4. The discussion of the outcome and
future work are provided in Section 5.

2 Related Work

There are a number of works on coreference re-
lations other than identity, i.e. concerning ref-
erences to abstract entities or extended reference.
Most of them concentrate on the analysis of abstract
anaphora. For instance, Botley (2006) distinguishes
three main types of abstract anaphora: “label”
anaphora, which encapsulates stretches of text (fol-
lowing Francis (1994)); “situation” anaphora and
“text deixis”. Following Fraurud (1992), “situation”
anaphora is classified into eventuality and factuality.
Hedberg et al. (2007), Navarretta & Olsen (2008),
and Dipper & Zinsmeister (2009) present a simi-
lar distinction concerning “situation” anaphora sub-
types. Dipper & Zinsmeister (2009) provide a sur-
vey of corpus-based studies on this topic, structur-

47



ing them according to the form of anaphoric ex-
pressions (demonstratives, personal pronouns, etc.)
and antecedents (verbal phrases, clauses, arbitary se-
quences or larger sequences). Most of these stud-
ies take into account only some particular forms of
anaphors and antecedents, e.g. Hedberg et al. (2007)
and Müller (2008) concentrate exclusively on it, this
and that. The analyses of Müller (2008), Kučová
& Hajičová (2004) and Pradhan et al. (2007) are
limited to coreference to verbal phrases. Viera et
al. (2005), Hedberg et al. (2007) and Poesio & Art-
stein (2008) concentrate on arbitary sequences. By-
ron (2003), Poesio & Artstein (2008) as well as
Navarretta & Olsen (2008) include clauses into their
analysis. The only work known to us that provides
a description of coreference to various forms of ab-
stract antecedents is (Taulé et al., 2008).

Dipper & Zinsmeister (2009) also describe the
languages involved in the studies on abstract coref-
erence. It is obvious that English predominates over
other languages. Multilingual approaches are pre-
sented in (Vieira et al., 2005), (Navarretta and Olsen,
2008) and (Taulé et al., 2008) only and do not in-
volve the language pair analysed in the present pa-
per.

We analyse properties of abstract anaphora and
antecedents from a multilingual perspective com-
paring Czech and German. Coreference to abstract
entities such as events, states, situations, facts and
propositions are referred to as abstract coreference.
These include coreference to (i) verbal phrases as
in example (2-a), where these purposes refers to an-
swering of these questions, (ii) finite clauses and
sentences as in example (1) above, in which the Ger-
man demonstrative pronoun dies [this] refers to the
whole preceding sentence, and (iii) larger text pas-
sages and discontinuous strings as in example (2-b).
Here, the modified NP these goals refers to the three
preceding sentences.

(2) a. Polling is essential for
answering both of these questions. ...the
technique most frequently employed for
these purposes is the “cross-sectional”
survey.

b. Germany is seeking to achieve a 40%
reduction of greenhouse gases in Germany
by 2020, assuming the EU commits to a

reduction of 30%. The German renewable
energy act sets a new target of 20% electricity
from renewables by 2020. Germany’s
Sustainable Strategy intends to halve overall
energy consumption by 2050. The scale of
effort needed to meet these goals demon-
strates the degree of commitment of both
our nations.

Anaphoric expressions referring to abstract entities
in our approach include mostly pronouns, nouns,
nominal groups and pronominal adverbs.

3 Data and Research Questions

For our analysis, several texts of written discourse
(essays) with comparable topics on economic, polit-
ical and social issues have been selected.

For the German data, 8 texts were excerpted from
the corpus CroCo (Hansen-Schirra et al., 2012),
comprising 12243 tokens and 645 sentences in to-
tal. The corpus is annotated on several levels,
which include morphological, syntactic, structural
and textual information. The information on the lat-
ter was annotated with the help of semi-automatic
procedures described by Lapshinova-Koltunski &
Kunz (2014). Textual information is represented in
the form of cohesive devices, such as coreference,
connectives, substitution, ellipsis and lexical cohe-
sion. The annotated structures contain information
about morpho-syntactic features of devices (includ-
ing antecedents) and allow yielding information on
the chain features, i.e. number of elements in chains,
distance between chain elements, etc. Annotation
of textual coreference contains not only relations of
identity between entities but also abstract and situa-
tion anaphora. Therefore, we may have coreference
to nominal phrases (NPs) along with coreference to
clauses, clause complexes or sentences as the one
illustrated in example (1) above.

The Czech texts were taken from the Prague
Dependency Treebank (PDT 3.0, (Bejček et al.,
2013)). They are annotated with morphological, an-
alytical and tectogrammatical information, whereas
each sentence is represented as a dependency tree
structure. The tectogrammatical layer of PDT 3.0
also contains annotation of information structure
attributes, textual coreference of different types,
bridging relations and PDTB-style discourse rela-

48



tions (discourse connectives, the discourse units
linked by them, and semantic relations between
these units), see (Poláková et al., 2013) for details.
Since texts are shorter in the Czech data than in the
German data, 15 texts were excerpted to arrive at a
similar number of tokens and sentences (11399 and
628 respectively).

Although these two data sets were annotated
within two different frameworks, the data on the ab-
stract entities are comparable, since they contain in-
formation on the structural types of antecedents (if
they are clauses, sentences or longer segments), as
well as the structural and functional types of refer-
ring devices, i.e. demonstratives or other linguistic
means. The comparability of the data was proved
and discussed in Lapshinova et al. (2015).

4 Analyses

The total number of abstract coreference, i.e. the
cases where anaphoric devices point on antecedents
other than nominal groups or pronouns, is similar in
the analysed Czech and German texts: 63 and 68
respectively. However, the scopus of the segments
they refer to demonstrates variation, as seen from
Table 1.

In the German data, the most occurring cases of
abstract anaphors (ca. 66%) refer to segments of
one sentence, whereas in the Czech texts, there are
more cases of coreferences with longer segments
(ca. 48%). On the one hand, these difference may
have a technical origin. By marking references to
longer segments in the data for Czech, annotators
did not have to mark the antecedent, which could
result in a greater number of abstract anaphors in
Czech in general. On the other hand, this could also
mean that the authors of texts in Czech summarise
larger textual passages more often than those of the
German texts.

For the structural types of antecedents, we ob-
serve a general tendency of demonstratives to re-
fer to abstract entities in both languages. 72% of
all demonstrative heads in our German data refer to
abstract entities, whereas 39% do so in the Czech
data. They are compensated by modified nominal
phrases (with a demonstrative modifier) whose pro-
portion estimates ca. 37% out of all modified NPs in
the Czech texts.

Now, we will have a look at various types of
anaphoric means that are used in both languages to
refer to non-nominal antecedents, see Table 2.

In Czech, most of the explicitly expressed refer-
ences to clauses (except for one) are realized by a
demonstrative pronoun ten [it/this]. This is quite
expectable, because these are mostly references to
clauses within the same sentence, so the antecedent
is close to anaphor and should be neither repeated
nor emphasized by other demonstratives, cf. ex-
ample (3), where ten [it/this] refers to the immedi-
ately preceding antecedent proč jejich počet naopak
ve statistikách nezdůrazňovat [why not to emphasize
their number in statistics]. The remaining sentence
is the case of nominalisation (pokles [decline]) in
example (4), used without a demonstrative pronoun,
also because the antecedent clause immediately pre-
cedes the anaphoric noun.

(3) Cizinci podstatně přispěli k německému
hospodářskému a kulturnı́mu vývoji,
proč jejich počet naopak ve statistikách
nezdůrazňovat a tı́m veřejně uznat je-
jich zásluhy o německou hospodářskou a
politickou demokracii? [Foreigners have
contributed significantly to the German
economic and cultural development, so
why not to emphasize their number in statistics,
and to acknowledge their merit of the German
economic and political democracy by this?

(4) Dnes se tento počet snı́žil na asi půl milionu,
jenže důvodem poklesu je předevšı́m
skutečnost, že ten, kdo nenı́ zaměstnán
déle než rok, již podporu nedostane. [Today,
that number dropped to about half a million, but
the reason for the decline is the fact that anyone
who is not employed for more than a year, gets
no support anymore.]

In some cases (ca. 16%), reference to abstract en-
tities in Czech is expressed by a non-modified NP.
In coreference chains in German, these are mostly
named entities which never refer to abstract entities.

German shows a clear preference for demonstra-
tive heads (like dies in example (1) in Section 1
above) to refer to abstract entities (ca. 65%). An-
other device within this category is a pronominal
adverb, e.g. dazu, dabei which represents a com-

49



German Czech
abs. in % abs. in %

to clauses 5 7.35 13 20.63
to sentences 45 66.18 20 31.75
to bigger segments 18 26.47 30 47.62
total 68 100.00 63 100.00

Table 1: Number of anaphors referring to the antecedents other than NP and pronoun and their subtypes

German Czech
abs. in % abs. in %

demonstrative head (dies, dazu/ ten [this]) 44 64.71 28 44.44
demonstrative modifier + NP (diese Frage/ tato otzka [this question]) 16 23.53 17 26.98
bare NP 0 0.00 10 15.87
temporal/local (hier, da, nun/ tam, tady [here, there, now]) 3 4.41 4 6.35
personal pronoun (er, sie [he she], etc.)/ zero anahora 3 4.41 2 3.17
comparative 2 2.94 2 3.17
total 68 100.00 63 100.00

Table 2: Distribution of anaphora types referring to abstract entities in German and Czech

position of a preposition and the definite article, and
is very common in German. Most of them in our
data (over 55%) refer to sentences or even larger seg-
ments, although NPs can also be their antecedents,
see example (5).

(5) Diese “Euro-Münzhaushaltsmischung”
kostet 20 DM. Dafür bekommt man 20
Münzen zwischen 1 Cent und 2 Euro.
[This household set of euro coins will cost
20 marks. For this, you get 20 coins between 1
cent and 2 euros in value].

Anaphoric expressions in the form of nominal
phrases modified by a demonstrative pronoun or a
definite article, mostly contain a general noun, e.g.
Weise [way] in example (6).

(6) Die neue deutsche Truppe wurde vollständig in
die militärischen Strukturen der Nato integriert.
Auf diese Weise konnte das Ziel erreicht werden.
[The new German units were fully integrated into
NATO military structures. In this way it was
possible to achieve the goal of...]

This structure can refer both to longer segments as
in example (6), and to clauses as in example (7),
where we have an infinitive clause as an antecedent
of dieses Feld [this area].

(7) Es ist eine der wichtigsten Aufgaben des

Staates, die Erhaltung des freien Wettbewerbs
sicherzustellen. Versagt der Staat auf
diesem Felde, dann ist es bald um
die soziale Marktwirtschaft geschehen.
[Protecting free competition is one of the
state’ s most important tasks. If the state fails in
this area, the social market economy will soon
be lost].

In all cases observed in our data, devices referring to
abstract entities occur immediately in the following
segment (either a clause or a sentence). No cases of
longer distances were discovered in the data at hand.

5 Discussion and future work

In this paper, we present preliminary results of
cross-lingual analysis of variation in abstract coref-
erence. We analysed a small portion of texts in two
languages that are not very close typologically us-
ing data sets annotated within two different frame-
works. Our findings show that the differences of ty-
pological character (absence of definiteness or pro-
drops) have also influence on the preferences for cer-
tain functional or structural types expressing coref-
erence. We believe that the knowledge on the differ-
ence observed here is important for various areas of
linguistics, including contrastive studies, translatol-
ogy and multilingual NLP, especially machine trans-
lation. For instance, when translating from Czech

50



into German, demonstrative heads should be used
for summarisation of sentences or longer text seg-
ments instead of full nominal phrases. It would
be interesting to have a look at translations from
Czech to German (e.g. using a discriminative trans-
lation model of it designed in Novak et al. (2013))
to see if we would also see changes in the prefer-
ences for abstract anaphora in translated German,
as it was shown by Zinsmeister et al. (2012) for
the translations from English into German. The au-
thors show that although demonstrative heads are
more common for the originally authored texts in
German, translated German reveals a higher num-
ber of personal heads expressed with es, the direct
translation of the English it which is used in En-
glish for coreference to abstract entities. Both trans-
lation scholars and machine translation developers
should be aware of such differences to avoid produc-
tion of texts which sound less natural for the target
language.

In our future work, we will also consider if the ob-
served phenomena are genre- or domain-dependent.
Coreference to abstract entities seems to be spe-
cific for the data at hand: abstract anaphora refer to
the most central concepts in the analysed discourse.
However, we need to have a look at further genres
and domains, as well as at larger number of texts,
for the evidence for this assumption.

6 Acknowledgement

We acknowledge the support from the Grant Agency
of the Czech Republic (grant 16-05394S). This work
has been using language resources developed and
stored and distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN
project of the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports of the Czech Republic (project LM2015071).
The work on this project was partially supported by
the grant ”Multilingual Corpus Annotation as a Sup-
port for Language Technologies” (LH14011, Min-
istry of Education, Youth and Sports). The project
GECCo has been supported through a grant from
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Re-
search Society).

References
Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlı́na

Jı́nová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová, Marie

Mikulová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Jarmila
Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda Ševčı́ková, Jan
Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová. 2013. Prague depen-
dency treebank 3.0.

Simon Botley. 2006. Proceedings of the 10th Joint ACL -
ISO Workshop on Interoperable Semantic Annotation.
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 11(1):73–
112.

Donna Byron. 2003. Annotation of pronouns and their
antecedents: A comparison of two domains. Technical
report, University of Rochester.

Stefanie Dipper and Heike Zinsmeister. 2009. Proceed-
ings of the third linguistic annotation workshop (law
iii).

Gill Francis. 1994. Labelling discourse: an aspect
of nominal group lexical cohesion. In Malcolm
Coulthard, editor, Advances in Written Text Analysis,
pages 83–101, London:Routledge.

Kari Fraurud. 1992. Situation reference: What does it
refer to? In GAP Working Paper, Fachbereich Infor-
matik, Universitat Hamburg.

Silvia Hansen-Schirra, Stella Neumann, and Erich
Steiner. 2012. Cross-linguistic Corpora for the
Study of Translations. Insights from the Language Pair
English-German. de Gruyter, Berlin, New York.

Nancy Hedberg, Jeanette K Gundel, and Ron Zacharski.
2007. Directly and indirectly anaphoric demonstrative
and personal pronouns in newspaper articles. Proceed-
ings of DAARC, pages 31–36.

Lucie Kučová and Eva Hajičová. 2004. Coreferential
Relations in the Prague Dependency Treebank. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution Collo-
quium, pages 97–102, San Miguel. Edies Colibri.

Ekaterina Lapshinova, Anna Nedoluzhko, and Kerstin
Kunz. 2015. cross languages and genres: Creat-
ing a universal annotation scheme for textual relations.
In Ines Rehbein and Heike Zinsmeister, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic Annotations,
NAACL-2015, Denver, USA.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski and Kerstin Kunz.
2014. Annotating cohesion for multillingual analysis.
In Proceedings of the 10th Joint ACL - ISO Workshop
on Interoperable Semantic Annotation, Reykjavik, Ice-
land, May. LREC.

M.C. Müller. 2008. Fully Automatic Resolution of It, this
and that in Unrestricted Multi-party Dialog. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Tübingen.

Costanza Navarretta and Sussi Olsen. 2008. Annotating
abstract pronominal anaphora in the DAD project. In
Proceedings of LREC-08.

Michal Novák, Anna Nedoluzhko, and Zdeněk
Žabokrtský. 2013. Translation of ”it” in a deep

51



syntax framework. In Bonnie L. Webber, editor, 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse
in Machine Translation, pages 51–59, Sofija, Bulgaria.
Bălgarska akademija na naukite, Omnipress, Inc.

Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric
Annotation in the ARRAU Corpus. In International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Marrakech, Morocco, May.

Lucie Poláková, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko,
Pavlı́na Jı́nová, Šárka Zikánová, and Eva Hajičová.
2013. Introducing the prague discourse treebank 1.0.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, pages 91–
99, Nagoya, Japan. Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

S. Pradhan, L. Ramshaw, R. Weischedel, J. MacBride,
and L. Micciulla. 2007. Unrestricted coreference:
Identifying entities and events in ontonotes. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE-ICSC.

Mariona Taulé, Maria Antònia Martı́, and Marta Re-
casens. 2008. Ancora: Multilevel annotated corpora
for catalan and spanish. In LREC.

Renata Vieira, Susanne Salmon-Alt, Caroline Gasperin,
Emmanuel Schang, and Gabriel Othero. 2005. Coref-
erence and anaphoric relations of demonstrative noun
phrases in multilingual corpus. Anaphora Process-
ing: linguistic, cognitive and computational modeling,
pages 385–403.

Heike Zinsmeister, Stefanie Dipper, and Melanie Seiss.
2012. Abstract pronominal anaphors and label nouns
in german and english: selected case studies and
quantitative investigations. Translation: Computa-
tion, Corpora, Cognition, 2(1).

52


