



















































Findings of the 2016 WMT Shared Task on Cross-lingual Pronoun Prediction


Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 525–542,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Findings of the 2016 WMT Shared Task
on Cross-lingual Pronoun Prediction

Liane Guillou
LMU Munich

CIS
liane@cis.uni-muenchen.de

Christian Hardmeier
Uppsala University

Dept. of Linguistics & Philology
christian.hardmeier@lingfil.uu.se

Preslav Nakov
Qatar Computing Res. Inst.

HBKU
pnakov@qf.org.qa

Sara Stymne
Uppsala University

Dept. of Linguistics & Philology
sara.stymne@lingfil.uu.se

Jörg Tiedemann
University of Helsinki

Dept. of Modern Languages
jorg.tiedemann@helsinki.fi

Yannick Versley
LinkedIn

Dublin, Ireland
yversley@gmail.com

Mauro Cettolo
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Trento, Italy
cettolo@fbk.eu

Bonnie Webber
ILCC, University of

Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk

Andrei Popescu-Belis
Idiap Research Institute
Martigny, Switzerland

apbelis@idiap.ch

Abstract

We describe the design, the evaluation
setup, and the results of the 2016 WMT
shared task on cross-lingual pronoun pre-
diction. This is a classification task in
which participants are asked to provide
predictions on what pronoun class label
should replace a placeholder value in the
target-language text, provided in lemma-
tised and PoS-tagged form. We provided
four subtasks, for the English–French and
English–German language pairs, in both
directions. Eleven teams participated in
the shared task; nine for the English–
French subtask, five for French–English,
nine for English–German, and six for
German–English. Most of the submissions
outperformed two strong language-model-
based baseline systems, with systems us-
ing deep recurrent neural networks outper-
forming those using other architectures for
most language pairs.

1 Introduction

Pronoun translation poses a problem for cur-
rent state-of-the-art Statistical Machine Transla-
tion (SMT) systems (Le Nagard and Koehn, 2010;
Hardmeier and Federico, 2010; Novák, 2011;
Guillou, 2012; Hardmeier, 2014).

anaphoric I have an umbrella. It is red.
pleonastic I have an umbrella. It is raining.
event He lost his job. It came as a total

surprise.

Figure 1: Examples of three different functions
fulfilled by the English pronoun “it”.

Problems arise for a number of reasons. In gen-
eral, pronoun systems in natural language do not
map well across languages, e.g., due to differ-
ences in gender, number, case, formality, or ani-
macy/humanness, as well as due to differences in
where pronouns may be used.

To this is added the problem of functional am-
biguity, whereby pronouns with the same surface
form may perform multiple functions (Guillou,
2016). For example, the English pronoun “it” may
function as an anaphoric, pleonastic, or event ref-
erence pronoun. An anaphoric pronoun corefers
with a noun phrase (NP). A pleonastic pronoun
does not refer to anything, but it is required by syn-
tax to fill the subject position. An event reference
pronoun may refer to a verb phrase (VP), a clause,
an entire sentence, or a longer passage of text. Ex-
amples of each of these pronoun functions are pro-
vided in Figure 1. It is clear that instances of the
English pronoun “it” belonging to each of these
functions would have different translation require-
ments in French and German.

525



The problem of pronouns in machine translation
has long been studied. In particular, for SMT sys-
tems, the recent previous studies cited above have
focused on the translation of anaphoric pronouns.
In this case, a well-known constraint of languages
with grammatical gender is that agreement must
hold between an anaphoric pronoun and the NP
with which it corefers, called its antecedent. The
pronoun and its antecedent may occur in the same
sentence (intra-sentential anaphora) or in differ-
ent sentences (inter-sentential anaphora). Most
SMT systems translate sentences in isolation, so
inter-sentential anaphoric pronouns will be trans-
lated without knowledge of their antecedent and
as such, pronoun-antecedent agreement cannot be
guaranteed. The accurate translation of intra-
sentential anaphoric pronouns may also cause
problems as the pronoun and its antecedent may
fall into different translation units (e.g., n-gram or
syntactic tree fragment).

The above constraints start playing a role in pro-
noun translation in situations where several trans-
lation options are possible for a given source-
language pronoun, a large number of options be-
ing likely to affect negatively the translation ac-
curacy. In other words, pronoun types that ex-
hibit significant translation divergencies are more
likely to be erroneously translated by an SMT sys-
tem that is not aware of the above constraints.
For example, when translating the English pro-
noun “she” into French, there is one main op-
tion, “elle” (exceptions occur, though, e.g., in ref-
erences to ships). However, several options exist
for the translation of anaphoric “it”: “il” (for an
antecedent that is masculine in French) or “elle”
(feminine), but also “cela”, “ça” or sometimes
“ce” (non-gendered demonstratives).

The challenges of correct pronoun translation
gradually raised the interest in a shared task, which
would allow the comparison of various proposals
and the quantification of their claims to improve
pronoun translation. However, evaluating pro-
noun translation comes with its own challenges,
as reference-based evaluation cannot take into ac-
count the legitimate variations of translated pro-
nouns, or their placement in the sentence. Build-
ing upon the experience from a 2015 shared task,
the WMT 2016 shared task on pronoun predic-
tion has been designed to test capacities for correct
pronoun translation in a framework that allows for
objective evaluation, as we now explain.

2 Task Description

The WMT 2016 shared task on cross-lingual pro-
noun prediction is a classification task in which
participants are asked to provide predictions on
what pronoun class label should replace a place-
holder value (represented by the token REPLACE)
in the target-language text. It requires no specific
Machine Translation (MT) expertise and is inter-
esting as a machine learning task in its own right.
Within the context of SMT, one could think of the
task of cross-lingual pronoun prediction as a com-
ponent of an SMT system. This component may
take the form of a decoder feature or it may be
used to provide “corrected” pronoun translations
in a post-editing scenario.

The design of the WMT 2016 shared task has
been influenced by the design and the results of
a 2015 shared task (Hardmeier et al., 2015) or-
ganised at the EMNLP workshop on Discourse in
MT (DiscoMT). The first intuition about evaluat-
ing pronoun translation is to require participants
to submit MT systems — possibly with specific
strategies for pronoun translation — and to es-
timate the correctness of the pronouns they out-
put. This estimation, however, cannot be per-
formed with full reliability only by comparing pro-
nouns across candidate and reference translations
because this would miss the legitimate variation of
certain pronouns, as well as variations in gender
or number of the antecedent itself. Human judges
are thus required for reliable evaluation, follow-
ing the protocol described at the DiscoMT 2015
shared task on pronoun-focused translation. The
high cost of this approach, which grows linearly
with the number of submissions, prompted us to
implement an alternative approach, also proposed
in 2015 as pronoun prediction (Hardmeier et al.,
2015). While the structure of the WMT 2016 task
is similar to the shared task of the same name at
DiscoMT 2015, there are two main differences,
one conceptual and one regarding the language
pairs, as specified hereafter.

In the WMT 2016 task, participants are asked to
predict a target-language pronoun given a source-
language pronoun in the context of a sentence.
In addition to the source-language sentence, we
provide a lemmatised and part-of-speech (PoS)
tagged target-language human-authored transla-
tion of the source sentence, and automatic word
alignments between the source-sentence words
and the target-language lemmata.

526



In the translation, the words aligned to a subset
of the source-language third-person subject pro-
nouns are substituted by placeholders. The aim
of the task is to predict, for each placeholder, the
word that should replace it from a small, closed
set of classes, using any type of information that
can be extracted from the documents. In this way,
the evaluation can be fully automatic, by com-
paring whether the class predicted by the system
is identical to the reference one, assuming that
the constraints of the lemmatised target text allow
only one correct class (unlike the pronoun-focused
translation task which makes no assumption about
the target text).

Figure 2 shows an English–French example
sentence from the development set. It contains
two pronouns to be predicted, indicated by RE-
PLACE tags in the target sentence. The first “it”
corresponds to “ce” while the second “it” corre-
sponds to “qui” (equivalent to English “which”),
which belongs to the OTHER class, i.e., does not
need to be predicted as is. This example illustrates
some of the difficulties of the task: the two source
sentences are merged into one target sentence, the
second “it” becomes a relative pronoun instead of
a subject one, and the second French verb has a
rare intransitive usage.

The two main differences between the
WMT 2016 and DiscoMT 2015 tasks are as
follows. First, the WMT 2016 task introduces
more language pairs with respect to the 2015 task.
In addition to the English–French subtask (same
pair as the DiscoMT 2015 task), we also provide
subtasks for French–English, German–English
and English–German. Second, the WMT 2016
task provides a lemmatised and PoS-tagged refer-
ence translation instead of the fully inflected text
provided for the DiscoMT 2015 task. The use of
this representation, whilst still artificial, could be
considered to provide a more realistic SMT-like
setting. SMT systems cannot be relied upon to
generate correctly inflected surface form words,
and so the lemmatised, PoS-tagged representation
encourages greater reliance on other information
from the source and target-language sentences.

The following sections describe the set of
source-language pronouns and the target-language
classes to be predicted, for each of the four sub-
tasks. The subtasks are asymmetric in terms of
the source-language pronouns and the prediction
classes.

The selection of the source-language pronouns
and their target-language prediction classes for
each subtask is based on the variation that is
to be expected when translating a given source-
language pronoun, i.e., the translation divergen-
cies of each pronoun type. For example, when
translating the English pronoun “it” into French,
a decision must be made as to the gender of the
French pronoun, with “il” and “elle” both provid-
ing valid options. Alternatively, a non-gendered
pronoun such as “cela” may be used instead. The
translation of the English pronouns “he” and “she”
into French, however, does not require such a de-
cision. These may simply be mapped one-to-one,
as “il” and “elle” respectively, in the vast major-
ity of cases. The translation of “he” and “she”
from English into French is therefore not consid-
ered an interesting problem and as such, these
pronouns are excluded from the source-language
set for the English–French subtask. In the oppo-
site translation direction, the French pronoun “il”
may be translated as “it” or “he”, and “elle” as
“it” or “she”. As a decision must be taken as to
the appropriate target-language translation of “il”
and “elle”, these are included in the set of source-
language pronouns for French–English.

2.1 English–French
This subtask concentrates on the translation of
subject-position “it” and “they” from English into
French. The following prediction classes exist for
this subtask (the class name, identical to the main
lexical item, is highlighted in bold, but each class
may include additional lexical items, indicated in
plain font between quotes):

• ce: the French pronoun “ce” (sometimes with
elided vowel as “c’ ” when preceding a word
starting by a vowel) as in the expression
“c’est” (“it is”);
• elle: feminine singular subject pronoun;
• elles: feminine plural subject pronoun;
• il: masculine singular subject pronoun;
• ils: masculine plural subject pronoun;
• cela: demonstrative pronouns, including

“cela”, “ça”, the misspelling “ca”, and the
rare elided form “ç’ ” when the verb follow-
ing it starts with a vowel;
• on: indefinite pronoun;
• OTHER: some other word, or nothing at all,

should be inserted.

527



ce OTHER ce|PRON qui|PRON It ’s an idiotic debate . It has to stop . REPLACE 0
être|VER un|DET débat|NOM idiot|ADJ REPLACE 6 devoir|VER stopper|VER .|. 0-0 1-1
2-2 3-4 4-3 6-5 7-6 8-6 9-7 10-8

Figure 2: English–French example sentence from the development set with two REPLACE tags to be
replaced by “ce” and “qui” (OTHER class), respectively. The French reference translation, not shown to
participants, merges the two source sentences into one: “C’est un débat idiot qui doit stopper.”

2.2 French–English
This subtask concentrates on the translation of
subject-position “elle”, “elles”, “il”, and “ils”
from French into English.1 The following predic-
tion classes exist for this subtask:

• he: masculine singular subject pronoun;
• she: feminine singular subject pronoun;
• it: non-gendered singular subject pronoun;
• they: non-gendered plural subject pronoun;
• this: demonstrative pronouns (singular), in-

cluding both “this” and “that”;

• these: demonstrative pronouns (plural), in-
cluding both “these” and “those”;

• there: existential “there”;
• OTHER: some other word, or nothing at all,

should be inserted.

2.3 English–German
This subtask concentrates on the translation of
subject-position “it” and “they” from English into
German. It uses the following prediction classes:

• er: masculine singular subject pronoun;
• sie: feminine singular, and non-gendered plu-

ral subject pronouns;

• es: neuter singular subject pronoun;
• man: indefinite pronoun;
• OTHER: some other word, or nothing at all,

should be inserted.

2.4 German–English
This subtask concentrates on the translation of
subject position “er”, “sie” and “es” from German
into English. The following prediction classes ex-
ist for this subtask:

• he: masculine singular subject pronoun;
• she: feminine singular subject pronoun;
1We explain below in Section 3.3.3 how non-subject pro-

nouns are filtered out from the data.

• it: non-gendered singular subject pronoun;
• they: non-gendered plural subject pronoun;
• you: second person pronoun (with both

generic or deictic uses);

• this: demonstrative pronouns (singular), in-
cluding both “this” and “that”;

• these: demonstrative pronouns (plural), in-
cluding both “these” and “those”;

• there: existential “there”;
• OTHER: some other word, or nothing at all,

should be inserted.

3 Datasets

3.1 Data Sources
The training dataset comprises Europarl, News
and TED talks data. The development and test
datasets consist of TED talks. Below we describe
the TED talks, the Europarl and News data, the
method used for selecting the test datasets, and the
steps taken to pre-process the training, develop-
ment, and test datasets.

3.1.1 TED Talks
TED is a non-profit organisation that “invites the
world’s most fascinating thinkers and doers [...] to
give the talk of their lives”. Its website2 makes the
audio and the video of TED talks available under
the Creative Commons license. All talks are pre-
sented and captioned in English, and translated by
volunteers world-wide into many languages.3 In
addition to the availability of (audio) recordings,
transcriptions and translations, TED talks pose in-
teresting research challenges from the perspective
of both speech recognition and machine transla-
tion. Therefore, both research communities are
making increased use of them in building bench-
marks.

2http://www.ted.com/
3As is common in other MT shared tasks, we do not give

particular significance to the fact that all talks are originally
given in English, which means that French–English transla-
tion is in reality a back-translation.

528



TED talks address topics of general interest and
are delivered to a live public audience whose re-
sponses are also audible on the recordings. The
talks generally aim to be persuasive and to change
the viewers’ behaviour or beliefs. The genre of the
TED talks is transcribed planned speech.

As shown in analysis presented by Guillou et
al. (2014), TED talks differ from other text types
with respect to pronoun usage. TED speakers
frequently use first- and second-person pronouns
(singular and plural): first-person to refer to them-
selves and their colleagues or to themselves and
the audience, second-person to refer to the audi-
ence, the larger set of viewers, or people in gen-
eral. TED speakers often use the pronoun “they”
without a specific textual antecedent, in sentences
such as “This is what they think.” They also
use deictic and third-person pronouns to refer to
things in the spatio-temporal context shared by the
speaker and the audience, such as props and slides.
In general, pronouns are common, and anaphoric
references are not always clearly defined.

For the WMT 2016 task, TED training and de-
velopment sets come from the MT task of the 2015
IWSLT evaluation campaign (Cettolo et al., 2015).
The test set from DiscoMT 2015 (Hardmeier et al.,
2015) was also released for development purposes.

3.1.2 Europarl and News
For training purposes, in addition to TED talks,
the Europarl4 and News Commentary5 corpora
were made available. We used the alignments pro-
vided by OPUS, including the document bound-
aries from the original sources. For Europarl, we
used version 7 of the data release and the News
Commentary set refers to version 9. The data
preparation is explained below.

3.2 Test Set Selection
We selected the test datasets for the shared task
from talks added recently to the TED repository
that satisfy the following requirements:

1. The talks have been transcribed (in English)
and translated into both German and French.

2. They are not included in the training, devel-
opment or test sets of the IWSLT evaluation
campaigns, nor in the DiscoMT 2015 test set.

3. In total, they amount to a number of words
suitable for evaluation purposes (some tens of
thousands).

4http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
5http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/News-Commentary.php

Once we found the talks satisfying these crite-
ria, we automatically aligned them at the segment
level. Then, we extracted a number of TED talks
from the collection, following the criteria outlined
in Section 3.2. Finally, we manually checked the
sentence alignments of these selected TED talks in
order to fix errors generated by either automatic or
human processing. Table 1 shows some statistics
about the test datasets prepared for each subtask.

subtask segs tokens
source target

English–French 1,213 22,429 23,626
French–English 1,199 24,019 23,911
English–German 1,258 22,458 20,118
German–English 1,192 20,795 23,926

Table 1: Statistics about 2016 test datasets.

In total, we selected 16 TED talks for testing,
which we split into two groups: 8 TED talks for
the English to French/German direction, and 8
TED talks for the French/German to English di-
rection. Another option would have been to create
four separate groups of TED talks, one for each
subtask. However, using a smaller set of docu-
ments reduced the manual effort in correcting the
automatic sentence alignment of the documents.

The TED talks belonging to the test datasets are
described in Tables 2 and 3. The English texts
used for the English–French and English–German
subtasks are the same. Differences in alignment
of the sentences leads to different segmentation of
the parallel texts for the different language pairs.
Minor corrections to the sentence alignment and
to the text itself, which were applied manually,
resulted in small differences in token counts for
the same English TED talk when paired with the
French vs. the German translation.

The TED talks in the test datasets were selected
to include more pronouns from the rare classes.
For example, for the English to French/German
dataset, we wished to include documents that
contained more feminine pronouns in the French
and in the German translations. For the Ger-
man/French to English dataset, we wished to in-
clude documents with more demonstrative pro-
nouns in the English translations. The group
of documents for the translation from English to
French/German was balanced to ensure that the
preference for rare pronouns was satisfied for both
target languages.

529



ID Speaker Segs Tokens Segs Tokens
English French English German

1541 L. Kristine 124 2,883 3,224 124 2,883 2,614
1665 E. Schlangen 48 1,027 1,087 48 1,027 887
2155 J. Howard 174 3,943 3,794 184 3,972 3,321
2175 K. Gbla 220 3,474 3,592 249 3,475 3,110
2241 P. Ronald 161 2,870 3,104 172 2,882 2,672
2277 D. Hoffman 225 3,736 3,837 217 3,729 3,293
2289 M. McKenna 118 2,342 2,666 121 2,338 2,207
2321 Y. Morieux 143 2,154 2,322 143 2,152 2,014

Total 1,213 22,429 23,626 1,258 22,458 20,118

Table 2: Test dataset documents: English to French/German.

ID Speaker Segs Tokens Segs Tokens
French English German English

2039 M. Gould Stewart 105 2,567 2,443 123 2,257 2,449
2140 E. Balcetis 127 2,725 2,541 132 2,206 2,509
2151 V. Myers 151 2,803 2,918 168 2,370 2,937
2182 R. Semler 235 4,297 4,530 261 3,848 4,548
2194 N. Burke Harris 93 2,592 2,380 105 1,977 2,369
2246 A. Davis 147 2,660 2,832 103 2,347 2,805
2252 E. Perel 162 3,369 3,220 163 3,162 3,226
2287 C. Kidd 179 3,006 3,047 137 2,628 3,083

Total 1,199 24,019 23,911 1,192 20,795 23,926

Table 3: Test dataset documents: French/German to English.

3.3 Data Preparation

In order to extract pronoun examples, we first
needed to align the data. We then extracted the
pronoun examples based on the alignments. Fi-
nally, we filtered the examples in order to remove
non-subjects. An innovation this year is the lem-
matisation of the target data to remove the infor-
mative features coming from the inflections of the
surrounding context. We used automatic lemma-
tisers and PoS taggers, and we further converted
the PoS labels to 12 coarse universal PoS tags
(Petrov et al., 2012). For all languages in our
dataset, we used TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) with
its built-in lemmatiser. The tagsets were then con-
verted to universal PoS tags using publicly avail-
able mappings,6 except for French, for which no
appropriate mapping was available. In French, we
clipped the morphosyntactic information from the
base word class, which is separated by a colon
(‘:’) in the tagset (e.g., VER:futu, VER:impe and
all other verb tags would be reduced to VER, thus
only keeping the verb tag, resulting in 15 tags.
For German, we had to map pronominal adverbs
to PROAV for the conversion to match the Tiger
tagset used in the mapping to universal PoS tags.

6https://github.com/slavpetrov/
universal-pos-tags

3.3.1 Alignment Optimisation

Since we extract examples based on word align-
ments, we need good alignment precision in order
not to extract erroneous examples, and good recall
in order not to overgenerate the OTHER class. For
the DiscoMT 2015 shared task, we explored this
issue for English–French and found that GIZA++
model 4 and HMM with grow-diag-final-and sym-
metrisation gave the best results. For pronoun–
pronoun links, we had an F-score of 0.96, with
perfect recall and precision of 0.93 (Hardmeier et
al., 2015). This was slightly higher than for other
links, which had an F-score of 0.92.

For German–English, we explored this issue
this year since it is a new language pair. We
used an aligned gold standard of 987 sentences
from (Padó and Lapata, 2005), which has been ex-
tensively evaluated by Stymne et al. (2014). We
used the same methodology as in 2015, and per-
formed an evaluation on the subset of links be-
tween the pronouns we are interested in. We re-
port precision and recall of links both for the pro-
noun subset and for all links, shown in Table 4.
The alignment quality is considerably worse than
for French–English both for all links and for pro-
nouns, but again the results for pronouns is better
than for all links in both precision and recall.

530



Alignment Symmetrisation All links Pronouns
P R P R

Model 4
gdfa

.75 .79 .82 .88
fast-align .69 .73 .80 .81

HMM

.80 .73 .87 .85
gd .81 .70 .89 .78
gdf .73 .77 .77 .90
∪ .71 .77 .76 .90
∩ .92 .61 .92 .74

Table 4: Evaluation of German–English align-
ments for all links and pronouns using different
alignment models and symmetrisation.

Across symmetrisation methods, HMM align-
ments give the best performance, especially for
precision. The trade-off between precision and
recall that holds for all links also applies to pro-
noun links. In the end, we decided to use HMM
with intersection symmetrisation, since we believe
that precision is more important than recall, in
order not to add any false positive instances of
the pronoun classes to our data. The lower re-
call will result in more examples from the OTHER
class though. For English–French, we applied the
same setup as last year using IBM Model 4 and
the grow-diag-final-and symmetrisation heuristic.
Similar to last year, we also perform backoff align-
ment with fast align in cases that are filtered out
before running GIZA++ because of length and
length-ratio restrictions of the parallel data.

3.3.2 Example Selection

In order to select the acceptable target classes, we
computed the frequencies of pronouns aligned to
the ambiguous source-language pronouns based
on the PoS-tagged training data. Using these
statistics, we defined the sets of predicted labels
for each language pair. Based on the counts, we
also decided to merge small classes such as the
demonstrative pronouns ‘these’ and ‘those’.

Using these datasets, we identified examples
based on the automatic word alignments. We in-
clude cases in which multiple words are aligned
to the selected pronoun if one of them belongs to
the set of accepted target pronouns. If this is not
the case, we use the shortest word aligned to the
pronoun as the placeholder token.

Unlike in 2015, we find a translation place-
holder token for the unaligned pronouns using the
following heuristic: we use alignment links of sur-
rounding source-language words to determine the
likely position for the placeholder token.

We expand the window in both directions until
we find a link. We insert the placeholder before or
after the linked token, depending on whether the
aligned source-language token is in left or right
context of the selected pronoun. If no link is found
in the entire sentence (an infrequent case), we use
a position similar to the position of the selected
pronoun within the source-language sentence.

3.3.3 Subject Filtering
The main interest of both the 2015 and the 2016
shared tasks has been on subject pronouns, and the
pronoun sets have been selected with this in mind.
However, several pronouns are ambiguous for the
subject/object distinction. For the source datasets,
this applies to English “it” and German “es” and
“sie”. In 2015, we ignored this issue, but this year
we added a filtering step for the cases where En-
glish or German was the source language. We used
automatic filtering for all datasets, and in addition,
some manual filtering for the test dataset.

For the automatic filtering, we parsed the data
using Mate Tools to perform joint PoS-tagging
and dependency parsing. For the ambiguous pro-
nouns, we then removed all pronoun instances that
were not labelled as subjects, i.e., had the depen-
dency label SBJ for English or SB for German. For
French–English, no filtering was performed since
all source pronouns are unambiguous subject pro-
nouns. Table 5 shows how the subject filtering
affected the IWSLT15 training set. For all lan-
guages, there was a large reduction for the OTHER
class. For German–English, there were also large
reductions for several other classes. Evaluations
carried out after the shared task showed that this
was mainly due to the dependency label EP, which
marks expletives, and which should not have been
filtered away. This mainly affected translation
from “es gibt” / “there is”, and explains the large
reduction of the there class for German–English.

For the test dataset, we manually checked all
of the pronouns that remained after the auto-
matic filtering, in order to remove any remaining
non-subjects. This showed that the performance
of the parser for subjects was good and only a
small amount of non-subjects remained, one for
English–French, two for English–German, and six
for German–English. We also noticed some issues
with the casing of German “Sie”, and changed it
in four cases. Due to time constraints, we did not
check the removed pronouns before releasing the
data, but only for evaluation purposes afterwards.

531



We checked all removed pronouns, 70 for
English–German, 71 for English–French, and
a sample of 70 pronouns for German–English,
where many more pronouns were filtered away.
For English as a source language, the filtering was
very accurate, and there were only two instances
for English–French and no instances for English–
German where a subject pronoun had been re-
moved erroneously. In both cases, the erroneous
removal of the subject position pronoun was due
to sentence segmentation issues. For German,
though, 34 of the 70 removed pronouns were sub-
jects. In 27 cases, they were labelled as expletives,
as described above, which could easily be reme-
died. The remaining cases are indirect speech, rel-
ative clauses, or subordinate clauses, which appear
to be more difficult for the parser than the English
counterparts. Even so, the performance was ac-
ceptable also for German, with a much lower rate
of non-subjects than before the filtering.

4 Baseline Systems

The baseline system for each language pair is
based on an n-gram language model. The ar-
chitecture is similar to that used for the Dis-
coMT 2015 cross-lingual pronoun prediction task,
but the systems are trained on lemmatised, PoS-
tagged data instead of raw, unprocessed text.
Given that none of the systems submitted to
the cross-lingual pronoun prediction task at Dis-
coMT 2015 were able to beat the baseline system,
we deemed it suitable for re-use this year.

We provided baseline systems for each sub-
task. Each baseline is based on a 5-gram language
model trained on word lemmata, constructed from
news texts, parliament debates, and the TED
talks of the training/development portions of the
datasets. The additional monolingual news data
comprises the shuffled news texts from WMT in-
cluding the 2014 editions for German and English
and the 2007–2013 editions for French. The Ger-
man corpus contains a total of 46 million sen-
tences with 814 million lemmatised tokens, En-
glish contains 28 million sentences and 632 mil-
lion tokens, and French includes 30 million sen-
tences with 741 million tokens.

The justification for using a baseline system
based on a language model remains unchanged
from the DiscoMT 2015 shared task. That is, the
aim is to reproduce the most realistic scenario for
a phrase-based SMT system.

The main assumption here is that the amount of
information that can be extracted from the transla-
tion table is not sufficient or is inconclusive. As a
result, the pronoun prediction would be influenced
primarily by the language model.

The baseline system fills the REPLACE token
gaps by using a fixed set of pronouns (those to be
predicted) and a fixed set of non-pronouns (which
includes the most frequent items aligned with a
pronoun in the provided test set) as well as the
NONE option (i.e., do not insert anything in the hy-
pothesis). The baseline system may be optimised
using a configurable NONE penalty that accounts
for the fact that n-gram language models tend to
assign higher probability to shorter strings than to
longer ones.

Two official baseline scores are provided for
each subtask. The first was computed with the
NONE penalty set to an unoptimised default value
of zero. The second was computed with the NONE
penalty set to an optimised value, which is differ-
ent for each subtask. The NONE penalty was op-
timised on the development set by a grid search
procedure where we tried values between 0 and
−4, with a step of 0.5.

5 Submitted Systems

Eleven teams participated in the shared task, but
not all teams submitted systems for all subtasks.
Some teams also submitted second, contrastive
systems for some subtasks. Ten of the groups sub-
mitted system description papers, which are cited
hereafter. For the eleventh submission, UU-CAP,
no system description paper was submitted. Brief
summaries of each submission, including UU-
CAP, are presented in the following sections.

5.1 CUNI

Charles University participated in the English–
German and German–English subtasks (Novák,
2016). Each CUNI system is a linear classi-
fier trained using a logistic loss optimised using
stochastic gradient descent, implemented in the
Vowpal Wabbit toolkit.7 In the primary submis-
sion, the training examples are weighed with re-
spect to the distribution of the target pronouns in
the training data, which aims at improving the pre-
diction accuracy of less frequent pronouns. The
contrastive submission does not weigh examples.

7https://github.com/JohnLangford/
vowpal_wabbit/wiki

532



German–English English–German English–French
word before after word before after word before after

he 8,939 8,932 er 2,217 2092 ce 17,472 16,415
she 3,664 3,541 sie 22,779 21041 elle 3,483 3,286
it 33,338 23,628 es 26,923 21207 elles 3,305 3,276
they 18,581 17,896 man 662 622 il 10,126 9,682
this 1,479 983 OTHER 32,197 21279 ils 17,234 17,145
these 250 172 cela 8,071 6,908
there 6,935 2,905 on 1,713 1,549
OTHER 30,751 18,102 OTHER 27,530 11,226

Table 5: Number of pronouns for the different classes in the IWSLT15 data before and after filtering.

Before extracting the examples as feature vec-
tors, the data is linguistically preprocessed us-
ing the Treex framework (Popel and Žabokrtský,
2010). The source-language texts undergo a thor-
ough analysis and are enriched with PoS tags,
dependency syntax, as well as semantic roles
and coreference for English. On the other hand,
only grammatical genders are assigned to nouns
in the target language texts. The system uses
three types of features: the features based on the
target-language model estimates provided by the
baseline system, linguistic features concerning the
source word aligned to the target pronoun, and ap-
proximations of the coreference and dependency
relations in the target language.

Following the submission of the CUNI systems
for English–German, an error was discovered in
the merging of the classifier output into the test
data file for submission. Fixing it yielded an im-
provement, with the contrastive system achieving
recall of 51.74, and 54.37 for the primary system.

Except for the English wordlist with gender dis-
tributions by Bergsma and Lin (2006), only the
shared task data was used in the CUNI systems.

5.2 IDIAP

The IDIAP systems (Luong and Popescu-Belis,
2016) focus on English–French using two types of
target-side information: a target-side pronoun lan-
guage model (PLM) and several heuristic gram-
mar rules. The goal is to test how much a target-
side only PLM can improve the translation of pro-
nouns, without any knowledge of the source texts,
i.e., by looking at target-side fluency only.

The rules are specifically constructed for pre-
dicting two cases: the French pronoun “on” and
the untranslated pronouns. They detect the source
and target patterns signalling the possible presence
of such pronouns, which are not always correctly
captured by SMT systems.

For predicting all of the other pronouns, the
IDIAP system relied solely on the scores coming
from the proposed PLM model. This target-side
PLM model uses a large target-language training
dataset to learn a probabilistic relation between
each target pronoun and the distribution of the
gender-number of its preceding nouns and pro-
nouns. For prediction, given each source pronoun
“it” or “they”, the system uses the PLM to score
all possible candidates and to select the one with
the highest score.

In addition to the PoS-tagged lemmatised data
that was provided for the shared task, the WIT3
parallel corpus (Cettolo et al., 2012), provided
as part of the training data at the DiscoMT 2015
workshop, was used to train the PLM model. Fur-
thermore, a French PoS-tagger, Morfette (Chru-
pala et al., 2008), was employed for gender-
number extraction.

5.3 LIMSI

The LIMSI systems (Bawden, 2016) for the
English–French task are linguistically-driven sta-
tistical classification systems. The systems use
random forests, with few, high-level features, re-
lying on explicit coreference resolution and exter-
nal linguistic resources and syntactic dependen-
cies. The systems include several types of con-
textual features, including a single feature using
context templates to target particularly discrimina-
tive contexts for the prediction of certain pronoun
classes, in particular the OTHER class.

The difference between the primary and con-
trastive systems is small. In the primary system,
the feature value ‘number’ is assigned by taking
the number of the last referent in the English-
side coreference chain. In the contrastive system,
the value of ‘number’ was taken directly from the
English pronoun that was aligned with the place-
holder: plural for “they” and singular for “it”.

533



A number of tools and resources are used in
the LIMSI system. Stanford CoreNLP is used for
PoS tagging, syntactic dependencies, and corefer-
ence resolution over the English text. The Mate
Parser (Bohnet and Nivre, 2012), retrained on
SPMRL 2014 data (Seddah et al., 2014) (depen-
dency trees), and the Lefff (Sagot, 2010), a mor-
phological and syntactic lexicon (used for infor-
mation on noun gender and impersonal adjectives
and verbs), are both used for French.

5.4 TurkuNLP

The architecture for the TURKUNLP system (Lu-
otolahti et al., 2016) is based on token-level se-
quence classification around the target pronoun us-
ing stacked recurrent neural networks.

The system learns token-level embeddings for
the source-language lemmata, target-language to-
kens, PoS tags, combination of words and PoS
tags and separate embeddings for the source-
language pronouns that are aligned with the target
pronoun. The network is fed sequences of these
embeddings within a certain window to the left
and to the right of the target pronoun. The win-
dow size used by the system is 50 tokens or until
the end of the sentence boundary.

All of these inputs are read by two layered gated
recurrent unit neural networks, except for the em-
bedding for the aligned pronoun. All outputs of
the recurrent layers are concatenated to a single
vector along with the embedding of the aligned
pronoun. This vector is then used to make the pro-
noun prediction by a dense neural network layer.

The primary systems are trained to optimise
macro-averaged recall and the contrastive systems
are optimised without preference towards rare
classes. The system is trained only on the shared
task data and all parts of the data, in-domain and
out-of-domain, are used for training the system.

5.5 UEDIN

The UEDIN systems (Wetzel, 2016) for English–
French and English–German are Maximum En-
tropy (MaxEnt) classifiers with the following set
of features: tokens and their PoS tags are extracted
from a context window around source- and target-
side pronouns. N -gram combinations of these fea-
tures are included by concatenating adjacent to-
kens or PoS tags. Furthermore, the pleonastic use
of a pronoun is detected with NADA (Bergsma
and Yarowsky, 2011) on the source side.

A Language Model (LM) is used to predict the
most likely target-side pronoun, and then it is in-
cluded as a feature. Another feature extracts the
closest target-side noun antecedent (and its gen-
der for German) via source coreference chains
and word alignments. Additionally, the systems
learn to predict NULL-translations (i.e., pronouns
that do not have an equivalent translation). Ex-
periments with linear-chain Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs) treating pronouns of the same coref-
erence chain as a sequence are conducted as well.
All models are trained on a subset of the pro-
vided training data that has well-defined document
boundaries in order to allow for meaningful ex-
traction of coreference chains.

The MaxEnt classifiers consistently outperform
the CRF models. Feature ablation shows that the
antecedent feature is useful for English–German,
and predicting NULL-translations is useful for
English–French. It also reveals that the LM fea-
ture hurts performance.

5.6 UHELSINKI
The UHELSINKI system (Tiedemann, 2016) imple-
ments a simple linear classifier based on LibSVM
with its L2-loss SVC dual solver. The system
applies local source-language and target-language
context using the given tokens and PoS labels as
features. Coreference resolution is not used, but
additional selected items in the prior context are
extracted to enrich the model. In particular, a
small number of the nearest determiners, nouns
and proper nouns are taken as possible antecedent
candidates. The contribution of these features is
limited even with the lemmatised target-language
context that makes it harder to disambiguate pro-
noun translation decisions. The model performs
reasonably well especially for the prediction of
pronoun translations into English.

5.7 UKYOTO
The UKYOTO system (Dabre et al., 2016) is a sim-
ple Recurrent Neural Network system with an at-
tention mechanism which encodes both the source
sentence and the context of the pronoun to be pre-
dicted and then predicts the pronoun. The interest-
ing thing about the approach is that it uses a sim-
ple language-independent Neural Network (NN)
mechanism that performs well in almost all cases.
Another interesting aspect is that good perfor-
mance is achieved, even though only the IWSLT
data is used.

534



This indicates that the NN mechanism is quite
effective. The only side effect is that the neural
network overfits on the training and on the devel-
opment datasets. In the future, the authors plan
to use coreference resolution and system combina-
tion, which should help improve the performance.

5.8 UUPPSALA
The main contribution of the UUPPSALA-
PRIMARY system (Loáiciga et al., 2016) for
English–French is a Maximum Entropy classifier
used to determine whether an instance of the
English pronoun “it” functions as an anaphoric,
pleonastic, or event reference pronoun. The
classifier is trained on a combination of semantic,
based on lexical resources such as VerbNet
(Schuler, 2005) and WordNet (Miller, 1995),
and frequencies computed over the annotated
Gigaword corpus (Napoles et al., 2012), syntactic,
from the dependency parser in the Mate tools
(Bohnet et al., 2013), and contextual features. The
event classification results are modest, reaching
only 54.2 F-score for the event class.

The translation model, into which the classifier
is integrated, is a 6-gram language model com-
puted over target lemmata using modified Kneser-
Ney smoothing and the KenLM toolkit (Heafield,
2011). In addition to the pure target lemma con-
text, it also has access to the identity of the source-
language pronoun, used as a concatenated label to
each REPLACE item. This provides information
about the number marking of the pronouns in the
source, and also allows for the incorporation of the
output of the ‘it’-label classifier. To predict classes
for an unseen test set, a uniform unannotated RE-
PLACE tag is used for all classes. The ‘disambig’
tool of the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) is then
used to recover the tag annotated with the correct
solution. The combined system with the ‘it’-labels
performed slightly worse than the system without
it (57.03 vs. 59.84 macro-averaged recall).

The same underlying translation model forms
the contrastive system for English–French, and the
primary system for all other subtasks.

5.9 UU-Cap
The UU-CAP approach for English–German uses
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs). Pronoun pre-
diction is formulated as a sequence labelling prob-
lem, where each word in a sequence is to be la-
belled as either one of the pronouns or ‘0’ if it does
not correspond to a pronoun placeholder.

This CRF approach has been applied only to
German, but there are plans to extend it to other
languages.

For German, CRF models are trained using a
rich feature set derived from both German and En-
glish. The German features include the word se-
quence itself, the lemma and the PoS-sequence, as
well as the gender of the surrounding words (10-
gram). The English features include the English
word to which the placeholder pronouns have been
aligned, and the number and gender features of the
surrounding English words (10-gram).

The CRF model was trained on the IWSLT15
corpus and used the TED talks for development.
The rule-based morphological Analyser SMOR
(Schmid et al., 2004) as well as its English spinoff
EMOR (not published) were used to derive the
gender and number of the German and English
words.

5.10 UU-Hardmeier

The UU-HARDMEIER system (Hardmeier, 2016)
is a system combination of two different models.
One of them, based on earlier work (Hardmeier et
al., 2013), is a feed-forward neural network that
takes as input the source pronoun and the source
context words, target lemmata and target PoS tags
in a window of 3 words to the left and to the right
of the pronoun. In addition, the network receives a
list of potential antecedent candidates identified by
the preprocessing part of a coreference resolution
system. Anaphora resolution is treated as a latent
variable by the model. This system is combined
by linear interpolation with a specially trained 6-
gram language model identical to the contrastive
system of the UUPPSALA submission described
above. The neural network component on its own
was submitted as a contrastive system.

In the evaluation, the system combination of the
two components achieved better scores than each
component individually. This demonstrates that
both components contribute complementary infor-
mation that is valuable for the task. A rather disap-
pointing result is that the neural network classifier
completely fails to predict the rare pronoun classes
in this evaluation, even though previous work sug-
gested that this should be one of its strengths
(Hardmeier et al., 2013). The reasons for this re-
quire further investigation.

535



5.11 UU-Stymne

The UU-STYMNE systems (Stymne, 2016) use
linear SVM classifiers for all language pairs. A
number of different features were explored, but
anaphora is not explicitly modelled. The features
used can be grouped in the following way: source
pronouns, local context words/lemmata, preced-
ing nouns, target PoS n-grams with two differ-
ent PoS tag-sets, dependency heads of pronouns,
target LM scores, alignments, and pronoun posi-
tion. A joint tagger and dependency parser on
the source text is used for some of the features.
The primary system is a 2-step classifier where
a binary classifier is first used to distinguish be-
tween the OTHER class and pronoun, then a multi-
class classifier distinguishes between the pronoun
classes. The secondary system is a standard 1-
step classifier. The Mate Tools parser (Bohnet
and Nivre, 2012) is used for joint PoS tagging and
parsing for all languages.

Across language pairs, source pronouns, local
context and dependency features performed best.
The LM and preceding noun features hurt perfor-
mance. For the binary distinction between OTHER
and pronouns, target PoS n-grams performed well.

The submitted systems for German–English and
French–English unfortunately contained a bug in
the feature extraction that severely affected the
scores. The system description paper also reports
the much higher scores with the bug resolved.

6 Evaluation

While in 2015 we used macro-averaged F1 as an
official evaluation measure, this year we adopted
macro-averaged recall, which was also recently
adopted by some other competitions, e.g., by
SemEval-2016 Task 4 (Nakov et al., 2016). More-
over, as in 2015, we also report accuracy as a sec-
ondary evaluation measure.

Macro-averaged recall ranges in [0, 1], where a
value of 1 is achieved by the perfect classifier,8 and
a value of 0 is achieved by the classifier that mis-
classifies all examples. The value of 1/C, where
C is the number of classes, is achieved by a trivial
classifier that assigns the same class to all exam-
ples (regardless of which class is chosen), and is
also the expected value of a random classifier.

8If the test data did not have any instances of some of the
classes, we excluded these classes from the macro-averaging,
i.e., we only macro-averaged over classes that are present in
the gold standard.

The advantage of macro-averaged recall over
accuracy is that it is more robust to class imbal-
ance. For instance, the accuracy of the majority-
class classifier may be much higher than 1/C if the
test dataset is imbalanced. Thus, one cannot inter-
pret the absolute value of accuracy (e.g., is 0.7 a
good or a bad value?) without comparing it to a
baseline that must be computed for each specific
test dataset. In contrast, for macro-averaged recall,
it is clear that a value of, e.g., 0.7, is well above the
majority-class and the random baselines, which
are both always 1/C (e.g., 0.5 with two classes,
0.33 with three classes, etc.). Standard F1 and
macro-averaged F1 are also sensitive to class im-
balance for the same reason; see Sebastiani (2015)
for more detail.

7 Results

The results of the evaluation are shown in Ta-
bles 6-9, one for each subtask. The tables con-
tain two scores: macro-averaged recall (the offi-
cial shared task metric) and accuracy.

As described in Section 4, we provide two of-
ficial baseline scores for each subtask. The first,
computed with the NONE penalty set to a default
value of zero, appears in the tables as baseline0.
The second, computed with the NONE penalty
set to an optimised value, appears in the tables
in the format baseline<penalty>. The optimised
penalty values are different for each subtask.

As we use macro-averaged recall as an official
evaluation measure, its value for the majority class
and for a random baseline are both 1/C, and thus
we do not show them in the tables. Specifically,
the macro-average recall of the random baseline
is 12.50 for English–French and French–English
(8 classes each), 20.00 for English–German, and
11.11 for German–English.

German–English. Table 6 shows the results for
German–English. We can see that all six partici-
pating teams outperform the baselines by a wide
margin. The top systems, TURKUNLP, UKYOTO
and UHELSINKI score between 73.91 and 69.76 in
macro-averaged recall. This is very much above
the performance of baseline0 and baseline-1.5,
which are in the low-mid 40s. It is also well
above the majority/random baseline (not shown)
at 11.11, which is outperformed by far by all sys-
tems. Note that the top-3 systems in terms of
macro-averaged recall are also the top-3 in terms
of accuracy, but in different order.

536



Submission Macro-Avg Recall Accuracy
1 TurkuNLP-primary 73.911 75.363
2 UKYOTO-primary 73.172 80.331

TurkuNLP-contrastive 72.60 80.54
3 UHELSINKI-primary 69.763 77.852

UU-Stymne-contrastive 60.83 70.60
4 CUNI-primary 60.424 64.186
5 UUPPSALA-primary 59.565 73.714
6 UU-Stymne-primary 59.286 69.985

CUNI-contrastive 56.83 65.22
baseline−1.5 44.52 54.87
baseline0 42.15 53.42

Table 6: Results for German-English. The first column shows the rank of the primary systems with
respect to the official metric: macro-averaged recall. The second column contains the team’s name and
its submission type: primary vs. contrastive. The following columns show the results for each system,
measured in terms of macro-averaged recall (official metric) and accuracy (unofficial, supplementary
metric). The subindices show the rank of the primary systems with respect to the evaluation measure in
the respective column. The random/majority baseline macro-averaged recall is 11.11.

English–German. The results for English–
German are shown in Table 7. This direction was
arguably harder as about half of the nine partici-
pating teams are below the optimised baseline-2
(with a score of 47.86), and one system is even be-
low baseline0. The clear winner is TURKUNLP,
with a macro-averaged recall of 64.41 (they are
also second in accuracy), ahead of UKYOTO with
52.50 and UU-STYMNE with 52.12 (third and
fourth in accuracy, respectively). All of the sys-
tems outperform the majority/random baseline (at
20.00), though some by a smaller margin than for
German–English.

French–English. The results for French–
English are shown in Table 8. Four of the five
participating teams had a macro-averaged recall
score above 50.00, and outperformed the LM-
based baselines at 38.38 and 42.96 for the tuned
and the untuned version, respectively. All of the
systems outperformed by far the majority/random
baselines at 12.50. Once again, TURKUNLP is the
clear winner with 72.03 (second in accuracy). It
is followed by UKYOTO with 65.63 (first in accu-
racy), UHELSINKI with 62.98 (third in accuracy),
and UUPPSALA with 62.65 (fourth in accuracy).

English–French. The results for English–
French are shown in Table 9. Seven of the nine
participating teams outperformed the two base-
lines (in fact, baseline0 was outperformed by all
but one team). All of the participants outper-
formed the majority/random baseline of 12.50.

The top system is TURKUNLP once again, with
macro-averaged recall of 65.70, which is barely
better than the 65.35 score of UU-STYMNE (sec-
ond in accuracy). The third-best result, 62.44, is
that of UKYOTO (fourth in accuracy).

Overall, there is a clear winner, TURKUNLP,
which won all four pairs/directions, in two of the
cases by a large margin. Naturally, baseline0 per-
forms worse than the tuned LM baseline in all four
cases. Accuracy scores do not align perfectly well
with macro-averaged recall, but the top systems
in macro-averaged recall are generally also among
the top in terms of accuracy.

8 Discussion

This year, almost all participating teams managed
to outperform the corresponding baselines in their
respective subtasks. This applies not only to the
majority/random baselines, which proved quite
easy to beat, but also to the more sophisticated
LM-based baseline with tuned parameters. This
is in stark contrast with the DiscoMT 2015 task,
where none of the participating systems was able
to outperform the baseline.

In the following subsections, we discuss the
success of the WMT 2016 task with respect to the
challenges of the individual subtasks, and the de-
sign of the submitted systems. We also include a
brief comparison with the DiscoMT 2015 task.

537



Submission Macro-Avg Recall Accuracy
1 TurkuNLP-primary 64.411 71.542

TurkuNLP-contrastive 58.39 72.85
2 UKYOTO-primary 52.502 71.283
3 UU-Stymne-primary 52.123 70.764
4 UU-Hardmeier-primary 50.364 74.671

UU-Stymne-contrastive 48.92 68.93
5 uedin-primary 48.725 66.326

baseline−2 47.86 54.31
uedin-contrastive 47.75 64.75

6 UUPPSALA-primary 47.436 68.675
UU-Hardmeier-contrastive 46.64 72.06

7 UHELSINKI-primary 44.697 65.807
8 UU-Cap-primary 41.618 63.718

baseline0 38.53 50.13
CUNI-contrastive 30.70 46.48

9 CUNI-primary 28.269 42.049

Table 7: Results for English-German. The first column shows the rank of the primary systems with
respect to the official metric: macro-averaged recall. The second column contains the team’s name and
its submission type: primary vs. contrastive. The following columns show the results for each system,
measured in terms of macro-averaged recall (official metric) and accuracy (unofficial, supplementary
metric). The subindices show the rank of the primary systems with respect to the evaluation measure in
the respective column. The random/majority baseline macro-averaged recall is 20.00.

8.1 Challenges

The subtasks each with different combinations
of source-language pronouns and target-language
prediction classes, provide different challenges.
Judging by the results, the prediction of pro-
nouns for English–French and English–German
was more difficult than for the reverse directions.
This is perhaps to be expected given the agreement
problems associated with predicting the transla-
tion of ambiguous English third-person singular
pronouns in languages with grammatical gender.
However, that is not to say that this is the only
problem that these translation directions present.

In the case of English–French translation, sys-
tems must accurately determine when to use gen-
dered vs. non-gendered translations of anaphoric
pronouns. This is in addition to the problems
arising from functional ambiguity in the source
language. Nevertheless, the English–French and
English–German tasks received a greater number
of submissions than the tasks for the reverse di-
rections. This is perhaps due to the greater avail-
ability of tools and resources for English, than for
French and German, coupled with a tendency to
focus more on source-language processing.

8.2 Comparison with the DiscoMT 2015 Task
The DiscoMT and WMT tasks are not directly
comparable. The WMT 2016 baseline, also an n-
gram language model, is trained on lemmatised,
PoS-tagged data, and therefore cannot predict plu-
ral pronoun forms. We might therefore consider
the WMT 2016 baseline systems to be weaker than
the DiscoMT 2015 baseline, which is trained on
fully inflected data. However, the submitted sys-
tems also have to contend with the same problem
of missing number information on target-language
nouns and pronouns. The fact that the systems
were able to beat the baseline validates the use of
more complex features and methods than simply
relying on local target-side context.

8.3 Submitted Systems
The submitted systems used recurrent neural
networks (TURKUNLP and UKYOTO), linear
models (CUNI), including SVMs (UU-STYMNE
and UHELSINKI), Maximum Entropy classifiers
(UEDIN), Conditional Random Fields (UU-CAP),
random forests (LIMSI), pronoun-aware language
models (IDIAP and UUPPSALA), and a system
combination incorporating a classifier and lan-
guage model (UU-HARDMEIER).

538



Submission Macro-Avg Recall Accuracy
1 TurkuNLP-primary 72.031 80.792

TurkuNLP-contrastive 66.54 85.06
2 UKYOTO-primary 65.632 82.931
3 UHELSINKI-primary 62.983 78.963
4 UUPSALA-primary 62.654 74.394

baseline−1.5 42.96 53.66
baseline0 38.38 52.44

5 UU-Stymne-primary 36.445 53.665
UU-Stymne-contrastive 34.12 52.13

Table 8: Results for French-English. The first column shows the rank of the primary systems with
respect to the official metric: macro-averaged recall. The second column contains the team’s name and
its submission type: primary vs. contrastive. The following columns show the results for each system,
measured in terms of macro-averaged recall (official metric) and accuracy (unofficial, supplementary
metric). The subindices show the rank of the primary systems with respect to the evaluation measure in
the respective column. The random/majority baseline macro-averaged recall is 12.50.

Overall, the most successful systems used re-
current neural networks (TURKUNLP and UKY-
OTO). The TURKUNLP system, which was the
best performing system for all four subtasks, is a
deep recurrent neural network, optimised to place
a greater emphasis on the rare pronoun classes in-
stead of the most common ones. The authors claim
that the English–French and English–German sys-
tems in particular benefit from this greater em-
phasis on rare pronoun classes. However, this is
not the only reason for its high performance, as
the contrastive system, which treats all pronoun
classes equally, also performs well. The UKYOTO
team, whose system ranked second in three of the
subtasks, report that the system performs well for
common pronoun classes but poorly on rare ones,
suggesting room for future improvement.

Given the good performance of the two recur-
rent neural network systems, we might conclude
that this architecture is a suitable choice for the
cross-lingual pronoun prediction task. It is dif-
ficult to determine any further clear patterns in
terms of architecture type and performance.

The systems used a wide variety of features,
and can be split into two main groups: those that
use only contextual information from the source
and the target language (TURKUNLP, UKYOTO,
UHELSINKI, and the UUPPSALA source-aware lan-
guage models), and those that make additional
use of external tools and resources (CUNI, IDIAP,
LIMSI, UEDIN, the UUPPSALA primary system for
English–French, UU-CAP, UU-HARDMEIER and
UU-STYMNE).

Popular external tools include those for
anaphora/coreference resolution (CUNI, LIMSI
and UEDIN), pleonastic “it” detection (CUNI,
UEDIN and UUPPSALA) and dependency parsing
(CUNI, LIMSI, UUPPSALA and UU-STYMNE).
Beyond the observation that recurrent NNs per-
form well, there seems to be no clear pattern as
to whether using external tools and resources vs.
context only works best. However, context-only
methods are applicable to any language pair.

In terms of data, most systems were trained only
on the datasets provided for the shared task. The
CUNI system used a wordlist with gender distri-
butions collected by Bergsma and Lin (2006), the
IDIAP system used the WIT3 corpus (Cettolo et al.,
2012), and the ‘it’-disambiguation classifier used
in the UUPPSALA system was trained on annotated
data from ParCor (Guillou et al., 2014) and the
DiscoMT2015 test set (Hardmeier et al., 2016).

9 Conclusions

We have described the design and the evalua-
tion of the shared task on cross-lingual pronoun
prediction at WMT 2016. The task is similar
to the DiscoMT 2015 task, which focused on
English–French translation. This year, we invited
participants to submit systems for four subtasks:
for the English–French and English–German lan-
guage pairs, in both translation directions. Un-
like the DiscoMT 2015 task, in which fully in-
flected target-language sentences were provided in
the training and test data, we provided a lemma-
tised, PoS-tagged representation.

539



Submission Macro-Avg Recall Accuracy
1 TurkuNLP-primary 65.701 70.515
2 UU-Stymne-primary 65.352 73.992
3 UKYOTO-primary 62.443 70.514
4 uedin-primary 61.624 71.313

TurkuNLP-contrastive 61.46 72.39
UU-Stymne-contrastive 60.69 71.05

5 UU-Hardmeier-primary 60.635 74.531
UUPPSALA-contrastive 59.84 70.78
uedin-contrastive 59.83 68.63
limsi-contrastive 59.34 68.36

6 limsi-primary 59.326 68.367
7 UHELSINKI-primary 57.507 68.906

baseline−1 50.85 53.35
UU-Hardmeier-contrastive 50.80 71.31

8 UUPPSALA-primary 48.928 62.208
baseline0 46.98 52.01

9 Idiap-primary 36.369 51.219
Idiap-contrastive 30.44 42.09

Table 9: Results for English-French. The first column shows the rank of the primary systems with
respect to the official metric: macro-averaged recall. The second column contains the team’s name and
its submission type: primary vs. contrastive. The following columns show the results for each system,
measured in terms of macro-averaged recall (official metric) and accuracy (unofficial, supplementary
metric). The subindices show the rank of the primary systems with respect to the evaluation measure in
the respective column. The random/majority baseline macro-averaged recall is 12.50.

We built on the success of the DiscoMT 2015
shared task, attracting increased attention from the
community in terms of the number of participants.
We received submissions from eleven groups, with
many teams submitting systems for several sub-
tasks. This year, the majority of the systems out-
performed the official shared task baselines. This
is in stark contrast to last year, where none of
the systems was able to beat the baseline, an n-
gram language model. Several factors may have
affected this including changes to the task itself,
and improved methods. We hope that the suc-
cess in the cross-lingual pronoun prediction task
will soon translate into improvements in pronoun
translation by complete MT pipelines.

10 Acknowledgements

The organisation of this task has received support
from the following project: Discourse-Oriented
Statistical Machine Translation funded by the
Swedish Research Council (2012-916). The work
of Chistian Hardmeier and Sara Stymne is part
of the Swedish strategic research programme
eSSENCE.

References
Rachel Bawden. 2016. Cross-lingual pronoun predic-

tion with linguistically informed features. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Trans-
lation (WMT 2016), Berlin, Germany.

Shane Bergsma and Dekang Lin. 2006. Bootstrapping
path-based pronoun resolution. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-COLING
2006), pages 33–40, Sydney, Australia.

Shane Bergsma and David Yarowsky. 2011. NADA: A
robust system for non-referential pronoun detection.
In Proceedings of The 8th Discourse Anaphora and
Anaphor Resolution Colloquium (DAARC 2011),
pages 12–23, Faro, Portugal.

Bernd Bohnet and Joakim Nivre. 2012. A transition-
based system for joint part-of-speech tagging and la-
beled non-projective dependency parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL 2012), pages 1455–1465, Jeju Island, Korea.

Bernd Bohnet, Joakim Nivre, Igor Boguslavsky,
Richárd Farkas, Filip Ginter, and Jan Hajič. 2013.
Joint morphological and syntactic analysis for richly

540



inflected languages. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 1:415–428.

Mauro Cettolo, Christian Girardi, and Marcello Fed-
erico. 2012. WIT3: Web inventory of transcribed
and translated talks. In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
ference of the European Association for Machine
Translation (EAMT 2012), pages 261–268, Trento,
Italy.

Mauro Cettolo, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stuker, Luisa
Bentivogli, Roldano Cattoni, and Marcello Federico.
2015. The IWSLT 2015 evaluation campaign. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation (IWSLT 2015), pages 2–
14, Da Nang, Vietnam.

Grzegorz Chrupala, Georgiana Dinu, and Josef van
Genabith. 2008. Learning morphology with Mor-
fette. In Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2008), pages 2362–2367, Marrakech, Mo-
rocco.

Raj Dabre, Yevgeniy Puzikov, Fabien Cromieres, and
Sadao Kurohashi. 2016. The Kyoto university
cross-lingual pronoun translation system. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Trans-
lation (WMT 2016), Berlin, Germany.

Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Aaron Smith, Jörg
Tiedemann, and Bonnie Webber. 2014. ParCor
1.0: A parallel pronoun-coreference corpus to sup-
port statistical MT. In Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2014), pages 3193–3198, Reyk-
javik, Iceland.

Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving pronoun translation
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Student Research Workshop at the 13th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (EACL 2012), pages
1–10, Avignon, France.

Liane Guillou. 2016. Incorporating Pronoun Function
into Statistical Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh.

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling pronominal anaphora in statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT 2010), pages 283–289, Paris, France.

Christian Hardmeier, Jörg Tiedemann, and Joakim
Nivre. 2013. Latent anaphora resolution for cross-
lingual pronoun prediction. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2013), pages 380–
391, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Christian Hardmeier, Preslav Nakov, Sara Stymne, Jörg
Tiedemann, Yannick Versley, and Mauro Cettolo.
2015. Pronoun-focused MT and cross-lingual pro-
noun prediction: Findings of the 2015 DiscoMT

shared task on pronoun translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Discourse in Machine
Translation (DiscoMT 2015), pages 1–16, Lisbon,
Portugal.

Christian Hardmeier, Jörg Tiedemann, Preslav Nakov,
Sara Stymne, and Yannick Versely. 2016. Dis-
coMT 2015 shared task on pronoun translation.
LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at Institute of
Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles Uni-
versity in Prague. http://hdl.handle.net/
11372/LRT-1611.

Christian Hardmeier. 2014. Discourse in Statistical
Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Uppsala.

Christian Hardmeier. 2016. Pronoun prediction with
latent anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the
First Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), Berlin, Germany.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT
2011), pages 187–197, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding
pronoun translation with co-reference resolution. In
Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statis-
tical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR (WMT
2010), pages 252–261, Uppsala, Sweden.

Sharid Loáiciga, Liane Guillou, and Christian Hard-
meier. 2016. It-disambiguation and source-aware
language models for cross-lingual pronoun predic-
tion. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Ma-
chine Translation (WMT 2016), Berlin, Germany.

Ngoc Quang Luong and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2016.
Pronoun language model and grammatical heuristics
for aiding pronoun prediction. In Proceedings of
the First Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), Berlin, Germany.

Juhani Luotolahti, Jenna Kanerva, and Filip Ginter.
2016. Cross-lingual pronoun prediction with deep
recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the
First Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), Berlin, Germany.

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical
database for English. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.

Preslav Nakov, Alan Ritter, Sara Rosenthal, Veselin
Stoyanov, and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2016. SemEval-
2016 task 4: Sentiment analysis in Twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation (SemEval 2016), pages 1–18, San
Diego, California, USA.

Courtney Napoles, Matthew Gormley, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2012. Annotated Gigaword. In Pro-
ceedings of the Joint Workshop on Automatic Knowl-
edge Base Construction and Web-scale Knowledge

541



Extraction (AKBC-WEKEX 2012), pages 95–100,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Michal Novák. 2011. Utilization of anaphora in ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of Contributed Pa-
pers, Week of Doctoral Students 2011, pages 155–
160, Prague, Czech Republic.

Michal Novák. 2016. Pronoun prediction with lin-
guistic features and example weighing. In Proceed-
ings of the First Conference on Machine Translation
(WMT 2016), Berlin, Germany.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Cross-
linguistic projection of role-semantic information.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Tech-
nology Conference and the conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP 2005), pages 859–866, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings
of the Eight International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 2089–
2096, Istanbul, Turkey.

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. Tec-
toMT: Modular NLP framework. In Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Advances in Natural
Language Processing (IceTAL 2010), volume 6233,
Reykjavik, Iceland. Springer.

Benoı̂t Sagot. 2010. The Lefff, a freely available and
large-coverage morphological and syntactic lexicon
for French. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), pages 2744–2751, Valletta, Malta.

Helmut Schmid, Arne Fitschen, and Ulrich Heid.
2004. SMOR: A German computational morphol-
ogy covering derivation, composition and inflection.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’04),
pages 1263–1266, Lisbon, Portugal.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, pages 44–49, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. Verbnet: A Broad-
coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. the-
sis, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2015. An axiomatically derived
measure for the evaluation of classification algo-
rithms. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on the Theory of Information Re-
trieval (ICTIR 2015), pages 11–20, Northampton,
Massachusetts, USA.

Djamé Seddah, Sandra Kübler, and Reut Tsarfaty.
2014. Introducing the SPMRL 2014 shared task
on parsing morphologically-rich languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Joint Workshop on Statisti-
cal Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages and
Syntactic Analysis of Non-Canonical Languages
(SPMRL-SANCL 2014), pages 103–109, Dublin,
Ireland.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing (ICSLP 2002), volume 2, pages 901–
904, Denver, Colorado, USA.

Sara Stymne, Jörg Tiedemann, and Joakim Nivre.
2014. Estimating word alignment quality for SMT
reordering tasks. In Proceedings of the Ninth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT
2014), pages 275–286, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Sara Stymne. 2016. Feature exploration for cross-
lingual pronoun prediction. In Proceedings of the
First Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), Berlin, Germany.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2016. A linear baseline classifier for
cross-lingual pronoun prediction. In Proceedings of
the First Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), Berlin, Germany.

Dominikus Wetzel. 2016. Cross-lingual pronoun pre-
diction for English, French and German with max-
imum entropy classification. In Proceedings of
the First Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), Berlin, Germany.

542


