



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 65–70,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Syntax and Pragmatics of Conversation: A Case of Bangla 

 

 

Samir Karmakar 

School Of Languages and Linguistics 

Jadavpur University 

India 

samirkrmkr@yahoo.co.in 

Soumya Sankar Ghosh 

School Of Languages and Linguistics 

Jadavpur University 

India 

 ghosh.soumya73@yahoo.com 

 

  

 

Abstract 

Conversation is often considered as the most 

problematic area in the field of formal lin-

guistics, primarily because of its dynamic 

emerging nature. The degree of complexity 

is also high in comparison to traditional sen-

tential analysis. The challenge for develop-

ing a formal account for conversational anal-

ysis is bipartite: Since the smallest structural 

unit at the level of conversational analysis is 

utterance, existing theoretical framework has 

to be developed in such a manner so that it 

can take an account of the utterance. In addi-

tion to this, a system should be developed to 

explain the interconnections of the utterances 

in a conversation. This paper tries to address 

these two tasks within the transformational 

and generative framework of Minimalism, 

proposed by Chomsky, with an emphasis on 

the Bengali particle to – traditionally classi-

fied as indeclinable. 
 

1 Introduction 

Formal modeling of conversation is still consid-

ered as daunting task in the fields of both compu-

tational and cognitive linguistics. In spite of the 

emphasis by Chomsky (1986) on the questions of 

(a) what constitutes the knowledge of language, 

(b) how is knowledge of language acquired, and 

(c) how is knowledge of language put to use, a 

few approaches has really dealt with the last 

questions of the above mentioned series. Though 

formal theories are proposed to deal with the 

very nature of knowledge of language in linguis-

tics, very less has been done to understand how 

this knowledge is put to use within the general 

framework of Transformational and Generative 

Grammar (henceforth, T-G Grammar). Under 

this situation, the paper seeks to investigate how 

knowledge of language is put to use. More spe-

cifically, the paper intends to explore how effi-

ciently the semantics and pragmatics of conver-

sation can be explained within the existing theo-

retical framework of T-G Grammar. Consider the 

following example: 

 
1.  Speaker_1 suśīl-ɸ ās-ɸ-b-e to 

Sushil-Nom  come-ɸ-fut-3.fut  prt  

Will Sushil come?  

Speaker_2   ā   suśīl-ɸ  ās-ɸ-b-e  
yes  Sushil-Nom  come-ɸ-fut-3.fut  

Yes, Sushil will come.  

 

 

In this piece of communication, Speaker_1 asks a 

question about the arrival of Sushil. In response 

to Speaker_1’s query Speaker_2 confirms 

Sushil’s arrival. The current status of linguistic 

enquiry in the field of syntax and semantics does 

not deal with this type of connected speech 

which we encounter often in our daily life. In 

most of the cases, idealized sentential representa-

tion is discussed to unveil the grammatical intri-

cacies. Interestingly, what falls outside of the 

scope of these sorts of investigation is a system-

atic exploration into what we would call the 

grammar of conversation. The importance of 

studying the grammar of conversation also lies 

with the fact that conversation embodies many 

principles of complex dynamic system. Under 

this situation, this paper attempts to address those 

problems involved in the formal modeling of the 

conversational discourse with in framework of 

Minimalist Program (Chomsky, 1995) with a 

specific emphasis on the behavior to Bengali par-

ticle to – traditionally classified as indeclinable. 
 

65



Unlike the major lexical expressions, to as a dis-

course particle hardly contributes in the content 

of the sentence; rather, it is used to induce some 

effect of emotional coloring on the content itself. 

By emotional coloring we do mean various states 

of minds involved in the act of questioning, 

doubting, confirming, requesting etc. From the 

perspective of conversation analysis, the expres-

sions like to are extremely crucial primarily be-

cause of their role in ongoing epistemic negotia-

tions happening between the interlocutors, i.e. 

the negotiation holding between Speaker_1 and 

Speaker_2. In virtue of contributing in the epis-

temic negotiation in terms of various emotional 

colors as is mentioned above, it expects other 

sentential discourses. As a consequence, it be-

comes quite essential to investigate how this ca-

pacity of meaning making can be talked about in 

terms of the pragmatic, semantic and syntactic 

behaviors of to.  

 

To attain the above stated goal, the paper will 

explore the sentential level semantics and prag-

matics of to in Bengali in Section 2. In Section 3, 

this discussion will be further augmented with a 

discussion of some pragmatic observations re-

garding the linguistic behavior of to to elucidate 

how current understanding of Pragmatics can 

provide some important clues about the formali-

zation of the problem stated above. Finally in 

Section 4, we have proposed a theoretical 

framework which is crucial in providing a sys-

temic formal account of conversation. 

2 Indeclinable to in Bengali  

Traditionally, to is classified as indeclinable for 

the reason of not being affected by the inflec-

tions. It is not being expected by the major lexi-

cal categories of a sentence. Its significance lies 

with its capacity to change the overall sense of a 

sentence. In addition to this it is also noticed that 

the incorporation of to has its direct bearing on 

the pitch contour of the sentence itself. Compare 

the sentences cited in (2) and (3): 

 
2.  suśīl-ɸ  kāl-ɸ  bājār-e  

Sushil-Nom  yesterday-Loctemp  market-Locspatial  

giy-ech-il-o    
go-perf-past-3.past   

Sushil had gone to the market yesterday  

3.  suśīl-ɸ  to  kāl-ɸ  bājār-e  
Sushil-Nom  prt  yesterday-Loctemp  market-Locspatial  

giy-ech-il-o     

go-perf-past-3.past    
Sushil had gone to the market yesterday  

 

As per the traditional practice, articulations of 

declarative sentences seem to be the objective 

rendition of the real world phenomena. For the 

interpretation of a declarative sentence like (2), 

one has no need to invoke the knowledge of pre-

ceding and following sentences, as if (2) is self-

sufficient. In contrast, the sentences like the one 

cited in (3) is considered as unreal in virtue of 

being stated in a mood other than declarative. 

What distinguishes (3) as unreal is the presence 

of to in it. Incorporation of to in (2) results into 

an articulation stated in irrealis mood. Irrealis 

mood covers a wide range of emotional in-

volvements like questioning, affirming etc. In 

other words, (3) is not an objective rendition 

about any worldly phenomena but involves a 

wide range of subjective necessities to satiate its 

meaning construing capacity. At least in case of 

to, it is also possible to show that change of its 

position in (3) confirms different types of re-

quirements raised by the context of communica-

tion within which the sentence is embedded in. 

Consider the following sentences: 

 
4.  suśīl-ɸ  kāl-ɸ  to  

Sushil-Nom  yesterday-Loctemp  prt  

bājār-e  giy-ech-il-o   

market-Locspatial  go-perf-past-3.past  
Sushil had gone to the market yesterday  

5.  suśīl-ɸ  kāl-ɸ  bājār-e  

Sushil-Nom  yesterday-Loctemp  market-Locspatial  

to  giy-ech-il-o  

prt  go-perf-past-3.past  

Sushil had gone to the market yesterday  
6.  suśīl-ɸ  kāl-ɸ  bājār-e  

Sushil-Nom  yesterday-Loctemp  market-Locspatial  

giy-ech-il-o  to  
go-perf-past-3.past  prt  

Sushil had gone to the market yesterday  

 

The other point which needs to be brought into 

the notice is the capacity of to of putting empha-

sis on the different constituents of a sentence. To 

represent emphasis, bold letters are used. Change 

in position changes the pattern of emphasizing 

while keeping the emotional content intact. 

Change in emotional content can only be in-

itiated by ensuring the change in the pitch con-

tour: From Fig. 1, it is visible that in case of af-

firming the stress is put on the syllables quite 

differently than it is put in case of questioning. 

Moreover the point we want to make here is that 

emotional conditioning has the power to super-

sede the lexical conditioning while emphasizing 

the communicative intention.  
 

 

66



 
Fig. 1. suśil kāl bājāre gi ec ilo to 

 

It is not hard to show that the ambiguity in the 

emotional content is always relative to pitch con-

tour carried by an utterance. For example the 

ambiguity between affirming and question-

ing/doubting in case of (7) can be solved by tak-

ing an account of the associated pitch contour. 

 
7.  suśīl-ɸ  ās-ɸ-b-e  to  

Sushil-Nom  come-ɸ-fut-3.fut  prt  

Will Sushil come?  

 
However, when the sense of request is prevail-

ing, no such ambiguity in terms of emotional 

content is noticed: 

 
8.  ekbār  es-ɸ-ɸ-o  to  

once  come-ɸ-pres-2.pres  prt  
Come once.  

 

Beside this, to can also appear with tāi and hay. 

The resultant forms tāito and hay-to, can mean 

several things depending on the context: 

 
9.  tāi  to  bal-ch-ɸ-i  

because  prt  tell-cont-pres-1pres  
That is why, I am telling (this).  

10 ha-ɸ-ɸ-y  to  tā-i  bal-ech-ɸ-i  

be-ɸ-ɸ-3pres.Imp  prt  that-emph  tell-perf-pres-1pres  

Probably, I have said so.  

 

Though tāito and hayto are composed of two 

different morphemes, they are often treated as 

single forms. Because of the anaphoric nature of 

tāi, tāito establishes a relation between the cur-

rent articulation and the previous articulations.  

 

In a conditional construction like (11), inclusion 

of to as in (12) brings different shades of inter-

pretation which is equivalent to ādau jadi balte 

dāo “if at all you allow me to speak”. 

11. bal-te  di-le  bal-ɸ-ɸ-i  
tell-prt  give-prt  tell-ɸ-pres-1.pres  

If you allow then only I speak.  

12. bal-te  di-le  to  bal-ɸ-ɸ-i  
tell-prt  give-prt  prt  tell-ɸ-pres-1.pres  

If you at all allow me to speak.  

 

to can also be used in a negative sense: 
 
13 bal-te  di-le  to  

tell-prt  give-prt  prt  

We are not allowed to speak  

 

When to is used in conjunction with the fu-

ture tense, it results into the sense of doubt 

and/or questioning. Consider (14): 

 
14. bal-te  de- ɸ-b-e  to  

tell-prt  give-ɸ-fut-3.fut  prt  
Will they allow us to speak?  

 

On the basis of this discussion, what we can ar-

gue that to is primarily an expression not con-

taining anything which is propositional in nature. 

As a consequence, the meaning construing ca-

pacity of it cannot be discussed in terms of the 

truth conditions. Under this situation what will 

be of interest is the way we understand the mean-

ing construing capacity of to: to as an emphatic 

indeclinable has the power to change the mean-

ing of the propositional content of the sentence 

within which it is embedded. The appearance of 

to in a sentence has distinct phonological bearing 

which is directly connected with the emotional 

coloring effect. Therefore, a theoretical account 

of the meaning construing capacity of to should 

have some component to deal with the phonolog-

ical aspect involved with it. 

 

 

3 Bengali particle to in the light of 
Pragmatics 

On the basis of discussion of Section 2, at least 

two different aspects of to can be talked about: 

Firstly, during conversation, the indeclinable to 

plays a crucial role in imposing the illocutionary 

force on the propositional content of the articula-

tion. As a consequence the syntax and semantics 

of to is not interpreted within the scope of IP (= 

Inflectional Phrase); rather we do feel IP is dom-

inated by the dis-course particles like to. A simi-

lar observation is also made by Searle (1969) 

while explaining the interrelation holding be-

tween illocutionary force (= F) and the proposi-

tional content (= p). To represent the interaction, 

Searle proposes the following scheme: F(p). 67



Vanderveken (1990) has also supported this pro-

posal.  

Secondly, a point to be noted here regarding the 

linguistic behavior of discourse particles like to: 

The meaning construing behavior of discourse 

particle to is not restricted within the scope of the 

utterance where it is embedded. Its meaning con-

struing behavior often invokes the context for 

other utterances. This has already been noticed in 

the discussions of Section 1 and 2. Therefore, to 

exhaust its meaning construing capacity, an ana-

lytical framework should have some provisions.  

Under this situation, then, what we want to look 

for in this paper is an unified theoretical account 

which can take care of aforementioned bilayered 

meaning construction: In one layer, to as an em-

phatic particle will determine the illocutionary 

aspect of the utterance; and, in other layer it will 

motivate a move to satisfy the requirements 

possed by the perlocutionary act of the following 

utterance. Note the concepts of locution, illocu-

tion and perlocution are first proposed by Austin 

(1975). 

4 Discussion 

While dealing with the problem of to, Bayer et 

al. (2014) considers Rizzi’s model, proposed in 

the year of 1997, where the syntactic representa-

tion of force is proposed as the highest functional 

projection: Rizzi argues CP (= Complimentizer 

Phrase) is composed of ForceP (= Force Phrase), 

FocP (= Focus Phrase) and TopP (= Topic 

Phrase) just like the way IP contains information 

about TP (= Tense Phrase) and AgrP (= Agree-

ment Phrase). Rizzi’s proposal in this regard can 

be summarized in the following figure: 

 

 
Fig. 2. Rizz’s proposal: Pragmatization of Syntax 

 

Rizzi’s proposal provides some solution to the 

incorporation of pragmatic content in the existing 

framework of syntax. In other words, syntax is 

now capable enough in taking an account of the 

utterance. 

4.1 Incorporating Illocution  

To incorporate the illocutionary aspect of an ut-

terance, the existing theoretical framework has to 

undergo certain types of modifications. These 

modifications will be elaborated now in this sec-

tion. Consider the following examples:  

 
15.  suśīl-ɸ  to  ās-ɸ-b-e  

Sushil-Nom  prt  come-ɸ-fut-3fut  

Sushil will come.  

[Confirming: keu nā eleo, suśīl to āsbe 

“even if nobody comes, (I do believe), 

Sushil will come”]  
16. suśīl-ɸ  ās-ɸ-b-e  to  

Sushil-Nom  come-ɸ-fut-3fut  prt  

Will Sushil come?  

 

Following Rizzi’s proposal, for (15) we get the 

syntactic representation of Figure 3. As per this 

representation, to originates at the Head-FocP 

position. As an emphatic particle to contains 

[+emph] feature which belongs to the [+F] class. 

The DP moves from Spec-AgrSP (= Specifier 

position of Subject-Agreement-Phrase) to Spec-

FocP (= Specifier position of Focus Phrase) in 

order to get the focus feature checked: 

 

 
Fig. 3. Syntactic representation of 15 68



In other words, [+emph] feature belonging to 

[+F] class feature is attributed to phrase migrated 

from Spec-AgrSP position to Spec-FocP. The 

syntactic representation for (16) is can also be 

provided following the same line of reasoning: 

 

 
Fig. 4. Syntactic representation of 16 

 
As per these representations, to originates in the 

Head-FocP (= Head position of the Focus 

Phrase) position with head feature +F. Solution 

to this specific problem can be generalized over a 

class of linguistic constructions involving the 

phenomenon of focusing. The generalization, 

then, would provide an interpretation (Fig. 5) 

that Head-FocP attracts the emphasized XP to-

wards itself in order to get the +F feature 

checked; and this in turn remains the sole moti-

vation for the movement of emphasized XP to 

the Spec-FocP position. 

 

 
Fig. 5. Motivation for the movement of the em-

phasized phrase in the Spec-FocP position 

 

In other words, the proposal creates a motivation 

for the phrase marked with +F to move out from 

its original position to a higher node to satisfy 

the need of interpretation: What remains un-

interpreted in its original position becomes com-

pletely interpretable due to its movement to the 

Spec-ForceP position. Till now, the first layer of 

the bilayered representation discussed in Section 

3 is outlined. Rest of this article will now deal 

with the second layer of the bilayered representa-

tion.  

 

To address the problem of capturing illocution-

ary aspect of an utterance, we will adopt a way 

similar to the one we have discussed above fol-

lowing the proposal developed in Karmakar et al. 

(2016). As per this proposal the FocP moved to 

Spec-ForceP position to check the head feature 

of the ForceP. Note that in (15) the head feature 

is [+R]; and, in (16) it is [+Dr]. 

 

 
Fig. 6. Capturing illocution 

 

To propose an effective way to capture illocution 

we would like to accommodate the taxonomy of 

speech acts as is proposed by Searle (1976): As 

per this proposal, speech acts can be reduced into 

five main types namely (a) representatives (= 

[+R] = asserting, concluding etc.), (b) directives 

(= [+Dr] = requesting, questioning etc.), (c) com-

missives (= [+C] = promising, threatening, offer-

ing etc.), (d) expressive (= [+E] = thanking, 

apologizing, welcoming, congratulating etc.), 

and (e) declarations ( = [+Dl] = excommuni-

cating, declaring, christening etc.) 

 

4.2 Conversation in terms of illocution and 
perlocution 

Conversation differs from the isolated utterances 

in several respects: In conversation, utterances 

often stand in some relation to the other utteranc-

es in order to satisfy different degrees of expec-

tancies. Conversation is not something static ra-

ther it is a dynamic network of different inten-

tions. Following Austin, these intentions can be 

best talked about in terms of different acts – 

namely locutionary act, illocutionary act and per-69



locutionary act. Locutionary act is primarily con-

cerned about those facts which are central in 

making sense in language; Illocutionary act is 

performed by the speaker to express that inten-

tion which is not directly associated with the dis-

crete lexicalized content of the articulation; And, 

perlocutionary act is all about what follows an 

utterance in a conversation.  

Following Karmakar et al. (2016), we propose a 

further split of ForceP into perlocutionary phrase 

(= PerlocP) and illocutionary phrase (= IllocP) to 

capture the way different types of speech acts 

interacts with each other during conversation. In 

our earlier discussion, we have shown how illo-

cutionary act can be handled within the syntactic 

framework of minimalist program; and, now we 

are proposing the following scheme of represen-

tation for (1) as an exemplar to show how syntax 

of conversation can be modeled to take an ac-

count of the emerging network of intentions dur-

ing different turns: 

 

 
 

Fig. 7. A Minimalist representation of (1) in 

terms of perlocution and illocution 

 
As per this representation IllocP dominating 

…[XP]+Dr… connected with the IllocP dominat-

ing …[XP]+Dl… not under any influence of the 

illocutionary acts (marked with subscripts +Dr 

and +Dl respectively) but definitely due to the 

act of perlocution expected by the utterance of 

Speaker_1. Also note that,   ā  appears in the 

Head-IllocP position and moves to the Head-

PerlocP position to satisfy the expectancy of the 

speech act performed by Speaker_1. This posi-

tion is a bit different from what Karmakar et al. 

(2016)  has claimed in their paper.  

5 Conclusion 

Since conversation is the most prevalent 

form of human communication, a formal 

study of conversation as an embodiment of 
complex adaptive system may reveal various in-

tricacies involved in the process of conversing. 

We have attempted one such intricacy to explore 

which principles and parameters are in work to 

make a communication meaningful. A little at-

tention will reveal the fact that the approach we 

have argued for encompasses the questions of 

both “what constitutes the knowledge of lan-

guage” as well as “how this knowledge is put to 

use”. Future research along this line demands a 

more rigorous characterization of various con-

cepts which remain crucial in defining their role 

in construing the structure of conversation in 

general.  

Reference 

Austin, J. (1975). How to Do Things with Words (2nd 

ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.  

Bayer, J., Dasgupta, P., Mukhopadhyay, S., & Ghosh, 

R. (2014, February 06-08). Functional Structure 

and the Bangla Discourse Particle to. Retrieved 

July 19, 2015, from http://ling.uni-

kon-

stanz.de/pages/StructureUtterance/web/Publicatio

ns_&_Talks_files/Bayer_Dasgupta_Mukhopadhy

ayGhosh_SALA.pdf  

Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of Language. New 

York: Praeger.  

Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program (3rd 

ed.). Massachusets: The MIT Press.  

Karmakar, S., Ghosh, S., & Banerjee, A. (2016). A 

Syntactic Framework of Conversational Prag-

matics of Bengali. Unpublished manuscript. 

Rizzi, L. (1997). The fine structure of the left periph-

ery. In L. Haegeman, Elements of Grammar (pp. 

281-337). Dordrecht: Kluwer.  

Searle, J. (1969). Speech Acts. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press.  

Searle, J. (1976). The classification of illocutionary 

acts. Language in Society , 5, 1-23.  

Vanderveken, D. (1990). Meaning and Speech Acts 

(Vol. I). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

70


