



















































Predicting the Direction of Derivation in English Conversion


Proceedings of the 14th Annual SIGMORPHON Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology, pages 93–98,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Predicting the Direction of Derivation in English Conversion

Max Kisselew∗, Laura Rimell†, Alexis Palmer‡, and Sebastian Padó∗
∗ IMS, Stuttgart University, Germany

{pado,kisselmx}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
† Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK

laura.rimell@cl.cam.ac.uk
‡ Leibniz ScienceCampus, ICL, Heidelberg University, Germany

palmer@cl.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract

Conversion is a word formation operation
that changes the grammatical category of
a word in the absence of overt morphol-
ogy. Conversion is extremely productive
in English (e.g., tunnel, talk). This paper
investigates whether distributional informa-
tion can be used to predict the diachronic
direction of conversion for homophonous
noun–verb pairs. We aim to predict, for ex-
ample, that tunnel was used as a noun prior
to its use as a verb. We test two hypotheses:
(1) that derived forms are less frequent than
their bases, and (2) that derived forms are
more semantically specific than their bases,
as approximated by information theoretic
measures. We find that hypothesis (1) holds
for N-to-V conversion, while hypothesis (2)
holds for V-to-N conversion. We achieve
the best overall account of the historical
data by taking both frequency and seman-
tic specificity into account. These results
provide a new perspective on linguistic the-
ories regarding the semantic specificity of
derivational morphemes, and on the mor-
phosyntactic status of conversion.

1 The Morphology of Conversion

Word formation operations that change the gram-
matical category of a word in the absence of overt
morphology pose interesting linguistic challenges.
Such operations are highly productive in English,
especially between the categories of noun and
verb (consider examples such as tunnel or walk,
also more recent examples such as email). This
phenomenon is also observed in other languages,
for example German (Vogel, 1996), Dutch (Don,
1993), Hungarian (Kiefer, 2005), and Bulgarian
(Manova and Dressler, 2005). We call these cases

“conversion”, without any theoretical commitment.
Conversion in English, especially N-to-V con-

version, has been extensively studied within mor-
phology and syntax. Historically, accounts for this
phenomenon involved (a) conversion (proper), a
category-changing word-formation operation as-
sumed to be different from other types of deriva-
tional morphology (Koziol, 1937; Bauer, 1983;
Plag, 1999), or (b) zero-derivation, involving a
derivational affix akin to -ize, -ify, -er, etc., but
which happens to be phonologically null (Bloom-
field, 1933; Marchand, 1969; Kiparsky, 1982).
Most current syntactic theories of conversion,
though, are based on underspecification. This is
the idea that meaning-sound correspondences are
stored in the lexicon as uncategorized roots and ob-
tain a grammatical category when combined with
syntactic heads, which may be phonologically null
or overt (Halle and Marantz, 1993; Pesetsky, 1995;
Hale and Keyser, 2002; Borer, 2005a; Arad, 2005).

The range of meanings resulting from conver-
sion has been a key source of evidence for various
theoretical approaches. Verbs derived via N-to-V
conversion can have a wide variety of meanings,
seemingly constrained only by the template ‘action
having to do with the noun’, such as in the phrase
celluloid the door open, meaning ‘use a credit card
to spring the lock open’ (Clark and Clark, 1979).
V-to-N conversion has a narrower semantic range.
It is likely to result in a noun referring to the event
described by the verb or to its result, e.g. talk
(Grimshaw, 1990).

This paper presents a computational study of
conversion: we study which factors are able to ac-
count for diachronic precedence in cases of English
V-to-N and N-to-V conversion. The goal is to pre-
dict, e.g., that tunnel was originally used as a noun
and walk as a verb. Historical precedence provides
a theory-neutral ground truth which we treat as a
proxy for the actual direction of conversion.

93



We use methods from distributional semantics
to test two morphological hypotheses: (1) that de-
rived forms are less frequent than their bases, and
(2) that derived forms are more semantically spe-
cific than their bases. We use information theoretic
measures to gauge semantic specificity, applying
these measures for the first time to theoretical ques-
tions regarding derivational morphology.

2 The Direction of Derivation

We analyze corpus data as a source of evidence for
the direction of derivation in lemmas attested in
both nominal and verbal contexts. We take histori-
cal precedence as the gold standard for the gram-
matical category of the base. For example, the
lemma tunnel was first attested in English as a
noun around the year 1440, and as a verb in 1577,
according to the Oxford English Dictionary. The
gold standard direction of derivation is therefore
N-to-V. On the other hand, the lemma drive was
first attested as a verb around 900 and as a noun in
1697, so the gold standard direction is V-to-N.

The idea of predicting a direction of derivation
is not uncontroversial from a theoretical perspec-
tive. According to underspecification accounts of
conversion, there is no direction to predict, since
both nominal and verbal uses result from syntactic
categorization of a root which is unspecified for
category. Nevertheless, even underspecification al-
lows for the fact that some roots seem to be used
primarily in one category or another (Harley and
Noyer, 1999; Arad, 2005; Borer, 2005b). More-
over, historical precedence provides an objective
ground truth, regardless of any particular theory of
word formation (Rimell, 2012).

Gold Standard. Our gold standard consists of
1,044 English lemmas which have undergone N-
to-V conversion and 948 lemmas which have un-
dergone V-to-N conversion. We obtained the his-
torical precedence data from CELEX (Baayen et
al., 1995) using the WebCelex interface.1 N-to-V
lemmas are coded in CELEX as monomorphemic
nouns and also conversion verbs; V-to-N lemmas
are monomorphemic verbs and also conversion
nouns.2 We limited the dataset to lemmas which
are monomorphemic in their base grammatical cat-

1http://celex.mpi.nl
2N-to-V lemmas have a CELEX entry with Class=N (part

of speech) and MorphStatus=M (monomorphemic), and a
second entry with Class=V and MorphStatus=Z (conversion).
The converse holds for V-to-N lemmas.

egory in order to avoid root compounds and de-
nominal verbs formed from already-derived nouns,
such as leverage and commission, which we be-
lieved would complicate the analysis. We manually
excluded a handful of lemmas which appeared in
both CELEX searches due to polysemy.

3 Methods

3.1 Hypotheses

We advance two main hypotheses which can be
investigated in a corpus-based fashion.

1. Derived forms are less frequent than their base
words.

2. Derived forms are semantically more specific
than their base words.

The first hypothesis is not entirely straightforward,
since some derived forms are in fact more frequent
than their bases, especially when the base is fre-
quent (Hay, 2001). However, derived forms have
been found to have lower frequency than their bases
in general (Harwood and Wright, 1956; Hay, 2001);
therefore, while the hypothesis as stated may be an
oversimplification, we use it as a first approxima-
tion to a frequency-related analysis of conversion.

The second hypothesis corresponds to the Mono-
tonicity Hypothesis of Koontz-Garboden (2007),
which states that derivational morphemes always
add content to their bases, in the form of compo-
sitional lexical semantic operators. Linguistic sup-
port for this proposal comes from cross-linguistic
examination of word-formation operations, such
as causative and anticausative operations on verbs.
If conversion is the result of a phonologically null
derivational affix, we would expect the Monotonic-
ity Hypothesis to hold. Semantic specificity, or
complexity – with a derived word assumed to have
a more complex, or narrower, meaning because it
has more semantic subcomponents – has also been
used as a diagnostic for the direction of derivation
in conversion (Plag, 2003), but based on linguistic
judgments rather than distributional semantics.

The rest of this section is concerned with opera-
tionalizing these two hypotheses. We first describe
the corpus that we are using, then the semantic
representations that we construct from it to pur-
sue the second hypothesis, and finally the concrete
predictors that instantiate the hypotheses.

94



3.2 Corpus
Our corpus is a concatenation of the lemmatized
and part-of-speech (PoS) tagged BNC3 and ukWaC
corpora4, containing 2.36 billion tokens. Both cor-
pora are widely used for building distributional
spaces. Together, they cover a large range of text
types both in terms of genres and of domains.

Since we will use this corpus to extract informa-
tion about the noun and verb usages of morpholog-
ically unmarked conversion cases, it is a pertinent
question how well standard part-of-speech taggers
recognize this distinction. To test this, we carried
out a manual annotation study.

From each corpus we extracted 33 examples
each of 100 lemmas, chosen randomly from the
lemmas in the gold standard, half on the N-to-
V conversion list and the other half on the V-to-
N list. Two of the authors, both native English
speakers, annotated the PoS tags for correctness.
Inter-annotator agreement was κ=0.68. Overall,
the accuracy of the PoS tags was 85%, which we
considered sufficiently reliable for good quality
category-specific representations.5

While many lemmas and their instances were
straightforward to annotate as either noun or verb,
some examples presented difficulties. Two promi-
nent cases were gerunds and adjectival forms
(forked tongue, fuselage was skinned with alu-
minum), although there were a variety of other, less
frequent cases. In these instances we used the overt
inflectional morphology as a guide; for example,
-ing or -ed endings indicated a verb. This strategy
is based on the fact that inflectional morphology
strictly selects for the part of speech of its base.

3.3 Vector Representations
To measure semantic specificity, we perform a
distributional analysis which represents each con-
version case with two 10,000-dimensional bag-of-
words vectors: one for the verb and one for the
noun, relying on automatic PoS tags (cf. Sec-
tion 3.2). The dimensions correspond to the most
frequent content words in the corpus. The context
window size is set to 5 words on either side of
the target. Following standard practice, we apply

3http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk, tagged with the
CLAWS4 tagger and the C5 tagset

4http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it, tagged with Tree-
Tagger and the Penn Treebank tagset

5We performed the same annotation on Wikipedia data,
tagged with TreeTagger and the Penn Treebank tagset, but
found the automatic PoS tagging to be less reliable. Therefore,
we excluded it from consideration.

a Positive Pointwise Mutual Information (PPMI)
transformation and L1-normalize each vector.6

Downsampling. The use of vectors based on co-
occurrence counts poses a methodological diffi-
culty, because word frequency is a potential con-
founder for the information-theoretic measures
with which we operationalize the specificity hy-
pothesis (Section 3.4). The potential difficulty
arises because more frequent words might have
denser vectors (more non-zero values), which could
lead to observing spurious increases in specificity
that are merely correlates of frequency rather than
the result of a conceptual shift. To avoid this
danger, we balance the frequencies of bases and
derived forms by downsampling. For each verb-
noun conversion pair, both vectors are constructed
from the same number of occurrences, namely
min(fN , fV ), by skipping instances of the more
frequent category uniformly at random. For exam-
ple, tunnel (n.) occurs 38,967 times in the corpus
and tunnel (v.) 2,949 times. Through downsam-
pling, the vectors both for tunnel (n.) and for tunnel
(v.) are constructed from 2,949 instances.

3.4 Operationalizing the Hypotheses

Frequency. We assess the frequency hypothesis
by directly comparing the number of nominal and
verbal corpus occurrences of a target lemma.

Semantic Specificity. We operationalize the se-
mantic specificity hypothesis by applying measures
of information content to distributional represen-
tations. This follows the example of two recent
studies. In the context of hyponymy identification,
Santus et al. (2014) proposed entropy as a measure
of the semantic specificity S(w) of a word w, via
its distributional, L1-normalized vector ~w. Entropy
is supposed to be inversely correlated with seman-
tic specificity, since higher specificity corresponds
to more restrictions on context, which means lower
entropy, defined as

S(w) = H(~w) = −
∑

i

~wi · log ~wi (1)

6Much recent work in distributional semantics has made
use of low-dimensional, dense vectors, obtained either by di-
mensionality reduction of co-occurrence vectors, or as word
embeddings from a neural network trained to optimize con-
text prediction. Although reduced vectors and embeddings
perform well on a variety of Natural Language Processing
tasks, they are not suitable for our approach, because their
feature weights are not interpretable probabilistically, which
information-theoretic measures rely on.

95



Predictor N-to-V V-to-N all

Most Freq. Class 100% 0% 52.4%

Entropy H 50.1% 75.5% 62.2%
KL divergence 53.8% 76.7% 64.6%
Frequency 84.7% 58.7% 72.3%

Freq + H + KL 77.4% 76.0% 76.8%

Table 1: Accuracies for predicting the direction
of derivation, presented by gold standard direction
(all results on downsampled space)

Predictor Estimate Std. Err. Sig.

Intercept 0.15 0.06 **
∆ entropy -2.08 0.18 ***
∆ KL divergence -2.22 0.18 ***
∆ log frequency 1.74 0.09 ***

Table 2: Logistic regression model (∆ always de-
notes noun value minus verb value)

The second study (Herbelot and Ganesalingam,
2013) was directly interested in measuring speci-
ficity and proposed to equate it with the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence D between a word vector
~w and the “neutral” vector ~n:

S(w) = D(~w||~n) =
∑

i

~wi · log ~wi
~ni

(2)

where ~n is the prior distribution over all words.
We compute ~n as the centroid of approximately
28,000 word vectors in our vector space; the vec-
tors are computed according to the procedure in
Section 3.3. In this approach, higher KL diver-
gence corresponds to higher semantic specificity.
We note that the entropy and KL divergence val-
ues are closely related mathematically and highly
correlated in practice (ρ = 0.91).

Combined Model. Finally, we combine the indi-
vidual indicators (standardized differences in log
frequency, entropy, and KL divergence within each
pair) as features in a logistic regression model. We
also experimented with including an interaction
between the information-theoretic terms and fre-
quency, but did not obtain a better model fit.

4 Results and Discussion

Assessing the Hypotheses. The quantitative re-
sults of our experiments are shown in Table 1.

Compared against the most frequent class base-
line, which assigns the most frequent direction in
the gold standard — that is, N-to-V— to all cases,
both our hypotheses are substantially, and signifi-
cantly, more successful in predicting the direction
of derivation (at a significance level of α = 0.05).

Furthermore, the frequency hypothesis is more
successful than the semantic specificity hypothe-
sis on the complete conversion dataset. However,
there is a striking complementarity between the
frequency and specificity hypotheses with respect
to the gold standard direction (N-to-V vs. V-to-N).
Among the N-to-V cases, frequency excels with al-
most 85% accuracy, while the specificity predictors
are at baseline level. V-to-N shows the opposite be-
havior, with above 75% accuracy for the specificity
predictors and a sharp drop for frequency.

This complementarity among the predictors also
enables the regression model to combine their re-
spective strengths. It yields accuracies of 76%+
for both N-to-V and V-to-N conversion, with an
overall accuracy of 76.8%, significantly better than
frequency only. Table 2 shows normalized coeffi-
cients obtained for the four predictors in the model,
all of which contribute highly significantly. Posi-
tive coefficients increase the log odds for the class
N-to-V. As expected, the frequency difference be-
tween noun and verb comes with a positive coef-
ficient: a higher noun frequency indicates N-to-V.
According to hypothesis (2), we would expect a
negative coefficient for the KL divergence differ-
ence between noun and verb and and a positive one
for entropy. While this expectation is met for KL
divergence, we also see a negative coefficient for
entropy. This is due to the very strong correlation
between the two predictors: the regression model
uses the weaker one, entropy, as a “correction fac-
tor” for the stronger one, KL divergence.

Table 3 shows some examples (taken from the
top of the alphabetically-ordered list of conversion
cases), cross-classified by whether two complemen-
tary predictors (frequency and KL divergence) both
make the correct prediction, disagree, or both fail,
together with the number of conversion instances
for each class. The two predictors agree more often
than they disagree, but among the disagreements,
the strong asymmetry between N-to-V (top) and
V-to-N (below) is readily visible.

Part-of-speech Differences as a Confounder.
A possible criticism of our results is that they arise
primarily from distributional differences between

96



correct direction: N-to-V

wrong in both wrong in f wrong in KL correct in both
size=112 size=48 size=370 size=514

augur balk age air
biff calk alarm alloy

correct direction: V-to-N

wrong in both wrong in f wrong in KL correct in both
size=132 size=259 size=91 size=466

ally account act accord
answer address babble ache

Table 3: Conversion examples cross-classified ac-
cording to the frequency (f ) and KL divergence
(KL) predictors, with sizes of various classes.

the two parts of speech (nouns and verbs) and are
not specifically related to conversion. To test this
hypothesis, we first inspected the means of entropy,
KL divergence and log frequency in our sample and
found that downsampling was successful in largely
eliminating differences at the part-of-speech level
(e.g., H̄N = 6.57, H̄V = 6.62). We tested the impor-
tance of the remaining differences by re-running
our experiments with predictors that were normal-
ized by part-of-speech (i.e., either subtracting the
part-of-speech mean or dividing by it). The perfor-
mance of the individual predictors hardly changed,
nor did the performance of the logistic regression
model (slight increase in accuracy from 76.8% to
77.0%). Our conclusion is that the patterns that we
observe are indeed reflections of semantic shifts
due to conversion, rather than inherent differences
between parts of speech.

Consequences of Asymmetry for Theory. The
asymmetry observed between N-to-V and V-to-N
conversion in Table 1 suggests that different theo-
retical accounts of conversion may be appropriate
for the two directions. The failure of the speci-
ficity hypothesis to predict the direction of N-to-V
conversion at better than chance level is consistent
with an underspecification approach, rather than
a derivational one (cf. Section 1). The theoreti-
cal justification for our hypothesis (2), namely that
derived forms are more semantically specific than
their bases, assumes that the input to N-to-V con-
version is a noun, to which semantic content is
added in the form of a phonologically null operator.
If, instead, an uncategorized root merges with a
categorizing head to form both the noun and the
verb, there is no reason why one would be more
semantically specific than the other. On the other

hand, the high accuracy of the information theo-
retic measures on V-to-N conversion are consistent
with a derivational approach.

There is an interesting positive correlation be-
tween semantic regularity and (gain in) frequency.
As often noted in the literature, the semantics of N-
to-V conversion is irregular, with conversion verbs
exhibiting a wide range of meanings – for example,
age, meaning something like ‘increase in age’. In
N-to-V conversion, the derived word often occurs
less frequently than its base, possibly because the
high level of semantic flexibility encourages nonce
formations. On the other hand, V-to-N conversion
has much more regular semantics, where the noun
typically names the event or its result – for exam-
ple, an address involves the act of addressing. In
V-to-N conversion, frequency is a poor predictor
of the direction of derivation, indicating that the
derived word often occurs more frequently than its
base, possibly because semantic regularity allows
usages to become entrenched.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we have analyzed the phenomenon of
diachronic direction of derivation in English con-
version. An initial experiment has shown a striking
complementarity in the ability of frequency and
semantic specificity to account for the direction of
conversion in N-to-V and V-to-N cases, as well
as good overall accuracy for a combined model.
This opens up interesting avenues for future ex-
ploration. We believe corpus-based, distributional
measures can yield useful insights for theoretical
approaches to morphology and syntax. Finally, we
note that Herbelot and Ganesalingam (2013) found
a frequency-based measure and KL divergence to
perform about equally well on the task of predicting
lexical specificity, e.g. that cat is more specific than
animal. The relationship between various corpus-
based measures remains to be fully explored.

Acknowledgments. We thank the reviewers for
their valuable comments and student assistant Olga
Chumakova for her support. MK and SP acknowl-
edge partial funding by Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (SFB 732, Project B9). LR acknowl-
edges EPSRC grant EP/I037512/1 and ERC Start-
ing Grant DisCoTex (306920). AP acknowledges
Leibniz Association grant SAS-2015-IDS-LWC
and the Ministry of Science, Research, and Art
of Baden-Württemberg.

97



References
Maya Arad. 2005. Roots and patterns: Hebrew

morpho-syntax. Springer, Dordrecht.

Harald R. Baayen, Richard Piepenbrock, and Leon Gu-
likers. 1995. The CELEX lexical database. Release
2. LDC96L14. Linguistic Data Consortium, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Laurie Bauer. 1983. English word-formation. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.

Leonard Bloomfield. 1933. Language. Henry Holt,
New York.

Hagit Borer. 2005a. In name only: Structuring sense,
Volume I. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Hagit Borer. 2005b. The normal course of events:
Structuring sense, Volume II. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Eve V. Clark and Herbert H. Clark. 1979. When nouns
surface as verbs. Language, 55:767–811.

Jan Don. 1993. Morphological conversion. Ph.D. the-
sis, Utrecht University.

Jane Grimshaw. 1990. Argument Structure. MIT
Press, Cambridge.

Ken Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser. 2002. Prole-
gomenon to a theory of argument structure. MIT
Press, Cambridge.

Morris Halle and Alec Marantz. 1993. Distributed
morphology and the pieces of inflection. In S.J.
Keyser and K. Hale, editors, The view from Building
20, pages 111–176. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Heidi Harley and Rolf Noyer. 1999. State-of-the-
article: Distributed Morphology. GLOT, 4:3–9.

Frank W. Harwood and Alison M. Wright. 1956. Sta-
tistical study of English word formation. Language,
32(2):260–273.

Jennifer Hay. 2001. Lexical frequency in morphology:
Is everything relative? Linguistics, 39:1041–70.

Aurélie Herbelot and Mohan Ganesalingam. 2013.
Measuring semantic content in distributional vectors.
In Proceedings of ACL, pages 440–445, Sofia, Bul-
garia.

Ferenc Kiefer. 2005. Types of conversion in hungar-
ian. In Approaches to Conversion/Zero-Derivation.
Waxmann, Münster.

Paul Kiparsky. 1982. Word formation and the lexicon.
In Fred Ingeman, editor, Proceedings of the Mid-
America Linguistics Conference, page 3–29. Univer-
sity of Kansas.

Andrew Koontz-Garboden. 2007. States, changes of
state, and the Monotonicity Hypothesis. Ph.D. the-
sis, Stanford University.

Herbert Koziol. 1937. Handbuch der englischen Wort-
bildungslehre. C. Winter, Heidelberg.

Stela Manova and Wolfgang U. Dressler. 2005.
The morphological technique of conversion in
the inflecting-fusional type. In Approaches to
Conversion/Zero-Derivation. Waxmann, Münster.

Hans Marchand. 1969. The categories and types of
present-day English word-formation: A synchronic-
diachronic approach, 2nd edition. C.H. Becksche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, München.

David Pesetsky. 1995. Zero syntax: Experiencers and
cascades. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Ingo Plag. 1999. Morphological productivity: Struc-
tural constraints in English derivation. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin and New York.

Ingo Plag. 2003. Word-Formation in English. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.

Laura Rimell. 2012. Nominal Roots as Event Predi-
cates in English Denominal Conversion Verbs. Ph.D.
thesis, New York University.

Enrico Santus, Alessandro Lenci, Qin Lu, and Sabine
Schulte im Walde. 2014. Chasing hypernyms in
vector spaces with entropy. In Proceedings of EACL,
pages 38–42, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Petra Maria Vogel. 1996. Wortarten und Wortarten-
wechsel. Zu Konversion und verwandten Erschein-
ungen im Deutschen und in anderen Sprachen. Mou-
ton de Gruyter, Berlin and New York.

98


