



















































Discontinuous VP in Bulgarian


Proceedings of DiscoNLP 2016, pages 31–36,
San Diego, California, June 17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

Discontinuous VP in Bulgarian 

Elisaveta Balabanova 
University of Library Studies and Information Technologies 

UniBIT 
elisavetabal@yahoo.com 

 
 
 
 

Abstract 

This paper presents Bulgarian discontinuous 
constituents.1 Bulgarian is claimed to be a 
language of relatively free word order. As a 
typical manifestation of free word order dis-
continuous constituents in Bulgarian have not 
been studied so far. The paper discusses and 
analyzes the freedom in Bulgarian word order 
and points out the way discontinuity has been 
treated within BulTreeBank. We show the re-
sults of our linguistic analysis of discontinu-
ous VPs and summarize the extent of word 
order freedom and word order constraints 
within VP. 

1 Introduction 

It is well known that discontinuous constituents are 
typical manifestation of free word order. It is also 
claimed that discontinuity is characteristic of lan-
guages with rich morphology. Bulgarian shares 
both of the above features. Scientists, working on 
word order problems in Bulgarian, debate whether 
Bulgarian is a configurational or non-
configurational language. Most of them share the 
belief that Bulgarian is a configurational language, 
but has some non-configurational features (i.e. the 
free permutation of the elements within VP) 
(Penchev, 1991).  

By exploring the issue of discontinuity in VP we 
aim to show the extent of word order freedom in 
Bulgarian and the restrictions on this freedom, 
coming from semantics. 

                                                   
1 In our definition „constituent“  is the same as „phrase“. For 
the parts of the constituent we use the term „elements of the 
constituent“. 

The structure of the paper is as follows: In Sec-
tion 2 discontinuous constituents and the theories 
of “free“ word order in Bulgarian are discussed; In 
Section 3 discontinuous constituents are presented 
within BulTreeBank; Section 4 deals with the 
types of discontinuity in VP and Section 5 con-
cludes the paper. 

2 Discontinuous constituents and the the-
ories of “free” word order in Bulgarian 

Researchers on Bulgarian word order have so far 
noticed that there is a greater word order freedom 
within the verb phrase than within other phrases 
(Rudin, 1986; Penchev, 1991). Scientists show that 
the variety of word order models usually is due to 
the influence of discourse on word ordering. In the 
tradition of Bulgarian word order investigations, 
especially in the first half of the 20th century, in-
formation packaging was taken as one of the most 
prominent manifestations of discourse.  Thus much 
of the research in the field of word order was de-
voted to the connection between word order and 
information packaging.  

Sv. Ivanchev (Ivanchev, 1975) is the first scien-
tist who spreaded the ideas of the Prague linguistic 
school in Bulgaria. The relation between word or-
der and information packaging is investigated by a 
number of researchers (Georgieva, 1974; Bre-
zinski, 1995; Avgustinova, 1997, Tisheva, 2003, 
Tisheva and Djonova, 2002; Tisheva and Djonova, 
2004a; Tisheva and Djonova, 2004b; Tisheva, 
2013). 

The interrelation between intonation, word order 
and information packaging is a topic of research of 
another Bulgarian linguist – Jordan Penchev 
(Penchev, 1980). J. Penchev aims to describe the 
main intonation types of Bulgarian sentences and 

31



 
 
 

 

for this reason he uses the information from the re-
lationship between semantics and information 
packaging. There are several researchers who in-
vestigate particular word order constructions, but 
as a whole we can summarize that all the research-
ers claim that there is a number of factors from 
structural (syntactic), discourse and prosodic na-
ture, which affect the word order models in Bul-
garian. The different combinations of these factors 
give rise to a larger number of word order combi-
nations within some Bulgarian phrases (the VP es-
pecially), than in others (NP, AP), which is the rea-
son for the researchers to discuss whether Bulgari-
an is a nonconfigurational language. Scientists de-
ny this hypothesis, showing that the word order 
freedom in some phrases is an isolated phenome-
non, which cannot be taken as a sign of noncon-
fiugrationality. They claim that within the structure 
of Bulgarian there is a combination of configura-
tional and nonconfigurational features.  

Based on the above mentioned assumptions, all 
the researchers are on the shared opinion of that 
Bulgarian has a rather free or relatively free word 
order, but noone has pointed out precisely the ex-
tent of the word order freedom and the restrictions 
on word order. Also noone so far has studied dis-
continuity in Bulgarian, so our survey is the first 
attempt to analyze one of the most frequent types 
of discontinuous VPs and the factors, causing dis-
continuity.  

3 Representation of discontinuous con-
stituents within BulTreeBank 

Investigating discontinuity within a corpus is a 
good way to investigate the extent of word order 
freedom and word order constraints. For this sake 
we use the corpus of syntactic trees in Bulgarian, 
namely BulTreeBank, which is a corpus of syntac-
tic trees of Bulgarian sentences. Constituency 
within the treebank is represented via graphs, 
which are defined on the basis of mother-daughter 
relation (Simov and Osenova, 2004). Graphs are 
chosen as close to the context free-tree representa-
tion (Simov and Osenova, 2004). In the syntactic 
trees the original word order is preserved and dis-
continuous elements are introduced where neces-
sary (Simov and Osenova, 2004). In the examples 
from the treebank VPC stands for verb-
complement phrase, VPS – for a verb-subject 

phrase, VPA is a head-adjunct phrase and VPF – a 
head-filler phrase, which has an extracted element, 
realized outside the phrase. 

There are three types of discontinuous constitu-
ents in the treebank. 

3.1 Functional element DiscA 

This is when a higher dependent is realized be-
tween the head and lower dependent/s. For the 
word order to be preserved, the higher element is 
marked up with the functional element DiscA 
(Discontinuous adjunct) and is annotated at a high-
er place with the functional element nid (nonim-
mediate dominance). Then the element DiscA and 
nid are connected with the same index, seen as a 
line in the tree below (Simov and Osenova, 2004). 
 

 
Figure 1: Sentence from the treebank with DiscA element: 
Izvednazh telefonat pak zvanna. (Suddenly, the telephone 
again rang 

3.2 Functional element DiscM 

DiscM stands for discontinuous mixture. 
This is a mixture of two constituents. The ele-

ments of two constituents are mixed with neither of 
the two being a governor of the other (Simov and 
Osenova, 2004). This is a very rare case of discon-
tinuity and has only two or three occurrences in the 
treebank. 
 

32



 
 
 

 

 
Figure 2: Sentence from the treebank with DiscM element: 
Malki go momi beriaha. (Little it girls picked up; i.e. little 
girls picked it up) 

3.3 Functional element DiscE 

This is external realization of inner constituent. 
This is the case of extraction (Simov and Osenova, 
2004). Again the element DiscE (Discontinuous 
extraction) is marked with nid with the same index 
as the phrase where it has been extracted from.  
 

 
Figure 3: Sentence from the treebank with DiscE and DiscA 
element: S tozi sluchai az sym svoevremenno zapoznat. (With 
this case I am on time informed.) 

4 Types of discontinuity, based on the 
type of the element causing it.  

In this part we present our investigation on discon-
tinuity within VP. VP is chosen as the most promi-
nent example of free word order in Bulgarian (see 
Section 2a). For the completion of the task it was 
necessary first of all to extract all the sentences, 
containing discontinuous VPs from the corpus. The 

total number of sentences with discontinuity in the 
corpus is 4160 sentences, which makes about 35% 
of all the sentences in the treebank. After doing 
this, we had to select the types of discontinuities 
within VP. We found out that there are 2 main 
groups of discontinuity in Bulgarian VP: i) discon-
tinuity, caused by an element which is part of the 
syntactic structure of the sentence (the element, 
causing discontinuity in this case is marked up 
with DiscA in the treebank) and ii) discontinuity, 
caused by an element, which is not part of the syn-
tactic structure of the sentence (the element, caus-
ing discontinuity in this case is marked up with the 
tag Pragmatic element in the treebank). In this pa-
per we will not deal with discontinuities of the 
second type. We are focused only on discontinui-
ties, caused by elements, which are part of the syn-
tactic structure of the tree. These elements are:  ad-
juncts; extracted complements of the head verb and 
the subject. Here we will focus only on discontinu-
ity, caused by adjuncts. 

4.1 Discontinuity, caused by adjuncts 

Within BulTreeBank discontinuities, caused by ad-
juncts, are the greatest number of discontinuities 
(67% of all the sentences with discontinuity in 
VP). In the treebank the sentences are annotated 
along the lines of HPSG (Pollard and Sag 1994). 
Thus, according to the theoretical frame we use, 
adjuncts are attached as sisters of the saturated VP 
phrase, i.e. when the verb has realized its depend-
ents – complement/s and subject (if there is a sub-
ject in the sentence, since Bulgarian is a pro-drop 
language). Only after the verb has taken its de-
pendents and formed either a VPC (verb-
complement phrase) or a VPS (verb-subject 
phrase), the adjunct is attached to this VPC or VPS 
phrase, forming a VPA phrase. This is the usual 
case, when adjuncts are realized linearly without 
causing discontinuity.  In this linear realization of 
the adjunct the latter modifies semantically the sat-
urated VP.  On the contrary, in the cases of discon-
tinuities the adjuncts are realized linearly first and 
the dependents of the verb (subject and/or com-
plements) – afterwards.  In such sentences the pro-
jection of the VPA phrase is higher up in the tree 
and the linear intersection is seen as a line in the 
graph (see Section 3.1). There are two cases of dis-
continuity in VP, caused by adjunct: i) The adjunct 

33



 
 
 

 

is realized between the subject and the head verb; 
ii) The adjunct is realized between the head verb 
and the complement. 

Before starting the linguistic analysis, we came 
across one problem. Namely, the adjuncts were not 
classified by types in the treebank. Therefore, we 
needed to have a classification of adjuncts first and 
then annotate manually all the adjuncts in the sen-
tences of discontinuities, according to this classifi-
cation. Only afterwards we could extract the sen-
tences with discontinuities by types of the adjuncts. 
The classification of adjuncts we used is based on 
GSBKE (GSBKE, 1983) and contains the follow-
ing types of adjuncts: adjuncts of time, of manner, 
of quantity and degree, of place, adjuncts of second 
predication, of condition, of reason, and of aim. In 
all the sentences with adjunct, causing discontinui-
ty, we annotated the adjuncts manually along this 
classification. Then it was possible to extract the 
groups of discontinuities by the type of the adjunct. 
This allowed us to make conclusions about the rea-
sons, causing discontinuous linear realization of 
the elements of the VP. 

4.1.1 Discontinuity between the subject and the 
head verb 

This is the biggest group of sentences with discon-
tinuities, caused by adjuncts.  

Here is the proportional distribution of sentences 
with adjuncts, causing discontinuity between the 
subject and the head verb in VP: Adjuncts of time 
– 45%; Adjunts of manner –  31%; Adjuncts of 
quantity and degree – 11%; Adjuncts of place – 
5%; Adjuncts of second predication – 3%; Ad-
juncts of condition – 2%; Adjuncts of reason – 1%; 
Adjuncts of aim – less than 1% 

 
 

 
Figure 4: Sentence from the treebank with adjunct between 
the head verb and the complement: Puskat v Evropa (adjunct 
of place) akcii na Intersputnik.(They release in Europe shares 
of Intersputnik). 
 

The information packaging2 in this type of sen-
tences follows two main patterns:  
 
1) The adjunct is part of the Ground.  
 
Example: Ground [link[V tzivilizovania sviat] tail 
[chovek prez celia si zhivot (adjunct of time)]] 
Focus [pazi „svetaia svetih“ na svoiata reputacia – 
svoeto kreditno dosie]. (In the civilized world one, 
during his whole life, keeps the most precious of 
his reputation – his credit history.) 
 

In sentences with such discontinuity and com-
municatively marked word order3 the adjunct can 
take the information value of either tail, or link of 
the tail. In sentences with communicatively un-
marked word order the information value of the ad-
junct is only a tail.  
 
2) The adjunct is part of the Focus 
 

                                                   
2 For analysis of information  packaging we use the metho- 
dology of Engdahl and Vallduvi  (Engdahl and Vallduvi, 
1994; Engdahl and Vallduvi 1996), where Focus is the actual 
information of the sentence, Ground is what is presupposed 
by the information at the output. Sentences have Ground only 
if the context ensures it. The Link is the particular  place in 
the sentence for introduction of the new information and the 
Tail points out that there is a need for information  update in 
this part of the discourse.  
3 For the relation between word order and information packag-
ing we use the model of T. Avgustinova (Avgustinova, 1997), 
in which there are 4 types of word order, according to the in-
formation packaging: communicatively unmarked, parenthe-
tical, communicatively marked and emphatic.  

34



 
 
 

 

Example: Ground [Vseki opit za ocenka na organ-
iziranata prestapnost v izmereniata na nacionalnata 
sigurnost] Focus [zadalzhitelno (adjunct of man-
ner) predpolaga predvaritelno da se utochniat ob-
hvatyt i sadarzhanieto na samoto poniatie. (Any at-
tempt to estimate the organized crime in the con-
text of the national security obligatorily presuppos-
es to define content of the notion itself.) 

4.1.2 Discontinuity between the head verb and 
the complement 

The position right after the head verb in VP has 
been investigated by a number of researchers 
(Rudin, 1986, Avgustinova, 1997, Penchev in: Bo-
yadzhiev, Kutzarov, Penchev, 1999, Tisheva, 
2000, Tisheva, 2013). 

Here is the proportional distribution of sentences 
with adjuncts, causing discontinuity between the 
subject and the head verb in VP: Adjuncts of man-
ner – 40%; Adjunts of time –  30%; Adjuncts of 
quantity and degree – 11%; Adjuncts of place – 
9%; Adjuncts of second predication – 4%; Ad-
juncts of aim – 2%; juncts of condition – less than 
1%; Adjuncts of reason – less than 1%. 
 

 
Figure 5: Sentence from the treebank with adjunct between 
the subject and the head verb: Izvendazh telefonat pak (ad-
junct of manner) zvynna.(Suddenly the telephone again rang). 

 
In sentences with adjuncts between the head 

verb and the complement the adjunct becomes part 
of the focus. 

 
Example: Razbira se, choveshko e da se sbyrka, 
no tuk Focus [znam mnogo dobre (adjunct of 
manner) za kakvo stava duma]. (Of course, it’s 
human to make mistakes, but I know exactly of 
what we’re talking about.) 

4.2 Conclusion about the word order models 
with discontinuity, caused by adjuncts 

From our linguistic analysis we can summarize 
that the factors, which rule the realization of ad-
juncts within VP are: 

1. The information packaging within the sen-
tence, which depends on 

2. The semantics of the adjuncts. According to 
the semantics of the adjunct and according 
to which part of the sentence the adjunct is 
syntactically attached, we distinguish4 two 
types of adjuncts: i) sentential (they modify 
semantically the whole sentence) and ii) 
phrasal (they modify semantically a particu-
lar element of the VP). 

Most of the adjuncts in Bulgarian modify se-
mantically the whole sentence (these are the ad-
juncts of time, of place, of condition, of reason and 
of aim). Syntactically, these adjuncts are realized 
as sisters of the saturated VP. Thus their linear re-
alization within VP is only a result of the particular 
information packaging that the speaker chooses to 
make in his utterance. 

The word order realization of the phrasal ad-
juncts (adjuncts of manner, of quantity and degree 
and adjuncts of second predication) is restricted by 
semantic constraints. The semantic scope of these 
adjuncts – i.e. over a particular element of the VP5 
– demands that they are realized in contact to the 
element they semantically modify (the contact po-
sition can be pre- or postposition).  

Since discontinuous constituents are a typical 
manifestation of free word order, we can summa-
rize that the word order freedom within Bulgarian 
VP is a result of different information packaging. 
The constraints on word order, though, come from 
semantics. This means that whenever adjuncts with 
narrow sematic scope are realized within VP, their 
semantics poses restrictions on word order since 
the adjunct has to be realized in contact to the ele-
ment of the VP it semantically modifies. The reali-
zation of the adjunct in contact to the element it 
modifies semantically (in pre- or postposition to 

                                                   
4 This distinction is already known for other languages, but the 
author is the first one who defines it for Bulgarian.  
5 For this we use the term “narrow semantic scope“. 

35



 
 
 

 

this element) results in syntactic discontinuity of 
the phrase. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper we have reviewed the theories about 
Bulgarian word order in the limelight of discontin-
uous constituents. We have shown how discontin-
uous constituents have been presented within Bul-
TreeBank. We have also pointed out the types of 
discontinuous constituents and presented our lin-
guistic analysis of the discontinuities, caused by 
adjuncts. We have described the reasons for linear 
realization of adjuncts within VP and we have also 
summarized the factors, which trigger word order 
freedom and impose word order constraints on the 
elements of VP, thus pointing out the precise ex-
tent of word order freedom in Bulgarian, which 
had not been studied thoroughly so far. 

References  

Tanya Avgustinova. 1997. Word order and clitics in 
Bulgarian. Saarbrucken dissertations in computational 
linguistics and language technology. Vol. 5. Universität 
des Saarlandes. 
 
Stefan Brezinski. 1995. Kratak balgarski sintaksis. UI 
„Sv.Kliment Ohridski“. Sofia 
 
BulTreeBank. http://www.BulTreeBank.org/ 
 
Engdahl and Vallduvi 1994. Information packaging and 
grammar architecture: A constraint-based approach. In 
E. Engdahl, editor, Integration Information Structure in-
to Constraint-based and Categorial Approaches, volume 
R.1.3.B of DYANA, Edinburgh, 41-79. 
 
Engdahl and Vallduvi 1996. Information packaging in 
HPSG. In Grover and Vallduvi, 1996, 113-128. 
 
Elena Georgieva. 1974. Slovored na prostoto izrechenie  
v balgarskia knizhoven ezik. Izd.BAN.Sofia 
 
GSBKE, 1983. Gramatika na savremennia balgarski 
knizhoven ezik. 1983 Tom 3. Izd.BAN. Sofia. 
 
Svetomir Ivanchev. 1957. Nabljudenia varhu upotre-
bata na chlena. In: Sv.Ivanchev. Prinosi v balgarskoto i 
slavianskoto ezikoznanie. Sofia. 1978 
 
Jordan Penchev. 1980. Osnovni intonacionni konturi v  
balgarskoto izrechenie. Izd. BAN. Sofia 
 

Jordan Penchev. 1991. Nekonfiguracionni iavlenia v 
balgarskia sintaksis, sp. Balgarski ezik, kn.6, Izd. BAN. 
Sofia. Bulgaria 
 
Carl Pollard and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase   
Structure Grammar. The University of Chicago Press. 
 
Katrin Rudin. 1986. Aspects of Bulgarian syntax: com-
plementizers and wh-constructions. Slavica Publishers, 
Inc. 
 
Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2004.  BTB-TR05: 
BulTreeBank Stylebook. http://www.BulTreeBank.org/ 
TechRep/BTB-TR05.pdf 
 
Jovka Tisheva. 2003. Bulgarian yes-no questions with 
particles nali and nima. In: Investigations into Formal 
Slavic Linguistics. Contributions of the 4th European 
Conference in Formal Description of Slavic Languages. 
Peter Kosta, Janna Blaszczak, Jens Frasek, Ljudmila 
Geist, Marzena Zygis (eds.). Peter Lang, Europaischer 
Verlag der Wissenschaften, Frankfurt am Main, 715-
729 
 
Jovka Tisheva. 2013. Pragmatichni aspekti na ustnata 
rech. Litera et Lingua Series Dissertations. 
http://slav.uni-sofia.bg/naum/liliseries/diss/2013/3 
 
Jovka Tisheva, Marina Djonova. 2002. Information 
structure and clitics in TreeBanks. In: Proceedings of 
the First Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries (TLT 2002). Sozopol. Bulgaria. 
 
Jovka Tisheva, Marina Djonova. 2004a. Stariat nov top-
ic. In: VII Nacionalni slavistichni chetenia. Sofia. 
 
Jovka Tisheva, Marina Djonova. 2004b. Za niakoi slo-
voredni modeli za topicalizacia na razgovornata rech. 
In: Sedma nauchna konferencia po problemite na razgo-
vornata rech. Veliko Tarnovo. 
 

36


