





































Bibliometrics, Information Retrieval and  
Natural Language Processing:  

Natural Synergies to Support Digital Library Research 

Dietmar Wolfram1 

1School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, WI  U.S.A.  53201 

dwolfram@uwm.edu 

Abstract Historically, researchers have not fully capitalized on the potential 
synergies that exist between bibliometrics and information retrieval (IR). 
Knowledge of regularities in information production and use, as well as citation 
relationships in bibliographic databases that are studied in bibliometrics, can 
benefit IR system design and evaluation. Similarly, techniques developed for IR 
and database technology have made the investigation of large-scale bibliometric 
phenomena feasible. Both fields of study have also benefitted directly from de-
velopments in natural language processing (NLP), which have provided new 
tools and techniques to explore research problems in bibliometrics and IR. Digi-
tal libraries, with their full text, multimedia content, along with searching and 
browsing capabilities, represent ideal environments in which to investigate the 
mutually beneficial relationships that can be forged among bibliometrics, IR 
and NLP. This brief presentation highlights the symbiotic relationship that ex-
ists among bibliometrics, IR and NLP.  

Keywords: bibliometrics, information retrieval, digital libraries, natural lan-
guage processing 

1 Introduction 

Both information retrieval (IR) and bibliometrics have long histories as 
distinct areas of investigation in information science. IR has focused on 
the storage, representation and retrieval of documents (text or other 
media) from the system and user perspectives. Bibliometrics and its 
allied areas (informetrics, scientometrics, webmetrics, or simply “met-
rics”) have focused on discovering and understanding regularities that 
exist in the way information is produced and used--but this simple defi-
nition belies the breadth of research undertaken. Units of analysis may 
be words, metadata fields, publications, authors, journals, research 
groups, institutions, sub-fields, disciplines or geographic regions. Ap-
plications of the study of these regularities and underlying processes 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

6

mailto:dwolfram@uwm.edu


extend to equally diverse areas such as science policy, subject indexing 
and IR system design, including digital libraries (DLs).  

The documentary contents of bibliographic IR systems and their as-
sociated indexes provide much of the data that metrics researchers rely 
on today to conduct their research. Conversely, many of the processes 
within IR are directly informed by metrics research. Surprisingly, there 
has been little overlap in the research agendas of these two areas of 
study over the history of information science. This is changing with the 
growing recognition of the common interests and the tools and tech-
niques used by IR and metrics researchers that can help to advance the 
research agendas of each field [1]. The recent international BIR work-
shops [2,3,4] have brought together researchers with combined interests 
in bibliometrics and IR. The BIR research presentations demonstrate 
the potential synergies that exist between these two areas. With large, 
full text databases now commonplace, both IR and bibliometrics have 
also benefitted from developments in natural language processing 
(NLP) and computational linguistics, where text-based techniques have 
improved document retrieval and the ability to explore relationships 
among entities of interest in metrics research.  

In a sense, digital libraries represent an ideal environment in which 
to study the intersection of IR, bibliometrics and NLP, whether the DLs 
consist of repositories of formal publications or heterogeneous collec-
tions of multimedia documents. With content representation and search 
functionality found in more traditional IR environments, hyperlinks that 
mimic relationships similar to those found in citation analysis, and full 
text contents that lend themselves to NLP analysis. This brief overview 
outlines how developments in IR and bibliometrics, along with lan-
guage-based methods, have helped to advance research in both areas. 
These intersections are most evident in bibliographic databases, but 
also extend to more heterogeneous digital libraries.  

2 Information Retrieval Research 

IR research has focused on the design of more efficient and effective 
systems to match documents to queries to meet the information needs 
of users. Early IR research was more system-centered, but user-
centered approaches are now employed alongside system-centered ap-
proaches in the design and evaluation of IR systems. Bibliometrics pro-
vides useful methods for the analysis of both system content and sys-

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

7



tem usage, to better understand system processes and user dynamics. In 
essence, IR processes represent forms of information production and 
use [5], where observed patterns follow classic power law distributions 
or possibly unimodal distributions (e.g., lognormal or Poisson-like). 
Furthermore, metric studies of scientific communication can provide 
frameworks to assist in the design of IR systems. 

Aspects of IR system content that lend themselves to bibliometric 
modeling include index term frequency distributions, indexing 
exhaustivity or term assignment, term co-occurrence frequency distri-
butions, database and index growth, and more recently, aspects of web-
based IR such as frequency distributions of inlinks/outlinks and docu-
ment persistence [6]. Applications of bibliometric modeling to IR sys-
tems have included the development of simulations to model IR system 
processes to better understand system interactions. These models also 
can be used to observe retrieval efficiency under different situations to 
identify preferred file structures or for space planning [7,8].  

User interactions with IR systems as recorded by transaction logs 
may be similarly modeled. Characteristics that can be modeled include 
search terms used per query, frequency distributions of query terms, 
query term co-occurrence, query frequency distributions, search session 
length based on queries or other actions, user search and browsing 
regularities, and site/document visitation frequency. Search and brows-
ing patterns may be modeled using network analysis methods, similar 
to those applied in citation analysis, to identify issues with interface use 
[9], or clustering techniques may be applied to identify larger scale 
search session patterns [10].  

Beyond mathematical modeling of specific bibliometric characteris-
tics of IR systems, higher level aspects of science models also can in-
form the search and retrieval process of scientific literature. Mutschke 
and Mayr [11], for instance, recognize this important observation and 
demonstrate that retrieval performance can benefit by ranking results 
based on our understanding of models of science.  

Citation-based connections between bibliographic records serve as a 
readily exploitable data source for expanding searching and browsing 
options for users. These ideas have been implemented in experimental 
systems over the past several decades such as I3R [12] and BIRS [13], 
with the latter also supporting query expansion through visualizations 
of relationships among searchable entities. The importance of citation 
linkages is also recognized by commercial database vendors such as 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

8



EBSCO and ProQuest, which now provide active hyperlinks to refer-
ences included in full text articles and to citing articles, where availa-
ble.  

For much of the history of IR, the research focus was on the repre-
sentation and retrieval of document surrogates with limited natural lan-
guage. Representation and retrieval were based on metadata fields, 
keywords or controlled vocabularies. Models to support query and doc-
ument matching were based on bag-of-words approaches that treated 
terms independently of one another. Context and semantics played no 
role in determining the aboutness of documents. At the same time, 
computational challenges increased as the size of databases grew. IR 
models such as the vector space model became more computationally 
expensive due to the high dimensionality associated with representing 
documents and processing document-query matching.  

   IR research has been more responsive to taking advantage of ad-
vanced NLP techniques to provide a more natural search environment 
for users and to extend retrieval evaluation beyond simple term inde-
pendence models. Dimensionality reduction techniques that lower the 
computational overhead associated with IR processing have become 
commonplace since early approaches based on latent semantic analysis 
were introduced over 25 years ago. Successors based on language mod-
eling [14], including topic modeling [15], have provided novel ways to 
tackle information search and retrieval. The applications have more 
recently included the recommendation of scientific articles [16] and the 
identification of search terms [17]. Language-based techniques have 
also been used to identify additional index terms for documents based 
on language surrounding citations appearing in citing documents [18]. 

3 Bibliometrics Research 

The relationship between IR and bibliometrics research can be consid-
ered in some ways symbiotic [19]. As noted above, methods used in 
metrics research have informed IR research. Conversely, tools and 
techniques developed to support IR research have been adapted to sup-
port metrics research. An exemplar is the development and application 
of PageRank [20] used by Google to rank webpages. It was directly 
influenced by citation analysis methods used in bibliometrics research. 
The developers recognized the parallels between citations and webpage 
inlinks. The effectiveness of PageRank is evident in Google’s 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

9



longstanding success as a search engine. More recently, PageRank-
based approaches have been reapplied to citation analysis research 
problems [21]. Other similar network-based approaches, such as 
Eigenfactor (URL: http://www.eigenfactor.org), provide addition-
al ways to rank journals or support methods to rank or recommend arti-
cles [22]. Furthermore, the h-index, initially developed to measure au-
thor impact, has been demonstrated to have application for the ranking 
of webpages, similar to PageRank, but with less computational over-
head [23].  

Citation analysis has been a core area of bibliometrics research for 
over 50 years. Citation relationships in the form of direct citations, co-
citations or bibliographic coupling create a network of linkages among 
documents, authors, and publication venues that allows one to visualize 
the intellectual structure of a field [24], or all of science [25]. Similarly, 
co-authorship-based studies provide another type of linkage that allows 
researchers to gain deeper insights into the dynamics of research com-
munities [26]. One limitation inherent in citation-based studies is that 
relationships among entities of interest only exist if the linkages exist. 
The lack of direct citation, co-citation, bibliographic coupling or co-
authorship should not preclude the possibility of relationships.  

This situation can be addressed using approaches that integrate the 
vocabulary used by the entities of interest, usually employing keyword 
or controlled vocabulary co-occurrence, which takes bibliometric stud-
ies more into the realm of IR research. Still, there are concerns with 
keyword-based approaches in bibliometrics research that mirror the 
same bag-of-words issues found in IR research. The assumption of in-
dependence of vocabulary in bibliographic entities, whether as key-
words or subject terms, creates the same issues observed earlier in IR 
studies. The ability to work with full text and natural language can im-
prove these analyses. More recent research has moved beyond simple 
co-occurrence to identify relationships among entities of interest. Of 
particular note has been the application of topic modeling techniques, 
such as Latent Dirichlet Analysis (LDA) [27], to bibliographic records 
to identify relationships among bibliometric entities of interest, for in-
stance, authors [28,29], that may not be reflected through citation or 
collaboration. Tang et al. [30] have developed a searchable system ini-
tially called ArnetMiner (now AMiner, URL: http://aminer.org) 
that profiles researchers based on publication content and supports ex-
pertise search.  

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

10



4 Conclusion 

The application of bibliometric methods for IR research and vice ver-
sa has evolved over the past forty years, from bibliometric modeling of 
IR system processes to the exploitation of citation relationships to pro-
vide extended browsing capabilities to identify potentially relevant 
documents based on citation linkages. More recently, the adoption of 
language-based methods from NLP and computational linguistics has 
benefitted both IR and bibliometrics research. Applications of lan-
guage-based approaches are still relatively new in bibliometric con-
texts. Link-based analysis (citations, co-authorship, hyperlinks) in 
combination with textual analysis can capitalize on the strengths of 
both approaches [31]. The analysis of full text collections--whether bib-
liographic databases or heterogeneous, multimedia digital libraries--
offers many opportunities for further study. The applications of cita-
tion-based methods and emerging language-based methods are evident 
in the range of presentations given at the BIRNDL workshop, which 
include the use of citation methods, text mining and topic modeling to 
enhance retrieval in full text or digital library environments, scholarly 
communication and our understanding of disciplinary boundaries.  

5 References 

1. Mayr, P., Scharnhorst, A.: Scientometrics and Information Retrieval: Weak-links Revital-
ized. Scientometrics 102, 2193–2199 (2015) 

 
2. Mayr, P., Scharnhorst, A., Larsen, B., Schaer, P., Mutschke, P.: Bibliometric-enhanced In-

formation retrieval. In Advances in Information Retrieval (pp. 798-801). Springer Interna-
tional Publishing (2014) 
 

3. Mayr, P., Frommholz, I., Scharnhorst, A., Mutschke, P.: Bibliometric-enhanced Infor-
mation Retrieval: 2nd International BIR Workshop. In Advances in Information Retrieval 
(pp. 845-848). Springer International Publishing (2015) 
 

4. Mayr, P., Frommholz, I., Cabanac, G.: Editorial for the 3rd Bibliometric-Enhanced Infor-
mation Retrieval Workshop at ECIR 2016 (2016) 
 

5. Egghe, L.: Power Laws in the Information Production Process: Lotkaian Informetrics. 
Elsevier (2005) 

 
6. Wolfram, D.: Applied Informetrics for Information Retrieval Research. Libraries Unlim-

ited (2003) 
 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

11



7. Wolfram, D.: Applying Informetric Characteristics of Databases to IR System File Design, 
Part I: Informetric Models. Information Processing and Management, 28(1), 121-133 
(1992)   

 
8. Wolfram, D.: Applying Informetric Characteristics of Databases to IR System Design, Part 

II: Simulation Comparisons. Information Processing and Management, 28(1), 135-151 
(1992) 

 
9. Han, H.J., Joo, S., Wolfram, D.: Using Transaction Logs to Better Understand User Search 

Session Patterns in an Image-Based Digital Library. Journal of the Korean Biblia Society 
for Library and Information Science. 25(1), 19-37 (2014)  

 
10. Wolfram, D., Wang, P., Zhang, J.: Identifying Web Search Session Patterns Using Cluster 

Analysis: A Comparison of Three Search Environments. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, 60(5), 896-910 (2009) 
 

11. Mutschke, P., Mayr, P.: Science Models for Search: A Study on Combining Scholarly In-
formation Retrieval and Scientometrics. Scientometrics, 102, 2323-2345 (2015) 

 
12. Croft, W.B., Thompson, R.H.: I R: A New Approach to the Design of Document Retrieval 

Systems. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 38(6), 389-404 (1987) 
 

13. Ding, Y., Chowdhury, G. G., Foo, S., Qian, W. Bibliometric information retrieval system 
(BIRS): A web search interface utilizing bibliometric research results. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 51(13), 1190-1204 (2000) 

 
14. Ponte, J.M., Croft, W.B.: A Language Modeling Approach to Information Retrieval. In 

Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 275-281). ACM (1998) 
 

15. Wei, X., Croft, W. B.: LDA-based Document Models for Ad-Hoc Retrieval. In Proceed-
ings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval (pp. 178-185). ACM (2006) 
 

16. Wang, C., Blei, D.M.: Collaborative Topic Modeling For Recommending Scientific Arti-
cles. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 448-456). ACM (2011) 

 
17. Koopman, R., Wang, S., Scharnhorst, A., Englebienne, G.: Ariadne's Thread: Interactive 

Navigation in a World of Networked Information. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 
1833-1838). ACM (2015) 

 
18. Ritchie, A., Robertson, S., Teufel, S.: Comparing Citation Contexts for Information Re-

trieval. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Information and knowledge man-
agement (pp. 213-222). ACM (2008) 
 

19. Wolfram, D.: The Symbiotic Relationship between Information Retrieval and Informetrics. 
Scientometrics, 102, 2201-2214 (2015) 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

12



 
20. Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., Winograd, T.: The PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing 

Order to the Web. http://ilpubs.stanford.edu:8090/422/1/1999-
66.pdf (1999)   
 

21. Waltman, L., Yan, E.: PageRank-related Methods for Analyzing Citation Networks. In Y. 
Ding, R. Rousseau and D. Wolfram (Eds.). Measuring Scholarly Impact. (pp. 83-100). 
Springer (2014) 

 
22. West, J. D., Wesley-Smith, I., Bergstrom, C. T.: A Recommendation System Based on Hi-

erarchical Clustering of an Article-level Citation Network. IEEE Transactions on Big Data  
(Forthcoming) 

 
23. Bar-Ilan, J., Levene, M.: The hw-rank: An h-index Variant for Ranking Web Pages, 

Scientometrics, 102, 2247–2253 (2015) 
 
24. White, H.D., McCain, K.W.: Visualizing a Discipline: An Author Co-Citation Analysis of 

Information Science, 1972-1995. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 
49, 327-355 (1998) 

 
25. Boyack, K.W., Klavans, R., Börner, K.: Mapping the Backbone of Science. 

Scientometrics, 64, 351-374 (2005) 
 
26. Glänzel, W., Schubert, A.: Analysing Scientific Networks through Co-Authorship. In 

Handbook of Quantitative Science and Technology Research (pp. 257-276). Springer 
Netherlands (2004) 
 

27. Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., & Jordan, M.J.:  Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine 
Learning Research, 3, 993–1022 (2003)   
 

28. Rosen-Zvi, M., Griffiths, T., Steyvers, M., Smyth, P.: The Author-topic Model for Authors 
and Documents. In Proceedings of the 20th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
gence (pp. 487-494). AUAI Press (2004) 

 
29. Lu, K., Wolfram, D.: Measuring Author Research Relatedness: A Comparison of Word-

Based, Topic-Based and Author Co-Citation Approaches. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, 63, 1973-1986 (2012)   
 

30. Tang, J., Zhang, J., Yao, L., Li, J., Zhang, L., Su, Z.: ArnetMiner: Extraction and Mining 
of Academic Social Networks. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 990-998). ACM (2008) 

 
31. Zitt, M.: Meso-level Retrieval: IR-bibliometrics Interplay And Hybrid Citation-Words 

Methods In Scientific Fields Delineation, Scientometrics, 102, 2223–2245 (2015) 
 

 
 

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

13


	editorial
	paper1
	paper2
	paper3
	paper4
	paper5
	Making Sense of Massive Amounts of Scientific Publications: the Scientific Knowledge Miner Project

	paper6
	paper7
	paper8
	Delineating Fields Using Mathematical Jargon

	paper9
	paper10

