



















































Exploring Query Expansion for Entity Searches in PubMed


Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (LOUHI), pages 106–112,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring Query Expansion for Entity Searches in PubMed 

 
 

                 Chung-Chi Huang                                Zhiyong Lu 
                National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), 
                                     National Library of Medicine, 
                                  National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
     chuang@frostburg.edu     Zhiyong.lu@nih.gov 

 

 
  

 

Abstract 

Identifying relevant studies from the entire 
scientific literature is an important task in bi-
omedical research. Past efforts have incorpo-
rated semantically recognized biological enti-
ties and medical ontologies into biomedical 
literature search. However, semantic relations 
are largely overlooked by biomedical search 
engines. In this work, we aim to discover 
synonymous biomedical semantic relations 
between entities and explore their uses in 
query (semantics) understanding for im-
proved retrieval performance. Specifically, 
we discover synonymous semantic relations 
from PubMed queries and apply them to que-
ry expansion and specification. In these two 
real-world scenarios, better PubMed retrieval 
effectiveness, in terms of recall and precision, 
can be achieved, demonstrating the utility of 
our proposed approach. 

1 Introduction 
PubMed is widely used by millions of users on a 
daily basis for seeking scholarly publications in 
biology and life sciences. Recent studies show 
that a significant portion of PubMed queries are 
entity specific (i.e. entity searches) (Neveol et 
al., 2011; Huang and Lu, 2016). 

Domain-specific search engines, such as 
PubMed, typically handle queries with domain 
knowledge in mind. For example, PubMed in-
corporates Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) to 
retrieve documents associated with query’s se-
mantic meaning than just keyword matches as in 
biomedicine it is common for concepts to appear 
in different forms in user queries and scholarly 
publications (Lu et al. 2009). However, PubMed 
can still suffer from mismatches between docu-
ment and query words when an information need 

involves entity semantic relations (Baumgartner 
et al., 2007). 

Consider the query chlorthalidone vs hydrochloro-
thiazide and chlorthalidone versus hydrochlorothiazide. 
Semantically similar as they are, PubMed returns 
twice more relevant documents for the latter, 
clearly overlooking the semantics of the general 
terms of vs and versus during its search. Unfortu-
nately, such performance difference resulting 
from different query formulations can lead to 
different levels of user satisfaction and different 
user experience with PubMed. 

In light of this, we propose a framework where 
we first understand user query’s semantics by 
discovering synonymous patterns among user 
queries (e.g. patterns CHEMICAL vs CHEMICAL and 
CHEMICAL versus CHEMICAL) for entity relations of 
interest. We then apply these learned synony-
mous patterns in query expansion to improve 
retrieval effectiveness for entity searches in 
PubMed. 

In this work, we mine synonymous patterns in 
user queries instead of scholarly publications 
because queries are generally short (Islamaj 
Dogan et al., 2009; Wilkinson et al., 1995) and 
tend to bond entities in proximity. Here we spe-
cifically target chemical-chemical and chemical-
disease relations such as chemical-induced-
disease relation (Wei et al., 2016). The proposed 
framework, however, is easily generalizable to 
understand other bio-entity relations such as pro-
tein-protein interaction (Phizicky and Fields, 
1995). 

Our work is unique in several aspects. First, 
PubMed queries are semantically analyzed 
through context patterns, and synonymous rela-
tions or synonymous context patterns are discov-
ered automatically. Second, synonymous patterns 
are applied to expand entity searches at pattern 
level to improve recall of relevant documents. 
Third, synonymous patterns can also be applied 

106



to searches with entities only, where we add ad-
ditional constraints to improve precision. Overall 
evaluation is able to point key directions for fu-
ture development and improvement of PubMed, 
and can also shed light on how to effectively 
search biomedical literature beyond PubMed. 

2 Related Work 
Query Expansion (QE) has been an area of active 
research in Information Retrieval (IR). QE tech-
niques manage to alleviate vocabulary mismatch 
between query and document words by adding 
related words to the initial queries, with the goal 
of improving retrieval effectiveness. Below we 
discuss three types of QE techniques classified 
based on how they derive related words: ontolo-
gy-oriented, query-independent data-driven, and 
query-dependent data-driven technique. 

Ontology-oriented techniques leverage lan-
guage properties (e.g. synonyms, hypernyms and 
etc.) in dictionaries (Liddy and Myaeng, 1993), 
thesauri, or lexical databases (Voorhees, 1994) to 
find QE. General-purpose lexical database e.g. 
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) or a domain-specific 
one e.g. MeSH (Nelson et al., 2001) may be 
used. 

Query-independent data-driven QE methods 
identify queries’ similar words by analyzing 
global-wide documents not specific to queries. 
Hence, they are also known as global corpus-
specific QE methods (Carpineto and Romano, 
2012). They learn word association by concept 
terms (Qiu and Frei, 1993), term clustering 
(Crouch and Yang, 1992), distributional similari-
ty (Lin 1998; Turney 2001; Chen et al., 2006), 
semantic topics (Park and Pamamohanarao, 
2007), to name a few. 

Query-dependent data-driven techniques, on 
the other hand, analyze query-specific documents 
for QE. While relevance feedback uses relevant 
documents from the initial queries, pseudo-
relevance feedback uses top-ranked documents 
without human intervention (Xu and Croft, 
1996). Measures for finding related terms in ini-
tially returned documents include Rocchio’s 
weighting (Rocchio, 1971), Chi-square 
(Doszkocs, 1978), and Kullback-Leibler distance 
(Carpineto et al., 2001). Recently, Cui et al. 
(2003) and Riezler et al. (2007) consider user-
clicked documents relevant for QE. 

In biomedicine, QE studies primarily focus on 
ontologies and pseudo-relevance feedback. For 
example, Jalali and Borujerdi (2008) and Lu et 
al. (2009) expand queries via MeSH ontology, 

and Srinivasan (1996), Aronson (1996), and Zhu 
et al. (2006) expand queries via Unified Medical 
Language System (Lindberg et al., 1993). On the 
other hand, biomedical queries can be reformu-
lated (Lu et al., 2009) or systematically expanded 
based on initially retrieved documents focusing 
on abbreviations (Bacchin and Melucci, 2005), 
the controlled vocabulary of MeSH (Thesprasith 
and Jaruskulchai, 2014), or open vocabulary (Ri-
vas et al., 2014). 

In contrast to previous work, we semantically 
analyze frequently-sought general patterns (or 
relations) in biomedical queries, discover pattern 
synonyms, and use these automatically-learnt 
synonymous patterns to expand real-world entity 
searches in PubMed. Such general-phrase pat-
tern-level semantics understanding, complemen-
tary to domain-specific MeSH, later proves use-
ful in QE and beneficial to PubMed literature 
search in our case studies. 

3 Entity Searches in PubMed 
(a) PubMed titles for the search midazolam sevoflurane 
 

1. Network Meta-Analysis on the Efficacy of Dexme-
detomidine, Midazolam, Ketamine, Propofol, and Fentanyl 
for the Prevention of Sevoflurane-Related Emergence Agi-
tation in Children. 
2. Determination of optimum time for intravenous cannula-
tion after induction with sevoflurane and nitrous oxide in 
children premedicated with midazolam 
(b) PubMed titles for its semantics-constrained query 
midazolam vs sevoflurane OR midazolam versus sevoflurane OR … 
 

1. Long-term sedation in intensive care unit: a randomized 
comparison between inhaled sevoflurane and intravenous 
propofol or midazolam. 
2. Complications of sevoflurane-fentanyl versus midazo-
lam-fentanyl anesthesia in pediatric cleft lip and palate sur-
gery: a randomized comparison study. 
Table 1. An example of PubMed search results (sorted 

by relevance) without (a) and with (b) semantic ex-
pansion. 

 

We focus on understanding users’ information 
needs or search semantics when they submit enti-
ty searches to PubMed. We discover synony-
mous patterns or entity relations in user queries 
(Section 3.1) and exploit them in the following 
two use scenarios to improve PubMed retrieval 
effectiveness. 
Scenario 1. Consider an entity pair search with 
explicit relation mention (e.g. comparison rela-
tion between two drugs as in albuterol vs levalbut-
erol). We expand the query with its synonymous 
counterparts belonging to the same pattern-level 
relation (e.g. adding albuterol versus levalbuterol, 
comparison between albuterol and levalbuterol, and etc.). 
With such query expansion, we expect to retrieve 

107



semantic 
relation pattern BiR 

semantic 
relation pattern BiR 

drug 
comparison 

#C versus #C 
#C vs #C 
comparison of #C and #C 
comparison #C and #C 
#C compare #C 
difference between #C and #C 
comparison between #C and #C 
#C compare to #C 
#C compare with #C 
difference #C and #C 

2.38 
10.05 
1.91 
1.91 
135.65 
144 
1.91 
135.65 
135.65 
144 

drug-
induced-
disease 

#C induced #D 
#D induced by #C 
#D associate with #C 
#C side effect #D 
#D caused by #C 
#C exposure and #D 
#C cause #D 
#D risk factor #C 
#D #C adverse effect 

1.14 
1.14 
969.6 
303 
21.07 
21.26 
48 
94.13 
484.8 

drug 
combination 

#C and #C combination 
combination of #C and #C 
combine #C and #C 
#C in combination with #C 
#C and #C combination therapy 
#C combined with #C 
add #C to #C 
combination therapy with #C and #C 
concomitant #C and #C 

1.35 
1.35 
904.2 
1.35 
6.14 
4.93 
37.99 
6.14 
38.64 

drug-treats-
disease 

#D treatment #C 
#D and #C therapy 
treatment of #D with #C 
treatment of #D #C 
#D treatment with #C 
#C treatment for #D 
#C in the treatment of #D 
#C in #D treatment 
#D treated with #C 
#C therapy in #D 

1.96 
2.41 
1.96 
1.96 
1.96 
1.96 
1.96 
1.96 
7.59 
2.41 

Table 2. Retrieval benefit in recall (BiR) when using synonymous relational patterns for query expansion. 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Patterns’ semantics similarity in terms of 
overlapping entities or LSA topics. While circles 

represent entities, the colors of the circles represent 
learned LSA topics. 

 

from PubMed additional documents originally 
unreachable and expect to balance PubMed re-
sults across different query formulations with 
identical semantics meaning. 
Scenario 2. Consider a pure entity pair search 
without any explicit mention of entity relation 
(e.g. midazolam sevoflurane). We constrain the query 
on its known search semantics learned based on 

past PubMed searches (e.g. comparison relation 
between these two drugs). The newly constructed 
search (e.g. midazolam vs sevoflurane OR midazolam 
versus sevoflurane OR … where OR combines Pub-
Med results) is expected to direct PubMed to-
wards documents users truly interested in but 
otherwise might be ranked low based on the orig-
inal search. Take Table 1 for example. Top-
ranked documents are more relevant with the 
new semantics-constrained query if users are to 
compare the two entities without explicitly men-
tioning so in the search query. 

Note that in Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 we per-
form PubMed searches under relevance sorting 
(as opposed to the default chronical sorting) and 
we search PubMed and use matches in article 
titles as a proxy for human relevance evaluation 
(Kim et al., 2016). In other words, to ensure 
quick turnaround and large-scale evaluation, we 
assume those matching titles all satisfy users’ 
information needs (i.e. perfect precision) and 
thus no human relevance judgments is required. 

3.1 Discovering Synonymous Patterns 
We have previously developed an unsupervised 
approach for identifying synonymous patterns of 
entity relations in PubMed queries (Huang and 
Lu, 2016). Due to space limitation, we only 
briefly outline major steps below. We refer inter-
ested readers to (Huang and Lu, 2016) for de-
tails. 

First, a six-month worth of PubMed queries 
(35M queries) are stemmed and tagged using 
entity recognition tools (Wei et al., 2015; 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

#C induce #D 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
#C in #D treatment 

patterns 

. 

. 

. 
#D due to #C 
. 
. 
. 
#D and #C therapy 
. 
. 
. 

patterns 
1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

=  <#C: omeprazole, #D: acute pancreatitis> 

=  <#C: fluoroquinolone, #D: neuropathy> 

=  <#C: warfarin, #D: skin necrosis> 

=  <#C: tamsulosin, #D: intraoperative floppy iris syndrome> 

=  <#C: streptozotocin, #D: diabetes> 

=  <#C: clonidine, #D: diabetic diarrhea> 

=  <#C: androgen, #D: prostate cancer> 

108



Leaman et al., 2013; Leaman et al., 2015) for 
genes/proteins, diseases, and chemicals/drugs. 

Next, we formulate queries to context patterns 
and focus on specifically discovering synony-
mous patterns for chemical-chemical (CC) and 
chemical-disease (CD) relations. For instance, 
the query skin necrosis associate with warfarin is for-
mulated into #D associate with #C where #C and #D 
stands for chemical and disease entity respective-
ly. 

Inspired by distributional similarity (Lin 
1998), we then exploit these patterns’ participat-
ing entity pairs to understand their semantics. In 
such a way, synonymous patterns can be found 
in an unsupervised fashion in contrast to seeds-
required pattern recognition work (e.g. Xu and 
Wang, 2014). Take Figure 1 for example. Our 
framework will consider the pattern #C induce #D 
semantically closer to #D due to #C than to #C in #D 
treatment since #C induce #D and #D due to #C share 
more participating entities in user queries: 2 
overlapping entities out of 7 entities vs 0 out of 
7. 

To avoid data sparseness issue on (distribu-
tional similarity in) entity mention, we further 
leverage latent semantic analysis, LSA, (Rehurek 
and Sojka, 2010) to find entities’ LSA topics 
which in turn reduces the space of semantics 
analysis from the dimension of entity pairs to a 
much smaller dimension of LSA topics. The 
benefit of using LSA topics is clear: after LSA 
transformation, #C induce #D in Figure 1, where 
circle’s colors depict LSA topics, shows stronger 
semantics connection with #D due to #C than pre-
viously without LSA: 2 overlapping LSA topics 
out of 3 topics. 

Our LSA-based approach is able to achieve 
satisfying performance in finding semantically 
similar patterns across entity relations of interest, 
such as drug-induced-disease relation, drug-drug 
interaction, to name a few. We refer interested 
readers to (Huang and Lu, 2016) for detailed 
evaluation results. 

3.2 Expanding Entity-Relation Searches 
 

Once our method identifies candidates of pattern 
synonyms, we collect the set of true synonymous 
patterns and apply them to semantic query ex-
pansion as below. 

We first order a semantic relation’s synony-
mous patterns according to their frequencies in 
PubMed queries, which represent user prefer-
ences or user intuitions (in searching the target 
bio-relation between two entities). See patterns 
in descending order of frequency in the second 

and fifth column of Table 2. For example, Pub-
Med users prefer using #C versus #C to #C vs #C or 
comparison of #C and #C in comparing two drugs. 
Currently, four common entity relations between 
drugs and between drugs and diseases are of our 
particular interest: drug comparison, drug com-
bination, drug-induced-disease and drug-treats-
disease. 

Second, for each relation, we assemble its 500 
most searched entity pairs from our search logs. 
For example, <albuterol, levalbuterol> is a popular 
chemical pair for the drug comparison relation. 

For each entity pair (e.g. <albuterol, levalbuterol>) 
of a semantic relation, we then submit a query 
with the pair using one of the relational patterns 
(e.g. albuterol vs levalbuterol) and compare the 
search result with that of semantically expanded 
query that leverages all synonymous patterns 
(e.g. albuterol versus levalbuterol OR albuterol vs leval-
buterol OR … Syntax OR combines PubMed re-
trieval results). Recall that the searches are lim-
ited to PubMed titles. Finally, we compute the 
ratio of the number of total search results via all 
patterns of the semantic relation over that of each 
individual pattern, averaged over 500 entity 
pairs. Such difference in recall is referred to as 
benefit in recall, BiR. 

As Table 2 shows, a BiR score above 1 means 
expanding queries using collective synonymous 
patterns of the same semantics improves PubMed 
recall or helps PubMed retrieve more relevant 
documents. Take the drug comparison relation 
for example. Regardless of the chemical pair of 
interest, expanded queries can always retrieve 
more relevant documents than using the individ-
ual pattern of #C versus #C (more than twice as 
many on average: 2.38). In some cases of Table 
2, the improvement in recall is substantial (e.g. 
135.65 associated with #C compare #C, 904.2 asso-
ciated with combine #C and #C, and so on). 

The benefit of using our synonymous patterns 
for query expansion in current PubMed settings 
can be observed across various types of CC or 
CD entity-relation searches, searches with ex-
plicit relation mention. And interestingly, the 
most frequently used patterns by users (or the 
most intuitive/straightforward search patterns 
from users’ points of view) may not always be 
the best choice at default: among the drug com-
parison patterns, comparison of #C and #C is more 
effective than the most popular #C versus #C in 
retrieving relevant documents. A semantic 
framework like ours can balance PubMed re-
trieval results across different entity-relation ex-
pressions in searches with similar meanings. 

109



3.3 Expanding Pure Entity Pair Searches 
 

Among PubMed searches, pure entity pair 
searches or searches containing only two bio-
entities without any explicit relation mentions 
(e.g. midazolam sevoflurane), account for approxi-
mately half of the searches involving dual bio-
entities. As a result, we investigate in this sub-
section how we can improve PubMed user expe-
rience by expanding these queries, with the help 
of our synonymous patterns and past user 
searches. The process is detailed below. 

First, we identify pure entity pair searches on-
ly sought by PubMed users in a specific rela-
tion/context, based on which we expand the 
searches and impose semantic search constraints. 
Take the pure entity pair search midazolam sevoflu-
rane for instance. Since it had only been searched 
with drug comparison relation by PubMed users, 
we later explicitly constrain that search query in 
the context of drug comparison relation. This 
step infers the implicit relation between the enti-
ty pair from the wisdom of the crowd (i.e. past 
search logs). Our hypothesis is that such implicit 
relation, if explicitly added to the search, may 
improve retrieval results and in turn user experi-
ence. 

In the current experiment, a total of 1,600 
unique pure entity-pair queries are collected with 
CC relation constraints (i.e. drug comparison, 
drug combination, and drug interaction) and CD 
relation constrains (i.e. drug-treats-disease, drug-
induced-disease, supplement-for-disease, drug-
resistance-in-disease). 

Similar to the settings in Section 3.2, we sub-
mit to PubMed (a) original queries, i.e. pure enti-
ty pairs and (b) expanded queries with explicit 
relation constraints learnt from past user queries. 
For example, original search midazolam sevoflurane 
and its semantics-constrained counterpart midazo-
lam versus sevoflurane OR midazolam vs sevoflurane OR 
… (expanded using our synonymous patterns of 
the drug comparison relation, in which midazolam 
sevoflurane had only been sought) will be submit-
ted to PubMed. 

Finally, based on the search results from (a) 
and (b), we compute the retrieval effectiveness of 
regular PubMed by using (b)’s results as the 
ground truth. In other words, we assume the ex-
panded queries truly represent users’ search in-
tention and their search results truly satisfy us-
ers’ information needs. Retrieval performance is 
measured by standard information retrieval (IR) 
measures: precision (P), mean reciprocal rank 

(MRR) and nDCG (Jarvelin and Kekalainen, 
2002) at rank 20. 

As we can see in Table 3, the difference be-
tween current performance scores in MRR or 
nDCG and perfect scores (i.e. perfect MRR or 
nDCG equals 1) suggests genuinely there is 
room for performance increase in retrieval for 
such searches, i.e. pure entity pair searches, in 
current PubMed settings. While pure CD search-
es yield better results than pure CC searches, po-
tential gain in performance is still substantial for 
CD queries, which can be achieved by simply 
adding semantics constraints and expanding que-
ries accordingly. In some cases (e.g. pure entity 
pair searches with implicit drug interaction rela-
tion), semantics constraints almost warrant a 
more satisfying search performance. 

entity pair 
type 

implicit relation IR measures 
@ 20 

results 

CC 

drug comparison 
P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.25 
0.43 
0.57 

drug combination 
P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.29 
0.47 
0.61 

drug interaction 
P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.13 
0.32 
0.43 

CD 

drug-treats-
disease 

P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.34 
0.58 
0.66 

drug-induced-
disease 

P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.36 
0.63 
0.70 

supplement-for-
disease 

P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.23 
0.47 
0.56 

drug-resistance-
in-disease 

P 
MRR 
nDCG 

0.21 
0.43 
0.55 

Table 3. Results on pure CC and CD queries with 
implicit relations. 

4 Summary 
We have applied query semantics understanding 
to PubMed literature search. The proposed 
framework involves discovering synonymous 
relational patterns in queries and, based on those, 
expanding PubMed user queries, specifically en-
tity search queries. Preliminary evaluation shows 
such semantic query expansion helps to improve 
PubMed retrieval effectiveness. And better 
PubMed performance implies better user experi-
ence and less curation effort (Lu and Hirschman, 
2012). Incorporating such general-phrase seman-
tics framework, complementary to domain-
specific MeSH, into PubMed serving millions of 
users is warranted. 

110



5 Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the Intramural Re-
search Program of the National Library of Medi-
cine, National Institutes of Health. The authors 
would like to thank anonymous reviewers for 
their suggestions and comments. 

Reference 
Aronson, A.R. 1996. The effect of textual variation on 

concept based information retrieval. Proc AMIA 
Annu Fall Symp. 

Aronson, A.R. and T.C. Rindflesch. 1997. Query 
expansion using the UMLS Metathesaurus. Proc 
AMIA Annu Fall Symp. 

Bacchin, M. and M. Melucci. 2005. Symbol-based 
query expansion experiments at TREC 2005 
Genomics Track. In Proceedings of Text REtrieval 
Conference. 

Baumgartner, W, Z. Lu, H. Johnson et al. 2007. An 
integrated approach to concept recognition in 
biomedical text. In Proceedings of BioCreative 
Challenge Evaluation Workshop. 

Carpineto, C., R. De Mori, G. Romano et al. 2001. An 
information-theoretic approach to automatic query 
expansion. ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems. 

Carpineto, C. and G. Romano. 2012. A survey of 
automatic query expansion in information retrieval. 
ACM Computing Surveys. 

Chen, H., M. Lin, and Y. Wei. 2006. Novel associa-
tion measures using web search with double check-
ing. In Proceedings of ACL, p. 1009-1016. 

Crouch, C.J. and B. Yang. 1992. Experiments in 
automatic statistical thesaurus construction. In 
Proceedings of ACM SIGIR. 

Cui, H., J.R. Wen, J.Y. Nie et al. 2003. Query 
expansion by mining user logs. IEEE Transactions 
on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 

Deerwester, S., S.T. Dumais, G.W. Furnas et al. 1990. 
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the 
Association for Information Science. 

Diaz-Galiano, M.C., M.T. Martin-Valdivia, and L.A. 
Urena-Lopez. 2009. Query expansion with a 
medical ontology to improve a multimodal 
information retrieval system. Comput Biol Med. 

Dramé, K., F. Mougin, and G. Diallo. 2014. Query 
expansion using external resources for improving 
information retrieval in the biomedical domain. In 
Proceedings of ShARe/CLEF eHealth Evaluation 
Lab. 

Doszkocs, T.E. 1978. AID, an associative interactive 
dictionary for online searching. Online Review. 

Fellbaum, C. 1998. WordNet: an electronic lexical 
database. 

Gauch, S., J. Wang, and S.M. Rachakonda. 1999. A 
corpus analysis approach for automatic query 
expansion and its extension to multiple Databases. 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems. 

Gonzalo, J., F. Verdejo, I. Chugur et al. 1998. 
Indexing with WordNet synsets can improve text 
retrieval. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop. 

Huang, C.C. and Z. Lu. 2016. Discovering biomedical 
semantic relations in PubMed queries for 
information retrieval and database curation. 
Database. 

Islamaj Dogan, R., G.C. Murray, A. Neveol et al. 
2009. Understanding PubMed user search behavior 
through log analysis. Database. 

Jalali, V. and M.R.M. Borujerdi. 2008. The effect of 
using domain specific ontologies in query 
expansion in medical field. In Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Innovations in 
Information Technology. 

Jarvelin, K. and J. Kekalainen. 2002. Cumulated gain-
based evaluation of IR technologies. ACM Trans-
actions on Information Systems. 

Kim, S., W.J. Wilbur, Z. Lu. 2016. Bridging the gap: 
a semantic similarity measure between queries and 
documents. arXiv:1608.01972. 

Lavrenko, V. and W.B. Croft. 2001 Relevance based 
language models. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR. 

Leaman, R., R. Islamaj Dogan, and Z. Lu. 2013. 
DNorm: disease name normalization with pairwise 
learning to rank. Bioinformatics. 

Leaman, R., C.H. Wei, and Z. Lu. 2015. tmChem: a 
high performance approach for chemical named 
entity recognition and normalization. J 
Cheminform. 

Liddy, E.D. and S.H. Myaeng. 1993. DR-LINK's 
linguistic-conceptual approach to document 
detection. In Proceedings of Text REtrieval 
Conference. 

Lin, D. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of 
similar words. In Proceedings of ACL, p. 768-774. 

Lindberg, D.A., B.L. Humphreys, and A.T. McCray. 
1993. The Unified Medical Language System. 
Methods Inf Med. 

Lu, Z. and L. Hirschman. 2012. Biocuration 
workflows and text mining: overview of the 
BioCreative 2012 Workshop Track II. Database. 

Lu, Z., W. Kim, and W.J. Wilbur. 2009. Evaluation of 
Query Expansion Using MeSH in PubMed. Inf 
Retr. 

111



Lu, Z., W.J. Wilbur, J.R. McEntyre et al. 2009. 
Finding query suggestions for PubMed. In AMIA 
Annu Symp Proc. 

Nelson, S.J., W.D. Johnston, and B.L. Humphreys. 
2001. Relationships in medical subject headings 
(MeSH). 

Neveol, A., R. Islamaj Dogan, and Z. Lu. 2011. Semi-
automatic semantic annotation of PubMed queries: 
a study on quality, efficiency, satisfaction. J 
Biomed Inform. 

Park, L.A.F. and K. Ramamohanarao. 2007. Query 
expansion using a collection dependent 
probabilistic latent semantic thesaurus. In 
Proceedings of PAKDD. 

Phizicky, E.M. and S. Fields. 1995. Protein-protein 
interactions: methods for detection and analysis. 
Microbiol Rev. 

Qiu, Y. and H.P. Frei. 1993. Concept based query 
expansion. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR. 

Rehurek, R. and P. Sojka. 2010. Software framework 
for topic modelling with large corpora. In Proceed-
ings of LREC Workshop. 

Riezler, S., E. Vasserman, I. Tsochantaridis et al. 
2007. Statistical machine translation for query 
expansion in answer retrieval. In Proceedings of 
ACL. 

Rocchio, J.J. 1971. Relevance feedback in 
information retrieval. 

Srinivasan, P. 1996. Query expansion and MEDLINE. 
Information Processing and Management. 

Thesprasith, O. and C. Jaruskulchai. 2014. Query 
expansion using medical subject headings terms in 
the biomedical documents. Intelligent Information 
and Database Systems. 

Tsuruoka, Y. and J. Tsujii. 2005. Bidirectional infer-
ence with the easiest-first strategy for tagging se-
quence data. In Proceedings of EMNLP, p. 467-
474. 

Turney, P.D. 2001. Mining the Web for synonyms: 
PMI-IR versus LSA on TOEFL. In Proceedings of 
EMCL, p. 491-502. 

Voorhees, E.M. 1994. Query expansion using lexical-
semantic relations. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR. 

Wei, C.H., H.Y. Kao, and Z. Lu. 2015. GNormPlus: 
an integrative approach for tagging genes, gene 
families, and protein domains. Biomed Res Int. 

Wei, C.H., Y. Peng, R. Leaman et al. 2016. Assessing 
the state of the art in biomedical relation extrac-
tion: overview of the BioCreative V chemical-
disease relation (CDR) task. Database. 

Wilkinson, R., J. Zobel, and R. Sacks-Davis. 1995. 
Similarity measures for short queries. In 
Proceedings of Text REtrieval Conference. 

Xu, R. and Q. Wang. 2014. Automatic construction of 
a large-scale and accurate drug-side-effect 
association knowledge base from biomedical 
literature. J Biomed Inform. 

Xu, X. and X. Hu. 2010. Cluster-based query 
expansion using language modeling in the 
biomedical domain. In Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Bioinformatics and 
Biomedicine Workshops. 

Zhai, C. and J. Lafferty. 2001. Model-based feedback 
in the language modeling approach to information 
retrieval. In Proceedings of CIKM. 

Zhu, W., X. Xu, X. Hu et al. 2006. Using UMLS-
based re-weighting terms as a query expansion 
strategy. In Proceedings of IEEE International 
Conference on Granular Computing. 

 

112


