









































Overview of the CL-SciSumm 2016 Shared Task

Kokil Jaidka1, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran2, Sajal Rustagi3, and
Min-Yen Kan2,4

1 Big Data Experience Lab, Adobe Research India
2 School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore

3 Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology,
Roorkee, India

4 Interactive and Digital Media Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore
kokil@pmail.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. The CL-SciSumm 2016 Shared Task is the first medium-scale
shared task on scientific document summarization in the computational
linguistics (CL) domain. The task built off of the experience and training
data set created in its namesake pilot task, which was conducted in 2014
by the same organizing committee. The track included three tasks involv-
ing: (1A) identifying relationships between citing documents and the re-
ferred document, (1B) classifying the discourse facets, and (2) generating
the abstractive summary. The dataset comprised 30 annotated sets of cit-
ing and reference papers from the open access research papers in the CL
domain. This overview paper describes the participation and the official
results of the second CL-SciSumm Shared Task, organized as a part of
the Joint Workshop onBibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and
Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2016), held
in New Jersey,USA in June, 2016. The annotated dataset used for this
shared task and the scripts used for evaluation can be accessed and used
by the community at: https://github.com/WING-NUS/scisumm-corpus.

1 Introduction

The CL-SciSumm task provides resources to encourage research in a promising
direction of scientific paper summarization, which considers the set of citation
sentences (i.e., “citances”) that reference a specific paper as a (community cre-
ated) summary of a topic or paper [21]. Citances for a reference paper are consid-
ered a synopses of its key points and also its key contributions and importance
within an academic community [19]. The advantage of using citances is that
they are embedded with meta-commentary and offer a contextual, interpreta-
tive layer to the cited text. The drawback, however, is that though a collection
of citances offers a view of the cited paper, it does not consider the context of
the target user [9] [24], verify the claim of the citation or provide context from
the reference paper, in terms the type of information cited or where it is in the
referenced paper [8].

CL-SciSumm explores summarization of scientific research, for the computa-
tional linguistics research domain. It encourages the incorporation of new kinds

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

93



of information in automatic scientific paper summarization, such as the facets of
research information being summarized the research paper. Our previous task
suggested that scholars in CL typically cite methods information from other pa-
pers. CL-SciSumm also encourages the use of citing mini-summaries written in
other papers, by other scholars, when they refer to the paper. It is anticipated
that these selected facts would closely reflect the most important contributions
and applications of the paper. These insights have been explored in a smaller
scope by previous work. We propose that further explorations can help to ad-
vance the state of the art. Furthermore, we expect that the CL-SciSumm Task
could spur the creation of new resources and tools, to automate the synthesis
and updating of automatic summaries of CL research papers.

Previous work in scientific summarization has attempted to automatically
generate multi-document summaries by instantiating a hierarchical topic tree[6],
generating model citation sentences[17] or implementing a literature review frame-
work[8]. However, the limited availability of evaluation resources and human-
created summaries constrains research in this area. In 2014, the CL-SciSumm
Pilot task was conducted as a part of the larger BioMedSumm Task at TAC 5.
In 2016, our proposal was not successful with ACL; fortunately it was accepted
as a part of the BIRNDL workshop [15] at JCDL-20166.

The development and dissemination of the CL-SciSumm dataset and the
related Shared Task has been generously supported by the Microsoft Research
Asia (MSRA) Research Grant 2016.

2 Task

Given: A topic consisting of a Reference Paper (RP) and up to ten Citing
Papers (CPs) that all contain citations to the RP. In each CP, the text spans
(i.e., citances) have been identified that pertain to a particular citation to the
RP.

Task 1A: For each citance, identify the spans of text (cited text spans) in
the RP that most accurately reflect the citance. These are of the granularity of
a sentence fragment, a full sentence, or several consecutive sentences (no more
than 5).

Task 1B: For each cited text span, identify what facet of the paper it belongs
to, from a predefined set of facets.

Task 2: Finally, generate a structured summary of the RP from the cited
text spans of the RP. The length of the summary should not exceed 250 words.
This was an optional bonus task.

Evaluation: Participants were required to submit their system outputs from
the test set to the task organizers. An automatic evaluation script was used to
measure system performance for Task 1a, in terms of the sentence id overlaps
between the sentences identified in system output, versus the gold standard
created by human annotators. Task 1b was evaluated as a proportion of the

5 http://www.nist.gov/tac/2014
6 http://www.jcdl.org

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

94



correctly classified discourse facets by the system, contingent on the expected
response of Task 1a. Task 2 was optional, and evaluated using the ROUGE-N [12]
scores between the system output and three types of gold standard summaries
of the research paper.
Data: The dataset comprises ten pairs of training sets, development and test
sets. Each pair comprises the annotated citing sentences for a research paper
and the discourse facets being referenced, and summaries of the research paper.

3 CL-SciSumm Pilot 2014

The CL Summarization Pilot Task [7] was conducted as a part of the Biomed-
Summ Track at the Text Analysis Conference 2014 (TAC 2014) 7. Ten pairs of
annotated citing sentences and summaries were made available to the partici-
pants, who reported their performance on the same Tasks described above, as a
cross-validation over the same dataset. System outputs for Task 1a were scored
using word overlaps with the gold standard measured by the ROUGE–L score.
Task 1b was scored using precision, recall and F1. Task 2 was an optional task
where system summaries were evaluated against the abstract using ROUGE–L.
No centralized evaluation was performed. All scores were self-reported.

Three teams submitted their system outputs. clair umich was a supervised
system using lexical, syntactic and WordNet based features; MQ system used
information retrieval inspired ranking methods; TALN.UPF used various TF-
IDF scores.

During this task, the participants reported several errors in the dataset in-
cluding text encoding and inconsistencies in the text offsets. The annotators also
reported flaws in the xml encoding, and problems in the OCR export to XML.
These issues hindered system building and evaluation. Accordingly, changes were
made to the annotation file format and the XML transformation process in the
current task.

4 Development

The CL-SciSumm 2016 task included the original training dataset of the Pi-
lot Task, to encourage teams from the previous edition to participate. It also
incorporated a new development corpus of ten sets for system training, and a
separate test corpus of ten sets for evaluation. Additionally, it provided three
types of summaries for each set in each corpus -

– the abstract, written by the authors of the research paper

– the community summary, collated from the reference spans of its citances

– human-written summary written by the annotators of the CL-SciSumm an-
notation effort

7 http://www.nist.gov/tac/2014

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

95



For the general procedure followed to construct the CL-SciSumm corpus, please
see [7]. There are two differences in the selection of citing papers (CP) for the
training corpus, as compared to the development and test corpora. Firstly, the
minimum numbers of CP provided in the former, which was 3, was increased
to 8 in the construction of the latter. Secondly, the maximum number of CPs
provided in the former was 10, but this limit was removed in the construction
of the latter, so that up to 60 CPs have been provided for a single RP. This was
done to have more citances of which potentially more would mention the RP in
greater detail. This would also produce a wider perspective in the community
summary.

4.1 Annotation

The annotators of the development and test corpora were five postgraduate
students in Applied Linguistics, from University of Hyderabad, India. They were
selected out of a larger pool of over twenty-five participants, who were all trained
to annotate an RP and its CPs on their personal laptops, using the Knowtator8

annotation package of the Protege editing environment9.
The annotation scheme was unchanged from what was followed by [7]: Given

each RP and its associated CPs, the annotation group was instructed to find
citations to the RP in each CP. Specifically, the citation text, citation marker,
reference text, and discourse facet were identified for each citation of the RP
found in the CP. Inadvertently, we included the gold standard annotations for
Task 1a and 1b when we released the test corpus. We alerted the participating
teams to this mistake and requested them not to use that information for training
their systems.

5 Overview of Approaches

The following paragraphs discuss the approaches followed by the participating
systems, in no particular order. Except for the top performing systems in each
of the sub-tasks, we do not provide detailed relative performance information
for each system, in this paper. The evaluation scripts have been provided at the
CL- SciSumm Github respository 10 where the participants may run their own
evaluation and report the results.

The approach by [14] used the Transdisciplinary Scientific Lexicon (TSL)
developed by [5] to build a profile for each discourse facet in citances and refer-
ence spans. Then a similarity function developed by [16] was used to select the
best-matching reference span with the same facet as the citance. For Task 2, the
authors used Maximal Marginal Relevance [3] to choose sentences so that they
brought new information to the summary.

8 http://knowtator.sourceforge.net/
9 http://protege.stanford.edu/about.php

10 github.com/WING-NUS/scisumm-corpus

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

96



Nomoto [20] proposed a hybrid model for Task 2, comprising TFIDF and
a tripartite neural network. Stochastic gradient descent was performed on a
training data comprising of triples of citance, the true reference and the set of
false references for the citance. Sentence selection was based on a dissimilarity
score similar to MMR.

Mao et al. [11] used an SVM classifier with a topical lexicon to identify the
best matching reference spans for a citance, using ifd similarity, Jaccard similar-
ity and context similarity. They finally submitted six system runs, each following
a variant of similarities and approaches - the fusion method, the Jaccard Cas-
cade method, the Jaccard Focused method, the SVM method and two voting
methods.

Klampfl et al. [10] developed three different approaches based on summa-
rization and classification techniques. They applied a modified version of an
unsupervised summarization technique, termed it TextSentenceRank, to the ref-
erence document. Their second method incorporates similarities of sentences to
the citation on a textual level, and employed classification to select from can-
didates previously extracted through the original TextSentenceRank algorithm.
Their third method used unsupervised summarization of the relevant sub-part
of the document that was previously selected in a supervised manner.

Saggion et al. [23] reported their results for the linear regression implementa-
tion of WEKA used together with the GATE system. They trained their model
to learn the weights of different features with respect to the relevance of cited
text spans and the relevance to a community-based summary. Two runs were
submitted, using SUMMA [22] to score and extract all matched sentences and
only the top sentences respectively.

Lu et al. [13] regarded Task 1a as a ranking problem, applying Learning to
Rank strategies. In contrast, the group cast Task 1b as a standard text classifi-
cation problem, where novel feature engineering was the team’s focus. Along this
vein, the group considered features of both citation contexts and cited spans.

Aggarwal and Sharma [1] propose several heuristics derived from bigram
overlap counts between citances and reference text to identify the reference text
span for each citance. This score is used to rank and select sentences from the
reference text as output.

Baki et al. [18] used SVM with subset tree kernel, a type of convolution
kernel. Computed similarities between three tree representations of the citance
and reference text formed the convolution kernel. Their set-up scored better
than their TF-IDF baseline method. They submitted three system runs with
this approach.

The PolyU system [2], for Task 1a, use SVM-rank with lexical and document
structural features to rank reference text sentences for every citance. Task 1b
is solved using a decision tree classifier. Finally, they model summarization as
a query–focussed summarization with citances as queries. They generate sum-
maries (Task 2) by improvising on a Manifold Ranking method (see [2] for de-
tails).

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

97



Finally, the system submitted by Conroy and Davis [4] attempted to solve
Task 2 with an adaptation of a system developed for the TAC 2014 BioMedSumm
Task 11. They provided the results from a simple vector space model, wherein
they used a TF representation of the text and non- negative matrix factorization
(NNMF) to estimate the latent weights of the terms for scientific document
summarization. They also provide the results from two language models based
on the distribution of words in human-written summaries.

6 System Runs

Performance of systems for Task 1a was measured by the number of sentences
output by the system that overlap with the sentences in the human annotated
reference text span (see section 4.1). These numbers were then used to calculate
the precision, recall and F1 score for each system. As Task 1b is a multi-label
classification, this task was also scored by metrics - precision, recall and F1 score.

Nine systems submitted outputs for Task 1. The following plots rank the
systems for Task 1 by their F1 scores. In the figures, all the systems have been
identified by their participant number. Only the top performing systems for
Tasks 1a, 1b and 2 have been identified by name in sections 6 and 7.

Fig. 1. System performances on Task 1a(left) and Task 1b(right).

Task 2, to create a summary of the reference paper from citances and the
reference paper text, was evaluated against 3 types of gold standard summaries:
the reference paper’s abstract, a community summary and a human summary.
A Java Implementation of ROUGE12 was used to compare the gold summaries
against summaries generated by systems. We calculated ROUGE–2 and ROUGE–
4 F1 scores for the system summaries against each of the 3 summary types.
ROUGE–1 and ROUGE–3, which showed similar results have been omitted from
this paper.

11 http://www.nist.gov/tac/2014/BiomedSumm
12 http://kavita-ganesan.com/content/rouge-2.0

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

98



Four of the nine system that did Task 1 also did the bonus Task 2. Following
are the plots with their performance measured by ROUGE–2 and ROUGE–4
against the 3 gold standard summary types.

Fig. 2. Task 2 system performances on abstract summaries measured by ROUGE–2
(left) and ROUGE–4 (right)

Fig. 3. Task 2 system performances on community summaries measured by ROUGE–2
(left) and ROUGE–4 (right)

Fig. 4. Task 2 system performances on human summaries measured by ROUGE 2 (left)
and 4 (right)

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

99



For Task 1a, the best performance was shown by sys16, developed by [2].
The next best performance was shown by sys8 [11] and sys6 [20].

For Task 1b, the best performance was shown by sys8 [11], followed by the
systems sys16 [2] and sys10 [23].

For Task 2, the system by [11], sys8, performed the best against abstract
and community summaries, while sys16 [2] performed well on community sum-
maries. The system by sys15 [1], was also a strong performer on these tasks. On
human summaries, the best performance was seen from sys3 [4].

The F1 scores of all systems on Tasks 1a and 1b were generally low. However,
the systems ranked in the first 3 places, did significantly better than systems
ranked in the last 3 places.

On Task 2, all systems except sys16 performed better when evaluated against
abstracts, than against other summary types. Furthermore, system performances
did not differ significantly from one another when evaluated against human and
community summaries. However, when evaluated against abstracts, the best
performing system significantly outperforms systems ranked in the lower half.

7 Conclusion

Ten systems participated in the CL-SciSumm Task 2016. A variety of heuristi-
cal, lexical and supervised approaches were used. Two of the best performing
systems in Task 1a and 1b were also participants in the CL-SciSumm Pilot Task.
The results from Task 2 suggest that automatic summarization systems may be
adaptable to different domains, as we observed that the system by [4], which had
originally been developed for biomedical human summaries, outperformed the
others. We also note that systems performing well on Tasks 1a and 1b also do
well in generating community summaries - this supports our expectations about
the Shared Task, and validates the need to push the state-of-the-art in scien-
tific summarization. In future work, other methods of evaluation can be used for
comparing the performance of the different approaches, and a deeper analysis
can lead to new insights about which approaches work well with certain kinds
of data. However, such an inquiry was beyond the scope of this overview paper.
We deem our Task a success, as it has spurred the interest of the community and
the development of tools and approaches for scientific summarization. We are
investigating other potential subtasks which could be added into our purview.
We are also scouting for other related research problems, of relevance to the
scientific summarization community.

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

100



Acknowledgement. The organizers of the CL-SciSumm16 shared task
would like to thank Microsoft Research Asia, for their generous funding.
We would also like to thank Vasudeva Varma and colleagues at IIIT-
Hyderabad, India and University of Hyderabad, India for their efforts
in convening and organizing our annotation workshops. We acknowledge
the continued advice of Hoa Dang, Lucy Vanderwende and Anita de
Waard from the pilot stage of this task and thank them for the same.
We thank Rahul Jha and Dragomir Radev for sharing their software to
prepare the XML versions of papers. We are grateful to Kevin B. Cohen
and colleagues for their support, and for sharing their annotation schema,
export scripts and the Knowtator package implementation on the Protege
software - all of which have been indispensable for this Shared Task.

References

1. Aggarwal, P., Sharma, R.: Lexical and Syntactic cues to identify Reference Scope
of Citance. In: Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2016).
pp. 103–112. Newark, NJ, USA (June 2016)

2. Cao, Z., Li, W., Wu, D.: PolyU at CL-SciSumm 2016. In: Proc. of the Joint Work-
shop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Pro-
cessing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2016). pp. 132–138. Newark, NJ, USA (June
2016)

3. Carbonell, J., Goldstein, J.: The use of MMR, diversity-based reranking for re-
ordering documents and producing summaries. In: 21st annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval. pp. 335–
336. Association of Computational Linguistics (1998)

4. Conroy, J., Davis, S.: Vector space and language models for scientific document
summarization. In: NAACL-HLT. pp. 186–191. Association of Computational Lin-
guistics, Newark, NJ, USA (2015)

5. Drouin, P.: Extracting a bilingual transdisciplinary scientific lexicon. In: eLexicog-
raphy in the 21st century: new challenges, new applications. pp. 43–53. Louvain-
la-Neuve: Presses Universitaires de Louvain (2010)

6. Hoang, C., Kan, M.: Towards automated related work summarization. In: Proc. of
COLING: Posters. pp. 427–435. ACL (2010)

7. Jaidka, K., Chandrasekaran, M.K., Elizalde, B.F., Jha, R., Jones, C., Kan, M.Y.,
Khanna, A., Molla-Aliod, D., Radev, D.R., Ronzano, F., et al.: The Computational
Linguistics Summarization Pilot Task. In: Proceedings of Text Analysis Confer-
ence. Gaithersburg, USA (2014)

8. Jaidka, K., Khoo, C.S., Na, J.C.: Deconstructing human literature reviews–a frame-
work for multi-document summarization. In: Proc. of ENLG. pp. 125–135 (2013)

9. Jones, K.S.: Automatic summarising: The state of the art. Information Processing
and Management 43(6), 1449–1481 (2007)

10. Klampfl, S., Rexha, A., Kern, R.: Identifying Referenced Text in Scientific Pub-
lications by Summarisation and Classification Techniques. In: Proc. of the Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language
Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2016). pp. 122–131. Newark, NJ, USA
(June 2016)

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

101



11. Li, L., Mao, L., Zhang, Y., Chi, J., Huang, T., Cong, X., Peng, H.: CIST System for
CL-SciSumm 2016 Shared Task. In: Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Li-
braries (BIRNDL2016). pp. 156–167. Newark, NJ, USA (June 2016)

12. Lin, C.Y.: Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. Text summa-
rization branches out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 workshop 8 (2004)

13. Lu, K., Mao, J., Li, G., Xu, J.: Recognizing reference spans and classifying
their discourse facets. In: Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced
Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries
(BIRNDL2016). pp. 139–145. Newark, NJ, USA (June 2016)

14. Malenfant, B., Lapalme, G.: RALI System Description for CL-SciSumm 2016
Shared Task. In: Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced In-
formation Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries
(BIRNDL2016). pp. 146–155. Newark, NJ, USA (June 2016)

15. Mayr, P., Frommholz, I., Cabanac, G., Wolfram, D.: Editorial for the Joint Work-
shop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Pro-
cessing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL) at JCDL 2016. In: Proc. of the Joint Work-
shop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Pro-
cessing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2016). pp. 1–5. Newark, NJ, USA (June
2016)

16. Mihalcea, R., Corley, C., Strapparava, C.: Corpus-based and knowledge-based mea-
sures of text semantic similarity. In: 21st national conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence. pp. 775–780. AAAI (2006)

17. Mohammad, S., Dorr, B., Egan, M., Hassan, A., Muthukrishan, P., Qazvinian, V.,
Radev, D.R., Zajic, D.: Using citations to generate surveys of scientific paradigms.
In: Proc. of NAACL. pp. 584–592. ACL (2009)

18. Moraes, L., Baki, S., Verma, R., Lee, D.: University of Houston at CL-SciSumm
2016: SVMs with tree kernels and Sentence Similarity. In: Proc. of the Joint Work-
shop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Pro-
cessing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2016). pp. 113–121. Newark, NJ, USA (June
2016)

19. Nakov, P.I., Schwartz, A.S., Hearst, M.: Citances: Citation sentences for semantic
analysis of bioscience text. In: Proceedings of the SIGIR’04 workshop on Search
and Discovery in Bioinformatics. pp. 81–88 (2004)

20. Nomoto, T.: NEAL: A neurally enhanced approach to linking citation and ref-
erence. In: Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2016).
pp. 168–174. Newark, NJ, USA (June 2016)

21. Qazvinian, V., Radev, D.: Scientific paper summarization using citation summary
networks. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics-Volume 1. pp. 689–696. ACL (2008)

22. Saggion, H.: SUMMA: A Robust and Adaptable Summarization Tool. Traitement
Automatique des Langues 49(2), 103–125 (2002)

23. Saggion, H., AbuRa’Ed, A., Ronzano, F.: Trainable Citation-enhanced Summa-
rization of Scientific Articles. In: Proc. of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Li-
braries (BIRNDL2016). pp. 175–186. Newark, NJ, USA (June 2016)

24. Teufel, S., Moens, M.: Summarizing scientific articles: experiments with relevance
and rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics 28(4), 4099–445 (2002)

BIRNDL 2016 Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Libraries

102




