



















































Towards proper name generation: a corpus analysis


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 222–226,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards proper name generation: A corpus analysis

Thiago Castro Ferreira and Sander Wubben and Emiel Krahmer
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC)

Tilburg University
The Netherlands

{tcastrof,s.wubben,e.j.krahmer}@tilburguniversity.edu

Abstract

We introduce a corpus for the study of proper
name generation. The corpus consists of
proper name references to people in web-
pages, extracted from the Wikilinks corpus. In
our analyses, we aim to identify the different
ways, in terms of length and form, in which a
proper names are produced throughout a text.

1 Introduction

In natural language generation systems, referring ex-
pression generation (REG) is the process of produc-
ing references to discourse entities. Among the ref-
erential forms which can be used to distinguish an
entity, proper names are an important and commonly
used one. For instance, Ferreira et al. (2016) showed
that writers produce a proper name as a first mention
to an entity in 91% of the analysed texts.

In generation systems, not only the choice of
whether a proper name should be generated is im-
portant, but also which form the proper name should
take. For instance, Barack Hussein Obama II is the
birth name of the 44th president of United States of
America. However, he is also commonly referred to
as Barack Obama, Obama, President Obama, etc.
How to automatically decide which form to use?

In this paper, we introduce a new corpus of 53,102
proper names referring to people in 15,241 texts1.
We analyse the corpus in terms of distribution of
proper name lengths, intuitively expecting an in-
versely proportional relation between length of a

1https://ilk.uvt.nl/˜tcastrof/regnames

name and sentence number in a text. We also anal-
yse these references in terms of the presence of the
first, middle and last name of the entity; and whether
the reference is accompanied by a title or an apposi-
tive.

2 Related Studies

Unlike the generation of descriptions (Krahmer and
van Deemter, 2012), only a few studies have fo-
cussed on the automatic generation of proper names.
Reiter and Dale (2000) suggests the use of a full
proper name for initial reference, optionally fol-
lowed by an appositive to indicate properties of the
entity important for the discourse. However, their
approach does not account for variation in proper
name references.

Van Deemter (2014) argues that proper name vari-
ants can be generated using standard algorithms
for the generation of descriptions. In other words,
van Deemter (2014) proposes describing proper
names based on a knowledge base of attribute-
value pairs. Just like a set of attribute-value pairs
{(type, cube), (color, blue)} is generated when the
target needs to be singled out from differently
coloured objects, a proper name like Frida Kahlo
can be seen to single out one person from a con-
text set. When the set is smaller, generally a shorter
name will suffice. Van Deemter, however, does not
apply this model in the context of text generation.

Siddharthan et al. (2011) presented a model
to (re)generate referring expressions to people in
extractive summaries. When generating a proper
name, the model chooses between a full name or
only a surname. Moreover, it also decides whether

222



to use pre- (role, affiliation and temporal modifiers)
or post-modifiers (appositives and relative clauses).
As far as we know, this is the only study that in-
troduced a corpus analysis of how humans produce
proper names in a discourse. However, it only dis-
tinguished proper names among full names and sur-
names in a small set of 876 news texts.

3 Data Gathering

3.1 Materials
To analyse how proper names are used in text,
we analysed webpages from the Wikilinks corpus
(Singh et al., 2012). This corpus was originally cre-
ated to study cross-document coreference and com-
prises around 40 million mentions to 3 million enti-
ties. All the mentions were extracted automatically
by finding hyperlinks to Wikipedia pages related to
the entities.

To collect our data, we identified the 1,000 most
frequently mentioned people in the corpus. To de-
termine which entities are persons, we used DBpe-
dia, a database that provides structured information
from Wikipedia (Bizer et al., 2009). From the Wik-
ilinks corpus, we then randomly chose a subset of
webpages that contain at least one mention to one of
the most frequently mentioned persons. In total, our
corpus contains texts from 15,241 webpages.

3.2 Annotation
To annotate the proper name references, we created
a knowledge base which describes all variations of
a proper name for the studied persons. We also
parsed the webpages to identify in which part of the
discourse the different proper name references were
used. The annotation procedure is explained in more
detail below.

Proper Names Knowledge Base We used two
ontologies present on DBpedia to extract differ-
ent proper names for the studied entities. The
FOAF (Friend-of-a-Friend) ontology was used to
extract the name (foaf:name), the given name
(foaf:givenName) and the surname (foaf:surname)
of a person. From the DBpedia ontology,
we extracted the birth name of the entities
(dbo:birthName).

Based on the proper names collected in DBpe-
dia, we created a knowledge base by identifying 3

proper name attributes: first name, middle name
and last name. First names consist of the first to-
ken from the name, given name and birth name,
whereas last names consist of the token from the sur-
name and the last tokens from the name and birth
name. Middle names are all the tokens which are
not the first token in the given and birth names and
last token in the name and birth name. For instance,
Charles Bukowski has Charles, Bukowski, Charles
Bukowski and Heinrich Karl Bukowski as his given
name, surname, name and birth name in DBpedia,
respectively. Based on this information, the knowl-
edge base for this entity would consist of Charles
and Heinrich as first names; Karl as middle name;
and Bukowski as last name.

Discourse Annotation The webpages were
parsed using the Stanford CoreNLP software (Man-
ning et al., 2014). Using this tool, we performed
part-of-speech tagging, lemmatization, named entity
recognition, dependency parsing, syntactic parsing,
sentiment analysis and coreference resolution.

To improve the coreference resolution we per-
formed a post hoc sanity check, to see whether ref-
erences which were labelled as being to the same
entity were correct. For each entity distinguished
by the software, we checked the proper nouns of
each proper name reference. If at least the proper
nouns of one proper name were values present in
the knowledge base of the target entity, all the ref-
erences of the entity distinguished by the software
were considered references to the target entity.

Once the references to the target entity were dis-
tinguished, we annotated their syntactic positions
based on the output of the dependency parser and
their referential statuses in the text and in the sen-
tence - whether a reference is a first or an old men-
tion to an entity. We also checked for the presence
of a title or an appositive in the proper name ref-
erences. These features were extracted based on the
named entity recognition and dependency parser, re-
spectively. In total, 53,102 proper name references
were annotated in this way (an average of 3 per text).

3.3 Analyses

To analyse how proper names referring to people
are distributed over a text, we checked the length of
these references in terms of tokens. We also anal-

223



0 50 100

2

2.5

3

Sentence

L
en

gt
h

Figure 1: Average length of the proper names in to-
kens by sentence.

Title 2.4%
First Name 59.3%
Middle Name 7.1%
Last Name 89%
Appositive 1.7%

Table 1: Percentage of the proper name attributes

ysed the possible variations of a proper name by
checking the presence of the first, middle and last
name of the entity, and whether the proper name was
accompanied by a title or an appositive.

4 Results

Figure 1 depicts the average length of proper name
references in the first 100 sentences of the texts. A
linear regression clearly shows that the length of a
proper name decreases along the text, as predicted.
Table 1 summarized the percentage of proper name
attributes. It reveals that the last name is the most
used one, followed by first name. The others occur
less frequently.

Figure 2 shows the average length of proper name
references as a function of syntactic position and ref-
erential status. Proper names in the object role of a
sentence are generally longer than those in subject
position (a); proper names that are new in the text
are longer than those that have been mentioned in the
text before, and vice versa when looking at new/old
references per sentence (b).

Table 2 depicts frequency of various attribute sets,
as a function of syntactic position and referential sta-
tus in the text and sentence. Proper names consist-
ing of both first and last name are the most common
in the corpus. This proper name form is the most

common one in the subject role of a sentence and as
a mention to a new entity in the discourse. On the
other hand, in the object role of a sentence and as
mention to an old entity in the text, the use of only
the last name is most common.

In general, proper names described by the first and
last names, and by the first, middle and last names
occur more often in the subject role of a sentence
as a mention to a new entity in the text. The com-
bination of first and last names is also more likely
as a mention to old entities in the sentence. Proper
names described by just one proper name attribute
reveal the opposite behaviour, occurring more in the
object role of a sentence as a mention to an old entity
in the text or new in the sentence.

5 Discussion

This study introduced a corpus for the study of
proper name generation. We analysed the different
forms in which proper name references occur in text
by checking their length as well as the occurrence of
different proper name attributes including the first,
middle, last names of the mentioned entity, as well
as possible modifiers, such as titles or appositives.

Analyses revealed that longer proper names - in
terms of number of tokens and proper name at-
tributes - are more likely to be generated early in
the text, in the object role of a sentence, and as the
reference to a new entity in the text or an old in the
sentence. Concerning referential status in text, our
results are broadly in line with Siddharthan et al.
(2011), which shows that a new entity in the text is
more likely to be referred to the full name, whereas
only the surname is used for an old entity. Concern-
ing referential status in the sentence, the fact that a
proper name reference to an old entity in the text is
more likely to be longer than one to a new entity was
somewhat unexpected, since some referential theo-
ries argue that a reference to previously mentioned
entities tend to be shorter (Chafe, 1994). A possible
explanation could be the presence of cataphora, as
in Unlike his peers, Harold Camping does not pack
a positive punch.

As future work, we aim to develop a compu-
tational model for proper name generation based
on the reported findings. Besides the variation
between proper name forms in different parts of

224



Subject Object

2

2.5

3

(a) Syntactic position

Discourse Sentence

2

2.5

New Old

(b) Referential status

Figure 2: Average length of the proper names as a function of: (2a) syntactic position and (2b) referential
status. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

Syntax Text Sentence General
Subject Object New Old New Old

First+Last 57.41% 38.74% 69.52% 36.53% 44.19% 57.16% 46.2%
Last 24.45% 37.17% 10.60% 44.26% 35.93% 26.61% 34.9%
First 6.15% 11.98% 4.33% 10.12% 8.58% 7.78% 8.5%
Middle+Last 3.39% 3.38% 4.62% 2.02% 2.91% 1.76% 2.8%
First+Middle+Last 2.92% 2.79% 4.72% 1.36% 2.44% 1.53% 2.3%
Middle 1.06% 1.88% 0.78% 1.74% 1.57% 0.80% 1.5%
Others 4.62% 4.06% 5.43% 3.97% 4.38% 4.36% 3.8%

Table 2: Percentage of the attribute sets in the proper name references

a text, this model should be able to address the
proper name preferences for each entity. For in-
stance, it should account that Winston Churchill
is typically mentioned by his surname (Churchill),
whereas Napoleon Bonaparte is by his first name
(Napoleon). We will address this by training in-
dividual models combining the a priori probability
of a particular proper name for a particular individ-
ual with contextual factors. Additionally, we plan to
annotate the proper name references to all the enti-
ties present in the texts of our corpus, and not only
the references to the 1,000 people studied here. We
think this expansion will give a broader view of the
generation of proper names, since we will be able
to study the process as a function of other discourse
conditions, as topicality.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the National Coun-
cil of Scientific and Technological Development
from Brazil (CNPq).

References
Christian Bizer, Jens Lehmann, Georgi Kobilarov, Sren

Auer, Christian Becker, Richard Cyganiak, and Sebas-
tian Hellmann. 2009. Dbpedia - a crystallization point
for the web of data. Web Semantics: Science, Services
and Agents on the World Wide Web, 7(3):154 – 165.
The Web of Data.

Wallace L. Chafe. 1994. Discourse, Consciousness, and
Time: The Flow and Displacement of Conscious Expe-
rience in Speaking and Writing. University of Chicago
Press.

Thiago Castro Ferreira, Emiel Krahmer, and Sander
Wubben. 2016. Individual variation in the choice of
referential form. In Proceedings of the 2016 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, San Diego, California. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Emiel Krahmer and Kees van Deemter. 2012. Compu-
tational generation of referring expressions: A survey.
Comput. Linguist., 38(1):173–218, March.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. In Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL) System Demonstrations, pages 55–60.

225



Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building natural
language generation systems. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA.

Advaith Siddharthan, Ani Nenkova, and Kathleen McK-
eown. 2011. Information status distinctions and re-
ferring expressions: An empirical study of references
to people in news summaries. Computational Linguis-
tics, 37(4):811–842.

Sameer Singh, Amarnag Subramanya, Fernando Pereira,
and Andrew McCallum. 2012. Wikilinks: A large-
scale cross-document coreference corpus labeled via
links to Wikipedia. Technical Report UM-CS-2012-
015.

Kees van Deemter. 2014. Referability. In Amanda Stent
and Srinivas Bangalore, editors, Natural Language
Generation in Interactive Systems, chapter 5, pages
101–103. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY,
USA.

226


