



















































Inherently Pronominal Verbs in Czech: Description and Conversion Based on Treebank Annotation


Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Multiword Expressions, pages 78–83,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Inherently Pronominal Verbs in Czech:
Description and Conversion Based on Treebank Annotation

Zdeňka Urešová Eduard Bejček
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské nám. 25

11800 Prague 1, Czech Republic
{uresova,bejcek,hajic}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Jan Hajič

Abstract

This paper describes results of a study related to the
PARSEME Shared Task on automatic detection of
verbal Multi-Word Expressions (MWEs) which fo-
cuses on their identification in running texts in many
languages. The Shared Task’s organizers have pro-
vided basic annotation guidelines where four basic
types of verbal MWEs are defined including some
specific subtypes. Czech is among the twenty lan-
guages selected for the task. We will contribute
to the Shared Task dataset, a multilingual open re-
source, by converting data from the Prague Depen-
dency Treebank (PDT) to the Shared Task format.
The question to answer is to which extent this can
be done automatically. In this paper, we concentrate
on one of the relevant MWE categories, namely
on the quasi-universal category called “Inherently
Pronominal Verbs” (IPronV) and describe its anno-
tation in the Prague Dependency Treebank. After
comparing it to the Shared Task guidelines, we can
conclude that the PDT and the associated valency
lexicon, PDT-Vallex, contain sufficient information
for the conversion, even if some specific instances
will have to be checked. As a side effect, we have
identified certain errors in PDT annotation which
can now be automatically corrected.

1 Introduction

Although Multi-Word Expressions (MWEs) at-
tract the attention of more and more NLP re-
searchers, as stated in Rosén et al. (2015), there
is no consensus both on MWEs annotation and on
what constitutes a MWE. This complicates the re-
search of MWEs based on annotated corpora and
language resources. To remedy this situation, the
COST network PARSEME1 (Savary et al., 2015)
concentrates on the study of MWEs and their an-
notation in treebanks aiming at building a set of
standardized annotation principles, corpora and
evaluation metrics.

In the framework of PARSEME, a Shared Task
on automatic detection of verbal Multi-Word Ex-
pressions was established in order to provide a
multilingual open resource to be available to the
NLP community. This initiative runs from 2015

1http://typo.uni-konstanz.de/parseme

to 2017. There are about twenty corpus contrib-
utors to the Shared Task. The task covers lan-
guages of different language families. Languages
are divided into four language groups of compara-
ble sizes: Germanic, Romance, Slavic and other.
Common standardized annotation guidelines have
been developed which try to define common prin-
ciples of verbal MWE annotation, while also tak-
ing language specifics into account (Vincze et al.,
2016). The guidelines summarize the properties
of verbal MWEs and provide basic annotation
rules for them. Various types of verbal MWEs
as identified by previous research have been clas-
sified into seven groups: light verb constructions
(LVC), idioms (ID), and then possibly verb par-
ticle combinations (VPC), inherently pronominal
verbs (IPronV) and inherently prepositional verbs
(IPrepV) if these three quasi-universal categories
are applicable in the language, possibly other lan-
guage specific category, and other verbal MWEs
(OTH).

In our paper, we concentrate on the inherently
pronominal verbs (IPronV) category. The paper
is structured as follows: In Section 2, the Czech
data (PDT) and the valency lexicon PDT-Vallex
are presented. In Section 3, the category of inher-
ently pronominal verbs (IPronV) is described fo-
cusing on Czech language specifics. In Section 4,
we focus on the relation of the specification of the
IPronV category for the Shared Task and the PDT-
Vallex and PDT annotation, which then forms the
starting point for the conversion procedure into the
format of the PARSEME Shared Task. Section 5
concludes the paper.

2 Czech data and lexicon

For our study, we use data from the Czech anno-
tated corpus, the PDT, as described in Sect. 2.1,
and from the Czech valency lexicon PDT-Vallex
(Sect. 2.2).

78



2.1 The Prague Dependency Treebank

The Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0 (Hajič et
al., 2006) published by the Linguistic Data Con-
sortium2 contains Czech written texts with com-
plex and interlinked morphological, syntactic and
complex semantic annotation.3 Its annotation
scheme is based on the formal framework called
Functional Generative Description (FGD) (Sgall
et al., 1986), which is dependency-based with a
“stratificational” (layered) approach to a system-
atic description of a language. The annotation
contains interlinked surface dependency trees and
deep syntactic/semantic (tectogrammatical) trees.
Valency is one of the core FGD concepts, used on
the deep layer (Panevová, 1974; Panevová, 1994).
We shall note that each verb occurrence at the tec-
togrammatical level of annotation contains a man-
ually assigned link (in a form of a unique frame
ID) to the corresponding valency frame in the va-
lency lexicon (Sect. 2.2).

The PDT has been extended in its versions PDT
2.5 (Bejček et al., 2012) and subsequently in PDT
3.04 by adding, e.g., extensive MWE annotation.
However, since we are focusing on IPronV in this
paper, we have in fact not used this extension,
which concerns other (mostly nominal) types of
MWEs.

2.2 PDT-Vallex – Czech valency lexicon

The Czech valency lexicon, called PDT-Vallex is
publicly available5 as a part of the PDT family of
treebanks; for details, see Urešová (2011), Dušek
et al. (2014) and Urešová et al. (2016), which we
very briefly summarize here. As such, it has been
designed in close connection with the specification
of the treebank annotation. Each verb occurrence
in the PDT is linked to a specific verb valency
frame in the valency lexicon.

Each valency entry in the lexicon contains a
headword, according to which the valency frames
are grouped, indexed, and sorted. The valency
frame consists of valency frame members (slots)
and their labels, the obligatoriness feature for each
member and the required surface form of va-
lency frame members. Any specific lexical real-
ization of a particular valency frame is exempli-

2http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2006T01
3https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0
4http://hdl.handle.net/11858/

00-097C-0000-0023-1AAF-3
5http://hdl.handle.net/11858/

00-097C-0000-0023-4338-F

fied by an understandable fragment of a Czech
sentence. Valency frame members are labeled
by functors based on the FGD theory (ACT for
Actor, or first argument, PAT for Patient or 2nd
argument, ADDRessee, EFFect and ORIGin for
the remaining core argument, and any other func-
tor if deemed obligatory). Notes help to delimit
the meaning (verb sense) of the individual va-
lency frames within one valency lexicon entry.
In the notes, synonyms, antonyms and aspectual
counterparts are often found as additional hints
to distinguish among the individual valency frame
senses. An example of a valency lexicon entry for
tolerovat (lit. tolerate) is in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: A simple PDT-Vallex entry with two
senses (lit. tolerate): to tolerate1 sth.PAT to
sb.ADDR, to tolerate2 sb.PAT

PDT-Vallex 2.0 which we have used in our work
contains 11,933 valency frames for 7,121 verbs.

3 Inherently pronominal verbs

The PARSEME Shared Task general guidelines
(Vincze et al., 2016) define the IPronV category as
a specific quasi-universal6 verbal MWE category.

We use the guidelines for IPronV identifica-
tion (Candito and Ramisch, 2016) where the basic
rules are described. The guidelines divide verbs
with a pronominal clitic into several groups. The
first group of IPronV never occurs without the
clitic – the clitic must co-occur with the verb, such
as:

• cs: bát se (lit. be afraid)
• fr: s’évanouir (lit. faint)
• pl: dowiedzieć się (lit. find out)
• pt: queixar-se (lit. complain)
The second group of IPronV contains such

verbs that might occur without the clitic, but with
a different meaning:

6quasi-universal = not found / defined for all languages,
as opposed to light verb constructions (LVC) and idioms (ID),
which are universal for all languages within the PARSEME
Shared Task.

79



• cs: hledět si (lit. mind sth) vs. hledět (lit.
watch)

• fr: s’agir (lit. be) vs. agir (lit. act)
• pl: radzić sobie (lit. manage) vs. radzić (lit.

advise)
• pt: encontrar-se (lit. be) vs. encontrar (lit.

meet)
The guidelines also list several other groups of

pronominal verbs defined by an occurrence in a
predominantly different syntactic behavior (recip-
rocals, reflexives, possessive reflexives, synthetic
passives, impersonal and inchoative), which are
NOT considered verbal MWEs (IPronV) unless
their meaning has shifted substantially.

Given the complexity of this kind of ver-
bal MWEs, the guidelines for the annotation of
IPronV contain a detailed suit of tests for the
proper annotation of IPronV. These tests are in
the form of a binary decision tree that shows how
to apply the tests in order to distinguish which
pronominal verb occurrence has to be annotated
as verbal MWEs and which should not. For ex-
ample, test No. 8 distinguishes between a recip-
rocal use with plural subject and a real inherently
pronominal construction:

Is it possible to remove the reflective
particle and replace the coordinated
subject (A and B) or plural subject
(A.PL) by a singular subject (A or A.PL)
and a singular object, often introduced
by to/with (B or A.PL), without chang-
ing the pronominal verb’s meaning? If
yes, it is not IPronV.7

3.1 Czech verbs with reflexive particles
The issue of Czech reflexives has been described
by many scholars, e.g., Štícha (1981), Panevová
(1999) or Panevová (2007), from diverse point of
views. For example, in Kettnerová and Lopatková
(2014) Czech reflexive verbs are dealt from the
lexicographic point of view and a proposal for
their lexicographic representation is formulated.
Although reflexives are the topic of Czech theoret-
ical (Panevová and Mikulová, 2007; Oliva, 2001)
as well as computational linguistic papers (Petke-
vič, 2013; Oliva, 2003), as far as we know, there
is no unified theoretical description of this lan-
guage phenomenon. We believe the reason is the
complexity of this ambiguous phenomenon since
the Czech reflexive particle se or si can be used

7Candito and Ramisch (2016), page 7

both as formal morphological means for word-
formation (e.g., reflexivization) and as syntactic
means for specific syntactic structures (reflexifity,
reciprocity, diatheses). Specifically, se is (a) a
short (clitic) form of the pronoun sebe (lit. all of
itself, myself, yourself, herself, himself, ourselves,
yourselves, themselves) in accusative case, or (b)
a reflexive particle for regular formation of pas-
sive constructions, particle for “frozen” construc-
tions where it diachronically became part of the
verb lexeme (except it is not written together with
the verb form; it can be placed quite far from it
in a sentence), as well as (c) the reflexivization
particle for certain additional types of construc-
tions, such as medio-passive construction of dis-
position it reads well which is expressed in Czech
by adding this particle to the verb form (čte se to
dobře).8

3.2 Inherently pronominal verbs
in the PDT-Vallex and in the PDT

As has been already mentioned, we are investigat-
ing whether the information present in the PDT-
Vallex (and in the PDT) can be used for determin-
ing the IPronV class. Although the detailed infor-
mation about specific types of pronominal verbs is
not explicitly captured in the PDT-Vallex, it does
contain information related to the use of reflexive
particles se or si in Czech. Moreover, the lexicon
is linked to the PDT, so each corpus occurrence
can be related to the lexicon (and vice versa).

The formal indicator that has been used in
the PDT-Vallex to denote “reflexivization” (in the
sense used in the PDT and PDT-Vallex annota-
tion, see Mikulová et al. (2006)) is the addition
of the particle se or si to the lemma (entry head-
word). Therefore, there might be up to three dif-
ferent headwords for each verb lemma in the PDT-
Vallex: one without any such particle, one with se
and one with si.9

Pronominal se/si is the only case of MWE cap-
tured in the PDT-Vallex as a headword, which il-
lustrates its specificity in Czech. Czech does not
display other similar phenomena such as phrasal
verbs in English (look up, run away etc.).10

8Moreover, se is also a vocalized preposition used with
the instrumental case, corresponding to English with.

9Just for completeness, there can never be both particles
at the same time.

10However, LVCs and IDs do exist in Czech and they can
also be identified in PDT-Vallex; see Fig. 2 and its description
at the end of this section.

80



In addition and to our advantage here, PDT-
Vallex stores different verb senses separately, as
different valency frames under the same head-
word.11

When we applied the specific tests for annota-
tion of IPronV and went through the suggested de-
cision tree step by step, we have determined that
the first three questions (inherent reflexives, i.e.,
reflexives tantum), inherent reflexives due to dif-
ferent senses (i.e., derived reflexives), and inherent
reflexives with a different subcategorization than
the verb without the particle (i.e., derived reflex-
ives) are easily answered by simply testing the ex-
istence of the se or si particle in the headword of
a particular valency frame. In other words, all va-
lency frames the headword of which contains the
se or si particle will be marked as IPronV.

We have then analyzed the follow-up tests in
the guidelines. These tests, similarly to the Plu-
ral/Coordination test shown earlier, test whether
the occurrence of the verb construction is rather of
a syntactic nature (deagentives etc.), and if YES,
it disallows to annotate it as IPronV. However, it
was found that since PDT-Vallex abstracts from—
or generalizes over—such constructions, keeping
only the basic (canonical, active voice) valency
frame, we can in fact rely on the se or si indica-
tors at the headword also for these special cases.
In other words, diatheses are not explicitly present
in the PDT-Vallex, they are assumed to be formed
by regular derivation processes (such as reflex-
ive or periphrastic passivization, reciprocalization,
etc.) on the basis of the canonical valency frame
as recorded in PDT-Vallex. Since the links from
the PDT corpus to the individual valency frames
in PDT-Vallex also abstract from such diatheti-
cal transformations, we do not have to apply such
tests to the PDT-Vallex entries when distinguish-
ing IPronV.

To summarize, we have determined that due to
the way PDT-Vallex is structured and linked to
the corpus, the only necessary indication that the
phrase should be marked as IPronV is that the va-
lency frame it is linked to has a headword with
the se or si particle. In other words, albeit without
knowing it, the annotators and creators of PDT-
Vallex have already built in the IPronV MWE type
in the lexicon using the se/si indicator.

11The valency frames for different verb senses for
each headword have often different syntactic and semantic
description—such as the number of arguments, their surface
realization etc.—but they might be identical.

Statistics for 1580 inherently pronominal verbs
as found in the PDT-Vallex are given in Table 1.

Particle
Type of IPronV se si

reflexive tantum verbs 587 98
derived reflexives 743 152

Table 1: Statistics on 1580 inherently pronomi-
nal verbs in PDT-Vallex. Reflexive tantum verbs:
clitic is compulsory; derived reflexives: absence
of the clitic changes the sense.

Table 2 shows numbers for 72 verbs (headwords
in PDT-Vallex) where we expect the annotation to
contain overlapping labels IPronV and one of ID
or LVC for at least one frame. The number of
all ID/LVC frames belonging to pronominal verbs
(headwords) is 172.

Type of overlap No. of headwords

ID only 58
LVC only 9
LVC and ID 5

Table 2: Statistics on verbs potentially overlapping
IPronV and ID/LVC annotation.

An example of valency lexicon entry for the
verb (headword) dělat si with all its valency
frames (senses) is displayed in Fig. 2. The first
and last frame describes a MWE of inherently
pronominal verb meaning, and each occurrence in
the corpus can be thus labeled IPronV. All the
other frames are examples of an embedded MWE,
since on top of being an IPronV, they are also of
the LVC category (those having one of the argu-
ments labeled CPHR) or of the ID (idiom) cate-
gory (those having one of the arguments labeled
DPHR). In these seven cases two embedded MWE
can be labeled at once: IPronV and either ID or
LVC.

4 Conversion of Czech data

Based on the results of the investigation described
in Sect. 3.2, we can conclude that the category
of IPronV as defined in the guidelines for the
PARSEME Shared Task corresponds to such verbs
in the PDT whose tectogrammatical lemma con-
tains se or si in a form of a “word with spaces”.

81



Figure 2: An example of PDT-Vallex entry with
several senses of the verb dělat (lit. do/make) in
which the particle si has to co-occur.
Translation of Czech examples:
dělat si1: he’s making short trips in the neighborhood;

he does whatever he wants

dělat si2 (představu=image): they were imagining the size of

the file

dělat si3 (starost=worry): the investors were worried;

mother was worried about son

dělat si4 (těžkou hlavu=heavy head): he did worry

dělat si5 (ne- nic z=not nothing out-of): don’t worry about it

dělat si6 (legraci, blázny=fun, fools): she was making fun of

them; he was making monkey out of her

dělat si7 (ne- iluze=not illusions): let’s don’t delude ourselves

dělat si8 (velkou hlavu=big head): student is not worried

about it; employees do not worry much about it

dělat si9 (s=with): the company did whatever they liked with

the mail

However, having the tectogrammatical annota-
tion of the PDT linked to the surface dependen-
cies, we have also checked the lexicon annotation
against the corpus not only through the reference
linking the PDT’s tectogrammatical annotation to
PDT-Vallex, but also against the surface depen-
dency annotation.

We worked with a hypothesis that all the
IPronV should be linked to a surface verb and a
separate node for the particle (se or si), and that
the syntactic function of the se or si node should
be labeled as AuxT. Analytical function AuxT is
assigned to the particles se or si in case the verb
sense without them does not exist, which to a large
extent also corresponds to the IPronV property at

the surface syntactic level (Hajič et al., 2004).12

We found that in 93.1% of the occurrences, this
is indeed the case, but there are more than 700
cases where the syntactic relation was different
(not AuxT). After investigating a sample of those,
we found that they were errors (such as holding the
Adv, Obj, AuxO or AuxR label) in the surface de-
pendency annotation. These cases will not be used
for the conversion to the PARSEME Shared Task
dataset, unless further investigation can prove that
they are indeed all just surface annotation errors in
the original data.

5 Conclusions

We have compared the annotation of verbal entries
in the PDT (and PDT-Vallex) with the PARSEME
Shared Task guidelines for inherently pronominal
verbs. The main conclusion is that albeit anno-
tated independently, the PDT/PDT-Vallex anno-
tation covers all IPronV categories relevant for
Czech as defined in the guidelines.

By a relatively simple conversion process we
have also checked the annotation at the surface
syntactic dependency annotation level of the PDT
and found a few mismatches. At this time, these
mismatches seem to be mostly errors of the sur-
face dependency level annotation in the PDT.13

Acknowledgements

The work described herein has been supported
by the grant GP13-03351P of the Grant Agency
of the Czech Republic, by the grant LD14117 of
the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of
the Czech Republic (MEYSCR) and by the LIN-
DAT/CLARIN Research Infrastructure projects,
LM2010013 and LM2015071 funded by the
MEYSCR. The project also accepted support from
the COST Action No. IC1207 “PARSEME”,
funded by the European Commission. It has
also been using language resources developed
and distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project
LM2015071 (http://lindat.cz).

12Except it might be elided, shared among several verb to-
kens in coordination etc., so that it is not that “reliable” in-
dicator as the presence of the reflexive particle in the PDT-
Vallex headword; for details, see Hajič (1998).

13The conversion process should be finished (including all
other types of verbal MWEs as defined by the PARSEME
Shared Task guidelines, which will be described in a followup
publication) by the time of the workshop and we will provide
full statistics.

82



References
Eduard Bejček, Jarmila Panevová, Jan Popelka, Pavel

Straňák, Magda Ševčíková, Jan Štěpánek, and Zdeněk
Žabokrtský. 2012. Prague dependency treebank 2.5 – a
revisited version of PDT 2.0. In Martin Kay and Chris-
tian Boitet, editors, Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2012),
pages 231–246, Mumbai, India. IIT Bombay, Coling 2012
Organizing Committee.

Marie Candito and Carlos Ramisch. 2016. Annotation
guidelines for inherently pronominal verbs (PARSEME
shared task on automatic detection of verbal MultiWord
Expressions), http://typo.uni-konstanz.de/
parseme/images/shared-task/guidelines/
PARSEME-ST-annotation-guidelines-
ipronv.pdf.

Ondřej Dušek, Jan Hajič, and Zdeňka Urešová. 2014. Ver-
bal valency frame detection and selection in Czech and
English. In The 2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition,
Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 6–11,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Buráňová, Zdeňka Ure-
šová, Alevtina Bémová, Jan štěpánek, Petr Pajas, and Jiří
Kárník. 2004. Anotace na analytické rovině. Návod
pro anotátory. Technical Report TR-2004-23, ÚFAL/CKL
MFF UK, Prague.

Jan Hajič, 1998. Building a Syntactically Annotated Corpus:
The Prague Dependency Treebank. Karolinum, Charles
University Press, Prague.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajičová, Petr Sgall,
Petr Pajas, Jan Štěpánek, Jiří Havelka, Marie Mikulová,
Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Magda Ševčíková Razímová, and
Zdeňka Urešová. 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank
2.0. Number LDC2006T01. LDC, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.

Václava Kettnerová and Markéta Lopatková. 2014. Reflex-
ive verbs in a valency lexicon: The case of czech reflexive
morphemes. In Andrea Abel, Chiara Vettori, and Natas-
cia Ralli, editors, Proceedings of the XVI EURALEX In-
ternational Congress: The User in Focus, pages 1007–
1023, Bolzano/Bozen, Italy. EURAC research, EURAC
research.

Marie Mikulová, Alevtina Bémová, Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová,
Jiří Havelka, Veronika Kolářová, Lucie Kučová, Markéta
Lopatková, Petr Pajas, Jarmila Panevová, Magda Razí-
mová, Petr Sgall, Jan Štěpánek, Zdeňka Urešová, Kateřina
Veselá, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2006. Annotation on the
tectogrammatical level in the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank. Annotation manual. Technical Report 30, Prague,
Czech Rep.

Karel Oliva. 2001. Reflexe reflexivity reflexiv. Slovo a
slovesnost, 62(3):200–207.

Karel Oliva. 2003. Linguistics-based PoS-tagging of Czech:
disambiguation of se as a test. In Contributions of the
4th European Conference on Formal Description of Slavic
Languages, pages 299–314. Postdam University, Ger-
many.

Jarmila Panevová and Marie Mikulová. 2007. On reci-
procity. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics,
(87):27–40.

Jarmila Panevová. 1974. On verbal Frames in Functional
Generative Description. Prague Bulletin of Mathematical
Linguistics, 22:3–40.

Jarmila Panevová. 1994. Valency frames and the meaning of
the sentence. The Prague School of Structural and Func-
tional Linguistics, 41:223–243.

Jarmila Panevová. 1999. Česká reciproční zájmena a
slovesná valence. Slovo a slovesnost, 60:91–100.

Jarmila Panevová. 2007. Znovu o reciprocitě. Slovo a
slovesnost, 68:269–275.

Vladimír Petkevič. 2013. Formal (morpho)syntactic prop-
erties of reflexive particles se, si as free morphemes in
contemporary Czech. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference SLOVKO 2013, pages 206–216. Sloven-
ska akademia vied, Slovakia.

Victoria Rosén, Gyri Losnegaard, Koenraad De Smedt, Ed-
uard Bejček, Agata Savary, Adam Przepiórkowski, Petya
Osenova, and Verginica Mititelu. 2015. A survey of
multiword expressions in treebanks. In 14th Interna-
tional Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories
(TLT 2015), pages 179–193, Warszawa, Poland. IPIPAN,
IPIPAN.

Agata Savary, Manfred Sailer, Yannick Parmentier, Michael
Rosner, Victoria Rosén, Adam Przepiórkowski, Cvetana
Krstev, Veronika Vincze, Beata Wójtowicz, Gyri Smørdal
Losnegaard, Carla Parra Escartín, Jakub Waszczuk,
Matthieu Constant, Petya Osenova, and Federico Sangati.
2015. PARSEME – PARSing and Multiword Expressions
within a European multilingual network. In 7th Language
& Technology Conference: Human Language Technolo-
gies as a Challenge for Computer Science and Linguistics
(LTC 2015), Poznań, Poland, November.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986. The
meaning of the sentence in its semantic and pragmatic as-
pects. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Zdeňka Urešová, Eva Fučíková, and Jana Šindlerová. 2016.
Czengvallex: a bilingual czech-english valency lexicon.
The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 105:17–
50.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2011. Valenční slovník Pražského závis-
lostního korpusu (PDT-Vallex). Studies in Computational
and Theoretical Linguistics. Ústav formální a aplikované
lingvistiky, Praha, Czechia.

Veronika Vincze, Agata Savary, Marie Candito, and
Carlos Ramisch. 2016. Annotation guidelines
for the PARSEME shared task on automatic de-
tection of verbal Multi-Word Expressions, ver-
sion 5.0, http://typo.uni-konstanz.de/
parseme/images/shared-task/guidelines/
PARSEME-ST-annotation-guidelines-v5.
pdf.

František Štícha. 1981. K syntakticko-sémantické
konkurenci aktivních, participiálních a reflexívních kon-
strukcí. Slovo a slovesnost, 42:183–192.

83


