



















































Pragmatic Factors in Image Description: The Case of Negations


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 54–59,
Berlin, Germany, August 12 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Pragmatic factors in image description: the case of negations

Emiel van Miltenburg
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

emiel.van.miltenburg@vu.nl

Roser Morante
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
roser.morante@vu.nl

Desmond Elliott
ILLC, University of Amsterdam

d.elliott@uva.nl

Abstract

We provide a qualitative analysis of the
descriptions containing negations (no, not,
n’t, nobody, etc) in the Flickr30K cor-
pus, and a categorization of negation uses.
Based on this analysis, we provide a set
of requirements that an image description
system should have in order to generate
negation sentences. As a pilot experiment,
we used our categorization to manually
annotate sentences containing negations in
the Flickr30k corpus, with an agreement
score of κ=0.67. With this paper, we hope
to open up a broader discussion of subjec-
tive language in image descriptions.

1 Introduction

Descriptions of images are typically collected
from untrained workers via crowdsourcing plat-
forms, such as Mechanical Turk1. The workers
are explicitly instructed to describe only what they
can see in the image, in an attempt to control con-
tent selection (Young et al., 2014; Chen et al.,
2015). However, workers are still free to project
their world view when writing the descriptions and
they make linguistic choices, such as using nega-
tion structures (van Miltenburg, 2016).

In this paper we study the use of negations in
image descriptions. A negation is a word that com-
municates that something is not the case. Nega-
tions are often used when there is a mismatch be-
tween what speakers expect to be the case and
what is actually the case (see e.g. (Leech, 1983;
Beukeboom et al., 2010)). For example, if Queen
Elizabeth of England were to appear in public
wearing jeans instead of a dress, (1a) would be
acceptable because she is known to wear dresses

1http://www.mturk.com

in public. But if she were to show up wearing a
dress, (1b) would be unexpected.

(1) a. Queen Elizabeth isn’t wearing a dress
b. ??Queen Elizabeth isn’t wearing jeans

Thus the correct use of negations often requires
background knowledge, or at least some sense of
what is expected and what is not.

We focus on two kinds of negations: non-
affixal negations (not, n’t, never, no, none, noth-
ing, nobody, nowhere, nor, neither) (Tottie, 1980);
and implicit negations in the form of prepositions
(without, sans, and minus), and the verbs lack,
omit, miss and fail. Horn (1989) calls this sec-
ond category ‘inherent negatives’. Affixal nega-
tions (words starting with a–, dis–, un–, non–, un–
or ending with –less) are beyond the scope of this
paper, but we hope to address them in future work.

The main contributions of this paper are an
overview of different uses of negations in im-
age description corpora, analysing the background
knowledge required to generate negations, and the
implications for image description models.2

2 Data

We focus on negations on the Flickr30K dataset
(Young et al., 2014). The negations were detected
by lexical string-matching using regular expres-
sions, except for the verbs. For the verbs, we
checked if any of the tokens starts with lack, omit,
miss or fail. Our search yielded 896 sentences, of
which 892 unique, and 31 false positives. Table 1
shows frequency counts for each negation term.

We carried out the same analysis for the Mi-
crosoft COCO dataset (Chen et al., 2015) to see if
the proportion of negations is a constant. Our ap-
proach yielded 3339 sentences on the training and

2We provide all of our code, data, and annotation guide-
lines online. See: https://github.com/evanmilte
nburg/annotating-negations

54



no 371 nothing 16 neither 2
not 198 lack 9 sans 1
without 141 fail 9 none 1
miss 69 never 5 nobody 1
n’t 68 nowhere 3

Table 1: Frequency counts for each negation term.

validation splits, of which 3232 unique. The pres-
ence of negations appears to be a linear function
of dataset size: 0.56% in the Flickr30K dataset,
and 0.54% in the MS COCO dataset. This sug-
gests that the use of negations is not particular to
either dataset, but rather it is a robust phenomenon
across datasets.

Table 2 shows the distribution of descriptions
containing negations across images. In the major-
ity of cases only one of the five descriptions con-
tains a negation (86.25% in Flickr30K and 72.05%
in MS COCO). Only in very exceptional cases do
the five descriptions contain negations. This indi-
cates that the use of negation is a subjective choice.

Dataset 1 2 3 4 5

Flickr30K 659 85 16 1 3
MS COCO 2406 277 78 30 5

Table 2: Distribution of the number of descriptions
of an image with at least one negation term.

3 Negation uses in image descriptions

In this section, we provide a categorization of
negation uses and assess the amount of required
background knowledge for each use. Our catego-
rization is the result of manually inspecting all the
data twice: the first time to develop a taxonomy,
and the second time to apply this taxonomy to
all 892 sentences. Note that our categorization is
meant as a practical guide to be of use for natural
language generation. There is already a unifying
explanation for why people use negations (unex-
pectedness, see (Leech, 1983; Beukeboom et al.,
2010)). The question here is how people use nega-
tions, what they negate, and what kind of knowl-
edge is required to produce those negations.
Salient absence: The first use of negation is to
indicate that something is absent:

(2) a. A man without a shirt playing tennis.
b. A woman at graduation without a cap on.

Shirts and shoes are most commonly mentioned
as being absent in the Flickr30K dataset. From
examples like (2a) speaks the norm that people
are supposed to be fully dressed. These examples
seem common enough for a machine to learn
the association between exposed chests and the
phrase without a shirt. But there are also more
difficult cases, such as (2b). To describe an image
like this, one should know that students (in the
USA) typically wear caps at their graduation. This
example shows the importance of background
knowledge for the full description of an image.

Example 2a (Image 2883099128)

Negation of action/behavior: The second cate-
gory is the use of negation to deny that an action
or some kind of behavior is occurring:

(3) a. A kid eating out of a plate without using
his hands.

b. A woman in the picture has fallen down and
no one is stopping to help her up.

Examples like these require an understanding
of what is likely or supposed to happen, or how
people are expected to behave.

Example 3a (Image 39397486)

Negation of property: The next use of negation is
to note that an entity in the image lacks a property.
In (4a), the negation does two things: it highlights
that the buildings are not finished, but in its combi-
nation with yet suggests that they will be finished.

55



(4) a. A man wearing a hard hat stands in front of
buildings not yet finished being built.

b. There are four boys playing soccer, but not
all of them are on the same team [. . . ].

In (4b), the negated phrase also performs two
roles: it communicates that there are (at least) two
teams, and it denies that the four boys are all in the
same team. For both examples, the negated parts
(being finished and being on the same team) are
properties associated with the concepts of BUILD-
ING and PLAYING TOGETHER, and could reason-
ably be expected to be true of buildings and groups
of boys playing soccer. The negations ensure that
these expectations are cancelled.

Example 4a (Image 261883591)

Example (5) shows a completely different effect
of negating a property. Here, the negation is used
to compare the depicted situation with a particular
reference point. The implication here is that the
picture is not taken in the USA.

(5) A wild animal not found in america jumping
through a field.

Negation of attitude: The fourth use of nega-
tion concerns attitudes of entities toward actions
or others. The examples in (6) illustrate that this
use requires an understanding of emotions or at-
titudes, but also some reasoning about what those
emotions are directed at.

(6) a. A man sitting on a panel not enjoying the
speech.

b. The dog in the picture doesn’t like blowing
dryer.

Example 6a (Image 2313609814)

Outside the frame: The most image-specific use
of negation is to note that particular entities are not
depicted or out of focus:

(7) a. A woman is taking a picture of something
not in the shot with her phone.

b. Several people sitting in front of a building
taking pictures of a landmark not seen.

The use of negation in this category requires
an understanding of the events taking place in
the image, and what entities might be involved in
such events. (7b) is a particularly interesting case,
where the annotator specifically says that there is a
landmark outside the frame. This raises the ques-
tion: how does she know and how could a com-
puter algorithm recognise this?

Example 7a (Image 4895028664)

(Preventing) future events: The sixth use of
negation concerns future events, generally with
people preventing something from happening.
Here are two examples:

(8) a. A man is riding a bucking horse trying to
hold on and not get thrown off.

b. A girl tries holding onto a vine so she won’t
fall into the water.

What is interesting about these sentences is that
the ability to produce them does not only require
an understanding of the depicted situation (some-
one is holding on to a horse/vine), but also of the
possibilities within that situation (they may or may
not fall off/into the water), depending on the ac-
tions taken.

Example 8a (Image 263428541)

56



Quotes and Idioms: Some instances of negations
are mentions rather than uses as shown in (9).

(9) A girl with a tattoo on her wrist that reads “no
regrets” has her hand outstretched.

Other times, the use of a negation isn’t con-
cerned with the image as much as it is with the
English language. The examples in (10) illustrate
this idiomatic or conventional use of negation.

(10) a. Strolling down path to nowhere.
b. Three young boys are engaged in a game

of don’t drop the melon.

Example 10a (Image 4870785283)

Other: Several sentences do not fit in any of the
above categories, but there aren’t enough similar
examples to merit a category of their own. Two
examples are given below. In (11), the negation is
used to convey that it is atypical to be holding an
umbrella when it is not raining.

(11) The little boy [. . . ] is smiling under the blue
umbrella even though it is not raining.

Example 11 (Image 371522748)

In (12), the annotator recognized the intention
of the toddler, and is using the negation to contrast
the goals with the ability of the toddler. Though
there are many other sentences where the nega-
tion is used to contrast two parts of the sentence
(see Section 4), there is just one example where an
ability is negated.

(12) A little toddler trying to look through a scope
but can’t reach it.

We expect have no doubt that there are still
other kinds of examples in the Flickr30K and the
MS COCO datasets. Future research should as-
sess the degree to which the current taxonomy is
sufficient to systematically study the production of
negations in image descriptions.

4 Annotating the Flickr30K corpus

Two of the authors annotated the Flickr30K corpus
using the categories listed above with two goals: to
validate the categories, and to develop annotation
guidelines for future work. By going through all
sentences with negations, we were able to identify
borderline cases that could serve as examples in
the final guidelines.

Using the categories defined in Section 3, we
achieved an inter-annotator agreement of Cohen’s
κ=0.67, with an agreement of 77%. We then
looked at sentences with disagreement, and set-
tled on categories for those sentences. Table 3
shows the final counts for each category, including
a Meta-category for cases like I don’t see a picture,
commenting on the original annotation task, or on
the images without describing them.

Category Count

Salient absence 488
Negation of action/behavior 90
Quotes and idioms 71
Not a description/Meta 40
Negation of attitude 36
False positive 31
Outside the frame 26
Negation of property 25
(Preventing) future events 21
Other 66

Table 3: Frequency count of each category.

In addition to our categorization, we found 39
examples where negations are also used to provide
contrast (next to their use in terms of the cate-
gories listed above). Two examples are:

(13) a. A man shaves his neck but not his beard
b. A man in a penguin suit runs with a man,

not in a penguin suit

Such examples show how negations can be used
to structure an image. Sometimes this leads to a
scalar implicature (Horn, 1972), like in (14).

57



(14) Three teenagers, two without shoes having
a water gun fight with various types of guns
trying to spray each other.
⇒ One teenager is wearing shoes.

A striking observation is that many negations
pertain to pieces of clothing; for example: 282
(32%) of the negations are about people being
shirtless, while 59 (7%) are about people not wear-
ing shoes. It is unclear whether this is due to selec-
tion bias, or whether the world just contains many
shirtless people. But we expect that this distribu-
tion will make it difficult for systems to learn how
to use negations that aren’t clothing-related.

5 Discussion

The negations used by crowdworkers are likely to
have required some form of “world knowledge”.
We now discuss potential sources of evidence for
recognising a candidate for negation in the de-
scription of an image: (a) The Outside the frame
category requires an understanding of human gaze
within an image, which is a challenging problem
in computer vision (Valenti et al., 2012). Addi-
tionally, we also need to understand the differ-
ences between scene types, both from a compu-
tational- (Oliva and Torralba, 2001) and a human
perspective (Torralba et al., 2006). (b) The Salient
absence category provides evidence for two kinds
of expectations that play a role in the use of nega-
tions: general expectations (people are supposed
to wear shirts, cf. 2a) and situation-specific ex-
pectations (students at graduation ceremonies typ-
ically wear caps, cf. 2b). (c) Finally, the Negation
of action/behavior category requires action recog-
nition, which is a challenging problem in still im-
ages (Poppe, 2010). The ability to automatically
recognise what people are doing in an image, and
how this contrasts with what they would typically
do in similar images, would greatly help with gen-
erating this use of negation.

From a linguistic perspective, background
knowledge could be represented by frames (Fill-
more, 1976) and scripts (Schank and Abelson,
1977). There are some hand-crafted resources that
contain this kind of knowledge, e.g. FrameNet
(Baker et al., 1998), but they only have limited
coverage. Recent work has shown, however, that it
is possible to automatically learn frames (Pennac-
chiotti et al., 2008) and script knowledge (Cham-
bers and Jurafsky, 2009) from text corpora. Fast
et al. (2016) show how such knowledge, as well

as knowledge about object affordances (Gibson,
1977), can be used to reason about visual scenes.

6 Conclusion

We studied the use of negations in the Flickr30K
dataset. The use of negations imply that the de-
scriptions contain a combination of objective and
subjective interpretations of the images. But nega-
tions are only one type of subjective language in
image description datasets. We expect that differ-
ent subjective language use (e.g. discourse mark-
ers such as yet or even though) can be observed
with relative ease in this and other datasets. Ad-
ditionally it would be interesting to study the use
of negations in different languages, such as the
German-English Multi30K dataset (Elliott et al.,
2016). We encourage further research to discover
other types of subjective language in vision and
language datasets, and studies of how subjective
language may affect language generation.

7 Acknowledgments

EM and RM are supported by the Netherlands Or-
ganization for Scientific Research (NWO) via the
Spinoza-prize awarded to Piek Vossen (SPI 30-
673, 2014-2019). DE is supported by NWO Vici
grant nr. 277-89-002 awarded to Khalil Sima’an.

References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.

1998. The berkeley framenet project. In Proceed-
ings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and 17th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics -
Volume 1, ACL ’98, pages 86–90, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Camiel J Beukeboom, Catrin Finkenauer, and
Daniël HJ Wigboldus. 2010. The negation bias:
when negations signal stereotypic expectancies.
Journal of personality and social psychology,
99(6):978.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2009. Un-
supervised learning of narrative schemas and their
participants. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer-
ence of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the
4th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2 - Volume
2, ACL ’09, pages 602–610, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakr-
ishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and

58



C. Lawrence Zitnick. 2015. Microsoft COCO cap-
tions: Data collection and evaluation server. CoRR,
abs/1504.00325.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and
Lucia Specia. 2016. Multi30K: Multilin-
gual English-German Image Descriptions. CoRR,
abs/1605.00459.

Ethan Fast, William McGrath, Pranav Rajpurkar, and
Michael S. Bernstein. 2016. Augur: Mining human
behaviors from fiction to power interactive systems.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’16, pages
237–247, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Charles J Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 280(1):20–32.

James J. Gibson. 1977. The theory of affordances.
In R. E. Shaw and J. Bransford, editors, Perceiving,
Acting, and Knowing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates.

Laurence R. Horn. 1972. On the Semantic Proper-
ties of Logical Operators in English. Ph.D. thesis,
UCLA, Los Angeles.

Laurence R. Horn. 1989. A natural history of negation.
CSLI Publications.

Geoffrey Leech. 1983. Principles of pragmatics. Lon-
don and New York: Longman.

Aude Oliva and Antonio Torralba. 2001. Modeling the
shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the
spatial envelope. International Journal of Computer
Vision, 42(3):145–175.

Marco Pennacchiotti, Diego De Cao, Roberto Basili,
Danilo Croce, and Michael Roth. 2008. Automatic
induction of framenet lexical units. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 457–465. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Ronald Poppe. 2010. A survey on vision-based human
action recognition. Image and Vision Computing,
28(6):976 – 990.

Roger C. Schank and Robert P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts,
Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry Into
Human Knowledge Structures. L. Erlbaum Asso-
ciates.

Antonio Torralba, Aude Oliva, Monica S Castelhano,
and John M Henderson. 2006. Contextual guid-
ance of eye movements and attention in real-world
scenes: the role of global features in object search.
Psychological review, 113(4):766.

Gunnel Tottie. 1980. Affixal and non-affixal negation
in English: Two systems in (almost) complementary
distribution. Studia linguistica, 34(2):101–123.

Roberto Valenti, Nicu Sebe, and Theo Gevers. 2012.
Combining head pose and eye location information
for gaze estimation. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 21(2):802–815, Feb.

Emiel van Miltenburg. 2016. Stereotyping and bias in
the Flickr30K dataset. In Proceedings of the 11th
Workshop on Multimodal Corpora (MMC2016),
pages 1–4.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to vi-
sual denotations: New similarity metrics for seman-
tic inference over event descriptions. TACL, 2:67–
78.

59


