



















































Expressions of Anxiety in Political Texts


Proceedings of 2016 EMNLP Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science, pages 92–101,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Expressions of Anxiety in Political Texts

Ludovic Rheault
Department of Political Science, University of Toronto

Abstract

Anxiety has a special importance in politics
since the emotion is tied to decision-making
under uncertainty, a feature of democratic in-
stitutions. Yet, measuring specific emotions
like anxiety in political settings remains a
challenging task. The present study tackles
this problem by making use of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) tools to detect anxi-
ety in a corpus of digitized parliamentary de-
bates from Canada. I rely upon a vector space
model to rank parliamentary speeches based
on the semantic similarity of their words and
syntax with a set of common expressions of
anxiety. After assessing the performance of
this approach with annotated corpora, I use it
to test an implementation of state-trait anxi-
ety theory. The findings support the hypoth-
esis that political issues with a lower degree
of familiarity, such as foreign affairs and im-
migration, are more anxiogenic than average,
a conclusion that appears robust to estimators
accounting for unobserved individual traits.

1 Introduction

Of the variety of emotions experienced by humans,
anxiety ranks arguably among the most relevant for
politics. Put simply, anxiety means feeling wor-
ried or concerned in the face of uncertainty (LaBar,
2016). We inherited this emotion from evolution-
ary processes with the critical function of keeping
us alert to external threats (Suomi and Harlow, 1976;
LeDoux, 2012; LaBar, 2016). Scholars have tied the
emotion not only to uncertainty, but also to one’s
lack of control over events (Mandler, 1972; Mineka

and Kelly, 1989). Of all social contexts, democratic
institutions appear to combine the full set of ingredi-
ents required to rouse anxiety. Indeed, parliaments
gather individuals with the specific purpose of mak-
ing decisions under uncertainty, sometimes in situa-
tions of emergency. The rules of the game are collec-
tive by nature, meaning that individual concerns are
at times ignored by the majority, which can exacer-
bate the sense of helplessness. As a result, it appears
natural to associate the domain of politics with anx-
iety. The emotion has already gained the attention
of scholars interested in politics, although empirical
evidence has focused mostly on actors outside polit-
ical institutions, such as voters (Marcus et al., 2000,
e.g.). This paper represents a systematic attempt to
automatically measure the level of anxiety in an ex-
tensive corpus of parliamentary debates.

Previous studies seeking to measure anxiety in
text using methods of NLP have been sporadic, yet
influential (Gilbert and Karahalios, 2010; Bollen
et al., 2011). Since the task of detecting anxi-
ety involves the recognition of rather subtle forms
of expression in language, the levels of accuracy
reached using machine learning classifiers are typi-
cally lower than for other tasks. More than a decade
ago, Mishne (2005) released a valuable resource for
the study of emotions in text, namely a corpus of
blog posts from the LiveJournal website where users
were invited to self-report their current mood by se-
lecting options from a list, including anxious. In the
original study, classifiers trained with Bag-of-Words
(BoW) features reached an accuracy rate of 54.25%
for the detection of the anxious mood, in balanced
class problems. In a more recent study using an

92



unbalanced dataset, Gilbert and Karahalios (2010)
reached a very high level of accuracy for the de-
tection of non-anxious texts, but only around 30%
of correct predictions for anxious ones. Papers fo-
cusing on the related concept of fear have reported
F1-scores between 0.20 and 0.74 (Strapparava and
Mihalcea, 2007; Roberts et al., 2012; Mohammad,
2012).1 It should be noted, however, that trying
to map specific emotions such as anxiety into bi-
nary categories may not be the optimal approach.
Feelings can be of various intensities, and binary
annotations amount to losing precious information.
Several modern approaches have instead relied upon
emotion-specific lexicons that can be used to create
continuous indicators (Tumasjan et al., 2010; Mo-
hammad et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2014). Using such
a methodology, for instance, Bollen et al. (2011)
were able to show that anxiety in social media is re-
lated to movements in the stock market.

The objective of this study is twofold. First, I seek
to develop a methodology for the automatic mea-
surement of levels of anxiety in writings, in particu-
lar, one that is adaptive to domain-specific corpora.
The third section of this report describes the method
and evaluates its performance using two annotated
datasets: a sample of sentences from the Canadian
House of Commons debates (the Hansard), anno-
tated for anxiety using a crowd-sourcing platform,
and the above-mentioned LiveJournal mood corpus.
Second, my goal is to explain the prevalence of anx-
iety in real-life political speeches using a large sec-
tion of the Hansard corpus.2 Based on state-trait
anxiety theory, which I discuss next, I implement
predictive models in which some of the topics de-
bated are expected to induce anxiety among parlia-
mentarians.

2 Theoretical Background

I derive my expectations about the presence of anx-
iety in politics from the seminal state-trait anxiety
theory proposed by Spielberger (1966). The the-
ory emphasizes the distinction between anxiety as

1Although Freud (1920, S. 3, Ch. 25) originally made a
distinction between anxiety and fear, scholars have since em-
phasized the close connection between the two concepts, some
advocating their conflation (McReynolds, 1976; Gray and Mc-
Naughton, 2000; LaBar, 2016).

2The full corpus is released on the www.lipad.ca website.

a trait, a more permanent feature of one’s person-
ality, and anxiety as a state, a temporary reaction
to stressful situations. In this model, state anxiety
is caused by the combination of both external events
and individual predispositions. Anxiety as a trait has
been the object of a voluminous literature, and cor-
responds to one of the “Big Five” personality traits
(neuroticism) (Eysenck, 1997). In fact, other pop-
ular theories in psychology emphasize the role of
factors such as personal experiences and biases in
explaining anxious responses to external stimuli, for
instance appraisal theory (Smith and Lazarus, 1993).
Transposed to the realm of politics, this means that
individual members of parliament (MPs) should ex-
hibit various levels of anxiety in response to a situ-
ational trigger, depending on their personalities. An
advantage of the Hansard corpus is that it allows to
observe the same individuals repeatedly, under vari-
ous situations. Thus, it becomes possible to account
for individual traits, even if they are unobserved.

Regarding external factors, a central idea guid-
ing my empirical analysis is that anxiety is more
likely to occur the less an issue is known to MPs.
Such an expectation directly follows from the nature
of anxiety, which entails uncertainty, and parallels
other theories in political psychology arguing that
unfamiliar situations make individuals more anxious
(Marcus, 2000; Marcus et al., 2000). In the con-
text of a parliament, I expect subject-matters that are
external to the country, such as foreign affairs and
immigration, to be less familiar, hence more anx-
iogenic. One could view this as an argument from
analogy: for individuals, strangers can be a source
of anxiety since their intentions are unknown; for
representatives of a state, other countries and their
nationals can be a similar source of unpredictability.
Of course, national issues such as natural disasters
or economic downturns can also be worrisome to
politicians. However, a reasonable working hypoth-
esis is that the more foreign the object of debate, the
more likely MPs are to experience anxiety.

Unlike ordinary social settings, however, mem-
bers of democratic institutions have functions that
may constrain the manner in which they respond to
ongoing events. In particular, members face differ-
ent incentives depending on the role that their po-
litical formation occupies in a legislature. Just like
personality traits may predispose to anxiety, one’s

93



partisan affiliation can affect the likelihood of ex-
pressing signs of that emotion. Parties forming the
opposition are required by convention to challenge
the government’s decisions; in fact, a period in the
daily business of the Canadian House of Commons,
the Oral Question Period, is dedicated to that duty.
It is natural to expect MPs from opposition parties
to communicate more forcefully their worries about
the problems faced by their constituents, as opposed
to members of the party in power, who are expected
to bring reassurance. Figure 1 is a simplified depic-
tion of the model guiding the present study. The fig-
ure is loosely based on the state-trait anxiety model
in Spielberger (1966), amended to account for the
peculiarities of parliamentary life. Basically, polit-
ical speeches are expected to become anxious due
to external triggers (unfamiliar topics under debate),
individual-level factors (mostly unobservable and
deeply entrenched personality traits) and party-level
functions (the government/opposition division).

3 Automated Detection of Anxiety in Text

A key challenge with the detection of anxiety in the
Hansard corpus is to account for the specific lan-
guage of a parliament. In contrast to the casual
English used in social media, politicians in parlia-
ment may be less explicit about their mood. To il-
lustrate, one message from the LiveJournal corpus
annotated with the anxious mood starts with the fol-
lowing words:

[I] have finals today :( I am very nervous..

In this case, the statement expresses an unfiltered
feeling that can be easily detected from word usage
by a computer. However, parliamentary debates are
subject to a decorum and speeches are usually less
personal. An efficient methodology needs to take
into account the vocabulary used to communicate
emotions in such a formal setting.

For this reason, I rely upon a methodology
that makes use of a vector space representation—
the transformation of the corpus under study
into numerical vectors based on word-word co-
occurrences—to identify the proximity of each new
word with a small set of seed words closely re-
lated to anxiety. This approach has been used pre-
viously to perform related tasks where semantic tar-
gets can be organized as polar opposites (Turney and

Littman, 2003). I have tested the approach with
different lists of seed words. Although the selec-
tion of these initial seed words may be a sensitive
task, accuracy results based on the annotated cor-
pora were not severely affected by small changes in
the seed list. For this analysis, I make use of 30
lemma/part-of-speech tuples associated with anxiety
on the one hand, and with the absence thereof on the
other hand. In the anxiety pole, seed lemmas include
threat, worry, fear, danger, anxious and tension, for
instance. These are general words selected recur-
sively from a thesaurus for their association with the
concept of anxiety. In the opposite pole, seed lem-
mas comprise ease, protect, confidence, safe, trust
and calm. Considering pairs of lemmas and parts of
speech (PoS) allows to take into account the distinc-
tion between the syntactic roles of each word, for
instance when being used as a verb or as a noun.

Specifically, I start by preprocessing the full
Hansard Corpus between 1980 and 2015. This stage
includes word and sentence segmentation, the attri-
bution of PoS tags and lemmatization, all performed
using the Stanford CoreNLP library (Manning et al.,
2014). This subset of the Hansard comprises above
245 million tokens, and the period was chosen to en-
compass that used in the rest of the empirical analy-
sis. The vector space model is computed on a recon-
structed corpus of combined lemma and PoS pairs
using the Glove program (Pennington et al., 2014),
which can be trained on the entire co-occurrence ma-
trix. I create word vectors of 300 dimensions using
a symmetric window size of 15 words.

Next, for each new lemma and PoS pair in the
Hansard corpus, I compute the cosine similarity be-
tween their vectors and the vectors of each lemma
and PoS pairing in the seed list. The sum of simi-
larity scores with the no-anxiety seeds is then sub-
tracted from the sum of similarity scores obtained
for the anxiety pole, and scaled back into a [−1, 1]
range, where 1 means the most anxious lemma and
−1 the least anxious. The created lexicon comprises
14,703 lemmas occurring 200 times or more in the
corpus, after excluding digits and proper nouns.

Finally, I match the numerical scores of anxiety
to the lemma/PoS pairs in the original corpus and
compute average values for each individual speech.
The result is a continuous indicator of the level anx-
iety, adapted to the specific register and tone of pol-

94



Figure 1: Simplified State-Trait Anxiety Model

Trait Anxiety
A politician's 

predisposition

to anxiety.

External Threat
A stressful event 

is debated 

in parliament.

State Anxiety
A politician 

experiences the 

feeling of anxiety.

Anxiety in Speech
Signs of anxiety are 

expressed during the 

debates. 

Party Function
Opposition parties must 

raise concerns about 

ongoing issues.

itics, which can also be linked back to metadata on
individual speakers, their party and the topic under
debate.

To assess the performance of this approach, I re-
tained the services of contributors from the Crowd-
Flower website. I randomly selected two series of
2,000 sentences from the Hansard, respectively from
the Government Orders and Oral Question Period
between 1994 and 2015.3 The decision to use sen-
tences as a unit of annotation is justified by the large
variation in the length of speeches during parliamen-
tary debates. Preliminary assessments made with the
help of a research assistant, based on entire speeches
as units of analysis, revealed the task to be impracti-
cal for human coders, since full speeches may intro-
duce several questions about how to properly code
a document expressing different intensities of emo-
tions. Shorter units of text can be more readily coded
as anxious or non-anxious, and they reduce the risk
of contradictory signals. I imposed the length of
sentences to be above 8 tokens and removed pro-
cedural interventions (e.g. the introduction of mo-
tions). The 4,000 sentences were annotated by three
different contributors via the crowd-sourcing plat-
form, with an average pairwise agreement of 79.3%.
Contributors were pre-screened with questions from
a test set and their judgments considered reliable
only if they reached a 70% agreement or above on
these test questions. Although reliability may not
reach the levels of more traditional methods, a re-

3Those two sections of the daily business of the House are
the most important ones. The Government Orders comprise
the debates on the bills introduced by the government. The
Oral Question Period opens the floor to the opposition, who can
question the government on its agenda and decisions.

cent study suggests that crowd-sourcing yields an-
notations comparable to those obtained from expert
surveys (Benoit et al., 2016).

The proportion of sentences coded as anxious
reaches 10.7% in the 4,000 Hansard sentences,
larger than in the LiveJournal corpus. To avoid an
unbalanced class problem, I have matched anxious
sentences with the same number of randomly se-
lected non-anxious ones. Although this is an ad-
mittedly small sample (854 sentences), the method-
ology reaches appreciable levels of accuracy using
support vector machines (SVMs) with a linear ker-
nel and a penalty parameter set at 0.5. Using the
anxiety indicator as a single feature, the level of ac-
curacy is around 63% (see Table 1), already above
the levels of some previously cited attempts to de-
tect the same emotion. Performance is slightly im-
proved when adding a BoW including unigrams and
bigrams.

I achieve important gains after including a sim-
ple categorical variable identifying the speaker, as
well as title annotations from the original Hansard.
With these metadata as features, the rate of accu-
racy reaches 83.6% (with a F1-score of 0.83, after
selecting the 700 best features based on chi-square
tests). This result is consistent with psychology the-
ory, which emphasizes the importance of account-
ing for individual-specific traits, and illustrates the
role of non-textual features in classification tasks.
Accuracy scores are computed with randomly as-
signed training and testing sets; using 3K-fold cross-
validation, the percentage of accuracy reaches 82%
in the best model. Additionally, I have consid-
ered grammatical features such as verb tense, after

95



Hansard (Anxious v. Non-Anxious)
Features Accuracy F1-Score Sample
Anxiety Score 62.9% 0.632 854
+BoW 69.0% 0.673 854
+Metadata 83.6% 0.830 854

LiveJournal (Anxious v. Non-Anxious Moods)
Features Accuracy F1-Score Sample
Anxiety Score 57.2% 0.582 30000
+BoW 74.6% 0.745 30000

LiveJournal (Anxious v. All Others Moods)
Features Accuracy F1-Score Sample
Anxiety Score 55.1% 0.565 30000
+BoW 72.9% 0.713 30000

Table 1: Accuracy Results for SVM Classifiers

identifying the verb phrase containing the root in
the dependency grammar structure of each sentence.
These features are significantly related to anxiety
(the future tense being positively related to anxiety,
and conversely for the past tense). However, they
did not improve accuracy further once accounting
for speaker identification.

Finally, I also assess the methodology against
the LiveJournal corpus. The latter comprises over
700,000 entries associated with several moods.
Since the proposed methodology is adaptive, I repli-
cated the same steps with the LiveJournal data, cre-
ating anxiety scores using word vectors of the en-
tire corpus and the same seed lists as before. Thus,
the measure is now tailored to the specific genre of
casual online discussions. To select anxious posts,
I combined semantically equivalent reported moods
(namely anxious, stressed, worried and restless).
Following the approach in Mishne (2005), I matched
a random sample of 15,000 anxious posts to the
same number of non-anxious ones (merging calm,
relaxed, optimistic and relieved) and to a sample of
all other moods except anxiety.4 The two bottom
panels of Table 1 report the results. Accuracy using
the anxiety score alone is lower than before, around
57%, still using SVMs (C = 80). Yet, the fact that a
univariate indicator is sufficient to achieve a perfor-
mance similar to that reported in previous studies us-
ing BoW models brings some additional legitimacy
to the methodology. When including unigrams and

4I have excluded irregular postings such as lists of tracks
from musical albums and messages in foreign language.

bigrams, the predictive model reaches a level of ac-
curacy exceeding 70%. Despite the possible limi-
tations of the two corpora discussed in this section,
these results suggest that the proposed score is sig-
nificantly related to anxiety, as perceived by human
coders or self-reported by Internet users.

4 Application to Parliamentary Debates

To examine the prevalence of anxiety in politi-
cal speeches, I rely upon the previously introduced
Hansard of the Canadian House of Commons. Us-
ing the anxiety scores generated with the method
described in the previous section, speeches in that
corpus are now associated with a level of anxiety.
The database is constructed at the speech level, each
observation corresponding to one intervention, and
each being associated with metadata. I removed
non-substantive speeches, for instance introductory
remarks, questions of procedure, and interventions
from the Speaker of the House.5 I have also removed
speeches for which the MP was not identified and
those comprising less than 8 tokens, to avoid a num-
ber of common brief utterances such as “Yes/No”
responses.

A portion of the Canadian parliamentary debates
had been manually annotated by other researchers
using the Comparative Agendas Project (CAP) topic
scheme, namely a set of over 40,000 questions asked
during the Oral Question Period between 1983 and
2004 (Penner et al., 2006). Coders attributed a
topic to each new question in a given exchange (an
exchange may include a question, an answer, and
sometimes follow-up questions), which means that
each annotation can be matched to more than one
speech in the Hansard corpus. Using variables com-
mon to both datasets, I was able to match most of
those annotations back with their original text.6 This
leaves a dataset of 119,623 speeches annotated by
topic, which I focus on for the empirical analysis
below. The topic scheme used by the CAP team is

5In contrast to Speakers in the US House of Representatives,
who are high-ranking legislators, the role of Speaker in West-
minster systems is procedural. Speakers in Canada do not play
a partisan role in the debates.

6Manual inspection after running the matching algorithm re-
vealed a few cases of mismatch due to discrepancies in the two
databases, often unresolvable. However, the large majority of
annotations appear correctly attributed in the Hansard corpus.

96



Speech Score
Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister is joking
about the serious and even catastrophic
situation of Canada’s public finances.

0.29

That this House condemn those policies
of the government which, having bred
a sense of insecurity, powerlessness and
doubt among Canadians, are a cause of the
recent increase in regional tensions and in-
cidents of racism and bigotry in Canada.

0.27

In those capacities we have absolute con-
fidence in the judgment of the Secretary of
State for External Affairs, and we can offer
that categoric assurance to the Leader of
the New Democratic Party.

–0.48

Mr. Speaker, as always we will strive to
protect the best interests of all Canadians.

–0.50

Table 2: Examples of Anxious and Non-Anxious Speeches

rather detailed, comprising 25 main topics and more
than 200 subtopics. For the sake of this study, I have
simplified the scheme to 10 categories by relabel-
ing the original CAP annotations. These 10 topics
should sound fairly intuitive to both political scien-
tists and scholars from other disciplines: constitu-
tional affairs, economy, education, environment, for-
eign affairs, health care, immigration, law and order,
natural resources, and a residual category containing
all other national topics such as land management
and intergovernmental affairs.

Illustrating the methodology when applied to po-
litical debates, Table 2 reports two examples of
speeches above the 99th percentile on the anxiety
score, and two under the 1st percentile. As can be
seen, the measure correctly ranks the first speech as
an expression of anxiety, despite the presence of a
word like joking, which could have been misinter-
preted as indicative of a light tone. The examples
may also serve to illustrate how political functions
influence the emotional valence of speeches: the two
anxious speeches come from members of the oppo-
sition parties, whereas the bottom two speeches of
Table 2 come from the government. The large ma-
jority of speeches fall under 0 on the anxiety scale,
which is consistent with the fact that the feeling re-
mains infrequent. The average value in the full sam-
ple is –0.13. In what follows, I normalize the indi-
cator by transforming it into a z-score with a mean
of 0, which facilitates the interpretation of findings.

The main objective from now on is to test the hy-
potheses laid out earlier in the theoretical section.

I start by looking at the bivariate relationship be-
tween the topic under debate and the level of anx-
iety of MPs. Figure 2 shows the average level of
anxiety by topic category (I use a weighted average
with token counts as weights to account for discrep-
ancies in speech lengths). As can be seen, immi-
gration and foreign affairs are the topics for which
Canadian MPs displayed the highest average level
of anxiety between 1983 and 2004 during oral ques-
tions, which is consistent with the starting hypoth-
esis. It shall be noted that anxiety is not bound to
external topics, however. The question of natural
resources—historically important for the Canadian
economy, and including debates on sectors such as
oil production and nuclear energy—ends up closely
behind, before environment and economy. Law and
order (which includes crime) and health care range
somewhere in the middle, being neither the most
anxious nor the least. Education and constitutional
affairs rank as the least anxiogenic topics during this
period.

It may be helpful to consider topic averages bro-
ken down by year to understand why immigration
turns out first in the ranking during that time span.
The highest levels of anxiety on the topic of immi-
gration are observed between 1993 and 2001, pe-
riod during which one of the major parties—the
Conservatives—had ruptured into factions. The new
parties (Reform and Bloc) began to voice a more
forceful opposition on that particular topic. The pe-
riod culminated with a major reform of immigration
legislation in 2001, year during which the average
level of anxiety reaches 0.31.

The corpus also allows for an examination of anx-
iety by party function, another component of the
model introduced above. Table 3 reveals that mem-
bers from parties in the opposition have levels of
anxiety larger than the global average (+0.26), while
the converse holds for parties forming the govern-
ment (–0.20). The specific parties exhibiting the
highest levels of anxiety in Table 3 are also those that
remained in the opposition the whole time. I have
also examined the link between anxiety and avail-
able biographical information on MPs. Women, for
instance, appear slightly less anxious than men, still
using the 1983–2004 sample of oral questions, based
on a one-tailed mean comparison t-test (p < 0.02).
Age also appears to be a significant predictor of anx-

97



Figure 2: Anxiety by Topic in the House of Commons (1983–2004)

0−0.1 −0.05 0.05 0.1
Anxiety (Weighted Average)

Constitutional Affairs

Education

Other Topics

Health Care

Law and Order

Economy

Environment

Natural Resources

Foreign Affairs

Immigration

Political Party Anxiety
Bloc Québécois 0.16
Canadian Alliance 0.35
Conservatives –0.08
Liberals –0.13
NDP 0.27
Reform 0.33
Government –0.20
Opposition 0.26

Table 3: Weighted Average of Anxiety (Normalized Scale) by
Political Group during Oral Question Period (1983–2004)

iety in speeches: older MPs are less likely to express
anxiety than younger ones.

Bivariate relationships, however, ignore the fact
that some of those speeches are uttered by the same
individuals. As pointed out earlier in the theoreti-
cal section, individual characteristics (traits) may af-
fect whether someone is likely to feel nervous at any
given point (state). Some MPs may have a tendency
to experience anxiety and express worries in the face
of adversity, whereas others may have a more stoic
personality. Such individual traits can represent a
confounding factor, and the unexplained variance of
the anxiety score may be clustered within individual
MPs. For these reasons, I rely upon statistical meth-
ods accounting for individual characteristics. I first
consider a “within” estimator that subtracts individ-
ual averages from each variable in the model (which
amounts to including a specific intercept parameter
for each MP). This is also known as a fixed effects

estimator that can be expressed in the form

yij = aj + x′ijβ + εij, (1)

where yij is the measured anxiety of a speech i ut-
tered by MP j, the aj are MP-specific intercepts, x is
a vector of observed metadata for each speech, and
εij is an error component. The within transforma-
tion precludes the inclusion of variables that do not
vary within individuals, such as gender. On the other
hand, this transformation implies that the estima-
tor accounts for all unobserved MP characteristics,
such as personality traits. Note that the government-
opposition status varies for some MPs, and can be
included among observed covariates. The second
estimator is a hierarchical model with random inter-
cepts at the party and individual levels. The model
corresponds to:

yij = α + x′ijβ + λj + θk + ǫij (2)

where λj and θk are random intercepts for MP j and
party k. This estimator allows for the inclusion of
variables such as age and gender.

Table 4 reports estimates from both these models.
Starting with the fixed effects model in the left col-
umn, estimated by OLS (F = 40.04; p = 0.000),
the results are consistent with several of the findings
stressed earlier about the relation between topics and
anxiety. Since the topic variable is categorical, esti-
mates are to be interpreted with respect to a base cat-
egory, in this case the residual category “other top-
ics”. As can be seen, the estimates suggest that for-
eign affairs and immigration are significantly more

98



Fixed Effects Hierarchical
Variable Est. p Est. p
Topic
Constitutional –0.079 0.008 –0.079 0.000
Economy 0.075 0.000 0.076 0.000
Education –0.041 0.057 –0.045 0.011
Environment 0.065 0.072 0.071 0.000
Foreign Affairs 0.125 0.000 0.129 0.000
Health Care 0.070 0.033 0.067 0.000
Immigration 0.145 0.000 0.150 0.000
Law and Order 0.077 0.001 0.081 0.000
Nat. Resources 0.145 0.000 0.143 0.000
Party Status
Government –0.360 0.000 –0.357 0.000
Obs. 119,623 117,704

Table 4: Multivariate Models of Anxiety in Parliament.
Both models include year, month and day of the week dummies

as well as a control variable for the length of speeches in
tokens. The hierarchical model is reported with approximate

p-values, and also includes age and gender as controls.

anxiogenic than the base category, supporting the re-
sults presented so far. These estimates are statisti-
cally significant, with reported p-values computed
using Arellano’s heteroskedasticity and autocorre-
lation (HAC) consistent standard errors (Arellano,
1987). However, once accounting for individual-
specific factors, the topic of national resources ap-
pears to produce the same effect on anxiety than im-
migration, and a larger effect than foreign affairs.
Education and constitutional affairs remain among
the least anxious topics. Members of the govern-
ment appear significantly less likely to express anx-
iety during their interventions, in line with the ob-
servations made previously. The last column of Ta-
ble 4 reports results from the three-level hierarchical
model estimated by restricted maximum likelihood.
This model includes age and gender as covariates,
which now turn out as non-significant predictors. A
few data points on the birth dates of MPs are miss-
ing, reducing the number of observations. However,
the results are very close to those obtained with the
first estimator, and again support some of the key
findings discussed so far.

5 Conclusion

Overall, this study illustrates the potential of NLP
methods for the detection of specific emotions such
as anxiety in politics. The finding that some topics
are a source of anxiety may help to inform future re-
search on legislative politics, for instance to examine

the role of emotions in the formation of preferences
over issues. From a methodological standpoint, the
study also illustrates the importance of theory and
non-textual features in predictive tasks. In particu-
lar, the results suggest that machine learning models
can be improved by accounting for author identifi-
cation in corpora where documents are clustered by
individuals. Although the findings bring support to
the proposed model, a limitation of this study is that
expressions of anxiety may not reflect the true emo-
tional state of a speaker. For example, politicians
may appeal to emotions strategically, in an attempt
to persuade. Disentangling the motives behind the
use of language would require additional research.
Nonetheless, the framework proposed in these pages
appears reliable enough to derive substantive results
of interest.

Looking forward, the methodology could serve to
answer other important questions about the role of
anxiety in politics, ones that fell beyond the scope of
this study. Previous research on anxiety has shown
that the emotion influences how people make de-
cisions. The experience of anxiety may ultimately
make some choices less appealing, or refrain in-
dividuals from action altogether (Raghunathan and
Pham, 1999; Gray and McNaughton, 2000). Mar-
cus et al. (2000) stressed the hypothesis that anxi-
ety leads individuals to search for more information
before making decisions. Whether this has positive
effects on the quality of decisions made by anxious
individuals, or whether the feeling clouds their judg-
ment, remains a debated question, albeit an impor-
tant one (Brader, 2011; Ladd and Lenz, 2008; Mar-
cus et al., 2011). Moreover, improving computa-
tional tools for the detection of specific emotions in
texts can have applications useful beyond the study
of politics. Examples include the detection of health
conditions such as anxiety disorders, stock market
forecasting or, more generally, contributions to the
development of an artificial intelligence able to ac-
curately identify specific emotions from language.

Acknowledgments

The author thanks Andreea Musulan for research as-
sistance as well as the Connaught Fund for financial
support.

99



References
Manuel Arellano. 1987. Computing Robust Standard

Errors for Within-Groups Estimators. Oxford Bulletin
of Economics and Statistics, 49(4):431–434.

Kenneth Benoit, Drew Conway, Benjamin E. Lauderdale,
Michael Laver, and Slava Mikhaylov. 2016. Crowd-
Sourced Text Analysis: Reproducible and Agile Pro-
duction of Political Data. American Political Science
Review, 110(2):278–295.

Johan Bollen, Huina Mao, and Xiaojun Zeng. 2011.
Twitter Mood Predicts the Stock Market. Journal of
Computational Science, 2(1):1–8.

Ted Brader. 2011. The Political Relevance of Emo-
tions: ‘Reassessing’ Revisited. Political Psychology,
32(2):337–346.

Michael W. Eysenck. 1997. Anxiety and Cognition: A
Unified Theory. Psychology Press, Hove.

Sigmund Freud. 1920. A General Introduction to Psy-
choanalysis. Boni and Liveright, New York.

Eric Gilbert and Karrie Karahalios. 2010. Widespread
Worry and the Stock Market. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Me-
dia (ICWSM 10).

Jeffrey A. Gray and Neil McNaughton. 2000. The Neu-
ropsychology of Anxiety: An Enquiry into the Func-
tions of the Septo-Hippocampal System. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.

Kevin S. LaBar. 2016. Fear and Anxiety. In
Lisa Feldman Barrett, Michael Lewis, and Jean-
nette M. Haviland-Jones, editors, Handbook of Emo-
tions. The Guilford Press, New York.

Jonathan McDonald Ladd and Gabriel S. Lenz. 2008.
Reassessing the Role of Anxiety in Vote Choice. Po-
litical Psychology, 29(2):275–296.

Joseph LeDoux. 2012. Rethinking the Emotional Brain.
Neuron, 73(4):653–676.

George Mandler. 1972. Helplessness: Theory and Re-
search in Anxiety. In Charles D. Spielberger, edi-
tor, Anxiety: Current Trends in Theory and Research,
pages 359–378. Academic Press, New York.

Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Pro-
cessing Toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, pages 55–60.

George E. Marcus, W. Russell Neuman, and Michael
MacKuen. 2000. Affective Intelligence and Political
Judgment. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

George E. Marcus, Michael MacKuen, and W. Russell
Neuman. 2011. Parsimony and Complexity: Devel-
oping and Testing Theories of Affective Intelligence.
Political Psychology, 32(2):323–336.

George E. Marcus. 2000. Emotions in Politics. Annual
Review of Political Science, 3:221–250.

William T. McReynolds. 1976. Anxiety as Fear: A Be-
havioral Approach to One Emotion. In Marvin Zuck-
erman and Charles D. Spielberger, editors, Emotions
and Anxiety: New Concepts, Methods, and Applica-
tions, pages 281–316. Lawrence Elbaurm Associates,
Hillsdale.

Susan Mineka and Kelly A. Kelly. 1989. The Relation-
ship Between Anxiety, Lack of Control and Loss of
Control. In Andrew Steptoe and Ad Appels, editors,
Stress, Personal Control and Health, pages 163–191.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.

Gilad Mishne. 2005. Experiments with Mood Classifi-
cation in Blog Posts. In Style2005: 1st Workshop on
Stylistic Analysis Of Text For Information Access.

Saif M. Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiaodan
Zhu. 2013. NRC-Canada: Building the State-of-the-
Art in Sentiment Analysis of Tweets. In Proceedings
of the Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation Exercises (SemEval-2013), Atlanta, Geor-
gia, USA, June.

Saif Mohammad. 2012. Portable Features for Clas-
sifying Emotional Text. In 2012 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 587–591.

Erin Penner, Kelly Blidook, and Stuart Soroka. 2006.
Legislative Priorities and Public Opinion: Represen-
tation of Partisan Agendas in the Canadian House
of Commons. Journal of European Public Policy,
13(7):959–974.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global Vectors for Word
Representation. In Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2014).

Rajagopal Raghunathan and Michel Tuan Pham. 1999.
All Negative Moods Are Not Equal: Motivational In-
fluences of Anxiety and Sadness on Decision Mak-
ing. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 79(1):56–77.

Kirk Roberts, Michael A. Roach, Joseph Johnson, Josh
Guthrie, and Sanda M. Harabagiu. 2012. EmpaTweet:
Annotating and Detecting Emotions on Twitter. In
Proceedings of the 9th Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference, pages 3806–3813.

Craig A. Smith and Richard S. Lazarus. 1993. Appraisal
Components, Core Relational Themes, and the Emo-
tions. Cognition and Emotion, 7(3/4):233–269.

Charles D. Spielberger. 1966. Theory and Research on
Anxiety. In Charles D. Spielberger, editor, Anxiety and
Behavior, pages 3–20. Academic Press, New York.

Carlo Strapparava and Rada Mihalcea. 2007. SemEval-
2007 Task 14: Affective Text. In Proceedings of the

100



4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Stephen J. Suomi and Harry F. Harlow. 1976. The Facts
and Functions of Fear. In Marvin Zuckerman and
Charles D. Spielberger, editors, Emotions and Anxiety,
pages 3–34. Lawrence Elbaurm Associates, Hillsdale.

Andranik Tumasjan, Timm O. Sprenger, Philipp G. Sand-
ner, and Isabell M. Welpe. 2010. Predicting Elections
with Twitter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Polit-
ical Sentiment. In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Peter D. Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Mea-
suring Praise and Criticism: Inference of Semantic
Orientation from Association. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
21(4):315–346.

Jian Zhao, Liang Gou, Fei Wang, and Michelle Zhou.
2014. PEARL: An Interactive Visual Analytic Tool
for Understanding Personal Emotion Style Derived
from Social Media. In Proceedings of the IEEE Sym-
posium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
203–212.

101


