



















































The Challenge of Sentiment Quantification


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016, page 173,
San Diego, California, June 12-17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Challenge of Sentiment Quantification∗

Fabrizio Sebastiani
Qatar Computing Research Institute

Hamad bin Khalifa University
PO Box 5825 Doha, Qatar

fsebastiani@qf.org.qa

Among the many challenges that sentiment analysis
(SA) faces, I want to concentrate on one which has
not received much attention within the SA commu-
nity, but that is going to play a major role in future
applications: Sentiment Quantification (SQ) (Esuli
and Sebastiani, 2010). Quantification is defined as
the task of estimating the prevalence (i.e., relative
frequency) of the classes of interest in a set of unla-
belled data via supervised learning (Forman, 2008);
examples of SQ are (i) determining the prevalence
of endorsements in a set of tweets about a political
candidate, or (ii) determining the prevalence of re-
buttals in a set of reviews of a given book. A naı̈ve
way to tackle quantification is by classifying each
unlabelled item independently and computing the
fraction of such items that have been attributed the
class. However, a good classifier is not necessarily
a good quantifier: assuming the binary case, even if
(FP +FN) is comparatively small, bad quantifica-
tion accuracy results if FP and FN are significantly
different (since perfect quantification coincides with
the case FP = FN ). This has led researchers to
study quantification as a task on its own right, rather
than as a byproduct of classification.

Within SA, quantification plays a major role,
since in many applications we are interested in es-
timating sentiment not at the individual level, but at
the aggregate level. For instance, when SA is ap-
plied to tweets, it is rarely (if at all) the case that we
are interested in the sentiment conveyed by an in-
dividual tweet (Gao and Sebastiani, 2015): it is the
sentiment of the crowd, and how it is distributed, that

∗The author is on leave from Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Italy

we are instead interested in, and monitoring this dis-
tribution over time is a holy grail within fields such
as the social sciences, market research, and online
reputation management.

Quantification is still an under-researched area,
due to the fact that for years it has not been iden-
tified as a task on its own. Challenges that are still
in need of satisfactory solutions are:

• Can we devise quantifiers that deliver high ac-
curacy irrespectively of the level of distribution
drift (i.e., the difference between class preva-
lence in the labelled and in the unlabelled sets)?

• Can we devise accurate quantifiers that do not
use the classification of individual items as an
intermediate step? And is this the best way to
tackle quantification?

• Aside from the binary case, can we devise ac-
curate quantifiers also for the multiclass case
(i.e., when the mutually exclusive classes are
> 2) and for the ordinal case (i.e., when there
is a total order defined on the set of classes)?

References
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2010. Sentiment

quantification. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 25(4):72–75.
George Forman. 2008. Quantifying counts and costs via

classification. Data Mining and Knowledge Discov-
ery, 17(2):164–206.

Wei Gao and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2015. Tweet sen-
timent: From classification to quantification. In
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Advances in Social Network Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM 2015), pages 97–104, Paris, FR.

173


