



















































The Challenges and Joys of Analysing Ongoing Language Change in Web-based Corpora: a Case Study


Proceedings of the 10th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-X) and the EmpiriST Shared Task, pages 27–34,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Challenges and Joys of Analysing Ongoing Language Change in
Web-based Corpora: a Case Study

Anne Krause
Leipzig University
Beethovenstraße 15

04107 Leipzig
anne.krause@uni-leipzig.de

Abstract

Researchers of language variation and
change often need to go to great lengths
to find sufficient data, particularly when
they shall be used for a sound statistical
analysis of the phenomenon in question.
The recent analogical change in the for-
mation of the imperative singular of Ger-
man strong verbs with vowel gradation is
a case in point, as it could not have been
studied without the compilation of a web-
based corpus. On the one hand, the inves-
tigation was faced with a number of chal-
lenges during the compilation of the cor-
pus, the search for relevant hits and their
annotation for a number of variables. On
the other hand, results which would other-
wise not have been obtained balance out
this increased amount of manual labour.
The present paper elaborates on some of
these challenges and provides suggestions
how they might be avoided in similar in-
vestigations in future. It concludes by pre-
senting invaluable insights which would
not have been gained without the present
corpus study.

1 Introduction

It has been noted several times by different au-
thors that the use of the web as corpus enriches in-
vestigations of linguistic variation and change by
providing a higher number of authentic and more
recent examples than traditional corpora can fur-
nish. In contrast to such “opportunistic” uses of
the web, researchers of recent language change
may be forced to make “systematic” use of web-
based corpora because they are “the only source
for examples of very rare usages and construc-
tions” (Mair, 2012, 245). In the present project,

a web-based corpus has been compiled as the pri-
mary source of evidence, not only because the
web yielded more examples than traditional cor-
pora but because the only text type which yielded
enough evidence is specific to the web.

Instead of consulting a large pre-existing web-
based corpus, material from a very specific web-
site was used in the current investigation; never-
theless, problems faced during corpus compilation
and analysis and suggestions for avoiding them
can be generalised to similar phenomena and lan-
guages to a great extent.

1.1 Change-in-progress in German verb
inflection

There are a number of German strong verbs which
exhibit a stem vowel change from the infinitive -e-
to -i- in the imperative singular, for example the
verb geben ‘give’ in Table 1:

present
number person indicative imperative

1st geb(e)
singular 2nd gibst gib

3rd gibt
1st geben

plural 2nd gebt gebt
3rd geben

Table 1: Conjugation table for the German verb
geben ‘give’

The present project investigates the replacement
of the established i-stem imperative singular of
these strong verbs with vowel gradation by an e-
stem variant formed in analogy to weak (regular)
verb inflection, e.g. sterben ‘to die’: stirb! →
sterb(e)!; geben ‘to give’: gib! → geb(e)!

27



1.2 The Conserving Effect

Along the lines of former usage-based analyses of
analogical language change, it is hypothesised that
the established i-stem imperative singular forms
of lower frequency verbs are replaced by analogi-
cal variants earlier and faster than those of higher
frequency verbs. For example, native speakers
of German consistently stumble over the expres-
sion Milk die Kuh! ’Milk the cow!’, employ-
ing the established i-stem imperative form of a
low frequency verb, but they seem to accept both
variants of verbs from a middle frequency region
such as bewirb dich!/ bewerb(e) dich! ’apply (for
sth.)!’. On the other end of the scale, the analog-
ically formed variants of high frequency verbs in
sentences like Geb mir das Buch! ’Give me the
book!’/ Seh es dir an! ’Have a look at it!’ are usu-
ally frowned at, whereas the i-stem variants of the
same verbs are not.

The imperative singular forms of high fre-
quency verbs are assumed to resist analogical
change because they are highly entrenched in
speakers’ minds; this phenomenon is generally re-
ferred to as the “Conserving Effect” (Bybee and
Thompson, 1997, 380). Although it has been
explained from very early on that this frequency
effect could be found in “modern leveling” as
well (Hooper, 1976, 99), the majority of research
in this area has been concerned with cases of com-
pleted language change. The present study thus
fills two gaps by examining change-in-progress in
German, a language in which the effects of type
and token frequencies are still underresearched.

1.3 Imperative singular forms in corpora

It became apparent very soon that the change in
the imperative singular of strong verbs with vowel
gradation could not be examined with the help of
“traditional” corpora (Mair, 2012) Although some
of them are comparably large (e.g. DeReKo1) and
contain spoken language (e.g. corpora in the DGD
database2), where linguistic change usually starts
out before it finds its way into written language,
none of these corpora yielded enough tokens of the
target imperative singular forms for a systematic
(let alone statistical) analysis. Two reasons for the
rarity of the imperative singular can be found in
the Duden grammar (Dudenredaktion, 2009, 548-
550): its use is tied to the condition that speakers

1http://www.ids-mannheim.de/cosmas2/
2http://dgd.ids-mannheim.de/

are on familiar terms (use of the informal second
person singular pronoun du), and there are several
other constructions used instead of the imperative
to express requests or commands, such as indica-
tive, modal and infinitive constructions.

Pre-existing large web-based corpora also have
drawbacks. Most of them do not provide meta
information about the authors of texts, a circum-
stance which has rather obvious reasons, given the
wealth of data in the corpora, and which could be
accepted. More serious for the study of a recent
language change is the fact that no information
is available about when the texts in these corpora
were produced, as is the case, for example, in the
deWaC (Baroni et al., 2008).

2 The Walkthrough Corpus

Instead of consulting traditional or existing web-
based corpora, a corpus was specifically compiled
for the present investigation. It consists of a web-
specific text type, viz. walkthroughs, which con-
tains a high number of instances of imperative sin-
gular forms. In addition, the website which was
crawled contains very recent language material
and the majority of texts on it have a timestamp,
so that the development of imperative formation
can be tracked.

2.1 Texts

Walkthroughs are guides for video games, i.e.
computer, console and internet games, which help
gamers complete a game successfully. They in-
clude step-by-step instructions, lists of achieve-
ments and items, cheats and other tips. Like in of-
ficial strategy guides (usually in print), which are
commissioned by the game publishers, their main
focus is on a precise rendering of the game’s con-
tent. In contrast to the former, these online guides
are written by gamers and the texts are subject to a
minimal amount of proofreading or revision. The
conditions of their production are therefore very
close to natural language.

Perhaps most importantly for the present in-
vestigation, the fact that members of the gaming
community write walkthroughs for other members
provides for an increased use of the imperative sin-
gular, e.g. nimm den Gegenstand ‘take the item’,
erstich den Feind ‘stab the enemy’ etc., which is
otherwise only rarely attested in corpora of Ger-
man, spoken or written. A pilot search on the web
revealed several candidate websites for the corpus

28



compilation, only one of which provided some of
the required meta information (also see section 3
below):

The website spieletipps.de3 exists since 2001
(in the present form). It was crawled in 2013;
hence, the corpus covers a time span of 12 years.
It is one of the main gaming websites in Ger-
many, on which complete walkthroughs, individ-
ual cheats and tips and forums are available for
the majority of existing platforms (including retro
ones like Atari consoles). The final walkthrough
corpus compiled from the website comprises ap-
proximately 7 m. tokens or word forms.

2.2 Crawler

A webcrawler (Java) was tailored to the website
in order to download all walkthrough texts, cheats
etc. Each text was stored in one line of a csv
file. Available meta information about texts and
authors were similarly stored in separate csv files.
When queries were entered in the search inter-
face (2.4), the data from these files were reunited
through an inverted index.

2.3 Annotation

All texts contained in the corpus were then
tagged for their part of speech using the Tree-
Tagger (Schmid, 1995). This should enable the
search for imperative forms of verbs (POS-tag
VVIMP in STTS) and thereby reduce the number
of word-level queries (however, see 3.1). The an-
notated versions of all texts were similarly stored
in a csv file.

2.4 Interface

A simple search interface was created, comparable
to those of popular web search engines. It allowed
word-level, e.g. gib, and POS-level queries, e.g.
vvimp2geben ‘imperative forms of give’. It out-
puts csv files with one row for each query hit and
columns for the query, sentence context and meta
information.

3 Challenges

Challenges arose during the compilation of the
corpus, the search for imperative singular forms
in it and the annotation of the data for additional
variables. One of these can be attributed to the re-
searcher (3.1); others are specific to the website

3http://spieletipps.de

(3.2 and 3.3), the corpus (3.4), the walkthrough
genre (3.5 and 3.6) or the search interface (3.7).

3.1 Non-computational linguists

Linguists who want to investigate a potential lan-
guage change-in-progress might find themselves
in a situation when the phenomenon in question
is not or only rarely attested in “traditional” cor-
pora. Even though they might be able to perform
a pilot search using one of the major web search
engines, many (if not to say) most linguists do not
possess the necessary programming skills for the
compilation of a corpus of web data.

Since this was the case in the present paper,
the compilation of the corpus itself was left in the
hands of a computer scientist. However, the latter
needs to be carefully instructed by the researcher
in order that the final product yields the required
results. Thus, the linguist should have a precise
idea not only of which data and meta data are
available during crawling (see 3.2 and 3.3) but also
of how annotation for additional variables may be
partly automatised by the use of an appropriate in-
terface (see 3.7).

3.2 Meta information about corpus texts

Although the corpus compiler in the present case
was instructed to retrieve each text on the website
along with all available meta information, he can
only include data in the corpus which is provided
by the website (creators). A crucial piece of infor-
mation for an investigation of language change in
general, and perhaps ongoing change in particular,
is the point in time when a linguistic utterance was
produced.

Unfortunately, the original timestamp of posts
on the website used for the present analysis was
not given. However, in contrast to corpora such
as the deWaC, which do not provide a date, ei-
ther, two dates could be retrieved from the present
website: i) when a member had registered, and ii)
when the game to which the entry referred was
released in Germany (or the earliest universal re-
lease, if no German version exists). The times-
tamp was extrapolated as the more recent of these
two dates: a member cannot post a walkthrough
or other tip for an existing game on the website
before being registered, and even as a registered
member, he/she cannot post a walkthrough or any-
thing similar about a game which has not been
released yet. The format of the timestamps was

29



mixed; they were therefore reduced to only the
posting year.

It turned out later that on the profiles of mem-
bers, their last postings were listed with the orig-
inal posting date. The comparison of the original
and extrapolated timestamps for the instances in
the final dataset revealed that 53.6% of the extrap-
olated posting years were correct and 22.0% could
be replaced by the years listed on the member pro-
files. For the remaining 24.4% of observations,
only the extrapolated dates were available (due to
the author’s active membership). Separate statisti-
cal analyses performed on the full dataset and a re-
duced dataset without these observations showed
that extrapolation did not have an effect on the re-
sults of the investigation.

3.3 Meta information about authors
In times of heated discussion about data protec-
tion, it is easily understood that members of a web-
site or forum wish to remain anonymous. On the
website used for the present investigation, mem-
bers can theoretically provide personal informa-
tion such as their full name, age and residence on
their profile page, and they can select which of
these data to share with the public. The crawler
could only include meta information about the au-
thors of texts in the corpus which was visible on
their public profile page. Therefore, in the final
dataset, which was used for the statistical analy-
sis, only 21.3% of the instances had an annota-
tion for the author’s age, 13.4% for gender (based
on members’ first names), and 6.8% for their resi-
dence. Analyses of the influence of sociolinguistic
factors on the change in imperative singular for-
mation of the strong verbs with vowel gradation
were thus based on such small samples that they
identified trends, but the results are not generalis-
able.

3.4 POS tagging
As mentioned before, the corpus search interface
allowed word-level and POS-level queries. Unsur-
prisingly, the analogical e-stem imperative vari-
ants of verbs were incorrectly tagged as finite
forms or as proper names; therefore, instead of us-
ing the POS-level query, these forms (e.g. geb,
gebe) had to be searched on word-level for ev-
ery individual verb. Perhaps more interestingly,
even though the i-stem imperative is the estab-
lished variant, only lower case instances of, for
example, gib were recognised correctly, whereas

capitalised Gib was often incorrectly tagged as a
noun or proper name and therefore not returned
by the POS-level query.

The available options in the corpus search inter-
face were thus sufficient to extract hits on the word
(and POS) level, and the immediate sentence con-
text in the output files provided enough informa-
tion to distinguish finite forms of a verb from gen-
uine imperative hits (1 vs. 2) and imperative forms
of simplex verbs from those of particle verbs (2 vs.
3):

(1) “Ich hab das Spiel bereits durchge-
spielt und gebe hier mal die Gegner
bekannt”
(nds/fluch-karibik-3/2620615)

(2) “Gebe ihm das Glas und die Spirale”
(pc/clever-smart/2742515)

(3) “Gebe die ersten beiden Buchstaben
ein”
(snes/nba-jam/310511)

However, at least the distinction between ex-
amples (1) and (2) would have been largely per-
formed by the TreeTagger if it had been trained ac-
cordingly, which would have reduced the amount
of manual POS-tag correction. In similar inves-
tigations of variation or recent language change,
it may be worth adapting the TreeTagger or sup-
plying manually tagged training material with in-
stances of the target construction or form before
tagging the actual corpus texts.

3.5 Authorship confirmation
Although all imperative singular instances in the
dataset were annotated for the member of the web-
site who had contributed the text in which they oc-
curred, it had to be ascertained that all of these
instances were indeed produced by the specified
author. For a number of reasons, the authors
quote from inside the game whose walkthrough
they are writing. Some of these quotes are read-
ily recognisable as such from the use of quotation
marks or their occurrence in tables of so-called
“achievements”, such as “Stiehl 30 Fahrzeuge”
‘Steal 30 vehicles’ (Gangstar Miami Vindication
for iPhone). Other quoted imperative singular
forms occurred in running text without any indi-
cation of being borrowed. The consultation of
“Let’s Play” videos4 proved an efficient way of ex-
posing the unmarked in-game imperative uses. In

4Youtube - http://youtube.com

30



these videos, gamers tape their computer or con-
sole screen while playing a particular game and
comment on how (missions or chapters in) the
game can be completed successfully. Thus, any in-
game commands which were quoted in the walk-
through appear on the player’s screen in the video
and can be discarded from the dataset.

3.6 Skewed frequency data

While walkthroughs have the advantage of being
practically the only text type to contain a very
high number of instances of the imperative singu-
lar, their special topic presented another challenge.
One of the aims of the present project was to test
whether the Conserving Effect of high token fre-
quency in analogical change is also found in the
recent change in imperative singular formation of
German strong verbs with vowel gradation. To this
end, instances in the dataset should be annotated
for the verb’s token frequency in German.

Unfortunately, the plots of video games are very
different from everyday life in the real world;
therefore, token frequencies of words in walk-
throughs are necessarily skewed. For example,
avatars in first- and third-person shooters and a
number of role-playing games do not eat, but es-
sen ‘to eat’ is a strong verb with vowel grada-
tion in German, hence one of the target verbs.
If the token frequencies for this and other target
verbs had been taken from the walkthrough cor-
pus, the results of the analysis would have been
skewed as well. In order to avoid this, verb to-
ken frequencies needed to be extracted from refer-
ence corpora (DeReWo5; Projekt Wortschatz Uni-
versität Leipzig6), frequency dictionaries (Jones
and Tschirner, 2006; Ruoff, 1990), and frequency
counts provided in a dictionary of German (Duden
online7).

3.7 Annotation for persistence

A close reading of some of the texts in the cor-
pus revealed that the specific form of the imper-
ative may in part depend on the preceding con-
text. Benedikt Szmrecsanyi explained that lan-
guage users are “creatures of habit” and tend to
reuse words or patterns whenever possible (2005;
2006). This “persistence” strategy may be at work

5http://www1.ids-mannheim.de/kl/projekte/methoden/
derewo.html

6http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/
7http://www.duden.de/woerterbuch/

in the formation of the imperative singular of the
strong verbs with vowel gradation as well.

Imperative singular forms of German verbs can
usually occur as a suffixed or unsuffixed variant:
red!/ rede! ‘talk!’, renn!/ renne! ‘run!’, steh!/
stehe! ‘stand!’. Similarly, the analogical e-stem
variants of strong verbs with vowel gradation can
occur with or without the suffix -e: nehm!/ nehme!
‘take!’; however, the i-stem variant is never suf-
fixed: nimm! It seemed that the authors of the
walkthroughs developed a “routine”, so that when
they had used the suffixed variants of one or sev-
eral consecutive verbs, e.g. laufe ... gehe ... ver-
lasse, they wished to add a suffix to the following
imperative singular form as well. If this next verb
was a strong verb with vowel gradation, the author
has no choice but to use the suffixed analogical e-
stem variant because a suffixed i-stem imperative
singular variant of these verbs does not exist. Ex-
amples (4) and (5) illustrate this persistence effect
of suffixed and unsuffixed previous imperatives.

(4) -e→ -e
“2. Stelle deine Gäste einander vor und
verkupple sie.
3. Gebe deinen Gästen genügend zu
trinken, indem...”
(ps2/playboy-mansion/2260012)

(5) -ø→ -ø
“Nach der Cutszene, geh-ø zu Junes und
geh-ø in die TV-Welt. Sobald du drin-
nen bist sprich-ø mit Rise um den let-
zten Boss zu suchen.”
(ps2/persona-4/3379622)

In order to test this hypothesis, all instances of im-
perative singular forms of strong verbs with vowel
gradation in the dataset need to be annotated for
the form of imperative singular occurrences in
their preceding context. As the interface which
was created for the walkthrough corpus does not
incorporate context queries, all imperative singu-
lar forms preceding the target forms in the dataset
were searched and annotated manually.

4 Joys

The compilation of the walkthrough corpus and
the search for and annotation of relevant instances
of the target construction presented many chal-
lenges. Results which would otherwise not have
been obtained, however, by far outweigh the costs
of manual labour. Not only did the corpus study

31



reveal frequency and persistence effects on imper-
ative singular formation of the strong verbs with
vowel gradation, but these results also served as
input for a subsequent experimental study.

4.1 Results of the corpus study

After removing all false hits, the final dataset com-
prised 1939 observations of imperative singular
forms of strong verbs with vowel gradation, i.e.
instances of the established i-stem variant and the
suffixed and unsuffixed analogical e-stem variants.
Mixed-effects regression models were fitted on the
dataset in order to determine which of the anno-
tated predictor variables had an influence on stem
vowel choice and suffixation of the imperative sin-
gular forms.

As expected, verb token frequency has a sig-
nificant effect on stem vowel choice: imperative
singular forms of lower frequency verbs show a
high probability of occurring with the analogical
e-stem, while higher frequency verbs retain the es-
tablished i-stem. The Conserving Effect of high
token frequency in analogical change is thus con-
firmed for morphological change-in-progress in
German (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Conserving Effect of verb token fre-
quency

The analysis also affirmed that the suffixation of
the imperative forms (and thereby indirectly stem
vowel choice) is significantly influenced by the oc-
currence of suffixed or unsuffixed imperative sin-
gular forms prior to the target imperatives: Imper-
ative singular forms of strong verbs with vowel
gradation show a high probability of being suf-
fixed (e.g. nehme) when they are preceded by
other suffixed imperative singular forms. Unsuf-
fixed variants of the imperative singular of these
verbs (e.g. nimm, nehm) occur more often af-
ter other unsuffixed imperative singular forms (see

examples 4 and 5). This effect is reinforced when
the previously occurring verb itself is a strong verb
with vowel gradation, e.g. nehme following gebe
or nimm following gib.

4.2 Experimental Study

The Conserving Effect of high token frequency
is generally explained on the basis of “entrench-
ment” (Langacker, 1987, 59): through repeated
use, the imperative forms of higher frequency
verbs have stronger mental representations than
those of lower frequency verbs. Therefore, the
forms of higher frequency verbs are more quickly
retrieved from memory than the forms of lower
frequency verbs. The longer they take to re-
trieve, the higher is the probability that the speaker
forms the imperative in analogy to the weak verb
paradigm. An instance of recent language change,
such as the example of imperative singular forma-
tion examined in the present paper, is an excellent
test case for the validity of this assumption.

In the experiment conducted as part of the cur-
rent project, participants’ reactions to the estab-
lished i-stem and analogical e-stem imperative sin-
gular variants, presented in verbs of different to-
ken frequency, were measured. Once it was known
from the corpus study that, in addition to the pre-
dictor verb token frequency, the presence of suf-
fixed or unsuffixed imperative singular forms prior
to the target imperative has a significant influ-
ence on the formation of the imperative singular
of strong verbs with vowel gradation, this poten-
tially disturbing persistence effect could be elimi-
nated in the experiment and stimulus design. Fur-
thermore, the corpus study showed up trends with
regard to the influence of dialect on imperative for-
mation (3.3) which inspired the inclusion of par-
ticipant groups from different dialect areas in or-
der to test this notion more systematically than
was possible in the corpus study itself. Finally,
sentences adapted from walkthrough texts can ac-
commodate a large number of verbs from diverse
semantic fields without appearing too absurd to the
participants. Thus, the corpus texts served yet an-
other purpose.

5 Suggestions for future research

The text type used in the present investigation was
identified through the coincidence that the author
relied on walkthroughs in order to complete sev-
eral video games and was therefore aware of the

32



high number of imperative singular forms con-
tained in texts of this kind. In other studies, suit-
able web-specific genres/ text types may be identi-
fied by performing pilot searches on the web or in
existing large web corpora and inspecting whether
instances of a target construction predominate in a
particular text type or web register. The situation
might be further improved by attempts at recognis-
ing and classifying as many web registers as pos-
sible and identifying linguistic patterns associated
with them (cf. Egbert and Biber, 2013; Biber et
al., 2015).

As concerns the compilation of a corpus for a
linguistic study, this task should preferably be del-
egated to a person who has experience with work-
ing with a linguistic corpus or is familiar with the
kinds of questions linguists wish to answer with
the help of corpora. In the current study, the pres-
ence of an ”intermediary” or ”translator”, i.e. a
linguist with extended IT knowledge, proved help-
ful while the research assistant was instructed on
how to compile the walkthrough corpus (cf. 3.1).
At the same time, the intermediary could answer
the author’s questions about how the corpus and
its query interface are created.

However, even the best assistant (and inter-
mediary) has to rely on the needs and demands
which the employing researcher expresses, who
in turn has to know the website(s) and features
of the specific text type very well. If the web-
site spieletipps.de would have been more thor-
oughly inspected before corpus compilation, the
time stamps for walkthroughs could have been ex-
tracted primarily from the member profile pages;
only if they were not available there, the pro-
gramme would have to resort to the release date
of the video game and the member registration
date as a proxy (3.2). Similarly, as explained
above, the persistence variables were manually an-
notated (3.7), i.e. the verb class and suffixation
of imperative singular forms in the preceding con-
text and the textual distance to the target imper-
ative form were searched and counted by hand.
Slight changes to the crawler could have reduced
the amount of manual labour in both annotation
steps. As the analysis of corpus data is at least
as time-consuming as the compilation of a corpus,
researchers might be tempted to push compila-
tion forward before knowing the included sources
well enough. The present investigation illustrates
clearly that the manual effort which can be avoided

outweighs the costs of a thorough inspection of
potential corpus texts, e.g. particular websites.

The analysis of sociolinguistic patterns of varia-
tion according to authors’ age, gender and location
only revealed trends in the present corpus study.
In such cases, conducting additional studies, for
example a psycholinguistic experiment (4.2) is an
effective way of consolidating or falsifying these
trends.

6 Conclusion

Even though the challenges of using web-based
corpora for analysing recent language change
seem to outweigh the joys in the present con-
tribution, this is largely due to the fact that the
former have been more elaborately discussed in
order to serve as advice for researchers of sim-
ilar phenomena in future. Some of the man-
ual labour explained above might be increased in
web-specific genres of the walkthrough kind and
cannot be avoided completely, such as extracting
frequency data from reference corpora or other
sources. Other drawbacks of the present corpus
have been avoided in the compilation of large ex-
isting web-based corpora: for example, the DE-
COW (German web corpus by COW; Schäfer,
2015) is annotated for meta information like the
“last modified” date. And yet others may be
avoided by tailoring the corpus compilation pro-
cess to the specific object of study, e.g. adjusting
or training the TreeTagger on a target construction.

Nevertheless, it cannot be stressed too often
that the walkthrough corpus offered data without
which work on the present project would not have
been possible. A bit of manual labour (after hours)
was rewarded with many invaluable insights from
the corpus analysis. Not only do these results ex-
plain the present stage of the change-in-progress
in imperative formation of strong verbs with vowel
gradation, but they also find their repercussions in
the design of a subsequent experimental study.

Acknowledgements

Work on the present PhD project (including the
compilation of the walkthrough corpus and pay-
ment for participants in the experiment) was
funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
through the Research Training Group GRK DFG
1624 ”Frequency Effects in Language”.

I would like to thank three anonymous WAC-X
reviewers for their helpful comments.

33



References
Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Adriano Ferraresi,

and Eros Zanchetta. 2008. The WaCky Wide Web:
A Collection of Very Large Linguistically Processed
Web-Crawled Corpora. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 43:209–226. [deWaC].

Douglas Biber, Jesse Egbert, and Mark Davies. 2015.
Exploring the composition of the searchable web: a
corpus-based taxonomy of web registers. Corpora,
10:11–45.

Joan Bybee and Sandra Thompson. 1997. Three fre-
quency effects in syntax. In Matthew L. Juge and
Jeri L. Moxley, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-
Third Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics
Society: General Session and Parasession on Prag-
matics and Grammatical Structure, pages 378–388.

Dudenredaktion, editor. 2009. Duden - Die Gram-
matik: unentbehrlich für richtiges Deutsch. Duden-
verlag, Mannheim and Wien and Zürich.

Jesse Egbert and Douglas Biber. 2013. Developing a
User-based Method of Web Register Classification.
In Proceedings of the 8th Web as Corpus Workshop,
pages 16–23.

Joan B. Hooper. 1976. Word frequency in lexi-
cal diffusion and the source of morphophonologi-
cal change. In William Christie, editor, Current
progress in historical linguistics, pages 95–105.
North Holland, Amsterdam.

Randall L. Jones and Erwin Tschirner. 2006. A Fre-
quency Dictionary of German: Core Vocabulary for
Learners. Routledge, London.

Ronald W. Langacker. 1987. Foundations of cognitive
grammar: vol. 1: Theoretical Prerequisites. Stan-
ford University Press, Stanford.

Christian Mair. 2012. From opportunistic to system-
atic use of the web as corpus. In Terttu Nevalainen
and Elisabeth Traugott, editors, The Oxford Hand-
book of the History of English, pages 245–255. Ox-
ford University Press, New York.

Arno Ruoff. 1990. Häufigkeitswörterbuch gesproch-
ener Sprache. Niemeyer, Tübingen.

Roland Schäfer. 2015. Processing and querying large
web corpora with the COW14 architecture. In Pro-
ceedings of Challenges in the Management of Large
Corpora, pages 28–34. [DECOW14].

Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in Part-of-
Speech Tagging with an Application to German. In
Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, pages
1–9. [TreeTagger].

Thomas Schmidt. 2014. Gesprächskorpora und
Gesprächsdatenbanken am Beispiel von FOLK und
DGD. Gesprächsforschung, 15:196–233. [DGD].

Benedikt Szmrecsanyi. 2005. Language users as crea-
tures of habit: A corpus-based analysis of persis-
tence in spoken English. Corpus Linguistics and
Linguistic Theory, 1(1):113–150.

Benedikt Szmrecsanyi. 2006. Morphosyntactic per-
sistence in spoken English. A corpus study at the in-
tersection of variationist sociolinguistics, psycholin-
guistics, and discourse analysis. Trends in Linguis-
tics. Studies and Monographs. De Gruyter, Berlin
and New York.

34


