



















































Syntactic methods for negation detection in radiology reports in Spanish


Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 156–165,
Berlin, Germany, August 12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Syntactic methods for negation detection in radiology reports in Spanish

Viviana Cotik1 and Vanesa Stricker1 and Jorge Vivaldi2 and Horacio Rodriguez3
1Departamento de Computación, FCEyN, UBA, Argentina, {vcotik, vstricker}@dc.uba.ar

2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, UPF, Barcelona, Spain, jorge.vivaldi@upf.edu
3Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, UPC, Barcelona, Spain, horacio@lsi.upc.edu

Abstract

Identification of the certainty of events
is an important text mining problem. In
particular, biomedical texts report medical
conditions or findings that might be fac-
tual, hedged or negated. Identification of
negation and its scope over a term of in-
terest determines whether a finding is re-
ported and is a challenging task. Not much
work has been performed for Spanish in
this domain.

In this work we introduce different algo-
rithms developed to determine if a term
of interest is under the scope of negation
in radiology reports written in Spanish.
The methods include syntactic techniques
based in rules derived from PoS tagging
patterns, constituent tree patterns and de-
pendency tree patterns, and an adaption
of NegEx, a well known rule-based nega-
tion detection algorithm (Chapman et al.,
2001a). All methods outperform a sim-
ple dictionary lookup algorithm developed
as baseline. NegEx and the PoS tagging
pattern method obtain the best results with
0.92 F1.

1 Introduction

Text mining and natural language processing
(NLP) techniques have been applied to the
biomedical domain for a long time. Automatic
identification of relevant terms in medical reports
is a preliminary step for indexing and for search
tools and it is useful for clinical, educational and
research purposes.

A clinical condition mentioned in a biomedical
text does not necessarily mean that a factual condi-
tion is reported, since the term or terms referring to
the condition could be under the scope of negation

or epistemic modality markers (hedges). For ex-
ample, in ”no lymphadenopathies were detected”,
”no ... were detected” indicates that the medical
condition (”lymphadenopathy”) is negated.

We refer to language constructions that denote
negations as negations or triggers and to medical
conditions and observations made about a partic-
ular illness in medical examinations as findings or
terms of interest.

According to (Chapman et al., 2001b), many of
the medical conditions described in unstructured
texts in medical health records are negated. For
this reason, the detection of negations in texts of
the biomedical domain is an important task in the
field of NLP, called BioNLP. Scope of negation
has also received attention in other domains (Wie-
gand et al., 2010; Potts, 2011; Wor, 2010).

In this work we implement five techniques: 1)
a simple approach, used as baseline, that deter-
mines if a finding is negated based on the pres-
ence of a negation term and a finding in the same
sentence. The negation term is detected by dictio-
narylookup of negation terms; 2) an adaptation of
NegEx to Spanish; the use of negation rules that
were created based on 3) PoS tagging patterns, 4)
constituent tree patterns, and 5) dependency tree
patterns. Our goal is to decide which of the imple-
mented methods is the best to automatically detect
negations of important findings tagged in radiol-
ogy reports written in Spanish.

Our methods are applied to Spanish and to a
particular domain: radiology. This domain (and
particularly our dataset) has the characteristic of
having short reports, with usually short sentences,
using informal language, containing non-standard
abbreviations, and with highly noisy text. As far
as we know, of our methods only NegEx has been
implemented for Spanish and our implementation
obtains better results. Using a Spanish dataset
presents some challenges: we had to build a cor-

156



pus and annotate it, syntactic parsing tools are
less developed for languages other than English,
and translations needed for the development of the
work incorporates errors.

Experiments were performed over a dataset pre-
pared from a set of ultrasonography reports written
in Spanish, that have been previously tagged auto-
matically with a tool based on RadLex1, a specific
radiology lexicon. A fragment of a tagged ultra-
sonography report in Spanish and its translation to
English can be seen below: ”Pancreas: tamano
y ecoestructura normal. Retroperitoneo vascu-
lar: sin <finding>alteraciones</finding>. No se
detectaron <finding>adenomegalias </finding>.
(...)”(”Pancreas: normal size and echotexture.
Vascular retroperitoneum: without <finding>
changes </ finding>. No <finding> lym-
phadenopathies </finding> were detected.(...) ”).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents previous work in the detection
of negation terms in the medical domain. In Sec-
tion 3 we present our main contributions, by ex-
plaining the methods and datasets used. Section
4 shows the results of evaluating each of the al-
gorithms with the testing dataset. Finally, Discus-
sions, Conclusion and Future Work are presented.

2 Previous work

The use of information retrieval techniques for au-
tomatically indexing narrative medical reports and
creating terminological resources has been present
at least since mid-late 90s (Aronson et al., 1994;
Rindflesch and Aronson, 1994; Sundaram, 1996).

In order to determine if a finding mentioned
in a narrative medical report is under the scope
of negation, (Chapman et al., 2001a) developed
NegEx, a simple algorithm based on regular ex-
pressions that obtained very good results for En-
glish. Several methods were built upon this simple
algorithm. (Wu et al., 2011) developed a word-
based radiology report search engine based in a
modification of NegEx. (Harkema et al., 2009)
developed ConText, based in NegEx, employing
a different definition for the scope of triggers and
adopting it to different type of medical reports.
NegEx has been adapted to Swedish (Skeppst-
edt, 2011), French (Deléger and Grouin, 2012),
Dutch (Afzal et al., 2014), and Spanish for clin-
ical records written in that language (Costumero
et al., 2014) and radiology reports (Stricker et al.,

1http://www.radlex.org/

2015). The NegEx lexicon has been extended for
Swedish, French and German (Chapman et al.,
2013).

Syntactic methods have also been used. (Huang
and Lowe, 2007) construct manually grammar
rules using Part of Speech tagging in order to de-
tect negations in radiology reports. (Uzuner et al.,
2009) compare a NegEx extension with a machine
learning technique that uses lexical and syntactic
information using two corpora of discharge sum-
maries and one of radiology reports. (Mehrabi
et al., 2015) use dependency parsing to reduce
NegEx False Positives. (Sohn et al., 2012) ap-
plies techniques of dependency parsing to detect
negations. Therefore he compiles negation rules
derived from the dependency paths.

Finally, machine learning techniques are also
used for the negation detection task. (Cruz Dı́az
et al., 2010) compare these techniques to a regular
expression-based method. (Morante and Daele-
mans, 2009) use them in order to establish the
scope of negation in biomedical texts. (Rokach et
al., 2008) perform automatic negation identifica-
tion in clinical reports by means of extracting au-
tomatically regular expressions and patterns from
annotated data and using them to create a learning
method.

Several challenges have been performed on this
topic. CoNLL 2010 Shared Task: Learning to
Detect Hedges and Their Scope in Natural Lan-
guage Text (Farkas et al., 2010), 2010 i2b2 NLP
challenge, focused on the negation and uncertainty
identification (Uzuner et al., 2011) and SEM 2012
Shared Task: Resolving the Scope and Focus of
Negation(Morante and Blanco, 2012).

3 Methods

In this section we introduce the different methods
developed to detect negations in radiology reports
written in Spanish. The idea underlying syntac-
tic techniques is to identify patterns of negations,
manually compile negation rules, and use them
to determine if a finding is under the scope of a
negation or not. These methods used rules that
were elaborated based on: 1) PoS tag patterns,
2) constituent tree (or shallow parsing) patterns of
of the sentences and 3) dependency tree patterns
(paths obtained from the dependency parsing of
sentences). Rules were evaluated with the testing
dataset.

Our methods only take into account the sen-

157



tence where the term of interest appears in order
to determine whether it is negated or not, i.e. it
does not use information of other sentences.

3.1 Dictionary lookup algorithm

This simple algorithm developed is based on the
lookup in the text of a list of negations marked by
the expert radiologist as usual negation terms used
in radiology reports. Sentences containing tagged
findings where a negation appears (in any order)
are tagged as Negated, and those with findings and
without negations are tagged as Affirmed. This
algorithm will be used as baseline.

3.2 The NegEx algorithm

NegEx algorithm for negation detection takes as
input medical records with tagged findings and
looks for phrases (triggers) that are mostly used
to denote negation, for example ”no signs of”. It
checks if the phrase is applied to negate the find-
ing or disease using rules that take into account
the distance among the finding and the negation
phrase.

The set of triggers provided by the NegEx
tool2 was translated using automatic translation3

(since translation is an expensive task and we are
not experts in the domain) and revised by two
non-domain experts. Those triggers that were
not correctly translated were eliminated or cor-
rected. Given that English lacks grammatical gen-
der, while Spanish has two (male and female), ad-
ditional trigger instances were generated due to
inflectional properties (for example from ”no” to
”ningún” ”ninguna”). NegEx triggers are divided
into: pseudo negation phrases, negation terms,
termination terms and conjunction terms. A la-
bel is used to classify each trigger in one of these
groups. Triggers were classified according to their
use.

This implementation differs from others (Cos-
tumero et al., 2014; Stricker et al., 2015) (and is
part of our contribution) mainly in that:

• tests were performed with two different trig-
ger sets: 1) NegEx translated triggers (de-
scribed in previous paragraph). A total of 210
translated triggers were obtained. 2) triggers
obtained by combining translated triggers, a

2https://code.google.com/p/negex/.
3Google Translate https://translate.google.com/

set of bi and trigrams4, and a list of triggers
provided by a physician expert in the radiol-
ogy domain (a total of 350 triggers),

• some end of scope triggers were added,

• coordinated negations, that were not taken
into account in the English, nor in the Span-
ish versions were included as a trigger (ni -
nor-) and NegEx algorithm was modified to
include this term.

3.3 POS tagging patterns

Tags were assigned to each word of the sentence
in order to determine the Part of Speech with the
use of Freeling analyzer (Carreras et al., 2004). A
small set of sentences were used to define negation
patterns based on PoS tags. Patterns defined were:

• no +...+ verb + ...+ <finding>

• no +...+ <finding>

• sin +...+ <finding>

• sin +...+ <finding> +...+ ni +...+ <finding>

• no +...+ <finding> +...+ ni +...+ <finding>

• no +...+ verb +...+ <finding> +...+ ni +...+
<finding>

where ”...” denotes zero or more words. The
algorithm looks for these patterns in PoS tagged
sentences. If a pattern occurs, the sentence is
labeled as Negated indicating that the finding is
under the scope of negation. For example: For
”no se detectaron adenomegalias” we would have
”RN P00CN000 VMIS3P0 FINDING”, that satis-
fies the pattern ”no +...+ verb + ...+<finding>”.

RN represents ”no”. The words ”sin” (without)
and ”ni” (nor) do not have specific negation tags
(they are tagged as preposition and conjunction).
That is why we look for these words directly in
the text, instead of looking for some specific tag
that represents them.

4Bi and trigrams were obtained from the 85600 report
dataset (see Data subsection). Those, whose first word was
no, were selected and the resulting were manually analyzed
in order to discard those that did not correspond to triggers.
94 triggers were obtained.

158



3.4 Constituent tree patterns
Shallow parsing identifies the constituents of a
sentence. We use this technique to manually elab-
orate patterns based on the phrase constituents
avoiding the use of word distance to determine
negation scope. Following patterns were used
(patterns and phrase constituents5 are shown):

1) no... verb... <finding>

/ neg
S - grup-verb
\ sn→grup-nom-mp→ w-ms→<finding>

2) without <finding>

S - grup-sp-> prep->sin
\ sn→grup-nom-mp→w-mp→<finding>

3) no <finding>

S - neg
\ sn→grup-nom-mp→w-mp→<finding>

4) no ... verb ... <finding> nor ... <finding>

/ neg
/ grup-verb

S − sn→grup-nom-mp→w-mp→<finding>
\ coord
\ sn→grup-nom-mp→w-mp→<finding>

5) <finding>: no

/ sn→grup-nom-ms→w-ms→<finding>
S - no-c→:
\ neg

Three steps were performed to obtain patterns
from the constituent tree: 1) the finding is replaced
by ”finding” and using Freeling the shallow pars-
ing tree is obtained. 2) the tree structure is repre-
sented in an array. 3) the array is used to check
whether the sentence satisfies one of the patterns
previously discovered. For example, in order to
check if a sentence satisfies pattern 1, it is verified
if node with label S has as children a node with

5neg stands for ”no”, grup-verb for ”ver-
bal syntagma”, sn for nominal syntagma. See
https://github.com/iknow/FreeLing/blob/master/doc/

grammars/esCHUNKtags for further references.

label neg, a node with label grup-verb and a node
with label sn (in this order), and if node with la-
bel sn has as child a node with label grup-nom-ms,
which also has as child a node with label w-ms and
this has as child the node with content finding.

3.5 Dependency tree patterns

Dependency parsing allows us to know the syntac-
tic structure of a phrase. The method is based on
syntactic context and does not take into account
word distance to determine negation scope. Nega-
tion patterns are manually created based on syn-
tactic dependency paths in the following way:

1. a small set of sentences containing all known
type of negations (no, ni, sin) (no, nor, with-
out) were parsed with a MATE dependency
parser (Bohnet et al., 2013)6. A parse tree
was obtained for each sentence (see Fig. 1),

2. negation terms were located automatically
and an algorithm was developed in order to
retrieve the path in the dependency tree be-
tween the negation term and the finding pre-
viously tagged,

3. paths were analyzed and a set of patterns that
imply negation of findings was manually de-
veloped, and

4. patterns obtained in the previous step were
tested with the testing dataset.

Figure 1: Example of a dependency parser tree for
a sentence of the form of Pattern 1 (P1).

Patterns detected were following:

6The model was obtained as indicated in (Arias et al.,
2014).

159



• P1: sentences of the form ”no se detectaron
adenomegalias” (The Spanish structure of
this particular sentence corresponds to NEG
(no) verb finding). The negation has a depen-
dency relation with a word that the finding
depends on.

• P2: sentences of the form ”retroperito-
neo vascular: sin alteraciones” (vascu-
lar retroperitoneum: without alterations)
(anatomical part: NEG (sin) <finding>).
The finding depends of ”sin”.

• P3: sentences like ”via biliar no dilatada”
(bile duct not delated) (anatomical part NEG
<finding>, where NEG is ”no”).

• P4: sentences of the form ”No se de-
tectaron colecciones ni liquido libre” (nei-
ther collections nor free liquid has been de-
tected) (NEG(no) verb <finding> NEG(ni)
<finding>).

Data
Two datasets were used. The analysis dataset to
infer the patterns of each of the proposed methods
used and the test dataset to test the methods and
compare their results.

Our original dataset is composed of about
85600 reports of ultrasonography studies per-
formed in a public hospital. Reports are written in
Spanish in non-structured format. They are brief
(approximately five lines each) and they state what
was found in the study performed on the patient.
Text is noisy, characterized by frequent typos, ab-
breviations, sentences which are not syntactically
well-formed and there is lack of punctuation in
some cases.

The process to obtain both datasets was the fol-
lowing: An algorithm was used in order to au-
tomatically detect terms of interest (findings in
the radiology domain) in the reports (Cotik et al.,
2015). Then, a sentence tokenization was per-
formed using NLTK (Loper and Bird, 2002). Only
sentences with findings are selected (randomly) to
create analysis and testing datasets. Finally, those
sentences were annotated as containing negation
with scope over the term of interest (Negated) or
not (Affirmed). For the creation of the testing
dataset a set of sentences were randomly selected
and the following steps were performed: 1) we
verified manually that sentences were neither the

same (among them) nor very similar, 2) segmenta-
tion issues -e.g. different sentences that were not
separated by the tokenizer- were corrected, 3) sen-
tences with findings tagged by the algorithm and
that were not considered actual findings by the
annotators were eliminated and replaced by new
ones. The analysis set is composed of 979 sen-
tences and the testing set of 1000 sentences.

Findings detection
There are various inventories that serve as a basis
to detect relevant terms in medical reports. Some
of them are ICD107, a standard diagnostic ter-
minology for epidemiology, health management
and clinical purposes; and SNOMED CT8, a clin-
ical health terminology ontology -all of them in-
cluded in UMLS (Unified Medical Language Sys-
tem)9 Metathesaurus-; and RadLex10, a lexicon
centered only on radiology terms. SNOMED CT
and ICD-10 are available in Spanish, RadLex is
only available in English and in German. Pre-
vious implementations vary the type of inventory
used to detect terms (UMLS, adaptations of ICD-
10 and MeSH11, among others). The information
extraction algorithm we used to detect findings is
based on the appearance of RadLex pathological
terms in the reports. RadLex was chosen because
it is the only lexicon specifically developed for
the radiology domain, which is the domain under
study. It has the disadvantage that no Spanish ver-
sion has been developed, so it had to be translated
from English. The translation is not an easy task,
since, particularly, in the medical domain, there
exist terms that are used differently in Spanish and
in English.

Annotations
Working with languages different than English
has, among others, the difficulty of the lack of data
and tools. In this case we do not have a Gold Stan-
dard for validating the reliability of the new model.
Annotating is an expensive task, and domain ex-
perts are not always available. The datasets build
had to be annotated. The analysis dataset was an-
notated by two non-experts and the testing dataset

7http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2016/en
8http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct
9http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/. UMLS is a set

of files and software that bring together many health and
biomedical vocabularies and standards to enable interoper-
ability between computer systems.

10http://rsna.org/RadLex.aspx
11http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh

160



by an expert of the radiology domain and two non-
experts.

All sentences (with previously tagged findings)
were annotated as Affirmed if it is possible to infer
that the finding is present in the patient, Negated
if the finding is absent, Probable if it is not cer-
tain that the finding is present, but it probably is,
and Doubt if the finding corresponds to the past
or if it is not clear for the annotator if the find-
ing is present or not. For results evaluation Proba-
ble annotations were considered as Affirmed, since
physicians are interested in retrieving them, and
sentences categorized as Doubt were replaced by
other sentences (that were also annotated). In the
cases where there was no agreement among an-
notators, usually the radiology-expert criteria was
respected. In case of doubt the annotation criteria
was revised by the annotators and the annotation
was done according to the results of this process.

In both cases, the annotation process was per-
formed in two stages, so that we could revise
the annotation criteria. Some annotated sentences
were overlapped, with the objective to calculate
the Inter Rater Agreement (IRA) between annota-
tors to measure their level of agreement. As mea-
sure for that goal we calculated Cohen’s Kappa co-
efficient (Cohen, 1960).

Figure 2 shows the number of sentences anno-
tated by each annotator individually and by more
than one annotator in the testing dataset. Kappa
coefficient (κ) was calculated for two sets: 1) 100
sentences annotated by non-expert annotator 1 and
radiology domain expert (annotator 3), and 2) 100
sentences annotated by non-expert annotator 2 and
annotator 3. Table 1 shows κ measure for the test-
ing dataset. κ measure for the analysis dataset had
similar results.

Figure 2: Number of sentences annotated by dif-
ferent annotators in the testing dataset.

annotators κ
A1 and A3 0.97
A2 and A3 0.96

Table 1: IRA of expert/non-experts annotation in
the testing dataset. A1 and A2 are computer sci-
ence experts (not medical, nor linguistic experts),
A3 is a radiology expert.

4 Results

Table 2 shows the performance of our NegEx
adaptation and our syntactic methods to Spanish
compared to the baseline. We show the best re-
sult of NegEx (obtained from the trigger set built
from a combination of translated triggers, bi and
trigrams and a list of terms suggested by the ra-
diology expert). F1 using NegEx only with trans-
lated triggers was similar: 0.91 (81 TP, 76 FP, 144
FN and 699 TN). Results of NegEx with the orig-
inal triggers (translated) and without the addition
of coordinated negations (and tested with another
dataset) can be seen in (Stricker et al., 2015).

Precision, Recall and F1 measure are the usual
measures in the field and here are based on the
interpretation of finding real negations. F1 mea-
sure balances precision -how many findings iden-
tified as negated, are actually negated- and re-
call -proportion of the negated findings that were
retrieved-. Accuracy is the rate of correctly classi-
fied sentences. True Positive (TP) refers to terms
negated by the Gold Standard and correctly pre-
dicted by the methods. See Table 4 for the mean-
ing of False Positive (FP), True Negative (TN) and
False Negative (FN).

5 Discussion

All algorithms outperform dictionary lookup, our
baseline algorithm. This makes sense, since the
baseline does not take negation scope into account.
For example in ”ectasia pielica izquierda sin cam-
bio de diametro postmiccional” what is negated
(cambio de diametro postmiccional) is not the
finding (ectasia). The baseline algorithm detects
the negation (sin) and assumes wrongly that the
finding is negated. This scope problem is solved
in the rest of the algorithms developed.

Constituent tree patterns and dependency tree
patters were tested assuming that they would per-
form better than PoS tagging patterns and NegEx
in the detection of the negation scope, since in

161



Algorithm Pattern NegEx POS Constituent Dependency
Matching (adapted Tagging Tree Tree
(baseline) to Spanish) Patterns Patterns Patterns

TP 201 220 219 200 194
FP 107 31 31 19 61
FN 24 5 6 25 31
TN 668 744 744 756 714
Accuracy 0.87 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.91
Precision 0.65 0.88 0.88 0.91 0.77
Recall 0.89 0.98 0.97 0.89 0.86
F1 0.75 0.92 0.92 0.90 0.81

Table 2: Performance of different algorithms with testing dataset composed by 1000 sentences.

Algorithm NegEx NegEx NegEx
(Costumero et al., 2014) (Stricker et al., 2015) (adapted)

F1 0.74 0.67 0.73

Table 3: Performance of different implementations of NegEx with (Costumero et al., 2014) dataset

predicted Neg predicted Aff
actual Neg TP FN
actual Aff FP TN

Table 4: actual stands for Gold Standard annota-
tion, predicted for algorithms output.

these two methods we have not to consider fixed
windows of words between the negation and the
term of interest (as we do consider in NegEx) or
each word that forms the sentence (as we do in
our PoS tagging method). Nevertheless NegEx
and the PoS Tagging based method have better re-
sults (not very different from constituent tree pat-
terns). We understand that two factors influence
these results: 1) the sentences of the reports are
usually in our case relatively short (average: 14
words, longest: 74 words). This explains why
having fixed windows of 6 words might be good
enough for our data and suggests that we do not
need to use more complex methods, that are in-
dependent of the length of the sentence and that
do not fix word distance. That is, the linear anal-
ysis performed by PoS tagging patterns might be
enough for these sentences. Dependency and con-
stituent parsing, that perform an analysis based on
the sentence structure, might be left for the most
complex sentences. 2) MATE, the tool used to
do the dependency parsing was trained based on a

general language12 that includes documents of the
medical domain, but that is not restricted to it13.

Regarding NegEx, another implementation was
tried with a very reduced trigger set, in order to
try to do it domain independent (see Table 3). F1
is similar when tested with our test set (0.91 in-
stead of 0.92), and it is also similar (0.73) to F1
obtained by (Costumero et al., 2014) (0.74) and
better than F1 obtained by (Stricker et al., 2015)
(0.67) when tested with Costumero’s dataset. This
demonstrates that our NegEx implementation with
a reduced trigger set could be used for data differ-
ent that radiology reports.

Further analysis of results shows that: 1) the ad-
dition of a line of code to NegEx algorithm allows
us to handle complex negations. E.g. in ”no se
detectaron finding1 ni finding2” (”finding 1 and
finding 2 were not detected”), when ”finding2” is
the term of interest. Those kinds of negations are
also handled correctly by the patterns built from
our syntactic methods, but in some cases nega-
tions are much more complex and are not correctly
parsed by the dependency parsing algorithm. 2)
Sometimes, negations are not affecting the term of
interest, but a modifier of it and the algorithm tags
the term of interest as negated. For example, in
”pancreas: no visible por abundante gas” (”pan-
creas: not visible due to abundant gas”). The

12https://www.iula.upf.edu/corpus/corpusuk.htm
13Besides, the area of documents in the medical domain is

broad and the ones used differ from radiology reports.

162



trigger ”no” (”not”) is applied to ”visible” (”visi-
ble”), but the term of interest is ”gas” (”gas”). 3)
Constituent tree patterns method has shown to fail
where there are no punctuation signs. This shows
that the characteristics of the noisy text makes the
success of syntactic techniques more complicated.

NegEx shows to perform better than a previ-
ous implementation for radiology reports in Span-
ish (Stricker et al., 2015) and similar than an
implementation for general medical texts also in
Spanish (Costumero et al., 2014) (see Section 5).
Our Pos-Tagging results and the ones reached by
(Huang and Lowe, 2007) for radiology reports in
English are similar. They obtain 0.90 recall, 0.97
precision and 0.93 F1, while we obtain 0,88 recall,
0,97 precision and 0,92 F1. (Sohn et al., 2012) re-
sults for negation detection in clinical texts in En-
glish using dependency parsing are also similar to
our dependency parser results. They obtain 0.74
recall, 0.97 precision and 0.84 F1, while we obtain
0.77, 0.86 and 0.81 for each of these measures.
Nevertheless, it is not easy to compare results with
existing papers, since languages and corpora are
not the same.

6 Conclusion

Considering the different methods implemented
for the detection of negations of terms of inter-
est in radiology reports written in Spanish, NegEx
has good results, but only considers partially the
negation scope over the target term (since it is cal-
culated based on a fixed-size window of words).
Among the pattern methods tested, PoS tags al-
lows us to study the ordering of words in phrases
containing negations and to elaborate patterns
based on them. But they are dependent on each
word of the sentence. Based on a reduced dataset
it is not easy to model all type of forms that
sentences with negated findings may have. Con-
stituent and dependency tree pattern methods dif-
fer from the PoS tagging method in that the whole
structure of the sentence is used. Constituent tree
method segments the sentence in syntactic related
groups. These cases do not have to take so many
detail into account and are easier to build. Both
methods differ in that the second takes into ac-
count the dependence among each type of word
in the sentence. Dependencies are modeled in a
tree and each edge is labeled with the relation that
exists among the words.

Detection negation in medical reports is a chal-

lenging task as it is characterized by short sen-
tences and informal language often noisy. Fur-
thermore, tools for Spanish in general are less de-
veloped than in other languages even more in this
specific subdomain. For example, the availabil-
ity of a large corpus of annotated medical reports
(and specifically those in the radiology domain)
would enable to have a better behavior of all lan-
guage related tools (in particular POS tagging as
well as constituent/dependency parsers). RadLex,
is a comprehensive lexicon of radiology terms that
was chosen to detect findings due to its adequacy
to our domain of interest. Its translation to Spanish
was made locally but unfortunately includes some
errors, such as the order of resulting words and
issues derived from ambiguity. All these issues
made negation detection more difficult.

The high IRA obtained among the annotations
performed by the specialist and two non-specialist
could imply that this particular type of reports
of short sentences could be annotated by non-
specialists in the domain. We consider this is an
important result, given the scarcity of resources.

We consider that having short sentences (ours
have an average of 14 words) may contribute to
the fact that NegEx and PoS tagging methods have
similar results than the constituent tree method and
better results than dependency tree method. An
analysis should be performed with more complex
sentences in order to test what happens in those
cases. The effectiveness of syntactic techniques
depends on the compliance of the text to the lan-
guage grammatical rules. The results obtained
support this asseveration.

7 Future Work

We are currently working in analyzing improve-
ments to the dependency parser patterns and we
are performing a further analysis of results, eval-
uating alternative methods (voting method, where
the classification (Affirmed/Negated) is based on
the tag received by most of the methods) and eval-
uating the possibility of implementing a hybrid
methodology -taking the best of NegEx and syn-
tactic methods- that reduces errors in order to ob-
tain better F1.

We would like to extend our work for dealing
with hedges and we plan to continue using these
methods for other type of medical reports written
in Spanish.

163



References
Zubair Afzal, Ewoud Pons, Ning Kang, Miriam

Sturkenboom, Martijn Schuemie, and Jan Kors.
2014. ContextD: an algorithm to identify contex-
tual properties of medical terms in a Dutch clinical
corpus.

Blanca Arias, Núria Bel, Mercé Lorente, Montser-
rat Marimón, Alba Milà, Jorge Vivaldi, Muntsa
Padró, Marina Fomicheva, and Imanol Larrea.
2014. Boosting the Creation of a Treebank. Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14),
9(Suppl 11):775–781.

Alan R. Aronson, Thomas C. Rindflesch, and
Browne C. Allen. 1994. Exploiting a Large The-
saurus for Information Retrieval. In Proceedings
of RIAO: Recherche d’Information Assistée par Or-
dinateur. Conférence, pages 197–217, New York,
USA.

Bernd Bohnet, Joakim Nivre, Igor Boguslavsky,
Richard Farkas, Filip Ginter, and Jan Hajic. 2013.
Joint morphological and syntactic analysis for richly
inflected languages. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics(TACL), 1(Suppl
11):415–428.

Xavier Carreras, Isaac Chao, Llus Padr, and Muntsa
Padr. 2004. Freeling: An open-source suite of lan-
guage analyzers. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’04).

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,
Gregory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001a.
A Simple Algorithm for Identifying Negated Find-
ings and Diseases in Discharge Summaries. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics, 34(5):301–310.

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,
Gregory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001b.
Evaluation of Negation Phrases in Narrative Clin-
ical Reports. In Proceedings of AMIA, Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Association Annual Sym-
posium, page 105, Washington, DC, USA.

Wendy W. Chapman, Dieter Hillert, Sumithra Velupil-
lai, Maria Kvist, Maria Skeppstedt, Brian E. Chap-
man, Mike Conway, Melissa Tharp, Danielle L.
Mowery, and Louise Deléger. 2013. Extending the
NegEx Lexicon for Multiple Languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th World Congress on Medical and
Health Informatics, pages 677–681, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for
Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Roberto Costumero, Federico López, Consuelo
Gonzalo-Martı́n, Marta Millan, and Ernestina
Menasalvas. 2014. An Approach to Detect
Negation on Medical Documents in Spanish. In

Brain Informatics and Health, volume 8609, pages
366–375.

Viviana Cotik, Darı́o Filippo, and José Castaño. 2015.
An Approach for Automatic Classification of Radi-
ology Reports in Spanish. In Proceedings of 15th
MEDINFO, pages 634–638.

Noa P. Cruz Dı́az, Manuel Jesús Maña López, and Jac-
into Mata Vázquez. 2010. Aprendizaje Automático
Versus Expresiones Regulares en la Detección de la
Negación y la Especulación en Biomedicina [Ma-
chine Learning versus Regular Expressions in Nega-
tion and Speculation Detection in Biomedicine].
Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural [Natural Lan-
guage Processing], 45:77–85.

Louise Deléger and Cyril Grouin. 2012. Detect-
ing negation of medical problems in French clini-
cal notes. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT
International Health Informatics Symposium, pages
697–702.

Richárd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, György Móra, János
Csirik, and György Szarvas. 2010. The CoNLL-
2010 Shared Task: Learning to Detect Hedges and
Their Scope in Natural Language Text. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 1–12, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Henk Harkema, John N. Dowling, Tyler Thornblade,
and Wendy W. Chapman. 2009. ConText: An Al-
gorithm for Determining Negation, Experiencer, and
Temporal Status from Clinical Reports. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 42(5):839–851, October.

Yang Huang and Henry J Lowe. 2007. A Novel Hybrid
Approach to Automated Negation Detection in Clin-
ical Radiology Reports. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 14(3):304–311.

Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002. NLTK: The
Natural Language Toolkit. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 Workshop on Effective Tools and Method-
ologies for Teaching Natural Language Processing
and Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 63–
70, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Saeed Mehrabi, Anand Krishnan, Sunghwan Sohn,
Alexandra M Roch, Heidi Schmidt, Joe Kesterson,
Chris Beesley, Paul Dexter, C Max Schmidt, Hong-
fang Liu, et al. 2015. Deepen: A negation detection
system for clinical text incorporating dependency re-
lation into negex. Journal of biomedical informat-
ics, 54:213–219.

Roser Morante and Eduardo Blanco. 2012. Sem 2012
shared task: Resolving the scope and focus of nega-
tion. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics - Volume 1:
Proceedings of the Main Conference and the Shared
Task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Se-
mEval ’12, pages 265–274, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

164



Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2009. A
Metalearning Approach to Processing the Scope of
Negation. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 21–29, Boulder, Colorado.

Christopher Potts. 2011. On The Negativity of
Negation. In Proceedings of Semantics and Lin-
guistic Theory, volume 20, pages 636–659, New
Brunswick, New Jersey.

Thomas C. Rindflesch and Alan R. Aronson. 1994.
Ambiguity Resolution While Mapping Free Text to
the UMLS Metathesaurus. In Proceedings of the
18th Annual Symposium on Computer Application
in Medical Care, pages 240–244, Washington, DC,
USA.

Lior Rokach, Roni Romano, and Oded Maimon. 2008.
Negation Recognition in Medical Narrative Reports.
Journal of Information Retrieval, 11(6):1–50.

Maria Skeppstedt. 2011. Negation Detection in
Swedish Clinical Text: An Adaption of NegEx to
Swedish. Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 2(Suppl
3):S3, January.

Sunghwan Sohn, Stephen Wu, and Christopher G
Chute. 2012. Dependency parser-based negation
detection in clinical narratives. AMIA Summits on
Translational Science proceedings AMIA Summit on
Translational Science, 2012:1–8.

Vanesa Stricker, Ignacio Iacobacci, and Viviana Cotik.
2015. Negated Findings Detection in Radiology
Reports in Spanish: an Adaptation of NegEx to
Spanish. In IJCAI - Workshop on Replicability and
Reproducibility in Natural Language Processing:
adaptative methods, resources and software, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Anita Sundaram. 1996. Information Retrieval: A
Health Care Perspective. Bulletin of the Medical Li-
brary Association, 84(4):591–593.

Özlem Uzuner, Xiaoran Zhang, and Tawanda Sibanda.
2009. Machine Learning and Rule-based Ap-
proaches to Assertion Classification. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association :
JAMIA, 16(1):109–115.

Özlem Uzuner, Brett R. South, Shuying Shen, and
Scott L. DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/VA Challenge
on Concepts, Assertions, and Relations in Clinical
Text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association : JAMIA, 18(5):552–556.

Michael Wiegand, Alexandra Balahur, Benjamin Roth,
Dietrich Klakow, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. A
survey on the role of negation in sentiment analysis.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and
Speculation in Natural Language Processing, NeSp-
NLP’10, pages 60–68, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

2010. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation
and Speculation in Natural Language Processing,
NeSp-NLP ’10, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Andrew S. Wu, Bao H. Do, Jinsuh Kim, and Daniel L.
Rubin. 2011. Evaluation of Negation and Un-
certainty Detection and Its Impact on Precision
and Recall in Search. Journal of digital imaging,
24(2):234–242, April.

165


