








































Microsoft Word - NLP4LA_LENApaper_revised.docx


 
 
 

 

The Language ENvironment Analysis (LENA) System: 
A Literature Review 

 
Hillary Ganek & Alice Eriks-Brophy 

Department of Speech-Language Pathology 
University of Toronto 

hillary.ganek@mail.utoronto.ca & a.eriks.brophy@utoronto.ca 
 
 

Abstract 

The Language ENvironment Analysis (LE-
NA) System is a relatively new recording 
technology that can be used to investigate typ-
ical child language acquisition and popula-
tions with language disorders. The purpose of 
this paper is to familiarize language acquisi-
tion researchers and speech-language 
pathologists with how the LENA System is 
currently being used in research. The authors 
outline issues in peer-reviewed research based 
on the device. Considerations when using the 
LENA System are discussed.   

1 Introduction 

In the past, research on language acquisition in-
volved short recordings or periods of in-person ob-
servations (Hart & Risley, 1995; Keller et al., 
2007). This form of data collection could be cum-
bersome and required extensive time for analysis. 
The costs and logistics associated with these meth-
odologies might be particularly unwieldy. The 
Language ENvironment Analysis (LENA) System 
is a new tool created to address these issues by 
combining a wearable audio recorder with auto-
mated vocal analysis software (LENA Research 
Foundation, 2014). The LENA Foundation’s initial 
intention was to provide a device that parents could 
use to easily monitor the amount of language stim-
ulation their child receives, however, the utility of 
such technology in the research world did not go 
unnoticed. In hopes of gathering the most natural-
istic samples possible, researchers are currently us-
ing the LENA System to investigate various as-
pects of language acquisition including the effects 
of parent-child talk, television, bilingualism, com-
munication disorders, and intervention among oth-
ers (Christakis et al., 2009; Greenwood, Thiemann-

Bourque, Walker, Buzhardt, & Gilkerson, 2011; 
Marchman, Martinez, Hurtade, Gruter, & Fernald, 
2016; Suskind et al., 2015; VanDam et al., 2015).  

1.1 The LENA System 
The LENA System’s hardware includes a digital 
language processor (DLP) that can audio record for 
up to 16 hours.  It measures 3-3/8” x 2-3/16” x 
1/2”, weighs less than two ounces, and consists of 
a display screen, a USB port for uploading, and 
two buttons for powering and recording.  The pro-
cessor is held in a specially designed t-shirt or vest 
with a pocket on the front to secure the device.  
The audio quality is a 16-bit channel at a 16kHz 
sample rate (Ford, Baer, Xu, Yapanel, & Gray, 
2008). Once the recording is complete it can be up-
loaded to the LENA software. Recordings are 
stored in the software by participant, allowing re-
peated recordings of one participant to be saved 
and compared over time. Once uploaded and re-
charged, the same participant or a new participant 
can use the DLP again without affecting the data 
stored in the software. The LENA System automat-
ically segments the recordings into 12 categories 
including speakers, environmental sounds, and si-
lence using Gaussian mixture models. A daylong 
audio file typically consists of 20,000 to 50,000 
segments (VanDam et al., 2016). The software 
then estimates: adult word count (AWC), child vo-
calization count (CVC), and conversational turn 
count (CTC). The amount of background noise, 
electronic sounds, meaningful speech, and silence 
that were part of the child’s listening environment 
are reported as percentages of the total sound pre-
sent in the day and are displayed in user-friendly 
LENA generated graphs along with the AWC, 
CVC, and CTC. Additional details can be extracted 
using ADEX software provided by the LENA 
Foundation (Ford, et al., 2008; VanDam, Ambrose, 
& Moeller, 2012). 



 
 
 

 

				In	addition	to	the	raw	data	counts,	Richards,	
Gilkerson,	Paul,	&	Xu	(2008)	discuss	the	Auto-
matic	Vocalization	Assessment	(AVA)	generated	
by	the	LENA	System,	which	is	correlated	with	
traditional	expressive	language	standard	scores	
including	those	from	the	Preschool	Language	
Scale	-	4th	Edition	(PLS-4)	(Zimmerman,	Steiner,	
&	Pond,	2002)	and	the	Receptive-Expressive	
Emergent	Language	Test	-	3rd	Edition	(REEL-3)	
(Bzoch,	League,	&	Brown,	2003).		To	learn	more	
about	the	LENA	hardware	and	software,	consult	
Ford	et	al.	(2008)	and	Oller	et	al.	(2010).	
				In	order	to	establish	reliability,	human	tran-
scribers	coded	70	full	day	English	recordings	
and	their	results	were	compared	with	those	ob-
tained	by	the	automated	software	(Xu, Yapanel, 
Gray, & Baer, 2008).	This	data	was	collected	as	
part	of	the	Natural	Language	Study	(NLS),	the	
LENA	Foundation’s	normative	study	(Gilkerson	
&	Richards,	2008).	The	LENA	System	correctly	
identified	82	and	76	percent	of	the	segments	
humans	coded	as	adult	speech	and	child	vocali-
zations	respectively,	indicating	reasonable	lev-
els	of	agreement	(Christakis	et	al.,	2009;	Warren	
et	al.,	2010;	Xu	et	al.,	2008;	&	Zimmerman	et	al.,	
2009).	Validity	has	also	been	shown	in	Spanish,	
French,	Mandarin,	Korean,	and	Vietnamese	(Ca-
nault, Le Normand, Foudil, Loundon, & Thai-Van, 
2015; Ganek & Eriks-Brophy, in revision; Gilker-
son et al., 2015; Pae et al., 2016; Weisleder & Fer-
nald, 2013). Although these studies show high fi-
delity, recording in a child’s natural environment 
can produce a degraded auditory signal that may 
negatively impact validation. Possible causes of in-
terference might include environmental factors 
such as background noise, overlapping speech, and 
reverberation, speaker variation like pitch or voice 
quality, and hardware variability. Although LENA 
clothing has been rigorously tested, fabric sound 
absorption rates may also impact accuracy (Xu, 
Yapanel, & Gray, 2009).	
 

2 Data Collection & Analysis 

The authors undertook an extensive search for 
peer-reviewed studies that reported use of the LE-
NA System. The search occurred over a four-year 
period (2012-2016) and included numerous data-
bases including Medline, PsycINFO, and Google 

Scholar. The search term “LENA System” was 
most commonly used. Articles were also found 
through the LENA Foundation website which 
keeps a list of recently published papers as well as 
through conversations with other LENA users. Ar-
ticles that dealt primarily with validation, the de-
velopment of new algorithms, or that used the DLP 
to record but did not use the commercially availa-
ble software were excluded. The primary purpose 
of this paper is to familiarize readers with how the 
LENA System is used to investigate language ac-
quisition and disorders. Therefore, articles that fo-
cused on the LENA System itself, rather than these 
populations, are not included in the present discus-
sion. Two articles were found that did not rely on 
the LENA software. Ota and Austin (2013) record-
ed for two hours pre- and post-treatment. They 
chose 15-minute segments coded by human coders 
for child turns, adult words, and conversational co-
hesiveness. Wang, Miller, and Cotina (2014), on 
the other hand, created and validated their own al-
gorithms for identifying the type of talk in a class-
room without using pre-existing LENA software. 
     The first author reviewed each article and ex-
tracted information regarding each study’s meth-
ods and participants. Each variable was chosen 
through conversations with LENA users or by 
identifying issues that arose within the literature it-
self. The following is a list of the data that was re-
viewed:  

 
Methods Participants 
Study Type Number of Participants 
LENA Variable Ages 
Number of Recordings Languages 
Length of Recordings Socio-Economic Status 
Time Intervals Analyzed Additional Needs 
Additional Assessments  
Additional Software  
Transcription Software  
Human Coders  

 

Table 1: Areas reviewed 
 

3 Results: Methods 

Thirty-eight articles were found using the criteria 
listed above. Below are the results from the table 
regarding the methods of reporting presented in 
LENA studies. An upcoming publication by Ganek 
and Eriks-Brophy will provide greater detail re-



 
 
 

 

garding the literature consulted in this review as 
well as in depth methodological analyses. 
 

3.1 Type of Study 
Studies were divided into three types:  comparative 
studies that examined LENA results between at 
least two cohorts, longitudinal studies that meas-
ured children’s progress over time, and cross-
sectional studies that investigated children’s ability 
at a specific point in time. Sixteen of the papers re-
viewed were comparative. They generally matched 
typically developing children to children with a 
communication disorder, though some compared 
language groups or treatment versus control 
groups. Eleven longitudinal studies evaluated child 
development over time. Both comparative and lon-
gitudinal studies measured the effects of treatment. 
Treatments including traditional speech therapy 
(Warren et al., 2010), formal established treatment 
programs such as Hanen’s It Takes Two to Talk 
(Manolson, 1992; Weil & Middleton, 2011), and 
treatment associated specifically with provision of 
LENA feedback (Pae et al., 2016; Suskind et al., 
2013). The remaining eleven cross-sectional stud-
ies often relied on a single day of recording. 
 

3.2 LENA Variables 
As mentioned above, the LENA System provides 
information on the adult word count (AWC), child 
vocalization count (CVC), conversational turn 
count  (CTC), an automatic vocalization assess-
ment (AVA), and background noise.  Four studies 
used LENA ADEX software to collect additional 
variables such as male versus female adult speech 
(Johnson, Caskey, Rand, Tucker, & Vohr, 2014; 
Ramirez-Esparza, Garcia-Sierra, & Kuhl, 2014; 
Sacks et al., 2013; Warren et al., 2010). Abney, 
Warlaumont, Haussman, Ross, & Wallot (2014) 
used ADEX to identify child vocal onset times be-
fore running a custom script. However, currently 
published research seems to focus primarily on 
AWC along with CVC and CTC. Eight articles uti-
lized information about background noise and only 
two focused on AVA scores.  

3.3 Length of Recordings 
VanDam et al. (2015) reported length of recording 
in total hours recorded across all participants while 

most reported the average number of 
hours/minutes each participant recorded. Full 16-
hour recordings, the longest a LENA DLP can 
produce, were most commonly used (M=12.3, 
SD=3.3). The LENA System software requires re-
cordings to be at least 10 hours long to complete a 
full automatic analysis. While 25 studies fell be-
tween 10 and 16 hours long, some studies asked 
participants to record for much shorter windows of 
time. In these cases, LENA analysis alone was 
usually not relied upon.  Instead, researchers con-
ducted their own analysis unrelated to the LENA 
variables, or added additional assessments. 

3.4 Number of Recordings 
Most of the papers recorded a single day (M=7.4, 
SD=11.6).  Those that recorded for more than that 
usually did so to counteract any potential observa-
tions effects (Sacks et al., 2013) or to engage in 
longitudinal data collection (Weisleder & Fernald, 
2013). Two papers reported the total number of re-
cordings for all participants, while others presented 
the average for each individual.  

3.5 Interval of Analysis 
Some researchers chose to limit the amount of re-
cording they used in analysis, often times using 
LENA data to govern segments of interest (ex. 
high CVC; Oller, 2010). Some researchers selected 
5-minute segments, sometimes only looking at the 
first minute or 30 seconds (Jackson & Callender, 
2014; Ramirez-Esparza et al., 2014). In 20 cases, 
however, no interval is stated. It is assumed that a 
full day recording (10+ hours) was used for analy-
sis. 

3.6 Additional Data and Software 
LENA software is not always capable of providing 
all the data that researchers are looking for. Seven 
studies developed their own customized algorithms 
to locate their desired outcomes, such as vocal on-
set times (Abney et al., 2014; Warlaumont et al., 
2010), consonant and vowel counts per utterance 
(Xu, Richards, & Gilkerson, 2014), pitch and 
speaking rate (Ko, Seidl, Cristia, Reimchen, & 
Soderstrom, 2015), and classroom speakers (Wang 
et al., 2014). Praat (Boersm & Weenink, 2013) and 
SALT (Miller & Chapman, 2013), widely available 
software programs, have also been used for analyz-



 
 
 

 

ing speech sounds and language development 
(Burgess, Audet, & Harjusola, 2013; Ko, et al., 
2015).  

3.7 Human Transcription and Coding 
The LENA System does not provide a transcription 
of the recordings. However, researchers frequently 
find it helpful to transcribe the data for analysis. 
While some validation studies refer to transcription 
software (Canault, et al., 2015; Gilkerson et al., 
2015), none of the studies reviewed for this paper 
reported which tools were used in transcription.  
    About a quarter of the studies did not transcribe 
but instead simply coded recordings, marking per-
tinent information rather than providing a full tran-
script. Commonly coded variables included infant 
directed versus adult directed speech, activity, and 
language spoken, among others. 

4 Participants 

This section refers to the participants observed in 
each study. Please refer to the upcoming publica-
tion by Ganek and Eriks-Brophy for further detail. 

4.1 Sample Size 
The Natural Language Study (NLS) (Gilkerson & 
Richards, 2008), the LENA Foundation’s norma-
tive study, included 329 participants. Seven studies 
used NLS data either as their primary source or as 
a comparative group. Studies for which new data 
was collected ranged from between one (Oller, 
2010) and eighty-one (Wood, Diehm, & Callender, 
2016) participants (M=24.9, SD=18.9). 
 

4.2 Participant Age 
The LENA System is validated from age 2 months 
to 48 month (Gilkerson & Richards, 2008). Twen-
ty-five of the studies reviewed here had partici-
pants within this age range. Nine, however, ex-
panded to five year olds and two observed children 
younger than two months old (Caskey, Stephens, 
Tucker, & Vohr, 2011; 2014), while two other 
studies had cohorts above the age range including 
older adults (Li, Vikani, Harris, & Lin, 2014; 
Vohr, Watson, St. Pierre, & Tucker, 2014). The 
expanded age ranges were dealt with by enlisting 
human coders, ignoring specific LENA outcomes, 

and providing additional evidence that participants 
had language ages within the normative range.  

4.3 Language Use 
Expansion outside of English speaking populations 
has been limited. Most studies include only Eng-
lish speakers, though there have been five studies 
that have included English-Spanish bilingual chil-
dren and six including monolingual Spanish speak-
ers. There has also been one study conducted in 
Mandarin (Zhang et al., 2015) and one with a tri-
lingual English-Spanish-German speaker (Oller, 
2010). This study relied on a human coder rather 
than the LENA results, avoiding a validation issue. 
 

4.4 Socio-Economic Status (SES) 
Socio-economic status (SES) is a measure of a per-
son’s social position based on income, education, 
and occupation. Hart and Risley (1995) famously 
reported a correlation between SES, language 
stimulation, and language abilities. Their study, 
and those like it, inspired the creation of the LENA 
System. Even though the impact of SES on lan-
guage outcomes is widely known, few of the stud-
ies reported here were able to control for it. Ten 
studies failed to report SES and another six report-
ed that comparative groups were matched either to 
each other or to census data. Six represented a 
range of maternal educational levels. Nine of the 
studies reported that their samples skewed towards 
high SES participants while five others reported 
collecting only low SES participants. Two studies 
also reported an SES mismatch between compara-
tive groups (Jackson & Callender, 2014; Wood, et 
al., 2016). 
 

4.5 Populations 
Most LENA System use in research has been con-
ducted on typically developing children. However, 
eight studies have focused on children with autism 
spectrum disorder, six on hearing loss, one on 
Down syndrome, two on pre-term infants, and 
three on language delay.  

4.6 Settings 
Due primarily to the normed age ranges for the 
LENA System, most studies included recordings 
completed in the home. Six papers conducted re-



 
 
 

 

cordings in a classroom setting specifically to 
evaluate possible differences in language stimula-
tion in a different environment (Burgess, et al., 
2013; Dykstra et al., 2012; Irvin, Hume, Boyd, 
McBee, & Odom, 2013; Jackson & Callendar, 
2014; Soderstrom & Wittebolle, 2013; Wiggin, 
Gabbard, Thompson, Goberis, & Yoshinaga-Itano, 
2012). 

5 Discussion 

LENA researchers are working to identify the best 
methods for integrating this new tool into the ex-
ploration of child language acquisition. Their work 
can help those new to the use of automated vocal 
analysis recognize best practices for LENA use. 

When reading LENA studies, it is important to 
be aware of the LENA Foundation’s normative 
study, the NLS. Almost 20 percent of the studies 
reviewed for this paper rely on this cohort either 
for primary data or comparative information. In-
terpreting LENA results, then, relies on the read-
er’s understanding of the methods and participants 
included in the NLS. Additionally, repeatedly rely-
ing on a single data set can reduce the generaliza-
bility of research results. 

To aid in the diversification of LENA data sets, 
a consortium of LENA researchers have recently 
joined forces to create Homebank, an online repos-
itory for LENA recordings (VanDam et al., 2016). 
The goal of this database is to provide researchers 
interested in advancing commercially available au-
tomated vocal analysis systems with extensive 
LENA data. The LENA System is capable of 
providing information on a variety of different as-
pects of a child’s auditory environment, however, 
there are a number of features it does not capture. 
For example, 12 of the articles coded LENA re-
cordings by hand for adult versus child-directed 
speech. Homebank encourages researchers as well 
as clinicians to donate data so that those interested 
in creating algorithms to identify variables similar 
to this one can do so. 

At this point in time, the LENA System does not 
produce a transcription of the audio recording. 
Many researchers are still transcribing recordings 
by hand, which allows them to capture qualitative 
information like vocabulary and syntax along side 
quantitative data. Hart and Risley (1992), among 
others, found that quality of language input was as 
important if not more important than the quantity 

of language input. Without involving a significant 
amount of human-power, however, aspects that 
might characterize the quality of the interaction 
could be difficult to extract. Researchers and clini-
cians alike would appreciate reliable transcription 
software. Unfortunately, technology is not current-
ly able to reach this goal. Outside of the LENA 
Foundation’s own transcription protocol (Gilker-
son, Coulter, & Richards, 2008), LENA literature 
rarely specifies how transcription was completed 
(transcriptionist training protocols, software pro-
grams utilized, etc.). Providing adequate details 
about transcription could allow for better replica-
tion and generalization of results in the future. 

While LENA software has proven to have high 
fidelity; it can still make coding errors (VanDam et 
al., 2012).  Occasionally it will mislabel a speaker. 
For example, a woman who raises her vocal pitch 
may be coded as a child (Gilkerson et al., 2015).  
Additionally, when two speakers are talking at the 
same time (overlapping talk) the LENA software 
discards both utterances (Warren et al., 2010; Xu et 
al., 2008).  In busy homes with large families, dis-
carding overlapping speech would likely underes-
timate the true number of interactions that oc-
curred. Similar issues may also impact LENA re-
sults obtained in classroom settings. However, both 
Xu et al. (2009) and Warren et al. (2010) state that 
recordings of 12 hours or longer provide reliably 
accurate LENA results. Labeling errors caused by 
speaker confusion or overlapping sounds are likely 
to have less significance in a large data set. Re-
cordings over multiple days may also increase ac-
curacy (Xu et al. 2009). Longer recordings are 
therefore more likely to demonstrate accuracy in 
LENA results, while also providing representation 
of language over multiple activities and settings. 
However, shorter recordings may be more accessi-
ble for human coding or transcription of elements 
the software is incapable of calculating. Addition-
ally, recordings less than 10 hours cannot be com-
pared to normative data provided by the device, 
which may be helpful in language acquisition re-
search. 

LENA studies conducted in classroom settings 
are particularly susceptible to reduced accuracy 
due to interfering noise and overlapping speech. 
Soderstrom and Wittebolle (2013) point out, how-
ever, that a reduced AWC due to overlap may ac-
tually portray a more accurate picture of the infor-



 
 
 

 

mation a young child or a child with a language 
disorder is able to process given the difficulties as-
sociated with listening in noise (Crandell, Smaldi-
no, & Flexer, 2005; Newman, 2010). All of the 
studies in classrooms reviewed here included mul-
tiple students in each classroom. It is unclear, how-
ever, if the DLPs were worn at the same time. Fu-
ture studies might consider comparing or synthe-
sizing data taken from multiple participants at the 
same time and location to investigate validity. 

Families recording with the LENA System at 
home, without supervision by the researcher, are 
free to turn off the device at any time, leading to 
variability in length. Eight studies controlled for 
length of recordings by looking at per hour/minute 
rates rather than reporting full recording results.  
Three others relied on the first 12 hours recorded, a 
measure that the LENA System provides automati-
cally (Vohr et al., 2014; Warren et al., 2010; Zhang 
et al., 2015). Additionally, four studies removed 
periods during which the child was sleeping to 
control for long segments of silence (Marchman, 
Martinez, Hurtado, Gruter, & Fernald, 2016; Sacks 
et al., 2013; Suskind et al., 2013; Weisleder & Fer-
nald, 2013). In order to obtain the most reliable re-
sults, LENA users must consider how they might 
control for length of recording. 
     Some researchers required more information 
than the LENA System is able to provide. Twenty-
six papers engaged in a mixed methods approach, 
combining LENA results with other types of data 
including standardized language assessments, in-
terviews, daily logs, and other technology such as 
Actograph (Santos-Lozano et al., 2012) and look-
while-listening tasks (Fernald, Zangle, Portillo, & 
Marchman, 2008). Combining automated vocal 
analysis with other data collection methods can 
provide a more holistic picture of a child’s lan-
guage development. 

Expanding the use of the LENA System to larg-
er more diverse populations may help to increase 
our understanding of language acquisition. The 
majority of LENA studies were conducted with 
English speaking families in the United States. 
LENA data collected from families that speak lan-
guages other than English might inform our under-
standing of language acquisition universally. Addi-
tionally, the LENA System is only normed be-
tween 2 and 48 months old so data for children 
outside this range may be invalid. However, Wang 

et al. (2014) showed that the LENA System was 
accurate in identifying child speakers up to grade 
four. Increasing the age range for LENA use could 
provide information on language use across the 
lifespan. Future LENA research should also strive 
to achieve a representative range of SES groups. 

Furthermore, this tool has been used with chil-
dren who have a variety of communication disor-
ders including hearing loss, autism, Down Syn-
drome, and language delays. Future research might 
consider replicating and increasing the types of 
communication disorders being investigated so that 
more families could benefit from the LENA Sys-
tem. It is also important to note, however, that 
many children with language disorders rely on vis-
ual languages and communication systems that will 
not be represented in LENA analysis. 

6 Conclusion 

Since the LENA System was first released, re-
searchers have been exploring its possible place in 
identifying and describing language acquisition 
and language disorders. It has already provided in-
triguing results about the natural language envi-
ronments of children from a number of different 
linguistic backgrounds and with a variety of com-
munication abilities. The LENA System is also be-
ing used as an intervention tool in many countries 
around the world. 
     Nevertheless, as the field continues to expand, 
LENA users must consider what the device’s true 
capabilities are. The LENA System is a remarkable 
tool for collecting data in a child’s language envi-
ronment. Understanding its strengths and weak-
nesses as well as the methods for its use will allow 
for enhanced interpretation of data contributing to 
the growth of the LENA System in both research 
and intervention settings. 

Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the Connaught In-
ternational Scholarship for Doctoral Students and 
the Ontario Graduate Scholarship for financial 
support.  They played no role in the construction of 
this paper. The LENA Research Foundation has 
not provided funding to the authors. 



 
 
 

 

References  
Abney, D., Warlaumont, A., Haussman, A., Ross, 

J., & Wallot, S. (2014).  Using nonlinear meth-
ods to quantify changes in infant limb move-
ments and vocalizations.  Frontiers in Psycholo-
gy, 5(771), 1-15.  

Burgess, S., Audet, L., & Harjusola-Webb, S. 
(2013).  Quantitative and qualitative characteris-
tics of the school and home language environ-
ments of preschool-aged children with ASD.  
Journal of Communication Disorders, 1-12. 

Bzoch, K., League, R., & Brown, V. (2003).  Re-
ceptive-Expressive Emergent Language Test (3rd 
ed.). Torrance, CA: Western Psychological Ser-
vices. 

Canault, M., Le Normand, M., Foudil, S., Loun-
don, N., Thai-Van, H. (2015).  Reliability of the 
Language ENvironment Analysis system (LE-
NATM) in European French. Behavior Research 
Methods, DOI 10.3758/s13428-015-0634-8. 

Caskey, M., Sephens, B., Tucker, R., & Vohr, B. 
(2014).  Adult talk in the NICU with preterm in-
fants and developmental outcomes.  Pediatrics, 
133(3), e578-e584. 

Caskey, M., Stephens, B., Tucker, R., & Vohr, B. 
(2011).  Importance of parent talk on the devel-
opment of preterm infant vocalizations.  Pediat-
rics, 128, 910-16. 

Christakis, D., Gilkerson, J., Richards, J., Zim-
merman, F., Garrison, M., Xu, D., Gray, S., & 
Yapanel, U. (2009). Audible television and de-
creased adult words, infant vocalizations, and 
conversational turns.  Archive of Pediatric & 
Adolescent Medicine, 163(6), 554-58. 

Crandell, C., Smaldino, J., & Flexer, C. (2005). 
Soundfield amplification: Applications to speech 
perception and classroom acoustics (2nd ed.) 
Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning. 

Dykstra, J., Sabatos-DeVito, Irvin, D., Boyd, B., 
Hume, K., & Odom, S. (2012). Using the Lan-
guage ENviroment Analysis (LENA) system in 
preschool classrooms with children with autism 
spectrum disorders. Autism, 17(5), 582-594. 

Fernald, A., Zangle, R., Portillo, A., & Marchman, 
V. (2008). Looking while listening: Using eye-
movements to monitor spoken language com-
prehension by infants and young children. In I. 
Sekerina, E.M. Fernandez, & H. Clahsen (Eds.), 
Developmental psycholinguistics: On-line 

methods in-children’s language processing (pp. 
97-135). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

Ford, M., Baer, C., Xu., Yapnel, U., & Gray, S. 
(2008). The LENA language environment analy-
sis system: audio specifications of the DLP-012 
(Technical Report LTR-03-2).  Boulder, CO: 
LENA Foundation. 

Ganek, H. & Eriks-Brophy, A. (in revision). A 
Concise Protocol for Validating Conversational 
Turn Count in Vietnamese. 

Gilkerson, J., Coulter, K., & Richards, J. (2008). 
Transcriptional analysis of the LENA natural 
language corpus (Technical Report No. LTR-06-
2). Boulder, CO: LENA Foundation. 

Gilkerson, J. & Richards, J. (2008).  The LENA 
natural language study (Technical Report LTR-
02-2). Boulder, CO: LENA Foundation.  

Gilkerson, J., Zhang, Y., Xu, D., Richards, J., Xu, 
X., Jiang, F., Harnsberger, J., & Topping, K. 
(2015). Evaluating LENA System performance 
for Chinese: A pilot study in Shanghai.  Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 
58, 445-452. 

Greenwood, C., Thiemann-Bourque, K., Walker, 
D., Buzhardt, J., & Gilkerson, J. (2011).  As-
sessing children’s home language environments 
using automatic speech recognition technology.   

Hart, B. & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differ-
ences in the everyday experience of young 
American children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. 
Brookes Publishing. 

Jackson, C. & Callender, M. (2014). Enviromental 
considerations: Home and school comparison of 
Spanish-English speakers' vocalizations. Topics 
in Early Childhood Special Education, 34(3), 
165-174. 

Johnson, K., Caskey, M., Rand, K., Tucker, R., & 
Vohr, B. (2014).  Gender differences in adult-
infant communication in the first months of life.  
Pediatrics, 134(6), e1603-e1610. 

Keller, H., Abels, M., Borke, J., Lamm, B., Su, Y., 
Wang, Y., & Lo, W. (2007). Socialization envi-
ronments of Chinese and Euro-American mid-
dle-class babies: Parenting behaviors, verbal 
discourses and ethnotheories. International 
Journal of Behavioral Development, 31(3), 210-
217.  

Ko, E., Seidl, A., Cristia, A., Reimchen, M., & 
Soderstrom, M. (2015). Entrainment of prosody 
in the interaction of mothers with their young 



 
 
 

 

children. Journal of Child Language, 43(2), 284-
309. 

LENA Research Foundation. (2014). The LENA 
Research Foundation.  Retrieved from 
http://www.lenafoundation.org/. 

Li, L., Vikani, A., Harris, G., & Lin, F., (2014).  
Feasibility study to quantify the auditory and 
social environment of older adults using a digi-
tal language processor.  Otology & Neurotology, 
35(8), 1301-1305. 

Manolson, A. (1992). It takes two to talk. Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada The Hanen Centre. 

Marchman, V., Martinez, L., Hurtado, N., Gruter, 
T., & Fernald, A. (2016). Caregiver talk to 
young Spanish-English bilinguals: Comparing 
direct observation and parent-report measures of 
dual-language exposure. Developmental Sci-
ence, 1-13. 

Miller, J. & Chapman, R. (2003). SALT: Systemat-
ic Analysis of Language Transcripts (v. 8.0) 
[computer software]. Madison, WI. 

Newman, R. (2010). The cocktail party effect in in-
fants revisited: Listening to one’s name in noise. 
Developmental Psychology, 41, 352-362. 

Oller, D. Kimbrough (2010). All-day recordings to 
investigate vocabulary development: A case 
study of a trilingual toddler.  Communication 
Disorders Quarterly, 31(4), 213- 222. 

Oller, D. Kimbrough, Niyogi, P., Gray, S., Rich-
ards, J., Gilkerson, J., Xu, D., Yapanel, U., & 
Warren, S. (2010). Automated vocal analysis of 
naturalistic recordings from Children with au-
tism, language delay, and typical development. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Scienc-
es of the United States of America, 107(30), 
13354-13359.  

Ota, C. & Austin, A. (2013). Training and mentor-
ing: Family child care providers’ use of linguis-
tic inputs in conversations with children. Early 
Childhood Research Quarterly, 28, 972-983. 

Pae, S., Yoon, H., Seol, A., Gilkerson, J., Richards, 
J., Ma, L., & Topping, K. (2016). Effects of 
feedback on parent-child language with infants 
and toddlers in Korea. First Langauge, DOI: 
10.1177/0142723716649273. 

Ramirez-Esparza, N., Garicia-Sierra, A., & Kuhl, 
P. (2014). Look who’s talking: Speech style and 
social context in language input to infants are 
linked to concurrent and future speech develop-
ment.  Developmental Science, 17(6), 880-891. 

Richards, J., Gilkerson, J., Paul, T., & Xu, D. 
(2008). The LENA automatic vocalization as-
sessment (Technical Report No. LTR-08-1). 
Boulder, CO: LENA Research Foundation. 

Sacks, C., Shay, S., Repplinger, L., Leffel, K., 
Sapolich, S., Suskind, E., Tannenbaum, S., & 
Suskind, D. (2013).  Pilot testing of a parent-
directed intervention (Project ASPIRE) for un-
derserved children who are deaf or hard of hear-
ing.  Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 
0(0), 1-12. 

Santos-Lozano, A., Torres-Luque, G., Marin,  
     P., Ruiz, J., Lucia, A., & Garatachea, N.  
     (2012).  Intermonitor variability of GT3X  
     accelerometer.  International Journal of  
     Sports Medicine, 33, 994-999. 
Soderstrom, M. & Wittebolle, K. (2013).  When do 

caregivers talk?  The influences of activity and 
time of day on caregiver speech and child vocal-
izations in two childcare environments.   PLoS 
ONE, 8(11), e80646. 

Suskind, D., Leffel, K., Graf, E., Hernandez, M., 
Gunderson, E., Sapolich, S., Suskind, E., Lein-
inger, L., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Levine, S. 
(2015). A parent-directed language intervention 
for children of low socioeconomic status: A ran-
domized controlled pilot study. Journal of Child 
Language, 43(2), 366-406. 

Suskind, D., Leffel, K., Hernandez, M., Sapolich, 
S., Suskind, E., Kirkham, E., & Meehan, P. 
(2013).  An exploratory study of “quantitative 
linguistic feedback”: Effect of LENA feedback 
on adult language production.  Communication 
Disorders Quarterly, 34(4), 199-209. 

VanDam, M., Ambrose, S. E., & Moeller, M. P. 
(2012).  Quantity of parental language in the 
home environments of hard-of-hearing 2-Year-
Olds.  Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Educa-
tion Advanced Access, 1-19. 

VanDam, M., Oller, K., Ambrose, S., Gray, S., 
Richards, J., Xu, D., Gilkerson, J., Silbert, N., & 
Moeller, M. (2015). Automated vocal analysis of 
children with hearing loss and their typical and 
atypical peers. Ear & Hearing, 36(4), e146-
e152. 

VanDam, M., Warlaumont, A., Bergelson E., Cris-
tia A., Soderstrom M., De Palma P., and 
MacWhinney, B. (2016). HomeBank: An online 
repository of daylong child-centered audio re-



 
 
 

 

cordings.  Seminars in Speech and Language, 
37(2), 128-141. 

Vohr, B., Watson, V., St Pierre, L., & Tucker, R. 
(2014).  The importance of language in the 
home for school age children with permanent 
hearing loss.  Acta Paediatrica, 103(1), 62-69. 

Wang, Z., Miller, K., & Cortina, K. (2014). Auto-
matic classification of activities in classrooms 
discourse. Computers and Education, 78, 115-
123.  

Warlaumont, A., Oller, K., Dale, R., Richards, J., 
Gilkerson, J., & Xu, D. (2010). Vocal interaction 
dynamics of children with and without autism.  
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of 
the Cognitive Science Society, 121-126. 

Warren, S., Gilkerson, J., Richards, J., Oller, K., 
Xu, D., Yapanel, U., & Gray, S. (2010).  What 
automated vocal analysis reveals about the vocal 
production and language learning environment 
of young children with autism. Journal of Au-
tism Developmental Disorders, 1-15.   

Weil, L. & Middleton, L. (2011). Use of the LENA 
tool to evaluate the effectiveness of a parent in-
tervention program. Perspectives on Language 
Learning and Education, 17, 108-111. 

Weisleder, A. & Fernald, A. (2013). Talking to 
children matters early language experience 
strengthens processing and builds vocabulary. 
Psychological Science, 24(11), 2143-2152. 

Wiggin, M., Gabbard, S., Thompson, N., Goberis, 
D., & Yoshinaga-Itano, C. (2012).  The school to 
home link: summer preschool and parents.  Sem-
inars in Speech and Language, 33(4), 290-296. 

Wood, C., Diehm, E., & Callender, M. (2016). An 
investigation of language environment analysis 
measures for Spanish-English bilingual pre-
schoolers from migrant low-socioeconomic-
status backgrounds. Language, Speech, and 
Hearing Services in Schools, 47, 123-134.  

Xu, D., Richards, J., & Gilkerson, J. (2014).  Au-
tomated analysis of child phonetic production 
using naturalistic recordings. Journal of Speech, 
Language, and Hearing Research, 57(5), 1638-
1650.  

Xu, D., Yapanel, U., & Gray, S. (2009).  Automatic 
childhood autism detection by vocalization de-
composition with phone-like units. The 2nd 
Workshop on Child, Computer and Interaction, 
1-7. 

Xu, D., Yapanel, U., Gray, S., & Baer, C. (2008). 
Signal processing for young child speech lan-
guage development.  Presented at The 1st Work-
shop of Child, Computer and Interaction, Cha-
nia, Crete, Greece. 

Zhang, Y., Xu, X., Jiang, F., Gilkerson, J., Xu, D., 
Richards, J., Harnsberger, J., Topping, K. 
(2015). Effects of quantitative linguistic feed-
back to caregivers of young children: A pilot 
study in China. Communication Disorders 
Quarterly, 37(1), 16-24. 

Zimmerman, F., Gilkerson, J., Richards, J., 
Christakis, D., Xu, D., Gray, S., & Yapanel, U. 
(2009). Teaching by listening: The importance 
of adult-child conversations to language devel-
opment. Pediatrics, 124, 342-349. 

Zimmerman, I. L., Steiner, V., & Pond, R. (2002).  
Preschool Language Scale (4th ed.). San Anto-
nio, TX: Psychological Corp


