








































Analysing the Integration of Semantic Web Features for Document
Planning across Genres

Marta Vicente
Department of Software
and Computing Systems
University of Alicante
Apdo. de Correos 99

E-03080, Alicante, Spain
mvicente@dlsi.ua.es

Elena Lloret
Department of Software
and Computing Systems
University of Alicante
Apdo. de Correos 99

E-03080, Alicante, Spain
elloret@dlsi.ua.es

Abstract

Language is usually studied and analysed
from different disciplines generally on the
premise that it constitutes a form of com-
munication which pursues a specific ob-
jective. The discourse, in that sense, can
be understood as a text which is con-
structed to express such objective. When
a discourse is created, its production is re-
lated to some textual genre, usually con-
nected with some pragmatic features, like
the intention of the writer or the audience
to whom is addressed, both conditioning
the use of language. But genres can be
considered as well as compounds of differ-
ent pieces of text with a certain degree of
order, each one seeking for more concrete
objectives. This paper presents a proposal
to learn such features as a way to generate
richer document plans, applying clustering
techniques over annotated documents.

1 Motivation and Research Context

The current research is carried out from a concep-
tion of Natural Language Generation (NLG) for
which the creation of a text requires an interme-
diate output called a document plan. It is by the
macroplanning stage that the system provides this
plan of selected and ordered content. At present,
our work is focused on how to elaborate that plan
in order to meet some requisites regarding flex-
ibility of the system: it should be able to pro-
duce different outcomes conditioned by the com-
municative goal, the audience,... the context, on
the whole. Henceforth, the main aim of our cur-
rent research is to enrich the pragmatic facet of the
NLG process. The expected outcome is a scheme
or ordering of the ideas that should be realised in

a set of cohesive and coherent sentences and para-
graphs.

According to some theories of the discourse
(Bakhtin, 2010; Halliday et al., 2014), genres can
be understood as social constructions that settle a
connection between the discourse and the situation
in which it is produced, reflected both in its struc-
ture and its content. According to Swavels (1990):

“A genre comprises a class of commu-
nicative events, the members of which
share some set of communicative pur-
poses. These purposes are recognised
by the expert members of the parent dis-
course community, and thereby consti-
tute the rationale for the genre. This
rationale shapes the schematic structure
of the discourse and influences and con-
straints choice of content and style.”

Besides, genres become interesting because they
are related to communicative purposes in different
manners, from a global viewpoint to fine-grained
levels. As an example, we can think on the case
of a person who is looking for recommendation
in review pages. Recommending would be the
main, global purpose of the text he consults when
it was created. But it is possible that the writer also
wanted to explain the motivation of the journey -
narrative, personal experience - or to describe the
facilities in order to complete his review. Narra-
tion, description, recommendation,... they repre-
sent low-level functions of the text related to the
intention of the writer and, in some cases, they can
be identified as different sets of sentences. This
lead us to the possibility of learning the structure
of the text and its features, which differs from one
genre to another. In reviews, the presence and or-
der of the parts is not strict.

Maybe one traveller does not share his personal
story, but also he describes the room and recom-



mends the brand, while another one first evaluates
and then describes. An example to illustrate this
can be found in table 1. Conversely, it would make
no sense to write a scientific article that reports the
results before explaining the methodology or not
explaining it at all, for example.

Review 1
Personal Experience:
On our last trip to Hawaii my husband and I...
As an added bonus, we were given...
We decided to take advantage of...
Description:
The lobby is adorned with lush gardens...
Alongside the gardens are tropical birds...
The rooms are spacious.
Recommendation:
If you are ever fortunate enough to visit
the beautiful island of Kauai, try to stay
at the H Regency, you won’t be disappointed.
Review 2
Description:
The W New York is on Lexington right...
The rooms are just as small as before...
The lobby of the hotel is also...
Personal Experience:
Being a corporate lawyer I travel...
The first time I was in a small room...
The second time I could not believe...
Description:
Although the room size is awful,
the hotel does have some nice touches.
Another benefit of the hotel is that...

Table 1: Review ordering from a functional ap-
proach. Just with the first words of the sentences
some characteristic features can be appreciated
(Verb tenses, person-thirdfirst-, ...)

Therefore, our hypothesis is that it is possible
to characterise subparts of a discourse (related to a
genre) according to their functionality and, at the
same time, learn about its (flexible) ordering. Due
to the lack of annotated corpora with discourse in-
formation about that communicative purposes, we
propose to work with unsupervised techniques to
achieve that goal. We expect to obtain the neces-
sary knowledge to produce appropriate document
plans. Taking into account several genres that nor-
mally exhibit a pre-defined or known-in-advance
structure, such as the case of news, Wikipedia
pages, or scientific article, we would be able to

validate our suggested approach in other textual
genres that lacks such well-defined structure a pri-
ori.

Our methodology relies on pattern detection
techniques. Until now, we have tried clustering
that does not require previous knowledge of the
number of clusters. Over an annotated corpus
we apply an Expectation-Maximisation (EM) al-
gorithm, having included within the features lin-
guistic information related to its placement.

The remainder of this paper is organised as fol-
lows. Section 2 summarises the related work con-
cerning text classification efforts and genre stud-
ies related to communication objectives. Section
3 describes the kind of linguistic lexical features
that we have been using in our experiments un-
til now. After that, section 4 describes some re-
sources coming from the Semantic Web environ-
ment that could complement and enrich those fea-
tures. Finally, section 5 describes the experiments
already performed and outlines future research op-
portunities.

2 Related Work

Back in 1997, Hearst tried to detect the struc-
ture of text using patterns of lexical co-occurrence
to identify paragraphs related to the same topic
(Hearst, 1997). In this case, term repetition proved
to be enough to detect subtopics in explanatory
texts, but did not include consideration about other
traits of the discourse (e.g. syntactic construc-
tions, verb tenses, number of adjectives in each
region) neither recovering more meaning further
than topic identification, as could be the purpose
intended on the paragraph(s). Besides, the author
remarked that the results had proved highly valu-
able when applied to explanatory text, but they
would be less significant for other text types.

From another point of view, Bachand (Bachand
et al., 2014) develops a research focused on the re-
lations between text-type, discourse structures and
rhetorical relations. Again, the experiments con-
ducted are implemented on a single type of fea-
ture, this time rhetorical relations and markers.
The good results obtained by the author indicate
that our approach, which is grounded in similar in-
tuitions, can reach comparable developments that
we expect will enrich our capacity for generating
accurate document plans.

Regarding reviews, most of the work developed
refers to sentiment analysis or polarity classifica-



tion (Cambria et al., 2013). A few research works
have been focused on the structure related to tex-
tual genres, relying on the Systemic Functional
Theory (Taboada, 2011). The relations of different
parts of the text with several purposes are revealed,
focusing their analysis on the domain of movie re-
views, and showing at the same time the variability
of the ordering in such type of documents.

Finally, a special mention must be done to
the Systemic Functional Theory (Halliday et al.,
2014). It provides a notion of genre that connects
situation types with semantic/lexico-grammatic
patterns from a conception of language highly re-
lated to its socio-semiotic origin. A textual typol-
ogy is depicted on this terms, connected as well
with the context of the discourse and the semantic
choices to organise it (Matthiessen, 2014). On the
other hand, and as a more precise example, the ty-
pology of processes that Halliday and Mathiessen
describe, directly influences the classification ac-
complished by ADESSE, one of the resources ap-
plied in our experiments over Spanish reviews, ex-
plained in the next section.

3 Analysis of the Features

Having pointed out the expanse of the related
work, our approach wants to overcome its limi-
tations. On the one hand, in the sense of being
suitable for any genre, not a particular one. On the
other hand, focusing on several types of features
at the same time, in order to propose a more com-
prehensive description of the parts of a discourse.

With regard to accomplish such a project, the
selection and design of the proper features be-
comes a challenging task itself, strongly related to
the aim of the investigation. Specifically, we try
to detect the features that may reveal links with
the functionality or purpose of the paragraph that
includes them. We have begun annotating several
aspects by means of linguistic tools and resources:
Freeling (Padró and Stanilovsky, 2012) for PoS
annotation and Entity Recognition and ADESSE
(Garcı́a-Miguel et al., 2010) as a source of verb
senses from a semantic perspective.

4 Semantic Web to enrich the Data Set

We believe that, in order to become more mean-
ingful, the quality of features could be improved
by means of some resources rooted in Web Seman-
tic technologies. There is some research related to
genres that can be useful in our project. In the

ADESSE verb senses
Mental, material, relational, verbal,
existential and modulation
FREELING features
PoS tagging: noun, adjective, pronoun,
verb (tense, aspect, ...), etc.

Table 2: Features annotated over the corpus of re-
views.

realm of reviews, opinion and sentiment annota-
tion, we can take advantage for example of MARL
Ontology Specification1, a data schema that has
been used in the EuroSentiment Project (Buite-
laar et al., 2013) or directly related to reviews
from a Sentiment Analysis perspective (Santosh
and Vardhan, 2015). Other genres have been tar-
geted for similar developments. With regard to
news genre, in order to obtain more significant
annotation of the documents, BBC provides a set
of ontologies related to their contents. DBPedia
has been already proved useful for Wikipedia arti-
cles researchers. Drammar (Lombardo and Dami-
ano, 2012) and OntoMedia (Jewell et al., 2005) are
ontology-based models for annotating features of
media and cultural narratives. All of them repre-
sent resources that may lead to different results in
our clustering task and analysis.

5 On-going Work

Until now, some experiments have been performed
over a corpus of Spanish reviews extracted from
Tripadvisor. The reviews were segmented into
sentences, and some figures regarding semantic
and morphological features were computed after
dividing each document in regions (sets of sen-
tences), increasing their number from one block
up to four blocks of sentences. Table 3 shows
some statistics of the corpus employed.

Number of reviews 1400
Sentences 12,467
Words labelled around 200,000

Table 3: Corpus statistics.

In order to strengthen the results, corpora of
other genres with different degree of flexibility in
their structure are being analysed: tales, news and
Wikipedia articles are to be compared with the for-

1http://www.gsi.dit.upm.es/ontologies/marl



mer outcomes. The length of the blocks is the
result of a proportional division of the length of
the document for now. As the research advances,
new experiments will be developed to determine
a more accurate size for the pseudo-paragraphs.
With the ideas introduced in the section 4, our next
step and proposal, includes improving the signifi-
cance of the features with which the clustering al-
gorithms have to work, trying to reveal an inner
structure of the text related to its genre and pur-
poses. The better our features are, the more pre-
cise the descriptions we can do of the discourse
areas.

Acknowledgments

This research work has been supported by
the Generalitat Valenciana by the grant
ACIF/2016/501.It has also funded by the
University of Alicante, Spanish Government
and the European Commission through the
projects, ”Explotación y tratamiento de la
información disponible en Internet para la an-
otación y generación de textos adaptados al
usuario” (GRE13-15) and ”DIIM2.0: Desar-
rollo de técnicas Inteligentes e Interactivas de
Minerı́a y generación de información sobre la
web 2.0” (PROMETEOII/2014/001), TIN2015-
65100-R, TIN2015-65136-C2-2-R, and SAM
(FP7-611312), respectively.

References
Félix-Hervé Bachand, Elnaz Davoodi, and Leila Kos-

seim. 2014. An investigation on the influence of
genres and textual organisation on the use of dis-
course relations. In International Conference on
Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 454–468. Springer.

Mikhail Mikhaı̆lovich Bakhtin. 2010. Speech genres
and other late essays. University of Texas Press.

Paul Buitelaar, Mihael Arcan, Carlos Angel Igle-
sias Fernandez, Juan Fernando Sánchez Rada, and
Carlo Strapparava. 2013. Linguistic linked data for
sentiment analysis.

Erik Cambria, Bjorn Schuller, Yunqing Xia, and
Catherine Havasi. 2013. New avenues in opin-
ion mining and sentiment analysis. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 28(2):15–21.

José M. Garcı́a-Miguel, Gael Vaamonde, and
Fita González Domı́nguez. 2010. Adesse, a
database with syntactic and semantic annotation of
a corpus of spanish. In LREC.

MAK Halliday, Christian MIM Matthiessen, Michael
Halliday, and Christian Matthiessen. 2014. An in-
troduction to functional grammar. Routledge.

Marti A. Hearst. 1997. Texttiling: Segmenting text
into multi-paragraph subtopic passages. Computa-
tional linguistics, 23(1):33–64.

Michael O. Jewell, K. Faith Lawrence, Mischa M.
Tuffield, Adam Prugel-Bennett, David E. Millard,
Mark S. Nixon, Nigel R. Shadbolt, et al. 2005. On-
tomedia: An ontology for the representation of het-
erogeneous media. In In Proceeding of SIGIR work-
shop on Mutlimedia Information Retrieval. ACM SI-
GIR.

Vincenzo Lombardo and Rossana Damiano. 2012. Se-
mantic annotation of narrative media objects. Mul-
timedia Tools and Applications, 59(2):407–439.

Christian MIM Matthiessen. 2014. Registerial cartog-
raphy: context-based mapping of text types and their
rhetorical-relational organization.

Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. FreeL-
ing 3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. In Proceed-
ings of the Eight International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12). Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

D. Teja Santosh and B. Vishnu Vardhan. 2015. Fea-
ture and sentiment based linked instance rdf data to-
wards ontology based review categorization. In Pro-
ceedings of the World Congress on Engineering, vol-
ume 1.

John Swales. 1990. Genre analysis: English in aca-
demic and research settings. Cambridge University
Press.

Maite Taboada. 2011. Stages in an online review
genre. Text & Talk-An Interdisciplinary Journal
of Language, Discourse & Communication Studies,
31(2):247–269.


