



















































Conversing with the elderly in Latin America: a new cohort for multimodal, multilingual longitudinal studies on aging


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning, pages 16–21,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Conversing with the elderly in Latin America: a new cohort for
multimodal, multilingual longitudinal studies on aging

Laura
Hernández-Domı́nguez
ÉTS, Quebec University

1100 Notre-Dame
Montreal, QC H3C1K3

laudobla
@gmail.com

Sylvie Ratté

ÉTS, Quebec Univ.
1100 Notre-Dame

Montreal, H3C1K3
Sylvie.Ratte
@etsmtl.ca

Charlene Pope

MUSC
Charleston, SC

29425-1600
popec

@musc.edu

Boyd Davis

UNC Charlotte
Charlotte,
NC 28223
bdavis

@uncc.edu

Abstract

Many studies have found that language al-
terations can aid in the detection of cer-
tain medical afflictions. In this work, we
present an ongoing project for recollect-
ing multilingual conversations with the el-
derly in Latin America. This project, so
far, involves the combined efforts of psy-
chogeriatricians, linguists, computer sci-
entists, research nurses and geriatric care-
givers from six institutions across USA,
Canada, Mexico and Ecuador. The rec-
ollections are being made available to the
international research community. They
consist of conversations with adults aged
sixty and over, with different nationalities
and socio-economic backgrounds. Con-
versations are recorded on video, tran-
scribed and time-aligned. Additionally,
we are in the process of receiving written
texts—recent or old—authored by the par-
ticipants, provided voluntarily. Each par-
ticipant is recorded at least twice a year to
allow longitudinal studies. Furthermore,
information such as medical history, edu-
cational background, economic level, oc-
cupation, medications and treatments is
being registered to aid conducting research
on treatment progress and pharmacologi-
cal effects. Potential studies derived from
this work include speech, voice, writing,
discourse, and facial and corporal expres-
sion analysis. We believe that our recollec-
tions incorporate complementary data that
can aid researchers in further understand-
ing the progression of cognitive degenera-
tive diseases of the elderly.

1 Introduction

The Carolinas Conversations Collection (Pope
and Davis, 2011), a project for recollecting con-
versations with elderly people that live in North
and South Carolina, started in 2008. This project
was initially supported by the USA National Li-
brary of Medicine. For the collection, the con-
versations were transcribed, marked, time-aligned
and made available to the international research
community by means of a secured website1. The
collection has grown steadily since then, having, at
present, over 460 conversations with adults over
sixty years old, either healthy or suffering from
any medical condition. A fourth of these conver-
sations were made with participants afflicted with
Alzheimer’s disease.

In 2015, we started to increase the coverage of
this collection to incorporate different languages.
The first additional language to be incorporated is
Latin-American Spanish. We are currently adding
conversations with new participants; elderly Span-
ish speakers from Ecuador and Mexico. Addi-
tionally, we are incorporating new information and
language modalities to increase the robustness of
possible studies that may use this corpus. So
far, this project has engaged involvement through
combined efforts of six institutions across four dif-
ferent countries.

2 Methodology

The recollections are being made at least twice
a year with each participant. In Ecuador, we
are working in collaboration with “Universidad
Técnica Particular de Loja” (UTPL), and with the
“Perpetuo Socorro” Foundation, a home for el-
derly people. In Mexico, the psychogeriatricians
from the Psychiatric Hospital “Fray Bernardino

1http://carolinaconversations.musc.edu/

16



Álvarez” have agreed to work as our medical ex-
perts and advisors for this project. Furthermore,
the Foundation and the Psychiatric Hospital have
made arrangements to allow us to communicate
with their residents, patients and their guardians,
and invite them to participate in our Latin Ameri-
can recollections.

In the case of Ecuador, none of the involved in-
stitutions has an Institutional Review Board (IRB)
for protection of human subjects, or any formal
ethics guidelines. For this reason, our institutional
IRB took over that role. Consequently, a person
authorized via the protocol and having a Canadian
or American certification of training in ethics for
research with human subjects, must be present, in
person, during all recollections. In the case of
Mexico, the hospital has its own IRB, and their
staff are trained in ethics. This allows them to rec-
ollect the conversations without any member of
the team from Canada or the USA needing to be
present.

Before the recordings, the participants and their
caregivers are given a short explanation of the
project and its aims. Provided they agree to par-
ticipate in the project, they sign an informed con-
sent form, and with the help of their primary psy-
chiatric care providers or their primary caregiver,
we fill a questionnaire with the medical informa-
tion of the participant. In this questionnaire we
request all the medications that the participants
are actively taking, as well as their medical condi-
tions. With first-time participants, we also record
their demographic data, such as birth date, gender,
educational level, occupation (prior to retirement),
first language, and ethnic affiliation. To protect the
privacy of the participants, all names are replaced
by aliases. In the case of Ecuador, aliases are ran-
domly chosen from a pool of names of characters
or writers of classic Latin American novels; in the
case of Mexico, they are chosen from names of
congresspeople. We select aliases that correspond
with the gender of the participants.

The interviewers are the caregivers at the Foun-
dation (Ecuador), and the primary psychiatric care
providers (Mexico). All interviews take place in
the Foundation’s and the psychiatric hospital’s fa-
cilities. We believe that having free topics, and a
familiar interviewer and environment, helps pro-
vide a more comfortable atmosphere for the par-
ticipants.

All our interviewers have been trained with

techniques to motivate the participants to talk,
even if they are afflicted by some type of cognitive
impairment. We’ve created animated videos and
other training materials to instruct interviewers on
how to incite free conversations with patients. The
strategies that we provide, come from practices
that have been developed during the years of ex-
perience interviewing elderly participants in North
and South Carolina for this collection. These ma-
terials are available online 2 to facilitate the long-
distance knowledge exchange.

While training the interviewers, we usually start
by explaining the context of the project. We then
emphasize the importance of letting the partici-
pants talk and express themselves as much as pos-
sible. We ask the interviewers to be patient and
allow the participants some time to process their
questions and then answer. We also give them
cues such as repeating the last utterance of the
participants when they are stuck; giving encourag-
ing feedback and signs of interest, such as making
eye contact, responding with interjections, corpo-
ral and facial expressions according to the mood
of the conversation; and keeping the flow of the
conversation by mentioning any information that
they have gathered about the participants during
the time of knowing them.

The conversations are free in the sense that there
is no specific theme to talk about, although the
most common topics are the early lives of the
participants, their hobbies, their health and their
views on life in general. There is no time limit to
these conversations. Some of the common ques-
tions to start the flow of the conversation are: “Tell
us about your life”, “What do you like to do?”,
“How was your childhood?”, “Do you have any
hobbies?”, “Who is accompanying you today?”,
“Do you have any pet?”, “What did you use to do
for a living?”.

The conversations from Mexico and Ecuador
are being manually transcribed and time-aligned
by our collaborators of the Linguistic Engineering
Group (LEG) at the National University of Mex-
ico. We selected the LEG group due to their vast
experience in the creation of corpora3 in Spanish.
The transcriptions are labelled with markings that
indicate pauses, interruptions, external noises, par-
ticipant’s noises (e.g., laughter, crying, coughing,
hawkings), intonation and emphasis (e.g., whis-

2https://goo.gl/E7xeOO (English and Spanish subtitles
are available)

3http://www.corpus.unam.mx/

17



pering, yelling), actions (e.g., winking, hand ges-
turing, finger snapping, clapping), and unconven-
tional pronunciations.

In addition to the recordings of the conversa-
tions, at Mexico we are also asking the participants
and/or their guardians for copies (digital or physi-
cal) of written texts, such as old letters, messages,
etc., authored by the participants, recently or in
years prior to this study, including letters from
their youth or middle age. This is to encourage re-
search in written analysis, such as the famous Nun
Study (Snowdon et al., 1996).

3 Description of the samples

Recollections in Ecuador started in May, 2015.
For the first series we interviewed 12 participants,
and recorded a total of 15 conversations. The sec-
ond recollection was made on January, 2016, and
it incorporated 4 new participants and a total of 10
interviews. So far, the cumulative recorded time
of conversations in Ecuador is over six hours and
45 minutes, and the average length of the conver-
sations is 16 minutes. The participants’ ages range
from 70 to 91 years old, with an average age of 83
years old (see Table 1).

We started the recollections in Mexico in Febru-
ary, 2016. For these recollections, the psychiatric
care providers interview the participants after their
routine consultations. Therefore, all recollections
and follow-ups are carried out throughout the year.
While writing this paper, the recollections in Mex-
ico have just begun and, so far, they included 9
participants, all female. However, we estimate
recording at least one conversation per week. Here
the participants’ ages range from 61 to 82 years
old, with an average age of 69 years old.

Women Men Global

U
SA

Participants 71 16 87
Conversations 368 94 462
Avg. age 79.3 79.1 79.3
Avg. education (years) 13.1 14.1 13.3

E
cu

ad
or Participants 12 4 16

Conversations 18 7 25
Avg. age 83.9 83 83.6
Avg. education (years) 6.2 8.2 6.7

M
ex

ic
o Participants 9 0 9

Conversations 9 0 9
Avg. age 69 - 69
Avg. education (years) 5.5 - 5.5

Table 1: Socio-demographic overview of the par-
ticipants of the collection

As shown in Table 1, the majority of our partic-
ipants in all countries are female. We attribute this

phenomenon to two main factors: first and fore-
most, women have shown a significantly higher
willingness, in comparison to men, to participate
in this project, especially in Mexico. Secondly, the
age expectancy of women is higher than men, for
which the elderly male population is smaller. We
are currently making efforts to increase the num-
ber of male participants to balance the sample.

4 Implications, applications and
prospects

The longitudinal, multilingual and multimodal at-
tributes of our collection, as well as the registra-
tion and follow up of the medical treatments taken
by the participants and their demographic infor-
mation, will allow researchers to perform a wide
variety of studies. Some of these studies have al-
ready been tackled before. However in most cases
authors have used small monolingual and homo-
geneous samples that do not allow the possibility
of generalizing. Furthermore, many of the datasets
used for these studies are not shared to the research
community, limiting the advancement of research.

Our collection has the advantage of contain-
ing a multiethnic sample, not to mention the het-
erogeneity gained by including participants from
three different countries. These attributes will
make for robust research that will support the
study of intra-language and inter-language vari-
ations, as well as intermodal linguistic analyses
(see Figure 1). Additionally, it will allow control
for alterations attributable to race, demographic
factors, specific diseases, medications and treat-
ments. Longitudinal studies will allow following
the course of aging in the elderly, and the differ-
ences between a healthy versus a pathological de-
cline. This collection also provides data to im-
prove automatic transcription and face recognition
for this particular cohort, which tends to present
particular challenges. Some of the clearest re-
search possibilities to be performed with this col-
lection are those focused on the improvement of
communication with the elderly, and medical ap-
plications.

4.1 Improving communication

It is important to maintain and preserve commu-
nication with the elderly, especially since it has
been suggested (Arkin, 2007) that maintaining
language-enriched conversations along with exer-
cise can delay the effects of dementia. Our col-

18



Figure 1: Multimodal studies available in the cor-
pus.

lection not only contains the utterances and tran-
scriptions of the elderly participants, but it also
includes the entire transcription of the exchanges
with the interviewers. This allows performing
studies to improve communication by analyzing
which strategies prove more successful in pro-
moting conversations with the elderly. Other au-
thors (Davis, 2005; Davis et al., 2011) have made
a strong emphasis on the importance of preserv-
ing communication with elderly people, and have
worked in the development of specific communi-
cation strategies, particularly with those suffering
from dementia.

In addition to explicit linguistic barriers, there
are other factors that limit our ability to commu-
nicate with elderly people. For example, Freuden-
berg et al. (2015) found out that young people have
trouble correctly interpreting facial expressions in
the elderly, often perceiving neutral expressions as
negative emotions. This in part makes studying
emotions in this population a challenge, but in do-
ing so, could provide insights on how to preserve
an effective communication with them. However,
analysis of emotions have other purposes, since al-
terations in the expression of emotions can show
signs of certain disorders (Hamm et al., 2014;
Adams and Oliver, 2011).

4.2 Medical applications

Automatic language analysis for studying neu-
rodegenerative diseases in elderly people has
been gaining momentum in recent years. Au-
thors like Jarrold et al. (2010) and (2014),
Schrder et al. (2010), Prud’hommeaux and
Roark, (2011), Lehr et al., (2013), Gonzalez-
Moreira et al. (2014), Khodabakhsh (2014)
and (2015), Guerrero et al. (2016), López-de-Ipiña

et al. (2015), and König et al. (2015), have studied
language alterations that may aid in the automatic
detection, or even prediction, of Mild Cognitive
Impairment and Alzheimer’s disease in its mild
and moderate stages, with promising results. Ad-
ditionally, Goberman et al. (2010), Holtgraves et
al. (2013), and Cardona et al. (2013), have studied
the linguistic features associated with Parkinson’s
disease. To support the furthering of these types
of research, we prioritize the inclusion of partici-
pants suffering from different cognitive and men-
tal afflictions (see Table 2).

USA Ecuador Mexico
Participants 87 16 9
Alzheimer’s dis. 47 8 2
Parkinson’s dis. 0 1 0
Depression 9 3 1
Schizophrenia 1 0 1
Bipolar disorder 1 1 0
Healthy (cognit.) 23 5 2

Table 2: Prevalence of the main mental health dis-
orders in each cohort.

5 Conclusions and future work

In this paper we presented a report of our first
recollections of conversations with elderly people
in Latin America, as well as the characteristics
of this ongoing multidisciplinary multicenter re-
search project. We envisage to continue these rec-
ollections for the following two to five years. Ad-
ditionally, we are initiating the necessary collabo-
ration agreements with Canadian institutions to in-
corporate a cohort with Canadian French-speakers
and English-speakers to our collection. With this
cohort we will add a new language and an En-
glish variation. Furthermore, in Ecuador we are
making arrangements to incorporate some elderly
Quechua-speakers to our sample. To our knowl-
edge, there is no available research on linguistic
analysis of this indigenous population. Finally,
we are currently working on our first research us-
ing this corpus. We believe that our recollections
can be of use for performing speech, voice, writ-
ing, discourse, and facial and corporal expression-
based analysis to further our understanding about
the progression of cognitive degenerative diseases,
and ultimately to help improving our communica-
tion strategies with the elderly, thus ameliorating
their quality of life.

19



Acknowledgments

We wish to express our deepest appreciation to
all the participants of this collection and their
their caregivers for their time and patience, also to
the interviewers and transcribers that have greatly
contributed to the creation of this dataset. We
would also like to thank the Psychiatric Hospital
“Fray Bernardino Álvarez” in Mexico City, spe-
cially Dr. Andrés Roche Bergua, Dr. Alexiz Bo-
jorge and Dr. Janet Jiménez Genchi, for their sup-
port, clinical insights and collaboration in the cre-
ation of the Mexican cohort of the dataset. We
also thank profusely all the staff members of the
“Perpetuo Socorro” Foundation in Quito, Ecuador,
specially Dr. Edwin Velasco and Mrs. Amparo
Sarabia. We are also deeply grateful for the sup-
port of the Linguistic Engineering Group at the
Engineering Institute at UNAM, in particular to
its leader Dr. Gerardo Sierra Martı́nez. Finally, we
would like to thank the “Universidad Técnica Par-
ticular de Loja” (UTPL) in Loja, Ecuador. This
research was partially supported by the FRQNT
177601, and the Ministère des Relations Interna-
tionales et de la Francophonie and CONACYT
Mexico (XV Groupe de Travail Québec-Mexique
2015-2017).

References
Dawn Adams and Chris Oliver. 2011. The expres-

sion and assessment of emotions and internal states
in individuals with severe or profound intellectual
disabilities. Clinical psychology review, 31(3):293–
306, apr.

Sharon Arkin. 2007. Language-enriched exercise plus
socialization slows cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s
disease. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
and Other Dementias, 22(1):62–77.

Juan Felipe Cardona, Oscar Gershanik, Carlos
Gelormini-Lezama, Alexander Lee Houck, Sebas-
tian Cardona, Lucila Kargieman, Natalia Trujillo,
Analı́a Arévalo, Lucia Amoruso, Facundo Manes,
and Agustı́n Ibáñez. 2013. Action-verb process-
ing in Parkinson’s disease: new pathways for motor-
language coupling. Brain structure & function,
218(6):1355–73, nov.

Boyd Davis, Margaret Maclagan, Tasos Karakostas, Si-
mon Liang, and Dena Shenk. 2011. Watching what
you say: walking and talking in dementia. Topics in
Geriatric Rehabilitation, 27(4):268–277.

Boyd H. (ed) Davis. 2005. Alzheimer talk, text,
and context: Enhancing communication. Palgrave
Macmillan.

Maxi Freudenberg, Reginald B. Adams, Robert E.
Kleck, and Ursula Hess. 2015. Through a glass
darkly: facial wrinkles affect our processing of emo-
tion in the elderly. Frontiers in psychology, 6.

Alexander M Goberman, Michael Blomgren, and Erika
Metzger. 2010. Characteristics of speech disfluency
in Parkinson disease. Journal of Neurolinguistics,
23(5):470–478.

E. Gonzalez-Moreira, D. Torres-Boza, M.A. Garcia-
Zamora, C.A. Ferrer, and L.A. Hernandez-Gomez.
2014. Prosodic speech analysis to identify mild cog-
nitive impairment. VI Latin American Congress on
Biomedical Engineering (CLAIB), pages 580–583.

José Marı́a Guerrero, Rafael Martı́nez-Tomás, Mari-
ano Rincón, and Herminia Peraita-Adrados. 2016.
Bayesian Network Model to Sup-port Diagnosis of
Cognitive Impair-ment Compatible with an Early
Diagnosis of Alzheimers Disease. Methods of In-
formation in Medicine, 55:42–49.

Jihun Hamm, Amy Pinkham, Ruben C Gur, Ragini
Verma, and Christian G. Kohler. 2014. Dimen-
sional information-theoretic measurement of facial
emotion expressions in schizophrenia. Schizophre-
nia research and treatment, 2014.

Thomas Holtgraves, Kelly Fogle, and Lindsay Marsh.
2013. Pragmatic language production deficits in
Parkinson’s disease. Advances in Parkinson’s Dis-
ease, 2(1):31–36.

William L Jarrold, Bart Peintner, Eric Yeh, Ruth Kras-
now, Harold S Javitz, and Gary E Swan. 2010. Lan-
guage Analytics for Assessing Brain Health : Cogni-
tive Impairment , Depression and Pre-symptomatic
Alzheimer’s Disease. In Yiyu Yao, Ron Sun,
Tomaso Poggio, Jiming Liu, Ning Zhong, and
Jimmy Huang, editors, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat-
ics), chapter Brain Info, pages 299–307. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.

William Jarrold, Bart Peintner, David Wilkins, Dim-
itra Vergryi, Colleen Richey, Maria Luisa Gorno-
Tempini, and Jennifer Ogar. 2014. Aided diagnosis
of dementia type through computer-based analysis
of spontaneous speech. In Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clini-
cal Psychology, pages 27–36.

Ali Khodabakhsh, Serhan Kusxuoglu, and Cenk
Demiroglu. 2014. Natural language features for
detection of Alzheimer’s disease in conversational
speech. In IEEE-EMBS International Conference
on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI), pages
581–584. IEEE, jun.

Ali Khodabakhsh, Fatih Yesil, Ekrem Guner, and Cenk
Demiroglu. 2015. Evaluation of linguistic and
prosodic features for detection of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease in Turkish conversational speech. EURASIP

20



Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing,
2015(1):9, mar.

Alexandra König, Aharon Satt, Alexander Sorin,
Ron Hoory, Orith Toledo-Ronen, Alexandre Der-
reumaux, Valeria Manera, Frans Verhey, Pauline
Aalten, Phillipe H. Robert, and Renaud David.
2015. Automatic speech analysis for the assessment
of patients with predementia and Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assess-
ment & Disease Monitoring, 1(1):112–124, mar.

Maider Lehr, Izhak Shafran, Emily Tucker
Prud’hommeaux, and Brian Roark. 2013. Dis-
criminative Joint Modeling of Lexical Variation
and Acoustic Confusion for Automated Narrative
Retelling Assessment. In HLT-NAACL, pages
211–220.

K. López-de Ipiña, J.B. Alonso-Hernández, J. Solé-
Casals, C.M. Travieso-González, A. Ezeiza,
M. Faúndez-Zanuy, P.M. Calvo, and B. Beitia.
2015. Feature selection for automatic analysis
of emotional response based on nonlinear speech
modeling suitable for diagnosis of Alzheimers
disease. Neurocomputing, 150(PB):392–401, feb.

Charlene Pope and Boyd H. Davis. 2011. Find-
ing a balance: The Carolinas Conversation Collec-
tion. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory,
7(1):143–161.

Emily Tucker Prud’hommeaux and Brian Roark. 2011.
Extraction of Narrative Recall Patterns for Neu-
ropsychological Assessment. In INTERSPEECH
2011, 12th Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association, pages 3021–
3024.

Johannes Schröder, Britta Wendelstein, and Ekkehard
Felder. 2010. Language in the Preclinical Stage of
Alzheimer’s Disease. Content and Complexity in Bi-
ographic Interviews of the ILSE Study. In Klinische
Neurophysiologie, volume 41, page S360.

David A. Snowdon, Susan J. Kemper, James A.
Mortimer, Lydia H. Greiner, David R. Wekstein,
and William R. Markesbery. 1996. Linguis-
tic ability in early life and cognitive function and
Alzheimer’s disease in late life: Finds from the Nun
Study. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 275(7):528–532.

21


