



















































On the verbalization patterns of part-whole relations in isiZulu


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 174–183,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

On the verbalization patterns of part-whole relations in isiZulu

C. Maria Keet1 and Langa Khumalo2
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town,

South Africa, mkeet@cs.uct.ac.za
2 Linguistics Program, University of KwaZulu-Natal,

South Africa, khumalol@ukzn.ac.za

Abstract

In the highly multilingual setting in South
Africa, developing computational tools to sup-
port the 11 official languages will facilitate ef-
fective communication. The exigency to de-
velop these tools for healthcare applications
and doctor-patient interaction is there. An im-
portant component in this set-up is generating
sentences in the language isiZulu, which in-
volves part-whole relations to communicate,
for instance, which part of one’s body hurts.
From a NLG viewpoint, the main challenge
is the fluid use of terminology and the con-
sequent complex agreement system inherent
in the language, which is further complicated
by phonological conditioning in the linguistic
realisation stage. Through using a combined
approach of examples and various literature,
we devised verbalisation patterns for both
meronymic and mereological relations, being
structural/general parthood, involvement, con-
tainment, membership, subquantities, partic-
ipation, and constitution. All patterns were
then converted into algorithms and have been
implemented as a proof-of-concept.

1 Introduction

Hitherto text-based human language technologies
in South Africa have been developed by CTexT
through the Autshumato project, whereas speech
technologies have been developed by the Meraka In-
stitute, which include Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion (ASR), pronunciation dictionaries and text-to-
speech (TTS) technologies under the auspices of the
Lwazi project. However, there is no computational

technology in all indigenous official languages (in-
cluding isiZulu), and the HLT audit (Sharma Grover
et al., 2011) indicated a huge gap in information and
knowledge processing in particular. This is impor-
tant to address for application areas such as doctor-
patient interactions, for which now only a small app
with canned bilingual text exist1. The app was well-
received for being a very small step toward meet-
ing a well-known need of personalised health com-
munication (Mettler and Kemper, 2003; Wilcox et
al., 2011). However, due to the entirely manual ef-
forts, the mobilezulu app with its canned text is ob-
viously not scalable to cover all areas of medicine,
like captured in standards such as SNOMED CT2

and for which terminology in isiZulu is being de-
veloped (Engelbrecht et al., 2010) and standardised
following PANSALB terminology development pro-
cesses (Khumalo, 2016). SNOMED CT has a logic-
based foundation by having the terms, relations, and
the constraints that hold among them represented in
the Description Logics-based OWL 2 EL ontology
language (Motik et al., 2009a). OWL is also becom-
ing popular as structured input for NLG (Bouayad-
Agha et al., 2014) and CNLs (Safwat and Davis,
2016). Some results have been obtained in gener-
ating grammatically correct natural language sen-
tences in isiZulu for the OWL 2 EL constructors
(Keet and Khumalo, 2016), which makes it look
promising to use. Exploratory experiments revealed
several issues with verbalising axioms involving the
pervasive part-whole relations (OWL object proper-
ties), however. The part-whole relation is compli-

1mobilezulu.org.za and mobilexhosa.org.za
2http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/

174



cated by the fluid use in speech and terminology.
For instance, structural parts (e.g., the jawbone of
the head), involvement (swallowing as part of eat-
ing), and membership is generalised as ingxenye in
isiZulu, yet participation is divided into individual
(e.g., the patient) and collective (e.g., the operat-
ing team) participation, using different terms. The
isiZulu-English dictionary lists 19 translations for
‘part’ alone (Dent and Nyembezi, 2009). It also in-
troduces the need to process prepositions, which are
present only in the deep structure in isiZulu (Math-
onsi, 2001), rather than as identifiable isolated words
in the better-resourced languages (such as ‘of’, von
[DE], van [NL], de [SP]) that generally do have to
be considered in NLG (Baldwin et al., 2009).

Linguistic and cognitive analyses of part-whole
relations have resulted in part-whole relation tax-
onomies, notably the seminal first one by (Winston
et al., 1987) and the most recent update in (Keet and
Artale, 2008), which have been used successfully
in NLP (e.g., (Tandon et al., 2016)). Such anal-
yses start from the underspecified ‘part’ in natural
language to examine what it really is ontologically.
For NLG in isiZulu, we face a ‘double direction’ of
analyses for non-English languages: which parts are
there, which terms are used for that, and how? The
general task at hand, thus, is to figure out how the
lexicalisation and linguistic realisation of part-whole
relations work in isiZulu.

We solve this problem by starting from an estab-
lished taxonomy of part-whole relations and adjust
where needed to cater for differences in conceptu-
alisation as expressed in grammatically correct nat-
ural language. Unlike in English, where the same
string—like ‘has part’, ‘is part of’, and ‘contains’—
can be plugged in a template unaltered3, the lexical-
isation and linguistic realisation in isiZulu depend
on other constituents in the sentence. These include
the noun class of the noun that plays the part or
whole role in the sentence, the agreement system be-
tween a noun and a verb, phonological conditioning,
and processing a preposition. In total, there are 13
such constituents for the part-whole relations cov-
ered. Instead of templates, this demands for verbal-
isation patterns such that a complete sentence can
be generated during runtime. The results presented

3check, e.g., SWAT NL (Third et al., 2011) or ACE online
(Fuchs et al., 2010).

here thus also provide a first account of how to con-
struct a full—albeit still highly structured—sentence
in isiZulu that has more dependent components (so-
called ‘concordial agreement’) than just verb conju-
gation with the subject concord and quantification
with the quantitative concord. These patterns have
been converted into algorithms and have been im-
plemented as a proof-of-concept, substantially ex-
tending algorithms for verbalising OWL 2 EL ax-
ioms with ‘simple’ relations (verbs) and for plural-
ising nouns (Keet and Khumalo, 2016; Byamugisha
et al., 2016), notably regarding locatives, concords,
a preposition, and more comprehensive phonologi-
cal conditioning.

The remainder of the paper is structured as fol-
lows. In Section 2 we outline the preliminaries on
part-whole relations and CNLs for isiZulu. We spell
out the patterns for the parts and wholes in isiZulu
in Section 3. We describe the tool design consider-
ations and implementation in Section 4. We discuss
in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.

2 Preliminaries

Part-whole relations in the context of natural lan-
guage commenced seriously with (Winston et al.,
1987), with various modifications to its latest in-
stalment by (Keet and Artale, 2008) as to which
part-whole relations there are. These part-whole re-
lations are also used in NLP (e.g., (Tandon et al.,
2016)), and in ontologies and controlled vocabular-
ies in medicine, such as openGalen and SNOMED
CT. There is a principal distinction between mereol-
ogy (parthood) and meronymy (parts in natural lan-
guage), where the latter includes the former. They
are summarised with an example in Table 1.

CNLs are gaining popularity as a version of
NLG in the scope of data(base/RDF)-to-text and
knowledge(/logic/OWL)-to-text. It has been shown
that straightforward templates do not suffice for
Bantu languages such as isiZulu, because (almost)
all words in any sentence need some processing
(Keet and Khumalo, 2016), cf. an occasional rule for
flexibility or beautification that one may still rather
classify as a template-based approach (van Deemter
et al., 2005). This is due mainly to the system of
noun classes, the agreement system among the vari-
ous constituents in a sentence, and the agglutinative
characteristics (Keet and Khumalo, 2016). The noun

175



Table 1: Main part-whole relations.

Relation Example
structural
parthood

wall is part of a house, human has part
a heart (physical objects)

involvement eating involves swallowing (pro-
cesses)

location city is located in a country (2D region
with occupant)

containment nucleus contained in cell, bolus of
food is contained in the stomach (3D
region with occupant)

membership player is member of a team (role &
collective)

participation enzyme participates in a catalytic reac-
tion (object & process)

subquantities sugar is a subquantity of lemonade,
blood sample is a sub quantity of blood
(stuffs/masses)

constitution a vase is constituted of clay (object &
stuff)

classes for isiZulu with relevant concords affecting
other words in a sentence is shown in Table 2. The
noun class system is one of the salient features of
the isiZulu language. Every noun belongs to a noun
class (NC). The noun is made up of two formatives,
the prefix and the stem (e.g., for NC2: aba- + fana
= abafana ‘boys’). Crucially, the NC governs the
agreement of all words that modify the noun. Most
NCs are set off into pairs in isiZulu such that most
nouns have a singular form in one class and a plu-
ral form in another as summarised in Table 2. It
must also be pointed out that for the most part the
semantics of a noun determines its class (cf. (Twala,
1992)).

So-called ‘verbalisation patterns’ and algorithms
have been developed by (Byamugisha et al., 2016;
Keet and Khumalo, 2016), which cover knowledge
representation language features from the Descrip-
tion Logic (DL) ALC (Baader et al., 2008)—hence,
OWL 2 EL (Motik et al., 2009a)—such as existen-
tial and universal quantification, subsumption, and
negation, which have been implemented by the au-
thors in the meantime. The relevant aspects are sum-
marised here to keep the paper self-contained:

– Conjunction ‘and’ (u in DL notation), enumer-
ative: na- is added to the second noun, using
phonological conditioning (see below).

– Subsumption: The copulative is either y- or ng-

, depending on the first letter of the name of the
superclass, and added to the name of the super-
class; e.g., inja yisilwane ‘dog is an animal’.

– Quantification, restricted to usage in simple in-
clusions of the form C v ∃R.D, i.e., ‘all Cs
R at least one D’. The ∀ ‘all’ is determined
by the noun class of the plural of C’s name,
R is a present tense verb conjugated in concor-
dance with the head noun (C, in plural), and
the ‘at least one’ is made up of the relative
concord and quantitative concord of the noun
class of D’s name and ends with -dwa. For in-
stance, uSolwazi v -fundisa.isifundo becomes
bonke oSolwazi bafundisa isifundo esisodwa
‘all professors teach at least one course’: First,
uSolwazi, in NC3, is pluralised to oSolwazi, in
NC4. Second, the word for ∀ for NC4 is bonke
and, third, the subject concord for it is ba-,
making bafundisa. Fourth, the noun class of
isifundo is 7, so the relative concord is esi- and
quantitative concord is -so-, forming esisodwa
for the verbalisation of ∃.

Phonological conditioning occurs in multiple oc-
casions (Miti, 2006), but the one relevant here con-
cerns adding a concord to the noun, because isiZulu
does not have two successive vowels in a word.
This is known as vowel coalescence, and the ba-
sic rules are: -a + a- = -a-, -a + e- = -e-, -a + i-
= -e-, -a + o- = -o-, and -a + u- = -o-. For in-
stance, ubisi na+ibhotela becomes ubisi nebhotela
(‘milk and butter’), ibhotela na+ubisi becomes ib-
hotela nobisi, and nga+ubumba becomes ngobumba
‘of clay’. Further, the locative suffix -ini is phono-
logically conditioned by the final vowel: -a+-ini=-
eni, -e+-ini=-eni, -o+ini=-weni, u+ini=-wini, -phu +
-wini = -shini, and the few loanwords that end in -
phu become -phini.

3 Patterns for Parts and Wholes

To describe the patterns, we systematically take the
axioms for ‘has part’ (wp), W v ∃hasPart.P , and
‘is part of’ (pw), P v ∃isPartOf.W to demon-
strate what is going on linguistically. Ontologically,
in a majority of cases, only one of the two reading
directions is applicable despite the pervasive infor-
mal use of the inappropriate one4; such ontological

4e.g., it is true that all humans have some heart (Human v
∃hasPart.Heart), but not that all hearts are part of some hu-

176



Table 2: Zulu noun classes with examples and a selection of
concords. NC: Noun class; PRE: prefix; QC: quantitative con-
cord; RC: relative concord; PC: possessive concord.

NC Full
PRE

QC
(∀)

RC QC
(∃)

SC PC

1 um(u)- wonke o- ye- u- wa-
2 aba- bonke aba- bo- ba- ba-
1a u- wonke o- ye- u- wa-
2a o- bonke aba- bo- ba- ba-
3a u- wonke o- ye- u- wa-
2a o- bonke aba- bo- ba- ba-
3 um(u)- wonke o- wo- u- wa-
4 imi- yonke e- yo- i- ya-
5 i(li)- lonke eli- lo- li- la-
6 ama- onke a- wo- a- a-
7 isi- sonke esi- so- si- sa-
8 izi- zonke ezi zo- zi- za-
9a i- yonke e- yo- i- ya-
6 ama- onke a- wo- a- a-
9 i(n)- yonke e- yo- i- ya-
10 izi(n)- zonke ezi- zo- zi- za-
11 u(lu)- lonke olu- lo- lu- lwa-
10 izi(n)- zonke ezi- zo- zi- za-
14 ubu- bonke obu- bo- bu- ba-
15 uku- konke oku- ko- ku- kwa-
17 ku- lonke olu- lo- lu- kwa-

aspects are beyond the scope of this paper.
Regarding notation, ultimately what is needed is

a detailed grammar for the verbalisation patterns. At
this stage, however, there is insufficient linguistic
knowledge to pursue this. Therefore, we use vari-
ables in the patterns, as listed in Table 3, where
each variable is to be substituted with the appro-
priate string (terminal, if it were a CFG), and sub-
scripts, omitting the orthogonal phonological condi-
tioning that is included in the explanation instead. A
dash between variables indicates they are part of one
word. Subscripts indicate ‘agreement’ of the various
elements. So, for instance, a “Wncx,pl” is the entity
(its name assumed to be given in the singular) that
plays the role of the whole, which is of noun class
(“nc”) x that is to be pluralised, and its preceding
“QCallncx,pl” is the term for the universal quantifi-
cation for the noun class that is the plural of noun
class x; e.g., if W is inja, in NC9, then Wncx,pl is

man (∗Heart v ∃isPartOf.Human), as there are hearts that
are part of another, non-human, animal.

Table 3: Abbreviations (Var.) used in the verbalisation patterns.
Var. Full name Comment
W entity play-

ing whole
our abbreviation

P entity that
plays the part

our abbreviation

CONJ Conjunction enumerative-and (not a
connective-and); na-

COP Copulative y- or ng-
LOC Locative locative prefix; ku- for NC

1a, 2a, 3a, and 17, e- other-
wise

LOC-
SUF

Locative here used for the locative
suffix; -ini

PRE Preposition only nga- is used here
EP Epenthetic -s-
PASS Passive tense -iw-
FV Final Vowel in this case just -e to go with

PASS
SC Subject Con-

cord
∼ conjugation; depends on
NC: see Table 2

PC Possessive
Concord

depends on NC: see Table 2

RC Relative
Concord

depends on NC: see Table 2

QCall quantitative
concord

universal quantification; de-
pends on NC: see Table 2

QC quantitative
concord

existential quantification;
depends on NC: see Table 2

izinja in NC10, and its QCallncx,pl is zonke.

structural/general parts and wholes Let us com-
mence with a parthood relation between objects.
The verbalisation patterns in isiZulu (for any noun
class) in the ‘has part’ (wp) and ‘part of’ (pw) read-
ing directions are as follows:
wp: QCallncx,pl Wncx,pl SCncx,pl-CONJ-Pncy

RCncy -QCncy -dwa
pw: QCallncx,pl Pncx,pl SCncx,pl-COP-ingxenye

PCingxenye-Wncy RCncy -QCncy -dwa
Note that the whole-part relation does not have one
single string like a ‘has part’, but it is composed of
SC+CONJ, and is thus dependent on both the noun
class of the whole (as the SC is) and on the first let-
ter of the name of the part (as the string for CONJ,
na-, depends on that). The ‘is part of’ reading di-
rection is made up of the ‘part’ ingxenye, which is a
noun that is preceded with the COP y- and together
amounts to ‘is part’. The ‘of’ is accounted for by
the possessive concord (PC) of ingxenye (NC9), be-

177



ing ya-, taking into account vowel coalescence. The
SC for concordance with the P has been included be-
cause, while in multiple examples, either SC-COP-
ingxenye or COP-ingxenye suffices, in some cases it
really does not. The patterns are illustrated in the
following two examples for heart (inhliziyo, NC9)
standing in a part-whole relation to human (umuntu,
NC1), with the ‘has part’ and ‘is part of’ underlined:
wp-ex: bonke abantu banenhliziyo eyodwa
pw-ex: zonke izinhliziyo ziyingxenye yomuntu

oyedwa

involved in is the same as for general parts. The
salient difference is that both P and W belong to
nominals that are in NC15. An example is that eat-
ing (ukudla) involves swallowing (ukugwinya):
wp-ex: konke ukudla kunokugwinya okukodwa
pw-ex: konke ukugwinya kuyingxenye yokudla

okukodwa
Observe that “bane-” in the previous example is dif-
ferent from the “kuno-” here, due to the different
SCs (abantu is in NC2 (ba-) and ukudla in NC15
(ku-), and vowel coalescence: na+i = -ne- in the for-
mer example and na+u = -no- here, yet the pattern is
exactly the same.

containment has a spatial component to it, which
is indicated with the locative affixes (LOC) in the
pw direction of verbalisation. Because isiZulu pro-
scribes vowel sequencing, the epenthetic -s- is re-
quired between the SC and the LOC e-. Patterns, for
any noun class:
wp: QCallncx,pl Wncx,pl SCncx,pl-CONJ-Pncy

RCncy -QCncy -dwa
pw: QCallncx,pl Pncx,pl SCncx,pl-EP-LOC-Wncy -

LOCSUF RCncy -QCncy -dwa
This is illustrated for the usual example (Donnelly
et al., 2006) of a bolus of food (indilinga yokudla,
NC9) that is contained in the stomach (isisu, NC7):
wp-ex: Zonke izisu zinendilinga yokudla eyodwa
pw-ex: Zonke izindilinga zokudla zisesiswini es-

isodwa
The zine- comes from the SC of NC10 of izisu
‘stomachs’, which is followed by the na+i=-ne- for
CONJ. The zise- is the result of NC10’s SC, zi- (see
Table 2), the EP -s-, and LOC e-, and then -u+-ini=-
wini as LOCSUF.

membership The patterns are as for general part-
hood; e.g., a doctor (udokotela, NC1a) is a member

of an operating team (iqembu labahlinzi, NC5):
wp-ex: onke amaqembu abahlinzi anodokotela

oyedwa
pw-ex: bonke odokotela bayingxenye yeqembu

labahlinzi elilodwa

subquantities Ontology has so far recognised two
core different usages of subquantities. First, as parts,
like alcohol is a subquantity of wine, flour of bread
and so on. While many of the mass nouns are in NC5
or NC6 in isiZulu, this is not always the case and if
in the singular it stays singular and in some cases,
the term can be both a count noun and a mass noun,
as is the case in English (e.g., ‘stone’). Therefore,
we change the pattern for part-subquantities so that
it omits the pluralisation. Also, one does not count
stuffs, so the ‘at least one’ is omitted as well.
wp: QCallncx Wncx SCncx-CONJ-Pncy
pw: QCallncx Pncx SCncx-COP-ingxenye

PCingxenye-Wncy
For instance, water (amanzi, NC6) as a subquantity
of urine (umshobingo, NC3):
wp-ex: wonke umshobingo unamanzi
pw-ex: onke amanzi ayingxenye yomshobingo

The second reading of subquantities is portions,
i.e., parts of the whole amount of stuff that are made
of the same stuff, be this a tissue sample under the
microscope glass that came from a patient’s tissue,
or the left-half of someone’s brain. In isiZulu, there
are two types: umunxa (NC3) as a kind of ‘spatial’
portion as in ‘the portion of the kitchen where the
kitchen utensils are’, and isiqephu (NC7) as a por-
tion for solid objects, like the tissue. For the ‘spatial’
portion, we obtain:
wp: QCallncx,pl Wncx,pl SCncx,pl-CONJ-Pncy
pw: QCallncx,pl Pncx,pl SCncx,pl-COP-umunxa

PCumunxa-Wncy
Observe that the COP is ng-, not y-, because of
the u-commencing umunxa; e.g., a hospital (isib-
hedlela, NC7) has a portion that is an operating the-
atre (ithiyetha yokuhlinzela, NC9a):
wp-ex: zonke izibhedlela zinethiyetha yokuhlinzela
pw-ex: onke amathiyetha okuhlinzela angumunxa

wesibhedlela
For the solid objects type of portion, the whole is

an amount of matter (mass noun), thus remains in
the noun class it is rather than being pluralised:
wp: QCallncx Wncx SCncx-CONJ-Pncy RCncy -

QCncy -dwa

178



pw: QCallncx,pl Pncx,pl SCncx,pl-COP-isiqephu
PCisiqephu-Wncy RCncy -QCncy -dwa

with as example a blood sample as a portion of blood
wp-ex: Lonke igazi linesampula legazi elilodwa
pw-ex: Onke amasampula egazi ayisiqephu segazi

elilodwa
For the W in the pw, there is again vowel coales-
cence: sa-+igazi = segazi, with sa- the PC for isiqe-
phu’s NC7. The part P is computationally compli-
cated. It may be a noun phrase, like ‘slice of bread’,
where the ‘of’ is again catered for by a PC, being the
one for the noun class of the noun that is the quantity
(slice, piece, bowl, etc). So, e.g., ucezu (NC11) has
PC lwa-, resulting in lwa-+isinkwa = lwesinkwa ‘of
bread’. Yet, a ‘sample of blood’, isampula legazi, is
considered a compound noun, not a noun phrase.

participation can be divided into two typologies
in isiZulu. There is individual type of participation
and a group type of participation, like a citizen vs
the electorate participating (taking part) in an elec-
tion. For individual objects, one can include an op-
tional ASP between the SC and COP, restricted to
-be- in this case. This is not used here so as to match
with the rest, assuming that it will suffice. As ex-
ample, a doctor (udokotela, NC1a) participates in an
operation (ukuhlinza, NC15):
wp-ex: Konke ukuhlinza kunodokotela oyedwa
pw-ex: bonke odokotela bayingxenye yokuhlinza

okukodwa
For the collective/group participation, a different

‘part’ is used, -hlanganyele, which is part in the
sense of participating by combining to do some-
thing, acting in unison (perfect tense). This is ver-
balised in the singular only:
wp: QCallncx Wncx SCncx-CONJ-Pncy RCncy -

QCncy -dwa
pw: QCallncx Pncx SCncx-hlanganyele LOC-Wncy -

LOCSUF RCncy -QCncy -dwa.
Either a LOC as prefix only is allowed, or a locative
circumfix can be used, i.e., LOC-W-LOCSUF with
vowel elision for the W on both sides. Here, the
latter is chosen. For instance, the operating team,
(iqembu labahlinzi, NC5) participating in an opera-
tion (ukuhlinza, NC15):
wp-ex: Konke ukuhlinza kuneqembu labahlinzi

elilodwa
pw-ex: Lonke iqembu labahlinzi lihlanganyele

okuhlinzeni okukodwa

Decomposing the locative aspects that result in
okuhlinzeni: the o- is the outcome of the vowel coa-
lescence of LOC e-+u- and -weni is the outcome of
the phonological conditioning -o+-ini’s LOCSUF.

constitution Also in this case of meronymic part-
whole relation, it partially diverges in that there is
no variation of ‘part’ as a noun, but a verb is used,
as in the previous case: it is either -akha ‘build’ for
objects that are made/constituted of some matter in
some structural sense or -enza otherwise. As this is
verbalised only as wholes being constituted of some-
thing, only that one is included:
wp: QCallncx,pl Wncx,pl SCncx,pl-akh-PASS-FV

PRE-Pncy .
wp: QCallncx,pl Wncx,pl SCncx,pl-enz-PASS-FV

PRE-Pncy .
The PRE here is restricted to nga-, with phonolog-
ical conditioning. Relatively, this construction is
similar to the notion of preposition contraction in
Romance languages (de Oliveira and Sripada, 2014).
For instance, in ‘all houses (izindlu ‘house’) are con-
stituted of stone (itshe, NC5)’, the passive and fi-
nal vowel causes the -iwe end, and likewise for ‘all
pills (amaphilisi, NC6) are made of starch (isitashi,
NC7)’:
wp-ex: zonke izindlu zakhiwe ngetshe
wp-ex: onke amaphilisi enziwe ngesitashi
The SC is modified because the stem starts with a
vowel: if the vowel of the SC is a high vowel (i-; u-)
and precedes the vowel of the stem which is low (a-),
there is hiatus resolution (Mudzingwa and Kadenge,
2011). The pattern is as follows: i- + a- = y and
u- + a- = w. Hiatus resolution is followed by the
elision of the initial vowel with the semi-vowel at-
taching to the initial vowel of the stem (u- + akhiwe
= yakhiwe).

This concludes the list of patterns.

4 Design and Implementation

We describe the transformation from the patterns to
the algorithms, some tool design considerations, and
the architecture of the implementation.

4.1 From verbalisation patterns to algorithms

The variables used in the verbalisation patterns be-
lie what needs to be done in the background, which
differs by variable in three principal ways. First,

179



there are the variables that algorithmically amount to
straight-forward look-up functions to retrieve some-
thing using the noun class, such as the SC, RC, and
QC as listed in Table 2. Second, there are func-
tions that change a word, notably the pluraliser,
which is not simply a case of list look-up (Bya-
mugisha et al., 2016). Third, there are the functions
for phonological conditioning that are needed for
CONJ, LOC, LOCSUF, PC, and PRE. Most of the
algorithms to verbalise part-whole relations need all
three groups of functions. For instance, Algorithm 1
for the verbalisation of the basic whole-part has the
straightforward look-up ones (“get...”), the call to
another algorithm for pluralisation (line 7), and one
call to the rules for vowel coalescence (phonologi-
cal conditioning) in line 11. The algorithm for the
‘is part of’ direction is similar except that instead
of line 11, the phonological conditioning is phono-
Condition(’ya’, c2) and sc1 stringed together with
yingxenye.

4.2 Design considerations

As the patterns demonstrate, the actual string for
‘has part’ depends on the noun of the entity that
plays the role of the whole and noun of the entity
that plays the role of the part, which means that it
is not feasible to store all possible strings, but this
has to be computed on-the-fly. Yet, OWL requires
a single, fixed, string of text for its ‘object prop-
erty’ (relationship), i.e., a single IRI (Motik et al.,
2009b). Integrating this with OWL means handling
object properties differently and full integration with
a linguistic model, yet the lemon model (McCrae et
al., 2012) already needs an extension to deal with
the noun classes (Chavula and Keet, 2014), or: that
structured representation does not suffice for isiZulu
at present. As solving that diverts away from a
proof-of-concept implementation of the algorithms
for part-whole relations to evaluate whether they and
the patterns they implement are correct, we chose an
incremental approach with Python instead. Also, the
patterns and algorithms presented in (Keet and Khu-
malo, 2016; Byamugisha et al., 2016) have been im-
plemented in Python, so we extended that with the
algorithms for the novel part-whole patterns.

The architecture of the components of the ver-
baliser are straightforward (see Fig. 1): nouns are
stored with their noun class, whereas verb stems

Algorithm 1: Determine the verbalisation of ba-
sic whole-part in an axiom

1: C set of classes, language L, v for subsump-
tion, ∃ for existential quantification; varia-
bles: A axiom, NCi noun class, c1, c2 ∈ C,
o ∈ R, a1 a term; r2, q2 concords;

Require: axiom of the form W v ∃wp.P has
been retrieved for verbalisation

2: c1 ← getF irstClass(A) {get whole}
3: c2 ← getSecondClass(A) {get part}
4: wp← getObjProp(A)

{get wp type (‘default’ parthood here)}
5: NC1 ← getNC(c1) {obtain noun class whole}
6: NC2 ← getNC(c2) {obtain noun class part}
7: cpl ← pluralise(c1, NC1)

{generate plural, using the pluraliser algorithm}
8: NC ′1 ← getP lNC(NC1)

{obtain plural NC, from known list}
9: a1 ← getQCAll(NC ′1)

{obtain quantitative concord (QC(all))}
10: sc1 ← getSC(NC ′1) {obtain subject concord}
11: conjp← phonoCondition(’na’,c2)

{prefix P with the CONJ, phonologically conditioned}
12: r2← getRC(NC2) {obtain relative conc. for c2}
13: q2← getQC(NC2)
{obtain quant. concord for c2 from the QC (exists)-list}

14: RESULT← ‘ a1 cpl sc1conjp r2q2dwa. ’
{verbalise the simple axiom}

15: return RESULT

are stored to facilitate processing of tense, for au-
tomatically determining this has only partial solu-
tions thus far (Pretorius and Bosch, 2003; Spiegler
et al., 2010). Each axiom type and each type of part-
whole relation relates to a Python function (which
calls others). The script is yet to be connected to
the SNOMED CT’s owl file to fetch the data, so the
code emulates that output such that the user adds
the terms in the input (see Fig. 2, “->” lines). The
code and other examples can be downloaded from
http://www.meteck.org/files/geni/ and a
few examples are shown in Fig. 2. It worked for 38
of the 42 test cases (90.5%). The four errors were
mainly due to the incomplete pluraliser of (Bya-
mugisha et al., 2016) (e.g., ucezi 7→ izincezi, not iz-
icezi) and one due to ambiguity of -akh vs. -enz for
constitution.

180



vroots

Python program

- quantification
- wp
- pw
- etc.

nncPairs

nounExcept

isakhiwo,7
igumbi,5
…

dl
hamb
… indoda,amadoda

umZulu,amaZulu

- pluraliser

Figure 1: Components of the proof-of-concept implementation
of the isiZulu verbaliser. The three txt files were created manu-
ally (examples of their contents are shown in courier font).

Figure 2: Screenshot of working code; wp/pw: general wholes/
parts; wp cp: collective participation; wp s: subquantity;
pw ci: containment.

5 Discussion

The patterns showed that, like in English, isiZulu
has several more specific terms for ‘part’—ingxenye,
indawo, isiqephu, umunxa, and hlanganyele—
although they do not match 1:1 with the established
part-whole relation categorisations as in Table 1.
Such ontological analyses are left for future work.
It does illustrate that in this case sentence planning
was a major hurdle compared to just linguistic real-
isation.

The patterns reconfirm results by (Keet and Khu-
malo, 2016) that the template-based approach is not
feasible for isiZulu, and, by extension, Bantu lan-
guages that all share the features of noun classes
and concordance. This, however, also makes it an
imperative to develop a grammar. While this ex-
ercise broadened the scope on understanding what
linguistic elements are needed for an NLG, and a
quasi pattern language was still sufficient to specify
the patterns, with the increased number of elements
to keep track of compared to (Keet and Khumalo,
2016), soon this limit will be reached. In addition,
rules need to be found so as to process groups of to-
kens so as to know which one is a compound noun

and which one is a noun phrase, in order to pro-
cess them correctly. Hopefully then also sufficient
insight is gained to construct a set of requirements
for the grammar and either practical ones might be
extended, such as the CFG of Ukwabelana (Spiegler
et al., 2010), explorations of (Zeller, 2005) worked
out in detail, or a natural language-independent ap-
proach like in (Kuhn, 2013) may be adjusted, or a
new one devised to handle the syntactic elements to
generate sentences with the intended semantics.

Finally, although the patterns have been specified
for isiZulu only, bootstrapping resources for related
Bantu languages—Xhosa, Swati, and Ndebele—
based on isiZulu resources have yielded good re-
sults (Bosch et al., 2008), and thus solving it for
isiZulu will open up HLT prospects for even lesser
resourced languages.

6 Conclusions

We devised verbalisation patterns for both
meronymic and mereological relations. New
constituents in the patterns with respect to related
works are, notably, the possessive concord, locative
affixes, and a basic treatment of prepositions and
the passive tense. The verbalisation patterns were
implemented successfully using a proof-of-concept
implementation of the algorithms, and tested with
42 examples, resulting in a 90.5% success rate. The
patterns reaffirm the infeasibility of the template-
based approach for isiZulu and Bantu languages
because of the complex morphosyntax.

The patterns also indicated that it is becoming a
pressing matter to commence with formally defining
a generative grammar for isiZulu. Another avenue
will be to take the latest medical terminology terms
in isiZulu and create a fully functional medical app.

Acknowledgments

This work is based on the research supported in
part by the National Research Foundation of South
Africa (CMK: Grant Number 93397).

References

F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. L. McGuinness, D. Nardi,
and P. F. Patel-Schneider, editors. 2008. The De-
scription Logics Handbook – Theory and Applications.
Cambridge University Press, 2 edition.

181



Timothy Baldwin, Valia Kordoni, and Aline Villavicen-
cio. 2009. Prepositions in applications: A survey and
introduction to the special issue. Computational Lin-
guistics, 35(2):119–149.

Sonja Bosch, Laurette Pretorius, and Axel Fleisch. 2008.
Experimental bootstrapping of morphological analy-
sers for nguni languages. Nordic Journal of African
Studies, 17(2):66–88.

N. Bouayad-Agha, G. Casamayor, and L. Wanner. 2014.
Natural language generation in the context of the se-
mantic web. Semantic Web Journal, 5(6):493–513.

Joan Byamugisha, C. Maria Keet, and Langa Khumalo.
2016. Pluralising nouns in isiZulu and similar lan-
guages. In A. Gelbkuh, editor, Proceedings of CI-
CLing’16, page in print. Springer.

Catherine Chavula and C. Maria Keet. 2014. Is
lemon sufficient for building multilingual ontologies
for Bantu languages? In C. Maria Keet and Valentina
Tamma, editors, Proceedings of the 11th OWL: Expe-
riences and Directions Workshop (OWLED’14), vol-
ume 1265 of CEUR-WS, pages 61–72. Riva del Garda,
Italy, Oct 17-18, 2014.

Rodrigo de Oliveira and Somayajulu Sripada. 2014.
Adapting simplenlg for brazilian portuguese realisa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 8th International Natural
Language Generation Conference (INLG), pages 93–
94, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., June. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

G. R. Dent and C. L. S. Nyembezi. 2009. Scholar’s Zulu
Dictionary. Shuter & Shooter Publishers, 4 edition.

M. Donnelly, T. Bittner, and C. Rosse. 2006. A for-
mal theory for spatial representation and reasoning in
biomedical ontologies. Artif Intell Med, 36(1):1–27.

C. Engelbrecht, N.C. Shangase, S.J. Majeke, S.Z.
Mthembu, and Z.M. Zondi. 2010. Isizulu terminol-
ogy development in nursing and midwifery. Alterna-
tion, 17(1):249–272.

Norbert E. Fuchs, Kaarel Kaljurand, and Tobias Kuhn.
2010. Discourse Representation Structures for ACE
6.6. Technical Report ifi-2010.0010, Dept of Infor-
matics, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

C. Maria Keet and Alessandro Artale. 2008. Represent-
ing and reasoning over a taxonomy of part-whole rela-
tions. Applied Ontology, 3(1-2):91–110.

C. M. Keet and L. Khumalo. 2016. Toward
a knowledge-to-text controlled natural language of
isiZulu. Language Resources and Evaluation, in
print:DOI: 10.1007/s10579–016–9340–0.

L. Khumalo. 2016. Disrupting language hegemony:
Intellectualizing African languages. In M. Samuel,
R. Dunpath, and N. Amin, editors, Towards a post-
humanist higher education curriculum: Undoing cog-
nitive damage, page (accepted). SENSE Publishers,
Rotterdam.

Tobias Kuhn. 2013. A principled approach to gram-
mars for controlled natural languages and predictive
editors. Journal of Logic, Language and Information,
22(1):33–70.

N. N. Mathonsi. 2001. Prepositional and adverb phrases
in Zulu: a linguistic and lexicographic problem. South
African Journal of African Languages, 2:163–175.

John McCrae, Guadalupe Aguado de Cea, Paul Buitelaar,
Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck, Asunción Gómez-
Pérez, Jorge Gracia, Laura Hollink, Elena Montiel-
Ponsoda, Dennis Spohr, and Tobias Wunner. 2012.
The Lemon cookbook. Technical report, Monnet
Project.

M. Mettler and D.W. Kemper. 2003. Information ther-
apy: Health education one person at a time. Health
Prom. Prac., 4(3):214–217.

L. Miti. 2006. Comparative Bantu phonology and mor-
phology. Cape Town: The Center for Advanced Stud-
ies of African Societies (CASAS).

Boris Motik, Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Ian Horrocks, Zhe
Wu, Achille Fokoue, and Carsten Lutz. 2009a. OWL
2 Web Ontology Language Profiles. W3C recommen-
dation, W3C, 27 Oct.

Boris Motik, Peter F. Patel-Schneider, and Bijan
Parsia. 2009b. OWL 2 web ontology lan-
guage structural specification and functional-style
syntax. W3c recommendation, W3C, 27 Oct.
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-syntax/.

C. Mudzingwa and M. Kadenge. 2011. Comparing hia-
tus resolution in karanga and nambya: An optimality
theory account. Nordic Journal of African Studies,
20(3):203–240.

L. Pretorius and E. S. Bosch. 2003. Finite-state compu-
tational morphology: An analyzer prototype for Zulu.
Machine Translation, 18(3):195–216.

Hazem Safwat and Brian Davis. 2016. CNLs for the se-
mantic web: a state of the art. Language Resources &
Evaluation, in print:DOI: 10.1007/s10579–016–9351–
x.

A. Sharma Grover, G.B. Van Huyssteen, and M.W. Pre-
torius. 2011. The South African human language
technology audit. Language Resources & Evaluation,
45:271–288.

Sebastian Spiegler, Andrew van der Spuy, and Peter A.
Flach. 2010. Ukwabelana – an open-source mor-
phological Zulu corpus. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING’10), pages 1020–1028. Association for
Computational Linguistics. Beijing.

Niket Tandon, Charles Hariman, Jacopo Urbani, Anna
Rohrbach, Marcus Rohrbach, and Gerhard Weikum.
2016. Commonsense in parts: Mining part-whole re-
lations from the web and image tags. In Proceedings

182



of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence (AAAI’16), pages 243–250. AAAI Press.

Allan Third, Sandra Williams, and Richard Power.
2011. OWL to English: a tool for generating or-
ganised easily-navigated hypertexts from ontologies.
poster/demo paper, Open Unversity UK. 10th Inter-
national Semantic Web Conference (ISWC’11), 23-27
Oct 2011, Bonn, Germany.

E. K. Twala. 1992. The noun class system of isizulu.
M.A. dissertation. University of Johannesburg.

Kees van Deemter, Emiel Krahmer, and Mariët Theune.
2005. Real versus tempalte-based natural language
generation: a false opposition? Computational Lin-
guistics, 31(1):15–23.

L. Wilcox, D. Morris, D. Tan, J. Gatewood, and
E. Horvitz. 2011. Characterising patient-friendly
micro-explanations of medical events. In SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’11), pages 29–32. ACM.

M.E. Winston, R. Chaffin, and D. Herrmann. 1987. A
taxonomy of partwhole relations. Cognitive Science,
11(4):417–444.

Jochen Zeller. 2005. Universal principles and parametric
variation: remarks on formal linguistics and the gram-
mar of zulu. Ingede Journal of African Scholarship,
1(3):20p.

183


