



















































Annotation of causal and aspectual structure of events in RED: a preliminary report


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Events: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 8–17,
San Diego, California, June 17, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotation of causal and aspectual structure of events in RED:
a preliminary report

William Croft, Pavlina Pešková, Michael Regan
University of New Mexico

{wcroft,pavlinap,reganman}@unm.edu

Abstract

Causal and temporal relations among events
are typically analyzed in terms of interclausal
relations. Yet participants in a monoclausal
event interact causally as well, and mono-
clausal events unfold in temporal phases. We
propose an annotation scheme for the resulting
analysis of event structure types. The annota-
tion scheme is based on a fine-grained anal-
ysis of aspectual structure combined with a
novel analysis of physical event types based
on proposals in the theoretical linguistics lit-
erature. By decomposing complex events in
a clause, we will ultimately model the overall
dynamic causal network of entities interacting
over time described in a text.

1 Introduction: Why annotate event
decomposition?

Most analyses of event structure in text assume that
a single clause headed by a verb denotes a sin-
gle event; causal, temporal and other relations be-
tween events are assumed to hold between clauses.
However, participants in a monoclausal event inter-
act causally as well, and monoclausal events un-
fold in temporal phases. These observations under-
lie the decompositional analyses of verb meaning
found widely in theoretical linguistics, both formal
and cognitive, and used to capture linguistic gener-
alizations. We use and extend the model of event de-
composition of Croft (2012), intended to account for
crosslinguistic generalizations, in order to develop
an annotation scheme for event structure in single
clauses.

A major issue in annotation of verb meaning
is that a verb can be construed in multiple ways,
largely though not entirely depending on the clausal
constructions in which it occurs. For example, one
and the same verb can describe events of different
aspectual types (Moens and Steedman, 1988; Croft,
2012) (examples from COCA and Google Books):

(1) a. He touched the tip of his hat, then left a
few bills on the bar and slid off his stool.

b. But touching the wound again and
again, and remaining concentrated on
the wound is not going to heal it.

c. We can say the chair is touching the
wall it is leaning against, but there re-
ally is not an encounter between them,
but only a spatial relation of contiguity.

d. Her fingers touched the ball, and she
gripped.

e. The desert touches the boundaries of ru-
ral and urban settlements alike.

Example (1a) describes an instant of contact (usu-
ally called semelfactive); example (1b) an activity
of repeated contact; example (1c) a transitory state
of maintained contact; example (1d) an achieve-
ment (instantaneous change) from noncontact to
contact, and example (1e) an inherent physical rela-
tionship between two landscape entities. The differ-
ent aspectual interpretations are constrained partly
by the tense-aspect construction (simple past, simple
present, progressive) but also partly by contextual
factors—for example, (1a) and (1d) are both simple
past but have different aspectual interpretations.

8



The same ambiguity is found in the force-
dynamic structure of events denoted by a single
verb. Examples (2) and (3) illustrate the ambigu-
ity, with the standard labels for the force-dynamic
type given in brackets (examples from COCA and
Google Books):

(2) a. Eva stayed by his side to hold the bowl,
or to wipe his face with a cool cloth.
[caused contact]

b. Remove from the heat and wipe the bot-
tom of the bowl dry. [change of state]

c. Dad waved at us and stopped to wipe the
sweat from his forehead. [removal]

d. He resisted the impulse to wipe them
[hands] on his jeans. [application]

(3) a. She flailed with her feet to get her bal-
ance and managed to kick the chair.
[contact]

b. So he’s going to shoot if I have to kick
him black and blue. [change of state]

c. Kick the ball into Lake Michigan...
[ballistic motion]

d. Go on, kick him the ball and let’s see
what he’ll do with it. [transfer]

e. You kick wildly at the plastic bottle,
finally knocking it loose. [conative—
action aimed towards a target entity]

In order to capture the aspectual and force-
dynamic structure of an event necessary to build
the dynamic causal network, a semantic analysis or
semantic annotation of clauses in text will have to
combine three elements: annotation of the verbal
“root”, the unanalyzed part of verb meaning (Levin
and Rappaport Hovav, 2005); annotation of the as-
pectual type, or aspectual image schema as we will
call it; and annotation of the force-dynamic image
schema, corresponding roughly to the labels found
in examples (2)–(3).

The goal of an annotation scheme is to allow an-
notators to identify semantic types and properties
in a text with a degree of reliability to make the
manually annotated corpus useful for training, and
also to allow automated integration with formal rea-
soning (Mani and Pustejovsky, 2012). We there-
fore propose an annotation scheme with holistic la-

bels for aspectual and causal event types. Force-
dynamic and aspectual structure are annotated sep-
arately from verb meaning and from each other, be-
cause verb meaning does not determine aspectual or
force-dynamic interpretation, as noted above. The
aspectual and causal event types for a clause are the
product of the combination of the verb meaning and
the tense-aspect and argument structure construc-
tions of the clause. The holistic annotation relieves
the annotator of identifying the contribution of the
construction vs. the predicate to the event’s seman-
tic structure. The aspectual and force dynamic an-
notations can be translated into the decompositional
analyses described in this paper, which can in turn
form the basis of formal reasoning about the events
in a text.

The aspect and force-dynamic annotation scheme
proposed here is intended to be included in Richer
Event Description (RED), which in its current form
primarily annotates time, modality, and event coref-
erence (Ikuta et al., 2014). RED is being revamped
to supplement the Abstract Meaning Representation
(AMR) annotation schema (Banarescu et al., 2013).
AMR uses PropBank framesets (Palmer et al., 2005)
for verb meanings (the verbal “root”), annotating ar-
gument roles by numbers (arg0, arg1, etc.) instead
of semantic role labels, as found in VerbNet (Kip-
per et al., 2007) or FrameNet (Fillmore et al., 2003).
The aspect and force-dynamic annotations provide
the event structure from which the semantic roles
of the numbered arguments can be derived. The
derivation of semantic roles from argument posi-
tions in an event decomposition has been argued for
by many theoretical linguists (Croft, 1991; Dowty,
1991; Van Valin and LaPolla, 1997).

In addition, other relevant semantic inferences
about the events in the text may be derived from
the aspectual and force-dynamic decompositional
event structures. We expect that automated post-
processing of syntactically parsed, semantically an-
notated text will provide data for statistical analy-
sis of the semantic interaction of constructions and
verbs (more generally, complex predicates) in pro-
ducing the event structure interpretation of a clause.

9



Event Types Definition Example Other Terms/References
States
Transitory May change over an indi-

vidual’s lifetime
He is sick. stage-level predicates (Carlson,

1979)
Inherent Permanent Holds over an individual’s

lifetime
She is French. object-level predicates (Carlson,

1979)
Acquired Permanent Once acquired does not

change
This window is broken.

Point Holds for one point in time The sun is at its zenith. (Mittwoch, 1988)
Achievements
Reversible Directed Ends in a transitory state The door opened. resettable verbs (Talmy, 1985)
Irreversible Directed Ends in a permanent state The window broke. nonresettable verbs (Talmy, 1985)
Cyclic Ends in a point state; re-

verts to the original state
immediately afterwards

The mouse squeaked. semelfactives (Smith, 1991), point
events (Jackendoff, 1991), full-
cycle predicates (Talmy, 1985)

Activities
Directed Describes an incremental

change in a single direction
on a scale

The soup cooled. degree achievements (Dowty,
1979), gradient verbs (Talmy,
1985), gradual completion verbs
(Bertinetto and Squartini, 1995)

Undirected Describes change that is
not incremental over time

The girls chanted. activities (Vendler, 1957)

Accomplishments
Incremental Consists of a directed ac-

tivity leading up to the de-
fined result state

I read the book. accomplishments (Vendler, 1957)

Nonincremental Consists of an undirected
activity leading up to the
defined result state

I repaired the computer. progressive achievements (Roth-
stein, 2004), runup achievements
(Croft, 1998)

Table 1: Aspectual image schemas

2 Annotation of aspectual structure of
events

Our annotation of aspect is considerably more fine-
grained than previous annotations (Friedrich and
Palmer, 2014; Mathew and Katz, 2009; Siegel and
McKeown, 2001; Xue and Zhang, 2014; Zarcone
and Lenci, 2008). It has long been known that
the four-way aspectual classification of events by
Vendler (1957) into states (static), activities (dy-
namic, durative, unbounded), achievements (dy-
namic, punctual, bounded) and accomplishments
(dynamic, durative, bounded) does not appear to in-
clude a number of other aspectual types that have
been described in the linguistics literature. Croft
(2012) argues that all of the aspectual types that
have been reported can be classified as different sub-
types of Vendler’s four classes. Table 1 summa-
rizes Croft’s aspectual classification, including defi-
nitions, examples and other names for the aspectual

types.

Based on Croft’s analysis, we annotated a small
sample of sentences from the data from the shared
annotation task for the NAACL 2016 4th Workshop
on Events (RED annotation), from which we had fil-
tered nonfinite examples (including modals and neg-
atives) and also perfects, whose aspectual analysis is
complex, as they represent the midpoint of a gram-
maticalization path from a resultative state construc-
tion to perfective and past event constructions (By-
bee et al., 1994; Croft, 2012).

We initially began with a two-level annotation
starting from the Vendler classes as in Table 1. How-
ever, we found that a more effective annotation be-
gan with very common paired (two-way) aspectual
ambiguities at the first level. For example He re-
moved the bones could be construed as either a di-
rected achievement or an incremental accomplish-
ment. Sentence context cannot always resolve such

10



Aspectual Ambiguity
Class

Aspectual Image Schema Example

Inceptive State Transitory State I remember her name.Directed Achievement Suddenly I remembered her name.

Expandable Action
Directed Achievement He died at 9:17pm.
Accomplishment He died in four hours.
(Incremental/Nonincremental)

Accomplishable Action Incremental Accomplishment Jules read the magazine (in an hour).Directed Activity Jules read the magazine (for an hour).

Directable Action Directed Activity He was running down the alley.Undirected Activity The kids ran all afternoon.

Cyclic Action Undirected Activity The light was flashing.Cyclic Achievement (Semelfactive) The light flashed (once).

Inactive Action Undirected Activity He is tasting the soup.Transitory State I taste the onion in the soup.

Inherent Action Inherent State The statue stands in the main square.Transitory State Joe is standing outside.

Disposition Inherent State She is polite.Undirected Activity She is being polite.
Table 2: Aspect annotation scheme

ambiguities, but the second level of annotation will
be used for such ambiguity resolution where possi-
ble (NB: we do not disambiguate reversible and ir-
reversible directed achievements at this stage). The
common paired aspectual ambiguities can be ob-
served in a multidimensional scaling analysis of
English and Japanese verbal aspectual ambiguities
(Croft, 2012, 266). These ambiguities are often not
easily resolvable in texts, but the common ambigui-
ties allow us to reduce the annotation possibilities to
just two image schemas. The annotation scheme is
presented in Table 2.

English is more flexible than other languages in
using a single predicate form in more than one as-
pectual image schema. Other languages use deriva-
tional morphology to distinguish different aspectual
construals of the same verb; this is true for some
English Inactive Actions (She is sleeping/asleep. In
fact, the paired image schemas in Table 2 understate
the range of aspectual construals of English predi-
cates; many predicates allow more than two constru-
als. The multidimensional scaling analysis in Croft
(2012) implies the semantic map of aspectual ambi-
guities in Figure 1. A predicate is likely to allow as-
pectual ambiguity in two or more connected aspec-
tual image schemas in this semantic map. Our ad-
mittedly small sample suggests that although a verb
out of sentence context may be multiply ambigu-

ous aspectually, a verb in a specific sentence context
may be only pairwise ambiguous, or not ambiguous
at all, most of the time.

Figure 1: Semantic map of common aspectual ambiguities

Croft (2012) supports his classification of aspec-
tual types by presenting a phasal analysis of events
mapped on two geometric dimensions, time (t) and
qualitative state (q). These phases generate the as-
pectual types listed in Table 1. The basic phases
Croft posits are:

• states, having one point on q persisting for
different temporal durations (point, finite seg-
ment, and a segment extending to the end of
the entity’s timeline for permanent and inher-
ent states);

• transitions, for punctual changes of state on q;

11



• a monotonic function on q for directed activi-
ties/incremental accomplishments; and

• a nonmonotonic function on q for undirected
activities/nonincremental accomplishments.

A simple verb in a particular tense-aspect con-
struction generally designates or profiles (Lan-
gacker, 1987) one phase. Other phases are also rep-
resented if they are presupposed, such as the ini-
tial rest state and inception of an event, or entailed,
such as the result state of an achievement or accom-
plishment. Accomplishments profile the inception
and completion phases as well, since they are tem-
porally and qualitatively bounded events. Croft’s
graphic representations of two examples of the as-
pectual types in Table 2 are given in Figure 2:

Figure 2: Aspectual representation of an incremental accom-
plishment and an irreversible directed achievement

The incremental accomplishment includes five
phases (in blue): the rest state, the inception transi-
tion, the directed change, the completion transition
and the (transitory) result state. The directed change
and the transitions that bound it are profiled. The di-
rected achievement consists only of the rest state, the
transition, and the permanent result state; and only
the transition is profiled.

Croft’s graphic representations of aspectual
phases need to be formalized in order to allow for
temporal reasoning over the aspectual analysis of
events in a text. There are several possibilities that
we are currently exploring. All involve a temporal
interval logic (Allen, 1984) for the time dimension.
States and changes of state on the q dimension can
be modeled using Dynamic Interval Temporal Logic
(Pustejovsky and Moszkowicz, 2011), or by a point-
or vector-based model.

3 Annotation of force-dynamic event
structure for physical events

We present an annotation scheme for physical events
that is novel but derived from linguistic research that

argues that events in simple clauses are analyzed in
terms of causal transmission of force interactions be-
tween participants in the event (Talmy, 1976; Talmy,
1988; Croft, 1991; Croft, 2012). We briefly sum-
marize the transmission of force model before in-
troducing our annotation scheme and its linguistic
justification.

The concept of causation in mind here is the nar-
row one pertaining to commonsense reasoning and
lexical semantics called intrinsic causation by Ikuta
et al. (2014), a local relation between events, not the
broader causal complex (Hobbs, 2005) including all
enabling conditions that must hold in order for a re-
sult to occur. Talmy (1976) develops the common
“billiard ball” model of causation (Langacker, 1991)
in which one participant forcefully acts on a second
participant leading to some sort of change in the Ag-
onist. Talmy (1976) defines four types of causation:
physical, the basic physical force transmission rela-
tion; volitional, where an agent volitionally acts on
a physical entity; affective, where an external entity
causes a change in mental state; and inducive, where
an agent volitionally causes a change in mental state
of another agent through social interaction (commu-
nication, authority, etc.). In the following example,
the force transmission from Sue to the hammer is vo-
litional causation, from the hammer to the coconut is
physical causation, and from the coconut’s breaking
to Greg’s satisfaction is affective causation:

(4) Sue broke the coconut for Greg with a ham-
mer.

Sue→ hammer→ coconut→ Greg
VOL PHYS AFF

Croft (1991) also extends Talmy’s force transmis-
sion analysis to noncausal relations, such as the spa-
tial relation between the paint (spatial figure) and the
wall (ground) in the well-known spray/load alterna-
tion (Jack sprayed paint on the wall/Jack sprayed
the wall with paint). Both sentences describe a sit-
uation in which Jack causes paint to end up on the
wall. There is a semantic difference, best analyzed
by Dowty (1991): the progress of the event is mea-
sured out by the change undergone by the direct ob-
ject participant (the incremental theme). In the first
example, the event is measured out by the paint go-
ing onto the wall; in the second example, the event

12



is measured out by the wall getting covered by the
paint.

Croft’s model allows us to decompose events into
a causal chain. However, Croft’s causal model only
describes who is acting on whom. It is too schematic
to capture the more fine-grained categories of events
that are assumed in discussions of verbs, argument
structure constructions and their associated mean-
ings by linguists such as Goldberg and Levin and
Rappaport Hovav. We propose a force dynamic
annotation scheme that captures these finer-grained
distinctions; at this stage, it applies to physical in-
teractions among physical entities, possibly brought
about by agents. The decompositional analysis of
force-dynamic image schemas underlying our anno-
tation scheme is based on types of force-dynamic
interactions proposed by Talmy (1988) and on types
of incremental themes proposed by Dowty (1991),
Tenny (1994), Hay et al. (1999), and others. Table
3 gives the force-dynamic image schemas that we
posit; names for event types in the linguistics litera-
ture subsumed by these schemas are given in italics.

The distinction between Force/Resist and the re-
maining force dynamic image schemas in Table 3 is
based on the analysis of force dynamics in Talmy
(1988). Talmy proposes a model of causal inter-
actions that is generalized from the “billiard ball”
model; Talmy calls the transmitter of force the An-
tagonist, and the receiver of force the Agonist. In
the “billiard ball” model, the Agonist has a tendency
towards stasis, the Antagonist a tendency towards
change, and the outcome of the force-dynamic inter-
action is change (of the Agonist). Talmy contrasts
this with other possible combinations of participant
tendency and outcome. In cases of simple contact
and force exertion, such as He tapped the window-
pane or They pushed the door (and it didn’t budge),
the Agonist tends towards stasis and the Antagonist
towards change, as in “billiard ball” causation; but
the outcome is stasis (that is, the Agonist is largely
unchanged). In cases of maintaining or resisting, as
in She was holding a ball, the force dynamics is the
inverse: the Agonist (the ball) tends towards change
(falling), but the Antagonist tends towards stasis,
and the outcome is stasis. These nonprototypical
force-dynamic image schemas, where the outcome
is stasis rather than change, will be called Force and
Resist respectively.

The remaining force-dynamic image schemas in
Table 3 are all subtypes of “billiard ball” causation.
They are distinguished primarily by the type of scale
on the qualitative dimension that the “theme” entity
undergoes. Scales may be incremental or instanta-
neous (Croft, 2012; Beavers, 2013). For incremen-
tal changes, some linguists have argued that all such
changes be analyzed as mereological: change pro-
ceeds part by part, as in I mowed the lawn (Krifka,
1989; Krifka, 1998; Dowty, 1991). Hay et al. (1999)
have argued that all such changes be analyzed as
scalar change of a property of an entity, as in The
balloon expanded. Croft (2012) argues that mereo-
logical change and property change are two different
types of incremental change, along with two other
incremental changes discussed by Dowty (1991):
holistic themes, when an entity gradually moves on
a path; and representation-source themes, when the
incremental change is defined on a source, as in I
copied the book. Instantaneous changes also fall into
the same four types (Croft, 2012).

Property theme change, as in The balloon rose
or The soup cooled, constitutes the change of state
force dynamic image schema. Path theme change
is found in all the different types of motion events,
such as The car screeched around the corner or She
tapped the ball into the pocket.

Mereological theme change constitutes the largest
number of image schemas. One scheme, which we
will call Application as in She wiped polish onto the
table, describes putting a figure entity on (or in) a
ground entity. Hence Application includes putting,
inserting, combining and mixing; these differences
are encoded by the verb, not the force dynamics. Its
reverse (Cruse, 1973) is Removal (including sepa-
rating), as in She wiped the dust off the table. An-
other related scheme, Covering as in He sprayed the
wall with paint, describes incrementally covering (or
filling) a ground entity with a figure entity. These
alternating schemas differ in that Application treats
the figure as the incremental theme while Covering
treats the ground as the incremental theme (Dowty,
1991). They are treated as distinct frames by Fill-
more and Atkins (1992) and Baker and Ruppenhofer
(2002). The reverse of Covering is Uncovering (in-
cluding emptying), as in I stripped the trees of bark.

The fourth type of theme, the representation-
source theme, applies exclusively to replication. But

13



Direct Inverse
Force (contact, force exertion) Resist (maintain)

Theme Direct Reverse
Property Change of State
Path Motion (directed motion, manner of motion)

Mereological Apply (application, combining) Remove (removal, separation)Cover ( covering, filling) Uncover (uncovering, emptying)

Design
Create Destroy
Transform
Replicate

Possession Transfer Obtain
Table 3: Force-dynamic image schemas

replication semantically belongs to a family of event
types including creation, transformation and de-
struction that all involve changes to the categorial
identity and/or individual integrity of the theme en-
tity.

One characteristic of this family of event types is
that the events are often not incremental. For exam-
ple in creation (writing, composing, painting), one
revises, deletes and reorganizes (Rothstein, 2004).
Also, if part of a window cracks, it is construed as
broken, even if later the crack lengthens or addi-
tional cracks appear. Some creation processes such
as baking bread involve different types of processes
such as mixing ingredients together, letting it sit, and
heating it in the oven; this process cannot be de-
scribed as simply mereological or a property change.
These processes all involve following a design, as
in a recipe. In replication, the design is simply the
structure of the source; in transformation and cre-
ation, the design is in the creator’s mind, and may
be more of a process like a recipe than a pre-formed
product. Destruction is the reverse of creation: un-
doing a design. We will call this generalization of
the representation-source theme a design theme.

Finally, transfer and obtaining involve a change in
possession, a socially-defined characteristic of phys-
ical objects (and other entities).

The first level of force dynamic annotation, given
in Table 3, provides the type of the “core” inter-
action in a single-clause event. In simple clauses,
the “core” force dynamic interaction can be supple-
mented by an external cause (typically volitional or
inducive causation) antecedent to the core interac-
tion, and by a beneficiary (affective causation) sub-
sequent to the core interaction. The second level of

force dynamic annotation that we propose involves
the presence, if any, of additional participants in the
causal chain, namely a causer and/or a beneficiary;
and whether or not the event profile includes the ini-
tiator (usually the agent) or not, the latter case being
the grammatically distinct passive argument struc-
ture construction with an oblique initiator. The ad-
ditional annotation has a combination of any or all or
none of the values causer, beneficiary and passive.

A preliminary annotation of a set of sentences
from the NAACL 2016 4th Workshop on Events
data (RED annotation) began by filtering out events
in VerbNet classes for which we have not developed
force-dynamic image schemas. We then annotated
verbs whose VerbNet class allows more than one
force-dynamic image schema: 9. Putting (Apply or
Cover image schemas), 10. Removing (Remove or
Uncover image schemas), 11. Sending and Carrying
(Motion or Transfer), and 26. Creation and Trans-
formation (Create or Transform). Unlike the aspec-
tual annotation, here we concluded that the verbs
in the corpus were largely unambiguous as to their
force-dynamic image schema, and can be disam-
biguated using suitable annotation guidelines. Our
work with force-dynamic image schemas is much
less advanced than the analysis of aspectual image
schemas, which are also smaller in number. As we
scale up with a fuller set of force-dynamic image
schemas, the annotation schema is likely to evolve
beyond the simple scheme in Table 3.

The finer-grained force-dynamic annotation,
combined with the finer-grained aspectual annota-
tion described in section 2, can be translated into
the causal-aspectual event structures described in
this paper, and then used for semantic analysis and

14



inference about events and their participants. Croft
(2012) integrates the phasal aspectual decomposi-
tion of an event with the causal chain decomposition
of the same event. An example of Croft’s integrated
graphic representation for Jane mowed the lawn
is given in Figure 3. Croft decomposes the event
into subevents each of which has its own partici-
pant. This decomposition allows the integration of
Talmy’s model of transmission of force between
participants and the standard model of causation
as events causing other events. What one partici-
pant does/undergoes causes another participant to
do/undergo something in the event. The graphic
representation aligns each participant’s subevent
temporally, and places the causally antecedent
participant below the subsequent participant.

Each participant performs/undergoes its own
subevent, represented by the blue t/q aspectual rep-
resentations as in Figure 2, associated with Jane
and the lawn. The red vertical arrows represent
the force-dynamic interaction between participants
(Jane’s mowing causes the lawn to be mowed—a
mereological change) that is encoded by the verb
and argument structure construction. The labels
‘mow’ and ‘mown’ are a shorthand for the undi-
rected activity of Jane and the mereological incre-
mental accomplishment of the lawn. The italicized
forms indicate the words associated with compo-
nents of the graphic representation, and the capital-
ized terms represent the argument phrases of the ar-
gument structure construction.

Figure 3: A representation of an aspectual and causal event
decomposition.

Again, Croft’s representations need to be formal-
ized in order to allow for casual reasoning over the
force-dynamic analyses of events in a text. We are
looking into dynamic graph structure (Harary and
Gupta, 1997), which incorporates a temporal dimen-

sion through which force-dynamic interactions be-
tween individuals change, as well as the qualitative
features of those individuals (namely the q dimen-
sion); or a vector model of force dynamics similar
to the model proposed by Warglien et al. (2012).

4 Conclusion

At this point, the annotation scheme is only a pro-
posal based on the decompositional semantic analy-
sis of event structure presented in this paper. The
annotation scheme will continue to be field-tested
to report on standard measures of inter-annotator
agreement for the subset of physical events that it
intends to capture. Provided that is successful, the
annotation scheme will then be extended to other
event types than those accounted for here. Several
other physical force-dynamic image schemas must
be analyzed. Emission and ingestion involve cre-
ation/destruction of the Agonist by the Antagonist,
but also motion of the Agonist relative to the An-
tagonist. Existence and other unary valency events
do not involve force-dynamic interactions, but do in-
volve a variety of participant theme types. Other
force-dynamic image schemas involve interactions
between nondistinct participants, such as a human
and her or his body part, and reflexive and recipro-
cal interactions, including the commercial transac-
tion frame. Finally, there are also “mental dynam-
ics”, in which the interaction involves mental states
or processes, and “social dynamics”, in which the in-
teraction involves social relationships and statuses.

More broadly, the decompositional analysis of
monoclausal events will allow us to integrate the
temporal and causal relations within monoclausal
events and temporal and causal relations between
events expressed in separate clauses. The result of
this analysis will be a “least common denomina-
tor” description of events and event relationships
that is invariant as to how events are linguistically
expressed (one clause or multiple clauses), and a
means to translate from linguistic expressions to this
basic description of events. Using this decomposi-
tion, we can model the events reported in a text as
a dynamic evolving network of individual entities,
each of which is changing over time and interact-
ing with other entities in the network, causally or in
other ways.

15



References

James F. Allen. 1984. Towards a general theory of action
and time. Artificial Intelligence, 23:123–54.

Collin F. Baker and Josef Ruppenhofer. 2002.
FrameNet’s frames vs. Levin’s verb classes. In Julie
Larson and Mary Paster, editors, Proceedings of the
Twenty-eighth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Lin-
guistics Society, pages 27–38. Berkeley: Berkeley Lin-
guistics Society.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cau, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Phillipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation for
Sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic An-
notation Workshop.

John Beavers. 2013. Aspectual classes and scales of
change. Linguistics, 51:681–706.

Pier Marco Bertinetto and Mario Squartini. 1995. An
attempt at defining the class of ‘gradual completion
verbs’. In Pier Marco Bertinetto, Valentina Bianchi,
James Higginbotham, and Mario Squartini, editors,
Temporal reference, aspect and actionality, volume 1,
pages 11–26. Torino: Rosenberg and Sellier.

Joan L. Bybee, Revere D. Perkins, and William Pagliuca.
1994. The evolution of grammar: tense, aspect and
modality in the languages of the world. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Gregory N. Carlson. 1979. Generics and atemporal
when. Linguistics and Philosophy, 3:49–98.

William Croft. 1991. Syntactic categories and grammat-
ical relations: the cognitive organization of informa-
tion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

William Croft. 1998. Event structure in argument link-
ing. In Miriam Butt and Wilhelm Geuder, editors, The
projection of arguments: lexical and compositional
factors, pages 21–63. Stanford: Center for the Study
of Language and Information.

William Croft. 2012. Verbs: aspect and causal structure.
Oxford University Press.

D. Alan Cruse. 1973. Some thoughts on agentivity.
Journal of Linguistics, 9:11–23.

David Dowty. 1979. Word meaning and Montague gram-
mar. Dordrech: Kluwer.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language, 67:547–619.

Charles J. Fillmore and B. T. S. Atkins. 1992. Towards
a frame-based lexicon: the semantics of risk and its
neighbors. In Adrienne Lehrer and Eva Feder Kittay,
editors, Frames, fields and contrasts: new essays in se-
mantics and lexical organization, pages 75–102. Hills-
dale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and
Miriam R. Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet.
International Journal of Lexicography, 16:235–50.

Annemarie Friedrich and Alexis Palmer. 2014. Auto-
matic prediction of aspectual class of verbs in context.
In Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the as-
sociation for computational linguistics (Short Papers),
volume 517-523. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Frank Harary and Gopal Gupta. 1997. Dynamic graph
models. Mathematical and Computer Modelling,
25(7):79–87.

Jennifer Hay, Christopher Kennedy, and Beth Levin.
1999. Scalar structure underlies telicity in “de-
gree achievements”. In Tanya Matthews and Devon
Strolovitch, editors, Proceedings of SALT, volume 9,
pages 127–144. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 2005. Toward a useful concept of
causality for lexical semantics. Journal of Semantics,
22:181–209.

Rei Ikuta, William F. Styler, Mariah Hamang, Tim
O’Gorman, and Martha Palmer. 2014. Challenges of
adding causation to richer event descriptions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition,
Detection, Conference, and Representation, pages 12–
20. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ray Jackendoff. 1991. Parts and boundaries. Cognition,
41:9–45.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2007. A large-scale classification of
English verbs. English Resources and Evaluations,
42:21–40.

Manfred Krifka. 1989. Nominal reference, tempo-
ral constitution, and quantification in event semantics.
In Johan van Benthem Renate Bartsch and Peter van
Emde Boas, editors, Semantics and contextual expres-
sion, pages 75–115. Foris: Dordrecht.

Manfred Krifka. 1998. The origins of telicity. In Susan
Rothstein, editor, Events and grammar, pages 197–
235. Dordrech: Kluwer.

Ronald W. Langacker. 1987. Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar, vol. I: theoretical prerequisites. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.

Ronald W. Langacker. 1991. Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar, vol. II: descriptive application. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.

Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argu-
ment realization. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Inderjeet Mani and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Interpret-
ing motion: grounded representations for spatial lan-
guage. Oxford University Press.

16



Thomas Mathew and Graham E. Katz. 2009. Super-
vised categorization for habitual versus episodic sen-
tences. In Sixth Midwest Computational Linguistics
Colloquium. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana Univer-
sity Press.

Anita Mittwoch. 1988. Aspects of English aspect: on
the interaction of perfect, progressive and durational
phrases. Linguistics and Philosophy, 11:203–54.

Marc Moens and Mark Steedman. 1988. Temporal on-
tology and temporal reference. Computational Lin-
guistics, 14:15–28.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: an annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106.

James Pustejovsky and Jessica L. Moszkowicz. 2011.
The qualitative spatial dynamics of motion in lan-
guage. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 11:15–44.

Susan Rothstein. 2004. Structuring events. Oxford:
Blackwell.

Eric V. Siegel and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2001. Learn-
ing methods to combine linguistic indicators: improv-
ing aspectual classification and revealing linguistic in-
sights. Computational Linguistics, 26(4):595–628.

Carlota Smith. 1991. The parameter of aspect. Dor-
drech: Kluwer.

Leonard Talmy. 1976. Semantic causative types.
In Masayoshi Shibatani, editor, The grammar of
causative constructions, volume 6, pages 43–116.
New York: Academic Press.

Leonard Talmy. 1985. Lexicalization patterns: semantic
structure in lexical forms. In Timothy Shopen, editor,
Language typology and syntactic description: gram-
matical categories and the lexicon, volume 3, pages
57–149. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Leonard Talmy. 1988. Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 2:49–100.

Carol L. Tenny. 1994. Aspectual roles and the syntax-
semantics interface. Dordrech: Kluwer.

Robert D. Van Valin and Randy J. LaPolla. 1997. Syntax:
structure, meaning and function. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Zeno Vendler. 1957. Verbs and times. The Philosophical
Review, 66:143–60.

Massimo Warglien, Peter Gärdenfors, and Matthijs West-
era. 2012. Event structure, conceptual spaces and the
semantics of verbs. Theoretical Linguistics, 38:159–
93.

Nianwen Xue and Yuchen Zhang. 2014. Buy one get one
free: distant annotation of Chinese tense, event type,
and modality. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Languages Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2014), pages 1412–1416. European Language
Resources Association.

Alessandra Zarcone and Alessandro Lenci. 2008. Com-
putational models of event type classification in con-
text. In Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
08), pages 1232–1238. European Language Resources
Association.

17


