



















































Learning pressures reduce morphological complexity: Linking corpus, computational and experimental evidence


Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Linguistic Complexity,
pages 222–232, Osaka, Japan, December 11-17 2016.

Learning pressures reduce morphological complexity: Linking corpus,
computational and experimental evidence

Christian Bentz
University of Tübingen

DFG Center for Advanced Study
Rümelinstraße 23

Tübingen, 72074, Germany
chris@christianbentz.de

Aleksandrs Berdicevskis
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Department of Language and Culture

Postbox 6050 Langnes
9037 Tromsø, Norway

aleksandrs.berdicevskis@uit.no

Abstract

The morphological complexity of languages differs widely and changes over time. Pathways of
change are often driven by the interplay of multiple competing factors, and are hard to disentan-
gle. We here focus on a paradigmatic scenario of language change: the reduction of morphologi-
cal complexity from Latin towards the Romance languages. To establish a causal explanation for
this phenomenon, we employ three lines of evidence: 1) analyses of parallel corpora to measure
the complexity of words in actual language production, 2) applications of NLP tools to further
tease apart the contribution of inflectional morphology to word complexity, and 3) experimental
data from artificial language learning, which illustrate the learning pressures at play when mor-
phology simplifies. These three lines of evidence converge to show that pressures associated with
imperfect language learning are good candidates to causally explain the reduction in morpholog-
ical complexity in the Latin-to-Romance scenario. More generally, we argue that combining
corpus, computational and experimental evidence is the way forward in historical linguistics and
linguistic typology.

1 Introduction

Languages inevitably change over time. Sounds are added or removed from phoneme inventories, mor-
phological markers are grammaticalized or lost, word orders permute in historical variants. Causal ex-
planations for these phenomena are often complex – or lacking all together – since they have to cope
with the interplay of learning and usage in a multitude of social settings, at different times, in different
places.

We here focus on a prominent change from Latin towards the Modern Romance languages: the sys-
tematic loss of morphological markers in all descendant languages of the common proto-language over
hundreds and thousands of years. Latin marked grammatical functions by means of inflectional vari-
ants of the same word root, thus displaying complex word forms. For example, the Latin word for
“brother” frater was inflected to yield fratres, fratribus, fratris, fratrum, fratri, fratre, etc. according
to singular/plural and case distinctions. This complexity is considerably reduced in Modern Romance
languages, where there are often simpler singular/plural distinctions as in Italian fratello/fratelli, French
frère/frères, and Spanish hermano/hermanos.

A theory currently gaining ground at the interface of historical linguistics, linguistic typology and soci-
olinguistics maintains that reduction in morphological complexity might be driven by learning pressures,
namely imperfect learning by non-native adults (McWhorter, 2002; McWhorter, 2011; Trudgill, 2011;
Wray and Grace, 2007). Adults learning a foreign language often lack the breadth of exposure to the
target language that a native speaker would have. Thus, they only partially learn the range of inflectional
variants of a word, and omit morphological markers in their language production (Papadopoulou et al.,
2011; Haznedar, 2006; Gürel, 2000). If non-native speakers represent a considerable part of the overall
speaker population, they might drive the language towards morphological simplification.

This line of reasoning was recently backed by quantitative analyses. Across different language families
and areas it was shown that languages spoken by more people (a proxy for the proportion of non-native

222



speakers) tend to have lower morphological complexity (Lupyan and Dale, 2010), that languages with
more non-native speakers have less complex morphological case marking (Bentz and Winter, 2013), and
that languages with more non-native speakers have fewer word forms more generally (Bentz et al., 2015).

Our hypothesis is that imperfect language learning might also explain the loss of inflections from
Classical Latin towards the Romance languages. These formed as the Roman empire expanded into the
European continent, and later evolved into modern day Romance languages. In the process of expansion,
Vulgar Latin varieties must have “recruited” considerable numbers of non-native speakers, which might
have reduced the range of word forms in usage across the whole population of speakers (Herman, 2000;
Bentz and Christiansen, 2010; Bentz and Christiansen, 2013). Over several generations, this mechanism
can lead to considerable loss of morphological marking. We here present three lines of evidence to give
such language change hypotheses an empirical and quantitative foundation.

1. A growing number of diachronic and synchronic corpora (see Cysouw & Wälchli (2007)) are avail-
able to measure patterns of change, rather than using single, isolated examples. Typological analy-
ses based on corpora have the advantage of reflecting actual language production and usage, rather
than expert judgement only. They are reproducible and transparent. In line with a range of earlier
studies (Juola, 1998; Milin et al., 2009; Moscoso del Prado, 2011; Bentz et al., accepted; Ehret
and Szmrecsanyi, 2016; Wälchli, 2012; Wälchli, 2014), we here apply corpus-based methods to
measure morphological complexity.

2. NLP tools allow us to automatically and efficiently analyze large collections of texts. This is here
illustrated with lemmatization, i.e. neutralization of inflected word forms to their base forms, also
called lemmas. Thus we can tease apart the effect of inflections from other factors influencing the
complexity of words.

3. Psycholinguistic experiments elicit the learning pressures that drive language change. So-called
iterated learning experiments are particularly helpful to understand multiple factors shaping in-
formation encoding strategies in artificial languages (Kirby et al., 2008; Kirby et al., 2015). We
here reanalyse data gathered in an artificial language learning experiment where inflectional mark-
ing is transmitted over several generations of “normal” and “imperfect” learners (Berdicevskis and
Semenuks, forthcoming).

We would argue more generally that an integration of corpus, computational and experimental evidence
is a valid strategy for understanding changes in any other set of languages and their phonological, mor-
phological and syntactic features.

2 Methods

2.1 Corpora
To control for constant content across languages, we use two sets of parallel texts: 1) the Parallel Bible
Corpus (PBC) (Mayer and Cysouw, 2014),1 and 2) the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)
in unicode.2 Details about the corpora can be seen in Table 1. The general advantage of the PBC is
that it is bigger in terms of numbers of word tokens per language (ca. 280K), compared to the UDHR
(ca. 1.8K). They represent two different registers: religious writing and transcribed speeches. This is
important to ensure that the trends observed extrapolate to different text types. In our analyses, we focus
on the Romance languages available in these corpora.

2.2 Estimating the Complexity of Words
We apply an information-theoretic measure of word complexity. Imagine a language that repeats the
same word over and over again. This language is maximally redundant, each instance (token) of the
same word (type) does essentially not store any information, hence this language has minimum word

1Last accessed on 09/03/2016
2http://unicode.org/udhr/

223



Parallel Corpus Size ∅ Size Texts Lang.
PBC ≈ 420M ≈ 280K 1471 1083
UDHR ≈ 650K ≈ 1.8K 356 333

Table 1: Information on the parallel corpora used.

complexity. In contrast, a language with an infinite number of different words, expressing an infinite
number of concepts, packs a lot of information into words, i.e. has maximum word complexity. Natural
languages range in between these extremes (Bentz et al., 2015), displaying a variety of distributions of
word tokens over word types. Such differences in type-token distributions can be measured by calculating
their entropies. The classic Shannon entropy (Shannon and Weaver, 1949) is defined as

H = −K
r∑

i=1

pi log2(pi). (1)

Where K is a positive constant determining the unit of measurement (which is bits for K=1 and log to
the base 2), r is the number of ranks (or different word types) in a word frequency distribution, and pi is
the probability of occurrence of a word of ith rank.

According to the maximum likelihood account, the probability pi is simply the frequency of a type
divided by the overall number of tokens in a text. However, it has been shown that this method under-
estimates the entropy, especially for small texts (Hausser and Strimmer, 2009). To estimate entropies
reliably, the James-Stein shrinkage estimator (Hausser and Strimmer, 2009) is used here instead. Ac-
cording to this approach the estimated probability per type is

p̂i
shrink = λp̂targeti + (1− λ)p̂iML, (2)

where λ ∈ [0, 1] is the shrinkage intensity and p̂targeti is the so-called “shrinkage target”. Hausser &
Strimmer (2009) suggest to use the maximum entropy distribution as a target, i.e. p̂targeti =

1

V
. This

yields

p̂i
shrink =

λ

V
+ (1− λ)p̂iML. (3)

The idea here is that the estimated probability p̂ishrink consists of two additive components, λ/V and
(1− λ)p̂iML respectively. In the full shrinkage case (λ = 1), Equation 3 yields p̂ishrink = 1/V , i.e. the
maximum entropy. In the no shrinkage case (λ = 0), Equation 3 yields p̂ishrink = p̂iML, i.e. the ML
estimation that is biased towards low entropy. Given empirical data, the true probability is very likely to
lie somewhere in between these two cases and hence 0 < λ < 1. The optimal shrinkage can be found
analytically. Finally, the probability pshrinki plugged into the original entropy equation yields

Ĥshrink = −K
r∑

i=1

p̂i
shrinklog2(p̂ishrink). (4)

Ĥshrink is a robust approximation of the word entropy calculated from a text collection. It reflects the
shape of type-token distributions. A long-tailed distribution will have higher Ĥshrink, i.e. higher overall
word complexity, while a short tailed distribution will have lower Ĥshrink, i.e. lower overall word
complexity. We use the R package entropy for shrinkage entropy estimations (Hausser and Strimmer,
2014).

224



Language Tokens unknown %
Latin 11427 266 2.5
Italian 15314 888 5.8
French 17602 983 5.6
Spanish 15581 907 5.8

Table 2: Information on number and percentage of tokens unknown to the TreeTagger in a combined
corpus of the PBC and UDHR. Note that only verses of the PBC which are parallel across several hundred
languages were taken into account here. This explains the relatively low number of tokens.

2.3 Lemmatization and Inflectional Complexity
Note that the overall complexity of words is driven by a range of factors. Consider the example of
the Latin lexeme frater “brother” again, which is frequently used in the Bible. As is illustrated in Fig-
ure 1, in Latin we get a whole range of inflectional variants, while in Italian, French and Spanish this
range is reduced to the singular/plural forms. However, inflection is but one process besides derivation,
compounding, contraction and others that shape type-token distributions (Bentz et al., accepted).

fr
at

re
s

fr
at

rib
us

fr
at

er
fr

at
re

m
fr

at
ris

fr
at

ru
m

fr
at

ri
fr

at
re

fr
at

re
sq

ue
fr

at
re

m
qu

e

fr
at

el
li

fr
at

el
lo

fr
èr

es
fr

èr
e h

er
m

an
os

he
rm

an
o

Latin Italian French Spanish

0

250

500

750

10987654321 10987654321 10987654321 10987654321
Ranks

F
re

qu
en

ci
es

Language

Latin

Italian

French

Spanish

Figure 1: Reduction of inflectional variants from Latin to the Romance languages. Here exemplified
with the occurrence of the word for “brother” in the Latin, Italian, French and Spanish texts of the PBC.

To tease apart inflectional complexity (Cinfl) we can estimate the difference in entropy before (Hraw)
and after lemmatization (Hlem):

Cinfl = ∆H = Hraw −Hlem (5)
This requires automatic (or manual) neutralization of inflectional variants of the same word root in a
corpus, i.e. lemmatization (see Moscoso del Prado (2011) for a similar account). In the following, this
process is outlined for both the natural and artificial languages used here.

Natural Languages: Word types of some natural languages can be lemmatized using the TreeTagger
(Schmid, 1994). It first associates the respective word type with a POS tag (and case indication if rele-
vant), and then derives the most likely lemma, thus outputting wordType/POS/lemma. For example, for
the Latin proper noun fratrem “brother.ACC.SG” the TreeTagger outputs: fratrem/N:acc/frater. Like-
wise, for an inflected verb such as creavit “create.3P.SG.PST” it outputs creavit/V:IND/creo (where creo
“create.1P.SG.PRES” is taken as the default lemma instead of the infinitive creare).

The TreeTagger is based on a statistical model trained on samples of manually lemmatized text. It
provides high accuracy on words already seen in the training set (close to 100%). The words that are
unknown to the tagger result in higher error rates. Table 2 shows the percentage of unknown word types
for each language. We use the PBC for lemmatization, since it is the bigger corpus in number of tokens.
The Romance languages that can be lemmatized using the TreeTagger are: Latin, Italian, French, and
Spanish.

Artificial Languages: The morphological structure of the artificial language used in our analyses is
outlined in Section 2.4, and illustrated in Appendix 6.1. Note that descendant languages usually preserve
much of this structure. We lemmatize the artificial languages by the following rules:

225



1. Only if two word forms occur at the same place in the utterance (i.e. first or second), can they be
neutralized to the same lemma.

2. Moreover, word forms have to adhere to the following similarity criteria to be neutralized to the
same lemma:

• Words that occur at the first place are “nouns”, they always denote an entity. For nouns, the
similarity criterion is the normalized Levenshtein distance between the two forms, which has
to be smaller than 0.50. In the initial languages, noun stems consisted of three letters, with a
plural marker being a one-letter ending. However, more complicated systematic ways to mark
number emerged in some descendant languages, which is why the threshold is 0.50 instead of
0.25.

• Words that occur at the second place are “verbs”, they always denote an event. For verbs, the
first letter has to be the same. In the initial languages, verb forms always consisted of two
letters, the first of which was a stem, the second an agreement marker. In the descendant lan-
guages, the stem letter is usually preserved, while the agreement marker can undergo various
changes.

3. The shortest form of a given paradigm is chosen as the lemma. For example, the nouns seg and segl
(PL.) are lemmatized to seg. If there are several forms of equal length, the most frequent one of
these is chosen as the lemma. If there is a tie, the first form the algorithm comes across is chosen.3

2.4 Iterated Learning Experiments

The experimental data are taken from an iterated learning experiment (Berdicevskis and Semenuks,
forthcoming). In the experiment, an artificial miniature-language called “epsilon” is learned and trans-
mitted from one participant to the next in an online setting. 15 isomorphic variants of epsilon are created
to be transmitted in 15 separate chains. “Isomorphic” here means that the grammatical structure of the
variants is the same, but the vocabulary is different. Thus, phrases are built based on a selection of
two nouns (e.g. seg, fuv) and three verb roots: e.g. m- “to fall apart”, r- “to grow antlers”, b- “to fly”.
Morphological features include number marking on nouns (e.g. SG: -∅, PL: -l) and agreement on verbs
(e.g. agreement with seg: -o, agreement with fuv: -i). Phrases consisting of nouns and verbs have to be
learned based on visual scenes of moving objects. For example, the phrase segl bo would be paired with
a picture where several seg objects fly. Overall, this leads to 15 epsilon variants made up of 16 possible
phrases matching 16 possible scenes (see Appendix 6.1).

Transmission chains consist of 10 generations (one participant per generation). There are 45 transmis-
sion chains, 15 for the normal learning condition (there are no imperfect learners in the population), 15
for what is called a temporarily interrupted condition (there are imperfect learners in generations 2-4)
and 15 for a permanently interrupted condition (there are imperfect learners in generations 2-10). Note
that the same 15 epsilon variants were used for all three conditions.

Imperfect (non-native) learning is simulated via less exposure. “Native” learners have six training
blocks to learn the artificial language epsilon, whereas “non-native” imperfect learners have only half of
the training blocks.

For further analyses, we collapse the 15 transmission chains per condition to one “corpus” consist-
ing of the word tokens produced in each generation. This yields around 280 tokens (noun and verb
forms) used in each generation of 10 learners. Finally, there were 450 participants (45 chains times 10
generations), all of them native speakers of Russian.

3Sometimes an utterance does not contain a verb, even though there is an event occurring on the stimulus image. We do not
posit empty tokens for these cases, which means that there is some variation in the corpus size across languages, both for the
lemmatized and non-lemmatized versions. If a participant produced one verb-less utterance, it means that their output language
will lack one word form which it might have had if the participant chose to name every event.

226



3 Results

3.1 Corpus Analyses

First, we want to measure the exact difference in word complexities between Latin and the Romance
languages. To this end, we use the shrinkage entropy estimation method (Section 2.2) applied to our
parallel corpora. As is illustrated in Figure 2 for both the PBC and the UDHR, Modern Romance lan-
guages have systematically lower word entropies. While Latin has a word entropy of ∼ 10.5 (PBC) and
∼ 8.5 (UDHR) respectively, Modern Romance languages fall below 9.75 and 8.2. Note that for some
languages we get different translations (e.g. 6 translations into Portuguese in the PBC), and hence a
range of entropy values. This variation is indicated by 95% confidence intervals in Figure 2 and also
Figure 3. Overall, these analyses illustrate that in the ca. 2000 years since Latin was last spoken as a
native language, the word entropy of its daughter languages systematically declined by around 10-15%.4

9.0

9.5

10.0

10.5

lat ita ron fra por cat spa
Language

E
st

im
at

ed
 E

nt
ro

py
 (

bi
ts

/w
or

d)

PBC

7.50

7.75

8.00

8.25

8.50

lat ron ita roh glg ast gle fra por spa lad gla
Language

E
st

im
at

ed
 E

nt
ro

py
 (

bi
ts

/w
or

d)

UDHR

Figure 2: Reduction of word entropy from Latin to the Romance languages in two parallel corpora
(PBC and UDHR). ISO 639-3 codes are given on the x-axis: Latin (lat), Italian (ita), Romanian (ron),
French (fra), Portuguese (por), Catalan, (cat), Spanish (spa), Romansh (roh), Galician (glg), Asturian
(ast), Ladino (lad).

3.2 Inflectional Complexity Reduction: Latin to Romance

Secondly, to pin down the reduction in inflectional complexity, we apply the lemmatization method out-
lined in Section 2.3. The results of this analysis for Latin, Italian, French and Spanish can be seen in
Figure 3. Grey dots indicate the word complexities for the raw texts (Hraw), black dots indicate the
word complexities after lemmatization (Hlem). The difference between these indicates the inflectional
complexity of each language, or in other words, how much information is stored in inflectional variants
of word roots. This is highest for Latin (Cinfl = ∆H ∼ 2.5), and systematically lower for Italian,
French and Spanish (Cinfl = ∆H ∼ 1.5). Hence, the complexity of inflectional marking has systemat-
ically dropped in the 2000 years between Latin and its descendant languages. Namely, around 1 bit of
information – formerly stored in inflectional marking – is now either lost or replaced by another level of
encoding (Ehret and Szmrecsanyi, 2016; Koplenig et al., 2016; Moscoso del Prado, 2011).

3.3 Iterated Learning Experiments

The missing link to explain the entropy reduction in natural languages is the actual behaviour of language
learners and users. Their impact on word entropy is illustrated here with data gathered from epsilon.
Figure 4 gives an overview of the entropy change in the aggregated epsilon variants over 10 generations
of transmission. The left panel shows the word entropy change in the three different learning conditions
(normal, temporarily interrupted, permanently interrupted), while the right panel shows lemma entropy
change (words neutralized for inflections).

4Note that there are two non-Romance languages in the UDHR sample: Irish Gaelic (gle) and Scottish Gaelic (gla).

227



Figure 3: Differences in entropies before and after lemmatization (words and lemmas) in Latin, Italian,
French and Spanish.

Focusing on the left panel first: in the normal condition (black), the entropy slightly decreases (from
7.23 to 7.15, i.e. ca. −1.1%) over 10 generations. For the temporarily interrupted condition (light
grey), the word entropy decreases more sharply by 7.23 to 6.93 (−4.1%). In the permanently interrupted
condition (dark grey), it also continuously drops from 7.23 to 6.95, i.e. by−3.9%. The right panel further
illustrates – as we would expect – that entropy drops for lemmas compared to words, namely from 7.23
to 6.23, i.e. by 1 bit or−14% (in generation 0). However, for lemmas there is less of a systematic pattern
in entropy change over 10 generations. In fact, for the normal and permanently interrupted conditions
there is almost no change at all. Only for the temporarily interrupted condition does the lemma entropy
drop somewhat from 6.23 to 6.09 (−2.2%).

In other words, the entropy drop in word forms over 10 generations of learning is mainly due to loss
of morphological markers (e.g. losing plural marking -l, or agreement marking -o and -i), rather than a
change in the base vocabulary (e.g. replacing vocabulary or using the noun seg where fuv should actually
be used).

words lemmas

6.25

6.50

6.75

7.00

7.25

0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0

Generation

E
st

im
at

ed
 E

nt
ro

py
 (

bi
ts

/w
or

d)

Condition

normal

perm. interrupted

temp. interrupted

Figure 4: Entropy changes in the artificial language epsilon over 10 generations for both the original
words produced by participants (left panel), and the lemmatized version (right panel). The languages
were either transmitted via normal exposure (black), with temporary interruption (light grey), or with
permanent interruption (dark grey). The vertical dashed lines indicate the generations of interruption in
the “temporarily” interrupted condition.

228



4 Discussion

The word entropy/complexity of all Modern Romance languages represented in the PBC and UDHR
parallel texts is lower than that of Classical Latin, which represents an earlier stage of the Romance
genus. Namely, across 10 different descendants the word entropy is reduced by ca. 10-15%. Since this
is a trend found in two independent parallel corpora, it is very unlikely due to effects of register or style
of translation.

Instead, this pattern derives to a large extent from the loss of morphological marking witnessed in the
ca. 2000 years since Romance languages evolved from Vulgar Latin. This is most clearly illustrated by
means of lemmatization. Systematically neutralizing inflectional variants reduces the word entropy in
Latin by around 2.5 bits, but in Spanish, French and Italian only by around 1.5 bits. Put differently, there
is 1 bit less information stored in word forms of these three Modern Romance languages compared to
Latin. Note that this information is not necessarily entirely lost, but potentially traded off for other means
of information encoding beyond the word, e.g. word order (Ehret and Szmrecsanyi, 2016; Koplenig et
al., 2016; Moscoso del Prado, 2011).

A potential caveat of our approach is that we infer grammatical structures used in spoken language
production from analysing written texts. Classical Latin, as represented in the PBC and UDHR texts, is
generally not considered the spoken proto-language of Modern Romance languages. Hence, a careful
interpretation is that our analyses hold for written Latin and written Modern Romance. Written records
are probably more conservative than spoken varieties, and reflect the spoken languages used at an earlier
stage. Having said that, a mechanism for morphological loss in (written) language usage is starting to
emerge from artificial language learning experiments. The data examined here illustrate that morpho-
logical marking can be learned and successfully transmitted under sufficient exposure. That is, the word
type entropy of the artificial language epsilon was largely maintained in the “normal” condition of learn-
ing and transmission. However, when learning pressure is increased by reducing the exposure, imperfect
learning effects kick in, and morphological distinctions are lost, which causes the word entropy to drop
by around 4%, depending on the number of generations of imperfect learners.

These numbers seem relatively small, but over several centuries and millennia they can accumulate
to considerable changes in the morphological structure of languages. Remarkably, the percentages of
reduction from artificial languages also make sense – as an approximation – in the natural language con-
text. If we assume generations of 30 years for a timespan of 2000 years, we arrive at ca. 66 generations.
The word entropy reduction in epsilon (for the temporarily and permanently interrupted conditions) is
approximately 0.310 = 0.03 bits per generation. If we multiply this by 66 we predict a reduction of ∼ 2
bits, which is around−18%. This is close to – but somewhat higher than – the 10% to 15% word entropy
reduction we actually find across 10 Modern Romance languages.

5 Conclusion

We have reported three lines of evidence – based on natural language corpora, NLP tools, and experimen-
tal data – to support the hypothesis that changes in morphological complexity from Latin to Romance
languages were driven by imperfect learning scenarios. This suggests more generally that integrating
corpora, computational tools, and experiments is a worthwhile strategy to model and explain complex
scenarios of language change.

First, corpus data of historical and synchronic varieties are a source to help us observe general trends,
rather than cherry-picking examples fitting our hypotheses. This was here illustrated by measuring the
exact word entropy reduction between Latin and Modern Romance languages. Second, computational
tools, such as entropy estimators and lemmatizers, allow us to quantify and further tease apart the ef-
fects in question. In our case study, we established that morphological loss is the main driver for entropy
reduction. Third, psycholinguistic experiments elicit the potential learning pressures at play under differ-
ent scenarios of language transmission. The systematic loss of morphological distinctions in the artificial
language epsilon, driven by “non-natives”, i.e. learners with less exposure, helps to understand the exact
mechanisms of change. They might be subtle when looked at in isolation, but can have considerable
effects when accumulated over time.

229



Thus, it is conceivable that elaborate corpus analyses in conjunction with iterated learning experiments
(with several, separate points of interruption, and with artificial languages closely modelled after specific
natural languages) could – for the first time – give us a model of language change “in real time”.

Acknowledgements

CB was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG FOR 2237: Project “Words, Bones, Genes,
Tools: Tracking Linguistic, Cultural, and Biological Trajectories of the Human Past”), and the ERC
Advanced Grant 324246 EVOLAEMP.

AB was funded by the Norwegian Research Council (grant 222506, ”Birds and Beasts”) and the
CLEAR research group (Faculty of Humanities, Social Sciences and Education, UiT The Arctic Univer-
sity of Norway).

References
Christian Bentz and Morten H Christiansen. 2010. Linguistic adaptation at work? The change of word order and

case system from Latin to the Romance languages. In Thomas C. Scott-Phillips, Monica Tamariz, Erica A. Cart-
mill, and James R Hurford, editors, The evolution of language. Proceedings of the 8th international conference
(EVOLANG8), pages 26–33, Singapore. World Scientific.

Christian Bentz and Morten H Christiansen. 2013. Linguistic Adaptation: The trade-off between case marking
and fixed word orders in Germanic and Romance languages. In East Flows the Great River: Festschrift in
Honor of Prof. William S-Y. Wang’s 80th Birthday, pages 46–58.

Christian Bentz and Bodo Winter. 2013. Languages with more second language speakers tend to lose nominal
case. Language Dynamics and Change, 3:1–27.

Christian Bentz, Annemarie Verkerk, Douwe Kiela, Felix Hill, and Paula Buttery. 2015. Adaptive communication:
Languages with more non-native speakers tend to have fewer word forms. PLoS ONE, 10(6):e0128254.

Christian Bentz, Tanja Samardžić, Dimitrios Alikaniotis, and Paula Buttery. accepted. Variation in word fre-
quency distributions: Definitions, measures and implications for a corpus-based language typology. Journal of
Quantitative Linguistics.

Aleksandrs Berdicevskis and Arturs Semenuks. forthcoming. Imperfect language learning eliminates morpholog-
ical overspecification: experimental evidence.

Michael Cysouw and Bernhard Wälchli. 2007. Parallel texts. Using translational equivalents in linguistic typology.
Sprachtypologie & Universalienforschung STUF, 60.2.

Katharina Ehret and Benedikt Szmrecsanyi. 2016. An information-theoretic approach to assess linguistic com-
plexity. In Raffaela Baechler and Guido Seiler, editors, Complexity and Isolation. de Gruyter, Berlin.

Ayse Gürel. 2000. Missing case inflection: Implications for second language acquisition. In Catherine Howell,
Sarah A. Fish, and Thea Keith-Lucas, editors, Proceedings of the 24th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development, pages 379–390, Somerville, MA. Cascadilla Press.

Jean Hausser and Korbinian Strimmer. 2009. Entropy inference and the james-stein estimator, with application to
nonlinear gene association networks. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10:1469–1484.

Jean Hausser and Korbinian Strimmer, 2014. entropy: Estimation of Entropy, Mutual Information and Related
Quantities. R package version 1.2.1.

Belma Haznedar. 2006. Persistent problems with case morphology in l2 acquisition. Interfaces in multilingualism:
Acquisition and representation, pages 179–206.

József Herman. 2000. Vulgar Latin. The Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, PA.

Patrick Juola. 1998. Measuring linguistic complexity: The morphological tier. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics,
5(3):206–213.

Simon Kirby, Hannah Cornish, and Kenny Smith. 2008. Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An
experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 105(31):10681–10686.

230



Simon Kirby, Monica Tamariz, Hannah Cornish, and Kenny Smith. 2015. Compression and communication in
the cultural evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141:87–102.

Alexander Koplenig, Peter Meyer, Sascha Wolfer, and Carolin Mueller-Spitzer. 2016. The statistical tradeoff
between word order and word structure: large-scale evidence for the principle of least effort. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.03587.

Gary Lupyan and Rick Dale. 2010. Language structure is partly determined by social structure. PloS ONE,
5(1):e8559, January.

Thomas Mayer and Michael Cysouw. 2014. Creating a massively parallel bible corpus. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asunción Moreno, Jan
Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May 26-31, 2014, pages 3158–3163. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

John H McWhorter. 2002. What happened to English? Diachronica, 19(2):217–272.

John H McWhorter. 2011. Linguistic simplicity and complexitiy: Why do languages undress? Mouton de Gruyter,
Boston.

Petar Milin, Victor Kuperman, Aleksandar Kostic, and R Harald Baayen. 2009. Paradigms bit by bit: An infor-
mation theoretic approach to the processing of paradigmatic structure in inflection and derivation. Analogy in
grammar: Form and acquisition, pages 214–252.

F Moscoso del Prado. 2011. The mirage of morphological complexity. In Proc. of the 33rd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, pages 3524–3529.

D. Papadopoulou, S. Varlokosta, V. Spyropoulos, H. Kaili, S. Prokou, and a. Revithiadou. 2011. Case morphol-
ogy and word order in second language Turkish: Evidence from Greek learners. Second Language Research,
27(2):173–204, February.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on New Methods in Language Processing, volume 12, pages 44–49.

Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver. 1949. The mathematical theory of communication. The University of
Illinois Press, Urbana.

Peter Trudgill. 2011. Sociolinguistic typology: social determinants of linguistic complexity. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Bernhard Wälchli. 2012. Indirect measurement in morphological typology. In A Ender, A Leemann, and Bernhard
Wälchli, editors, Methods in contemporary linguistics, pages 69–92. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin.

Bernhard Wälchli. 2014. Algorithmic typology and going from known to similar unknown categories within and
across languages. Aggregating Dialectology, Typology, and Register Analysis: Linguistic Variation in Text and
Speech, 28:355.

Alison Wray and George W Grace. 2007. The consequences of talking to strangers: Evolutionary corollaries of
socio-cultural influences on linguistic form. Lingua, 117:543–578.

231



6 Appendices

6.1 Appendix A. Meaning space used in iterated learning experiment.

Figure 5: The meaning space of one of the initial input languages with the corresponding signals. Sub-
script N denotes noun stems, V - verb stems, PL - plural marker, AGR - agreement marker. Morphemes
are hyphenated for illustration purposes. Reproduced with permission from Berdicevskis and Semenuks
(under revision).

232


