



















































A Proposal for Linguistic Similarity Datasets Based on Commonality Lists


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Evaluating Vector Space Representations for NLP, pages 127–133,
Berlin, Germany, August 12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Proposal for Linguistic Similarity Datasets Based on Commonality Lists

Dmitrijs Milajevs
Queen Mary University of London

London, UK
d.milajevs@qmul.ac.uk

Sascha Griffiths
Queen Mary University of London

London, UK
s.griffiths@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

Similarity is a core notion that is used
in psychology and two branches of lin-
guistics: theoretical and computational.
The similarity datasets that come from
the two fields differ in design: psycho-
logical datasets are focused around a cer-
tain topic such as fruit names, while lin-
guistic datasets contain words from var-
ious categories. The later makes hu-
mans assign low similarity scores to the
words that have nothing in common and to
the words that have contrast in meaning,
making similarity scores ambiguous. In
this work we discuss the similarity collec-
tion procedure for a multi-category dataset
that avoids score ambiguity and suggest
changes to the evaluation procedure to re-
flect the insights of psychological litera-
ture for word, phrase and sentence similar-
ity. We suggest to ask humans to provide a
list of commonalities and differences in-
stead of numerical similarity scores and
employ the structure of human judgements
beyond pairwise similarity for model eval-
uation. We believe that the proposed ap-
proach will give rise to datasets that test
meaning representation models more thor-
oughly with respect to the human treat-
ment of similarity.

1 Introduction

Similarity is the degree of resemblance between
two objects or events (Hahn, 2014) and plays a
crucial role in psychological theories of knowl-
edge and behaviour, where it is used to explain
such phenomena as classification and conceptual-
isation. Fruit is a category because it is a practi-
cal generalisation. Fruits are sweet and constitute
deserts, so when one is presented with an unknown

fruit, one can hypothesise that it is served toward
the end of a dinner.

Generalisations are extremely powerful in de-
scribing a language as well. The verb runs re-
quires its subject to be singular. Verb, subject and
singular are categories that are used to describe
English grammar. When one encounters an un-
known word and is told that it is a verb, one will
immediately have an idea about how to use it as-
suming that it is used similarly to other English
verbs.

The semantic formalisation of similarity is
based on two ideas. The occurrence pattern of
a word defines its meaning (Firth, 1957), while
the difference in occurrence between two words
quantifies the difference in their meaning (Harris,
1970). From a computational perspective, this mo-
tivates and guides development of similarity com-
ponents that are embedded into natural language
processing systems that deal with tasks such as
word sense disambiguation (Schütze, 1998), in-
formation retrieval (Salton et al., 1975; Milajevs
et al., 2015), machine translation (Dagan et al.,
1993), dependency parsing (Hermann and Blun-
som, 2013; Andreas and Klein, 2014), and di-
alogue act tagging (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom,
2013; Milajevs and Purver, 2014).

Because it is difficult to measure performance
of a single (similarity) component in a pipeline,
datasets that focus on similarity are popular among
computational linguists. Apart from a pragmatic
attempt to alleviate the problems of evaluating
similarity components, these datasets serve as an
empirical test of the hypotheses of Firth and Har-
ris, bringing together our understanding of human
mind, language and technology.

Two datasets, namely MEN (Bruni et al., 2012)
and SimLex-999 (Hill et al., 2015), are cur-
rently widely used. They are designed especially
for meaning representation evaluation and sur-
pass datasets stemming from psychology (Tver-
sky and Hutchinson, 1986), information retrieval

127



(Finkelstein et al., 2002) and computational lin-
guistics (Rubenstein and Goodenough, 1965) in
quantity by having more entries and, in case of
SimLex-999, attention to the evaluated relation by
distinguishing similarity from relatedness. The
datasets provide similarity (relatedness) scores be-
tween word pairs.

In contrast to linguistic datasets which contain
randomly paired words from a broad selection,
datasets that come from psychology contain en-
tries that belong to a single category such as verbs
of judging (Fillenbaum and Rapoport, 1974) or an-
imal terms (Henley, 1969). The reason for cate-
gory oriented similarity studies is that “stimuli can
only be compared in so far as they have already
been categorised as identical, alike, or equivalent
at some higher level of abstraction” (Turner et al.,
1987). Moreover, because of the extension ef-
fect (Medin et al., 1993), the similarity of two
entries in a context is less than the similarity be-
tween the same entries when the context is ex-
tended. “For example, black and white received
a similarity rating of 2.2 when presented by them-
selves; this rating increased to 4.0 when black was
simultaneously compared with white and red (red
only increased 4.2 to 4.9)” (Medin et al., 1993).
In the first case black and white are more dissimi-
lar because they are located on the extremes of the
greyscale, but in the presence of red they become
more similar because they are both monochromes.

Both MEN and SimLex-999 provide pairs that
do not share any similarity to control for false pos-
itives, and they do not control for the comparison
scale. This makes similarity judgements ambigu-
ous as it is not clear what low similarity values
mean: incomparable notions, contrast in mean-
ing or even the difference in comparison context.
SimLex-999 assigns low similarity scores to the
incomparable pairs (0.48, trick and size) and to
antonymy (0.55, smart and dumb), but smart and
dumb have relatively much more in common than
trick and size!

The present contribution investigates how a
similarity dataset with multiple categories should
be built and considers what sentence similarity
means in this context.

2 Dataset Construction

Human similarity judgements To build a sim-
ilarity dataset that contains non-overlapping cate-
gories, one needs to avoid comparison of incom-
parable pairs. However, that itself requires an a
priori knowledge of item similarity or belonging-
ness to a category, making the problem circular.

To get out of this vicious circle, one might er-
roneously refer to an already existing taxonomy
such as WordNet (Miller, 1995). But in case of
similarity, as Turney (2012) points out, categories
that emerge from similarity judgements are differ-
ent from taxonomies. For example, traffic and wa-
ter might be considered to be similar because of
a functional similarity exploited in hydrodynamic
models of traffic, but their lowest common ances-
tor in WordNet is entity.

Since there is no way of deciding upfront
whether there is a similarity relation between two
words, the data collection procedure needs to test
for both: relation existence and its strength. Nu-
merical values, as has been shown in the introduc-
tion, do not fit this role due to ambiguity. One
way to avoid the issue is to avoid asking humans
for numerical similarity judgements, but instead to
ask them to list commonalities and differences be-
tween the objects. As one might expect, similar-
ity scores correlate with the number of listed com-
monalities (Markman and Gentner, 1991; Mark-
man and Gentner, 1996; Medin et al., 1993). For
incomparable pairs, the commonality list should
be empty, but the differences will enumerate prop-
erties that belong to one entity, but not to another
(Markman and Gentner, 1991; Medin et al., 1993).

Verbally produced features (norms) for empiri-
cally derived conceptual representation of McRae
et al. (2005) is a good example of what and how
the data should be collected. But in contrast to
McRae et al. (2005)—where explicit comparison
of concepts was avoided—participants should be
asked to produce commonalities as part of similar-
ity comparison.

The entries in the dataset So far, we have pro-
posed a similarity judgement collection method
that is robust to incomparable pairings. It also nat-
urally gives rise to categories, because the absence
of a relation between two entries means the ab-
sence of a common category. It still needs to be
decided which words to include in the dataset.

To get a list of words that constitute the dataset,
one might think of categories such as sports, fruits,
vegetables, judging verbs, countries, colours and
so on. Note, that at this point its acceptable to
think of categories, because later the arbitrary cat-
egory assignments will be reevaluated. Once the
list of categories is ready, each of them is popu-
lated with category instances, e.g. plum, banana
and lemon are all fruits.

When the data is prepared, humans are asked
to provide commonalities and differences between
all pairs of every group. First, all expected sim-

128



ilarities are judged, producing a dataset that can
be seen as a merged version of category specific
datasets. At this point, a good similarity model
should provide meaning representation that are
easily split to clusters: fruit members and sport
members have to be separable.

Intra-category comparisons should be also per-
formed, but because it is impractical to collect all
possible pairwise judgements between the number
of words of magnitude of hundreds, a reasonable
sample should be taken. The intra-category com-
parisons will lead to unexpected category pairings,
such as food that contains vegetables and fruits, so
the sampling procedure might be directed by the
discovery of comparable pairs: when a banana
and potato are said to be similar, fruits and veg-
etables members should be more likely to be as-
sessed.

Given the dynamic nature of score collection,
we suggest setting up a game with a purpose (see
Venhuizen et al. (2013) an example) where players
are rewarded for contributing their commonality
lists. Another option would be to crowdsource the
human judgements (Keuleers and Balota, 2015).

Evaluation beyond proximity Human judge-
ments validate the initial category assignment
of items and provide new ones. If a category
contains a superordinate, similarity judgements
arrange category members around it (Tversky
and Hutchinson, 1986). For example, similarity
judgements given by humans arrange fruit names
around the word fruit in such a way that it is their
nearest neighbour, making fruit the focal point of
the category of fruits.

As an additional evaluation method, the model
should be able to retrieve focal points. Therefore,
a precaution should be taken before human judge-
ment collection. If possible, categories should
contain a superordinate.

Similarity evaluation needs to focus on how
well a model is able to recover human similarity
intuitions expressed as groupings, possibly around
their focal points. We propose to treat it as a
soft multi-class clustering problem (White et al.,
2015), where two entities belong to the same class
if there is a similarity judgement for them (e.g. ap-
ple and banana are similar because they are fruits)
and the strength is proportional to the number of
such judgements, so we could express that apple
is more a fruit than it is a company.

In contrast to the current evaluation based on
correlation, models also need to be tested on the
geometric arrangement of subordinates around the
focal points, as only the proximity based evalua-

tion does not capture this (Tversky and Hutchin-
son, 1986).

3 Sentence Similarity

The question of sentence similarity is more com-
plex because sentences in many ways are different
entities than words. Or are they? Linguistics has
recently often pointed toward a continuum which
exists between words and sentences (Jackendoff,
2012). Jackendoff and Pinker (2005), for exam-
ple, point out that there is good evidence that “hu-
man memory must store linguistic expressions of
all sizes.” These linguistic expressions of vari-
able size are often called constructions. Several
computational approaches to constructions have
been proposed (Gaspers et al., 2011; Chang et
al., 2012), but to the authors’ best knowledge they
do not yet feature prominently in natural language
processing.

To be able to measure the similarity of phrases
and sentences in the proposed framework, we need
to be able to identify what could serve as com-
monalities between them. So what are they? First
of all, words, sentences and other constructions
draw attention to states of affairs around us. Also,
sentences are similar to others with respect to the
functions they perform (Winograd, 1983, p. 288).

Prototype effects As Tomasello (2009) points
out, speakers of English can make sense of phrases
like X floosed Y the Z and X was floosed by Y. This
is due to their similarity to sentences such as John
gave Mary the book and Mary was kissed by John
respectively. Thus, X floosed Y the Z is clearly
a transfer of possession or dative (Bresnan et al.,
2007).

The amount in which sentences are similar, at
least to a certain extent, corresponds to the func-
tion of a given sentence (the ideational function
(Winograd, 1983, p. 288) especially). Tomasello
(1998) points out that sentence-level constructions
show prototype effects similar to those discussed
above for lexical systems (e.g. colours). Consider
the following sentences:

• John gave Mary the book. is a example of an
Agent Causes Transfer construction. These
usually are build around words such as give,
pass, hand, toss, bring, etc.

• John promised Mary the book. is a exam-
ple of an Conditional transfer construction.
These usually are build around words such as
promise, guarantee, owe, etc.

As soon as one has such a prototype network,
one can actually decide sentence similarity as one

129



can say with respect to what prototypes sentences
and utterances are similar. In this case, a common
sentence prototype serves the same role as com-
monality between words.

Similarity in context However, prototype cat-
egories work on the semantic-grammatical level,
and might be handled by similarity in context: a
noun phrase can be similar to a noun as in female
lion and lioness, and to another noun phrases as
in yellow car and cheap taxi. The same similar-
ity principle can be applied to phrases as to words.
In this case, similarity is measured in context, but
it is still a comparison of the phrases’ head words
of which meaning is modified by arguments they
appear with (Kintsch, 2001; Mitchell and Lapata,
2008; Mitchell and Lapata, 2010; Dinu and Lap-
ata, 2010; Baroni and Zamparelli, 2010; Thater et
al., 2011; Séaghdha and Korhonen, 2011). With
verbs this idea can be applied to compare transi-
tive verbs with intransitive. For example, to cycle
is similar to to ride a bicycle.

Sentential similarity might be treated as the sim-
ilarity of the heads in the contexts. That is, the
similarity between sees and notices in John sees
Mary and John notices a woman. This approach
abstracts away from grammatical differences be-
tween the sentences and concentrates on seman-
tics and fits the proposed model as the respect for
the head, which is a lexical entity, has to be found
(Corbett and Fraser, 1993).

Attention attraction But still, what about prag-
matics? As Steels (2008) points out, sentences and
words direct attention and do not always directly
point or refer to entities and actions in the world.
For example, he points to the fact that if a person
asks another person to pass the wine they are actu-
ally asking for the bottle. The speaker just attracts
attention to an object of perception in a given situ-
ation.

Grammaticalisaton and lexicalisaton There
are several ways in which a sentence can both be
grammaticalised and lexicalised. For example, No
and I’ve seen John eating them are similar sen-
tences because they lexicalise the same answer to
the question Do we have cookies? More generally,
this gives rise to dialogue act tags: for another way
of utterance categorisation, refer to the work of
Kalchbrenner and Blunsom (2013) and Milajevs
and Purver (2014).

Thus, questions which the sentences answer, are
valid respects for similarity explanation, as well as
entailment, paraphrase (White et al., 2015) or spa-
tial categories (Ritter et al., 2015). This also mo-

tivates the approach of treating sentences on their
own and encoding the meaning of a sentence into
a vector in such a way that similar sentences are
clustered together (Coecke et al., 2010; Baroni et
al., 2014; Socher et al., 2012; Wieting et al., 2015;
Hill et al., 2016).

Discourse fit If one conceptualises sentence
similarity with respect to a discourse, then one
might ask how different sentences fit in to such a
discourse. Griffiths et al. (2015) tried to construct
two versions of the same dialogue using a bottom-
up method. They deconstructed a certain dialogue
in a given domain—a receptionist scenario—into
greetings, directions and farewells. They used a
small custom made corpus for this purpose and
created the two dialogues by having people rate
the individual utterances by friendliness. The re-
sulting two dialogues were surprisingly uneven.
The dialogue was supposed to give instructions to
a certain location within a building. The “friendly
version” was very elaborated and consisted of sev-
eral sentences:

(1) The questionnaire is located in room Q2-102.
That is on the second floor. If you turn to your
right and walk down the hallway. At the end
of the floor you will find the stairs. Just walk
up the stairs to the top floor and go through
the fire door. The room is then straight ahead.

The sentence which served the same purpose in
the “neutral version” was a fairly simple sentence:

(2) The questionnaire is located in Q2-102.

Often the same function of a given sentence in a
dialogue can be performed by as little as one word
or several phrases or a different sentence or even a
complete story.

Language sub-systems and strategies Steels
(2010) introduces the idea of language sub-
systems and language strategies. A language sub-
system are the means of expressing certain re-
lated or similar meanings. Examples of such sub-
systems include:

• Lexical systems which express colours.
• Morphological devices to encode tenses.
• Usage of word order to express relations be-

tween agent and patient.
The later is an illustration of a language strategy.
In English agent-patient relations are mainly en-
coded by syntax whereas German would use in-
tonation and a combination or articles and case to
convey the same information. Russian, in contrast,

130



will use morphological devices for the same pur-
pose. Hence, for some purposes the entities which
are similar may not be of clearly delineated cate-
gories such as “word” or “sentence” but may be
of chunks of language which belong to the same
sub-system.

Above we identified seven criteria by which
sentence similarity can be compared. The instruc-
tions for the sentence similarity judgement tasks
may incorporate the criteria as hints for human
participants during data collection.

4 Conclusion
In this contribution we discussed the notion of
similarity from an interdisciplinary perspective.
We contrasted properties of the similarity relation
described in the field of psychology with the char-
acteristics of similarity datasets used in compu-
tational linguistics. This lead to the recommen-
dations on how to improve the later by removing
low score ambiguity in a multi-category similarity
dataset.

In the future, a multi-category similarity dataset
should be build that allow evaluation of vector
space models of meaning by not only measur-
ing proximity between the points, but also their
arrangement with respect to clusters. The same
ideas can be used to build phrase- and sentence-
level datasets. However, we leave the exact sen-
tence similarity criteria selection for future work
in this area.

On a broader perspective, this work highlights
psychological phenomena that being incorporated
into the models of meaning are expected to im-
prove their performance.

Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their com-
ments. Support from EPSRC grant EP/J002607/1
is gratefully acknowledged by Dmitrijs Milajevs.
Sascha Griffiths is supported by ConCreTe: the
project ConCreTe acknowledges the financial sup-
port of the Future and Emerging Technologies
(FET) programme within the Seventh Framework
Programme for Research of the European Com-
mission, under FET grant number 611733.

References
Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein. 2014. How much do

word embeddings encode about syntax? In Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 822–827, Baltimore, Mary-
land, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Marco Baroni and Roberto Zamparelli. 2010. Nouns
are vectors, adjectives are matrices: Representing
adjective-noun constructions in semantic space. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’10, pages 1183–1193, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Marco Baroni, Raffaela Bernardi, and Roberto Zam-
parelli. 2014. Frege in space: A program of com-
positional distributional semantics. LiLT (Linguistic
Issues in Language Technology), 9.

Joan Bresnan, Anna Cueni, Tatiana Nikitina, and
R Harald Baayen. 2007. Predicting the dative alter-
nation. pages 69–94. Royal Netherlands Academy
of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam.

Elia Bruni, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni, and Nam-
Khanh Tran. 2012. Distributional semantics in tech-
nicolor. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Long Papers - Volume 1, ACL ’12, pages 136–
145, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Nancy C Chang, Joachim De Beule, and Vanessa Mi-
celli. 2012. Computational Construction Grammar:
Comparing ECG and FCG. In Luc Steels, editor,
Computational Issues in Fluid Construction Gram-
mar, pages 259–288. Springer Verlag, Berlin.

Bob Coecke, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, and Stephen
Clark. 2010. Mathematical foundations for a com-
positional distributional model of meaning. CoRR,
abs/1003.4394.

Greville G Corbett and Norman M Fraser. 1993.
Heads in grammatical theory. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Ido Dagan, Shaul Marcus, and Shaul Markovitch.
1993. Contextual word similarity and estimation
from sparse data. In Proceedings of the 31st An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL ’93, pages 164–171, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Georgiana Dinu and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Measuring
distributional similarity in context. In Proceedings
of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’10, pages
1162–1172, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Samuel Fillenbaum and Amnon Rapoport. 1974.
Verbs of judging, judged: A case study. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13(1):54
– 62.

Lev Finkelstein, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Yossi Matias,
Ehud Rivlin, Zach Solan, Gadi Wolfman, and Ey-
tan Ruppin. 2002. Placing search in context: The
concept revisited. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 20(1):116–
131, January.

131



John R. Firth. 1957. A Synopsis of Linguistic Theory,
1930-1955. Studies in Linguistic Analysis, pages 1–
32.

Judith Gaspers, Philipp Cimiano, Sascha S Griffiths,
and Britta Wrede. 2011. An unsupervised algorithm
for the induction of constructions. In 2011 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Development and Learn-
ing (ICDL), pages 1–6. IEEE, August.

Sascha Griffiths, Friederike Eyssel, Anja Philippsen,
Christian Pietsch, and Sven Wachsmuth. 2015. Per-
ception of Artificial Agents and Utterance Friend-
liness in Dialogue. In Maha Salem, Astrid Weiss,
Paul Baxter, and Kerstin Dautenhahn, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Symposium on ”New Fron-
tiers in Human-Robot Interaction”, pages 46 – 53,
Canterbury, UK. AISB.

Ulrike Hahn. 2014. Similarity. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 5(3):271–280.

Zellig S. Harris, 1970. Papers in Structural and
Transformational Linguistics, chapter Distributional
Structure, pages 775–794. Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht.

Nancy M. Henley. 1969. A psychological study of
the semantics of animal terms. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 8(2):176 – 184.

Karl Moritz Hermann and Phil Blunsom. 2013. The
role of syntax in vector space models of composi-
tional semantics. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 894–904,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Felix Hill, Roi Reichart, and Anna Korhonen. 2015.
Simlex-999: Evaluating semantic models with gen-
uine similarity estimation. Comput. Linguist.,
41(4):665–695, December.

Felix Hill, Kyunghyun Cho, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2016. Learning distributed representa-
tions of sentences from unlabelled data. CoRR,
abs/1602.03483.

Ray Jackendoff and Steven Pinker. 2005. The nature of
the language faculty and its implications for evolu-
tion of language (Reply to Fitch, Hauser, and Chom-
sky). Cognition, 97(2):211–225.

Ray Jackendoff. 2012. Language. In Keith Frank-
ish and William Ramsey, editors, The Cambridge
Handbook of Cognitive Science. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, MA.

Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recurrent
convolutional neural networks for discourse compo-
sitionality. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Con-
tinuous Vector Space Models and their Composition-
ality, pages 119–126, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Emmanuel Keuleers and David A. Balota. 2015.
Megastudies, crowdsourcing, and large datasets in
psycholinguistics: An overview of recent develop-
ments. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 68(8):1457–1468. PMID: 25975773.

Walter Kintsch. 2001. Predication. Cognitive Science,
25(2):173 – 202.

Arthur B. Markman and Dedre Gentner. 1991. Com-
monalities, differences and the alignment of concep-
tual frames during similarity judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting of the Cogni-
tive Science Society, USA, pages 287–292.

Arthur B. Markman and Dedre Gentner. 1996. Com-
monalities and differences in similarity compar-
isons. Memory & Cognition, 24(2):235–249.

Ken McRae, George S. Cree, Mark S. Seidenberg, and
Chris McNorgan. 2005. Semantic feature pro-
duction norms for a large set of living and nonliv-
ing things. Behavior Research Methods, 37(4):547–
559.

Douglas L Medin, Robert L Goldstone, and Dedre
Gentner. 1993. Respects for similarity. Psycho-
logical review, 100(2):254.

Dmitrijs Milajevs and Matthew Purver. 2014. Inves-
tigating the contribution of distributional semantic
information for dialogue act classification. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Continuous Vector
Space Models and their Compositionality (CVSC),
pages 40–47, Gothenburg, Sweden, April. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Dmitrijs Milajevs, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh, and Thomas
Roelleke. 2015. IR Meets NLP: On the Seman-
tic Similarity Between Subject-Verb-Object Phrases.
In Proceedings of the 2015 International Confer-
ence on Theory of Information Retrieval, ICTIR ’15,
pages 231–240, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database
for english. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39–41, Novem-
ber.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
models of semantic composition. In Proceedings
of ACL-08: HLT, pages 236–244, Columbus, Ohio,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition
in distributional models of semantics. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 34(8):1388–1429.

Samuel Ritter, Cotie Long, Denis Paperno, Marco
Baroni, Matthew Botvinick, and Adele Goldberg.
2015. Leveraging preposition ambiguity to assess
compositional distributional models of semantics.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics, pages 199–
204, Denver, Colorado, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

132



Herbert Rubenstein and John B. Goodenough. 1965.
Contextual correlates of synonymy. Commun. ACM,
8(10):627–633, October.

G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. S. Yang. 1975. A vec-
tor space model for automatic indexing. Commun.
ACM, 18(11):613–620, November.

Hinrich Schütze. 1998. Automatic word sense
discrimination. Comput. Linguist., 24(1):97–123,
March.

Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha and Anna Korhonen. 2011.
Probabilistic models of similarity in syntactic con-
text. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’11, pages 1047–1057, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Richard Socher, Brody Huval, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2012. Semantic com-
positionality through recursive matrix-vector spaces.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning,
EMNLP-CoNLL ’12, pages 1201–1211, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Luc Steels. 2008. The symbol grounding problem has
been solved, so what’s next? In Manuel de Vega,
Arthur M Glenberg, and Arthur C Graesser, editors,
Symbols and Embodiment: Debates on Meaning and
Cognition, pages 223–244. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.

Luc Steels. 2010. Can Evolutionary Linguistics Be-
come a Science? Journal for Evolutionary Linguis-
tics, 1(1).

Stefan Thater, Hagen Fürstenau, and Manfred Pinkal.
2011. Word meaning in context: A simple and ef-
fective vector model. In Proceedings of 5th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1134–1143, Chiang Mai, Thailand,
November. Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing.

Michael Tomasello. 1998. The return of constructions.
Journal of Child Language, 25(02):431–442.

Michael Tomasello. 2009. The cultural origins of
human cognition. Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

John C Turner, Michael A Hogg, Penelope J Oakes,
Stephen D Reicher, and Margaret S Wetherell.
1987. Rediscovering the social group: A self-
categorization theory. Basil Blackwell.

Peter D Turney. 2012. Domain and function: A
dual-space model of semantic relations and compo-
sitions. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
pages 533–585.

Amos Tversky and J. Wesley Hutchinson. 1986. Near-
est neighbor analysis of psychological spaces. Psy-
chological Review, 93(1):3 – 22.

Noortje Venhuizen, Valerio Basile, Kilian Evang, and
Johan Bos. 2013. Gamification for word sense
labeling. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Computational Semantics (IWCS
2013) – Short Papers, pages 397–403, Potsdam,
Germany.

Lyndon White, Roberto Togneri, Wei Liu, and Mo-
hammed Bennamoun. 2015. How well sentence
embeddings capture meaning. In Proceedings of
the 20th Australasian Document Computing Sym-
posium, ADCS ’15, pages 9:1–9:8, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2015. From paraphrase database to
compositional paraphrase model and back. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1506.03487.

Terry Winograd. 1983. Language as a cognitive pro-
cess (Vol. 1): Syntax. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA.

133


