



















































Universal Morphology for Old Hungarian


Proceedings of the 10th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH), pages 118–127,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Universal Morphology for Old Hungarian

Eszter Simon
Research Institute for Linguistics,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences

Benczúr u. 33.
H-1068 Budapest, Hungary

simon.eszter@nytud.mta.hu

Veronika Vincze
MTA-SZTE Research Group

for Artificial Intelligence
Tisza Lajos krt. 103.

H-6720 Szeged, Hungary
vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

This paper provides a description of the
automatic conversion of the morphologi-
cally annotated part of the Old Hungar-
ian Corpus. These texts are in the for-
mat of the Humor analyzer, which does not
follow any international standards. Since
standardization always facilitates future
research, even for researchers who do not
know the Old Hungarian language, we
opted for mapping the Humor formalism
to a widely used universal tagset, namely
the Universal Dependencies framework.
The benefits of using a shared tagset across
languages enable interlingual comparisons
from a theoretical point of view and also
multilingual NLP applications can profit
from a unified annotation scheme. In this
paper, we report the adaptation of the Uni-
versal Dependencies morphological anno-
tation scheme to Old Hungarian, and we
discuss the most important theoretical lin-
guistic issues that had to be resolved dur-
ing the process. We focus on the linguistic
phenomena typical of Old Hungarian that
required special treatment and we offer so-
lutions to them.

1 Introduction

There is a growing interest not only in the nat-
ural language processing (NLP) community, but
even among theoretical and historical linguists
for building and using databases of historical
texts. High quality historical corpora enriched
with some kinds of linguistic information and
metadata can provide a fertile ground for theoret-
ical investigations. Several databases of historical
texts have recently been created for various Indo-
European languages, such as the Penn-Helsinki

Parsed Corpus of Middle English (Kroch and Tay-
lor, 2000), the Tycho Brahe Parsed Corpus of His-
torical Portuguese (Galves and Britto, 2002), or
the Welsh Prose corpus (Thomas et al., 2007) and
for non-Indo-European languages as well, such as
the Old Hungarian Corpus (Simon, 2014).

Historical corpora represent a rich source of
data, but only if the relevant information is speci-
fied in a computationally interpretable and retriev-
able way. Moreover, following the current stan-
dardisation efforts allows for cross-lingual com-
parative studies, as well as for longitudinal inves-
tigations on language change. With the recent
increase in the number of annotated corpora, it
seems advisable to move towards a harmonized
common framework and methodology. Standard-
ization always facilitates future research – in this
case even for researchers who do not know the Old
Hungarian language.

Natural language processing activities in Hun-
gary were not synchronized in the past, hence sim-
ilar resources were developed in parallel at dif-
ferent locations. As a consequence, there are
two morphological analyzers for Hungarian: Hun-
morph (Trón et al., 2005) and Humor (Novák,
2003). The former one has not been maintained
recently, while the latter one is not freely available.
Moreover, they use different formalisms, which
share only one common property: they do not fol-
low any international standards. For the morpho-
logical annotation of Old Hungarian texts, the Hu-
mor analyzer was used, thus all of the morphologi-
cally annotated texts are in a special format, which
is hard to be interpreted for a non-Hungarian re-
searcher. That is the reason behind the need of
mapping the Humor formalism to a widely used
universal tagset, for which we chose the Universal
Dependencies (UD) framework.

The UD tagset and annotation scheme have just
been adapted to Modern Hungarian (Vincze et al.,

118



2016). In this paper, we report the adaptation of
the morphological annotation scheme to Old Hun-
garian, and we discuss the most important theoret-
ical linguistic issues that had to be resolved during
the process. Section 2 briefly presents the inter-
national project Universal Dependencies and Mor-
phology, then we summarize the part-of-speech
(POS) tags and morphological features that are rel-
evant for Old Hungarian. Section 3 gives a brief
introduction of the Old Hungarian language and
describes the morphologically annotated part of
the Old Hungarian Corpus which has been con-
verted into the UD tagset. Section 4 reports on
our experiences in the conversion and discusses
the specific linguistic issues concerning parts-of-
speech and features. In Section 5, we contrast the
annotation schemes developed for Old and Mod-
ern Hungarian. Conclusions and the planned fu-
ture work end the paper in Section 6.

2 Universal Dependencies and
Morphology

Universal Dependencies is an international project
that aims at developing a unified annotation
scheme for dependency syntax and morphology in
a language-independent framework (Nivre, 2015).
Currently (as of June 2016), there are anno-
tated datasets available for 45 languages, includ-
ing modern languages such as English, German,
French, Hungarian and Irish, and old languages
such as Ancient Greek, Coptic, Latin and Old
Church Slavic, among others1. Datasets from all
these languages apply the same tagsets at the mor-
phological and syntactic levels and are annotated
on the basis of the same linguistic principles, to
the widest extent possible, however, in some cases,
language-specific decisions had to be made. The
benefits of using a shared tagset across languages
enable interlingual comparisons from a theoretical
point of view and also multilingual NLP applica-
tions can profit from a unified annotation scheme.

Standardized tagsets for both morphological
and syntactic annotation have been constantly im-
proved in the international NLP community. As
for dependency syntax, Stanford dependencies is
one of the most widely used tagsets (de Marn-
effe and Manning, 2008). For morphology, the
MSD coding system was developed for a bunch
of Eastern European languages including Hungar-
ian (Erjavec, 2012). Interset functions as an in-

1http://universaldependencies.org

POS description

ADJ adjective
ADP adposition
ADV adverb
AUX auxiliary
CONJ coordinating conjunction
DET determiner
INTJ interjection
NOUN noun
NUM number
PART particle
PRON nominal pronoun
PROPN proper noun
PUNCT punctuation
SCONJ subordinating conjunction
VERB verb
X other

Table 1: POS tags for Old Hungarian.

terlingua for different morphological tagsets and
it enables the conversion of different tagsets to
the same morphological representation (Zeman,
2008). Rambow et al. (2006) defined a multilin-
gual tagset for POS tagging and parsing, while
McDonald and Nivre (2007) identified eight POS
tags based on data from the CoNLL-2007 Shared
Task (Nivre et al., 2007). Petrov et al. (2012)
offered a tagset of 12 POS tags and applied this
tagset to 22 languages.

Now, Universal Dependencies is the latest stan-
dardized tagset that we are aware of. In its current
form, morphological information is encoded in the
form of POS tags and feature–value pairs. There is
a fixed set of universal POS tags without the pos-
sibility of introducing new members, but features
and values can have language-specific additions if
needed. Features are divided into the categories
lexical features and inflectional features. Lexical
features are features that are characteristics of the
lemmas rather than the word forms, whereas in-
flectional features are those that are characteris-
tics of the word forms. Both lexical and inflec-
tional features can have layered features: some
features are marked more than once on the same
word, e.g. a Hungarian noun may denote its pos-
sessor’s number as well as its own number. In
this case, the Number feature has an added layer,
Number[psor].

As mentioned above, Universal Morphology

119



annotates words with POS information and mor-
phological features. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the
POS tags and morphological features that are rel-
evant for Old Hungarian, based on the annotation
scheme created for Modern Hungarian, described
at the UD website and in Vincze et al. (2016).

3 Old Hungarian

The Old Hungarian era lasted from 896 to 1526,
the year of the occupation of the major part of the
Hungarian Kingdom by the Ottoman Empire. The
first part of this period (between 896–1350), doc-
umented by linguistic fragments and short coher-
ent texts, is called the Early Old Hungarian period.
The Late Old Hungarian period between 1350–
1526 is the period of codices.

The Old Hungarian Corpus (Simon, 2014) con-
tains all codices from the Late Old Hungarian pe-
riod and several minor texts from the Early Old
Hungarian period in their original orthographic
form. Because of the heterogeneity of the Old
Hungarian orthographic system, the original to-
kens had to be transcribed into their modernized
form during a normalization step (for more de-
tails, see Oravecz et al. (2010)). Twelve of 47
codices have been normalized so far, and five of
them have been morphologically analyzed and dis-
ambiguated.

The five codices are (in the order of the year
of their writing/translation): Jókai Codex (after
1372/around 1448), Munich Codex (1466), Fes-
tetics Codex (before 1494), Guary Codex (before
1495) and Booklet on the Dignity of the Apostles
(1521). These codices contain legends of saints,
prayers, psalms, Bible translations and religious
readings.

The Humor morphological analyzer was origi-
nally developed for Modern Hungarian and later
it was extended to be capable of analyzing words
containing morphological constructions, suffixes,
paradigms and stems that were used in Old Hun-
garian but no longer exist in Modern Hungarian
(Novák et al., 2013). Since the analyzer gener-
ates all potential morphological analyses for each
token, a disambiguation step is required to select
the most appropriate analysis. For this purpose, an
HMM-based trigram tagger, PurePos (Orosz and
Novák, 2012) was used, whose output was man-
ually validated and corrected. This is the source
data of the present conversion process, which con-
tains 158,746 tokens altogether.

4 Language-specific extensions

Since the time interval of the Old Hungarian pe-
riod is more than 600 years, several linguistic phe-
nomena were in permanent change during this pe-
riod. That is one of the reasons behind the het-
erogeneity of Old Hungarian texts. For instance,
the progress in which postpositions became ver-
bal particles or adverbs roots back to the Proto-
Hungarian period and lasts even in the Modern
Hungarian era, thus making a decision on their
POS tag is far from trivial (discussed in more de-
tail in Section 4.2). Such issues posed several
problems during the conversion process, which are
detailed in this section.

In examples, throughout the section, the rel-
evant parts are emboldened. As a morphologi-
cal description, we apply and follow the standard
Leipzig Glossing Rules. The source of the exam-
ple is provided in brackets after the translation. If
the example is part of the Bible, the translation is
copied from the King James Bible, and its biblical
locus (book, chapter, verse) is also provided.

First, we discuss general issues of the conver-
sion, then we illustrate specific cases that are rel-
evant to only some or only one POS. Finally,
challenges concerning morphological features are
summed up.

4.1 General issues

Derivations changing part-of-speech
Hungarian has a great number of derivational suf-
fixes, some of which change the POS of the word.
These may derive – among others – verbs from
nouns, e.g. fül (‘ear’) ∼ fülel (‘listen carefully’);
nouns from adjectives, e.g. vad (‘wild’) ∼ vadság
(‘wildness’); adjectives from nouns, e.g. hold
(‘moon’) ∼ holdbeli (‘located on the moon’);
or adverbs from adjectives, e.g. vı́g (‘merry’) ∼
vı́gan (‘merrily’) (for more details, see Törkenczy
(2005)). They are formed either with a non-
harmonic suffix or with harmonic two- or more-
form suffixes, which are added to the stem. The
choice of the appropriate harmonic variant is de-
termined by vowel harmony (see below).

Hungarian derivational suffixes are denoted by
the Humor morphological analyzer, but the UD
formalism takes into account only the POS of
the derived form and does not note the root
and the derivational steps during which the final
word form was created. During the conversion,
POSs of words containing derivational suffixes

120



Feature Description POS

PronType type of pronouns ADV,DET,PRON
NumType type of numerals ADJ,ADV,DET,NUM
Reflex reflexivity PRON
Poss possessive pronouns PRON
Number number ADJ,ADV,AUX,NOUN,NUM,PRON,PROPN,VERB
Number[psor] number of possessor ADJ,NOUN,NUM,PRON,PROPN
Number[psed] number of possessed ADJ,NOUN,NUM,PRON,PROPN
Person person ADJ,ADV,AUX,PRON,VERB
Person[psor] person of possessor ADJ,NOUN,NUM,PRON,PROPN
Case case ADJ,NOUN,NUM,PRON,PROPN
Definite definiteness DET,VERB
Degree degree ADJ,ADV,NUM
VerbForm form of the verb ADJ,ADV,VERB
Mood mood AUX,VERB
Tense tense AUX,VERB
Aspect aspect ADJ,VERB
Voice voice ADJ,VERB

Table 2: Morphological features for Old Hungarian.

which do not change the lexical category were left
unchanged, while POS-changing suffixes caused
several difficulties. In addition to changing the
POS, the lemma had also to be changed.

In the case of POSs which cannot be inflected,
the full normalized word form can stand for the
lemma as well. However, in those cases when
the derived form may be inflected (verbs, nouns,
adjectives), the lemma and the normalized form
are not interchangeable. Thus the new lemma has
to be generated from the old lemma and the har-
monized form of the derivational suffix. More-
over, there are several irregular stems which may
be changed before the derivational suffix, thus the
converter must be capable to deal with them. The
irregular stems occurring in the current version
of the corpus are fully covered by the rules of
the converter, but new stems may appear when
expanding the corpus with new sources. Lem-
mas coming from the Humor morphological an-
alyzer can be preserved in the 10th column of the
CoNLL-U format, which is dedicated to any other
annotation.

Allomorphs
In Hungarian, most suffixes harmonize with the
stem they are attached to, which means that most
suffixes exist in two or three alternative forms
differing in the suffix vowel, and the selection
of the suffix alternant is determined by the stem

vowel(s). This phenomenon is known as vowel
harmony, whose roots probably go back to the
Proto-Uralic language, thus it exists in the Old
Hungarian language as well.

There are several alternants in the Old Hungar-
ian language which do not exist in Modern Hun-
garian and which therefore have specific mark-
ings in the formalism of Humor. An example of
this phenomenon is the allomorph -i. In many
cases, it is difficult or even impossible to decide
whether it is the 3rd person singular form of the
possessive suffix, or whether it marks the plu-
rality of the possessed noun. For instance, the
form ÿgeretÿth can be normalized either as ı́géret-
é-t (‘promise-POSS.3SG-ACC’), or as ı́géret-e-i-
t (‘promise-POSS.3SG-PL-ACC’). These forms
get the morphological code N.PxS3=i.Acc or
N.PxS3.Pl=i.Acc in the Humor formalism. How-
ever, these phenomena cannot be marked in the
framework of UD, therefore they have been con-
verted into the same feature–value pair as the
corresponding Modern Hungarian suffix, without
marking the surface form of the suffix. Since the
CoNLL-U format of UD allows us to keep the
original language-specific POS tags and morpho-
logical features, these kinds of information will
not be lost.

121



4.2 Issues concerning parts-of-speech
Pronouns
In UD, only pronouns that substitute nouns are
assigned the POS tag PRON, all the other pro-
nouns are tagged according to the POS they stand
for in the context. However, in the Old Hungar-
ian Corpus, all pronouns – even those substituting
other parts-of-speech – are tagged as pronouns.
While converting the data, we could exploit the
fact that pronouns inflected for case can only sub-
stitute nouns, compare the examples below:

(1)
ilyetén könyörgés-ek-et
such prayer-PL-ACC
‘such prayers’ (Kazinczy C. 26r)

(2)
soha ilyetén-t nem ten-ni
never such-ACC not do-INF
‘such thing never to do’ (Jókai C. 107)

Thus, inflected pronouns were automatically
tagged as PRON. Words that were originally
tagged as pronouns and occurred in the nominative
case (i.e. they were not inflected) were assigned
their UD POS tags with the help of lexical support:
we defined lists for those pronouns and determined
their UD POS tag manually. For instance, in Ex-
ample 1, ilyetén was tagged as ADJ. These lists
were then used in the automatic conversion pro-
cess.

Postpositions
Some of the prepositional meanings found in other
languages such as English are expressed in Hun-
garian by postpositions (Example 3) and case end-
ings (Example 4). Hegedűs (2014) claims that
there is historical evidence that the only differ-
ence between postpositions and case suffixes is
that suffixes are monosyllabic and most of them
show vowel harmony with the stem they are at-
tached to. Syntactically, the two groups behave
largely identically in Modern Hungarian.

(3)
ház-a fölött
house-POSS.3SG above
‘above his house’ (Festetics C. 57)

(4)
ház-á-ba
house-POSS.3SG-ILL
‘into his house’ (Jókai C. 88)

Similarly to the forms of pronouns inflected for
case (Example 5), some postpositions may form

postpositional pronominal forms (Example 6).
The former word forms can be regarded as a com-
bination of a case marker and a marker for person
and number, while the latter ones consist of a post-
position plus the regular person/number endings.

(5)
nek-em
DAT-1SG
‘to me’ (Festetics C. 54)

(6)
ellen-em
against-1SG
‘against me’ (Jókai C. 103)

In the Old Hungarian Corpus, however, these
suffixes are analyzed as possessive endings, which
is also a valid approach. Some of the Old Hun-
garian postpositions can appear in a structure that
is analogous to the possessive construction (for
more details on possessive constructions, see Sec-
tion 4.3). Similarly to how the possessor can ap-
pear in dative case, the complement of some post-
positions can also be in dative case, while a pos-
sessedness marker may appear on the postposition
(Hegedűs, 2014), compare the examples below:

(7)
halál-a után
death-POSS.3SG after
‘after his death’ (Vienna C. 4)

(8)
halál-od-nak után-a
death-POSS.2SG-DAT after-POSS
‘after your death’ (Bod C. 14r)

Since inflected pronouns and inflected postpo-
sitions behave in a similar way, it can be argued
that these endings are only markers of person and
number, without referring to possession. In the
UD morphology, we analyze both of them as per-
sonal pronouns as they can substitute inflected
nouns, and assign them the features Person and
Number, without any reference to possession.

Complex verb forms
According to the description on the UD website,
auxiliaries express grammatical distinctions not
carried by the lexical verb, thus the lexical verb
and the auxiliary together bear all suffixes. In this
sense, there are four auxiliaries in Old Hungarian
(vala, volt, volna, legyen), which are parts of the
Old Hungarian complex verb forms. In Hungar-
ian, a conjugated verb form consists of the stem

122



plus two inflectional slots, i.e. positions where in-
flectional suffixes can occur. The first of these suf-
fix positions is that of tense/mood and the second
one is that of person/number. This is the reason be-
hind the need for complex verb forms, thus there
is insufficient place in one inflected word form
for expressing tense and mood at the same time.
Therefore, one of the tense and mood markers has
to be ‘out-sourced’ to an auxiliary, while agree-
ment and definiteness markers stay on the lexical
verb.

There are four complex verb forms in Old Hun-
garian: past continuous, past perfect, past condi-
tional, and past subjunctive. With the only ex-
ception of past conditional, all of them are extinct
from the Modern Hungarian language.

The past continuous and the past conditional
constructions have a version in which the auxiliary
also bears an agreement marker, as in Examples 9
and 10:

(9)

tart-om val-ék
keep-1SG.DEF be-IPFV.1SG
‘I was keeping (them)’

(Munich C. 103vb)

(10)
ı́r-t-am vol-nék
write-PST-1SG be-COND.1SG
‘I would have written’ (Bod C. 15r)

In these cases, Person and Number features
of both the lexical verb and the auxiliary have
the same value. In the cases where the auxiliary
does not carry any grammatical distinctions, but
the tense or mood suffixes, Person, Number,
Voice and Definite features remain under-
specified.

Verbal particles
Hungarian verbs often have particles, which ap-
pear pre-verbally in neutral Hungarian sentences.
In these cases, they are attached to the beginning
of the verb, thus they constitute one token with
the verb (Example 11). However, there are sev-
eral cases when particles become separated from
the verb and actually appear after the verb. For
example, if another word or group of words is the
focus in the sentence, the particle obligatorily fol-
lows the verb (Example 12).

(11)

ki-tisztul-ok nagy vétés-ből
out-purge-1SG big sin-ELA
‘I am purged from big sin’

(Festetics C. 11)

(12)
sok-ak-at hagy-t-am el
many-PL-ACC leave-PST-1SG away
‘I left many’ (Könyvecse 18v)

If the verbal particle immediately precedes the
verb, its code is attached to that of the verb in the
Humor formalism. Since the verbal particle + verb
construction is treated as one unit, only one POS
tag can be assigned to it, which is VERB.

In cases when the particle is separated from the
verb, the particle itself must have its own POS
tag. According to the UD description, however,
not all function words that are traditionally called
particles automatically qualify for the PART tag,
but they may be adpositions or adverbs by origin,
therefore should be tagged as ADP or ADV, respec-
tively.

The state and origin of verbal particles are con-
stantly disputed even in Modern Hungarian. For
example, D. Mátai (1992) claims that they devel-
oped from spatial adverbs, while Hegedűs (2014)
proposes that they all go back to spatial postposi-
tions with a lative (mostly goal) meaning.

The oldest particles are meg ‘back’, ki ‘out’, le
‘down’, el ‘away’, be ‘into’, fel ‘up’. They are
telicizing elements with often little spatial mean-
ing left due to semantic bleaching. However, since
they have not been fully grammaticalized, they
have preserved some spatial meaning, and as a re-
sult we cannot treat them as regular particles.

In addition to the oldest particles, several new
ones were born during the Old Hungarian period.
According to the theory of Hegedűs (2014), all of
them go back to, and are grammaticalized from
postpositions, therefore we tagged them as ADP.

Adverbial participles
Old Hungarian has three types of adverbial partici-
ples, which are formed with one of the harmon-
ising two-form suffixes: -ván/-vén, -va/-ve, and
-atta/-ette. In the UD formalism, they all have
the VerbForm=Trans feature–value pair, since
they are transgressives, i.e. non-finite verb forms
that share properties of verbs and adverbs.

While -ván/-vén adverbial participles do not
agree, participles with -va/-ve can optionally agree
with their subject (Examples 13 and 14), and par-
ticiples with -atta/-ette ending obligatorily agree
with their subject, see Example 15.

(13)
hal-va lel-ik val-a
dead-PART find-3PL.DEF be-PST
‘they found him dead’ (Guary C. 103)

123



(14)

mi alu-vánk
we sleep-PART.1PL
‘while we slept’
(Munich C. 35vb; Matthew 28,13)

(15)

mı́g ő beszéll-ette
while he speak-PART.3SG
‘while he yet spake’
(Munich C. 81vb; Luke 22,47)

While some of the Old Hungarian non-finites do
agree with their subject, none of them distinguish
the definite and indefinite conjugation like finite
clauses do. Moreover, they do not bear tempo-
ral, mood, and aspect suffixes, thus in this sense
their agreement paradigm can be said to be de-
fective. Therefore, they can optionally get the
Person and Number features in UD besides the
VerbForm=Trans feature–value pair.

4.3 Issues concerning features
Definiteness of the verb
As a special type of agreement, Hungarian verbs
also mark the definiteness of their objects. In other
words, the form of the verb changes when the def-
initeness of the object also changes (Törkenczy,
2005). Proper nouns and noun phrases with a def-
inite article are prototypical examples of definite
objects while bare nouns and noun phrases with an
indefinite article are indefinite objects. Compare:

(16)
lát-á az ház-at
see-IPFV.3SG.DEF the house-ACC
‘he saw the house’ (Kazinczy C. 13r)

(17)
lát-a álm-ot
see-IPFV.3SG.INDEF dream-ACC
‘he had a dream’ (Vienna C. 73)

As can be seen in Examples 16 and 17, the two
verb forms differ only in one accent, more pre-
cisely, in the definite form there is an accented a,
but in the indefinite form, there is no accent on the
last vowel. However, due to the lack of standard-
ized orthography and spelling conventions in the
Old Hungarian period, the very same words can
be spelled completely differently on the one hand,
and different words can be spelled in the same
way on the other hand, especially when no dia-
critics are used. Thus, we could encounter cases
when it was impossible to decide whether the def-
inite or the indefinite form of the verb was meant

to be used, e.g. lata could be láta (the indefinite
form) as well as látá (the definite form). For these
cases, it seemed necessary to add another possi-
ble value of the Definite feature: the value
Underspecified denotes that the definiteness
of the verb cannot be figured out and it leaves this
feature under-specified.

Possessive constructions
The possessor in Hungarian possessive construc-
tions can have two different surface forms both in
Old and Modern Hungarian, without any differ-
ence in meaning (similar to the English construc-
tions the boy’s dog and the dog of the boy). That is,
both of the following examples are widely used:

(18)

Jézus tanı́tvány-a
Jesus disciple-POSS.3SG
‘Jesus’s disciple’
(Munich C. 35rb; Matthew 27,57)

(19)
Jézus-nak nev-é-be
Jesus-DAT name-POSS.3SG-ILL
‘in the name of Jesus’ (Booklet 16r)

The first (unmarked) form coincides with the
nominative case whereas the second (marked)
form coincides with the dative form of the noun,
cf.:

(20)

mond-á Jézus-nak
say-IPFV.3SG.DEF Jesus-DAT
‘said unto Jesus’
(Munich C. 23rb; Matthew 17,4)

According to the UD guidelines for Modern
Hungarian, the case of the unmarked possessor
is nominative, that is, a nominative possessor is
not distinguished from the subject. However, the
marked possessor is labeled differently from the
dative argument, bearing a genitive label. In the
original version of the Old Hungarian Corpus, a
distinction was made in all of the cases, and the
labels Nom, Dat, Nom Gen and Dat Gen are used
for the subject, indirect object, nominative posses-
sor and dative possessor, respectively.

Here, we voted for not making a distinction
of the surface cases at the level of morphology.
Hence, we annotated the unmarked possessor with
the nominative case and the marked possessor with
the dative case. On the other hand, the syntactic
annotations of these should differ from each other,
that is, the distinction will be made at the level of
syntax. Table 4.3 summarizes these distinctions.

124



Example Translation UD for MH OH original UD for OH

a fiú kutyája the boy’s dog Nom Nom Gen Nom
a fiú játszott the boy was playing Nom Nom Nom
a fiúnak a kutyája the dog of the boy Gen Dat Gen Dat
a fiúnak adta a könyvet he gave the book to the boy Dat Dat Dat

Table 3: Morphological features for possessors (MH: Modern Hungarian, OH: Old Hungarian).

5 Differences between Old and Modern
Hungarian

In this section, we briefly contrast the annotation
schemes for Old and Modern Hungarian, and we
highlight the most important differences.

In Old Hungarian, there were more tenses and
verb forms in use than in Modern Hungarian (see
Section 4.2). Hence, more feature combinations
are possible in Old Hungarian. Certain forms of
adverbial participles agreed with the subject in
Old Hungarian, however, this phenomenon is ex-
tinct now (cf. Section 4.2). For this reason, ad-
verbial participles can have the features Number
and Person in Old Hungarian but not in Modern
Hungarian.

The verbal particle meg originates from a post-
position meaning ‘behind’. However, in Modern
Hungarian, meg totally lost this shade of meaning
and now is only used as a particle that perfectivizes
the meaning of the verb it is attached to. Due to
this historical change, meg is tagged as PART in
Modern Hungarian but as ADP in Old Hungarian.

In Old Hungarian, ordinal and fractal num-
bers are not distinguished from each other, that
is, the word form harm-ad (‘three-DERIV.SFX’)
can mean ‘a third part of something’ and ‘the
third one’ as well. However, in Modern Hungar-
ian, it can only have the first meaning, the lat-
ter one is expressed by the word form harm-ad-
ik (‘three-DERIV.SFX-DES’). As a consequence,
fractal numbers occur only in Modern Hungarian
but not in Old Hungarian.

There are also differences concerning the mark-
ing of possessors. As discussed above in Sec-
tion 4.3, the Old Hungarian UD annotation scheme
makes use of only the labels Nom and Dat, re-
gardless of whether the noun is used as a possessor
or not. However, the morphological annotation of
the UD treebank for Modern Hungarian was con-
verted from the Szeged Treebank (Csendes et al.,
2005), which makes a distinction between dative
possessors and indirect objects (both ending in a

dative suffix), thus the distinction was kept in the
UD treebank as well. It should be noted, however,
that it is not historical changes that led to this dis-
tinction: the annotation principles of the two tree-
banks are responsible for this divergence.

Due to the orthographic features of codices, the
value Underspecified had to be added to the
Definite feature for verbs, which is not present
in Modern Hungarian (cf. Section 4.3). Neverthe-
less, this feature value might be of use in Modern
Hungarian too: for instance, social media users
tend to write their posts without accents, which
might also yield ambiguous word forms. Thus,
should social media texts be included in the Mod-
ern Hungarian UD treebank in the future, this fea-
ture value might be exploited there as well.

As can be seen, in some cases, Old Hungar-
ian had a richer set of morphological processes
(for instance, verbal conjugation), but in other
cases, Modern Hungarian has developed some
more morphological distinctions (like that of ordi-
nal and fractal numbers). Thus, both additions and
losses occurred in Hungarian morphology from a
historical perspective. Later on, we intend to in-
vestigate whether this is true for syntax as well: we
would like to adapt the UD annotation guidelines
to Old Hungarian and see the syntactic differences
between Old and Modern Hungarian.

6 Conclusions and future work

In this paper, we reported the automatic conver-
sion of the morphological annotation of the Old
Hungarian Corpus to the international standard
framework of Universal Dependencies and Mor-
phology. We presented the linguistic phenom-
ena typical of Old Hungarian that required spe-
cial treatment and we offered solutions to them.
The detailed description of the Old Hungarian
morphology has been made publicly available, to-
gether with the converted corpus2. Later on, we
intend to adapt the Modern Hungarian UD depen-

2http://oldhungariancorpus.nytud.hu/

125



dency tagset and annotation principles to Old Hun-
garian as well. After that, we are planning to add
syntactic annotation to the corpus and publish it at
the UD website3, together with the adapted depen-
dency labels and their detailed description.

Currently, additional texts from the Old Hun-
garian period are being digitized and normalized,
also, morphological annotation is being added to
them. These texts will then be standardized ac-
cording to the UD morphology on the basis of the
conversion rules developed in this paper and thus,
the dataset of Old Hungarian texts with UD mor-
phology will be expanded too.

Finally, it should be noted that the Hungarian
NLP community is currently implementing a new
morphological analyzer, which is planned to pro-
vide output in different formalisms, one of which
will be the UD morphology. We are confident that
our corpus and the above-mentioned morpholog-
ical analyzer can contribute to the more effective
and faster processing of Old Hungarian texts.

Acknowledgments

The research reported in the paper was conducted
with the support of the Hungarian Scientific Re-
search Fund (OTKA) grant #112057. We thank
the anonymous reviewers for their comments.

References
Dóra Csendes, János Csirik, Tibor Gyimóthy, and

András Kocsor. 2005. The Szeged TreeBank.
In Václav Matousek, Pavel Mautner, and Tomás
Pavelka, editors, Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue,
TSD 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 123–132, Berlin / Heidelberg, September.
Springer.

Mária D. Mátai. 1992. Az igekötők [Particles]. In
Loránd Benkő, editor, A magyar nyelv történeti
nyelvtana II/1. A kései ómagyar kor. Morfematika
[Historical grammar of the Hungarian language.
The Late Old Hungarian period. Morphology],
pages 662–695. Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. Stanford dependencies manual. Tech-
nical report, Stanford University.

Tomaž Erjavec. 2012. MULTEXT-East: morphosyn-
tactic resources for Central and Eastern European
languages. Language Resources and Evaluation,
46(1):131–142.
3As currently there is no dependency annotation available

for the Old Hungarian Corpus, it is not officially listed among
the UD treebanks on the UD website.

Charlotte Galves and Helena Britto. 2002. The Ty-
cho Brahe Corpus of Historical Portuguese. Online
publication.

Veronika Hegedűs. 2014. The cyclical development
of Ps in Hungarian. In É. Kiss, Katalin, editor, The
Evolution of Functional Left Peripheries in Hungar-
ian Syntax, pages 122–147. Oxford University Press.

Anthony Kroch and Ann Taylor. 2000. The
Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Middle English
(PPCME2). CD-ROM.

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. Charac-
terizing the errors of data-driven dependency pars-
ing models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 122–131.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 shared task on de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
Shared Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages
915–932.

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a Universal Grammar
for Natural Language Processing. In Alexander Gel-
bukh, editor, Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing, pages 3–16. Springer.

Attila Novák, György Orosz, and Nóra Wenszky. 2013.
Morphological annotation of Old and Middle Hun-
garian corpora. In Proceedings of the 7th Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Her-
itage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 43–
48, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Attila Novák. 2003. Milyen a jó Humor? [What
is good Humor like?]. In Proceedings of the 1st
Hungarian Computational Linguistics Conference,
pages 138–144, Szeged. SZTE.

Csaba Oravecz, Bálint Sass, and Eszter Simon. 2010.
Semi-automatic Normalization of Old Hungarian
Codices. In Proceedings of the ECAI 2010 Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Her-
itage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH
2010), pages 55–60, Lisbon, Portugal. Faculty of
Science, University of Lisbon.

György Orosz and Attila Novák. 2012. PurePos: An
Open Source Morphological Disambiguator. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Processing and Cognitive Science,
pages 53–63.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings of
LREC, May.

Owen Rambow, Bonnie Dorr, David Farwell, Rebecca
Green, Nizar Habash, Stephen Helmreich, Eduard
Hovy, Lori Levin, Keith J. Miller, Teruko Mitamura,

126



Reeder, Florence, and Advaith Siddharthan. 2006.
Parallel syntactic annotation of multiple languages.
In Proceedings of LREC, May.

Eszter Simon. 2014. Corpus building from Old Hun-
garian codices. In É. Kiss, Katalin, editor, The Evo-
lution of Functional Left Peripheries in Hungarian
Syntax, pages 224–236. Oxford University Press.

Peter Wynn Thomas, D. Mark Smith, and Diana Luft.
2007. Rhyddiaith Gymraeg 1350-1425.

Miklós Törkenczy. 2005. Practical Hungarian Gram-
mar. Corvina, Budapest.

Viktor Trón, György Gyepesi, Péter Halácsy, András
Kornai, László Németh, and Dániel Varga. 2005.
Hunmorph: Open source word analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Software, pages
77–85, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas, Katalin Ilona Simkó,
Zsolt Szántó, and Viktor Varga. 2016. Univerzális
morfológia és dependencia magyar nyelvre [Univer-
sal Morphology and Dependencies for Hungarian].
In XII. Magyar Számı́tógépes Nyelvészeti Konferen-
cia.

Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable tagset conversion us-
ing tagset drivers. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan
Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias, editors,
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08),
Marrakech, Morocco, may. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA). http://www.lrec-
conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/.

127


