



















































Analysis of Anxious Word Usage on Online Health Forums


Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (LOUHI), pages 37–42,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Analysis of Anxious Word Usage on Online Health Forums

Nicolas Rey-Villamizar
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-3010

nrey@uh.edu

Prasha Shrestha
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-3010
pshrestha3@uh.edu

Farig Sadeque
School of Information
University of Arizona

Tucson, AZ 85721
farig@email.arizona.edu

Steven Bethard
School of Information
University of Arizona

Tucson, AZ 85721
bethard@email.arizona.edu

Ted Pedersen
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Minnesota, Duluth
Duluth, MN 55812-3036
tpederse@d.umn.edu

Arjun Mukherjee, Thamar Solorio
Dept. of Computer Science

University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-3010

arjun@cs.uh.edu, solorio@cs.uh.edu

Abstract

Online health communities and support
groups are a valuable source of information
for users suffering from a physical or mental
illness. Users turn to these forums for moral
support or advice on specific conditions,
symptoms, or side effects of medications.
This paper describes and studies the linguistic
patterns of a community of support forum
users over time focused on the used of anxious
related words. We introduce a methodology
to identify groups of individuals exhibiting
linguistic patterns associated with anxiety and
the correlations between this linguistic pattern
and other word usage. We find some evidence
that participation in these groups does yield
positive effects on their users by reducing the
frequency of anxious related word used over
time.

1 Introduction

How people behave within a given community is
an important question, especially in the context of
health support. The advancement of technology
has complemented the classic in-person health sup-
port forums to a growing and vibrant online com-
munity. Social media research has indicated that

individuals psychological states and social support
status relating to health and well-being may be de-
duced via analysis of language and conversational
patterns (Tamersoy et al., 2015). In the offline
world, some psychological studies of people’s be-
havior have shown correlation of different sociolog-
ical dimensions such as sadness and anger over the
time course of a breakup process (Sbarra, 2006). We
want to study these kinds of correlations in online
support forums.

In this paper we focus our attention on the anal-
ysis of the users who participated in the Daily-
Strength forums1, and we propose a methodology to
study the users’ behaviors by analyzing the linguis-
tic characteristics of their posts. Researchers have
shown that a large and increasing number of peo-
ple are going online for medical information and ad-
vice (Fox and Duggan, 2013). We focus our study
on the usage of words related to anxiety. This is an
important area of interest for us given that previous
research has shown that in some age groups up to
33.7% of participants are diagnosed with some type
of Anxiety Disorder (Chou, 2010).

Some researchers have found a correlation be-

1https://www.dailystrength.org/

37



tween the usage of words related to anxiety with
daily negative emotions (Tov et al., 2013). Applying
our proposed framework, we found that the usage
of words related to anxiety by active users in an on-
line health support group has a steady decrease over
the course of a user’s involvement in the community
and we theorize their daily negative emotion reduces
as well. Our proposed framework can be easily ex-
tended to other related conditions such as depression
or eating disorders. In general, we believe that so-
ciolinguistic characteristics in online health support
forums is an exciting topic that can shed additional
light on human behavior and on the design of social
media systems.

2 Related Work

Online Health Forums and social media: Online
health communities are a rich source of data for the
research community as a whole. Some researchers
have studied the potential and limitation of such
data and how it can augment existing public health
capabilities and enable new ones (Dredze, 2012).
One of the major concerns is the credibility of the
information. Other researchers have studied how
to automatically establish the credibility of the user
generated medical statements by analyzing linguis-
tic clues (Mukherjee et al., 2014). Other researchers
have focused on understanding abstinence from
tobacco or alcohol use (Tamersoy et al., 2015) and
on how to find early indications of Adverse Drug
Reactions from online healthcare forums (Sam-
pathkumar et al., 2014). In the online world, several
of the largest online health community websites
are: MedHelp (www.medhelp.org), Patients-
LikeMe (www.patientslikeme.org), and
Daily-Strength (www.dailystrength.org)

Sociolinguistic patterns in social media: Social
media is very appealing to the study of sociolinguis-
tic analysis of the users. In particular one of the
main concerns is how much information is actually
posted by the users to justify the study of such tex-
tual data. In (Park, 2012) the authors found evidence
that people post about their treatment on social me-
dia. Some researchers have shown the predictive
power of studying linguistic patterns of social media
users in order to predict depression (De Choudhury
and Gamon, 2013). Furthermore, other researchers

have studied insights about diseases, such as ana-
lyzing symptoms and medication usage and have
found a strong correlation with public health data
(Passarella, 2011). Ofoghi et al. (2016) have cre-
ated an emotion classification of microblog content
in order to study the public mood and effectively
utilize it as an early warning system for epidemic
outbreak. Also, they analyzed the emotions in mi-
croblog content after outbreaks to validate their ap-
proach. Finally, Aman and Szpakowicz (2007) de-
scribe an emotion annotation task and study how the
inter-annotator agreement. They show how difficult
is the emotion annotation task, the inter-annotator
agreement ranges between 0.6 to 0.79.

Anxiety disorders: Researchers estimate the per-
centage of adults with anxiety disorders to vary from
3.2% (Fuentes and Cox, 1997) up to 14.2% (Norton
et al., 2012). Other researchers have suggested that
up to 33% of the general population will develop
“clinical significant anxiety disorder” at some time
in their life (Barlow et al., 2002). Anxiety disor-
ders are commonly associated with medical condi-
tions such as thyroid disease, asthma and heart dis-
ease (Diala and Muntaner, 2003). Also, some con-
ditions such as coronary heart disease, hypertension,
and hypoglycemia can be worsened through anxiety
(Hersen and Van Hasselt, 1992).

3 Dataset Description

We collected data from Daily-Strength, one of the
largest online support groups with more than 500
active groups based on the physical and mental con-
ditions of its users. Daily-Strength allows users to
create profiles, maintain friends, and join various
condition-related support groups. It serves as a re-
source for patients to connect with others who have
similar conditions. Users in these support groups
can either create a new thread on a new topic2, or
reply3 to a thread that someone else has created.

In the current study, we selected the support
groups that had the most vibrant communities based
on the number of unique users, and the number of
unique threads. We focused on support groups with
more than 1,000 different users and more than 200

2The topics are curated by the system administrators.
3The website does not distinguish between a reply to a main

thread and a reply to a reply.

38



Table 1: Dataset statistics
Characteristic Value

Number of support groups 93
Number of unique users 193,354
Number of unique posts 10,612,830

original threads. At the time of our data crawl, 93
groups fulfilled this selection constraint. Some of
the most active support groups in this list include:
Acne, ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Dis-
order), Alcoholism, Asthma, Back Pain, Bipolar
Disorder, Bone Cancer, COPD (Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease), and Fibromyalgia. We crawled
all of the original posts, thread initiations, and all the
user replies for these support groups from the earli-
est available post until March 25, 2015. The posts
and replies were downloaded as HTML files, one
per thread, where each thread contains an initial post
and zero or more replies. We filtered out posts from
administrators of the website since they do not re-
flect the user’s activities but just general guidelines
or advice for the users.

Researchers have shown that a large and increas-
ing number of people are going online for medical
information and advice (Fox and Duggan, 2013).
We want to base our analysis on a group of users
who are consistently involved in the forum. More-
over, since we’re interested in exploring if participa-
tion in the forum has any effects on its users and if
these effects are reflected in linguistic patterns, it’s
important to analyze data from user posts across a
significant period of time. We believe one year of
activity will fulfill this purpose. Thus in subsequent
analyses we filtered by users whose first and last post
are at least one year apart, and who posted at least
50 posts during that interval. This filtering reduced
the total number of users to approximately 10,000
users, still a significant number for our studies.

4 Analysis framework

We defined user behavioral dimensions (BDs) based
on the word list provided by the Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC) lexicon (Tausczik and Pen-
nebaker, 2010). Each BD is defined as the corre-
sponding word list from the LIWC lexicon. The
LIWC contains 4,500 words and word stems, and
each word or word stem defines one or more word

categories or subdictionaries. This is a well devel-
oped tool aimed at revealing our thoughts, feelings,
personality, and motivations based on our word us-
age. We focused on the anxious word list, but our
analysis can be easily extended to any of the other
LIWC list. Based on the emission of words in the
linguistic dimensions in LIWC we created what we
call user behavioral dimensions (BD). In order to
study how the users of anxious words relate to other
BDs defined by the LIWC we present in subsec-
tion 4.3 the correlation with six other BDs.

4.1 User’s sub-population selection
The first part of our framework consists of creating
a methodology to study a specific user’s behavioral
dimension. This methodology will help us find sub-
populations corresponding to a particular BD. For
this we propose metric for each of the BDs. We
quantify each user BD according to:

BDi(u) = log

 1
|posts(u)|

∑
p∈posts(u)

|wordsBDi(p)|
|words(p)|


where i ∈ {1, . . . , N} indexes the BDs, N is the
number of different BDs, posts(u) is the list of posts
for user u, words(p) is the list of words in post p,
and wordsBDi(p) is the list of words in post p that
were on the list BDi. In essence, we measure the
average fraction of words from the list BDi across
the posts of a user. Since these fractions are less than
1 and we are using a logarithmic scale, BDi(u) will
always have a negative magnitude.

We propose to base our analysis on the study of
the extreme populations. To do that, we create a his-
togram which allows us to cluster users at the tails
of the distribution. We create 4 clusters per condi-
tion out of this histogram. The lower 15% and 30%
users; the top 30% and 15%. Figure 1 shows the
generated histogram for the anxious word list from
the LIWC. In order to select each population we sort
the users according to the quantified values of the
BD and then select the upper/lower part of the users.

4.2 Anxious word usage
We present the methodology used to analyze the BD
corresponding to anxious words. The other BDs can
be analyzed in an analogous way. The methodol-
ogy we developed to analyze anxious word usage

39



Figure 1: Sample usage of anxious related words.

is as follows. We first group all the posts based on
the month when the user posted. All posts from the
users during their first month, second month, third
month, and so on. We then analyzed the usage pat-
tern of anxious words over time. Figure 2 shows that
the anxiousness of the users decreases in a constant
manner over the course of their active involvement
in the forum. This is in agreement with the effect of
off-line support groups (Cain et al., 1986).

Figure 2: Single BD, anxious word usage.

4.3 Correlation of anxious words with other
word usage

In this part we focus on the analysis of BDs that cor-
relate the most with anxious word usage. We ranked
the BDs based on the correlation with anxious words
usage. We used the Pearson coefficient correlation.
In descending order the most correlated BDs are:
a) anger, b) self-pronouns, c) death, d) money, e)

present, and f) body. We present the results of all the
correlations for completeness and describe the ones
we found most interesting. For each of the clusters
of users we identified on the anxious word usage, we
plot the secondary BD score over time in Figure 3.

Figure 3 panels (a), (b), (c), and (e), shows that
the usage of anger, self, death, and present words
also decreases over time for all the low and high
heavy users of anxious words. However from pan-
els (d) and (f) we see that there is an increase of that
particular word usage for some of the groups and a
decrease from other groups.

Figure 3 (c) illustrates this for the case of an-
chor usage of anxious words and the figure shows
the usage pattern of death words by those groups
of users. We can see that users who used more
anxious words (magenta dotted and black dash-dot)
consistently used more death words over time than
users who used fewer anxious words (red line and
blue dashed). We theorize that this pattern can be
related to suicidal topics similar to what other re-
searchers have reported for depressed and anxious
patients (Pompili et al., 2012)

From Figure 3 panel (d) we can see a differ-
ence between the amount of money related words
used by people who use anxious words. The groups
of users who use less anxious words (red line and
blue dashed) tend to use more money related words,
whereas the groups of users who use more anxious
related words (magenta dotted and black dash-dot)
tend to use less money words. In general researchers
have linked people being tight with money as hav-
ing more negative emotions such as been more anx-
ious (McClure, 1984), however to the best of our
knowledge this is the first study of such relation into
a health support context where money is probably
not directly related to how wealthy or not an indi-
vidual is. From Figure 3 panel (e) we can see that
people who use more anxious words (magenta dot-
ted and black dash-dot) tend to use more present
words, whereas people who use less anxious words
(red line and blue dashed) use less present words.
Some researchers have previously linked Defensive
Pessimism people with being anxious in the present
(Norem and Smith, 2006), we theorize that it can
be a general pattern of people participating in online
support forums.

40



(a) Anxious-Anger (b) Anxious-Self (c) Anxious-Death

(d) Anxious-Money (e) Anxious-Present (f) Anxious-Body
Figure 3: Correlation of the different BDs. Anchor BD anxious word usage (in boldface). Red line (-), blue line (–), black (-.), and
magenta (..) corresponds to the lower 15%, 30% and upper 30%, 15% of the anxious word usage distribution.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

Similar to what other researchers (Cain et al., 1986)
have shown for off-line support groups, based on our
proposed framework for analyzing linguistic pat-
terns of users of online support groups we conclude
that the anxiety levels of patients involved in support
groups lowers over time. We also conclude that anx-
iety levels are not directly related to money related
talks in online support forums participants.

In this paper we have presented the correlation be-
tween Anxiety and BDs that we think are more inter-
esting to study and the ones which are more relevant
given the literature on Anxiety. However, a more de-
tailed and robust method is been developed in order
to rank the most relevant BDs which exhibit signifi-
cant correlation over time.

References

Saima Aman and Stan Szpakowicz. 2007. Identifying
expressions of emotion in text. In International Con-
ference on Text, Speech and Dialogue, pages 196–205.
Springer.

David H Barlow, Susan D Raffa, and Elizabeth M Co-
hen. 2002. Psychosocial treatments for panic disor-
ders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder, vol-
ume 2.

Eileen N. Cain, Ernest I. Kohorn, Donald M. Quinlan,
Kate Latimer, and Peter E. Schwartz. 1986. Psy-
chosocial benefits of a cancer support group. Cancer,
57(1):183–189.

Kee-Lee Chou. 2010. Panic disorder in older adults: ev-
idence from the national epidemiologic survey on al-
cohol and related conditions. International journal of
geriatric psychiatry, 25(1-3):822–832.

Munmun De Choudhury and Michael Gamon. 2013.
Predicting depression via social media. Proceedings
of the Seventh International AAAI Conference on We-
blogs and Social Media, 2:128–137.

Chamberlain C. Diala and Carles Muntaner. 2003.
Mood and anxiety disorders among rural, urban, and
metropolitan residents in the United States. Commu-
nity Mental Health Journal, 39(3):239–252.

Mark Dredze. 2012. How social media will change pub-
lic health. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 27(4):81–84.

Susannah Fox and Maeve Duggan. 2013. Pew
Internet & American Life Project. online
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/01/15/health-
online-2013/.

Karina Fuentes and Brian J Cox. 1997. Prevalence of
anxiety disorders in elderly adults: A critical analysis.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psy-
chiatry, 7916(4):269–279.

Michel Hersen and Vincent B. Van Hasselt. 1992. Be-
havioral assessment and treatment of anxiety in the
elderly. Clinical Psychology Review, 12(1984):619–
640.

41



Robert F. McClure. 1984. The relationship between
money attitudes and overall pathology. Psychology:
A Journal of Human Behavior, 21(1):4–6.

Subhabrata Mukherjee, Gerhard Weikum, and Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2014. People on drugs:
credibility of user statements in health communities.
KDD ’14: Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD in-
ternational conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining.

JK. Norem and S. Smith. 2006. Defensive pessimism:
positive past, anxious present, and pessimistic future.
In Judgements over time: The interplay of thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors, pages 34–46.

Joanna Norton, Maria Laure Ancelin, Rob Stewart, Clau-
dine Berr, Karen Ritchie, and Isabelle Carriere. 2012.
Anxiety symptoms and disorder predict activity limi-
tations in the elderly. Journal of Affective Disorders,
141:276–285.

Bahadorreza Ofoghi, Meghan Mann, and Karin Ver-
spoor. 2016. Towards early discovery of salient health
threats: A social media emotion classification tech-
nique. In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. Pacific
Symposium on Biocomputing, volume 21, page 504.

Minsu Park. 2012. Depressive moods of users portrayed
in twitter. ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Healthcare In-
formatics (HI-KDD), page 18.

Ralph J Passarella. 2011. You are what you tweet : An-
alyzing twitter for public health. In Empirical Natural
Language Processing Conference (EMNLP)., 56(8):1–
12.

Maurizio Pompili, Marco Innamorati, Zoltan Rihmer,
Xenia Gonda, Gianluca Serafini, Hagop Akiskal,
Mario Amore, Cinzia Niolu, Leo Sher, Roberto
Tatarelli, Giulio Perugi, and Paolo Girardi. 2012.
Cyclothymic-depressive-anxious temperament pattern
is related to suicide risk in 346 patients with ma-
jor mood disorders. Journal of affective disorders,
136(3):405–11.

Hariprasad Sampathkumar, Xue-wen Chen, and Bo Luo.
2014. Mining adverse drug reactions from online
healthcare forums using hidden Markov model. BMC
medical informatics and decision making, 14(1):91.

David A. Sbarra. 2006. Predicting the onset of emo-
tional recovery following nonmarital relationship dis-
solution: Survival analyses of sadness and anger. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin 32, 3:298–
312.

Acar Tamersoy, Munmun De Choudhury, and
Duen Horng Chau. 2015. Characterizing smok-
ing and drinking abstinence from social media.
In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Conference on
Hypertext & Social Media, pages 139–148. ACM.

Yla R. Tausczik and James W. Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: LIWC and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of Language and
Social Psychology, 29(1):24–54.

William Tov, Kok Leong Ng, Han Lin, and Lin Qiu.
2013. Detecting well-being via computerized content
analysis of brief diary entries. Psychological assess-
ment, 25(4):1069–78.

42


