



















































Bridging the gap between computable and expressive event representations in Social Media


Proceedings of EMNLP 2016 Workshop on Uphill Battles in Language Processing: Scaling Early Achievements to Robust Methods, pages 6–10,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Bridging the gap between
computable and expressive event representations in Social Media

Darina Benikova
Language Technology Lab

University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

darina.benikova@uni-due.de

Torsten Zesch
Language Technology Lab

University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

torsten.zesch@uni-due.de

Abstract

An important goal in text understanding is
making sense of events. However, there is
a gap between computable representations on
the one hand and expressive representations
on the other hand. We aim to bridge this gap
by inducing distributional semantic clusters as
labels in a frame structural representation.

1 Introduction

We experience events in our everyday life, through
witnessing, reading, hearing, and seeing what is hap-
pening. However, representing events computation-
ally is still an unsolved challenge even when deal-
ing with well-edited text. As soon as non-standard
text varieties such as Social Media are targeted,
representations need to be robust against alterna-
tive spellings, information compression, and neol-
ogisms.

The aim of our envisioned project is bridging the
gap between argument-level representations which
are robustly computable, but less expressive and
frame-level representations which are highly expres-
sive, but not robustly computable. The distinction
and the gap between the two main representation
types is presented in Figure 1. On the argument-
level, the event give and all its arguments are identi-
fied, whereas on the frame-level additional semantic
role labels are assigned.

We envision a representation that enables opera-
tions such as equivalence, entailment, and contradic-
tion. In this paper, we will focus on the equivalence
operation due to space constraints. These operations
are not only necessary to compress the amount of

information, which is especially important in high-
volume, high redundancy Social Media posts, but
also for other tasks such as to analyze and under-
stand events efficiently.

We plan to achieve building a robustly com-
putable and expressive representation that is suited
to perform the discussed operations by using Social
Media domain specific clusters and topic labeling
methods for the frame-labeling. We intend to eval-
uate the validity of our representation and approach
extrinsically and application-based.

2 Types of representations

We distinguish between representations on two lev-
els: (i) argument-level, which can be robustly im-
plemented more easily, and (ii) frame-level, which
is highly expressive.

Argument-level As shown in Figure 1, most ar-
gument representations consist of an event trig-
ger, which is mostly a verb, and its correspond-
ing arguments (Banarescu et al., 2013; Kingsbury
and Palmer, 2003). Argument-level representations
based on Social Media posts are used in applications
such as e.g. creating event calendars for concerts and
festivals (Becker et al., 2012) or creating overviews
of important events on Twitter (Ritter et al., 2012).

Frame-level On this level, events are represented
as frame structures such as proposed by Fillmore
(1976) that built upon the argument-level, i.e. the ar-
guments are labeled with semantic roles.

A well-known frame semantic tagger is
SEMAFOR (Das, 2014).

6



Figure 1: Representations of an exemplary event on argument and frame-level

3 Challenges

The main challenge is to bridge the gap between ar-
gument and frame-level representation.

3.1 Performance of operations

Our goal is to develop a representation that is both
computable even on noisy Social Media text and ex-
pressive enough to support all required operations
like equivalence. A semantically equivalent sen-
tence for our examplary sentence “The witch gave
an apple to Snow White” would be “Snow White re-
ceived an apple from the witch.”, as receive is the
antonym of give and the roles of Giver and Receiver
are inverted.

On the argument-level, it remains a hard problem
to establish the equivalence between the two sen-
tences, while that would be easy on the frame-level.
However, getting to the frame-level is an equally
hard problem and frame representations suffer from
low coverage (Palmer and Sporleder, 2010).

3.2 Coverage

Palmer and Sporleder (2010) categorized and eval-
uated the coverage gaps in FrameNet (Baker et al.,
2003). Coverage, whether of undefined units, lem-
mas, or senses, is of special importance when deal-
ing with non-standard text that contains spelling
variations and neologisms that need to be dealt with.

In our opinion, the lack of undefined units is an
especially problematic issue in Social Media texts.
Furthermore, it may contain innovative, informal or
incomplete use of frames, due to space restrictions
such as presented by Twitter. Also by cause of space
restrictions, which lead to a lack of context, and con-
sidering the variety of topics that is addressed in So-

cial Media, it is more challenging to find a fitting
frame out of an existing frame repository (Ritter et
al., 2012; Li and Ji, 2016).

Giuglea and Moschitti (2006) and Mùjdricza-
Mayd et al. (2016) tried to bridge the gap by
combing repositories on frame and argument level
and representing them based on Intersective Levin
Classes (ILC) (Kipper et al., 2006). ILC, which
are used in VerbNet (Kipper et al., 2006), are more
fine-grained than classic Levin verb classes, formed
according to alternations of the grammatical ex-
pression of their arguments (Levin, 1993). Classic
Levin verb classes were used for measuring seman-
tic evidence between verbs (Baker and Ruppenhofer,
2002).

However, these approaches also have to deal with
coverage problems due to their reliance on manually
crafted frame repositories.

4 Approach

According to Modi et al. (2012) frame semantic
parsing conceptually consists of 4 stages:

1. Identification of frame-evoking elements
2. Identification of their arguments
3. Labeling of frames
4. Labeling of roles

We summarize these tasks in groups of two, namely
identification and labeling, and discuss our approach
towards them in the following subsections.

4.1 Identification of frame-evoking elements
and their arguments

We regard the first two tasks as tasks of the
argument-level, which we plan to solve with part-of-
speech tagging and dependency parsing, by extract-

7



ing all main verbs to solve the first task and consid-
ering all its noun dependencies as arguments in the
second task. This is similar to the approach of Modi
et al. (2012).

4.2 Labeling of predicates and their arguments
Like Modi et al. (2012), we focus on the last two
tasks, which we regard as tasks of the frame-level.
We observe this task under the aspect of fitting the
realization of operation tasks as discussed earlier. As
we only regard predicate frames and their arguments
for the role labeling, we will use predicate as a term
for the unlabeled form of frame and argument as the
unlabeled form of role.

Pre-defined frame labels There have been at-
tempts to bridge the gap on Social Media texts by
projecting ontological information in the form of
computed event types on the event trigger on the
argument-level (Ritter et al., 2012; Li et al., 2010;
Li and Ji, 2016) in order to solve the task of frame
labeling. However, according to Ritter et al. (2012)
the automatic mapping of pre-defined event types
is insufficient for providing semantically meaning-
ful information on the event.

We aim to augment those approaches by inducing
frame-like structures based on distributional seman-
tics. Moreover, we want to use similarity clusters
for the labeling of arguments in frames. We seek
to compute the argument labels by the use of super-
sense tagging, similarly to the approach presented
by Coppola et al. (2009). They successfully used the
WordNet supersense labels (Miller, 1995) for verbs
and nouns as a pre-processing step for the automatic
labeling of frames and their arguments.

Approaches using Levin classes, ILC, or WordNet
supersenses tackle the same tasks, namely labeling
the frame and their corresponding roles. However,
all of these suffer from the discussed coverage prob-
lem.

Clusters as labels To circumvent the coverage is-
sue, there have been approaches using clusters sim-
ilarly to frame labels. Directly labeling predicates
and their arguments has been performed by Modi et
al. (2012), who iteratively clustered verbal frames
with their arguments.

As our main goal is to perform operations on
event representations, we do not need human-

Figure 2: Representations of our approach to bridge the gap

readable frames as proposed by FrameNet, but a
level that is semantically equivalent to it, thus our
first goal is to compute domain specific clusters for
the labeling.

In contrast to Modi et al. (2012), we plan to clus-
ter the verbal predicates and the arguments sepa-
rately. Although this might seem less intuitive, we
believe that due to the difficulties with Social Media
data, the structures of full frames are less repetitive
and are more difficult to cluster. Thus, by dividing
the two tasks of predicate and argument clustering,
we hope to achieve better results in our setting.

Furthermore, in order to deal with the issues of
the previously discussed peculiarities of the Social
Media domain, we plan to train clusters on large
amounts of Tweets.

An example of our envisioned representation is
shown in Figure 2, which was produced using the
Twitter Bigram model of JoBimViz (Ruppert et al.,
2015). Figure 2 shows the clustering for finding the
correct sense in the labeling task, for both the pred-
icate and its arguments. As the example shows, this
representation has some flaws that need to be dealt
with. It should be mentioned that the model used
for this computation is pruned due to performance
reasons, which is a cause for some of the flaws.

For example, Snow White is not recognized as a
Named Entity or a multi-word expression. To deal
with the issue of the false Named Entity representa-
tion of Snow White presented in the exemplary rep-
resentation, we plan to experiment with multi-word
or Named Entity recognizers. Thus, we plan to train
a similar model on a larger set of Tweets, without
pruning due to performance reasons.

The main flaw is that the wrong sense cluster of
give is selected. To improve the issues that occurred
above, we plan to use soft-clustering for the step
of finding the correct sense cluster. Allowing soft

8



classes not only facilitates disambiguation (Riedl,
2016), but may also be helpful when identifying the
argument role in the frame and thus allow for the
previously described operations of equality. By pro-
viding only one cluster per predicate Modi et al.
(2012) put the task of disambiguation aside, which
we want to tackle as mentioned above.

Furthermore, aiming at representations that are
suited for operations such as equality, the known
problems of antonyms being in the same cluster
needs to be solved. Similarly to Lobanova et al.
(2010), who automatically extracted antonyms in
text, we plan to solve this issue with a pattern-based
approach.

Topic-clustered labels After succeeding in the
clustering task, we plan to experiment with human-
readable frame clusters. In contrast to using pre-
defined WordNet supersenses and mapping these to
frames, we want to solve the task of finding labels
for the clusters by using supersenses computed from
domain-specific clusters to directly label the frames
and their arguments.

Our hypothesis is that by using more and soft
clusters for the supersense tagging, the role labels
of the event arguments become semantically richer,
because more specific semantic information on the
arguments and their context in the event is encoded.

Thus, we plan to use the supersense tagging by
using an LDA extension, in which a combination of
context and language features is used, as described
by Riedl (2016).

5 Evaluation plan

We plan to evaluate our approach in an extrinsic,
application-based way on a manual gold standard
containing event paraphrases. In order to test how
well our approach performs in comparison to state-
of-the-art approaches of both argument and frame
representations, such as Das (2014) or Li and Ji
(2016) in the task of equivalence computation, we
will compare the results of all approaches.

For this purpose, we plan to develop a dataset that
is similar to Roth and Frank (2012), but tailored to
the Social Media domain. They produced a corpus
of alignments between semantically similar predi-
cates and their arguments from news texts on the
same event.

6 Summary

In this paper we present our vision on a new event
representation that enables the use of operations
such as equivalence. We plan to use pre-processing
to get the predicates and their arguments. The main
focus of the work will be using sense clustering
methods on domain-specific text and to apply these
clusters on text. We plan to evaluate this application
in an extrinsic, application-based way.

Further on, we plan to tackle tasks such as: topic-
model based frame labeling on the computed clus-
ters; pattern-based antonym detection in the clusters
for enabling the operation of contradiction and im-
prove the task of equivalence; and experiment with
Named Entity and multiword recognizers in order to
improve the results in argument recognition.

7 Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) under grant No. GRK 2167, Re-
search Training Group ”User-Centred Social Me-
dia”.

We also kindly thank the EMNLP for granting us
a travel support.

References
Collin F. Baker and Josef Ruppenhofer. 2002.

FrameNet’s frames vs. Levin’s verb classes. In Pro-
ceedings of the 28th annual meeting of the Berkeley
Linguistics Society, pages 27–38.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and Beau Cronin.
2003. The structure of the framenet database. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):281–296.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representation
for Sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic
Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with Dis-
course, pages 178–186, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Hila Becker, Dan Iter, Mor Naaman, and Luis Gravano.
2012. Identifying content for planned events across
social media sites. In Proceedings of the fifth ACM
international conference on Web search and data min-
ing, pages 533–542, Seattle, WA, USA.

Bonaventura Coppola, Aldo Gangemi, Alfio Gliozzo,
Davide Picca, and Valentina Presutti. 2009. Frame de-
tection over the Semantic Web. In European Semantic
Web Conference, pages 126–142. Springer.

9



Dipanjan Das. 2014. Statistical models for frame-
semantic parsing. In Proceedings of Frame Seman-
tics in NLP: A Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore,
pages 26–29, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame Semantics and the Na-
ture of Language. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, pages 20–33.

Ana-Maria Giuglea and Alessandro Moschitti. 2006.
Semantic Role Labeling via FrameNet, VerbNet and
PropBank. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 44th
annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 929–936, Sydney, Australia.

Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2003. PropBank:
the Next Level of TreeBank. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries, pages 105–116, Vaxjo, Sweden.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2006. Extending VerbNet with novel
verb classes. In Proceedings of Language Resources
and Evaluation, pages 1027–1032, Genoa, Italy.

Beth Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alternations:
A preliminary investigation. University of Chicago
press.

Hao Li and Heng Ji. 2016. Cross-genre Event Extrac-
tion with Knowledge Enrichment. In The 15th An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 1158–1162, San
Diego, CA, USA.

Hao Li, Xiang Li, Heng Ji, and Yuval Marton. 2010.
Domain-Independent Novel Event Discovery and
Semi-Automatic Event Annotation. In Proceedings
of the 24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, In-
formation and Computation, pages 233–242, Sendai,
Japan.

Anna Lobanova, Tom Van der Kleij, and Jennifer Spe-
nader. 2010. Defining antonymy: A corpus-based
study of opposites by lexico-syntactic patterns. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 23(1):19–53.

George A Miller. 1995. WordNet: a lexical database for
English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41.

Ashutosh Modi, Ivan Titov, and Alexandre Klemen-
tiev. 2012. Unsupervised induction of frame-semantic
representations. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT
Workshop on the Induction of Linguistic Structure,
pages 1–7, Montral, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Eva Mùjdricza-Mayd, Silvana Hartmann, Iryna
Gurevych, and Anette Frank. 2016. Combining
semantic annotation of word sense & semantic roles:
A novel annotation scheme for verbnet roles on
german language data. In Proceedings of the Tenth

International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 3031–3038, Portorož,
Slovenia, May.

Alexis Palmer and Caroline Sporleder. 2010. Evaluating
FrameNet-style semantic parsing: the role of coverage
gaps in FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 23rd interna-
tional conference on computational linguistics, pages
928–936, Uppsala, Sweden.

Martin Riedl. 2016. Unsupervised Methods for Learn-
ing and Using Semantics of Natural Language. Ph.D.
thesis, TU Darmstadt.

Alan Ritter, Oren Etzioni, and Sam Clark. 2012. Open
domain event extraction from twitter. In Proceedings
of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1104–
1112, Beijing, China.

Michael Roth and Anette Frank. 2012. Aligning pred-
icate argument structures in monolingual comparable
texts: A new corpus for a new task. In Proceedings
of the First Joint Conference on Lexical and Compu-
tational Semantics-Volume 1: Proceedings of the main
conference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, pages 218–227, Montral, Canada.

Eugen Ruppert, Manuel Kaufmann, Martin Riedl, and
Chris Biemann. 2015. Jobimviz: A web-based visual-
ization for graph-based distributional semantic mod-
els. In The Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) System Demonstra-
tions, pages 103–108.

10


