









































Baltic J. Modern Computing, Vol. 4 (2016), No. 2, pp. 361–367

Collaborative development of a rule-based
machine translator between Croatian and Serbian

Filip KLUBIČKA1, Gema RAMÍREZ-SÁNCHEZ2, Nikola LJUBEŠIĆ1,3

1 University of Zagreb, Ivana Lučića 3, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia
2 Prompsit Language Engineering, Avenida de la Universidad s/n, ES-03202 Elche, Spain

3 Jožef Stefan Institute, Jamova cesta 39, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

fklubick@ffzg.hr, gramirez@prompsit.com, nljubesi@ffzg.hr

Abstract. This paper describes the development and current state of a bidirectional Croatian-
Serbian machine translation system based on the open-source Apertium platform. It has been
created inside the Abu-MaTran project with the aims of creating free linguistic resources as well
as having non-experts and experts work together. We describe the collaborative way of collecting
the necessary data to build our system, which outperforms other available systems.

Keywords: machine translation, collaboration, Apertium, open-source, Croatian, Serbian

1 Introduction

Croatian and Serbian are language varieties and official registers of the pluricentric
Bosnian-Croatian-Montenegrin-Serbian (BCMS) language. Although mutually intelli-
gible, the national varieties are standardised differently, and both communities have a
high interest to produce documentation that adheres to these standards, if for no other
reason, then for the sake of producing standard documents for Serbian, the official lan-
guage of an EU candidate state. Thus it is sensible to make use of a related language
of a recent member state and employ machine translation between these two language
varieties to meet this aim.

Creating machine translation (MT) systems for South-Slavic languages, both be-
tween themselves and other languages, is also the aim of the Abu-MaTran project.4 In
the first phase of the project, the focus was on MT between English and Croatian, while
MT between South-Slavic is the focus of the second phase. The system presented in
this paper will be used within the project to increase the amount of English - Serbian
parallel data by translating the Croatian side of English-Croatian parallel data to Ser-
bian. It will also be added to another by-product of the Abu-MaTran project - AltLang
- a service for translating between language varieties.5

4 http://abumatran.eu
5 http://www.altlang.net



362 Klubička et al.

2 Related work

Forcada et al. (2011) and their open-source Apertium platform have shown that, when
doing machine translation between language variants or closely-related languages like
Spanish and Catalan, a rule-based shallow transfer approach is often sufficient to pro-
duce good quality translations. Indeed, work has already been done in building rule
based translators from BCMS into Macedonian and Slovene (Peradin et al, 2014). To
our knowledge, however, no similar work has been done for the Croatian-Serbian lan-
guage pair specifically. The only accessible state of the art system for this pair is Google
Translate,6 which reaches a BLEU score of 82.27 in the Serbian-Croatian direction.
However, the statistical approach that Google uses, which has also been explored in
(Popović et al, 2014) but only using small corpora, is not a feasible option for us, as
there are not enough parallel corpora available to train SMT systems that can deal with
the minute differences between the two languages without introducing additional noise.

Nonetheless, some free linguistic resources were initially available to us: the HBS
monolingual dictionary7 built for other Apertium language pairs like HBS-Macedonian
(Peradin and Tyers, 2012) and HBS-Slovene (Peradin et al, 2014), the SETimes news
corpora of both Croatian and Serbian8 and the hrWaC and srWaC web corpora (Ljubešić
and Klubička, 2014). This is always an advantage, as both monolingual and bilingual
corpora are extensively used to semiautomatically extract knowledge for Apertium such
as frequent non-covered entries, bilingual correspondences, rules, development and test
sets, and data needed to train statistical part-of-speech taggers.

Considering the amount of available data, coupled with the fact that differences
between Croatian and Serbian occur mostly at the level of orthography and lexicon,
with only a bit of syntax (limited only to specific structures and verbal tenses), a rule-
based approach makes the most sense. We expect a high quality and a more controlled
output from such a system, reproducing other Apertium-based success stories such as
the Norwegian Nynorsk-Norwegian Bokmål (Unhammer et al, 2006) or Spanish and
Aragonese (Cortés et al, 2012) language pairs.

3 Apertium language pair

The structure of the Croatian-Serbian language pair is based on the same structure
shared by other Apertium language pairs. This esentially includes two monolingual
dictionaries (source and target) which are used as morphological anlysers/generators,
one set of morphological tags for the part-of-speech tagger (currently shared by the
two languages involved), and two sets of structural transfer rules (one for each transla-
tion direction). However, because there is significant overlap in the lexemes of the lan-
guages, instead of two separate monolingual dictionaries, there is only one. In addition
to pairing lemmas with inflectional paradigms, this monolingual dictionary - called the
metadix - explicitly encodes differences between the three language varieties (Bosnian,
Croatian, Serbian) with regards to variant-specific lexemes and the reflex of the vowel

6 http://translate.google.com
7 HBS is the ISO 639-3 code for the macrolanguage covering the three languages in question
8 http://nlp.ffzg.hr/resources/corpora/setimes/



Collaborative RBMT, HR-SR 363

yat.9 Furthermore, the language pair includes a bilingual dictionary which explicates
lexical differences as one-to-one translations, a shared Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
tagger, a transfer module for each translation direction and a transliterator for the cyrilic
and latin alphabets.

The basic system on which we started making improvements was produced in only
a couple of weeks by extracting relevant components from existing language pairs. In
other words, we took the dictionaries from HBS-Slovene, the tagger from the HBS
module, a bilingual dictionary created from monolingual entries and the transfer rules
for agreement between basic noun phrases. Additionally, the work presented in this
paper also kicked off the efforts to enrich the HBS monolingual dictionary, which ran
in parallel with our construction of the Croatian-Serbian language pair, and resulted in
Apertium’s largest lexicon to date, with 97,437 lemmas (Ljubešić et al, 2016).

4 Development

Even though there is considerable overlap, the biggest source of differences between
Croatian and Serbian is still the differing lexicon. Thus it was important to construct a
large, high-coverage bilingual dictionary. Additionally, transfer rules needed to be de-
fined to account for the few syntactic differences between the languages. Each of these
tasks was tackled in two phases - at hands-on Abu-MaTran workshops held in Zagreb
and within a course held during the winter semester of 2015/2016 at the University of
Zagreb, titled Selected chapters in Natural Language Processing.10

The approach to including non-experts in the process consisted of creating very
focused tasks for data which is needed for each of the Apertium modules based on
materials created beforehand, e.g. in the form of precomputed bilingual entries that
they had to assess. When possible, user-friendly interfaces or very simple spreadsheets
were used to lower the technical barrier. After each task, the contributors were able to
see the impact of their collaborative work in the translator’s performance almost real-
time, which proved to be very motivating. While larger groups could work on dictionary
entries (as this is an easy task), only a reduced group worked on writing transfer rules
(as this requires an advanced level of technical knowledge).

4.1 Adding bilingual entries

First phase: The first workshop was focused on monolingual and bilingual dictionar-
ies.11 We automatically produced bilingual candidates from comparable corpora - hrWaC
and srWaC (Ljubešić and Klubička, 2014) - by identifying lexemes from the Serbian
corpus that, given their frequency in the Croatian corpus, were occurring much more
frequently than by chance. The workshop participants validated the candidates and

9 For example, the following lexical entry extracted from the metadix produces either
the surface form ’pjevačica’ or ’pevačica’, depending on the chosen language variant:
<e lm=”pjevačica”><i>p</i><par n=”e je yat”/><i>vačic</i><par n=”vodnic/a n”/></e>

10 Within this course, students were taught about machine translation and the Apertium frame-
work, among other things.

11 Materials available at http://www.abumatran.eu/?p=292



364 Klubička et al.

added additional linguistic information, such as pointing out parts of speech, morpho-
logical differences and translation direction details.12 This workshop resulted in the ad-
dition of approximately 485 new entries in a single day. These entries were additionally
checked by experts later on.

Second phase: During a one-semester course, our students collected bilingual data
and produced many new entries for the bilingual dictionary using several methods, rang-
ing from running texts of their choice through our translator and filling the bilingual dic-
tionary with the untranslated lexemes, to validating and adding bilingual candidates ex-
tracted by using the output of a distributional similarity tool (Fišer and Ljubešić, 2011)
applied to texts from the Croatian and Serbian Wikipedia. By the end of the course, the
dictionary contained 1694 bilingual entries, which is also its current size.

4.2 Adding rules

First phase: Our second workshop focused on transfer rules13 from Serbian to Croatian.
We automatically extracted rules for Serbian to Croatian (Sánchez et al., 2015) and our
workshop participants validated them based on actual examples of these rules, answer-
ing the simple question ”Is this a valid translation?”14 We taught them how to formalise
the rules and presented them with 100 rules to be validated. The implementation of
the rules was done by experts after the workshop. In 1 week we implemented 25 new
Serbian to Croatian rules and 10 basic Croatian to Serbian rules.

Second phase: Nearing the end of the course, after adding sufficient bilingual en-
tries, the students were taught about shallow transfer rules. They once again looked into
the outputs of the texts they ran through the translator and annotated the syntactic mis-
takes occurring in the translations. Some of the rules that could be fixed via shallow
transfer were added during the course for demonstration purposes, but most were for-
malised and implemeted as a result of the joint work between a language expert and an
Apertium expert during a secondment at Prompsit Language Engineering. At the end
of this stage, the number of Serbian to Croatian rules was extended to 99 rules, and
Croatian to Serbian to 82, which is the current state of the system. Most of the rules
implemented cover a bit of syntax via short-distance word shifting (e.g. there are sev-
eral verbal constructions involving the da particle which differ between the languages
in regards to word order and whether the da particle is present or not)15, as well as
agreement rules (e.g. if the head noun of a noun phrase changes gender in translation,
the premodifying adjectives need to change gender as well).16

12 Participants would point out whether the translation of a given lexeme is bidirectional (like
direktorica-direktorka), just from Croatian to Serbian (like zabava-žurka), or just from Serbian
to Croatian (like kasnije-docnije)

13 Materials available at http://www.abumatran.eu/?p=418
14 [SR] Zemlje jugoistočne Evrope trebale bi da suraduju

[HR] Zemlje jugoistočne Europe trebale bi suradivati
15 [SR] da li možeš

[HR] možeš li
16 [SR] naš brzi računar (masculine)

[HR] naše brzo računalo (neuter)



Collaborative RBMT, HR-SR 365

4.3 Tagger training

Additional insight gained during the workshops and coursework was that the HBS tag-
ger was in serious need of improvement. The tagger we had at the beginning of the
described process was using a constraint grammar, and it was producing many errors,
which very palpably hindered the translation process. Fortunately, by the time the bilin-
gual lexicon and transfer rules were extended, we had the newly created hr500k Croat-
ian training corpus (Ljubešić et al, 2016) at our disposal, so we decided to train a statis-
tical tagger17 based on Hidden Markov Models (Rabiner, 1989) with the tools provided
in Apertium. A necessary preprocessing step was to transfer the tags in the training cor-
pus from the MULTEXT-East Morphosyntactic Specifications, revised Version 418 to
Apertium’s notation. This was done by automatically mapping the hr500k training cor-
pus to the Apertium tagset, retaining only sentences with full coverage and splitting this
dataset into training and test data. This left us with 145,626 tokens (9,465 sentences) of
training data and 7,682 tokens (500 sentences) of test data.

Additionally, a tagset file with ambiguity classes was defined so as to narrow down
the tagset as much as possible. This step makes learning the morphological disambigua-
tion process feasible as the amount of training data that would be necessary to observe
all the possible sequences of full tags, given the rich morphology of the languages, is
many orders higher than the amount of data currently available.

We performed a comparative intrinsic evaluation of both the constraint grammar and
statistical tagger on the 500-sentence test dataset. We evaluated both taggers via token-
level accuracy. In this setting, the improvement in accuracy was quite substantial: while
the old constraint grammar-based tagger had an accuracy of 76%, the new HMM tagger
achieved an accuracy of 90.19%.

5 Evaluation

Finally, we perform a comparative evaluation of our system, but we present an eval-
uation of only the Serbian to Croatian direction as this direction was the initial fo-
cus of the development and the other direction was still under development at the
moment of presenting these results. We compare our system to the output of Google
Translate,19 as this is the current state of the art system. For our baseline we assume
that the output is identical to the input, a setup which yields the lowest evaluation
scores. Our SMT baseline was constructed by training a phrase-based Moses system on
200k segments from the SETimes parallel corpus, with an additional 2 thousand seg-
ments of development data, while we use hrWaC2.0 for building the language model
(Ljubešić and Klubička, 2014).

For the evaluation we use a test set consisting of 351 Serbian sentences gathered
from newspaper texts that were manually translated into Croatian by students. We eval-
uate the system with BLEU (Papineni et al, 2006) and TER (Snover et al, 2006). Table
1 shows the results of the evaluation process.

17 It should be noted that even though using the same tagger for both Croatian and Serbian is not
ideal, previous experiments (Agić et al., 2013) have shown that only a minor drop in accuracy
should be expected from this setting.

18 https://github.com/ffnlp/sethr/blob/master/mte4r-upos.mapping
19 Output retrieved on 2016-01-27



366 Klubička et al.

BLEU TER
baseline 72.66 0.1300
SMT 73.54 0.1255
Google 82.27 0.0873
Apertium 82.97 0.0782

Table 1. Results of the MT evaluation. Statistically significantly better results are in bold.

When compared to our baseline systems, the evaluation scores are decidedly posi-
tive. When compared to Google’s system, we also improve, but the question is whether
this improvement is statistically significant. To calculate this we use approximate ran-
domisation with 1000 iterations, and while the reported 0.7 point improvement in BLEU
yields a p-value of 0.384, which is too high to prove statistical significance, the improve-
ment in TER by -0.0091 is in fact statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.018. Given
that BLEU is known to favour statistical machine translation in its evaluation, it is safe
to claim that our system outperforms that of Google.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we present a bidirectional machine translation system between Croatian
and Serbian, which was collaboratively developed between the University of Zagreb
and Prompsit Language Engineering in the framework of the Abu-MaTran project. To
achieve this, we combine Apertium’s resources with the University of Zagreb’s man-
power and resources, taking advantage of our researcher’s employment and second-
ments, as well as hands-on workshops organised as part of our Abu-MaTran activities
to get other interested parties to help with the creation of additional necessary linguistic
resources.

The result of this work is a system that has been developed in a total of approx-
imately 6 person months (including experiments for semi-automatic extraction of vo-
cabulary and data, work in dictionaries, HMM and implementation of rules, workshop
and course materials, training of non-experts and evaluation) and which outperforms
the current state of the art. The contribution of this work for the wider community is
the release of numerous freely available linguistic tools and resources, as well as the
considerable transfer of knowledge between all participating institutions. Additionally,
this system opens up the possibility of smoothing the way towards translating official
EU documents that are and will be published in Croatian20 into Serbian, the language
of an EU candidate state.

Future work will go into extending the system and further evaluating both transla-
tion directions, creating combinations with Bosnian, using it to create synthetic training
data, and adding it to AltLang to offer a commercial service that uses the current system
to customise content to a specific language variant.

20 E.g. the acquis communautaire; EU parallel corpora and translation memories such as DGT
(https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/language-technologies/dgt-translation-memory); the Special Edi-
tion of the EU Official Journal (http://eur-lex.europa.eu/eu-enlargement/hr/special.html)



Collaborative RBMT, HR-SR 367

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union
Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement PIAP-GA-2012-
324414 (Abu-MaTran) and the Swiss National Science Foundation grant IZ74Z0 160501
(ReLDI).

References
Agić, Ž., Ljubešić, N., Merkler, D. (2013). Lemmatization and morphosyntactic tagging of Croa-

tian and Serbian. In Proceedings of the Fourth Biennial International Workshop on Balto-
Slavic Natural Language Processing, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Cortés Martı́nez, J.P., O’Regan, J., Tyers, F.M. (2012). Free/Open Source Shallow-Transfer Based
Machine Translation for Spanish and Aragonese. In Proceedings of the Eighth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Istanbul, Turkey.

Fišer, D., Ljubešić, N. (2011). Bilingual Lexicon Extraction from Comparable Corpora for
Closely Related Languages. In Proceedings of the Recent Advances in Natural Langugage
Processing Conference, Hissar, Bulgaria.

Forcada, M.L., Ginestı́-Rosell, M., Nordfalk, J., O’Regan, J., Ortiz-Rojas, S., Pérez-Ortiz, J.A.,
Sánchez-Martı́nez, F., Ramı́rez-Sánchez, G., Tyers, F.M. (2011). Apertium: a free/open-
source platform for rule-based machine translation. Machine Translation. 25(2):127-144

Ljubešić, N., Klubička, F. (2014). {bs,hr,sr}WaC – Web corpora of Bosnian, Croatian and Ser-
bian. In Proceedings of the 9th Web as Corpus Workshop (WaC-9), Gothenburg, Sweden.

Ljubešić, N., Klubička, F., Agić, Ž., Jazbec, I. (2016). New Inflectional Lexicons and Training
Corpora for Improved Morphosyntactic Annotation of Croatian and Serbian. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Portorož,
Slovenia.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002). BLEU: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Peradin, H., Tyers, F. (2012). A rule-based machine translation system from Serbo-Croatian
to Macedonian. Third International Workshop on Free/Open-Source Rule-Based Machine
Translation (FreeRBMT 2012).

Peradin, H., Petkovski, F., Tyers, F. (2014). Shallow-transfer rule-based machine translation for
the Western group of South Slavic languages. In Proceedings of the 9th SaLTMiL Workshop
on Free/open-Source Language Resources for the Machine Translation of Less-Resourced
Languages, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Popović, M., Ljubešić N. Exploring cross-language statistical machine translation for closely
related South Slavic languages. Language Technology for Closely Related Languages and
Language Variants (LT4CloseLang), Doha, Qatar.

Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE

Sánchez-Cartagena, V.M., Pérez-Ortiz, J.A., Sánchez-Martı́nez, F. (2015). A generalised align-
ment template formalism and its application to the inference of shallow-transfer machine
translation rules from scarce bilingual corpora. In Computer Speech & Language

Snover, M., Dorr, B., Schwartz, R., Micciulla, L., and Makhoul, J. (2006). A Study of Translation
Edit Rate with Targeted Human Annotation. In Proceedings of AMTA

Unhammer, K., Trosterud, T. (2009). Reuse of free resources in machine translation between
Nynorsk and Bokmål. In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Free/Open-
Source Rule-Based Machine Translation, Alicante, Spain.

Received May 2, 2016 , accepted May 18, 2016


