



















































A Challenge Proposal for Narrative Generation Using CNLs


Proceedings of The 9th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 171–173,
Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Challenge Proposal for Narrative Generation Using CNLs

Eugenio Concepción and Gonzalo Méndez and Pablo Gervás and Carlos León
Facultad de Informática

Instituto de Tecnologı́a del Conocimiento
Universidad Complutense de Madrid

{econcepc,gmendez,pgervas,cleon}@ucm.es

Abstract

We propose a competitive shared evaluation
task for Narrative Generation. It would in-
volve the generation of new stories for a
given domain from common ground knowl-
edge shared by all systems. A set of source
materials will be provided for development,
represented in Controlled Natural Language
(CNL), which should also be used to phrase
the text outputs of participating systems. By
having all participating systems operate from
the same sources for knowledge and generate
in a compatible output format, comparability
of the results will be enhanced. Submitted re-
sults will be subject to both automatic and hu-
man evaluation.

1 Introduction

A story generator algorithm (SGA) refers to a com-
putational procedure resulting in an artefact that
can be considered a story (Gervás, 2012). The
term story generation system can be con-
sidered as a system that applies a SGA to construct
stories. There is a growing population of such story
generation systems that share two significant char-
acteristics: one, they operate from a set of knowl-
edge resources that act as input to the story gen-
eration process; two, they rely on elementary text
building solutions – usually based on template fill-
ing – for producing human-readable versions of their
outputs. Comparative evaluations of any kind be-
tween these story generation systems are very diffi-
cult because: different systems start from different
(unrelated) knowledge resources, and text outputs
of the different systems are heavily influenced by

the (different) sets of templates employed to render
them. A common approach to acquiring knowledge
resources is to mine a set of reference stories, to ob-
tain from them the required knowledge. These re-
sources usually make explicit two types of informa-
tion that is implicit in the stories: relation between
events in the story and latent variables relevant to
it – such as causality, emotion, affinities between
characters, narratological concepts... –, and/or in-
formation about typical/acceptable sequencing be-
tween events – depending on the degree of refine-
ment of the system, sometimes based on the latent
variables.

The present proposal revolves around the idea of
developing a Controlled Natural Language (CNL)
that can be used to specify the source material for
a story generation task. A CNL is an engineered
subset of natural languages whose grammar and vo-
cabulary have been restricted in order to reduce both
ambiguity and complexity of full natural languages
(Schwitter, 2010). If such a CNL could be used to
represent a set of reference stories, while ensuring
that any latent variables are made explicit in the rep-
resentation, it should be possible to automatically
extract the relevant knowledge resources from such
source material. To make this possible, the type of
source material required should include a set of ex-
ample stories either enriched with explicit mentions
of latent variables or accompanied by explicit decla-
ration of the relation between elements in the stories
and the latent variables. If textual outputs of story
generation systems could be phrased in such a CNL,
it should be feasible to compare outputs of different
systems on a shared common footing.

171



2 Conceptual Basis

In (Gervás and León, 2014) the authors provided a
list of the most relevant classifications of the story
generation systems according to the type of knowl-
edge resources that they rely on, and the way these
knowledge resources are implemented as specific
data structures. That paper proposed a list of as-
pects of a narrative relevant to story telling systems
in this sense: including the discourse produced for
the story, the representation of the activity of agents
– in terms of actions, interactions, mental states,
and movement between locations –, the causal re-
lations between elements in the story, the motiva-
tions of agents, the theme of parts of the story, the
emotions involved in or produced by the story, the
intentions of the author, and the narratological con-
cepts involved in the story structure. These various
aspects constitute sources of candidate features for
the role of latent features relevant for story telling.

CNLs can be considered as a tradeoff between the
expressivity of natural languages and the need for
a formal representation that can be handled by com-
puters. The requirements for the definition of a CNL
grammar (Kuhn, 2010) relevant for the present pur-
pose are: that it should be fully formalized and in-
terpretable by computers, it should not depend on
a concrete algorithm or implementation, it should
be easy to implement in different programming lan-
guages, and it should be sufficiently expressive (for
the task at hand).

3 A Proposal for a Story Generation
Shared Task

The feasibility of the shared task relies on the de-
velopment of two basic resources: a grammar for a
CNL capable of representing the various aspects rel-
evant to story telling and the resources required by
story generation systems, and a set of source materi-
als that encode the necessary knowledge for gener-
ating stories in a specific domain covering a selected
set of the relevant aspects.

The challenge as proposed is addressed to existing
story generation systems.1 The task would involve:
extracting task-specific instances of the knowledge

1It may be undertaken by researchers willing to develop a
system from scratch if they consider it feasible, but the effort
involved would be much higher.

resources required for the candidate system from the
source materials provided, adapting the text render-
ing modules of the story generation system to gener-
ate stories as close as possible to the the CNL devel-
oped for the task, and submitting the resulting stories
for evaluation.

3.1 Development of Resources

The proponents of the challenge intend to enlist the
collaboration of authors of existing story generation
systems with a two-fold purpose: to ensure that the
developed resources provide coverage of as many
aspects of narrative deemed relevant from a compu-
tational perspective, and to raise interest in the chal-
lenge and build a community of candidate partici-
pants. The collaboration envisaged would take the
form of providing sample instances of the knowl-
edge resources employed by their system for gener-
ation in a domain of their choice.

3.1.1 The CNL

Such resources will be used to inform the iterative
development of the grammar for the CNL. An initial
grammar will be built covering aspects common to
all systems and all resources. This grammar will be
progressively enriched with any additional aspects
covered by some systems and not by others, until
all selected aspects are covered. Depending on what
aspects are covered by the compiled resources and
how easy they are to embed into a story, decisions
will need to be made on how to represent the rel-
evant latent variables, either as explicit enrichment
of stories or as separate declaration of their relation
to story elements. Some progress has already been
made along these lines (Concepción et al., 2016).

A parser will be developed for the CNL, capable
of building actual data structures for the various as-
pects represented. Both the grammar for the CNL
and the code for the parser will be made available to
participants. The parser will be designed so that it
has a specific module for saving the data structures
to disk. Such module may be reinstantiated by par-
ticipants to select which part of the knowledge in the
data structure is saved onto what particular represen-
tation format for a particular system.

172



3.1.2 The Source Materials
The CNL will be used to develop source materi-

als for a particular domain chosen as focus for the
challenge. Source materials may consist of a set of
enriched stories and/or a set of definitions of rela-
tions between story elements and latent variables.
Additional knowledge relevant to the domain may
also need to be encoded – using the CNL – in the
source materials. The basic scope and structure of
such additional material will be based on the con-
cept of a story bible or show bible as considered by
screenwriters for information on a television series’
characters, settings, and other elements.

3.1.3 Evaluation Procedures
Textual outputs produced by participating sys-

tems will be processed using the parser described in
3.1.1. Outputs will be rated automatically on the fol-
lowing parameters: grammaticality – based on con-
formance to the grammar –, novelty with respect to
reference stories in the source materials – data struc-
tures built by the parser from the outputs will be
compared with those arising from the reference sto-
ries according to existing metrics for narrative sim-
ilarity (Peinado et al., 2010; Hervás et al., 2015) –
, and additional rating schemes developed for any
relevant features – as the data structures generated
by the parser will include explicit representation of
these aspects, development for specif metrics is pos-
sible for features like degree of causal connectivity,
rise and fall of emotion or affinity between charac-
ters over a story, or any others explicitly represented.

For the parameters chosen, judgements from hu-
man evaluators will also be compiled.

3.1.4 Expected Timeline
A tentative timeline is proposed which would

involve: requesting contributions – as samples of
knowledge resources – from interested researchers
by the end of September 2016, publish source ma-
terials in March 2017, outputs to be submitted by
participants by July 2017, final results presented at
INLG 2017. However, in view of the various uncer-
tainties existing in the proposal, it may be necessary
to comtemplate the need to postpone the submission
deadline to 2018, in which case the tentative time-
line may be re-distributed accordingly over the in-
tervening period.

4 Expected Benefits

The development of agreed versions of source ma-
terials from which story generation resources can be
extracted, a grammar for outputs of story systems,
and procedures for quantitative measurement of rel-
evant features would constitute significant benefits.

Acknowledgments

This proposal has been partially supported by
projects WHIM (611560) and PROSECCO
(600653) funded by the European Commission,
Framework Program 7, the ICT theme, and the
Future Emerging Technologies FET program, and
by project IDiLyCo (MINECO/FEDER TIN2015-
66655-R), funded by the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and the European Regional Development
Fund.

References
E. Concepción, P. Gervás, G. Méndez, and C. León.

2016. Using CNL for knowledge elicitation and ex-
change across story generation systems. In 5th Work-
shop on Controlled Natural Language (CNL 2016),
Aberdeen, Scotland, 07/2016. Springer, Springer.

P. Gervás and C. León. 2014. The need for multi-
aspectual representation of narratives in modelling
their creative process. In 5th Workshop on Computa-
tional Models of Narrative, OASIcs-OpenAccess Se-
ries in Informatics.

P. Gervás. 2012. Story generator algorithms. In The
Living Handbook of Narratology. Hamburg University
Press.

R. Hervás, A. Sánchez-Ruiz, P. Gervás, and C. León.
2015. Calibrating a metric for similarity of stories
against human judgment. In Creativity and Expe-
rience Workshop, International Conference on Case-
Based Reasoning, Bad Homburg, Frankfurt, Germany,
09/2015.

T. Kuhn. 2010. Codeco: A practical notation for con-
trolled english grammars in predictive editors. In Con-
trolled Natural Language, pages 95–114. Springer.

F. Peinado, V. Francisco, R. Hervás, and P. Gervás.
2010. Assessing the novelty of computer-generated
narratives using empirical metrics. MINDS AND MA-
CHINES, 20(4):588, 10/2010.

R. Schwitter. 2010. Controlled natural languages for
knowledge representation. In Proc. of the 23rd In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Posters, COLING ’10, pages 1113–1121, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

173


