



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and A K Singh. Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 144–153,
Varanasi, India. December 2016. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Automatic Translation of English Text to Indian Sign 

Language Synthetic Animations 

Lalit Goyal, Assistant Professor,  

DAV College, Jalandhar.  

goyal.aqua@gmail.com 

Dr. Viahal Goyal, Associate Professor,  

Punjabi University, Patiala.  

vishal.pup@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

This article presents the prototype for English 
Text to Indian Sign Language conversion 
system using synthetic animations in real 
domain. The translation system consists of 
parsing module which parses the input English 
sentence to phrase structure grammar 
representation on which Indian sign language 
grammar rules are applied to reorder the words 
of the English sentence (as the grammar of 
English language and Indian sign language is 
different). Elimination module eliminates the 
unwanted words from the reordered sentence. 
Lemmatization is applied to convert the words 
into the root form as the Indian sign language 
does not use the inflections of the words. All 
the words of the sentence are then checked 
into lexicon which contains the English word 
with its HamNoSys notation and the words 
that are not in the lexicon are replaced by their 
synonym. The words of the sentence are 
replaced by their counter HamNoSys code. In 
case the word is not present in the lexicon, 
HamNoSys code will be taken for each 
alphabet of the word. The HamNoSys code is 
converted into the SiGML tags and this 
SiGML tags are sent to animation module 
which converts the SiGML code into the 
synthetic animation using avatar. 

The proposed system is innovative as the 
existing working systems uses videos rather 
than synthetic animations. Even the existing 
systems are limited to conversion of words and 
predefined sentences into Indian sign language 
whereas our proposed system converts the 
English sentences into Indian sign language in 
real domain. 

1 Introduction 

There are approximately 7105 known living 
languages in the world divided in 136 different 
language families. Sign language is one of 
these 136 families which is used by hearing 
impaired people to convey their message. This 
family of the language contains 136 sign 
languages all over the world depending upon 
the region of the world.  Out of nearly 7 billion 
people on earth, nearly 72 million are deaf and 
hard of hearing. Out of such a big number 
approximately 4.3 million such people use 
Sign language. Rest of nearly 67 million deaf 
and hard of hearing people do not use any sign 
language to communicate. Thus nearly 90% 
deaf have a very limited or no access to 
education and other information [1, 2]. 

Sign language is used by hearing impaired 
people using hand shapes, fingers, face 
expressions, gestures and other parts of the 
body [1]. It is a visual-spatial language as the 
signer often uses the 3D space around his body 
to describe an event [5]. As sign languages do 
not have well defined structure or grammar 
therefore there is no or very less acceptability 
of these signs outside their small world. Sign 
languages until the 1960s were not viewed as 
bona fide languages, but just collections of 
gestures and mime. Dr. Stokoe’s research on 
American Sign Language proved that it is a 
full-fledged language with its own grammar, 
syntax, and other linguistic attributes. To 
prove the same for other sign languages, there 
are some efforts including Indian Sign 
Language [3]. 

In spoken language, a word is composed of 
phonemes. Two words can be distinguished by 

144



at least one phoneme (while speaking a pause 
and while writing a space). In SL, a sign is 
composed of cheremes (equivalent to phoneme 
in a spoken language) and similarly two signs 
can differ by at least one chereme [6]. A sign 
is a sequential or parallel construction of its 
manual and non-manual cheremes. A manual 
chereme can be defined by several parameters 
like Hand shape, Hand location, Hand 
Orientation, Hand Movements (straight, 
circular or curved). Non-manual chereme are 
defined by parameters like Facial expressions, 
Eye gaze and Head/body posture [5]. 

However, there exist some signs which may 
contain only manual or only non-manual 
components. For example the sign “Yes” is 
signed by vertical head nod and it has no 
manual component. SL signs can be generally 
classified into three classes: One handed, two 
handed, and non-manual signs. Figure shows 
the overall Indian sign hierarchy.  

 

Figure 1. ISL Type Hierarchy 

One Handed Signs: The one handed signs are 
represented by a single dominating hand. One 
handed signs can be either static or dynamic 
(having movements). Each of the static and 
movement signs is further classified into 
manual and non-manual signs. Figure shows 
examples of one handed static signs with non-
manual and manual components. 

           

Figure 2. One Handed Static Manual Sign 

(Ear) and Non-Manual Sign (Headache) 

Two Handed Signs: The two handed signs are 
represented by both the hands of the signer. As 
in the case of one handed signs, similar 
classification can be applied to two handed 
signs. However, two handed signs with 
movements can be further distinguished as: 
Type0 and Type1 signs. 

Type0  signs are those where both hands are 
active 

Type1 signs are those where one hand 
(dominant) is more active compared to the 
other hand (non-dominant) as shown below.  

       

Figure 3. Two Handed Sign "long"(both the 

hands are moving)   and “Flag” (only the 

dominant right hand is moving)  

Communication for the hearing impaired 
people in common places like railway stations, 
bus stands, banks, hospitals etc. is very 
difficult because a hearing person may not 
understand the sign language used by the 
hearing impaired person to communicate. 
Also, a hearing person cannot convey any 
message to hearing impaired person as he/she 
may not know the sign language.  

To make the communication between hearing 
impaired and hearing community, the 
language translation is must that may include, 

 

Figure 4: Communication between Hearing 

and Hearing Impaired Community 

This is worth mentioning here that Sign 
languages are not “Natural languages 
represented through signs” or not even 
translated word to word in signs. For 
example, the word light in English has 
different meanings. Light means not heavy, or 

145



we say light color i.e. not dark or switch on the 
light. Here, we represent these different 
meanings in English with same word 'light’ 
but in sign language, we will represent these 
different meanings with different signs. So, 
Sign language is not representation of word as 
it is but rather the meanings are represented 
using Sign language. 

So we interpret that Sign language and Signed 
Language are different. Signed Language is 
any other natural language for which signs are 
created for every word. Signed English has 
word order of English only and every word of 
English is represented using signs. The 
problem with this approach is that it is very 
slow because signing every word takes time 
and if speech and the Signed English both are 
being communicated at the same time, Signed 
English will be much behind the actual words 
spoken in English [3]. Another type of sign 
mechanism exists, known as Sign Supported 
English. Sign Supported English does not 
display sign for each word and only signs are 
displayed for some important words of the 
speech and rest of the sentence is spoken only. 

Yet another type is Finger Spelling where 
instead of having the symbols for words, 
fingers are used to show the letters, which 
make the word. This form is merged with any 
other form of Sign Language because of 
limited dictionary of Sign Language. 

An alternative to Sign Language is Cued 
Speech. It uses hand shapes and placement 
with mouth movements to show the sounds. 
Considered to be visible counterpart of spoken 
language, cued speech works by combining 
visible hand and mouth movements to 
represent sound just like phonemes are 
combined in any other natural language. Cued 
speech represents the individual sounds of 
words via a system of visual phonetics where 
as sign language is used to represent a whole 
word. One advantage cued speech over sign 
language systems is that the number of 
different signs to remember is far less than in a 
sign language because only a few phonemes 
are to be represented using signs and rest all 
the words are made up of these phonemes’ 
signs only [4]. 

 

2 Facts about Indian Sign language 

Sign language is natural language which has 
some facts with which the people are not 
aware off. Some of the facts of the sign 
language are: 

• NOT the same all over the world. 

• NOT just gestures and pantomime, but do 
have their own grammar. 

• Have much smaller dictionary than the 
other spoken natural languages. 

• Finger-spelling for the unknown words. 

• Words may be joined e.g. to represent 
dinner, one might show the sign of Night 
and then Food. 

• Most of the sign languages put the 
adjective after the noun e.g. Car Red. 

• Never use am/is/are/was/were/ (linking 
verbs). 

• Never use word-endings/suffixes. 

• Always sign in the Present Tense. 

• Do not use articles. (a, an, some, the). 

• Do not use I, but uses me. 

• WH-questions are at the END e.g. “You 
go where?” 

• Have no gerunds. (-ing). 

• Use non-manual expressions as well e.g. 
use of eye brows, eye lids, facial 
expressions, head and shoulders 
movement. 

• NOT been invented by hearing people. 

 

3 Overview of Overall System 

The success of the translation system from 
English text to Indian sign language required 
lexical and syntactic knowledge of Indian sign 
language. The lexicon has been created for 
English word – ISL sign as discussed in the 
next section. The overall architecture of the 
system is shown in the figure below. The 
system consists of 7 modules: 

• English parser for parsing the English text 

• Sentence reordering module based on ISL 

grammar rules 

146



• Eliminator for eliminating the unwanted 

words 

• Lemmatization for getting the root word of 

each word and Synonym replacement 

module to replace the unknown word with 

its synonym counterpart 

• Word to SiGML conversion using 

HamNoSys 

• Synthetic Animation module.  

The input to the system is written English text 
which is parsed to get the phrase structure 
grammar representation of the sentence. The 
parsed sentence is then sent to the conversion 
module which reorders the words of the 
English sentence according to the rules of ISL 
grammar. Reordering is required as English 
uses SVO order where as ISL uses the SOV 
order along with some other variations for 
interrogative and negative sentences. After 
getting the sentence as per ISL grammar, 
unwanted words from the sentence are 
removed. This is because the ISL used only 
the words which have some meaning and all 

the helping words like linking verbs, articles 
etc are not used. The output is sent to the 
lemmatization module which converts the 
words in their root form. This is again because 
the sign language uses the root form of each 
word irrespective of other languages which 
uses suffixes, gerund, past and futures words 
in their sentences. Because of limited 
dictionary of ISL, the unknown words in the 
sentence are replaced with their synonym 
counterpart, in case the synonym is not 
available, finger spelling of the word is 
performed character by character. At this 
stage, the sentence is ready to animate. Each 
word of the sentence is replaced by its 
equivalent HamNoSys (Writing notation of the 
sign)[8] from the English Word-HamNoSys 
dictionary and the HamNoSys string is 
converted to SiGML (Signing gesture markup 
language) code using SiGML rules. This 
SiGML code  is sent to SiGML animation tool 
which plays the synthetic animation.  

 

 

 

Figure 5: Architecture of English Text to ISL Synthetic Animation System 

 

 

147



4 English-ISL Lexicon 

Translating from a source language to target 
language requires a bilingual dictionary. 
Translating English text to ISL, bilingual 
dictionary of English and Indian Sign 
Language is created which contains the 
English word and its equivalent Indian sign. 
Here, the English word’s counterpart Indian 

sign can be taken as the real human video, sign 
picture, coded sign language text, or synthetic 
animation. All the approaches have their own 
pros and cons but the synthetic animations are 
well suited for the translation of spoken 
language to sign language. A comparison of 
all the media has been given in the table as 
shown: 

 

Table 1: Comparison of Different Media for Representing the Sign 

Kind of Media Pros  Cons 

Video Signs • Realistic 

• Easy to create 

• Time consuming to create 

• High memory consumption 

• Not supported by translation 
system 

Pictures • Very less memory 
consumption 

• Time consuming to create 
pictures 

• Not realistic as compared to 
videos 

• Not supported by translation 
system 

Coded Sign Language Text • Minimal Memory 
consumption 

• Supported by translation 
system as it is the written 
form and can be processed 
very easily 

• Very difficult to read and 
understand 

• Required to be learnt 

Synthetic Animations • Very less memory 
consumption 

• Can be easily reproduced 

• Supported by translation 
system 

• Avatar can be made 
different according to choice 

• Not as realistic as human 
videos. 

 

Because synthetic animation is supported by 
the translation system are much realistic as 
compared to pictures and coded text so 
synthetic animations have been produced for 
corresponding English word in this translation 
system.  

To create the animation of each English word, 
a written form of the sign is taken. Though a 
3D sign cannot be written but researchers have 
put their efforts to create the notation system 

with which a 3D sign can be expressed in 
written form. Some of the written forms for 
3D sign are Stokoe Notation[11], 
SignWriting[12], Hamburg notation System[8] 
etc. We have used HamNoSys (Hamburg 
Notation System)[8] notation for creating the 
dictionary. HamNoSys has an alphabet of 
about 200 symbols (Unicode of this notation 
system is available)[8] which covers almost all 
the hand shapes, Hand location, Hand/palm 
orientation, Hand movement, and non-Manual 

148



part of the sign. The basic structure of the 
HamNoSys is: 

 

Figure 6: Structure of HamNoSys Code 

Later this HamNoSys can be converted into 
SiGML code which can be animated by an 
animation tool using an Avatar as shown in the 
following architecture:   

 

Figure 7: Architecture to produce the 

animation from English word.  

A list of 1818 most commonly used English 
words[10] used by the differently abled people 
is taken for creating the bilingual dictionary of 
English word and HamNoSys notation.  The 
words are categorized in part of speech and a 
count of 1510 words are coded into 
HamNoSys as shown in the table[10]:  

Table 2: Statistics of Words Implemented 

Word Category 
No. of 

Words 
No. of Words 

Implemented 

Adjectives 185 177 

Adverb 54 54 

Conjunction 3 3 

Determiner 12 12 

Noun 1136 855 

Preposition 32 32 

Pronoun 33 32 

Verb 359 333 

 5  Parsing of the Input English Sentence 

For rule based conversion of one language to 
another language, grammatical structure of the 
source language is required so that the words 
of the source sentence can be reordered as per 
the grammar rules of the target language. 
Parsing is the answer to know the grammatical 
structure of the sentence. To get the 
grammatical structure of the sentences of 
English language, parsing is done using third 
party software. We have used the Stanford 
parser[7] for this purpose which uses 
unlexicalized PCFG(probabilistic context free 
grammar)  with output accuracy of 86.36%. 
Probabilistic parser is trained on the hand-
parsed sentences and the knowledge gained is 
used to parse the new sentences. Stanford 
parser is capable to produce three different 
outputs, part-of-speech tagged text, context 
free phrase structure grammar representation, 
and type dependency representation. Stanford 
parser uses Penn Tree tags for parsing the 
English sentence. In this project, we have used 
phrase structure grammar representation as in 
rule based approach, the grammatical structure 
of the English sentence was required to 
convert it into the sentence as per the 
grammatical structure of target language 
(Indian sign language). 

6 Grammar Rules for Conversion of 

English Sentence to ISL Sentence 

Translation of one spoken language to another 
spoken language is complex task if both the 
languages have different grammar rules. The 
complexity is increased many folds when 
source language is spoken language and the 
target language is sign language. For 
translating English text to Indian sign 
language, a comparison of grammar of both 
the languages is must: 

 

 

 

 

149



Table 3: Comparison of Grammar of English and Indian Sign Language 

English language grammar Indian sign language grammar 

English grammar is well structured and a lot of 
research work has been carried out to define the 
rules for it. English grammar follows the subject-
verb-object order.  

ISL is invented by deaf and a little work has 
been done to study the grammar of this language. 
The structure of sentences of ISL follows the 
subject-object-verb order[13]. 

English language uses various forms of verbs 
and adjectives depending upon the type of the 
sentence. Also, a lot of inflections of the words 
are used in English sentences. 

ISL does not use any inflections  ( gerund, 
suffixes, or  other forms ), it uses the root form  
of the   word.    

English language has much larger dictionary Indian sign language has a very limited 
dictionary, approximately 1800 words[10].  

Question word in interrogative sentences is at the 
start in English 

In Indian sign language, the question word is 
always sentence final[1].  

A lot of helping verbs, articles, and conjunctions 
are used in the sentences of English 

In Indian sign language, no conjunctions, articles 
or linking verbs are used 

  

For conversion of English sentence to a 
sentence as per ISL grammar rules, all the verb 
patterns (20 patterns)[15] are studied and rules 
are formed to convert English sentence into 
ISL sentence. The parsed sentence is the input 
to this module where the noun phrase and the 
prepositional phrase are freezed but if there is 

any verb phrase present in the sentence, it is 
checked recursively because the verb phrase 
may further be composed of noun phrase, 
prepositional phrase, verb phrase or even the 
sentence. Some of the rules of conversion are 
given in the table: 

 

Table 4: Examples of Grammatical Reordering of Words of English Sentence 

Verb Pattern Rule Input Sentence Parsed Sentence Output Sentence 

verb + object VP NP go school (VP (VB Go ) (NP 
(NN school ) ) ) 

school go 

subject + verb NP V birds fly (NP (NNS birds ) ) 
(VP (VBP fly ) ) 

birds fly 

subject + verb + 
subject 
complement 

NP V NP his brother 
became a soldier 

(NP (PRP$ his ) (NN 
brother ) ) (VP (VBD 
became ) (NP (DT a 
) (NN soldier ) ) ) 

his brother a 
soldier became 

subject + verb + 
indirect object + 
direct object 

NP V NP NP i lent her my pen (NP (FW i ) ) (VP 
(VBD lent ) (NP 
(PRP her ) ) (NP 
(PRP$ my ) (NN pen 
) ) ) 

i her my pen lent 

150



subject + verb subject + verb show me your 
hands 

(VP (VBP show ) 
(NP (PRP me ) ) ) 
(NP (PRP$ your ) 
(NNS hands ) ) 

me your hands 
show 

subject + verb + 

direct object + 

preposition 
+prepositional 

object 

 

NP V NP PP she made coffee 
for all of us 

(NP (PRP She ) ) 
(VP (VBD made ) 
(NP (NN coffee ) ) 
(PP (IN for ) (NP 
(NP (DT all ) ) (PP 
(IN of ) (NP (PRP us 
) ) ) ) ) ) 

she coffee for all 
of us made 

subject + verb + 

indirect object + 
direct object 

V NP PP show your  hands 
to me 

(VP (VB show ) (NP 
(PRP$ your ) (NNS 
hands ) ) (PP (TO to 
) (NP (PRP me ) ) ) ) 

your hands to me 
show 

subject + verb + 
preposition 

prepositional 

object 

NP V PP we are waiting for 
suresh 

(NP (PRP we ) ) (VP 
(VBP are ) (VP 
(VBG waiting ) (PP 
(IN for ) (NP (NN 
suresh ) ) ) ) ) 

we for suresh are 
waiting 

 

7 Elimination of Unwanted Words 

Indian sign language sentences are formed of 
main words. All the words like linking verbs, 
suffixes, articles are not used. After applying 
the grammar rules, the ISL sentence is 
generated of which all the unwanted words are 
required to be removed. The part of speech 
which are not the part of ISL sentence are 
detected and eliminated from the sentence. Out 
of 36 POS tags, the various part of speech 
which do not form the part of ISL sentence are 

TO, POS(possessive ending), MD(Modals), 
FW(Foreign word), CC(coordinating 
conjuction), some DT(determiners like a, an, 
the), JJR, JJS(adjectives, comparative and 
superlative), NNS, NNPS(nouns plural, proper 
plural), RP(particles), SYM(symbols), 
Interjections, non-root verbs. These above 
mentioned unwanted words are removed from 
the ISL sentence.  Below is the table of 
examples in which unwanted words are 
removed.  

 

Table 5: Elimination of unwanted words 

Input  English Sentence Sentence after reordering Output ISL Sentence(After 

elimination) 

go school school go go school 

birds fly birds fly birds fly 

his brother became a soldier his brother a soldier became his brother soldier become 

i lent her my pen i her my pen lent i her my pen lent 

show me your hands me your hands show me your hand show 

she made coffee for all of us she coffee for all of us made she coffee all we made 

show your  hands to me your hands to me show your hand me show 

we are waiting for suresh we for suresh are waiting we suresh waiting 

151



 

 8 Lemmatization & Synonym Replacement 

Indian sign language uses the root words in 
their sentences. All the words used must not 
contain suffixes, gerund or it should not be an 
inflexion of a word. If a word in the ISL 
sentence is not root word, it is converted into 
the root word after passing it to the stemmer 
and applying lemmatization rules. The porter 
stemmer [16] is used for stemming.  

After converting the inflections of the words to 
their respective root words, the ISL sentence 
contains only the root words. Now, each root 
word is checked for availability in the English-
ISL dictionary. Though this dictionary 
contains only 1478 words, a list of synonyms 
is created to make the system robust and 
increase the hits in the dictionary. An indirect 
approach is used rather than creating a list of 
all the synonyms of English language. We 
have collected the synonyms of only 1478 
words (the words which are in our bilingual 
dictionary) A total of approximately 4000 
synonym words are included in our database. 
It was taken care to remove the duplicacy of 
the words as well the part of speech of each 
word was taken care. For example, the word 
inaugural is an adjective, its synonym is taken 
as opening as adjective otherwise the word 
opening is used as verb also. The word 
anger(v) has the synonyms irate, insense, 
enrage, infuriate which all are verbs. Also the 
word angry(n) has the synonyms as 
annoyance, irritation, fury, rage, resentment, 
antagonism which all are noun.  In case, no 
word is found in the dictionary or synonym 
list, the word is spelled. Here, spelling the 
word means finger spelling i.e. each character 
of the word is taken whose sign will be 
produced. Signs of all the alphabets of English 
have also been maintained in the database 
increasing the dictionary size to approximately 
6000 words. All the personal nouns(names of 
persons, buildings etc) are finger spelled. 

9 Sign Animation using Avatar 

After all processing done on the English 
sentence to convert to ISL sentence, it is ready 
to be animated. As already discussed, the 
synthetic animation(using a computer 

generated character known as Avatar) is best 
suitable for producing the sign. To animate the 
sentence, we have used an animation tool 
SiGML Player[17]. To generate the animation 
through this tool, the input must be the tags of 
SiGML(Signing Gesture Markup Language) 
and the output of this tool is animated 
character. 

To get the SiGML tags, each word of the ISL 
sentence is replaced with its corresponding 
HamNoSys code. For the words which are not 
in the English-ISL dictionary database, each 
character (alphabet) of the word is replaced 
with the corresponding HamNosys code. Now, 
we have the HamNosys code of the whole ISL 
sentence. The HamNoSys code is now 
converted to SiGML tags using HamNoSys-
SiGML conversion rules. As soon as we get 
the SiGML tags for the whole sentence, it is 
sent to the animation tool which plays it as the 
animated character. 

 

Figure 8: Architecture to produce the 

Animation from English word 

10 Conclusion 

In this paper, a translation system for English 
text to Indian sign language has been 
presented. The automatic system is the first 
ever translation system for Indian sign 
language in real domain. The major 
components of the system are conversion 
module(converts the English sentence to ISL 
sentence based on the grammatical rules), 
Elimination module(eliminates the unwanted 
words from the ISL sentence), Synonym and 
Lemmatization module(converts each word of 
the ISL sentence to root word), and Animation 
module(converts the ISL sentence to synthetic 
animation). Currently, the system has been 
created for context free conversion of English 
text to synthetic animations. A lot of time is 

152



consumed to create the dictionary of English 
word to Indian sign in which non-manual 
component of each sign is taken care as well 
as the lips of avatar are animated so that it a 
hard of hearing person can read the lips also. 
Overall conversion accuracy has been checked 
by demonstrating the system in various deaf 
schools. The work has been very much 
appreciated by the interpreters and students. In 
future, the dictionary of sign language can be 
enhanced adding more words in it. Also, the 
context can be taken care while converting the 
English sentence to ISL sentence. 

References 

1. Ethnologue: Languages of the World. (2015). 
Retrieved July 10, 2016, from 

http://www.ethnologue.com/ 

2. WFD | World Federation of the Deaf - World 
Federation of the Deaf, WFD, human rights, 
deaf, deaf people. (2015). Retrieved July 10, 

2016, from https://wfdeaf.org/ 

3. Zeshan, U., Vasishta, M. N., & Sethna, M. 
(2005). Implementation of Indian Sign 
Language in educational settings. Asia Pacific 

Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 16(1), 16-
40. 

4. Setting Cued Speech Apart from Sign 
Language - Accredited Language Services. 

(2016). Retrieved March 21, 2016, from 
https://www.accreditedlanguage.com/2016/08
/17/setting-cued-speech-apart-from-sign-
language/ 

5. Zeshan, U. (2003). Indo-Pakistani Sign 
Language grammar: a typological 
outline. Sign Language Studies, 3(2), 157-
212. 

6. Stokoe, W. C. (2005). Sign language 
structure: An outline of the visual 
communication systems of the American 
deaf. Journal of deaf studies and deaf 
education, 10(1), 3-37. 

7. Klein, D., & Manning, C. D. (2003, July). 
Accurate unlexicalized parsing. 
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on 

Association for Computational Linguistics-

Volume 1 (pp. 423-430). Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

8. Hanke, T. (2004, May). HamNoSys-

representing sign language data in language 
resources and language processing contexts. 
In LREC (Vol. 4). 

9. Goyal, L., & Goyal, V. (2016). Development 
of Indian Sign Language Dictionary using 
Synthetic Animations. Indian Journal of 
Science and Technology, 9(32). 

10. Dictionary | Indian Sign Language. (n.d.). 
Retrieved July 15, 2016, from 
http://indiansignlanguage.org/dictionary 

11. Stokoe, W. C. (1978). Sign language 

structure. 

12. Sutton, V. (1995). Lessons in sign writing. 
SignWriting 

13. Sinha, S. (2003). A skeletal grammar of 

Indian sign language. Unpublished master’s 
diss., Jawaharlal Nehru University, New 

Delhi, India. 

14. Aboh, E., Pfau, R., & Zeshan, U. (2005). 

When a wh-word is not a wh-word: The case 
of Indian Sign Language. The yearbook of 
South Asian languages and linguistics, 2005, 
11-43. 

15. Wren, P. C., & Martin, H. (1999). High 
school English grammar and composition. 

16. Porter, M. F. (2001). Snowball: A language 
for stemming algorithms. 

17. JASigning. (2015). Retrieved june 15, 2016, 
from 
http://vh.cmp.uea.ac.uk/index.php/JASigning 

 

153


