



















































Automatic discovery of Latin syntactic changes


Proceedings of the 10th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH), pages 156–164,
Berlin, Germany, August 11, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic discovery of Latin syntactic changes

Micha Elsner and Emily Lane
melsner0@gmail and lane.434@osu.edu

Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University

Abstract

Syntactic change tends to affect construc-
tions, but treebanks annotate lower-level
structure: PCFG rules or dependency arcs.
This paper extends prior work in native
language identification, using Tree Substi-
tution Grammars to discover constructions
which can be tested for historical variabil-
ity. In a case study comparing Classi-
cal and Medieval Latin, the system dis-
covers several constructions correspond-
ing to known historical differences, and
learns to distinguish the two varieties with
high accuracy. Applied to an intermediate
text (the Vulgate Bible), it indicates which
changes between the eras were already oc-
curring at this earlier stage.

1 Introduction

In recent years, the study of language variation and
change has been aided by a variety of computa-
tional tools that can automatically infer hypothe-
ses about language change from a corpus (Eisen-
stein, 2015). In the domain of syntax, however,
computational work is still limited by the neces-
sity of manually choosing interesting hypotheses
to study. For example, computational research on
the syntax of African-American English (Stewart,
2014) is driven by pre-existing scholarly intuitions
about the distinctive features of this dialect, but
such intuitions are much harder to obtain for dead
(or newly-emerging) language varieties.

This paper adopts a method for unsupervised
learning of syntactic constructions previously
found effective for native language identification
(Swanson and Charniak, 2012), and shows that it
can discover a range of historically varying ele-
ments in a Latin corpus. In particular, we conduct
a case study comparing classical prose (1st century

CE) with the Medieval writing of Thomas Aquinas
(c. 1270) and the intermediate stage of the Vulgate
Bible (4th century CE). Such a method can be used
for the initial “hypothesis discovery” step in a his-
torical research project. Although the method is
currently incapable of discovering some (lexically
bound) constructions, we demonstrate that it dis-
covers several interpretable and interesting histor-
ical changes.

The method (which we review more fully be-
low) induces a Tree Substitution Grammar (TSG)
from a constituency treebank. TSG rules are larger
than Context-Free Grammar (CFG) rules and thus
have the power to represent constructions, includ-
ing partial lexicalization. We use chi-squared fea-
ture selection to rank the TSG rules for their sen-
sitivity to historical change. We evaluate the rules
both by building classifiers to identify the histori-
cal period of unknown text, and by manual exam-
ination and interpretation.

2 Variationist research

Computational methods for studying language
variation can enhance both diachronic (historical)
and synchronic (sociolinguistic) research. In some
cases, the computational contribution is to build a
classifier for a particular feature which is already
of interest. For instance, Bane et al. (2010) tar-
get pre-selected phonetic features for analysis in
recorded speech. Other computational systems are
exploratory: capable of discovering new hypothe-
ses about geographical or social variation in the
data. But existing systems of this type are lex-
icographic. For instance, Eisenstein (2015) de-
tects previously unknown local slang terms, such
as “deadass” in New York City. Rao et al. (2010)
discover words and ngrams correlated with gender
and other social attributes, as do later papers such
as Bamman et al. (2014).

156



C

C

quod

V.IND

N.NOM N.NOM V.IND

est

Figure 1: A TSG fragment with the root sym-
bol C (complement clause), introducing an indica-
tive subclause headed by quod which contains two
nominals and the verb est “is”.

Work on syntactic variation is much rarer. For
the most part, it is confirmatory rather than ex-
planatory; computational systems are designed to
find examples of specific constructions in order
to support investigations driven by pre-existing
hypotheses. Such systems do not suggest new
hypotheses from the data. Stewart (2014) de-
tects African-American copula deletion and aux-
iliary verb structures; Doyle (2014) investigates
“needs done” and double modals. We know of one
exploratory project using syntactic features: Jo-
hannsen et al. (2015) use universal dependencies
to extract “treelets” correlated with age and gen-
der. Our TSG fragments are similar to their treelet
features, but have the potential to be larger and are
partly lexicalized.

3 Tree substitution grammars

A Tree Substitution Grammar (TSG) generalizes
Context-Free Grammar (CFG) by allowing rules
to insert arbitrarily large tree fragments (Cohn et
al., 2009). Each fragment has a root symbol (anal-
ogous to the left-hand-side category in a CFG) and
a frontier which can consist of terminals (words)
and non-terminal symbols to be filled in later in the
derivation. An example tree fragment is shown in
figure 1; this fragment describes a particular com-
plement clause structure which can be interpreted
as the construction “that X is Y”.

A single treebank tree may have multiple TSG
derivations (depending on how it is split up into
constructional fragments), so TSGs must be in-
duced from the data. The Data-oriented Parsing
(DOP) method (Bod and Kaplan, 1998) was crit-
icized by Johnson (2002) for its poor estimation
procedure. Newer methods select a set of frag-
ments either using Bayesian models (Cohn et al.,
2009; Post and Gildea, 2009) or using so-called
Double-DOP (Sangati and Zuidema, 2011), which

creates a TSG rule for every maximal fragment
which occurs more than once in the dataset. For
instance, the fragment in figure 1 would be ex-
tracted from the trees for dicit quod Cicero con-
sul est and quod Caesar dux est scimus,1 since it
is shared between them both, but cannot be fur-
ther expanded without adding an unshared ele-
ment. TSGs are equivalent in expressive power to
CFGs and can be efficiently parsed using the same
algorithms (Goodman, 1996).

TSGs have been used effectively for native
language identification (Swanson and Charniak,
2012): determining the native language of a writer
with intermediate proficiency in English, given a
sample of their English writing. (Two closely
related approaches are Wong and Dras (2011)
and Wong et al. (2012).) Swanson and Charniak
(2014) show that the rules learned by their system
can be interpreted as transferring features or con-
structions from their native language. In this work,
we argue that TSG is also useful for detecting the
forms of change which occur in historical corpora.

4 Classical and Medieval Latin

Lind (1941) divides Latin roughly into Classi-
cal (250 BCE to 100 CE), Late (100-600 CE),
Medieval (600-1300) and Neo-Latin (1300-1700).
Though these divisions are heuristic, they do cor-
respond to episodes of lexical and grammatical
change. Medieval Latin was an educated language
used by clerics and scholars. It diverges from
its Classical roots partly due to the influence of
the evolving Romance languages and of Church
texts (themselves often influenced by Hebrew and
Greek) (Lind, 1941; Löfstedt, 1959).

Scholars debate the nature and origins of vari-
ability within Medieval Latin. Löfstedt (1959, ch.
3) surveys this research. For instance, an early
theory that African Late Latin was syntactically
distinct was rejected on the grounds that the sup-
posedly African constructions represented a dis-
tinct rhetorical style rather than a dialect. Simi-
lar questions have been raised about dialectal dif-
ferences between France and Spain and the influ-
ences of Germanic languages on their local vari-
eties of Latin.

A robust computational method could help to
resolve controversies like these. In many cases,
the dispute is centered around some construction

1“He says Cicero is consul” and “That Caesar is a general,
we know”.

157



which is claimed to be a regional variant. For
instance, Hanssen (1945) claims that mittere pro
may be a calque of English “send for”, a claim
which Löfstedt (1959) rebuts by providing a va-
riety of examples from elsewhere. The construc-
tions involved may be quite rare, and a special-
ist in one region or period may be unaware that a
construction of interest is attested elsewhere, es-
pecially in obscure texts. An automatic method
for discovering cases which vary across regions or
periods could not only help to reject this type of
spurious claim, but also find genuine examples of
regional variation which may not have been previ-
ously noticed.

5 Case study

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
we use it to construct a classifier which differen-
tiates between single utterances of Classical and
Medieval Latin. The classifier features are a set of
TSG fragments. We induce the TSG from train-
ing data, then run a feature selection procedure to
limit their number. We show that the learned clas-
sifier is fairly effective, and analyze two sets of its
learned features by hand, connecting them to the
literature on known historical changes.

As a secondary question, we investigate the
placement of the Vulgate Bible: is it more simi-
lar to Classical or Medieval Latin? The Vulgate
is often seen as an intermediate between the two
periods. Sidwell (1995, p.30) says that it:

“sanctified usages such as changes in the
use of cases and the subjunctive, and the
more frequent use of quod/quia clauses
in reported speech. . . . It is linguistically
a central text.”

But while the Vulgate has a strong influence on
Medieval tradition, its compiler, St. Jerome,2 was
classically educated; in a famous letter, he actu-
ally chastised himself for being “a Ciceronian, not
a Christian” (Wright, 1933) because of his pref-
erence for classical prose over the “uncultivated”
Biblical style. Running the classifier on sentences
from the Vulgate can reveal how the text balances
these two affinities.

2Our sample, the book of Revelation, was “slightly re-
vised” (Sidwell, 1995) by Jerome from an older Latin trans-
lation of the 2nd century CE (Hornblower et al., 2012).

Author Text Sents. Date
Classical (Perseus)

Cicero In Catalinam 327 63
BCE

Sallust Bellum
Catalinae

701 c. 42
BCE

Caesar de Bello
Gallico

71 c. 57
BCE

Petronius Satyricon 1114 c. 54-
68 CE

Late (Perseus)
Jerome
(editor)

Vulgate
Bible (Reve-
lation)

405 c. 380
CE

Medieval (Thomisticus)
Thomas
Aquinas

Summa
Contra
Gentiles

9859 c.
1250-
70

Table 1: Authors and texts used in the current
study; dates from (Shipley et al., 2008; Horn-
blower et al., 2012).

6 Data and preprocessing

Our case study uses two Latin treebanks, Perseus
(Bamman and Crane, 2011) and Index Thomisti-
cus (Passarotti, 2011), each of which contains
dependency-parsed Latin prose (Bamman et al.,
2007). Table 1 provides a list of authors, dates
and sizes. Unfortunately, the Late and Medieval
groups are represented by a single author each;
this represents a weakness of this project, since it
will be impossible to distinguish Medieval Latin
in general from the specific style of Aquinas. The
data is also somewhat unbalanced, with Aquinas
representing much more text than any other author.
These limitations are imposed by the system’s re-
quirement for parse trees, and the unavailability of
other parsed Latin data.

Both source treebanks use non-projective de-
pendency trees. To employ the TSG technique,
we convert these to constituency trees. Our con-
version introduces a phrasal projection over ev-
ery head word with children; following Klein and
Manning (2004), we give this projection the same
label as the head word’s part of speech. Non-
projective edges are converted to projective ones
by reordering the words so that the descendants
of every head are contiguous. When a subtree is
moved for this purpose, its tag is marked with a
diacritic, so that the grammar can learn separate

158



quem ad finem iactabit
what to end hurl.3.FUT

ROOT

V.IND

R

R

ad

N.ACC

P.ACCmov

quem

N.ACC

finem

V.IND

iactabit

Figure 2: Transformation of the non-projective
construction quem ad finem iactabit (“how far will
[your audacity] hurl [itself]”) from the Perseus
Treebank into a constituency structure. mov is the
“moved element” diacritic.

rules for non-projective constructions.3 See figure
2 for an example.

The treebanks use multidimensional part of
speech tags, with slightly different tagging con-
ventions. We use only the top-level part of speech
tag for most words, converting the Thomisticus
tags deterministically into the Perseus tags. We
use the remaining dimensions to annotate nomi-
nals with their case and verbs with their mood (in-
dicative, subjunctive, imperative or infinitive).

Finally, again following Swanson and Charniak
(2013), we selectively delexicalize the trees. This
prevents the “syntactic” patterns our system learns
as markers of variation from being dominated by
lexical items marking different topics (Sarawgi
et al., 2011). For instance, Aquinas frequently
uses the adjective Christiana “Christian”, while
the Classical authors do not. But this is a change
in culture, rather than in language.

We remove all lexical items except prepositions
(POS tag R), conjunctions (C), and a short list of
adverbials (D), ne, non, tam, tamen, ita, etiam
(“lest, not, so, however, thus, besides”). We re-
place all forms of the verb esse (“to be”), which is
often used as an auxiliary, with the Perseus Tree-
bank lemmatized form sum1. For example, the
phrase ad quem finem is delexicalized to ad UNK

3Unlike the construction of Nivre and Nilsson (2005), this
tag is intended to describe non-projective constructions but
does not give enough information to parse them.

UNK, although the part of speech tags remain as a
guide to the grammatical form.

Finally, we split our data into random
train/dev/test sections, with 110 of each era for de-
velopment, 210 testing and the rest training. Since
we do not train or develop on the Vulgate, we set
this data aside as a single set.

7 Learning and ranking constructions

We extract a set of TSG rules using Double-DOP
(Sangati and Zuidema, 2011). As stated above,
this process yields the set of all maximal TSG
fragments which occur in more than one tree-
bank tree. It is usually more exhaustive than the
Bayesian extractors (Cohn et al., 2009), although
it can be slow for large corpora.

As in Swanson and Charniak (2013), we then
match each rule against each treebank sentence,
deciding whether that rule can occur in any deriva-
tion of the sentence. We assemble these decisions
into a (rule×sentence) binary co-occurrence ma-
trix. To compute variants which change between
Classical and Medieval Latin, we sum across sen-
tences in the training set to compute the four-way
contingency table of counts: sentences with and
without the rule in each era. We compute the χ2

statistic for each table and use this to rank the
rules for feature selection. Swanson and Charniak
(2013) recommend χ2 because it tends to retain
moderately rare rules with good predictive power,
rather than focusing on generally-applicable rules
with weak predictions (as is the case for Informa-
tion Gain).

We select rules for which the χ2 probability is
less than .00001 (tuned on development experi-
ments; the corresponding χ2 statistic is about 19).
In our dataset, this method selects 357 TSG frag-
ments. We use the Megam (Daumé III, 2004)
maximum entropy classifier to learn a predictor for
the era (Classical or Medieval) of a sentence given
the binary feature vector indicating presence or ab-
sence of these 357 fragments. Results are shown
in table 2. The classifier overpredicts the major-
ity class (Medieval) but still achieves 77% accu-
racy on the minority class, indicating that its fea-
tures are reasonably informative about language
change.

7.1 Analysis

We will discuss two interpretable patterns discov-
ered by our system: a known historical change in

159



Era N Correct Acc
Classical 442 341 77%
Medieval 1972 1931 98%
Majority 2414 1972 82%
Overall 2414 2268 94%

Table 2: Classifier accuracy on test data.

the use of complement clauses, and a stable but
hard-to-interpret pattern in adjective/noun order-
ing. Finally, we discuss our failure to detect the
decline of a parenthetical construction called the
ablative absolute. In each case, we have manually
grouped together TSG fragments selected by the
system and imposed an interpretation on them by
doing additional linguistic analysis.

Classical Latin verbs like dicere “to say” typi-
cally take nonfinite complement clauses (Pinkster,
1990). In Medieval Latin, these verbs more com-
monly take finite complement clauses, often with
the complementizer quod “that” (Sidwell, 1995,
p.368). The two sentences below (the first from
Cicero, the second from Aquinas) exemplify these
different structures:

(1) Lepidum
Lepidus.ACC

te
you.ACC

habitare
live.with.INF

velle
want.INF

dixisti
say.2.PFV

“You said you want to live with Lepidus.”

(2) Dicitur
say.3.PASS

quod
COMP

sapientia
wisdom.NOM

infinitus
infinite

thesaurus
treasury

est
be.3

“It is said that wisdom is an infinite trea-
sury.”

Table 3 shows a collection of tree fragments re-
lated to this change, along with their χ2 statistic
values. The system clearly identifies the Medieval
complementizer quod “that” with both indicative
and subjunctive clauses, along with autem “how-
ever” and igitur “therefore”. Although these do
occur in Classical prose, the high values of the
χ2 statistic show that they are clearly much more
widely used in Medieval Latin. The system also
identifies the decline of the Classical complemen-
tizer cum (“when” with indicatives, “since” with
subjunctives). The low χ2 value (46) for the in-
finitival complement clause, however, must be ac-
counted as a partial failure of the system; this frag-
ment appears low in the selected list of features.

Fragment χ2 hits
More Classical

(V.INF N.ACC V.INF) 46 69
(C (C cum) V.SBJV) 299 68
(C (C cum) V.IND 102 24

More Medieval
(C igitur) 353 1575

(C (C autem) V.IND) 351 1475
(C (C quod) V.IND) 161 990

(C (C quod) V.SBJV) 150 738

Table 3: Hand-selected features related to changes
in complement clauses.

The system’s failure to extract this construction
with high confidence stems from an inability to
generalize over the contents of the subclause. Due
to the flat tree structure, a subclause with a tem-
poral modifier, for example: dico te priore nocte
venisse “I say that you came last night” cannot
be unified with a subclause without. This leads
to data fragmentation, and therefore to a low fre-
quency for the construction, which reduces the
system’s confidence in associating it with the Clas-
sical period.

A second interpretable set of TSG fragments
governs adjective ordering. It consists of all the
rules (N.case N.case Adj.case) (a nominal, headed
by a noun with a postnominal adjective) and
(N.case Adj.case N.case) (prenominal adjective).
Table 4 shows the statistics. With the exception of
the ablative case, the Classical data slightly prefers
postnominal adjectives, while the Medieval data
strongly prefers prenominals. Ledgeway (2012)
states that Classical Latin used postnominal ad-
jectives in unmarked contexts, with prenominals
serving some semantic and pragmatic functions.
This preference is claimed to be stable throughout
the Middle Ages, leading to modern Romance lan-
guages with mainly postnominal adjectives. Our
Medieval corpus data does not follow this pat-
tern, since prenominals are more typical. But
whether this reflects an actual localized or tempo-
rary change, or Aquinas’s personal style, cannot
be determined without further investigation.

The ablative absolute is an adverbial modifier
that is frequently used to denote a time, or the
cause of an action, and often takes the place of a
subordinate clause. However, the ablative absolute
is not grammatically dependent on any word in its
sentence (Allen and Greenough, 1983, p. 263).

160



Case % postnominals χ2

Classical Medieval
Nom 53 26 135
Gen 56 25 115
Dat 65 8 90
Acc 57 34 413
Abl 35 36 228

Table 4: Percent of postnominal adjectives in
noun-adjective phrases, and χ2 value for the post-
nominal rule. The Classical data contains more
postnominals, while the Medieval data contains
more prenominals.

It normally consists of a noun and a passive par-
ticiple, (although another noun or an adjective can
replace the participle):

(3) Omni
All.ABL

pacata
pacified.PAST.PART

Gallia
Gaul.ABL

ad
against

eos
them

exercitus
army.NOM

noster
our.NOM

adduceretur
lead.3.SBJV
“With all of Gaul having been pacified,
our army would be led against them”

There is current speculation that the ablative ab-
solute descends from either an instrumental or a
locative origin (Allen and Greenough, 1983). Ra-
mat (1991) argues that it developed from a very
colloquial style of speech, as a way to compensate
for a lack of “complementizers, auxiliaries, and
determiners” (p. 261). Furthermore, Ramat argues
that the construction is “more pragmatic than syn-
tactic”, and thus declined as Medieval Latin be-
came more formal and syntactically rigid.

The system finds several rules for ablative
noun/participle phrases, but none with a χ2 value
above 40. We detect 56 uses in the Classics and
65 in the Medieval corpus. This construction is
hand-annotated in the treebanks, however, so we
can check our accuracy. In fact, the Classical cor-
pus contains 105 ablative absolutes, while the Me-
dieval corpus has none. Our system underdetects
the Classical cases due to modifiers and reorder-
ings, as discussed above. It overdetects the Me-
dieval ones; Medieval constructions that appear to
be ablative absolutes often contain gerunds rather
than passive participles, an issue hidden by delexi-
calization and the use of coarse tags. Additionally,
Thomas favors a construction similar to the abla-

tive absolute, but which is actually a prepositional
phrase:

(4) Quem
That

in
in

rebus
things.ABL

cognoscendis
known.PART

quotidie
daily

experimur
experience.1.PL

“That we experience daily in the knowing
of things”

Thus, we miss this historical change because the
ablative absolute is quite varied in form, and be-
cause our representation fails to distinguish it from
similar constructions.

7.2 Late Latin: The Vulgate

We run the Classical/Medieval classifier on the
Vulgate, with results shown in table 5. Despite
the classifier’s overall bias towards the Medieval
class, we find that the Vulgate is generally more
Classical. However, the proportion of sentences
labeled in this way (64%) is not comparable to the
77% of Classical sentences labeled as Classical,
indicating that the Vulgate is indeed intermediate
between the two eras.

To determine which features most typify the
Classical and Medieval components of the Vul-
gate, we compute the summed contribution of each
feature to the entire set of decisions. If a feature fi
has weight θi, we compute its importance M(i)
over a set of examples x:

M(i) =
∑

x

|fiθi| (1)

The top 5 features for each class are shown
in table 6. Several features represent changes in
adjective ordering (discussed above) and the use
of complementizers or clause-initial markers. A
few, such as the occurrence of conjunctions and
adverbs, do not represent real historical changes
and are presumably markers of specific topics or
styles. The importance attached to the preposi-
tion in may reflect either a stylistic difference, or
the Medieval tendency to use a preposition where
Classical Latin uses the bare ablative case (Sid-
well, 1995, p. 367). We believe these results show
that the system can aid a linguist in finding lan-
guage change, but that the output still needs to be
analyzed and interpreted by hand.

With the exception of cum, the clausal features
discussed above have little impact on the classifi-
cation of Vulgate sentences. To determine whether

161



N %
Total 405 100
Labeled Classical 258 64
Labeled Medieval 147 36

Table 5: Classifier results on the Late Latin Vul-
gate.

Classical M(i) Medieval M(i)
Postnominal
adj. (abl)

868 Genitive pro-
nouns

757

Any conjunc-
tion

768 Preposition in
“in”

713

Preposition su-
per “on”

725 Clause-initial et
“and”

601

Postnominal
adj. (acc)

631 Any adverb 559

Conjunction
cum “when”

600 Postnominal
adjective in PP

507

Table 6: Features important in the classification of
Vulgate sentences, ranked by importance M(i).

this represents a failure to generalize, or genuine
ambiguity, we search the Vulgate Book of Revela-
tions by hand for verbs with clausal complements;
these are not particularly frequent, accounting for
their small importance weights. However, both
types of complements appear:4

(5) his,
those.ABL

qui
who

se
REFL.ACC

dicunt
say.3.PL

Judaeos
Jews.ACC

esse,
be.INF

et
and

non
not

sunt
be.3.PL

“those who say that they are Jews and are
not”

(6) quia
because

dicis
say.2

quod
DEM

dives
rich

sum
be.1

. . . et

. . . and
nescis
not.know.2

quia
COMP

tu
you

es
be.2

miser
poor

“For you say, “I am rich, . . . ” You do not
realize that you are wretched”

(7) diabolus
devil

. . . sciens

. . . knowing
quod
COMP

modicum
short

tempus
time

habet
has.3

“the devil [has come down to you with
great wrath], because he knows that his
time is short”

Example 5 shows the Classical infinitive clause
and 7 the Medieval quod-clause. Example 6 ap-

4Translations from the New Revised Standard Edition.

pears to be a transitional form, in which the first
quod is not a complementizer, but a demonstra-
tive introducing a direct quote (“you say this: I
. . . ”). This is evident from the following first-
person verb, where an indirect quote ought to be
in second person. The use of quod here echoes the
Greek text and is an instance of the well-known
influence of the Greek Bible on Christian Latin
(Löfstedt, 1959, ch. 6).

8 Discussion

We find that TSGs are effective at identifying sev-
eral historical changes in a modestly-sized corpus
of Latin text. This extends the results of earlier
papers which use TSGs to identify the writing of
non-native English users. Here, the same features
are applied to changes across time; we anticipate
that similar results could be obtained in synchronic
analysis of different dialects.

The approach does have significant limitations,
however. Firstly, the dependence on treebank
parses limits the set of texts to which the method
can be applied. Parsing historical data may require
specialized techniques (Pettersson et al., 2013)
and fits within a larger set of cross-domain pars-
ing problems which are notoriously difficult (Mc-
Closky et al., 2010). In particular, we suspect that
the most difficult constructions will be precisely
the ones which are novel in a particular era or re-
gion, since these may not appear in the training
data. Parsers for Latin of any kind are rare, al-
though working systems (McGillivray, 2013; Pas-
sarotti and Dell’Orletta, 2010) do exist.

Secondly, as seen above, the system has trouble
unifying different examples of large constructions,
such as clauses with and without modifiers. This
prevents it from learning constructions larger than
one or two context-free rules due to data sparsity.
More expressive versions of TSG like Tree Ad-
joining Grammar (Joshi and Schabes, 1997) have
been studied as solutions to this problem, includ-
ing variants reducible to TSG (Swanson et al.,
2013). It seems likely that such a more sophis-
ticated grammatical representation could help to
address this problem.

Although delexicalization of all content words
was effective in controlling for the very different
topics represented in our corpus, it also renders
the system incapable of recognizing any lexically
mediated changes. For instance, the system can-
not represent changes in the argument structure

162



or subcategorization of a particular verb. Löfstedt
(1959) lists changes such as datives with verbs of
asking. Detecting this kind of change would re-
quire relexicalizing the trees, and therefore devel-
oping more sensitive statistical controls for topic.
Due to the rarity of any individual word in a small
corpus, however, a solution to this problem would
be far less useful without methods for solving the
previous ones as well. Only with a large automat-
ically parsed corpus and a method for reducing
fragmentations could enough examples of a lexi-
cally specific construction be gathered for any but
the most common words.

Finally, the system cannot represent any
changes involving semantic shifts. For instance,
(Sidwell, 1995, p. 364) describes shifts in the
tense system, including the use of pluperfect
where perfect would be expected. Such changes
cannot be detected from trees alone. Discovering
them requires an ability to interpret the text and
infer the implied time at which actions take place.

9 Conclusion

Despite these limitations, we believe TSGs offer
a useful exploratory tool for discovering syntactic
variation in corpora. Such a tool can allow histor-
ical linguists to learn about possible grammatical
changes in dead languages for which they have no
native intuition, broadening the kinds of questions
they might investigate. This would parallel the re-
cent use of computational systems to learn about
lexical variation, allowing similar insights about
the nature and history of syntactic change.

Acknowledgments

Ben Swanson, Brian Joseph, Alex Erdmann, Julia
Papke and our reviewers, gratias vobis agimus.

References
J.H. Allen and J.B. Greenough. 1983. Allen and Gree-

nough’s New Latin Grammar. Caratzas Publishing
Co., Inc., New Rochelle, New York.

David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2011. The an-
cient Greek and Latin dependency treebanks. In
Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, pages
79–98. Springer.

David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Gregory Crane, and
Savina Raynaud. 2007. A collaborative model of
treebank development. In Proceedings of the Sixth
International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories, pages 1–6.

David Bamman, Jacob Eisenstein, and Tyler Schnoe-
belen. 2014. Gender identity and lexical varia-
tion in social media. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
18(2):135–160.

Max Bane, Peter Graff, and Morgan Sonderegger.
2010. Longitudinal phonetic variation in a closed
system. Proc. CLS, 46:43–58.

Rens Bod and Ronald Kaplan. 1998. A probabilistic
corpus-driven model for lexical-functional analysis.
In Proceedings of the 17th international conference
on Computational linguistics-Volume 1, pages 145–
151. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Trevor Cohn, Sharon Goldwater, and Phil Blun-
som. 2009. Inducing compact but accurate tree-
substitution grammars. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 548–556.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hal Daumé III. 2004. Notes on CG and LM-BFGS
optimization of logistic regression. Paper avail-
able at http://pub.hal3.name#daume04cg-bfgs, im-
plementation available at http://hal3.name/megam/,
August.

Gabriel Doyle. 2014. Mapping dialectal variation by
querying social media. In EACL, pages 98–106.

Jacob Eisenstein. 2015. Written dialect variation in
online social media. In Charles Boberg, John Ner-
bonne, and Dom Watt, editors, Handbook of Dialec-
tology. Wiley.

Joshua Goodman. 1996. Efficient algorithms for pars-
ing the DOP model. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Jens T. Hanssen. 1945. Observations on Theodor-
icus Monachus and his history of the old Norwe-
gian kings, from the end of the XII. sec. Symbolae
Osloenses, 24.

Simon Hornblower, Antony Spawforth, and Esther Ei-
dinow. 2012. The Oxford Classical Dictionary. Ox-
ford University Press.

Anders Johannsen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard.
2015. Cross-lingual syntactic variation over age and
gender. In Proceedings of CoNLL.

Mark Johnson. 2002. The DOP estimation method is
biased and inconsistent. Computational Linguistics,
28(1):71–76.

Aravind K Joshi and Yves Schabes. 1997. Tree-
adjoining grammars. In Handbook of formal lan-
guages, pages 69–123. Springer.

Dan Klein and Christopher Manning. 2004. Corpus-
based induction of syntactic structure: Models of
dependency and constituency. In Proceedings of the
42nd Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’04), Main Volume, pages 478–485,
Barcelona, Spain, July.

163



Adam Ledgeway. 2012. From Latin to Romance: Mor-
phosyntactic typology and change. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

L.R. Lind. 1941. Medieval Latin studies: Their nature
and possibilities. University of Kansas Publications.

Einar Löfstedt. 1959. Late Latin. Instituttet for Sam-
menlignende Kulturforsking.

David McClosky, Eugene Charniak, and Mark John-
son. 2010. Automatic domain adaptation for pars-
ing. In Human Language Technologies: The 2010
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 28–36, Los Angeles, California, June. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Barbara McGillivray. 2013. Methods in Latin Compu-
tational Linguistics. Brill.

Joakim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2005. Pseudo-
projective dependency parsing. In Proceedings of
the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 99–106. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Marco Passarotti and Felice Dell’Orletta. 2010. Im-
provements in parsing the Index Thomisticus tree-
bank. revision, combination and a feature model for
medieval Latin. In Proceedings of LREC.

Marco Carlo Passarotti. 2011. Language resources.
the state of the art of Latin and the Index Thomisti-
cus treebank project. In Corpus anciens et Bases de
donnes, ALIENTO. changes sapientiels en Mditer-
rane, pages 301–320. ALIENTO.

Eva Pettersson, Beáta Megyesi, and Jörg Tiedemann.
2013. An SMT approach to automatic annotation
of historical text. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Computational Historical Linguistics at NODAL-
IDA 2013, NEALT Proceedings Series, volume 18,
pages 54–69.

Harm Pinkster. 1990. Latin Syntax and Semantics.
Routledge.

Matt Post and Daniel Gildea. 2009. Bayesian learning
of a tree substitution grammar. In Proceedings of the
ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages
45–48. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Paolo Ramat. 1991. On Latin absolute constructions.
Linguistic Studies on Latin: Selected Papers from
the 6th International Colloquium on Latin Linguis-
tics, pages 259–268.

Delip Rao, David Yarowsky, Abhishek Shreevats, and
Manaswi Gupta. 2010. Classifying latent user at-
tributes in Twitter. In Proceedings of the 2nd in-
ternational workshop on Search and mining user-
generated contents, pages 37–44. ACM.

Federico Sangati and Willem Zuidema. 2011. Ac-
curate parsing with compact tree-substitution gram-
mars: Double-DOP. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 84–95. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Ruchita Sarawgi, Kailash Gajulapalli, and Yejin Choi.
2011. Gender attribution: tracing stylometric evi-
dence beyond topic and genre. In Proceedings of
the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 78–86. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Graham Shipley, John Vandespoel, David Mattingly,
and Lin Foxhall. 2008. The Cambridge Dictio-
nary of Classical Civilization. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Keith Sidwell. 1995. Reading Medieval Latin. Uni-
versity of Cambridge.

Ian Stewart. 2014. Now we stronger than ever:
African-american syntax in Twitter. EACL 2014,
page 31.

Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2012. Native
language detection with tree substitution grammars.
In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Short
Papers-Volume 2, pages 193–197. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2013. Extract-
ing the native language signal for second language
acquisition. In HLT-NAACL, pages 85–94.

Ben Swanson and Eugene Charniak. 2014. Data
driven language transfer hypotheses. In EACL,
pages 169–173.

Ben Swanson, Elif Yamangil, Eugene Charniak, and
Stuart M Shieber. 2013. A context free TAG variant.
In ACL (1), pages 302–310.

Sze-Meng Jojo Wong and Mark Dras. 2011. Exploit-
ing parse structures for native language identifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1600–1610. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Sze-Meng Jojo Wong, Mark Dras, and Mark Johnson.
2012. Exploring adaptor grammars for native lan-
guage identification. In Proceedings of the 2012
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning, pages 699–709. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

F.A. Wright. 1933. Letter to Eustochium: Select letters
of St. Jerome. Harvard University Press.

164


