



















































Role-Preserving Redaction of Medical Records to Enable Ontology-Driven Processing


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2017 workshop, pages 194–199,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Role-Preserving Redaction of Medical Records to
Enable Ontology-Driven Processing

Seth Polsley, Atif Tahir, Muppala Raju, Akintayo Akinleye, Duane Steward
Texas A&M Health Science Center

College of Medicine Biomedical Informatics Research group
College Station, Texas

spolsley,atif.tahir,mnpr84,akinleyeakintayo,dsteward@tamu.edu

Abstract

Electronic medical records (EMR) have
largely replaced hand-written patient files
in healthcare. The growing pool of
EMR data presents a significant resource
in medical research, but the U.S. Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) mandates redacting medical
records before performing any analysis on
the same. This process complicates ob-
taining medical data and can remove much
useful information from the record. As
part of a larger project involving ontology-
driven medical processing, we employ a
method of recognizing protected health in-
formation (PHI) that maps to ontologi-
cal terms. We then use the relationships
defined in the ontology to redact medi-
cal texts so that roles and semantics of
terms are retained without compromising
anonymity. The method is evaluated by
clinical experts on several hundred med-
ical documents, achieving up to a 98.8%
f-score, and has already shown promise
for retaining semantic information in later
processing.

1 Introduction

Medical health records data has immense poten-
tial for research in furthering the field of auto-
mated healthcare. Unfortunately, one of the chal-
lenges facing medical informatics is the dissemi-
nation and sharing of digital records for research
and analysis due to strict regulations regarding pa-
tient confidentiality. Protecting protected health
information (PHI) is a critical responsibility of
health care providers, with the U.S. Health Insur-
ance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
outlining a number of principles. Removing PHI

can also mean removing critical parts of a record,
so building redaction techniques that preserve as
much information about the original data as possi-
ble while still retaining anonymity is an important
pre-processing step.

In this work, we discuss a redaction framework
for removing PHI from medical records through
de-identification. One of the primary goals of
this framework is to preserve valuable informa-
tion like roles, semantics, and time intervals as
much as possible. Because this forms the pre-
processing stage of future text processing, we
elected to model roles according to a formal on-
tology; this maintains relationships and enables
straightforward detection of ontological terms in
later phases.

2 Background

Knowledge buried in medical text is valuable, but
due to federal law protecting sensitive data, it must
be de-identified for distribution. Most existing
methods rely on rule-based systems that match
patterns and dictionaries of expressions that fre-
quently contain PHI. Sweeny’s Scrub tool uses
templates and a context window to replace PHI
(Sweeney, 1996). Datafly, also by Sweeny, offers
user-specific profiles, including a list of preferred
fields to be scrubbed (Sweeney, 1997). Thomas
developed a method that uses a lexicon of 1.8 mil-
lion names to identify people along with “Clin-
ical and Common Usage” words from the Uni-
fied Medical Language System (UMLS) (Thomas
et al., 2002). Miller developed a de-identification
system for cleaning proper names from records
of indexed surgical pathology reports at the Johns
Hopkins Hospital (Miller et al., 2001). Proper
names were identified from available lists of per-
sons, places and institutions, or by their proximity
to keywords, such as “Dr.” or “hospital.” The Perl

194



tool Deid is a recent development which combines
several of these rule-based and lexical approaches
with some additional capabilities like better han-
dling of time (Neamatullah et al., 2008).

While identifying PHI for removal or
anonymization remains an open challenge,
simply redacting texts overlooks one of the
more fundamental aspects of recent biomedical
informatics, which has incorporated a focus on
ontology-driven development (Mortensen et al.,
2012; Ye et al., 2009; Tao et al., 2013; Sari
et al., 2013; Omran et al., 2009; Lumsden et al.,
2011; Pathak et al., 2009). In a domain like
healthcare – where information is dense, diverse,
and specialized – an ontology allows representing
knowledge in a usable manner, because it de-
scribes a framework for clearly defining known
terms and their relationships (Hakimpour and
Geppert, 2005; Lee et al., 2006; Pieterse and
Kourie, 2014; Strohmaier et al., 2013; Kapoor and
Sharma, 2010). Once the data has been formally
described via an ontology, new applications
become apparent. To provide several examples,
simply by formalizing electronic records as an
ontology, researchers have shared better ways to
represent patient care profiles (Riaño et al., 2012),
perform risk assessment (Draghici and Draghici,
2000), evaluate elderly care (Hsieh et al., 2015),
and more (Rector et al., 2009; Rajamani et al.,
2014). Perhaps the greatest promise lies in
ontology-driven computational models, where the
structure of an ontology makes the data accessible
to programmatic operations, and there have been
several applications to the problem of automated
diagnosis (Bertaud-Gounot et al., 2012; Haug
et al., 2013; Hoogendoorn et al., 2016).

Some of these ontology-driven techniques do
consider redaction as it relates to the ontology. Of
particular note is the extensive work by South et
al. in identifying the exact types of PHI present
throughout the medical record according to risk
(South et al., 2014). Dernoncourt applied recur-
rent neural networks to the task of identifying PHI
by type to remove the need for large dictionaries
on the i2b2 dataset (Dernoncourt et al., 2016). In
the future, we hope to share a more direct con-
trast between our role-labeling and South et al.’s,
but our goals remain distinct from either South et
al. or Dernoncourt. Because our ontology cen-
ters around the medical encounter, we must lever-
age the EMR’s dynamic list of patients, caregivers,

and providers to ensure roles are preserved accord-
ing to their specific encounter. In this way, our
work is more similar to Douglass’ MIMIC dataset,
which uses a patient list to assure role (Douglass
et al., 2004).

3 Methods

The core reasoning for our methodology is that
knowing the role of a redacted name can be vital,
and since we will be processing patient records at
the encounter-level, tying specific roles to single
encounters is necessary. For instance, was a con-
dition reported by the caregiver or by the clinician
and at what time? That is just a single question il-
lustrating the potential for confusion when names
are redacted without roles or ordering, yet, there
is no need to blindly attempt to extract roles from
free text. Nearly every EMR maintains structured
data like a patient’s name, family contact, and at-
tending physician. By leveraging this knowledge,
pseudonyms can be constructed that remove con-
fusion regarding roles in the final text.

To formally support role-preservation, we be-
gin by defining a very simple ontology to relate
key roles and terms. Patients are treated by clini-
cians and observed by caregivers. Treatments (or
interventions) are given on the basis of a medical
encounter, and, depending on the outcome, may
lead to more medical encounters or the end of the
record of care. This is a very basic means of mod-
eling roles in medical texts, but it supports cross-
domain redaction that preserves much of the se-
mantics and relationships after the anonymization
stage.

The redaction pipeline operates on data in two
stages to support better identification of roles in
the text. First, the structured data is used to extract
whatever knowledge is available, typically roles
like doctors and patients, to perform knowledge-
based redaction. Second, the unstructured text un-
dergoes entity recognition to clean missed terms.
While this approach requires some insight about
the data beforehand, it is a logical means of ensur-
ing we can remove all PHI without damaging roles
and relationships.

3.1 Structured

3.1.1 Patient-Centric Role Preservation
Our system initially builds a dictionary of known
individuals in each role. A person can have any
number of names of any length but all of them are

195



Table 1: Sample dictionary of names
Patients Caregivers Providers

Original
Ira Jones Michael Jones Daniel Moore

Barbara Davis Mary Johnson
Redacted

Clark
ClarkCAREGIV ER1 ClarkPROV IDER1
ClarkCAREGIV ER2 ClarkPROV IDER2

drawn directly from the fields in the EMR. In ac-
cordance with the ontology, patients will be iden-
tified first as the subject of care, a unique field in
most systems. Depending on the domain, there
will be a personal doctor, an attending physician,
or some other clinician name given in a separate
field. Caregivers may be drawn from locations like
billing or family contacts. For this part, knowl-
edge of the data structure is necessary, but once
the source fields are identified, they will be con-
sistent across the other records.

Once the dictionary of names and roles is built,
patients are assigned a pseudonym randomly from
a list of non-matching family names to provide
anonymity and linked to the pseudonym in the
dictionary. Subsequently, all individuals associ-
ated with that patient are assigned a derivative
pseudonym denoting their role. Consider the ex-
ample shown in Table 1. For this small dictionary
of a single patient, we see more than one caregiver
and provider listed. The system first replaces the
patient’s name, Patricia Jones, with a false name,
Clark. This identifier then becomes the basis for
all subsequent individuals with a connection to the
patient.

After the dictionary has been constructed, the
system knows all the original names and their new
pseudonyms. The medical texts are scanned for
any occurrence of any known name, ignoring case
or modifiers like possessive forms. Full names
will be on file, but given names and family names
may appear separately in the record. Regular ex-
pressions are used to match variants of names
while enforcing order.

3.1.2 Date Offsets

It is worth emphasizing the importance of dates
in medical record data. One can simply remove
or replace dates to redact PHI, as with names, but
just like names, we wished to preserve more infor-
mation in support of the ontology. In particular,
intervals between encounters or patient ages un-
der 89 are compliant with HIPAA and useful for

tasks like association mining. A common solution
is to use offsets for dates because the original date
will be erased from the document without losing
intervals. However, an unconstrained random off-
set still loses information. For instance, intervals
given in the free text will be broken if a day of the
week is mentioned and then a date given. Our sys-
tem ensures intervals are undamaged by constrain-
ing date offsets in week-long intervals. Thus, even
if the dates are moved by years, there’s no loss in
day-granular intervals.

The date offset is applied across all records of a
single patient uniformly to maintain interval and
continuity of encounters. Furthermore, the sys-
tem is very flexible about handling dates in free
text, using as much knowledge as possible to piece
together correct, redacted dates. For example, a
snippet of a medical note may read: ”A surgery
was performed in 2005 to correct the issue; on
March 4, the patient...” Because the redaction sys-
tem makes use of the structured fields, it would
extract the date of entry for this medical note. As-
suming that date is March 7, 2006, the system will
move forward labeling unspecified years as 2006,
giving a means of differentiating the vague dates
2005 and March 7.

3.2 Unstructured

The second pass of de-identification also operates
over free text, but it does not make use of known
information such as the dictionary of names or the
dates of an entry. Instead, general attributes of po-
tential PHI are used to locate and remove sensitive
data. Email addresses, phone numbers, mailing
addresses, and medical case numbers are located
through common regular expressions. ZIP codes
are retained because they are not considered PHI
and can be useful for location-based operations.

Unknown entities appear frequently in the text
due to other names of people or places being writ-
ten that are not listed in the dictionary of names.
To account for these entities, Stanford’s CoreNLP
is used to detect any remaining entities in the text
which do not belong to a linked pseudonym (Man-
ning et al., 2014). All entities are redacted accord-
ing to their determined type, e.g. NAME1 for a
person or LOCATION1 for a place. Even in the
unstructured phase, sequential naming schemes
ensure unknown people and places do not become
confounded with any other entities.

196



3.3 Complete Pipeline

By the time the pipeline has finished, the text has
been run through two rounds of de-identification.
First, any useful knowledge is pulled from the data
in the EMR to build a dictionary for rule-based
redaction that preserves roles. Second, operat-
ing without any knowledge, a set of regular ex-
pressions and more sophisticated entity recogni-
tion methods are employed to clear other sensi-
tive data without adding ambiguity or destroying
valuable non-PHI information. The inclusion of
CoreNLP in the final part supports more advanced
language models than simply using rules and regu-
lar expressions. This allows the complete pipeline
to capture almost any potential PHI while still rec-
ognizing known entities, particularly those rele-
vant to the ontology, or types of entities, such as
contact numbers of locations.

4 Evaluation

We worked with data sets from two different do-
mains – veterinary and hospice care. Fortunately,
due to the cross-domain design of our ontology,
there was little difficulty in identifying fields that
mapped to elements of the ontology. Upon defin-
ing this mapping, huge portions of text from both
domains were pushed through the full pipeline.
The resulting text included ontological terms and
other marked regions, e.g. ZIP codes, while re-
moving as little other information as possible.

Ideally, the final medical texts appear identical
to the original files with only the PHI removed. To
evaluate this, a team of clinical experts reviewed
hundreds of documents, marking missed PHI or
text that was unnecessarily redacted in each. From
the veterinarian domain, where we studied com-
plete discharge summaries (DS), two medical doc-
tors reviewed 122 cases. From the hospice do-
main, which operated on shorter clinical notes
(CN), the same experts reviewed 500 notes. To
provide a simple baseline for comparison, we also
tested a single rule-based approach for matching
patient names against a data set of 15 documents.

As we see in Table 2, the system performed
very well at correctly identifying PHI and non-
PHI, especially in contrast with the patient-names
baseline. In the discharge summaries, the ma-
jority of false negatives were due to previously-
unnamed doctors who were neither in the dictio-
nary nor detected during entity recognition. Only
one misspelling of a patient name was detected.

Table 2: Word-level metrics for baseline (BL), dis-
charge summaries (DS), and clinical notes (CN)

Count BL DS CN
False Negatives 498 76 4
False Positives 0 5 250
True Positives 63 3391 1655
True Negatives 17191 75694 50460

Table 3: Performance of baseline (BL), discharge
summaries (DS), and clinical notes (CN).

Metric BL DS CN
Specificity 100% 99.9% 99.5%
Sensitivity 11.2% 97.8% 99.8%
Precision 100% 99.9% 86.9%
F-Score 20.2% 98.8% 92.9%

In the clinical notes, there were a great deal more
false positives. Because the final step incorporates
CoreNLP, certain texts will include many entities
that are not PHI. Table 3 shows that specificity,
sensitivity/recall, and precision are high for both,
although the precision for clinical notes suffers
due to the many false positives. While the baseline
achieves high precision by matching only patient
names, the lower sensitivity and f-score demon-
strate the high number of PHI belonging to other
categories that the full system captures.

5 Conclusion and Ongoing Work

Medical records can provide a wealth of informa-
tion for data scientists but due to their sensitive
nature, are often limited in availability. Effective,
reliable redaction is the best known solution to the
problem, but most techniques will lose exact de-
tails like encounter-level roles. In this work, we
integrate knowledge and model-based approaches
to augment redaction. In future works, we seek to
share some of the benefits we have seen using roles
to create better semantic clusters and word models
than achieved through only pseudonyms. We hope
that such de-identification pipelines, highly cog-
nizant of the original data structure, will encour-
age a future of richer and more capable ontology-
driven analysis.

Acknowledgments

We wish to thank Girish Kasiviswanathan, Pratik
Mrinal, Amber Schulze, Preston Baker, Ruihong
Huang, and Tracy Hammond for their support.

197



References
Valérie Bertaud-Gounot, Régis Duvauferrier, and Anita

Burgun. 2012. Ontology and medical diagnosis. In-
formatics for Health and Social Care 37(2):51–61.

Franck Dernoncourt, Ji Young Lee, Ozlem Uzuner, and
Peter Szolovits. 2016. De-identification of patient
notes with recurrent neural networks. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association page
ocw156.

M Douglass, GD Clifford, Andrew Reisner,
GB Moody, and RG Mark. 2004. Computer-
assisted de-identification of free text in the mimic ii
database. In Computers in Cardiology, 2004. IEEE,
pages 341–344.

Anca Draghici and George Draghici. 2000. Cross-
disciplinary approach for the risk assessment on-
tology design. Information Resources Management
Journal (IRMJ) 26(1):37–53.

Farshad Hakimpour and Andreas Geppert. 2005. Reso-
lution of semantic heterogeneity in database schema
integration using formal ontologies. Information
Technology and Management 6(1):97–122.

Peter J Haug, Jeffrey P Ferraro, John Holmen, Xinzi
Wu, Kumar Mynam, Matthew Ebert, Nathan Dean,
and Jason Jones. 2013. An ontology-driven, diag-
nostic modeling system. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 20(e1):e102–e110.

Mark Hoogendoorn, Peter Szolovits, Leon MG Moons,
and Mattijs E Numans. 2016. Utilizing uncoded
consultation notes from electronic medical records
for predictive modeling of colorectal cancer. Artifi-
cial intelligence in medicine 69:53–61.

Nan-Chen Hsieh, Rui-Dong Chiang, and Wen-Pin
Hung. 2015. Ontology based integration of residen-
tial care of the elderly system in long-term care in-
stitutions. Journal of Advances in Information Tech-
nology 6(3).

Bhaskar Kapoor and Savita Sharma. 2010. A compar-
ative study ontology building tools for semantic web
applications. International Journal of Web & Se-
mantic Technology (IJWesT) 1(3):1–13.

Yugyung Lee, Kaustubh Supekar, and James Geller.
2006. Ontology integration: Experience with med-
ical terminologies. Computers in Biology and
Medicine 36(7):893–919.

Jim Lumsden, Hazel Hall, and Peter Cruickshank.
2011. Ontology definition and construction, and
epistemological adequacy for systems interoperabil-
ity: A practitioner analysis. Journal of Information
Science 37(3):246–253.

Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The stanford corenlp natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In ACL (System Demon-
strations). pages 55–60.

R Miller, JK Boitnott, and GW Moore. 2001. Web-
based free-text query system for surgical pathology
reports with automatic case deidentification. Arch
Pathol Lab Med 125:1011.

Jonathan Mortensen, Matthew Horridge, Mark A
Musen, and Natalya Fridman Noy. 2012. Applica-
tions of ontology design patterns in biomedical on-
tologies. In AMIA.

Ishna Neamatullah, Margaret M Douglass, H Lehman
Li-wei, Andrew Reisner, Mauricio Villarroel,
William J Long, Peter Szolovits, George B Moody,
Roger G Mark, and Gari D Clifford. 2008. Auto-
mated de-identification of free-text medical records.
BMC medical informatics and decision making
8(1):32.

Esraa Omran, Albert Bokma, Shereef Abu Al-Maati,
and David Nelson. 2009. Implementation of a chain
ontology based approach in the health care sector.
Journal of Digital Information Management 7(5).

Jyotishman Pathak, Harold R Solbrig, James D Bun-
trock, Thomas M Johnson, and Christopher G
Chute. 2009. Lexgrid: a framework for represent-
ing, storing, and querying biomedical terminologies
from simple to sublime. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 16(3):305–315.

Vreda Pieterse and Derrick G Kourie. 2014. Lists, tax-
onomies, lattices, thesauri and ontologies: Paving a
pathway through a terminological jungle. Knowl-
edge Organization 41(3).

Sripriya Rajamani, Elizabeth S Chen, Mari E Akre,
Yan Wang, and Genevieve B Melton. 2014. Assess-
ing the adequacy of the hl7/loinc document ontology
role axis. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association pages amiajnl–2014.

Alan L Rector, Rahil Qamar, and Tom Marley. 2009.
Binding ontologies and coding systems to electronic
health records and messages. Applied Ontology
4(1):51–69.

David Riaño, Francis Real, Joan Albert López-
Vallverdú, Fabio Campana, Sara Ercolani, Patrizia
Mecocci, Roberta Annicchiarico, and Carlo Calta-
girone. 2012. An ontology-based personalization of
health-care knowledge to support clinical decisions
for chronically ill patients. Journal of biomedical
informatics 45(3):429–446.

Anny Kartika Sari, Wenny Rahayu, and Mehul Bhatt.
2013. An approach for sub-ontology evolution in a
distributed health care enterprise. Information Sys-
tems 38(5):727–744.

Brett R South, Danielle Mowery, Ying Suo, Jianwei
Leng, Óscar Ferrández, Stephane M Meystre, and
Wendy W Chapman. 2014. Evaluating the effects
of machine pre-annotation and an interactive annota-
tion interface on manual de-identification of clinical
text. Journal of biomedical informatics 50:162–172.

198



Markus Strohmaier, Simon Walk, Jan Pöschko, Daniel
Lamprecht, Tania Tudorache, Csongor Nyulas,
Mark A Musen, and Natalya F Noy. 2013. How
ontologies are made: Studying the hidden social
dynamics behind collaborative ontology engineer-
ing projects. Web Semantics: Science, Services and
Agents on the World Wide Web 20:18–34.

Latanya Sweeney. 1996. Replacing personally-
identifying information in medical records, the scrub
system. In Proceedings of the AMIA annual fall
symposium. American Medical Informatics Associ-
ation, page 333.

Latanya Sweeney. 1997. Guaranteeing anonymity
when sharing medical data, the datafly system.
In Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Sympo-
sium. American Medical Informatics Association,
page 51.

Cui Tao, Guoqian Jiang, Thomas A Oniki, Robert R
Freimuth, Qian Zhu, Deepak Sharma, Jyotishman
Pathak, Stanley M Huff, and Christopher G Chute.
2013. A semantic-web oriented representation of
the clinical element model for secondary use of elec-
tronic health records data. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 20(3):554–562.

Sean M Thomas, Burke Mamlin, Gunther Schadow,
and Clement McDonald. 2002. A successful tech-
nique for removing names in pathology reports using
an augmented search and replace method. In Pro-
ceedings of the AMIA Symposium. American Medi-
cal Informatics Association, page 777.

Yan Ye, Zhibin Jiang, Xiaodi Diao, Dong Yang, and
Gang Du. 2009. An ontology-based hierarchical
semantic modeling approach to clinical pathway
workflows. Computers in biology and medicine
39(8):722–732.

199


