



















































Facebook sentiment: Reactions and Emojis


Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media , pages 11–16,
Valencia, Spain, April 3-7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Facebook Sentiment: Reactions and Emojis

Ye Tian1, Thiago Galery2,3
1Laboratoire Linguistique Formelle,

Université Paris-Diderot, Paris, France
2DBpedia Association
& 3Idio, London, UK

tiany.03@gmail.com
tgalery@gmail.com

Giulio Dulcinati4,
Emilia Molimpakis4 & Chao Sun4

4Division of Psychology
and Language Sciences,

University College London, London, UK
g.dulcinati@gmail.com

emilia.molimpakis@ucl.ac.uk
chao.sun.13@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

Emojis are used frequently in social me-
dia. A widely assumed view is that emo-
jis express the emotional state of the user,
which has led to research focusing on
the expressiveness of emojis independent
from the linguistic context. We argue that
emojis and the linguistic texts can mod-
ify the meaning of each other. The over-
all communicated meaning is not a sim-
ple sum of the two channels. In order
to study the meaning interplay, we need
data indicating the overall sentiment of the
entire message as well as the sentiment
of the emojis stand-alone. We propose
that Facebook Reactions are a good data
source for such a purpose. FB reactions
(e.g. “Love” and “Angry”) indicate the
readers’ overall sentiment, against which
we can investigate the types of emojis used
the comments under different reaction pro-
files. We present a data set of 21,000
FB posts (57 million reactions and 8 mil-
lion comments) from public media pages
across four countries.

1 Introduction

We use social media not only to share information,
but also to express emotions. This paper presents
a data set of multi-cultural Facebook (FB) posts
from public media pages, the readers’ reactions
and the emojis contained in the comments. We ar-
gue that this data set - one that can be up-scaled in
size, in genres, and in languages/cultures - is a use-
ful and cheap resource for investigating the types
of emojis used in different emotional contexts.

2 Emojis and Sentiment - Some
background

Emoticons, such as “;)”, are representations of fa-
cial expressions using punctuation symbols. They
were first used by the computer scientist Scott
Fahlman in 1982 as a “joke marker” (Fahlman,
2012). Recently, emoticons have been gradually
replaced by emojis, which are graphic symbols
representing facial expressions (e.g. smiling), ges-
tures (e.g. thumbs up), objects (e.g. vehicles) and
even actions (e.g. dancing). They have gained
popularity rapidly in smartphone texts, emails and
social media. On certain platforms (e.g. In-
stagram), in some countries (e.g. Finland and
France), over half of all online messages con-
tain emojis, and this trend is going up worldwide
(Dimson, 2015).

Emojis have attracted an increasing amount of
research interest in sociology and in computer sci-
ence. Sociological research is interested in how
people with different demographic profiles (age,
gender and culture) use emoticons and emojis,
how it affects people’s relationships and and how
it fits the cultural contexts (Huffaker and Calvert,
2005; Sugiyama, 2015; Wolf, 2000; Kelly and
Watts, 2015). Research in computer science has
primarily focused on using emoticons and emojis
as a cue for automatically analysing the sentiment
of short messages, commonly tweets (Hu et al.,
2013; Novak et al., 2015; Thelwall et al., 2010;
Boia et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2012; Hogenboom
et al., 2013). It was found that positive emoticons
and emojis are used more frequently than negative
ones (Novak et al., 2015). The polarity of emoti-
cons and emojis is relatively well correlated with
the perceived emotional polarity of the entire text,
but is poorly correlated with the perceived emo-
tional polarity of the accompanying linguistic text
alone (Boia et al., 2013). Using emoticons and

11



emojis as a cue for sentiment analysis of tweets
results in better accuracy compared to using the
linguistic text alone (Hogenboom et al., 2013; Hu
et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2012), to a level between
60% to 75%. Emojis tend to be a better indicator
for an overall negative tweet than a positive one.

Although the polarity of emojis frequently mis-
match the polarity of the accompanying linguis-
tic text or even the entire message, little has been
done to analyze the nature of these mismatches.
The default assumption is that emojis express the
user’s emotional state, therefore they can be seen
as an independent channel of communication from
that of the linguistic text. For example, (Novak et
al., 2015) offered sentiment scores for 751 most
frequently used emojis, calculated using the senti-
ment rating of 1.6 million tweets in 13 European
languages containing these emojis. This signif-
icant piece of work has provided a lot of infor-
mation on the cross-linguistic usage of emojis in
tweets. However, treating the average sentiment
of tweets containing emojis as the sentiment score
of the emojis themselves relies on the assumption
that the meaning of emojis are consistent across
linguistic contexts.

We argue that emojis and the linguistic text can
modify the meaning of each other. The overall
communicated meaning is not a simple sum of the
two channels. A similar view has been voiced
by some linguists. (Baron, 2009) points out that
just like linguistic words, the meaning of emoti-
cons and emojis are often under-specified. (Dres-
ner and Herring, 2010) argues against the idea
that emoticons are signs of emotion. Drawing
on speech act theory, they argue that emoticons
are indicators of the illocutionary force of the tex-
tual utterance that they accompany. They “neither
contribute to the propositional content (the locu-
tion) of the language used, nor are they just an
extralinguistic communication channel indicating
emotion” (Dresner and Herring, 2010) [pp. 255].

We propose that an emoji can interact with the
linguistic text in six ways. An emoji can

1. replace a word/phrase.
e.g. I want have a .

2. repeat a word/phrase (accenting, adding fo-
cus)
e.g. Take note Sam, this is how you season
food, you are almost done there babe. Like
you did the chicken the other nights.

3. express the speaker’s emotion or attitude in-
dependently.
e.g. (Facebook update from survivor of the
Florida gay club shooting 2016-06-12): I am
safely home and hoping everyone gets home
safely as well.

4. enhance/ emphasize an emotion expressed in
the text.
e.g. This would probably be really good .

5. modify the meaning of linguistic text (e.g.
marking non-literal or non-serious use); im-
plying propositional content
e.g. I bet you are enjoying your revision .

-A: Would you like to come to my party? -B:

6. be used for politeness.
e.g. Can you please cook us something that
I tag you in instead of your 4am pastas?
Thanks.

We hypothesize that compared to negative emo-
jis, positive emojis are more often used not as di-
rect reflection of emojis, but are used (1) ironically
in a negative context, or (2) for politeness reasons
(e.g. in a request or disagreement). These uses
are also seen in smiles and laughter in natural di-
alogue (Mazzocconi et al., 2016). In face-to-face
conversations, we may produce an ironic laugh-
ter to communicate that an attempted joke was not
funny, or smile when we ask for a favour.

In order to study the meaning interplay between
linguistic texts and emojis, we need to model con-
texts where the sentiment of the emojis are consis-
tent with the overall sentiment of the texts, as well
as contexts where they are inconsistent. Obtaining
such data would normally require a large amount
of manual labeling. Instead, we propose that we
can cheaply obtain data set for this purposes by
looking at Facebook Reactions and emojis in com-
ments.

3 Facebook reactions

Facebook reactions, released in February 2016,
are an extension of the old ”Like” button. Its six
options (Like, Love, Haha, Wow, Sad and An-
gry) are represented by slightly edited versions
of several long-established Unicode Emojis, and
they allow for a more nuanced expression of how

12



users feel towards a post. The emotions under-
lying these six reactions are supposed to be fre-
quent and universal. If we assume that Facebook
reactions reflect the readers’ overall sentiment to-
wards a post, we can investigate the distributions
of emojis in readers’ comments, under different
emotional attitudes. Thus, if there is a mismatch
in the emotional polarity between the overall pro-
file of reactions (e.g. dominantly “Angry” - nega-
tive) and the sentiment of the emojis in the com-
ments (e.g. “thumbs up” - positive), these emojis
are likely used not to directly reflect emotions.

4 Current data set and analysis

We collected data from 21,000 posts in Au-
gust 2016 on public media Facebook pages from
four countries: UK (bbc, the Daily Mail, Daily
Mirror, the Telegraph), US (CNN, Fox News,
New York Times, Wall Street Journal, MSNBC),
France (Le Figaro, Le Monde, Liberation) and
Germany (Die WELT, Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, Suddeutsche Zeitung). These posts were
shared 15,273,365 times. There were 57,444,404
reactions and 8,463,602 comments to these posts.
We tried to balance the political leanings of the se-
lected media. The purpose of analyzing data from
different countries was to see whether the way we
use Facebook Reactions and emojis can be gener-
alized cross-culturally/linguistically. We analyzed
the reactions, sharing behaviours, and the emojis
that appeared in the comments. The data set con-
tains country, name of media, the title of the posts,
the link to the full article (if any), the time of post-
ing, the total times shared, the total number of re-
actions, a breakdown of reactions (Likes, Loves,
etc), the total number of comments, and the texts
of the comments1.

5 Results - Facebook Reactions

In terms of reactions (figure1), we found that
“Like”, being the default reaction, is unsurpris-
ingly the most frequent (overall 78.9%). The fre-
quency of the other fie reactions ranks as “Love”
(5.5%), “Angry” (5.4%) “Sad” (4.0%), “Haha”
(3.7%), “Wow” (2.5%).

There are small but statistically different differ-
ences cross countries (p< 2.2e-16). “Angry’ is the
most frequent in France at 9% and the least fre-
quent in the UK at 3%. “Love” is the highest in the

1As of 23/02/2017, the authors are still discussing with
Facebook regarding the details of data release options.

Figure 1: Facebook Reactions distribution (the
small pie shows the zoomed-in distribution of re-
actions other than “Like”)

US at 6% and lowest in Germany at 2%. “Haha”
is the highest in Germany at 6% and lowest in the
UK at 3%. The overall comments to reaction ratio
is 0.15, and sharing to reaction ratio is 0.27.

We calculated the proportions of each of the six
Reactions for all posts (for example, a post could
have 80% “Like”, 10% “Wow”, 5% “Haha”, 5%
“Love”, and 0% of “Angry” or “Sad”), and ap-
plied K-means clustering algorithm to these Re-
action proportions. We found four major pro-
files of Reactions (figure 2), which we label “Just
likes”, “Amused/Surprised”, “Angry” and “Sad”.
The first cluster is characterized by almost all re-
actions being ”Like”. The second cluster has a
significant percentage of “Haha”s but also some
“Angry”s. In both the “Angry” and “Sad” clusters,
less than half of the reactions are “Like”s. In the
“Angry” cluster, 41% of reactions are “Angry” and
8% are “Sad”. In “Sad” cluster, 40% of reactions
are “Sad” while 9% are “Angry”. We calculated
the Share to Reaction ratios (number of Shares/
number of Reactions), and found them to be dif-
ferent in different Reaction profiles: 0.16 for “Just
likes”, 0.24 for “Amused/Surprised”, 0.33 for “An-
gry” and 0.24 for “Sad”: people are more likely to
share a post when the reaction is something other
than “Like”, suggesting that stronger emotional at-
titude leads to more post sharing.

5.1 Results - Emojis

We randomly sampled 100,000 emoji-containing
comments, and processed the emojis by match-
ing them against a dictionary of emoji Unicode.

13



Figure 2: Four profiles of FB Reactions

These emojis can then be more easily counted and
be matched with the emoji sentiment score from
(Novak et al., 2015). We found that in our data,
the most frequent emojis are “thumbs up”, “face
with heart shaped eyes”, “claps”, “angry face”
and “winking face” (Figure 3). This is differ-
ent from that of Twitter emoji distribution based
on http://www.emojitracker.com/, where the most
frequent is “face with tears of joy”. We cannot
generalize this to a difference between Facebook
and Twitter emoji use. Our data, being being com-
ments to news articles on public pages, are likely
less personal and more evaluative, and hence the
frequent uses of “thumbs up”. Unlike words in
natural language, emoji frequencies do not seem
to follow a Zipfian distribution, leading to a hy-
pothesis that the senses of emojis overlap more
than that of linguistic words. We found that posi-
tive emojis are more frequent than negative ones,
which is consistent with previous findings (Novak
et al., 2015).

Figure 3: Emoji frequencies in FB comments on
media pages

Emojis frequencies in FB comments

We found that emoji distributions vary across
countries (figure 4). All countries use positive
emojis more frequently than negative ones. France
uses “angry face” frequently, consistent with the
fact that the “Angry” reaction is the most fre-
quent in France among the four countries. Both
the UK and the US use “crying face”/ “face with
tears” frequently. The US also frequently uses the
“American flag” emoji, though this may be due

Figure 4: FB Emoji distribution by country

to the data been collected during the US election
campaign (August 2016).

Emoji distributions are different in different
Reaction profiles (figure 5). The most frequent
emojis under “Just likes” are all positive. Un-
der “Amused/Surprised” there are a mixture of
positive emojis (e.g. “thumbs up”) and nega-
tive/neutral emojis (e.g. “astonished face”) indi-
cating surprise. Interestingly, while the most fre-
quent emojis under “Sad” all have negative senti-
ment, a significant amount of emojis under Angry
are positive (e.g. thumbs up and clapping hands).
This suggests that users often use emojis ironically
when their overall attitude is Angry.

Using the sentiment scores compiled for emo-
jis by (Novak et al., 2015), we calculated the av-
erage emoji-based sentiment score for each com-
ment containing emojis. We assumed that repe-
titions of emojis likely express a stronger senti-
ment than a single use, but the marginal increase
of each repetition should gradually diminish, i.e.,
the use of three “heart shapes” in a row express a
stronger sentiment than one “heart shape”, but not
three times as much. Taking this into account, we
calculated the emoji-based sentiment of comments
using:

1

n

n∑
i=1

log((number of emojii) + 1)× sentiment of emojii

n = the total number of distinct emojis

For example, if a comment contains three
“faces with tears of joy” and one “winking
face”, the emoji-based sentiment of the com-
ment would be calculated as ((log(3)+1)*0.22 +
(log(1)+1)*0.46)/2 = 0.46. Then, we calculated
the emoji-based sentiment score of each post by
averaging the emoji-based sentiment scores of all
comments for this post. The scores for the four Re-
action profiles of posts are: 0.41 for ”Just likes”,
0.34 for ”Amused/Surprised”, 0.24 for ”Angry”
and 0.24 for ”Sad”. Though the scores for the
first two profiles are higher (and therefore more
positive) than the last two, the difference is small,

14



and the sentiment scores for “Angry” and “Sad”
are still positive when negative values should be
expected. We think two factors may have damp-
ened the difference between scores of the posi-
tive profiles and the negative profiles. First, like
we mentioned before, the emoji sentiment scores
from (Novak et al., 2015) were calculated from the
sentiment of entire tweets. If positive emojis are
sometimes used in negative contexts (ironically or
for politeness), this method would render lower
scores of positive emojis than what what would
have been the scores when they are used “liter-
ally” (directly reflect emotions). Second, we saw
that positive emojis are often used in overall nega-
tive profiles, e.g. “clapping hands” are frequently
used in the “Angry” Reaction profile. These are
contexts where many of the emojis are used ironi-
cally, or are used for marking that the accompa-
nying text is ironic. Therefore, using the senti-
ment scores of these positive emojis to calculate
the sentiment of the entire comments will lead to
misleading results. This further demonstrates the
fact that emojis and linguistic texts can modify the
meaning of each other, and it is important to study
how the meaning interplay works.

Figure 5: FB Emoji distribution by Reaction pro-
file

6 Future studies

Our next step is to model contexts of emojis,
distinguishing those where emojis directly reflect
emotions, and those where the meaning of emojis
are modified. In addition, to know whether any of
the the cross-country differences we found are in-
deed due to cultural factors rather than due to the
major events happening in each country, we need
to obtain data over a longer period of time from a
wider varieties of FB pages.

7 Conclusions

Our results show that there is a reliable correla-
tion between Facebook reactions and emoji us-
ages, suggesting that emojis can be used to detect
users sentiment, if we take into account of contexts
where their meanings are modified (used ironi-
cally or for politeness). This study also demon-
strates that Facebook reactions and comments are
a good data source for investigating indicators of
user emotional attitudes.

References
Naomi Baron. 2009. The myth of impoverished signal:

Dispelling the spoken-language fallacy for emoti-
cons in online communication. In Jane Vincent and
Leopoldina Fortunati, editors, Electronic emotions:
The mediation of emotion via information and comu-
nication technologies, pages 107–135. Peter Lang,
Oxford.

Marina Boia, Boi Faltings, Claudiu-Cristian Musat,
and Pearl Pu. 2013. A:) is worth a thousand
words: How people attach sentiment to emoticons
and words in tweets. In Social Computing (So-
cialCom), 2013 International Conference on, pages
345–350. IEEE.

Thomas Dimson. 2015. Emojineering: Ma-
chine learning for emoji trends by instagram.
http://instagram-engineering.tumblr.com/post/
117889701472/emojineering-part-1-machine-
learning-for-emoji. Accessed: 2016-06-12.

Eli Dresner and Susan C. Herring. 2010. Functions of
the nonverbal in cmc: Emoticons and illocutionary
force. Communication theory, 20(3):249–268.

Scott E. Fahlman. 2012. Smiley lore:-. Scott E.
Fahlmans Homepage.

Alexander Hogenboom, Daniella Bal, Flavius Frasin-
car, Malissa Bal, Franciska de Jong, and Uzay Kay-
mak. 2013. Exploiting emoticons in sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing, pages 703–710.
ACM.

Xia Hu, Jiliang Tang, Huiji Gao, and Huan Liu.
2013. Unsupervised sentiment analysis with emo-
tional signals. In Proceedings of the 22nd interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web, pages 607–
618. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee.

David A. Huffaker and Sandra L. Calvert. 2005.
Gender, identity, and language use in teenage
blogs. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion, 10(2):00–00.

15



Ryan Kelly and Leon Watts. 2015. Characterising
the inventive appropriation of emoji as relationally
meaningful in mediated close personal relationships.
Experiences of Technology Appropriation: Unantic-
ipated Users, Usage, Circumstances, and Design.

Chiara Mazzocconi, Ye Tian, and Jonathan Ginzburg.
2016. Towards a multi-layered analysis of laughter.
In Proceedings of JerSem, the 19th Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue.

Petra Kralj Novak, Jasmina Smailović, Borut Sluban,
and Igor Mozetič. 2015. Sentiment of emojis. PloS
one, 10(12):e0144296.

Satomi Sugiyama. 2015. Kawaii meiru and maroy-
aka neko: Mobile emoji for relationship mainte-
nance and aesthetic expressions among japanese
teens. First Monday, 20(10).

Mike Thelwall, Kevan Buckley, Georgios Paltoglou,
Di Cai, and Arvid Kappas. 2010. Sentiment
strength detection in short informal text. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 61(12):2544–2558.

Alecia Wolf. 2000. Emotional expression online: Gen-
der differences in emoticon use. CyberPsychology
& Behavior, 3(5):827–833.

Jichang Zhao, Li Dong, Junjie Wu, and Ke Xu. 2012.
Moodlens: an emoticon-based sentiment analysis
system for chinese tweets. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1528–
1531. ACM.

16


