



















































Graph Methods for Multilingual FrameNets


Proceedings of TextGraphs-11: the Workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Processing, ACL 2017, pages 45–50,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Graph Methods for Multilingual FrameNets

Collin F. Baker and Michael Ellsworth
International Computer Science Institute

1947 Center St. Suite 600
Berkeley, CA 94704

collinb,infinity@icsi.berkeley.edu

Abstract

This paper introduces a new, graph-
based view of the data of the FrameNet
project, which we hope will make it eas-
ier to understand the mixture of seman-
tic and syntactic information contained in
FrameNet annotation. We show how En-
glish FrameNet and other Frame Semantic
resources can be represented as sets of in-
terconnected graphs of frames, frame ele-
ments, semantic types, and annotated in-
stances of them in text. We display ex-
amples of the new graphical representation
based on the annotations, which combine
Frame Semantics and Construction Gram-
mar, thus capturing most of the syntax and
semantics of each sentence. We consider
how graph theory could help researchers
to make better use of FrameNet data for
tasks such as automatic Frame Semantic
role labeling, paraphrasing, and transla-
tion. Finally, we describe the develop-
ment of FrameNet-like lexical resources
for other languages in the current Multilin-
gual FrameNet project. which seeks to dis-
cover cross-lingual alignments, both in the
lexicon (for frames and lexical units within
frames) and across parallel or comparable
texts. We conclude with an example show-
ing graphically the semantic and syntactic
similarities and differences between paral-
lel sentences in English and Japanese. We
will release software for displaying such
graphs from the current data releases.

1 Overview

In this paper, we provide a new graph-based dis-
play of FrameNet annotation, which we hope will
make the complex data model of FrameNet more

accessible to a variety of users. We begin with
a brief introduction to the Frame Semantics and
the FrameNet project and their underlying graph
structures. Section 3 illustrates how annotation
maps words in sentences to nodes in FrameNet,
showing the struture of a sentence in the new graph
representation. Sect. 4 discusses how the graph
representation could help NLP developers, partic-
ularly w.r.t. automatic semantic role labeling. In
Sect. 5, we introduce the Multilingual FrameNet
project, and what comparisons of frame structures
across languages might reveal by way of another
example sentence in the new format, then discuss
our conclusions and acknowledge support for our
work.

2 Frame Semantics and English
FrameNet

The FrameNet Project [Fillmore and Baker, 2010,
Ruppenhofer et al., 2016] at the International
Computer Science Institute (ICSI) is an ongoing
project to produce a lexicon of English that is
both human- and machine-readable, based on the
theory of Frame Semantics developed by Charles
Fillmore and colleagues [Fillmore, 1997] and sup-
ported by annotating corpus examples of the lexi-
cal items. Although FrameNet (FN) is a lexical re-
source, it is organized not around words, but rather
the roughly 1,200 semantic frames [Fillmore,
1976]: characterizations of events, relations, states
and entities which are the conceptual basis for un-
derstanding the word senses, called lexical units
(LUs). Frames are distinguished by the set of roles
involved, known as frame elements (FEs). Defin-
ing individual lexical units relative to semantic
frames provides a crucial level of generalization
for their meaning and use. Much of the informa-
tion in FN is derived from the more than 200,000
manually annotated corpus sentences; annotators

45



not only mark the target word which evokes the
frame, but also those phrases which are syntac-
tically related to the target word and express its
frame elements. FN covers roughly 13,500 LUs,
and provides very rich syntagmatic information
about the combinatorial possibilities of each LU.
Each frame averages about 10 frame elements, and
the same frame can be evoked by words (or mul-
tiword expressions) of any part of speech.

FrameNet frames are connected by eight
types of relations, including full inheritance (IS-
A relation) in which all core FEs are inher-
ited, weaker forms of inheritance (called Us-
ing and Perspective on), and relations between
statives, inchoatives, and causatives. Most
frames are linked in a single large lattice (an-
alyzed in Valverde-Albacete [2008]). The full
graph is difficult to render, but can be browsed
at https://framenet.icsi.berkeley.
edu/fndrupal/FrameGrapher

Animate_being

Sentient

Human

Artifact

Structure

Body_of_water

Running_water

Living_thing Location

Region Point Line

Landform

Physical_entity

[...] Physical_object

Body_part Container

Figure 1: (Partial) FrameNet semantic type hierar-
chy

2.1 Semantic types and their hierarchy

FrameNet also has a small hierarchy of seman-
tic types which can be marked on Frames, FEs
and LUs; a portion is shown in Fig. 1. Many
of the semantic types in FrameNet are similar to
nodes in widely used ontologies, but they are lim-
ited to those which are linguistically important; for
example, most agent FEs (not only those called
“Agent”, but all those descended from the AGENT
FE in the high-level frame Intentionally act) have
the semantic type SENTIENT (Non-sentient ac-
tants receive the FE CAUSE).1 Some semantic

1Matching FE semantic types to fillers is complicated by
phenomena such as metonymy (The White house announced
today . . . ) and personification (She still runs good, but even-
tually she’ll need new tires.), not fully addressed in FN.

types add information which cross-cuts the frame
hierarchy; e.g., POSITIVE JUDGEMENT and NEG-
ATIVE JUDGEMENT are used to separate those
LUs in the frames Judgement, Judgement com-
munication and Judgement direct address that
have positive affect from those with negative af-
fect.

3 Frame Semantic and Construction
Grammar representation of sentence
meaning

The development of Frame Semantics has gone
hand in hand with the development of Construc-
tion Grammar, by Fillmore and a wide range
of colleagues (Michaelis [2010],Feldman et al.
[2010]). FrameNet annotators not only mark
which spans of the corpus sentences instantiate
which Frame Elements, but also the phrase type
(PT) of the constituent that covers that span2 and
the grammatical function (GF, a.k.a. grammatical
relation) between that constituent and the target in-
stance of the lexical unit as a coextensive set of
spans on three annotation “layers”. Additional in-
formation is added on other “layers” indicating the
presence of copulas and other support verbs, the
antecedents of relative clauses, etc. This syntac-
tic information, based on Construction Grammar,
can be combined with the FE labels to form a joint
syntactico-semantic representation of much of the
meaning of a sentence. In graph terms, the annota-
tion process creates a mapping between the string
of characters in the sentence and (1) nodes repre-
senting frame elements in the frame hierarchy and
(2) nodes representing parts of constructions in the
Construction Grammar hierarchy.

We illustrate this with an example sentence ex-
tracted from a TED talk entitled “Do schools kill
creativity?” by Ken Robinson3: The thing they
were good at in school wasn’t valued, or was actu-
ally stigmatized. The graph representation derived
from FrameNet annotation is shown in Fig. 2.4

In this figure, the nodes of the graph are
syntactico-semantic entities (solid borders) or se-
mantic entities (dotted borders) and the words of
the sentence are the terminal nodes of the graph (in
boxes). Each edge specifies the relationship be-
tween nodes, solid black for syntactico-semantic

2Most FEs are in fact constituents.
3https://www.ted.com/talks/ken_

robinson_says_schools_kill_creativity?
4For methods for producing such graphs, see Ellsworth

and Janin [2007].

46



the

thing they were

good

at at

school

was

n't

valued

Positive_judgement

or

was actually stigmatized

Negative_judgement

CNI CNI

1

2

3 3

S

NP [3]

Ext

VP

Head

S

NP [1]

Ext

VP

Head

NP [2]

N:ENTITY

Head

RelClHead Conj/Head

VP:JUDGEMENT

Head

VP:JUDGEMENT

Head

Supp

AP:EXPERTISE

Sem H

PP

Marker Ant./Sem H

TProtagonist Skill

Prep:LOCATIVE RELATION

*Place Figure

T Entity

T CognizerEvaluee

AVP:NEGATION

Negated_P

T

T CognizerEvaluee

T

N:LOCALE BY USE

Ground

T

Figure 2: Graph of Frame Semantic Annotation of Example English Sentence

relations, and dashed red for purely semantic re-
lations. The graph is organized so that higher
nodes syntactically subsume lower nodes and ar-
rows point from semantic heads to semantic sub-
ordinates. The graph is close to being a tree,
like conventional constituent parses, but contains a
few semantic edges that cross the syntactic edges,
shown with the indexes 1, 2, and 3 (bare numbers
with dashed arcs) which refer to the non-adjacent
nodes NP[1], NP[2], and NP[3] respectively.

The nodes and edges have features represent-
ing the full annotation of the sentence. The large
ovals represent semantics via the names of evoked
frames: Entity, Expertise, Judgement (twice),
Locative relation Local by use, and Negation.
Though not shown in this graph, each frame in-
stance is also linked to the frame hierarchy graph
(Sec. 2). The edges descending from the frames
semantically represent the relations described by
Frame Elements in the same hierarchy. The dot-
ted lines pointing to dotted nodes are links into the
semantic type hierarchy (Sec. 2.1). The syntactic
features of the non-terminal nodes are summarized
by Phrase Type (PT) labels (S, N, NP, V, VP, PP,
etc. with their conventional meanings) and part-of-
speech (not shown). Other features on the edges
are syntactico-semantic categories: T (target, the
word(s) that evokes the frame), RelC (relative
clause), Ant. (antecedent of relative clause), Head
(syntactic and semantic head), Sem H (semantic
head), and Supp (support, a syntactic head).

4 Applications of FrameNet data as a
graph

The ability to separate syntactic and semantic de-
pendency is potentially of use in many tasks in-
volving FrameNet data, including automatic se-
mantic role labeling (ASRL), inferencing, lan-
guage generation, and cross-linguistic compari-
son. Because of the clear representation of syn-
tactic and semantic dependency in the graph (dis-
played in Fig. 2 by vertical position, arrow direc-
tion, and non-local edges), many tasks should be
able to use the graph even without special pro-
cessing for the subtypes of edges, e.g. for relative
clauses as seen under NP[3]. To find out the over-
all meaning of this sentence, one can start from the
“S” node and follow the edges marked “Head” or
“Sem H” to the two instances of the Judgement
frame. From there, the application can drill fur-
ther down as needed, into the frame hierarchy, the
semantic type hierarchy, or the fillers of the frame
roles.

One task in particular that could use the full
power of such graphs is automatic semantic role
labeling (ASRL). The high cost of expert semantic
annotation has spurred interest in building ASRL
systems. Much of this has been based on the Prop-
Bank [Palmer et al., 2005] style of annotation, but
work on Frame Semantic role labelers has contin-
ued, with increasing success (Das et al. [2014],
Roth and Lapata [2015]). These improvements

47



学校は
gakkou wa
school-TOP

彼らの
karera no

their

才能を
sainou o

talent

評価
hyouka
value

Positive_judgement

し
shi-
"do"

ない
-nai
not

どころか
dokoroka
instead

ダメ
dame

no good
Negative_judgement

だ
da
be

と
to

烙印を
rakuin o

brand

 押し
oshi
press

てしまう
te shimau
"end up"

[2] NP:EXPERTISE

Protagonist Skill T

VP:JUDGEMENT

Evaluee

AUX:NEGATION

Negated_p

V

T

1

Cognizer

T

VP

VP:LABELING

Sem H

AUX

[1] NP

head Supp

VP

Conj/HeadHead Head

AdjP

Sfin

CopSem H

と-P

Sem H

N

Label T Sem H

V

T

1

Speaker

2

Entity

S

Ext Head

Figure 3: Frame Semantic Annotation of Equivalent Japanese Sentence

generally reflect the effort those researchers have
made to understand the FrameNet data in depth,
including dependencies between semantic roles
within a frame, propagation of semantic types
across frames, and dependencies between syntax
and semantics in a specific sentence. When Frame
Element annotation is treated simply as indepen-
dent tags for machine learning (even if syntactic
information is imported from other sources), the
learning algorithms are starved of the information
needed to make smarter generalizations about the
large proportion of the syntactic information about
each lexical unit that is predictable from other lex-
ical units in the frame, other related frames, or
structures of the language as a whole, such as pas-
sivization and relative clause structure. The cur-
rent distribution format of the FrameNet data does
not make this clear. Since FrameNet data is basi-
cally discrete and categorial, treating it as an in-
terlocking set of graphs should enable better use
of all the information, explicit and implicit, in
FrameNet.

5 Multilingual FrameNet

The development of the FrameNet resource at
ICSI has inspired the creation of a number of
Frame Semantics-based projects for other lan-
guages: efforts on Spanish, German, Japanese,
Chinese, Swedish, Brazilian Portuguese, and

French have all received substantial funding, pri-
marily from their national or provincial govern-
ments. The basic research question is: to what ex-
tent are the semantic frames universal and to what
extent are they language-specific? Even if equiva-
lent frames exist in two languages, how much of
the frame structure will be preserved in transla-
tion? If a different frame is used, is it a near neigh-
bor via frame relations in one or both of the lan-
guages? These questions have also been discussed
by, e.g. Boas [2009], Čulo [2013], and Čulo and
de Melo [2012].

The sentence in Fig. 2 is part of an experiment
in annotation of parallel texts; TED talks were
chosen because translations are freely available
in all of these languages. The TED talk trans-
lations are done by volunteers, so they may not
be of professional quality, but this is a common
situation on the web today, which NLP research
has to deal with. In general the TED talk transla-
tions tend to be fairly ”literal”, so we would expect
that the frames would be very similar across lan-
guages. However, frame differences occur even
here. E.g, in the graph of the Japanese translation
of this sentence (shown in Fig. 3), the first con-
junct has the Judgement frame like the English,
but the second instance of Judgement in English
is translated by the frame Labeling in Japanese.
Here the agent of the labeling is the school, pre-

48



sumably metonymic for either the faculty, the stu-
dents, or both.5 Thus, the graph representation of
the FrameNet data helps to make clear which parts
of the sentences to compare across languages. We
hope that ultimately such comparisons will lead to
graph-based MT systems that can transfer mean-
ing at a deeper level.

One of the goals of the Multilingual FrameNet
project is to quantify the patterns of frame occur-
rence across varied languages. The new annota-
tion of parallel texts has just begun, so we the
number of instances of frames is still small, but we
can report some suggestive results based on com-
paring the annotation of verbs of motion in two
texts. One is the TED talk, where we have an-
notation for English and Brazilian Portuguese; the
other is a chapter of the Sherlock Holmes story
”The Hound of the Baskervilles”, translated by
professional translators, where we compare anno-
tation in English and Spanish. (We some annota-
tion previously on these texts in English, Spanish,
Japanese and German, but not Portuguese.)

Name Lang Same Partial Diff. Tot.
TED EN-PT 38 4 22 64
Hound EN-ES 33 3 23 59

Table 1: Frame similarity and difference across
parallel texts

Table 1 gives the counts for instances of verbs
of motion in two texts, showing cases where the
aligned verbs are the same or different across
languages. We had hypothesized that the pro-
fessional, literary translations of the ”Hound”
text would have more cross-linguistic differences,
while that the volunteer translations of the TED
talks would be more often frame-preserving. The
counts shown here conform to that expectation,
but the differences are not conclusive.

6 Conclusion

FrameNet data is extremely rich, but not usu-
ally presented in a form that is easy for use in
NLP. There are clear advantages to viewing the
FrameNet annotation data as a graph that sepa-
rates out entities (nodes) from relations (edges)
and clarifies which information is semantic, syn-
tactic, or both. The semantic information can be

5The content of the negative judgement is also made ex-
plicit in the phrase headed by to, literally something like
“they wind up being branded as ‘no good’.”

cleanly integrated with FrameNet’s already elab-
orate graph of frames and semantic types, while
generalizations over syntactic information should
enable improved use of FrameNet annotation in
ASRL training and cross-linguistic comparison.

6.1 Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the TextGraph re-
viewers for their helpful suggestions. Any errors
and omissions that remain are the fault of the au-
thors.

This material is based in part upon work sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. 1629989. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-
essarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation. The text from the TED talks was used
by permission under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution–Non Commercial–No Derivatives license.

References

Hans C. Boas. Recent trends in multilingual
computational lexicography, pages 1–26.
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 2009. URL
http://sites.la.utexas.edu/hcb/
files/2011/02/Boas_2009e_Trends_
in_Multl_Lexicography.pdf.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. Frame-
Semantic parsing. Computational Linguistics, 40
(1), 2014. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/J/J14/J14-1002.pdf.

Michael Ellsworth and Adam Janin. Mutaphrase:
Paraphrasing with framenet. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing,
Prague, June 2007. Association for Computational
Linguistics. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology-new/W/W07/W07-1424.pdf.

Jerome Feldman, Ellen Dodge, and John Bryant.
Embodied construction grammar. In Bernd
Heine and Heiko Narrog, editors, The Oxford
handbook of linguistic analysis, pages 111–
137. Oxford University Press, New York, 2010.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199544004.013.0006.

Charles J. Fillmore. Frame semantics and the nature
of language. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences: Conference on the Origin and De-
velopment of Language and Speech, 280(1):20–32,
1976. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1749-6632.1976.tb25467.x.

49



Charles J. Fillmore. Valence, hierarchies, and link-
ing. Handout for paper presented at CLP, Prague,
November 1997.

Charles J. Fillmore and Collin F. Baker. A frames
approach to semantic analysis. In Bernd Heine
and Heiko Narrog, editors, Oxford Handbook of
Linguistic Analysis, pages 313–341. OUP, 2010.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199544004.013.0013.

Laura A. Michaelis. Sign-Based Construction
Grammar. In Bernd Heine and Heiko Nar-
rog, editors, Oxford Handbook of Linguis-
tic Analysis, pages 139–158. OUP, 2010.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199544004.013.0007.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
The Proposition Bank: An annotated corpus of se-
mantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106, March 2005. URL http://aclweb.org/
anthology-new/J/J05/J05-1004.pdf.

Michael Roth and Mirella Lapata. Context-
aware Frame-Semantic Role Labeling. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 3:449–460, 2015. ISSN 2307-
387X. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/Q/Q15/Q15-1032.pdf.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, Collin F. Baker,
and Jan Scheffczyk. FrameNet II: Extended
Theory and Practice. International Computer
Science Institute, Berkeley, California, 2016. URL
https://framenet2.icsi.berkeley.
edu/docs/r1.7/book.pdf.

Francisco J. Valverde-Albacete. Extracting frame-
semantics knowledge using lattice theory. J Logic
Computation, 18(3):361–384, June 2008. doi: 10.
1093/logcom/exm069. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/logcom/exm069.

Oliver Čulo and Gerard de Melo. Source-Path-
Goal: Investigating the Cross-Linguistic Potential
of Frame-Semantic Text Analysis. it - Informa-
tion Technology, 54, 2012. URL https://doi.
org/10.1524/itit.2012.0675.

Oliver Čulo. Constructions-and-frames analysis of
translations: The interplay of syntax and seman-
tics in translations between English and German.
Constructions and Frames, 5(2):143–167, 2013.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1075/cf.5.
2.02cul.

50


