


















































JMIL_DEPLING 2017_final


Prices go up, surge, jump, spike, skyrocket, go through the roof… 
Intensifier Collocations with Parametric Nouns of Type PRICE 

Jasmina Milićević 
Department of French, 
Dalhousie University  

Halifax 
Canada 

jmilicev@dal.ca 

Abstract 

The paper looks into the expression of inten-
sification with parametric nouns such as 
PRICE, COST, FEE, RATE, etc., focusing on col-
locations these nouns form with intensifying 
adjectives, inchoative and causative intensi-
fying verbs and corresponding de-verbal 
nouns. Degrees of intensification possible 
with these nouns are discussed, as well as 
analytical vs. synthetic expression of intensi-
fication (a steep increase in prices ~ a spike 
in prices). Sample lexicalization rules are 
proposed—namely, rules that map semantic 
representations of intensifier collocations 
headed by nouns of this type to their deep-
syntactic representations. The theoretical 
framework of the paper is Meaning-Text lin-
guistic theory. 

1 The Problem Stated 

The paper looks into the expression of intensifi-
cation with parametric nouns such as PRICE, 
COST, FEE, RATE, etc., hereafter PRICE type 
nouns, or {NPRICE} for short (see Table 1, Sec-
tion 3 below). More precisely, it describes col-
locations these nouns form with intensifying 
adjectives, as well as with inchoative and causa-
tive intensifying verbs and corresponding de-
verbal nouns. A cursory comparison is provided 
with antonymic, i.e., attenuating, expressions 
entering in collocations with {NPRICE}. 
     A parametric noun (cf. Mel’čuk, 2013: 214) 
corresponds to (at least) a two-place predicate, 
‘P of X is α’, with X being the thing parameter-
ized and α, the value of the parameter: the 
priceP [of gas]X is [$1.85 per gallon]α, the 

speedP [of the vehicle]X is [70 miles per hour]α, 
the quantityP [of oil]X is [30 tons]α, etc.1  

The α value may not be explicitly quantified, 
but characterized as being big or small (on 
some scale): The price of gas is high. | The 
speed of the vehicle is low. | The quantity of oil 
is huge. | Etc.  

I will be interested namely in the case where 
α of an NPRICE, without being explicitly quanti-
fied, is qualified as high, or ‘big’ [STATIVE], or 
rising—‘getting bigger’—[INCHOATIVE], or 
else being caused to rise [CAUSATIVE]. These 
cases are illustrated, respectively, in (1), (2) and 
(3); the examples come from Google searches 
(some have been slightly modified). 

(1) STATIVE: ‘⟦P of X being α,⟧ α is (very) big’, etc. 

a. Post-paid service plans often charge
steep 〈astronomical, prohibitive〉 over-
age FEES.  

b. California divorce COST is high 〈whoop-
ing high, exorbitant〉.

(2) INCHOATIVE: ‘⟦P of X being α,⟧ α begins to be 
bigger than αʹ by β (β being big)’ 

a. Electricity COSTS went up 〈rose sharply,
surged, skyrocketed〉 in August.

b. Make sure your mortgage payments do
not increase1 if there is a rise 〈a major 
hike, a spike〉 in interest RATES.  

1 An NPRICE parametric noun typically has additional
dependents; thus, the person who determines the price 
of something corresponds to an argument (in our 
terms, semantic actant) of PRICE; similarly, the person 
who incurs the cost of something corresponds to a 
semantic actant of COST; FEE has two additional 
semantic atants: the one who sets it and the one who 
pays it; and so on. These actants are not directly 
relevant for the present discussion.

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 145-153,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

145



(3) CAUSATIVE: ‘⟦P of X being α,⟧ α is caused to 
begin to be bigger …’ 

a. Massive regulation of the health care in-
dustry causes the PRICES to increase1 〈to
go way up, to go through the roof〉.

b. Higher mortgage rates spurred an in-
crease 〈a jump, a surge〉 in home SALES. 

c. If you’re running for office you don’t
want to be known as the person who in-
creased2 〈hiked up〉 TAXES.2 

The paper will focus on two phenomena, ob-
served in the examples above: 
1) Varying degrees of intensification ex-

pressed by {NPRICE} collocates.
Thus, steep < astronomical; go up < skyrock-

et << go through the roof; a rise < a spike; 
raise < hike up; and so on.  
2) Synthetic vs. analytical expression of inten-

sification in collocations headed by
{NPRICE}.

High(er) degree of intensification can be ex-
pressed either by an NPRICE collocate itself or by 
a separate lexeme (underlined in the examples 
below), which gives rise to approximate equiva-
lences: [cost is] exorbitant 〈whooping high〉; 
[costs] skyrocket 〈rise sharply〉; hike up [prices] 
〈cause a substantial rise [in prices]〉; etc. When 
intensification is expressed analytically, the 
collocate of an NPRICE is itself intensified, serv-
ing as the base of the corresponding collocation 
of “second order”, as it were. 

These phenomena will be described from the 
viewpoint of Meaning-Text linguistic theory 
[MTT], in particular, its lexicological branch, 
Explanatory Combinatorial Lexicology 
(Mel’čuk, 2006), and its dependency-based se-
mantics and syntax (Mel’čuk, 2012, 2013 and 
2015). 

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: 
a brief review of formal means used in the 
Meaning-Text approach to describe intensifica-
tion: the lexical function Magn ‘big’/‘intense’ 
and other related lexical functions (Section 2); 
an overview of {NPRICE} and intensifying ex-
pressions with which they combine (Section 3); 
degrees of intensification expressed by collo-
cates of {NPRICE} and their lexicographic treat-
ment (Section 4); a sketch of lexicalization 
rules for analytical vs. synthetic expression of 
intensification with {NPRICE}, i.e., rules that 

2 INCREASE1 ‘become bigger’ is an intransitive verb, and
INCREASE2 the corresponding causative verb.

map semantic representations of the corre-
sponding collocations to their deep-syntactic 
representations (Section 5); conclusion (Section 
6). 

Data used in the paper come from a colloca-
tion database that Igor Mel’čuk kindly let me 
use, Longman Dictionary of Contemporary 
English [LDOCE, www.ldoce.online.com], and 
the WWW. 

The collocation database consists of over 
15,000 entries (entry count is per collocate, not 
per headword). The number of intensifier collo-
cations is some 4,000; only a small proportion 
of those are headed by {NPRICE}. For the pur-
poses of this paper, collocations were added 
and data complemented from the two other 
sources. 

Linguistic literature on intensification is ex-
tremely rich and even a cursory survey thereof 
is impossible here; some of the works I consult-
ed are Greenbaum (1970), Quirk et al. (1985: 
589ff), Altemberg (1991), Kennedy & McNally 
(2005), Cacchiani (2004), Gallardo (2008), 
Méndez-Naya, ed. (2008), Fleischhauer (2013), 
Bertinetto & Civardi (2015) and van Der 
Wouden & Foolen (2017). Within Meaning-
Text approach, various aspects of intensifica-
tion were treated, for instance, in Boguslavskij 
& Iomdin (2000), Iordanskaja & Polguère 
(2005), Grossman & Tutin (2007) and 
Milićević & Timošenko (2014).  

2 Meaning-Text Description of Intensi-
fication: Magn and Related Lexical 
Functions 

2.1 Collocations and Lexical Functions
In the MTT framework, collocations are de-

scribed in terms of lexical functions [LFs]. 
Since LFs are quite well known, there is no 
need to introduce them here (the interested 
reader may consult, for instance, Wanner, ed., 
1996 and Mel’čuk, 2015: 155-279) and we can 
pass directly to the LFs relevant for the present 
discussion: Magn, Plus, IncepPredPlus, and 
CausPredPlus. But first, two important facts, 
holding for all LFs, should be noted.  
• The meaning of an LF is actually a cluster of
several related meanings, similar to the mean-
ing of a grammeme, which also “stands for” a 
cluster of several meanings; for instance, the 
grammeme ‘plural’ can mean ‘more than one’ 
[three books], ‘a kind of’ [three cheeses], ‘a big 
quantity of’ [the sands of the desert], and so on. 
This explains the recourse to several glosses 

146



indicating the meaning of some LFs, such as 
Magn (see immediately below). 
• Elements of the value that an LF returns for 
a given headword are not perfectly synonymous 
(this may be the case even if we consider just 
one particular meaning of the LF, as mentioned 
in the preceding paragraph); in fact, sometimes 
they display obvious semantic differences, 
which in case of intensifiers may go beyond 
varying degrees of intensification. Thus, for 
instance, [a] spike [in prices] is not only more 
intense than [a] rise but also quicker, [prices] 
go through the roof means that they rise very 
high from an already high starting level, and so 
on (for more on this, see Section 3). However, 
such differences can be ignored in contexts 
where precision and attention to detail are not 
paramount, i.e., in most everyday discourse sit-
uations.  

2.2 Lexical Functions Magn and Plus 
The LF Magn is an adjectival/adverbial modifier 
whose meaning is ‘intense(ly)’, ‘big’, ‘much’/ 
‘many’. 

Here are examples of Magn type collocations 
as they would appear in an English Explanatory 
Combinatorial Dictionary [ECD] (where collo-
cates are listed in the entries of their head-
words):  
NUMBER(N) ‘quantity’ 
Magn: large, sizeable, //myriad, << huge, 

<< record-breaking, << unprecedented, 
<< //gazillion 

FIGURE(N) ‘number’ 
Magn: high, << huge, << staggering  
SHORTAGE 
Magn: severe, acute 
Magntemp: chronic  
INFLATION 
Magnquant: widespread, rampant 
impossible to control Magn: << runaway 
COST(N) 
Magn: high, significant, < huge, << astronomi-

cal, << exorbitant 
SPENDING(N) 
Magn2: strong 
[AntiBon+Magn2]: lavish 

The symbol “//” precedes a fused element of 
the value of an LF, expressing together, i.e., in 
one word, the meaning of the headword and the 
intensification; thus, myriad means ‘huge num-
ber’. 

Degrees of intensification are indicated by 
the symbols “<” (more) and “<<” (much more). 
(Another way to specify intensification degrees 
is to use degree Roman superscripts; see Sec-
tion 4.) 

Superscripted semantic features, such as temp 
and quant above, identify the dimension of the 
meaning of the headword that is being intensi-
fied. Subscripted Arabic numerals, as in Magn2, 
indicate the semantic actant of the headword on 
which the intensification bears. (In this particu-
lar case, these are the things for which the 
spending takes place; cf. military 〈defense, 
capital〉 spending). 

Non-standard components, such as impossible 
to control, capture the additional meaning car-
ried by a given collocate with respect to the 
basic meaning of the relevant LF; we will see 
more of these in Section 3. 

The last example features a configuration of 
LFs, made up of a complex LF AntiBon ‘not 
good according to the Speaker’, and the already 
seen Magn2. Intensifying LFs often enter into 
such configurations. For some examples of the 
LF AntiMagn, see Table 2 in Section 3. 

Like Magn, the LF Plus is a quantitative 
modifier, a comparison marker meaning ‘to a 
greater extent’; its antonym is Minus ‘to a less-
er extent’. Both appear only in complex LFs, 
either with Magn (e.g., PlusMagn(ALERT): 
heightened; PlusMagn(CONCERN): growing; 
MinusMagn(DISCIPLINE): failing) or with Incep 
and Pred (see immediately below). 

2.3 Lexical Functions IncepPredPlus and 
CausPredPlus 

These are complex verbal LFs, made up of the 
following simple LFs: the verb Pred ‘to.be’, the 
already seen comparison marker Plus ‘more’, 
and the verb Incep ‘begin’, respectively Caus 
‘to.cause’. Thus, IncepPredPlus means ‘begin 
to be bigger (than before/than something else 
by some value)’ and IncepPredPlus—‘cause 
something [to begin] to be bigger (than be-
fore/than something else by some value)’. For 
instance: 
NUMBER(N) ‘quantity’ 
IncepPredPlus: grow 
quickly IncepPredPlus: << explode  
COST(N) 
IncepPredPlus: go up, rise, increase1 
very quickly IncepPredPlus: << (sky)rocket 
CausPredPlus: drive up [ART ~], push [ART ~] 

up/higher 

147



Caus2PredPlus: raise [ART ~]3 

For some examples of the antonyms of these 
two LFs, the attenuators IncepPredMinus and 
CausPredMinus, see Tables 4 & 5 below. 

3 Intensification with PRICE-type Par-
ametric Nouns 

{NPRICE} have a “natural” and very rich co-oc-
currence with expressions of intensification 
(this is why they have been selected for this 
study). The nouns are presented first, and then 
their intensifying (and some of attenuating) col-
locates.  

3.1 The Domain of {NPRICE} 

Here are some nouns belonging to the set 
{NPRICE}: 

amount  
budget 
business 
charge(s) 
cost(s)  
debt 

deficit  
expense(s) 
fare  
fee  
figure  
inflation 

interest 
investment 
level 
mortgage 
number 
price(s) 

rate 
sales 
spending 
stock(s) 
tax(es) 
wage(s) 

Table 1. Some members of {NPRICE} 
The bolded nouns are the core items of the 

set; the co-occurrence data supplied below ap-
plies in the first place to these nouns and is 
shared to a somewhat lesser extent, albeit quite 
robustly, with the remaining items (for more on 
this, and for some frequency data, see the end 
of this section).  

Other, semantically more distant nouns such 
as employment, enrolment, turnout, etc., share 
some co-occurrence with {NPRICE}.  

Some of the nouns in Table 1 are used (in the 
relevant sense) only in the plural (e.g. sales) or 
are much more frequently used in the plural 
(those with the plural marker in parentheses). In 
some cases, there is a meaning difference be-
tween the plural and the singular form (i.e., they 
represent two different lexemes); for instance, 
costs ‘expenses’ vs. cost = ‘price’. 

The underscored nouns can combine with 
some other nouns from the set, as in Inflation 
levels are high; Mortgage rates went up; The 
amount of sales increased1; etc., but they easily 
                                                
3 Examples for the last two LFs: Increasing fuel prices 

also drive up the cost of food (the Cause is external, 
i.e., not an actant of the headword, so Caus bears no 
actantial subscripts); Apple quietly raised the cost of 
some of its machines (the Causer is internal, coincid-
ing with the SemA 2 of the headword, i.e., the person 
who determines the cost, which is shown by the actan-
tial superscript accompanying Caus).  

undergo ellipsis: Inflation is high; Mortgage 
went up; The sales increased1. Conversely, 
there are instances where these nouns are used 
alone, such as The rate(s) increased1; The fig-
ures/numbers are up; etc.4  

3.2 Intensifiers of {NPRICE} 

Tables 2-5 show the most common intensifying 
collocates of {NPRICE}; attenuating collocates 
are indicated as well, for comparison.  

In the tables, the non-standard components of 
an LF meaning (abruptly & quickly, from a 
high level, impossible to control, etc.) pre-
cede the elements of LF value which express 
them; these components are based on LDOCE’s 
definitions of the corresponding lexical units. 
Intensification levels are tentatively indicated as 
Degree I and Degree II/III. 
Magn ‘big’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 
high; steep astronomical; exorbitant;  

making Oper1 impossible prohibitive;  
impossible to control runaway; stag-
gering 

Plus ‘to a greater extent’ 
Degree  I Degree II/III 
growing galloping 
AntiMagn ‘small’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 
low < modest negligible  
Minus ‘to a smaller extent’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 
falling dwindling 

Table 2. Degree adjectives combining with {NPRICE} 

Two adjectival modifiers non-specific to  
{NPRICE}, colloq. whooping ‘very large [physical-
ly]’ and colloq. jaw-dropping ‘very impressive 
or surprising’ are indiscriminately used as high-
er-level intensifiers or attenuators.5  

                                                
4 These are of course two different types of ellipsis. The 

first ellipsis type is seen also in the expressions such 
as The (exchange) rate of the US dollar fell/rose 
against the Japanese Yen. 

5 Examples: Nike debuts a pair of sunglasses at the Rio 
Olympics for a jaw-dropping cost of $1,200 [by any-
one’s standard, this must be ‘very high’]. | The price is 
jaw-dropping, 9 dollars per bottle. [For quality wine, 
this means ‘very low’.] | Yet another whopping pay 
raise [‘very big’, or, ironically, ‘very small’]. 

148



IncepPredPlus ‘become +’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 

gradually creep 
up; go up; 
grow; in-
crease1; rise 
 

to a very high level go through the 
roof; abruptly jump, surge, shoot 
up, spike, zoom; abruptly & quickly 
balloon, escalate, explode; quickly, 
to a high level soar; quickly, by a 
large amount (sky)rocket  

IncepPredMinus ‘become –’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 
gradually 
cool; de-
crease;  
for a short 

time dip; 
drop; fall; 
go down  

abruptly, to a very low level crash; 
gradually, to a very low level dwindle; 
abruptly, by a large amount plummet, 
plunge, tumble   
 

Table 3. Inchoative degree-verbs combining with {NPRICE} 

CausPredPlus ‘cause to become +’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 
boost; drive up; increase2; push 
up/higher; put up; raise; send up 

deliberately hike 
up, ramp up; 
send sky-
high/soaring, 
send through 
the roof 

CausPredMinus ‘cause to become –’ 
Degree I Degree II/III 
cut; drive down; push 
down/lower; reduce; send down  

slash 

Table 4. Causative degree-verbs combining with{NPRICE} 

S0IncepPredPlus 
Degree I Degree II/III 
growth; in-
crease(N);  
rise(N) 

jump(N); escalation; explosion;  
spike(N);  surge(N) 

S0IncepPredMinus 
Degree I Degree II/III 
drop(N); dip(N) crash(N) 
S0CausPredPlus 
Degree I Degree II/III 
raise(N) hike(N);  rump-up 
S0CausPredMinus 
Degree I Degree II/III 
cut(N); re-
duction  

 

Table 5. Degree nouns combining with {NPRICE} 

Many collocates (both intensifiers and atten-
uators) are metaphorically derived from inde-
pendent lexical units denoting basic spatial po-
sitions (up/down) or changes thereof (rise/fall, 
jump/dip; hike up/push down), as well as vio-
lent physical phenomena (explosion/crash). 

As mentioned at the beginning of this sec-
tion, most of the collocates listed in Tables 2-5 
combine with the nouns in Table 1, but some of 
them fit some nouns better than others. For ex-
ample, in a cursory WWW search, ballooned was 
most frequently found in combination with 

costs (40,700 hits), significantly less so with 
prices (6,210) and infrequently with fees 
(1,230). Similarly, crashed was found co-
occurring most often with prices (61,100 hits), 
more rarely with stock (19,100), and hardly ev-
er with fees (349). On the other hand, some 
nouns have more specific collocates, not used 
with other nouns.  

Degree I intensity collocates seem to fit vir-
tually all nouns from {NPRICE}, those of Degree 
II/III may have a less close fit with some of the 
nouns. 

Table 6 features common intensifiers of 
some (for the most part) Degree I intensifying 
and attenuating collocates of {NPRICE}. 
Magn of Magn/AntiMagn 
Degree I Degree II/III 
very extremely,  

colloq. whoop-
ing 

Magn of IncepPredPlus/Minus 
Degree I Degree II/III 
a lot; considerably; markedly; 
significantly; sharply; steeply; 
substantially; colloq. way  

abruptly, by a large 

amount dramati-
cally 

Magn of S0IncepPredPlus/Minus 
Degree I Degree II/III 
considerable; major; sharp; 
steep; substantial 

abrupt, by a large 

amount dramatic  
Table 6. Intensifiers of {NPRICE} degree collocates 

The same intensifiers combine with high- 
and low degree expressing collocates of 
{NPRICE}; for instance, very 〈extremely, whoop-
ing〉 low/high prices; Stocks rose/fell sharply 
〈considerably, dramatically〉; and so on.  

To sum up, while some interesting generali-
zations over collocates of {NPRICE} are possible, 
it is still necessary to describe the co-occur-
rence for each noun individually. More on this 
will be said in Conclusion. 

4 Degrees of Intensification with 
PRICE-type Parametric Nouns 

As mentioned previously, ECD lexicogra-
phers use three degrees of intensification with 
Magn type LFs: ‘intense’, ‘very intense, and 
‘very very intense’. Some data from the collo-
cation database I consulted are presented in Ta-
ble 7, next page. 

The 3-way distinction is based on linguistic 
intuition and has not been specifically theorized 
within this framework.  

In the linguistic literature on intensification, 
some authors use three degrees (e.g., Cacchiani, 
2004), as above, and others, two: relative and 

149



high (e.g., Gallardo, 2009).6 However, the theo-
retical bases of or linguistic evidence for these 
distinctions are hardly ever discussed. 

 Magn Magn < Magn << 
DANGER big, grave, 

great 
 mortal 

DIFFER-
ENCE 

big, funda-
mental, sig-
nificant,  
sharp, stark,   
striking, vast 

crucial, 
enor-
mous, 
huge, key 

 

DIFFER-
ENT 

basically, 
distinctly,  
dramatically, 
markedly,   
starkly, strik-
ingly 

 complete-
ly, entire-
ly, //poles 
apart, rad-
ically, 
totally 

EPIDEM-
IC(N) 

major, vast   sweeping  

EVI-
DENCE 

quant ample, 
clear, cogent, 
compelling, 
convincing, 
dramatic, 
quant moun-
tainous, 
strong, unam-
biguous  

conclu-
sive, in-
contro-
vertible, 
irrefuta-
ble  
   

 

FACT True well-
establish-
ed, well-
known  
 

irrefuta-
ble 

PAIN keen, temp-
nagging, 
searing, se-
vere, sharp, 
tempunrelent-
ing  

killer- excruciat-
ing, ex-
treme, 
gut-
wrench-
ing 

SPEED(N) High breath-
taking, 
lightning 

break-
neck 

TIRED //exhausted, to 
the bone, very, 
//washed out 

complete-
ly, ex-
tremely  

 

TOLL heavy devastat-
ing 

 

Table 7. Degrees of Magn in an ECD database (excerpts) 

In domains such as ours, degrees of intensifi-
cation could be determined rather objectively, 
by reference to numerical values of the parame-
ters in question. That is, we could try and find 

                                                
6 Remember that we are talking about intensifiers in col-

locations, not more or less free intensifiers that may 
present more degrees: a bit/somewhat < enough/rather 
< quite/pretty/really < absolutely/extremely/totally.  

conceptual correlates for intensification degrees 
admitted by {NPRICE}.  

Let us assume the following Semantic Struc-
ture [SemS] for the LF IncepPredPlus (on se-
mantic representations in MTT, see, for in-
stance, Mel’čuk, 2012: 161-394): 

 

 
Figure 1. SemS of the LF IncepPredPlus 

NB: The semanteme configuration in the shaded area of 
Figure 1 is not the part of the meaning of the LF In-
cepPredPlus: it represents the context (or conditions) 
in which the configuration ‘begin being bigger …’ 
can be implemented, at the deep-syntactic level, by 
the LF in question. (This context is actually a gener-
alized SemS of the corresponding collocation base 
with its SemA 1.) See the lexicalization rules in Fig-
ure 3. 

A note on the actants of the semanteme ‘big-
ger’ is in order: in ‘α is bigger than αʹ by β, ‘α’ 
is the value [of something] that is being com-
pared with ‘αʹ’, which is either ‘α’ at some pre-
vious time point or the value of another pa-
rameter; the meaning ‘β’ is obvious—the value 
representing the difference between ‘α’ and 
‘αʹ’. Thus, Prices go up means ‘prices [of 
something] are α, α being bigger than αʹ [= α 
before the change] by β’, and Prices of wheat 
are higher than prices of barley means ‘prices 
of wheat are α, α being bigger than αʹ, prices of 
barley, by β’. 

Some possible instantiations of the SemS in 
Figure 1 follow: 

(4) a. Between 1850 and 1854 pricesP of wheatX 
jumped by 60% [β]. 

b. The priceP of natural gasX rose above $5 
per mcf [α].  

c. GasolineX pricesP will increase1 by 10% 
[β], to 1.65 euros per liter [α]. 

d. Crude oilX pricesP spiked from $13 [αʹ] to 
roughly $34 per barrel [α], i.e., by some 
38% [β]. 

As we can see, specific lexicalizations of the 
meaning of IncepPredPlus correlate with actu-
al numerical values of the parameter P. There-
fore, we could posit that higher degree inchoa-
tive verbs are used if the value of β exceeds a 

‘bigger’ ‘α’ 

‘X’ 

1 
2 

‘P’ 
‘begin’ 

1 

1 3 
2 

‘αʹ’ 
‘β’ 

150



certain percentage point or if α is bigger than αʹ 
by certain amount, and so on. The same reason-
ing could be used to determine whether a two- 
or three-degree distinction is necessary for de-
grees of intensification. 

This kind of precision would be in order if 
we were to elaborate entries for a terminologi-
cal database or a lexicon to be used in some 
NLP applications. For our purposes, however, it 
is enough to determine the relative values of the 
parameter. 

Speaking about linguistic evidence, it is 
clearly there to corroborate a two-degree dis-
tinction; cf., for instance, the incompatibility of 
higher degree nouns and verbs with slight(ly)/a 
bit (a slight increase/*surge; costs rose/*spiked 
slightly) or the incompatibility of higher degree 
adjectives with VERY/A LOT (very high 〈steep〉 
vs. very *staggering). However, the evidence is 
hard to come by when it comes to distinguish-
ing between (the putative) Degrees II and III. 

For the time being, I will refrain from mak-
ing too fine distinctions and will use two de-
grees of intensification: high, and very high, 
which will be indicated by degree superscripts 
accompanying the relevant LFs: MagnI vs. Mag-
nII, IncepPredPlusI vs. IncepPredPlusII, and 
CausPredPlusI vs. CausPredPlusII. (The same 
superscripts can be used with attenuating LFs).7  

Thus, the SemS in Figure 1 above is actually 
good for IncepPredPlusI, and that of Incep-
PredPlusII looks like this: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. SemS of the LF IncepPredPlusII 

This is a generalized representation, captur-
ing the core meaning of this LF; in actual fact, 
either α or αʹ (or both) can also be characterized 
as ‘big’, which will trigger specific lexicaliza-
tions: if α is ‘big’ (plus the non-standard com-
ponent ‘quickly’ is present), then soar is an ap-
propriate lexicalization, if both α and αʹ are big, 
˹go through the roof˺ is OK, and so on. 

                                                
7 While the Roman superscript notation is sporadically 

found (in the MTT literature) with Magn type LFs, it is 
standardly used with realization LFs to indicate “de-
grees” of realization. 

5 Sample Lexicalization Rules for In-
tensifiers of PRICE-type Parametric 
Nouns 

As indicated in Section 1, higher degree of in-
tensification with {NPRICE} nouns can be ex-
pressed synthetically, within an NPRICE collo-
cate, or analytically, by a separate lexical unit 
forming a collocation with the NPRICE collocate 
as the headword; this gives rise to equivalences 
such as these: 

(5) a. Alberta crop crisis sent wheat PRICES 
through the roofCausPredPlusII. 

b. Alberta crop crisis causedCaus wheat 
PRICES to shoot upIncepPredPlusII. 

c. Alberta crop crisis spurredCaus a sharp-
Magn increase1S0IncepPredPlusI in wheat 
PRICES. 

d. Wheat PRICES spikedIncepPredPlusII 〈roseIn-
cepPredPlus

I steeplyMagnI, gotIncep muchMagnI 
higherPlus〉 ˹in the wake of˺Adv2Caus Alber-
ta crop crisis. 

These sentences are mutual paraphrases: they 
express the same meaning—‘Alberta crop crisis 
caused wheat prices to begin being much big-
ger’—but they do so more and more analytical-
ly, as it were, as we go from (5a) to (5d). 

In MTT framework, there are two ways to 
produce these sentences:  

1) by alternative lexicalizations from their 
common semantic structure, through applica-
tion of semantic-to-deep syntax mapping rules 
(e.g., Mel’čuk, 2013: 188-259);  

2) by meaning-preserving reformulations of 
the deep-syntactic structure of any of these sen-
tences, through application of deep-syntactic 
equivalence, or paraphrasing, rules (e.g., 
Mel’čuk, 2013: 137-188).  

In what follows, I will illustrate the first rule 
type. 

Sample rules for synthetic vs. analytic im-
plementation of inchoative high intensity verbs 
are given in Figure 3, next page. (Some lexical-
ization rules for the FL Magn can be found in 
Mel’čuk 2013: 213-214.) 

These rules are needed (among others) to 
produce paraphrases such as those in example 
(5d) above. 

Similar lexicalization rules can be written for 
other intensifying (and attenuating) LFs. 

‘bigger’ ‘α’ 

‘X’ 

1 
2 

‘begin’ 
1 

1 3 
2 

‘αʹ’ 

‘β’ 

‘big’ 
1 

‘P’ 

151



6 Conclusion 
The paper discussed intensifier collocations of 
parametric nouns of type PRICE, in particular 
degrees of intensification and analytical vs. syn-
thetic expression of intensification possible 
with these nouns. 

While all the nouns considered share to a 
considerable extent the co-occurrence with in-
tensifiers—in particular Degree I intensifiers, 
they also have their own, idiosyncratic, collo-
cates, a finding consistent with the collocation 
phenomenon in general. Thus, a generalized 
lexicographic entry for the nouns belonging to 
{NPRICE} can be envisaged, but this does not 
obviate the need for recording intensifier collo-
cations for each member of the set, in their re-
spective lexicographic entries.  

Two degrees of intensification, high and very 
high, were suggested for these nouns’ collo-
cates, along with the corresponding formal lexi-

cographic treatment within the Meaning-Text 
paradigm.  

Sample lexicalization rules for intensifier 
collocation headed by members of {NPRICE} 
were proposed, taking into account the possibil-
ity of analytical and synthetic expression of in-
tensification, i.e., by a separate lexeme, a collo-
cate of an {NPRICE} intensifier (a steep rise in 
PRICES 〈TAXES, FEES〉; SALES 〈STOCKS〉 rose 
dramatically), or within the intensifier itself (a 
hike in PRICES 〈TAXES, FEES〉; SALES 〈STOCKS〉 
went through the roof). 

Attenuating collocates of {NPRICE} were con-
sidered in a cursory way, insofar as they pro-
vided a basis for comparison with the intensify-
ing collocates. Preliminary findings point to 
two differences: attenuators are not as numer-
ous as intensifiers, and they are even less prone 
to a three-degree distinction of intensity.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

Figure 3. Lexicalization rules for the FL IncepPredPlusII 
 

Future work could focus on determining, 
based on a larger corpus of data, if two degrees 
of intensification are enough to cover all the 
cases of intensification (as tentatively suggested 
here) or, on the contrary, a three-degree distinc-
tion is necessary. Other topic to explore include 
factors determining the choice of intensifier 
collocates of PRICE type nouns (e.g., how high a 
rise in prices should be in order for it be called 
a spike, etc.), as well as preference rules for 

analytical vs. synthetic expression of intensifi-
cation with the nouns of this type. Plus, of 
course, a closer look at attenuation, along the 
same lines. 

 
Acknowledgments 
 
I am grateful to Igor Mel’čuk for generously 
letting me use his database of lexical functions 
for English, as well as for his most helpful re-

⇔ 
L(‘X’) 

IncepPredPlusII 

I 

L(‘P’) 
I 

‘bigger’ ‘α’ 

‘X’ 

1 
2 

‘P’ 
‘begin’ 

1 

1 3 
2 

‘αʹ’ 

‘β’ 

‘big’ 
1 

⇔ 
L(‘X’) 

IncepPredPlusI 

I 

L(‘P’) 
I 

ATTR 

MagnI 

⇔ 
II Plus 

L(‘X’) 

IncepPred 

I 

L(‘P’) 
I 

ATTR 

MagnI 

152



marks on a pre-final version of this paper. 
Thanks are also due to three anonymous re-
viewers, whose comments allowed me to im-
prove some aspects of the paper.  

References  

Altemberg, Bengt. 1991. Amplifier Collocations in 
Spoken English. In Johanson, S. & Stenström, A.-
B., eds, English Computer Corpora. Selected Pa-
pers and Research Guide, Mouton de Gruyter, 
Berlin/New York, p. 127-149. 

Bertinetto, Pier Marco & Civardi, Eugenio. 2015. 
The Semantics of Degree Verbs and the Telicity 
Issue. Borealis: An International Journal of His-
panic Linguistics, 4(1): 57-77. 

Boguslavskij, Igor & Iomdin, Leonid. 2000. Seman-
tika medlennosti [The Semantics of Slowness]. 
Slovo v tekste i v slovare. Sbornik stat’ej k 70-
letiju akademika Ju. D. Apresjana. Jazyki russkoj 
kul’tury, Moskva, p. 52-60. 

Cacchiani, Silvia, 2004. Towards a Model for Inves-
tigating Predicate-Intensifier Collocations. Pro-
ceedings of EURALEX 2004, p. 943-947. 

Fleischhauer, Jens. 2013. Interaction of Telicity and 
Degree Gradation in Change of State Verbs. In 
Arsenijević, B., Gehrke, B. & Marín, R., eds, 
Studies in the Composition and Decomposition of 
Event Predicates. Springer, Dordrecht, p. 125-
152. 

Gallardo, Catherine. 2009. L’intensification dans les 
expressions figées françaises à coordination in-
terne. Lingvisticæ Investigationes, 32(2): 238- 
252. 

Greenbaum, Sidney. 1970. Verb-Intensifier Colloca-
tions in English: An Experimental Approach. 
Mouton, The Hague/Paris.  

Grossmann, Francis & Tutin, Agnès. 2007. Motiva-
tion of Lexical Functions in Collocations: The 
Case of Intensifiers Denoting ‘Joy’. In Wanner, 
Leo, ed., Selected Lexical and Grammatical Is-
sues in the Meaning-Text Theory. In Honour of 
Igor Mel’čuk. Benjamins, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia, p. 140-165. 

Iordanskaja, Lidija & Polguère, Alain. 2005. Hook-
ing up Syntagmatic Lexical Functions to Lexico-
graphic Definitions. In Apresjan, Ju. & Iomdin, 
L., eds, East-West Encounter: Second Interna-
tional Conference on Meaning-Text Theory. Slav-
ic Culture Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 
p. 176-186. 

Kennedy, Christopher & McNally, Louise. 2005. 
Scale Structure, Degree Modification, and the 
Semantics of Gradable Predicates. Language, 81, 
p. 345–381. 

Mel’čuk, Igor. 2012, 2013, 2015. Semantics. From 
Meaning to Text, vols 1-3. John Benjamins, Am-
sterdam/Philadelphia.  

Mel’čuk, Igor. 2006. Explanatory Combinatorial 
Dictionary. In Sica, G., ed., Open Problems in 
Linguistics and Lexicography. Polimetrica, Mon-
za, p. 225–355. 

Méndez-Naya, Bélen, ed. 2008. Intensifiers, Special 
Issue of English Language and Linguistics, 12(2). 

Milićević, Jasmina & Timošenko, Svetlana. 2014. 
Towards a Fine-grained Description of Intensify-
ing Adjectives for Text Processing. Computation-
al Linguistics and Intellectual Technologies. Pro-
ceedings of the Annual International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics, DIALOG 2014, p. 
427-440. 

Quirk, Randolph, Greenbaum, Sidney, Leech, Geof-
frey & Svartvik, Jan. 1985. A Comprehensive 
Grammar of the English Language. Longman, 
London. 

Van Der Wouden, Ton & Foolen, Ad. 2017. A Most 
Serious and Extraordinary Problem. Intensifica-
tion of Adjectives in Dutch, German, and English. 
Leuvense Bijdragen, 101: 82-100. 

Wanner, Leo, ed. 1996. Lexical Functions in Lexi-
cography and Natural Language Processing. 
Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia. 

153




