



















































ZikaHack 2016: A digital disease detection competition


Proceedings of the International Workshop on Digital Disease Detection using Social Media 2017 (DDDSM-2017), pages 39–46,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

 
 
 

   

ZikaHack 2016: A digital disease detection competition 

 
Dillon C Adam1, Jitendra Jonnagaddala2, Daniel Han-Chen3, Sean Batongbacal4, Luan 
Almeida5, Jing Z Zhu6, Jenny J Yang7, Jumail M Mundekkat4, Steven Badman8, Abrar 

A Chughtai1, C Raina MacIntyre1 

 
1Integrated Systems for Epidemic Response, UNSW Sydney, Australia 

2School of Public Health, UNSW Sydney, Australia 
3School of Mathematics & Statistics, UNSW Sydney, Australia 

4School of Computer Science & Engineering, UNSW Sydney, Australia 
5Computer Science Department, Federal University of Alagoas, Brazil 

6Concord Repatriation General Hospital, Sydney, Australia 
7Faculty of Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Australia 

8Kirby Institute, UNSW Sydney, Australia 
 

Abstract 

Effective response to infectious dis-
eases outbreaks relies on the rapid and 
early detection of those outbreaks. In-
validated, yet timely and openly availa-
ble digital information can be used for 
the early detection of outbreaks. Public 
health surveillance authorities can ex-
ploit these early warnings to plan and 
co-ordinate rapid surveillance and 
emergency response programs. In 
2016, a digital disease detection com-
petition named ZikaHack was 
launched. The objective of the compe-
tition was for multidisciplinary teams 
to design, develop and demonstrate in-
novative digital disease detection solu-
tions to retrospectively detect the 2015- 
16 Brazilian Zika virus outbreak earlier 
than traditional surveillance methods.  
In this paper, an overview of the Zik-
aHack competition is provided. The 
challenges and lessons learned in or-
ganizing this competition are also dis-
cussed for use by other researchers in-
terested in organizing similar competi-
tions. 

1 Introduction 

Rapid detection of disease outbreaks through dis-
ease surveillance is critical for early and effective 

prevention and control of potential epidemics. Tra-
ditional communicable disease surveillance typi-
cally includes elements of case detection, valida-
tion, and dissemination, to accurately detect out-
breaks and inform subsequent control measures 
where necessary. These methods however, while 
highly specific, rely on clinical diagnoses and/or 
laboratory confirmation, and involve a chain of 
processing from health providers to government 
health authorities.  This can be a time-consuming 
process, which while suitable for accurate surveil-
lance of long term trends, is not timely enough for 
rapid outbreak detection. More timely methods of 
detecting outbreaks could reduce the delay of dis-
ease control measures, particularly important dur-
ing the early hours and days of an outbreak.  
 

The extraordinary increase in public domain 
data driven by the accessibility of the internet, 
smart phones and social media, mean that a wealth 
of information about our individual and collective 
lives is more readily available than ever before. 
Utilizing these data for disease surveillance is re-
ferred to as digital disease detection. It has shown 
increasing promise in the early detection and iden-
tification of outbreaks, despite concerns regarding 
the validity and accuracy of disease predictions 
(Bernardo et al., 2013; Chunara et al., 2012). De-
spite these limitations, unofficial public data 
sources, such as online search engines and social 
media can provide timely information for the early 
detection of disease outbreaks and can be used to 
support the early initiation of traditional surveil-
lance activities (Bernardo et al., 2013; Ginsberg et 

39



 
 
 

   

al., 2009; Salathe et al., 2013). The World Health 
Organization (WHO) reports that more than 60% 
of their initial outbreak reports come from unoffi-
cial sources (Christaki, 2015; World Health 
Organization, 2016).  
 

1.1 Zika & the 2015 Brazilian outbreak 
Zika virus (ZIKV) was first identified in monkeys 
in 1947, and then in humans in 1952 in Uganda 
(Kirya, 1977). Only occasionally reported in equa-
torial regions of Africa and Asia (Ioos et al., 2014), 
the virus was not considered a pathogen of signifi-
cant public health concern until the 2015 epidemic 
in Brazil, concurrent with reports of associations 
with birth defects such as microcephaly. The first 
signs of a potential ZIKV outbreak occurred in 
May 2015, as the Pan American Health Organiza-
tion (PAHO) released an alert for possible ZIKV 
infection in Brazil following a cluster of non-spe-
cific rash in February 2015. The first cluster of mi-
crocephaly cases was reported in August 2015 but 
the association with ZIKV infection wasn’t noted 
until November (Schuler-Faccini et al., 2016). By 
February 2016, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) declared the ZIKV epidemic to be a Public 
Health Emergency of International Concern 
(World Health Organization (WHO), 2016). It is 
estimated that anywhere between 10–80% of the 
Brazilian population (207 million) may have been 
exposed to ZIKV during the outbreak (Jaenisch et 
al., 2016; Johansson et al., 2016; Nishiura et al., 
2016). If symptoms do appear, they are mostly 
mild and non-specific such as such as fever, rash, 
and joint pain typical of many other arboviral dis-
eases such as dengue and chikungunya (Duffy et 
al., 2009; Grard et al., 2014; Olson et al., 1981). As 
such, many women were not aware they had be-
come infected until their baby was born with birth 
defects nine months later. The risk of microcephaly 
due to ZIKV is estimated to be low, ranging from 
0-5%, but may be as high as 30% (Jaenisch et al., 
2016; Johansson et al., 2016; Nishiura et al., 2016; 
Oliveira Melo et al., 2016; Ventura et al., 2016). 

2 ZikaHack 2016  

Hackathons are typically short-term competitions 
which bring together multidisciplinary teams to de-
velop innovative solutions to a defined problem. 

                                                        
1 https://sphcm.med.unsw.edu.au/centres-units/centre-re-
search-excellence-epidemic-response 

Hackathon style competitions have proven effec-
tive in enhancing student-centred learning and fos-
tering inter professional development (Kienzler & 
Fontanesi, 2017; Youm & Wiechmann, 2015).  In-
spired by this, a digital disease detection competi-
tion called ‘ZikaHack 2016’ was organised and 
sponsored by The National Health and Medical Re-
search Council’s (NHMRC) Centre for Research 
Excellence in Integrated Systems for Epidemic Re-
sponse (ISER)1.  Based at University of New South 
Wales (UNSW) Sydney, ISER conducts applied 
systems research to enhance collaboration and 
build capacity in health systems for epidemic re-
sponse and control. Open to university students 
world-wide, the competition challenged multidis-
ciplinary student teams to design and develop dig-
ital disease detection solutions to detect early sig-
nals for the ZIKV outbreak in Brazil earlier than 
traditionally surveillance methods did, using only 
publicly available data sources. One of the main 
task for the teams was to identify the Brazilian 
ZIKV outbreak and formulate the scope for poten-
tial early signals.  
 

3 Competition structure 

3.1  Overview 

The competition was split into two phases: a 
shortlisting phase, and a development phase. Phase 
one of the competition was launched in August 
2016. Eligible teams of three to six students were 
tasked to submit an application including a pro-
posal of no more than 3,000 words describing their 
solution to detect an early ZIKV surveillance sig-
nal. A key requirement for entry was the cross-dis-
ciplinary background and mixed study level of the 
student teams: team composition had to include 
both undergraduate and postgraduate students with 
at least one student from science, technology, engi-
neering or math (STEM), and another from a 
health-related program. Students had to be enrolled 
at a recognised university within their country at 
the time of application. Only applications in Eng-
lish were accepted. For exact eligibility criteria 
used, please refer to Appendix A. 
 

Details of the competition such as conditions of 
entry and proposal requirements were posted on the 

40



 
 
 

   

ISER website. The competition was widely publi-
cized on the university website and emails were 
sent to colleagues working at other universities in 
Australia and overseas for promotion. A local com-
pany, thinkable.org, was also contracted to pro-
mote and field applicants for the competition.  
 

3.1 Phase One  
Phase one of the competition was launched in Au-
gust 2016. Students were given approximately five 
months to form teams and submit a proposal before 
the closing date of 30 November 2016. Applica-
tions were reviewed for eligibility and ranked in a 
blinded process by a panel of four judges inde-
pendently. Criteria for the ranking was general: a 
demonstrated understanding of the ZIKV problem 
in Brazil, the contest brief and originality of the 
proposed solution. A median-rank score for each 
submission was calculated blindly and submissions 
re-ranked. Judges deliberated over the top perform-
ing submissions and selected two finalists to move 
forward into phase two. Teams were notified on 19 
December 2016. A summary of phase one pro-
posals is presented in Table 1.  

 

3.2 Phase Two 
Teams shortlisted for phase two were tasked to 
begin development and implementation of their 
proposed digital disease detection solutions. The 
primary criteria for evaluation was the ability of the 
solution to identify the ZIKV outbreak early com-
pared to the official ZKV epidemic alert by the 
WHO in February 2016. Complete solution docu-
mentation and source code were also required to be 
compiled for evaluation. A joint teleconference 
with the finalists and the competition organizers 
was held to provide teams with an opportunity to 
ask questions and discuss any challenges faced.  Fi-

nal submissions were due 30 April 2017. The final-
ists presented an overview of their solutions and 
early signals of ZIKV outbreak in Brazil before the 
same four person judging panel. Presentations were 
scored according to a final criterion including the 
ability of the tool to produce an early signal of the 
ZIKV outbreak earlier than traditional surveillance, 
originality, feasibility and adaptability of the de-
sign. The winning team was notified in early May 
20172.  

4 Competition results 

4.1 Participants 

A total of eight proposals were received in phase 
one. One team was disqualified as they did not 
meet the entry criteria. Of the seven qualifying 
teams, the average team size was five persons with 
34 total individual student applicants. The large 
majority student applicants were enrolled at an 
Australian university (n=32; 94%) and male (n=26; 
77.5%). Four out of seven teams collaborated be-
tween at least two universities with the remaining 
three team’s composition exclusively of students 
from the same university.  The most common level 
of study was postgraduate (n=22; 65%) and of 
those, most were enrolled in a Master level pro-
gram (n=16; 73%) followed by a doctoral level 
program (n=6; 27%). Thirty-five percent of appli-
cants were (n=12) enrolled in an undergraduate 
bachelor program. Across all program levels, pub-
lic health and computer science were the most 
common fields of study (n=6; 18% each) followed 
by data science, information technologies and en-
gineering (n=5; 15% each).  
 
4.2 Proposed solutions 

 
Most but not all teams correctly understood the 
challenge of identifying early signals of Brazilian  

ZIKV outbreak.  Teams routinely proposed using 
machine learning and natural language processing 
algorithms to develop models for ZIKV prediction 
from social media sources. However, the queries 
used and data sources specified differed between 
teams as did the methods. At least one social media 
platform was chosen by most teams as a potential 
data source for digital disease detection however in 
some cases multiple sources were specified. The 

                                                        
2 https://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/health/students-find-
early-signals-zika-virus-outbreak  

most common source was Twitter (n=5/7; 71%), 
followed by Facebook (n=3/7; 42%). The ‘REST’ 
and ‘Streaming Twitter’ API was commonly pro-
posed (even though it is not possible to obtain the 
data required for this competition retrospectively) 
as a means for data extraction. Google trends was 
another source of data proposed (n=3/7; 47%). 
Some common query-terms proposed across social  

41



 
 
 

   

 media platforms and search engines included: fe-
ver, rash, headache and conjunctivitis. Python was 
mentioned in all proposed solutions that specified 
at least one programming language, followed by R 
and Matlab.  

 
Proposed solutions for ZIKV early detection 

varied and are summarised in Table 1. Many teams 
included climate variables into their models as a 
predictor of mosquito biting risk. For example, 
Team 1 proposed using an algorithm to predict 
ideal conditions for a ZIKV outbreak based on his-
toric climate data (mosquito risk) and calculating 
outliers of a regression analysis using filtered 
search results. Another incorporated the epidemio-
logical concept of R0 (expected number of second-
ary infection produced by primary infection) by 
calculating the predicted number of ZIKV infec-
tions by location using a trained machine learning 
model from twitter data, and then statistically com-
pared this value to other models with similar symp-
toms such as dengue and chikungunya. Some solu-
tions however demonstrated a collection of ideas 
that lacked detail or were inappropriate for desired 
challenge outcome. Two of the proposed solutions 
were selected for phase two development.  

 
 

4.3 Winning Solution: Gadyan 
 
Gadyan (in Australian aboriginal language means 
"Sydney shellfish”) was able to generate early sig-
nals, approximately three months before the WHO 
official alert in early 2016. Gadyan employed a 
multi-stage pipeline based approach with various 
components and sub-components incorporated into 
the solution. Gadyan specifically focused on mi-
crocephaly syndromic surveillance and used retro-
spectively collected relevant data from Google 
trends, Twitter and Wikipedia for the period Jan 
2013 to December 2016. The data extracted from 
these sources varied in type and formats. Unstruc-
tured tweets were extracted from twitter users in 
Brazil and structured data from the Google trends 
and Wikipedia. As part of this solution, automatic 
translation was also performed on Portuguese and 
Spanish data. The data extracted from these various 
heterogeneous data sources were appropriately rep-
resented in standardized time series (weekly inter-
vals and monthly) formats. The standardized data 
was further used to generate outbreak alerts. Ini-
tially, the alerts were generated using a single data 
source and conventional aberration detection algo-
rithms. However, the better early warning alerts 
were possible by combining all the data sources 

Team Data Sources Algorithms Language 

1 Facebook, Google search, National weather data, Census data 

Unnamed machine learning algo-
rithms, Delay differential, Propor-
tional hazards models 

Not specified 

2 Twitter, PubMed, Google scholar, News sources, Worldclim.org 
Unnamed mosquito model, 
SIR transmission model Python 

3 

Facebook, Twitter, Google trends, 
Google maps, National weather sta-
tistics, Mass social events calendar, 
Wikipedia, HealthMap, CDC 

Deep neural networks, Unnamed 
machine learning algorithms. 

Python, R, 
Matlab 

4 United Nations world tourism organi-sation, Government reports 
Unnamed clustering algorithm, 
Random forests, Decision trees. Python, R 

5 Twitter, Global climate data, Google trends 

Bayesian Markov network model, 
Auto regression exogenous model, 
SVM regression model, Naive 
Bayes 

Not specified 

6 Twitter Deep neural networks Python 

7 Reddit, Twitter, Wikipedia, Instagram Deep neural networks, Unnamed aberration detection models Python 

 
Table 1: Summary of phase one proposals 

42



 
 
 

   

and using change point detection algorithms in-
stead of standard aberration detection algorithms. 
The official microcephaly surveillance data from 
WHO/PAHO was used to perform correlation anal-
ysis and assessment of the outbreak alerts during 
the development of the solution. The developed 
Gadyan solution is subjected to various limitations 
but can be extended to detect other disease out-
breaks. 
 

4.4 Runner Up 
The second finalist and runner-up developed an 
Outbreak Confidence Distribution (OCD) model to 
compute the likelihood of a ZIKV outbreak by lo-
cation (Brazilian states).  The solution used a com-
bination of retrospective google search term que-
ries downloaded in both Spanish and Portuguese to 
train a stacked Machine Learning model with Ran-
dom Forests and Neural Nets. The model was 
trained on data sourced from three Brazilian states 
and then tested on the remaining states. The solu-
tion produced signals of possible ZIKV outbreak as 
early as September 2014 in the state of Espírito 
Santo. The early signal of ZIKV varied for each 
state, but the model commonly identified Novem-
ber 2014 as the potential origin of the outbreak in 
Brazil.  The solution however suffered from some 
noisy signals. 
 

5 Discussion  

The results demonstrate that student-centred multi-
disciplinary teams can provide unique and innova-
tive solutions to challenging digital disease detec-
tion problems. There are many advantages in car-
rying out competitions such as this in an academic 
setting. Hackathons are frequently reported as hubs 
for student research innovations (Artiles & 
Wallace, 2013; Briscoe, 2014) and the results of 
ZikaHack concur that university organised compe-
titions with prize monies can incentivise talented 
students to apply for university competitions. 
Overall, the number of unique solutions proposed 
satisfied the goals of competition organisers. 

 
Twitter as the choice source of public domain 

data was unsurprising. Many past efforts to create 
digital disease detection (DDD) tools have used 
Twitter as a primary data source to track epidemics 
(Aramaki et al., 2011; Jonnagaddala et al., 2016; 

Lampos et al., 2010). Despite its popularity, the ef-
fectiveness of twitter for DDD is questionable. For 
users, only 1% of the data can be publicly accessed 
(0.2% of which is geocoded), query terms used to 
retrieve data can lead to bias, and most tweets orig-
inate from the United States (Al-garadi et al., 2016; 
Romano et al., 2016). In addition, Twitter is also a 
very difficult source to perform microcephaly syn-
dromic surveillance because identification of preg-
nant women on social media is a challenging task 
(Huang et al., 2017). Google search trends can also 
suffer from similar biases. However, many pro-
posals attempted to overcome issues of bias by in-
tegrating additional data such as climate into their 
models or weighting certain parameters and data 
points over others. For example, tweets that refer-
enced rash and conjunctivitis would be weighted 
more than headache or haemorrhage due to their 
greater association with ZIKV infection compared 
with similar syndromes caused by chikungunya vi-
rus and dengue. This was recognised correctly as 
the primary challenge in identifying an early ZIKV 
signal by most teams.  
 

The popularity of Python as the programming 
language of choice by teams was also unsurprising. 
It is well agreed that Python’s relatively easy syn-
tax, speed, and vast array of available libraries are 
particularly suited for DDD. Python as a language 
for data science and machine learning has recently 
surpassed R and all signs point to this trend contin-
uing (Granville, 2017). While no restrictions on 
programming language was specified in the Zik-
aHack competition documents, if a single language 
is preferred to potentially ease administration and 
judging, future organisers should feel comfortable 
selecting Python.  

 
We observed various issues and challenges in 

organising the ZikaHack competition. The eligibil-
ity requirements may have proved a barrier to some 
applicants, specifically, the requirement that stu-
dents need to form a multi-disciplinary team of 
three to six members. Despite a comfortable appli-
cation period, some interested students struggled to 
form teams and contacted the organisers to enquire 
about potential exemptions. While no exceptions 
were offered, a Facebook group and event page 
was organised shortly after launch to help students 
or single-discipline groups find potential team ma-
tes. The idea of using social media platform proved 
effective and we observed good engagement and 

43



 
 
 

   

communication between interested students. Those 
considering organising similar cross-disciplinary 
competitions would be advised to consider the use 
of social media to stimulate collaborations prior to 
launch. 

 
Following the close of phase one and as the com-

petition progressed into phase two, it became clear 
during that workloads were shared unevenly across 
teams, and often substantial contributions were 
from single students. In one instance, 70% of the 
work was formally declared as the work of a single 
team member, with as little as 5% coming from an-
other in the same team. In another case, planning, 
formulation, and implementation of the digital dis-
ease detection models was the responsibility of one 
student, and all other team members declared equal 
responsibility for reviewing the model implemen-
tation and background. This may be evidence of a 
heavy technical burden required from computer 
science or engineering students to complete the 
challenge, and may have reduced the number of 
proposals submitted, however this cannot be 
proven. With this in mind, future competitions like 
ZikaHack with specific cross-disciplinary entry re-
quirements may consider specifying a maximum 
and minimum declared workload per student to im-
prove workload balance. Alternatively, loosening 
the multidisciplinary team requirements may im-
prove balance but might also have adverse effects, 
such as a lack of understanding of the core chal-
lenges, in this case specifically related to ZIKV and 
health.  The entry requirements in ZikaHack how-
ever were not without purpose: as mentioned, one 
of the primary goals of ISER (competition organ-
iser) is to enhance collaboration and build capacity 
in health systems research for epidemic response 
and control. As such, it was important that there 
was cross-disciplinary engagement across student 
faculties, particularly between health and STEM, 
and to advocate cross-faculty research in the vari-
ous areas of disease surveillance.  

 
Female student participation was low in Zik-

aHack. Twenty-four percent (8/34) of all individual 
student applicants was female. Approximately 
18% of current Australian Information Technol-
ogy, Engineering and related technology students 
are female (Australian Government Department of 
Education and Training, 2017). We could therefore 
expect a similar distribution of gender across en-
tries. While 24% of all applicants were female, 

91% were from health-related fields meaning only 
9% of female applicants were from computer sci-
ence and engineering related areas. Studies have 
shown female participation in hackathons are sig-
nificantly underrepresented when compared to en-
rolments (Richard et al., 2015), the reasons for 
which are not well examined, but may be sympto-
matic of the broader cultural challenges faced by 
females in predominately male fields such as re-
duced confidence, prejudice and stereotyping 
(Irani, 2004). Others suggest the underlying cause 
may be similar to societies’ wider issues of un-
derrepresentation of female computer science and 
engineering graduates employed in industry and 
academia. (Briscoe, 2014) Efforts to increasing the 
gender diversity in hackathon style competitions 
may therefore benefit from diversity quotas which 
may help resolve this imbalance. Alternatively, ex-
plicitly encouraging female entrants may reduce 
feelings of being unwelcome and the perceptions 
of a ‘boys-club’ (Warner & Guo, 2017). The rea-
sons for reduced female participation in ZikaHack 
however is purely speculative, as participants were 
not interviewed. 

6 Conclusion 

ZikaHack 2016 was a unique, rewarding and suc-
cessful adaption of the hackathon format and could 
be replicated yearly either as a continuation, by 
building on the work of previous years, or a source 
for new ideas by varying the specific challenge. As 
a competition with multi-disciplinary require-
ments, ZikaHack exposed students to concepts out-
side their field of study, which in turn may inspire 
participants into alternative research areas; for ex-
ample, the proposals submitted here could serve as 
a platform for a future research proposals. In the 
case of ZikaHack, while never the original goal, re-
search opportunities were offered to some finalists 
who exceeded expectations. Academics consider-
ing organising similar events might also consider 
how such competitions, perhaps organised yearly 
with associated monies, may initiate and sustain 
their areas of research into the future. 

Acknowledgments 

Funding for this competition was provided by the 
National health and medical research council’s  

  

44



 
 
 

   

Centre for Research Excellence, Integrated Sys-
tems for Epidemic Response (ISER), grant number 
APP1107393. 

References 

Al-garadi, Mohammed Ali, Khan, Muhammad Sadiq, 
Varathan, Kasturi Dewi, Mujtaba, Ghulam, & Al-
Kabsi, Abdelkodose M. (2016). Using online social 
networks to track a pandemic: A systematic 
review. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 62, 1-
11. 

Aramaki, Eiji, Maskawa, Sachiko, & Morita, Mizuki. 
(2011). Twitter catches the flu: detecting influenza 
epidemics using Twitter. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the conference on empirical 
methods in natural language processing. 

Artiles, Jessica A, & Wallace, David R. (2013). 
Borrowing from hackathons: overnight 
designathons as a template for creative idea hubs in 
the space of hands-on learning, digital learning, 
and systems re-thinking. WEEF, Cartagena. 

Australian Government Department of Education and 
Training (2017). uCube: Enrolment Count by Field 
Of Education by Gender.   Retrieved from 
http://highereducationstatistics.education.gov.au/ 

Bernardo, T. M., Rajic, A., Young, I., Robiadek, K., 
Pham, M. T., & Funk, J. A. (2013). Scoping review 
on search queries and social media for disease 
surveillance: a chronology of innovation. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 15(7), e147. 

Briscoe, Gerard. (2014). Digital innovation: The 
hackathon phenomenon. 

Christaki, E. (2015). New technologies in predicting, 
preventing and controlling emerging infectious 
diseases. Virulence, 6(6), 558-565. 

Chunara, R., Andrews, J. R., & Brownstein, J. S. 
(2012). Social and news media enable estimation 
of epidemiological patterns early in the 2010 
Haitian cholera outbreak. American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, 86(1), 39-45. 

Duffy, Mark R., Chen, Tai-Ho, Hancock, W. Thane, 
Powers, Ann M., Kool, Jacob L., Lanciotti, Robert 
S., . . . Hayes, Edward B. (2009). Zika Virus 
Outbreak on Yap Island, Federated States of 
Micronesia. New England Journal of Medicine, 
360(24), 2536-2543. 

Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, MH., Patel, RS., Brammer, L., 
Smolinski, MS., & Brilliant, L. (2009). Detecting 
influenza epidemics using search engine query 
data. Nature, 457, 1012-1015. 

Granville, V. (2017, August 30 2017). Python 
Overtakes R for Data Science and Machine 
Learning.   Retrieved from 
http://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/p

ython-overtakes-r-for-data-science-and-machine-
learning 

Grard, G., Caron, M., Mombo, I. M., Nkoghe, D., 
Mboui Ondo, S., Jiolle, D., . . . Leroy, E. M. 
(2014). Zika virus in Gabon (Central Africa)--
2007: a new threat from Aedes albopictus? PLoS 
Negl Trop Dis, 8(2), e2681. 

Huang, Yi-Jie , Su, Chu Hsien , Chang, Yi-Chun  , 
Ting, Tseng-Hsin , Fu, Tzu-Yuan , Wang, Rou-
Min , . . . Hsu, Wen-Lian. (2017). Incorporating 
Dependency Trees Improve Identification of 
Pregnant Women on Social Media Platforms. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Digital Disease 
Detection using Social Media 2017, Taipei, 
Taiwan.  

Ioos, S., Mallet, H. P., Leparc Goffart, I., Gauthier, 
V., Cardoso, T., & Herida, M. (2014). Current Zika 
virus epidemiology and recent epidemics. 
Medecine et Maladies Infectieuses, 44(7), 302-307. 

Irani, Lilly. (2004). Understanding gender and 
confidence in CS course culture. Paper presented at 
the ACM SIGCSE Bulletin. 

Jaenisch, Thomas, Rosenberger, Kerstin Daniela, 
Brito, Carlos, Brady, Oliver, Brasil, Patrícia, & 
Marques, Ernesto. (2016). Estimating the risk for 
microcephaly after Zika virus infection in Brazil. 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 

Johansson, M. A., Mier-y-Teran-Romero, L., 
Reefhuis, J., Gilboa, S. M., & Hills, S. L. (2016). 
Zika and the Risk of Microcephaly. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 375(1), 1-4. 

Jonnagaddala, Jitendra, Jue, Toni Rose , & Dai, 
Hong-Jie. (2016). Binary classification of Twitter 
posts for adverse drug reactions. Paper presented 
at the Proceedings of the Social Media Mining 
Shared Task Workshop at the Pacific Symposium 
on Biocomputing, Big Island, HI, USA. 

Kienzler, Hanna, & Fontanesi, Carolyn. (2017). 
Learning through inquiry: a Global Health 
Hackathon. Teaching in Higher Education, 22(2), 
129-142. 

Kirya, B. G. (1977). A yellow fever epizootic in Zika 
forest, Uganda, during 1972: Part 1: Virus isolation 
and sentinel monkeys. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg, 
71(3), 254-260. 

Lampos, Vasileios, De Bie, Tijl, & Cristianini, Nello. 
(2010). Flu detector-tracking epidemics on Twitter. 
Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in 
Databases, 599-602. 

Nishiura, H., Mizumoto, K., Rock, K. S., Yasuda, Y., 
Kinoshita, R., & Miyamatsu, Y. (2016). A 
theoretical estimate of the risk of microcephaly 
during pregnancy with Zika virus infection. 
Epidemics, 15, 66-70.  

45



 
 
 

   

Oliveira Melo, A. S., Malinger, G., Ximenes, R., 
Szejnfeld, P. O., Alves Sampaio, S., & Bispo De 
Filippis, A. M. (2016). Zika virus intrauterine 
infection causes fetal brain abnormality and 
microcephaly: Tip of the iceberg? Ultrasound in 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 47(1), 6-7. 

Olson, J. G., Ksiazek, T. G., Suhandiman, & 
Triwibowo. (1981). Zika virus, a cause of fever in 
Central Java, Indonesia. Trans R Soc Trop Med 
Hyg, 75(3), 389-393. 

Richard, Gabriela T, Kafai, Yasmin B, Adleberg, 
Barrie, & Telhan, Orkan. (2015). StitchFest: 
Diversifying a College Hackathon to broaden 
participation and perceptions in computing. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the 46th ACM 
Technical Symposium on Computer Science 
Education. 

Romano, Sara, Di Martino, Sergio, Kanhabua, 
Nattiya, Mazzeo, Antonino, & Nejdl, Wolfgang. 
(2016). Challenges in detecting epidemic outbreaks 
from social networks. Paper presented at the 
Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications Workshops (WAINA), 2016 30th 
International Conference on. 

Salathe, M., Freifeld, C. C., Mekaru, S. R., Tomasulo, 
A. F., & Brownstein, J. S. (2013). Influenza A 
(H7N9) and the importance of digital 
epidemiology. New England Journal of Medicine, 
369(5), 401-404. 

Schuler-Faccini, L., Ribeiro, E. M., Feitosa, I. M., 
Horovitz, D. D., Cavalcanti, D. P., Pessoa, A., . . . 
Brazilian Medical Genetics Society-Zika 
Embryopathy Task, Force. (2016). Possible 
Association Between Zika Virus Infection and 
Microcephaly - Brazil, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep, 65(3), 59-62. 

Ventura, C. V., Maia, M., Bravo-Filho, V., Góis, A. 
L., & Belfort, R., Jr. (2016). Zika virus in Brazil 
and macular atrophy in a child with microcephaly. 
The Lancet, 387(10015), 228. 

Warner, Jeremy, & Guo, Philip J. (2017). Hack. edu: 
Examining How College Hackathons Are 
Perceived By Student Attendees and Non-
Attendees. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
the 2017 ACM Conference on International 
Computing Education Research. 

World Health Organization. (2016). Epidemic 
intelligence - systematic event detection. .   
Retrieved from 
http://www.who.int/csr/alertresponse/epidemicintel
ligence/en/ 

World Health Organization (WHO). (2016). WHO 
statement on the first meeting of the International 
Health Regulations (2005) (IHR 2005) Emergency 
Committee on Zika virus and observed increase in 
neurological disorders and neonatal malformations.   

Retrieved from 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2
016/1st-emergency-committee-zika/en/ 

Youm, J., & Wiechmann, W. (2015). The Med 
AppJam: a model for an interprofessional student-
centered mHealth app competition. J Med Syst, 
39(3), 34. 

 

Appendix A. Eligibility Criteria 

The following eligibility Criteria was used for the Zik-
aHack 2016 competition.  
• Student team has 3 to 6 enrolled students (who must 

all be enrolled at the time of the Phase 1 Submission 
Date of 30 November 2016) 

• There is a single nominated team leader 
• Team includes undergraduate and postgraduate stu-

dents 
• Team includes students from the following two dis-

cipline areas: STEM (science, technology, engi-
neering, mathematics) and health related (medicine, 
nursing, public health, allied health) disciplines 

• Must be studying at a registered university and rec-
ognised within its country as a university. 

• Letter of support including verification of the stu-
dent’s status of enrolment using the template pro-
vided for each team member is attached to the ap-
plication.  

• Application in English 
• No team member had a direct connection with any 

investigator or affiliate of ISER (such as a student-
supervisor relationship) 

• The work has been done entirely by the student 
team, with no other assistance. 

• All students agreed to be named as part of the team 
 

 

46


