



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 408–416,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

 

RULE BASED APPROCH OF CLAUSE BOUNDARY IDENTIFICATION 

IN TELUGU 
 

 

Ganthoti Nagaraju 

Department of Linguistics 

and Language Technology, 

Central University of Kerala 

gnagarajug62@gmail.com 

 

Thennarasu S 

Department of Linguistics 

and Language Technology, 

Central University of Kerala 

   thennarasus@gmail.com 

Christopher Mala 

Center for Applied Linguis-

tics and Translation Studies, 

University of Hyderabad 

efthachris@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

One of the major challenges in Natural Lan-

guage Processing is identifying Clauses and 

their Boundaries in Compu-tational Linguis-

tics. This paper attempts to develop an Au-

tomatic Clause Bound-ary Identifier (CBI) 

for Telugu lan-guage. The language Telugu 

belongs to South-Central Dravidian language 

fami-ly with features of head-final, left-

branching and morphologically aggluti-

native in nature (Bh. Krishnamurti, 2003). A 

huge amount of corpus is studied to frame 

the rules for identifying clause boundaries 

and these rules are trained to a computational 

algorithm and also discussed some of the is-

sues in identifying clause boundaries. A 

clause boundary annotated corpus can be de-

veloped from raw text which can be used to 

train a machine learning algorithm which in 

turns helps in development of a Hybrid 

Clause Boundary Identification Tool for 

Telugu. Its implementation and evaluation 

are discussed in this paper.  

1. Introduction 

A Clause is a grammatical unit that includes, 

at minimum, a predicate and an explicit and 

implied subject and expresses a proposition 

(Crystel, 1980). In other words, a clause is 

defined as a group of words having a subject 

and a predicate. It is a well-known fact that a 

sentence may contain one or more clause. 

Simple sentences always have a single 

clause. Analyzing these clauses in NLP is an 

easy task. But when a sentence has more 

than one clause it becomes difficult to pro-

cess. Identification of predicate and its de-

pendent thematic elements become even 

more difficult. To solve this problem, identi-

fication of clause boundary is mandatory. 

Clause Boundary Identification is the pro-

cess of dividing the given sentence into a set 

of clause. Correct automatic detection of ma-

jor syntactic boundaries, in particular clause 

boundaries help in improving many other 

tools in NLP (Leffa, 1998; Ejerhed, 1988, 
Vijay et al., 2009; Gadde et al., 2010). The 

Telugu Clause boundary identifier (T-CBI) 
is an automatic tool to identify boundaries of 

clauses and mark their start and end points. 

In another words, it identifies the structure 

that underlies the sentence. Shallow parsed 

sentence are used as input to T-CBI and fur-

ther parse the sentence and marks the clause 

with their boundaries along with their appro-

priate tags. This module can be used in big-

ger NLP systems like Machine Translation 

systems, Information Extraction and Infor-

mation Retrieval, Search Engines, etc.  

The data driven (Puscasu, 2004) and rule 

based (Leffa, 1998) approaches are promi-
nent in the development of a CBI. In order to 

build a clause boundary identifier, using data 

driven approach, one needs to have a good 

clause boundary annotated corpus for train-

ing (Sharma et al, 2013). Such a corpus is 

not available in the Telugu language. Hence 

a Rule-Based approach is selected in the cur-

rent study to develop an efficient CBI for 

Telugu. By using Morphological cues such 

as agreement markers (person, gender, num-

ber) and case markers/ Tense Aspect Modal 408



(TAM) markers to identify the start and end 

of the clause. Other than these, certain lexi-

cal cues are used to identify the CBI. Identi-

fied Thematic roles of the constituents are 

used in the T-CBI for better performance of 

the Rules. The development of automatic T-

CBI will be used to develop the clause 

boundary annotated corpus for the task of 

clause boundary identification from raw text 

using machine learning process in NLP.  

2. Review of Earlier Researches 

Clause Boundary Identification started with 

Eva Ejerhed’s Clause Identification System 

(Ejerhed, 1988) for text to speech system. 

Leffa (1998) has developed a rule-based sys-
tem to identify clauses from English to Por-

tuguese machine translation system. Pa-

pageorgiou developed a rule-based clause 

boundary system as a pre-processing tool for 

bilingual alignment parallel text (Papageor-

giou, 1997). Tomohiro Ohno et al. (2006) 

built CBI for Japanese to implement Spoken 

Monologue System. The dependencies with-

in a clause are identified by dividing a sen-

tence into clauses and executing stochastic 

dependency parsing for each clause. Later, 

the dependencies over clause boundaries are 

identified stochastically, and the dependency 

structure of the entire sentence is thus com-

pleted. This method executes dependency 

parsing in two stages: at the clause level and 

at the sentence level. According to their 

evaluation, the recall of the system is 95.7% 

and the precision is 96.9%. Phani Gadde et 

al. (2010) have attempted to improve data 

driven dependency parsing using clausal in-

formation. They have used Stagel parser of 

Husain et al. (2009), to provide the clause 

boundary information that is then incorpo-

rated as features during the actual parsing 

process. They experimented with different 

combinations of the information provided in 

the data such as Vibhakti and TAM fields. 

Daraksha Parveen  et al. (2011) have built a 

CBI for Urdu using Conditional Random 

Field (CRF) as the classification method and 

clause markers. A hybrid approach is pro-

posed to use both techniques i.e. rule based 

and machine learning to build an identifier 

for different clause boundaries of Urdu lan-

guage. Lakshmi, S. et al. (2012) have built a 

clause boundary identification system for 

Malayalam sentences using the CRF. Here, 

the clause boundaries are identified using 

grammatical features. Sobha L. et al. (2013) 

have built Malayalam CBI using CRF. They 

have developed a corpus with tagging of dif-

ferent type of clauses as well as the start and 

end of the clause. They selected approxi-

mately 6415 tourism and 385 health corpus 

sentences from the Web and the training set 

consisted of 5000 sentences from both the 

domains. Testing of the system was done 

with 401 unseen sentences from the corpus 

of tourism. They achieved a precision and 

recall on different types of clauses of about 

70% and 80% respectively. Aniruddha 

Ghosh et al. (2013) have built CBI for the 

Bengali language. They used a syntactic rule 

based model with CRF, a machine learning 

technique. They have achieved 73% and 

78% of precision and recall respectively. Ra-

hul Sharma et al. (2013) have attempted to 

build a clause boundary to Hindi Treebank 

data. They have used the dependency at-

tachments and dependency annotated rela-

tions to mark clauses. They chose 16,000 

sentences and conducted an exercise on 238 

clauses and got the result of 94% of accuracy 

in the clause boundary identification. 

 

 

      3. Description of Rule Format. 

 

Classification of Telugu Clauses 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 409



3.1. Finite Clauses 

Finite Clause contains subject and finite 

verb, the finite verb is in agreement with the 

subject. Finite clauses are classified as Ver-

bal Predicate, Nominal Predicate and Com-

pound. Nominal predicate in sub-categorized 

to Noun, Adjectival and Number-words and 

Compound Clauses are sub-categorized to 

Conjunctive and Disjunctive Clauses. Con-

junctive clauses are further sub-categorized 

into co-ordinate, correlate and subordinate 

clauses. 
 

3.1.1. Verbal Predicate clause 

In verbal predicate clause, a finite verb oc-

curs in the end of a sentence. It distinguishes 

for tense such as past, present and future. 

Each tense distinguishes positive and nega-

tive clauses. Examples for verbal predicate 

clauses are given below: 

 

Past Tense 

i) Positive 

nēnu āme-nu    tiṭṭ ā-nu 

I       she ACC scold PST 1.SG. 

 'I scolded her’ 
 

ii). Negative 

nēnu āme-nu     tiṭṭ a-lēdu 

I        she ACC scold INF- PST. NEG 

'I did not scold her' 
 

3.1.2. Nominal Predicate clause 

Noun/adjective/number word phrase in its 

predicate position agrees in gender, person 

and number with the subject. In the case of 

first or second person singular or in first per-

son plural in Telugu, they inflect with num-

ber and with person. The pronominal suffix-

es -ni/-nu, -mi/-mu and -vi/-vu are manifest-

ed on the predicate for first person singular, 

first person plural and second person singu-

lar respectively. 
 

i). Noun phrase in Predicate position: 

nēnu oka abbāyi- ni 

I       a      boy 1.SG. 

 'I am a boy' 
 

This is an example for nominal predicate 

sentence. The subject nēnu agrees with the 

nominal predicate. The agreement is mani-

fested with the marker -ni  
 

ii). Adjective phrase in Predicate position: 

nīvu/nuvvu poḍugu vāḍi-vi 

you tall poss. 2.SG. 

'You are a tall boy/guy' 
 

The subject nīvu/nuvvu agrees with the ad-

jectival predicate. The agreement is mani-

fested with the marker -vi. 
 

iii). Number word phrase in Predicate po-

sition: 

mēmu muggu- ra-mu 

we     three 3.SG.H. 1.PL. 

'We are three persons' 

 

This is an example for number word predi-

cate sentence. The subject mēmu agrees with 

the number-word predicate. The agreement 

is manifested with the marker -mu. No Nom-

inal Predicate Agreement for 2.PL and 

3.SG/PL.M/F/N 

 

3.1.3 Compound Clause 

A sentence containing two or more coordi-

nate independent clauses, usually joined by 

one or more conjunction markers, but no de-

pendent clause, as in the below sentence. 
 

e.g.: [The lightning flashed]MC  and  [the rain 

fell.]MC  

 

3.1.3a Conjunctive Clause 

Some compound sentences are joined by a 

conjunction. Some of the conjunction marker 

in Telugu are:   ani, mariyu, leka, (kāni), 

kāka, Ena, kanuka, endukante. 
  
Examples of compounds in sentences 

include: 

mā āyana panilo nimaGFulE unnāru 

aMdukani nenu bajāruku velYlānu. 
 

Other compound sentences are joined with a 

semicolon. If a semicolon is used, it may or 

may not have a conjunctive adverb.  
 

 

 410



i). Coordinative Clause 

This is done using one of two or more claus-

es of equal status in a sentence, especially 

when joined by a coordinating conjunction. 

Here kāni is the coordinative marker. 
 

mēmu vacc-ā- -mu kāni [vāḍu rā-lēdu 

we   come PST. 1.PL. but he come.INF 

PST.NEG 

'We came but he did not come.' 

 

ii)  Correlative Clause 

A correlative conjunction is a paired con-

junction that links balanced words, phrases, 

and clauses. The elements connected by cor-

relative conjunctions are usually parallel -

that is, similar in length and grammatical 

form. Each element is called a conjoin. Some 

of the Correlatives in Telugu are: le-

ka/kāka/gāka, kādu/kani and “-e kāka/-e 

gāka/-V kūda.” 

  

evaḍu vaccāḍ-ō vāḍu nā tammu-ḍu 

who come RTM he ACC brother 3.SG. 

 'The one who came is my brother' 
 

Here we are using morphological cue  

X-ō Y 

ō-relative-correlative marker, X and Y are 

clauses. 
 

iii) Subordinate Clause 

A subordinating conjunction is a word that 

connects a main clause to a subordinate 

clause. A main clause is an independent 

clause that can stand alone by itself as a sen-

tence. In other words, a main clause does not 

need any additional information to operate as 

a sentence. 

Here we use lexical cues: 

X- COMP Y 

COMP -complementizer, X and Y are claus-

es. 

ani    annā 

anēdi    anna 

atlu    aMte 

  annatlu 

 

MC1[nēnu vacc- ā- -nu]MC1 ani MC2[vāḍi- 

to cepp- ā- nu]MC2 

I come PST 1SG. COMP     he ASS. say 

PST. 1.SG 

'I told him that I came' 

 

3.1.3b. Disjunctive Clause 

A coordinate construction is the one that us-

es a disjunctive conjunction to indicate a 

contrast. The items on either side of the dis-

junctive conjunction are called disjunct. 

Here we use morphological cues. 

X- ō Y-ō Z 

ō -Disjunctive marker, X, Y and Z are claus-

es 

vast- ā- ḍ- ō rā- ḍ- ō nāku tēliyadu 

come FUT. 3.SG.M DISJ come. FUT. NEG-

3.SG.M DISJ I-DAT do not know 

`I do not know either he comes or not' 

 

3.2. Non-finite Clauses 

Non-finite clause are formed with non-finite 

verb and verb does not marked with gender, 

number and person suffixes in agreement 

with grammatical subject of the sentence, but 

they form by adding appropriate tense-mode 

suffix to a verb stem. And they are always 

depended and embedded. 

 

3.2.1. Conditional clause 

In this conditional clause we use morpholog-

ical cue -te `positive conditional marker' 

-rākapōte/ rākuMṭe `negative conditional 

marker' 

SC[nuvvu addamu nu jāraviḍis-tē]SC 

MC[adi pagilipō- tuM- di]MC 

you mirror ACC. drop COND that break 

FUT 3.SG.N. 

 'If you drop the mirror, it will break' 
 

This is an example for complex sentence 

with conditional clause. As we noted here, 

there are two clauses, one of them is subor-

dinate clause or dependent clause and the 

other one is super ordinate clause or main 

clause. The verb is present in both the sen-

tences. The subject nuvvu in SC ends with 

conditional marker -tē and adi in MC agrees 

the agreement and is manifested with the 

marker -di respectively  
 

 

 
411



3.2.2. Concessive clause 

In this concessive clause we use morpholog-

ical cues. -inā `positive concessive marker' 

-rākapōyinā/ -rākunnā `negative concessive 

marker 

SC[jōhn veḷl- inā]SC MC[mary veḷla-du]MC 

John go CONCM Mary go 3.SG. 

'Though John goes, Mary don't go' 
 

This is an example for complex sentence 

with concessive clause. As we noted here, 

there are two clauses, one of them is subor-

dinate clause or dependent clause and the 

other one is super ordinate clause or main 

clause. The verb is present in both the sen-

tences. The subject Jōhn in SC ends with 

concessive marker -inā and Mary in MC 

agrees the agreement and is manifested with 

the marker -du respectively. 
 

3.2.3. Participle Clause 

3.2.3a. Conjunctive Participle 

We use morphological cues in this conjunc-

tive participle clause. -i `positive conjunctive 

participle marker' -aka/ akuMḍā `negative 

conjunctive participle marker' 
 

MC[SC[ataḍu iḍli tin- i]SC kāṅī coffee trāga 

lēdu]MC 

he idli eat CP coffee drink NEG 

'Having eaten idli, he didn’t take coffee' 

 

This is an example for complex sentence 

with verbal participle clause and also 

forward control. As we noted here, there are 

to clauses, one of them is subordinate clause 

or dependent clause and the other one is su-

per ordinate clause or main clause. The verb 

is present in both the sentences. The subject 

ataḍu in SC ends with verbal participle 

marker-i and in MC agrees the agreement 

and is manifested with the negative marker 

lēdu respectively.  

sujāta snānaM ceyy- aka vāraM rōjulay- iM- 

di 

sujatha bath PV NCP week days PST 3.SG. 

'Sujatha has not bathed from the last one 

week' 
 

According to Chekuri ramarao, in his book 

Telugu Vakyam, he explained in this 

sentence (48) also that it is a temporal ex-

pression, even though 'vāraM rōjulayiMdi' is 

plural marker it takes only singular agree-

ment marker -di. In this case we should not 

use yesterday, day before yesterday, etc. for 

this sentence also. Here we have negative 

participle marker -aka is there in the sen-

tence. 
 

3.2.3b. Adjective Participle 

We use morphological cues in this adjectival 

predicate. -ina `positive past adjectival parti-

ciple marker' -tunna `positive durative adjec-

tival participle marker' -ē `positive future 

adjectival participle marker' -ani `Negative 

adjectival participle marker'  

Adjectival participle form of verbs can be 

pronominalized. 
 

i) Past Adjectival Participle: 

 

SC[nēnu   vāḍi- ki   icc- ina   pustakaM]SC 

I      he-DAT   give PP       book 

           'I gave a book to him' 
 

This is an example for accusative nominali-

zation in complex sentences with adjectival 

participle clause. As we noted here, the sub-

ject nēnu in SC ends with past participle 

marker-ina and the accusative pustakaM is 

nominalized as shown in the example. The 

actual sentence is 'nēnu vāḍiki pustakaM ic-

cānu', before doing nominalization pustakaM 

is in the accusative position. 

 

nēnu vāḍi- ki ivv- ani pustakaM 

I he DAT give NPP book 

'I didn't give a book to him' 
 

This is an example for accusative nominali-

zation in complex sentences with 

adjectival participle clause. As we noted 

here, the subject nēnu in SC ends with nega-

tive past participle marker -ani and the accu-

sative pustakaM is nominalized as shown in 

the example. The actual sentence is ' nēnu 

vāḍiki pustakaM ivva lēdu', before doing 

nominalization pustakaM is in the accusative 

position 
 

 412



 

ii) Durative Adjectival Participle 

 

vāḍi- ki    pustakaM is- tunna nēnu 

he DAT     book           give DP i 

'I am giving a book to him' 
 

This is an example for nominative nominali-

zation in complex sentences with 

adjectival participle clause. As we noted 

here, the subject vāḍu in SC ends with dura-

tive participle marker -tunna and the nomi-

native nēnu is nominalized as shown in the 

example. The actual sentence is 'nēnu vāḍiki 

pustakaM istunnānu', before doing nominali-

zation nēnu is in the nominative position. 
 

vāḍi- ki pustakaM ivv- ani nēnu 

he DAT book give NDP i 

'I am not giving a book to him' 

 

This is an example for nominative nominali-

zation in complex sentences with adjectival 

participle clause. As we noted here, the sub-

ject vāḍu in SC ends with negative durative 

participle marker -ani and the nominative 

nēnu is nominalized as shown in the exam-

ple. The actual sentence is 'nēnu vāḍiki 

pustakaM ivvaḍaM lēdu', before doing nom-

inalization nēnu is in the nominative position 
 

iii) Future Adjectival Participle: 

vāḍi- ki pustakaM icc- ē nēnu 

he DAT book give FP I 

'I will give a book to him' 
 

This is an example for nominative nominali-

zation in complex sentences with adjectival 

participle clause. As we noted here, the sub-

ject vāḍu in SC ends with future participle 

marker -ē and the nominative nēnu is nomi-

nalized. The actual sentence is 'nēnu vAdiki 

pustakaM iswānu', before doing nominaliza-

tion nēnu is in the nominative position. 

vāḍi- ki pustakaM ivv-ani nēnu 

he DAT book give NFP i 

'I will give a book to him' 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This is an example for nominative nominali-

zation in complex sentences with adjectival 

participle clause. As we noted here, the sub-

ject vāḍu in SC ends with negative future 

participle marker -ani and the nominative 

nēnu is nominalized as shown in the exam-

ple. The actual sentence is 'nēnu vAdiki 

pustakaM ivvanu', before doing nominaliza-

tion nēnu is in the nominative position. 

 

3.2.4. Gerundival Clause 

In gerundival clause also we use morpholgi-

cal cues: -aḍaM `gerundival marker' 
 

SC[vāḍi- ki cepp- aḍaM]SC MC[nā- ku 

isṭaM lēdu]MC 

 he DAT book GEND me DAT like NEG 

 'I don't like telling him'. 
 

This is an example for gerundival clause. As 

we noted here, the subject vāḍu in SC 

ends with gerundival marker -aḍaM. 
 

3.2.5. Infinitival Clause 
In infinitival clause we use morphological 

cues. -a `infinitive marker', -a_ gānē  'as 

soon as', -a_baṭṭi 'because' 

      āme cepp- a- baṭṭi nēnu cēs- ā- nu 

     she say INF because I do PST 1.SG 

     'Because she told, I did'. 
 

This is an example for infinitival clause. As 

we noted here, the subject āmē in SC ends 

with infinitival marker -baṭṭi. 
 

Rule for Clause Identification 

Rules for clause boundary identification are 

described in the below: 

413



 

 
 

 
 

 

 

4. Testing and Evaluation  

We have taken 5000 sentence from tourism and 

health domain corpus to test the rule set. This 

corpus includes all type of sentence like Relative 

Participle, Conditional, Main clauses and etc. 
414



 

S. 

No. 

Clause Type No. of Sent 

1 Conditional 907 

2 Concessive 280 

3 Verbal participle 1017 

4 Adjectival participle 674 

5 Gerundival 436 

6 Non-finite  869 

7 Relative 817 

 Total 5000 

 

These sentences were first processed with 

shallow parser from which we extract Mor-

phological, POS and Chunk information later 

this is given as input to simple parser which 

assigns the karaka roles (thematic relation-

ships) which indeed helps the T-CBI perform 

well. Evaluation of the Rules is given below. 
 

Clause Type No. of 

Sentence 

Correct 

Identi-

fcation 

% of 

recog-

nition 

Conditional 907 857  

Concessive 280 184  

Verbal  

participle 

1017 802  

Adjectival  

participle 

674 490  

Gerundival 436 421  

Non-finite 869 532  

Relative 817 593  

Total 5000 3879 77.58 

 

Out of 5000 sentence T-CBI was able to 

identify 3879 sentence correctly which 

means the performance of the T-CBI can be 

scaled to 77.58% of accuracy. Using this we 

can create huge amount of corpus of CBI 

pre-annotated. 

 

5. Conclusion 

Thus, this paper has attempted to show how 

implicit clausal information captured in a 

shallow parsed text can be extracted and are 

used to develop CBI for Telugu. The paper 

has also discussed some of the issues in iden-

tifying clause boundaries using the above 

said approach. A plan has been implemented 

with these rules in a computational algorithm 

for future exercises. Once the rules are im-

plemented it would be easy to scale the per-

formance of the rules designed. A clause 

boundary annotated corpus can be developed 

from raw text which can be used to train a 

machine learning algorithm which in turns 

helps in development of a Hybrid Clause 

Boundary Identification Tool for Telugu. 
 

Reference 

Bharati, S. Husain, B. Ambati, S. Jain, 

D. Sharma and R. Sangal. 2008. `Two 

Semantic features make all the differ-

ence in Parsing accuracy'. Proc. of 

ICON-08.  

 

Bharati, Vineet Chaitanya, Rajeev 

Sangal. Natural Language Processing 

A Paninian Perspective. Prentice Hall 

of India (1995). 

 

Ghosh, A. Das, and S. Bandyopadh-

yay, “Clause Identification and Clas-

sification in Bengali,” in Proceedings 

of the 1st Workshop on South and 

Southeast Asian Natural language 

Processing (WSSANLP, 23rd Inter-

national Conference on Computation-

al Linguistics (COLING), Beijing, 

August 2010, pp. 17-25. 

 

E. Ejerhed, “Finding Clauses in Unre-

stricted Text by Finitary and Stochas-

tic Methods,” in Proceedings of the 

2nd Conference on Applied Natural 

Language Processing, Austin Texas, 

1988, pp. 219-227. 

 

Gadde, Phani, et al. 2010. "Improving 

data driven dependency parsing using 

clausal information." Human Lan-

guage Technologies: The 2010 Annu-

al Conference of the North American 

Chapter of the Association for Com-

putational Linguistics. Association for 

Computational Linguistics. 

 

Lakshmi S, Vijay Sundar Ram R and 

Sobha Lalitha Dev. 2012. Clause 415



Boundary Identification for Malaya-

lam Using CRF. In Proceedings of the 

Workshop on Machine Translation 

and Parsing in Indian Languages 

(MTPIL).24th International Confer-

ence on Computational Linguistic 

 

Sharma, Rahul, et al. 2013. "Automat-

ic Clause Boundary Annotation in the 

Hindi Treebank." WSSANLP-2013: 

83. 
 

“A rule based approach for automatic Claus 

boundary detection and classification in 

Hindi" by Rahul Sharma and Soma Paul 

[Proceedings of the Conference the 5th 

Workshop on South and Southeast Asian 

NLP WSSANLP - 2014]. 

 

 

416


