



















































Towards a lexicon of event-selecting predicates for a French FactBank


Proceedings of the Workshop Computational Semantics Beyond Events and Roles (SemBEaR), pages 16–21,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards a lexicon of event-selecting predicates for a French FactBank

Ingrid Falk and Fabienne Martin
University of Stuttgart

firstname.lastname@ling.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

This paper presents ongoing work for the
construction of a French FactBank and a
lexicon of French event-selecting predi-
cates (ESPs), by applying the factuality
detection algorithm introduced in (Saurí
and Pustejovsky, 2012). This algorithm
relies on a lexicon of ESPs, specifying
how these predicates influence the factual-
ity of their embedded events. For this pilot
study, we focused on French factive and
implicative verbs, and capitalised on a lex-
ical resource for the English counterparts
of these verbs provided by the CSLI Group
(Nairn et al., 2006; Karttunen, 2012).

1 Introduction

Texts not only describe events, but also encode in-
formation conveying whether the events described
correspond to real situations in the world, or to
uncertain, (im)probable or (im)possible situations.
This level of information concerns event factual-
ity. This study reports ongoing work on the anno-
tation of French TimeBank events with event fac-
tuality information, whose main goal is the elabo-
ration of a French FactBank. We plan to achieve
this as follows. Saurí and Pustejovsky (2012)
developed an elaborate model of event factuality
that allows for its automatic detection. We aim
to capitalise on this work by applying Saurí and
Pustejovsky (2012)’s algorithm to the events in the
French TimeBank (FTiB henceforth) and assign
to these a factuality profile. Given that the FTiB
has only about 1/4 of the size of the English Time-
Bank, we will manually review the automatically
obtained factuality profiles in a second step.

Saurí and Pustejovsky (2012)’s algorithm relies
on two crucial prerequisites. The first is the iden-
tification of the sources at play, i.e. the cognitive

agents endorsing a specific epistemic stance on the
events described. The text author is the default
source, but some linguistic constructions — and
a subclass of verbs in particular, see e.g. affirm
— present one or more sources that are also com-
mitted to the factuality of the reported event. Sec-
ondly, the algorithm makes use of three language-
specific and manually developed lexical resources,
capturing the way polarity particles, particles of
epistemic modality and so-called event-selecting
predicates (e.g. manage to, suspect that) influence
event factuality. In this study, we show how ex-
isting lexical semantic resources can be used and
modified in order to build the French-specific lex-
ical resources needed to apply Saurí and Puste-
josvki’s algorithm to the French TimeBank.

2 The English FactBank

As described in (Saurí and Pustejovsky, 2009),
FactBank is an English corpus annotated with in-
formation concerning the factuality of events. It is
built on top of the English TimeBank by adding a
level of semantic information. TimeBank is a cor-
pus annotated with TimeML (Pustejovsky et al.,
2005), a specification language representing tem-
poral and event information in discourse. The fac-
tuality information encoded in TimeBank and rel-
evant for our work are the event-selecting predi-
cates (cf. Section 3) which project a factual value
to the embedded event by means of subordination
links (or SLINKs).

In TimeBank, a total of 9 488 events across 208
newspaper texts have been manually identified and
annotated. FactBank assigns additional factuality
information to these events. More specifically, it is
annotated for each event (i) whether its factuality
is assessed by a source different from the text au-
thor and (ii) the degree of factuality the new source
and the text author attribute to the event (for in-

16



stance, Peter affirmed P presents P as certain for
Peter, but does not commit the text author to P
in a specific way). Saurí and Pustejovsky (2009)
distinguish six ‘committed’ factuality values (i.e.
values to which a source is committed) and one
‘uncommitted’ value, which are shown in Table 1.

Saurí and Pustejovsky (2012) present an algo-
rithm which assigns to each TimeBank event a fac-
tuality profile consisting of (i) its factuality value,
(ii) the source(s) assigning the factuality value to
that event and (iii) the time at which the factual-
ity value assignment takes place. The algorithm
assumes that events and relevant sources are al-
ready identified and computes the factuality pro-
file of events by modelling the effect of factual-
ity relations across levels of syntactic embedding.
It crucially relies on three lexical resources which
the authors developed manually for English. Since
to apply this algorithm to the French data we need
to create similar resources for French, we describe
them in more detail in the following section.

3 Lexical Resources for the Automatic
Detection of Factuality Profiles

The first lexical resource is a list of 11 nega-
tion particles (adverbs, determiners and pronouns)
which determine the polarity of the context, to-
gether with a language independent table showing
how these polarity markers influence the polarity
of the event. The corresponding list of negation
particles needed for French can be set up easily.

The second resource aims to capture the influ-
ence of epistemic modality on the event. It gives
a list of 31 adjectives, adverbs and verbs of epis-
temic modality together with the factuality value
they express. Most of their French counterparts
influence the context the same way as in English,
except for modal verbs, that are well-known to
give rise to an ‘actuality entailment’ under their
root/non-epistemic readings (i.e. to present the
embedded event as a fact in the real world) when
combined with a perfective tense, see (Hacquard,
2009), an issue briefly addressed in Section 4.

The third resource is the most complex one and
accounts for the influence on the event factual-
ity value in cases where the event is embedded
by so-called event-selecting predicates (ESPs), of
which suspect that/manage to are examples. ESPs
are predicates with an event-denoting argument,
which lexically specify the factuality of the event.
Saurí and Pustejovsky distinguish two kinds of

ESPs: Source Introducing Predicates (SIPs) in-
troduce a new source in discourse (e.g. sus-
pect/believe); Non Source Introducing Predicates
(NSIPs) do not (e.g. manage/fail). As part of their
lexical semantics, SIPs determine (i) the factual-
ity value the new source (the ‘cogniser’) assigns
to the event described by the complement, and
(ii) the factuality value assigned by the text author
(i.e. the ‘anchor’) to the same event. NSIPs, on
the other hand, determine event factuality wrt. a
unique source, the anchor. In addition, the assess-
ment of event factuality wrt. the relevant source(s)
varies with the polarity and modality present in the
context of the ESP. Table 1 illustrates the lexicon
layout through sample entries for the NSIPs man-
age and fail.1 The ESP lexicon built by Saurí and
Pustejovsky (2012) consists of 646 entries in total
(393 verbs, 165 nouns and 88 adjectives). In order
to apply Saurí and Pustejovsky (2012)’s algorithm
to the French TimeBank, we need to build a simi-
lar ESP lexicon for French. To speed up this pro-
cess, we plan to use a large body of research about
English predicates with sentential complements
(Karttunen, 1971b; Karttunen, 1971a; Nairn et al.,
2006; Karttunen, 2012)2, which we briefly intro-
duce in the following.

Factive and implicative verbs. Nairn et al.
(2006) develop a semantic classification of
complement-taking verbs according to their effect
on the polarity of their complement clauses. This
classification is shown in Table 2. We illustrate
how the table works in the following examples.
In example (1), the ESP fail to has positive po-
larity. We obtain the factuality of the embedded
event (reschedule) by retrieving from the polarity
+ column in Table 2 the polarity value in the fail to
row, which is ‘−’, i.e. the meeting is not resched-
uled (has factuality CT−). For (2), the factuality
must be retrieved from the polarity − column re-
sulting in ‘+’, i.e. a factuality of CT+ (the meeting
is rescheduled).

(1) Kim failed to reschedule the meeting.

(2) Kim did not fail to reschedule the meeting.

The effect of a predicate on the polarity of its em-
bedded complement is represented more concisely

1The lexicon layout for SIPs, less relevant for our study,
is very similar except that an SIP lexicon entry must also pro-
vide factuality values for the cogniser source in addition to
the anchor.

2The ESP lexicons created in (Saurí and Pustejovsky,
2012) are not freely available.

17



Contextual factuality
CT PR PS U

polarity + − u + − u + − u + − u
manage (a) CT+ CT− CTu PR+ PR− PRu PS+ PS− PSu Uu Uu Uu

fail (a) CT− CT+ CTu PR− PR+ PRu PS− PS+ PSu Uu Uu Uu
Table 1: Sample lexical entries for NSIPs. CT, PR and PS signify certain, probable and possible respectively, U (and/or u)
unspecified (unknown or uncommitted), (a) refers to the anchor.

Polarity of ESP Sample
+ − predicate

2-way + − manage to
implicatives − + fail to

1-way + n force to
+implicatives − n refuse to

1-way n − attempt to
-implicatives n + hesitate to

factives + + forget that
counterfactives − − pretend that

Neutral n n want to

Table 2: Semantic classification of complement taking verbs
wrt. the effect of the polarity of the main clause (ESP, head
row) on the factuality of the complement clause (embedded
event, subsequent rows). n stands for none.

through a “signature”. For instance, the signature
of factive verbs as forget that is ‘++ |−+’ (Read:
‘if positive polarity, event happens; if negative po-
larity, event happens’).

Thus, based on the signature of a predicate and
its polarity in a given sentence, we can determine
the factuality of the embedded event in that sen-
tence. It should now be obvious how the classifica-
tion in Table 2 can be “plugged” into the ESP lex-
ical resources illustrated in Table 1:3 For a given
ESP for which a lexical entry has to be set up (eg.
fail), the factuality value conveyed on the embed-
ded event can be retrieved from Table 2 whenever
the corresponding table entry is not n. In case it is,
the polarity value must be set to u (unspecified).

Nairn et al. (2006) compiled a list of roughly
250 English verbs found to carry some kind of im-
plication: a positive or negative entailment, a fac-
tive or a counterfactive presupposition4. To test
how this approach can help us build the French
ESP lexical resource required for a French factual-
ity profiler, we translated these English verbs into

3Factive and implicative verbs are typically non-source
introducing predicates (NSIPs).

4These resources are available at https://web.
stanford.edu/group/csli_lnr/Lexical_
Resources/.

their French counterparts, and looked at the sen-
tences in the French TimeBank using these French
counterparts as ESPs. We first briefly introduce
the French TimeBank before describing our data,
experiments and findings.

4 Experiments on the French TimeBank

The French TimeBank (Bittar, 2010; Bittar et al.,
2011) is built on the same principles as the English
TimeBank, but introduces additional markup lan-
guage to deal with linguistic phenomena not yet
covered and specific to French. Most relevant to
this study are the following. FTiB uses ALINK ele-
ments to encode aspectual subordination relations,
holding between events realised by an aspectual
verb (e.g. commencer ‘begin’) and a subordinated
event complement. The subordinating events in
ALINKs, as those in SLINKS, are ESPs and are
therefore also relevant for this study. Also, since
French modal auxiliaries can be fully inflected and
fall within the scope of aspectual operators, they
are also marked up as events. Lastly, the TimeML
schema was adapted to represent the grammati-
cal tense/aspect system of French, and to account
eg. for the imparfait (IMPERFECT), not grammati-
calised in English.

FTiB is made up of 108 newspaper texts for a
total of 16 208 tokens. 2 098 of these represent
events. Since in our experiments, we are inter-
ested in assessing factuality at the sentence level,
we segmented FTiB into (814) sentences, and ex-
tracted from them the subordination links (SLINKs
and ALINKs). Overall, FTiB contains 485 subor-
dination links. Luckily, the subordinating events
in 444 of these links are ESPs. From these links,
we selected those where the subordinating event
was a translation of an English verb for which
we have a signature (179, instantiating 49 dif-
ferent verbs). We first checked for the 49 types
whether the French predicate has the same signa-
ture as the English verb it translates. We found
that this was very roughly the case for most of

18



these verbs (but see below). For example, the fac-
tive signature ‘+ + | − +’ of learn that is inher-
ited by its translation apprendre que. Similarly,
the implicative signature ‘+ − | − n’ of help also
characterises its French translation aider à. Our
translation approach raised several interesting is-
sues, however. A first one concerns verbs with
a syntax-dependent factuality profile. In English,
learn that/forget that for instance have the (fac-
tive) signature + + | − +, whereas learn to is
less biased wrt. the factuality of the embedded
event, and forget to has the (implicative) signa-
ture +− | −+. French translations of these verbs
also quite systematically see their signatures vary-
ing with the syntactic structure, or have an argu-
ment structure that its English counterpart cannot
instantiate; see e.g. the factive VP apprendre sa
mort (lit. ‘*learn his death’). For these cases, we
paired the relevant reading with the appropriate
signature manually. A second issue is raised by
verbs with an aspect-dependent factuality profile.
It is well-known that in Romance, modal verbs
trigger an actuality entailment under some of their
readings, but with a perfective only. For instance,
the example (3), where the modal verb permet-
tre has an enable reading and is combined with
a perfective (PFV), triggers an actuality entailment
(the embedded event has to happen). With an im-
perfective (IMP), however, the actuality entailment
vanishes, cf. (4). Also, when the same verb per-
mettre has a deontic (‘grant permission’) reading,
no actuality entailment is triggered, even with a
perfective, see (5) (Hacquard 2006:41).

(3) Cette
This

carte
card

m’a permis
me permit-PFV

d’entrer.
to enter

→ I entered.
(4) Cette

This
carte
card

me permettait
me permit-IMP

d’entrer.
to enter

6→ I entered.
(5) Le

The
doyen
dean

m’a permis
me permit-PFV

d’entrer.
to enter

6→ I entered.
Our translations of the English verbs analysed

by Nairn et al. (2006) revealed that several other
French verbs show the same lability, see Table 3.
That is, the entailment triggered with the perfec-
tive is lost with an imperfective, or at least re-
placed by a defeasible inference, see e.g. the ex-
amples (6)-(7).

ASPECT USED
PFV IMP

Polarity of ESP
+ − + −

assurer (la victoire)
+ n n n

insure (the victory)
condamner (x à rester)

+ n n n
condemn (x to stay)
conduire (à la catastrophe)

+ n n n
lead to (catastrophy)
apprendre (à voler)

+∗ −∗ n n
learn (to fly)
réussir (à entrer)

+ − n n
manage (to enter)
daigner (répondre)

+ − n n
deign (to answer)
motiver (x à venir)

+∗ −∗ n n
motivate (x to come)
échouer (à persuader x) − + n n
fail (to persuade x)

Table 3: Examples of verbs whose inferential profile varies
with the aspect used. Certain events are labelled ‘+’, very
likely but not certain events, ‘+∗’, counterfactual events, −,
very unlikely events ‘−∗’.

(6) A
at

ce
that

moment-là,
moment

elle
she

a réussi
manage-PFV

à
to

s’enfuir.
escape

#Mais
but

finalement,
finally

elle
she

ne s’est pas enfuie.
NEG escape-PFV
‘At that moment, she managed to escape.
But finally, she didn’t escape.’

(7) A
at

ce
that

moment-là,
moment

elle
she

réussissait
manage-IMP

(encore)
(still)

à
to

s’enfuir.
escape

OK Mais
but

finalement,
finally

elle
she

ne s’est pas enfuie.
NEG escape-PFV

‘At that moment, she ‘was managing’ to
escape. But finally, she didn’t escape.’

Interestingly, most of these predicates with an
aspect-dependent inferential profile (12 out of 13
in the current stage of annotation) are implicative
verbs. On the other hand, verbs whose inferential
profile is independent from aspect are mostly fac-
tive (+ + | − +) verbs (17 out of 23). The verb
savoir illustrates well the point. Used as a trans-
lation of the English factive verb know, savoir is
factive both with PFV and IMP. However, savoir
is also used in the FTiB as a two-way implicative
verb (+ + | − −), see (8)-(9). In the latter use,

19



savoir has an abilitative reading and like être ca-
pable de ‘be able to’, triggers an actuality entail-
ment with PFV, see (8), but has a neutral inferential
profile with IMP (+n| − n), see (9).
(8) Il

he
a su
be able-PFV

maîtriser
master

ce
this

fantasme.
fantasy

→ He mastered this fantasy.
(9) Il

he
savait
be able-IMP

maîtriser
master

ce
this

fantasme.
fantasy

6→ He mastered this fantasy.
Why do implicative verbs (contrary to factive

verbs) lose their entailment when combined with
IMP? Recent analyses of implicative verbs by
(Baglini and Francez, 2016) and (Nadathur, 2016)
can help to explain this observation. According
to Baglini & Francez’ analysis, a manage p state-
ment presupposes familiarity with a causally nec-
essary but insufficient condition A for the truth of
p, and asserts that A actually caused the truth of p.
Nadathur extends a modified version of this anal-
ysis to the whole class of implicative verbs. The
important point for us is that under these anal-
yses, implicative verbs have an at-issue compo-
nent: they assert an ‘event’, namely the obtain-
ing/actualisation of the causal factor A for the truth
of p. Given the ‘imperfective paradox’, the imper-
fective form of such verbs unsurprisingly suspends
the actualisation event, as what happens with the
imperfective form of overtly causative verbs (e.g.
Trump was causing a new catastrophe when Pence
stopped him does not entail the occurrence of a
new catastrophe). On the other hand, factive verbs
like savoir que p ‘know that p’ do not assert the
obtaining of a causal factor for the truth of p, but
rather a mental state having p as its object. We
therefore do not expect aspect to interfere with
their inferential profile.
For these verbs with an aspect-dependent aspec-
tual profile (including plainly modal ones)5, we
manually annotated the reading instantiated and
the corresponding signature in the FTiB.
The third interesting point raised by our transla-
tion is illustrated by French verbs having a dif-
ferent factuality profile than their English counter-
parts. For instance, although pousser à is used to
translate the implicative verb provoke to, it is not
implicative with an agent subject, even with a per-
fective (contrary to its near synonym conduire à).

5FTiB has only 32 instances of devoir, 8 of falloir and 21
of pouvoir.

5 Ongoing research

These experiments showed that verbs whose factu-
ality profile varies with the reading selected and/or
its argument structure are very pervasive among
French ESPs. A lexicon of ESPs should therefore
carefully distinguish between the different read-
ings/argument structures an ESP may instantiate.
Also, they suggest that interesting new correla-
tions can be found between event factuality pro-
files on one hand, and particular sets of syntac-
tic/semantic properties on the other. For instance,
verbs like refuser ‘refuse/fail’ are two way im-
plicative verbs with an inanimate subject or with
an animate subject controlling the complement,
cf. (10)-(11), but only trigger a strong (but never-
theless defeasible) inference with a matrix subject
distinct from the infinitival subject, see (12).

(10) Le tiroir a refusé de s’ouvrir, #mais il s’est
ouvert quand même.
‘The drawer failed to open, but it opened
nevertheless.’

(11) Marie a refusé d’entrer, #mais elle est
entrée quand même.
‘Marie refused to enter, but she entered
nevertheless.’

(12) Le garde a refusé que Marie entre, OK mais
elle est entrée quand même.
‘The guard refused to allow Marie to enter,
but she entered nevertheless.’

To find these correlations, we are building a
French lexicon of ESPs on top of a rich lexicon
encoding morphological, syntactic and semantic
properties of French verbs for each of their read-
ings, “Les verbes français” (Dubois and Dubois-
Charlier, 1997; François et al., 2007). In the first
step, we use the French verbs analysed in our ex-
periments as seeds, link them with each of their
readings in Les verbes français, and provide a
manual signature for all of their other ESP read-
ings. This will hopefully give an idea of the
semantic and syntactic properties characterising
each factuality profile. In the second step, we will
enrich the different subclasses of ESPs (distin-
guished by their signature) with similar candidates
by using (semi-)automatic methods along the lines
of those described in (Richardson and Kuhn, 2012;
De Melo and De Paiva, 2014; White and Rawlins,
2016; Eckle-Kohler, 2016), and then review them
manually.

20



References
Rebekah Baglini and Itamar Francez. 2016. The

Implications of Managing. Journal of Semantics,
33/3:541–560.

André Bittar, Pascal Amsili, Pascal Denis, and Lau-
rence Danlos. 2011. French TimeBank: an ISO-
TimeML annotated reference corpus. In Proceed-
ings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies: short papers-Volume 2, pages 130–
134. Association for Computational Linguistics.

André Bittar. 2010. Building a TimeBank for French:
a reference corpus annotated according to the ISO-
TimeML standard. Ph.D. thesis, Paris 7.

Gerard De Melo and Valeria De Paiva. 2014. Sense-
specific implicative commitments. In International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 391–402. Springer.

Jean Dubois and Françoise Dubois-Charlier. 1997. Les
Verbes français. Larousse.

Judith Eckle-Kohler. 2016. Verbs Taking Clausal
and Non-Finite Arguments as Signals of Modality
- Revisiting the Issue of Meaning Grounded in Syn-
tax. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2016, August 7-12, 2016, Berlin, Germany, Volume
1: Long Papers.

Jacques François, Denis Le Pesant, and Danielle Lee-
man. 2007. Présentation de la classification
des Verbes Français de Jean Dubois et Françoise
Dubois-Charlier. Langue française, 153(1):3–19.

Valentine Hacquard. 2009. On the Interaction of As-
pect and Modal Auxiliaries. Linguistics and Philos-
ophy, 32:279–312.

Lauri Karttunen. 1971a. Implicative Verbs. Language,
47(2):340–358.

Lauri Karttunen. 1971b. The logic of English predi-
cate complement constructions, volume 4. Indiana
University Linguistics Club Bloomington, Indiana.

Lauri Karttunen. 2012. Simple and phrasal implica-
tives. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics-Volume 1:
Proceedings of the main conference and the shared
task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages
124–131. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Prerna Nadathur. 2016. Causal necessity and suffi-
ciency in implicativity. In Proceedings of Seman-
tics and Linguistics Theory (SALT) 26, pages 1002–
1021.

Rowan Nairn, Cleo Condoravdi, and Lauri Karttunen.
2006. Computing relative polarity for textual in-
ference. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
workshop on Inference in Computational Semantics
(ICoS-5), pages 20–21.

James Pustejovsky, Robert Knippen, Jessica Littman,
and Roser Saurí. 2005. Temporal and event infor-
mation in natural language text. Language resources
and evaluation, 39(2):123–164.

Kyle Richardson and Jonas Kuhn. 2012. Light tex-
tual inference for semantic parsing. In 24th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
page 1007.

Roser Saurí and James Pustejovsky. 2009. FactBank:
a corpus annotated with event factuality. Language
resources and evaluation, 43(3):227.

Roser Saurí and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Are you
sure that this happened? assessing the factuality de-
gree of events in text. Computational Linguistics,
38(2):261–299.

Aaron Steven White and Kyle Rawlins. 2016. A com-
putational model of s-selection. In Semantics and
Linguistic Theory, volume 26, pages 641–663.

21


