














































Building and using language resources and infrastructure to develop e-learning programs for a minority language


Building and using language resources and infrastructure to develop
e-learning programs for a minority language

Heli Uibo

University of Tartu

UiT The Arctic University of Norway

Landstormsvägen 12

68534 Torsby, Sweden

heli1401@gmail.com

Jack Rueter

University of Helsinki

Keinutie 11 M 72

FIN-00940 Helsinki

rueter.jack@gmail.com

Sulev Iva

University of Tartu

Ülikooli 18, 50090 Tartu, Estonia

Võro Institute

sulev.iva@ut.ee

Abstract

We will demonstrate Võro Oahpa (http:

//oahpa.no/voro), a set of language

learning programs for Võro, a minority

language in Estonia. When setting up

and developing the system, we have made

use of the infrastructure developed at the

Saami language technology centre Giellate-

kno, UiT the Arctic University of Norway

and the Võro language resources and tools

– the online electronic dictionary synaq.org

that also includes pronunciations; Võro

speech synthesis; the morphological finite

state transducer that is being developed as

a part of the same project and a multilin-

gual word list from North Saami Oahpa.

Võro Oahpa consists of four language learn-

ing programs: Leksa – a vocabulary quiz,

Numra – a program for practicing numer-

als and time expressions, Morfa-S – mor-

phology drill and Morfa-C – morphology

exercises formulated as question-answer

pairs. The development is still in progress

but the programs have already used within

the Võro language course at the Univer-

sity of Tartu. We discuss the issues spe-

cific for Võro and show how combining

the existing infrastructure, resources and

experiences can make the development of a

learning system for a language with limited

resources easier and give extra values to

the system.

1 Introduction

The Võro language is a South Estonian language

with ca 70 000 speakers. (The Estonian written

language is based on the dialects of Northern Esto-

nia). Võro organisations (Võro Institute etc.) want

This work is licenced under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International Licence. Licence details: http:
//creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

to recognise Võro officially as a separate language

which has been discussed twice in Estonian parla-

ment Riigikogu, however, without positive decision.

That is why Võro is officially considered a dialect

of Estonian even up to now. Despite of this Es-

tonian government supports the maintenance and

development of Võro by financing Võro Institute

– a state institute dealing with Võro language and

culture. Võro also has its own official ISO language

code ’vro’.

The Võro language is taught in ca 20 kinder-

gartens (in so-called language nests) and about the

same number of schools in South-Eastern Estonia.

Altogether 450 primary and secondary school stu-

dents are learning Võro language and culture or

participating in other classes where the language

of instruction is Võro ( Opetajate leht, 2017). The

kindergartens and schools are located in the area

where children’s parents or grandparents also might

speak Võro but it is not necessarily the case. On the

other hand, thousands of Võro speakers or people

interested in learning Võro language live in other

parts of Estonia and Võro Institute has got queries

about distant courses of Võro for adults. Since

1996 the Võro language as a subject can be stud-

ied at the University of Tartu. The Võro language

course is given every term and has a form of a

traditional language course with auditorial lessons.

We are aware of only one other online pro-

gram for Võro language learning that existed be-

fore Oahpa – the game ”Mein Zimmer” (http://

edlv.planet.ee/meinZimmer/) that has among

others been adapted to the Võro language. It is a

nice ”find-a-key” game but it is focused on one

particular topic and thus very limited.

When learning a Uralic language the most diffi-

cult thing is morphology. Although there are a lot

of language learning programs available, most of

them deal with vocabulary learning.

Thus, there was and is a need for free online

language learning tools for Võro that would cover

Heli Uibo, Jack Rueter and Sulev Iva 2017. Building and using language resources and infrastructure to

develop e-learning programs for a minority language. Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for

Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on Language Acquisition at

NoDaLiDa 2017. Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings 134: 61–67.

61



the basic vocabulary for a learner and, most impor-

tantly, the basic grammar. In 2013, as a part of a

cooperation project between the language technol-

ogy researchers at the University of Tartu and the

Saami language technology centre Giellatekno at

UiT the Arctic University of Norway, we started to

adapt Oahpa, a set of language learning programs,

initially created for North Saami and by now im-

plemented for more than 20 languages, to the Võro

language. The ICALL system Oahpa (Antonsen et

al, 2009) is primarily meant as a supporting tool for

learning vocabulary and grammar for adult students

attending respective language courses. But as the

usage statistic shows, a lot of people who do not

attend any course, also use the system for learning

North Saami because it is freely available on the in-

ternet. During a 6 months period there were 3,676

unique visitors of North and South Saami Oahpa

pages (Antonsen et al., 2013) while the number

of people who were taking the respective language

courses was about ten times smaller.

So, Oahpa should be a good choice for the in-

tended users of our language learning programs

– the participants of the Võro language course at

University of Tartu and all other Võro language

learners whereever in the world, with possibly no

or little contact with the spoken Võro and no ac-

cess to Võro language courses. When designing

the content of Võro Oahpa we are trying to meet

the needs of both user groups. Our programs can

mostly be used to support the students’ individual

training of vocabulary and grammar of the Võro

language.

Other grammar learning programs we are aware

of are e.g. Killerfiller (Bick, 2005) and ESPRIT

(Koller, 2005). These are text-based ICALL sys-

tems where sentences are extracted from a corpus.

In the system VIEW (Meurers et al, 2010), any

webpage that is in the right language can turned

into a grammar exercise. This is a fantastic system

but concerning the Võro language, however, the

material on the web is still quite small.

2 Existing resources and infrastructure

Thanks to the cooperation project we could make

use of the Giellatekno and Divvun infrastructure

(Moshagen et al, 2014) – a development infras-

tructure created to make it easier for people work-

ing on languages with limited textual resources

to build language technology applications. The

general idea is that (computational) linguists com-

pose formalised grammar descriptions and lexicons,

and the intrastructure makes it possible to use the

lexicons and grammar as the basis for NLP tools

(e.g. morphological and syntactic analyser) and

end user tools such as proofing tools and electronic

dictionaries. We got easily used to Giellatekno in-

frastructure that has standard places for language

data (word lists, source code for the morphological

transducer, Oahpa source files, documentation files,

etc.) and standard procedures for the production of

language technology tools and end-user programs

out of these. The infrastructure is well suited for

morphologically rich languages.

As one of our goals was to provide pronuncia-

tions for the people who live in the environment

where they do not hear spoken Võro we decided to

make use of the existing audio and text-to-speech

resources.

One important Võro language resource is the on-

line dictionary http://synaq.org that includes

15 000 entries in the direction Võro-Estonian and

20 000 entries in the direction Estonian-Võro. The

dictionary also includes high quality audio files for

Võro words. The audio files have been produced

in cooperation of the Võro Institute with the Cen-

ter of South Estonian Language and Culture and

Laboratory of Phonetics, University of Tartu.

During the development of Võro Oahpa a pro-

totype of Võro speech synthesis was developed

at the Institute of Estonian Language. There are

two voices to choose between: a middle aged

man and a 11-years-old girl. The quality of the

synthesized speech is good, very close to nat-

ural speech. The demo of the speech synthe-

sis is available at the following URL: www.eki.

ee/~indrek/voru/index.php and the software

can be downloaded from here: github.com/

ikiissel/synthts_vr.

3 Our work: Võro Oahpa – a set of

language learning programs

We have a previous experience of setting up Oahpa

for a number of languages. Although the overall

procedure of setting up a new instance of Oahpa

is similar, each language has some specific issues

that need to be dealt with. For the Võro language

these issues were:

• extensive spell-relax

• many parallel forms

Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on

Language Acquisition at NoDaLiDa 2017

62



Spell-relax means that the program accepts

different variants of typing for some characters.

Checking of the correct answers must not be too

strict because the written language is quite new

(from 1990s) and there is no consensus on how to

mark e.g. glottal stop and palatalisation; some let-

ters of the Võro alphabet are missing from the key-

board layouts (there is no special Võro keyboard

layout yet).

The illative and inessive plural of some nouns

may attest to as many as 6-9 forms, e.g. the word

pereh ”family”:

pereh+N+Pl+Ill: [perrihe, perriihe, perride, perri-

ide, perehtehe, perehtede]

pereh+N+Pl+Ine: [perrin, perriin, perrih, perriih,

perrihn, perriihn, perehten, perehteh, perehtehn],

whereas the second person singular can attest to

3 if not 6 forms, e.g. the word ehitelemä ”to dec-

orate” ehitelemä+V+Act+Ind+Prt+Sg2: [ehitelit,

ehiteliq, ehitelideq, ehitellit, ehitelliq, ehitellideq]

In the Oahpa exercises we need to decide which

forms to accept as possible forms and which ones

to display as correct answers. Whereas the parallel

forms issue has to do with the morphology exer-

cises Morfa-S and Morfa-C the relaxed spelling

applies to all four games implemented in Võro

Oahpa.

3.1 Multi-purpose side product

– morphological finite state transducer of

Võro

A finite state transducer (FST) incorporates both a

morphological analyser and a generator. It defines

correspondences between tag strings and word

forms of a language. There exists a powerful FST

development environment in the Divvun ad Giel-

latekno infrastructure. Using the standard file and

tag names and other conventions makes it possible

for a FST developer (linguist) to use the automatic

build process that is taken care of by a number

of filters and scripts. The compiled transducers

can be used in several applications as language

learning programs, online dictionaries, spelling

checkers and machine translation tools. The Võro

morphological transducer has so far been used in

Oahpa and in the morphology-aware dictionary

http://sonad.uit.no.

While building the morphological FST we have

made use of the experience of developing morphol-

ogy descriptions for other Uralic languages as the

Saami languages, Erzya, Hill Mari a.o.

The problems we tackled when modeling Võro

morphology were the following:

• Vowel harmony is not always predictable from
the nominative or genitive singular forms, vari-

ation between singular and plural stem har-

mony, e.g. (”host”) esäk – esäku genitive

singular but esäkidegaq comitative plural.

• Consonant gradation 2 – as many as 4 grades:
häbü, häu, häpü and häppü (”shame” nomina-

tive, genitive, partitive, illative singular).

• Many inflection types. Even if it seems that
the word belongs to the same type there might

be some forms in the paradigm that are differ-

ent. The classification of nouns and adjective

stem types has uncovered further irregular-

ities, that might be dealt with through geo-

graphic/dialect classification.

• Parallel forms. For pedagogical purposes, it
should be desirable that the preferred paral-

lel forms are tagged differently from the non-

preferred ones. Therefore, we have tagged

all the non-preferred parallel forms with the

tag +Use/NG. The non-preferred forms are

accepted when the user enters those but not

shown as correct answers.

We have applied the systematic error correction

procedure of the FST:

1. All the simple words, i.e. derived and com-

pound words excluded, have been generated

by the FST as a large table.

2. A testing person has marked the errors in the

table.

3. The errors have been corrected in the FST.

New subtypes of the inflection types for both

nouns and verbs have been described in the FST

as a result of this systematic work. For example,

the noun types where singular nominative ends

with a consonant but the stem vowel appears in

genitive and other cases have been split by stem

vowel to 3-4 separate types. That was implemented

by introducing new continuation lexica.

2Consonant gradation is a type of consonant mutation
where during the inflection either the length of a consonant is
changing, a consonant is replaced by another consonant or a
consonant is disappearing. E.g. supi : suppi (”soup” genitive
singular vs partitive singular), anda : anna (”to give” infinitive
vs connegative)

Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on

Language Acquisition at NoDaLiDa 2017

63



Currently all the 13260 yaml tests pass, i.e.

the morphological FST generates correctly all the

forms that are given in the tests.

The FST has also been tested on the running text

(Võro wikipedia and children’s book ”Suur must

koer”). The current testing results are presented in

the table Table 1.

Total Missing Missing %

All tokens 82 390 294 335 28%

Unique tokens 30 695 50 142 61%

Table 1: Evaluation results of the Võro FST.

For Oahpa the lexical coverage is good enough,

as long as all the words that are in the Oahpa lex-

icon are in the FST. The most important thing is,

however, that all the generated forms are correct.

But in the longer perspective, of course, we aim

at much better lexical coverage that would facili-

tate morphological analysis and spelling check of

running Võro texts.

3.2 Online language learning tools (Oahpa

games)

3.2.1 Numra – program for training

numerals and date and time expressions

Numra is probably the simplest game that a be-

ginner might start with. The easiest setup of the

Cardinals game presents numerals 1-10 as the sets

of five and the user’s task is to guess which number

corresponds to which word.

Three special finite state transducers were cre-

ated to enable these exercises – a transducer of

cardinal and ordinal numerals, a transducer of time

expressions and a transducer of date expressions.

The transducers define correspondences between

numerical and textual representations of numbers,

time points and dates.

3.2.2 Leksa – a vocabulary training program

Leksa is a classical vocabulary test where the user

has to translate isolated words or everyday ex-

pressions from Võro to a metalanguage or vice

versa. The drop-down menus enable the selection

of words by topic (semantic category, sometimes in

a broader sense): human, animal, food/drink, time,

body, clothes, school, nature, work/economy, etc.

There are several metalanguages – Estonian,

Finnish, English, German, North Saami, Norwe-

gian, Swedish. This makes it possible for people

with different language backgrounds to learn Võro

vocabulary. To make Võro Oahpa more accessible

we have also localised the whole user interface to

Estonian, Finnish, English and Võro. The lexicon

size of Leksa is ca 1300 words. The core of the lex-

icon comes from North Saami Oahpa (therefore we

also have translations to North Saami and Norwe-

gian for most of the words). But we have adapted

the lexicon to our needs – removed some words

that belong to Saami cultural space and added lists

of frequently used Võro words with translations to

some semantic classes (alltogether ca 300 words).

We have also added audio to Võro Leksa – a pos-

sibility to listen to the pronunciations of the Võro

words. The pronunciations have been integrated

from the sound database of the Võro-Estonian-

Võro electronic dictionary synaq.org. The words

have been read in by native speakers of Võro.

3.2.3 Morfa-S – a morphology drill program

Given the primary form (nominative singular for

nouns and infinitive for verbs), the task is to build a

specific inflected form. For nouns all the 14 cases

in singular and plural can be practiced (except for

essive that does not have separate singular/plural

forms). For verbs there are exercises on indicative

mood personal mode present and past tense first

till third person in singular and plural, including

negation forms. For adjectives we have exercises

on positive and comparative grade. It is possible

to practice their declination in all cases in singular

and plural. Morfa-S exercises are based on isolated

words.

3.2.4 Morfa-C – morphology exercises in the

context

The Morfa-C game is based on question-answer

templates and the word form database that also

includes semantic information. Each exercise con-

sists of a question and an answer where one word

is replaced by a blank that the user has to fill with a

word in the appropriate inflected form. The seman-

tic tags are used to build semantically plausible

sentences. Despite of that, the sentences some-

times come out funny or inappropriate. Is it okay

to present a grammar exercise where the police-

man steals (vro: politsei varastas) or a priest drinks

vodka (vro: keriguopõtaja juu viina)? For more

advanced students the humor can be on its place

whereas it can be confusing for beginners (also

unpedagogical for adolecents). Our solution was a

very fine-grained semantic classification. For exam-

ple, we have picked only the action verbs suitable

for Morfa-C present and past tense verb inflection

Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on

Language Acquisition at NoDaLiDa 2017

64



exercises and added ca 50 verbs to this list. At the

moment we have 151 semantic categories defined

but the number will probably increase as we add

new Morfa-C question-answer templates. Some

semantic categories that we are using are listed in

Table 2, together with the number of words in each

category.

Semantic category Nr of words

ANIMAL 71

BODYPART 41

FOOD DISH 38

FOOD GROCERY 36

CLOTHES 36

PROFESSION 20

FAMILY 20

WEATHER 10

SCHOOL 6

Table 2: Examples of semantic categories used in

Võro Oahpa.

Another example. The question-answer pairs

that are about buying and eating things require dis-

tinction between the food that can be bought from

the grocery shop and the food that can be eaten as

a meal. Often the food and drink words belong to

both categories but not always. We also needed a

special category for the food words that are natu-

ral to use in plural (things that we normally eat a

plenty of, not only one, e.g. peas, berries, nuts).

The lists of words denoting foods and drinks have

also been extended with more foods and drinks that

are common in Estonia or specific to South-East

Estonia.

There is also a specific exercise for practicing

back negation. Back negation has got a special

attention because it exist neither in Estonian nor

in Finnish. In Estonian, Finnish (and also in Võro

parallel to back negation) the front negation is used

where the negation word precedes the verb (e.g. ei

olõq = ”not is”). In back negation, the negation

appears as a suffix that is added to the verb (e.g.

olõ-õiq = ”is-not”). There are more examples of

back negation on Figure 1.

Morfa-C game in Võro Oahpa has a new feature

that does not exist in any of the other implemen-

tations of Oahpa. Namely, the computer will read

aloud the sentences (questions) using Võro syn-

thetic voice (of a 11-years-old girl) when the user

clicks on the loudspeaker icon.

A problem we have discovered was repetition

of the identical exercises. This is partly due to the

small number of words in some semantic sets but

can still be avoided by improving the algorithm.

There are three types of repetitions that we would

like to eliminate:

1. Identical exercises within an exercise set con-

sisting of three or five question-answer pairs

should be prohibited.

2. It would also be good to avoid repetitions in

the subsequent exercise sets. That is, if the

user presses the button ”New set” then the task

words she had in the previous set should not

occur in the new set of exercises, or even bet-

ter – the words that she answered correctly

should not occur but the words where she

made a mistake could be presented again. But

this idea is difficult or impossible to imple-

ment until we have not implemented the au-

thentication of users and binding the usage

data to specific users.

3. Avoid presenting the negatively loaded words

(e.g. ossõndama ”to vomit”, varastama ”to

steal”, pelgämä ”to be frightened”, ullitama

”to act the fool”) too often. That presumes

a modification of the exercise creation pro-

cess: weights should be assigned to the words

(low weights to the words that should appear

rarely) and these weights should be taken into

account in the word selection algorithm.

3.3 Discussion

The most important question is: Would Võro

Oahpa meet the users’ needs?

We assume that most of the users are speakers

of Estonian or Finnish. Therefore we need to focus

on features of the Võro language that are different

from Estonian:

• vowel harmony

• partially different case endings

• using of illative (the case corresponding to
the English preposition ”into”) vs allative

(the case corresponding to ”onto”), inessive

(”in”) vs adessive (”on”), elative (”out of”)

vs ablative (”off”), particularly in connection

with place names (there are place names that

are used with different cases in Estonian and

Võro)

Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on

Language Acquisition at NoDaLiDa 2017

65



Figure 1: Screenshot of the Morfa-C verb back negation exercise

• two different ways of building negation: front
negation (ei olõq) and back negation (olõ-õiq)

• different negation word in present vs past
tense (ei olõq = ”is not”, es olõq = ”was not”)

• palatalisation mark in the written language

• more extensive use of diminutive

• pronouncation (especially important for the
people who live outside of South-East Esto-

nia)

All of the above, except for vowel harmony, also

holds for Finnish speakers.

We also have to think about users with other

mother tongues. Features that might be difficult for

people with non-Uralic mother tongue:

• many morphological forms

• vowel harmony

• pronouncation

• usage of all the cases

All the listed topics are in fact included in Oahpa

exercises in either implicit or explicit way but we

need to create more specific exercises to make the

learner pay attention to the particular features of

Võro. For example, we have specific exercises in

Morfa-C for practicing back negation and using

the correct negation word (ei or es) but we should

also create some special exercises on difficult in-

flection types, vowel harmony rules and diminutive

building.

Võro Oahpa is free to use for everybody on the

URL http://oahpa.no/voro. The authors will

be grateful for any feedback about the system.

4 Conclusion

In this article we have presented our work on Võro

language learning programs. This is the first freely

available program for Võro that gives the users the

possibility to train the basic 1300 words vocabu-

lary, date and time expressions and morphology.

While setting up and developing the programs we

have made use of the Divvun and Giellatekno in-

frastructure as well as Võro language resources

that were either created externally (online Võro-

Estonian-Võro dictionary synaq.org where we

got the pronuncations of the Võro words from and

software for Võro speech synthesis) or within the

same project (Võro morphological transducer). We

Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on

Language Acquisition at NoDaLiDa 2017

66



can confirm that the infrastructure was helpful for

our work. The biggest challenge is modeling the

Võro morphology – covering all the inflection

types, marking the preferred and non-preferred

parallel forms and handling the different ways of

spelling. Adding the audio dimension adds extra

value to Võro Oahpa as many of the program’s

prospective users are not exposed to spoken Võro.

Reading aloud the Morfa-C questions is the feature

that is totally new – it has not been implemented in

any of the previous instances of Oahpa. The work

on Võro Oahpa is continuing to enable practicing

of larger vocabulary and more of the grammar.

Acknowledgments

The work has been funded by The Research Coun-

cil of Norway project EMP160 ”Saami – Esto-

nian language technology cooperation: similar lan-

guages, same technologies”.

References

Lene Antonsen, Saara Huhmarniemi, and Trond
Trosterud. 2009. Interactive pedagogical programs
based on constraint grammar. Proceedings of the
17th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics. Nealt Proceedings Series 4.

Lene Antonsen, Ryan Johnson, Trond Trosterud, and
Heli Uibo. 2013. Generating modular grammar ex-
ercises with finite-state transducers. Proceedings of
the second workshop on NLP for computer-assisted
language learning at NODALIDA 2013, May 22-24,
Oslo, Norway. NEALT Proceedings Series 17: 27-
38.

Eckhard Bick 2005. Live use of Corpus data and
Corpus annotation tools in CALL: Some new de-
velopments in VISL. Nordic Language Technology,
Årbog for Nordisk Sprogteknologisk Forskningspro-
gram 2000-2004: 171–185 Museum Tusculanums
Forlag.

Thomas Koller 2005. Development of web-based
plurilingual learning software for French, Spanish
and Italian. Studies in Contrastive Linguistics. Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Contrastive Lin-
guistics Conference (ICLC4). University of Santi-
ago de Compostela Press.

Detmar Meurers, Ramon Ziai, Luiz Amaral, Adriane
Boyd, Aleksandar Dimitrov, Vanessa Metcalf, Niels
Ott 2010. Enhancing authentic web pages for lan-
guage learners. Proceedings of the NAACL HLT
2010 Fifth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications: 10–18

Sjur Moshagen, Jack Rueter, Tommi Pirinen, Trond
Trosterud, and Francis M. Tyers. 2014. Open-
Source Infrastructures for Collaborative Work on

Under-Resourced Languages Proceedings of
CCURL (Collaboration and Computing for Under-
Resourced Languages in the Linked Open Data
Era) workshop 2014 organised with LREC2014:
71–77 European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Parijõgi M. 2017. Kool on kodukeele viimane kants.
(School is the last stronghold of the home language)
Opetajate Leht, 10.03.2017.

Proceedings of the Joint 6th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning and 2nd Workshop on NLP for Research on

Language Acquisition at NoDaLiDa 2017

67


