39

Proceedings of the LT4DHCSEE in conjunction with RANLP 2017, pages 39–43,

Varna, Bulgaria, 8 September 2017.

http://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-046-5_006

 

 

 

 

Personalization of Political Discoures On Social Media 

Cristina Florentina Moise, University of Bucharest, cristi-

na.florentina.moise@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

According  to  Phillips  and  Young,  success  in 
politics is now highly influenced by the online 
activities  of political institutions. Within  these 
platforms,  politicians  can  exchange  views  on 
the  latest  partisan  developments  or  hot  topics, 
inviting  the  public  and  citizens  to  comment, 
share  ideas  and  adhere  to  their  political  pro-
grams [Phililips and Young et al 2009]. 

According 
to  Sundar,  Kalyanaraman,  and 
Brown (2003) interactivity  is  usually  associat-
ed with positive perception. The user will only 
make  an  effort  to  search  and  read  the  infor-
mation  if  he  feels  engaged  with  the  political 
party  or  message  [Sundar,  Kalyanaraman  and 
Brown 
political 
engagement  is  largely  restricted  to  people  al-
ready  active  in  politics  and  on  the  Internet. 
Other audiences are less responsive [Tenhunen 
and Karvelyte et al 2015].  

al  2003].  Online 

et 

Nevertheless,  in  the  last  years,  social  media 
has reshaped its structures and methods of con-
temporary  political  communication.   The  pub-
lic became  more active and  willing to  react  to 
political message even though it is not partisan 
of a political party. 

That is  why, in  the last  years,  politicians have 
a  significant  interest  to  have  a  two-way  com-
munication with their citizens, to discover their 
opinions  and  feelings  about  different  ideas. 
Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  allocate  resources 
for  sentiment  analysis,  which  is  also  called 
opinion  mining  (one  of  the  most  active  re-
search  areas  in  natural  language  processing 
since early 2000 [Liu et al 2012]).  

1 

Introduction 

Online  environment  especially,  social  media 
channels are the most used tools for public com-
munication within societies. In particular, for hav-
ing  a  direct  dialog  with  their  citizens,  politicians 

are  continuously  delivering  message  on  mi-
croblogs (like Twitter) or on social networks (like 
Facebook) [Chilton and Schäffner et al 2002]. 

 

For  political  communication,  it  is  essential  to 
come  with  personalized  discourses  for  each  seg-
ment of voters, to get the insights quickly and to 
have the  flexibility to adapt the  message  accord-
ing to the context and to the people reaction.  

 

This  paper  overviews  the  Majoritas  ecosystem 
(https://majoritas.com/),  providing  a  complete 
overview  of  political  campaigns  assessment 
aimed to assist politicians and their staff in deliv-
ering consistent and personalized message.  

 

The system has been running for five years being 
adopted on almost all continents: Brazil,  the US, 
France,  Congo,  Indonesia,  Moldavia,  Albania, 
Serbia, etc. 

 

The  ecosystem  contains  a  suite  of  services  and 
applications that can outline and summarize data 
provided  by  online,  offline  and  social  media 
sources,  assists  in  creating  the  right  message  to 
the right audience, assessing voters’ behavior dur-
ing the entire time of the campaign. 

 

The solution was built to help politicians to have 
an iterative approach in their campaigns. It is im-
portant to adopt an ‘agile’ methodology when po-
litical  communication  strategy  is  defined.  After 
each  message,  post  or  tweet,  politicians  need  to 
assess  the  impact.  What  is  the  reaction  of  their 
followers or, is there any response from the com-
petition? 

 

Majoritas  Social  Media  Room  (one  of  the  appli-
cation of Majoritas ecosystem) was designed as a 
cloud  political  communication  platform  that  as-
sists politicians in empowering their social media 
presence. In other words, from a single place, the 
candidate can communicate diverse types of mes-

40

 

sage  within  his  social  media  community  using 
multiple Twitter accounts and Facebook pages. 

 

Besides  delivering  messages,  Social  Media  plat-
form  was  designed  to  get  real  time  voters’  reac-
tion  regarding  candidate’s  posts  and  tweets, 
providing  insights  concerning  their  engagement 
to different topics, ideas or beliefs.   

 

2  Related Work 

 
Mullen and Malouf et al 2006, based on the posts 
collected  from  several  political  blogs,  tried  to 
classify  if  posters’  orientation  was  either  left  or 
right. They applied the Naïve Bayes text classifier 
and conclude that for political sentiment analysis, 
the traditional word-based text classification is not 
adequate. 

 

According to Yu and Hatzivassiloglou et al 2003, 
considering  the  character  limitation  of  tweets, 
classifying the sentiment analysis of Twitter mes-
sages  is  similar  to  the  analysis  of  sentence-level 
sentiment. It is important to consider the informal 
tone as well and the specialized language used on 
social media. 
 
Besides  sentiment  analysis  algorithms,  TF-IDF 
(Term  Frequency-Inverse  Document  Frequency) 
technique  is  also  very  useful  to  performing  mi-
croblogs text mining. 

 

Even though both: sentiment analysis and TF-IDF 
are considered text classification techniques, their 
scope  is  different.  On  the  one  hand,  the  aim  of 
sentiment  analysis  is  to  classify  texts  into  opin-
ions:  ‘negative’  or  ‘positive’.  On  the  other  hand, 
the scope of TF-IDF is to classify categories with-
in categories.  

 

TF-IDF  calculates  a  weight  which  represents  the 
importance of a term inside a text: 
TF(t) = (Number of times term t appears in a doc-
ument) / (Total number of terms in the document) 
IDF(t)  =  log_e(Total  number  of  documents  / 
Number of documents with term t in it). 
 
Value = TF * IDF 
 
Another important aspect that needs to be consid-
ered  in  translating  microblogs  messages  into  in-

sights  regarding  posters’  feelings,  views,  judge-
ments, is the social network. As per Pozzi, Fersini, 
Mesina  and  Liu  et  al  2017,  sentiment  analysis  in 
social networks is generally based on the assump-
tion that the texts provided by the users are inde-
pendent and identically distributed.  

 

The principle of homophily [Lazarsfeld and Mer-
ton et  al  1954], reveals that based on the ‘friend-
ship’ relationships, connected users may be likeli-
er to share similar opinions. 

 

Popescu  and  Etzioni  et  al  2005  proposed  PMI  - 
Pointwise  Mutual  Information statistics  to  im-
prove aspect extraction on product reviews. They 
introduced the meronymy term which represents a 
part-whole  relationship.  In  regard  to  politics,  the 
topics used by candidates in their discourse are al-
so  a  form  of  meronymy  since  these  subjects  are 
part of their campaigns. 
 

3  Data Gathering 

Using  Majoritas  Social  Media  platform,  we  col-
lected all information from Facebook and Twitter 
accounts  regarding  a  politician  of  which  identity 
will be kept anonymized.  
Both Twitter and Facebook provide APIs for data 
tracking.  If Twitter offers Search API and Stream-
ing API  for tweets  monitoring, Facebook provide 
Graph API for posts’ tracking. 

 

In addition, the paper’s authors considered that the 
integration  of  the  insights  obtained  from  several 
social  media  channels,  including  micro  blogs, 
generates a consistent image of the political mes-
sage. 
To  assess  the  impact  of  a  message,  several  data 
points should be analyzed and correlated.  

 

Below  are  presented  some  conclusions  obtained 
for  a  politician  from  Europe  CEE  (presidential 
elections). 

 

Majoritas  concluded  that  hashtags  analysis  needs 
to be performed in  order to  assess  for how many 
times,  politician’s  hashtags  were  mentioned  on 
Facebook  or  Twitter.  This  indicator  provides  a 
strong insight regarding the impact of the message 
(post) on social media being linked with the mer-
onymy term of Popescu and Etzioni, 2005:  

 

41

 

Table 1: Hastags Analysis 

Moreover, by monitoring conversations regarding 
different domains of interests very useful insights 
were  discovered.  For  our  case,  the  most  popular 
areas were:  

 

Table 2: Domain of interests (*sample data) 

 

 

Besides posts’ category, we realized that it is 
also  important  to  understand  what  reaction 
generates  each  type  of  post:  messages  (text), 
videos, live videos, pictures or links: 

Furthermore,  subscribers’  presence  (tweets, 
likes/reactions, comments or shares) needs to 
be  integrated  in  the  analysis.  We  need  to  see 
how the post reached the subscriber: paid, or-
ganic or viral reach. 

 

Figure 2: Daily evolution of actions on posts 

 

 

Figure 3: Daily evolution of posts reach 

 

We  understood  that  based  on  their  reaction 
and  presence,  subscribers  can  have  various 
levels of influence [Lazarsfeld and Merton et 
al 1954]. Therefore, it is important to identify 
the  most  ‘vocal’  followers  and  understand 
what  are  their  beliefs.  Based  on  the  message 
that a politician wants to deliver, he can target 
distinct  groups  of  people  and  use  them  to 
spread his ideas.  In order to build a stronger 
engagement,  we  defined  a  gamification  pro-
cess as well.  

 

 

 

Figure 4: Level of influence 

 

All the above indicators are enriched with sta-
tistics  regarding  the  feedback  received  from 
subscribers  to  politician’s  posts  (sentiment 
analysis): 

 

Figure 1: Content Type 

42

 

 
Figure 5: Evolution of positive / negative 

feedback 

 

 

 

Figure 9: Competitive Analysis Metrics 

Figure 6: Reactions Evolution 

 

The application can also perform competitive 
analysis  between  any  two  persons  that  have 
accounts on social media: 

In the end, everything is summarized in a sin-
gle view: 

Figure 7: Summarization 

In order to assess a politician communication 
strategy, it is essential to analyze the competi-
tion as well. Therefore, it is important to per-
form  a  competitive  analysis  –  a  comparison 
between  the  impact  of  a  politician  message 
versus his competitors. 

Moreover,  we  analyze  what  were  competi-
tors’  reactions  to  our  candidate  message  (in 
case they had any reaction), what do we know 
about their subscribers and what are their evo-
lutions on social media: 

 

Figure 8: Competitive Analysis – Engage-

ment Rate 

 

 

Figure 10: Facebook Competitive Analysis 

 

 

4  How it works 

Firstly,  to  obtain  a  proper  overview  about  politi-
cian messages delivered on social media, it  is es-
sential to perform a strong analysis of the collect-
ed  data:  number  of  subscribers,  number  of  likes, 
the reactions, shares, comments, etc. 
 
The second step is data correlation and discovery. 
In this  stage,  we  identify  the  main domain of  in-
terests  by  performing  automatic  classifications. 
We  do  a  trend  detection  on  topics,  on  message 
type,  on  subscribers’  reaction.  Also,  we  outline 
different  typologies  of  subscribers’  profiles  and 
what are their level of influence. 
 
The  analysis  is  enriched  with  sentiment  analysis 
performed using annotators. Majoritas Social Me-
dia  Room  profiles  subscribers  through  the  senti-
ment they associated with candidate’s messages. 
  
Moreover,  we create  multiple  rankings  calculated 

43

 

at a user level: activity rank, type of influence, so-
cial media influence rank, probable voting behav-
ior. 
In the end, we include competition analysis to get 
a complete overview regarding how our politician 
is placed in relation with his competitors.  
 
By  using  all  these  functionalities,  politicians  can 
define  their  communication  strategies.  They  can 
predict what type of feedback can be obtained by 
addressing  different  messages.  Also,  they  can 
have a faster reaction and can apply agile method-
ology in defining communication plans. 

 
 

5  Conclusion and future work 

In this paper, we addressed the issue of getting po-
litical insights related to voters’ reaction at politi-
cians’  message  on  social  channels.  We  demon-
strated  that  the  political  topic  can  influence  the 
engagement rate and, the percentage of voters’ fa-
vorability to a certain candidate. 

 

Moreover,  the  authors  observed  a  direct  relation-
ship  between  the  number  of  supporters  than  a 
politician has on social media channels and the re-
sults  of  the  elections. Also,  we  observed  that  the 
politicians that are active and react to users’ com-
ments  are  perceived  as  more  favorable.  This  is 
trend is not applicable for CEE Europe, but for the 
all Europe and the US as well (Facebook follow-
ers: Hilary 10m vs Trump 22m; Macron  1.9m  vs 
Le Pen 1.5m). 

 

Majoritas  Social  Media  Room  was  designed  as 
end-to-end  solution  that  assist  politicians  in  cali-
brating their discourse and offer them the chance 
to customize their campaign based on people reac-
tion. 
Fortunately,  there  are  no  other  similar  platforms 
that perform this type of integrated assessment. 
The  automation of  this  creative  process  might  be 
used not only in politics, but also in journalism or 
advertising. 

 

As  future  work,  we  plan  to  enrich  our  platform 
with  two  new  modules:  one  area  regarding  the 
prediction  on  the  outcome  of  political  events 
(there is a x% chance that Y event is going to hap-
pen). Another  area  which  can  be  improved  is  re-
lated to the surveys’ assessment: the usage  of  the 

wisdom of  crowds  that perform much better  than 
the media savvy pundits. 

 

References  

[Chilton  and  Schäffner  et  al  2002],  Paul  Chilton, 
Christina  Schäffner  in  Politics  as  Text  and  Talk: 
Analytic approaches to political discourse, 2002  

 [Lazarsfeld  and  Merton  et  al  1954],  Lazarsfeld 
P.F., Merton R.K. Friendship as a social process: 
a substantive and methodological analysis, 1954 

[Liu  et  al  2012],  Liu  B.  Sentiment  Analysis  and 
Opinion  Mining.  San  Rafael,  CA:  Morgan  & 
Claypool; 2012 

[Mullen  and  Malouf  et  al  2006],  Mullen,  T.  and 
Malouf, R., AAAI: A Preliminary Investigation in-
to  Sentiment  Analysis  of  Informal  Political  Dis-
course, 2006 

[Phililips  and  Young  et  al  2009],  Phillips  D.,  & 
Young,  P.,  Online  Public  Relations:  A  Practical 
Guide  to  Developing  an  Online  Strategy  in  the 
World  of  Social  Media.  London:  Kogan  Page; 
2009 

[Popescu  and Etzioni  et al 2005], Popescu,  A.-M. 
&  Etzioni,  O.,  Extracting  Product  Features  and 
Opinions  from  Reviews.  Proceedings  of  Confer-
ence  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language; 
2005 

[Pozzi, Fersini, Mesina and Liu et al 2017], Pozzi 
F.A., Fersini E., Messina E. and Liu B., Sentiment 
in  Social  Networks,  Elsevier  First 
Analysis 
Edition, 2017 

[Sundar,  Kalyanaraman  and  Brwon  et  al  2003], 
Sundar, S. S., Kalyanaraman, S., & Brown, J., Ex-
plicating  Web  Site  interactivity:  impression  for-
mation  effects  in  Political  Campaign  Sites.  Com-
munication Research; 2003 

[Tenhunen  and  Karvelyte  et  al  2015],  Susanna 
Tenhunen  and  Vilma  Karvelyte,  European  Par-
lamentary research Service Blog: The role played 
by social media in political participation and elec-
toral campaigns, 2015 

[Yu and Hatzivassiloglou et al 2003], Yu, H., and 
Hatzivassiloglou,  V.,Towards  answering  opinion 
questions:  Separating  facts  from  opinions  and 
identifying the polarity of opinion sentences, 2003 

