



















































Exploring Properties of Intralingual and Interlingual Association Measures Visually


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 314–317,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

Exploring Properties of Intralingual and Interlingual Association
Measures Visually

Johannes Graën, Christof Bless
Institute of Computational Linguistics

University of Zurich
graen@cl.uzh.ch, christof.bless@uzh.ch

Abstract

We present an interactive interface to ex-
plore the properties of intralingual and
interlingual association measures. In
conjunction, they can be employed for
phraseme identification in word-aligned
parallel corpora.

The customizable component we built to
visualize individual results is capable of
showing part-of-speech tags, syntactic de-
pendency relations and word alignments
next to the tokens of two corresponding
sentences.

1 Introduction

In corpus linguistics, statistical association mea-
sures are used to empirically identify words that at-
tract each other, i.e. that appear together in a corpus
significantly more often than pure change would
let us expect. Several association measures have
been proposed andmotivated in different ways (for
an overview see Evert 2004, 2008). What they
have in common is that they provide a scale that
allows for ordering: from high association to no
measurable association to negative association.1
Association measures can not only be applied to

monolingual corpora, where they help identifying
collocations, but also to interlingual relations, in
our case word alignments in parallel corpora. In
(Graën 2017), we exploit the fact that while some
words in parallel texts are regular translations of
each other, others are forced by idiomatic con-
straints. To find these constraints and thus iden-
tify phrasemes, we combine intralingual associa-
tion measures on syntactical relations with inter-
lingual association measures on word alignments.

1It is worth mentioning that some association measures
do not differentiate between high positive and high negative
associations. Our application only uses those that make this
difference.

This paper describes the necessary steps to pre-
pare our corpus, which association measures we
defined and how the results can visually be ex-
plored through our graphical interface.

2 Corpus Preparation

We extracted parallel texts from the Corrected &
Structured Europarl Corpus (CoStEP) (Graën et
al. 2014), which is a cleaner version of the Eu-
roparl corpus (Koehn 2005).
For tagging and lemmatization, we used the

TreeTagger (Schmid 1994)with the languagemod-
els available from the TreeTagger’s web page. To
increase tagging accuracy for words unknown to
the language model, we extended the tagging lex-
icons, especially the German one, with lemmas
and part-of-speech tags for frequent words. In ad-
dition, we used the word alignment information
between all the languages (see below) to disam-
biguate lemmas for those tokens where the Tree-
Tagger provided multiple lemmatization options.
This approach is similar to the one described by
Volk et al. (2016).
On the sentence segments identified (about 1.7

million per language), we performed pairwise sen-
tence alignment with hunalign (Varga et al. 2005)
and based on that word alignment with the Berke-
ley Aligner (Liang et al. 2006).2 To increase align-
ment accuracy, we not only calculated the align-
ments on the word form of all tokens, but also on
the lemmas of content words.3 For the latter, we
mapped the tagsets of the individual languages to
the universal tagset defined by Petrov et al. (2012)

2The Berkeley Aligner employs a symmetrically trained
alignment model, whereas other word alignment tools such as
Giza++ (Och and Ney 2003) or fastalign (Dyer et al. 2013)
require an additional symmetrization step for obtaining sym-
metrical alignments. Symmetric alignment in the first place is
to be preferred over symmetrization of two asymmetric align-
ments (cf. Tiedemann 2011).

3Here, we used the word form instead if no lemma was
provided.

314



and defined content words to be those tokens that
are tagged as either nouns, verbs, adjectives or ad-
verbs.
We used the MaltParser (Nivre et al. 2006) to

derive syntactical dependency relations in Ger-
man, English and Italian. As there was no pre-
trained model available for Italian, we built one
based on the Italian Stanford Dependency Tree-
bank (ISDT).4 Each parser model uses particular
language-specific dependency relations. Univer-
sal dependency relations (McDonald et al. 2013)
could facilitate the definition of syntactic relations.
For our purpose however (see next section), it suf-
fices to identify the direct object relationship of
verbs. Moreover, at the time we prepared the cor-
pus, there were no ready-to-use universal depen-
dency parsers available for the languages required.
Mapping language-specific parser models to uni-
versal dependency relations is not as straightfor-
ward as mapping individual tagsets to universal
part-of-speech tags (cf. Marneffe et al. 2014).

3 Interlingual Association Measures

We aim at identifying phrasemes, i.e. highly id-
iomatic multi-word units. In (Graën 2017), we
employ the example of support verb constructions
consisting of a verb and its direct object, where
the verb “supports” the semantics of the expres-
sion leaving aside its own. A walk, for instance,
cannot literally be taken or given (Spanish: dar un
paseo, literally ‘give a walk’). Supporting verbs
often show a “light” character, hence the alias light
verb construction.
Following the example of support verb con-

structions, we regard all verbs with aligned di-
rect objects in parallel sentences as candidates.
There are four relations that can be evaluated: Be-
sides the intralinguistic association measure on the
verb and its direct object in each language, we
can also measure the association of both verbs and
both objects by using the same association mea-
sures on the interlinguistic relation of word align-
ment. While an intralinguistic associationmeasure
makes a statement about the relative frequency of
two words appearing in a particular constellation
in amonolingual corpus, an interlinguistic associa-
tion measures makes a statement about the relative
frequency of two words being aligned in a parallel
corpus.5

4http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/ISDT
5When calculating association measures, we only take

In the – frequent – case that the supporting verbs
are otherwise not common translations of each
other, i.e. they show little attraction apart from the
constellation we are looking at, the interlinguistic
association measure of the aligned verbs yields a
comparably low score. We exploit this fact and
rank all candidates in such a way that for a high
rank this verb alignment score is required to be low
while all other scores are required to be high.

4 Visual Exploration

Different properties of the well-known association
scores make them suited for different tasks and dif-
ferent levels of cooccurrence (Evert 2008, cps. 3–
5). It is less clear though, what the characteristics
of association on word alignment are. We, there-
fore, implemented an interface (depicted in Fig. 1)
to explore the results of different association mea-
sures applied to particular patterns, which are de-
scribed by syntactic relations and attributes.
This pattern is searched in the corpus, results

are aggregated using the lemmas of all tokens and
sorted by frequency of such lemma combinations.6
The user can change the sort criterion to any of the
following association measures: t-score, z-score,
mutual information (MI), observed/expected ratio
(O/E) and O2/E. Both lemmas can be filtered using
regular expressions.
When the user select a combination from the re-

sulting list, the distribution of aligned lemma com-
binations of all available languages7 is shown. The
same association measures can be employed for
sorting.
To explore the individual examples, we set up

a visualization that displays the sentence and its
aligned counterparts on top of each other. The
user can navigate through all the sentences that in-
clude the selected linguistic constellation (source
and target lemma combinations).
Two kinds of relations can be switched on

and off: syntactic dependency relations between
the words in both languages and the word align-
ments. In addition, universal part-of-speech tags
are shown if requested. The tokens belonging to
one of the lemma combinations are highlighted by

lemmas into account to reduce variation and get more reliable
values.

6We do this for English, German and Italian as source lan-
guages and store the precalculated association measures in a
database.

7Our corpus comprises alignments between English,
Finnish, French, German, Italian, Polish and Spanish.

315



Figure 1: The support verb construction “play a role” and its translation into four other languages. Results
in the target languages are sorted using t-score as association measure.

default. The attributes of all other tokens can be
made visible interactively or switched on perma-
nently. Integrating all this information on one page
facilitates tracing differences in the usage of a par-
ticular linguistic schema.8
The graphical display is designed to be cus-

tomizable and reusable. Its output can not only
be used interactively, it also serves for printing as
the graphics is rendered in Scalable Vector Graph-
ics (SVG) format. Furthermore, the user can ad-
just the spacing between individual tokens and the
gap between both sentences, and reposition depen-
dency labels to achieve the best visual appearance.

5 Conclusions

We built an interface for exploration of different
types of association measures. Intralingual asso-
ciation measures are widely used to assess the at-
traction of pairs of words in a corpus. Interlingual
association measures do essentially the same but
on word-alignments between corresponding sen-
tences in two languages.
Our interface is an approach to visually explore

the properties of different association measures.
Results of a particular pattern applied to a source
language and the aligned patterns in different tar-
get languages can be sorted according to a selec-
tion of association measures. Unlike the approach

8It also helps to detect recurring tagging, parsing or align-
ment errors.

described in (Graën 2017), we do not (yet) provide
the option of a weighted combined score.
The interface described here is available for

exploring at: http://pub.cl.uzh.ch/purl/
visual_association_measures. We also pro-
vide the source code of the visualization compo-
nent there.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation under grant 105215_146781/1
through the project “SPARCLING – Large-scale
Annotation and Alignment of Parallel Corpora for
the Investigation of Linguistic Variation”.

316



References

Dyer, Chris, Victor Chahuneau, and Noah A.
Smith (2013). “A Simple, Fast, and Effective
Reparameterization of IBM Model 2”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pp. 644–649.

Evert, Stefan (2004). “The Statistics of Word
Cooccurrences: Word Pairs and Collocations”.
PhD thesis. Universität Stuttgart.

– (2008). “Corpora and collocations”. In: Corpus
linguistics: An international handbook 2. Ed. by
A. Lüdeling and M. Kytö, pp. 1212–1248.

Graën, Johannes (2017). “Identifying Phrasemes
via Interlingual Association Measures”. In:
Lexemkombinationen und typisierte Rede im
mehrsprachigen Kontext. Ed. by Christine
Konecny et al. Tübingen: Stauffenburg Linguis-
tik.

Graën, Johannes, Dolores Batinic, andMartin Volk
(2014). “Cleaning the Europarl Corpus for Lin-
guistic Applications”. In: Proceedings of the
Conference on Natural Language Processing.
(Hildesheim). Stiftung Universität Hildesheim,
pp. 222–227.

Koehn, Philipp (2005). “Europarl: A parallel cor-
pus for statistical machine translation”. In: Ma-
chine Translation Summit. (Phuket). Vol. 5,
pp. 79–86.

Liang, Percy, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein (2006).
“Alignment by Agreement”. In: Proceedings
of the main conference on Human Language
Technology Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pp. 104–111.

Marneffe, Marie-Catherine de, Timothy Dozat,
Natalia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Gin-
ter, Joakim Nivre, and Christopher D. Man-
ning (2014). “Universal Stanford Dependen-
cies: A cross-linguistic typology”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation. Ed.
by Nicoletta Calzolari et al. Vol. 14. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA),
pp. 4585–4592.

McDonald, Ryan T., Joakim Nivre, Yvonne
Quirmbach-Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipan-
jan Das, Kuzman Ganchev, Keith B. Hall, Slav
Petrov, Hao Zhang, Oscar Täckström, Claudia
Bedini, Núria Bertomeu Castelló, and Jungmee

Lee (2013). “Universal Dependency Annotation
for Multilingual Parsing”. In: Proceedings of
the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. 2, pp. 92–97.

Nivre, Joakim, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson
(2006). “Maltparser: A data-driven parser-
generator for dependency parsing”. In:Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation. Vol. 6,
pp. 2216–2219.

Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney (2003). “A
Systematic Comparison of Various Statistical
Alignment Models”. In: Computational linguis-
tics 29.1, pp. 19–51.

Petrov, Slav, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald
(2012). “A Universal Part-of-Speech Tagset”.
In: Proceedings of the 8th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Ed. by Nicoletta Calzolari et al. Istanbul: Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Schmid, Helmut (1994). “Probabilistic part-of-
speech tagging using decision trees”. In: Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on New
Methods in Natural Language Processing.
(Manchester). Vol. 12, pp. 44–49.

Tiedemann, Jörg (2011). Bitext Alignment. Vol. 4.
Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies 2. Morgan & Claypool.

Varga, Dániel, László Németh, Péter Halácsy, An-
drás Kornai, Viktor Trón, and Viktor Nagy
(2005). “Parallel corpora for medium den-
sity languages”. In: Proceedings of the Re-
cent Advances in Natural Language Processing.
(Borovets), pp. 590–596.

Volk, Martin, Chantal Amrhein, Noëmi Aepli,
Mathias Müller, and Phillip Ströbel (2016).
“Building a Parallel Corpus on the World’s Old-
est Banking Magazine”. In: Proceedings of the
Conference on Natural Language Processing.
(Bochum).

317


