Multilingual Ontologies for the Representation and Processing of 

Folktales 

 
 

Thierry Declerck 

Anastasija Aman, Martin Banzer, 

Dominik Macháček, Lisa Schäfer, Natalia 

DFKI GmbH,  

Skachkova 

Saarland University 

Multilingual Technologies 

Computational Linguistics Department 

Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3 
D-66123 Saarbrücken 

declerck@dfki.de 

P.O. Box 15 11 50 

D-66041 Saarbrücken, Germany 

 

 

Abstract 

to 

on 

folktales 

We  describe  work  done  in  the  field  of 
folkloristics  and  consisting 
in  creating 
ontologies  based  on  well-established 
studies  proposed  by  “classical”  folklorists. 
This work is supporting the availability of a 
huge  amount  of  digital  and  structured 
knowledge 
digital 
humanists.  The  ontological  encoding  of 
past  and  current  motif-indexation  and 
classification  systems  for  folktales  was  in 
the  first  step  limited  to  English  language 
data. This led us to focus on making those 
newly generated formal knowledge sources 
available  in  a  few  more  languages,  like 
German, Russian and Bulgarian. We stress 
the 
this 
multilingual  extension  of  our  ontologies  at 
a  larger  scale,  in  order  for  example  to 
support 
the  automated  analysis  and 
classification  of  such  narratives  in  a  large 
variety  of  languages,  as  those  are  getting 
more and more accessible on the Web.   

importance 

achieving 

of 

1 

Introduction 

A  final  goal  of  our  work  is  to  make  high  quality 
content in the larger field of folkloristics available 
to a broad range of applications involving language 
technologies. The content, which is based on well-
established  and  widely  used  classical  motif-
indexation,  description  and  classification  systems 

for folklore and related narratives, has been ported 
to standard W3C1 formal representation languages, 
like OWL2, RDF(s)3  and RDF4. 

The result of this work is an integrated ontology 
containing about 60,000 classes and instances that 
are 
interlinked  and  searchable  by  means  of 
semantic  query  engines.  The  integrated  ontology, 
encoding  distinct 
for 
folktales,  offers  a  unique  combination  of  generic 
classifications  of  narrative  types  and  very  fine-
grained motifs (or patterns) occurring in tales.  

types  of  descriptives 

This  ontology  can  be  optimally  re-used  in  the 
context  of  narrative  engines  supporting  the  re-
organization and adaptation of plots and characters 
in  different  and  new  contexts  of  narration  to  be 
displayed in various  environments, like automated 
text generation or audio story telling.   

The original folktale knowledge sources that are 
now  available  in  this  rich  semantic  environment 
are the Thompson's Motif-Index of Folk-Literature 
(Thompson,  1955-1958),  the  Aarne-Thompson-
Uther  Classification  System  of 
International 
Folktales  (Uther,  2004),  the  so-called  Proppian 
functions  and  also 
typical  characters  of 
(Russian) folktales (Propp, 1968).  

the 

The  work  by  Propp  is  very  relevant,  as  his 
approach was aiming not only at characterizing the 
elements  of  a  tale,  but  also  and  mainly  at 
describing  the  organization  of  such  elements  in  a 
tale  for  building  consistent  stories.  The  influence 

                                                           
1 https://www.w3.org/ 
2 https://www.w3.org/OWL/ 
3 https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/ 
4 https://www.w3.org/RDF/ 

20

Proceedings of the LT4DHCSEE in conjunction with RANLP 2017, pages 20–23,

Varna, Bulgaria, 8 September 2017.

http://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-046-5_003

21

In a second step, we proposed a multilingual 

ontologization of the Proppian system. A version is 
available now for English, German and Russian. This 

work was done together with 2 Russian native speakers, 

who could read the original version of the work by 

Propp, and could also extract the relevant terms from 

the German translation (published in 1972) and from the 

English version (Propp, 1968).  

Table  1  gives  an  example  on  the  way  this 
multilingual 
in  our 
ontology, for the Proppian function “Interdiction”. 
 

is  encoded 

information 

of  the  Proppian  approach  on  the  production  of 
cinematic  narratives  has  been 
studied  and 
discussed  in  many  publications  (see  for  example 
(Fell, 1997)).  

The ontologization of the Proppian elements, in 
combination  with  the  Motifs  Index  and  the  Tales 
Types  offers  a  very  closely  woven  set  of  fined-
grained  modules  that  can  serve  as  an  (extensible) 
catalogue of basic plot elements.  Instances for the 
Aarne-Thompson-Uther  Classification  System  of 
International  Folktales  have  been  collected  from 
various Web resources, like the ``Multilingual Folk 
Tale  Database5 and  the  “Ashliman  collection”6,  so 
that we have now more than 4,000 stories included 
as instances in the ontology.  

2  Towards  Multilingual  Ontologies  for 

Folktales 

In a first step we created an ontology based on one 
story, the Russian tale “Гуси-лебеди” (The Magic 
Swan Geese), including a large family ontology, as 
families  are  playing  an  important  role  in  many 
tales.  The  ontology  is  described  in  (Koleva  et  al., 
2012).  This  was  our  first  development  of  a 
multilingual  ontology  in  the  field  of  folktales. 
Languages  covered  were  English,  German, 
Russian and Bulgarian. 
 

 

 

Table 1: The Propp Function “Interdiction” in the 
ontology, including multilingual rdf(s) “label” and 

“comment” properties. 

 

In  Table  1,  the reader  can see how  we  encode  the 
multilingual  data  using  the  RDF(s)  annotation 
properties  “label”  and  “comment”.  The  texts 
encoded by those properties are taken directly from 
the  Russian  text  and  its  official  translations  in 
English and German.  

In  a  following  step,  we  will  provide  for  a 
translation  of  our  ontology  version  of  the  Aarne-
Thompson-Uther  Classification 
of 
International  Folktales7.  For  adding  German  terms 
and  descriptions  of  tale  types  we  will  use  (Uther, 

System 

                                                           
7 See (Declerck et. al., 2017) for details on this ontology. 

 

 

Figure 1: Screenshot from the Protégé tools, showing an 
element of the multilingual family class hierarchy in our 

first multilingual folktale ontology. 

                                                           
5 http://www.mftd.org/index.php?action=atu 
6 http://www.pitt.edu/~dash/folktexts.html 

22

2015), a  classification  system  for  German  folktale 
types covering to a great extent (Uther, 2004), but 
with German language data.  Figure 28 is giving an 
idea  of  the  type  of  hierarchical  structure  we  are 
dealing with in this resource, which we abbreviate 
to “ATU”. 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Example of the classification levels of ATU. 

ANIMAL TALES and TALES OF 

MAGIC are in the first level, Wild Animals, Wild 

Animals and Domestic Animals and Wild 

Animals and Humans are on the second level and The 
Clever Fox and Other Wild Animals are on the third 
level. The ranges behind each line are the so called 

ATU numbers which belong to each class. 

 
A way to start to expand the language coverage of 
the  ontological  ATU  resource  lies  for  example  in 
taking  term  equivalents  that  are  available  in 
corresponding  Wikipedia  articles,  but 
is 
limited  by  now  to  French,  Estonian,  Spanish, 
Hebrew,  Chinese  and  Portuguese,  which  are  the 
Wikipedia  articles  that  contain  a  relevant  number 
of  ATU  types  in  their  language.  There  is  a  need 
thus 
in  other 
languages that are covering the ATU types.  

resources 

identify 

textual 

this 

to 

The same strategy can be followed for obtaining 
the term equivalents for the Proppian functions and 
characters.  We  notice  for  example  that  the  31 
function  names  are  available  in  the  Croatian 
Wikipedia article on Propp. Also the work (Propp, 
1968) has been translated in the Bosnian-Croatian-
Montenegrin-Serbian  language  (in  1982).  And  as 

                                                           
8 Image taken from http://www.mftd.org/index.php?action=atu 

(Propp,  1968)  has  been  translated  in  quite  some 
languages,  it  should  be  easy  to  extract  from  those 
translations the list of function and character terms. 

3  Multilingual Folktale Resources 

One  goal  of  having  different 
indexation, 
classification  or  other  schemes  for  folktales 
standardized  in  one  formal  representation  is  to 
support  NLP  tasks  applied  to  such  types  of  texts 
and 
their  automated  mark-up  or 
classification  along  the  lines  of  a  well-established 
knowledge source. 

to  allow 

There  is  one  very  interesting  resource  on  the 
Web,  called  “Multilingual  Folk  Tale  Database”9, 
which  is  offering  for  some  of  the  uploaded  tale 
texts,  in  many  languages,  a  corresponding  type 
number 
the  Aarne-Thompson-Uther 
classification.  The  “Multilingual  Folk  Tale 
Database”  is  also  displaying  some  folktales  in  a 
parallel fashion, in various languages, offering to a 
certain extent a comparable multilingual corpus of 
folktales.  

from 

This  data  can  thus  provide  for  a  kind  of  gold 
standard for classification tasks, at least for tales in 
English, which are in the majority in the database. 
We wrote a crawler for accessing the content of the 
Multilingual  Folktale  Database  and  extracted 
folktales  with  available  metadata. This  gave  us  an 
access to information about the language, the ATU 
class number and its label.  

4 

Issues  for  a  multilingual  Classification 
Task  

The  Multilingual  Folk  Tale  Database  contains 
stories in 11 languages. We crawled all of them.  
Figure  3  summarizes  the  number  of  stories  by 
language.  In  total  we  have  901  stories  in  English 
and between roughly 500 and 600 stories in other 4 
languages,  French,  Spanish,  Hungarian  and 
Russian10. We realized that we have too few stories 
in  German,  Danish,  Polish,  Italian,  Czech  and 
Dutch  to  implement  a  strong  supervised  classifier 
for them. We also realized that many of the stories 
in the Multilingual Folk Tale Database do not have 
an ATU number assigned. 
 

                                                           
9 See again: http://www.mftd.org/index.php?action=atu 
10 Those figures are valid for May 2017, when we crawled the 
database. 

23

 

 

Figure 3: Number of all stories in the Multilingual Folk 

Tale Database by language (May 2017) 

 

 

Figure  4  shows  the  numbers  of  stories  with 
assigned  ATU  level  1  labels,  for  each  language. 
The language with most labelled stories is English, 
with  342  labelled  stories.  The  second  is  German, 
with 227 stories. For other languages we have too 
few  resources.  So  there  is  a  need  to  expand  this 
kind  of 
the 
corresponding languages.  
 

resources  with 

from 

tales 

5  Conclusions 

that 

In  this  short  paper,  we  presented  work  done  in 
generating  multilingual  ontologies 
are 
encoding  past  and  current  “classical”  (meaning 
non-digital-born) knowledge sources in the field of 
folklore, more specifically folktales. We described 
the current level of multilingualism in some of the 
ontologies  we  developed  and  proposed  a  way  to 
extend  this  to  more  languages.  Additionally  we 
described a multilingual source of tales, which are 
partly labelled with the type numbers of the Aarne-
Thompson-Uther classification scheme, and which 
can be used by now for an automated classification 
task for English folktales. We note that the current 
collection  of  labelled  tales  in  other  languages  has 
to  be  considerably  extended 
for  allowing 
supervised training.  

Acknowledgments 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments. 

References  

Thierry  Declerck,  Antónia  Kostová  and  Lisa  Schäfer. 
2017.  Towards  a  Linked  Data  Access  to  Folktales 
classified  by  Thompson’s  Motifs  and  Aarne-
Thompson-Uther’s  Types.  Proceedings  of  Digital 
Humanities 2017. Montréal.  

John  L.  Fell.  1977.  Vladimir  Propp  in  Hollywood.Film 
30(3):19–28. 

Quarterly 
https://doi.org/10.2307/1211770. 

Nikolina  Koleva,  Thierry  Declerck,  and  Hans-Ulrich 
Krieger.  2012.  An  ontology-based  iterative  text 
processing  strategy  for  detecting  and  recognizing 
characters  in  folktales.  In  Jan  Christoph  Meister, 
editor,  Digital  Humanities 
2012  Conference 
Abstracts, Hamburg University Press. 

 

 

Vladimir  Propp.  1968.  Morphology  of  the  folktale. 
Trans., Laurence Scott. 2nd ed., University of Texas 
Press. 

Figure 4: Number of stories in the Multilingual Folk 

Tale Database with an ATU type tag of level 1 by 

language (May 2017) 

 
As  the  database  of  multilingual  folktales  is  in 
continuous  expansion,  we  are  quite  confident  that 
in a limited amount of time a collection of tales in 
the  languages  of  concerns  for  the  LTDHCSEE 
workshop can be reached, whereas additional focus 
should be given on the correct assignment of ATU 
types to each tales. 

Stith  Thompson.  1955-1958.  Motif-index  of  folk-
literature:  A  classification  of  narrative  elements  in 
folktales, ballads,  myths,  fables,  medieval romances, 
exempla,fabliaux, 
legends. 
Revised  and  enlarged  edition,  Indiana  University 
Press. 

jest-books,  and 

local 

Hans-Jörg  Uther.  2004.  The  Types  of  International 
Folktales:  A  Classification  and  Bibliography.  Based 
on 
system  of  Antti  Aarne  and  Stith 
Thompson.Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.  

the 

