



















































Enhancing Drug-Drug Interaction Classification with Corpus-level Feature and Classifier Ensemble


Proceedings of the International Workshop on Digital Disease Detection using Social Media 2017 (DDDSM-2017), pages 52–56,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

 Enhancing Drug-Drug Interaction Classification with 
Corpus-level Feature and Classifier Ensemble

Abstract 

The study of drug-drug interaction (DDI) 

is important in the drug discovering. Both 

PubMed and DrugBank are rich re-

sources to retrieve DDI information 

which is usually represented in plain text. 

Automatically extracting DDI pairs from 

text improves the quality of drug discov-

ering. In this paper, we presented a study 

that focuses on the DDI classification. 

We normalized the drug names, and de-

veloped both sentence-level and corpus-

level features for DDI classification. A 

classifier ensemble approach is used for 

the unbalance DDI labels problem. Our 

approach achieved an F-score of 65.4% 

on SemEval 2013 DDI test set. The ex-

perimental results also show the effects 

of proposed corpus-level features in the 

DDI task. 

1 Introduction 

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a situation that a 

drug modifies the effect of another drug, and the 

modified effect may be increased, decreased or 

new. For examples, if a patient takes two drugs 

and one increases the effect of another, 

an overdose may occur. In contrary, an under 

dosage may occur if the effect is decreased. Fur-

thermore, the DDI may also cause the side ef-

fects. Therefore, the survey of DDI studies is 

important for improving the quality of drug dis-

covering. Many drug-drug interactions are pub-

licly available through PubMed or DrugBank 

(Law, et al., 2014). However, only a fraction of 

them is in a structured format such as DrugBank 

(Law, et al., 2014). Most DDIs are represented in 

unstructured plane text. Therefore, automatically 

                                                 
 * Corresponding author 

extracting DDI form these texts is an important 

issue.  

In 2013, SemEval (Segura-Bedmar, et al., 

2013) sets this task as the one of its shared task 

challenge. Extracting DDI consists of two tasks: 

(1) drug name recognition (DNR) and (2) DDI 

classification. The named entity recognition 

(NER) is usually formulated as the sequence la-

bel problem and resolved by the Conditional 

Random Fields model (Campos, et al., 2013; 

Leaman, et al., 2015). The most important thing 

is to design and select proper features which cap-

ture the boundaries of the named entities. For 

DNR, several approaches (Björne, et al., 2013; 

Liu, et al., 2015; Rocktäschel, et al., 2013) have 

been proposed. For instance, Liu et.al (Liu, et al., 

2015) considered selecting DNR features as a 

feature engineering problem, and their experi-

ments combined several features. Their approach 

achieved an F-score of 79.36% in the DDIEx-

traction 2013 dataset (Segura-Bedmar, et al., 

2013).  

The second task is to classify the drug-drug 

pair in the sentence into one of advice, effect, 

mechanism, int (interaction) or negative labels. 

The advice label indicates that the drug-drug pair 

is recommended or advised to have the interac-

tion. The effect label indicates that the DDI ef-

fect is described in the sentence. The mechanism 

label indicates that the DDI is described about 

Pharmacology which includes both pharmacody-

namics and pharmacokinetics. The int label indi-

cates that the physical interaction is stated with-

out any other information. The negative label 

indicates that there is no interaction. For the sec-

ond task, several Machine Learning (ML)-based 

approaches have been proposed. For an example, 

WBI-DDI (Thomas, et al., 2013) proposed a two-

step strategy. They detect general drug-drug in-

teractions regardless of subtype using the differ-

ent machine-learning methods, and proposed an 

ensemble voting approach to ensemble these 

methods. Their approach achieved an F-score of 

 
Jing-Cyun Tu 

Yuan-Ze University, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan 

st410634@gmail.com 

Po-Ting Lai 
National Tsing-Hua University, 

HsinChu, Taiwan 
potinglai@gmail.com 

Richard Tzong-Han Tsai* 
National Central University, 

Taoyuan, Taiwan 
thtsai@csie.ncu.edu.tw 

 

52



60.9%. The ML-based approaches usually suf-

fered from bias number of the positive and nega-

tive DDI pairs. Only few of them have true inter-

actions. To resolve this problem, FBK-irst 

(Chowdhury and Lavelli, 2013) proposed a mul-

ti-phase kernel-based approach. They consider 

the negative DDI sentence and pair as less in-

formative sentence (LLS) and less informative 

instance (LLI). They design the rules and classi-

fier to discard LLS and LLI. They proposed a 

hybrid kernel approach and several syntactic de-

pendent features for DDI detection and classifi-

cation. Their approach achieves an F-score of 

65% on SemEval DDI 2013 test set (Segura-

Bedmar, et al., 2013).  

Despise many DDI classification approach-

es had been proposed, the approaches for DDI 

still can be further improved. For an example, 

since a drug can be represented in its branded 

name or generic name, the interaction describe in 

other sentence could not be directly used in other 

sentences without linking its different names. 

Therefore, the features used in current approach-

es usually focus on sentence-level and the infor-

mation above the target DDI sentences, such as 

corpus-level features, were not referred. Iyer 

et.al. (Iyer, et al., 2013) proposed an annotation-

based approach to learn DDI from the electronic 

medical records (EMR). Since the EMR has rich 

temporal information such as section times, they 

annotate temporal relationship between the drugs 

and event and calculate the odds ratio (OR) of 

the drug-drug pair with events to only one drug 

with the event. Their experimental results show 

the effect of odds ratio in learning DDI pairs.  

In this paper, we present a study that focus-

es on the second task. First, we proposed a ML-

based approach which includes the basic words, 

Part-of-speech, syntactic and template features as 

our baseline. Second, we deal with the drug vari-

ous names and proposed the corpus-level fea-

tures by calculating the odds ratios of the drugs 

matched our automatically generated DDI tem-

plate which is inspired by Iyer et.al.’s approach 

(Iyer, et al., 2013). Third, to tackle the bias labels 

in DDI corpus, we used a classifier ensemble 

approach with voting strategy. The experiments 

are in the SemEval DDI 2013 dataset (Segura-

Bedmar, et al., 2013). Our proposed approach 

achieved an F-score of 65.4%, which outper-

forms both WBI-DDI and FBK-irst’s approaches. 

2 Method 

The proposed DDI classification approach con-

sists of four main steps. The first is Drug Name 

Normalization, which used RxNorm (Nelson, et 

al., 2011) to normalize drug synonyms in order 

calculate odds ratio more accurately. Following 

is the Odds Ratio step, in which we calculate the 

odds ratio of drug-drug pair matched DDI tem-

plates to only one drug matched. Next, Features 

for Classification presents the DDI classification 

features. Lastly, the Classifier Ensemble divides 

positive and negative training data into equal size, 

and training five classifiers in the different sets, 

then used a voting strategy to ensemble classifi-

cation results. 

2.1 Drug Name Normalization 

A drug might be represented as its generic name 

or branded name in the text. Here we refer them 

as drug synonyms. To normalize the synonyms 

can make the calculation of odds ratio more ac-

curately. RxNorm is a tool developed by Nation-

al Library of Medicine (NIH). It contains the 

normalized drug names and links them to many 

drug vocabularies which are commonly used in 

pharmacy management and drug interaction 

software. RxNorm can links the drug names be-

tween different systems which do not use the 

same software and vocabulary. Before calculat-

ing the odds ratio, we will use RxNorm to nor-

malize the drug name d into its generic name g. 

If the d cannot be normalized to any generic 

name, then we will use d as its normalized name. 

2.2 Odds Ratio 

The odds is the ratio r of the probability p1 that the 

event of interest occurs to the probability p2 that it 

does not occur. This is often estimated by the ratio 

of the number of times t1 that the event of interest 

occurs to the number of times t2 that it does not. In 

this paper, the odds ratio refers to the ratio or of 

the odds r1 that the drug d1 interacts with the drug 

d2 to the odds r2 that d1 or d2 interacts with the 

other drugs. For example, the odds r1 that a drug 

d1 interacts with the drug d2 is 4 and the odds r2 

that d1 or d2 interacts with the other drugs is 2. 

The odds ratio or of d1 and d2 will be 4/2 = 2. The 

higher or indicates the higher odds that d1 and d2 

have interaction than they interact with the other 

drugs. While calculating or, whether d1 interacts 

with d2 is obtained by the DDI templates which 

we will introduce in section 2.3.2. 

2.3 Features for Classification 

Our classifier uses basic, template and odds ratio 

53



features. The basic and template features utilized 

the immediate context of the drugs pair as fea-

tures, whereas odds ratio features used the cor-

pus-level information. 

2.3.1 Basic Features 

The basic features comprised words, Part-of-

speech (POS) and syntactic features. There are 

two sets of word features used in our system, 

each with a different feature label. Inter-Drugs n-

grams set includes all word unigrams and bi-

grams located between drugs. If none is present, 

the feature is given a “NULL” value. Surround-

ing Words set includes the two words before the 

first drug and the two after the second drug. If 

there are no words before or after both NEs, a 

“NULL” value is set. All words are treated as 

bag-of-words. That is, the order of these words is 

not considered. Similarly, the unigrams of POS 

tags between drugs are also used as POS fea-

tures. We also parse each sentence with a full-

sentence syntactic parser (Roark, et al., 2006) to 

generate its full parse tree. We use the syntactic 

path through the parse tree from the drug d1 to 

the drug d2 as a feature.  

2.3.2 Template Features 

Our template generation (TG) algorithm, which 

extracts word patterns for drugs pairs using 

Smith and Waterman's local alignment algorithm 

(Smith and Waterman, 1981). Firstly, we pair all 

sentences containing positive relations. The sen-

tence pairs are then aligned word-by-word and a 

pattern satisfying the alignment result is created. 

Each slot in the template is given by the corre-

sponding constraint information expressed in the 

form of a word (e.g. “associated”). If two 

aligned sentences have nothing in common for a 

given slot, the TG algorithm puts a wildcard in 

the position. The complete TG algorithm is de-

scribed with pseudo code in the Algorithm. The 

similarity function used to compare the similarity 

of two tokens in local algorithm is defined as: 



 


 otherwise  0,

     if  , yx
yxSim

1
max),(  

where x and y are tokens in sentences si and sj, 

respectively. The similarity of two sentences is 

calculated by the local algorithm on the basis of 

this token-level similarity function. 

Template Generation Algorithm 
INPUT: A set of sentences S = {s1, …, sk} 

1：T = {}; 

2：for si in s1 to sk-1 

3：    for sj in si+1 to sk 

4：        if the similarity of si and sj above the threshold 

5：        then generate template t from si and sj 

6：            T ← t ; 

7：    end; 

8：end; 

9：return T 

OUTPUT: A set of templates T = {t1, …, tk} 

2.3.3 Odds Ratio Features 

The odds ratio is the ratio of one odds to an-

other, and it is larger than zero. In our exper-

iment, we use different thresholds as odd ra-

tio features include 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5. The 

real number of odds ratio is also used as one 

of the odds ratio features. 

2.4 Classifier Ensemble 

The amount of negative DDI pairs is higher than 

the positive ones in both DDI corpus and real 

world. The support vector machine model 

(Chang and Lin, 2011) used in our experiment is 

suffered from this problem. To tackle this prob-

lem, we proposed a classifier ensemble approach 

to training our classifiers. Firstly, we randomly 

divide the negative data into five unique subsets, 

since the ratio of the positive pairs to the nega-

tive pairs is approximate 5 in the experimental 

training corpus. Secondly, we construct five 

training datasets that each contains all positive 

data and one negative subset. Thirdly, we train 

five base classifiers with SVM. Here we use the 

Gaussian kernel. Once the classifiers are con-

structed, new DDI pairs are classified by the 

classifiers, and their results are aggregated to 

form the final ensemble decision output. The 

vote method is used in this paper. Given classifi-

ers Ci, i = 1, 2, ... , NC, and DDI labels Lj , j = 1, 

2, ... , NL, where NC is the ensemble size and NL 

is the number of DDI labels. The final aggregat-

ed decision is the winning classifier that has the 

highest votes across all classifiers. If any tie situ-

ation existed, the label with the highest predicted 

value will be assigned. 

3 Experiments 

To evaluate our approach, the SemEval 2013 

DDI corpus is used. Table 1 shows the number of 

the DDI categories annotated in the corpus. The 

most common type was negative pairs in both 

54



training and test set. Here, we first compare the 

performance achieved by baseline features (basic 

+ template features) to the baseline + odds ratio 

(OR) features. In Table 2, we can see that OR 

features improve the baseline’s performance by 

an F-score 11.9%. Our approach performs better 

than FBK-irst and WBI-DDI, because our OR 

features are effective. In Table 3, we list the F-

score for each category of DDI. We observe that 

the F-scores for advice and mechanism are com-

paratively high. This is possibly because they 

have some specific keywords in both categories. 

However, although effect is the second most fre-

quent category, it does not have a high F-score. 

We think this discrepancy is due to the fact that 

the descriptions of DDI effects are commonly 

presented more flexible. Int's performance is 

comparatively higher than the other two systems 

since the OR features are effective while the 

training set is very small. 

 

Type 
Training 

set 

Test 

set 

#Documents 456 116 

#Sentence 2915 341 

#Positive 

pairs 

Advice 658 160 

Effect 1243 292 

Mechanism 1004 253 

Int 168 10 

Total 3073 715 

#Negative pairs 17905 4312 

#Total pair 20978 5027 

Table 1: The statistic of DDI dataset 

 

Configuration P(%) R(%) F(%) 

Baseline 50.4 57.0 53.4 

WBI-DDI 64.2 57.9 60.9 

FBK-irst 65.0 66.0 65.0 

Baseline + OR 64.0 66.7 65.3 

Table 2: The DDI classification performances on 

the test set 

 

Category 
Baseline 

+ OR 

FBK-

irst 

WBI-

DDI 

Advice 69.5 69.2 63.2 

Effect 62.3 62.8 61.0 

Mechanism 68.2 67.9 61.8 

INT 60.0 54.7 51.0 

Overall 65.3 65.0 60.9 

Table 3. The F-scores of individual DDI catego-

ries on the test set 

 

4 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present a classifier ensemble ap-

proach for drug-drug interaction classification. We 

developed the sentence-level features for the clas-

sification. To encode corpus-level odds ratio fea-

tures, we used the RxNorm to normalize the drug 

names. Our ensemble classifier achieves an F-

score of 65.4% on SemEval 2013 DDI test set. 

The results underscore the effect of corpus-level 

features in classifying the drug-drug interaction. 

Reference 

Björne, J., Kaewphan, S. and Salakoski, T. 

(2013) UTurku: Drug Named Entity 

Recognition and Drug-Drug Interaction 

Extraction Using SVM Classification and 

Domain Knowledge. Second Joint 

Conference on Lexical and Computational 

Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings 

of the Seventh International Workshop on 

Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013). 

Association for Computational Linguistics, 

pp. 651-659. 

Campos, D., Matos, S. and Oliveira, J.L. (2013) 

Gimli: open source and high-performance 

biomedical name recognition, BMC 

Bioinformatics, 14, 54. 

Chang, C.-C. and Lin, C.-J. (2011) LIBSVM: A 

library for support vector machines, ACM 

Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., 2, 1-27. 

Chowdhury, M.M.F. and Lavelli, A. (2013) FBK-

irst : A Multi-Phase Kernel Based Approach 

for Drug-Drug Interaction Detection and 

Classification that Exploits Linguistic 

Information. Second Joint Conference on 

Lexical and Computational Semantics 

(*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the 

Seventh International Workshop on 

Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013). 

Association for Computational Linguistics, 

pp. 351-355. 

Iyer, S.V., et al. (2013) Learning Signals of 

Adverse Drug-Drug Interactions from the 

Unstructured Text of Electronic Health 

Records, AMIA Summits on Translational 

Science Proceedings, 2013, 98-98. 

Law, V., et al. (2014) DrugBank 4.0: shedding 

new light on drug metabolism, Nucleic 

55



Acids Research, 42, D1091-D1097. 

Leaman, R., Wei, C.-H. and Lu, Z. (2015) 

tmChem: a high performance approach for 

chemical named entity recognition and 

normalization, Journal of Cheminformatics, 

7, S3. 

Liu, S., et al. (2015) Feature Engineering for 

Drug Name Recognition in Biomedical 

Texts: Feature Conjunction and Feature 

Selection, Computational and Mathematical 

Methods in Medicine, 2015, 9. 

Nelson, S.J., et al. (2011) Normalized names for 

clinical drugs: RxNorm at 6 years, Journal 

of the American Medical Informatics 

Association : JAMIA, 18, 441-448. 

Roark, B., et al. (2006) SParseval: Evaluation 

metrics for parsing speech, Proc. LREC. 

Rocktäschel, T., et al. (2013) WBI-NER: The 

impact of domain-specific features on the 

performance of identifying and classifying 

mentions of drugs. Second Joint Conference 

on Lexical and Computational Semantics 

(*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the 

Seventh International Workshop on 

Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013). 

Association for Computational Linguistics, 

pp. 356-363. 

Segura-Bedmar, I., Martínez, P. and Herrero 

Zazo, M. (2013) SemEval-2013 Task 9 : 

Extraction of Drug-Drug Interactions from 

Biomedical Texts (DDIExtraction 2013). 

Second Joint Conference on Lexical and 

Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 

2: Proceedings of the Seventh International 

Workshop on Semantic Evaluation 

(SemEval 2013). Association for 

Computational Linguistics, pp. 341-350. 

Smith, T.F. and Waterman, M.S. (1981) 

Identification of common molecular 

subsequences, Journal of Molecular 

Biology, 147, 195-197. 

Thomas, P., et al. (2013) WBI-DDI: Drug-Drug 

Interaction Extraction using Majority 

Voting. Second Joint Conference on Lexical 

and Computational Semantics (*SEM), 

Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh 

International Workshop on Semantic 

Evaluation (SemEval 2013). Association for 

Computational Linguistics, pp. 628-635. 

 

 

56


