










































%


1 
Proceedings of the Linguistic Resources for Automatic Natural Language Generation Workshop, pages 1–9, 

Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4, 2017. © 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics 

From FOAF to English: Linguistic Contribution to Web Semantics 

Max Silberztein 

Université de Franche-Comté 

max.silberztein@univ-fcomte.fr 

Abstract 

This paper presents a linguistic module capable 

of generating a set of English sentences that 

correspond to a Resource Description 

Framework (RDF) statement; I discuss how a 

generator can control the linguistic module, as 

well as the various limitations of a pure 

linguistic framework. 

1 Introduction 

Automatic Natural Language Generation Software 

aims to express information stored in a knowledge 

database as a Natural Language text. The 

information at the source typically consists of a 

series of simple atomic statements, such as “John 

owns a house”, “Mary lives in Manchester”, “Peter 

is Ann’s cousin”. These statements are usually 

stored in a knowledge database or ontology in a 

formal notation such as Prolog (e.g. 

“Own(John,House)”) or XML. 

Translating each elementary statement into an 

isolated English sentence is straightforward; the 

difficulty arises when one tries to process a complex 

set of statements to generate a text that feels 

“natural”: an entity that is mentioned several times 

might then have to be referred to by a pronoun, a 

possessive determiner (e.g. He is her cousin), or an 

anaphoric term (e.g. The student is her cousin); a 

complement might need to be brought into focus 

(e.g. It is Peter who is Ann’s cousin); subsequent 

sentences might need to agree in tense and aspect, 

etc. For each original individual statement, there 

might be thousands of potential English sentences 

that can express it: the generator must then decide 

                                                                                                            
1 See Silberztein (2016a). NooJ is a free, open-source linguis-

tic development environment supported by the European 

Metashare program. 

which sentence to produce. This article presents the 

linguistic component of such a system. 

2 The linguistic framework 

Based on the principles of linguistic approaches to 

generation laid out by Danlos (1987), I have used 

the NooJ1 platform to construct a set of linguistic 

resources that parses a sequence of RDF statements 

and produces a corresponding set of English 

sentences. NooJ allows linguists to construct 

structured sets of linguistic resources (“modules”) 

in the form of dictionaries and grammars2 to 

formalize a large gamut of linguistic phenomena: 

orthography and spelling, inflectional, derivational 

and agglutinative morphology, local and structural 

syntax, transformational syntax, lexical and 

predicative semantics. All linguistic analyses are 

performed sequentially by adding and/or removing 

linguistic annotations to/from a Text Annotation 

Structure (TAS); at each level of the analysis, each 

parser uses the annotations that were added to the 

TAS by preceding parsers, and then adds new 

annotations to the TAS, or deletes annotations that 

have been proven to be incorrect. This architecture 

allows the system to perform complex linguistic 

operations that require information coming from all 

levels of analyses, even when total disambiguation 

was not possible at earlier stages of the analysis, 

thus avoiding the problems at the heart of criticisms 

against pure linguistic approaches.3 

For instance, to generate the sentence “She is 

Joe’s love” from the elementary statement “Joe 

loves Lea”, a linguistic system needs to access the 

following information:

2 Regular Grammars, Context-Free Grammars, Context-Sensi-

tive Grammars and Unrestricted Grammars can be entered ei-

ther in a textual or in a graphical form. The grammars shown 

in this article are graphical Context-Sensitive Grammars. 
3 See for instance the “generation gap” discussed by Gardent 

Perez-Beltrachini (2017). 



 

2 

 

 the word “loves” can be a conjugated form of 
lexical entry to love;4 

 the verb to love can be nominalized into the 
Human Noun a love;5 

 the structure N0 V N1 can be restructured as N1 

is N0’s V-n; 

 the Noun Lea is feminine therefore it can be 
replaced with pronoun she when it is in a 

subject position. 

One important characteristic of NooJ resources is 

that they are “application-neutral”: they can be used 

both by parsers and by generators. This allows a 

single software application to both: 

 parse sentences, e.g., from sentence “It is not 
Lea that he loves”, produce the analysis “Joe 

loves Lea +Focus1 +Neg +Pron1”,  

 or, the other way around, given the elementary 

sentence “Joe loves Lea” and the series of 

operators “+Pro0 +Preterit +AspCont 

+Intens2”, generate the complex sentence “He 

continued to love Lea for a long time”. 

Given the elementary sentence Joe loves Lea, 

Silberztein (2016b) showed that by combining 

linguistic operations such as negation (e.g. Joe does 

not love Lea), focus (e.g. It is Joe who loves Lea), 

tense (e.g. Joe loved Lea), aspect (e.g. Joe has 

stopped loving Lea), modality (e.g. Joe should love 

Lea), intensity (e.g. Joe loves Lea passionately), 

pronominalization (e.g. He loves her), 

nominalization (e.g. Joe is in love with Lea), etc., a 

system can generate over a million declarative 

sentences (e.g. It is not her that he stopped loving), 

about 500,000 nominal phrases (e.g. Joe’s 

passionate love for her) and over 3 million 

questions (e.g. When did Joe start loving her?). 

Each generated sentence is associated with the 

series of transformations (e.g. +Passive, +Focus1) 

used to produce it. 

In this article, I show how this system can be 

adapted so that an NLG system can control what 

exact English sentence(s) need to be generated. 

                                                                                                            
4 There are other possible analyses such as in loves = Plural of 

Noun a love. 
5 There is a second nominalization that is not in play here : 

Joe’s love for Lea, where love is an abstract noun. 

3 FOAF Predicates 

The Semantic Web6 constitutes a gigantic network 

of ontologies that contain elementary pieces of 

information, written in the RDF syntax. A typical 

RDF statement is a triple that contains one subject 

entity, one predicate and one object entity; the 

predicate states the type of relationship between the 

two entities. All three elements are identified by a 

URI. For instance, the following RDF triple states 

that the person “Mark_Twain” is the author of the 

book “Huckleberry_Fin”:7 
  <http://example.org/Mark_Twain> 

  <http://example.org/author> 

  <http://example.org/Huckleberry_Fin>. 

In this article, I focus on the Friend Of A Friend 

(FOAF) ontology (FOAF Vocabulary Specification 

2010), which contains a set of classes for entities: 

Agent, Document, Group, Image, Organization, 

Person, Project... 

and a set of properties (i.e. predicates), e.g.: 

account, age, based near, birthday, 

currentProject, familyName, gender, 

givenName, interest, knows, name, title… 

4 From RDF to English 

A linguistic module capable of parsing RDF 

statements and producing the corresponding 

potential English sentences needs the following 

resources: 

 a set of lexical and morphological resources to 
link all words and expressions to their actual 

inflected and derived forms (I am using NooJ’s 

default English module); 

 a syntactic grammar to parse an RDF statement 
and extract from it the value of its entities and 

predicate; 

 one syntactic grammar for each FOAF 
property, in order to describe the set of English 

sentences that can be used to express it. 

The grammar for FOAF property currentProject 

shown in Figure 1 contains four parts: 

 Turtle: this grammar describes RDF 
statements expressed in the simple Turtle 

notation; 

6 See Berners-Lee et al. (2001). 
7 I am using the Terse RDF Triple Language (Turtle) syntax, 

see RDF1.1. Turtle (2014). 

http://example.org/Mark_Twain
http://example.org/author


 

3 

 

 declarative, this grammar describes 
declarative sentences, e.g. Tim Berners-Lee is 

currently working on the World Wide Web 

project 

 noun phrase describes noun phrases, e.g. Tim 

Berners-Lee’s World Wide Web current project 

 question describes questions, e.g. Is Tim 
Berners-Lee involved in the World Wide Web 

project? 

 
Figure 1: Parse RDF and generate sentences 

Note that the same grammar can be used to parse 

an RDF statement and produce the corresponding 

English equivalent (sentences, phrases and 

questions), or reciprocally, to parse any English 

sentence, phrase or question and produce the 

corresponding RDF statement. In this article, I 

assume that the system receives an RDF statement 

as its input; it will then produce the corresponding 

English declarative sentences, phrases and 

questions. 

4.1 Parsing an RDF statement 

Parsing an RDF statement written in the simplified 

Turtle notation is straightforward: a statement is a 

sequence of three XML tags followed by a period; 

each tag contains an URI that represents an entity or 

a predicate. For instance, consider the following 

triple: 
<http://dbpedia.org/Tim_Berners-Lee> 

<http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/currentProject> 

<http://dbpedia.org/World_Wide_Web>. 

Grammar XML, shown in Figure 2, extracts the 

suffix of each tag’s URI and stores it in variable 

$Suf. Note that the suffix may contain any number 

of letters, digits, periods, dashes and underscore 

characters.8  

The main grammar Turtle shown in Figure 3 

contains three references to the XML graph: it 

parses a sequence of three consecutive XML tags 

                                                                                                            
8 <WF> matches any sequence of letters; <NB> matches any 

sequence of digits. 
9 Variables with prefix “@” have a global scope. This allows 

the system to link a given entity to all its references (e.g. 

“Lea” with Pronoun “her”) across a grammar that may contain 

and computes the value of each variable $Suf. Each 

subsequent value of $Suf is then copied to the 

corresponding global variables @Subject, 

@Predicate and @Object.9 

 
Figure 2: Parse XML tags 

After parsing the previous RDF statement, 

variable @Subject is set to “Tim_Berners-Lee”, 

variable @Predicate is set to “currentProject” and 

variable @Object is set to “World_Wide_Web”. 

 
Figure 3: Parsing Turtle RDF Statements 

4.2 Generating English Sentences 

Each property from the FOAF ontology 

corresponds to a set of English sentences that can be 

used to express it. In this approach, one must 

construct one grammar to generate all the English 

sentences that correspond to each of the FOAF 

properties name, firstName, givenName and 

familyName (e.g. His first name is Tim, Berners- 

Lee’s given name is Tim), a grammar that 

corresponds to the FOAF property age (e.g. John is 

18-month old; Mary is 12; Joe is still a teenager; 

Lea is a senior citizen), a grammar that expresses 

the fact that a person knows another person (e.g. 

John is acquainted with Mary, Lea has met Joe 

already), a grammar that expresses the fact that a 

person is currently working on a project, another for  

dozens of graphs. Here, we want to link @Predicate to all its 

English corresponding terms, whether they are Verbs (e.g. 

works on), Adjectives (is involved in) or even Nouns (e.g. 

head of). 



 

4 

 

  

 

Figure 4: Declarative Sentences 

 

property pastProject, another for property enemyOf, 

etc. 

Being able to automatically produce questions 

would be useful for a few specialized applications 

such as literature or language teaching (whereas a 

software automatically generates questions from a 

study text that students are expected to answer) or 

question answering, whereas sentences recognized 

by the declarative grammar are potential answers 

for any question recognized by the question 

grammar.10 In this article, I present the declarative 

and noun phrase grammars. 

4.3 Declarative Sentences 

The entrance point for the grammar that represents 

(i.e. can parse and/or generate) the declarative 

sentences for property currentProject is shown in 

Figure 4. 

The grammar uses the value of the variables 

@Subject and @Object (in red in the graph) that 

were set by the parsing of the currentProject RDF 

statement. This graph contains references to 

embedded graphs (in yellow in the graph) such as 

current, project, the project, etc. For instance, the 

embedded grammar current represents the 

following Adjectives: 

                                                                                                            
10 The question grammar generates over one million ques-

tions, such as Who is working on the World Wide Web pro-

ject? What is Tim Berners-Lee’s current project? Is Tim Bern-

ers-Lee involved in the World Wide Web project? 

 current = current | in progress | ongoing | 
present | present-day; 

The grammar project contains the following nouns: 

 project = activity | affair | adventure | 
assignment | business | creation | enterprise | 

job | project | scheme | task | venture; 

The graph for the project is displayed in Figure 5. 

 
Figure 5: Graph for “the project” 

Note that this graph can produce anaphoric terms 

as well as pronouns, e.g.: 

Tim Berners-Lee is currently working on that 

enterprise. It is under Tim Berners-Lee’s 

control. 

The declarative grammar for property 

currentProject contains over 30 graphs and 

represents (i.e. can both parse or generate) over 

50,000 declarative sentences. 



 

5 

 

4.4 Noun Phrases 

The entrance point for the grammar that represents 

the noun phrases that might be used to express 

property currentProject can be seen in Figure 6. 

 
Figure 6: Noun Phrases 

This grammar represents (i.e. parses or 

generates) two types of noun phrases: phrases that 

focus on the currentProject entity, e.g.: 

Tim Berner-Lee’s World Wide Web, his 

ongoing project, etc. 

and phrases that focus on the person entity, e.g.: 

The World Wide Web project’s current director, 

the present head of that enterprise, its director, 

etc. 

This grammar does not describe phrases that 

focus on the date (e.g. the moment when Tim 

Berners-Lee’s project is the World Wide Web), even 

though the information that the project is “current” 

is a crucial part of the information represented by 

the RDF statement. Generating phrases from RDF 

statements that explicitly refer to a project’s initial 

and/or ending dates will require other grammars for 

dates, such as the default one available in the NooJ’s 

English module. 

5 Pronouns and anaphora 

The grammar currentProject produces certain 

sentences and phrases that should not be generated 

in isolation, e.g.: 

He is currently involved in that project. 

His project. 

If the goal is to produce one isolated sentence or 

phrase, that sentence or phrase should not contain 

any pronoun, possessive determiner or anaphoric 

term, otherwise the original information would be 

lost. However, most NLG applications aim at 

                                                                                                            
11 See Lloret Pastor (2011) on how the COMPENDIUM auto-

matic summary system manages redundancy and information 

producing texts that are sequences of related 

sentences and phrases: in order to keep the resulting 

text natural, it is then important to be able to use 

pronouns, possessive determiners, anaphoric terms, 

as well as every linguistic operator the language 

offers: aspect, derivation, focus, intensity, modality, 

tense, etc.11 

6 Aspect and Tense 

The currentProject property limits the possible 

aspect and tense of the generated English sentences 

to present or present progressive: the linguistic 

module generates sentences such as the following 

ones: 

Tim Berners-Lee (works | is working | is 

currently working) on the World Wide Web 

project; Tim Berners-Lee (is involved | is 

currently involved) in the World Wide Web 

project; Tim Berners-Lee’s (current | in 

progress | on going | present | present-day) 

project is the World Wide Web project, etc. 

but it may also generate sentences such as the 

following ones: 

[+Tense]: Tim Berners-Lee (was working | has 

worked | will be working) on the World Wide 

Web project. 

[+Aspect]: Tim Berners-Lee started working 

on the World Wide Web project (in 1989); Tim 

Berners-Lee has been working on the World 

Wide Web (for 20 years); Tim Berners-Lee will 

stop working on the World Wide Web (next 

year).  

[+Modality]: Tim Berners-Lee should work on 

the World Wide Web project; Tim Berners-Lee 

can work on the World Wide Web; Tim 

Berners-Lee might work on the World Wide 

Web. 

as well as sentences that contain any combination of 

Tense / Aspect / Modality variants: 

Tim Berners-Lee could have started to work on 

the WWW project (one year earlier). Steve 

Jobs has worked on the iPhone project (for a 

long time). Jürgen E. Schrempp initiated the 

Chrysler-Daimler merger task (last year). Has 

Larry Page been involved in the Alphabet Inc.  

fusion. The WebNLG Challenge also aims at producing a se-

quence of sentences that might contain elisions, anaphora or 

pronouns. 



 

6 

 

 

 
Figure 7: Operator-controlled generation 

 

Company adventure (from the very 

beginning)? 

Based on the sole currentProject property, it 

might not be appropriate to generate these 

sentences; however, text generators are always used 

to express more than one piece of information; these 

sentences will be useful if the generator needs to 

produce sentences that express properties such as 

pastProject, or if the generator has access to date 

information such as: when did Tim Berners-Lee 

start to work on the WWW, when does Jürgen E. 

Schremp plan to stop working on the merger, how 

long has Larry Page been working on the creation 

of the Alphabet Inc. Company? etc. 

The linguistic module cannot perform extra-

linguistic computations, such as producing 

complements such as for 28 years by subtracting the 

initial project’s date from the current date, by itself. 

It can, however, perform simple equality tests by 

using constraints such as <$gender="Male"> (to 

pronominalize Tim Berners-Lee as he), and 

<$pastProject=$currentProject> (to produce 

sentences such as Tim Berners-Lee is still working 

on the World Wide Web). 

7 Controlling the linguistic module 

To control what sentence is to be generated, the 

generator that pilots the linguistic system must send 

a set of operators that act as parameters. Following 

are examples of sentences generated, given a set of 

operators: 

 [+AspTilNow+Pro0+Focus1]: 
It is on the World Wide Web venture that he has 

been working until now. 

 [+When+Preterit+Pro0+Pro1]: 
When did he work on that enterprise? 

 [+Neg+Future+AspStop]: 
Tim Berners-Lee will no longer work on the 

World Wide Web adventure. 

Operators can be sent to the linguistic module 

with a “+” or a “-” prefix, to control whether the 

generator wants to activate, or filter out, the 

corresponding sentences and phrases. For instance, 

the generator may filter out sentences that contain a 

negation or a pronoun with the following sequence 

of operators: [-Neg-Pro0-Pro1]. Figure 7 shows that 

this exact sequence of operators makes the linguistic 

system produce over 11,000 declarative sentences, 

none of which include a negation or a pronoun. 

7.1 Incorrect information 

One problem with the pure linguistic approach is 

that, if not properly controlled, the linguistic module 

will also generate sentences that misrepresent the 

initial FOAF information, e.g.: 



 
 
 

7 

 

 [+Neg]: 
Tim Berners-Lee is not currently working on 

the World Wide Web project 

 [+Future+AspCont+Intens2]: 
Tim Berners-Lee will keep on working on the 

World Wide Web project forever 

However, even though the previous sentences are 

not appropriate, some combinations of these 

operators may produce correct statements, e.g.: 

 [+Neg+Future+AspCont+Intens2]: 

Tim Berners-Lee will not keep on working on 

the World Wide Web project forever 

In other words, linguistic operators such as +Neg 

or +Future are not “bad” intrinsically: they must be 

controlled by the generator, just like any other 

linguistic operator: it is the responsibility of the 

calling application (here, the generator) to control 

the linguistic module by setting the correct 

parameters in order to enable or disable the 

production of each sentence and phrase. 

8 Limitations 

There are a few problems with the prototype as it is 

now. 

8.1 Missing information 

The single FOAF statement that constitutes the 

input of the linguistic prototype presented in this 

article does not mention the entities’ names. 

Therefore, the sentences generated by the prototype 

actually resemble the following: 

Tim_Berners-Lee is currently working on the 

World_Wide_Web project. 

In a finalized software application, the generator 

should retrieve the value of the person’s name 

property, available as an FOAF property: 
<foaf:name xml:lang=”en”> Tim 

Berners-Lee </foaf:name> 

Using the value of the FOAF givenName, 

firstName and familyName properties for person 

entities would allow the linguistic component to 

generate abbreviated variants such as “Berners-

Lee”, or even “Tim” (in a casual context, for 

instance). In the same manner, the linguistic module 

                                                                                                            
12 gender is an FOAF property attached to class Agent rather 

than its subclass Person. The generator will therefore need to 

make entity Tim_Berners-Lee inherit its gender property to 

make it explicit to the linguistic module. 

would need to access a list of variants and 

abbreviations for each project entity, such as “the 

Web” or “WWW” for entity World_Wide_Web. 

Another important piece of information is the 

gender of each person entity: for Tim_Berners-Lee, 

the generator needs to combine operator +Pro0 with 

operator +Mas to stop the linguistic module from 

generating incorrect feminine or neutral pronouns 

or possessive determiners such as in: The World 

Wide Web is (her | its) current project.12 As this 

information is available in FOAF: 
<foaf:gender 

xml:lang=”en”>Male</foaf:gender> 

Another possibility is to add this FOAF statement 

to the linguistic module to its input, store the value 

of the gender in a variable (e.g. $gender), and add a 

constraint on the variable in the grammar 

everywhere we need to produce a pronoun, such as 

in Figure 8. 

 
Figure 8: Adding gender information 

8.2 What is a project? 

Because the Web Semantics’ entities are meant to 

represent elements of meanings independent from 

the languages, they tend to be more generic than 

actual English terms, which makes it difficult to 

compute back the sets of English terms they 

represent.13 

For instance, the FOAF project class regroups 

entities that are not always easily referred to by the 

English term “project”: it makes sense to qualify the 

World Wide Web as a project, an enterprise or even 

a program, but it is much more difficult to use the 

following terms: 

Tim Berners-Lee is currently working on the 

World Wide Web (activity | affair | assignment 

| business | creation | job | management 

| scheme | task | venture) 

13 The vagueness and inconsistency of the Semantic Web are 

its two most common criticisms. 



 
 
 

8 

 

The World Wide Web has existed too long to be 

qualified as an affair; it is too big to be qualified as 

a task; it is not an assignment, nor a business, Tim 

Berners-Lee does not “manage” it, etc. 

However, these terms would be more appropriate 

for other currentProject entities, e.g.: 

Larry Page is responsible for the Alphabet Inc. 

Company (adventure | affair | business | 

creation | task | venture) 

Other FOAF classes such as Group and 

Organization might be relevant for describing what 

the World Wide Web or the Alphabet Inc. Company 

are: having the information that the World Wide 

Web is both a project and an organization will allow 

the linguistic module to produce much better 

sentences. 

8.3 What does the person do exactly? 

A similar problem concerns the person entity: when 

a project is described in FOAF as someone’s current 

project, it is not clear what this person does, exactly: 

Is Tim Berners-Lee the originator, or the creator, 

or the inventor of the Web? Is Steve Jobs the 

designer, or the mastermind, or the leader of the 

iPhone project? Is Larry Page the founder, or the 

originator, or the father of the Alphabet Inc. 

Company? Is Jürgen E. Schrempp the artisan, or the 

architect, or the facilitator of the Mercedes-

Chrysler merger? Even though both the person and 

the project entities are well defined, at this point we 

do not have the capability to select which exact 

terms can be used naturally: therefore, at this point, 

the linguistic prototype produces a large number of 

not-so-natural phrases such as “the World Wide 

Web task” or “the iPhone affair”. 

8.4 How current is a currentProject? 

When a project is described in FOAF as a 

currentProject, it is not clear whether it is possible 

or not to replace the prototypic adverb currently 

with expressions such as: for the moment, right now, 

these days, etc., and if tenses other than present or 

present progressive (such as present perfect or 

future) are adequate or not: 

 [+PresentPerfect]: 

Tim Berners-Lee has worked on the World 

Wide Web project (OK) 

 [+PresentPerfect+AspCont+Intens1]: 

Tim Berners-Lee has been working on the 

World Wide Web project for a long time (OK) 

 [+Future]: 
Tim Berners-Lee will work on the World Wide 

Web project (not OK) 

 [+Future+AspCont+Intens1]: 

Tim Berners-Lee will continue to work on the 

World Wide Web project for a long time (not 

OK) 

It will be necessary to explore the FOAF 

ontology to check if the currentProject is also listed 

as a pastProject; if so, the generator can send the 

operators +AspCont and +PresentPerfect to the 

linguistic module. The more information the 

generator has access to, the more it will be able to 

generate sentences produced by the linguistic 

module. As of now, unfortunately, we need to 

restrict the generation capability of the linguistic 

module drastically: the system is far from producing 

most of the English sentences that occur on the 

Web, such as the following ones: 

Under Jobs’ exacting leadership, Apple 

pioneered many things with the iPhone. Tim 

Berners-Lee is the director of the World Wide 

Web Consortium. Larry Page: I am really 

excited to be running Alphabet as CEO with 

help from my capable partner, Sergey, as 

President. 

However, grammars developed with NooJ are 

meant to be used not only for the generation, but 

also for the parsing of any text, including the 

previous sentences: the fact that a large number of 

sentences generated by the linguistic module are not 

yet useable by the generator is a consequence of the 

extreme simplicity of the FOAF ontology, rather 

than of a shortcoming of linguistics. 

9 Conclusion 

It is possible to construct a system capable of 

translating RDF statements into a rich set of English 

sentences. As a generator taps into the power of 

expression of the English language, it needs to 

control it: this can be performed via the use of 

linguistic operators. 

Some operators, such as +Focus0 or +Pro1, are 

“information neutral”, in the sense that they do not 

produce English sentences that might betray the 

information of the original RDF statement: they are 



 
 
 

9 

 

typically used for rhetorical purposes, to make the 

resulting text more natural. 

Other linguistic operators, such as +Neg, +Future 

or +AspCont, are more “dangerous” to use, but 

should be easy to control, for instance by exploring 

the FOAF ontology to obtain missing information, 

such as the person’s gender or the project’s initial 

date. Exploring the Semantic Web to get more and 

more relevant information will be crucial in any 

case, as a system needs to access enough 

information about projects (dates, duration, 

organization involved, type of business, etc.) to 

state something “interesting”. 

However, the information stored in ontologies 

such as FOAF will never be as rich as necessary for 

an automatic generator to be able to produce all the 

English sentences that might express it. One 

solution for fixing the “vagueness” of the Semantic 

Web would be to enrich ontologies so that they 

contain information as precise as what the English 

language can express; in practice, this would require 

us to add to generic properties such as 

currentProject properties such as projectType, 

involvementType, projectOrganizationType, 

durationScale, involvementType, etc. to pinpoint 

what exact term is relevant for the project, what 

exact type of function and involvement the person 

has in the project (author a book, build a company, 

merge two companies, head an organization, design 

a product, oversight a business deal, chair a 

conference, etc.). 

Reciprocally, producing RDF statements by 

parsing even complex English sentences has been 

proven to be feasible.14 It seems to me that it would 

be therefore more sensible to develop linguistic 

resources to formalize more and more detailed 

information from the texts that already exist on the 

Web, rather than to store a simplified and redundant 

version of the information already available in 

English form on the Web in ontologies, and then try 

afterwards to compute back its equivalent English 

sentences. 

References 

Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler and Ora Lassila. 2001. 

The Semantic Web. In Scientific American, pp 29-37. 

Annibale Elia, Simonetta Vietri, Alberto Postiglione, 

Mario Monteleone and Federica Marano. 2010. Data 

                                                                                                            
14 NooJ has been used since 2002 to parse texts in a dozen lan-

guages and produce Semantic annotations in XML or Prolog 

Mining Modular Software System. In: SWWS2010 - 

Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on 

Semantic Web & Web Services. Las Vegas, Nevada, 

USA 12-15 luglio 2010 CSREA Press, pp 127-133. 

FOAF Vocabulary Specification 0.98. 2010. Namespace 

Document 9 August 2010. Marco Polo Eds. Available 

at:http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.476.8247&rep=rep1&t

ype=pdf  

RDF 1.1 Turtle – Terse RDF Triple LanguageTurtle. 

World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). 2014. Available 

at: https://www.w3.org/TR/turtle  

Laurence Danlos. 1987. The linguistic basis of Text 

Generation. Studies in Natural Language Processing. 

Cambridge University Press Eds. 

Maria Pia di Buono. 2017. Endpoint for Semantic 

Knowledge. In Automatic Processing of Natural-

Language Electronic Texts with NooJ. Selected Papers 

from the 10th International NooJ Conference. (eds. 

Barone, Monteleone, Silberztein) CCIS Springer: 

Communication in Computer and Information Science 

#667, pp 223-233. 

Héla Fehri, Kais Haddar and Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou. 

2010. Automatic Recognition and Semantic Analysis 

of Arabic Named Entities. In Applications of Finite-

State Language Processing: Selected Papers from the 

NooJ 2008 International Conference (Budapest, Hun-

garia) (eds. K. Judit, M. Silberztein, T. Varadi). Cam-

bridge Scholars Publishing, Newcastle., UK, pp 101-

113. 

Claire Gardent and Perez-Beltrachini. 2017. A Statistical, 

Grammar-Based Approach to Mico-Planning. In 

Computational Linguistics 43:1. The MIT Press Eds, 

pp 1-30. 

Kristina Kocijan and Marko Požega. 2015. Building 

Family Trees With NooJ. In Formalising Natural Lan-

guages with NooJ 2014: Selected papers from the 

NooJ 2014 International Conference, (eds. J. Monti, 

M. Silberztein, M. Monteleone, M. P. di 

Buono), Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars 

Publishing, pp 198-210. 

Elena Lloret Pastor. 2011. Text Summarization based on 

Human Language Technologies and its Application. 

Tesis Doctorales. Universitad de Alicante Eds. 

Max Silberztein. 2016a. Formalizing Natural 

Languages: the NooJ approach. ISTE-Wiley E 

Max Silberztein. 2016b. Joe loves Lea: Transformational 

Analysis of Direct Transitive Sentences in Automatic 

Processing of Natural-Language Electronic Texts with 

NooJ. NooJ 2015 (eds. T. Okrut, Y. Hetsevich, M. Sil-

berztein, H. Stanislavenka). Communications in Com-

puter and Information Science, vol 607. Springer, 

Cham, pp 55-65. 

notation, cf. for instance Fehri et al. (2010), Elia et al. (2010), 

Kocijan and Požega (2015), di Buono (2017). 

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.476.8247&rep=rep1&type=pdf
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.476.8247&rep=rep1&type=pdf
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.476.8247&rep=rep1&type=pdf
https://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/

