



















































A Syllable-based Technique for Word Embeddings of Korean Words


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Subword and Character Level Models in NLP, pages 36–40,
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics.

A Syllable-based Technique for Word Embeddings of Korean Words

Sanghyuk Choi∗ and Taeuk Kim and Jinseok Seol and Sang-goo Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Seoul National University
{sanghyuk, taeuk, jamie, sglee}@europa.snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Word embedding has become a funda-
mental component to many NLP tasks
such as named entity recognition and ma-
chine translation. However, popular mod-
els that learn such embeddings are un-
aware of the morphology of words, so it
is not directly applicable to highly agglu-
tinative languages such as Korean. We
propose a syllable-based learning model
for Korean using a convolutional neural
network, in which word representation is
composed of trained syllable vectors. Our
model successfully produces morphologi-
cally meaningful representation of Korean
words compared to the original Skip-gram
embeddings. The results also show that
it is quite robust to the Out-of-Vocabulary
problem.

1 Introduction

Continuous word representation has been a fun-
damental ingredient to many NLP tasks with the
advent of simple and successful approaches such
as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013a) and GloVe
(Pennington et al., 2014). Although it has been
verified that they are effective in formulating se-
mantic and syntactic relationship between words,
there are some limitations. First, they are only
available to words in pre-defined vocabulary thus
prone to the Out-of-Vocabulary(OOV) problem.
Second, they cannot utilize subword information
at all because they regard word as a basic unit.
Those problems become more magnified when ap-
plying word-based methods to agglutinative lan-
guages such as Korean, Japanese, Turkish, and
Finnish. In this work, we propose a new model

∗ Portions of this research were done while the author
was a student at Seoul National University.

that utilizes syllables as basic components of word
representation to alleviate the problems, especially
for Korean. In our experiment, we confirm that our
model constructs representation of words which
contains a semantic and syntactic relationship be-
tween words. We also show that our model can
handle OOV problem and capture morphological
information without dedicated analysis.

2 Related Work

Recent works that utilize subword information to
construct word representation could be largely di-
vided into two families: The models that use mor-
phemes as a component and the others taking ad-
vantage of characters.

Morpheme-based representation models
A morpheme is the smallest unit of meaning in

linguistics. Therefore, there are many researches
that consider morphemes when building word rep-
resentations (Luong et al., 2013; Botha and Blun-
som, 2014; Cotterell and Schütze, 2015).

Luong et al. (2013) applies a recursive neu-
ral network over morpheme embeddings to obtain
word embeddings. Although morpheme-based
models are good at capturing semantics, one ma-
jor drawback is that most of them require manu-
ally annotated data or an explicit morphological
analyzer which could introduce unintended errors.
Our model doesn’t need such a preprocessing.

Character-based representation models
Recently, utilizing information from characters

has become one of the active NLP research topics.
One way to extract knowledge from a sequence
of characters is using character n-grams (Wieting
et al., 2016; Bojanowski et al., 2016).

Bojanowski et al. (2016) suggests an approach
based on the Skip-gram model (Mikolov et al.,
2013a), where the model sums character n-gram
vectors to represent a word. On the other hand,

36



Figure 1: Overall architecture of our model. Each syllable is a d-dimensional vector. For a given word
‘안녕하세요’ (hello, annyeonghaseyo), we concatenate vectors according to syllable order in word.
After passing through the convolutional layer and max pooling layer, word representation is produced.
All parameters are jointly trained by Skip-gram scheme.

there are some approaches (Dos Santos and Gatti,
2014; Ling et al., 2015; Santos and Guimaraes,
2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2016; Joze-
fowicz et al., 2016; Chung et al., 2016) in which
word representations are composed of character
embeddings via deep neural networks such as con-
volutional neural networks (CNN) or recurrent
neural networks (RNN).

Kim et al. (2016) introduces a language model
that aggregates subword information through a
character-level CNN. Models based on characters
have shown competitive results on many tasks. A
problem of character-based models is that charac-
ters themselves have no semantic meanings so that
models often concentrate on only local syntactic
features of words. To avoid the problem, we select
syllables which have fine-granularity like a char-
acter but has its own meaning in Korean as a basic
component of the representation of words.

3 Proposed Model

Characteristics of Korean Words
Morphologically, unlike many other languages,

a Korean word (Eojeol) is not just a concatenation
of characters. It is constructed by the following hi-
erarchy: a sequence of syllables (Eumjeol) forms
a word, and the composition of 2 or 3 characters
(Jaso) forms a syllable (Kang and Kim, 1994).

In linguistics, Korean language is categorized
as an agglutinative language, where each word is

made of a set of morphemes. To complete the
Korean word (Eumjeol), a root morpheme must
be combined with a bound morpheme (Josa), or
a postposition (Eomi). This derivation produces
about 60 different forms of the similar meaning,
which causes the explosion of vocabulary. For the
same reason, the number of occurrences of each
word is relatively small even with a large corpus,
which prevents the model from an efficient learn-
ing. Thus, most of the Korean word represen-
tation models use morphemes as an embedding
unit, though it requires an additional preprocess-
ing. The problem is that errors coming from an im-
mature morpheme analyzer might be propagated
to the word representation model. Moreover, a
single Korean syllable possess a semantic mean-
ing. For example, the word ‘대학’(college, dae-
hag) is a composition of ‘대’(big, or great, dae)
and ‘학’(learn, or a study, hag). Therefore, our
model regards syllables as embedding units rather
than words or morphemes. For instance, the rep-
resentations of ‘나는’(I am, naneun), ‘나의’(my,
naui), or ‘나에게’(to me, na-ege) are constructed
by leveraging the same syllable vector ‘나’(I, na).

Syllable-based Representation

Similar to (Kim et al., 2016), let S be a set
of all Korean syllables. We embed each syl-
lables into d-dimensional vector space, so that
Q ∈ Rd×|S| becomes a syllable embedding ma-

37



trix. Let (s1, s2, ..., sl) denote a word t ∈ V
which consists of l syllables, t is represented by
concatenating syllable vectors as a column vec-
tor: (Qs1, Qs2, ..., Qsl) ∈ Rd×l. Then we apply
a convolution filter H ∈ Rd×w having a width w,
we get a feature map f t ∈ Rl−w+1. For filters
whose widths are more than 1, they need a zero
padding when processing words coming from only
a single syllable.

In detail, for the given filter H , the feature map
can be calculated as follows:

f ti = tanh(〈(Qsi, ..., Qsi+w−1), H〉+ b) (1)

where 〈A, B〉 = tr(ABᵀ) denoting Frobenius in-
ner product. We then apply a max pooling yt =
maxi f ti to extract the most important feature. By
using multiple filters, namely H1, H2, ...,Hh, we
get a final representation yt = (yt1, ..., y

t
h) for the

word t.
For training, we adopt Skip-gram (Mikolov

et al., 2013b) method with negative sampling so
that for a given center word yt, we maximize the
log-probability of predicting context word yc. We
jointly train syllable embedding matrix and convo-
lution filters all together. Figure 1 shows overall
architecture of our model.

4 Experiments and Results

Datasets and Baselines
The Experiments are performed on a randomly

sampled subset of Korean News corpus collected
from 2012 to 2014, containing approximately
2.7M tokens, 11k vocabulary, and 1k syllables.
We compare our model to the original skip-gram
model with negative sampling (Mikolov et al.,
2013b) as a baseline.

Implementation details
For all experiments, we use the following com-

mon parameters for both our model and baseline.
We use vector representations of dimension 320,
the size of window is 4 and the negative-sampling
parameter is 7. We train over twelve epochs. In
our model, the dimension of syllable embedding is
320. Empirically, using filters with size 1~4 was
enough since most of Korean words are composed
of 2~4 syllables1.

1About 95% of words in a training set had a length less
than 5.

Figure 2: Test result on translated WordSim353
dataset. It contains similarity and relatedness test
and measured by Pearson correlation. Our model
outperformed the baseline in similarity task.

4.1 Quantitative Evaluation

We use the WordSim353 dataset (Finkelstein et al.,
2001; Agirre et al., 2009) for the word similarity
and relatedness task. As WordSim353 dataset is
an English data, we translated it into Korean. The
quality of the word vector representation is evalu-
ated by computing Pearson correlation coefficient
between human judgment scores and the cosine
similarity between word vectors.

The graph in Figure 2 shows that our model
outperforms the baseline on WS353-Similarity
dataset. We estimated it since a lot of similar
words share the same syllable(s) in Korean. On
the other hand, on WS353-Relatedness, the per-
formance is not as good in comparison with the
similarity task. We presume that leveraging sylla-
bles on computing representations can be a noise
among related words without common syllables.

4.2 Qualitative Evaluation

Out-Of-Vocabulary Test
Since our model uses syllable vectors when

computing word representation, it is possible to
achieve representation of OOV words by combin-
ing syllables. To evaluate the representations of
OOV words, we manually chose 4 newly coined
words not appear in training data (Table 1). These
words were derived from original words. For ex-
ample, ‘구글신’(God Google, gugeulsin) is de-
rived from ‘구글’(Google, gugeul) and ‘갤노
트‘(Gal’Note, gaelnoteu) is a abbreviation form
of ‘갤럭시노트’(Galaxy Note, gaelleogsinoteu).
Morphologically, two of them concatenate addi-
tional syllables to the original word, and the other

38



Original word Newly coined word

구글

(Google, gugeul)
구글신

(God google, gugeulsin)
이득

(Profit, ideug)
개이득

(Real profit, gaeideug)
퇴근

(Leave work,
toegeun)

퇴근각

(Time to leave work,
toegeungag)

갤럭시노트

(Galaxy Note,
gaelleogsinoteu)

갤노트

(Gal’Note,
gaelnoteu)

Table 1: 4 newly coined words in Korean which
did not appear in training data. Proposed model
successfully recognized stem from the original
word, and predicted it as the most similar word.

two remove some syllables.
We examined the nearest neighbor of the repre-

sentations of OOV words, and confirmed that each
original word vector is placed in the nearest dis-
tance. It is no wonder since almost every newly
coined word keeps the syllables of original word
with their positions fixed.

Morphological Representation Test
We now evaluate our model on language mor-

phology by observing how word representation
leverages morphological characteristics. As men-
tioned above, the process of forming a sentence of
Korean is totally different from many other lan-
guages. In case of Korean, a word can func-
tion in the sentence only if it is combined with
the bound morpheme. For example, ‘서울을’(of
Seoul, seoul-eul) is a combination of full mor-
pheme ‘서울’(Seoul, seoul) + bound morpheme
‘을’(of, eul).

To compare how models learn the morpholog-
ical characteristics, we randomly sampled hun-
dred words and the same words combined with
certain postposition(‘을’, eul) from the training
data. The graph in Figure 3 shows this re-
sult more clearly. We can observe that words
forming the discriminative parallel clusters against
postposition-combined-words while the baseline
doesn’t.

5 Conclusion

We present a syllable-based word representation
model experimented with Korean, which is one of
morphologically rich languages. Our model keeps

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: PCA projections of vector representation
of 100 randomly sampled pairs of word. Each pair
is composed of a word and the same word with
postposition. In (b), our model shows that words
forming the discriminative parallel clusters against
postposition-combined-words.

the characteristics of Skip-gram models, in which
word representation learns from context words. It
also takes into account the morphological charac-
teristics by sharing parameters between the words
that contain common syllables. We demonstrate
that our model is competitive on quantitative eval-
uations. Furthermore, we show that the model can
handle OOV words, and capture morphological re-
lationships. As a future work, we have a plan to
expand our model so that it can utilize overall in-
formation extracted from words, morphemes and
characters.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Min-
istry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (NRF-
2016M3C4A7952587, PF Class Heterogeneous
High Performance Computer Development).

39



References
Eneko Agirre, Enrique Alfonseca, Keith Hall, Jana

Kravalova, Marius Paşca, and Aitor Soroa. 2009. A
study on similarity and relatedness using distribu-
tional and wordnet-based approaches. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technologies: The 2009
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
19–27.

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin,
and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Enriching word vec-
tors with subword information. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.04606 .

Jan Botha and Phil Blunsom. 2014. Compositional
morphology for word representations and language
modelling. In International Conference on Machine
Learning. pages 1899–1907.

Junyoung Chung, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2016. A character-level decoder without ex-
plicit segmentation for neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.06147 .

Ryan Cotterell and Hinrich Schütze. 2015. Morpho-
logical word-embeddings. In HLT-NAACL. pages
1287–1292.

Cícero Nogueira Dos Santos and Maira Gatti. 2014.
Deep convolutional neural networks for sentiment
analysis of short texts. In COLING. pages 69–78.

Lev Finkelstein, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Yossi Matias,
Ehud Rivlin, Zach Solan, Gadi Wolfman, and Eytan
Ruppin. 2001. Placing search in context: The con-
cept revisited. In Proceedings of the 10th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web. ACM, pages
406–414.

Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam
Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. 2016. Exploring
the limits of language modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.02410 .

Seung-Shik Kang and Yung Taek Kim. 1994. Syllable-
based model for the korean morphology. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th conference on Computational
linguistics-Volume 1. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 221–226.

Yoon Kim, Yacine Jernite, David Sontag, and Alexan-
der M Rush. 2016. Character-aware neural language
models. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.

Wang Ling, Tiago Luís, Luís Marujo, Ramón Fernan-
dez Astudillo, Silvio Amir, Chris Dyer, Alan W
Black, and Isabel Trancoso. 2015. Finding function
in form: Compositional character models for open
vocabulary word representation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1508.02096 .

Thang Luong, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2013. Better word representations with
recursive neural networks for morphology. In
CoNLL. pages 104–113.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 .

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP. volume 14, pages 1532–
1543.

Cicero Nogueira dos Santos and Victor Guimaraes.
2015. Boosting named entity recognition with
neural character embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1505.05008 .

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2016. Charagram: Embedding words and
sentences via character n-grams. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.02789 .

Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015.
Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
sification. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems. pages 649–657.

40


