



















































Semantic Storytelling, Cross-lingual Event Detection and other Semantic Services for a Newsroom Content Curation Dashboard


Proceedings of the 2017 EMNLP Workshop on Natural Language Processing meets Journalism, pages 68–73
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic Storytelling, Cross-lingual Event Detection and other
Semantic Services for a Newsroom Content Curation Dashboard

Julian Moreno-Schneider, Ankit Srivastava,
Peter Bourgonje, David Wabnitz∗, Georg Rehm

DFKI GmbH, Language Technology Lab, Alt-Moabit 91c, 10559 Berlin, Germany
∗Kreuzwerker GmbH, Ritterstraße 12-14, 10969 Berlin, Germany

Corresponding author: georg.rehm@dfki.de

Abstract

We present a prototypical content curation
dashboard, to be used in the newsroom,
and several of its underlying semantic con-
tent analysis components (such as named
entity recognition, entity linking, sum-
marisation and temporal expression analy-
sis). The idea is to enable journalists (a) to
process incoming content (agency reports,
twitter feeds, reports, blog posts, social
media etc.) and (b) to create new articles
more easily and more efficiently. The pro-
totype system also allows the automatic
annotation of events in incoming content
for the purpose of supporting journalists
in identifying important, relevant or mean-
ingful events and also to adapt the content
currently in production accordingly in a
semi-automatic way. One of our long-term
goals is to support journalists building up
entire storylines with automatic means. In
the present prototype they are generated in
a backend service using clustering meth-
ods that operate on the extracted events.

1 Introduction

Journalists write and distribute news articles based
on information collected from different sources
(news agencies, media streams, other news arti-
cles etc.). In order to produce a high-quality piece,
a fair bit of research is needed on the topic and
domain at hand. Facts have to be checked, re-
quiring at least basic domain knowledge, different

view points considered and information from mul-
tiple sources combined in a sensible way. In short,
much research is needed to arrive at a piece of con-
tent that combines new and surprising information
with a decent context of the event reported upon.
While the amount of available, especially digital
information is increasing on a daily basis, the jour-
nalist’s ability to read all this information is de-
creasing in the little time available. This calls for
tools that support journalists in processing large
amounts of incoming information.

There are differences in journalistic reporting,
depending on the event being covered. News
about a event with global relevance, such as a war,
differs from news about the inauguration of a lo-
cal cultural centre. When looking at the available
source material, the amount of background infor-
mation, also its diversity, differs significantly in
both cases. Coverage for the global event depends
on a much larger amount of readily available infor-
mation while the local event coverage depends on
smaller amounts of data that may need a bit of ef-
fort in tracking them down (the name of local news
sources for example). To address this difference in
research requirements we describe a prototypical
approach for cross-lingual semantic analysis, es-
pecially event detection, ultimately aimed at sup-
porting journalists through semantic storytelling,
based on two data sets.

Section 2 briefly describes the content curation
dashboard, while Section 3 focuses upon semantic
storytelling. Section 4 describes the use cases and
sketches the results of initial experiments on news
data. Section 5 concludes the paper.

68



2 The Content Curation Dashboard

One of the partner companies involved in our joint
technology transfer project (Rehm and Sasaki,
2015) to introduce curation technologies to differ-
ent sectors, is currently designing and developing
an extension for the open source newsroom soft-
ware Superdesk.1 Superdesk is a production envi-
ronment for journalists that specialises on the cre-
ation of content, i. e., the play-out and rendering
of the content is taken care of by other parts of a
larger system. Our Superdesk extension allows the
semantic processing of incoming news streams to
enable several smart features, e. g., keyword alerts,
content exploration, identifying related content,
among others. The tool also allows the visualisa-
tion and annotation of news documents using addi-
tional information sources, databases and knowl-
edge graphs such as Linked Data. The idea is to
allow rich faceted search scenarios so that the jour-
nalist has fine-grained mechanisms for locating
the needle in a potentially very large haystack of
digital data. Faceted search includes entities, top-
ics, sentiment values and genres, complemented
with semantic information from external sources
(DBpedia) enabling higher semantic search preci-
sion based on extracted information than would be
possible with keyword based search.

Visualisation includes menus that show the an-
notated entities and their frequencies next to a set
of related documents. Example screens of the con-
tent curation dashboard are shown in Figure 1. The
Superdesk extension and the underlying semantic
technologies mainly operate on the (1) ingest view
and the (2) authoring view. The first view allows to
ingest multiple incoming content channels into the
production environment; our semantic tools can
automatically analyse the content using, for exam-
ple, named entity recognition, sentiment analysis,
topic detection, classification (e. g., IPTC topics)
and others, so that journalists can tailor the incom-
ing news feed exactly to their liking and current
topics. In the second view, the semantic tools are
used to support the authoring process, to add and
modify annotations, to recommend related content
potentially to be linked to in the new article.

While Superdesk is a specialised newsroom
software, journalists also often use Content Man-
agement Systems such as Symphony to automate
day-to-day work (e. g., file and document man-

1https://www.superdesk.org

Initial Search and Filtering:

Annotated Entities:

Searching related content to the document:

Arranging the storyline:

Figure 1: The Content Curation Dashboard

69



agement).2 For document exploration proper IR
systems (mainly ElasticSearch) have gained pop-
ularity through user-friendly wrappers such as
Kibana,3 which offers visualisation of maps and
timelines, or Kibi,4 which offers richer visualisa-
tion capabilities (graphs, charts).

We want to enable journalists interactively to
put together a story based on extensive seman-
tic content enrichment. In our various use cases,
different parts of the content function as atomic
building blocks (sentences, paragraphs, docu-
ments). In the use case of the present paper we fo-
cus, for now, upon document level building blocks
for generating stories, i. e., documents can be rear-
ranged, included and deleted from a storyline. In
a later stage we plan to use smaller content com-
ponents with which we will experiment towards
the generation of news articles based on multiple
story paths, automatically generated with the help
of semantic annotations.

Currently our technology allows us to generate
“semantic fingerprints” which enable suggestions
as to where the currently edited article would fit in
either an existing storyline or recommend a new
one based on content currently being readied for
production and further enhanced by related con-
tent. Generally, it would enable journalists to work
more in smaller update increments to a developing
story or storyline without having to retell a story
time and again. Storylines, in that sense, can be
thought of as a container, pulling related stories
together. By providing for a semi-automatic ar-
rangement of stories within a storyline (e. g., by
suggesting that a story fits in a certain slot within
a chronological order of related events or in a cer-
tain slot in an existing narrative), journalists can
be alleviated of the need to be aware of these re-
lationships and to manage them. Consumers of
news articles get the benefit of additional context
and navigational tools provided by articles being
arranged in storylines as well as enjoying a more
efficient news consumption experience.

3 Semantic Storytelling for Journalists

In our current prototype we attempt to generate
a set of potential storylines from a collection of
incoming news documents. A storyline is a set
of building blocks that, through their combination

2https://symphony.com
3https://www.elastic.co/products/kibana
4https://siren.solutions/kibi/

(temporal, geographical, semantic, etc.) form a
story. In several use cases, the atomic building
blocks are documents; we use a more fine-grained
approach in which events are the building blocks
of storylines, i. e., a set of entities governed by a
trigger element (normally a verb) and which to-
gether represent an occurring action in the text.

The linguistic processing is done by a seman-
tic annotation pipeline that creates a layer of
named entities, temporal expressions and other
information on top of the document collection,
also augmented with event detection (Bourgonje
et al., 2016a,b). For example, in the sentence
“Barack Obama visited Ukraine last summer and
had a meeting with Petró Poroshenko” there are
two persons (Barack Obama, Petró Poroshenko),
one location (Ukraine) and one temporal expres-
sion (last summer). There are also two trig-
ger verbs: “visited” and “meet”. Therefore,
there are two events in this sentence: [visited,
Barack Obama, Ukraine, last summer] and [meet,
Barack Obama, Petró Poroshenko]. The sentence
“Vladimir Putin will meet next summer with pres-
ident Petró Poroshenko in Moscow” contains one
event: [meet, Vladimir Putin, Petró Poroshenko,
Moscow, next summer]. Events in German or En-
glish texts are extracted using cross-lingual event
detection (Section 3.1). Then, storylines are cre-
ated from combinations of annotated events using
three clustering techniques to obtain related and
similar information in the collection. In the Su-
perdesk extension (Section 2), storylines are still
composed of a set of related documents. Once
completed, the extension will also operate on the
more fine-grained event-centric approach.

Work related to our rather general, domain-
independent storytelling concept typically concen-
trates on very specific objectives. A few systems
focus on providing content for entertainment pur-
poses (Wood, 2008; Poulakos et al., 2015). Other
researchers focus on specific domains, e. g., sto-
rytelling in gaming (Gervás, 2013), for recipes
(Cimiano et al., 2013)or weather reports (Belz,
2008), requiring knowledge about characters, ac-
tions, locations, events, or objects that exist in this
particular domain (Riedl and Young, 2010; Turner,
2014). Regarding news, (Shahaf and Guestrin,
2010) describe methods for navigating within a
new topic using hidden connections. They auto-
matically find links between news articles through
the extraction of links between entities. (Vossen

70



et al., 2015) handle news streams through a for-
mal model for representing storylines. They also
describe a first implementation and visualisation
that helps inspecting the generated structures.

3.1 Cross-lingual Event Detection
We implemented a cross-lingual event detec-
tion system, i. e., we automatically translate
non-English documents to English using Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007) and detect events in the
translated documents using a state-of-the-art event
extraction system based on (Yang and Mitchell,
2016), trained on the English section of ACE 2005
(Doddington et al., 2004). The cross-lingual de-
tection of events encompasses a pipeline that ends
up with a list of annotated events in every docu-
ment (Rehm et al., 2017b).

3.2 Semantic Storytelling
Extracted events themselves are not useful to a
journalist who works on a set of documents. They
have to be analysed further, summarised, rear-
ranged and then presented in a way that speeds
up (human) access and understanding. In a previ-
ous approach (Schneider et al., 2016) we focused
upon template-filling, using the results of relation
extraction to fill (biography) templates to present
these as content pieces to the knowledge worker.
In the present paper, events serve the same pur-
pose, delivering content pieces for a news article.

These general clusters of events can provide
the logical text structure of a new journalistic
piece. We can also cluster documents based on
the temporal dimension grouping together events
that happened in the same period of time (e. g., a
war or an award ceremony), or based on locations,
using latitude and longitude coordinates. Another
option is traditional semantic clustering, obtaining
sets of documents that talk about the same events
and entities. To get semantically related events, we
cluster documents based on the entities that appear
in the events (entity frequency). Our interpretation
of semantically related events are events that share
entities as their participants (subject and object).
The cluster information for the two previous ex-
amples is shown in Table 1. Once the documents
are clustered, their events are grouped and ranked
by frequency. In the previous example there were
three events, one document with two events and
one document with one event: d1 = {ev1, ev2}
and d2 = {ev3}. If both documents are in the
same cluster, and considering that we use the clus-

ters as storylines, the resulting set of events in this
storyline will be {ev1, ev2, ev3}.
3.3 Visualisation
To get a better understanding of the data set, the
analysis results, the extracted events and to pre-
pare attaching the semantic storytelling back-end
to the newsroom content curation dashboard, we
implemented an experimental visualisation proto-
type (Figure 2). This prototype provides access to
the full set of semantic analysis information and
can be used interactively to explore and evaluate
the system. The map shows locations involved in
extracted events with highlighted annotations. The
slider below the map can be used to filter events
by time. Additional details and case studies can
be found in (Rehm et al., 2017a; Schneider et al.,
2017). We will explore if we can integrate part of
this prototype tool into the Superdesk extension.

Figure 2: The experimental visualisation tool

4 Evaluation

We performed a qualitative evaluation of several
generated storylines (clusters).5 We apply the sto-
rytelling generation approach in two journalistic
use cases: domain-specific web-crawled global
news and general domain regional news. While
the basic steps in both cases are the same (collect-
ing relevant information, checking facts, writing
an article, etc.), there are differences that make
these two cases special: the “global news” articles
are in English and were collected online while the
“regional news” articles are in German, distributed
by a news agency, so language usage and also reg-
ister/style is different. We applied several cluster-
ing algorithms to both data sets using fixed and
free cluster sizes; EM provides a rather balanced
distribution along clusters.

5We would have performed the evaluation with the Su-
perdesk extension but are still in the process of fully integrat-
ing the current prototype.

71



Obama Petró Summer Putin Moscow Ukraine

Document d1 1 1 1 0 0 1

Document d2 0 1 1 1 1 0

Table 1: Using the frequencies of extracted events as features for a clustering algorithm

4.1 Global News: Obama’s Trips

For the global news case we used a data set that
consists of news articles on the trips of Barack
Obama (487 files, 24,387 sentences, 897,630 to-
kens).6 All documents are English online news,
which is why boilerplate cleaning was applied.7.
The storytelling backend annotated a total of
61,718 entity mentions and 6,752 event triggers.
After clustering using EM and the 50 most fre-
quent entities as features, we obtain five clusters,
i. e., five storylines. The number of documents
contained in each storyline is: 4, 4, 19, 19, 16.
The number of events included in each cluster is:
472, 1027, 2525, 3785, 2638. In the first clus-
ter, there are three documents talking about trips
to Asia (China, Vietnam, Istanbul) and only one
to Germany; the documents in the second clus-
ter are grouped together because of remaining
HTML tags after the boilerplate cleaning; the third
cluster is semantically more diverse and contains
documents talking about trips to South America
(Cuba, Argentina, Colombia) and Asia (Beijing,
Bangkok, Philippines), but there are some unre-
lated documents talking about wars (Syria, Sec-
ond World War) and trips to the UK (London);
the fourth cluster contains mainly documents talk-
ing about trips to Europe to the G20 Summit;
the last cluster groups documents mentioning dif-
ferent places (Brazil, Egypt, Afghanistan, Japan,
etc). Considering the topic diversity, this approach
seems to be an interesting initial point for the au-
tomatic generation of semantic content for stories
in large collections with topic heterogeneity.

4.2 Regional News

For the second use case we analyse a German gen-
eral domain regional news collection (1,037 arti-
cles, 716,885 words, avg. number of words 691.3),
provided by one of our project partner companies.
The storytelling system, working on the automat-

6Based on a list of links to news articles in
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of international
presidential trips made by Barack Obama

7https://github.com/kohlschutter/boilerpipe

ically translated English documents, annotated a
total of 61,054 entity mentions and 2,571 event
triggers. The discrepancy in the number of events
between the two data sets can be attributed to dif-
ferent writing styles as well as the fact that the lat-
ter was translated automatically. After the clus-
tering process using EM and the 50 most frequent
entities as features, we obtain five storylines (with
34, 17, 113, 25, 35 documents, and 4167, 2529,
11885, 2930, 3284 events, respectively). After
manually evaluating the documents and events we
can summarise that the automatic translation of
the documents, performed with an MT system that
had not been domain-adapted, has had a negative
impact on the performance of the event extraction
system and, therefore, the clustering results.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We present a system based on three main compo-
nents: (1) a cross-lingual event detection module;
(2) a storyline generation component that can de-
termine related events; (3) a newsroom content cu-
ration dashboard prototype that helps journalists
in the process of analysing large document col-
lections. Regarding the manual evaluation of the
generated storylines, we observe that the storyline
generator clearly unveils inherent semantic relat-
edness as a basic property of the documents in the
global news data set, while demonstrating docu-
ments in the local news data set to be rather unre-
lated. Further improvement of the storyline gen-
eration and event detection system is foreseen for
future work, especially regarding deeper and more
fine-grained filtering of the extracted events in or-
der to minimise the number of events included in a
storyline. A future version of the newsroom cura-
tion dashboard will be able to suggest, to the jour-
nalist, event-based storylines. We will also include
additional visualisation, as well as more linked
data sources. In the semantic backend, additional
processing modules will be included, especially
coreference resolution to improve the coverage of
extracted entity mentions.

72



Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful feedback. The project “Digitale Kuratierung-
stechnologien” is supported by the German Federal Min-
istry of Education and Research, Wachstumskern-Potenzial
(no. 03WKP45). http://www.digitale-kuratierung.de.

References
Anja Belz. 2008. Automatic Generation of Weather

Forecast Texts Using Comprehensive Probabilistic
Generation-space Models. Natural Language Engi-
neering 14(4):431–455.

Peter Bourgonje, Julian Moreno-Schneider, Jan
Nehring, Georg Rehm, Felix Sasaki, and Ankit
Srivastava. 2016a. Towards a Platform for Curation
Technologies: Enriching Text Collections with
a Semantic-Web Layer. In H. Sack, G. Rizzo,
N. Steinmetz, D. Mladenic, S. Auer, and C. Lange,
editors, The Semantic Web. Springer, number 9989
in LNCS, pages 65–68.

Peter Bourgonje, Julian Moreno Schneider, Georg
Rehm, and Felix Sasaki. 2016b. Processing Doc-
ument Collections to Automatically Extract Linked
Data: Semantic Storytelling Technologies for Smart
Curation Workflows. In A. Gangemi and C. Gar-
dent, editors, Proc. of the 2nd Int. Workshop on NLG
and the Semantic Web (WebNLG 2016). ACL, Edin-
burgh, UK, pages 13–16.

Philipp Cimiano, Janna Lüker, David Nagel, and
Christina Unger. 2013. Exploiting Ontology Lexica
for Generating Natural Language Texts from RDF
Data. In Proc. of the 14th European Workshop on
NLG. ACL, Sofia, Bulgaria, pages 10–19.

George Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark Przybocki,
Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, and Ralph
Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content extraction
(ace) program – tasks, data, and evaluation. In Proc.
of LREC 2004. ELRA, Lisbon, Portugal.

Pablo Gervás. 2013. Stories from Games: Content and
Focalization Selection in Narrative Composition. In
I Spanish Symposium on Entertainment Computing.
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain.

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
R. Zens, M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, C. Dyer,
B. Cowan, W. Shen, C. Moran, O. Bojar, A. Con-
stantin, and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. ACL,
Prague, CZ, pages 177–180.

Steven Poulakos, Mubbasir Kapadia, Andrea Schüpfer,
Fabio Zünd, Robert Sumner, and Markus Gross.
2015. Towards an Accessible Interface for Story
World Building. In AAAI Conf. on AI and Interac-
tive Digital Entertainment. pages 42–48.

Georg Rehm, Jing He, Julian Moreno Schneider, Jan
Nehring, and Joachim Quantz. 2017a. Designing

User Interfaces for Curation Technologies. In S. Ya-
mamoto, editor, Human Interface and the Manage-
ment of Information: Information, Knowledge and
Interaction Design, 19th Int. Conf., HCI Int. 2017.
Springer, Vancouver, CA, number 10273 in LNCS,
pages 388–406. Part I.

Georg Rehm and Felix Sasaki. 2015. Digitale
Kuratierungstechnologien – Verfahren für die ef-
fiziente Verarbeitung, Erstellung und Verteilung
qualitativ hochwertiger Medieninhalte. In Proc. of
GSCL 2015. pages 138–139.

Georg Rehm, Julian Moreno Schneider, Peter Bour-
gonje, Ankit Srivastava, Jan Nehring, Armin Berger,
Luca König, Sören Räuchle, and Jens Gerth. 2017b.
Event Detection and Semantic Storytelling: Gener-
ating a Travelogue from a large Collection of Per-
sonal Letters. In T. Caselli, B. Miller, M. van Erp,
P. Vossen, M. Palmer, E. Hovy, and T. Mitamura,
editors, Proc. of the Events and Stories in the News
Workshop. ACL, Vancouver, CA.

Mark Owen Riedl and Robert Michael Young. 2010.
Narrative Planning: Balancing Plot and Character.
J. Artif. Int. Res. 39(1):217–268.

Julian Moreno Schneider, Peter Bourgonje, Jan
Nehring, Georg Rehm, Felix Sasaki, and Ankit Sri-
vastava. 2016. Towards Semantic Story Telling with
Digital Curation Technologies. In L. Birnbaum,
O. Popescu, and C. Strapparava, editors, Proc. of
NLP meets Journalism (NLPMJ 2016). NY.

Julian Moreno Schneider, Peter Bourgonje, and Georg
Rehm. 2017. Towards User Interfaces for Seman-
tic Storytelling. In S. Yamamoto, editor, Human
Interface and the Management of Information: In-
formation, Knowledge and Interaction Design, 19th
Int. Conf, HCI Int. 2017. Springer, Vancouver, CA,
number 10274 in LNCS, pages 403–421. Part II.

Dafna Shahaf and Carlos Guestrin. 2010. Connecting
the dots between news articles. In Proc. of 16th
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining. ACM, New York, NY, USA, KDD
’10, pages 623–632.

S.R. Turner. 2014. The Creative Process: A Computer
Model of Storytelling and Creativity. Taylor & Fran-
cis.

Piek Vossen, Tommaso Caselli, and Yiota Kont-
zopoulou. 2015. Storylines for Structuring Mas-
sive Streams of News. In Proc. of 1st Workshop
on Computing News StoryLines (CNewS 2015), co-
located with ACL 2015 and ACL-IJCNLP 2015. Be-
jing, China.

Mark D. Wood. 2008. Exploiting Semantics for Per-
sonalized Story Creation. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on
Semantic Computing. Washington, DC, ICSC ’08,
pages 402–409.

Bishan Yang and Tom Mitchell. 2016. Joint extraction
of events and entities within a document context. In
Proc. of NAACL 2016. ACL, pages 289–299.

73


