




































HistoBankVis: Detecting Language Change via Data Visualization

Christin Schätzle
Department of Linguistics

University of Konstanz
christin.schaetzle@uni-konstanz.de

Michael Hund Frederik L. Dennig
Department of Computer Science

University of Konstanz
{michael.hund, frederik.dennig}

@uni-konstanz.de

Miriam Butt
Department of Linguistics

University of Konstanz
miriam.butt@uni-konstanz.de

Daniel A. Keim
Department of Computer Science

University of Konstanz
daniel.keim@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract

We present HistoBankVis, a novel visu-
alization system designed for the inter-
active analysis of complex, multidimen-
sional data to facilitate historical linguistic
work. In this paper, we illustrate the vi-
sualization’s efficacy and power by means
of a concrete case study investigating the
diachronic interaction of word order and
subject case in Icelandic.

1 Introduction

The increasing availability of digitized data for
historical linguistic research has led to an in-
creased use of quantitative methods, with an em-
ployment of increasingly sophisticated statistical
methods (Manning and Schütze, 2003; Baayen,
2008; Hilpert and Gries, 2016). However,
diachronic investigations involve understanding
highly complex interactions between various lin-
guistic and extra-linguistic features and structures.
Due to the complexity of this multidimensional
data, significant patterns may not be uncovered or
understood.

We therefore designed HistoBankVis, a novel
visualization system which facilitates the investi-
gation of historical change by integrating methods
coming from the field of Visual Analytics (Keim
et al., 2008). HistoBankVis allows a researcher to
interact with the data directly and efficiently while
exploring correlations between linguistic features
and structures. Our system in effect consigns to
history the painstaking work of finding patterns
across various different tables of features, num-
bers and statistical significances. Rather, in our
system, the researcher can first identify certain
features to be investigated and within minutes can

obtain an at-a-glance overview that provides infor-
mation about whether interesting patterns can in-
deed be identified across features over time. Rel-
evant patterns can then be further analyzed by
drilling down to individual data points and new
hypotheses can be generated. These hypotheses
may then be tested anew with respect to a fresh
look at the data. Given that historical data typi-
cally present a data sparsity problem, we also pro-
vide multiple different ways of calculating or esti-
mating statistical significance, e.g. Euclidean dis-
tance, to deal with the small number of data points.

The efficacy of HistoBankVis is exemplified via
a concrete test case, namely a syntactic investi-
gation of the Icelandic Parsed Historical Corpus
(IcePaHC, Wallenberg et al., 2011). The IcePaHC
is annotated in the Penn TreeBank style (Marcus
et al., 1993) and consists of 61 texts with around
one million words covering all attested stages of
Icelandic.

The visualization not only identifies changing
syntactic features in IcePaHC ad-hoc by means of
a well-structured statistical analysis process, but
also supports the researcher in the generation and
validation of hypotheses. Moreover, the visual-
ization bridges the gap between annotated values,
statistical analyses and the actual underlying data
by providing access to the original sentences from
IcePaHC during a data filter and selection process.

2 Related Work

Visualizations tailored to the analysis of historical
linguistic data range from work on modal verbs
within historical academic discourse (Lyding et
al., 2012) to the cross-linguistic spread of new
suffixes throughout mass media (Rohrdantz et al.,
2012; Rohrdantz, 2014), the semantic change of
word meanings (Rohrdantz et al., 2011) and the

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 32



Figure 1: The workflow of our novel visualization system: based on the analysis task, the user splits
documents into sentences, extracts and filters for relevant linguistic factors (=dimensions) as well as
customized or pre-defined time periods. The visualization provides different levels of detail that the user
can switch back and forth between. The system crucially allows for a feed-back loop by which the user
can iterate back to refilter or modify the underlying data.

evolution of meanings as represented in dictionar-
ies (Theron and Fontanillo, 2015). With respect
to Icelandic and IcePaHC, Butt et al. (2014) and
Schätzle and Sacha (2016) designed a glyph vi-
sualization for the analysis of individual factors
leading to syntactic change. HistoBankVis builds
on the experiences gathered while working on the
glyph visualization. In particular, the glyph visual-
ization was not able to deal elegantly with the po-
tentially large amounts of interacting data dimen-
sions that are of interest for any kind of historical
linguistic research question. The system also re-
lied on specific assumptions about the nature of
the data and the research questions to be pursued.

The goal of HistoBankVis thus is to provide
both a more generically applicable system for his-
torical linguistic research and a more flexible in-
vestigation of data dimensions, allowing for ex-
ploratory access to a potentially high number of
factors. The system also either provides for the
possibility of analyzing each factor at a time or to
look at interactions of interrelated factors on de-
mand.

3 The HistoBankVis System
3.1 Iterative Analysis Workflow

The idea behind HistoBankVis is an iterative
workflow, displayed in Figure 1. The text data
are processed by extracting linguistic factors
which have been identified by the researcher as
relevant for the task at hand. This is typically
done by a previous careful consultation of the rel-
evant theoretical literature. In what follows, we
call these linguistic factors dimensions and their
possible values features. For example, the linguis-
tic factor voice is a data dimension containing the
features active, passive and middle. Based on the
analysis task, the user can filter for a subset of
the data (e.g., only certain dimensions/features or
only sentences from a specific set of genres or time

periods). To visualize the historical developments
of dimensions over time, the researcher needs to
define time periods for the comparison . The
visualization then allows the researcher to in-
teractively compare the distribution of all selected
features and dimensions of the filtered sentences
across the different time periods. The visualiza-
tion moreover provides details-on-demand on all
views via mouse interaction techniques. Finally,
the user can react to the insights collected from the
visualization and test new hypotheses by interact-
ing directly with the system . Interactions could
involve changes in the data processing, adapting
the filters or modifying the time periods.

3.2 Data Processing

As part of a concrete case study, we are cur-
rently working with HistoBankVis to investigate
the interaction between subject case and word or-
der. Although Icelandic is generally taken to have
changed only little with respect to syntax and mor-
phology (Thráinsson, 1996; Rögnvaldsson et al.,
2011), several changes with respect to word or-
der have been documented (e.g., Kiparsky (1996),
Rögnvaldsson (1996) and Hróarsdóttir (2000) on
the change from OV to VO and Franco (2008) and
Sigurðsson (1990) on the decrease of V1). Some
questions regarding Icelandic on the basis of the
existing literature are: Which strategies are used
to mark grammatical relations? Do these strate-
gies change in the history of Icelandic?

In order to investigate these questions, we iden-
tified relevant linguistic dimensions based on in-
formation contained in the theoretical literature
and automatically extracted these dimensions via
Perl scripts from the annotation of IcePaHC. We
included information about the type of verb, voice,
word order, case and valency. These dimensions
were furthermore mapped onto the sentence IDs
contained in IcePaHC. These sentence IDs pro-

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 33



Figure 2: The filter module : The researcher can
filter for data from specific years containing only
specific data features before generating a data set
with previously selected dimensions.

vide information about the year date, the name and
the genre of the text in which the sentence occurs.
As part of our preprocessing, we used this infor-
mation to generate a well-structured database that
HistoBankVis can operate on.

3.3 Task-based Filtering

Once the data has been processed, the researcher
has the option of filtering for sentences with rele-
vant properties. Besides filtering for data within
a specific time frame, the researcher can visu-
ally construct SQL-like filters for features in the
database. Based on the analysis task, the dimen-
sions and features can be combined with logi-
cal AND- or OR-functions. For example in Fig-
ure 2, we filtered for sentences which contain the
word order OVS, i.e., (direct) object, verb, subject,
within texts from 1750 to 1900 CE. The researcher
then further selects the dimensions for analysis,
e.g., subject case, voice, word order and the verbs
involved. Each sentence matching the configured
filter can be analyzed by displaying it and its Penn
Treebank annotation in conjunction with all avail-
able extracted features on demand. Thus, the fil-
tering component of HistoBankVis serves as a pre-
processing system on its own, providing the re-
searcher with a more fine-grained view on the data
by only selecting a certain number of dimensions
and/or a subset of sentences. This not only allows
the researcher to become familiar with and explore
the data set at hand, but also furthers the under-
standing of the data quality by granting access to
detailed information about each data point. Ad-
ditionally, the filtered data set can be downloaded
as a CSV-file to be processed in a different tool of
choice.

3.4 Analyzing Change over Time

To analyze and visualize the selected dimensions
over time, the researcher has to first specify rel-
evant time periods . For Icelandic, our
system automatically supports two common divi-
sions into time periods: (1) Old and Modern Ice-
landic, i.e., 1150–1550 and 1550–2008 CE (e.g.,
see Thráinsson (1996); referred to as Range A
in the following); (2) more fine-grained periods
as defined per Haugen (1984), i.e., 1150–1350,
1350–1550, 1550–1750, 1750-1900, and 1900–
2008 CE (referred to as Range B in what follows).
The system also allows the user to enter fully cus-
tomized periods.

Compact Matrix Visualization We provide a
compact matrix repre-
senting an understand-
ing about differences
between the selected di-
mensions across time
periods. Each row and
column of the matrix

corresponds to one period. This especially facil-
itates the comparison of the first period to all oth-
ers and every period with its predecessor (entries
along the diagonal of the matrix). HistoBankVis
provides two comparison modes: statistical sig-
nificance and distance based. In both modes the
difference between two periods is mapped onto a
colormap (red depicts a high and white
a low significance/distance). To measure the sta-
tistical significance, HistoBankVis supports a χ2-
test. Here the p-value is mapped to the colormap:
red corresponds to p = 0 and white to p ≥ 0.2.

indicates that the difference is statistically sig-
nificant (with α = 0.05) and signals the absence
of necessary preconditions. Alternatively, the Eu-
clidean distance can be used when the necessary
preconditions for the χ2-test are not met, e.g., in
order to deal with problems of data sparsity. A
high Euclidean distance reflects a large difference
in the compared distributions and indicates high
significance. The visual patterns in the matrix
view serve as a measure of quality and “interest-
ingness" as one can quickly spot combinations of
periods which differ significantly and should be
investigated further.

Difference Histograms Visualization While
the overview matrix is a useful means to quickly
gain insights, difference histograms provide a view

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 34



Figure 3: Difference histograms for the distribu-
tion of subject case and word order in transitive
sentences in Old versus Modern Icelandic.

with more details on the diachrony of individual
features. Each time period is visualized as one bar
chart, see Figure 3 for Range A. Each dimension
is encoded via a different color, e.g., blue for sub-
ject case and orange for word order. The height of
one bar corresponds to the percentage of sentences
containing the respective features. Additional in-
formation, such as the underlying sentences, the
exact percentages and the relative size of the fea-
ture occurrence compared to the overall text size
can be accessed via several interaction techniques.

The comparison of bar heights along different
periods provides insights on which dimensions
and/or combinations of features change over time.
We furthermore computed the difference between
two neighboring periods and visualized this as a
separate bar chart below the percentages of fea-
tures in the histograms. The color green indicates
that a feature increased compared to the previous
period and red indicates that the feature decreased,
e.g., SVO increases in Figure 3, while VSO de-
creases. The system also allows for other compar-
ison modes such as the option of comparing each
time period with the first or last period, with the
average of all periods, or with the average of all
periods before the current one in order to make
deviating features stand out and to observe trends.

3.5 Hypothesis Generation and Feedback

Once the patterns in the data have been explored,
hypotheses tested and perhaps new ones formed,
the researcher can feed the knowledge gained back
into each of the individual parts of the system
by changing the filters, trying out different time
periods or by going back to the data process-
ing step and including different or more features.
This creates an iterative analysis process in which
knowledge-based and data-driven modeling are
combined.

3.6 Access and Usability

HistoBankVis is implemented as an on-line
browser-app and is freely available via our web-
site.1 The website includes a demo video which
guides the user through the different analysis
steps. Each analysis step performed by the user
(e.g., applied filters or selected dimensions) and
the current views (e.g., difference histograms) are
encoded by uniquely identified URLs. The URL
scheme allows a researcher to easily store and
retrieve visualizations with different properties.
It also allows for knowledge and data exchange
between researchers supporting collaborative re-
search projects since URLs representing a certain
view on the data can be shared with other re-
searchers locally or non-locally.

Besides the IcePaHC dataset, which Histo-
BankVis uses as its default data set, the system
makes provision for researchers who would like
to load their own data into HistoBankVis. The
specifications for the new data sets are also pro-
vided. The data needs to be in a tab-separated for-
mat in which each line starts with a unique ID fol-
lowed by the year date corresponding to the entry
and an arbitrary number of data dimensions. Ad-
ditionally, a file with meta information about the
source texts (e.g., the text itself and/or the syntac-
tically parsed sentence structure) can be uploaded
as well. The mapping between the data dimen-
sions and meta information is done via the unique
ID. Further instructions and an example data set
with abstract dimensions and values are available
on our website, providing the user with more in-
formation on how to prepare and structure the data
set.

4 Case Study

The visualizations above were obtained as part
of an on-going investigation into correlations be-
tween word order and dative subjects. First, we
investigated the word order distribution across all
subjects in Old and Modern Icelandic by filtering
for sentences containing a subject (S), a verb (V)
and a direct object (O/O1). We subsequently vi-
sualized the dimensions subject case and word or-
der. The difference histograms not only show that
SVO is the dominant order for both time periods,
but also that SVO is slightly increasing over time,
accompanied by a concomitant decrease of VSO,

1http://histobankvis.dbvis.de

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 35



Figure 4: Word order within the past two time pe-
riods from Range B for dative subjects. See Fig-
ure 7 in the Appendix for all periods.

see Figure 3. Moreover, the subjects involved are
mainly nominative and more rarely dative.

Following this initial broad look at the data, we
took a more nuanced look and visualized the data
with respect to Range B. Here, the distance matrix
(see Section 3.4) revealed at-a-glance that there is
a significant change in the last two time periods.
By comparing each range with the previous one,
a fairly large increase of SVO becomes visible in
the last time stage (cf. the green bar under SVO1
in Figure 4), while VSO is further decreasing, as
shown by the red bar underneath VSO1. Dative
subjects also increase slightly in the last range (see
Figure 5 in the Appendix).

Given these findings, a separate analysis of
word order in dative and nominative subjects was
in order. This could easily be done by configur-
ing the filter settings to only include either da-
tive or nominative subjects. While the word or-
der histograms for nominative subjects (see Fig-
ure 6 in the Appendix) conform to the overall de-
velopments of word order for all subjects, dative
subjects pattern differently. The difference his-
tograms in Figure 4 show that VSO is the dom-
inant word order for dative subject sentences un-
til around 1900, which is when SVO surpasses
VSO as dominant order following a continuous in-
crease.

Strikingly, we found the OVS order to be stand-
ing out in the second to last time stage by devi-
ating strongly from the average appearance in the
other stages. We thus filtered the data once more
for only OVS and noted that the verbs found in the
relevant time period are mainly experiencer predi-
cates, such as líka ’like, please’, see Figure 2. We
postulate that these experiencer verbs are subject
to lexicalization over time and are changing from a
structure in which the experiencer/goal is realized

as a structural object to a structure whose sentient
experiencer/goal participant is instead realized as a
structural subject. I.e., something like This pleases
me, in which the experiencer is an object is in-
stead realized as I like this, where the experi-
encer is a subject. The general ability of experi-
encer/goal arguments to be realized in principle as
either an experiencer subject or an undergoer/goal
object has been well documented across languages
(cf. Grimshaw, 1990), as have general linguistic
principles by which sentient/animate participants
are preferentially realized as subjects (e.g., Dowty,
1991). We postulate that the Icelandic pattern is
an instance of a historical change by which ex-
periencer participants are increasingly realized as
dative subjects. Our findings are also in line with
recent research on the interaction between middle
morphology and dative subjects by Schätzle et al.
(2015).

Recall that we also found an overall change to-
wards SVO word order. We postulate that this
points towards the development of a fixed prever-
bal subject position in the history of Icelandic with
the 19th century as a major key turning point. Da-
tive subjects show a slower tendency to follow this
development. We explain this slower tendency by
the fact that experiencer/goal arguments were not
canonical subjects and that many of them under-
went reanalysis from object to subject first.

Other changes with respect to Icelandic word
order have been reported to happen around the
same time, e.g. the decrease of V1 (Sigurðsson,
1990; Butt et al., 2014) and the loss of OV
(Hróarsdóttir, 2000). These and other findings
are the subject of on-going work, also with the
aid of HistoBankVis. We hope to have been able
to demonstrate the efficacy of HistoBankVis with
this snap shot of our on-going historical work.

5 Conclusion

In conclusion, we present a powerful new visual-
ization tool, HistoBankVis, which facilitates the
detection and analysis of language change with re-
spect to an annotated corpus. By means of just a
few clicks, we were able to investigate changes in
word order in interaction with subject case.

Our method combines knowledge-based and
data-driven modeling. The system was developed
on the IcePaHC, but has been set up in a gen-
eralized manner so that it can be applied to any
Penn Treebank-style annotated corpus or indeed

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 36



any annotated corpus as the visualization builds on
a database designed to process any kind of well-
structured data set.

HistoBankVis can also be used as a prepro-
cessing and filtering tool without the visualization
module as it allows for the export of filtered data
sets. That is, the user can simply choose to fil-
ter the data set according to some features and
dimensions that they specify. The user does not
need to proceed on to a visualization of the se-
lected dimensions, but can choose to export just
those filtered records. If the user does choose to
proceed to the visualization, the fact that the visu-
alization is implemented as a browser-app means
that each analysis step remains accessible via a
single identification URL. This not only facilitates
a collaborative research structure by allowing re-
searchers to share their analyses and perspectives
on the data across machines, it also facilitates the
analysis process since individual perspectives on
the data can be stored and individual analyses can
be (re)retrieved at any time.

Finally, we hope to have demonstrated that His-
toBankVis represents a novel and effective visu-
alization system which immensely facilitates the
investigation of historical language change.

Acknowledgments

We thank the German Research Foundation (DFG)
for financial support within the projects A03 and
D02 of the SFB/Transregio 161.

References
R. Harald Baayen. 2008. Analyzing Linguistic Data. A

Practical Introduction to Statistics Using R. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.

Miriam Butt, Tina Bögel, Kristina Kotcheva, Christin
Schätzle, Christian Rohrdantz, Dominik Sacha,
Nicole Dehe, and Daniel Keim. 2014. V1 in Ice-
landic: A multifactorical visualization of historical
data. In Proceedings of the LREC 2014 Workshop
“VisLR: Visualization as added value in the develop-
ment, use and evaluation of Language Resources”,
Reykjavik, Iceland.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. Language, 67(3):547–619.

Irene Franco. 2008. V1, V2 and criterial movement in
Icelandic. Studies in Linguistics, 2:141 – 164.

Jane Grimshaw. 1990. Argument Structure. The MIT
Press, Cambridge.

Einar Haugen. 1984. Die skandinavischen Sprachen:
Eine Einführung in ihre Geschichte. Hamburg:
Buske.

Martin Hilpert and Stefan Th. Gries. 2016. Quantita-
tive approaches to diachronic corpus linguistics. In
Merja Kytö and Päivi Pahta, editors, The Cambridge
Handbook of English Historical Linguistics, pages
36–53. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Thorbjörg Hróarsdóttir. 2000. Word Order Change in
Icelandic. From OV to VO. John Benjamins, Ams-
terdam.

Daniel Keim, Gennady Andrienko, Jean-Daniel
Fekete, Carsten Görg, Jörn Kohlhammer, and Guy
Melançon. 2008. Visual analytics: Definition, pro-
cess, and challenges. In Information visualization,
pages 154–175. Springer.

Paul Kiparsky. 1996. The shift to head-initial VP
in Germanic. In H. Thráinsson, J. Peter, and
S. Epstein, editors, Comparative Germanic Syntax.
Kluwer.

Verena Lyding, Stefania Degaetano-Ortlieb, Ekate-
rina Lapshinova-Koltunski, Henrik Dittmann, and
Christopher Culy. 2012. Visualising linguistic evo-
lution in academic discourse. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2012 Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH,
pages 44–48. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schütze. 2003.
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Pro-
cessing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, 6 edition.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson, Anton Karl Ingason, and
Einar Freyr Sigurðsson. 2011. Coping with
variation in the Icelandic Parsed Historical Corpus
(IcePaHC). In J.B. Johannessen, editor, Language
Variation Infrastructure, volume 3 of Oslo Studies
in Language, pages 97–112.

Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson. 1996. Word order variation in
the VP in Old Icelandic. Working Papers in Scandi-
navian Syntax, 58:55–86.

Christian Rohrdantz, Annette Hautli, Thomas Mayer,
Miriam Butt, Frans Plank, and Daniel A. Keim.
2011. Towards Tracking Semantic Change by Vi-
sual Analytics. In Proceedings of ACL 2011 (Short
Papers), pages 305–310.

Christian Rohrdantz, Andreas Niekler, Annette Hautli,
Miriam Butt, and Daniel A. Keim. 2012. Lexi-
cal Semantics and Distribution of Suffixes - A Vi-
sual Analysis. Proceedings of the EACL 2012
Joint Workshop of LINGVIS & UNCLH, pages 7–15,
April.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 37



Christian Rohrdantz. 2014. Visual Analytics of
Change in Natural Language. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Konstanz.

Christin Schätzle and Dominik Sacha. 2016. Visual-
izing language change: Dative subjects in Icelandic.
In Annette Hautli-Janisz and Verena Lyding, editors,
Proceedings of the LREC 2016 Workshop “VisLR II:
Visualization as Added Value in the Development,
Use and Evaluation of Language Resources”, pages
8–15.

Christin Schätzle, Miriam Butt, and Kristina Kotcheva.
2015. The diachrony of dative subjects and the mid-
dle in Icelandic: A corpus study. In M. Butt and
T. H. King, editors, Proceedings of the LFG15 Con-
ference. CSLI Publications.

Halldór Ármann Sigurðsson. 1990. V1 declaratives
and verb raising in icelandic. In Joan Maling and
Annie Zaenen, editors, Modern Icelandic Syntax
(Syntax and Semantics 24), pages 41–69. Academic
Press, San Diego.

Roberto Theron and Laura Fontanillo. 2015.
Diachronic-information visualization in historical
dictionaries. Information Visualization, 14(2):111–
136.

Höskuldur Thráinsson. 1996. Icelandic. In Ekkehard
König and Johan van der Auwera, editors, The Ger-
manic Languages, pages 142–189. Routledge, Lon-
don.

Joel C. Wallenberg, Anton Karl Ingason, Einar Freyr
Sigurðsson, and Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson. 2011. Ice-
landic Parced Historical Corpus (IcePaHC). Version
0.9.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 38



Appendix

Figure 5: Word order and subject case for Range
B: The blue bars represent the general distribution
of subject case within the filtered data set (sen-
tences containing a subject, a direct object and
a verb). The orange bars represent the possible
word order patterns occurring in the data. Over
time, SVO increases consistently with respect to
each previous time period (green bar). At the same
time, VSO decreases (red bar). The dimension
subject case remains stable until the last time pe-
riod in which a slight increase of dative subjects is
visible.

Figure 6: Word order for Range B for nominative
subjects. The diachrony of the word order pat-
terns corresponds to the one found for all subjects
(as displayed in Figure 5), i.e., VSO is decreasing
across the time stages, while SVO is increasing.

Figure 7: Word order for Range B for dative sub-
jects. VSO is the dominant word order up un-
til the last time stage in which SVO becomes the
dominant word order after continuously increas-
ing along the whole corpus. Moreover, OVS word
order stands out in the second to last time stage.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 39


