



















































Iconic Locations in Swedish Sign Language: Mapping Form to Meaning with Lexical Databases


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 221–225,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

Iconic Locations in Swedish Sign Language:
Mapping Form to Meaning with Lexical Databases

Carl Börstell & Robert Östling
Department of Linguistics

Stockholm University
{calle,robert}@ling.su.se

Abstract

In this paper, we describe a method
for mapping the phonological feature
location of Swedish Sign Language
(SSL) signs to the meanings in the
Swedish semantic dictionary SALDO. By
doing so, we observe clear differences
in the distribution of meanings associated
with different locations on the body. The
prominence of certain locations for spe-
cific meanings clearly point to iconic map-
pings between form and meaning in the
lexicon of SSL, which pinpoints modality-
specific properties of the visual modality.

1 Introduction

1.1 Language and iconicity
The word forms of a language have tradition-
ally been regarded as arbitrary, that is, there is
no motivation for why a certain meaning is en-
coded by a specific form (de Saussure, 1916). The
iconicity found in the word forms of spoken lan-
guage is normally restricted to a few categories—
e.g. onomatopoeia and ideophones (Perniss et
al., 2010)—but also visible in so-called phonaes-
themes, grouping certain meanings together—
e.g. tw- in twist and twirl (Kwon and Round,
2015). Large-scale cross-linguistc comparisons of
form and meaning have shown that there are some
preferences for using and avoiding certain sounds
for certain meanings (Blasi et al., 2016). How-
ever, since the extent of iconicity in spoken lan-
guage is still quite limited, the general assumption
is still that arbitrary word forms are the norm for
any given language in that modality.

1.2 Signed language and iconic locations
Signed language uses the other of the two natu-
ral modalities of human language, being visual–
gestural instead of auditive–oral. A key difference

Figure 1: The SSL sign THINK (Svenskt tecken-
språkslexikon, 2016).

between signed and spoken language is that the
former is widely regarded as more iconic (and con-
sequently less arbitrary) than the latter, in terms of
both lexically specified and morphologically mod-
ified depiction (Klima and Bellugi, 1979). The
articulation of any sign is located in the physical
space on or around the body of the signer. The lo-
cation of the sign (a.k.a. place of articulation) can
be iconic already in lexical signs (Taub, 2001), but
sign locations may be altered to adhere to and syn-
tax/discourse iconicity (Perniss, 2012; Meir et al.,
2013).1 In this study, we only focus on lexically
specified locations of signs (see Section 2.1). Two
examples of iconic locations in SSL signs are il-
lustrated in Figure 1, in which the sign THINK is
located at the forehead (representing brain activ-
ity), and Figure 2, in which the sign QUIET is lo-
cated at the mouth (represented by a well-known
gesture, depicting an obstacle in front of the lips).

The iconic relationship between form and
meaning is well-attested for signed language, in-
cluding location as one form feature. How-
ever, few studies that have investigated this link
by quantitative means, and none for SSL.

1The co-speech gestures often accompanying spoken lan-
guage may be similarly iconic, for instance with regard to the
location of gesturing in the physical space (McNeill, 1992).

221



Figure 2: The SSL sign QUIET (Svenskt tecken-
språkslexikon, 2016).

2 Data and Methodology

2.1 The SSL online dictionary

The SSL dictionary (SSLD) (Svenskt tecken-
språkslexikon, 2016) is an online video dictionary
of SSL. It is an ongoing language resource and
documentation project, creating a lexical database
constantly expanding in size (Mesch et al., 2012).
The version used for this study included 15,874
sign entries. Each sign entry has one or more
Swedish word translations, and also features a
phonological transcription of the sign form, in
which sign location is one value.

All sign data were exported from the SSLD
database, and from this raw data, Swedish key-
words and sign locations were extracted using a
Python script. For the purposes of this study, com-
plex signs with more than one location (e.g. com-
pounds) were excluded.

For single location signs, we also excluded a)
signs using the so-called neutral space as the lo-
cation, and b) signs for which the other, non-
dominant, hand was used as the location (Cras-
born, 2011). The former were excluded since we
were only interested in signs with body-specified
locations.2 The latter cases were excluded since
the other hand is found to be iconic in terms of
its shape and interaction with the dominant hand,
rather than as a location per se (Lepic et al., 2016).

The finalized SSLD data consist of a list of
3,675 signs that met our criteria, their Swedish
keywords, and location. In this list, 29 locations
were present. These were collapsed into 20 lo-
cations, conflating near identical locations (e.g.
eyes and eye). Table 1 shows a list of all loca-
tions and the number of signs per location.

2This does not necessarily entail body contact.

Location No. of signs
head 81
forehead 414
upper face 159
eyes 95
face 153
nose 214
ears 103
lower face 47
cheeks 210
mouth 398
chin 325
neck 196
shoulders 77
arm 36
upper arm 47
lower arm 110
chest 860
belly 101
hip 42
leg 7
Total 3,675

Table 1: Distribution of signs across locations
(anatomically descending).

2.2 SALDO

SALDO (Borin and Forsberg, 2009) is a semantic
lexicon of Swedish, in which each word sense is
arranged into a hierarchy through its (unique) pri-
mary descriptor and its (one or more) secondary
descriptors. Unlike the more familiar WordNet
(Miller, 1995) style lexica, the precise semantic
relationship indicated by SALDO’s descriptors is
not formally specified. While this makes some of
the applications of WordNet difficult to reproduce
with SALDO, generating a number of broad se-
mantic categories is sufficient for our needs.

For the purposes of this work, we define the
semantic category defined by a word sense to be
the set of all primary or secondary descendants in
SALDO. This implies that each sense in SALDO
defines a category, possibly overlapping, and that
the choice of which categories to investigate is
very free. We selected categories that were large
enough to provide a sensible analysis, as well as
semantically tied to the human body. Because
SSLD does not contain any mapping to SALDO’s
word senses, we approximate sense disambigua-
tion by using the first SALDO sense of any SSLD
entry. In practice, this amounts to looking up the

222



(a) ‘believe’ (b) ‘think’ (c) ‘see’ (d) ‘hear’ (e) ‘say’ (f) ‘feel’ (g) ‘eat’

Figure 3: Location distributions for seven semantic categories. Brightness represents the degree to which
a given body part is over-represented in the given semantic category, with respect to the distribution over
locations for all signs in the lexicon.

'think'
(n=27)

'hear'
(n=25)

'believe'
(n=71)

'feel'
(n=84)

'see'
(n=94)

'say'
(n=131)

'eat'
(n=164)

Figure 4: The distribution of locations for signs within seven semantic categories (with number of sign
entries per semantic category in brackets).

Swedish translation available in each SSLD entry
using SALDO, and choosing the first sense in case
there are several. This is a surprisingly close ap-
proximation, because the first sense is generally
the most common.3

To give a sense of how one of the semantic
categories we study looks, we sample ten ran-
dom signs in the category ‘eat’: animal feed, ap-
pendix (anatomy), kiwi, gravy, foodstuff, lunch,
belly ache, anorexia, full, oatmeal. While many
actual types of food are included, we also see
terms such as appendix whose assocation to ‘eat’
is more indirect.

3The exception to this among our concepts is ‘feel’,
where we use the second SALDO sense of the correspond-
ing Swedish word, ‘känna’.

2.3 Visualization

We investigate the distribution of locations for a
given semantic category by first looking up its
members in SALDO as described above, then
looking up the corresponding signs in SSLD
through their Swedish translations. The locations
of the resulting set of signs is then visualized in
two ways:

• by varying the light level of body parts pro-
portional to the (exponentiated) pointwise
mutual information (PMI) of the given con-
cept and that location (see Figure 3).

• by a jitter plot showing the number of signs
within a concept with a certain location (see
Figure 4).

223



Pointwise mutual information is defined as

PMI(l,c) = log
p(l,c)

p(l)p(c)

where, as we use maximum-likelihood estimation,
p(l) is the proportion of signs articulated at loca-
tion l, p(c) is the proportion of signs that belong
to category c, and p(l,c) the proportion that are
both of the above at the same time. Intuitively, this
is a measure of how overrepresented a location is
among the signs within a given concept, relative
to the overall distribution of locations in the SSLD
lexicon. In our visualization, high PMI is repre-
sented by brighter regions.

We have chosen to use two separate but simi-
lar visualization techniques for reasons of clarity,
since the first gives an intuitive picture of where on
the body a particular semantic category is focused
in SSL vocabulary, whereas the second makes it
easier to see the actual distribution of sign loca-
tions within a concept without comparison to the
overall distribution.

3 Results

Figure 3 shows the location distributions for seven
semantic categories: ‘believe’, ‘think’, ‘see’,
‘hear’, ‘say’, ‘feel’, and ‘eat’.

The amount of iconicity in SSL is clearly visi-
ble in this figure, where signs in the categories ‘be-
lieve’ and ‘think’ are over-represented around the
forehead (with specific meanings such as suspect
and ponder), ‘see’ around the eyes (e.g. stare),
‘hear’ on the ears (e.g. listen), ‘say’ around the
mouth (e.g. speak, talk) or neck (e.g. voice), ‘feel’
on several locations on the lower face related to
sensory inputs (e.g. smell, sweet), and ‘eat’ around
the mouth (e.g. lunch) or belly (e.g. hungry).

This iconicity is by no means absolute, as in-
dicated by Figure 4. This shows that even in the
most extreme cases, such as ‘hear’ and ‘think’,
the bias in location is not absolute. Other cat-
egories, like ‘say’, are in fact distributed quite
widely throughout the body although the mouth
area is clearly over-represented.4

4 Conclusions

In this paper, we have showed clear examples
of iconic patterning in the distribution of mean-
ings across the lexically specified locations of SSL

4In Figure 4, the prominence of each location is shown by
level of darkness in the plotted signs (i.e. darker means more
prominent).

signs. This is done by quantitative means, using
a novel method of matching Swedish word en-
tries in the SSLD to the meanings in the seman-
tic dictionary SALDO, followed by a visualiza-
tion based on a prominence-ranking of locations to
meaning domains. The results illustrate that some
body locations are much more prominent than oth-
ers within certain semantic domains. This is at-
tributed to the iconic structure of signed language,
with sign forms directly or metaphorically evok-
ing salient properties of some referent. Since not
all signs are necessarily iconic, and because iconic
forms may choose from a range of features of its
referent to depict, the distribution of meanings to
locations is not absolute. Instead, locations are
more or less prominent for certain meanings, and
in many cases this is directly linked to iconicity.

Acknowledgments

We wish to thank the two anonymous reviewers
for comments and suggestions on this paper.

References
Damián E. Blasi, Søren Wichmann, Harald Ham-

marström, Peter F. Stadler, and Morten H. Chris-
tiansen. 2016. Sound–meaning association bi-
ases evidenced across thousands of languages. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
113(39):10818–10823.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the
family: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet.
In NODALIDA 2009 Workshop on WordNets and
other Lexical Semantic Resources – between Lexical
Semantics, Lexicography, Terminology and Formal
Ontologies, pages 7–12, Odense, Denmark.

Onno Crasborn. 2011. The other hand in sign lan-
guage phonology. In Marc van Oostendorp, Colin J.
Ewen, Elizabeth Hume, and Keren Rice, editors, The
Blackwell companion to phonology, vol. 1, chap-
ter 10, pages 223–240. Malden, MA & Oxford.

Ferdinand de Saussure. 1916. Cours de linguistique
générale. Payot, Paris.

Edward S. Klima and Ursula Bellugi. 1979. Iconicity
in signs and signing. In Edward S. Klima and Ursula
Bellugi, editors, The signs of language, pages 9–34.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Nahyun Kwon and Erich R. Round. 2015. Phonaes-
themes in morphological theory. Morphology,
25(1):1–27.

Ryan Lepic, Carl Börstell, Gal Belsitzman, and Wendy
Sandler. 2016. Taking meaning in hand: Iconic mo-
tivations for two-handed signs. Sign Language &
Linguistics, 19(1):37–81.

224



David McNeill. 1992. Hand and Mind: What Gestures
Reveal about Thought. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.

Irit Meir, Carol Padden, Mark Aronoff, and Wendy
Sandler. 2013. Competing iconicities in the struc-
ture of languages. Cognitive Linguistics, 24(2):309–
343.

Johanna Mesch, Lars Wallin, and Thomas Björkstrand.
2012. Sign Language Resources in Sweden: Dic-
tionary and Corpus. In Onno Crasborn, Eleni
Efthimiou, Evita Fotinea, Thomas Hanke, Jette
Kristoffersen, and Johanna Mesch, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 5th Workshop on the Representation and
Processing of Sign Languages: Interactions between
Corpus and Lexicon [LREC], pages 127–130, Paris.
ELRA.

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical
database for English. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.

Pamela Perniss, Robin L. Thompson, and Gabriella
Vigliocco. 2010. Iconicity as a general property
of language: evidence from spoken and signed lan-
guages. Frontiers in Psychology, 1(227).

Pamela Perniss. 2012. Use of sign space. In Roland
Pfau, Markus Steinbach, and Bencie Woll, editors,
Sign language: An international handbook, pages
412–431. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin/Boston, MA.

Svenskt teckenspråkslexikon. 2016. Sign Language
Section, Department of Linguistics, Stockholm Uni-
versity. http://teckensprakslexikon.ling.su.se/.

Sarah F. Taub. 2001. Language from the body: Iconic-
ity and metaphor in ASL. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

225


