



















































Universal Dependencies for Afrikaans


Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 38–47,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 22 May 2017.

Universal Dependencies for Afrikaans

Peter Dirix1, Liesbeth Augustinus1,2, Daniel van Niekerk3, and Frank Van Eynde1

1 University of Leuven, Centre for Computational Linguistics, fname.lname@kuleuven.be
2 FWO-Vlaanderen

3 North West University, Centre for Text Technology, fname.lname@nwu.ac.za

Abstract

The Universal Dependencies (UD) project
aims to develop a consistent annotation
framework for treebanks across many lan-
guages. In this paper we present the UD
scheme for Afrikaans and we describe the
conversion of the AfriBooms treebank to
this new format. We will compare the con-
version to UD to the conversion of related
syntactic structures in typologically simi-
lar languages.

1 Introduction

Afrikaans is a West Germanic language spoken by
about 7 million people in South Africa, Namibia
and a worldwide diaspora, mainly in English-
speaking countries. It is one of the eleven of-
ficial languages in South Africa and a main lin-
gua franca in both South Africa and neighbouring
Namibia.

Until recently, not many NLP tools were avail-
able for Afrikaans. Pilon (2005) developed a fine-
grained morpho-syntactic tag set and trained a ver-
sion of the TnT tagger (Brants, 2000) on a man-
ually corrected set of ca 20K words. This tag-
ger was used to annotate the 58M-word Taalkom-
missie corpus.1 The annotated corpus was sub-
sequently put into a search tool (Augustinus and
Dirix, 2013). The first small Afrikaans treebank
was only created in 2015 in the context of the the
AfriBooms project (Augustinus et al., 2016).

We will discuss the setup of the AfriBooms
treebank in Section 2 and continue with a short
overview of Universal Dependencies in Sec-
tion 3. The UD language-specific description for
Afrikaans as well as the conversion to the UD
scheme will be given in Section 4. Section 5 con-
cludes and discusses some plans for future work.

1Taalkommissiekorpus, version 1.1 (2011), published by
CText, North-West University, Potchefstroom.

2 AfriBooms treebank

The basis for the development of the AfriBooms
treebank is a filtered subset of the Afrikaans part of
the NCHLT Annotated Text Corpora.2 It contains
ca 49K tokens of PoS tagged government domain
documents.

The original PoS annotation of the NCHLT cor-
pus was based on a fine-grained tag set (Pilon,
2005). As some of the information in that tag set
turned out to be superfluous for determining the
sentence dependency structure, the PoS tag set was
simplified to a largely universal set of PoS tags
(Petrov et al., 2012). This was done in order to
facilitate the syntactic annotation process for the
human annotators. For example, 17 classes of verb
PoS tags, distinguishing present and past tense;
main verbs and auxiliaries; copular verbs, transi-
tive verbs, intransitive verbs and verbs requiring a
prepositional phrase for main verbs; separable and
inseparable verbs; and finally for auxiliaries the
type (modal, auxiliary of tense, auxiliary of as-
pect, auxiliary of mode) were all mapped to one
tag VERB. Table 1 presents the resulting tag set.

The simplified corpus was syntactically anno-
tated with the first version of an Afrikaans parser.3

In a next step, the annotations were manually
checked by one primary annotator while a subset
containing 943 words was double-checked by a
second annotator. The inter-annotator agreement
(IAA) is calculated in terms of labelled attach-
ment score (LAS) and unlabelled attachment score
(UAS) averaged over words (Nivre et al., 2007).
The LAS is 82.5%, while the UAS is 88.9%.

2Afrikaans NCHLT Annotated Text Corpora, edition 1.0,
created by M. Puttkammer, M. Schlemmer and R. Bekker
and available through the South African Language Resource
Management Agency, Potchefstroom, ISRLN 139-586-400-
050-9.

3The parser was retrained afterwards on the resulting tree-
bank.

38



AB POS TAG FREQUENCY DESCRIPTION
ADJ 2781 Adjectives
ADP 5561 Adpositions
ADV 1481 Adverbs
CONJ 2616 Conjunctions
DET 4113 Determiners
NOUN 9964 Nouns (including proper nouns)
NUM 635 Numerals
PRON 3561 Pronouns
PRT 1677 Particles
PUNCT 4028 Punctuation
VERB 6720 Verbs (including auxiliary verbs)
X 758 Catch-all class (including abbreviations and interjections amongst others)

Table 1: The PoS tag set and its frequencies in the AfriBooms treebank

AB DEPENDENCY TAG FREQ. DESCRIPTION
dep 1009 dependent
dep:punct 4497 punctuation
dep:root 1870 root
dep:aux 2534 auxiliary (verb)
dep:conj 2359 conjunct
dep:cc 1886 coordination (e.g. to

conjunctions)
dep:arg 1130 argument
dep:arg:subj 2605 subject
dep:arg:comp 3 complement
dep:arg:comp:obj 3763 object
dep:arg:comp:obj:dobj 111 direct object
dep:arg:comp:obj:iobj 0 indirect object
dep:arg:comp:obj:pobj 6106 object of preposition
dep:arg:comp:compl 0 complementiser
dep:arg:comp:mark 5 marker (introducing

adverbial clause)
dep:arg:comp:rel 0 relative (introducing

relative clause)
dep:arg:comp:acomp 0 adjectival complement
dep:mod 11120 modifier
dep:mod:advcl 0 adverbial clause

modifier
dep:mod:tmod 0 temporal modifier
dep:mod:amod 2447 adjectival modifier
dep:mod:num 462 numeric modifier
dep:mod:number 0 element of compound

number
dep:mod:appos 0 appositional modifier
dep:mod:abbrev 63 abbreviation modifier
dep:mod:adv 0 adverbial modifier
dep:mod:adv:neg 0 negation modifier
dep:mod:poss 830 possession modifier
dep:mod:prt 1375 phrasal verb particle
dep:mod:det 5101 determiner
dep:mod:prep 0 prepositional modifier

Table 2: The Stanford dependency tag set and its
frequencies in the AfriBooms treebank

For the dependency relations, a subset of the
Stanford tag set was adopted, applying the conven-
tions of De Marneffe (2006; 2008). An overview
of the dependency tags together with their fre-
quencies is given in Table 2.

The figures in Table 2 show that the annotators
often fell back onto more generic tags such as dep,
dep:arg and dep:mod, resulting in a large amount
of syntactic relations that could have been further
specified.

All sentences in the treebank are validated ac-
cording to the following principles:

• Graph completeness: Each sentence must
form a single complete graph, i.e. all words
must be reachable from the root node.

• Dependence restriction: Words may have
multiple dependents and each phrase has at
most one head.

• Projectivity: Connection lines between
words should not cross each other.

The treebank was delivered in the Folia-XML
format (van den Bosch et al., 2007). An exam-
ple of a sentence from the AfriBooms treebank is
given in Figure 1. It visualizes the PoS tag and de-
pendency annotation for the sentence Die webtu-
iste sal ‘n nuwe deurblaai-venster oopmaak. ‘The
website will open a new browser window’.

The different phases of the bootstrapping of
the parsing process, as well as the details of the
manual annotation and verification process are de-
scribed in Augustinus et al. (2016).

39



Figure 1: An example sentence taken from the AfriBooms treebank

3 Universal Dependencies

Universal Dependencies (UD) is a project devel-
oping cross-language consistent treebank annota-
tion for as many languages as possible, aiming
to facilitate multilingual or language-independent
parser development, cross-lingual learning, and
linguistic research from a language typology per-
spective (Nivre et al., 2016). The annotation
scheme is based on a combination of adapted (uni-
versal) Stanford dependencies (de Marneffe et al.,
2006; de Marneffe and Manning, 2008), Google
universal PoS tags (Petrov et al., 2012), and the
Interset interlingua for morphosyntactic tag sets
(Zeman, 2008). The general philosophy is to pro-
vide a universal inventory of categories and guide-
lines to facilitate consistent annotation of simi-
lar constructions across languages, and allowing
language-specific extensions when necessary to
encode specific features. Guidelines for version
2.0 as well as the treebanks released in this ver-
sion are published on the project’s website.4

Universal dependencies describe dependency
relations between words. For most languages,
white space determines what a token is. Apart
from contractions and clitics, words are not seg-
mented. The use of multi-word tokens is limited
to a few fixed expressions that function as adverbs
or adpositions.

UD treebanks are represented in the CoNLL-
U format, which is an adaptation of the older
CoNLL-X format. This format is a tab-separated
text file with ten columns. The first three columns
respectively contain the position of the token in the

4https://universaldependencies.org

sentence, the token and its lemma. Lemmas are
defined as the dictionary form of the token, which
depends on the language. For example verb lem-
mas are typically represented by the infinitive, but
in Greek the indicative present first person singu-
lar is employed. Column 4 contains the universal
PoS tag. The morphosyntactic annotation of the
pre-converted treebank, if any, can be put in col-
umn 5. The universal and language-specific mor-
phological features describing number, case, per-
son, gender, mood, tense etc. in the column 6.
Column 7 indicates the head of the current token
in reference to its position in the sentence (column
1). Column 8 contains the universal dependency
relation, while column 9 (optionally) contains an
enhanced dependency graph in the form of head-
dependency relation pairs. Any other type of an-
notation can be placed in column 10. Fields should
never be empty and may have an underscore as
place-holder if necessary. Figure 2 presents the
sentence in Figure 1 in the UD format.

4 Converting AfriBooms to the UDT
format

4.1 Language-specific definitions for
Afrikaans

In general, the structural conversion for the
Afrikaans treebank aims to be in line with what
was done for Dutch and German UDs, as they
are the two languages closest to Afrikaans. For
those languages, UD treebanks are already avail-
able. Despite the fact that Afrikaans has a sim-
plified morphology compared to Dutch, the lan-
guages share a lot of features, which include gen-

40



1 Die die DET LB Definite=Def|PronType=Art 2 det _ _
2 webtuiste webtuiste NOUN NSE Number=Sing 7 nsubj _ _
3 sal sal AUX VTUOM Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf|VerbType=Mod 7 aux _ _
4 ’n ’n DET LO Definite=Ind|PronType=Art 6 det _ _
5 nuwe nuut ADJ ASA AdjType=Attr|Case=Nom|Degree=Pos 6 amod _ _
6 deurblaai-venster deurblaai-venster NOUN NSE Number=Sing 7 obj _ _
7 oopmaak oopmaak VERB VTHSG Subcat=Tran|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf 0 root _ _
8 . . PUNCT ZE _ 7 punct _ _

Figure 2: Example for an Afrikaans sentence in the UDT format

eral Indo-European ones, but also very specific
(West) Germanic characteristics such as extensive
nominal compounding, separability of compound
verbs, and extensive diminutive formation.

4.1.1 PoS tags and morphological features
The Afrikaans Universal PoS tags and features are
listed in Table 3.

Nouns For nouns (NOUN) and proper names
(PROPN), we introduce a feature Degree next to
number. As in in Dutch, this is in order to cover
the extensive possibilities of diminutive forma-
tion, e.g. huis ‘house’ gets huisie ‘little house’
and Jan (‘John’) has Jantjie ‘little John’. Be-
sides this language-specific feature, we need the
Num feature, but not Case as Afrikaans has hardly
any remainders of the old Germanic case sys-
tem. The genitive is expressed by the particle se,
which is covered by the feature PartType=Gen
for particles. There are still a few fixed expres-
sions inherited from Dutch, like ter ere van ‘in
honour of’, which will be considered as multi-
word adverbials or prepositions. We will treat
fixed Latin expressions such as ex aequo similarly.
We do not include the difference between com-
mon nouns, measurement nouns, collectives and
abstract nouns, which was present in the original
tag set, as most of those tags did not occur in the
training set of the tagger anyway. Pluralia tanta
will be represented as ‘plural’ nouns.

Adjectives Adjectives (ADJ) have degrees of
comparison like most other Indo-European lan-
guages. We introduce the Case feature to cover for
the formal, archaic genitive forms like iets interes-
sants ‘something interesting’ (Donaldson, 1993).
Other archaic accusative or dative forms might oc-
cur in fixed expressions (e.g. te geleëner tyd ‘at
the proper time’), but as there are very few, these
expressions are also considered multi-word adver-
bials. In addition to these features we need to in-
troduce a new language-specific feature AdjType

to account for the fact that most adjectives have a
different form depending on whether they are used
attributively or predicatively, e.g. ’n eerlike kêrel
(‘an honest guy’) vs. dié kêrel is eerlik (‘this guy is
honest’). This is only relevant for the nominative
case. The forms are indistinguishable in the com-
parative and superlative, but as our original tag set
does make the distinction, we propose to keep it.
As prescribed in the UD guidelines, ordinal num-
bers form part of adjectives.

Adverbs For adverbs (ADV), we only keep the
differences in degree and we will not introduce
features to describe the type of adverb (temporal,
modal, etc.) at this point.

Verbs Verbs (VERB) have a very simple mor-
phology in Afrikaans. Apart from a few auxil-
iaries and modals, verbs only have one present
form, which also serves as infinitive, and a past
participle, which is used in the formation of the
past tense. The verb wees ‘to be’ has a separate
infinitive next to the present form is ‘is’, while it
also has an old preterite form to express the past
(was ‘was’), just like some modals. Present and
past participles are considered as adjectives when
they behave as such. An indication of the distinc-
tion native speakers make between past participles
and their (declinable) adjectival forms, is the fact
that the old Dutch strong forms can only be used
in adjectival positions and not to form the past
tense (Donaldson, 1993). For example, one cannot
say die kind word aangenome, only die kind word
aangeneem ‘the child is adopted’. However, one
can say die kind is aangenome, in which case this
is analysed as a combination of the copula and a
predicative complement, next to die kind is aange-
neem, which means ‘The child has been adopted’.
The strong form often has a more figurative or ab-
stract meaning, as in ’n gebroke hart (‘a broken
heart’) vs. ’n gebreekte bord (‘a broken plate’)
(Conradie, 2017).

For the category of auxiliaries (AUX) we intro-

41



UD POS TAG DESCRIPTION MORPHOLOGICAL FEATURES
ADJ Adjectives AdjType=Attr,Pred; Case=Nom,Gen; Degree=Cmp,Pos,Sup
ADP Adpositions AdpType=Circ,Post,Prep
ADV Determiners Degree=Cmp,Pos,Sup
AUX Auxiliaries Tense=Past,Pres; VerbForm=Fin,Inf; VerbType=Aux,Cop,Mod,Pas
CCONJ Coordinating conjunctions
DET Determiners Definite=Def,Ind; PronType=Art,Dem,Ind;
INTJ Interjections
NOUN Nouns Degree=Dim; Num=Plur,Sing
NUM Numerals
PART Particles PartType=Inf,Neg,Gen
PRON Pronouns Case=Nom,Acc; Number=Plur,Sing; Person=1,2,3; Poss=Yes;

PronType=Ind,Int,Prs,Rcp,Rel; Reflex=Yes
PROPN Proper names Degree=Dim; Num=Plur,Sing
PUNCT Punctuation
SCONJ Subordinating conjunctions
SYM Symbols
VERB Non-auxiliary verbs Tense=Pres,Past; VerbForm=Fin,Inf,Part; Subcat=Intr,Prep,Tran
X Other

Table 3: Afrikaans Universal PoS tags and their potential morphosyntactic feature values

duce the VerbType feature to distinguish between
copular verbs, modal verbs, the passive auxiliaries
word ‘be’ (present) and wees (past), and other aux-
iliaries. This is similar to the Dutch treatment,
apart from the introduction of the passive voice
category. Like Dutch and German, Afrikaans has
separable verbs, i.e. verbs that are actually com-
pounds of a particle (or sometimes an adjective or
a noun) and another verb. In verb-initial clauses,
the two parts get separated and the particle moves
to the end of the clause. An example is Ek gaan die
huis binne ‘I enter the house’ with the separable
verb binnegaan ‘to enter’ (literally ‘inside go’).5

Pronouns and determiners Pronouns are
treated in a similar way as in Dutch. Possessive
and reflexive pronouns are considered a subset
of the personal pronouns and have person and
number features. We do not indicate the gender
of third person pronouns. On top of this, we
distinguish relative, interrogative, indefinite, and
reciprocal pronouns as a part of the PRON class.
Demonstrative pronouns are put in the DET class
together with indefinite determiners and articles,
as required by the UD guidelines. For articles, the
distinction between definite and indefinite articles
is indicated by the Definite feature.

Adpositions We also follow the Dutch annota-
tions in defining three types of adpositions (ADP):
prepositions, postpositions and circumpositions,

5In verb-final clauses, the verb is placed at the end of the
clause after the particle, and the two are (usually) treated as a
single orthographic unit. Compare the verb-initial construc-
tion to a construction with a subordinate clause: Hy sien dat
ek die huis binnegaan ‘He sees that I enter the house’.

encoded with the AdpType.

Particles We introduce three types of particles
(PART): te ‘to’ introducing the infinitive (denoted
by Inf), the genitive particle se ‘his/her/their’
(similarly used as ’s in English and denoted by
Gen, and the negative particle nie ‘not’ which
is used in most negative sentences in addition
to a negative adverb or determiner (Huddlestone,
2010).

Remaining PoS tags The other PoS tags for nu-
merals (NUM), coordinating conjunctions (CCONJ),
subordinating conjunction (SSCONJ), interjections
(INTJ), punctuation (PUNCT), symbols (SYM), and
the remainder class (X) do not have any additional
features.

Contracted forms One common contraction is
the colloquial dis for dit is (the expletive ‘it is’),
which needs to be split. Note that this construction
does not appear in AfriBooms treebank.

4.1.2 Dependency relations
UD represents dependency relations between
words in the form of a tree. Only one word, de-
pendent on the ROOT, can be the head of the sen-
tence. All other words are dependent on another
word in the tree. The main driving principle of the
UD formalism is the primacy of content words.

42



UD POS TAG MORPHOLOGICAL FEATURES FREQ. EXAMPLE
ADJ AdjType=Attr|Case=Nom|Degree=Cmp 34 minder
ADJ AdjType=Attr|Case=Nom|Degree=Pos 2321 tweede
ADJ AdjType=Attr|Case=Nom|Degree=Sup 41 doeltreffendste
ADJ AdjType=Pred|Case=Nom|Degree=Cmp 20 vinniger
ADJ AdjType=Pred|Case=Nom|Degree=Pos 419 nuttig
ADJ AdjType=Pred|Case=Nom|Degree=Sup 5 hoogste
ADP AdpType=Prep 5604 in
ADV Degree=Cmp 54 beter
ADV Degree=Pos 1728 vandag
ADV Degree=Sup 11 mees
AUX Tense=Past|VerbForm=Fin|VerbType=Cop 54 was
AUX Tense=Past|VerbForm=Fin|VerbType=Mod 20 wou
AUX Tense=Past|VerbForm=Fin|VerbType=Pas 266 is
AUX Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf|VerbType=Aux 384 het
AUX Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf|VerbType=Cop 608 is
AUX Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf|VerbType=Mod 1049 sal
AUX Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf|VerbType=Pas 543 word
CCONJ _ 1768 en
DET Definite=Def|PronType=Art 3237 die
DET Definite=Ind|PronType=Art 876 ’n
DET PronType=Dem 396 hierdie
DET PronType=Ind 315 baie
NOUN Degree=Dim|Number=Plur 5 koekies
NOUN Degree=Dim|Number=Sing 9 koekie
NOUN Number=Plur 2610 blaaiers
NOUN Number=Sing 6784 toegang
NUM _ 197 twee
PART PartType=Gen 152 se
PART PartType=Inf 836 te
PART PartType=Neg 244 nie
PRON Case=Acc,Nom|Number=Plur|Person=1|PronType=Prs 470 ons
PRON Case=Acc,Nom|Number=Plur|Person=2|PronType=Prs 4 julle
PRON Case=Acc,Nom|Number=Plur|Person=3|PronType=Prs 96 hulle
PRON Case=Acc|Number=Sing|Person=1|PronType=Prs 8 my
PRON Case=Acc|Number=Sing|Person=2|PronType=Prs 19 jou
PRON Case=Acc|Number=Sing|Person=3|PronType=Prs 13 haar
PRON Case=Nom|Number=Sing|Person=1|PronType=Prs 66 ek
PRON Case=Nom|Number=Sing|Person=2|PronType=Prs 186 u
PRON Case=Nom|Number=Sing|Person=3|PronType=Prs 350 dit
PRON Number=Plur|Person=1|Poss=Yes|PronType=Prs 308 ons
PRON Number=Plur|Person=1|PronType=Prs|Reflex=Yes 13 ons
PRON Number=Plur|Person=3|Poss=Yes|PronType=Prs 89 hul
PRON Number=Plur|Person=3|PronType=Prs|Reflex=Yes 3 hulself
PRON Number=Sing|Person=1|Poss=Yes|PronType=Prs 10 my
PRON Number=Sing|Person=2|Poss=Yes|PronType=Prs 90 jou
PRON Number=Sing|Person=2|PronType=Prs|Reflex=Yes 1 jouself
PRON Number=Sing|Person=3|Poss=Yes|PronType=Prs 56 sy
PRON Number=Sing|Person=3|PronType=Prs|Reflex=Yes 12 homself
PRON PronType=Ind 307 enige
PRON PronType=Int 20 wat
PRON PronType=Rcp 6 mekaar
PRON PronType=Rel 1116 wat
PROPN Number=Sing 463 Suid-Afrika
PUNCT _ 4027 .
SCONJ _ 946 as
SYM _ 435 R5
VERB Subcat=Intr|Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part 64 gedemonstreer
VERB Subcat=Intr|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf 547 werk
VERB Subcat=Prep|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf 25 voldoen
VERB Subcat=Tran|Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part 725 gemeet
VERB Subcat=Tran|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin,Inf 2445 ontdek
X _ 385 DRK

Table 4: Frequency of the UD PoS tags and the morphological features in the Afrikaans UD treebank

43



This means that in general content words are
the head instead of function words, e.g. nouns
are the head of prepositional phrases. The aim of
this principle is to allow for maximal comparabil-
ity across languages. In addition to the obligatory
dependency relations, it is possible to add an en-
hanced dependency graph to this scheme with a
more complete basis for semantic interpretation.6

For instance, the regular dependency relations
lack a dependency relation between raised subjects
and an embedded verb. It is possible to encode this
kind of information in the enhanced dependency
graph.

The UD scheme defines 37 types of relations,
of which 24 are actual dependency relations. The
taxonomy for the latter is organized along two di-
mensions, which can be represented in the form
of a matrix.7 The first dimension corresponds
to functional categories in relation to the head
(core arguments of clausal predicates, non-core
dependents of clausal predicates, and dependents
of nominals) whereas the second dimension cor-
responds to the structural categories of the depen-
dent (nominals, clauses, modifiers, and function
words).

Additionally, there are 13 relations that are not
dependency relations in the narrow sense. It con-
cerns relations for analyzing coordination, mul-
tiword expressions, ellipsis, and special relations
for concepts such as root, punctuation and multi-
word expressions.

Afrikaans shares many syntactic features with
Dutch and German. It has, for instance, verb-
second in main clauses but verb-final in (most)
subordinate clauses (Biberauer, 2003); and there is
the occurrence of substitute infinitives, also known
as Infinitivus Pro Participio or IPP (Augustinus
and Dirix, 2013). Afrikaans also has particular
features such as double negation (Huddlestone,
2010).

In principle, all types of Universal Depen-
dency relations can be applied to Afrikaans. The
only exception is the classifier relation (clf), as
Afrikaans has no grammaticalized classifier sys-
tem. As in Dutch and German, we introduce the
compound:prt relation for compounds of which
a part has been elided, e.g. in- en uitvoer ‘import
and export’, as well as for the particle of sepa-
rable verbs. We also introduce nsubj:pass and

6http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/enhanced-
syntax.html

7http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/

csubj:pass for the subjects of passive verbs, us-
ing word (present) or is (past) as auxiliary.

4.2 Conversion and issues

As described in section 2 the original NCHLT cor-
pus was available with original more fine-grained
tags of the NCHLT corpus. We reintroduced those
features in the AfriBooms treebank in order to pre-
pare for conversion to UD, as they contain mor-
phological information which is required by the
UD guidelines. In general, we kept the morpho-
logical features used in UD releases for other lan-
guages. Most of the original morphological tags
have been converted to UD features, but we did
not do this for the types of adverbs or the type of
nouns, and as well as the types of symbols and
punctuation marks, as these were semantic in stead
of morphosyntactic features. The XML format
of AfriBooms treebank was converted into a tab-
separated format, which facilitates the conversion
to the CoNLL-U format considerably. The actual
conversion was done using a Perl script.

4.2.1 PoS tags and morphological features

At the level of PoS tags and features there were
hardly any disambiguation issues. Pronouns that
have the same form in their base and oblique
forms have a Case=Nom,Acc feature which could
be disambiguated manually. We have not done
this yet. This is also the case for the feature
VerbForm=Fin,Inf which is assigned to most
verbs including auxiliaries, as the form of the
present tense is identical to the infinitive.

The counts for the PoS tags and their morpho-
logical features in the automatically converted ver-
sion of AfriBooms can be found in Table 4.

As the AfriBooms treebank is relatively small,
not all possible morphological forms occur in the
treebank, e.g. the genitive form of articles and
their comparatives. This will obviously inhibit au-
tomated parser training.

4.2.2 Dependency relations

Table 5 lists the initial mapping of the dependency
relations. Compared to the conversion of the PoS
tags and morphological features, the conversion of
the dependency relations was less straightforward,
as some structural conversion was needed.

The first problem is due to the small size of the
AfriBooms treebank, as a about one third of the
Stanford dependencies tags was not used in the

44



treebank and we can only provide mappings for
dependencies occurring in that treebank.

AB DEP. TAG UD DEP. TAG UD DESCRIPTION
root root root
aux aux auxiliary
conj conj conjunct
cc cc coordinating conjunction
subj nsubj nominal subject
dobj obj object
iobj iobj indirect object
pobj case case-marking element
obj obj object
amod amod adjectival modifier
mod amod adjectival modifier
num nummod numeric modifier
appos appos appositional modifier
poss det determiner
det det determiner
prt mark marker
dep dep unspecified dependency
arg dep unspecified dependency
comp dep unspecified dependency
mark dep unspecified dependency
abbrev appos appositional modifier
punct punct punctuation

Table 5: Initial mapping between the AfriBooms
and UDT dependency relations

The second problem with respect to the auto-
mated conversion is the underspecification of de-
pendency relations in the AfriBooms treebank.
The UD relations only have one generic tag (dep),
while the dependencies used in the AfriBooms
treebank have several levels of underspecification,
e.g. mod, arg, obj (see Table 2). Those rela-
tions need to be either specified automatically or
manually. In Dutch, there were actually similar is-
sues with underspecification; when possible they
were resolved in an automated way (Bouma and
van Noord, 2017).

The third issue is that the human annotators of
the AfriBooms treebank did not consistently fol-
low the content word primacy principle. For in-
stance in the case of prepositional phrases they as-
signed the head status to the preposition, which
means we had to flip the dependency relation be-
tween them and have the noun point to the gov-
ernor of the phrase. The dependency relation was
set to nmod or obl, depending on the PoS of the
governor. A similar issue exists for copular con-
structions: the verb is assigned the head of the re-
lation, while the predicative complement is iden-
tified as an object. Again, we changed the depen-
dency relation, making the nonverbal predicate the

head (mostly the root of the sentence), introducing
the cop relation and switching the governor of the
subject to the nonverbal predicate. Similarly, we
had to fix possessive constructions like leerders se
vermoë (‘learners’ ability’), to make sure the pos-
sessive particle had the case relation, and swap-
ping the relation between the two nouns, making
the second one the governor and giving it the de-
pendency relation of the former one, while giving
the former one the nmod relation. Another depen-
dency relation that had to swap its head, are the cc
types for conjunctions, which need to point to the
following noun (phrase) and not to the preceding
one.

The fourth problem is that some relations are
not distinguished in the original AfriBooms an-
notation. A number of them could be (semi-)au-
tomatically introduced. For instance, as the orig-
inal treebank annotations do not make a distinc-
tion between nsubj (nominal subject) and csubj
(clausal subject), we converted them all to nsubj
and replaced them afterwards to csubj if the gov-
ernor of the subject is either a verb or an auxiliary.
Furthermore, we introduced compound:prt for
compounds with partial elision, as mentioned in
the previous section. In order to do this, we again
had to swap the dependency relation and change
the governors of all the tokens depending on the
partially elided compound, as the first part of the
expression was treated as the head in the Afri-
Booms treebank. The result needs to be reviewed
manually, as there are also phrases consisting of
more than one compound with partial elision (e.g.
klein-, medium- en mikro-ondernemings – ‘small,
medium and micro-enterprises’), and phrases of
the type besigheids- en ander sektore (‘business
and other sectors’), which stands for besigheidsek-
tor en ander sektore. In the latter example the first
item is a partially elided compound, but the second
part consists of an adjective followed by a noun,
which is also the elided part of the first compound.

In addition, we introduced aux:pass for pas-
sive auxiliaries based on their morphological fea-
tures, and specified nsubj:pass for the nominal
subject of those verbs. We also introduced iobj
for a list of ca 30 verbs for which the indirect ob-
ject is introduced with the preposition aan. Fi-
nally, we also specified the flat relation in multi-
word named entities.

We replaced amod with advmod for all adverbs
and negative particles that had this dependency re-

45



Figure 3: Example for an Afrikaans sentence after automated conversion in the UDT format: ‘Choose
themes and subjects that link with the critical outcomes and the developmental outcomes.’

lation in the original treebank.
We also fixed the dependency relation of verbs

following the particle te to xcomp, as the original
treebank did not distinguish between nominal and
clausal constituents. Furthermore, we also had to
flip the dependency relation between relative pro-
nouns and the content verb of the relative sentence,
and made sure the verb has the xcomp dependency
relation.

All of this patching work was done using an ad-
ditional Perl script which we ran after the initial
conversion. As mentioned in section 2 the Afri-
Booms treebank contains many generic dep rela-
tions, which need to be further specified. Even
though the patching work greatly reduced the
number of generic items, many of them should be
manually reviewed. This is currently in progress.
An example of a converted sentence is given in
Figure 3.

As a final step, the converted treebank was val-
idated using the UDT tools available on GitHub.8

Table 6 presents the final figures of each de-
pendency relation category after conversion and
patching.

5 Conclusion and future work

We created a UD treebank for Afrikaans using
an automated conversion scheme from the exist-
ing AfriBooms treebank. It is a small treebank of
about 49K words consisting of governments docu-
ments. Due to its small size and the specific genre,
it does not contain all possible dependency rela-
tions and morphological feature values.

As many of the dependency relations were un-
derspecified in the original treebank, the next step

8https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/
tools

consists of a manual check. We furthermore plan
to train parsers for the annotation of both the de-
pendency relations and the morphological infor-
mation. Those parsers will be used to create more
annotated data, for starters from Wikipedia, but
possibly also for other text types, such as the
Taalkommissie corpus. A (small) part of those
data could be verified manually in order to im-
prove parsing accuracy.

UD DEP. TAG FREQ. DESCRIPTION
advmod 1780 adverbial modifier
amod 5080 adjectival modifier
appos 63 appositional modifier
aux 1663 auxiliary
aux:pass 854 passive auxiliary
case 5890 case-marking element
cc 1886 coordinating conjunction
ccomp 905 clausal complement
compound:prt 408 separable verb particle /

elided part of a compound
conj 2001 conjunct
cop 149 copula
csubj 3 clausal subject
csubj:pass 0 clausal subject of passive verb
dep 1668 unspecified dependency
det 5775 deterniner
flat 231 flat multiword expression
iobj 53 indirect object
mark 1051 marker
nmod 2948 nominal modifier
nsubj 3010 nominal subject
nsubj:pass 500 nominal subject of passive verb
nummod 461 numeric modifier
obj 2804 object
obl 2728 oblique nominal
punct 4497 punctuation
root 1903 root
xcomp 965 open clausal complement

Table 6: The UD tag set with number of occur-
rences in the AfriBooms treebank

46



References
Liesbeth Augustinus and Peter Dirix. 2013. The IPP

effect in Afrikaans: a corpus analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013) - NEALT Pro-
ceedings Series 16, pages 213–225, Oslo.

Liesbeth Augustinus, Peter Dirix, Daniel Van Niekerk,
Ineke Schuurman, Vincent Vandeghinste, Frank Van
Eynde, and Gerhard Van Huyssteen. 2016. Afri-
Booms: An Online Treebank for Afrikaans. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
pages 677–682, Portorož. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Theresa Biberauer. 2003. Verb Second (V2) in
Afrikaans: a Minimalist investigation of word-order
variation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge.

Gosse Bouma and Gertjan van Noord. 2017. Increas-
ing return on annotation investment: the automatic
construction of a Universal Dependency Treebank
for Dutch. In Proceedings of the Universal De-
pendencies Workshop at the 21st Nordic Conference
of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2017),
Gothenburg.

Thorsten Brants. 2000. TnT – A Statistical Part-of-
Speech Tagger. In Proceedings of the Sixth Applied
Natural Language Processing Conference (ANLP-
2000), pages 224–231, Seattle.

Jac Conradie. 2017. The re-inflecting of Afrikaans.
Paper given at the Germanic Sandwich 2017, Mün-
ster.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. The Stanford typed dependencies repre-
sentation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Cross-
Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Evaluation at
COLING 2008, pages 1–8, Manchester, UK.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating Typed
Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006),
pages 449–454, Genoa. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Bruce C. Donaldson. 1993. A Grammar of Afrikaans.
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York.

Kate Huddlestone. 2010. Negative Indefinites in
Afrikaans. Ph.D. thesis, Utrecht University.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 shared task on de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
shared task session of EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 915–
932.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual
Treebank Collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 1659–1666, Por-
torož. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A Universal Part-of-Speech Tagset. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012),
pages 2089–2096, Istanbul. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Suléne Pilon. 2005. Outomatiese Afrikaanse woord-
soortetikettering. Master’s thesis, North-West Uni-
versity, Potchefstroom.

Antal van den Bosch, Bertjan Busser, Sander Canisius,
and Walter Daelemans. 2007. An efficient memory-
based morphosyntactic tagger and parser for Dutch.
In Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands:
Selected papers from the Seventeenth CLIN Meeting,
pages 191–206, LOT, Utrecht.

Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable Tagset Conversion
Using Tagset Drivers. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2008), pages 213–218, Mar-
rakesh. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

47


