



















































Using Question-Answering Techniques to Implement a Knowledge-Driven Argument Mining Approach


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Argument Mining, pages 85–90
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 8, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Question-Answering Techniques to Implement a Knowledge-Driven
Argument Mining Approach

Patrick Saint-Dizier
CNRS-IRIT

118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse Cedex, France

stdizier@irit.fr

Abstract

This short paper presents a first implemen-
tation of a knowledge-driven argument
mining approach. The major processing
steps and language resources of the sys-
tem are surveyed. An indicative evalua-
tion outlines challenges and improvement
directions.

1 Introduction

This paper presents a first implementation of
a knowledge-driven argument mining approach
based on the principles developed in (Saint-Dizier
2016). This knowledge based approach to ar-
gument mining was felt to be challenging be-
cause of the heavy load put on knowledge de-
scription and acquisition, inference pattern devel-
opment and implementation complexity. The aim
of this paper is to introduce an architecture for the
implementation, to structure the different sources
of data: lexical, knowledge base and inferences,
and to explore how the data can be specified or
acquired. We feel that this approach allows to de-
velop in the middle and long term an accurate ar-
gument mining system that can identify arguments
in any type of text given a standpoint or a contro-
versial issue and to explain what facets of the is-
sue are attacked or supported, why, how and how
much. It also allows, as shown in (Saint-Dizier
2016b), the construction of a synthesis of argu-
ments based on domain knowledge, which is con-
venient for users and domain experts. An original
rule-based approach to argument mining is intro-
duced in this contribution. We feel that this anal-
ysis, due to the diversity of knowledge, is difficult
to develop with statistical-based methods. How-
ever, our approach is in a very early development
stage: this makes comparisons with statistical sys-
tems premature and not of mush use.

The implementation principles and the develop-
ment of the associated data and inferences raise
major challenges in NLP and AI. We propose here
an initial experiment which nevertheless produces
interesting results. We show how the concepts
proper to a controversial issue can be extracted
and expanded for the purpose of argument min-
ing. Then, patterns that encode the structure of
arguments are developed in association with an
approach to measure their relatedness to the is-
sue. An linguistic analysis of the structure of
standpoints and arguments is proposed. This pa-
per ends by an indicative evaluation that analyzes
challenges, e.g. such as those developed in (Feng
et al. 2011), (Peldsusz et al. 2016), and identifies
the necessary improvement directions. Due to its
limited size, this paper outlines the main features
of the implementation, while references point to
additional material.

2 Controversial Issue Analysis

In this experiment, a controversial issue is formu-
lated as an evaluative statement and interpreted as
a query. The general form is:
NP, VerbExp, Evaluative.
The initial NP, which may be simple or a com-
pound, is the focus of the issue. It contains the
root concepts that play a role in the argument min-
ing process. The VerbExp symbol is composed
of a main verb (be, have, verb particle construc-
tions associated with state verbs or factives such
as is based on, relies upon, etc.) possibly mod-
ified by a modal (must, should, ought to). The
Evaluative symbol covers a variety of evalua-
tive forms typical of consumer evaluations: Adjec-
tive Phrase (AP), adverbs (e.g. necessary), evalu-
atives with the right-adjunction of an NP or a PP
(e.g. expensive for a 2 stars hotel). Attacks and
supports are based on this structure. This simple

85



format should cover, possibly via reformulation,
quite a large number of situations.

The concepts used in the arguments for or
against a controversial issue are basically the is-
sue root concepts or those derived from them. In
(Saint-Dizier 2016), it is shown that these root
and derived concepts are appropriately defined and
structured in the constitutive, agentive and telic
roles of the Qualia structures of the Generative
Lexicon (Pustejovsky 1995). In general, argu-
ments indeed support or attack purposes, func-
tions, goals (in the telic role) or parts (in the con-
stitutive role) of these concepts, or the way they
have been created (agentive role). In the author’s
previous works, a concept network is constructed
from these Qualias.

Root concepts extraction: these concepts are
the nouns in the initial NP, e.g. in Vaccine against
Ebola is necessary, root concepts are ‘vaccine’
and ‘Ebola’. The relational term against appears
in the telic role of the head noun of ‘vaccine’,
whose purpose is to protect ’against’ a disease.

Structure of a Qualia: our implementation is
carried out in Prolog, Qualias are facts:
qualia(Concept, role-name([list of

Related-Concepts])).

Related-Concepts are constants or predicates.
Their lexical realizations are given in a lexicon,
where Related-Concept matches with Concept:
lex([Word], Category, SemanticFeature,

Concept).

Qualia structures are considered here as a knowl-
edge and lexical data repository appropriate for
argument mining independently of the theoretical
aims behind the Generative Lexicon.

Qualia acquisition and description: at the
moment there is no available repository of Qualia
structures. Therefore, Qualias must be constructed
for each application and domain. (Claveau et
al. 2013) investigated ways to automatically ac-
quire the basic information which should appear
in Qualias. In our case, and this is a temporary
situation, we develop Qualia by a combination of
manual descriptions and bootstrapping techniques
to acquire e.g. uses, purposes or functions of the
concepts at stake in a controversial issue. For ex-
ample, bootstrapping based on patterns such as ’X
is used for Y’ allows to get uses Y of concept X.
In (Saint-Dizier 2016), it is shown that the number
of Qualias for an issue is very limited, to a maxi-
mum of 20 structures; this facilitates the task and

improves its feasibility. In our perspective, Qualia
structures are a formalism that is appropriate to
represent the required knowledge. In addition and
prior to bootstrapping, it would be of much interest
to investigate how and how much large knowledge
bases such as Cyc or Sumo and lexical reposito-
ries such as FrameNet can be used to feed Qualia
structures of given concepts.

An introduction to the Generative Lexicon
The Generative Lexicon (GL) (Pustejovsky,

1995) is an attempt to structure lexical seman-
tics knowledge in conjunction with domain knowl-
edge. In the GL, the Qualia structure of an entity is
both a lexical and knowledge repository composed
of four fields called roles:

• the constitutive role describes the various
parts of the entity and its physical proper-
ties, it may include subfields such as material,
parts, shape, etc.

• the formal role describes what distinguishes
the entity from other objects, i.e. the entity in
its environment.

• the telic role describes the entity functions,
uses, roles and purposes,

• the agentive role describes the origin of the
entity, how it was created or produced.

To illustrate this conceptual organization, let us
consider the controversial issue (1):
The vaccine against Ebola is necessary.
The main concepts in the Qualia structure of the
head term of (1), vaccine are organized as follows:

Vaccine(X):

CONSTITUTIVE:

[
ACTIVE PRINCIPLE,
ADJUVANT

]
,

TELIC:


MAIN: PROTECT FROM(X,Y,D),
AVOID(X,DISSEMINATION(D)),
MEANS: INJECT(Z,X,Y)

,
FORMAL:

[
MEDICINE, ARTIFACT

]
,

AGENTIVE :

[
DEVELOP(T,X), TEST(T,X),
SELL(T,X)

]


Construction of a network of concepts: This

network is constructed following the recursive
principle described in (Saint-Dizier 2016), for a
depth of three, to preserve a certain conceptual

86



proximity with the root concepts (Mochales et al
2009). It is a tree where root concepts appear at the
root, and concepts derived from the initial Qualias
appear at levels 2 or 3. This network partly char-
acterizes the generative expansion of arguments
w.r.t. an issue.

3 The argument mining process

The argument mining model and implementation
are structured in five phases which are briefly de-
scribed below. These are adapted from question-
answering techniques (Maybury 2004), in particu-
lar factoid and comparative questions..

A. The context of the experiment: For this
experiment, three relatively concrete controversial
issues have been selected:
(Issue 1) Vaccination against Ebola is necessary,
(Issue 2) Nuclear plants must be banished,
(Issue 3 Car traffic must be reduced.
A set of 21 texts dealing with these topics has been
manually searched on the web using the keywords
of the issues to get relevant texts. These texts do
not contain any technical considerations and are
therefore accessible to most readers. Besides argu-
ments, these texts contain a lot of additional con-
siderations, which are definitions, descriptions,
historical considerations, etc. One challenge is
therefore to identify arguments among other types
of data. The accuracy of the different steps of the
automatic mining process is evaluated on this set
of texts and compared to our manual analysis (sec-
tion 4).

B. Discourse analysis: Argumentative units are
assumed to be sentences. The first step is to make
a discourse analysis of each sentence in the 21
texts. This is realized using TextCoop (Saint-
Dizier 2012). Discourse structures which are iden-
tified are those usually found associated with ar-
guments: conditions, circumstances, causes, goal
and purpose expressions, contrasts and conces-
sions. The goal is to identify the kernel of the
argument, in general the main proposition of the
sentence, and its sentential modifiers. In addition,
the discourse structures may give useful indica-
tions on the argumentation strategy that is used.

C. Analysis of argument kernels: similarly to
the controversial issue, argument kernels are spe-
cific forms of evaluative statements. The follow-
ing forms are recognized by our parser:
(1) evaluative expressions in attribute-value
form, where the attribute is one of the concepts of

the controversial issue concept lattice: Vaccine de-
velopment is very expensive, car exhaust is toxic.
(2) use of comparatives, e.g. nuclear wastes are
more dangerous than coal wastes.
(3) facts related to the uses, consequences or
purposes of the main concept of the issue e.g.:
vaccine prevents bio-terrorism
(4) Structures (1) to (3) described above may be
embedded into report or epistemic structures such
as the authorities claimed that the adjuvant is not
toxic. The main proposition is the proposition in
the scope of thes constructions.
Specific language patterns to identify these con-
structions have been developed by means of Pro-
log rules or TextCoop patterns. The result is an ad-
ditional tagging that identifies the argument topic
and the evaluation structure (see example below).

D. Relatedness detection: the next step is to
identify those sentences whose kernel is concep-
tually related to the controversial issue that is con-
sidered. In a first stage, a simple strategy, similar
to factoid question analysis, identifies argument
candidates on the basis of the set of lexicalizations
Lex of the concepts in the issue concept network.
The kernels whose subject or object NP head term
(the argument topic) belongs to Lex are consid-
ered as potential arguments. The closer they are to
the root, the more relevant they are a priori. Object
NPs are also processed to account for cases where
the subject is neutral w.r.t. the issue, e.g.: car man-
ufacturers provide incorrect pollution rates. In a
further stage, more advanced question-answering
techniques will be used, including constraint re-
laxation and terminological inference.

The annotation of each of the selected sentences
includes an attribute that indicates the comprehen-
sive conceptual path that links it to the controver-
sial issue. This annotation clarifies the relation(s)
that hold between the argument and the issue, and
what facets of the concept(s) are supported or at-
tacked.

E. Argument polarity identification: w.r.t. the
issue. From C-(1) above, the following construc-
tions are frequently observed:
(1) The pattern contains a subject with no specific
polarity followed by verb with a polarity specified
in the lexicon (e.g. protects, prevents are positive
whereas pollutes is negative), followed by either:
(1a) the negation of the VP; (1b) the use of ad-
verbs of frequency, completion, etc. possibly com-
bined with a negation: never, almost never, sel-

87



dom, rarely, not frequently, very frequently, fully,
systematically, or (1c) the use of modals express-
ing doubt or uncertainty: seem, could, should. The
polarity of the argument is an equation that in-
cludes the lexical elements polarities. For exam-
ple a verb with a negative polarity combined with
a negation results in a positive polarity. Polarity
could also be neutral if the strength of each term
can be specified a priori. Finally, this polarity is
combined with the issue orientation in order to de-
termine if the argument is an attack or a support.
(2) When the subject head noun and the verb
are neutral, then language realizations involve at-
tribute structures with one or more adjectives that
evaluate the concept: toxic, useless, expensive,
etc., which can be modified by intensifiers such
as: 100%, totally. Those adjectives have a clear
polarity in the context at stake. The polarity of the
adjective is combined with the polarity induced by
the intensifier, e.g. rarely toxic has a positive po-
larity, since it combines two negative polarities.

A comprehensive representation for an argu-
ment mined from issue (1) is:
<argument Id= 11, polarity= negative , conceptualPath=

vaccine/agentive/test/constitutive/protocol >

<concession> Even if the vaccine seems 100% efficient and

without any side effects on the tested population,

< /concession>

<kernel arg> <topic> more elaborated test protocols

</topic><eval> are necessary < /eval>. < /kernel arg>

<elaboration> The national authority of Guinea has

approved the continuation of the tests on targeted

populations.</elaboration> < /argument>.

4 An indicative evaluation

We consider that the evaluation carried out at this
stage gives indications on the feasibility and ac-
curacy of the process and suggests a number of
improvement directions. The evaluation presented
below is developed by components so that the dif-
ficulties of each of them can be identified. It is
too early, but necessary in a later stage, to com-
pare the results of our approach with others on the
basis of existing datasets such as those defined by
e.g. (Stab and Gurevych 2014) or (Aharoni et ali.
2014).

A. Corpus characteristics: Table 1 summa-
rizes the manual annotation process, realized here
by ourselves on the 21 texts advocated in section
3A. Annotation by several annotators is planned
and necessary, but requires some in depth training

Issue nb of texts nb of annotated
nb. + size (words) arguments
Issue 1 9 (3900) 27
Issue 2 6 (3100) 21
Issue 3 6 (1500) 18
Total 21 (8500) 66

Table 1: Corpus characteristics.

Issue nb of Qualias nb of concepts
Issue 1 12 38
Issue 2 9 35
Issue 3 15 41
Total 36 114

Table 2: Qualia development.

and competence in knowledge representation.
All the arguments found have been annotated,

including redundant ones over different texts. Re-
dundant arguments (between 40% to 50% of the
total because authors often copy-paste each other)
have been eliminated from the analysis below, but
kept for further tests. Table 1 indicates the total of
different arguments per issue. On average, 22 dif-
ferent arguments for or against a given issue have
been found, this is quite large for this type of issue.

B. Knowledge and lexical representation
evaluation: The head terms of issues (1) to (3)
are: vaccination, Ebola, nuclear plants, car traf-
fic. The last two terms are compound terms: they
are treated as a a specialization of plant and traf-
fic respectively, with their own Qualias, some of
which being inherited from the generic terms plant
and traffic. Table 2 presents the number of Qualia
structures that have been developed for this exper-
iment and the total number of concepts included in
the telic, agentive and constitutive roles, which can
potentially serve to identify arguments (D. above).
To each of these concepts correspond one or more
lexical entries. It is clear that a principled and
partly automatic development of Qualia structures
is a cornerstone to this approach. For this exper-
iment, for each issue, it took about a half day to
develop the Qualias.

Table 3 presents the distribution of the concepts
over the three levels of the concept network. Level
2 has several terminal concepts, with no associated
Qualia, therefore, level 3 has less concepts.

C. Argument kernel identification: This step
is realized using TextCoop, which is well-suited
for the relatively simple structures found in these
texts. In this experiment, there is no manual dis-
course structure analysis, since this is not the task
that is investigated here. In this type of text,

88



Concept network levels nb of concepts
Level 1 (root) 16
Level 2 53
Level 3 45
Total 114

Table 3: The concept network.

Issue nb args. recognized nb of concepts
- accuracy rate from levels 1 / 2 / 3

Issue 1 20 - 74% 4 / 8 / 2
Issue 2 13 - 62% 4 / 11 / 7
Issue 3 11 - 61% 5 / 9 / 3
Total 44 - 66% 13 / 28 / 12

Table 4: Indicative accuracy.

TextCoop has an accuracy of about 90% (Saint-
Dizier 2012). Manual annotation begins after the
discourse analysis of each sentence of the 21 texts.

D. Relatedness: Table 4 summarizes the accu-
racy of the analysis w.r.t. the manual analysis.
Correctly identified arguments are given in col-
umn 2. Column 3 gives indications on the con-
cept level used in the concept network. An argu-
ment can be selected on the basis of several con-
cepts. Non-overlapping arguments may also use
the same concept(s).

Table 5 indicates the rate of incorrectly rec-
ognized arguments (noise) and of arguments not
found w.r.t. to the manual annotation (silence).

The size of the corpus that is investigated is
rather modest but for each issue we feel we have
quite a good coverage in terms of argument diver-
sity: adding new texts does not produce any new,
critical, argument. The main reasons for noise and
silence are the following, which need to be taken
into account to extend the system, and to deal with
more abstract issues:
- noise: (1) some sentences are selected because
they are related to the issue, but they are rather
comments, general rules or explanation, not argu-
ments, in spite of their main proposition evaluative
structure; (2) some sentences involve level 3 con-
cepts in the network, and have been judged to be
too weak or remote in the manual annotation.
- silence: (1) some sentences which have been
manually annotated require additional inferences

Issue noise: nb args. silence: nb or args.
Issue 1 6 - 22% 7 - 26%
Issue 2 4 - 19% 8 - 38%
Issue 3 3 - 16% 7 - 39%
Total 13 - 19% 22 - 34%

Table 5: noise- silence.

such as those developed in (Saint-Dizier 2012) and
cannot be reduced to a concept network traversal;
(2) other sentences have arguments which are not
related to the concept network (e.g. vaccine pre-
vents bio-terrorism), these are of much interest but
difficult to relate to the issue at stake.
- over-performing humans: in a few cases, the
automatic analysis can over-perform human an-
notators. For example, 7 persons died under the
Ebola vaccine tests is manually annotated as an
attack of issue (1). However, in our implementa-
tion, the concept ’test’ is in the agentive role of the
Qualia of vaccine (how the vaccine was created),
it is pre-telic and cannot be an attack of the is-
sue which considers the uses and functions (telic)
of the vaccine. The system correctly ignored this
statement. This can be modeled by an axiomatiza-
tion of the semantics of the Qualia roles.
These limitations of our implementation raise ad-
ditional knowledge representation and inference
features which are of much scientific and practi-
cal interest for the evolution of this approach.

E. Polarity: Polarity analysis is based on the
equations developed in section 3, E. above. The
system is rather simple at the moment, but seems
to be relatively satisfactory, with 39 correctly as-
signed polarity over the 44 correctly recognized
arguments (accuracy of 88%).

5 Conclusion

Although this implementation for a knowledge-
based argument mining approach, based on
question-answering techniques, is rather simple, it
shows the architecture of the system, the required
resources and the type of extensions, in terms of
knowledge and inferences, which may be needed.

The system is fully implemented in Prolog and
TextCoop. For the moment, the implementation
is quite simple, however, we are exploring ways
to limit the non-determinism by reducing a priori
the search space. Linguistic resource structures
are quite standard, the main current corner stone
of the approach is the acquisition of the relevant
roles (telic and constitutive) of Qualia structures.
An exploration of the use of existing knowledge
resources may be helpful in this respect when the
exact nature of the required resources for argu-
ment mining has been identified and modelled.

A demo by component could be made at the
workshop if appropriate. The code is not (yet)
available due to university property regulations.

89



References
Ehud Aharoni, Anatoly Polnarov, Tamar Lavee, Daniel

Hershcovich, Ran Levy, Ruty Rinott, Dan Gutfreund
and Noam Slonim. 2014. A Benchmark Dataset for
Automatic Detection of Claims and Evidence in the
Context of Controversial Topics . 1st workshop on
Agument Mining, Baltimore.

Vincent Claveau and Pascale Sebillot. 2013. Automatic
Acquisition of GL Resources, Using an Explanatory,
Symbolic Technique, ch 19. Advances in Generative
Lexicon Theory, Springer.

Alan Cruse. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK.

Vincent W. Feng and Graeme Hirst. 2011. Classify-
ing arguments by scheme, In Proceedings of the
49th ACL: Human Language Technologies, Port-
land, USA.

Alan Fiedler and Helmut Horacek. 2007. Argumenta-
tion within deductive reasoning, 22(1):49-70. Inter-
national Journal of Intelligent Systems.

Cristina Kirschner, Johan Eckle-Kohler and Iryna
Gurevych. 2015. Linking the Thoughts: Analysis of
Argumentation Structures in Scientific Publications,
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation
Mining, Denver

Mark Maybury (ed). 2004. New Directions in Question
Answering., MIT Press.

Rachel Mochales Palau and Marie-Francine Moens.
2009. Argumentation mining: the detection, classi-
fication and structure of arguments in text., Twelfth
international ICAIL’09, Barcelona.

Hung Nguyen and Diane Litman. 2015. Extracting Ar-
gument and Domain Words for Identifying Argument
Components in Texts. Proc of the 2nd Workshop on
Argumentation Mining, Denver.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2016. From ar-
gument diagrams to argumentation mining in texts:
a survey. International Journal of Cognitive Infor-
matics and Natural Intelligence (IJCINI).

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon..
MIT Press.

Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2012. Processing natural lan-
guage arguments with the TextCoop platform. vol
3(1). journal of Argumentation and Computation.

Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2016. Argument Mining: The
bottleneck of knowledge and language resources.
LREC16, Portoroz.

Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2016.(b) A Two-Level Ap-
proach to Generate Synthetic Argumentation Re-
ports. CMNA17, London.

Christian Stab,Iryna Gurevych. Identifying Argumen-
tative Discourse Structures in Persuasive Essays.
COLING’14, Dublin.

90


