



















































Lexicon Induction for Spoken Rusyn -- Challenges and Results


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 27–32,
Valencia, Spain, 4 April 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lexicon Induction for Spoken Rusyn – Challenges and Results

Achim Rabus
Department of Slavonic Studies

University of Freiburg
Germany

achim.rabus@
slavistik.uni-freiburg.de

Yves Scherrer
Department of Linguistics

University of Geneva
Switzerland

yves.scherrer@unige.ch

Abstract

This paper reports on challenges and re-
sults in developing NLP resources for spo-
ken Rusyn. Being a Slavic minority lan-
guage, Rusyn does not have any resources
to make use of. We propose to build
a morphosyntactic dictionary for Rusyn,
combining existing resources from the et-
ymologically close Slavic languages Rus-
sian, Ukrainian, Slovak, and Polish. We
adapt these resources to Rusyn by us-
ing vowel-sensitive Levenshtein distance,
hand-written language-specific transfor-
mation rules, and combinations of the two.
Compared to an exact match baseline, we
increase the coverage of the resulting mor-
phological dictionary by up to 77.4% rel-
ative (42.9% absolute), which results in a
tagging recall increased by 11.6% relative
(9.1% absolute). Our research confirms
and expands the results of previous stud-
ies showing the efficiency of using NLP
resources from neighboring languages for
low-resourced languages.

1 Introduction

This paper deals with the development of a mor-
phological dictionary for spoken varieties of the
Slavic minority language Rusyn by leveraging the
similarities between Rusyn and neighboring ety-
mologically related languages. It is structured as
follows: First, we give a brief introduction on the
characteristics of the Rusyn minority language and
the data our investigation is based upon. After-
wards, we describe our approach to lexicon induc-
tion using resources from several related Slavic
languages and the steps we took to improve the
matches from the dictionaries. Finally, we discuss
the results and give an outlook on future work.

2 Rusyn and the Corpus of Spoken
Rusyn

Rusyn belongs to the Slavic language family and
is spoken predominantly in the Carpathian region,
most notably in Transcarpathian Ukraine, Eastern
Slovakia, and South Eastern Poland, where it is
called Lemko.1 Some scholars claim Rusyn to be
a dialect of Ukrainian (Skrypnyk, 2013), others
see it as an independent Slavic language (Pugh,
2009; Plishkova, 2009). While there is no deny-
ing the fact that Ukrainian is the standard lan-
guage closest to the Rusyn varieties, certain dis-
tinct features at all linguistic levels can be detected.
This makes the Rusyn varieties take an interme-
diary position between the East and West Slavic
languages (for more details see, e.g., Teutsch
(2001)). Nowadays, the speakers of Rusyn find
themselves in a dynamic sociolinguistic environ-
ment and experience significant pressure by their
respective roofing state languages Ukrainian, Slo-
vak, or Polish. Thus, new divergences within the
old Rusyn dialect continuum due to contact with
the majority language, i.e., so-called border ef-
fects, are to be expected (Rabus, 2015; Woolhiser,
2005). In order to trace these divergences, and
create an empirically sound basis for investigat-
ing current Rusyn speech, the Corpus of Spoken
Rusyn (www.russinisch.uni-freiburg.
de/corpus, Rabus and Šymon (2015)) has been
created. It consists of several hours of transcribed
speech as well as recordings.2 Although the tran-
scription in the corpus is not phonetic, but rather
orthographic, both diatopic and individual varia-

1According to official data, there are 110 750 Rusyns, ac-
cording to an “informed estimate” no less than 1 762 500, the
majority of them living in the Carpathian region (Magocsi,
2015, p. 1).

2The corpus engine is CWB (Christ, 1994), the GUI func-
tionality has been continuously expanded for several Slavic
corpus projects (Waldenfels and Woźniak, 2017; Waldenfels
and Rabus, 2015; Rabus and Šymon, 2015).27



tion is reflected in the transcription. The reason for
that is that exactly this variation is what we want
to investigate using the corpus, i.e., more “Slovak”
Rusyn varieties should be distinguished from more
“Ukrainian” or “Polish” varieties. Besides, vari-
ation in transcription practices of different tran-
scribers cannot be avoided.

At the moment, Rusyn does not have any exist-
ing NLP resources (annotated corpora or tools) to
make use of. The aim of this paper is to investigate
first steps towards (semi-)automatically annotating
the transcribed speech data. It goes without saying
that the different types of variation present in our
data significantly complicate the task of develop-
ing NLP resources.

3 Lexicon Induction

We propose to build a morphosyntactic dictionary
for Rusyn, using existing resources from etymo-
logically related languages. The idea is that if
we know that a Rusyn word X corresponds to the
Ukrainian word Y , and that Y is linked to the mor-
phosyntactic descriptions M1,M2,Mn, we can cre-
ate an entry in the Rusyn dictionary consisting of
X and M1,M2,Mn. The proposed approach is in-
spired by earlier work by Mann and Yarowsky
(2001), who aim to detect cognate word pairs in or-
der to induce a translation lexicon. They evaluate
different measures of phonetic or graphemic dis-
tance on this task. While they show that distance
measures adapted to the language pair by machine
learning work best, we are not able to use them as
we do not have the required bilingual training cor-
pus at our disposal. Scherrer and Sagot (2014) use
such distance measures as a first step of a pipeline
for transferring morphosyntactic annotations from
a resourced language (RL) towards an etymologi-
cally related non-resourced language (NRL).

Due to the high amount of variation and the
heterogeneity of the Rusyn data (our NRL), we
resolved to use resources from several neighbor-
ing RLs, namely from the East Slavic languages
Ukrainian and Russian as well as from the West
Slavic languages Polish and Slovak.3 This makes
sense, because the old Rusyn dialect continuum
features both West Slavic and East Slavic linguis-
tic traits, with more West Slavic features in the
westernmost dialects and more East Slavic ones

3As a matter of fact, Russian is no neighboring language
to Rusyn, but since for historical reasons there are numerous
Russian borrowings in Rusyn and since NLP resources for
Russian are developed quite well, we also include Russian.

Language Source Entries

Polish MULTEXT-East 1.9M
Russian MULTEXT-East 244k
Russian TnT (RNC) 373k
Ukrainian MULTEXT-East 300k
Ukrainian UGtag 4.6M
Slovak MULTEXT-East 1.9M

Table 1: Sizes of the morphosyntactic dictionaries
used for induction.

in the easternmost dialects. Moreover, the respec-
tive umbrella languages – Ukrainian, Slovak, and
Polish – exert considerable influence on the Rusyn
vernacular. In fact, the overwhelming majority of
Rusyn speakers are bilingual.

3.1 Data

Our RL data consist of morphosyntactic dictionar-
ies (i.e., files associating word tokens with their
lemmas and tags) from Ukrainian, Slovak, Pol-
ish, Russian. All of them were taken from the
MULTEXT-East repository (Erjavec et al., 2010a;
Erjavec et al., 2010b; Erjavec, 2012). As Rusyn
is written in Cyrillic script, we converted the Slo-
vak and Polish dictionaries into Cyrillic script first.
During the conversion process, we made the to-
kens more similar to Rusyn by applying certain lin-
guistic transformations (e.g., denasalization in the
Polish case) and thus excluded some output tokens
that could not possibly match any Rusyn tokens for
obvious linguistic reasons.

As mentioned above, the standard language
closest to the Rusyn varieties is Ukrainian. Several
Ukrainian NLP resources exist, e.g., the Ukrainian
National Corpus.4 However, these resources can-
not easily be used to train taggers or parsers. UG-
tag (Kotsyba et al., 2011) is a tagger specifically
developed for Ukrainian; it is essentially a mor-
phological dictionary with a simple disambigua-
tion component. Its underlying dictionary is rather
large and can be easily converted to text format,
making it a good addition to the small MULTEXT-
East Ukrainian dictionary. For Russian, we com-
plemented the small MULTEXT-East dictionary
with the TnT lexicon file based on data from the
Russian National Corpus (Sharoff et al., 2008).
We also harmonized the MSD tags (morphosyn-
tactic descriptions) across all languages and data

4www.mova.info28



sources. Table 1 sums up the used resources.
Our NRL data consist of 10 361 unique to-

kens extracted from the Corpus of Spoken Rusyn
(which currently contains a total of 75 000 running
words). In addition, we were able to obtain a small
sample of morphosyntactically annotated Rusyn,
amounting to 1 047 tokens; the induction methods
are evaluated on this sample.

3.2 Exact Matches

As a baseline, we checked how many Rusyn word
forms could be retrieved by exact match in the four
RL lexicons. Despite Rusyn being closely related
to the dictionary languages, the results are rather
poor: merely 55.47% of all Rusyn tokens were
found in at least one RL lexicon (see Table 2, first
column).

We further show the relative contributions of
the four RLs in Table 2. Ukrainian is by far the
most successful language, both with respect to
the overall matched words (i.e., words matched
with Ukrainian and possibly other RLs) and to
uniquely matched words (i.e., words matched with
Ukrainian but not with any other RL). This is due
to several factors: e.g., Ukrainian is the RL with
the smallest linguistic distance to the Rusyn va-
rieties, the Ukrainian dictionary is considerably
larger than the other dictionaries, and the rela-
tive majority of tokens in the corpus belongs to
“Ukrainian” varieties of Rusyn.

Table 2 also shows some ambiguity measures.
On average, a Rusyn token is found in 1.66 re-
sourced languages and associated with 3.28 tags.
Trivially, a Rusyn word is matched with exactly
one RL word, as both forms need to be identical
for exact match.

We evaluated the correctness of the induced lex-
icon on the annotated Rusyn sample. More than
84% of the 1 047 words were covered, and the cor-
rect tag was among the induced ones for more than
78% of words. (We do not attempt to disambiguate
the tags here, which is why we only report re-
call.) We also report noise, which is defined as the
amount of covered but wrongly tagged words (i.e.,
coverage - recall). With a noise of only 6%, we
can characterize exact match as a high-precision,
low-recall method.

The poor coverage often results from ortho-
graphic mismatches by merely one or a few dif-
ferent letters between the Rusyn token and its RL
counterpart. In order to improve the coverage, we

propose different types of transformations, as de-
scribed in the following sub-sections.

3.3 Daitch-Mokotoff Soundex Algorithm

Soundex is a family of phonetic algorithms for in-
dexing words and, in particular, names by their
pronunciation and regardless of their spelling (Hall
and Dowling, 1980). The principle behind a
Soundex algorithm is to group different graphemes
into a small set of sound classes, where all vow-
els except the first of a word are discarded. The
Daitch-Mokotoff Soundex is a variant of the orig-
inal (English) Soundex that is adapted to Eastern
European names (Mokotoff, 1997).

Matching soundex-transformed RL words with
soundex-transformed NRL words allowed us to
obtain a coverage of 97.16% (i.e., almost all NRL
words were matched), but in fact, each matched
NRL word was associated with as many as 630
RL words on average. Thus, this algorithm proved
to be too radical as it identified a multitude of
unrelated tokens. In particular, vowel removal
neutralized nearly all inflectional suffixes. While
Soundex algorithms have proved useful for match-
ing names with different spellings, they are clearly
not adapted to our task. Therefore, we had to resort
to less radical transformation methods.

3.4 Hand-Written Transformation Rules

The Slavic RLs in question differ with respect to
regular sound changes and morphological corre-
spondences that are reflected in orthography. For
instance, Rusyn dialects reflect Common Slavic
*ě as і, while Russian yields e. Moreover, Rusyn
verbs in the infinitive end in -ти, while Russian
has -ть. About 40 such transformation rules were
formulated for each language and implemented in
foma (Hulden, 2009).

During the lexicon induction process, each RL
word was transformed with the appropriate rules
to resemble Rusyn. All rule applications were op-
tional, yielding a multitude of candidates for each
RL word. Whenever one of the candidates cor-
responded to an existing Rusyn word, this was
counted as a match. As shown in Table 2, applying
these transformation rules yielded a considerable
increase of matched words (compared with exact
match) to more than 76%. Ambiguity levels rise
slightly, and the contributions of the different lan-
guages rise uniformly. The better coverage is con-
firmed on the test set, and tagging recall also in-29



Exact Soundex Rules Leven. R+L L+R

Words matched with any RL 55.47% 97.16% 76.38% 98.09% 98.38% 98.09%

Words matched with PL 13.92% 87.24% 19.17% 25.80% 24.66% 22.89%
Words matched with RU 20.03% 92.57% 30.30% 37.26% 38.03% 34.41%
Words matched with SK 19.43% 93.45% 28.17% 39.62% 37.68% 35.63%
Words matched with UK 38.84% 96.06% 49.49% 70.09% 64.89% 63.69%

Words matched with PL only 3.91% 0.10% 5.16% 5.76% 6.34% 6.81%
Words matched with RU only 3.94% 0.12% 7.44% 6.15% 8.79% 8.82%
Words matched with SK only 4.14% 0.31% 6.69% 8.64% 9.33% 10.49%
Words matched with UK only 21.69% 1.27% 26.25% 33.46% 33.23% 36.12%

Average RL language ambiguity 1.66 3.80 1.66 1.76 1.68 1.60
Average RL word ambiguity 1.00 630.74 1.29 2.17 1.81 1.51
Average tag ambiguity 3.28 271.62 3.66 5.08 4.34 3.93

Coverage on test set 84.2% — 90.4% 99.0% 99.6% 99.0%
Tagging recall on test set 78.2% — 81.9% 87.3% 87.1% 86.4%
Noise on test set 6.0% — 8.5% 11.7% 12.5% 12.6%

Table 2: Results of the different lexicon induction methods. Percentages show how many distinct Rusyn
words were matched with any of the four RLs, with at least one of the RLs, and with exactly one RL. The
last rows show the coverage, tagging recall and noise on the annotated Rusyn sample.

creases by more than 3%,5 while the noise level
increases by 2.5%.

3.5 Vowel-Sensitive Levenshtein Distance
As an alternative to hand-written rules, we also
tested a vowel-sensitive variant of Levenshtein
distance (Levenshtein, 1966), following Mann and
Yarowsky (2001). In this variant, edit operations
on vowels are assigned a weight of 0.5, whereas
edit operations on consonants use the standard
weight of 1. Using this variant was motivated by
the fact that Rusyn vowels differ systematically
and significantly from the vowels present in neigh-
boring Slavic languages and also within different
Rusyn varieties. We also normalize distances by
the length of the longer word.

Initial experiments have shown that most NRL
words lie within a small distance of an RL word,
and that matches with high distance values are
most often wrong. Because of that, we decided
to discard all matches with distance values higher
than 0.25. This considerably decreased word
and tag ambiguity while losing merely 1.95% of
matched tokens. Even with this threshold, the
number of matched words as well as the tagging
recall – but also the noise – is higher than with the

5This increase is statistically significant with p < 0.05:
χ2(1;N = 1047) = 4.32.

rules.6 Future research will show whether the opti-
mal threshold can be found automatically, e.g., by
using a small annotated development corpus.

Despite the good coverage, we were concerned
by the higher ambiguity values, which is why we
decided to combine Levenshtein distance with the
transformation rules.

3.6 Rules and Levenshtein

In this first combined approach, we complement
the rules with Levenshtein results in order to in-
crease coverage: Whenever the rules do not suc-
ceed in creating a match for a Rusyn word, we back
off to the corresponding Levenshtein results. This
combination outperforms both individual meth-
ods in terms of matches (98.38%, as compared to
76.38% and 98.09%). As expected, the resulting
ambiguity levels lie between those of the rules and
those of the Levenshtein method. The coverage on
the test set also increases, but this is not followed
by better tag recall.7

6The tagging recall difference is statistically significant:
χ2(1;N = 1047) = 11.89; p < 0.001.

7The tagging recall difference is not statistically signifi-
cant: χ2(1;N = 1047) = 0.02; p = 0.90.30



3.7 Levenshtein and Rules

In the second combined approach, we start with
the Levenshtein results and filter them using the
rules in order to further reduce ambiguity. The un-
derlying idea is that in case of ambiguity, some of
the Levenshtein-induced results will be correct and
some will not. The correct ones will relate to the
Rusyn words by known correspondences such as
those implemented in the rules, while the incorrect
ones will not. Hence, we took all Rusyn words
matched (using Levenshtein) with more than one
distinct RL word and transformed these RL words
using the rules. We then checked whether the rules
were able to “move” the RL words closer to Rusyn,
i.e., whether the minimum Levenshtein distance of
any transformed word was lower than the origi-
nal Levenshtein distance. We only kept those RL
words for which this check succeeded.

For example, the Levenshtein method matched
the Rusyn word береме ‘we take’ with Polish
беремы, Russian берем, беремя, Slovak бериеме,
берме, and Ukrainian берем, беремо, all of which
obtained a Levenshtein distance of 0.083 (one
vowel substitution, insertion, or deletion in a word
of length 6). The rule base contains rules which
transform the Ukrainian ending -мо, the Russian
ending -м, and the Polish ending -мы to Rusyn -ме.
Hence, the Russian, Ukrainian and Polish forms
are transformed to береме, reducing the distance
to the Rusyn word to 0 (exact match). Therefore,
we only keep беремы and берем as well as беремо
and discard the other candidates. Since all three
forms share the identical tag, the Rusyn word is
morphologically disambiguated and only receives
the correct reading as a verb in first person plural
present tense.

This filtering approach resulted in an even fur-
ther decrease of ambiguity while maintaining a
high match rate: Average source word ambiguity
dropped from 2.17 using the Levenshtein approach
via 1.81 using rules and Levenshtein to 1.51 using
Levenshtein and rules. This is close to the average
source word ambiguity of 1.29 achieved when us-
ing exclusively the rules. However, a high amount
of matched tokens could be maintained. While the
combined Levenshtein and rules approach seems
to be most successful in terms of matched words
and ambiguity levels, the tagging recall actually
suffers slightly.8 This is to be expected, as reduc-

8The difference in tagging recall compared to Leven-
shtein is again not statistically significant: χ2(1;N = 1047)=

ing the ambiguity mainly increases the precision
(sometimes at the expense of recall), which is not
measured here.

4 Conclusion and Further Work

We have shown that a morphological dictionary
for Rusyn can be created by leveraging existing re-
sources of four etymologically closely related lan-
guages. Induction methods based on Levenshtein
distance and hand-written philological rules sig-
nificantly outperform exact match, both in terms
of matched words and in terms of tagging recall.
Also, the figures show that while there are signif-
icant differences in the individual contribution of
each language, all languages contribute to the in-
duction process.

Further work will be devoted to extending our
work to lemmatization (which is available in the
four RL dictionaries) and to making use of the
newly created resources by statistical taggers (cf.
Scherrer and Rabus (2017)).

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Christine Grillborzer, Na-
talia Kotsyba, Bohdan Moskalevskyi, Andrianna
Schimon, and Ruprecht von Waldenfels. The usual
disclaimers apply.

Sources of external funding for our research in-
clude the German Research Foundation (DFG).

References
Oliver Christ. 1994. A modular and flexible ar-

chitecture for an integrated corpus query system.
In Proceedings of COMPLEX’94: 3rd Conference
on Computational Lexicography and Text Research,
pages 23–32.

Tomaž Erjavec, Ştefan Bruda, Ivan Derzhanski, Lud-
mila Dimitrova, Radovan Garabík, Peter Holozan,
Nancy Ide, Heiki-Jaan Kaalep, Natalia Kotsyba,
Csaba Oravecz, Vladimír Petkevič, Greg Priest-
Dorman, Igor Shevchenko, Kiril Simov, Lydia
Sinapova, Han Steenwijk, Laszlo Tihanyi, Dan Tu-
fiş, and Jean Véronis. 2010a. MULTEXT-east free
lexicons 4.0. Slovenian language resource reposi-
tory CLARIN.SI.

Tomaž Erjavec, Ivan Derzhanski, Dagmar Divjak,
Anna Feldman, Mikhail Kopotev, Natalia Kot-
syba, Cvetana Krstev, Aleksandar Petrovski,
Behrang QasemiZadeh, Adam Radziszewski,
Serge Sharoff, Paul Sokolovsky, Duško Vitas, and
Katerina Zdravkova. 2010b. MULTEXT-east

0.34; p = 0.56.31



non-commercial lexicons 4.0. Slovenian language
resource repository CLARIN.SI.

Tomaž Erjavec. 2012. MULTEXT-East: Morphosyn-
tactic resources for Central and Eastern European
languages. Language Resources and Evaluation,
1(46):131–142.

Patrick A. V. Hall and Geoff R. Dowling. 1980. Ap-
proximate string matching. ACM Computing Sur-
veys, 12(4):381–402.

Mans Hulden. 2009. Foma: a finite-state compiler and
library. In Proceedings of the Demonstrations Ses-
sion at EACL 2009, pages 29–32, Athens, Greece,
April. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Natalia Kotsyba, Andriy Mykulyak, and Ihor V.
Shevchenko. 2011. UGTag: morphological
analyzer and tagger for the Ukrainian language.
In Stanisław Goźdź-Roszkowski, editor, Explo-
rations across Languages and Corpora, pages 69–
82, Frankfurt a. M.

V. I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary Codes Capable of Cor-
recting Deletions, Insertions and Reversals. Soviet
Physics Doklady, 10:707–710, February.

Paul R. Magocsi. 2015. With Their Backs to the Moun-
tains: A History of Carpathian Rus’ and Carpatho-
Rusyns. Central European University Press, Bu-
dapest.

Gideon S. Mann and David Yarowsky. 2001. Mul-
tipath translation lexicon induction via bridge lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the Second Meeting of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (NAACL 2001), pages 151–
158, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Gary Mokotoff. 1997. Soundexing and genealogy.
http://www.avotaynu.com/soundex.
htm. Accessed: 2016-12-20.

Anna Plishkova. 2009. Language and national iden-
tity: Rusyns south of Carpathians, volume 14 of
Classics of Carpatho-Rusyn scholarship. Columbia
University Press and East European Monographs,
New York.

Stefan M. Pugh. 2009. The Rusyn language: A gram-
mar of the literary standard of Slovakia with refer-
ence to Lemko and Subcarpathian Rusyn, volume
476 of Languages of the World/Materials. Lincom
Europa, München.

Achim Rabus and Andrianna Šymon. 2015. Na novŷch
putjach isslidovanja rusyns’kŷch dialektu: Korpus
rozhovornoho rusyns’koho jazŷka. In Kvetoslava
Koporová, editor, Rusyn’skŷj literaturnŷj jazŷk na
Slovakiji: Zbornyk referativ z IV. Midžinarodnoho
kongresu rusyn’skoho jazŷka, pages 40–54. Prjašiv.

Achim Rabus. 2015. Current developments in
Carpatho-Rusyn speech – preliminary observations.
In Patricia A. Krafcik and Valerij Ivanovyč Padjak,

editors, Juvilejnyj zbirnyk na čest’ profesora Pavla-
Roberta Magočija, pages 489–496. Užhorod.

Yves Scherrer and Achim Rabus. 2017. Multi-source
morphosyntactic tagging for spoken Rusyn. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for Similar
Languages, Varieties and Dialects (VarDial 2017),
Valencia, Spain.

Yves Scherrer and Benoît Sagot. 2014. A language-
independent and fully unsupervised approach to lex-
icon induction and part-of-speech tagging for closely
related languages. In Proceedings of LREC 2014,
pages 502–8, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Serge Sharoff, Mikhail Kopotev, Tomaz Erjavec, Anna
Feldman, and Dagmar Divjak. 2008. Designing and
evaluating Russian tagsets. In Proceedings of LREC
2008, Marrakech, Morocco.

H. A. Skrypnyk, editor. 2013. Ukrajinci-Rusyny:
Etnolinhvistyčni ta etnokul’turni procesy v isto-
ryčnomu rozvytku. Instytut mystectvoznavstva,
fol’klorystyky ta etnolohiji im. M.T. Ryl’s’koho,
Kyjiv.

Alexander Teutsch. 2001. Das Rusinische der Ost-
slowakei im Kontext seiner Nachbarsprachen, vol-
ume 12 of Heidelberger Publikationen zur Slavistik.
A, Linguistische Reihe. Lang, Frankfurt am Main,
Berlin, Bern.

Ruprecht von Waldenfels and Achim Rabus. 2015. Re-
cycling the Metropolitan: building an electronic cor-
pus on the basis of the edition of the Velikie Minei
Čet’i. Scripta & e-Scripta, 14–15:27–38.

Ruprecht von Waldenfels and Michał Woźniak. 2017.
SpoCo – a simple and adaptable web interface for
dialect corpora. Journal for Language Technology
and Computational Linguistics, 31(1).

Curt Woolhiser. 2005. Political borders and dialect
divergence/convergence in Europe. In Peter Auer,
Frans Hinskens, and Paul Kerswill, editors, Dialect
change, pages 236–262. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge.

32


