



















































Storyteller: Visual Analytics of Perspectives on Rich Text Interpretations


Proceedings of the 2017 EMNLP Workshop on Natural Language Processing meets Journalism, pages 37–45
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Storyteller: Visual Analytics of Perspectives on Rich Text Interpretations
Maarten van Meersbergen

Janneke van der Zwaan
Willem van Hage

Netherlands eScience Center
Science Park 140

Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Email: m.vanmeersbergen@esciencecenter.nl

j.vanderzwaan@esciencecenter.nl
w.vanhage@esciencecenter.nl

Piek Vossen
Antske Fokkens
Inger Leemans

Isa Maks
VU University Amsterdam

De Boelelaan 1081
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Email: piek.vossen@vu.nl
antske.fokkens@vu.nl
inger.leemans@vu.nl

isa.maks@vu.nl

Abstract

Complexity of event data in texts makes
it difficult to assess its content, espe-
cially when considering larger collections
in which different sources report on the
same or similar situations. We present
a system that makes it possible to visu-
ally analyze complex event and emotion
data extracted from texts. We show that
we can abstract from different data mod-
els for events and emotions to a single data
model that can show the complex relations
in four dimensions. The visualization has
been applied to analyze 1) dynamic devel-
opments in how people both conceive and
express emotions in theater plays and 2)
how stories are told from the perspective
of their sources based on rich event data
extracted from news or biographies.

1 Introduction

People frequently write about the changes in the
world and about the emotions that these events
arouse. Events and emotions typically have com-
plex structures and are difficult to detect and repre-
sent. According to our estimation, standard news
articles contain about 200 event mentions on av-
erage (Vossen et al., 2016). These events stand
in complex temporal and causal relations to each
other, while the text can also present different per-
spectives on their impact. Especially when consid-
ering event data from many different sources that
may report on the same events, the extracted data
quickly becomes very complex.

Most systems that handle large collections of
text use some kind of topic clustering. Docu-
ments are grouped together on the basis of a sim-
ilarity measure and clustering technique. In the

case of streaming text, such as news and tweets,
topic modeling and clustering is also done dy-
namically over time, indicating when a cluster ap-
pears and dies out. Dynamic clustering can be
seen as a rough approximation of the temporal
bounding of a real world event. Although topic
modeling works well as an indicator of trending
real world events, it does not tell the story in de-
tail as a sequence of events with participants and
causal/temporal relations across these events.

In this paper we present Storyteller, a visual
analytics tool for complex multidimensional tex-
tual data. Storyteller groups events with multi-
ple participants into storylines. As such, it can
give insight into complex relations by providing
multiple perspectives on time-based textual data.
We explain the capabilities of Storyteller by ap-
plying it to semantically linked news data from
the NewsReader project,1 using different perspec-
tives on the data to visualize complex relations be-
tween the events found by its Natural Language
Processing (NLP) pipeline. These visualizations
give more insight into the performance of the sys-
tem and how well complex event relations approx-
imate the storylines people construct when reading
news. We further show the usability of the Sto-
ryteller visualization for general purpose event-
based textual data by applying it to other use cases,
namely the Embodied Emotions and BiographyNet
projects provided by other humanities experts.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section
3, we present the semantic model for events used
in NewsReader. Section 4 explains the Storyteller
visualization tool that loads the NewsReader data
and provides different views and interactions. We
show the capacity of data generalization by the
tool by applying it to other projects with biograph-

1http://www.newsreader-project.eu/

37



ical data and emotions in Dutch 17th century the-
ater plays in Section 5. Section 2 explains how
our work differs from others. Section 6 concludes
with future plans.

2 Related work

Interactive graphics have been used for before to
analyze high dimensional data (Buja et al., 1996;
Martin and Ward, 1995; Buja et al., 1991), but
fast, web-based and highly interactive visualiza-
tions with filtering are a fairly new development.
With the advent of the open source libraries D3.js
(Bostock et al., 2011), Crossfilter.js (Square, 2012)
and DC.js (dcj, 2016), we now have the tools to
rapidly develop custom visual applications for the
web.

The egoSlider (Wu et al., 2016) uses a simi-
lar visualization to our co-participation graph for
Egocentric networks. Our visualization can how-
ever display co-participation of all participants
rather than just for one. The interactive filtering,
our other views on the multidimensional data, and
the immediate link to the original data are also not
present in egoSlider.

The TIARA system (Liu et al., 2012) visualizes
news stories as theme rivers. It also has a network
visualization of actor-actor relations. This can be
used when the corpus consists of e-mails, to show
who writes about what to whom. In StoryTeller,
the relations are not based on metadata but are re-
lations in the domain of discourse extracted from
text.

3 Multi-dimensional event data from text

The NewsReader system automatically processes
news and extracts what happened, who is involved,
and when and where it happened. It uses a cascade
of NLP modules including named entity recogni-
tion and linking, semantic role labeling, time ex-
pression detection and normalization and nomi-
nal and event coreference. Processing a single
news article results in the semantic interpretation
of mentions of events, participants and their time
anchoring in a sequence of text.

In a second step, the mention interpretations
are converted to an instance representation ac-
cording to the Simple Event Model (Van Hage
et al., 2011) or SEM. SEM is an RDF represen-
tation that abstracts from the specific mentions
within a single or across multiple news articles.
It defines individual components of events such

as the action, the participants with their roles and
the time-anchoring. A central notion in News-
Reader is the event-centric representation, where
events are represented as instances and all infor-
mation on these events is aggregated from all the
mentions in different sources. For this purpose,
NewsReader introduced the Grounded Annotation
Framework (GAF, (Fokkens et al., 2013)) as an ex-
tension to SEM through gaf:denotedBy relations
between instance representations in SEM and their
mentions represented as offsets to different places
in the texts. Likewise, information that is the same
across mentions in different news articles gets de-
duplicated and information that is different gets
aggregated. For each piece of information, the
system stores the source and the perspective of the
source on the information. The result is a com-
plex multidimensional data set in which events and
their relations are defined according to multiple
properties (Vossen et al., 2015). The Storyteller
application exploits these dimensions to present
events within a context that explains them, approx-
imating a story.

The following dimensions from the News-
Reader data are used for the visualization. Event
refers to the SEM-RDF ID: the instance identi-
fier. The actors in the news article, which are de-
scribed using role labels that come from different
event ontologies, such as PropBank (Kingsbury
and Palmer, 2002), FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998),
and ESO (Segers et al., 2015). A climax score
indicating the relevance of the event (normalized
between 0 and 100) for a story. The climax score
is a normalized score based on the number of men-
tions of an event and the prominence of each men-
tion, where early mentions count as more promi-
nent. A group label that uniquely identifies the
event-group to which the event belongs. In News-
Reader, groups are formed by connecting events
by topic overlap of the articles in which they are
mentioned and by sharing the same actors. Each
group also has a groupScore which indicates the
relevance of the group or storyline for the whole
collection. For NewsReader, this is the highest
climax score within the group of events normal-
ized across all the different groups extracted from
a data set. The group’s groupName consists of the
most dominant topic within the group in compari-
son with all other groups based on IDF*TF. Event
groups are the basis for event-centric story visual-
izations.

38



The labels represent all the different wordings
used to mention the event. The prefLabel is the
most-frequent label for the event. Time refers to
the date to which the event is anchored. Mentions
is a list of mentions of the event in source texts.
A mention consists of a snippet, the offsets of the
label in that snippet (snippet char), the URI of
the source text, and char, the character offsets for
the raw text inside the source. Next we show an
abbreviated example of a NewsReader event in the
JSON format used in Storyteller:

{ "timeline":
"events": [{
"actors": {
"actor:": [

"dbp:European_Union",
"dbp:United_Kingdom",
"dbp:The_Times",
"dbp:Government_of_the_United_Kingdom"

]
},
"prefLabel": ["stop"],
"time": "20140622",
"climax": 89,
"event": "ev194",
"groupName": "[Community sanction]",
"groupScore": "099",
"labels": [
"stop",
"difficulty",
"pressure"

],
"mentions": [{
"char": [ "5665", "5673" ],
"perspective": [{

"source": "author:FT_reporters"
}],
"snippet": [" Sunday Times, said

they were extremely concerned
about the UK’s difficulties in
stopping the EU from introducing
measures that continue to
erode Britain’s competitiveness"],

"snippet_char": [ 81, 89 ],
"uri": ["http://www.ft.com/thing/
f2bc1380-fa32-11e3-a328-00144feab7de"]

}, {
(...)

4 Storyteller

The Storyteller application consists of 3 main co-
ordinated views (Wang Baldonado et al., 2000): a
participant-centric view, an event-centric view and
a data-centric view.

User interaction is a key component in the de-
sign. The rich text data are too complex to visual-
ize without it, as they contain numerous intercon-
nected events, participants and other properties.
Given that the estimated processing capacity for
accurate data of human sight is limited to around

500 kbit per second (Gregory and Zangwill, 1987),
a large number of connections can make the visual
exploration very difficult without filters to slice the
data into humanly manageable portions. This sec-
tion presents the 3 views and describes how filter-
ing can be applied.

The interactivity focuses mostly on analysis
through filtering. The user can apply filters by
clicking through various components of the charts.
These filters are then dynamically applied to the
other parts of the application, reducing the amount
of data on the screen. This allows a user to drill-
down into the data, gaining knowledge of its com-
position in the process.

4.1 Participation-centric view

The participation-centric view (Figure 1), which
is our own graph design that we have dubbed a
Co-Participation graph, is an interactively filter-
able version of the XKCD Movie Narrative Charts
(Munroe, 2009). It is placed at the top of the Sto-
ryteller page and visualizes the participants of all
the events. The major participants are placed on
the Y-axis and the events they participate in are
placed (as ovals) on a timeline. Each participant’s
timeline has a different color. If different partici-
pants take part in the same event, the lines are bent
towards and joint in this event, showing the co-
participation through this intersection. Events re-
ceive descriptive labels. Hovering the mouse cur-
sor over an event will show further details, such as
the mentions of that specific event.

4.1.1 Axis ordering
The X-axis is a timeline stretching between the
first of the events shown and the last. The Y-axis
is slightly more complicated. The ordering of the
participants is of great importance to the legibil-
ity of the resulting chart. If this is done improp-
erly, the resulting chart will be cluttered because
of many curved lines crossing each other unneces-
sarily. We solved this legibility problem by order-
ing the elements in such a way that the participant
lines travel straight for as long as possible. We do
this by re-ordering the elements on the Y-axis in
order of co-appearance on the timeline, from bot-
tom to top. We start by determining the first and
bottom-most line. For this, we select the first event
on the timeline and determine the participants of
this event. We then loop over all events that share
these participants in order of appearance on the
timeline. Every time a new co-participant is found

39



Figure 1: The Co-Participation graph in its unfiltered state, with a NewsReader dataset loaded

Figure 2: The Co-Participation graph in a filtered state, showing only those events where Apple Inc.
co-participates

in one of these events, it is added to the list. Once
all events have been processed in this manner, the
algorithm has clustered events that share partici-
pants making the resulting graph much easier to
read.

4.1.2 Filtering

An alphabetic list of all of the participants
present in the dataset is displayed left of the Co-
participants graph. The length of the colored bar
indicates the number of events in which the partic-
ipant occurs. This number is shown when hover-
ing the mouse over the bar.

Clicking on one of the items in the partic-
ipant list applies a filter to the dataset. The
Co-participation graph only shows the lines with
events that involve the selected participant. This
means that the line of the selected participant
and those of participants that co-participate with
the selected participant are displayed. Selecting
more than one participant reduces the graph to
those events in which all selected participants co-
participate.

4.2 Event-centric view

Figure 3 shows the event-centric view. This sec-
ond view in the Storyteller demo shows time or-
dered sequences of events grouped in different
rows. The grouping can be determined in differ-
ent ways and according to different needs.

In NewsReader, each row in the graph approxi-
mates the structure of a story, as defined in (Vossen
et al., 2015): consisting of one or more climax
events, preceded by events that build up towards
the climax and following events that are the conse-
quence of the climax defined by prominence (see
section 3). Preceding and following events are se-
lected on the basis of co-participation and topic-
overlap: so-called bridging relations. The size
(and color) of the event bubbles represents the cli-
max score of the event.

A climax event together with all bridged events
approximate a story, where we expect events to in-
crease in bubble size when getting closer to the cli-
max event (the biggest bubble in a row) and then
gradually decrease after the climax event. The
size of the events thus mimics the topical devel-
opment of for example streaming news, while we
still show details on the events within such a topic.
The first row presents the story derived from the

40



Figure 3: The event-centric view, with data of the Embodied Emotions project (See: Use Cases).

Figure 4: The same event-centric view, with a filter applied to only show high-climax events from the
year 1740 and onwards.

Figure 5: The same event-centric view, with a filter applied to only show events with the fear emotion.

climax event with the highest score (normalized to
100). The next rows show stories based on lower
scoring climax events that are not connected to
the main story. We thus apply a greedy algorithm
in which the most prominent events has the first
chance to absorb other events.

Stories are labeled by the climax event’s group-
Name (consisting of the topic that is dominant for

the set of events making up the story and the high-
est climax score within the event). In addition to
the label, each row has a colored bar that indicates
the cumulative value of the climax scores of all the
events within a story. Note that the story with the
highest climax event does not necessarily have the
largest cumulative score. If an event is mentioned
a lot but poorly connected to other events, the cu-

41



mulative score may still be lower than that of other
stories.

The bottom graph of the second view plots in-
dividual events for climax score on the Y-axis so
that events from the same story may end up in dif-
ferent rows. Group membership is indicated by
symbols representing the events. This view shows
how events from a story are spread over climax
scores and time.

4.2.1 Filtering

The user can select a story by clicking on the in-
dex of stories to the left. Unlike the Participation-
centric view, selecting more than one group or
row adds data to the representation. This is inten-
tionally different from the co-participation graph,
where multiple selections intersect (groups can, in
this context, by definition not intersect), because
stories are separated on the basis of lack of over-
lap.

In the bottom graph of the event-centric view,
the user can make selections by dragging a region
in the Y/X space with the mouse. A region thus
represents a segment in time and a segment of cli-
max scores. This enables both selecting time in-
tervals (by dragging a full height box between two
particular time frames) and selection of the most
(or least) influential events, which can be used to
exclude outliers in the data but also to select and
inspect them.

All filters are applied globally: this means that
participant selection in the top view influences the
event-centric visualization and vice-versa.

4.3 Data-centric view

At the bottom of the Storyteller page, we see text
snippets from the original texts that were used to
derive the event data. It lists all events visual-
ized for a given set of filters. Events are presented
with the text fragments they are mentioned in and
the event word is highlighted. The event labels
are given separately as well, where synonyms are
grouped together. Furthermore, the table shows
the scores, the date and the group name or story la-
bel. No selections can be made through this view.

4.4 The full system

The seven tasks of the Visual Information Seeking Mantra

Overview Gain an overview of the entire collection.

Zoom Zoom in on items of interest.

Filter Filter out uninteresting items.

Details-on-demand Select an item or group and get details
when needed.

Relate View relationships among items.

History Keep a history of actions to support undo, replay,
and progressive refinement.

Extract Allow extraction of sub-collections and of the query
parameters.

(Shneiderman, 1996)

We designed Storyteller following the (author-
itative) Taxonomy for data visualizations (Shnei-
derman, 1996), phrased as the 7 tasks of the Visual
Information Seeking Mantra:

We initiate the visualization with the Overview
task presenting the initial (unfiltered) view. The
Filter and Zoom tasks allow the selection of sub-
sets of items in multiple ways through the differ-
ent views. The Details-on-demand task provides
detailed mouse-over information boxes as well as
a view into the raw data that is maintained while
filtering. The co-participation graph supports the
main Relate task, the filter state displays the His-
tory, and finally, the data-view allows users to Ex-
tract.

Storyteller is built to be as generic, reusable and
maintainable as possible. We have used only Free
and Open Source (FOSS) software web visualiza-
tion tools and libraries and made Storyteller it-
self fully FOSS as well. The code is available on
github2 and a demo is also available.3

5 Expert Panel Use Cases

The Storyteller demo has been used in two use
cases other than NewsReader. We briefly describe
both use cases in this section.

5.1 Embodied Emotions
Embodied Emotions (Zwaan et al., 2015) is a dig-
ital history project that investigates the relation

2https://github.com/NLeSC/
UncertaintyVisualization/

3http://nlesc.github.io/
UncertaintyVisualization/

42



Figure 6: The data-centric view, showing the raw data and offsets for the text snippets, as well as the
(colored) labels as found in the text. The data displayed here is from 17th century dutch theatre plays

between body parts and emotions in Dutch stage
plays over time (i.e. in what body parts do peo-
ple experience emotions, and through which bod-
ily acts do they express emotions). In our Story-
teller visualization, emotions are events and body
parts are participants. The visualization can be ap-
plied at two levels. First, the X-axis of the Co-
participation graph can be used to represent the
acts of a single play. Second, the X-axis can be
used as a timeline where we plot which emotions
and body parts are linked to each other in plays
published in a specific year.

Intersections indicate when different body parts
are associated with the same emotion. The cur-
rent online demo shows the second type of visu-
alization: emotion/body-part pairs occurrence per
year.4 The climax score in this visualization re-
flects the prominence of the emotion (the occur-
rence of the emotion related to the number of sen-
tences).

5.2 BiographyNet

The BiographyNet (Ockeloen et al., 2013) use
case involves the visual exploration of biographies
of prominent people in Dutch history. The biogra-
phies have been processed by a pipeline similar to
the one used for NewsReader. However, the data
is radically different: biographies mainly contain
events related to the subject of the biography and
we do not find many instances of cross-document
event co-reference.

The BiographyNet demo5 therefore does not fo-
cus on event instances but on event types: we

4http://nlesc.github.io/
EmbodiedEmotions/

5http://nlesc.github.io/BiographyNet/

extract all events related to a person that can be
linked to a specific year from the biographical text
and meta data. The biography subjects are the par-
ticipants in our visualization, the event types are
the events. If two people are born in the same year,
study during the same year or die in the same year,
etc., their lines intersect. The BiographyNet visu-
alization thus allows historians to perform genera-
tion analyses: what other events have people born
in a specific year have in common? The climax
score reflects the number of participants involved
in an event. The event-centric visualization thus
shows which events are prominent in a given year.

6 Conclusion

The fast and efficient web-based visualizations of
the output of NLP pipelines allows us to visu-
ally analyze complex storylines spanning years.
This means that we can now analyze news articles
with much more context, be it by looking at co-
participants, co-occurrence or other such criteria.
This changes literature study from first having to
read all the text to build an overview to first having
a rough overview that allows you to decide which
text to read later.

Storyteller’s event-based input format makes it
easy to port to new data sources. We described
two other projects with different graph-like data
(biographies and emotions) that can be served with
the same application thanks to this generic input
format.

There are many directions in which this re-
search could be advanced in the future. First, the
interaction model should be completed. Although
Storyteller allows the user to select and filter the
data in almost all graphs, other interactivity could

43



be added. For example, currently, the data table
(view 3) only shows the results of filters and se-
lections applied in other views. This table could
be made interactive by adding search functional-
ity. This means that the data can be filtered based
on user queries. Another possibility for improved
interaction is to allow the user to re-order events,
participants and groups according to different cri-
teria (e.g., based on frequency, or alphabetically).

While we now have a visualization capable of
displaying a decently sized data, it cannot handle
the sheer volume of all available news data. We
are currently implementing an interface that gen-
erates manageable data structures on the basis of
user queries from a triple store that contains mas-
sive event data from the processed news in RDF
(i.e. possibly millions of news articles and bil-
lions of triples). The user queries are translated
into SPARQL requests and the resulting RDF is
converted to the JSON input format. This solu-
tion requires that some structures, e.g. the climax
score and the storylines, need to be computed be-
forehand. The user should make a visually sup-
ported selection overview, zoom and filter before
querying the database to obtain all required data
and displaying the current views.

The NewsReader data exhibits various degrees
of uncertainty and source perspectives on the event
data (e.g. whether the source believes the event has
actually happened, or whether it is a positive or
negative speculation or expectation of the source).
These are modeled through the RDF representa-
tion as well but have not yet been considered in the
tool. In the next version of the Storyteller applica-
tion, we aim to visualize this data layer as well.

Feedback from domain experts who explored
data from the three different use cases indicates
that a proper understanding of the tool and the
data is required in order to get meaningful results.
In addition to developing tutorials that help re-
searchers to get the most out of Storyteller, we pro-
pose two types of user studies. First, we need to
evaluate Storyteller’s usability. Second, we need
to evaluate to what extent Storyteller generates re-
sults (data and views) that are useful for the differ-
ent domains.

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and
the Netherlands eScience Center for sponsoring

this research.

References
2016. DC.js dimensional charting javascript library.

C. F. Baker, C. J. Fillmore, and J. B. Lowe. 1998. The
Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proc. of ACL, pages
86–90.

M. Bostock, V. Ogievetsky, and J. Heer. 2011. D3
data-driven documents. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 17(12):2301–2309.

A. Buja, D. Cook, and D. F. Swayne. 1996. Interac-
tive high-dimensional data visualization. Journal of
computational and graphical statistics, 5(1):78–99.

A. Buja, J. A. McDonald, J. Michalak, and W. Stuet-
zle. 1991. Interactive data visualization using focus-
ing and linking. In Proc. of Visualization’91, pages
156–163. IEEE.

Antske Fokkens, Marieke van Erp, Piek Vossen, Sara
Tonelli, Willem Robert van Hage, Luciano Serafini,
Rachele Sprugnoli, and Jesper Hoeksema. 2013.
GAF: A grounded annotation framework for events.
In The 1st Workshop on Events, Atlanta, USA.

R. L. Gregory and O. L. Zangwill. 1987. The Oxford
companion to the mind. Oxford University Press.

P. Kingsbury and M. Palmer. 2002. From treebank to
propbank. In LREC. Citeseer.

S. Liu, M. X. Zhou, S. Pan, Y. Song, W. Qian,
W. Cai, and X. Lian. 2012. Tiara: Interactive,
topic-based visual text summarization and analysis.
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology,
3(2):25.

A. R. Martin and Matthew O. Ward. 1995. High di-
mensional brushing for interactive exploration of
multivariate data. In Proc. of Visualization’95, page
271.

R. Munroe. 2009. Xkcd# 657: Movie narrative charts.

N. Ockeloen, A. Fokkens, S. ter Braake, P. Vossen,
V. De Boer, G. Schreiber, and S. Legêne. 2013. Bi-
ographynet: Managing provenance at multiple lev-
els and from different perspectives. In Proc. of
LISC2013, pages 59–71. CEUR-WS. org.

R. Segers, P. Vossen, M. Rospocher, L. Serafini, E. La-
parra, and G. Rigau. 2015. ESO: A frame based on-
tology for events and implied situations. In Proceed-
ings of MAPLEX 2015, Yamagata, Japan.

Ben Shneiderman. 1996. The eyes have it: A task by
data type taxonomy for information visualizations.
In IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, pages
336–343.

Square. 2012. Crossfilter.js fast multidimensional fil-
tering for coordinated views.

44



W. R. Van Hage, V. Malaisé, R. Segers, L. Hollink, and
G. Schreiber. 2011. Design and use of the simple
event model (sem). Web Semantics: Science, Ser-
vices and Agents on the World Wide Web, 9(2):128–
136.

P. Vossen, T. Caselli, and Y. Kontzopoulou. 2015. Sto-
rylines for structuring massive streams of news. In
Proc. of CNewS 2015, Bejing, China.

Piek Vossen, Rodrigo Agerri, Itziar Aldabe, Agata Cy-
bulska, Marieke van Erp, Antske Fokkens, Egoitz
Laparra, Anne-Lyse Minard, Alessio Palmero Apro-
sio, German Rigau, Marco Rospocher, and Roxane
Segers. 2016. Newsreader: Using knowledge re-
sources in a cross-lingual reading machine to gener-
ate more knowledge from massive streams of news.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 110:60 – 85.

M. Q. Wang Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchin-
sky. 2000. Guidelines for using multiple views in in-
formation visualization. In Proc. of AVI, pages 110–
119. ACM.

Y. Wu, N. Pitipornvivat, J. Zhao, S. Yang, G. Huang,
and H. Qu. 2016. egoslider: Visual analysis of ego-
centric network evolution. Visualization and Com-
puter Graphics, 22(1):260–269.

J. M. van der Zwaan, I. Leemans, E. Kuijpers, and
I. Maks. 2015. Heem, a complex model for min-
ing emotions in historical text. In Proc. of IEEE
eScience, pages 22–30.

45


