
























Framework for the Analysis of Simplified Texts
Taking Discourse into Account: the Basque Causal Relations as Case Study

Itziar Gonzalez-Dios and Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza and Mikel Iruskieta
itziar.gonzalezd@ehu.eus; a.diazdeilarraza@ehu.eus, mikel.iruskieta@ehu.eus

University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
IXA Group for NLP

Manuel Lardizabal pasealekua 1. 20018 Donostia, Gipuzkoa

Abstract

Text simplification is crucial for some readers
to understand the content of a text. Analyzing
simplified texts can help to understand the mech-
anism hidden in the process of simplification. In
this paper we present a research framework to
analyze the impact of simplification operations on
discourse. To that end, we used the Corpus of the
Simplified Basque texts (CBST) and we studied
the strategies followed in the simplification of
causal relations and their effects at discourse
level. From this analysis of the sample we derive
that discourse has not been always taken into
account which may lead to a lack of coherence
in the simplified text.

1 Introduction and Related Work

Text Simplification is a research line that has been
important in the educational community (Simensen,
1987; Young, 1999; Crossley et al., 2007) but it is also
becoming important in the Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) community. Therefore, multidisciplinary
researchers are working on different ways to make text
simplification by automatic or semi-automatic means.
This task is known as Automatic or Automated Text
Simplification (ATS) and its development has been
deeply explained in the literature ((Saggion, 2017)).

In this work, we want to describe a framework to
analyze simplified texts taking discourse structure
following the Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST)1

(Mann and Thompson, 1988) into account and answer
the following research questions:

1RST is an approach to describe text coherence by means of
coherence relations or rhetorical relations and has been applied to
many NLP tasks.

− How can we describe the impact of simplification
operations in discourse?

− How do simplification operations affect the
rhetorical structures of the original texts?

This type of studies need annotated corpora which are
expensive, but at the same time, necessary. We can find
in the literature corpora available for English (Petersen
and Ostendorf, 2007; Xu et al., 2015; Pellow and
Eskenazi, 2014), Danish (Klerke and Søgaard, 2012),
German (Klaper et al., 2013), Brazilian Portuguese
(Caseli et al., 2009), Spanish (Bott and Saggion,
2011), Italian (Brunato et al., 2015) and Basque
(Gonzalez-Dios, 2016). In the case of the last three
corpora, simplification operations have been annotated
and general annotation schemes derived. Besides,
from the simplification perspective, Gonzalez-Dios
et al. (2016) analyzed in the Basque corpus whether
conditional, concessive, purpose, temporal and relative
clauses2 have been simplified or not, and if so, which
were the macro-operations that had been performed.

From the discourse perspective, Crossley et al. (2007)
analyzed the cohesion of 105 texts taken from seven
texts-books aiming beginners of English as a second
language with Coh-metrix (Graesser et al., 2004). They
focused on the following seven sets: i) causal cohesion,
ii) connectives and logical operators, iii) coreference
measures, iv) density of major parts of speech measures,
v) polysemy and hypernymy measures, vi) syntactic
complexity, and vii) word information and frequency
measures. They found out among others that original

2These clauses are the most five predictive features for the
readability assessment system for Basque (Gonzalez-Dios et al.,
2014) at the syntactic level.

48
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop Recent Advances in RST and Related Formalisms, pages 48–57,

Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4 2017. c�2017 Association for Computational Linguistics



Original Structural Intuitive
Beraz, hegoaren formak, nahiz eta
hegan egitearen lehen arrazoia ez
izan, garrantzi handia du, ingu-
ruan duen airearen jarioan asko
eragiten duelako.

Beraz, hegoaren formak gar-
rantzi handia du ; izan ere,
hegoaren formak inguruan duen
airearen jarioan asko eragiten
du . Hegoaren forma, ordea, ez
da hegan egitearen lehen arrazoia.

Beraz, hegoaren formak, nahiz
eta hegan egitearen lehen arra-
zoia ez izan, garrantzi handia du ;
izan ere, inguruan duen airearen
jarioan asko eragiten du.

So, the form of the wings, though it
is not the main motive of the flying,
is very important, because it affects
a lot the surrounding air flow.

So, the form of the wings is very
important; indeed, the form of the
wings affects a lot the surrounding
air flow. The form of the wings is
not, however, the main motive of
the flying.’

So, the form of the wings, though it
is not the main motive of the flying,
is very important; indeed, it affects
a lot the surrounding air flow.

Table 1: The original sentence Bernoulli 80 and its two simplified versions

texts had a higher ratio of causal verbs to causal particles.
Therefore, original texts exhibited less causal relations.
In the analysis of intuitively simplified texts, Crossley et
al. (2012) found out that advanced level texts exhibited
less causal cohesion than beginning level texts.

To our knowledge, there is no joint framework to
analyze simplified texts taking simplification operations
and discourse into account. That is why the aim of
this paper is to propose a framework to measure how
simplification operations affect relational discourse
structure. In this study, we focus on forms used to
express causality because reducing causal discourse
relations is crucial for people with language disorders.
For example, Kong et al. (2017) stated that the coher-
ence of speakers with aphasia tended to miss essential
information content. This can be measured because
aphasia speakers reduce some RST relations, such as
ELABORATION and causal relations in their speech.

This paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we
present the resources needed to perform the analysis; in
Section 3, we describe the framework for the analysis;
in Section 4, we present the results of the quantitative
analysis on the causal relations and in Section 5, we
conclude and outline the future work.

2 Resources

In order to perform this study, we have used the Corpus
of Basque Simplified Text (CBST). This corpus is a col-
lection of texts divided in 227 sentences of the science
popularisation domain. Each original sentence in the
corpus has a structurally simplified and an intuitively
simplified sentence. In this corpus, the operations

performed in order to simplify the sentences have been
annotated following an annotation scheme3 composed
by the following eight macro-operations: i) delete,
ii) merge, iii) split, iv) transformation, v) insert, vi) re-
ordering, vii) no operation and viii) other. These macro-
operations involve many operations (Gonzalez-Dios,
2016). In Table 1 we show the original sentence iden-
tified as Bernoulli 80 and its two simplified versions.

To create the cause subcorpus, we extracted
semi-automatically the causal clauses as done by
Gonzalez-Dios et al. (2016) and then, following the
proposal of Iruskieta et al. (2016), we extracted the
sentences containing causal discourse markers and
causal lexical signals. The main figures of this sample
are presented in Table 2.

Original Structural Intuitive
Sentences 69 90 97

Words 1441 1482 1399
Table 2: Sentence and word number in our sample

The number of causal structures found in the original
sentences of the CBST is shown according to their
type in Table 3: i) syntactically marked causal signals
(syntactic), ii) causal signals made explicit by discourse
markers (DMs), iii) causal relations signaled with

3Note that annotation results may yield subjective idiosyncrasies,
due to fact that the corpus is annotated only with one annotator.
In our opinion this fact is not a problem for the aim of this paper,
because our objective is to explore a methodology to measure a joint
analysis between simplification and relational discourse structure.
As far as we know, no agreement measures have been given in the
annotation process of simplified corpora.

49



nouns and verbs (Lexical).

Type Simp. RST Joint
Syntactic 17 3 3

DMs 16 3 3
Lexical 32 3 3

Table 3: Number of analyzed causal structures

The additional resources used in this analysis are 1) a
study of the frequencies and positions of the adverbial
clauses (Gonzalez-Dios et al., 2015) in order to see
the frequencies of the syntactic relations; 2) the corpus
Zernola (Gonzalez-Dios et al., 2014) to see if the
syntactic relations are also used in simple texts; and 3) a
lemma frequency list (Gonzalez-Dios, 2016) to see the
frequencies of the discourse markers and lexical signals.

3 Framework
for the Analysis of Simplified Texts

In this section, we present the framework and the
annotation required to perform the analysis of simplified
texts taking discourse into account.

3.1 Simplification Annotation and Analysis
Following Gonzalez-Dios et al. (2016), we propose
to annotate whether the target clauses, in our case
the causal relations, have been treated or not (binary
tagging). If so, which operations have been performed
in each structure. Besides, in this study, we add
complementary descriptions such as clause length,
syntactic depth (depth of the syntactic tree), surrounding
phenomena or frequency information. These are the
questions we propose:

a) Simplification treatment and macro-operations:
− Have the syntactic, DMs and lexical signals

been treated or not? In the case of the
syntactic signals,we also analyze if they
have been treated or not according to the
causal type defined by Euskaltzaindia
(Euskaltzaindia, 2011): i) pure causal
-(e)lako ‘because’, ii) causal explicative bait-
‘since’ and iii) pseudo-causal -(e)nez ‘as’).

− When the simplification is performed, we
ask: which macro-operations have been
performed? For each macro-operation,
which exact operations? In the case of lexical
signals, which operations according to the
PoS (verbs or nouns)?

b) Length and depth
− The sentences that have been split are longer

than the average sentence length of original
clause?

− The sentences that have been split are inside
another subordinate clause?

c) Frequencies
− In the case of the syntactic signals, are they

also frequent in other corpora? For this
analysis, the frequencies of other corpora are
needed.

− When performing transformations, have the
syntactic, DMs and lexical signals been sub-
stituted with a more frequent equivalent one?

d) Ordering
− In the case of the syntactic signals, do the

reordering operations suit the word order
found in other corpora or the canonical RST
relation order?

− Do they suit canonical or stylistic word or
sentence orders?

3.2 Discourse Annotation (RST) and Analysis
In the discourse analysis, we want to know if the
relations found in the original texts have been kept,
modified or deleted in the simplified texts. To that end,
we follow this procedure:

− Segmentation: automatic fine-grained discourse
segmentation with EusEduSeg (Iruskieta and
Zapirain, 2015) and manually corrected following
Iruskieta (2014). Output format: RS3.

− Rhetorical structure annotation: manually anno-
tated with RSTTool (O’Donnell, 2000) following
a modular and incremental annotation method
(Pardo, 2005). Output format: RS3.

− Description if there were maintained or changed
the nucleus-satellite order of the relations and
the relation names with the Rhetorical DataBase
(RhetDB) (Pardo, 2005).

In order to describe the simplification operations
at rhetorical structure level, we propose the following
questions:

a) Rhetorical relations:
− What kind of rhetorical relations were deleted

from the original sentences in the intuitive
corpus-set and in the structural corpus-set?

50



− Which relations have been added for text
simplification?

b) Ordering:
− Has the nucleus-satellite order been

maintained in rhetorical relations?4

3.3 Joint Annotation and Analysis
In order to join both analyses and based on the previous
annotation, we propose to analyze the influence of
simplification operations in discourse looking at
the elementary discourse units (EDU), the central
subconstituent (CSC)5 and the rhetorical relations
(RR). Exactly, we look the simplification operations
performed which impact have on discourse. So, for each
relation we make a description like the one that follows
for the structurally simplified sentence presented in
Table 1: i) an insert (hegoaren formak ’the shapes of the
wings’) has been performed in the clausal proposition;
ii) two split and three insert operations (izan ere,
Hegoaren forma ’due to the shape of the wings’ and
ordea ’however’) in the surrounding phenomena.

Regarding rhetorical structure, we based on the
simplification annotation and in the RST trees like the
one presented in Figure 1, where the rhetorical structure
(RS-tree) of the original text is shown above and the
RS-tree of the structurally simplified text is bellow.
There are three main changes in Figure 1: i) there is one
span missing (4 above and 3 bellow), ii) the CAUSE
relation is attached directly to the most important EDU
of the RS-tree (to the central subconstituent), and
iii) the CONCESSION relation has a new order (SN
above and NS bellow) and is attached to a bigger text
span (EDU1−2 bellow)6.

In order to quantify and summarize that, these are
the questions we propose:

a) Treatment in simplification:
− Has it been treated or not?

b) Elementary discourse unit (EDU):
4This is important as Mann and Thompson (1987) state: “if a

natural text is rewritten to convert the instances of non-canonical
span order to canonical order, it seldom reduces text quality and
often improves it”.

5The CSC is the salient EDU of a text span.
6Other changes were done in signaling the relations: in the

signal CAUSE, the causal subordinator -lako ’since’ was changed
into the explicative connector izan ere ’since’.
And in the signal CONCESSION the subordinator nahiz eta ...-n ’in
spite of’ was changed into the connector ordea ’however’.

− Does the EDU number remain the same? If
it changes, which are the changes?

c) Central subconstituent (CSC):
− Are there any changes in the CSC? Which?

d) Rhetorical relations (RR):
− Are the RRs kept? Which ones?
− Are there new RRs?
− Which RRs have been added, modified or

deleted?

This way we see how the simplification operations
affect discourse.

4 Results of the Quantitative Analysis

In this section, we present the results and analysis
of the causal relations (our sample) according to the
framework presented in Section 3.

4.1 Results of Simplification Analysis
Treatment and macro-operations: In Table 4 we
present the results in relation to the treatment in both
simplification approaches. As we can see: i) more syn-
tactic signals have been treated in the intuitive approach;
ii) results in the lexical signals are similar; iii) and
discourse markers do not seem to be treated in any case.

Treated Structural Intuitive
Syntactic 47.06 (8/17) 64.71 (11/17)
DMs 25.00 (4/16) 6.25 (1/16)
Lexical 21.21 (7/34) 24.24 (8/34)

Table 4: Percentages and raw numbers of causal relations

Focusing on the different types of causal syntactic
signals (Table 5), we see that there is a tendency to
treat the pure causal -(e)lako ‘because’ in the structural
approach, while explicative bait- ‘since’ is treated in
the intuitive approach.

Structural Intuitive
Pure -(e)lako 55.56 (4/9) 33.33 (3/9)
Explicative bait- 40.00 (2/5) 100.00 (5/5)
Pseudo -(e)nez 33.33 (1/3) 100.00 (3/3)

Table 5: Treated Clauses according to the causal type in both ap-
proaches

Looking at the macro-operations (Table 6) we see that,
in our sample, while the syntactic signals undergo split
and transformation operations, the discourse markers

51



Figure 1: Bernoulli 80 sentence’s original (above) and structural (bellow) RS-trees

undergo transformations (as they are lexical units they
cannot undergo splitting operations). The lexical signals
undergo split and transformation operations in the struc-
tural approach, but only transformations in the intuitive.

Comparing the approaches, it is noticeable that more
split operations are performed in the structural approach
and more transformations in the intuitive. Exactly,
the transformations performed in syntactic signals
are: i) transforming a subordinate clause into a main
clause ii) reformulations (more than one operations and
paraphrases) and ii) changing the syntactic signal.

Regarding discourse markers, the transformation
that has been performed is the substitution of a
discourse marker for a more frequent one. The other
macro-operations are delete and reordering.

In the case of the lexical signals, the operations
performed vary according to the PoS. In Table 7
we present figures about the number of operations
performed in nouns and verbs.

To summarize the analysis of the operations, we
see that some macro-operations are restricted to the
relation type and the PoS of it. That is, we see that no
split is applied in all causal DMs or in all noun causal
signals. For example, in the causal clause of sentence
presented in Table 1, an insert has been performed in
the structural approach; in the intuitive approach a split,
a transformation (subordinate to main clause) and an
insert have been performed.

Length and depth: The average length of the causal
clauses in our original sample are 7 words7. In the in-
tuitive approach, the split operations have been carried
out in all the clauses with 7 or more words, but this only
happens in 2 out of the 5 split operations carried out in
the structural approach. In relation to the depth, two of
the split operations in the structural approach were per-
formed in subordinate clauses inside subordinate clauses
e.g. a relative clause inside a noun clause.

Frequencies: Related to the description of the syntac-
tic structures contained in the CBST, we have checked
if they are also frequent structures in the BDT corpus8

and in the Zernola corpus. As we can see, they are all
frequent structures in both corpora (Table 8).

In Table 9 we present some transformation operations
involving substitutions. Our analysis lead us to propose
some preliminary conclusions: syntactic signals and
DMs are not always substituted with more frequent
equivalent ones, but with less ambiguous. As we
see here, more frequent forms do not always mean
simplicity.

Ordering: In relation to the reordering operations,
we have analyzed whether the movements carried out

7As mentioned before, there are 17 clauses with syntactic
relations. The longest of them has 17 words and the shortest 3. The
mode is 4 words and the median 6.

8We consider a structure as frequent when it has more than 10 %
of occurrences in its type.

52



Macro-oper. Only split Only trans Split+trans Only others
Approach Str. Int. Str. Int. Str. Int. Str. Int.
Syntactic 37.5

(3/8)
9.09
(1/11)

37.5
(3/8)

81.82
(9/11)

25.00
(2/8)

9.09
(1/11)

0.00
(0/8)

0.00
(0/11)

DMs 0.00
(0/4)

0.00
(0/1)

25.00
(1/4)

100.00
(1/1)

0.00
(0/4)

0.00
(0/1)

75.00
(3/4)

0.00
(0/1)

Lexical 42.86
(3/7)

0.00
(0/8)

42.86
(3/7)

50.00
(4/8)

0.00
(0/7)

0.00
(0/8)

14.29
(1/7)

50.00
(4/8)

Table 6: Percentages and raw numbers of macro-operations performed in causal relations

Oper. Split Trans Reor. Delete
Appr. Str Int Str Int Str Int Str Int
Noun 0 0 1 3 1 1 0 1
Verb 3 0 2 1 0 0 0 2

Table 7: Macro-operations performed in the lexical signals accord-
ing to their PoS

BDT Zernola
Pure -lako 26.91 28.10
Explicative bait- 39.94 46.28
Pseudo -nez 23.94 25.62
Others 9.21 0.00

Table 8: Distribution of causal structures in the corpora BDT and
Zernola

in the simplified sentences at syntactic level suit the
canonical word order or the order of clauses found in
EPEC. In our sample no reordering was performed at
that level. But, we did find an interesting reordering in
the intuitive approach: a stylistic reordering took place
in the signals in order to avoid the rear-burden 9.

4.2 Results of Discourse Analysis

In Table 10, we present the results obtained with Rhetor-
ical Database in the different corpus-sets regarding sim-
plification approaches and rhetorical relations. The num-
ber (K) of all the relations and the differences (diff.) of
each corpus-set: i) relations of the original texts (source
text) in the first two columns, ii) relations of the intu-
itively simplified texts in the following two, and iii) re-
lations of the structurally simplified texts in the last two.

We can observe different simplification strategies in

9“(...) “rear burden” (...) [is] the effect that occurs when some
key elements for correct processing of the message (e.g. the verb)
are pushed towards the end of the sentence, thus delaying and
making more difficult the comprehension of the message by the
receiver.” (Maia-Larretxea, 2015, 68).

Table 10:

− Less frequent RRs in both simplified datasets: the
causal relation RESULT has less frequency in both
simplified corpus-sets and CIRCUMSTANCE has
also less frequency in both corpus-sets10.

− More frequent RRs in both simplified datasets: SO-
LUTIONHOOD, CONCESSION and BACKGROUND
are used to simplify texts.

− New RRs in one of the simplified datasets:
PURPOSE, RESTATEMENT and MEANS are new
relations in the intuitive approach and JOINT and
PREPARATION in the structural.11

Using RhetDB, we extracted and presented in
Table 11 the nuclearity type (SN: satellite first and
nucleus after; NS: the other way around, nucleus first
and satellite after) of all the hypotactic relations12 and
their frequencies.

Regarding Table 11, we see that the frequency of
the causal relations (CAUSE, RESULT and PURPOSE)
is bigger in the original subcorpus 0.411 (0.117 for SN
and 0.294 for NS),13 than in the intuitive 0.318 (SN:
0.09 and NS: 0.227) and structural approach 0.3 (SN:
0.00 and NS 0.3). This shows that there are less causal
relations in the simplified datasets as also found by
Graesser et al. (2004) and Crossley et al. (2012) and
the NS order is preferred in the causal subgroup, when
any causal relation is maintained.

Another interesting observation is that the NS
ordering has been increased in the structural approach,

10Although SAME-UNIT (SU) is not a relation, we report it,
because it was also simplified in both corpus-sets.

11We think that RRs such as JOINT have appear because
discourse was not taken into account when simplifying texts.

12Note that all multinuclear or paratactic relations were excluded
from this analysis.

13The frequencies were normalized, as follows: original cause
subgroup SN: the total K of the SN divided by the total K in the
subcorpus: (2+1)/(9+8).

53



Type Transformation Explanation
Syntactic bait- -> -(e)lako causal explicative substituted with a pure

causal (less frequent)
DMs horrez gain ’moreover’ -> gainera ‘in addition’ substituted with a more frequent

bada ‘so’, ‘then’, ‘well’ -> hala ere ‘however’ substituted with a less frequent, but less
ambiguous

Signals eragile ‘originator’,‘promoter’ -> arrazoi ‘reason’,
‘cause’, ‘motive’

substituted with a more frequent near
synonym

Table 9: Transformation operations involving substitutions

Source text Intuitive Structural
Relations K K Diff. K Diff.
Result 3 1 -2 2 -1
Circumstance 3 1 -2 1 -2
∗Same-unit (SU) 4 3 -1 2 -2
Solutionhood 1 3 2 2 1
Concession 2 3 1 4 2
Background 1 2 1 2 1
Purpose 0 1 1 0 0
Restatement 0 1 1 0 0
Means 0 1 1 0 0
Preparation 0 0 0 1 1
Joint 0 0 0 1 1
Cause 3 4 1 3 0
Justify 1 1 0 1 0
Condition 1 2 1 1 0
No-conditional 1 1 0 1 0
Elaboration 1 1 0 0 -1
List 3 2 -1 4 1
Table 10: Simplification strategies and rhetorical relations

whereas in the intuitive approach the SN was increased
(and, therefore, the NS decreased). This change brings
the important message to the back of the structure
and this way, it is more difficult to maintain all the
information needed to understand the sentence in the
memory, above all in the case of long sentences.

4.3 Joint Analysis

The results of the joint analysis of our sample are
presented in Table 12. First column shows the sentence
identifier, second column if it has been treated in sim-
plification or nor, third column the changes performed
in EDU frequency,14 fourth column if the changes were

14The sign ’+’ means that there are more EDUs or that some
relation was added, whereas the sign ’−’ means that something is

Original Intuitive Structural
Relations SN NS SN NS SN NS
Cause 2 1 1 3 3
Justify 1 1 1
Result 3 1 2
Purpose 1
Condition 1 1 1 1
No-conditional 1 1 1
Circumstance 1 2 1 1
Solutionhood 1 3 1 1
Concession 2 3 2
Background 1 2 2
Restatement 1
Means 1
Preparation 1
Elaboration 1 1 4
Total 9 8 14 8 5 15

Table 11: Nucleus/satellite ordering of the rhetorical relations in the
original and simplified datasets

performed in the CSCs, the fifth column if RRs were
maintained and the sixth column if RRs were changed.

To underline these results of Table 12 we summarized
the most important differences in Table 13. We observe
that the simplification operations performed in the in-
tuitive (Int.) and structural (Str.) approaches are similar
when simplifying (Simpl.), maintaining or changing the
EDUs (Changes in EDUs), performing changes in the
CSC and maintaining the RRs. But there is a great differ-
ence when they establish a new rhetorical relation (see
Table 13), because there are only 3 changed relations
(underlined in bold) in common: RESULT > CAUSE,
CIRCUMSTANCE > CONDITION and +CONCESSION.

4.4 Concluding remarks

As a conclusion of this joint analysis, we think that
rhetorical relations of the original texts were not always

missing, for example ’−info’ means that there is less information.
The sign > means that something at the left was changed by another
thing to the right.

54



Text Simpl. Changes in
EDUs

Changes in CSC Maintained RRs Changed RRs

Etxeko 19 int YES List
Bernoulli 80 int YES Concession, Cause
Exoplanetakv39 int YES +EDU Cause +Restatement
Exoplanetak33 int NO No-conditional
Etxeko 20 int NO −Same-unit −Same-unit, −info Circumstance, Result −Same-unit
Etxeko 28 int YES Justify Result > Solutionhood
Exoplanetak 13 int YES +EDU Condition, Elaboration Result > Cause, +Solutionhood
Bernoulli 04 int YES Concession Circumstance > Condition
Bernoulli 38 int YES +EDU +EDU, −info Background +Concession
Etxeko 19 est YES +EDU +EDU, −info List +Elaboration
Bernoulli 80 est YES −Same-unit −Same-unit Concession, Cause −Same-unit
Exoplanetak 39 est YES Cause > Joint (NS > NN)
Exoplanetak 33 est YES +EDU −Info No-conditional, Same-unit +Concession, +Preparation
Etxeko 20 est YES +N Circumstance, Result +Contrast
Etxeko 28 est NO Justify, Result
Exoplanetak 13 est YES Condition, Elaboration Result > Cause
Bernoulli 04 est YES CU changed Concession Circumstance > Condition
Bernoulli 38 est YES +EDU +EDU, −info Background +Concession, +Solutionhood

Table 12: Contingency table of the joint analysis

Simpl. EDU CSC RR
Int. 7 Yes 3 +EDU 1 −SU −info 12 kept

2 No 1 −SU 1 +EDU −info 6 changed
3 +EDU 2 +EDU −info 12 kept

8 Yes 1 −SU 1 −info 9 changed
Str. 1 No 1 −SU 1 NS > NN

1 Change the CSC
1 NN

Table 13: Results of the joint analysis

taken into account when simplifying them (most of
them were maintained). So, we want to propose for
future simplification guidelines that not only lexis or
syntax should be taken into account, but also discourse.
That is, if in the original text there is a significant
discourse relation, it should be kept in the simplified
text when it helps comprehension but deleted when it
leads to confusion. But the need of the discourse would
not be limited to relations but to the overall relational
discourse structure when simplifying text manually, the
CSC and the same-unit should also be carefully treated.

For automatic texts simplification systems, the
detection of the CSC should also be an important step,
above all in the cases that the main piece of information
should be highlighted. The difficult task of detecting
the same-unit constructions could also be interesting,
so that they should be deleted as much as possible.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we present a framework for the analysis
of simplified texts taking discourse into account. In the
simplification analysis, we propose to analyze the treat-
ment and its the macro-operations, the length and depth,
the frequencies and the reordering; in the discourse anal-
ysis, we propose to segment, annotate and describe the
rhetorical relations; and, in the joint analysis, we pro-
pose to see the impact of simplification operations on the
elementary discourse units, central subconstituents and
rhetorical relations. Preliminary results show that this
framework is useful to describe the simplified texts and
that discourse is not always taken into account when sim-
plifying texts in our datasets with the risk of creating not-
coherent simplified texts. We have seen e.g. that some
macro-operations such as the split cannot be applied to
all the relations and that being more frequent does not
involve simplicity as took for granted many times.

Currently, we are searching for more simplified
texts in Basque to get more data and asking more
people to simplify them, in order to get ride of the
possible bias caused by the people who simplified
the texts. Moreover, we are annotating in the Corpus
of Basque Simplified Texts (CBST) more rhetorical
relations to understand or describe all the simplification
mechanisms. In the near future, we also want to perform
this analysis with entire texts and not only sentences.

55



Acknowledgments

This study was carried out within the framework of
the following projects: IXA group, Research Group
(GIU16/16) and TUNER (TIN2015-65308-C5-1-R).

References
[Bott and Saggion2011] Stefan Bott and Horacio Saggion.

2011. An Unsupervised Alignment Algorithm for Text
Simplification Corpus Construction. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Generation,
MTTG ’11, pages 20–26, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Brunato et al.2015] Dominique Brunato, Felice Dell’Orletta,
Giulia Venturi, and Simonetta Montemagni. 2015. Design
and Annotation of the First Italian Corpus for Text Sim-
plification. In The 9th Linguistic Annotation Workshop
held in conjuncion with NAACL 2015, pages 31–41.

[Caseli et al.2009] Helena M. Caseli, Tiago F. Pereira, Lucia
Specia, Thiago. A. S. Pardo, Caroline. Gasperin, and
Sandra Aluı́sio. 2009. Building a Brazilian Portuguese
Parallel Corpus of Original and Simplified Texts. In the
Proceedings of CICLing, pages 59–70.

[Crossley et al.2007] Scott. A. Crossley, Max M. Louwerse,
Philip M. McCarthy, and Danielle S. McNamara. 2007.
A Linguistic Analysis of Simplified and Authentic Texts.
The Modern Language Journal, 91(1):15–30.

[Crossley et al.2012] Scott A Crossley, David Allen, and
Danielle S McNamara. 2012. Text Simplification and
Comprehensible Input: A case for an Intuitive Approach.
Language Teaching Research, 16(1):89–108.

[Euskaltzaindia2011] Euskaltzaindia. 2011. VII, (Perpaus
jokatugabeak: denborazkoak, kausazkoak eta helbu-
ruzkoak, baldintzazkoak, kontzesiozkoak, moduzkoak,
erlatiboak eta osagarriak) [VII (Subordinate Clauses-2,
temporal, Causal and Purpose, Conditional, Concessive,
Modal, Relative and Completive]. In Euskal Gra-
matika Lehen Urratsak [Basque Grammar First Steps].
Euskaltzaindia, Bilbo.

[Gonzalez-Dios et al.2014] Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Maŕıa Jesús
Aranzabe, Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, and Haritz Salaberri.
2014. Simple or Complex? Assessing the Readability of
Basque Texts. In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers, pages 334–344, Dublin, Ireland, August.
Dublin City University and Association for Computational
Linguistics.

[Gonzalez-Dios et al.2015] Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Maŕıa Jesús
Aranzabe, and Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza. 2015. Perpaus
adberbialen agerpena, maiztasuna eta kokapena EPEC-
DEP corpusean [Presence, frequency and Position of
Basque Adberbial Clauses in The BDT corpus]. Technical

report, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
UPV/EHU/LSI/TR 02-2015.

[Gonzalez-Dios et al.2016] Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Maŕıa Jesús
Aranzabe, and Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza. 2016. A Pre-
liminary Study of Statistically Predictive Syntactic
Complexity Features and Manual Simplifications in
Basque. In Proceedings of the Computational Linguistics
for Linguistic Complexity (CL4LC) workshop at Coling
2016, pages 89–97.

[Gonzalez-Dios2016] Itziar Gonzalez-Dios. 2016. Eu-
skarazko egitura sintaktiko konplexuen analisirako
eta testuen sinplifikazio automatikorako proposamena-
Readability Assessment and Automatic Text Simplification.
The Analysis of Basque Complex Structures. Ph.D. thesis,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU).

[Graesser et al.2004] Arthur C. Graesser, Danielle S. Mc-
Namara, Max M. Louwerse, and Zhiqiang Cai. 2004.
Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and language.
Behavior Research Methods, 36(2):193–202.

[Iruskieta and Zapirain2015] Mikel Iruskieta and Benat
Zapirain. 2015. Euseduseg: A Dependency-based EDU
Segmentation for Basque. Procesamiento del Lenguaje
Natural, 55:41–48.

[Iruskieta et al.2016] Mikel Iruskieta, Maŕıa Jesús Aranzabe,
Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, and Mikel Lersundi. 2016.
Kausazko koherentzia-erlazioen azterketa automatikoa
euskarazko laburpen zientifikoetan [Toward a computa-
tional approach of causal coherence relations in scientific
abstract texts]. Gogoa, 14:45–77.

[Iruskieta2014] Mikel Iruskieta. 2014. Pragmatikako
erlaziozko diskurtso-egitura: deskribapena eta bere ebalu-
azioa hizkuntzalaritza konputazionalean [The Discourse
Structure of the Pragmatic Relations: Description and its
Evaluation in Computational Lingustics]. Ph.D. thesis,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU).

[Klaper et al.2013] David Klaper, Sarah Ebling, and Martin
Volk. 2013. Building a German/Simple German Parallel
Corpus for Automatic Text Simplification. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text
Readability for Target Reader Populations, pages 11–19,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

[Klerke and Søgaard2012] Sigrid Klerke and Anders Søgaard.
2012. DSim, a Danish Parallel Corpus for Text Sim-
plification. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uǧur Doǧan,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eight International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’12), pages 4015–4018, Istanbul, Turkey, May.
European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

[Kong et al.2017] Anthony Pak-Hin Kong, Anastasia Linnik,
Sam-Po Law, and Waisa Wai-Man Shum. 2017. Mea-
suring Discourse Coherence in Anomic Aphasia Using

56



Rhetorical Structure Theory. International Journal of
Speech-Language Pathology, pages 1–16.

[Maia-Larretxea2015] Julian Maia-Larretxea. 2015. On
Criteria of Professionals of the Language about the
Back-burden in Basque. Procedia-Social and Behavioral
Sciences, 212:67–73.

[Mann and Thompson1987] William C Mann and Sandra A
Thompson. 1987. Rhetorical structure theory: A theory
of text organization. University of Southern California,
Information Sciences Institute.

[Mann and Thompson1988] William C. Mann and San-
dra A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical Structure Theory:
Toward a functional theory of text organization. Text-
Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse,
8(3):243–281.

[O’Donnell2000] Michael O’Donnell. 2000. RSTTool
2.4: a Markup Tool for Rhetorical Structure Theory.
In Proceedings of the first international conference on
Natural language generation-Volume 14, pages 253–256.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Pardo2005] Thiago Alexandre Salgueiro Pardo. 2005.
Métodos para análise discursiva automática. Ph.D. thesis,
Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação.

[Pellow and Eskenazi2014] David Pellow and Maxine Eske-
nazi. 2014. An Open Corpus of Everyday Documents for
Simplification Tasks. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop
on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Tar-
get Reader Populations (PITR), pages 84–93, Gothenburg,
Sweden, April. Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Petersen and Ostendorf2007] Sarah E. Petersen and Mari
Ostendorf. 2007. Text Simplification for Language
Learners: A Corpus Analysis. In In Proceedings of
Workshop on Speech and Language Technology for
Education. SLaTE, pages 69–72. Citeseer.

[Saggion2017] Horacio Saggion. 2017. Automatic Text
Simplification. Morgan & Claypool.

[Simensen1987] Aud Marit Simensen. 1987. Adapted
Readers: How are they Adapted. Reading in a Foreign
Language, 4(1):41–57.

[Xu et al.2015] Wei Xu, Chris Callison-Burch, and Courtney
Napoles. 2015. Problems in Current Text Simplification
Research: New Data Can Help. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 3:283–297.

[Young1999] Dolly N. Young. 1999. Linguistic Simplifi-
cation of SL Reading Material: Effective Instructional
Practice? The Modern Language Journal, 83(3):350–366.

57


