



















































Investigating the content and form of referring expressions in Mandarin: introducing the Mtuna corpus


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 213–217,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Investigating the Content and Form of Referring Expressions in Mandarin:
Introducing the Mtuna Corpus

Kees van Deemter
University of Aberdeen

Le Sun
Institute of Software

Chinese Academy of Sciences

Rint Sybesma
Leiden University

Xiao Li
University of Aberdeen

Bo Chen
Institute of Software

Chinese Academy of Sciences

Muyun Yang
Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract

East Asian languages are thought to handle
reference differently from English, particu-
larly in terms of the marking of definiteness
and number. We present the first Data-Text
corpus for Referring Expressions in Mandarin,
and we use this corpus to test some initial hy-
potheses inspired by the theoretical linguistics
literature. Our findings suggest that function
words deserve more attention in Referring Ex-
pression Generation than they have so far re-
ceived, and they have a bearing on the debate
about whether different languages make dif-
ferent trade-offs between clarity and brevity.

1 Introduction

East Asian languages can differ considerably from
the languages of Western Europe, which have often
dominated formal and computational studies of lan-
guage. One phenomenon where these differences
are obvious is Referring Expressions (REs), where
languages such as Mandarin differ markedly from,
for example, English, in terms of their expression of
number (e.g., Am I referring to 1 thing or more?),
maximality (Am I talking about all the things that
have a certain combination of properties, or only
some of them?), and givenness status (Am I talking
about something that the hearer is familiar with?).

To gain an insight in these matters, and to
assist future research, we have embarked on a
data gathering enterprise focussing on East Asian
languages, starting with a language elicitation
experiment in which speakers of Mandarin were
asked to produce one-shot REs in a carefully

balanced range of situations. The present paper
introduces the corpus and offers an initial assess-
ment of some of our research questions. The
Mtuna data-text corpus is freely available from
homepages.abdn.ac.uk/k.vdeemter-
/pages/mtuna-webpage/, containing the
original Chinese characters, their transcription into
(phonetic) pinyin notation, and an informal English
gloss. Each RE is coupled with a pictorial scene that
shows the referent and its distractors in the same
way as participants in the experiment saw it.

2 Initial Research Questions

According to the linguistics literature, REs without a
numeral can take three different shapes, namely (1)
Demonstrative + Classifier + Noun Group (e.g., Na
ge laoren, “That (person) old person”), (2) Demon-
strative + Noun Group (Na laoren, “That old per-
son”) , and (3) (bare) Noun Group Laoren, “Old
person”) (Cheng and Sybesma 1999, 2015).1 We
call these the DCN pattern, the DN pattern, and the
N pattern respectively. Together we call them the
Canonical Patterns of reference in Mandarin.

Noun Groups (the third pattern) can be strikingly
open to interpretation: they can be understood as
indefinite, generic, or definite; moreover, they are
not marked for number. Thus, a bare Noun Group
like lüse de yizi (lit: green colour chair) can mean
the green chair, but equally, the green chairs, green
chairs (in general), and a green chair. We are in-

1Classifiers are words that attribute entities to ontological
classes; in certain contexts classifiers are obligatory. Noun
Groups are combinations of Nouns and their modifiers (e.g., ad-
jectives).

213



terested how frequently each of these NPs occur be-
cause it will give us a first insight into the role of
underspecification in Mandarin. Following a small
pilot experiment with 10 speakers, we set out to ad-
dress the following questions:

Research Questions: Are the three Canonical
patterns the ones that are used predominantly when
people refer? Is this only true for sentence posi-
tions where definiteness is the norm (in Mandarin
this is the pre-verbal position), or is it equally true
for other positions? How frequently are REs under-
specified for number, maximality,2 and givenness?

The original English TUNA corpora were col-
lected in 2006 and used for multiple shared tasks
(Gatt and Belz 2010) on Referring Expression Gen-
eration (REG) and other work in this area (van
Deemter et al. 2012). Each corpus consists of REs
produced by humans presented with a target item (1
or 2 pieces of furniture, or 1 or 2 people’s faces)
and a set of distractors (other pieces of furniture or
faces), in a web-based elicitation paradigm. A Dutch
TUNA was conducted in 2011 (DTuna, Koolen et al.
2011) and an Arabic one in 2015 (Khan 2015).

Though a number of other REG data gathering ex-
ercises have followed (see e.g., van Deemter 2016),
the TUNA setup suits our research questions well.
However, the analysis of the corpus is very differ-
ent this time. For whereas earlier TUNAs focussed
on the properties expressed by a given RE (chair,
green, etc.), our research questions mean that func-
tion words (English: the, a, one, two, this, those,
both) are key. Although these are sometimes consid-
ered to be part of Linguistic Realisation, they are not
just “syntactic sugar”, since they contribute much to
the information conveyed by these REs (e.g., Kamp
and Reyle 1993, and many other treatments of the
semantics and pragmatics of English).

3 The Mtuna Experiment and Corpus

The 44 stimuli of our experiment (40 + 4 items orig-
inally used for training only) resemble closely those
of earlier TUNAs; like these, they were semantically
balanced (e.g. the number of cases when the target
could be identified by means of colour was identi-
cal to the number of cases when the target could

2An occurrence of the above-mentioned NP lüse de yizi
would be maximal if it denoted all the green chairs in the scene.

Figure 1: A furniture trial, with the RE in pre-verbal position.

be identified by means of size). They include ref-
erences to sets as well as individual items. Instruc-
tions to participants were translated from Dtuna, ex-
cept that the new instructions did not include exam-
ples of actual REs in the target language (i.e., Man-
darin), since these could have biased participants to-
wards particular syntactic patterns. Also, where ear-
lier TUNAs had always asked subjects essentially
the same question, namely “Which object/objects
appears/appear in a red window?”, the new exper-
iment distinguished between REs in pre-verbal and
post-verbal position.

Participants were recruited from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences (Institute of Software) and the
Harbin Institute of Technology. Data from 37 partic-
ipants have been obtained. 35/37 were self-assessed
native speakers of Mandarin, 2/37 were merely flu-
ent. 29/37 were from the North of China and 8/37
from the South. Subjects were discouraged from us-
ing location in their REs, being told that the recipient
might view the scenes on a page that uses a different
layout. Items were presented in random order and
with random layout where all entities were allotted
to cells in a 3-by-5 grid invisible to participants.

Sentence position was varied in a between-

214



Figure 2: A people trial with RE in post-verbal position.

subjects design: Participants who were asked to
produce REs in pre-verbal position were asked this
trigger question: Shenme jiaju/ren chuxian zai le
hongkuang zhong? (What furniture / person oc-
cur(s) in red frame(s)?) Immediately below this
question, the page continues: Qing buchong juzi:
........ zai hongse fangkuang zhong (Please complete
the sentence: “......is in the red frame(s)”.) Partici-
pants who were asked to produce REs in post-verbal
position were asked: Nin xiwang shoushizhe xuanze
shenme jiaju/ren? (What furniture / person do you
want the participants to choose?) The page contin-
ues: Qing buchong juzi: Hongse fangkuang zhong
de shi........ (Please complete the sentence: “What’s
in the red frame is .....”)

4 Initial Analysis of the Mtuna corpus

The corpus was subjected to an initial analysis of
all descriptions elicited. Our conclusions need to
be handled with care, because further analysis is
needed and the narrowness of our participant base
(recruited from two Language Technology groups)
may have biassed our results.
1. Are the three Canonical Patterns the ones that
are actually used? Table 2 shows the numbers for

Pattern Pre-verbal Post-verbal
N 315 326
DN 0 0
DCN 0 0
Other D 5 4
Indefinite 98 54
Ordinal 4 0

Table 2: Raw frequencies of referential patterns for singular
(i.e., non-set) references. Other D are structures such as Lan

yizi, zui da de nage (“The blue chair, that largest one”), where

the Demonstrative takes a different position than in DN and

DCN. Indefinites tended to be of the form “Yi ...” (“One ...”)

Ordinals were expressions such as (“First from the left””). Not

all participants answered all the questions, with different num-

bers of entries for Pre-verbal and Post-verbal.

references to singular referents only. The N Pat-
tern dominated, whereas no DN or DCN Patterns
were found. We did found a small number of Or-
dinal Patterns, all of which came from a small num-
ber of subjects who had ignored the instruction to
avoid mentioning the location of the referent (say-
ing things like ”the first ... from the left”). Indefinite
NPs occurred quite often, even in pre-verbal posi-
tion, where we had expected not to see them (though
the bulk of these REs were produced by just 3 par-
ticipants). These results appear to be at odds with
linguists’ views about the dominant patterns; one
possible explanation is that Demonstratives are re-
stricted to situations in which the antecedent is either
pointed at or mentioned in earlier text (Jenks 2015).
2. Was the choice of RE pattern influenced by
sentence position? A Chi-Square calculation on the
figures of Table 2 suggests a cautiously affirmative
answer (p < .05), caused by the larger number of
indefinites in pre-verbal position. We had expected
to see fewer N Patterns in post- than in pre-verbal
position, but this expectation was not borne out.
3. How often were REs non-specific as to num-
ber, maximality, and givenness? Mandarin’s ex-
plicit markers for maximality were used very rarely
(14 occurrences of dou (“all”)). No explicit mark-
ers for givenness were found. In both cases, we may
have missed out on less obvious markers (e.g., syn-
tactic position may play a role), therefore we plan
a new experiment that will investigate readers’ or
listeners’ interpretation of the REs produced in the
corpus.

215



Mandarin (transcribed into pinyin) Approximate English Gloss
Furniture
Xiaode lüsede xiangqian de zhuozi Small green [sub] forward table
Yizhang lüse de shuzhuo One[cla] green [sub] desk
Zhengmian chao qian de xiezitai, chicun jiaoxiaode nage Front facing [sub] writing desk, the smaller size [sub] of those
Yige chouti chaowai de lüse xiao shuzhuo One[cla] small desk with a drawer facing out [sub]
Lüse zhuozi Green table
Yige zhengmian chaoxiang guancezhe de xiangdui xiao de zhuozi A[cla] relatively small table facing observer [sub]

People
Dai yanjing hei toufa de liang ge ren Wear glasses black hair [sub] two [cla] people
Liang ge dai yanjing de nianqing nanxing Two [cla] wear glasses [sub] young men
Hei toufa liang ge ren Black hair two [cla] people
Liang ge dai yanjing chuan heise xifu de heise toufa de nanren zai
hongse fangkuang zhong

Two [cla] wear glasses wear black clothes [sub] black hair
man in red box

Dai yanjing hei toufa de liangwei kexuejia Wear glasses black hair [sub] two[cla] scientists
Yige zhengmian de chaowai de dai yanjing, chuan xizhuang da
lingdai hei toufa de nanren

One[cla] face outward [sub] wear glasses, wear suit and tie
black-haired man

Table 1: Some REs as found in the corpus referring to the target referents in Figures 1 and 2. [cla] denotes a classifier, [sub] denotes
a subordinating de. The modelling of classifier and subordinator use is a topic to which we will turn in later research.

Number was
marked

Number was
not marked

singular post-verbal 59 325
singular pre-verbal 106 312
plural post-verbal 231 157
plural pre-verbal 297 121

Table 3: A singular RE was counted as marked for number if it
was of the form Yi ... (“One ...”). A plural RE was marked for

number if it contained the numeral liang (“two”) or an ordinal

or if it used a conjunction.

Number can be marked by numerals, by ordinals
or by the use of logical conjunction (e.g., he (“and”),
as in hongse yizi he lüse dianfengshan (“red chair
AND green fan”)). Table 3 suggests that number
tended to be marked when the referent was plural but
not when it was singular; number was marked more
often in pre-verbal than in post-verbal position.

5 Discussion

It has often been suggested that East Asian lan-
guages handle the trade-off between brevity and
clarity differently to those of Western Europe, with
the former (as typical instances of languages that are
“cool” rather than “hot”) allegedly leaning more to-
wards brevity, and relying more on communicative
context for disambiguation (Newnham 1971, Huang
1984). If this was true, one would expect that Man-
darin REs use less over-specification (i.e., REs from
which one or more properties can be removed with-

out causing referential confusion) and more under-
specification than in English and Dutch; equally, one
might expect that Mandarin REs are less fully speci-
fied in terms of number, maximality, and givenness.
In future, we want to investigate these hypotheses
and their implications for REG more thoroughly.

Based on a first look at our data, a nuanced pic-
ture is emerging, where defaults are likely to play a
role. Based on the literature (e.g., Chao 1968), Man-
darin NPs in pre-verbal position may be interpreted
as definite unless there is information to the con-
trary; based on our data, it may be that a Mandarin
NP denotes a singular entity by default, and that plu-
ral interpretations only arise when the context en-
forces this (e.g., by means of a numeral). These is-
sues need to be investigated further.

Some aspects of the unexpected distribution of
patterns in Mandarin reported in section 4 may have
been caused by ususual features of the communica-
tive situation in which we placed our participants,
for instance because only written input was avail-
able to them. If this was true, then this would also
cast doubt on earlier results that were obtained with
the same, TUNA-style, data gathering method.

Acknowledgments
This work is partly supported by the National Natural Science

Foundation of China, Grant no. 61433015. We thank Stephen

Matthews, University of Hong Kong, for comments, and Albert

Gatt, University of Malta, for access to Dutch TUNA.

216



6 References

Chao 1968. Y. R. Chao. A Grammar of Spoken Chinese. Uni-

versity of California Press.

Cheng and Sybesma, 1999. L. Cheng and R. Sybesma. Bare

and Not-So-Bare Nouns and the Structure of NP. Linguistic In-

quiry 30 (4).

Cheng and Sybesma, 2015. L. Cheng and R. Sybesma. [Syn-

tactic sketch of] Mandarin, Syntax Theory and Analysis. An

International Handbook. Handbooks of Linguistics and Com-

munication Science, ed. Tibor Kiss and Artemis Alexiadou,

42.1-3, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Gatt and Belz, 2010. A. Gatt and A. Belz. Introducing shared

task evaluation to NLG: The TUNA shared task evaluation

challenges. In Krahmer, E. and Theune, M., editors, Empir-

ical Methods in Natural Language Generation, p. 264 - 293.

Springer Verlag, Berlin.

Huang 1984. C. -T. J. Huang. On the distribution and reference

of empty pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry 15 (4), p.531 – 574.

Jenks, 2015. P. Jenks. Two kinds of definites in numeral clas-

sifier languages. In Proceedings of Semantics and Linguistic

Theory (SALT) 25.

Kamp and Reyle, 1993. H. Kamp and U. Reyle. From Dis-

course to Logic. Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Khan, 2015. I.H. Khan. Do Speakers Produce Different Refer-

ring Expressions in Their Native Language Than A Non-native

Language? International Journal of Computational Linguistics

Research 6 (2), p. 41 - 47.

Koolen et al. 2011. R. Koolen, A.Gatt, M. Goudbeek, E. Krah-

mer. Factors causing overspecification in definite descriptions.

Journal of Pragmatics 43, p. 3231 - 3250.

Newnham, 1971. R. Newnham. About Chinese. Har-

mondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books.

van Deemter et al., 2012. K. van Deemter, A. Gatt, I. van der

Sluis, and R. Power. Generation of Referring Expressions: As-

sessing the Incremental Algorithm. Cognitive Science, 36 (5):
p. 799 - 836.

van Deemter, 2016. K. van Deemter. Computational Models

of Referring: a Study in Cognitive Science. MIT Press, Cam-

bridge Mass.

Westerbeek et al. 2015. H. Westerbeek, R. Koolen, and A.

Maes. Stored object knowledge and the production of referring

expressions: The case of color typicality. Frontiers in Psychol-

ogy 6.

217


