



















































PLN-PUCRS at EmoInt-2017: Psycholinguistic features for emotion intensity prediction in tweets


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 189–192
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

PLN-PUCRS at EmoInt-2017:
Psycholinguistic features for emotion intensity prediction in tweets

Henrique D. P. dos Santos, Renata Vieira
Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul

Porto Alegre - Brazil
henrique.santos.003@acad.pucrs.br, renata.vieira@pucrs.br

Abstract

Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC) is a rich dictionary that map
words into several psychological cat-
egories such as Affective, Social,
Cognitive, Perceptual and Biological
processes. In this work, we have used
LIWC psycholinguistic categories to train
regression models and predict emotion
intensity in tweets for the EmoInt-2017
task. Results show that LIWC features
may boost emotion intensity prediction on
the basis of a low dimension set.

1 Introduction

In Natural Language Processing tasks many tech-
niques rely on statistical methods to classify texts
based on word distribution. Sentiment analysis
also takes advantage of this kind of approach to
detect emotion or polarity in sentences (Liu and
Zhang, 2012). Twitter became the main source
of data to extract sentiment information in social
media because of its data characteristics: huge
amount of small sentences distributed in a time-
line, which are easily gathered.

In Twitter, sentiment classification intends to
extract polarity or emotion with regards to a spe-
cific subject. The polarity defines a positive or
negative valency and the emotion usually is mod-
eled over Ekman’s six basic emotions: joy, anger,
sadness, happiness, surprise, fear and disgust (Ek-
man, 1992).

This work intends to score tweets for emotion
intensities, by giving a real value for each tweet
(Mohammad and Bravo-Marquez, 2017a), as part
of the EmoInt-2017 task. The goal of the task is,
given a tweet, to predict the intensity of a specific
emotion expressed in it (Mohammad and Bravo-
Marquez, 2017b). The intensity score is a real-

valued score between 0 and 1. The minimum pos-
sible score 0 stands for feeling the least amount of
emotion and the maximum possible score 1 stands
for feeling the maximum amount of emotion. This
shared task analyze the emotion: anger, fear, joy
and sadness. We show an approach that can score
emotions based on psycholinguistic features.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we describe LIWC, the well-known psy-
cholinguistic dictionary used in our experiments,
Section 3 covers some previous work that use psy-
cholinguistic features to classify text. Section 4
presents the proposed techniques and their evalua-
tion. In Section 5 we discuss the most informative
LIWC categories for each emotion set and finally,
we conclude in Section 6 with future work.

2 LIWC Categories

Linguistic inquiry and word count (LIWC), be-
sides being a software, is a psycholinguistic lexi-
con created by psychologists with focus on study-
ing the various emotional, cognitive, and struc-
tural components present in individuals’ verbal
and written speech samples (Pennebaker et al.,
2015). This resource allows non-specialists to re-
trieve psychological statistics in text, and to search
for patterns that are able to detect differences in
group of documents.

The first LIWC version was developed as part
of an exploratory study of language and disclosure
(Pennebaker, 1993). The second (LIWC2001) and
third (LIWC2007) versions updated the original
with an expanded dictionary and a modern soft-
ware design (Pennebaker et al., 2001, 2007).The
most recent evolution, LIWC2015 (Pennebaker
et al., 2015), has significantly altered both the dic-
tionary and software options. LIWC 2007 has
been available as a open source dictionary.

LIWC dictionary classifies words in a variety

189



Category Examples
Affective happy, cried, love, hurt
Social mate, talk, they, dad
Cognitive cause, know, ought, think
Perceptual look, heard, feeling, view
Biological eat, blood, pain, hand

Table 1: LIWC psychological process examples

of psychological categories based on psycholo-
gists studies and observations (Tausczik and Pen-
nebaker, 2010). LIWC assigns words into one
of four high-level categories: linguistic processes,
psychological processes, personal concerns, and
spoken categories. These are further subdivided
into a three-level hierarchy. The taxonomy ranges
across topics (e.g., health and money), emotional
responses (e.g., negative emotion) and processes
not captured by either, such as cognition (e.g., dis-
crepancy and certainty). The words carry rich
information about the author’s personality, senti-
ments, style, topics, and social relationships.

The main categories in LIWC dictionary are the
following:

• Linguistic Dimensions and Other Grammar
• Affective, Social, Cognitive, Perceptual and

Biological processes

• Drives, Time orientations and Relativity
• Personal concerns and Informal language
These categories are then specialized in other

sub-categories, as in Affective processes sub-
categorized as Positive and Negative Emotions,
Anxiety, Anger and Sadness.

Some examples of words in such categories
can be found in Table 1. These categories were
translated to other languages (Balage Filho et al.,
2013), and have been used to compare writing
styles between languages and countries (Afroz
et al., 2012). In this paper we use this dictionary
for emotion prediction.

3 Related Work

There has been a lot of research seeking text clas-
sification in the scope of social media. Here we
focus on the works that use LIWC psycholinguis-
tic features to solve some of those problems.

Nguyen et al. (2013) use the LIWC psycho-
logical lexicon to distinguish blog posts of the

autism community from others. They analyze the
frequency distribution differences in psychologi-
cal processes between those communities and are
able to detect them with 79% of accuracy using
machine learning. Mohtasseb and Ahmed (2009)
use psychological features to find online diaries
in blogs. Iyyer et al. (2014) classifies political
ideology between liberal and conservatives in so-
cial media. Santos et al. (2017) took advantage of
LIWC dictionary to analyze and detect personal
stories posts in Brazilian blogs with 81% of preci-
sion over thousands of posts.

LIWC Psycholinguistic features are also used to
define the writer personality, as Poria et al. (2013)
shown in their work. Besides, it can be used to
identify mental issues in online forum communi-
ties (Cohan et al., 2016).

There is a great potential for psychologically
oriented dictionaries and here we use it to score
emotions values in tweets together with Support
Vector Machines algorithms.

4 Psycholinguistic Features

For evaluating the prediction property of psy-
cholinguistic categories, each tweet is converted
to a vector of 64 positions, one for each LIWC
category, explained previously. Each LIWC cate-
gory represents the frequency distribution of this
category appearance in the specific tweet. Each
word could fit multiples categories, e.g. the word
”admits” belongs to categories: Common verbs,
Present tense, Social processes, Cognitive pro-
cesses and Insight.

For our experiments we use Python library
Scikit-Learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) machine
learning algorithms. We ran cross-fold validation
with 10 folds.

We use Support Vector Regression (SVR) tun-
ning the RBF, Linear, Linear SVR and Sigmoid
kernel parameters C (the penalty parameter) and γ
(the kernel width hyperparameter) performing full
grid search over the 800 combinations of expo-
nentially spaced parameter pairs (C, γ) following
(Hsu et al., 2003). For Gradient Boosting Regres-
sion we run a simple grid search. Only the best re-
sults of each algorithm, using Spearman rank cor-
relation, are shown in Table 2.

The best results were obtained using Gradient
Boosting Regression, Linear SVR and SVR with
linear kernel, all with default parameters. All
three algorithms are highlighted in Table 2 be-

190



Algorithm joy anger sadness fear Avg Score
SVR k=Linear 0.431 0.502 0.557 0.441 0.483
Linear SVR 0.428 0.504 0.556 0.443 0.482
Gradient Boosting 0.420 0.519 0.565 0.420 0.481
SVR k=RBF 0.399 0.445 0.517 0.407 0.442
SVR k=Sigmoid -0.016 -0.085 -0.108 0.069 -0.035

Table 2: Spearman Score running each algorithm over emotions sets

Joy Anger Sadness Fear
Total function words Auxiliary verbs 1st pers singular Anxiety
Negations Present tense Social processes Sadness
Cognitive processes Negations Sadness Feel
Discrepancy Swear words See Ingestion
Tentative Humans Ingestion Space
Exclusive Relativity Leisure Death

Positive emotion
Negative emotion

Affective processes
Anger

Table 3: Top 10 LIWC most informative features

cause there is no statistical difference in the Spear-
man rank correlation.

In Scikit-learn library, SVR with linear ker-
nel differs from Linear SVR because the last use
liblinear rather than libsvm. The processing time
and prediction score is better using liblinear then
the generic SVM library, as we see in Table 2.

After defining the regression algorithm and the
best parameters, we built the model for each emo-
tion dataset, based on the training set. Then we run
each model for the test set and generate the output
for evaluation. The LIWC resource, test dataset
and scripts can be accessed in author’s Github
project page 1.

5 Most Informative Features

Using univariate linear regression tests, we tested
the effect of a single regressor and listed the most
informative LIWC features for each emotion tweet
set. In Table 3 we show the top 10 features.

LIWC sub-categories such as Positive and Neg-
ative Emotion, Affective and, Anger are features
with good prediction level for every emotion set.
Sadness sub-category, as expect, is a good pre-
dictor for Sadness emotion intensity. Positive and
Negative Emotion are categories that range a vari-
ety of words in LIWC dictionary, so, for a emotion

1https://github.com/heukirne/EmoInt

regression task, is expect that they have a good re-
gression information. It is important to state that
Anger is a subcategory of Negative Emotion.

Another interesting confirmation is death, sad-
ness and anxiety categories as good predictors for
Fear emotion set. Anger category appears as an
informative feature for Joy emotion set, we will
look further in the details of that to see whether it
is informative due to a low feature value or some-
thing else. Also, we want to look further to ex-
plain Negations LIWC category as good predictor
in Joy emotion set.

6 Conclusion and Further Work

Psycholinguistic features have been used to clas-
sify texts and sentences for a variety of tasks. Here
we presented our system that makes use of such
categories for emotion intensity prediction. Each
word was mapped to several psychological cate-
gories and used as a feature vector.

In future work, we intend to study these cate-
gories with other well-known good predictors like
Affective Tweets classifier (Bravo-Marquez et al.,
2016). Also, psychological categories could im-
prove the semantic information of word embed-
ding vectors.

191



Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by CAPES
(Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal
de Nı́vel Superior) Foundation (Brazil), PUCRS
(Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande
do Sul) and UFRGS (Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul).

References
Sadia Afroz, Michael Brennan, and Rachel Greenstadt.

2012. Detecting hoaxes, frauds, and deception in
writing style online. In Security and Privacy (SP),
2012 IEEE Symposium on. IEEE, pages 461–475.

Pedro P Balage Filho, Thiago AS Pardo, and Sandra M
Aluısio. 2013. An evaluation of the brazilian por-
tuguese liwc dictionary for sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the 9th Brazilian Symposium in In-
formation and Human Language Technology (STIL).
pages 215–219.

Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Eibe Frank, Saif M Moham-
mad, and Bernhard Pfahringer. 2016. Determining
word–emotion associations from tweets by multi-
label classification. In WI’16. IEEE Computer So-
ciety, pages 536–539.

Arman Cohan, Sydney Young, and Nazli Goharian.
2016. Triaging mental health forum posts. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Lin-
guistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic
Signal to Clinical Reality, San Diego, California,
USA, June. volume 16.

Paul Ekman. 1992. An argument for basic emotions.
Cognition & emotion 6(3-4):169–200.

Chih-Wei Hsu, Chih-Chung Chang, Chih-Jen Lin, et al.
2003. A practical guide to support vector classifica-
tion. National Taiwan University .

Mohit Iyyer, Peter Enns, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and
Philip Resnik. 2014. Political ideology detection
using recursive neural networks. In Proceedings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
pages 1113–1122.

Bing Liu and Lei Zhang. 2012. A survey of opinion
mining and sentiment analysis. In Mining text data,
Springer, pages 415–463.

Saif M. Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez. 2017a.
Emotion intensities in tweets. In Proceedings of the
sixth joint conference on lexical and computational
semantics (*Sem). Vancouver, Canada.

Saif M. Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez.
2017b. WASSA-2017 shared task on emotion in-
tensity. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Compu-
tational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and
Social Media Analysis (WASSA). Copenhagen, Den-
mark.

Haytham Mohtasseb and Amr Ahmed. 2009. Mining
online diaries for blogger identification. In Pro-
ceedings of the World Congress on Engineering. vol-
ume 1.

Thin Nguyen, Dinh Phung, and Svetha Venkatesh.
2013. Analysis of psycholinguistic processes and
topics in online autism communities. In Multimedia
and Expo (ICME), 2013 IEEE International Confer-
ence on. IEEE, pages 1–6.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research
12:2825–2830.

James W Pennebaker. 1993. Putting stress into words:
Health, linguistic, and therapeutic implications. Be-
haviour research and therapy 31(6):539–548.

James W Pennebaker, Roger J Booth, and Martha E
Francis. 2007. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc [computer software]. Austin, TX: liwc. net .

James W Pennebaker, Ryan L Boyd, Kayla Jordan, and
Kate Blackburn. 2015. The development and psy-
chometric properties of liwc2015. Technical report,
The University of Texas at Austin.

James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J
Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates 71(2001):2001.

Soujanya Poria, Alexandar Gelbukh, Basant Agarwal,
Erik Cambria, and Newton Howard. 2013. Common
sense knowledge based personality recognition from
text. In Mexican International Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence. Springer, pages 484–496.

Henrique D.P. dos Santos, Vinicius Woloszyn, and Re-
nata Vieira. 2017. Portuguese personal story analy-
sis and detection in blogs. In Web Intelligence (WI),
2017 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on.
IEEE, Leipzig, Germany.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: Liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of language
and social psychology 29(1):24–54.

192


