



















































Human Evaluation of Multi-modal Neural Machine Translation: A Case-Study on E-Commerce Listing Titles


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 31–37,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Human Evaluation of Multi-modal Neural Machine Translation:
a Case Study on E-commerce Listing Titles

Iacer Calixto1, Daniel Stein2, Evgeny Matusov2, Sheila Castilho1 and Andy Way1

1ADAPT Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland
2eBay Inc., Aachen, Germany

{iacer.calixto,sheila.castilho,andy.way}@adaptcentre.ie
{danstein,ematusov}@ebay.com

Abstract

In this paper, we study how humans per-
ceive the use of images as an additional
knowledge source to machine-translate user-
generated product listings in an e-commerce
company. We conduct a human evaluation
where we assess how a multi-modal neural
machine translation (NMT) model compares
to two text-only approaches: a conventional
state-of-the-art attention-based NMT and a
phrase-based statistical machine translation
(PBSMT) model. We evaluate translations
obtained with different systems and also dis-
cuss the data set of user-generated product
listings, which in our case comprises both
product listings and associated images. We
found that humans preferred translations ob-
tained with a PBSMT system to both text-only
and multi-modal NMT over 56% of the time.
Nonetheless, human evaluators ranked transla-
tions from a multi-modal NMT model as bet-
ter than those of a text-only NMT over 88% of
the time, which suggests that images do help
NMT in this use-case.

1 Introduction

In e-commerce, leveraging Machine Translation (MT)
to make products accessible regardless of the cus-
tomer’s native language or country of origin is a
very persuasive use-case. In this work, we study
how humans perceive the machine translation of user-
generated auction listings’ titles as listed on the eBay
main site1. Among the challenges for MT are the
specialized language and grammar for listing titles, as
well as a high percentage of user-generated content for
non-business sellers, who are often not native speakers
themselves. This is reflected on the data by means of
extremely high trigram perplexities of product listings,
which is in 4 digit numbers even for language models
(LMs) trained on in-domain data, as we discuss in §3.
This is not only a challenge for LMs but also for auto-
matic evaluation metrics such as the n-gram precision-
based BLEU metric (Papineni et al., 2002).

1http://www.ebay.com/

The majority of listings are accompanied by a prod-
uct image, often (but not always) a user-generated shot.
Moreover, images are known to bring useful com-
plementary information to MT (Calixto et al., 2012;
Hitschler et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016; Calixto et
al., 2017b). Therefore, in order to explore whether
product images can benefit the machine translation of
auction titles, we evaluate a multi-modal neural MT
(NMT) system to eBay’s production system, specif-
ically a phrase-based statistical MT (PBSMT) one.
We additionally train a text-only attention-based NMT
baseline, so as to be able to measure eventual gains
from the additional multi-modal data independently of
the MT architecture.

According to a quantitative evaluation using a com-
bination of four automatic MT evaluation metrics, a
PBSMT system outperforms both text-only and multi-
modal NMT models in the translation of product list-
ings, contrary to recent findings (Bentivogli et al.,
2016). We hypothesise that these automatic metrics
were not created for the purpose of measuring the im-
pact an image brings to an MT model, so we conduct
a human evaluation of translations generated by three
different systems: a PBSMT, a text-only attention-
based NMT and a multi-modal NMT system. With that
human evaluation we wish to see whether those find-
ings corroborate the automatic scores or instead sup-
port results included in recent papers in the literature.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
In §2 we briefly describe the text-only and multi-modal
MT models we evaluate in this work and in §3 the data
sets we used, together with a discussion of interesting
findings. In §4 we discuss how we structure our evalua-
tion and in §5 we analyse and discuss our results. In §6
we discuss important related work and finally in §7 we
draw conclusions and suggest avenues for future work.

2 MT Models evaluated in this work

We first introduce the two text-only baselines used in
this work: a PBSMT model (§2.1) and a text-only
attention-based NMT model (§2.2). We then briefly
discuss the doubly-attentive multi-modal NMT model
we use in our experiments (§2.3), which is compara-
ble to the model evaluated by Calixto et al. (2016) and
further detailed and analysed in Calixto et al. (2017a).

31



Figure 1: Decoder RNN with attention over source sen-
tence and image features. This decoder learns to inde-
pendently attend to image patches and source-language
words when generating translations.

2.1 Statistical Machine Translation (SMT)

We use a PBSMT model where the language model
(LM) is a 5–gram LM with modified Kneser-Ney
smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 1995). We use minimum
error rate training (Och, 2003) for tuning the model pa-
rameters using BLEU as the objective function.

2.2 Text-only NMT (NMTt)

We use the attention-based NMT model introduced
by Bahdanau et al. (2015) as our text-only NMT base-
line. It is based on the encoder–decoder framework
and it implements an attention mechanism over the
source-sentence words X = (x1, x2, · · · , xN ), where
Y = (y1, y2, · · · , yM ) is its target-language transla-
tion. A model is trained to maximise the log-likelihood
of the target given the source.

The encoder is a bidirectional recurrent neural net-
work (RNN) with GRU units (Cho et al., 2014). The
annotation vector for a given source word xi is the
concatenation of forward and backward vectors hi =[−→
hi;
←−
hi
]

obtained with forward and backward RNNs,
respectively, and C = (h1,h2, · · · ,hN ) is the set of
source annotation vectors.

The decoder is also an RNN, more specifically a neu-
ral LM (Bengio et al., 2003) conditioned upon its past
predictions via its previous hidden state st−1 and the
word emitted in the previous time step yt−1, as well as
the source sentence via an attention mechanism. The
attention computes a context vector ct for each time
step t of the decoder where this vector is a weighted
sum of the source annotation vectors C:

esrct,i = (v
src
a )

T tanh(U srca st−1 +W
src
a hi), (1)

αsrct,i =
exp (esrct,i)∑N

j=1 exp (e
src
t,j)

, (2)

ct =
N∑

i=1

αsrct,ihi, (3)

where αsrct,i is the normalised alignment matrix between
each source annotation vector hi and the word to be
emitted at time step t, and vsrca , U

src
a and W

src
a are

model parameters.

2.3 Multi-modal NMT (NMTm)

We use a multi-modal NMT model similar to the one
evaluated by Calixto et al. (2016) and further studied
in Calixto et al. (2017a), illustrated in Figure 1. It can
be seen as an expansion of the attentive NMT frame-
work described in §2.2 with the addition of a visual
component to incorporate local visual features.

We use a publicly available pre-trained Convolu-
tional Neural Network (CNN), namely the 50-layer
Residual Network (ResNet-50) of He et al. (2016) to
extract convolutional image features (a1, · · · ,aL) for
all images in our dataset. These features are extracted
from the res4f layer and consist of a 196 x 1024 di-
mensional matrix where each row, i.e. a 1024D vector,
represents features from a specific area and so only en-
codes information about that specific area of the image.

The visual attention mechanism computes a context
vector it for each time step t of the decoder similarly
to the textual attention mechanism described in §2.2:

eimgt,l = (v
img
a )

T tanh(U imga st−1 +W
img
a al), (4)

αimgt,l =
exp (eimgt,l )∑L

j=1 exp (e
img
t,j )

, (5)

it =
L∑

l=1

αimgt,l al, (6)

where αimgt,l is the normalised alignment matrix between
each image annotation vector al and the word to be
emitted at time step t, and vimga , U

img
a and W

img
a are

model parameters.

3 Data sets

We use the data set of product listings and images
produced by eBay, henceforth referred to as eBay24k,

32



which consists of 23, 697 tuples of products each con-
taining (i) a product listing in English, (ii) a prod-
uct listing in German and (iii) a product image. In
∼6k training tuples, the original user-generated prod-
uct listing was given in English and was manually
translated into German by in-house experts. The same
holds for validation and test sets, which contain 480
and 444 triples, respectively. In the remaining training
tuples (∼18k), the original listing was given in Ger-
man and manually translated into English. We also
use the publicly available Multi30k dataset (Elliott et
al., 2016), a multilingual expansion of the original
Flickr30k (Young et al., 2014) with∼30k pictures from
Flickr, each accompanied by one description in English
and one human translation of the English description
into German.

Although the curation of in-domain parallel product
listings with an associated product image is costly and
time-consuming, monolingual German listings with an
image are far simpler to obtain. In order to increase the
small amount of training data, we train the text-only
model NMTt on the German–English eBay24k and
Multi30k data sets (without images) and back-translate
83, 832 German in-domain product listings into En-
glish. We use the synthetic English, original German
and original image as additional training tuples, hence-
forth eBay80k.

The translation of user-generated product titles raises
particular challenges; they are often ungrammatical
and can be difficult to interpret in isolation even by a
native speaker of the language, as illustrated in Table 1.
We note that the listings in both languages have many
scattered keywords and/or phrases glued together, as
well as few typos (e.g., English listing in the first ex-
ample). Moreover, in the second example the product
image has a white frame surrounding it. These are all
complications that make the multi-modal MT of prod-
uct listings a challenging task, where there are differ-
ent difficulties derived from processing listings and im-
ages.

To further demonstrate these issues, we compute per-
plexity scores with LMs trained on one in-domain and
one general-domain German corpus: the Multi30k (∼
29k sentences) and eBay’s in-domain data (∼ 99k sen-
tences), respectively.2 The LM trained on the Multi30k
computes a perplexity of 25k on the eBay test set, and
the LM trained on the in-domain eBay data produces a
perplexity of 4.2k on the Multi30k test set. We note that
the LM trained on eBay’s in-domain data still computes
a very high perplexity on eBay’s test set (ppl = 1.8k).
These perplexity scores indicate that fluency might not
be a good metric to use in our study, i.e. we should not
expect a fluent machine-translated output of a model
trained on poorly fluent training data.

2These are 5-gram LMs trained with KenLM (Heafield
et al., 2013) using modified Kneser-Ney smoothing on tok-
enized, lowercased data.

Image Product Listing

(en) apple macbook pro 13.3“
laptop - dvd - rw drive / good
screen / airport card keyboar

(de) apple macbook pro laptop
13.3“ - dvd - rw - laufwerk / gutes
display / airport karte tastatur

(en) modern napkin holder table
top stainless steel weighted
arm napkins paper towels

(de) moderner tischserviettenhalter
aus edelstahl mit beschwertem arm
für servietten und papiertücher

Table 1: Examples of product listings accompanied by
product images from the eBay test set.

Listing Difficulty Adequacy
language N listing only listing+image listing+image

English 20 2.50 ± 0.84 2.40 ± 0.84 2.45 ± 0.49
German 15 2.83 ± 0.75 2.00 ± 0.50 2.39 ± 0.78

Table 2: Difficulty to understand product listings with
and without images and adequacy of listings and im-
ages. N is the number of raters (Calixto et al., 2017b).

3.1 English and German product listings

Clearly, user-generated product listings are not very
fluent in terms of grammar or even predictable word
order. To better understand whether this has an impact
on semantic intelligibility, Calixto et al. (2017b) have
recently conducted experiments using eBay data to as-
sess how challenging listings are to understand for a
human reader. Specifically, they asked users how they
perceive product listings with and without having the
associated images available, under the hypothesis that
images bring additional understanding to their corre-
sponding listings.

In Table 2, we show results which suggest that the
intelligibility of both the English and German product
listings are perceived to be somewhere between “easy”
and “neutral” when images are also available. It is no-
table that, in case of German, there is a statistically sig-
nificant difference between the group who had access
to the image and the product listing (M=2.00, SD=.50)
and the group who only viewed the listing (M=2.83,
ST=.30), where F(1,13) = 6.72, p < 0.05. Further-
more, humans find that product listings describe the as-
sociated image somewhere between “well” and “neu-
tral” with no statistically significant differences be-
tween the adequacy of product listings and images in
different languages (Calixto et al., 2017b).

Altogether, we have a strong indication that images
can indeed help an MT model translate product listings,
especially for translations into German.

33



0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%

NMTt

NMTm

PBSMT

Time in Seconds1st best 2nd best 3rd best

18.8% 32.6% 48.5%

24.8% 42.5% 32.6%

56.3% 24.8% 18.8%

Figure 2: Models PBSMT, NMTt and NMTm ranked
by humans from best to worst.

4 Experimental set-up
We use the eBay24k, the additional back-translated
eBay80k and the Multi30k (Elliott et al., 2016) data
sets to train all our models. In our experiments, we
wish to contrast the human assessments of the ade-
quacy of translations obtained with two text-only base-
lines, PBSMT and NMTt, and one multi-modal model
NMTm, with scores computed with four automatic
MT metrics: BLEU4 (Papineni et al., 2002), ME-
TEOR (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), TER (Snover et
al., 2006), and chrF3 (Popović, 2015).3 We report
statistical significance with approximate randomisation
for the first three metrics using the MultEval tool (Clark
et al., 2011).

For our qualitative human evaluation, we ask bilin-
gual native German speakers:

1. to assess the multi-modal adequacy of transla-
tions (number of participants N = 18), described
in §4.1;

2. to rank translations generated by different mod-
els from best to worst (number of participants
N = 18), described in §4.2.

On average, our evaluators’ consisted of 72%
women and 28% men. They were recruited from em-
ployees at eBay Inc., Aachen, Germany, as well as
the student and staff body of Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.

4.1 Adequacy
Humans are presented with an English product listing,
a product image and a translation generated by one of
the models (without knowing which model). They are
then asked how much of the meaning of the source is
also expressed in the translation, taking the product im-
age into consideration. They must then select from a
four-level Likert scale where the answers range from
1 – All of it to 4 – None of it.

4.2 Ranking
We present humans with a product image and three
translations obtained from different models for a par-
ticular English product listing (without identifying the

3We specifically compute character 6-gram F3.

models) and ask them to rank translations from best to
worst.

5 Results
In Table 3, we contrast the human assessments of the
adequacy of translations obtained with two text-only
baselines, PBSMT and NMTt, and one multi-modal
model NMTm, with scores obtained computing four
MT automatic metrics.

Both models NMTm and PBSMT improve on model
NMTt’s translations according to the first three auto-
matic metrics (p < 0.01), and we also observe im-
provements in chrF3. Although a one-way anova did
not show any statistically significant differences in ad-
equacy between NMTm and NMTt (F(2, 18) = 1.29,
p > 0.05), human evaluators ranked NMTm as better
than NMTt over 88% of the time, a strong indication
that images do help neural MT and bring important in-
formation that the multi-modal model NMTm can effi-
ciently exploit.

If we compare models NMTm and PBSMT, the latter
outperforms the former according to BLEU, METEOR
and chrF3, but they are practically equal according to
TER. Additionally, the adequacy scores for both these
models are, on average, the same according to scores
computed over N = 18 different human assessments.
Nonetheless, even though both models NMTm and PB-
SMT are found to produce equally adequate output,
translations obtained with PBSMT are ranked best by
humans over 56.3% of the time, while translations ob-
tained with the multi-modal model NMTm are ranked
best 24.8% of the time, as can be seen in Figure 2.

We stress that the multi-modal model NMTm con-
sistently outperforms the text-only model NMTt, ac-
cording to all four automatic metrics used in this work.
Translations generated by model NMTm contain many
neologisms, possibly due to training these models us-
ing sub-word tokens rather than just words (Sennrich et
al., 2016). Some examples are: “sammlerset”, “gara-
genskateboard”, “kampffaltschlocker”, “schneidsattel”
and “oberreceiver”. We argue that this generative qual-
ity of the NMT models and the data sets evaluated in
this work could have made translations more confusing
for native German speakers to understand, therefore the
preference for the SMT translations.4

We note that the pairwise inter-annotator agreement
for the ranking task shows a fair agreement among the
annotators (κ = 0.30), computed using Cohen’s kappa
coefficient (Cohen, 1960). For all the other evalua-
tions, according to Landis and Koch (1977) the pair-
wise inter-annotator agreement can be interpreted as
slight (κ = 0.15 for the multi-modal translation ad-
equacy). The lower agreement score seems plausible
since our annotators were crowdsourced and so had
limited guidelines and less training for the tasks that
would have been ideal.

4The SMT model was trained on words directly and there-
fore does not present these issues.

34



Model BLEU4↑ METEOR↑ TER↓ chrF3↑ Adequacy↓
NMTt 22.5 40.0 58.0 56.7 2.71 ± .48
NMTm 25.1† 42.6† 55.5† 58.6 2.36 ± .47
PBSMT 27.4†‡ 45.8†‡ 55.4† 61.6 2.36 ± .47

Table 3: Adequacy of translations and four automatic metrics on eBay’s test set: BLEU, METEOR, TER and chrF3.
For the first three metrics, results are significantly better than those of NMTt (†) or NMTm (‡) with p < 0.01.

6 Related work

Multi-modal MT has just recently been addressed by
the MT community in a shared task (Specia et al.,
2016), where many different groups proposed tech-
niques for multi-modal translation using different com-
binations of NMT and SMT models (Caglayan et al.,
2016; Calixto et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016; Li-
bovický et al., 2016; Shah et al., 2016). In the multi-
modal translation task, participants are asked to train
models to translate image descriptions from one natural
language into another, while also taking the image it-
self into consideration. This effectively bridges the gap
between two well-established tasks: image description
generation (IDG) and MT.

There is an important body of research conducted in
IDG. We highlight the work of Vinyals et al. (2015),
who proposed an influential neural IDG model based
on the sequence-to-sequence framework. They used
global visual features to initialise an RNN LM de-
coder, used to generate the image descriptions in a tar-
get language, word by word. In contrast, Xu et al.
(2015) were among the first to propose an attention-
based model where a model learns to attend to spe-
cific areas of an image representation as it generates
its description in natural language with a soft-attention
mechanism. In their model, local visual features were
used instead. In both cases, as well as in this work
and in most of the state-of-the-art models in the field,
models transferred learning from CNNs pre-trained for
image classification on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
2015).

In NMT, Bahdanau et al. (2015) was the first to
propose to use an attention mechanism in the de-
coder. Their decoder learns to attend to the relevant
source-language words as it generates a sentence in
the target language, again word by word. Since then,
many authors have proposed different ways to incor-
porate attention into MT. Luong et al. (2015) proposed
among other things a local attention mechanism that
was less costly than the original global attention; Fi-
rat et al. (2016) proposed a model to translate from
many source and into many target languages, which in-
volved a shared attention mechanism strategy; Tu et al.
(2016) proposed an attention coverage strategy, so that

the model has explicit information from which source
words are used to generate previous target words, and
therefore addressed the problems of over- and under-
translation.

Calixto et al. (2017b) has recently reported n-best
list re-ranking experiments of e-commerce product list-
ings using multi-modal eBay data. Whereas their fo-
cus is on improving translation quality with n-best list
re-ranking experiments, in this work our focus is on
the human evaluation of translations generated with the
different text-only and multi-modal models. To the best
of our knowledge, along with Calixto et al. (2017b) we
are the first to study multi-modal NMT applied to the
translation of product listings, i.e. for the e-commerce
domain.

7 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we investigate the potential impact of
multi-modal NMT in the context of e-commerce prod-
uct listings. Images bring important information to
NMT models in this context; in fact, translations ob-
tained with a multi-modal NMT model are preferred to
ones obtained with a text-only model over 88% of the
time. Nevertheless, humans still prefer phrase-based
SMT over NMT output in this use-case. We attribute
this to the nature of the task: listing titles have little
syntactic structure and yet many rare words, which can
produce many confusing neologisms especially if using
subword units.

The core neural MT models still have to be improved
significantly to address these challenges. However, in
contrast to SMT, they already provide an effective way
of improving MT quality with information contained in
images. As future work, we will study the impact that
additional back-translated data have on multi-modal
NMT models.

Acknowledgements
The ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology
(www.adaptcentre.ie) at Dublin City University
is funded under the Science Foundation Ireland Re-
search Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and is
co-funded under the European Regional Development
Fund.

35



References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by
Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.
ICLR 2015.

Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and
Christian Janvin. 2003. A Neural Probabilistic Lan-
guage Model. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:1137–1155.

Luisa Bentivogli, Arianna Bisazza, Mauro Cettolo, and
Marcello Federico. 2016. Neural versus phrase-
based machine translation quality: a case study.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
257–267, Austin, Texas, USA.

Ozan Caglayan, Walid Aransa, Yaxing Wang,
Marc Masana, Mercedes Garcı́a-Martı́nez, Fethi
Bougares, Loı̈c Barrault, and Joost van de Wei-
jer. 2016. Does multimodality help human and
machine for translation and image captioning? In
Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine
Translation, pages 627–633, Berlin, Germany.

Iacer Calixto, Teofilo de Campos, and Lucia Spe-
cia. 2012. Images as context in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In The 2nd Annual Meeting of
the EPSRC Network on Vision & Language (VL’12),
Sheffield, UK. EPSRC Vision and Language Net-
work.

Iacer Calixto, Desmond Elliott, and Stella Frank. 2016.
DCU-UvA Multimodal MT System Report. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Trans-
lation, pages 634–638, Berlin, Germany.

Iacer Calixto, Qun Liu, and Nick Campbell. 2017a.
Doubly-Attentive Decoder for Multi-modal Neural
Machine Translation. CoRR, abs/1702.01287.

Iacer Calixto, Daniel Stein, Evgeny Matusov, Pintu Lo-
har, Sheila Castilho, and Andy Way. 2017b. Using
images to improve machine-translating e-commerce
product listings. In Proceedings of the 15th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, EACL 2017, Valen-
cia, Spain (Paper Accepted).

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Dzmitry Bah-
danau, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. On the Properties
of Neural Machine Translation: Encoder-Decoder
Approaches. In Proceedings of SSST@EMNLP
2014, Eighth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and
Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 103–111,
Doha, Qatar.

Jonathan H. Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and
Noah A. Smith. 2011. Better Hypothesis Testing
for Statistical Machine Translation: Controlling for
Optimizer Instability. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: Short
Papers - Volume 2, HLT ’11, pages 176–181, Port-
land, Oregon.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement
for Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor
Universal: Language Specific Translation Evalua-
tion for Any Target Language. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 376–380, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and Lu-
cia Specia. 2016. Multi30k: Multilingual english-
german image descriptions. In Workshop on Vision
and Language at ACL ’16, Berlin, Germany.

Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
2016. Multi-Way, Multilingual Neural Machine
Translation with a Shared Attention Mechanism. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 866–875, San Diego, California.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, pages
770–778, Las Vegas, NV, USA.

Kenneth Heafield, Ivan Pouzyrevsky, Jonathan H.
Clark, and Philipp Koehn. 2013. Scalable modi-
fied Kneser-Ney language model estimation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 690–696,
Sofia, Bulgaria.

Julian Hitschler, Shigehiko Schamoni, and Stefan Rie-
zler. 2016. Multimodal Pivots for Image Cap-
tion Translation. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2399–2409,
Berlin, Germany.

Po-Yao Huang, Frederick Liu, Sz-Rung Shiang, Jean
Oh, and Chris Dyer. 2016. Attention-based Mul-
timodal Neural Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the First Conference on Machine Translation,
pages 639–645, Berlin, Germany.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, volume I,
pages 181–184, Detroit, Michigan.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33(1):159–174.

Jindřich Libovický, Jindřich Helcl, Marek Tlustý,
Ondřej Bojar, and Pavel Pecina. 2016. CUNI Sys-
tem for WMT16 Automatic Post-Editing and Multi-
modal Translation Tasks. In Proceedings of the First
Conference on Machine Translation, pages 646–654,
Berlin, Germany.

36



Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Effective Approaches to Attention-
based Neural Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
1412–1421, Lisbon, Portugal.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics - Volume 1, pages 160–167, Sap-
poro, Japan.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Maja Popović. 2015. chrF: character n-gram F-score
for automatic MT evaluation. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 392–395, Lisbon, Portugal.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause,
Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, An-
drej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein,
Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. Im-
ageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV),
115(3):211–252.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1715–1725,
Berlin, Germany, August.

Kashif Shah, Josiah Wang, and Lucia Specia. 2016.
SHEF-Multimodal: Grounding Machine Translation
on Images. In Proceedings of the First Conference
on Machine Translation, pages 660–665, Berlin,
Germany.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study
of translation edit rate with targeted human anno-
tation. In Proceedings of Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas, pages 223–231, Cam-
bridge, MA, USA.

Lucia Specia, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and
Desmond Elliott. 2016. A Shared Task on Mul-
timodal Machine Translation and Crosslingual Im-
age Description. In Proceedings of the First Con-
ference on Machine Translation, WMT 2016, pages
543–553, Berlin, Germany.

Zhaopeng Tu, Zhengdong Lu, Yang Liu, Xiaohua Liu,
and Hang Li. 2016. Modeling Coverage for Neural
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 76–85,
Berlin, Germany.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural im-
age caption generator. In IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2015,
pages 3156–3164, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich Zemel,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and
tell: Neural image caption generation with visual at-
tention. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-15), pages
2048–2057, Lille, France.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to
visual denotations: New similarity metrics for se-
mantic inference over event descriptions. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2:67–78.

37


