Proceedings of the Biomedical NLP Workshop associated with RANLP 2017, pages 73–80,

Varna, Bulgaria, 8 September 2017.

https://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-044-1_010

73

POMELO: Medline corpus with manually annotated

food-drug interactions

Thierry Hamon1,2, Vincent Tabanou3, Fleur Mougin4, Natalia Grabar5, Frantz Thiessard3,4

1 LIMSI, CNRS, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France

2 Universit´e Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e, Villetaneuse, France

3 CHU de Bordeaux, Pole de sante publique, Service d’information m´edicale, Bordeaux, France

4 Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, Bordeaux Population Health Research Center,

team ERIAS, UMR 1219, F-33000 Bordeaux, France

5 CNRS UMR 8163 STL, Universit´e Lille 3, 59653 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

hamon@limsi.fr, vincenttabanou@aol.com, fleur.mougin@u-bordeaux.fr,

natalia.grabar@univ-lille3.fr, frantz.thiessard@u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract

When patients take more than one med-
ication, they may be at risk of drug in-
teractions, which means that a given drug
can cause unexpected effects when taken
in combination with other drugs. Similar
effects may occur when drugs are taken to-
gether with some food or beverages. For
instance, grapefruit has interactions with
several drugs, because its active ingredi-
ents inhibit enzymes involved in the drugs
metabolism and can then cause an exces-
sive dosage of these drugs. Yet, informa-
tion on food/drug interactions is poorly re-
searched. The current research is mainly
provided by the medical domain and a
very tentative work is provided by com-
puter sciences and NLP domains. One
factor that motivates the research is re-
lated to the availability of the annotated
corpora and the reference data. The pur-
pose of our work is to describe the ratio-
nale and approach for creation and anno-
tation of scientiﬁc corpus with informa-
tion on food/drug interactions. This cor-
pus contains 639 MEDLINE citations (ti-
tles and abstracts), corresponding to 5,752
sentences. It is manually annotated by two
experts. The corpus is named POMELO.
This annotated corpus will be made avail-
able for the research purposes.

1

Introduction

Prescribed medicines depend on initial marketing
authorization to guarantee the security of patients.
Nevertheless, medicines can cause adverse drug
reactions (ADRs) discovered during clinical trials,
but usually later, in a pharmacovigilance context,

while drugs are administered to patients (Aagaard
and Hansen, 2013; Brahma et al., 2013; Cote and
Choy, 2013; Yom-Tov and Gabrilovich, 2013; Wei
et al., 2013). For this reason, prescription and in-
take of drugs is controlled all over their marketing
and use by patients.

When patients take more than one medication,
they may be at risk of drug interactions, which
means that a given drug can cause unexpected ef-
fects when taken in combination with other drugs.
For instance, sedative and pain medication cause
an important drowsiness in patients, while other
drugs (benzylpenicillin and heparin) interact be-
tween them and cannot be placed in the same sy-
ringe. Most drugs are not concerned by such ef-
fects. Yet, when such adverse events happen, they
may have negative and serious effects on patients
and their health. Hence, it is important to know the
possible interactions between drugs and to clearly
indicate them to patients and to medical staff. For
this reason, for several years now, automatic ex-
traction of drug-drug interactions is heavily re-
searched in order to provide an updated and timely
information on known interactions between drugs
or between their active principles.
In the same
way, it becomes possible to discover potential ad-
verse effects and adverse reactions (Aronson and
Ferner, 2005) of these drugs.

A different but yet related situation occurs when
drugs are taken together with certain food or bev-
erages. Food and drug interaction may also lead
to negative effects on health and well-being of pa-
tients. For instance, grapefruit has interactions
with several drugs, because its active ingredients
inhibit enzymes involved in the drugs metabolism
and can then cause an excessive dosage of these
drugs (Duke Med Health News, 2013; Greenblatt
and Derendorf, 2013). Due to the difﬁculty to de-
tect them, because patients usually do not remem-

74

ber the food they have taken, and to their com-
plexity, such situations are studied less frequently,
even if they are important for patients and for the
medical care process. Our main interest is to study
food-drug interactions and to automatically detect
them in scientiﬁc literature.

Most information on food/drug interactions is
recorded in unstructured sources, such as scien-
tiﬁc articles and some knowledge bases, like Drug-
Bank1 (Wishart et al., 2006), or possibly in dis-
cussion fora which provide patient point of view
of adverse events. Yet, this information remains
poor. For instance, DrugBank records textual in-
formation about food/drug interactions for less
than 10% of drugs, and it mainly provides infor-
mation on optimal drug intake time.

Regarding these observations, our objective is
to use and mine scientiﬁc bibliographical data in
order to describe interactions that exist between
drugs and food, and that may lead to adverse ef-
fects. To achieve this goal, our ﬁrst step is to de-
sign and to annotate a dataset of MEDLINE ab-
stracts. This is the purpose of the work presented
in this paper.

In what follows, we ﬁrst present some related
work (section 2). We then present the annotation
scheme (section 3), and describe the corpus deﬁ-
nition and the annotation process (sections 4 and
5). Finally, we present our results (section 6), and
discuss our work and conclude with future orien-
tations (section 7).

2 Related work

We present two kinds of works: those performed
by pharmacists and pharmacovigilance experts on
drug/drug interactions (DDI) and food/drug inter-
actions (FDI) in medical domain, and those per-
formed by computer scientists on information ex-
traction.

2.1 Medical domain
In has been deﬁned that interactions can occur in
different ways. The interactions presented here
have been deﬁned for the DDI cases, but they show
very similar effects when the FDIs occur. Hence,
two drugs given together may act at the same or
similar receptor, which can lead to a greater or
to a decreased effect of either drug. Another sit-
uation is when one drug is affected by action of

another drug. In this case, their absorption, distri-
bution, metabolism or excretion (commonly called
ADME) are involved (Doogue and Polasek, 2013).
We give here some examples of DDIs found on-
line2:

• Absorption. Some drugs can alter the ab-
sorption of another drug. For example, cal-
cium can block absorption of some medica-
tions. Hence, the HIV treatment dolutegravir
(Tivicay) should not be taken at the same time
as e.g. calcium carbonate (Tums, Maalox),
because it can lower the amount of dolute-
gravir absorbed and reduce its effectiveness
in treating HIV infection. For the same rea-
son, many drugs cannot be taken with milk
or dairy products because they will bind with
the calcium;
• Distribution.

Protein-binding interactions
can occur when highly protein-bound drugs
compete for a limited number of binding
sites. One example is between fenoﬁbric acid
(Trilipix), used to lower cholesterol in the
blood, and warfarin, a common blood thin-
ner to help prevent clots. Fenoﬁbric acid can
increase the effects of warfarin and cause the
bleeding in patient;

• Metabolism. Drugs are usually eliminated
from the body further
to their changes
through metabolism. Enzymes in the liver,
usually the CYP450 enzymes, are often re-
sponsible for breaking down drugs and for
their elimination from the body. However,
enzyme levels may go up or down and affect
how drugs are broken down. For example,
using diltiazem, a blood pressure medication,
with simvastatin, a medicine to lower choles-
terol, may elevate the blood levels and cause
side effects due to simvastatin. Indeed, dil-
tiazem can block the CYP450 3A4 enzymes
needed for the breakdown of simvastatin, in
which case, high blood levels of simvastatin
can lead to serious liver and muscle side ef-
fects. Another example is when grapefruit
affects the action of the CYP3A4 enzyme,
thus also affecting the intake of several drugs
(Duke Med Health News, 2013; Greenblatt
and Derendorf, 2013);

1http://www.drugbank.ca/

2https://www.drugs.com/drug_

interactions.html

75

• Excretion. Some nonsteroidal antiinﬂamma-
tory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g.
indomethacin),
may lower kidney function and affect the ex-
cretion of lithium, a drug used for bipolar
disorder, in which case its action can be in-
creased.

From these examples, we can highlight several

points related to the intake of drugs:

• when several medications are taken together,
patients should deﬁne the best way to take
them (e.g. time, dose) with their doctor;

• DDIs and FDIs may show similar action pat-
terns because they may contains same or sim-
ilar active principles, like shown above with
the calcium intake, present in drugs and in di-
ary products, or with grapefruit and diltiazem
changing the behavior of some enzymes;

• the interaction can follow several patterns:
action of a given medication can be de-
creased, increased or cause side effects which
are usually not observed.

2.2 Computer Sciences
As noticed above, it is important to research the
issues related to DDIs and FDIs. Concerning the
DDIs, and globally the ADRs (Adverse Drug Re-
actions), their reporting is extremely low. For in-
stance, in France, 96% of the ADRs are simply not
reported (Moride et al., 1997; Lacoste-Roussillon
et al., 2001). As for the FDIs, they are even more
difﬁcult to identify for several reasons: the large
number of possible interactions, the difﬁculty of
describing meals in a standard ADR reporting
form, the difﬁculty to remember exactly which
food has been taken at a given moment, and prob-
ably also for sociological reasons because drugs
and pathology are connected unconsciously and
associated with negative feelings, whereas food
is rather an indication of good health. For these
reasons, it is important to provide automatic NLP
(Natural Language Processing) methods for min-
ing available sources of information, like MED-
LINE bibliographical database3.

Several works have been done on automatic
extraction of DDIs (Duda et al., 2005; Bj¨orne
et al., 2013; Ayvaz et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2015;
Kolchinsky et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016; Schnei-
der and Boyce, 2016). In most cases, supervised

categorization methods are exploited for the detec-
tion of entities and of their interactions. This ex-
plains why the majority of these works are part of
the NLP challenges, like *SEM (Segura-Bedmar
et al., 2013) for DDI extraction and BIOCRE-
ATIVE (Krallinger et al., 2009) for PPI (Pro-
tein–Protein Interaction) extraction.
Indeed, the
*SEM challenge proposes task dedicated to DDI
extraction and provides annotated corpora. The
main contribution of our work is related to the cre-
ation of biomedical corpora and their annotation
with information on food/drug interactions.

Notice that there is very little work on auto-
matic FDI extraction. Currently, several knowl-
edge bases, semantic resources and repositories
concerning the involved entities (i.e., drugs, food
and diseases) are available (Brown et al., 1999;
NLM; RxNorm; Kuhn et al., 2010). Yet, the FDI
information is fragmented and scattered across
these bases and repositories. As consequence,
there is no explicit relations between these entities.
Linked Data projects, such as Linked Open Drug
Data (LODD4), attempt
to create ﬁne-grained
links between such knowledge bases. In addition,
the already mentioned DrugBank (Wishart et al.,
2006) knowledge base contains various kinds of
information on drugs, although their relations with
food is provided as free-text ﬁelds and is mainly
concerned with the optimal drug intake time. The
effort done for the formalization of the FDI infor-
mation from DrugBank (Jovanovik et al., 2014)
has been performed manually.

In the next sections, we propose the description
of the methodology for the creation of annotated
corpus with FDIs.

3 Annotation schema: Representation of
drug related information and of FDIs

In Figure 1, we present the model of the drug-
related information. The model is instantiated for
the solumedrol medication. Hence, a given drug
has an international name (DCI) and a therapeu-
tic class (or is-a relation). It has a composition
and is prescribed for speciﬁc indications and with
speciﬁc features (e.g. dosage, mode, frequency
and duration of administration). Then, a drug may
have adverse effects, including those due to action
of food (FDIs) or of other drugs (DDIs).

The annotated entities must belong to one of

these categories:

3https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed

4http://www.w3.org/wiki/HCLSIG/LODD

76

Figure 1: Model of the drug-related information

1. food names and their different types (ingredi-

ents, cooked meals, food supplements...),

2. meal time (before, during, after),

3. drug names and related information (dosage,

frequency, duration, mode),

4. disorders for which a given drug is indicated,

5. side effects (including FDIs) of drugs.

According to types of actions of drugs on patients
and to the ADME model (section 2.1), we propose
to investigate the following types of interactions
between these entities:

• decrease, reduce, slow down or make disap-
pear drug effect (absorption, elimination...)
due to food,

• increase or speed up drug effect due to food,
• make appear, have (new) side effects, make
appear negative effect, or worsen drug effect
due to food,

• increase side effect of drugs due to food,
• improve drug effect, have positive effect on

drug, or reduce side effect of drug,

• treat a disorder,

• have no effect on drug,
• drug must be taken without food,
• have effect on drug or general relation with
drug. These relations are under-deﬁned: re-
lation or effect exist but it is not possible to
decide what kind of relation or effect it is.

4 Corpus design

The MEDLINE bibliographical base has been
queried in order to extract citations related to food-
drug interactions with the following query:

(”FOOD DRUG INTERACTIONS”[MH] OR
”FOOD DRUG INTERACTIONS*”) AND (”ad-
verse effects*”)

In December 2013,

it permitted to obtain a
set of 639 citations, of which we exploit titles
and abstracts. This corpus is called POMELO,
namely grapefruit in French, because has been
built and annotated during the French MESHS-
funded project POMELO.

5 Corpus annotation

The POMELO corpus (639 titles and abstracts cor-
responding to 5,752 sentences) has been manually
annotated in order to make explicit the informa-
tion on food/drug interactions. Two experts have

phosphate disodique anhydre

phosphate monosodique anhydre

lactosis

cortisone

sodium

c
o
m
p
o
s
i
t
i
o
n

steroidal anti−inflammatory

is a

methylprednisolone

DCI

solumedrol

r
o
f
 
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
r
p

brain oedema

allergic shock

Quincke oedema

suffocation by larynx oedema

salt

FDI

DDI

digitaline

insulin

s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
e
s
r
e
v
d
a

swelling of face

arterial hypertension

acne

osteoporosis

ulcer of stomach

depression

s
e
r
u
t
a
e
f
 

n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
r
p

dosage

mode

frequency

reason

duration

77

been involved in the annotation process: one res-
ident and one medical doctor. The annotation has
been done mainly by the resident, who was helped
by the medical doctor when facing difﬁcult situa-
tions. The annotation has been performed with the
BRAT software (Stenetorp et al., 2012).

To prepare the annotation, we exploited some
existing resources in English and French, which
have been automatically projected on corpus. For
instance, the food has been pre-annotated using:

• the USDA National Nutrient Database5
• the Codex Alimentarius of the WHO (World

Health, Organization)6,

• and resources built from some recipes.

Other entities have been pre-annotated with ex-
isting terminologies: disorders and side effects
(Brown et al., 1999; NLM; Kuhn et al., 2010), and
drugs (RxNorm; Wishart et al., 2006). Besides,
speciﬁc resources have been built for the annota-
tion of dosage, frequency, duration and mode of
drug administration.

Then, the POMELO corpus has been checked
out for the correctness of entities and further an-
notated with relations by the annotators.

6 Results
In Figure 2, we give an example of an annotated
citation. Drugs are in blue, food in green and ad-
verse effects in cyan. Other entities are related to
dosage, frequency and duration. Then, relations
between these entities are marked up.

5http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/search/

list

6http://www.codexalimentarius.org

Entities
drug
food
treated disease
drug effect
side effect
meal time
mode
dosage
duration
frequency

Nb
4,953
2,783
645
558
1,985
1,027
539
767
86
282

Table 1: Types and number of the annotated enti-
ties

Relation
decrease absorption
slow absorption
slow elimination
increase absorption
speed up absorption
new side effect
negative effect on drug
worsen drug effect
has side effect
increase side effect
positive effect on drug
reduce side effect
improve drug effect
treat
no effect on drug
without food
has effect
relation

Nb
64
21
18
52
4
4
91
16
434
239
23
23
14
350
145
23
233
706

Table 2: Types and number of the annotated rela-
tions

In Tables 1 and 2, we indicate the types and
numbers of entities and relations manually anno-
tated by experts. We can see for instance that
among the most frequent relations we can ﬁnd:

• drugs have side effects (n=434):

Atovaquone suspension was well tolerated;
diarrhea, nausea, fatigue, and rash were the
most common adverse events.

• drugs treat disorders (n=350):

Metrifonate is an inhibitor of cholinesterase
effective in the treatment of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease.

• food increases side effects (n=239):

Animals infused ethanol-containing diets ad-
equate in carbohydrate developed steatosis,
but had no other signs of hepatic pathology.
• food has no effect on drugs (n=145):
Azimilide dihydrochloride may be orally ad-
ministered to patients without regard to the
prandial state.

• food has undefined effect on drugs

(n=233):
In both studies the equivalence in AUC of
DDVP was paralleled by equivalent effects
on BChE inhibition.

78

Figure 2: Sample of annotated document (title and abstract) issued from a Medline citation

• food has undefined relation with

drugs (n=706):
We know that changing a customary diet to
one high in protein and low in carbohy-
drate increases the rates of metabolism of an-
tipyrine and theophylline, and shifting to an
isocaloric diet of low protein- protein-high
carbohydrate slows the rates of metabolism
of these drugs.

This corpus will be made available for the re-
search purposes. In this way, we expect to encour-
age the research on food/drug interactions.

7 Conclusion

We described our work done in order to create
a corpus of biomedical literature (titles and ab-
stracts) annotated with information on food/drug
interactions.
The corpus is called POMELO,
namely grapefruit in French. Titles and abstracts
are obtained from MEDLINE bibliographical
base. We ﬁrst propose a model of the food/drug-
related information, which takes into account var-
ious aspects going from composition of drugs to
their intake and possible adverse effects. Then, the
annotation is performed by two experts: one resi-
dent and one medical doctor. Several entities are
annotated, such as drugs, food, diseases and drug
effects, meal time, and drug-related information
(mode, dosage, duration and frequency). These
entities are pre-annotated automatically and then
checked out manually by the annotators. Then,
relations between these entities are manually an-
notated. Among the most frequent relations, we

can observe for instance: drugs have side effects,
drugs treat disorders, food increases side
effects, food has no effect on drugs, food
has undefined effect on drugs, food has
undefined relation with drugs.

We have several orientations for the future work
on this research. One of the orientations is con-
cerned by increasing the size and quality of the an-
notated corpus: (1) an updated MEDLINE query
indicates that currently there are more citations
indexed with the queried keywords; (2) another
related MESH keyword (herb/drug interactions)
can be exploited to enrich the corpus; (3) even
if two experts have been involved in the anno-
tation, the annotation can be done by other in-
dependent annotators; (4) ﬁnally, this English-
language annotated corpus can be enriched with
French-language citations and documents. An-
other orientation is related to the exploitation of
this annotated corpus: (1) use of the annotations
for creating the model for automatic extraction of
food/drug interactions; (2) exploit this model for a
systematic extraction of FDIs and their recording
together with their evidence level; (3) creation of
a knowledge base with food/drug interactions and
their use by medical professionals and patients.

The POMELO corpus will be made available for
the research purposes on the web site of the MIAM
project (https://miam.limsi.fr/).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the MESH emergent
project and Agence Nationale de la Recherche
through the grant ANR-16-CE23-0012 France.

79

References
L Aagaard and EH Hansen. 2013. Adverse drug re-
actions reported by consumers for nervous system
medications in europe 2007 to 2011. BMC Pharma-
col Toxicol 14:30.

JK Aronson and RE Ferner. 2005. Clariﬁcation of ter-
minology in drug safety. Drug Saf 28(10):851–70.

S Ayvaz, J Horn, O Hassanzadeh, Q Zhu, J Stan,
NP Tatonetti, S Vilar, M Brochhausen, M Samwald,
M Rastegar-Mojarad, M Dumontier, and RD Boyce.
2015. Toward a complete dataset of drug-drug inter-
action information from publicly available sources.
J Biomed Inform 55:206–17.

J Bj¨orne, S Kaewphan, and T Salakoski. 2013.
UTurku: Drug named entity detection and drug-drug
interaction extraction using svm classiﬁcation and
domain knowledge.
In International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013). pages 1–9.

DK Brahma, JB Wahlang, MD Marak, and MCh
Sangma. 2013. Adverse drug reactions in the el-
derly. J Pharmacol Pharmacother 4(2):91–4.

EG Brown, L Wood, and S Wood. 1999. The med-
ical dictionary for regulatory activities (MedDRA).
Drug Saf. 20(2):109–117.

GM Cote and E Choy. 2013. Role of epigenetic modu-
lation for the treatment of sarcoma. Curr Treat Op-
tions Oncol .

MP Doogue and TM Polasek. 2013. The abcd of clini-
cal pharmacokinetics. Ther Adv Drug Saf 4(1):5–7.

Stephany Duda, Constantin Aliferis, Randolph Miller,
Alexander Slatnikov, and Kevin Johnson. 2005. Ex-
tracting drug-drug interaction articles from Medline
to improve the content of drug databases. In AMIA
Symp. pages 216–20.

Duke Med Health News. 2013. Grapefruit: enemy of
many medications. in some patients, the interaction
of fruit and drug may put their life and health at risk.
Duke Med Health News 19(2):1–2.

DJ Greenblatt and H Derendorf. 2013. Grapefruit-

medication interactions. CMAJ 185(6):507.

Milos Jovanovik, Aleksandra Bogojeska, Dimitar Tra-
janov, and Ljupco Kocarev. 2014. Inferring cuisine
- drug interactions using the linked data approach.
Nature 5(9346):1–7.

Sun Kim, Haibin Liu, Lana Yeganova, and W. John
Wilbur. 2015. Extracting drug–drug interactions
from literature using a rich feature-based linear ker-
nel approach.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics
55:23–30.

Artemy Kolchinsky, An´alia Lourenc¸o, Heng-Yi Wu,
Lang Li, and Luis M. Rocha. 2015. Extraction of
pharmacokinetic evidence of drug-drug interactions
from the literature. PLoS ONE 10(5):1–24.

M Krallinger, F Leitner, and A Valencia. 2009. The
biocreative ii.5 challenge overview. In BioCreative
II 5 Workshop 2009 on Digital Annotations.

Michael Kuhn, Monica Campillos,

Ivica Letunic,
Lars Juhl Jensen, and Peer Bork. 2010. A side ef-
fect resource to capture phenotypic effects of drugs.
Molecular Systems Biology 6(1).

C. Lacoste-Roussillon, P. Pouyanne, F. Haramburu,
G. Miremont, and B. B´egaud. 2001.
Incidence of
serious adverse drug reactions in general practice: a
prospective study. Clin Pharmacol Ther 69(6):458–
462.

Shengyu Liu, Buzhou Tang, Qingcai Chen, and Xiao-
long Wang. 2016. Drug-drug interaction extraction
via convolutional neural networks. Comput Math
Methods Med. 2016; 2016: 6918381 2016:1–8.

Y. Moride, F. Haramburu, A. Requejo Alvarez, and
B. B´egaud. 1997. Under-reporting of adverse drug
reactions in general practice. Br J Clin Pharmacol
43(2):177–181.

NLM. 2001.

Medical Subject Headings.

Na-
tional Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland.
www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html.

RxNorm. 2009. RxNorm, a standardized nomencla-
ture for clinical drugs. Technical report, National
Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland. Avail-
able at www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
rxnorm/docs/index.html.

Jodi Schneider and Richard D. Boyce. 2016. Acquiring
and representing drug-drug interaction knowledge as
claims and evidence. In NLM Informatics Training
Conference.

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Paloma Martinez, and Maria
Herrero-Zazo. 2013. SemEval-2013 task 9 : Ex-
traction of drug-drug interactions from biomedical
texts (DDIExtraction 2013). In Lexical and Compu-
tational Semantics (*SEM). pages 341–350.

brat:

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topi´c,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi
a web-based tool for nlp-
Tsujii. 2012.
assisted text annotation.
In Proceedings of the
Demonstrations at
the
European Chapter of
the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Avignon, France, pages 102–107.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E12-2021.

the 13th Conference of

Z Wei, C Doria, and Y Liu. 2013. Targeted therapies in
the treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.
Clin Med Oncol 7:87–102.

David S. Wishart, Craig Knox, An Chi Guo, Savita
Shrivastava, Murtaza Hassanali, Paul Stothard, Zhan
Chang, and Jennifer Woolsey. 2006. Drugbank: a
comprehensive resource for in silico drug discovery
and exploration. Nucleic Acids Research 34:668–
672. Database issue.

80

E Yom-Tov and E Gabrilovich. 2013. Postmarket drug
surveillance without trial costs: discovery of adverse
drug reactions through large-scale analysis of web
search queries. J Med Internet Res 15(6):124–125.

