



















































Adapting SimpleNLG to Spanish


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 144–148,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting SimpleNLG to Spanish

Alejandro Ramos-Soto and Julio Janeiro-Gallardo and Alberto Bugarı́n
Centro Singular de Investigación en Tecnoloxı́as da Información (CiTIUS)

University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
{alejandro.ramos,julio.janeiro,alberto.bugarin.diz}@usc.es

Abstract

We describe SimpleNLG-ES, an adaptation
of the SimpleNLG realization library for
the Spanish language. Our implementa-
tion is based on the bilingual English-French
SimpleNLG-EnFr adaptation. The library has
been tested using a battery of examples that
ensure that the most common syntax, mor-
phology and orthography rules for Spanish are
met. The library is currently being used in
three different projects for the development
of data-to-text systems in the meteorological,
statistical data information, and business intel-
ligence application domains.

1 Introduction

In recent times, natural language generation (NLG)
is receiving increased attention beyond its research
community. Commercial success is nowadays a fact
for several NLG companies and this trend is likely
to expand in coming years, as many opportunities
will arise for the development of NLG systems that
provide useful interpretable information and address
different needs within organizations.

In this context, software for NLG purposes which
is freely available is an exception rather than a norm.
In fact, according to Reiter (Reiter, 2017), this prob-
lem is worsened by a lack of visibility of available
software. In other words, there is not much software
for NLG and most of it is unknown to the wide pub-
lic. However, among the different tasks that can be
identified within an NLG system according to (Re-
iter and Dale, 2000), software for the realization task
(the actual text generation process from the inter-

mediate representation of the information to be con-
veyed) is actually plentiful when compared to other
tasks like referring expression generation.

In this paper we focus on a specific realizer for
the English language, namely SimpleNLG, which
was originally presented in (Gatt and Reiter, 2009),
but has been improved over the years and has be-
come a popular and active project. As a Java library,
SimpleNLG honours its name by providing an intu-
itive object-oriented API for generating text from a
lexical-syntactic specification.

Moreover, different adaptations of SimpleNLG
have been made to support other languages. Among
them, the bilingual English-French version devel-
oped by Vaudry (Vaudry and Lapalme, 2013), pro-
vided an abstraction of the common linguistic fea-
tures shared by both languages. Subsequent adap-
tations include German (Bollmann, 2011), Brazilian
Portuguese (de Oliveira and Sripada, 2014) and Ital-
ian (Mazzei et al., 2016), based on different versions
of the original and the bilingual versions of the li-
brary. SimpleNLG has also served as inspiration for
a realizer for the Indian Telugu language (Dokkara
et al., 2015).

2 Adapting SimpleNLG-EnFr to Spanish

Given that Spanish is one of the most spoken lan-
guages in the world in terms of native speakers, there
are many potential benefits about providing a real-
izer that supports this language. To our knowledge,
there has been a previous attempt at developing a
Spanish version of SimpleNLG, as in (Trzpis, 2015).
However, this project was not made publicly avail-
able and, according to its description, several fea-

144



tures were missing or incomplete, such as interrog-
ative questions, gerund and participle verb forms or
an extensive lexicon.

In order to address this, we provide an adap-
tation of the bilingual English-French version of
SimpleNLG for the Spanish language. Specifi-
cally, we have opted for the creation of a bilin-
gual English-Spanish version that follows the orig-
inal class structure of SimpleNLG-EnFr, instead of
adding a third language to the existing implemen-
tation of SimpleNLG-EnFr. While we believe that
creating a more general framework based on Sim-
pleNLG with multilingual support is a necessary
task that should be undertaken in the future, our
main interest is to provide an useful NLG tool which
is not currently available for NLG developers that
may need use the Spanish language.

Thus, as in SimpleNLG-EnFr, most of the ba-
sic framework is shared between both languages,
such as document elements and some grammar rules
which are common for both English and Spanish.
Based on the abstract classes, we have subclassed
several functionalities regarding syntax, morphol-
ogy, and orthography and adapted an already exist-
ing lexicon which provides a very extensive collec-
tion of Spanish words and inflections. The Spanish
grammar used as reference is the “Nueva gramática
de la lengua española” (RAE, 2011).

2.1 Lexicon

Instead of building our own lexicon, we opted for
reusing already well-known and reputed existing re-
sources in the literature. In particular, we have
used the Spanish dictionary provided by the FreeL-
ing project (Padró and Stanilovsky, 2012) to develop
and test SimpleNLG-ES. This dictionary provides
555,000 forms corresponding to more than 76.000
lemma-PoS (Part of Speech) combinations. Since
the dictionary cannot be used directly with Sim-
pleNLG, we converted the original file format into
an XML file format which is compatible with the re-
alizer.

3 Features of the Spanish language

We describe here some of the most interesting fea-
tures of the Spanish language which have been in-
corporated into SimpleNLG-ES. These involve syn-

tax, orthography, morphology and morphophonol-
ogy elements.

3.1 Syntax

Some of the most relevant features in terms of syn-
tax include the adjective positioning, the use of re-
flexive pronouns for passive clauses, relatively sim-
ple interrogative clauses, and the subjunctive con-
version of imperative statements that are used as rel-
ative clauses.

Verb phrase: Verb phrases are in structure sim-
ilar to English verb phrases. Among the most in-
teresting verb phrase features of the Spanish lan-
guage for which we have added support, the con-
struction of verb clauses without subject using the
verb “haber”, is expressed as “hay” (which actually
means “there is/are”). Likewise, passive clauses,
which are less common in Spanish, can be con-
structed by adding the reflexive pronoun “se”. For
instance, “se crearon tres prototipos” means “three
prototypes were created”.

Noun phrase: Noun phrases follow a similar pat-
tern to their English counterpart, with a determiner,
a noun, and one or more adjectives. The main dif-
ference is that adjectives are usually positioned after
the noun, although they can also be positioned be-
fore the noun for emphatic purposes or slight differ-
ences in meaning. For instance, “that good man”
can be expressed as “ese hombre bueno” or “ese
buen hombre”.

A specific feature involving noun phrases when
used as indirect objects is that a preposition ‘a’ has
to be attached before the noun phrase. For instance,
“I gave the kids a toy” would be expressed as “Le
di un juguete a los niños”. This actually coincides
with the less used English alternative, “I gave a toy
to the kids”.

Interrogative clause: Interrogative clauses are
formed in many cases by simply adding the proper
punctuation signs at the beginning and end of a sen-
tence. For instance, a simple statement converted
into a yes/no question like “you want to eat”→ “do
you want to eat?” would be expressed as “quieres
comer”→ “¿quieres comer?”.

In the case of a ‘who’ question, where this particle
plays the role of an indirect object, the beginning of

145



the question incorporates a preposition ‘a’, just like
in the indirect object case described above for the
noun phrase. For instance, “Who do you prefer?”
would be expressed as “¿A quién prefieres?”.

Relative clause: In the case of relative clauses,
subordinate imperative sentences are transformed
into subjunctive. For instance, “Throw away the
stones.” → “I want you to throw away the stones.”,
would be expressed as “Tira las piedras.” →
“Quiero que tires las piedras.” (“I want that you
throw away the stones”, literally translated).

3.2 Orthography
Most general orthography rules that are used in En-
glish also apply to Spanish, such as beginning sen-
tences with capital letters or punctuation using com-
mas and dots. Thus, in SimpleNLG-ES most orthog-
raphy code is shared for both languages.

In Spanish there exist orthographic rules that de-
termine whether specific letters within words must
include a tilde, a diacritical mark that helps de-
termine the word pronunciation. For example, in
‘pretérito’ the tilde over the ‘e’ letter implies a stress
in the pronunciation for that syllable. In our case, the
Freeling lexicon already provides the correct forms
of the words, including tildes. This allowed us to
avoid including the related orthography rules for de-
termining tildes, which involve identifying syllables
and ending letters for words.

In fact, the only Spanish orthographic rule we had
to add is the inclusion of the interrogative particle
‘¿’ that marks the beginning of an interrogative sen-
tence.

3.3 Morphology
Gender and number: Determiners, adjectives
and some nouns must be inflected in gender and
number. In our case the lexicon supports all inflec-
tions for base words, but we have also included sev-
eral rules for inflection of plurals for regular nouns.

Verb tenses: As in other languages, in Spanish
there exist regular and irregular verbs. We have in-
cluded in SimpleNLG-ES the standard rules for in-
flecting regular verbs, while irregular verbal forms
are provided by the lexicon. Moreover, verbs in
Spanish can be inflected for several modalities (in-
dicative, subjunctive, imperative) and many differ-

ent tenses. Tenses involve simple and compound
forms using the auxiliar verb “haber” (to have). All
of them are correctly supported by SimpleNLG-ES.

In order to illustrate the complexity of the ver-
bal system in Spanish, which is supported by
SimpleNLG-ES, consider the English sentence “I
had eaten”. In Spanish, depending on the context,
this could correspond to the indicative compound
tense named pretérito pluscuamperfecto “yo habı́a
comido” or to the preterito perfecto compuesto “yo
hube comido”. At the same time, “if I had eaten”
would correspond to the subjunctive pretérito plus-
cuamperfecto “si yo hubiera comido” or “si yo
hubiese comido” (this tense admits two different
forms). Thus, depending on the context of the sen-
tence, “I had eaten” could correspond in Spanish to
three different tenses, four different realizations, and
two different modalities.

3.4 Morphophonology
The Spanish language is not as rich as other
close languages in terms of morphophonology rules.
However, there exist two main contractions between
the prepositions ‘a’ and ‘de’, and the masculine sin-
gular determinant ‘el’ that are always used:

• “a el”→ ‘al’ (to the)
• “de el”→ ‘del’ (of the)

Other contractions are used in a more colloquial
spoken context, such as “para atrás” → “patrás”
(backwards) and “para adelante” → “palante”
(forwards), but these are not officially recognized
by the Real Academia Española (the official organ-
ism that regulates the Spanish language). Thus,
SimpleNLG-ES includes only support for ‘al’ and
‘del’.

4 Test and use

We have tested our adaptation of SimpleNLG for
Spanish in different ways. Firstly, we adapted the
existing tests for the English language version, as
many of the features tested also apply to Span-
ish. These tests, built using a unit testing frame-
work, check the functioning of the library at differ-
ent levels, by comparing if the text strings generated
by the library match the correct expected results.
SimpleNLG-ES passed all these tests successfully.

146



Secondly, we tested SimpleNLG-ES in the real
data-to-text service GALiWeather (Ramos-Soto et
al., 2015), which is a template-based NLG system
that was deployed in May 2015 as a public service
for the Official Meteorology Agency (MeteoGalicia,
2000) of Galicia (NW Spain). GALiWeather pro-
duces automatically daily operational weather fore-
casts for each of the 314 municipalities in Galicia.

Specifically, we refactorized and adapted GALi-
Weather, to perform realization using SimpleNLG
for Spanish. Tests consisted of 76 different real
weather forecasts produced since November 2016,
which were generated for the same input data. The
corresponding forecast texts were generated using
both approaches (GALiWeather’s original template-
based and SimpleNLG-ES realizations) and their
strings were matched using unit testing assertion
methods.

Only in 7 out of the 76 testing examples (9%),
the same non-relevant difference was found between
pairs of texts generated for the same input data. This
corresponded to the case where the Spanish reflex-
ive pronoun ‘se’ appeared. In Spanish, this pronoun
can be placed separately or attached to a verb with
no changes in meaning, as in “se podrán encontrar”
or “podrán encontrarse”. The templates use the lat-
ter case, while our adaptation of SimpleNLG applies
the former rule:

• Expected (template-based GALiWeather): “Se
espera que los cielos alternen periodos muy nu-
bosos con otros parcialmente nubosos, aunque
ocasionalmente podrán encontrarse poco nu-
bosos o despejados.”

• Actual (SimpleNLG-ES): “Se espera que los
cielos alternen periodos muy nubosos con otros
parcialmente nubosos, aunque ocasionalmente
se podrán encontrar poco nubosos o despeja-
dos.”

In order to further test and refine the library, we
are also currently using SimpleNLG-ES in three dif-
ferent projects for the development of data-to-text
systems in new domains, with satisfactory results.
The first project is in the environmental information
domain, also in cooperation with the Galician Me-
teorology Agency, for automatically generating tex-
tual meteorological warnings following the guide-

lines of the European Meteoalarm service (EUMET-
Net, 2007). The second project focuses on providing
textual descriptions and explanations in natural lan-
guage about a number of official statistical data and
indicators. Finally, the third project is in the busi-
ness intelligence information realm.

5 Documentation and release

SimpleNLG-ES has been thoroughly documented.
Specifically, the source code maintains the original
documentation style of SimpleNLG in English. We
have also adapted and translated the original docu-
mentation and tutorial into Spanish.

The source code of SimpleNLG-ES and its asso-
ciated documentation are available on GitHub (Ale-
jandro Ramos-Soto, 2017).

6 Conclusions

We have described in this paper the most relevant
features of our adaptation SimpleNLG-ES of the re-
alizer SimpleNLG for the Spanish language. This
version provides an extensive support for the most
common usage of Spanish, using a comprehensive
lexicon that covers most of the common Spanish vo-
cabulary and all its inflections.

SimpleNLG-ES has been tested through various
means. Moreover, the library is currently being used
in three different projects for the development of
real D2T systems in the meteorological, statistical
data information, and business intelligence applica-
tion domains. As current and near future work, we
will extend the library to also support the Galician
language.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by TIN2014-56633-C3-
1-R and TIN2014-56633-C3-3-R projects from the
Spanish “Ministerio de Economı́a y Competitivi-
dad” and by the “Consellerı́a de Cultura, Educación
e Ordenación Universitaria” (accreditation 2016-
2019, ED431G/08) and the European Regional De-
velopment Fund (ERDF). A. Ramos-Soto is funded
by the “Consellerı́a de Cultura, Educación e Orde-
nación Universitaria” (under the Postdoctoral Fel-
lowship accreditation ED481B 2017/030).

147



References
Alberto Bugarı́n Alejandro Ramos-Soto, Julio

Janeiro-Gallardo. 2017. SimpleNLG-ES on
GitHub. https://github.com/citiususc/
simplenlg-es. Accessed: 2017-10-03.

Marcel Bollmann, 2011. Proceedings of the 13th Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Generation,
chapter Adapting SimpleNLG to German, pages 133–
138. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rodrigo de Oliveira and Somayajulu Sripada, 2014.
Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conference (INLG), chapter Adapt-
ing SimpleNLG for Brazilian Portuguese realisation,
pages 93–94. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Sekhar Sasi Raja Dokkara, Verma Suresh Penumathsa,
and Gowri Somayajulu Sripada, 2015. Proceedings
of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation (ENLG), chapter A Simple Surface Real-
ization Engine for Telugu, pages 1–8. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

EUMETNet. 2007. Meteoalarm web-
site. www.meteoalarm.eu. http://www.
meteoalarm.eu. Accessed: 2017-05-12.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter, 2009. Proceedings of the
12th European Workshop on Natural Language Gen-
eration (ENLG 2009), chapter SimpleNLG: A Reali-
sation Engine for Practical Applications, pages 90–93.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alessandro Mazzei, Cristina Battaglino, and Cristina
Bosco, 2016. Proceedings of the 9th International
Natural Language Generation conference, chapter
SimpleNLG-IT: adapting SimpleNLG to Italian, pages
184–192. Association for Computational Linguistics.

MeteoGalicia. 2000. Meteogalicia opera-
tional forecasting website for municipali-
ties. www.meteogalicia.gal. http://www.
meteogalicia.gal/web/predicion/
localidades/localidadesIndex.action?
idZona=15078. Accessed: 2017-05-12.

Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freeling
3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Proceedings of
the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA.

RAE. 2011. Nueva gramática de la lengua
española. http://www.rae.es/recursos/
gramatica/nueva-gramatica. Accessed:
2017-05-10.

A. Ramos-Soto, A. Bugarı́n, S. Barro, and J. Taboada.
2015. Linguistic descriptions for automatic genera-
tion of textual short-term weather forecasts on real pre-
diction data. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems,
23(1):44 – 57.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge University
Press.

Ehud Reiter. 2017. Why isnt there more
open-source NLG software? https:
//ehudreiter.com/2017/03/17/
open-source-nlg-software/. Accessed:
2017-05-10.

Damian Jozef Trzpis. 2015. Adaptación de una her-
ramienta de generación de lenguaje natural al idioma
español. Master Thesis.

Pierre-Luc Vaudry and Guy Lapalme, 2013. Proceedings
of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, chapter Adapting SimpleNLG for Bilin-
gual English-French Realisation, pages 183–187. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

148


