









































Microsoft Word - W17-1016.docx


Dependency Structure of Binary Conjunctions 
(of the IF…, THEN… Type) 

Igor Mel’čuk 
University of Montreal 

Department of Linguistics and Translation 
Observatoire de linguistique Sens-Texte 

Canada 
igor.melcuk@umontreal.ca 

Abstract 

The dependency surface-syntactic structure 
is proposed, within the Meaning-Text 
framework, for binary conjunctions of the 
IF–THEN type; e.g.: 

IF→Y, THEN←X 
A universal typology of conjunctions is 
sketched, and three examples of English 
binary conjunctions are given. Binary 
conjunctions are “discontinuous” phrasemes-
idioms, collocations and formulemes that 
have to be considered together with their 
actants, since there are no direct syntactic 
links between their components. Full lexical 
entries for two Russian binary conjunctions 
are presented, supplied with linguistic 
comments, and deep-syntactic rules ensuring 
the expansion of a deep-syntactic binary 
conjunction node into the corresponding 
surface-syntactic tree are illustrated. 

1 The Syntactic Structure of a Binary 
Conjunction 

This paper examines subordinating and coordi-
nating binary conjunctions (or correlative sub-
ordinators/coordinators, as they are known in 
the literature: Quirk et al. 1991: 935–941, 999–
1001). The typical examples are the subordin-
ating conjunction IF…, THEN… and the coordin-
ating conjunction EITHER…, OR… The discus-
sion is carried out within the Meaning-Text 
approach (see Mel’čuk 1974, 2012, 2016b). 

In sentence (1) dependency relations between 
lexemes are obvious, except for THEN, the second 
component of the conjunction IF…, THEN…: 

(1) If A→and→B are→equal, then B←follows→C. 

The dependency for THEN is proposed in what 
follows. 

Without THEN the superordinate clause can 
linearly precede or follow the subordinate 
clause with IF; but with THEN it can only 
follow. This gives the idea to make this THEN 
dependent on IF: IF–r→THEN; as a result, the 
binary conjunction IF…, THEN… can be stored 
in the lexicon exactly in the form of this syn-
tactic subtree. Such a description had been 
tacitly accepted for almost half a century: 

• In Mel’čuk 1974: 231, No. 31, (e), the surface-
syntactic relation [SSyntRel] r between IF and 
THEN was called “1st auxiliary.” 
• In Mel’čuk & Pertsov 1987: 331, No. 19.1, it
was rebaptized “binary-junctive.” 
• In Iomdin 2010: 43, it appears under the name
of “correlative SSyntRel.” 
• In Mel’čuk 2012a: 143, No. 51, it is “correlative-
auxiliary.” 

However, this syntactic description of binary 
conjunctions contradicts the definition of sur-
face-syntactic dependency (or, more precisely, 
that of surface-syntactic relation), which was 
advanced in Mel’čuk 1988: 130–144 and has 
been used as such since; see its newer formula-
tions, for instance, in Mel’čuk 2009: 25–40 and 
Mel’čuk 2015b: 411–433. In order to lay bare 
this contradiction, only the first part of this 
definition—namdely Criterion A—is needed, 
strictly speaking. Nevertheless, to facilitate the 
task of the reader I will cite here the whole 
definition—that is, the full set of criteria for 
SSyntRels. (Of course many substantial expla-
nations and interesting special cases have to be 
bypassed.) 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 127-134,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

127



2 Criteria for Surface-Syntactic 
Dependencies (= Surface-Syntactic 

Relations) 

NB: Given the limitations of space and time, the 
formulations below are approximate and 

controversial cases are not considered; for 

important details, see the above references. 

Criterion A: PRESENCE of a syntactic depen-

dency between two lexemes in an utterance 

(prosodic unity of and linear arrangement in the 

configuration L1–synt–L2) 

In a given utterance, the lexemes L1 and L2 can 

have a direct Synt-dependency link (= they can 

form a configuration L1–synt–L2), if and only if 

both Conditions 1 and 2 are simultaneously 

satisfied: 

Condition 1 
(a) General case 

L1 and L2 can form a phrase of L, such as 

N—V, V—N, ADJ—N, PREP—N, ADV—ADJ, etc. 
(b) Special case 

L1 and L2 cannot form a phrase, but the lexemes 

L1, L2 and configurations of lexemes of the set 

{Li} appearing in the same utterance can, such 

that the following are also phrases of L: 

• L1→{Li-1} L2→{Li-2}

• L1→{Li-1} and L2→{Li-2}

Condition 2 
The linear position of one of the lexemes L1 and 

L2 in the utterance under consideration must be 

specified with respect to the other. 

Examples 

Case (b) covers configurations of two types: 

(i) L1→L(PREP)2→L(N){i-2}, as in oneL1 ofL2 themL{i-2}

Here, *one→of cannot be a phrase, while the utter-

ances of→them and one→of→them are phrases, 

having of and one as their heads. Therefore, a 

syntactic link between ONE and OF is allowed. 

(ii) L1→{L{i-1}} L(CONJ)2→{L{i-2}}, as in 

It←becameL1→{obvious}{Li-1} thatL2→{he was

there}{Li-2}.
1

1 For the surface-syntactic relations mentioned in this 

paper, see Mel’čuk 2015c and 2016a. 

Here, *became→that cannot be a phrase, while 

became→obvious and that→{he was there} are 

phrases, with became and that as their heads; 

thus, BECOME and THAT can be considered 

syntactically linked. 

Condition 1 of Criterion A requires that, in 

order to have a direct syntactic link in the given 

utterance, two lexemes Lʹ and Lʹʹ could form a 

phrase of the language. 

Condition 2 of Criterion A requires that, in 

order for two lexemes Lʹ and Lʹʹ to have a 

direct syntactic link in the given utterance, one 

of them must determine the linear position of 

the other. 

These conditions are logically independent: 

—In He took in his knapsack a book full of 

vowels [Keats], Condition 1 allows the adjective 

FULL to depend on KNAPSACK (full knapsack is 

a phrase of English), but Condition 2 does not. 

—In I wish I was either in your arms, or that a 

thunderbolt would strike me [Keats], Condition 2 

allows the particle EITHER to depend on OR 

(either has to precede the governor of or), but 

Condition 1 does not. 

Criteria B1-B3: DIRECTION of the syntactic de-

pendency between two lexemes in an utterance 

Criterion B1 (passive syntactic valence
2
 of the 

phrase L1–synt–L2)

In a phrase L1–synt–L2 the lexeme L1 is the 

syntactic governor of L2, or the head of the 

phrase L1–synt–L2, if L1 determines the passive 

syntactic valence of the phrase to a greater 

extent than L2. 

Example 

The passive valence of the phrase John—and—

Mary is that of a noun (it can be the subject and 

the direct object of a verb, the object of a pre-

position, an apposition, etc.); the passive 

valence of the phrase and—Mary is determined 

by AND; therefore, 

MARY–synt→AND–synt→JOHN. 

This is actually the general schema for coor-

dinating conjunctions: 

L1–synt→CONJ(coord)–synt→L2. 

Criterion B2 (morphological contact point in the 

phrase L1–synt–L2) 

In a phrase L1–synt–L2, where both L1 and L2 have 

the same syntactic properties (and influence the 

2 Passive syntactic valence of an LU L is the set of all 

possible syntactic governors of L. 

pseudo-subjectival 

128



 

 
 

passive valence of L1–synt–L2 to the same 
degree), the lexeme L1 is the syntactic governor 
of L2, or the head of the phrase L1–synt–L2, if L1 
determines the morphological behavior of the 
phrase to a greater extent than L2. 
Example 
In the French phrase Bibliothèque Mitterand 
‘Mitterand Library’ the head is BIBLIOTHÈQUE 
since the phrase imposes the agreement of the 
adjective in the feminine gender (the gender of 
BIBLIOTHÈQUE): La Bibliothèque Mitterand est 
spaci+euse(fem) ‘The Mitterand Library is spaci-
ous’. 
Criterion B3 (denotation of the phrase L1–synt–L2) 

In a phrase L1–synt–L2, where both L1 and L2 
have the same syntactic and morphological 
properties (and influence the passive valence 
and morphological behavior of L1–synt–L2 to the 
same degree), the lexeme L1 is the syntactic 
governor of L2, or the head of the phrase L1–
synt–L2, if L1 determines the denotation of L1–
synt–L2 to a greater extent than L2. 
Example 
The denotation of the phrase [the American] 
writer—Dos_Pasos is a real person (an Ame-
rican writer having a particular name), not the 
name Dos_Pasos; therefore, we have 

WRITER–synt→DOS_PASOS. 

Criteria B1–B3 form a hierarchy: 
B1 > B2 > B3 

This means that if Criterion B1 is applicable, it 
determines the syntactic governor; otherwise, 
Criterion B2 is pressed into action, and if 
applicable, it determines the syntactic gover-
nor; if it also fails, Criterion B3 is supposed to 
solve the problem. 
Criteria C1-C3: TYPE of the syntactic depen-
dency between two lexemes in an utterance 
Criterion C1 (presence of semantic contrast: Mini-
mal Pair test) 
Notation: wi(L) is a wordform of lexeme L. 
A hypothetical SSyntRel r should not describe 
two phrases 

w1(L1)–r→w2(L2) and w3(L1)–r→w4(L2), 
if 1) they contrast semantically 

[‘w1(L1)–r→w2(L2)’ ≠ ‘w3(L1)–r→w4(L2)’], 
and 

2) they formally differ only by some syntact-
ic means of expression—i.e., by word order, 
syntactic prosody, or syntactic grammemes. 
In such a case, r should be split into two dif-
ferent SSyntRels, r1 and r2. 

Example 
Rus. žena–synt→druga ‘wife of.friend’ and žena–
synt→drug ‘wife, who is a friend’ should be 
described by two different SSyntRels (actantial-
attributive and qualifying-appositive), since these 
phrases semantically contrast and formally 
differ only by the case of DRUG: the genitive in 
the first phrase and the same case as that of 
ŽENA in the second. 
Criterion C2 (syntactic substitutability: Substitu-
tion test) 
A SSyntRel r must have a prototypical dependent 
that is allowable with any governor. 
Example 
have–synt→been and be–synt→going should be 
described by two different SSyntRels (perfect-
analytical and progressive-analytical) since there is no 
word-class whose element is possible as a 
dependent both with HAVE and BE within an 
analytical form. 
Criterion C3 (no limited repeatability: Cooccur-
rence test) 
A SSyntRel r must be either unlimitedly re-
peatable or non-repeatable—that is, it cannot 
be limitedly repeatable. 
Example 

write–synt→after the lunch, write–synt→on the 
next line, write–synt→over the door etc. can all 
be described by the same SSyntRel: circumstant-
ial, since the number of these dependents is the-
oretically unlimited. On the contrary, [They] 
returned–synt→all and [They] returned–synt→drunk 
require two different SSyntRels (floating-copredicative 
and subject-copredicative), since otherwise the 
dependent will be repeatable exactly twice. 

Now we are fully equipped to take on the 
problem formulated in Section 1: What is the 
dependency structure of a binary conjunction? 

3 The Dependency Description for 
Binary Conjunctions 

Consider the expression “IF Y, THEN X”: 
—The expression *IF THEN is not a phrase of 
English; 
—IFL2 forms a phrase with the subordinate 
clause Y{Li-2}, and THENL1, with the superord-
inate clause X{Li-1}; 
—IFL2 subordinates the Main Verb of Y and is 
itself subordinated to the Main Verb1 of X{Li-1}: 

MV(X{Li-1})→IFL2→MV(Y{Li-2}), 

129



 

 
 

thus corresponding to Case (b) of Condition 1 
of Criterion A; 
—THEN is subordinated to the Main Verb of 
X{Li-1}. 

As a result, we have the following SSynt-
structure for a subordinating binary conjunction 
(both of its components depend on the Main 
Verb of the superordinate clause): 
 

IF→Y, THEN←X. 

This proposal is aimed at correcting a 
mistake that has been being perpetrated for 
many years; it concerns all the binary conjunc-
tions and a motley set of expressions similar to 
them. 

4 Conjunctions: A Typology 
A sketch of conjunction typology will give the 
discussion a certain depth:, it will make clear 
that the proposed solution is typologically 
plausible. 

• According to their meaning/function, con-
junctions are divided in two major families: 
subordinating vs. coordinating. These two fa-
milies are very different in their properties and 
behavior—as different as two major opposed 
ways of syntactic linking: subordination and 
coordination. 

• According to their form, conjunctions are 
classified along two independent axes: 
—the number of components: single (just one 
component) vs. binary (two components) vs. 
repeated (theoretically unlimited repetition of 
the second component); 

 

—the structure of components: simple (all 
components are monolexemic) vs. compound 
(at least one component is plurilexemic). 

A binary or repeated conjunction is neces-
sarily linearly discontinuous—its components 
cannot be in linear contact. (In a sentence like 
He is an either-or person we do not have a 
binary conjunction used as such, but its meta-
linguistic name as a premodifier.)  

Since repeated conjunctions can be only co-
ordinating, there are 10 logically possible 
classes of conjunctions, see Table 1 below. 
(Since there are no English examples for Class 
10, Russian conjunctions are supplied; raised 
semi-brackets ˹ ˺ enclose idioms.) 

5 Binary Conjunctions in English 
Here is a (non-exhaustive) list of English 
binary conjunctions. 
 Subordinating 
IF…, (THEN)… 

˹NO SOONER…, THAN2…˺ 
˹THE3…, THE2…˺ 

 

 Coordinating 
 ˹BOTH… AND…˺ 
 ˹EITHER… OR…˺ 
˹NEITHER… NOR…˺ 
NOT ONLY…, BUT ALSO…

 NOT SO MUCH…, AS… 

The first component of a coordinating binary 
conjunction and the second component of a 
subordinating binary conjunction are them-
selves not conjunctions, but, respectively, 
adjectives or particles, which depend on an 
element in the corresponding clause—via the 
modificative, the auxiliary or the restrictive SSyntRel 
(according to the conjunction). 

 

  

 simple compound 
 simple conjunctions compound conjunctions 
 subordinating coordinating subordinating coordinating 

 
 single 

1 
IF, WHEN, 

  ALTHOUGH 

2 
AND, OR, BUT 

3 
˹AS SOON AS˺ 

4 
˹AS WELL AS˺, ˹LET ALONE˺ 

 
 binary 

5 
IF…, (THEN)… 

 ˹THE…, THE…˺ 

6 
˹BOTH… AND…˺,   ˹EITHER… OR…˺, 
˹NEITHER… NOR…˺  

7 
 ˹NO SOONER…, THAN2…˺ 

 

8 
NOT SO MUCH…, AS… 
NOT ONLY…, BUT ALSO… 

 
 repeated ——— 

9 
  ˹EITHER…, OR…, OR…, OR…˺ 
˹NEITHER…, NOR…, NOR…, NOR…˺

——— 
10 

Rus. ˹TO LI…, TO LI…, TO LI…˺ 
‘whether…, or…, or…’ 

Table 1: Classes of conjunctions 
 

130



 

 
 

circumstantial 
auxiliary

subord-conjunct comparative

r 

The following three examples will be helpful. 
 

˹NO SOONER – THAN2˺: 
deep binary subordinating conjunction, consist-
ing of the surface subordinating conjunction 
˹NO SOONER˺ and the particle THAN2 (THAN1 is 
a comparative conjunction). 
 

 
 
(2) No←sooner→had I arrived than the kids rushed 

towards me. 

˹THE3 – THE2˺: 
deep binary subordinating conjunction, consisting 
of the surface subordinating conjunction THE3 and 
the particle THE2 (THE1 is the definite article). 

(3) a. 
  
The higher you climb the←auxil–colder it←gets. 

The surface-syntactic structure [SSyntS] for 
a synonymous sentence with a different order-
ing of the superordinate and subordinate 
clauses is almost the same as the SSyntS for 
sentence (3a), but with THE2 omitted: 

 

b. It←gets→colder the higher you climb. 
˹EITHER – OR˺: 
deep binary coordinating conjunction, consist-
ing of the surface coordinating conjunction OR 
and the particle EITHER. 

(4) I’ll have either←auxiliary–tacos–coord→or–[a]– 
–coord-conjunctional→pizza. 

6 Phraseological Nature of Binary 
Conjunctions 

A binary conjunction is a plurilexemic expres-
sion that is not free: it is a phraseme (Mel’čuk 
2015b: 263–362). However, it is quite an un-
common phraseme: its components are not 
directly syntactically linked. Such syntactically 
discontinuous phrasemes have not been consid-
ered before. Indeed, a phraseme is “a phrase 
that…,” while IF – THEN or EITHER – OR are 
obviously not phrases. Therefore, one has to 
consider ta binary conjunction together with the 
lexical expressions (in this case, clauses) that 
implement its actants: IF Y, THEN X and 
EITHER Y OR X are bona fide phrases. It is 
under this form that they must be stored in the 
lexicon. (For more on the semantic, deep-
syntactic and surface-syntactic representation 
of binary conjunctions, see Section 8.) 

But if binary conjunctions are phrasemes, 
what type of phraseme are they? 

Five of the English binary conjunctions—˹NO 
SOONER Y, THAN2 Х˺; ˹THE3 Y, THE2 Х˺; ˹BOTH X 
AND Y˺; ˹EITHER X OR Y˺ and ˹NEITHER X NOR 
Y˺ —are idioms: they are non-compositional. 

The conjunctions NOT SO MUCH X, AS Y and 
NOT ONLY X, BUT ALSO Y are formulemes (a 
subtype of cliché; Mel’čuk 2015a)—composi-
tional, but completely fixed expressions. 

And the binary conjunction IF Y, THEN X is a 
collocation, although of an unusual type: there 
is no direct syntactic link between the base and 
the collocate. In this collocation, the base is the 
first component (IF), which controls the use of 
the second component (the collocate THEN); the 
latter can be optional, must follow the base and 
occupies the initial linear position in the 
superordinate clause. 

Binary conjunctions are characterized by 
syntactic discontinuity: they form phrases only 
together with their actants, since their own 
components are syntactically not directly linked 
to each other. In this, they are unlike almost all 
other phrasemes. However, they share this 
feature with a few idioms, which it seems 
worthwhile to quote here: 

 

˹NOTHING→IF NOT←X(ADJ)˺ ≈ ‘extremely’: 
Barbara was nothing if not feminine. 

Rus. ˹PRI VSËM←X-e˺ ‘despite X’ (Apresjan 2014): 
pri vsëm ego talante ‘despite [lit. ‘with all’] his 
talent’ 

 
Rus. ˹TO LI  EŠČË←X(V)˺ ‘I signal that X(V) will 
take place, TO referring to something very bad’: 
To li ty togda eščë uvidiš´! ‘I signal that what 
you will then see will be very bad’ [lit. ‘That 
whether you then still will.see!’]. 
 

Fr. ˹EN TOUT←X(N)˺ 
‘while being completely ADJ(X)’: 

Je te le dis en toute amitié 
‘I tell you this being completely [your] friend 
[lit. ‘in all friendship’]’. 

7 An Illustration: Russian Binary 
Conjunctions KAK…, TAK I… lit. 
‘as…, so also…’ 

To demonstrate my proposal in action, I will 
offer here the lexicographic descriptions—that 
is, lexical entries—for two Russian binary 
compound conjunctions: 

comparative subord-conjunct 

131



 

 
 

ČITAT´ ‘read’ 

KNIGAPL ‘books’ 

ANGLIJSKIJ ‘English’

FRANCUZSKIJ 
‘French’ I ‘also’ 

TAK ‘so’ 

ON 
‘he’ 

KAK 
‘as’ auxiliary 

subjectival dir-objectival 

restrictive 

coord-conjunctional 

coordinative 

modificative 

SIDET´ lit. ‘sit’

NAD ‘over’

STAT´JASG
‘paper’

ON 
‘he’ 

subjectival oblique-objectival

prepositional

KAK ‘as’

subord-conjunctional 

ZASNUT´ ‘fall asleep’  

ON 
‘he’ 

subjectival 
circumstantial 

I 
‘also’ TAK 

‘so’ 

auxiliary restr 

the coordinating ˹KAK X, TAK I Y˺1 ≈ ‘both X 
and Y’, see (5), and 
the subordinating ˹KAK Y, TAK (I) X˺2 ≈ ‘as Y, X’, 
see (6). 

First, two illustrative sentences and their 
surface-syntactic structures. 
 (5) Russian 
On čitaet kak anglijskie, tak i francuzskie knigi. 
he reads  as English so  also French books 
‘He reads both English and French books’. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1:  
Surface-Syntactic Structure of Sentence (5) 

In (5), KAK ‘as’ is not a conjunction, but a 
particle depending on the following adjective. 
Similarly, I is a particle meaning ‘also’, homo-
nymous with the coordinating conjunction I 
‘and’. But TAK ‘so’ appears here as a coordinat-
ing conjunction (anglijskie–coord→tak–(i)–coord-
conjunct→francuzskie by analo-gy with anglijskie–
coord→i–coord-conjunct→francuzskie). 

 (6) Russian 
Kak sidel   on nad stat´ëj, tak on i  zasnul. 
as worked he  on paper so he also fell.asleep 
‘As he was.working on [his] paper, he fell asleep’. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The double-headed dashed arrow indicates core-
ference; it is part of the referential structure, one of 
the four structures composing the surface-syntactic 
representation of a sentence. 

Figure 2: 
Surface-Syntactic Structure of Sentence (6) 

In (6), TAK ‘so’ is not a manner adverb, but a 
component of the second part of a binary com-
pound conjunction; it is semantically empty and is 
positioned always at the beginning of the su-
perordinate clause. This is why it needs a special 
auxiliary SSyntRel. It links the second component 
of some binary subordinating con-junctions to the 
head of the superordinate clause, cf. (2). 
 

The conjunctions ˹KAK X TAK I Y˺1 and ˹KAK 
Y, TAK I X˺2 are: 

• homonymous and belong to two different 
vocables; 

• idioms, since their meanings are by no means 
compositional; 

• syntactically discontinuous in that *kak tak i is 
not a phrase of Russian: only kak X, tak i Y is a 
phrase. 

Here are the lexical entries of both Russian 
binary compound conjunctions. (For the orga-
nization of a lexical entry of the Explanatory 
Combinatorial Dictionary—a special lexicon 
of the Meaning-Text approach, see, among 
others, Mel’čuk 2013: Ch. 11.) 

˹KAK X, TAK I Y˺1 ≈ ‘both X and Y’: idiom, deep 
binary compound coordinating conjunction (Sannikov 
2008: 302–303); written language. 
Definition 
˹kak X, tak i Y˺1: ‘i X, i Y’ 
[lit. ‘as X, so also Y’] 
Government Pattern 
X  I Y  II  
1. L 1. L (“L” stands for ‘lexeme’3) 

1) L ≠ ?ADJ(short), ?PREDICATIVE 
(Sannikov 2008: 303) 

?On byl kak bolen, tak i goloden  
‘He was both sick and hungry’ 
(bolen and goloden are short adjectives). 
Surface-Syntactic Structure 
KAK←auxil–Y–coord→TAK–coord-conjunct→X–restr→I 
Lexical Functions 
Syn : i X, i Y ≈ ‘both X and Y’ 
Anti : ni X, ni Y ≈ ‘neither X nor Y’ 
Examples 
V ètoj proporcii izmenjaetsja kak cena, tak, 
razumeetsja, i bogatstvo 
lit. ‘In this proportion changes as price, so, of 
course, also wealth’. 
Tam vy smožete kak vinogradnogo soka vypit´, 
tak i černiki poest´ 
lit. ‘There you will.be.able as grape juice drink, 
so also blackberries eat’. 

                                                           
3 Thus, X and Y cannot be expressed by clauses. 

132



 

 
 

circumstantial 

 

 

˹NO SOONER 
 THAN2˺ 

L(‘X’)

L(‘Y’)

II

ATTR  

 

 

 

NO_SOONER 

L(‘X’) 

circumstantial 

L(‘Y’) 

subord-conjunctional

THAN2
auxiliary



  

 L(‘X’)

L(‘Y’)

II

ATTR  

 

IF 

L(‘X’) 

circumstantial 

L(‘Y’) 

coord-conjunctional



THEN
ATTR THENauxiliary

Ja kak sebe takogo ne pozvoljal, tak i ne poz-
voljaju lit. ‘I as to.myself such.things didn’t 
allow, so also don’t allow’ = ‘As I didn’t allow 
this to myself before, so I do not now’. 
Oba filosofa izučali kak fiziku, tak i kosmo-
logiju 
lit. ‘Both philosophers studied as physics, so 
also cosmology’. 

˹KAK Y, TAK (I) X˺2 ≈ ‘as Y, X’: idiom, deep binary 
compound subordinating conjunction; colloquial style. 

Definition 
˹kak Y, tak i X˺2: ‘immediately at/since the 

moment of Y, X’ 
[lit. ‘as Y, so also X’] 
Government Pattern 

X  I Y  II 
1. CLAUSE 1. CLAUSE 

Surface-Syntactic Structure 
 

KAK–subord-conjunctional→Y TAK←auxil–X–restr→I 
Linear Order 

1. The particle TAK is initial in the superor-
dinate clause. 

2. The subordinate clause introduced by 
KAK precedes the superordinate clause. 

3. The conjunction KAK is not necessarily 
initial in the subordinate clause, but it neces-
sarily precedes its Main Verb. 

4. If the particle I is omitted, there must be at 
least one full lexeme between TAK and the 
Main Verb of the superordinate clause. 
Examples 
Kak pervyj raz sxodil ja v ataku, tak ot very i 
otpal 
lit. ‘As first time went I in attack, so from faith 
[I] also fell.away’ = ‘After my first attack I lost 
my faith’. 
Kak on rodilsja v Armavire, tak tam i vyros 
lit. ‘As he was.born in Armavir, so there [he] 
also grew.up’. 
Èta dama kak podnjala ruku “za”, tak i ne 
opustila eë, kogda golosovali “protiv” 
lit. ‘This lady as rose hand for, so [she] also 
didn’t lower it when [people] were voting 
against’. 
Kak budeš´ s nej govorit´, tak vsë (i) pojmëš´ 
lit. ‘As [you] will with her talk, so everything 
[you] also will.understand’. 

8 Deep-Syntactic Rules for Binary 
Conjunctions 

Finally I would like to illustrate the Sem-rules 
and DSynt-rules that ensure the treatment of a 
binary conjunction. Two examples will be 
given: for a binary conjunction that is an idiom 
(˹NO SOONER Y, THAN2 X˺) and  for one that is 
a collocation (IF Y, THEN X). 
 

Example 1 
Sem-structure 

‘X←1–no_sooner_than2–2→Y’ 
 

DSynt-structure SSynt-structure
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Shading indicates the context: that part of the 
rule that is not manipulated by it but whose 
presence is necessary for the rule to apply. 
L(‘X’) stands for «lexical expression L of 
meaning ‘X’». 

The correspondence between these two struc-
tures constitutes a DSynt-rule for the binary com-
pound conjunction ˹NO SOONER Y, THAN2 X˺. In 
other words, this rule, as as part of its lexical 
entry, is exploited during the transition from the 
deep-syntactic structure of a sentence with this 
conjunction to its surface-syntactic structure. 

A binary conjunction that is an idiom exists as 
such only in the DSynt-structure, where it appears 
on one node. This reflects its semantic unity. 
Example 2 

Sem-structure 
‘X←1–if_then–2→Y’ 

 

DSynt-structure SSynt-structure
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

133



 

 
 

9 Conclusions 
1. A dependency syntactic structure is propos-
ed for binary conjunctions, both subordinating 
and coordinating. 
2. A universal typology of conjunctions is 
sketched, and three examples are given of 
English binary conjunctions. 
3. Binary conjunctions are “discontinuous” 
phrasemes—phrasemes that have to be consi-
dered together with their actants. 
4. The full lexical entries are presented for two 
Russian binary compound conjunctions: the 
coordinating ˹KAK X, TAK I Y˺1 ≈ ‘both X and Y’ 
and the subordinating ˹KAK Y, TAK (I) X˺2 ≈ ‘as 
Y, X’. 
5. Two sample DSynt-rules for introducing a 
binary conjunction into the SSynt-subtree are 
presented for the binary conjunctions ˹NO 
SOONER Y, THAN2 X˺ and IF Y, THEN X. 

Acknowledgments 

My most heartfelt thanks go to Margarita Alon-
so Ramos, David Beck, Lidija Iordanskaja, 
Sébastien Marengo and Jasmina Milićević, who 
read the preliminary versions of this text. 
Thanks as well to the three anonymous review-
ers for Depling-2017. 

References 
Valentina Apresjan. 2014. Syntactic Idioms across 

Languages: Corpus Evidence from Russian and 
English. Russian Linguistics, 38: 2, 187–203. 

Leonid Iomdin. 2010. Sintaksičeskie otnošenija 
[Syntactic Relations]. In: Apresjan, Ju., Bogus-
lavskij, I., Iomdin, L., Sannikov, V., Teoreti-
českie problemy russkogo sintaksisa: vzaimodej-
stvie grammatiki i slovarja, Moskvа: Jazyki sla-
vjanskix kul´tur, 21–43. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1974. Opyt teorii lingvističeskix mo-
delej «Smysl �Tekst». Semantika, sintaksis 
[Outline of a Theory of Linguistic Meaning-Text 
Models. Semantics, Syntax]. Moskva: Nauka. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory 
and Practice. Albany, N.Y.: State University of 
New York Press. 

 

 

 

 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2009. Dependency in Natural Language. 
In: Polguère & Mel’čuk (eds) 2009: 1–110. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2012a. Jazyk: ot smysla k tekstu 
[Language: from Meaning to Text]. Moskva: 
Jazyki slavjanskoj kul´tury. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2012b. Semantics: From Meaning to 
Text. [Vol. 1.] Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2013. Semantics: From Meaning to 
Text. Vol. 2. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Ben-
jamins. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2015a. Clichés, an Understudied 
Subclass of Phrasemes. Yearbook of Phraseo-
logy, 6: 55–86. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2015b. Semantics: From Meaning to 
Text. Vol. 3, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Ben-
jamins. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2015c. A General Inventory of Sur-
face-Syntactic Relations in World Languages. 
Part One. Moscow Linguistic Journal, 17: 2, 75–
103. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2016a. A General Inventory of Sur-
face-Syntactic Relations in World Languages. 
Part Two. Moscow Linguistic Journal, 18: 1, 94-
120. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2016b.  Language: From Meaning to 
Text. Moskva/Boston: Academic Studies Press. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2017. KAK …, TAK I …: čto èto za? 
[KAK…, TAK I…: What Kind of Stuff is It?]. 
Russkij jazyk v naučnom osvesčenii, No. 1 (33), 
67–85. 

Igor Mel’čuk and Nikolaj Pertsov. 1987. Surface 
Syntax of English. A Formal Model within the 
Meaning-Text Framework. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 

Alain Polguère and Igor Mel’čuk (Eds.) 2009. De-
pendency in Linguistic Description. Amsterdam/ 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

Randolph Quirk, Sydney Greenbaum, Geoffrey 
Leech, Jan Svartvik. 1991. A Comprehensive 
Grammar of the English Language. London/ 
New York: Longman. 

Vladimir Sannikov. 2008. Russkij sintaksis v se-
mantiko-pragmatičeskom prostranstve [Russian 
Syntax in Semantic-Pragmatic Space]. Moskva: 
Jazyki slavjanskix kul´tur. 

134




