



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 212–219,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Relationship Extraction based on Category of Medical Concepts from
Lexical Contexts

Anupam Mondal Dipankar Das Sivaji Bandyopadhyay
Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India
link.anupam@gmail.com, dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com,

sivaji cse ju@yahoo.com

Abstract

Medical information extraction is an
emerging task in healthcare services aim
to acquire crucial information of the con-
cepts like diseases, symptoms, and drugs
and also to identify their relations from
corpora. In the present article, we have
proposed a relationship extraction sys-
tem based on such categories of medi-
cal concepts. We have employed rule-
based as well as Support Vector Machine
(SVM) based feature-oriented approach
along with a domain-specific lexicon viz
WordNet of Medical Event (WME 2.0).
The lexicon assists in recognizing med-
ical concepts and their related features
like Parts-Of-Speech (POS), categories,
and Similar Sentiment Words (SSW). We
have opted only four fundamental cat-
egories diseases, drugs, symptoms, and
human anatomy of medical concepts as
provided in WME lexicon. Such cat-
egories play a crucial role in identify-
ing eight types of different semantic rela-
tions viz. drug-drug, disease-drug, and
human anatomy-symptom from the med-
ical context. Thereafter, we have val-
idated both rules and features-oriented
approaches and offers an average F-
Measures of 0.79 and 0.86 individually.

1 Introduction

The availability of medical documents such as re-
ports, discharge summaries, and prescriptions and
their related information are growing quickly. In
order to extract critical and crucial information,
the researchers have applied various statistical and
ontology-based approaches with well-known ma-
chine learning classifiers (Mondal et al., 2016b;

Uzuner et al., 2011). The extracted informations
are medical concepts (terms), categories (classes),
and their relations, which assist the experts such
as doctors and other medical practitioners as well
as the non-experts as patients in understanding the
problems (e.g. diseases, symptoms) and their re-
lated remedies (e.g. drugs).

The medical concepts are presented by the key
terms like words or phrases of the corpus whereas
the category refers to the fundamental classes of
medical concepts such as diseases and symptoms.
The assigned categories of medical concepts and
their in-between relations help to build a medical
annotation system. Besides, each sentence of the
corpus is presented as a medical context in this pa-
per. For an example, ”abdominal pain” denotes
the medical concept and its category is denoted by
”symptom” in the following medical context.

”Abdominal pain is a sign of early preg-
nancy.”.

In order to design our category based relation-
ship extraction system, we observed the following
major challenges:

A. The first challenge was how to identify the
medical concepts and their textual spans from un-
structured or semi-structured medical corpora. To
address this challenge, we have used WordNet of
Medical Events (WME), a domain-specific lexi-
con (Mondal et al., 2016a, 2015). The lexicon
provides a good coverage while extracting med-
ical concepts from our experimental dataset viz.
SemEval-2015 Task-61 and MedicineNet2.

B. The second challenge was how to decide the
set of categories for the medical concepts and as-
sign them. To overcome the first sub-challenge,
we adopted the help of a group of medical prac-
titioners and to cope-up with the second sub-

1http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/task6/
2http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/hp.asp212



Figure 1: An example of extracted relations using
proposed system.

challenge, we used the categorization system of
medical concepts (Mondal et al., 2017, 2016a).
The categorization system assists in assigning one
of the four medical categories such as diseases,
symptoms, drugs, and human anatomy to the con-
cepts.

C. The third and final challenge of the present
work was how to identify the relations between a
pair of medical concepts in a context and evalu-
ate the relations. To address this issue, we have
built a rule-based and a feature-based relationship
extraction systems, which help to predict the type
of relations between a pair of medical concepts.
Table 1 shows the proposed eight types of rela-
tions with illustrative examples. Besides, we have
manually prepared a labeled dataset, which con-
tains 2000 medical contexts and their tagged med-
ical concepts, categories, and relations as shown
in Figure 1.

In the present research, our primary motivation
was to build an annotation system which helps to
assign all four types of medical categories such as
diseases, symptoms, drugs, and human anatomy
and their related relations in a context. According
to the best of our knowledge, we are unable to find
any medical corpora which contain all the men-
tioned categories at a time. Afterwards, we have
discussed the contribution of the paper as follows,

I. A labeled dataset preparation by a group of
medical practitioners. The dataset has been la-
beled with medical concepts and their categories
and proposed eight types of category-based rela-
tions in a context. We have acquired the dataset
from SemEval-2015 Task-6 and MedicineNet re-
sources which contain around 2000 number of
medical contexts. The dataset helps to design and
validate the relationship extraction system.

II. Relationship extraction plays a key role in
identifying the semantic information from the cor-
pus. To extract these relations, we have proposed a
linguistic rule-based (Abacha and Zweigenbaum,
2011a; Hearst, 1992) and a feature-oriented ma-
chine learning (Rink et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2009)

approach. The rule-based patterns help to iden-
tify the specific relations from the dataset, whereas
machine learning approach assists in extracting
generalize relations with promising accuracy. For
an example, the following medical context is able
to extract disease - symptom (illustration, inflam-
mation symptom for the adnexitis disease) and
symptom - human anatomy (illustration, inflam-
mation affect the uterus) relations.

”The adnexitis disease characterizes
inflammation symptom of attachments of the
uterus human anatomy.”

The proposed relation extraction system assists
in understanding the subjective information of the
corpus. Besides, these systems guide to build var-
ious applications namely, annotation and recom-
mendation system in healthcare services.

The overall structure of the paper is as follows.
Section 2 presents the related work carried out in
this field. Section 3 describes the dataset prepara-
tion and brat representation technique. Section 4
and Section 5 present the proposed relation extrac-
tion system and its evaluation approach. Finally,
Section 6 presents the concluding remarks related
to our study.

2 Related Work

2.1 Medical Ontologies and Lexicons

Biomedical information extraction research is
challenging due to the availability of a large num-
ber of daily produced unstructured and semi-
structured medical corpus. To represent the struc-
tured corpus and extracting the subjective and con-
ceptual information from the corpus, a domain-
specific lexicon is essential (Borthwick et al.,
1998). To this end, the standard vocabularies and
ontologies such as UMLS (Unified Medical Lan-
guage System) and SNOMED-CT (Systematized
Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms), and
lexicons like MEN (Medical WordNet) and WME
(WordNet of Medical Event) have used by the re-
searchers (Smith and Fellbaum, 2004; Kilgarriff
and Fellbaum, 2000; Mondal et al., 2016a).

2.2 Medical Category and Relation
Extraction

These ontologies and lexicons assist in extracting
the relevant information from the corpus such as
medical concept categories and relations between
medical concepts.213



Relation Explanation and Example
Dr-SyDi A drug how helps to improve or cure or side effects the diseases or symptoms.

Warfarin is also used to reduce the risk of clots causing strokes or heart attacks.
Ha-SyDi A disease or symptom which effects a part of the body.

A painful inflammation of the big toe and foot.
Di-Sy The symptoms which reflect a disease.

Anal fissures typically cause pain and bleeding with bowel movements.
Dr-Dr How the drugs are related each other.

An oral lipid-lowering medicine ( trade name Zocor ) administered to reduce blood cholesterol levels;
recommended after heart attacks.

Sy-Sy How the symptoms are related each other.
A rhythmic tightening in labor of the upper uterine musculature that contracts the size of the uterus
and pushes the fetus toward the birth canal.

Di-Di How the diseases are related each other.
Kaposi’s sarcoma is a form of skin cancer that can involve internal organs.

MMT-SyDi The medical terms such as process and chemical components etc. how helps to refer the diseases or symptoms.
When you swallow or inhale these highly toxic products, you can experience life-threatening symptoms.

Ha-Ha How various body parts are related or effected each other under a situation.
Nodding movement of the head or body.

Note: Di− > Disease, Dr− > Drug, Sy− > Symptom, Ha− > Human anatomy, and MMT− > Miscellaneous Medical Term
Table 1: An illustration of the proposed eight types of relations for the medical context.

Eklund (Eklund, 2011) developed an annotation
system to extract the relations as diseases for treat-
ments from the scientific medical corpus. Yao, et
al. (Yao et al., 2010) extracted category relations
as cures, prevents, and side effects, which describe
the distinctive nature for the biomedical text (med-
ical papers) (Abacha and Zweigenbaum, 2011b;
Frunza and Inkpen, 2010). Franzen et al. (Franzén
et al., 2002) have annotated Yapex corpus with 200
medical abstracts to extract the category as pro-
teins. These ontologies are fundamentally look-
ing for extracting protein-protein interaction and
disease-treatment relations from corpora under a
BioText project (Rosario and Hearst, 2005).

Khoo et al. (Khoo et al., 2000) developed a
causal relations extraction system from abstracts
of biomedical articles by aligning manually con-
structed graph patterns with syntactic dependency
trees. Lee et al. (Lee et al., 2003) applied UMLS
to identify semantic relations between medical en-
tities. Their first method was able to extract 68%
of the semantic relations in their test corpus but if
many relations were possible between the relation
arguments no disambiguation performed. Their
second method (Lee et al., 2004) targeted the pre-
cise extraction of ”treatment” relations between
drugs and diseases. Manually written linguistic
patterns were constructed from medical abstracts
talking about cancer. Their system reached 84%

recall but an overall 48.14% precision. Embarek
and Ferret (Embarek and Ferret, 2008) developed
an approach to extract four kinds of relations (De-
tect, Treat, Sign, and Cure) between five kinds
of medical entities. The employed patterns were
constructed automatically using an alignment al-
gorithm which maps sentence parts using an edit
distance (defined between two sentences) and dif-
ferent word-level clues.

3 Dataset Preparation

The present section describes how we employed
a domain-specific lexicon namely WME 2.0 and
prepared an annotated dataset for relation extrac-
tion system. Also, discussed the brat environment
to visualize the tagged concepts, categories and re-
lations of our medical corpora.

Evaluation Data: We initially acquired corpora
from SemEval-2015 Task-6 and MedicineNet re-
sources. Thereafter, the corpora have been con-
verted into medical contexts in the form of sin-
gle sentences according to the presence of medi-
cal concepts for our experiment. Table 2 shows
the distributions of medical concepts and contexts
from SemEval, MedicineNet as well as WME 2.0
resources.

We randomly collected 2000 medical contexts
from the acquired corpora and manually labeled214



SemEval-2015 Task-6 MedicineNet WME 2.0
Medical concepts 9786 9834 10186
Contexts (medical + non-medical) 10985 9076 -
Medical contexts 6774 7042 -

Table 2: A statistical distribution of unique num-
ber of the medical concepts and contexts from var-
ious resources.
by a group of medical practitioners in the brat
environment. Table 3 shows the distributions of
manually labeled category-based relations. In or-
der to label the corpus, the medical practitioners
have used WME 2.0 lexicon, which assists in un-
derstanding medical concepts and their categories
based on their glosses and semantics.

Relation Manually labeled
All relation 2071
Dr-SyDi 52
Ha-SyDi 198
Di-Sy 312
Dr-Dr 15
Sy-Sy 132
Di-Di 282
MMT-SyDi 927
Ha-Ha 153

Table 3: A statistics of manually labeled various
relations

WME Lexicon: In healthcare, a lexicon from
the medical domain is demanding to identify the
conceptual information such as category or senti-
ment from the corpus (Cambria, 2016). To this
end, we borrow the knowledge from WordNet of
Medical Event (WME 2.0), a domain-specific lex-
icon (Mondal et al., 2016a, 2015).

However, the current version of WME namely
WME 2.0 was enhanced with more sentiment and
semantic features for 10186 number of medical
concepts (Mondal et al., 2017, 2016a). WME 2.0
was added with affinity score, gravity score, Simi-
lar Sentiment Words (SSW), and category feature
along with the existing features of WME 1.0, e.g.,
gloss (descriptive explanation), Parts-Of-Speech
(POS), polarity score, and sentiment.

The conventional WordNet 3, a preprocessed
medical dictionary, and SenticNet 4 were applied
to prepare our present resource for extracting se-
mantic relations of concepts. Affinity score indi-
cates what extend two concepts are close to each
other by measuring the number of common sen-
timent words (SSW) appeared for a pair of con-
cepts within the range of 0 to 1. On the other
hand, gravity score identifies sentiment-oriented

3https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
4http://sentic.net/

relevance between medical concepts and their var-
ious glosses (descriptive explanations) and ranges
from -1 to 1. While -1 suggests no relation and
1 indicates strong relations either positive or neg-
ative, which helps to identify a proper gloss for
concepts. Besides, the assigned categories such as
diseases, drugs, treatments, human anatomy, and
MMT assist in extracting the subjective informa-
tion of the concepts.

For example, WME 2.0 lexicon presents the
properties of a concept say amnesia as of category
(disease), POS (noun), gloss (”loss of memory
sometimes including the memory of personal iden-
tity due to brain injury, shock, fatigue, repression,
or illness or sometimes induced by anesthesia.”),
SSW (memory loss, blackout, fugue, stupor), po-
larity score (-0.375), affinity score (0.429), gravity
score (0.170), and sentiment (negative).

Brat Annotation: We have used an annotation
tool namely brat to manually label the relations be-
tween a pair of medical concepts within their con-
texts. The tool helps to easily label the contexts,
which generate an annotation (.ann) file for each
input text (.txt) file. The .ann file has labeled med-
ical concepts along with their IDs (Ti), categories
(Disease, Drugs etc.), textual spans and concepts
and relations with IDs, categories and arguments.
Thereafter, we have written a python script to con-
vert the manually tagged annotation file into the
format according to our proposed system output.
The script assists in evaluating the proposed ex-
tracted relations.

For example, the following medical context de-
notes an annotated output as

”T1 Disease 1 39 Giant cell interstitial pneumo-
nia (GIP)”

”T2 Disease 59 77 pulmonary fibrosis”
”R1 Di-Di Arg1:T1 Arg2:T2”.
”Giant cell interstitial pneumonia (GIP) disease

is a rare form of pulmonary fibrosis disease.”

4 Relationship Extraction

Biomedical texts are primarily rich with subjective
information such as problems and treatments and
they are represented as medical concepts, category
and their relations in case of ours. Recognition
of important relations between medical concepts
is a challenging task due to lack of involvement of
domain-experts. Thus, to overcome the challenge,
we have proposed a relation extraction system by
utilizing the categories of medical concepts. To215



Figure 2: A flow diagram of different types of
relations in medical context.

develop the category-based relation extraction sys-
tem, we have considered the following hypothe-
sis and proposed methodology viz. rule-based and
feature-oriented approach.

4.1 Hypothesis:
In the present research, we have considered four
primary categories of medical concepts diseases,
drugs, human anatomy, and symptoms and a com-
bined category MMT that refers to unrecognized
categories of medical concepts. To identify the
relationship between these categories, we have
adopted eight types of relations after close ob-
servations done by experts. Figure 2 shows the
overall presentation i.e how we proposed eight re-
lations based on various concepts and their cat-
egories in a context. Finally, we have classified
these relations into two major groups as combined
and direct. The combined relations are Ha-SyDi,
Dr-SyDi, and MMT-SyDi and rest of the five rela-
tions are presented as direct relation as mentioned
in Table 1.

We have also observed that two of the categories
(e.g., Disease and Symptom) are very close to each
other in their context level appearances and there-
fore we merged them to make a single category
(e.g., SyDi) instead of making the individual pair
of relation with other categories.

4.2 Proposed Methodology:
Rule-based Approach In case of relation ex-
traction, rule-based approach adopts various lin-
guistic textual patterns between the pair of medi-
cal concepts. To identify these patterns, we have
collected the promising pairs of the medical cate-
gory that are semantically or subjectively related

each other as shown in Figure 2. The consecutive
appearance of concepts has not been taken into
account in case of identifying rules because such
concepts are ambiguous in nature and conflicting
in their medical senses.

These identified patterns converted to Static
Surface Patterns (SSP) using various regu-
lar expressions and are labeled by our pro-
posed relations. An example, the linguis-
tic textual pattern ”<Drug> used to combat
<Disease>” is converted to static surface pattern
as ”<Drug>(.*?)<Disease>” with Dr-SyDi rela-
tion label.

The linguistic patterns help to reduce the man-
ual effort and enhance the list of patterns with new
relations where SSP assists in designing an au-
tomated relationship extraction system. Table 4
presents the number of extracted SSPs for eight
relations with the specific example.

Therefore, the following algorithm has been ap-
plied to extract the category-based relations be-
tween the pair of medical concepts in a context.
The output of the proposed system is shown in
Figure 3.

Algorithm:
1. Identify the category of annotated medical

concepts in a context and present them as C =
{MC1,MC2,...,MCn}, where MCn is nth identi-
fied medical concept with category in a context.

2. Compare the Static Surface Patterns (SSP)
with the pair of medical concepts from C.

2.1. If SSP matches with the pair of con-
cepts in C, then assigned the corresponding rela-
tion.

2.2. Else look for the next pair of concepts
in C as mentioned in Step 2.

3. If not found any relation in C then label ”No
relation” and move to next context (C).

4. Else combine the assigned relations with la-
beled concepts for the context (C) and move to
next context (C).

Feature-oriented Approach Relation extrac-
tion is presented as a multi-label classification
problem due to the presence of various types of
semantic relations between medical concepts. To
address this problem, we have considered feature-
oriented machine learning approach over rule-
based approach. The concerned features are cate-
gory, intermediate word sequence, POS, and SSW
of the pair of medical concepts in a context for our
experiment.216



Relation Patterns Example
Dr-SyDi 12 .... <Warfarin/Drug> is also used to reduce the risk of <clots/Symptom> ....
Ha-SyDi 14 .... <coronary artery/Human anatomy> by a <thrombus/Disease> ....
Di-Sy 24 .... <halitosis/Disease> , is an <unpleasant odor/Symptom>....
Dr-Dr 6 .... <oral lipid-lowering medicine/Drug> trade name <Zocor/Drug> ....
Sy-Sy 10 .... <Frozen shoulder/Symptom> , also known as <adhesive capsulitis/Symptom> ....
Di-Di 18 .... <Kaposi’s sarcoma/Disease> is a form of <skin cancer/Disease> ....
MMT-SyDi 27 .... <toxic products/MMT> , you can experience <life-threatening symptoms/Symptom> ....
Ha-Ha 6 .... <vagus nerve/Human anatomy> included , emerge from or enter the <skull/Human anatomy> ....

Table 4: A statistics and examples of relation patterns in the contexts.

Figure 3: Output of the extracted relation using rule-based approach.

To identify the mentioned features, we have also
employed WordNet and WME 2.0 lexicons. These
lexicons help to assign the category, POS, and
Similar Sentiment Words (SSW) for the medical
concepts. Besides, we have written a python script
to recognize the intermediate word sequence be-
tween the pair of the concepts.

For example, the following medical context
identifies the features say 1. annotated medi-
cal concepts (”degenerative brain disorder” and
”dementia”) 2. POS labels (noun and verb) 3. in-
termediate word sequence (”(.*) that leads to (.*)”)
4. categories of medical concepts (disease and dis-
ease), and 5. SSW (”Alzheimer’s disease, Hunt-
ington’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease” and
”mental illness, madness, and insanity”), respec-
tively.

”Degenerative brain disorder that leads to de-
mentia.”

Figure 4 illustrates the steps to extract the re-
lations between a pair of medical concepts us-
ing proposed feature-oriented approach along with
machine learning classifier. Besides, we have ex-
tracted these features from the evaluation dataset
and processed through the linear Support Vec-
tor Machine (SVM) classifier to predict the rela-
tions. The following section discusses the evalua-

Figure 4: A flow diagram of the feature-oriented
relationship extraction system.

tion process for both of the proposed approaches.

5 Evaluation

We have used the state-of-the-art evaluation met-
rics such as precision, recall, and F-Measure 5

to validate the proposed relation extraction ap-
proaches.

Rule-based Relation Extraction In order to re-
duce the ambiguity of the extracted relations,

5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision and recall217



we have employed the same annotated medical
concepts and their categories in both rule-based
as well as feature-oriented approaches. Table 5
presents the distribution of manual and system
tagged category-based relations and their related
precision, recall, and F-measure.

Relation Manually labeled Extracted/Correct/Incorrect Precision Recall F-Measure
All relations 2071 2681 / 1881 / 780 0.70 0.91 0.79
Dr-SyDi 52 102 / 46 / 56 0.45 0.88 0.59
Ha-SyDi 198 233 / 178 / 35 0.76 0.90 0.82
Di-Sy 312 386 / 282 / 104 0.73 0.90 0.81
Dr-Dr 15 22 / 13 / 9 0.59 0.87 0.70
Sy-Sy 132 193 / 115 / 78 0.60 0.87 0.71
Di-Di 282 341 / 254 / 87 0.74 0.90 0.81
MMT-SyDi 927 1227 / 871 / 356 0.71 0.94 0.81
Ha-Ha 153 177 / 122 / 55 0.69 0.80 0.74

Table 5: A statistics of various relation identi-
fication between the pair of medical concepts in
context using rule-based approach.

Feature-oriented Relationship Extraction Be-
sides, to validate the feature-oriented system, we
additionally prepared a test dataset along with our
built-in evaluation dataset. The test dataset con-
tains rest of 11816 medical contexts as referred in
Table 2.

Thereafter, the features have been extracted
from the evaluation dataset and processed through
linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier
to learn the proposed relation extraction model.
Hence, the test dataset has been applied to the
learned model for predicting and validating the ex-
tracted relations. Table 6 summarizes the result as
precision, recall, and F-Measure.

Relation Precision Recall F-Measure
All relations 0.92 0.81 0.86
Dr-SyDi 0.90 0.72 0.80
Ha-SyDi 0.91 0.80 0.85
Di-Sy 0.90 0.79 0.84
Dr-Dr 0.88 0.76 0.82
Sy-Sy 0.89 0.78 0.83
Di-Di 0.91 0.80 0.85
MMT-SyDi 0.93 0.82 0.87
Ha-Ha 0.88 0.72 0.79

Table 6: A statistics of various relation identi-
fication between the pair of medical concepts in
context using feature-oriented approach.

Finally, we have observed that the feature-
oriented approach provides a better F-Measure
(0.86) over the rule-based approach (0.79) for ex-
tracting relations. So, we conclude that both ap-
proaches are important to extract the mentioned
eight relations from the unstructured corpus.

6 Conclusion and Future Scope

In this article, we have focused on extracting
eight types of category-based relations of medical
concepts from the context. The relation extrac-
tion system facilitates to design various domain-
specific applications. We have employed two
well-known approaches such as rule-based and
feature-oriented. Also, we have manually pre-
pared an evaluation dataset to design and validate
the relation extraction system. The rule-based ap-
proach helps to understand the semantic knowl-
edge where linguistic features assist in improving
the accuracy of the system. Finally, the evaluation
section shows the effectiveness of the proposed re-
lation extraction approaches by offering the av-
erage F-Measures of 0.79 and 0.86 for the rules
and features-oriented techniques, respectively in
healthcare. In future, we will try to introduce new
relations for the medical concepts to build a re-
lation database, which helps to design a medical
recommendation system.

References
Asma Ben Abacha and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2011a.

Automatic extraction of semantic relations between
medical entities: a rule based approach. Journal of
biomedical semantics 2(5):1.

Asma Ben Abacha and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2011b. A
hybrid approach for the extraction of semantic rela-
tions from medline abstracts. In International Con-
ference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computa-
tional Linguistics. Springer, pages 139–150.

Andrew Borthwick, John Sterling, Eugene Agichtein,
and Ralph Grishman. 1998. Exploiting diverse
knowledge sources via maximum entropy in named
entity recognition. In Proc. of the Sixth Workshop
on Very Large Corpora. volume 182.

Erik Cambria. 2016. Affective computing and senti-
ment analysis. IEEE Intelligent Systems 31(2):102–
107.

Ann-Marie Eklund. 2011. Relational annotation of sci-
entific medical corpora. In LOUHI 2011 Third Inter-
national Workshop on Health Document Text Mining
and Information Analysis. page 27.

Mehdi Embarek and Olivier Ferret. 2008. Learning
patterns for building resources about semantic rela-
tions in the medical domain. In LREC.

Kristofer Franzén, Gunnar Eriksson, Fredrik Olsson,
Lars Asker, Per Lidén, and Joakim Cöster. 2002.
Protein names and how to find them. International
journal of medical informatics 67(1):49–61.218



Oana Frunza and Diana Inkpen. 2010. Extraction of
disease-treatment semantic relations from biomedi-
cal sentences. In Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop
on Biomedical Natural Language Processing. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 91–98.

Marti A Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of
the 14th conference on Computational linguistics-
Volume 2. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 539–545.

Christopher SG Khoo, Syin Chan, and Yun Niu.
2000. Extracting causal knowledge from a medical
database using graphical patterns. In Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 336–343.

Adam Kilgarriff and Christiane Fellbaum. 2000.
Wordnet: An electronic lexical database.

Chew-Hung Lee, Christopher Khoo, and Jin-Cheon
Na. 2004. Automatic identification of treatment
relations for medical ontology learning: An ex-
ploratory study. ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE OR-
GANIZATION 9:245–250.

Chew-Hung Lee, Jin-Cheon Na, and Christopher
Khoo. 2003. Ontology learning for medical digi-
tal libraries. In International Conference on Asian
Digital Libraries. Springer, pages 302–305.

Anupam Mondal, Erik Cambria, Dipankar Das, and
Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2017. Auto-categorization
of medical concepts and contexts. Research in Com-
puting Science .

Anupam Mondal, Iti Chaturvedi, Dipankar Das, Ra-
jiv Bajpai, and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2015. Lex-
ical resource for medical events: A polarity based
approach. In 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining Workshop (ICDMW). IEEE, pages
1302–1309.

Anupam Mondal, Dipankar Das, Erik Cambria, and
Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2016a. Wme: Sense, polar-
ity and affinity based concept resource for medical
events. Proceedings of the Eighth Global WordNet
Conference pages 242–246.

Anupam Mondal, Ranjan Satapathy, Dipankar Das, and
Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2016b. A hybrid approach
based sentiment extraction from medical context. In
4th Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets
Psychology (SAAIP 2016), IJCAI 2016 Workshop,
July 10, Hilton, New York City, USA.

Bryan Rink, Sanda Harabagiu, and Kirk Roberts. 2011.
Automatic extraction of relations between medical
concepts in clinical texts. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 18(5):594–600.

Barbara Rosario and Marti A Hearst. 2005. Multi-way
relation classification: application to protein-protein
interactions. In Proceedings of the conference on

Human Language Technology and Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 732–739.

Barry Smith and Christiane Fellbaum. 2004. Medi-
cal wordnet: a new methodology for the construc-
tion and validation of information resources for con-
sumer health. In Proceedings of the 20th interna-
tional conference on Computational Linguistics. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, page 371.

Özlem Uzuner, Brett R South, Shuying Shen, and
Scott L DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/va challenge on
concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
ciation 18(5):552–556.

Lin Yao, Cheng-Jie Sun, Xiao-Long Wang, and Xuan
Wang. 2010. Relationship extraction from biomedi-
cal literature using maximum entropy based on rich
features. In 2010 International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning and Cybernetics. IEEE, volume 6,
pages 3358–3361.

Jun Zhu, Zaiqing Nie, Xiaojiang Liu, Bo Zhang, and
Ji-Rong Wen. 2009. Statsnowball: a statistical ap-
proach to extracting entity relationships. In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th international conference on
World wide web. ACM, pages 101–110.

219


