











































Instructions for Depling 2011 Proceedings


On the Predicate-Argument Structure: Internal and Absorbing 

Scope 

Igor Boguslavsky 

Russian Academy of Sciences 

Institute for Information Transmission  

Problems, Russia  

Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
igor.m.boguslavsky@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Valency filling is considered a major 

mechanism for constructing the semantic 

structure of the sentence from semantic 

structures of words. This approach requires 

a broader view of valency and actant, cover-

ing all kinds of actant-bearing words and all 

types of valency filling. We introduce the 

concept of scope as a generalization of act-

ant: it is any fragment of a Syntactic 

(SyntScope) or Semantic Structure (Sem-

Scope) that fills a valency of a predicate. 

Actant is a particular case of scope. We dis-

cuss two classes of situations, mostly on the 

material of Russian, that manifest non-

isomorphism between SyntScope and Sem-

Scope: (a) meaning α that fills a valency of 

word L constitutes only a part of the mean-

ing of word L′ (internal scope); (b) predi-

cate π is an internal component of the mean-

ing of word L; π extends its valency (distinct 

from valencies of L) to words different from 

L (absorbing scope). 

1 Introduction 

This paper is a continuation of a series of pub-

lications (Boguslavsky 1985, 1996, 1998, 

2003, 2007, 2014, 2016) in which we discuss 

different types of valency slot filling. Several 

introductory remarks are in order.  

First of all, instantiating valency slots, or, in 

a different terminology, identifying arguments 

of predicates, is a major step in constructing 

the semantic structure of the sentence, because 

it is the main mechanism of meaning amal-

gamation, a kind of semantic glue that con-

nects meanings together. This view of valen-

cies implies that the concepts of valency and 

actant (or, argument) should be interpreted 

broader than it is often done. Here we follow 

the tradition of the Moscow Semantic School 

(MSS), which in its turn, shares these notions 

with the Meaning – Text theory (Apresjan 

1974, Mel'čuk 1974). For MSS, the starting 

point in defining the concept of valency of a 

word is the semantic analysis of the situation 

denoted by this word. The analytical semantic 

definition of a word, constructed according to 

certain rules (Apresjan 1995), should explicitly 

present all obligatory participants of the situa-

tion denoted by this word. For a word L to 

have a certain valency slot it is necessary, 

though insufficient, that a situation denoted by 

L should contain a corresponding participant in 

an intuitively obvious way. Another condition 

is that this participant should be expressible in 

a sentence along with L in a systematic way 

(Mel’čuk 2014). A word or a phrase that de-

notes such a participant is said to fill (or in-

stantiate) the valency slot and is called an act-

ant. 

The range of valency words is not restricted 

to verbs and nouns. Other parts of speech, such 

as adjectives, adverbs, particles, conjunctions, 

and prepositions are equally entitled to be 

classed as actant-bearing words. Moreover, 

being non-prototypical predicates, they sub-

stantially extend our idea of the inventory of 

the ways which predicates use to instantiate 

their valencies.   

The next remark is that we are going to 

speak about valency filling at two representa-

tion levels – at the level of the syntactic struc-

ture (SyntS) and at the level of the semantic 

structure (SemS). SyntS is a dependency tree, 

the nodes of which are lexical units (LU) – 

lexemes or multiword expressions that func-

tion as a whole. In SemS LUs are represented 

by their semantic decomposition, which is a 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 15-24,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

15

mailto:igor.m.boguslavsky@gmail.com


complex composed by simpler semantic units 

(=semantemes) connected, in their turn, by 

predicate-argument relations.  

Let us introduce two interrelated terms. We 

will call semantic scope of L in valency α 

(SemScope(L)
α
) a fragment of SemS that fills 

valency α of L. Syntactic scope of L in valency 

α (SyntScope(L)
α
) is a corresponding fragment 

of SyntS
1
. We will use the term scope without 

any specification when the difference between 

SyntScope and SemScope is irrelevant. Tradi-

tional terms actant (argument) have a narrower 

meaning and denote a particular case of scope. 

In the prototypical case, SyntScope and 

SemScope are isomorphic (what it exactly 

means will be explained below). However, this 

is not always the case. In this paper, we will 

investigate two important classes of such situa-

tions.  

The paper is structured as follows. First, we 

will present the prototypical situation of valen-

cy filling (Section 2). In Section 3 we intro-

duce syntactically non-prototypical types of 

valency filling. Sections 4 and 5 will examine 

two special cases of non-isomorphism between 

SyntScope and SemScope – internal scope and 

absorbing scope. We will conclude in Section 

6. 

2 Prototypical Valency Slot Filling  

As mentioned above, valency filling is a major 

mechanism of constructing SemS. According 

to MSS, to discover the semantic structure of a 

sentence, one needs, first of all, a dictionary 

that contains the following information for 

each scope-bearing word:  

(a) analytical definition of its meaning; 

among other things, it should represent all 

valency slots (by means of variables);  

(b) each valency slot should be assigned the 

information on how it can be filled; this infor-

mation includes primarily the data on the syn-

tactic position of the SyntScope in SyntS – 

whether it is the subject, direct or indirect ob-

ject, which prepositions or conjunctions are 

needed to introduce it, and what lexico-

grammatical form it can have. In different 

theoretical frameworks this information is 
                                                           

1 The term SemScope is denotation-wise identical to the 
term semantic actant used in the Meaning-Text Theory 

(Mel’čuk 2014, Ch.12). However, our SyntScope is 

broader than syntactic actant. Since we prefer to maintain 

the parallelism of the terms used at different levels of 

representation, we have opted for the pair SyntScope – 

SemScope.  

provided by subcategorization frames, gov-

ernment patterns or similar data structures. 

It is understandable, then, that for identifying 

arguments in the text, besides the dictionary, 

the syntactic structure of the sentence should 

also be available.  

In the prototypical case, SyntScope and 

SemScope satisfy certain requirements: 

(1) SyntScope:  

i. SyntScope(L) depends on L in the depend-
ency structure;  

ii. SyntScope(L) is connected to L directly 
(and not through some intermediate 

nodes).  

(2) SemScope: 

i. SemScope is isomorphic to SyntScope: if 
SyntScope = A, SemScope = ‘A’; 

ii. The word meaning is impermeable to pred-
icate-argument relations. 

Properties (i) and (ii) of SyntScope are ob-

vious and do not seem to require explanations. 

Let us comment on the properties of Sem-

Scope.  

The isomorphism property means that if 

some fragment A of SyntS is the syntactic 

scope of lexeme L, then the semantic argument 

of L will be exactly ‘A’ (=the meaning of A). 

And inversely, if a fragment ‘A’ of SemS fills 

a valency of lexeme L, then SyntScope(L) will 

be the fragment A of SyntS whose meaning is 

‘A’.   

The second property states the impermea-

bility of lexeme borders for predicate-

argument relations. This property manifests 

itself in two ways. First, an internal (i.e. not the 

topmost) element of the semantic definition of 

L cannot be an argument of a predicate that 

does not belong to the same definition. The 

contact point for external predicates is usually 

the topmost component of the definition (usu-

ally, genus proximum). For example, Longman 

Dictionary of Contemporary English defines 

bicycle  as ‘a vehicle with two wheels that 

you ride by pushing its pedals with your feet’. 

The topmost component of this definition is 

semanteme ‘vehicle’. That is why the phrase 

big bicycle is interpreted as ‘big vehicle’ but 

under no circumstances as ‘big pedals’ or ‘big 

feet’. 

Second, if the definition of lexeme L con-

tains a predicate π which has its own argu-

ments (i.e. distinct from the arguments of L), in 

a sentence, these arguments are fully located 

16



inside the definition of L. They cannot include 

definition-external components.   

As an illustration, let us consider a pair of 

Russian antonyms sobljudat’ ‘observe’ – nar-

ušat' ‘violate’, which differ by a negation: 

‘observe the rules’ – ‘do what is allowed by 

the rules’; ‘violate the rules’ – ‘do what is not 

allowed by the rules’. If one attaches a nega-

tion to one of then, the antonymy turns into the 

synonymy: 

(3a) On ne budet sobljudat' pravila priličija.  

‘he will not observe the decency standards’. 

(3b) On budet narušat' pravila priličija.  

‘he will violate the decency standards’. 

Let us introduce an adverbial of purpose in-

to sentences (3a) and (3b): 

(4a) On ne budet sobljudat' pravila priličija 

tol'ko čtoby tebe ugodit'.  

‘he will not observe the decency standards 

only to please you’. 

(4b) On budet narušat' pravila priličija tol'ko 

čtoby tebe ugodit'.  

‘he will violate the decency standards only to 

please you’ 

Sentence (4a) has two interpretations de-

pending on whether or not the purpose adver-

bial is included in the scope of negation:  

1) not [will observe the decency standards 

only to please you];  

2) [not [will observe the decency stand-

ards]] only to please you.  

Sentence (4b) has only the second interpre-

tation. 

The reason is that in (4a) the negation is 

expressed by a separate word, while in (4b) it 

makes part of the lexical meaning of narušat' 

‘violate’ and therefore its scope cannot include 

the purpose adverbial. The rule that prohibits 

external material from making part of the 

scope of an internal predicate will be made 

more precise below, in section 5.2. 

3 Non-Prototypical Valency Slot Filling  

Linguistic phenomena rarely exist in their pure 

form. Most often, there is a core zone, in 

which the properties of the phenomenon stand 

out very clearly, and a periphery zone, in 

which these properties are weaker or undergo 

certain modifications. In the area of valency 

filling, the core zone is beyond doubt consti-

tuted by verbal constructions, in which the 

actants are expressed by the subject of the verb 

and different types of complements. In this 

zone, properties (1)-(2) from the previous sec-

tion perfectly hold. The periphery zone is 

much more diverse.  

As far as the syntactic aspect of valency 

filling is concerned, the deviation from the 

prototype is determined first of all by different 

syntactic potential of valency-bearing words. 

There is a wide range of syntactic positions 

that a SyntScope may have with respect to its 

predicate.  From this point of view, three types 

of valency slot filling could be distinguished: 

ACTIVE, PASSIVE, and DISCONTINOUS ones 

(Boguslavsky 2003). If lexeme L 

subordinates its SyntScope A by means of an 

immediate dependency relation, we will say 

that such a valency filling is ACTIVE (the boy 

[A] runs [L], the search [L] for [A] the 

solution). This is the most typical 

(prototypical) case. If a lexeme is 

subordinated to its SyntScope, we will say 

that the filling is PASSIVE (green [L] leaves 

[A], run [A] quickly [L]). This kind of valency 

filling is characteristic of adverbials, 

adjectives, particles, conjunctions and 

prepositions. If there is no direct syntactic 

link between the lexeme and its SyntScope, we 

will call such valency filling DISCONTINOUS 

(By habit [L], John [A] got up early). This is a 

relatively infrequent type, typical of adverbials 

and adjectives.   

 In more detail, cases of violation of re-

quirement (1), due to non-prototypical syntac-

tic positions of SyntScope with respect to their 

predicates, were examined in Boguslavsky 

2007. Here we will concentrate on the viola-

tion of requirement (2). 

4 Internal semantic scope 

When predicate-argument relations are dis-

cussed, it is usually presumed that both the 

predicate and its argument are lexical units – a 

lexeme or a multiword expression that func-

tions as single unit.  

The phenomena that we will discuss below 

require that lexical units be replaced by their 

semantic definitions, i.e. decomposed into 

simpler semantic units (=semantemes). We 

proceed from the assumption that, in the proto-

typical case, if word A semantically affects 

word B, then the semantic definition of B 

should contain a meaning component for A 

to act upon.  

17



We will need not only the semantemes that 

make part of the lexical meaning but also those 

that originate in semantically relevant gram-

matical categories, such as tense, aspect, 

mood, number, etc. For example, the habitual 

meaning of the imperfective aspect in Russian 

(as in On vstaet rano ‘He gets up early’) is 

expressed by means of the predication ‘situa-

tion P [‘get up early’] takes place always or 

usually’. As we will see below, both lexical 

and grammatical semantemes can enter into 

predicate-argument relations with semantemes 

belonging to a different word, usually an ad-

verbial or an adjective.  

4.1 Temporal adverbials: zavtra ‘tomor-
row’ 

Let us begin with temporal adverbials such as 

zavtra ‘tomorrow’, vo vtornik ‘on Tuesday’, 

vtorogo maya ‘on May 2’, etc. All these ex-

pressions have a valency corresponding to the 

situation that is temporally located at the time 

interval specified by the adverbial. This situa-

tion is normally denoted by the verb to which 

the adverbial is syntactically connected. Let us 

look at (5): 

(5) *I saw you tomorrow. 

This sentence is ungrammatical, and the reason 

is obvious: tomorrow places the seeing event 

in the future, while the past tense places it in 

the past. One can generalize this simple fact 

and predict that tomorrow cannot modify of a 

verb in the past. This generalization seems 

quite straightforward but still it is wrong. Cf. 

sentence (6): 

(6) Ja ždal tebja zavtra (a ty prišel segodnja).  

‘I expected you tomorrow (and you came to-

day)’. 

It has the same grammatical and syntactic 

structure as (5), but nevertheless is quite ac-

ceptable. To explain this difference, we have to 

decompose the lexical meaning of expect. Ac-

cording to COBUILD, if X expects Y, X be-

lieves that Y is going to happen or arrive, be-

cause X has been told that it will.  Now, it is 

clear that the event which tomorrow places in 

the future in (6) is not the top predication of 

the definition - ‘X believes something’, but the 

embedded predication ‘Y is going to happen or 

arrive’. Hence, as opposed to (5), (6) contains 

no contradiction: the meanings of the past 

tense and of tomorrow apply to different 

events. The past tense is related to the internal 

state of the subject of expecting, while tomor-

row characterizes the arrival of the object. We 

will call this type of valency filling INTERNAL 

SCOPE to convey the idea that the scope of the 

predicate is located inside the lexical meaning 

of some lexeme. 

It goes without saying that this effect has 

nothing to do with specific properties of to-

morrow. I have chosen this adverbial only to 

create a dramatic conflict between (5) and (6). 

As a matter of fact, the same behavior with 

respect to expect is inherent in any when-

adverbial. On the other hand, expect is not the 

only verb that lets temporal adverbials pene-

trate its lexical meaning. Here are some more 

examples from Russian. 

(7) Ja na tebja zavtra rassčityvaju.  

 lit. ‘I count on you tomorrow’  

‘I hope that tomorrow you will do what I am 

asking for’. 

(8) Ja priglašaju vas zavtra na obed. 

 lit. ‘I am inviting you tomorrow for lunch’ 

‘I am inviting you for lunch for tomorrow’. 

(9) V ponedel’nik menja vyzyvajut k dekanu. 

 ‘on Monday I am called to the dean’ 

a) ‘the call takes place on Monday’ 
b) ‘I have to come to the dean’s office on 

Monday’ 

(10) Poteplenie obeščali v konce nedeli. 

lit. ‘warming was promised at the end of the 

week’ 

a) ‘the promise that the weather will be 
warmer was made at the end of the 

week’ 

b) ‘according to the promise, the weather 
will be warmer at the end of the week’ 

4.2 Temporal adverbials: na zavtra ‘for 
tomorrow’ 

It is instructive to contrast adverbials of the 

type zavtra ‘tomorrow’, vtorogo maja ‘on May 

2’, v ponedel'nik ‘on Monday’, etc. with the 

ones introduced by preposition na and an NP 

denoting localized time spans – na zavtra ‘for 

tomorrow’, na vtoroe maja ‘for May 2’, na 

ponedel'nik ‘for Monday’, etc. 

(11a) On priglasil ee na zavtra. 

‘he invited her for tomorrow’ 

(11b) Čto vy predlagaete na segodn'a? 

‘what do you propose for today?’  

(11c) My dogovorilis' na ponedel'nik o vstreče. 

18



lit. ‘we agreed for Monday on the meeting’ 

‘we agreed that the meeting will take place on 

Monday’  

(11d) On navjazal nam na utro nikomu ne 

nužnuju poezdku. 

lit. ‘he imposed on us for the morning a trip 

that nobody needed’. 

‘he imposed on us a trip that was to take place 

in the morning and that nobody needed’.    

Both types of expressions (zavtra ‘tomor-

row’ – na zavtra ‘for tomorrow’, etc.) seem to 

do the same job – they place an event in the 

same temporal interval but they are not per-

ceived as synonyms and are rarely inter-

changeable. The difference consists in what 

event is being assigned a temporal characteris-

tic. In sentences (11a-d) what is characterized 

temporally are not the acts of the invitation, 

proposal, agreement or imposition themselves, 

but the events that these acts imply – coming 

for a visit in (11a), proposed activity in (11b), 

a meeting in (11c) and a trip in (11d). These 

expressions mean the same but differ in their 

scope. Adverbials of the zavtra type usually 

have an external scope, and only in some cases 

discussed above can have an internal one. The 

na zavtra adverbials in sentences like (11a-d), 

on the contrary, have an internal scope and do 

not allow for an external one. 

The range of the verbs that permit an inter-

nal scope interpretation of na zavtra adverbials 

is rather large and hardly intersect with the 

verbs with which zavtra-adverbials can have 

an internal scope. Some of the exceptions are 

rassčityvat’ ‘to count on’ and vyzyvat’ ‘call’. 

In one of the interpretations, sentences (12a)-

(12b) and (13a)-(13b) are synonymous. 

(12a) Zavtra možeš’ na menya rassčityvat’. 

‘you can count on me tomorrow’ 

(12b) Na zavtra možeš’ na menya rassčityvat’. 

lit. ‘you can count on me for tomorrow’ 

‘you can count on me tomorrow’ 

(13a) On vyzval menja v 3 časa v ponedel’nik 

lit. ‘he called me at 3 o’clock on Monday’ 

‘he called me for 3 o’clock on Monday’ 

(13b) On vyzval menja na 3 časa v ponedel’nik 

‘he called me for 3 o’clock on Monday’. 

That is why if a verb (distinct from ras-

sčityvat’, vyzyvat’ and some others) co-occurs 

with both types of adverbials, the phrases are 

not synonymous, because the adverbials have 

different scope; cf.:  

(14a) Čto on predložil na ponedel’nik? ‘What 

did he propose for Monday?’ ≠ 

(14b) Čto on predložil v ponedel’nik? ‘What 

did he propose on Monday?’  

This also explains why zavtra and na zavtra 

adverbials are not perceived as synonyms, in 

spite of their semantic similarity and identical 

syntactic functions.   

This description may raise the following 

objection: Do we really need to resort to such 

an exotic description as an internal scope? 

Why cannot we simply say that the verb ždat' 

'to expect' and other verbs mentioned above 

have one valency more – that of the time of the 

internal proposition? In this case, phrases like 

Ja ždal tebja zavtra 'I expected you tomorrow' 

will display quite standard predicate-argument 

relations.  

This solution could be valid, if it were only 

temporal adverbials that could scope over the 

internal proposition. But the range of such 

adverbials (underlined below) is much more 

diverse: 

(15a) My ždem ego iz otpuska.  

lit. ‘we are expecting him from vacation’  

‘we expect him to come back from vacation’  

(15b) Kogda ždat' vas k nam (v Moskvu)?  

lit. ‘when could we expect you to us (to Mos-

cow)?’ 

‘when could we expect you to visit us (to Mos-

cow)?’ 

(15c)  Nepremenno (objazatel'no) ždem vas. 

lit. ‘without fail we are expecting you’ 

‘we expect that you come without fail’  

(15d) Ja ždal tebja s ženoj.  

lit. ‘I expected you with your wife’ 

‘I expected that you would come with your 

wife’  

(15e) Ego sročno vyzvali k dekanu. 

lit. ‘he was urgently called to the dean’ 

‘he was called to the dean and must come ur-

gently’  

(15f) Ego vyzvali v školu s roditeljami.  

lit. ‘he was called to school with his parents’  

‘he was called to school and must go there  

with his parents’.  

Obviously, all these adverbials cannot open 

separate valency slots in the verb meaning. 

Therefore, they can only have a circumstantial 

status and have an internal scope in the mean-

ing of the verb. 

19



4.3 Intensifiers and akzent ‘accent’ 

We speak of an internal scope when a word 

semantically affects an internal component of 

the meaning of lexeme L. The capacity to have 

such a scope is mostly characteristic of adver-

bials and adjectives. Very often, this compo-

nent is not difficult to find. For example, 

kormit' (kogo-to) ‘to feed (somebody)’ means  

‘to give food to somebody’. When adverbial 

vkusno ‘tastily’ is attached to this verb, its 

internal scope is obvious: ‘to give tasty food’. 

However, in many cases it is not that clear. 

As we stressed above, if word A semantically 

affects word B, then the meaning of B should 

contain a component for A to act upon. This 

requirement can be used in search of adequate 

meaning definition. Suppose we want to define 

the meaning of word B and see that it can be 

modified by A, which affects semanteme α. 

This is a serious argument in favour of includ-

ing α in the definition of B. Let us illustrate 

this principle with the word accent, as used in 

sentences like (16): 

(16a) She spoke with a southern accent.  

(16b) The man had a Spanish accent. 

(16c) He can mimic the Georgian accent.  

We will use the definition from the Long-

man Dictionary of Contemporary English, 

which is very similar to definitions of other 

dictionaries:  

(17) ACCENT: ‘the way someone pronounces 

the words of a language, showing which coun-

try or which part of a country they come from’. 

According to this definition, southern ac-

cent is interpreted as the way somebody pro-

nounces the words of a language, showing that 

the speaker is from the South. This interpreta-

tion reflects the meaning of (16a) well enough. 

But if we try to apply this definition in other 

contexts, we will see that it is not sufficient. 

How should we interpret sentences that say 

something about the degree of the accent, such 

as (18a) or (18b)? 

(18a) He has a slight Essex accent. 

(18b) She still speaks with a strong (heavy, 

pronounced) accent.    

Definition (17) does not contain any com-

ponent that could justify quantifiablity of ac-

cent. What do we want to convey when we say 

that somebody has a slight Essex accent? Ob-

viously, not that the pronunciation of this per-

son s l i g h t l y  s h o w s  that he/she is 

from Essex. Rather, we mean that, first, his/her 

pronunciation of English words (a) is typical 

for people from Essex, and second, is 

s l i g h t l y  d i f f e r e n t  from the 

standard. Similarly, (18b) means that the dif-

ference between the actual pronunciation and 

the standard is large. It is just the degree of the 

deviation from the standard that is character-

ized by degree adjectives, such as slight and 

strong.  

Facing phrases such as slight (strong) ac-

cent makes us revise the definition of accent 

and introduce a component that accounts for its 

quantifiability. This component is the devia-

tion from the standard. The deviation may be 

greater or smaller, but it is one of the semantic 

elements that constitute accent.  

A definition that reflects these considera-

tions can look like this: 

(19) ‘peculiarities of the pronunciation of per-

son Y in language Z that distinguish it from the 

standard pronunciation of the speakers of Z 

and are typical for the representatives of lan-

guage, group or region X’. 

Examples: French accent (pronunciation typi-

cal for the French), aristocratic accent (pro-

nunciation typical for aristocracy), southern 

accent (pronunciation typical for southerners). 

4.4 Edinstvennyj ‘the only’ in the context 
of  syn/doč ‘son/daughter’  

The standard interpretation of the phrase 

edinstvennaja doč ‘the only daughter’ implies 

that there are no other daughters, just as the 

phrase edinstvennyj syn ‘the only son’ means  

that there are no other sons. In these phrases, 

nouns syn ‘son’ and doč ‘daughter’ fill one of 

the valencies of edinstvennyj ‘only’ (Boguslav-

sky 2016). However, these phrases can also be 

used in a more general meaning – ‘there are no 

other children’. For example, in (20a) and 

(20b) this is the most natural interpretation:  

(20a) K nemu prišla ženščina – vdova, – u 

kotoroj pogib edinstvennyj syn.  

‘a woman came to him – a widow – whose 

only son was killed’ 

(20b) Ego edinstvennaja doč i naslednitsa 

Varvara slyla odnoj iz samyx zavidnyx nevest 

Rossii. 

20



‘his only daughter and heiress Varvara was 

reputed to be one of the most enviable brides 

in Russia’.  

In the standard interpretation, the valency 

of the unique element is filled by the whole 

meaning of son/ daughter: ‘there is nobody 

else that is a son/daughter (=an immediate 

male/female descendant)’. In (20a)-(20b) this 

valency is filled by only a genus proximum 

part of this meaning: ‘an immediate descend-

ant’.  

Apparently, syn ‘son’ and  doč ‘daughter’ 

are not the only words in which edinstvennyj 

can affect the genus proximum component 

alone. Cf. sentence (21a), which can be inter-

preted as ‘there were no other pieces of seat 

furniture (not necessarily chairs, but also 

stools, arm-chairs, benches etc.)’ or sentence 

(21b), which can mean that ‘there was no more 

money (not necessarily roubles)’. 

(21a) On sel na edinstvennyj stul v komnate. 

‘he sat on the only chair in the room’   

(21b) Ja istratil edinstvennyj rubl’, kotoryj u 

menja ostavalsja. 

‘I spent the only rouble left’. 

4.5 Tože ‘also’ in the context of po-moemu 
‘in my opinion’ 

In Sections 4.1-4.4 we discussed cases when a 

valency of an adverbial or an adjective was 

filled by a part of the lexical meaning of a verb 

or a noun. Here we will deal with a case where 

both participants – the predicate and the word 

in which the predicate has an internal scope – 

are adverbs.  

Let us begin with a two-place verb X 

dumaet, čto Y ‘X thinks that Y’. There exists 

an adverbial – po-moemu ‘in my opinion’ – 

which is an adverbial realization of the predi-

cation Ja dumaju, chto P ‘I think that P’. Due 

to this, sentences (22a)-(22b) may be regarded 

as synonymous.  

(22a) Ja dumaju, čto Real Madrid proigraet. 

‘I think Real Madrid will lose’ 

(22b) Po-moemu, Real Madrid proigraet. 

‘in my opinion, Real Madrid will lose’ 

From the point of view of the argument 

structure, valency Y of dumat’ is inherited by 

the adverbial and is expressed by means of the 

subordinating verb (cf. proigraet ‘will lose’ in 

(22b)). Valency X is incorporated in the mean-

ing of the adverbial and cannot be expressed 

along with it: po-moemu, Y = ‘I think that Y’.   

Now, let us take another adverbial – tože 

‘also’:  

(23) Ja tože dumaju, čto Real Madrid 

proigraet.  

‘I also think that Real Madrid will lose’.  

Tože ‘also’ is a two-place predicate, too: X tože 

P = ‘X is doing P; something or someone dif-

ferent from X is doing the same’. According to 

this definition, the meaning of (23) looks like 

this: ‘I think that Real Madrid will lose; some-

body else thinks the same’.  

Now, we can introduce the key example: cf. 

dialogue (24a-b). 

(24a) – Po-moemy, Real Madrid proigraet.  

‘in my opinion, Real Madrid will lose’. 

(24b) – Po-moemu tože, (Real Madrid 

proigraet).  

lit. ‘in my opinion also, Real Madrid will lose’. 

Let us compare (24b) with the synonymous 

sentence (25): 

(25) I also think that Real Madrid will 

lose.   

In (25), both valencies of also are filled (X = 

‘I’, Y = ‘think that RM will lose’). The same is 

true for (24b). Hence, one part of the lexical 

meaning of po-moemu  (‘I’) fills valency X of 

tože, and another part (‘think that’) – valency 

Y. 

5 Absorbing semantic scope 

In this section, internal components will not 

act as a scope but rather as a predicate that has 

a scope of its own. In other words, we will be 

interested in the scope of the predicates that 

constitute only a part of the meaning of some 

word.  From this point of view, of particular 

interest are meanings expressed by grammati-

cal categories. We will speak about two such 

meanings: the habitual imperfective and the 

inchoative.  

5.1 Habitual meaning 

We have seen above (Section 2) that if the 

negation is part of the lexical meaning of 

word L, its scope cannot include circumstan-

tials connected to L. However, aspectual 

meanings behave in a different way. For ex-

ample, the habitual meaning of the imperfec-

tive aspect (‘to take place always / usually’) 

21



affects the whole predication formed by the 

verb and can easily involve its circumstan-

tials. We can see that in (26):  

(26) Každyj den’, pozavtrakav [Perf], 

Petya idet [Imperf] v školu.  

 ‘every day, after having breakfast [Perf] 

Peter goes [Imperf] to school’. 

The verb zavtrakat’ ‘have breakfast’(perf. 

pozavtrakat’) is in the perfective aspect 

and denotes a single event, while idti ‘go’ 

is in the habitual imperfective. Neverthe-

less, the situation that always takes place 

includes both events – the one expressed 

by the imperfective and the one expressed 

by the perfective.   

The same is true for the negation. The 

verb opazdyvat’ ‘to be late’ means ‘to 

come later than is needed’. Sentence (27) 

with the habitual means that Peter always 

comes to school in time: 

(27) Petya ne opazdyvaet v školu.  

lit. ‘Peter is not late for school’  

‘Peter is never late for school’. 

Having noted this information about the ha-

bitual imperfective, we will turn to the adverb 

počti ‘almost’. Let us give here a slightly sim-

plified definition of počti than proposed in 

(Boguslavsky 1985, Wierzbicka 1987):  

(28) Počti Р = ‘P does not take place; the dif-

ference between P and P, which does take 

place, is very small’.  

Let us compare sentences (29a) and (29b):  

(29a) Petr ne ošibsja v svoem prognoze.  

‘Peter was not mistaken in his forecast’  

(29b) Petr počti ne ošibsja v svoem prognoze.  

‘Peter was almost not mistaken in his fore-

cast’.  

Sentence (29a) means that Peter’s forecast 

was correct, and (29b) – that it was almost 

correct, i.e. it deviated from truth very little. 

In other words, the SemScope of počti ‘al-

most’ in (29b) is ‘not mistaken (=correct)’. 

Let us show it schematically: 

(30a) not[mistaken in his forecast] = not[the 

forecast is not correct]  = the forecast is cor-

rect 

(30b) almost not [mistaken in his forecast] = 

almost not [the forecast is not correct] = al-

most [the forecast is correct] 

 

 Similarly, in (31) the SemScope of počti is 

‘was not left’. 

(31) Vremeni počti ne ostalos’.  

lit.‘time almost not was-left’ 

‘there was almost no time left’.  

Now, let us put (29b) in the habitual imperfec-

tive:  

(32) Petr počti ne ošibaetsja v svoix 

prognozax.  

‘Peter is almost not mistaken in his forecasts’.  

In contrast to (29b), sentence (32) is ambigu-

ous:  

(32a) ‘Peter makes very small mistakes in his 

forecasts, his forecasts are almost correct’  

(32b) ‘Peter makes mistakes (maybe quite 

serious) very seldom (almost never)’.  

The first reading is a kind of habitual variant 

of (29b): ‘every time Peter is making a fore-

cast, it is either correct or almost correct’. The 

second interpretation is more curious. Here 

počti affects the aspectual component of the 

meaning (‘always’): ‘Peter is not always cor-

rect in his forecasts, but the deviation from 

“always” is very small’. 

Let us summarize how the meaning of the 

verb is distributed among the scopes of the 

negation and počti in both interpretations of 

(32). In both cases, the negation affects the 

lexical component of ošibit’sja ‘make-

mistake’, because, as mentioned above, its 

scope cannot include the aspectual compo-

nent. As for počti, in (32a) it scopes over the 

combination of the negation with the lexical 

component, again, without affecting the as-

pectual component: 

(33a) always [almost not make-mistake].  

In (32b), on the contrary, its scope includes 

only aspectual meaning: 

(33b) [almost always] [not make-mistake]  

Here the aggregate meaning of the verb is 

“dragged apart” by the scopes of the negation 

and počti. 

After distinguishing between two possible 

SemScopes of počti in (32), which account for 

the ambiguity of this sentence, it is easy to 

explain why sentence (34) is not ambiguous, 

although it has a verb in the habitual imper-

fective just as (32): 

22



(34) On počti ne xodit v teatr. 

lit. ‘he almost does not go to the theater’ 

‘he goes to the theater very seldom, almost 

never’ 

Theoretically, (34) can have two SemScopes, 

similar to (33a) and (33b): 

(35a) always[almost not goes to the theater] 

(35b) [almost always][not goes to the theater]    

However, one of them – (35a) – is senseless:  

not-going to the theater cannot be quantified 

by ‘almost’. This becomes obvious if we put 

(34) in the perfective aspect and thus exclude 

the aspectual SemScope – the sentence be-

comes anomalous: 

(36) *On počti ne pošel v teatr. 

‘he almost did not go to the theater’.  

It is worth noting that počti can scope over the 

aspectual meaning only in the context of ex-

plicit negation. Sentence (37) cannot mean 

‘almost always makes mistakes’: 

(37) *Petr počti ošibaetsja v svoix 

prognozax. 

‘Peter almost makes mistakes in his fore-

casts’. 

Even implicit negation is not sufficient to 

support the ‘almost never’ interpretation. 

Sentence (38a) does have this interpreta-

tion, while (38b) does not.  

(38а) Petr počti ne sobljudaet pravila.  

‘Peter almost does not observe rules’  

(38b) Petr počti narušaet pravila.  

‘Peter almost breaks rules’.  

5.2 Inchoative meaning 

In Russian, there is a large group of verbs 

whose meaning contains the inchoative 

component. For example: zasmejat'sja 

(‘begin to laugh’), zatrepetat' (‘begin to 

tremble’), zaigrat' (‘begin to play’), zapet' 

(‘begin to sing’), zasnut' (‘begin to 

sleep’), zainteresovat'sja (‘begin to be 

interested’), etc. The meaning of inchoa-

tivity can be represented as follows: 

P began = 

(а) ‘before moment t not-P was true’; 

(б) ‘after t P is true’. 

We showed above that an intra-word 

predicate cannot typically scope over the 

meanings expressed outside of the given 

word. Now we will describe some condi-

tions in which this rule does not hold.  

Let us consider sentence (39): 

(39) Zakončiv školu, Volodya vserjez zan-

jalsja politikoj. 

‘after graduating from high school, Vo-

lodya was seriously engaged (lit. began to 

be engaged) in politics’. 

The meaning of (39) consists of three 

components: 

(a) ‘before moment t Volodya was 
not engaged in politics’; 

(b) ‘after t he is engaged in politics’; 
(c) ‘he is engaged in politics serious-

ly’. 

Component (c) has nothing to do with the 

scope of beginning. It is not part of the situa-

tion that did not take place before t and does 

take place afterwards. Now, let us move ad-

verb vserjez ‘seriously’ to the Rheme of the 

sentence: 

(40) Zakončiv školu, [Volodya zanjalsja poli-

tikoj]Th [vserjez]Rh. 

‘after graduating from high school, [Volodya 

was engaged (lit. began to be engaged) in poli-

tics]Th[seriously]Rh’ 

The meaning of the sentence has changed. 

Now the sentence means that Volodya was 

engaged in politics even before t, but not seri-

ously. The situation that did not take place 

before t and takes place after t is not simply 

‘engagement in politics’ but ‘serious engage-

ment in politics’. Hence, component ‘serious-

ly’, is included in the scope of ‘begin’. 

The situation is highly noteworthy: a rhe-

matic component of the sentence «is absorbed» 

by the scope of an intraword predicate. Such a 

scope can be called ABSORBING. 

6 Conclusion 

The mechanism of valency filling (or discover-

ing predicate-argument relations) is considered 

as the main instrument of combining word 

meanings together to obtain the meaning of the 

whole sentence. This approach requires that a 

broader class of valency-bearing words be 

taken into account than is usual. Predicates 

expressed by adverbs, adjectives and particles 

often fill their valencies in a different ways 

than verbs and nouns do.  For this reason, it is 

expedient to generalize the concept of actant 

and introduce a broader concept that covers all 

23



types of valency filling irrespective of the way 

it is realized in the syntactic structure. This is 

the concept of scope.  

The scope should be considered separately 

at the syntactic and semantic level of sentence 

representation, because fragments of syntactic 

and semantic structures filling the same valen-

cy may be non-isomorphic. We demonstrated 

two types of such non-isomorphism, which 

were called internal and absorbing scope.  Of 

special interest is the interaction between the 

predicates expressed by lexical and grammati-

cal means. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the RSF grant 

16-18-10422, which is gratefully acknowl-

edged. We are grateful to anonymous review-

ers of the paper whose criticism helped us 

improve the presentation. 

References 

Yuri D. Apresjan. 1974. Leksičeskaja semantika. 

Sinonimičeskie sredstva jazyka. Moskva. Nauka. 

Yuri D. Apresjan. 1995. Izbrannye Trudy. Vol. I–II. 

Мoskva. Škola “Jazyki russkoj kultury”. 

Igor Boguslavsky. 1985. Issledovanija po sin-

taksičeskoj semantike: sfery dejstvija logičeskix 

slov. Moskva. Nauka.  

Igor Boguslavsky. 1996. Sfera dejstvija leksičeskix 

edinits. Moskva. Škola “Jazyki russkoj kultury”. 

Igor Boguslavsky. 1998. Sfera dejstvija nači-

natel’nosti I aktual’noe členenie: vtjagivanie 

remy. Semiotika i informatika. Vyp. 36. Moskva. 

 Igor Boguslavsky. 2003. On the Passive and Dis-

continuous Valency Slots. Proceedings of the 1st 

International Conference on Meaning-Text The-

ory. Paris, Ecole Normale Supérieure, June 16–

18.  

Igor Boguslavsky. 2007. Enlarging the Diversity of 

Valency Instantiation Patterns and Its Implica-

tions. In: Lecture Notes In Artificial Intelligence. 

Logic, Language, and Computation: 7th Interna-

tional Tbilisi Symposium on Logic, Language, 

and Computation, TbiLLC 2007, Tbilisi, Geor-

gia, October 1-5, 2007. Bosch, P; Gabelaia, D; 

Lang, J (Eds.) Springer-Verlag  Berlin, Heidel-

berg, p. 206 – 220.   

Igor Boguslavsky. 2014. Argument structure of 

adverbial derivatives in Russian. Proceedings of 

COLING 2014, the 25th International Confer-

ence on Computational Linguistics: Technical 

Papers, pages 1071–1080, Dublin, Ireland, Au-

gust 23-29. 

Igor Boguslavsky. 2016. On the Non-canonical 

Valency Filling. GramLex 2016, co-located with 

COLING 2016. Proceedings of the Workshop on 

Grammar and Lexicon: Interactions and Inter-

faces, pages 51–60. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1974. Opyt teorii lingvističeskix 

modelej “Smysl – Tekst”. Moskva. Nauka. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2014. Semantics. From meaning to 

text. Volume 3. John Benjamins Publishing 

Company. Amsterdam/Philadelphia. 

Anna Wierzbicka. 1987. The Semantics of Quanti-
tative Particles in Polish and in English. In:
Od kodu do kodu. Warszawa, s.175-189.  

24

http://portal.acm.org/author_page.cfm?id=81418598070&coll=GUIDE&dl=GUIDE&trk=0&CFID=67909667&CFTOKEN=44226650
http://portal.acm.org/author_page.cfm?id=81418598070&coll=GUIDE&dl=GUIDE&trk=0&CFID=67909667&CFTOKEN=44226650



