



















































Rule-Based Translation of Spanish Verb-Noun Combinations into Basque


Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017), pages 149–154,
Valencia, Spain, April 4. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Rule-Based Translation of Spanish Verb+Noun Combinations into Basque

Uxoa Iñurrieta, Itziar Aduriz*, Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, Gorka Labaka, Kepa Sarasola
IXA NLP group, University of the Basque Country

University of Barcelona
usoa.inurrieta@ehu.eus, itziar.aduriz@ub.edu

a.diazdeilarraza|gorka.labaka|kepa.sarasola@ehu.eus

Abstract

This paper presents a method to improve
the translation of Verb-Noun Combina-
tions (VNCs) in a rule-based Machine
Translation (MT) system for Spanish-
Basque. Linguistic information about a
set of VNCs is gathered from the pub-
lic database Konbitzul, and it is inte-
grated into the MT system, leading to an
improvement in BLEU, NIST and TER
scores, as well as the results being signif-
icantly better according to human evalua-
tors.

1 Introduction

Multiword Expressions (MWEs) constitute a chal-
lenging phraseological phenomenon for Natural
Language Processing (NLP). They are formed by
more than one word, but the whole expression has
to be taken into account in order to understand
its meaning (Sag et al., 2002). They are very
frequent in natural language, but their process-
ing is not straightforward, especially due to their
morphosyntactic variability. Furthermore, diffi-
culties multiply when it comes to Machine Trans-
lation (MT), since MWEs are not usually trans-
lated word for word and, hence, sophisticated pro-
cessing methods are needed.

In this paper, we will deal with Verb-Noun
Combinations (VNCs), and we will explain how
MWE-specific linguistic information can be used
to improve a rule-based MT system which trans-
lates Spanish into Basque, namely Matxin (Mayor
et al., 2011). After discussing some related work
(Section 2), a brief explanation about Matxin and
the way it handles MWEs will be given (Sec-
tion 3). Then, the experimental setup will be pre-
sented (Section 4), and results will be shown (Sec-
tion 5).

2 Related Work

MWEs are word combinations that need to be
treated as a whole in order to get good re-
sults in lexically-sensitive NLP tasks (Sag et
al., 2002). Not all MWEs are morphosyntacti-
cally fixed –there are also semi-fixed and flexi-
ble combinations–, which makes their processing
a complex task. Some kinds of MWEs, like VNCs,
are specially tricky, as they are more likely to have
multiple morphosyntactic variants.

Over the last decades, quite a lot of research has
been done on MWE identification and extraction
(Gurrutxaga and Alegria, 2011; Ramisch, 2015),
which is relevant not only for NLP applications
but also for other disciplines like Lexicography
(Vincze et al., 2011). MWE-specific resources are
being developed in a number of languages, as re-
ported by Losnegaard et al. (2016) in a survey
carried out within the PARSEME COST Action
(IC1207).

However, not so much work has been under-
taken concerning the multilingual aspects of this
phraseological phenomenon, although challenges
get bigger when multiple languages are involved.
One of the reasons why this happens is that MWEs
are not usually translated word for word from one
language to another, especially when these lan-
guages are from very different typologies (Bald-
win and Kim, 2010; Simova and Kordoni, 2013),
as with Basque and Spanish1.

Joint efforts are also being made towards im-
proving Machine Translation systems, for exam-
ple, within the european QTLeap project (Agirre
et al., 2015). Although statistical MT systems al-
ready integrate some phraseological knowledge as
a consequence of training their models on large

1Whereas Spanish is a romance language, Basque is a
non-indoeuropean language which belongs to no known fam-
ily. More details about the main differences between both
languages are given in Section 3.

149



corpora (Ren et al., 2009; Bouamor et al., 2012;
Kordoni and Simova, 2014), rule-based systems
often get bad results when MWEs are involved, as
they tend to translate each word separately. Thus,
this kind of expression being so frequent in natural
language, MT systems benefit greatly from includ-
ing phraseological knowledge, and several stud-
ies have shown that even the simplest method to
process MWEs makes a difference in the system’s
translation quality (Wehrli et al., 2009; Seretan,
2014).

3 Matxin: Rule-based MT from Spanish
into Basque

Matxin (Mayor et al., 2011) is an MT system
which translates Spanish into Basque, two long-
distance families. As opposed to Spanish, which
uses prepositions, Basque is a morphologically
rich language where postpositions and cases are
used and word order is free. The system is rule-
based, mainly because of the scarcity of parallel
corpora available in these languages.

Matxin’s general architecture is divided into
three phases:

1. Analysis. The source text is analysed using
the FreeLing parser (Padró and Stanilovsky,
2012), which gives morphological informa-
tion, chunking information, and determines
the dependency relationship between words.

2. Transfer. The deep syntactic representation
of the Spanish sentence is transferred into an
equivalent representation in Basque. During
this phase, on the one hand, the lexical com-
ponents in the source language are replaced
with their corresponding elements in the tar-
get language, and, on the other hand, the
structure is also transferred. Specific mod-
ules for Spanish-Basque translation are in-
cluded in this phase, like the one to change
prepositions into postpositional information.

3. Generation. Firstly, the nodes in each chunk
and the chunks themselves are reordered in
the sentence from scratch, and postpositional
information is added to the chunks when
needed. Then, the forms of the words in
Basque are created from the labelled lexical
elements. The morphological processor used
for this purpose is Morfeus (Alegrı́a et al.,
1996).

3.1 Current MWE handling
At the moment, Matxin uses a very simple method
to process MWEs. When an entry in the system’s
bilingual dictionary is formed by more than one
word, the whole expression is treated as a fixed
sequence, that is, as if it was a single word. During
the transfer phase, the Spanish MWE is replaced
by its corresponding Basque word(s), as shown in
example (1)2.

(1) ’A vacancy was filled.’
ES: Se cubrió una plaza.

Refl covered a vacancy
MT: Plaza bat bete zen.

vacancy a fill AuxV

In the case of verbal MWEs (including VNCs),
verb inflection is taken into account, but the rest
of the words have to follow the verb exactly like
they appear in the entry. This means that mor-
phosyntactic variation is not processed correctly,
neither when identifying the MWE in the source
language, nor when translating it into the target
language. More details about this are given in Sec-
tions 4.1 and 4.2.

(2) ’They filled all vacancies.’
ES: Cubrieron todas las plazas.

they-covered all the vacancies
MT: Plaza guztiak estali zituzten.

vacancy all.abs cover AuxV
CT: Plaza guztiak bete zituzten.

vacancy all.abs fill AuxV

(3) ’He doesn’t pay me attention.’
ES: No me hace caso.

not me.IndObj he-does attention
MT: Ez nau kasu egiten.

not AuxV.DObj attention do
CT: Ez dit kasu(rik) egiten.

not AuxV.IndObj attention.part do

In example (2), the VNC cubrir plazas is not
identified as a MWE and, as a consequence, the
wrong lexical choice is done when translating it
into Basque. In example (3), on the other hand,
the VNC is identified well, but the grammatical
information of its Basque translation is incorrect,
because the system ignores that the Basque VNC
needs an indirect object instead of a direct one.

2In examples, we use ES for the Spanish text to be trans-
lated, MT for the result of the MT system, and CT for the
correct Basque translation.

150



4 Experimental setup

The VNC set used for the experiment consisted
of 92 combinations taken from the Konbitzul
database3, where a number of Spanish VNCs
and their Basque translations are collected along
with linguistic data. The combinations in Konb-
itzul were gathered from several sources; the set
we used here originally came from the Elhuyar
Spanish-Basque dictionary4 and was then anal-
ysed and tailored to meet the requirements of the
database. According to the information in Kon-
bitzul, 57 out of the 92 combinations were mor-
phosyntactically semi-fixed, while the resting 26
were completely flexible.

Concerning the corpus, 4,991 sentences were
selected from a bigger parallel corpus made of
cross-domain texts collected by web-crawling
and automatically aligned between Spanish and
Basque. It was expressly crafted for this experi-
ment, meaning that it did not consist of random
sentences but of selected sentences containing: ei-
ther instances of the Spanish VNCs in our set (Ex-
ample 4), or both the verb and the noun of a given
VNC in our set, but not being part of the VNC in
this context (Example 5). This allowed us to test
the performance of the MT system both when the
VNC needed to be processed as a whole and when
the verb and the noun needed to be translated sep-
arately.

(4) Iban dando voces por la calle.
they-went giving voices on the

street
’They were shouting on the street.’

(5) Aquellas voces le dieron una pista.
those voices her.IndObj gave a clue
’Those voices gave her a clue.’

The information in Konbitzul was first used
to help to identify instances of the VNCs when
analysing the source text (Section 4.1), and then
to transfer the source sentence into the target lan-
guage (Section 4.2). Therefore, the identifica-
tion of VNCs was done within the Analysis phase
of the translation procedure, and their translation
was done within the Transfer phase, the Genera-
tion phase not needing any special adaptation for
MWE handling (Section 3).

3http://ixa2.si.ehu.eus/konbitzul
4http://hiztegiak.elhuyar.eus/

4.1 Identifying the Spanish VNCs

In Konbitzul, comprehensive linguistic informa-
tion is specified for the VNC set we use here,
including some features specifically analysed for
NLP purposes. The morphosyntactic classification
is first used, according to which the VNCs can be
of three types: fixed, semi-fixed or flexible.

When a given VNC is classified as flexible, it
means that, concerning morphosyntax, the noun
and the verb work as any other noun and verb in
the sentence, that is, they can have as many vari-
ants as any non-phraseological VNC.

(6) Me da muchı́simo miedo.
me.IndObj gives very-much fear
’It scares me very much.’
¡Qué miedo me da!
what fear me.IndObj gives
’How scary (I find it)!’

On the other hand, when the VNC is classified
as semi-fixed, some restrictions are needed in or-
der to distinguish occurrences of the VNC from
other sentences where the verb and the noun are
present but should not be treated as an MWE.

(7) Estoy muy de acuerdo.
I-am very of agreement
’I agree very much.’
Estoy harta del acuerdo.
I-am fed-up of-the agreement
’I’m fed up with the agreement.’

In example (7), two sentences are shown, both
of which contain the verb estar and the noun
acuerdo preceded by the preposition de. In the
first sentence, those words constitute a MWE (es-
tar de acuerdo, ’agree’), but not in the second one,
where the noun phrase (NP) has a determiner. By
restricting determiners from the NP in the VNC,
the system identifies a MWE in the first sentence
but not in the second one5.

For the identification task, we followed the
same procedure as the one used in (Iñurrieta et
al., 2016). First of all, the method currently used
by Matxin is run, that is: word sequences are
searched for against entries in the database, tak-
ing verb infletion into acount, but not considering
the potential variability of the rest of the elements.

5All restrictions are collected and explained in (Iñurrieta
et al., 2016).

151



Then, automatically-produced chunking informa-
tion and syntactic dependencies are used, and mor-
phosyntactic restrictions specified in Konbitzul are
applied (Example 7).

4.2 Translating the VNCs into Basque
Concerning translation, Konbitzul classifies the
Spanish VNCs according to what needs to be
changed when translating them into Basque: lexi-
con, grammar, or both lexicon and grammar.

For the VNCs needing lexical treatment,
Basque equivalents are specified for the verb and
the noun in Spanish. This information is integrated
into Matxin, so that, when a VNC is identified, the
system does not translate it regularly (Example 8).

(8) ’The topic aroused interest.’
ES: El tema despertó interés.

the topic awakened interest
MT: Gaiak interesa esnatu zuen.

topic.erg interest awaken AuxV
CT: Gaiak interesa piztu zuen.

topic.erg interest turn-on AuxV

On the other hand, for the VNCs needing
special grammatical treatment, the features that
need to be taken into account are specified. For
those cases, exceptional rules are added within
the Transfer phase, so that the specified feature(s)
is/are not translated regularly.

The features specified in the database are:

• Cases or postposition marks of the NPs
• Determiner irregularities
• Number and definiteness of the NPs
• Syntactic relations of the verbs and the NPs
• Postpositions of open slots
In example (9), for instance, the Basque NP

needs a postposition other than the one automat-
ically given as a translation of the Spanish prepo-
sition. Furthermore, it needs to be indefinite, but
it would be translated as definite if no special rule
was applied.

(9) ’She treats me with respect.’
ES: Me trata con respeto.

she-me.DObj treats with respect
MT: Errespetuarekin tratatzen nau.

respect.soc treat AuxV
CT: Errespetuz tratatzen nau.

respect.ins treat AuxV

When it comes to example (10), the noun in the

Spanish VNC is preceded by a preposition, and
this prepositional phrase works as a modifier of
the verb. On the other hand, the combination has
an object which works as an open slot, that is, an
element which is always present but can be filled
with any NP. In the Basque translation, the object
of the verb in the VNC is actually the noun in the
VNC, and the open slot is a postpositional phrase
which works as a modifier. Therefore, both the
syntactic relation and the postposition of the open
slot need special rules to be processed correctly.

(10) ’They miss him.’
ES: Lo echan en falta.

him.IndObj throw in lack
MT: Faltan botatzen dute.

lack.ine throw AuxV
CT: Haren falta sumatzen dute.

his lack.abs feel AuxV

5 Results

After integrating all the linguistic information into
Matxin, the system was evaluated using three au-
tomatic evaluation metrics: BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002), NIST (Doddington, 2002) and TER
(Snover et al., 2006). Evaluation was carried out
without casing, and two systems were compared:
(a) the original one, Matxin, and (b) the same sys-
tem with VNC-specific information.

System BLEU NIST TER
Matxin 7.28 3.88 84.36

Matxin-VNC 7.50 3.90 84.27

Table 1: BLEU, NIST and TER scores obtained
by Matxin with and without VNC-specific infor-
mation

As shown in Table 1, all scores improve when
VNC-specific information is used. The greatest
improvement is obtained in BLEU score (0.22
points), and results are statistically significant ac-
cording to paired bootstrap resampling (p>0.05).
It must be noted that BLEU scores are low for
Spanish-Basque, and this result means a relative
increase of 3.02%.

5.1 Human evaluation

Apart from using automatic evaluation metrics,
three human evaluators were also given a repre-
sentative sample of the sentences translated differ-
ently by both systems and were asked to compare

152



them. All evaluators were Spanish and Basque na-
tive speakers: two of them (A and B) were lin-
guists, whereas the third one (C) had no linguistic
background.

System A B C
Matxin-VNC 77.50% 77.50% 46.50%

Matxin 6.50% 8% 40.50%
No preference 16% 14.50% 13%

Table 2: Scores by three human evaluators

Although scores clearly show that the system
with VNC-specific information gets better results,
they also suggest that improvements are much
more evident for linguists than for native speakers
with no linguistic background (Table 2). In fact,
43.52% of the evaluation set led to disagreements
among annotators, but 78.57% of these (33% of
the whole set) were cases in which both linguists
said the new system performed better while anno-
tator C chose the other translation.

Taking into account that only a few combina-
tions were tested and the corpus used was specif-
ically prepared based on those combinations, it
can be foreseen that the overall improvement this
method would produce on large corpora would not
be as significant. However, as the kind of linguis-
tic information we chose is proved to have a posi-
tive effect on the system’s output, we conclude that
this methodology is relevant and useful for further
investigation.

6 Conclusion

In the experiment presented in this paper, linguis-
tic information was used to improve the translation
of VNCs in Matxin, a rule-based MT system for
Spanish-Basque. MWE-specific linguistic infor-
mation was gathered from Konbitzul, a database
collecting data about a list of VNCs, and this in-
formation was then used both for the identification
of idiomatic VNCs in Spanish and for their trans-
lation into Basque.

After integrating information about 92 VNCs
into Matxin, the system was evaluated on a 4,991-
sentence cross-domain corpus, using three auto-
matic metrics: BLEU, NIST and TER. The score
that raised the most was BLEU, with an increase of
0.22 points (3.02%). A human evaluation was also
carried out, where the improvement became even
more evident, even if it also suggested that lin-

guists are more likely to notice improvements than
native speakers with no linguistic background.

It must also be noted that the corpus we used
here was specifically crafted for this experiment,
which means that the improvement would proba-
bly not be as significant in a bigger general cor-
pus. However, results are positive as a start, and
we intend to keep investigating how this method-
ology can be enhanced. The next step will be to
add more VNCs and test them in bigger corpora,
so that conclusions can be drawn at a greater scale.

Acknowledgments

Uxoa Iñurrieta’s doctoral research is funded by the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitive-
ness (BES-2013-066372). The work was carried
out in the context of the SKATeR (TIN2012-
38584-C06-02), EXTRECM (TIN2013-46616-
C2-1-R) and TADEEP (TIN2015-70214-P)
projects.

References
Eneko Agirre, Iñaki Alegrı́a, Nora Aranberri,

Mikel Artetxe, Ander Barrena, António Branco,
Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, Koldo Gojenola, Gorka
Labaka, Arantxa Otegi, et al. 2015. Lexical
semantics, Basque and Spanish in QTLeap: Quality
Translation by Deep Language Engineering Ap-
proaches. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural,
55:169–172.

Iñaki Alegrı́a, Xabier Artola, Kepa Sarasola, and
Miriam Urkia. 1996. Automatic morphological
analysis of basque. Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting, 11(4):193–203.

Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multi-
word expressions. In Handbook of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Second Edition, pages 267–292.
Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Dhouha Bouamor, Nasredine Semmar, and Pierre
Zweigenbaum. 2012. Identifying bilingual multi-
word expressions for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 8th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2012), pages 674–679.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation
of machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the second
international conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Research, pages 138–145. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc.

Antton Gurrutxaga and Iñaki Alegria. 2011. Auto-
matic extraction of nv expressions in basque: basic
issues on cooccurrence techniques. In Proceedings

153



of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from
Parsing and Generation to the Real World, pages 2–
7. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Uxoa Iñurrieta, Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, Gorka
Labaka, Kepa Sarasola, Itziar Aduriz, and John
Carroll. 2016. Using linguistic data for english
and spanish verb-noun combination identification.
In The 26th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING 2016): Technical Pa-
pers, pages 857–867.

Valia Kordoni and Iliana Simova. 2014. Multiword ex-
pressions in machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2014), pages 1208–
1211.

Gyri Losnegaard, Federico Sangati, Carla Parra Es-
cartı́n, Agata Savary, Sacha Bargmann, and Jo-
hanna Monti. 2016. Parseme survey on MWE re-
sources. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2016), Paris, France. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Aingeru Mayor, Iñaki Alegrı́a, Arantza Dı́az De Ilar-
raza, Gorka Labaka, Mikel Lersundi, and Kepa Sara-
sola. 2011. Matxin, an open-source rule-based ma-
chine translation system for basque. Machine trans-
lation, 25(1):53–82.

Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freel-
ing 3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012),
pages 2473–2479.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhug. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318.

Carlos Ramisch. 2015. Multiword Expressions Acqui-
sition. Springer.

Zhixiang Ren, Yajuan Lü, Jie Cao, Qun Liu, and Yun
Huang. 2009. Improving statistical machine trans-
lation using domain bilingual multiword expres-
sions. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Identification, Interpretation, Disam-
biguation and Applications (ACL 2009, pages 47–
54. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ivan A Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
expressions: A pain in the neck for nlp. In Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and
Computational Linguistics, pages 1–15. Springer.

Violeta Seretan. 2014. On collocations and their in-
teraction with parsing and translation. In Informat-
ics, volume 1, pages 11–31. Multidisciplinary Digi-
tal Publishing Institute.

Iliana Simova and Valia Kordoni. 2013. Improving
English-Bulgarian statistical machine translation by
phrasal verb treatment. In Proceedings of MT Sum-
mit XIV Workshop on Multi-word Units in Machine
Translation and Translation Technology.

Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In Proceedings of association for machine transla-
tion in the Americas, volume 200.

Orsolya Vincze, Estela Mosqueira, and Mar-
garita Alonso Ramos. 2011. An online collocation
dictionary of Spanish. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Meaning-Text Theory,
pages 275–286.

Eric Wehrli, Violeta Seretan, Luka Nerima, and
Lorenza Russo. 2009. Collocations in a rule-based
mt system: A case study evaluation of their transla-
tion adequacy.

154


