





































A Dependency Treebank for Kurmanji Kurdish

Memduh Gökırmak
Department of Computer Engineering

Istanbul Technical University
Turkey

gokirmak@itu.edu.tr

Francis M. Tyers
School of Linguistics

Higher School of Economics
Russia

francis.tyers@uit.no

Abstract

This paper describes the development of
the first syntactically annotated corpus of
Kurmanji Kurdish. The corpus was used as
one of the surprise languages in the 2017
CoNLL shared task on parsing Universal
Dependencies. In the paper we describe
how the corpus was prepared, some Kur-
manji specific constructions that required
special treatment, and we give results for
parsing Kurdish using two popular data-
driven parsers.

1 Introduction
With current end-to-end pipelines for tokenisation,
tagging and parsing, such as UDPipe (Straka et al.,
2016), a treebank is no longer simply a collection of
annotated sentences, but could be considered a vital
basic language resource. Given just the treebank
a statistical model can be trained which performs
everything up to dependency parsing.
This paper describes such a treebank for Kur-

manji Kurdish, a language spoken in parts of Iran,
Iraq, Syria, Armenia and Turkey. The treebank
was created as one of the surprise languages for
the CoNLL 2017 shared task in dependency pars-
ing (Zeman et al., 2017);¹ but it is hoped that it
provides a template for further development of lan-
guage technology for Kurmanji.
The paper is laid out as follows, in Section 2 we

give a brief sociolinguistic and typological overview
of the Kurdish. Then in Section 3 we describe some
prior work on computational resources and tools for
Kurmanji. In Section 4 we describe the compo-
sition of the corpus, and in Section 5 we describe
some details of the annotation guidelines, paying at-
tention to Kurmanji-specific phenomena. Section 6
reports on a small experiment with three popular

¹http://universaldependencies.org/
conll17/

data-driven parsers, and is followed by some av-
enues for future work in Section 7 and conclusions
in Section 8.

2 Kurdish

Kurmanji Kurdish (also referred to in the litera-
ture as ‘Northern Kurdish’) is an Indo-Iranian lan-
guage spoken by approximately 14 million people
throughout the Middle East. It is a recognised mi-
nority language in Armenia (Simons and Fennig,
2017). Kurmanji over the past century has become
the most prominent Kurdish language, partly due
to the fact that its speakers are a majority among
speakers of Kurdish languages, and partly due to in-
tense cultural and political activity centered around
the Kurmanji language. Manuscripts in what could
be considered a precursor to Kurmanji have been
discovered from five centuries back or more, but
the most intense efforts in the creation of a literary
written standard of Kurmanji were in the 1920s and
30s onward throughout the 20th century. Through
the work of writers, academics and intellectuals like
Celadet Bedirxan and his colleagues at Hawar, the
Damascene Kurdish magazine where the Latin Kur-
dish alphabet was first adopted, Kurmanji has accu-
mulated a respectable literature and a standard reg-
ister has been created. Despite all of this activity
and possibly due to the ‘prestige’ status of other lan-
guages in the region,² many speakers of the vari-
ous dialects of Kurmanji are not aware of a Kurdish
literature, and some are even shocked to learn that
Kurdish languages are written at all.
Kurmanji has two grammatical genders, mascu-

line and feminine; four cases: nominative, oblique,
construct and vocative; and definiteness marked on
nouns. The language has prepositions and postpo-
sitions, and also combinations of these which form
circumpositions. Verbs are formed from two stems,
past and present.

²Such as Arabic, Persian and Turkish

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 64-72,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

64



Figure 1: The Kurmanji speaking area (dark grey)
within the wider Kurdish speaking area (light grey).
The areas where Kurmanji is most widely spoken
straddle the borders of Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey.

Regarding syntax, the language is primarily
subject–object–verb, with auxiliaries following the
main verb and split-ergative alignment, where past-
tense transitive verbs agree with the person and
number of the syntactic object rather than the sub-
ject. Noun phrases are largely head initial, with
modifiers following the head noun, exceptions to
this are determiners and numerals which precede
the modified noun. The language has a fairly strict
constituent order, and the morphology is of the fu-
sional type with the complexity being similar to that
of Icelandic.

3 Prior work

There are a number of reference grammars of
Kurmanji available, the most widely-known being
Thackston (2006). We also made use of the gram-
mar by Bedirxan and Lescot (1990), and consulted
the grammar by Aktuğ (2013). Many other gram-
mars are available, including several different writ-
ings by Celadet Ali Bedirxan himself, in most lan-
guages of the Middle East, French and English.
Many of these grammars are written for the purpose
of teaching beginners, and most of these introduc-
tory grammars lack important details required for
proper linguistic reference. Many grammars also
have a good deal of influence from majority lan-
guages in the countries they were written. This par-
ticularly comes to light when the writer of a gram-
mar describes and thinks about elements of Kur-
manji with analogy to Turkish.
A text corpus of Kurmanji and Sorani Kurdish by

the name of Pewan was introduced in Esmaili and
Salavati (2013). Pewan is a plaintext corpus created
for the purpose of information retrieval, and was the

first publically-available digital corpus of Kurdish.
The corpus is unfortunately not freely available, be-
ing based on texts under restrictive copyright provi-
sions.
Another lexical resource for Kurdish, although

again unfortunately not freely available, is KurdNet
(Aliabadi et al., 2014). This is an effort to build a
WordNet-like resource for all variants of Kurdish,
including Kurmanji.
Walther et al. (2010) describes the rapid devel-

opment of a morphological analyser and part-of-
speech tagger for Kurmanji based on a raw cor-
pus and Thackston’s reference grammar (Thack-
ston, 2006). They start by defining part-of-speech
andmorphological categories, and then build a mor-
phological description of Kurmanji in their formal-
ism. They train a maximum-entropy based tagger
using a number of different unsupervised methods
achieving an accuracy of 85.7% on a hand-tagged
evaluation corpus of thirteen sentences. The semi-
automatically created lexicon described was re-
leased under a free/open-source licence allowing it
to be incorporated, after improvement in the Aper-
tium morphological analyser for Kurmanji (see
§4.2).

4 Corpus

The corpus comprises of text from two domains, the
first is a short Sherlock Holmes story, Dr. Rwey-
lot,³ which was translated into Kurmanji by Segman
(1944) and published in theRohanî journal in Dam-
ascus.
The motivation behind choosing a story text as

opposed to news text was threefold. First of all
being published in 1944 by an author who died in
1951,⁴ the text is out of copyright. Secondly, hav-
ing a whole story annotated as opposed to individual
sentences will be interesting when looking at prob-
lems such as co-reference resolution. Finally, the
orthography is close enough to the modern orthog-
raphy that any differences can be easily handled.
The text was available through the Kurdish Digi-

tal Library of the Paris Kurdish Institute⁵ as a PDF
file. The PDF had already been processed with an
OCR system, and the resulting body of text was ac-
curate enough to use with some manual fixing of
errors resulting from the OCR process.

³Original title: The Adventure of the Speckled Band.
⁴Bişarê Segman is widely believed to be a nom de plume of

Celadet Berdixan, who died in 1951.
⁵http://bnk.institutkurde.org/

65



Text S T T/S non-proj
Dr. Rweylot 339 4,717 13.9 17.9
Wikipedia 415 5,543 13.4 16.6
Total: 780 10,260 13.2 17.2

Table 1: Composition of the treebank. S is the
number of sentences and T the number of to-
kens. T/S gives the average length of a sentence.
The non-proj column gives the percentage of non-
projective sentences.

The remainder of the treebank is made up
of sentences selected randomly from the Kurdish
Wikipedia.⁶ From the randomly-selected sen-
tences, we excluded those which were not in Kur-
manji, those with too many orthographic errors and,
for legal reasons, those dealing with topics consid-
ered controversial in Turkey.

4.1 Orthography
Kurmanji Kurdish, unlike Sorani Kurdish, is pri-
marily written using the Latin script, rather than the
Perso-Arabic script, ever since Hawar adopted the
Latin script in the 1930s. Both, however, use alpha-
bets as their primary writing system: Sorani uses a
modified version of the Perso-Arabic abugida, by
introducing mandatory vowels. Kurmanji’s alpha-
bet includes several letters with diacritics: circum-
flexes to mark long vowels, and cedillas to mark
palato-alveolar affricates ş /ʃ/ and sibilants ç /tʃ/.
The script was also devised by Celadet Bedirxan.
In both the Sherlock Holmes story and the

Wikipedia sentences, the orthography was not stan-
dardised. This is an issue in written Kurmanji,
where many can more or less write in a certain lit-
erary dialect but few will produce texts that over-
lap completely in terms of orthography. Depending
on the writer’s dialect, the word ku ‘that’ might be
written ko, heye ‘there is’ might be written as heya,
adpositions might have slight variations and spelling
may vary to represent the differences in pronunci-
ation. In order to be able to represent this variety
in the treebank we have maintained the differently
spelled words in the form column of the CoNLL-
U file,⁷ and used the variants that exist in the mor-

⁶Database dump:          kuwiki-20150901-pages-
articles.xml.bz2

⁷CoNLL-U is the file format used in Universal Dependen-
cies for storing treebanks. A description of the format can
be found here: http://universaldependencies.
org/format.html

phological analyser in the lemma column, e.g. both
heya and heye will have the lemma hebûn (the exis-
tential copula).
Another orthography issue becomes apparent in

tokenisation. In the Sherlock story, in some cases
negation is written analytically where it would be
synthetic in a more modern text. Example (1a)
shows negation written separately from the verb,
while in example (1b) it is written together.⁸

(1) a. Zimanê
Tongue-

wê
she-

ne

digeriya.
turn- . .2

‘Her tongue was not turning.’
b. Zimanê

Tongue-
wê
she-

nedigeriya.
-turn- . .2

‘Her tongue was not turning.’

We have kept this syntactic variety as it is likely
that many sentences parsed with any system based
on this treebank will also have some non-standard
syntactic elements, and standardising and fixing too
much may lead to a less robust system.
Throughout the paper, we use ⁅ and ⁆ symbols

to mark where contraction has taken place in the
dependency trees, for example Ezê ‘I will’ will be
shown as ⁅Ez- -ê⁆. contracted with the first person
singular pronoun.

4.2 Preprocessing
Preprocessing the corpus consists of running the
text through the Kurmanji morphological analyser⁹
available from Apertium (Forcada et al., 2011),
which also performs tokenisation of multi-word
units based on the longest match left-to-right. The
morphological analyser returns all the possible mor-
phological analyses for each word based on a lexi-
con of around 13,800 lexemes. After tokenisation
and morphological analysis, the text is processed
with a constraint-grammar (Bick and Didriksen,
2015) based disambiguator for Kurmanji consisting
of 85 rules which remove inappropriate analyses in

⁸The tags used in the glosses are: = construct case,
= oblique case, = progressive aspect, = narrative
tense, 2 = second person singular.

⁹https://svn.code.sf.net/p/apertium/
svn/languages/apertium-kmr

66



context. For example, there is a systematic ambi-
guity between the past participle and the second-
person singular past tense of the verb. One rule re-
moves the participle reading if there is no follow-
ing auxiliary verb. Applying these rules reduces the
average number of analyses per word from around
2.87 to around 1.47.

4.3 Formats
The native format of the treebank is the VISL for-
mat (Bick and Didriksen, 2015). This is a text-
based format where surface tokens are on one line,
followed by analyses on the subsequent line. The
reason for choosing this format was that it was more
convenient for hand-annotation, and was the for-
mat that the morphological analyser and constraint
grammar output. In Appendix A we present, for
reference, a sentence in VISL format.

4.3.1 CoNLL-U
In order to convert to the standard CoNLL-U for-
mat, we needed to do some additional processing:

• The morphological analyser sometimes to-
kenises two space-separated tokens into a sin-
gle token, for example li ber ‘in front of’ is to-
kenised as a single token. When the surface
form and the lemma had an equal number of
spaces were split into multiple tokens.

• Parts of speech and morphological features
were converted from Apertium standard to
Universal Dependencies using a lookup table
and set longest-overlap algorithm.

• In multiword tokens where there is a single sur-
face form with multiple syntactic words, the
sub-word tokens are created using a language-
independent longest-common-subsequence al-
gorithm with the surface form and the under-
lying lemma. For example, LCS(ezê, ez) = ez
and LCS(ezê, dê) = ê.

• The specialSpaceAfter=No feature, used
in training tokenisers, was added automatically
to the column of CoNLL-U by a script.

After these transformations a valid CoNLL-U file is
produced which can be used in training most popu-
lar statistical parsers.

5 Annotation guidelines
The annotation guidelines are based on Universal
Dependencies (Nivre et al., 2016), an international

collaborative project to make cross-linguistically
consistent treebanks available for a wide variety of
languages. The Kurmanji treebank is based on ver-
sion 2.0 of the guidelines which were published in
December, 2016.
We chose the UD scheme for the annotation as

it provides ready-made recommendations on which
to base annotation guidelines. This reduces the
amount of time needed to develop bespoke anno-
tation guidelines for a given language as where the
existing universal guidelines are adequate they can
be imported wholesale into the language-specific
guidelines.
In the following subsections we describe some

particular features of Kurmanji that are interesting
or novel with respect to the Universal Dependencies
annotation scheme.

5.1 Alignment
Kurmanji, like other Kurdish languages, is split
ergative. This is similar to the languages of the (rel-
atively) closely related Indo-Aryan family. Erga-
tivity does not, however, exist in most other Indo-
Iranian languages. With intransitive clauses and
in non-past-tense transitive clauses, the verb agrees
with the most agent-like argument (typically in
nominative case). However in past-tense transitive
clauses, the verb agree with the most patient-like ar-
gument, which is usually in nominative case, while
the most agent-like is in the oblique case. This is
different to the Indo-Aryan system, which primar-
ily uses aspect, rather than tense, to assign ergativity.
The following sentence in the treebank provides a

good example of the contrast between transitive and
intransitive sentences in the past tense: Ez kenîm û
min got: … ‘I laughed and I said: …’

Ez kenîm û min got : …
Case: Nom Obl

I laughed and I said : …

nsubj

conj

cc

nsubj punct

Note the intransitive verb kenîm ‘laughed’ has the
subject in nominative, while the transitive verb got
‘said’ has the subject in the oblique.

5.2 Contracted prepositions
Similar to the preposition–pronoun combinations in
the Celtic languages, and like the Spanish contigo
‘with you’, Kurmanji has four prepositions which
contract with third-person singular complements.

67



These are bi ‘with’, ji ‘from’, di ‘at/in’ and li ‘at/in’.
They are dealt with in the annotation by assigning to
syntactic words to the surface form, one represent-
ing the preposition and the other representing the
pronoun.

5.3 Circumpositions
In addition to prepositions, Kurmanji also employs
circumpositions, where a preposition and a postpo-
sition encircle the same noun phrase. In some sit-
uations, both the preposition and postposition must
appear together, e.g. di … de ‘in …’. In other situ-
ations the prepositions can be used on their own. In
the latter situation the postposition either modifies
or gives a more nuanced meaning to and thus re-
fines the meaning of the preposition. Consider the
following example, Heq di destên we de ye. ‘The
truth is in your hands’.

Heq di destên we de ye
Truth in hands your in is

nsubj

cop

case

case:circ

nmod:poss

Either the preposition or the postposition can be
elided, this phenomenon occurs more frequently in
colloquial speech. The elided adposition is the non-
essential one. If a postposition is part of a circum-
position, we annotate it with the language-specific
relation case:circ.

5.4 Construct case
The construct case in Kurdish is used to link a head
noun to adjectival or nominal modifiers.
Construct inflection on the head noun signifies

that the following word modifies the initial word.
When more than one word modifies the initial word
in a construct structure, a construct extender is used
to show that the second modifier also modifies the
initial noun, as opposed to modifying the last noun
in the noun–noun structure.
If the phrase only has two elements, then some-

times the construct inflection can be dropped. In
this case the head noun is inflected in the nomina-
tive case.
The construct case overrides any other inflection

that the noun might have if it were not in a construct
phrase. See Figure 2 for an example of how the con-
struct inflection overrides the inflection from verbal
subcategorisation.

5.5 “Light” verbs
We use the term light verb to refer to the complex
predicates formed of a nominal plus a verb which
is used as a single predicate. These are common
in languages that Kurmanji is in close contact with,
such as Persian and Turkish.
In the treebank we use the label com-

pound:lvc to link the nominal part of the pred-
icate to the verb, and consider them as forming a
single unit. This is similar to the approach taken in
other languages in Universal Dependencies which
have this feature.
We use a number of diagnostics for determining

if a given expression should be considered a light
verb:

• “Is there another patient-like participant in the
sentence aside from the nominal involved in
the light verb construction?”

• “Is the nominal involved in the construction not
inflected as if it were a simple argument to the
verb? (i.e. is it inflected in the nominative case
where it would otherwise be in the oblique?)”

• “Could this be considered a case of secondary
predication?”

• “Are the constituents written together in the in-
finitive (e.g. in passive constructions, nominal
use)”

An example is presented of a straightforward use
of a light verb in Kurmanji. Serokwezîr kuştina
sivîlan şermezar dike. “The Prime Minister con-
demns the killing of civilians.” The word şermezar,
“shame”, is used together with the verb kirin to
mean condemn, and the construction takes another
argument as a direct object.

Serokwezîr kuştina sivîlan şermezar dike.
the prime minister the killing civilians shame does .

nsubj

obj

nmod:poss compound:lvc

Unlike in some other languages, for example the
Turkic languages, in Kurmanji these constructions
may be discontinuous with an argument appearing
between the verb and the nominal. For example:
Min bêriya te kiriye, ‘I missed you’ (lit. I did a before
of you), has a construct case on the nominal part of

68



Xwarina min devê min dişewitîne
Food me mouth me burns

Case: Con Obl Con Obl

nsubj

obj

nmod:poss nmod:poss

(a) ‘My food is burning my mouth’

Xwarina dev dişewitîne
Food mouth burns

Case: Nom Obl

nsubj

obj

(b) ‘Food burns the mouth’

Xwarina min devê min şewitand
Food me mouth me burnt

Case: Con Obl Con Obl

nsubj

obj

nmod:poss nmod:poss

(c) ‘My food burnt my mouth’

Xwarinê dev şewitand
Food mouth burnt

Case: Obl Nom

nsubj

obj

(d) ‘Food burnt the mouth’

Figure 2: Example of annotation of construct case. Note in (a) and (c) how the construct case overrides the
verbal case government, which would have been nominative and oblique respectively (see §5.1).

the light verb construct, bêriya ‘fore/before’, which
forms a noun phrase with the argument te, ‘you’.

Min bêriya te kiriye .
Case: Obl Con Obl

Me fore you did .

nsubj

obj

compound:lvc

5.6 Future clitic
Future tense is expressed with present subjunctive
inflection on the predicate and a future clitic after
the subject. This clitic is usually in the form dê,
which we consider to be its lemma in our annota-
tion, but appears as ê after pronouns, and the pro-
noun and clitic often contract. For example com-
pare examples (2a) and (2b).¹⁰

(2) a. Hevalê
Friend-

zilam
man-

dê min
me-

bibîne.
see- .3 .

‘The man’s friend will see me.’
b. Ezê

I-
biçim
go- .1

malê.
home.

‘I will go home.’

¹⁰The tag stands for future tense, 3 and 1 stand for
third and first person singular respectively.

The following example demonstrates the annota-
tion of this feature for the sentence Hûnê tê de çi
bikin? ‘What will you do in there?’.

⁅Hûn- -ê⁆ ⁅t- -ê⁆ de çi bikin ?

You will in it at what do ?

nsubj

aux

objcase

obl

case punct

5.7 Pluperfect
The pluperfect tense is syntactically analytic but of-
ten contracts, e.g. kirî bû becomes kiribû. We cur-
rently represent this tense synthetically as this is how
it is analysed by the morphological analyser. In the
next version of UD Kurmanji we plan to split the
tense up into its tokens of the main verb and the
auxiliary bûn.

5.8 Subordination
Subordinate clauses are often formed with specific
inflections, subjunctive in the present tense and what
we have called ‘optative’ in the past.

5.8.1 Complement clauses
In some cases subordination of finite clauses also
occurs, with or without a complementiser. In the
sentence, Tu ji xwe ewle yî ko te dengekî fîkandinê
û yê zencîrê bihîst?, ‘Are you sure that you heard
a sound of whistling and a chain?’ subordination is

69



done with the help of the complementiser ku, here
written as ko as a result of dialect variation.

Lê min nikarî bû bi awakî din bikira
But me not could was with way different do

cc

nsubj aux case

obl

amod

ccomp

The verb form bikira in this sentence is an opta-
tive inflection of the verb kirin, ‘to do’.

Tu ewle yî ko te dengek bihîst ?
You sure are that you a sound heard ?

nsubj cop

mark

nsubj

obj

ccomp

punct

5.8.2 Relative clauses
Relative clauses can be introduced in three ways,
which are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

Subjunctive mood: Here the mood of the
subordinate clause indicates that the verb form is a
nominal modifier. Di xwezayê de bi hezaran tiştên
mirov bixwin hene. ‘In nature things that people eat
exist in thousands’.

Bi hezaran tiştên mirov bixwin hene
with thousands things people eat exist

case

acl

nsubj

nsubj

obl

Relative pronoun: Very often a relative clause will
be introduced with the use of a relative pronoun,
usually ku ‘that’/‘who’. Mirov ku dojeh nebîne, ‘a
person who does not see hell’

Mirov ku dojeh nebîne
Person that hell not see

nsubj

obj

acl

Note that like the English that, ku in Kurmanji is
ambiguous between being a relative pronoun and a
complementiser.
Construct case: A nominal in construct case is
also a frequent way to introduce a relative clause.

Helbestên ku hatine nivisandin, ‘poems that have
been written’.

Helbestên ku hatine nivisandin
Case: Con

Poems that came writing

nsubj

aux

acl

5.8.3 Adverbial clauses
As in other Indo-European languages, in Kurmanji,
adverbial clauses are usually introduced by subordi-
nating or adverbial conjunctions. In the following
sentence,Wextê Holmes vegeriya...saet jî bû bû yek,
“By the time Holmes returned, the clock had struck
one’, the subordinationg conjunction wextê ‘by’ in-
troduces the adverbial clause.

Wextê Holmes vegeriya … saet jî bû bû yek
When Holmes returned … hour too was one

mark

nsubj

advcl

nsubj

advmod

cop

6 Parsing performance

In order to test the treebank in a real setting, we
evaluated three widely-used popular dependency
parsers: Maltparser (Nivre et al., 2007), UDPipe
(Straka et al., 2016) and BiST (Kiperwasser and
Goldberg, 2016). In addition we provide results for
using the treebank for part-of-speech tagging using
UDPipe, to be able to compare with Walther et al.
(2010).
The BiST parser requires a separate development

set for tuning. The set we used was the sample data
from the shared task, this was 20 sentences, or 242
tokens. Both UDPipe and BiST parsers are also
able to use word embeddings, we trained the em-
beddings using word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013)
on the raw text of the KurdishWikipedia. ForMalt-
parser we used the default settings and for BiST
parser we tested the MST algorithm.
We performed 10-fold cross-validation by ran-

domising the order of sentences in the test portion
of the corpus and splitting them into 10 equally-
sized parts. In each iteration we held out one
part for testing (75 sentences) and used the rest
for training (675 sentences). We calculated the

70



Parser UAS [range] LAS [range]
Maltparser 69.4 [64.5, 76.7] 61.5 [57.3, 65.3]
BiST 71.2 [68.1, 74.4] 63.8 [60.7, 67.5]
UDPipe 73.1 [66.9, 77.6] 65.9 [59.6, 68.3]
Maltparser [+dict] 71.2 [67.8, 78.7] 64.0 [60.8, 69.3]
BiST [+dict] 72.7 [69.4, 74.5] 66.3 [63.7, 68.5]
UDPipe [+dict] 74.3 [72.6, 77.2] 67.9 [65.6, 70.1]

Table 2: Preliminary parsing results for UDPipe
and Maltparser. The numbers in brackets denote
the upper and lower bounds found during cross-
validation.

System Lemma POS Morph
UDPipe 88.3 [85.3, 89.6] 88.2 [85.5, 90.8] 78.6 [75.4, 80.1]
UDPipe [+dict] 94.6 [93.9, 95.7] 93.0 [91.8, 93.8] 85.9 [84.2, 87.6]

Table 3: Performance of UDPipe for lemmati-
sation, part-of-speech and morphological analysis
with the default parameters, and with an external
full-form morphological lexicon.

labelled-attachment score (LAS) and unlabelled-
attachment score (UAS) for each of the models
using the CoNLL-2017 evaluation script.¹¹ The
same cross-validation splits were used for training
all three parsers.
The morphological analyser and part-of-speech

tagger in UDPipe was tested both with and without
an external morphological dictionary. In this case
the morphological dictionary, shown in Table 2 as
[+dict], consisted of a full-form list generated
from the morphological analyserdescribed in §4.2
numbering 343,090 entries.
The parsing results are found in Table 2. UDPipe

is the best model, and adding the dictionary helps
both POS tagging and parsing, an improvement of
2% LAS over the model without a dictionary.
For calculating the results for part-of-speech tag-

ging, morphological analysis and lemmatisation, we
used the same experiment but just looked at the re-
sults for columns 3, 4, and 6 of the CoNLL-U file.
The results presented in Table 3 can be compared
with the 85.7% reported by Walther et al. (2010)
on 13 sentences. Predictably, in all cases adding the
full-form list substantially improves performance.

7 Future work
Themost obvious avenue for future work is to anno-
tate more sentences. A treebank of 10,000 tokens
is useful, and can be used for bootstrapping, but in
¹¹http://universaldependencies.org/

conll17/evaluation.html

order to be able to train a parser useful for pars-
ing unseen sentences we would need to increase the
number of tokens 6-10 fold.
We also think that there are prospects for work-

ing on other annotation projects based on the tree-
bank, for example a co-reference corpus based on
the short story.
There are a number of quirks in the conver-

sion process from VISL to CoNLL-U, for ex-
ample the language-independent longest-common-
subsequence algorithm could be replaced with a
Kurmanji specific one that would be able to success-
fully split tokens like lê into l and ê.

8 Concluding remarks
We have described the first syntactically-annotated
corpus of Kurmanji Kurdish, indeed of any Kurdish
language. The treebank was used as one of the sur-
prise language test sets in the 2017 CoNLL on de-
pendency parsing and is now released to the public.
The corpus consists of a little over 10,000 tokens
and is released under a free/open-source licence.

Acknowledgements
Work on the morphological analyser was funded
through the 2016 Google Summer of Code pro-
gramme and Prompsit Language Engineering with
a contract from Translators without Borders.
We would like to thank Fazil Enis Kalyon, Daria

Karam, Cumali Türkmenoğlu, Ferhat Melih Dal,
Dilan Köneş, Selman Orhan and Sami Tan for
providing native speaker insight and assisting with
grammatical and lexical issues.
Wewould also like to thankDan Zeman andMar-

tin Popel for insightful discussions and the anony-
mous reviewers for their detailed and helpful com-
ments.

References
Halil Aktuğ. 2013. Gramera Kurdî – Kürtçe Gramer.
Avesta Publishing.

Purya Aliabadi, Mohammad Sina Ahmadi, Shahin
Salavati, and Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili. 2014. To-
wards building kurdnet, the kurdish wordnet. In Pro-
ceedings of the 7th Global WordNet Conference.

Celadet Bedirxan and Roger Lescot. 1990. Rêzimana
Kurdî.

Eckhard Bick and Tino Didriksen. 2015. Cg-3 – be-
yond classical constraint grammar. In Proceedings of

71



the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics, NODALIDA, pages 31–39. Linköping University
Electronic Press, Linköpings universitet.

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili and Shahin Salavati. 2013.
Sorani Kurdish versus Kurmanji Kurdish: An Empir-
ical Comparison. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 300–305.

M. L. Forcada, M. Ginestí-Rosell, J. Nordfalk,
J. O’Regan, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz,
F. Sánchez-Martínez, G. Ramírez-Sánchez, and
F. M. Tyers. 2011. Apertium: a free/open-source
platform for rule-based machine translation. Machine
Translation, 25(2):127–144.

Eliyahu Kiperwasser and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Simple
and accurate dependency parsing using bidirectional
LSTM feature representations. TACL, 4:313–327.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In Proceedings of Workshop
at ICLR.

J. Nivre, J. Hall, J. Nilsson, A. Chanev, G. Eryigit,
S. Kübler, S. Marinov, and E. Marsi. 2007. Malt-
Parser: A language-independent system for data-
driven dependency parsing. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 13(2):95–135.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Chris Manning, Ryan
McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Sil-
veira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Dan Zeman. 2016. Univer-
sal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual Treebank Col-
lection. In Proceedings of Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC’16).

Bişarê Segman. 1944. Dr. Rweylot. Ronahî, 24. Trad.
Doyle, A. C. (1892) The Adventure of the Speckled
Band.

Gary F. Simons and Charles D. Fennig, editors. 2017.
Ethnologue: Languages of the World. SIL Interna-
tional.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajič, and Jana Straková. 2016. UD-
Pipe: trainable pipeline for processing CoNLL-U files
performing tokenization, morphological analysis, pos
tagging and parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’16), Paris, France, May. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Wheeler M. Thackston. 2006. Kurmanji Kur-
dish: A Reference Grammar with Selected Read-
ings. http://www.fas.harvard.edu/
~iranian/Kurmanji/index.html.

Géraldine Walther, Benoît Sagot, and Karën Fort. 2010.
Fast Development of Basic NLP Tools: Towards a
Lexicon and a POS Tagger for Kurmanji Kurdish.
In International Conference on Lexis and Grammar,
September.

Daniel Zeman, Martin Popel, Milan Straka, Jan Ha-
jic, Joakim Nivre, Filip Ginter, Juhani Luotolahti,
Sampo Pyysalo, Slav Petrov, Martin Potthast, Fran-
cis Tyers, Elena Badmaeva, Memduh Gökırmak,
Anna Nedoluzhko, Silvie Cinkova, Jan Hajic jr.,
Jaroslava Hlavacova, Václava Kettnerová, Zdenka
Uresova, Jenna Kanerva, Stina Ojala, Anna Missilä,
Christopher D. Manning, Sebastian Schuster, Siva
Reddy, Dima Taji, Nizar Habash, Herman Leung,
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Manuela Sanguinetti,
Maria Simi, Hiroshi Kanayama, Valeria dePaiva, Kira
Droganova, Héctor Martínez Alonso, Çağrı Çöltekin,
Umut Sulubacak, Hans Uszkoreit, Vivien Macke-
tanz, Aljoscha Burchardt, KimHarris, KatrinMarhei-
necke, Georg Rehm, Tolga Kayadelen, Mohammed
Attia, Ali Elkahky, Zhuoran Yu, Emily Pitler, Saran
Lertpradit, Michael Mandl, Jesse Kirchner, Hec-
tor Fernandez Alcalde, Jana Strnadová, Esha Baner-
jee, Ruli Manurung, Antonio Stella, Atsuko Shi-
mada, Sookyoung Kwak, Gustavo Mendonca, Ta-
tiana Lando, Rattima Nitisaroj, and Josie Li. 2017.
Conll 2017 shared task: Multilingual parsing from
raw text to Universal Dependencies. In Proceedings
of the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multilingual Pars-
ing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies, pages
1–19, Vancouver, Canada, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Appendix A. Format
Example sentence in VISL format, Diviya bû
tiştekî mihim qewimî biwa. ‘It must have been that
something important had happened’
”<Diviya bû>”

”divêtin” vblex plu p3 sg @root #1->0
”<tiştekî>”

”tişt” n m sg con ind @nsubj #2->4
”<mihim>”

”mihim” adj pst @amod #3->2
”<qewimî>”

”qewimin” vblex iv pp @ccomp #4->1
”<biwa>”

”bûn” vaux narr p3 sg @aux #5->4
”<.>”

”.” sent @punct #6->1

72




