



















































TALERUM - Learning Danish by Doing Danish


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 318–321,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

TALERUM - learning Danish by doing Danish

    Peter Juel Henrichsen
Danish Center for Applied Speech Technology

pjh.msc@cbs.dk

Abstract

Talerum  is  an  interactive  L2  learning  environment,
here presented publicly for the first time. Talerum is
designed  for  use  in  Danish  language  classes
throughout  the  vast  and  sparsely  populated  West-
Nordic  area.  In  a  town-like  setting  (resembling
Copenhagen) the pupil navigates among shops (foods,
clothes,  tools),  a  cafe,  a  school  and,  importantly, a
home base  where  the  game opens  and  the  pupil  is
welcomed as an exchange student. Through elaborate
dialogues  with  the  game  characters,  the  pupil
discovers and pursues a  secret mission. Talerum thus
uses elements of game-logic, informal dialogue, and
relatively deep semantic analysis to get and keep the
attention of the language student of generation IT.

 

1   Background

Talerum is  the last  corner stone in the suite of
language training tools developed and user-tested
by the working group FRASAR. The entire suite
is hosted by Iceland University at

https://taleboblen.hi.is

Established  in  2012,  the  Frasar  group  (Nordic
computational linguists and didacticians) reaches
out to language teachers and pupils  in the vast
West-Nordic  area  (Greenland,  Iceland,  the
Faroese  Islands)  where  Danish  is  taught  as  a
second/third language. The Frasar tools support
the  productive  aspects  of  language  learning,
especially informal Danish as used in everyday
situations  (smalltalk,  friends'  conversations,
greetings, shopping, ...). The tools are browser-
based  and  combine  gaming  elements,  example
dialogues  (with  recordings  by  native  Danes),
spoken language exercises (acoustic analysis of
pupils' pronunciation), songs, jokes, puzzles and
interactivity to stimulate language awareness and
prepare the pupil to meet the Danes. See Lihong
(2013)  and  Chik  (2014)  for  perspectives  on
gaming  as  a  strategy  for  L2  teaching  wrt.
individual and social learning.

2   Talerum

At  NODALIDA-17  we  will  demonstrate
Talerum, perhaps the most ambitious Frasar tool.
Talerum  offers  a  free-style  exploration  of  a
virtual suburb with shops, a cafe, a school, and a
home base. Pupils enter the game with little or no
formal  preparation.  The  intended,  but  untold,
plan  is  for  the  pupil  to  first  explore  the  game
universe  aimlessly,  then  uncover  a  hidden
mission,  and  finally  work  systematically  on
solving her task to earn a reward of points and
praise. Each step requires (and rewards) concise
and  relevant  Danish-language  productions  in
numerous  dialogues  with  the  game  characters.
While most of the Frasar tools aim at language
correctness,  Talerum  allows  the  pupil  to  do
things  with  language:  present  themselves  to  a
stranger,  obtain  information  through  dialogue,
negotiate  with  a  shop  attendant,  and  even
smalltalk. Contrary to most CALL tools (Johnson
2005, Godwin-Jones 2014, Chun 2016) Talerum
combines shallow syntax analysis (not penalizing
syntax  errors)  with  fairly  deep  semantic
evaluation. See Berns (2012) and Chik (2014) for
relevant  discussion.  Also  we  admit  to  being
inspired by the classical Larry Laffer game.

Figure 1. Talerum scenes and gates. All sessions
begin  and  end  at  the  family  home  (state
"Home").  α-gates  are  always  open,  β-gates
depend on the pupil's current game status.

IN

Home

School

Cafe

OUT

Store Mall
tables

yard

class

cashier cachier

clothes

shoes

haute

booth

dining
living

kitchen
sleep

food

candy

bottles

tools

α α

α

α

α

α α

β

β

α

α

α

α

β

α

α
β

α

α

β

β
β

β

α
α

α
β

α

β

α

α

318



2.1   Interaction modalities

Pupil clicks a gate button.  System responds by
changing the scene (e.g. "Prøverum" in fig.2).

Pupil initiates or continues a dialogue with one
of the Talerum characters, e.g. an opener "Dav,
jeg hedder  Thor",  hello I'm Thor, or  a  specific
query  "har  du  et  par  sorte  cowboybukser  i
small?", do you have pair of black jeans size S?
System returns a Danish phrase in response.

Pupil clicks  on  a  former  phrase.  System
responds by playing back the phrase in speech
synthesis  (prosody  of  Danish  vernacular:  high
speech rate, falling contour, phonetic reductions).

Pupil clicks a help button.  System responds by
supplying  context-relevant  information,  either
language  assistance  (specific  Danish  terms  or
phrases,  with  translations  in  the  pupil's  L1)  or
game-related  advice  (usually  'indirect',  e.g.  "I
Danmark betaler næsten alle med dankort", Most
Danes pay their bills with the dankort, a hint to
the user to search for and collect a paycard.

2.2   Environments, scenes and gates

Talerum has five main environments, viz. a home
base, a school, a café, a department store, and a
food court (see fig. 1, Home, School, Cafe, Store,
Mall,  respectively).  The  environments  serve  as
hubs,  each  connecting  a  sub-system  of  scenes
(lowercased  in  the  graph).  Some  scenes  are
static,  others dynamic. Static scenes only allow
entry and exit (they serve to widen the navigation
space and add a little  suburb realism, liked by
our child testers). Passage through static scenes
does not contribute to the game mission and is
neither rewarded nor punished wrt. performance
evaluation. Dynamic scenes, in contrast, involve
dialogue potentially promoting the mission.

The  most  elaborate  interaction  takes
place  in  the  home  environment  (living  room,
sleeping room, kitchen), the food market, and the
clothing shop SuperChik (fig. 2). The latter is a
second-hand store  for  fashion items (becoming
ever  more  popular  in  Copenhagen),  the  pupil
taking  the  role  as  a  customer  enquiring  about
particular  items  specifying  her  wishes  and
negotiating  quality  and  price.  She  may  even
change  her  mind  or  ask  broader  questions  not
relating  to  clothing.  The  system's  replies  are
generated  by  a  range  of  strategies  including
canned lines ("Hvad skulle det  være?"),  phrase

templates  ("Vi  fører  desværre  ikke  X"),  and
genuinely  compositional  constructions
(introduced below). On the user side, Talerum's
spelling control is strict, syntax control relaxed.

As  illustrated  in  fig.2,  the  three  most
recent turns remain visible. The line "Dig før: en
blå kjole" (You before:  a blue dress) quotes the
pupil (and also links to the TTS playback). The
next line is the attendant's turn (here describing a
particular dress). The third line "Din tur: ja tak,
den tager jeg" (Your turn: OK, I'll take it) has just
been  entered  by  the  pupil,  but  not  sent  yet.
Pressing  "Sig  det!"  at  this  point  will  have  the
effect of a classical speech act. The attendant will
acknowledge the sale transferring the commodity
to the pupil's basket, while the gate panel (right
side)  will  change  accordingly  replacing  gate
"Megazin" (building  exit)  by  a  new  gate
"Kassen" (Cashier, fig.3).
 

Figure  2.  SuperChik,  a  second-hand  clothing
shop in the Department Store environment.

Figure 3. The cachier's desk. Access to this scene
requires an item in the pupil's shopping basket.
Exit  from this  scene to  the  Department  Store's
main hall requires a successful payment.

319



2.3   Talerum dialogue - an example

Pupil:- Dav, jeg vil gerne se på et par støvler.
  [hello, I'd like to see some boots]
 

Clerk:-  Vi  fører  desværre  ikke  fodtøj.  Var  der
andet, du kunne tænke dig?
  [I'm sorry, but we don't have footware; anything else?]
 

Pupil:- Så vil jeg gerne have nogle bukser.
  [then I'd like to look at some trousers]
 

Clerk:- Ja tak. Vi har mange forskellige slags, var
der noget bestemt du kunne tænke dig?
  [we have several kinds, anything in particular you'd like?]
 

Pupil:- Gerne hvide, og helst af ren bomuld
  [white is best, and of pure cotton if possible]
 

Clerk:- Hvad med den her, en lækker hvid buks i
bomuld til 149 kroner. Noget for dig?
  [what about this, a nice pair of white jeans size M, at 149]
 

Pupil:- kan jeg prøve den på?
  [can I try them on?]
 

Clerk:- ja, prøverummet er lige her ved siden af
  [certainly, the booth is right next to us]
 

Pupil:- [kommer tilbage] De er lidt for store
  [they're somewhat large]
 

Clerk:- Her er en skøn bomuldsbuks i small, nok
mest til dagligbrug, til 89 kroner. Var det noget?
  [what about this lovely cotton, size S, at 89, you like it?]
 

Pupil:- ja tak, den tager jeg. 
  [yes please, I'll take them]
 

Clerk:- mange tak. Du kan betale i Kassen.
  [thank you very much, please proceed to the cachier]

2.4   Semantic evaluation

Dialogues  in  the  Home  environment  follow  a
predefined  sequence  of  stages  where  each
production may or may not allow a step forward.

In  contrast,  dialogues  in  the  shops  are
user-driven,  and  responses  are  generated  with
inference-based methods. The derived discourse-
information  is  accumulated  (until  the  pupil
leaves the scene) enabling the use of pronominal
anaphor,  stepwise  clarification  of  wishes  and
offers, re-negotiation, and even intermediate off-
topic enquiries. 

The response generator takes as input (i)
the  pupil's  latest  production  (normalized  by
filtering out function words etc.), (ii) a stack of
propositions representing the preceding discourse
(may contain contradicting information after re-
negotiation, such as "size medium"  and "larger
than  medium",  giving  priority  to  the  most-
recent), (iii) the set of all entities (goods), (iv) a
no-go list of entities already rejected or sold, (v)
a focus entity (only defined if a particular entity
is  being  negotiated).  The  resulting  type-logical

expression  is  mapped  to  a  Danish  phrase
reflecting its type: a yes/no-question (e.g. "Kan
du lide  denne  her?", do  you like  this  one?),  a
material question ("Hvad kunne du ellers tænke
dig?",  what  else  would you like?),  a  statement
("Vi har ikke flere kjoler i den farve",  we have
no  more  dresses  in  that  color),  or  a  simple
boolean  (e.g.  "Ja  tak",  yes  please,  or  "Nej,
desværre", no we don't). 

The  inference  system  is  written  in
Prolog,  the  language-specific  and  www-related
parts in Perl, Python and Linux-shell. Client-side
code is html5 (including css and JavaScript). The
overall  architecture  is  module-based,  so  most
functional  modifications  require  local  changes
only, such  as  commodity  types  and properties,
scenes&gates,  dialogues,  characters,  and  more.
Portation of the entire Talerum to a new language
locale  only  requires  rewriting  a  single  module
(the  phrase  database  used  by  the  response
generator)  and replacing the lexicon file (word
forms  cum PoS). More technological details are
to be published soon. Do ask us at NODALIDA.

2.5   The challenge

We have tested Talerum with children during the
construction  phase.  Most  like  shopping around
randomly  and  trying  their  hand  with  Danish
dialogue for a while. However, after a while they
loose  interest,  so  we  added a  secret  challenge.
Through dialogue with your roomy (called Emil
for  boy  users,  Ida for  girls,  same  age  as  the
pupil) and family members you learn the details
of your task, eventually sending you to town to
obtain  something  (e.g.  a  present)  making
someone  relieved or  surprised.  Completing  the
task  will  earn  you  a  seasoned  appreciation
(depending on your time score and efficiency).

3   Concluding remarks

Talerum is currently being tested in folkeskoler
and  gymnasier  in  Kalaallit  Nunaat,  Ísland  and
Føroyar  (pupils  11-14Y).  The results  (metadata
and performance  data)  will  be  released  in  late
2017 and might  be  interesting for  comparative
studies.  We  already  know  from  earlier  work
(Henrichsen 2015A&B, forthcom.) that Icelandic
and  Greenlandic  pupil  groups  differ  markedly
wrt.  proficiency,  motivatedness,  and  linguistic
challenges faced with the Danish language.

Talerum (ver. 2.0) will be released soon
for  classroom  use.  For  practical  info  contact
FRASAR's founder and chair Auður Hauksdóttir.

320



References 

Anke Berns,  A Gonzalez-Pardo. D. Camacho. 2012.
Game-like  Language  Learning  in  Virtual  3D
Environments.  2012.  Journal  of  Computers  and
Education. 60(1):210-220.

Alice  Chik.  2014.  Digital  Gaming  and  Language
Learning:  Autonomy and Community.  Journal of
Language Learning and Technology. 18(2): 85-100

Dorothy Chun, R. Kern, B. Smith. 2016. Technology
in  Language  Use,  Language  Teaching,  and
Language  Learning.  The  Modern  Language
Journal. 100(S1):64-80.

Robert  Godwin-Jones.  2014.  Games  in  Language
Learning:  Opportunities  and  Challenges.  Jorunal
of  Language Learning and Technology. 18(2):  9-
19.

Peter  Juel  Henrichsen.  2015A.  Talebob  –  an
Interactive  Speech  Trainer  for  Danish.
NODALIDA 2015.

Peter  Juel  Henrichsen.  2015B.  Taking  the  Danish
Speech Trainer from CALL to ICALL.  NLP4CALL
(workshop at NODALIDA 2015).

W. Lewis Johnson, Hannes Vilhjalmsson, and Stacy
Marsella.  2005.  Serious  Games  for  Language
Learning: How Much Game, How Much AI? C.-K.
Looi et al. (Eds.) IOS Press.

Cao  Lihong.  2013.  Development  and  Prospect  of
Online Language  Learning,  Journal  of  Xiangnan
University. 13(03)

321


