









































Microsoft Word - UD in Mehweb.doc


Universal Dependencies for Dargwa Mehweb 

Alexandra Kozhukhar 
National Research University Higher School of Economics 

Faculty of Humanities 
School of Linguistics 

Russia 
sasha.kozhukhar@gmail.com 

Abstract 

The Universal Dependencies (UD) project 
aims to create the unified annotation 
schemes across languages. With its own an-
notation principles and abstract inventory 
for parts of speech, morphosyntactic fea-
tures and dependency relations, UD aims to 
facilitate multilingual parser development, 
cross- lingual learning, and parsing research 
from a language typology perspective. This 
paper provides the description for the way 
Dargwa Mehweb (East Caucasian language 
family) meets UD scheme. 

1 Introduction 
The Universal Dependencies (UD) (Nivre et 
al., LREC 2016) is a project dealing with con-
sistent cross-linguistic morphological and syn-
tactic mark-up. The UD is currently in version 
2 and covers 52 languages with 10 more lan-
guages yet to be included. While UD covers 11 
language families, it does not include lan-
guages of the Caucasus and, in particular, East 
Caucasian languages. 
The guidelines of UD are based on the Google 
Universal Part-of-Speech Tagset (Petrov et al. 
2012) for parts of speech, the Interset frame-
work (Zeman 2008) for morphological fea-
tures, and Stanford Dependencies (De Marnef-
fe et al. 2006, De Marneffe et al. 2014) for 
syntactic relations. The approach aims at mak-
ing typological features of the languages of the 
world scalable and at simplifying the cross-
linguistic comparison. 

The paper is structured as follows: Section 
2 provides general information about the 
Dargwa Mehweb language – area of distribu-
tion, number of speakers, some sociolinguistic 
data and a short grammar overview; Section 3 
describes part of speech mapping; Section 4 
discusses relevant features of Dargwa Me-

hweb; Section 5 explains the syntactic depend-
encies of Dargwa Mehweb in terms of the UD 
approach; Section 6 discusses the cases of the 
language change and grammaticalization; and 
Section 7 presents the conclusions. 

2 Dargwa Mehweb: General Infor-
mation 

Mehweb belongs to Dargwa group of East 
Caucasian language family. It is often consid-
ered a dialect of Dargwa (Magometov 1982), 
although according to (Koryakov & Sumba-
tova 2004, Khaidakov 1985) Mehweb is a sep-
arate language rather than a dialect. For the 
following research we consider Mehweb a 
separate language. According to lexicostatistic 
analysis, Mehweb is a member of the north-
central group of Dargwa languages (Koryakov 
2013). 

Dargwa Mehweb is spoken in the village 
Megeb (Republic of Daghestan, Russian Fed-
eration). The language is spoken by approxi-
mately 800 people but is not quite at risk of 
becoming endangered (Dobrushina et al. 
2017). Megeb is the only Dargwa village in the 
area surrounded by Lak and Avar villages. The 
official language of the village is Avar, chil-
dren are taught Avar in school. Most of the 
speakers are bi- or trilingual (Kozhukhar & 
Barylnikova 2013). 

Dargwa Mehweb was first mentioned in 
(Uslar 1892). There are two reference gram-
mars of Mehweb (Magometov 1982, 
Khaidakov 1985), both published in 1980s, 
and selected essays on different aspects of the 
Mehweb grammar (Dobrushina et al. 2017) 
published in 2017. Dictionaries and texts were 
obtained during field trips to Megeb in 1990s 
and 2010s organized by Lomonosov Moscow 
State University and Higher School of Eco-
nomics. 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 92-99,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

92



Mehweb is notliterate. Native speakers use 
Avar orthography that does not match com-
pletely the phonemic inventory of Mehweb. 
During the field trips in 2010s a new orthogra-
phy based on the IPA was introduced. All pre-
vious texts were converted into new orthogra-
phy. In the following paper we use the orthog-
raphy invented in 2010s. 

In terms of its features Dargwa Mehweb is a 
typical East Caucasian language. Mehweb 
demonstrates agglutinative morphology. Me-
hweb is ergative in terms of agreement and 
case marking. There are five non-spatial cases 
in Mehweb. Spatial forms are bimorphemic: 
the first morpheme defines the spatial domain 
(‘on’, ‘near’, ‘in’ etc.) and the second one de-
fines the orientation (Goal, Source, Path). 
There are no adpositions in Mehweb – all spa-
tial relations are expressed with spatial cases 
and directional prefixes on verbs. Most of the 
verbs have perfective and imperfective stems 
from which all the verbal forms are derived. 
The formal relation between the stems is irreg-
ular and involves alternations, infixation and 
loss of class agreement slots. Most of the verbs 
bear a class agreement marker referential to the 
absolutive argument of the clause. Class 
agreement distinguishes feminine, masculine 
and neuter in singular, human and non-human 
in plural. Mehweb is a typical East Caucasian 
language with basic SOV order. 

Most of the East Caucasian languages, and 
Mehweb as well, allow using non-finite forms 
as heads of simple clauses. Clausal coordina-
tion is encoded by joining clauses headed by 
non-finite verb forms and the matrix clause. 
Apart from citation and reported speech con-
texts, where finite verb form is obligatory, all 
subordinate clauses bear non-finite verb forms 
such as action nominals, infinitives, participles 
and converbs. There is no clausal coordination 
in Mehweb. Mehweb has reflexive pronouns 
which can also be used in logophoric function. 

In the following paper we use Leipzig 
Glossing Rules (Comrie et al. 2008) to indicate 
grammatical features in the examples. The list 
of abbreviations used in the paper is given in 
Appendix A. 

 

3 POS Mapping 
POS mapping is simple since there are exclu-
sively verbal (participle morpheme, TAM 
markers etc.) and exclusively nominal mor-

phemes (number, case). Cross-categorial mor-
phemes are considered clitics (coded as 
PART), for example, additive clitic =ra, which 
functions as CCONJ ‘and’, class markers or 
emphatic clitic =al, which can be combined 
with pronouns and numerals. 

Most of the adjectives in Mehweb are 
marked with attributivizing morpheme -(i)l. 
There is a closed set of adjectives that also 
bear a class marker of the head. 

(1) ħunt’a-l qul-le-šu 
red-ATR house-PL-AD(LAT) 

 
(2) har-il  urši-li-s 

each-ATR boy-OBL-DAT 
 
(3) r=igu-l 

F1-engaged-ATR 
 
Adverbs derived from adjectives are marked 

with adverbalizing morpheme -le. All other 
adverbial meanings, especially spatial ones, are 
expressed with verbal prefixes or spatial cases. 
Mehweb has auxiliaries, they are used with 
adjectives in predicative position (sa=b=i) and 
analytical progressive verb forms (le=w). Me-
hweb uses negative copula agwara with af-
firmative auxiliaries. 

There are four deictic pronouns that are 
mapped as DET. DETs can also be used as 
personal pronouns (cf. Table 1). 
 

Meaning Pronoun Meaning Pronoun 

‘near the 
hearer’ 

il ‘higher 
than 
hearer’ 

ič’ 

‘far from 
hearer’ 

it ‘lower 
than 
hearer’ 

iχ 

Table 1: Mehweb deictic pronouns 
 
There are special pronouns that function as 

wh-words, for example, sik’al meaning ‘what’. 
Wh-words can be used in affirmative sentences 
as well as in interrogative ones. 

There are no CCONJ and SCONJ in Me-
hweb since all the subordinates are encoded by 
non-finite verb forms. Thus ‘Ali-[ERG] hit-
[finite] Fatima run away-[converb]’ would 
mean that ‘Ali hit Fatima and ran away’ but 
not that ‘Running away Ali hit Fatima’. 

93



In Mehweb CCONJ and SCONJ are distin-
guished by the type of the converb used in the 
subordinate clause – for CCONJ general con-
verbs are used, for SCONJ, specialized ones. 
We can assume that Mehweb had SCONJs 
since the texts from 40 years ago contain a 
special conjunction, but contemporary texts 
lack this conjunction. For further information 
see Section 6. 

Table 2 gives the overview on the POS 
mapping for Mehweb. 
 

POS Mehweb POS Mehweb 

ADJ + CCONJ – 

ADV + DET + 

NOUN + NUM + 

VERB + PART + 

ADP – SCONJ – 

AUX + PRON + 

INTJ + PROPN + 
Table 2. Overview on the parts of speech in Me-

hweb 
 

4 Features Mapping 
The following section deals with feature 

mapping for Dargwa Mehweb. Subsection 4.1. 
deals with nominal features; subsection 4.2. 
covers verbal features. 

 

4.1 Nominal Features 
Animacy feature with values Hum and Nhum 

is used for class agreement in plural since Me-
hweb does not distinguish female, masculine 
and neuter in plural. Table 2 presents clitics 
marking class (gender) in Mehweb. Gender 
feature with values Fem, Masc and Neut are 
used in singular. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Sg Pl  

M w 

b HPL F d 

F1 d-r 

N b d-r NPL 
Table 3: Class markers in Mehweb 

 
Case feature is used to distinguish between 

cases. There are five non-spatial cases, namely, 
absolutive, ergative, comitative, dative, geni-
tive. Vocative case is formed by stress shift 
(Dobrushina et al. 2017). Spatial cases consist 
of two morphemes. We propose our own map-
ping for spatial cases, where each spatial form 
has marker of Localization and Orientation: 

Localizations: Super (‘On’), In (‘In’), Inter 
(‘Inside’), Apud (‘Near’); 

Orientations: Lat (‘Move towards’), Ess 
(‘Staying in place’), El (‘Move away from’), 
Trans (‘Moving through’). 

All orientation markers are expressed by 
special suffix except the lative, which is zero 
in Mehweb. It worths noting that zero lative is 
very rare in East Caucasian languages. Usually 
it is the essive which is expressed by zero. 

There are only singular (coded as Sing) 
and plural (coded as Plur) number. There are 
also pluralia tantum nouns in Mehweb. 

The Person feature is polarity dependent. 
There is a distinction between the first person 
singular and second person singular: in affirm-
ative clauses suffix -ra marks the first person 
singular, whereas in negative and interrogative 
clauses the same suffix marks second person 
singular. Polarity feature thus has to be coded 
using three values instead of two: Pos, Neg 
and Interrogative. 

Mehweb pronouns can be coded using the 
following values: Dem, Rcp, Int, Neg, Ind. 
There are no separate personal pronouns in 
Mehweb — demonstratives (in matrix clauses) 
and reflexives (in subordinate clauses) are used 
instead. 

There is a set of ordinal (coded as Ord) and 
cardinal numerals (coded as Card). Cardinal 
numerals are derived from ordinals using em-
phatic clitic =al. 

 

94



4.2 Verbal Features 
Aspect feature is used to distinguish be-

tween imperfective (coded as Imp) and perfec-
tive (coded as Perf) verb stems. 

Mehweb demonstrates a wide range of 
moods, thus the Mood feature with the values 
Ind, Imp, Cnd, Pot, Jus, Opt, Prp is re-
quired. Some of the values of the Mood feature 
are encoded by special converbs, for example, 
apprehensive meaning is expressed by a sepa-
rate morpheme, and it is still under discussion 
whether the values of the feature Mood should 
be used or it requires introducing some sepa-
rate values. 

All verb forms bear a tense marker: Past, 
Fut, Pres. The following verb forms are rel-
evant for Mehweb: Fin, Inf, Part, Conv, 
Vnoun. There are also analytical verb forms 
which consist of an auxiliary and a general 
converb, for example, the for of progressive. 

Table 4 gives an overview on the feature 
mapping in Mehweb. 
 

Feature Relevant Values 

Animacy Hum, Nhum 

Aspect Imp, Perf 

Case Abs, Erg, Com, Dat, Gen, 
Voc 

Foreign Yes 

Gender Fem, Masc, Neut 

Mood Ind, Imp, Cnd, Pot, Jus, 
Opt, Prp 

NumType Ord, Card 

Number Sing, Plur, Ptan 

Person 1, 2 

Polarity Pos, Neg 

Reflexive Yes 

Tense Fut, Past, Pres 

VerbForm Fin, Inf, Part, Conv, 
Vnoun 

Voice Cau 

PronType Dem, Rcp, Int, Neg, Ind 

Table 4: Feature mapping in Mehweb 

5 Syntactic dependencies mapping 
Syntactic structure of East Caucasian lan-

guages, and Darwa Mehweb as well, differs 
significantly from languages described in 
terms of UD approach earlier. In this section 
we discuss some cases of dependency relations 
mapping for Mehweb. 

In Mehweb as in a language with ergative 
alignment nsubj is marked with ergative case 
in transitive clauses and with absolutive in in-
transitive clauses. The causer is also marked 
with ergative. 

 
text: ʡaˁli w-ak’-ib	
gloss: Ali(nom) m-come.pfv-aor 
text[eng]: ‘Ali came’. 	
ʡaˁli NSUBJ PROPN 	
wak’ib ROOT VERB 	

 
 
In the example above the root of the 

clause is the verb wak’ib ‘came’ which is in-
transitive. Ali is nsubj marked with absolu-
tive case. Verb also bears a class agreement 
marker w- referring to Ali, i.e. masculine and 
singular (see Table 3). 

However, there are cases where Mehweb 
does not fit the ergative logic. In the sentence 
with transitive and intransitive verb forms con-
joined, since there is no coordination in Me-
hweb, transitive and intransitive verb forms 
have ergative argument as nsubj. Thus ‘Ali-
[ERG] hit-[transitive] Fatima-[ABS] and ran 
away-[intransitive]’ would mean that ‘Ali hit 
and Ali ran away’ and not that ‘Ali hit Fatima 
and Fatima ran away’. 

There is also a list of experiential verbs that 
have subject marked with oblique cases such 
as Dat and Inter:Lat. Such cases will be 
marked as obl:exprnc. 

The obj is always marked with Abs in-
cluding the cases with transitive experiential 
verbs, for example, verb gwes ‘to see’ marks 

95



its nsubj with Inter:Lat and is obj with 
Abs. Transitive verbs get class agreement 
from OBJ. If the subordinate clause turns out 
to be a direct object of the verb, i.e. ccomp, 
the verb form gets Neut class agreement. 
iobj can be marked with oblique non-spatial 
cases and all spatial cases. 
 

text: adaj-ni mašinka-li-če 
muc’ur b-erč-ur	
gloss: father-erg  
hair.cutter-obl-super(lat) 
beard(nom) n-cut.hair.pfv-aor  
text[eng]: ‘The father cut his 
beard with a hair cutter’. 	
adajni NSUBJ NOUN  
mašinkaliče OBL NOUN  
muc’ur OBJ NOUN  
berčur ROOT VERB  

 
 
In the example above the root of the 

clause is transitive verb berčur ‘shove’. Father 
(‘adaj’) is nsubj marked with ergative case. 
The verb bears an agreement marker b- (i.e. 
neuter, singular) referring to the beard 
(‘muc’ur’) which is in absolutive case, i.e. 
obj. The cutter (‘mašinka-li-če’) is marked 
with Super:Ess marker -če and a zero 
marker of lative, therefore it is considered an 
obl. 

The relevance of csubj in Mehweb is un-
der discussion since it was not directly tested 
yet. advcl and acl are the main strategies of 
the clause composition. In case subordinate 
clause is headed by the participle it is assigned 
acl label. In case subordinate clause is headed 
by the specialized or general converb it is as-
signed advcl. If the subordinate clause is 
headed by the infinitive or nomen actionis it is 
assigned xcomp. If the matrix verb bears a 
neuter singular class marker (b-) and there are 
no neuter singular obj in the matrix clause 
then b- is considered a subordinate clause 
agreement marker and the subordinate is as-
signed ccomp label. 

In case of citation and indirect speech the 
cited phrase is headed by the finite verb. These 
types of clauses were labeled parataxis. 

However, cited phrases can be connected with 
matrix clauses by reflexive pronoun used in 
subject position in the cited phrase and co-
referential to the subject of the matrix clause. 
Thus the parataxis label is under discus-
sion. 

 
text: ʡali-ze b-alh-an abaj iz-
uwe le-r-deš 	
gloss: Ali-inter n-know:ipf-hab 
mother(abs) be.sick:ipf-cvb  
cop-f-nmlz 
text[eng]: ‘Ali knows that mother 
is sick.’  
ʡalize NSUBJ PROPN  
balhan ROOT VERB  
abaj NSUBJ NOUN  
izuwe CCOMP VERB  
lerdeš AUX AUX  

 
 
Example above consists of two clauses: 

ʡalize balhan ‘Ali knows’ and abaj izuwe ler-
deš ‘mother is sick’. The root of the whole 
sentence is an experiential transitive verb 
balhan ‘knows’. Since balhan is an experiential 
verb its obl:exprn is marked with interla-
tive, i.e. Inter:Lat, case. The direct object 
of the root verb is a second clause abaj izuwe 
lerdeš, thus it is labeled ccomp. Root verb 
bears the class agreement marker b- (neuter, 
singular) which refers to the subordinate 
clause. The head of the second clause is an 
auxiliary verb lerdeš (being). Auxiliary verb 
bears the class agreement marker -r- (feminine, 
singular) referring to the nsubj of the ccomp 
mother (‘abaj’) and a nominalization suffix  
-deš since the second clause is subordinate and 
has to be non-finite. Subordinate clause con-
tains also a converb izuwe ‘being sick’ which 
is a part of an analytic progressive form izuwe 
lerdeš standing for ‘is being sick’. Converb 
izuwe is labeled VERB.  

Mehweb does not allow to use more than 
one auxiliary in a single analytical verb form. 
However, Mehweb demonstrates so-called 
biabsolutive constructions with analytical verb 
forms: 

 
 
 
 

96



(4) Ɂali  kung 
Ali(ABS)  book(ABS)  
luč-uwe  le(=b/=w) 
read.IPF-CVB aux(=N/=M) 
‘Ali is reading a book’.  

 

 
 
 
The preceding tree is impossible since Ali 

must be in ergative case in order to be consid-
ered nsubj of the transitive verb ‘read’. 

 

 
 
We propose treating biabsolutive construc-

tions as if they were advcls since they turn 
out to be two clauses: matrix clause headed by 
copula and subordinate clause headed by con-
verb. Therefore (4) will be literally translated 
as ‘The book is so that Ali reads it’.  

Table 5 gives the overview on the syntactic 
dependencies mapping. 
 

UD Mehweb 

nsubj + 

obj + 

iobj + 

csubj not attested 

ccomp + 

xcomp + 

obl + 

vocative + 

expl – 

acl + 

advcl + 

advmod + 

aux + 

cop + 

mark – 

nmod + 

det + 

clf – 

Table 5: Dependency relations (UD 2.0) as attested 
in Mehweb 

 
Mehweb does not have mark tags since the 

clauses headed by converbs are encoded in-
stead, marked as advcl. Mehweb also lacks 
expletive subject and classifiers. There is no 
nmod since there are no prepositional groups 
(the genitive case is used instead).  

 

6 Language change and grammatical-
ization 

Language material we are basing on is het-
erogeneous since half of the texts are contem-
porary and half of them is 40 years old. These 
two groups of texts demonstrate some differ-
ences in how conjunction is expressed. This 
was considered a case of a language change. 

Texts from (Magometov 1982) have a spe-
cial autonomous word form wa which func-
tions as ‘and’ and is used as a conjunction be-
tween nouns and clauses. Contemporary texts 
lack wa. Instead of wa acls and advcls, i.e. 
subordinate clauses headed by non-finite verb 
forms, are used to conjoin clauses and =ra clit-
ic is used to conjoin nouns. For cases with wa 
SCONJ POS label and conj dependency rela-
tion label are used, although conjoining clauses 
and nouns with wa is considered unnatural for 
Mehweb. 

The following case is considered a gram-
maticalization of an non-finite verb form. In 
Mehweb when matrix clause is headed by the 
speech verb, e.g. ‘say’ or ‘know’, converb ile 
‘being said’ occurs in the end of the subordi-
nate clause. For majority of native speakers ile 
is optional. Some native speakers recognize ile 
as an autonomous verb form, whereas others 
do not provide a subtle translation for it. 

We provide two ways of treating ile. The 
first one is treating it as an optional citation 
particle, i.e. PART. The second one is consid-

97



ering ile a separate advcl since it is a con-
verb. Cited phrase that precedes ile then is 
considered its ccomp in that case. 

 

7 Conclusion 
In this paper we described how well the UD 

approach covers the features of one of the typ-
ical East Caucasian language, Dargwa Me-
hweb. Three types of guidelines were applied: 
POS mapping, feature mapping and dependen-
cy relations. 

Some features were raised due to mapping. 
First is the way grammaticalization cases 
should be treated since there are more than one 
possible way of representing them on a de-
pendency tree. Second is a clausal conjunction 
since Dargwa Mehweb use the sequence of 
non-finite clauses instead of expected 
SCONJs. Third is a lack of difference between 
moods and special converbs since there are 
special mood markers that can be combined 
with converbs only. 

 

References 

Bernard Comrie, Martin Haspelmath and Bal-
thasar Bickel. 2008. The Leipzig glossing 
rules: Conventions for interlinear mor-
pheme-by-morpheme glosses. URL: 
https://www.eva.mpg.de/lingua/resources/g
lossing-rules.php 

 
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCart-

ney, Christopher D Manning, et al. 2006. 
Generating typed dependency parses from 
phrase structure parses. In Proceedings of 
5th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC), volume 
6, pages 449– 454. 

 
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, 

Natalia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip 
Ginter, Joakim Nivre, and Christopher D. 
Manning. 2014. Universal Stanford De-
pendencies: a cross-linguistic typology. In 
Proceedings of the 9th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC), Reykjavik, Iceland, May. 
European Language Resources Association 
(ELRA). 

 
Nina Dobrushina, Michael Daniel, Dmitry 

Ganenkov, George Moroz , Daria Barylni-

kova, Marina Kustova, Alexandra Kozhu-
khar, Yuri Lander, Maria Sheyanova and Il-
ia Chechuro. 2017. Mehweb. Selected es-
says on phonology, morphology and syntax. 
Berlin: Language Science Press. 

 
Said Khajdakov. 1985. Darginskij i megebskij 

yazyki (printsipy slovoizmeneniya) 
[Dargwa and Mehweb languages]. Ma-
khachkala. 

 
Yuri Korjakov and Nina Sumbatova. 2007. 

Darginskie jazyki [The Dargwa Lan-
guages] In BRJe, tom 8. Moskva: Bol'shaja 
rossijskaja enciklopedija, pages 328–329. 

Yuri Koryakov. 2013. Convergence and diver-
gence in the classification of Dargwa lan-
guages. In 46th Annual Meeting of the 
Societas Linguistica Europaea (SLE 
2013). 18–21 September 2013. Book of 
abstracts. Part 1. Split: University of Split. 

Alexandra Kozhukhar and Daria Barylnikova. 
2013. Multilingualism in Dagestan. Higher 
School of Economics Research Paper No. 
WP BRP, 4. 

 
Alexander Magometov. 1982. Megebskij di-

alekt darginskogo jazyka (Issledovanie i 
teksty) [The Mehweb Dialect of Darwga 
Language]. Tbilisi: Mecniereba. 

 
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, 

Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, 
Christopher D Manning, Ryan McDonald, 
Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Silvei-
ra, et al. 2016. Universal dependencies v1: 
A multilingual treebank collection. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC 2016). 

 
Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDon-

ald. 2012. A universal part-of- speech tags-
et. In Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC), pages 2089–2096. 

 
Petr Uslar. 1892. Etnografija Kavkaza. Jazy-

koznanie [Ethnography of the Caucasus]. 
V. Hjurkilinskij jazyk, Tiflis. 

 
Daniek Zeman. 2008. Reusable tagset conver-

sion using tagset drivers. In Proceedings of 

98



the 6th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 
pages 213–218. 

 

Appendix A. List of abbreviations 

ABS absolutive 
AD localization ad 
AOR aorist 
ATR attributivized 
AUX auxiliary 
CVB converb 
DAT dative 
F feminine 
F1 feminine 
HPL human plural 
IPF imperfective 
LAT lative 
M masculine 
N neuter 
NMLZ nominalization 
NPL non-human plural 
OBL oblique 
PFV perfective 
PL plural 

 
 

99




