



















































Plotting Markson's "Mistress"


Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature.

,

Proceedings, pages 33–39, Vancouver, BC, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Plotting Markson’s “Mistress” 

 
Conor Kelleher 

School of Computer Science 
University College Dublin 

  Dublin, Ireland 
conor.kelleher.1@ucdconnect.ie 

Mark T. Keane 
Insight Data Analytics Centre 

University College Dublin 
 Dublin, Ireland 

mark.keane@ucd.ie  

 

Abstract 

The post-modern novel “Wittgenstein’s 
Mistress” by David Markson (1988) pre-
sents the reader with a very challenging 
non-linear narrative, that itself appears to 
one of the novel’s themes. We present a 
distant reading of this work designed to 
complement a close reading of it by David 
Foster Wallace (1990).   Using a combina-
tion of text analysis, entity recognition and 
networks, we plot repetitive structures in 
the novel’s narrative relating them to its 
critical analysis.  

1 Introduction 
Certain novels not only cry out for critical in-
terpretations but actually try to direct them.  

(Wallace, 1990, p. 244)  

In recent years, a considerable body of research 
has contrasted the close reading of traditional 
literary criticism with distant readings based on 
text and network analytics (e.g., Jänicke et al., 
2015; Moretti, 2005, 2013; Serlen, 2010).  In this 
paper, we take the ecumenical position that dis-
tant readings can surface unappreciated patterns 
in a literary work to support close readings (c.f., 
Coles et al., 2014; Jänicke et al., 2015).  For in-
stance, a number of distant readings have sup-
ported close readings by providing abstractions 
showing the social networks of characters in-
volved in a literary work (Agarwal et al., 2012; 
Grayson et al., 2016; Elson et al., 2010).  The 
present work has, in part, been inspired by these 
distant readings, thought it explores phrase repe-
tition and association networks. Specifically, we 
analyse the structure of repetitions in the post-
modern novel “Wittgenstein’s Mistress” (1988) 
by the American author, David Markson to sup-
port a close reading of the novel by David Foster 
Wallace (1990). 

1.1 Close Reading “Wittgenstein’s Mistress” 
David Markson’s (1988) novel “Wittgenstein’s 
Mistress” (WM) is renowned for it use of an ex-
perimental, non-linear narrative structure.  The 
novel deals with the thoughts of a woman – 
simply known as Kate – who appears to be the 
last living person on earth. The narrative captures 
the streamed consciousness of her thoughts about 
art, her travels though her empty world, and her 
reflections on the imprecision of language.  The 
novel has no chapters but consists of almost 
4,000 short paragraphs many of which are single 
sentences, exemplified by following excerpt: 

Gaetano Donizetti being still another person 
whom I otherwise might have mixed up with 
Vincenzo Bellini.  Or with Gentile Bellini, 
who was also Andrea Mantegna’s brother-
in-law, being Giovanni Bellini’s brother. 

Well I did mix him up. With Luigi Cherubini. 
Music is not my trade. 
Although Maria Callas singing in that particu-

lar scene has always sent shivers up and 
down my spine. 

When Van Gogh was mad, he actually once 
tried to eat his pigments. 

Well, and Maupassant, eating something much 
more dreadful than that, poor soul. 

The list becomes distressingly longer. 
(Markson, 1988, p. 111) 

One major feature of the narrative is Kate’s re-
petitive turn of thought.  Regularly, phrases and 
paragraphs are repeated throughout the novel, or 
the same entities, people and places are men-
tioned over and over again.  To the reader the 
narrative often seems like a long piece of classi-
cal music where various motifs and themes are 
repeated and returned to at definite intervals; but, 
this structure is almost impossible to grasp be-
cause the “musical phrases” are “word phrases”, 
repetitions of named people (e.g., Maupassant), 
places (e.g., Rome) and turns-of-phrase (e.g., ‘so 

33



to speak’).  Understanding this repetitive stream 
of consciousness and its significance is perhaps 
one of the main critical challenges of the novel.  
In his critical commentary, David Foster Wallace 
(1990) says: 

You could call this technique ‘deep nonsense’, 
meaning I guess a linguistic flow of strings, 
strands, loops and quiffs that through the very 
manner of its formal construction flouts the 
ordinary cingula of ‘sense’ and through its de-
fiance of sense’s limits manages somehow to 
‘show’ what cannot ordinarily be ‘expressed’.    

(Wallace, 1990, p. 248)  
One way to think about the current distant read-
ing is that it is an attempt to surface the “formal 
construction” of WM, to better understand its 
message. 

A second major feature of the novel is it con-
cern with language itself, or rather many of the 
concerns raised by Wittgenstein in his early and 
late philosophy of language.  Wallace argues that 
the book could be viewed as “a weird cerebral 
roman a clef” that attempts to dramatise “the 
very bleak mathematical world (of) Wittgen-
stein’s Tractus”; that it tries to show what it 
would like “if somebody really had to live in a 
Tractatusized world” (Wallace p. 246).  In par-
ticular, Wallace points to the atomistic, inde-
pendence of words and what they refer to, in this 
world, quoting Wittgenstein: 

The world is everything that is the case; the 
world is nothing but a huge mass of data, of 
logically discrete facts that have no intrinsic 
connection to one another. Cf the Tractus 1.2: 
‘The world falls apart into facts…’ 1.2.1” 
‘Any one fact can be either the case, or not the 
case, and everything else remains the same’. 

(Wallace, 1990, p. 254) 
Faced with this world where there is no connec-
tion between ‘facts’, Wallace points out “that 
Kate’s textual obsession is simply to find connec-
tions between things, any strands to bind the his-
torical facts & empirical data that are all her 
world comprises” (pp. 254-255).    

It is clear that a close reading of WM presents 
real challenges for anyone attempting to under-
stand its structure.  Hence, in this paper, have 
attempted a distant reading using text analytic 
techniques to surface the novel’s repetition-
structures to support Wallace’s critical analysis. 

2 Analysing Markson’s Mistress 
We believed that the key to the narrative struc-
ture of Wittgenstein’s Mistress lies in surfacing 
the repetitive aspects of the narrative, taking the 
novel’s short paragraphs as a sort of “fundamen-
tal unit of analysis”. Hence, we progressively 
analysed the text in four distinct ways to surface 
these repeating structures, exploring: 
• Repeated Phrases: generating all n-grams of 

differential lengths from (2-32) we identified 
repeating unique, maximal strings of charac-
ters in the text (aka repeated phrases) 

• Named Entities: taking these maximal n-
gram strings, we extracted all the entities 
mentioned in them, as the narrative often re-
lies heavily on repeated references to people, 
places and things 

• Networks of Association: we then used these 
named entities to build associative networks, 
on basis of how  “close” they were to one 
another in these repeating text-fragments 
(see our definitions of “close” in later sec-
tion) 

•  Sequences of Repetitions: finally, we exam-
ined whether these networks (clumps of as-
sociated entities) occurred in definite se-
quences; that is, was there a definite tenden-
cy for one cluster to follow another in pat-
terned sequences, to determine whether we 
could sketch the “DNA of the novel” 

In the following subsections, we elaborate the 
specific methods used to perform these different 
analyses and what we discovered using them.  

2.1 Finding Repeated Phrases 
Intuitively, reading WM one has a strong sense 
that certain phases are consistently re-used 
throughout the text.   However, is very hard to 
get a sense of the scale of this repetition or, in-
deed, its structure without resorting to text ana-
lytic methods.  So, to capture the extent of the 
repetition we performed an analysis of the nov-
el’s repeated phrases. 

We transformed a PDF of the novel into a 
plain text file retaining its punctuation and para-
graph boundaries. The novel has 3,804 para-
graphs, 4,352 sentences and a total of 81,970 
words, referring to approximately 3,058 named 
entities (people, places, organisations, etc.) of 
which 462 are unique, named entities. Treating 
this text as a long string of words, we used dif-
ferent-sized, n-gram windows and slid them over 
the text to find repeated phrases (using the NLTK 

34



tokenisation packages and our own n-gram pro-
gram). Using this method all possible n-grams 
were computed from 2-grams up to 32-grams 
halting the search when no further repetition was 
found in the n-gram set. As we looped through n-
grams of different window sizes, we retained re-
peated n-grams and discarded any that only oc-
curred once.  Furthermore, across n-gram sets of 
different sizes we discarded n-grams that had 
word-sequences that were subsets of longer n-
grams, so we ended up with a list of all the 
unique, maximally-sized n-grams that had been 
repeated at least two times or more in the novel.   

 
N-gram    N 

Was it really some other person I was so 
anxious to discover when I did all of 
that looking or was it only my own soli-
tude that I could not abide ? 

32 

Although doubtless when I say they are 
half empty I should really be saying 
they are half filled since presumably 
they were totally empty before some-
body half filled them 

29 

Still I find it extraordinary that young 
men died there in a war that long ago 
and then died in the same place three 
thousand years after that 

28 

Even if a part I have always liked is 
when Orestes finally comes back after 
so many years and Electra does not rec-
ognize her own brother 

26 

Then	 again	 it	 is	 not	 impossible	 that	
they	 were	 once	 filled	 completely	 be-
coming half empty only when some-
body removed half of the books to the 
basement 

25 

Table 1: Top-5 Longest Repeated N-grams 

In our n-gram search upto 32-grams, we iden-
tified a large number of unique, maximal n-
grams; there were 4,503 phrases, different-sized 
n-grams that were repeated at least twice in the 
text (see Tables 1 and 2). 

Table 1 shows the top-5 n-grams by length 
found in the text (i.e., number of words they con-
tain), each of which only occurred twice in the 
novel.  Table 2 shows the top-10 most frequently 
repeating n-grams found in the text.  Notably, the 
most frequent maximal n-grams are typically 
quite short.  

This analysis gives us a first sense of the ex-
tent of the repetition in the text, indicating that 
this repetition is being deployed systematically to 
achieve some narrative effect. Indeed, of the 

3,804 paragraphs in the novel, 3,323 contain at 
least one or more maximal n-gram with >3 
words.  In the next sub-section, we get a sense of 
the systematicity that may lie in this repetition by 
identifying the named entities involved in these 
repeated sequences. 

 
N-gram N 

now that I think about it 8 
There would appear to be no 7 
doubtless I would not have 7 
Even if I have no 7 
When one comes right down to it 6 
But be that as it may 6 
As a matter of fact the 6 
As a matter of fact what 6 
And to tell the truth I 6 
God the things men used to do 5 
Table 2: Top-10 Frequently Repeated N-grams 

2.2 Identifying Named Entities 
To further analyse the repeated text fragments 
found in the n-gram analysis, we used the 
NLTK’s Stanford Named Entity Recogniser 
(NER) package to find all the named entities 
mentioned in the set of maximal n-grams; though 
we needed to manually extend its functionality to 
remove incorrect identifications and to add miss-
ing entities (to deal with problems like “William 
de Kooning” and “de Kooning” being treated as 
separate entities).  The full text yielded 462 
unique entities (from 3,804 paragraphs) and 
when we searched our maximal n-gram set, we 
found that 117 of these entities were mentioned 
in the paragraphs containing repeated phrases 
(341 paragraphs). We used this set of entities as a 
basis for examining the repetitions of people, 
places and things in networks of association.  

2.3 Networks of Association 
To get a real sense of the structure of the repeti-
tion we constructed networks of association be-
tween the 314 unique named entities that were 
mentioned in our n-gram text-fragments.  We 
build two different networks based on different 
measures of association (for other possibilities 
see Grayson et al., 2016).  First, we build net-
works for entities that were associated by virtue 
of being mentioned in the same paragaph (see 
Figures 1-5).  Second, we build networks for en-
tities that were associated by virtue of being men-
tioned in the same and/or the immediately follow-
ing paragraph (see Figure 6).  These networks 

35



revealed that there are definite and distinct repeti-
tive-structures of association in the novel.    

For example, Figure 2 shows one of the smaller 
networks – which we call the Homeric Network -
-- showing associations between a variety of 
Greek-related entities, reflecting references to 
Homer (e.g., Illiad, Sirens, Odysseus). Note, that 
the thickness of the link in this network indicates 
the frequency with which these two entities were 
repeatedly associated within the paragraphs of 
the novel.   So, for instance, the link between 
Achilles and Odysseus is thicker because they are 
mentioned together in paragraphs several times. 

Performing this type of analysis we found five 
disjoint networks of different sizes between other 
named entities that we have titled after their dom-
inant associations: (i) Paris Network (Figure 1), 
(ii) Homeric Network (Figure 2), the Rome Net-
work (Figure 3), (ii) the Spanish Network (Figure 
4), (iii) the Gallery Network (Figure 5). 

These five networks show Kate’s swirling, re-
petitive thoughts about these entities when we 
define the association very tightly (i.e., same par-
agraph mentions). They show a considerable 
amount of local coherence.  However, if we wid-
en the definition of “association” to one-
paragraph further out, we find that all of these 
networks become inter-connected. Figure 6 
shows the swirling complexity of the associations 
between all of the named entities as the more lo-
cal networks get connected together.  Note, 
again, that the width of the links in this network 
indicates repeated associations. 

This wider definition of association shows 
that that the original in-paragraph networks are 
reinforced and expanded with new entities; 
though they still retain their identity as distinct 
networks.  Figure 6 also shows that there are hub-
like entities (e.g., Dylan Thomas, Nightwatch, La 
Mancha) that play a role in cross-connecting the 
in-paragraph networks; perhaps indicating that 
these entities are pivotal in Kate’s thinking (n.b., 
Markson claimed Dylan Thomas as a major in-
fluence).  Such hubs could be further elucidated 
by a pagerank analysis. 

3 What Does it All Mean? 
We began this paper by proposing that Wallace’s 
close reading of WM could be complemented by 
a distant reading of the novel.  We have shown 
that a text analytic and network analysis of the 
repeated mentions of people, places and things in 
the novel can reveal some definite structures.   
But, what does it all mean?   

 
 
 

 
Figure 1: The Paris Network 

 
 
 
 

 
Figure 2: The Homeric Network 

 
 
 

 

Figure 3: The Rome Network 
 

36



 
Figure 4: The Spanish Network 

 
 

 
Figure 5: The Gallery Network 

 
Wallace’s (1990) contention was that the repeti-

tion in WM reflects Kate’s response to a Trac-
tusized world; that she is endeavouring to con-
nect things to establish a meaning that is absent.  
Our distant reading shows the obsessive persis-
tence with which Kate pursues this attempt to 
connect; she appears to run over the same path of 
association again and again, hoping it becomes 
reinforced so that it persists as something “real”.   
This analysis is consistent with one of Wallace’s 
claims about Kate’s predicament: 

…that Kate’s textual obsession is simply to 
find connections between things, any strands 
to bind the historical facts & empirical data 
that are all her world comprises.  And always 
– necessarily – genuine connections elude 
her.  All she can find is an occasional syn-
chronicity: the fact that certain names are 
similar enough to be richly confusing  -- Wil-
liam Gaddis and Taddeo Gaddi – or that cer-
tain lives & events happened to overlap in 
space & time. And these very thin connections 
turn out not to be ‘real’, features only of her 
imagination;                  

 (Wallace, 1990, pp. 254-255)    

If one examines the five disjoint networks (Fig-
ures 1-5) one notable feature of them is how they 
are all only partly-thematic, as their themes are 
often upset by outliers.  For instance, the Homer-
ic network (Figure 2) has mostly Homeric enti-
ties, but then Alexander the Great and Plato are 
thrown in (people associated by place and race 
but not part of the Homeric tales). Similarly, the 
Spanish network (Figure 4) has a lot of Spanish-
related nodes (e.g., Madrid, El Greco, Prada) but 
then it veers into outlier sub-networks involving 
European philosophers and American writers.  
These structures confirm Wallace’s proposition 
that Kate’s networks of repetition ultimately lack 
real coherence and meaning, beyond that which 
she tries to impose by obsessive repetition.  In 
this way, we see this network analysis as provid-
ing a highly complementary reading to that of 
Wallace. 

4 The DNA of a Novel 
There is one outstanding question that is invited 
by the current analysis, though we do not have a 
complete answer to it. Namely, are there definite 
sequences in the references made to different 
networks in the novel?  That is, is there a tenden-
cy for a reference to one network to follow the 
reference to another, defining a type of higher-
level DNA for the novel?    

Figure 7 shows the paragraphs of the novel 
numbered from 1-3804 with each paragraph col-
oured on the basis of whether it refers to the Ho-
meric (pink, Figure 2) or Rome Networks (blue, 
Figure 3).  It shows a number of interesting prop-
erties: (i) these two networks dominate large 
parts of the novel, even though they are not the 
largest of the five found, (ii) there are definite 
sections of the novel where they dominate or fail 
to be referenced (i.e., the blank, white strips), (iii) 
references to them form definite banded sequenc-
es. To verify the latter point we analysed the fre-
quency of these two networks in sequences of 
different lengths.   Table 3 shows that they tend 
to commonly follow one another, sometimes in 
quite long sequences.  

Overall, this shows that there are higher levels 
of repetitive structure that could yield other in-
sights about repetition in WM.  Indeed, it may 
well be that the novel has definite higher-level 
structure (yet to be found) that could constitute 
the “DNA of the novel” (see Figure 8). 
 
 

37



 

 
Figure 6. The Network of Networks in Wittgenstein’s Mistress 

 
 

 
Figure 7: Paragraphs Where the Homeric (pink) 

and Rome Networks (blue) Are Referenced 

5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have considered the use of data 
analytics techniques to provide a distant reading 
of David Markson’s novel “Wittgenstein’s Mis-
tress”.  We have tried to address the role of repe-
tition in the novel and to pursue evidence for 
proposals made by David Foster Wallace in his 
close reading of the text.  In the round, specifi-

cally supporting patterns have been found in our 
analysis.  Obviously, more could be done, in par-
ticular perhaps around the exploration of the re-
peating references to networks we have found; in 
this respect we are currently examining tech-
niques in time-series analysis and sequence in-
duction with this question in mind. 

This analysis also invites comparative treat-
ments of such associative references in other 
works that (i) are equally concise at the para-
graph-level but which lack explicit repetition 
(e.g., Hemingway) or (ii) aim for similar stream-
of-consciousness effects (e.g., Joyce). Such anal-
yses could reveal new insights into repeated, as-
sociative referencing in diverse literary works.    

Acknowledgements 
This research was an undergraduate final-year project 
by the first author, supervised by the second author, 
and was supported by Science Foundation Ireland 
(SFI) under Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2289.   

38



 

 
Figure 8: Paragraphs Referencing Networks: 

 (i) Paris (cyan), (ii) Homeric (pink), (iii) Rome 
(blue), (iv) Spanish (red), (v) Gallery (green) 
 

 

 
Table 3: Frequencies of Paragraph Sequences 
Referencing Homeric (2) & Rome Networks (3) 

Reference 
Agarwal Apoorv, Augusto Corvalan, Jacob Jensen, 

and Owen Rambow. 2012, June. Social network 
analysis of Alice in Wonderland. In Workshop on 
Computational Linguistics for Literature, pp. 88-
96. 2012. 

Coles Katharine, Meyer Miriah, Lein Julie Gonnering, 
McCurdy, Nina. 2014. Empowering Play, 
Experimenting with Poems: Disciplinary Values 
and Visualization Development. Proceedings of 
the Digital Humanities, 2014. 

Elson David, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R. 
McKeown.  2010, July. Extracting social networks 

from literary fiction. In Proceedings of the 48th 
annual meeting of the association for 
computational linguistics (pp. 138-147). 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Grayson Siobhan, Wade Karen, Meaney Gerardine. 
and Greene Derek. 2016. May, The sense and 
sensibility of different sliding windows in 
constructing co-occurrence networks from 
literature. In Computational History and Data-
Driven Humanities: 2nd IFIP WG 12.7 
International Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, (pp. 65-
77). Springer International Publishing. 

Grayson, Siobhan, Wade, Karen, Meaney Gerardine, 
Rothwell Jennie, Mulvany Maria, and Greene 
Derek. 2016, May. Discovering structure in social 
networks of 19th century fiction. In  8th ACM 
Conference on Web Science (pp. 325-326). ACM. 

Jänicke, Stefan, Greta Franzini, Muhammad Faisal 
Cheema, and Gerik Scheuermann. 2015. On close 
and distant reading in digital humanities: A survey 
and future challenges. Proc. of EuroVis—STARs, 
pp.83-103. 

Markson, David. 1988. Wittgenstein's mistress. 
Dalkey Archive Press. (Reproduced 1995 with 
afterword containing Wallace, 1990). 

Moretti, Franco. 2005. Graphs, maps, trees: Abstract 
models for a literary history. Verso Books. 

Moretti, Franco. 2013. Distant reading. Verso Books. 

Serlen, Rachel. 2010. The distant future?  Literature 
Compass, 7(3), pp.214-225. 

Wallace David Foster. 1990. The empty plenum: 
David Markson’s “Wittgenstein’s 
Mistress”. Review of Contemporary Fiction, 10(2), 
p.219 (Reproduced as an afterword in 1995 
printing of Markson, 1988). 

39


