



















































Improving coreference resolution with automatically predicted prosodic information


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Speech-Centric Natural Language Processing, pages 78–83
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Improving coreference resolution
with automatically predicted prosodic information

Ina Rösiger∗, Sabrina Stehwien∗, Arndt Riester, Ngoc Thang Vu
Institute for Natural Language Processing

University of Stuttgart, Germany
{roesigia,stehwisa,arndt,thangvu}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

Adding manually annotated prosodic in-
formation, specifically pitch accents and
phrasing, to the typical text-based feature
set for coreference resolution has previ-
ously been shown to have a positive effect
on German data. Practical applications on
spoken language, however, would rely on
automatically predicted prosodic informa-
tion. In this paper we predict pitch ac-
cents (and phrase boundaries) using a con-
volutional neural network (CNN) model
from acoustic features extracted from the
speech signal. After an assessment of the
quality of these automatic prosodic anno-
tations, we show that they also signifi-
cantly improve coreference resolution.

1 Introduction

Noun phrase coreference resolution is the task of
grouping noun phrases (NPs) together that refer
to the same discourse entity in a text or dialogue.
In Example (1), taken from Umbach (2002), the
question for the coreference resolver, besides link-
ing the anaphoric pronoun he back to John, is to
decide whether an old cottage and the shed refer
to the same entity.

(1) {John}1 has {an old cottage}2.
Last year {he}1 reconstructed {the shed}?.

Coreference resolution is an active NLP research
area, with its own track at most NLP conferences
and several shared tasks such as the CoNLL or
SemEval shared tasks (Pradhan et al., 2012; Re-
casens et al., 2010) or the CORBON shared task
20171. Almost all work is based on text, although

*The two first authors contributed equally to this work.
1http://corbon.nlp.ipipan.waw.pl/

there exist a few systems for pronoun resolution
in transcripts of spoken text (Strube and Müller,
2003; Tetreault and Allen, 2004). It has been
shown that there are differences between written
and spoken text that lead to a drop in performance
when coreference resolution systems developed
for written text are applied on spoken text (Amoia
et al., 2012). For this reason, it may help to use
additional information available from the speech
signal, for example prosody.

In West-Germanic languages, such as English
and German, there is a tendency for coreferent
items, i.e. entities that have already been intro-
duced into the discourse (their information sta-
tus is given), to be deaccented, as the speaker as-
sumes the entity to be salient in the listener’s dis-
course model (cf. Terken and Hirschberg (1994);
Baumann and Riester (2013); Baumann and Roth
(2014)). We can make use of this fact by providing
prosodic information to the coreference resolver.
Example (2), this time marked with prominence
information, shows that prominence can help us
resolve cases where the transcription is potentially
ambiguous2.

(2) {John}1 has {an old cottage}2.
a. Last year {he}1 reconstructed {the

SHED}3.
b. Last year {he}1 reconSTRUCted the

shed}2.
The pitch accent on shed in (2a) leads to the in-

terpretation that the shed and the cottage refer to
different entities, where the shed is a part of the
cottage (they are in a bridging relation). In con-
trast, in (2b), the shed is deaccented, which sug-
gests that the shed and the cottage corefer.

A pilot study by Rösiger and Riester (2015) has

2The anaphor under consideration is typed in boldface, its
antecedent is underlined. Accented syllables are capitalised.

78



shown that enhancing the text-based feature set
for a coreference resolver, consisting of e.g. auto-
matic part-of-speech (POS) tags and syntactic in-
formation, with pitch accents and prosodic phras-
ing information helps to improve coreference res-
olution of German spoken text. The prosodic la-
bels used in the experiments were annotated man-
ually, which is not only expensive but not applica-
ble in an automatic pipeline setup. In our paper,
we present an experiment in which we replicate
the main results from the pilot study by annotating
the prosodic information automatically, thus omit-
ting any manual annotations from the feature set.
We show that adding prosodic information signif-
icantly helps in all of our experiments.

2 Prosodic features for coreference
resolution

Similar to the pilot study, we make use of pitch ac-
cents and prosodic phrasing. We predict the pres-
ence of a pitch accent3 and use phrase boundaries
to derive nuclear accents, which are taken to be
the last (and perceptually most prominent) accent
in an intonation phrase. This paper tests whether
previously reported tendencies for manual labels
are also observable for automatic labels, namely:

Short NPs Since long, complex NPs almost al-
ways have at least one pitch accent, the presence
and the absence of a pitch accent is more helpful
for shorter phrases.

Long NPs For long, complex NPs, we look for
nuclear accents that indicate the phrase’s overall
prominence. If the NP contains a nuclear accent,
it is assumed to be less likely to take part in
coreference chains.

We test the following features that have proven
beneficial in the pilot study. These features are de-
rived for each NP.

Pitch accent presence focuses on the presence
of a pitch accent, disregarding its type. If one ac-
cent is present in the NP, this boolean feature gets
assigned the value true, and false otherwise.

Nuclear accent presence is a boolean feature
comparable to pitch accent presence. It gets as-
signed the value true if there is a nuclear accent
present in the NP, false otherwise.

3We do not predict the pitch accent type (e.g. fall H*L or
rise L*H) as this distinction was not helpful in the pilot study
and is generally more difficult to model.

3 Data

To ensure comparability, we use the same dataset
as in the pilot study, namely the DIRNDL cor-
pus (Eckart et al., 2012; Björkelund et al., 2014),
a German radio news corpus annotated with both
manual coreference and manual prosody labels.
We adopt the official train, test and development
split4 designed for research on coreference res-
olution. The recorded news broadcasts in the
DIRNDL-anaphora corpus were spoken by 13
male and 7 female speakers, in total roughly 5
hours of speech. The prosodic annotations follow
the GToBI(S) standard for pitch accent types and
boundary tones and are described in Björkelund
et al. (2014). In this study we make use of two
class labels of prosodic events: all accent types
(marked by the standard ToBI *) grouped into a
single class (pitch accent presence) and the same
for intonational phrase boundaries (marked by %).

4 Automatic prosodic information

In this section we describe the prosodic event de-
tector used in this work. It is a binary classifier
that is trained separately for either pitch accents
or phrase boundaries and predicts for each word,
whether it carries the respective prosodic event.

4.1 Model

We apply a convolutional neural network (CNN)
model, illustrated in Figure 1. The input to the
CNN is a matrix spanning the current word and its
right and left context word. The input matrix is
a frame-based representation of the speech signal.
The signal is divided into overlapping frames for
each 20 ms with a 10 ms shift and are represented
by a 6-dimensional feature vector for each frame.

We use acoustic features as well as position in-
dicator features following Stehwien and Vu (2017)
that are simple and fast to obtain. The acoustic
features were extracted from the speech signal us-
ing the OpenSMILE toolkit (Eyben et al., 2013).
The feature set consists of 5 features that comprise
acoustic correlates of prominence: smoothed fun-
damental frequency (f0), RMS energy, PCM loud-
ness, voicing probability and Harmonics-to-Noise
Ratio. The position indicator feature is appended
as an extra feature to the input matrices (see Fig-
ure 1) and aids the modelling of the acoustic con-

4http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
forschung/ressourcen/korpora/dirndl.
en.html

79



Figure 1: CNN for prosodic event recognition with
an input window of 3 successive words and posi-
tion indicating features.

text by indicating which frames belong to the cur-
rent word or the neighbouring words.

We apply two convolution layers in order to ex-
pand the input information and then use max pool-
ing to find the most salient features. In the first
convolution layer we ensure that the filters always
span all feature dimensions. All resulting feature
maps are concatenated to one feature vector which
is fed into the two-unit softmax layer.

4.2 Predicting prosodic labels on DIRNDL

We predict prosodic events for the whole DIRNDL
subcorpus used in this paper. To simulate an ap-
plication setting, we train the CNN model on a
different dataset. Since the acoustic correlates of
prosodic events as well as the connection between
sentence prosody and information status exploited
in this paper are similar in English and German,
we train the prosodic event detector on English
data and apply the model to the German DIRNDL
corpus5. The data used to train the model is a
2.5 hour subset of the Boston University Radio

5Rosenberg et al. (2012) report good cross-language re-
sults of pitch accent detection on this dataset.

News Corpus (Ostendorf et al., 1995) that contains
speech from 3 female and 2 male speakers and that
includes manually labelled pitch accents and into-
national phrase boundary tones. Hence, both cor-
pora consist of read speech by radio news anchors.
The prediction accuracy on the DIRNDL anaphora
corpus is 81.9% for pitch accents and 85.5% for
intonational phrase boundary tones6. The speaker-
independent performance of this model on the
Boston dataset is 83.5% accuracy for pitch accent
detection and 89% for phrase boundary detection.
We conclude that the prosodic event detector gen-
eralises well to the DIRNDL dataset and the ob-
tained accuracies are appropriate for our experi-
ments.

5 Coreference resolution

In this section, we describe the coreference re-
solver used in our experiments and how it was ap-
plied to create the baseline system using only au-
tomatic annotations.

5.1 IMS HotCoref DE
The IMS HotCoref DE coreference resolver is
a state-of-the-art tool for German7 (Rösiger and
Kuhn, 2016). It is data-driven, i.e. it learns from
annotated data with the help of pre-defined fea-
tures using a structured perceptron that models
coreference within a document as a directed tree.
This way, it can exploit the tree structure to create
non-local features (features that go beyond a pair
of NPs). The standard features are text-based and
consist mainly of string matching, part of speech,
constituent parses, morphological information and
combinations thereof.

5.2 Coreference resolution using automatic
preprocessing

As we aim at coreference resolution applicable to
new texts, all annotations used to create the text-
based features are automatically predicted using
NLP tools. It is frequently observed that the per-
formance drops when the feature set is derived
in this manner compared to using features based
on manual annotations. For example, the perfor-
mance of IMS HotCoref DE drops from 63.61

6The per-class accuracy is 82.1% for pitch accents and
37.1% for phrase boundaries. Despite these low quality
phrase boundary annotations, we believe that, as a first step,
their effectiveness can still be tested. This issue will be ad-
dressed in future work.

7www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/forschung/
ressourcen/werkzeuge/HOTCorefDe.html

80



to 48.61 CoNLL score8 on the reference dataset
TüBA-9 D/Z. The system, pre-trained on TüBA,
yields a CoNLL score of 37.04 on DIRNDL with
predicted annotations. This comparatively low
score also confirms the assumption that the per-
formance of a system trained on written text drops
when applied to spoken text. The drop in perfor-
mance can also be explained by the slightly dif-
ferent domains (newspaper text and radio news).
However, if we train on the concatenation of the
train and development set of DIRNDL we achieve
a score of 46.11. This will serve as a baseline in
the following experiments.

6 Experiments

We test our prosodic features by adding them to
the feature set used in the baseline. We define
short NPs to be of length 3 or shorter9. In this
setup, we apply the feature only to short NPs. In
the all NP setting, the feature is used for all NPs.
The ratio of short vs. longer NPs in DIRNDL is
roughly 3:1. Note that we evaluate on the whole
test set in both cases. We report how the perfor-
mance of the coreference resolver is affected in
three settings:

(a) trained and tested
on manual prosodic labels (short gold),

(b) trained on manual prosodic labels, but tested
on automatic labels (this simulates an appli-
cation scenario where a pre-trained model is
applied to new texts (short gold/auto) and

(c) trained and tested on
automatic prosodic labels (short auto).

Table 1 shows the effect of the pitch accent pres-
ence feature on our data. All features perform sig-
nificantly better than the baseline10. As expected,
the numbers are higher if we limit this feature to
short NPs. We believe that this is due to the fact
that the feature contributes most when it is most
meaningful: on short NPs, a pitch accent makes
it more likely for the NP to contain new infor-
mation, whereas long NPs almost always have at

8We report the performance of the coreference system in
terms of the CoNLL score, the standard measure to assess the
quality of coreference resolution.

9In our experiments, this performed even better than
length 4 or shorter as used in Rösiger and Riester (2015).

10We compute significance using the Wilcoxon signed rank
test (Siegel and Castellan, 1988) at the 0.01 level.

Baseline 46.11
+ Accent short NPs all NPs
+ Presence gold 53.99 49.68
+ Presence gold/auto 52.63 50.08
+ Presence auto 49.13 49.01

Table 1: Pitch accent presence

Baseline 46.11
+ Nuclear accent short NPs all NPs
+ Presence gold 48.63 52.12
+ Presence gold/auto 48.46 51.45
+ Presence auto 48.01 50.64

Table 2: Nuclear accent presence

least one pitch accent, regardless of its informa-
tion status. We achieve the highest performance
with gold labels, followed by the gold/auto ver-
sion with a score that is not significantly worse
than the gold version. This is important for appli-
cations as it suggests that the loss in performance
is small when training on gold data and testing
on predicted data. As expected, the version that
is trained and tested on predicted data performs
worse, but is still significantly better than the base-
line. Hence, prosodic information is helpful in all
three settings. It also shows that the assumption
on short NPs in the pilot study is also true for au-
tomatic labels.

Table 2 shows the effect of adding nuclear ac-
cent presence as a feature to the baseline. Again,
we report results that are all significantly better
than the baseline. The improvement is largest
when we apply the feature to all NPs, i.e. also
including long, complex NPs. This is in line with
the findings in the pilot study for long NPs. If we
restrict ourselves to just nuclear accents, this fea-
ture will receive the value true for only a few of
the short NPs that would otherwise have been as-
signed true in terms of general pitch accent pres-
ence. Therefore, nuclear pitch accents do not pro-
vide sufficient information for a majority of the
short NPs. For long NPs, however, the presence
of a nuclear accent is more meaningful.

The performance of the different systems fol-
lows the pattern present for pitch accent type: gold
> gold/auto > auto. Again, automatic prosodic
information contributes to the system’s perfor-
mance. The highest score when using automatic
labels is 50.64, as compared to 53.99 with gold
labels. To the best of our knowledge, these are
the best results reported on the DIRNDL anaphora
dataset so far.

81



EXPERTEN {der Großen KOALITION}1 haben sich auf [...] ein Niedriglohn-
Experts (of) the grand coalition have themselves on a low wage

Konzept VERSTÄNDIGT. Die strittigen Themen [...] sollten bei der nächsten
concept agreed. The controversial topics shall at the next

Spitzenrunde {der Koalition}1 ANGESPROCHEN werden.
meeting (of) the coalition raised be.

EN: Experts within the the grand coalition have agreed on a strategy to address [problems associated
with] low income. At the next meeting, the coalition will talk about the controversial issues.

Figure 2: Example from the DIRNDL dataset with English translation. The candidate NP (anaphor) of
the coreference chain in question is marked in boldface, the antecedent is underlined. Pitch accented
words are capitalised.

7 Analysis

In the following section, we discuss two examples
from the DIRNDL dataset that provide some in-
sight as to how the prosodic features helped coref-
erence resolution in our experiments.
The first example is shown in Figure 2. The coref-
erence chain marked in this example was not pre-
dicted by the baseline version. With prosodic
information, however, the fact that the NP “der
Koalition” is deaccented helped the resolver to
recognise that this was given information: it refers
to the recently introduced antecedent “der Großen
Koalition”. This effect clearly supports our as-
sumption that the absence of pitch accents helps
for short NPs.

An additional effect of adding prosodic infor-
mation that we observed concerns the length of
antecedents determined by the resolver. In several
cases, e.g. in Example (3), the baseline system
incorrectly chose an embedded NP (1A) as the an-
tecedent for a pronoun. The system with access
to prosodic information correctly chose the longer
NP (1B)11. Our analysis confirms that this is due to
the accent on the short NP (on Phelps). The pres-
ence or absence of a pitch accent on the adjunct
NP (on USA) does not appear to have an impact.

(3) {{Michael PHELPS}1A aus den USA}1B .
{Er}1 ...
Michael Phelps from the USA. He ...

11The TüBA-D/Z guidelines state that the maximal exten-
sion of the NP should be chosen as the markable.
http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/
fileadmin/static/ascl/resources/
tuebadz-coreference-manual-2007.pdf

8 Conclusion and future work

We show that using prosodic labels that have been
obtained automatically significantly improves the
performance of a coreference resolver. In this
work, we predict these labels using a CNN model
and use these as additional features in IMS Hot-
Coref DE, a coreference resolution system for
German. Despite the quality of the predicted la-
bels being slightly lower than the gold labels, we
are still able to replicate results observed when
using manually annotated prosodic information.
This encouraging result also confirms that not only
is prosodic information helpful to coreference res-
olution, but that it also has a positive effect even
when predicted by a system.

A brief analysis of the resolver’s output illus-
trates the effect of deaccentuation. Further work is
necessary to investigate the impact on the length
of the predicted antecedent.

One possibility to increase the quality of the
predicted prosody labels would be to include
the available lexico-syntactic information into the
prosodic event detection model, since this has
been shown to improve prosodic event recogni-
tion (Sun, 2002; Ananthakrishnan and Narayanan,
2008). To pursue coreference resolution directly
on speech, a future step would be to perform all
necessary annotations on automatic speech recog-
nition output. As a first step, our results on Ger-
man spoken text are promising and we expect
them to be generalisable to other languages with
similar prosody.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Kerstin Eckart for her help
with the preparation of DIRNDL data. This work

82



was funded by the German Science Foundation
(DFG), Sonderforschungsbereich 732, Project A6
and A8, at the University of Stuttgart.

References
Marilisa Amoia, Kerstin Kunz, and Ekaterina

Lapshinova-Koltunski. 2012. Coreference in spo-
ken vs. written texts: a corpus-based analysis. In
Proceedings of LREC.

Sankaranarayanan Ananthakrishnan and Shrikanth S.
Narayanan. 2008. Automatic prosodic event detec-
tion using acoustic, lexical and syntactic evidence.
In IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Lan-
guage Processing. volume 16, pages 216–228.

Stefan Baumann and Arndt Riester. 2013. Coreference,
lexical givenness and prosody in German. Lingua
136:16–37.

Stefan Baumann and Anna Roth. 2014. Prominence
and coreference – On the perceptual relevance of F0
movement, duration and intensity. In Proceedings
of Speech Prosody. pages 227–231.

Anders Björkelund, Kerstin Eckart, Arndt Riester,
Nadja Schauffler, and Katrin Schweitzer. 2014. The
extended DIRNDL corpus as a resource for auto-
matic coreference and bridging resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC. pages 3222–3228.

Kerstin Eckart, Arndt Riester, and Katrin Schweitzer.
2012. A discourse information radio news database
for linguistic analysis. In Sebastian Nordhoff
Christian Chiarcos and Sebastian Hellmann, editors,
Linked Data in Linguistics: Representing and Con-
necting Language Data and Language Metadata,
Springer, pages 65–76.

Florian Eyben, Felix Weninger, Florian Groß, and
Björn Schuller. 2013. Recent developments in
openSMILE, the Munich open-source multimedia
feature extractor. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM
international conference on Multimedia. pages 835–
838.

Mari Ostendorf, Patti Price, and Stefanie Shattuck-
Hufnagel. 1995. The Boston University Radio News
Corpus. Technical Report ECS-95-001, Boston Uni-
versity.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. Conll-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in ontonotes. In Joint Confer-
ence on EMNLP and CoNLL-Shared Task. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–40.

Marta Recasens, Lluı́s Màrquez, Emili Sapena,
M. Antònia Martı́, Mariona Taulé, Véronique
Hoste, Massimo Poesio, and Yannick Versley. 2010.
Semeval-2010 task 1: Coreference resolution in
multiple languages. In Proceedings of the 5th

International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation.
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, SemEval ’10, pages 1–8.

Andrew Rosenberg, Erica Cooper, Rivka Levitan, and
Julia Hirschberg. 2012. Cross-language prominence
detection. In Speech Prosody.

Ina Rösiger and Jonas Kuhn. 2016. IMS HotCoref DE:
a data-driven co-reference resolver for German. In
Proceedings of LREC 2016.

Ina Rösiger and Arndt Riester. 2015. Using prosodic
annotations to improve coreference resolution of
spoken text. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP. pages
83–88.

Sidney Siegel and N. John Jr. Castellan. 1988. Non-
parametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences.
McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, CA, 2nd edition.

Sabrina Stehwien and Ngoc Thang Vu. 2017. Prosodic
event detection using convolutional neural networks
with context information. In Proceedings of Inter-
speech.

Michael Strube and Christoph Müller. 2003. A ma-
chine learning approach to pronoun resolution in
spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. pages 168–175.

Xuejing Sun. 2002. Pitch accent prediction using en-
semble machine learning. In Proceedings of ICSLP-
2002. pages 16–20.

Jacques Terken and Julia Hirschberg. 1994. Deaccen-
tuation of words representing ‘given’ information:
Effects of persistence of grammatical function and
surface position. Language and Speech 37(2):125–
145.

Joel Tetreault and James Allen. 2004. Dialogue struc-
ture and pronoun resolution. In Proceedings of the
5th Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution
Colloquium.

Carla Umbach. 2002. (De)accenting definite descrip-
tions. Theoretical Linguistics 2/3:251–280.

83


