



















































Speeding up corpus development for linguistic research: language documentation and acquisition in Romansh Tuatschin


Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature.

,

Proceedings, pages 89–94, Vancouver, BC, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Speeding up corpus development for linguistic research:
language documentation and acquisition in Romansh Tuatschin

Géraldine Walther
University of Zürich

Plattenstrasse 54
8032 Zürich, Switzerland

geraldine.walther@uzh.ch

Benoı̂t Sagot
Inria

2 rue Simone Iff
75 012 Paris, France

benoit.sagot@inria.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we present ongoing work
for developing language resources and ba-
sic NLP tools for an undocumented vari-
ety of Romansh, in the context of a lan-
guage documentation and language acqui-
sition project. Our tools are designed to
improve the speed and reliability of cor-
pus annotations for noisy data involving
large amounts of code-switching, occur-
rences of child speech and orthographic
noise. Being able to increase the efficiency
of language resource development for lan-
guage documentation and acquisition re-
search also constitutes a step towards solv-
ing the data sparsity issues with which re-
searchers have been struggling.

1 Introduction

Contemporary linguistic research relies more and
more heavily on the exploration of statistical pat-
terns in language. The non-categorical distribution
and variety of linguistic units has become a focus
for understanding complex variations across pat-
terns, such as dative alternations (Bresnan et al.,
2007) or cases of optionality (Wasow et al., 2011).
Studies like these require the availability of large
consistently annotated corpora.

For lesser or undescribed languages however,
such resources are not readily available. What
is worse, the current rate of language extinction
could lead to the disappearance of 20-90% of to-
day’s spoken languages by the end of the 21st
century (Krauss, 1992). Documenting endangered
languages will allow us to preserve traces of the
current language diversity, a part of the world’s
cultural heritage. Building reliable linguistic re-
sources will allow us to study them according to
fast evolving research standards.

Similarly, studies on language acquisition are
based on recorded, transcribed, and annotated data
of parent-child interactions. Language acquisition
research has produced significant databases, such
as the CHILDES project (McWhinney, 2000), yet
mainly manually and at enormous costs.

Relying solely on manual annotators is too
costly an option. Minimising resource develop-
ment costs is crucial. Manual language resource
development for language documentation and lan-
guage acquisition projects should be sped up, as
soon as technically possible, by employing NLP
tools such as spelling correction/normalisation
tools and part-of-speech (POS) taggers. For in-
stance, POS taggers used as pre-annotators have
been shown to increase both annotation speed and
annotation quality, even when trained on limited
amounts of data (Marcus et al., 1993; Fort and
Sagot, 2010).

Yet language acquisition and language docu-
mentation data presents specific challenges for au-
tomatic linguistic annotation. Firstly, such data
usually consists of transcriptions of spontaneous
speech. Secondly, previously undescribed lan-
guages are often not written and lack established
orthographies, resulting in noisy transcriptions.
Thirdly, acquisition data consists of recordings of
child-parent interactions. The recorded target chil-
dren’s language production can differ dramatically
from adult language, adding another layer of lin-
guistic variation. Finally, as new data is usually
still being collected, available raw and even more
so annotated data is rare, which significantly limits
the available training data for annotation tools.

In this paper, we show the interaction be-
tween manual resource development (morpholog-
ical lexicon, spelling and POS-annotated corpus)
and automatic tools on current annotation experi-
ments for a language documentation and acquisi-
tion project on the undocumented and previously

89



non-written Romansh dialect of Tuatschin.

2 Romansh Tuatschin

The term Romansh denotes a set of Romance
languages with important Germanic lexical and
grammatical influence, mostly spoken in the can-
ton of the Grisons in South-Eastern Switzerland.
Although Romansh is considered one of the four
official national languages of Switzerland, the
term Romansh covers in fact a variety of languages
and dialects with significantly differing features.
The dialect we focus on in present paper corre-
sponds to a previously undocumented dialect of
the Romansh Sursilvan variety called Tuatschin. It
is spoken by approximately 1,500 speakers in the
Val Tujetsch area. Contrary to the neighbouring
main Sursilvan dialect, which is also the main lan-
guage in local schools, Tuatschin is at this point
an unwritten language. It is however still natively
spoken and transmitted both in the local area and
within families who have left and settled in larger
cities within the country. Speakers are proud of
their language and culture and promote it through
a local cultural association and occasional, non-
normalised, publications in the local newspaper.

The development of the resources described
here is part of a project which combines language
documentation and acquisition research. One aim
of this project is to gain better understanding of
intergenerational language transmission in endan-
gered language contexts, which might contribute
to eventually slowing down, if not reversing, lin-
guistic and cultural erosion of minority languages.
The data used in this project is mostly original
data from fieldwork in the Val Tujetsch, original
recordings within five Tuatschin speaking families
with at least one child aged between 2 and 3 years,
and updated and normalised lexical data from the
Tuatschin word-list by Caduff (1952).

Adult speakers of Tuatschin are usually multi-
lingual, natively speaking at least two, if not more,
Romansh dialects (Tuatschin and Sursilvan), as
well as German (both High German and the lo-
cal variety of Swiss German), and often a fair
amount of Italian and French. Everyday conver-
sations in the Tuatschin speaking area comprise a
high amount of code-switching. Conversations be-
tween speakers of neighbouring dialects more of-
ten than not result in each speaker speaking their
own variety, accommodating the other person’s di-
alect to varying degrees. Insertion of German lex-

ical items or full utterances is ubiquitous.
As a result, our recorded Tuatschin data com-

prises a high amount of German and standard Sur-
silvan. This is even more acute in the acquisition
corpus data used within present experiments, as
the children’s families tend to be natively bilin-
gual. While the children’s mothers are all na-
tive Tuatschin speakers, the fathers are Sursilvan,
Swiss German or Italian speakers. The children
therefore produce a significant amount of mixed
utterances. In addition to the high amount of code-
switching due to this particular language setting,
language acquisition data also comprises intrin-
sic noise due to the differences between child and
adult language, including nonce-words or specific
child-speech. The variation observed in our cor-
pus data ranges from language and dialectal varia-
tion to adult/child register differences. Developing
automated tools for such a corpus requires coping
with noisy, heterogeneous corpus data.1

3 Developing guidelines

3.1 Orthography

The first challenge in developing linguistic re-
sources and automated tools for a previously un-
written language like Tuatschin consists in devel-
oping an orthography that can be used for tran-
scribing recorded data, and training future tran-
scribers (native speakers) in using this new or-
thography. We wanted this orthography to also be
usable by native speakers outside the project. In
collaboration with two native speakers within the
Val Tujetsch, we developed a new orthography for
Tuatschin, which is mainly based on the orthog-
raphy for the neighbouring written dialect Sur-
silvan, but accommodates the phonetic and mor-
phological differences of Tuatschin, from the pro-
nunciation of specific vowels and diphthongs to
diacritic marking of infinitive forms. Once the
main principles of the orthography had been estab-
lished, we started training our native corpus tran-
scribers. However, without complete resources
(such as a full lexicon or grammar) at their dis-
posal, each one of them still had their own in-
terpretation of the overall principles for the tran-

1Note that while Sursilvan does have an established or-
thography and is used a a language of instruction in schools,
there are no automatic tools available for the language. The
existing online lexicon can only be queried online but is not
freely available. Despite the languages’ similarity there are
no existing resources that could be leveraged to facilitate au-
tomatic work on Tuatschin at this point.

90



scription of individual words, adding an additional
transcriber-related layer to the variation within the
data. Developing the new orthography also re-
quired several passes, based on feedback from our
transcribers and progress in our own understand-
ing of the language data through our ongoing field
work. Subsequent changes contributed to varia-
tion even within an individual transcriber’s orthog-
raphy, however reducing the differences between
different transcribers’ orthographic strategies.

3.2 Annotation tagset inventories

For our corpus annotation, we developed two sep-
arate tagsets, one for part-of-speech (POS) anno-
tation and one for morphosyntactic features. Just
as for our orthographic conventions, our tagset
evolved alongside field work progress while anno-
tation was already ongoing, adding further noise
to our corpus data. This kind of noise is a com-
mon problem in language documentation projects
where data collection, annotation, and analysis
are conducted in parallel. Without the availabil-
ity of automatic tools, it normally requires several
passes of manual post-cleaning and adds to the
overall cost of language resource development.

Our POS tagset comprises a fine-grained and
a coarse POS inventory. The full coarse-grained
inventory, used for our POS tagging experi-
ments (see Section 5.2) is the following: ADJ,
ADV(erb), COMPL(ementiser), CONJ(unction),
DET(erminer), INTER(jection), N(oun), PN
(proper noun), PREP(osition), PRN (pronoun),
PUNCT(uation), QW (question word), SOUND,
V(erb). Fine-grained tags add information such
as DET def for definite articles or PREP loc for
locative prepositions. It also comprises a specific
childspeech refinement of all POS for words that

are specific to child-speech. The morphosyntactic
features follow the Leipzig Glossing Rule conven-
tions commonly used in language documentation
projects and comprise distinctions for number and
gender, as well as tense, mood and person.

Although we have designed this language-
specific inventory as a means to better model
the morphological and morphosyntactic proper-
ties of Tuatschin, we recognise the relevance and
importance of the Universal Dependency (UD)
initiative,2 whose aim is to “develo[p] cross-
linguistically consistent treebank annotation for
many languages, with the goal of facilitating mul-

2http://universaldependencies.org

tilingual parser development, cross-lingual learn-
ing, and parsing research from a language typol-
ogy perspective.” In the current version (2.0), sev-
eral dozen languages are already covered, some-
times with more than one treebank. What is more,
the UD website announces a Romansch and a (dis-
tinct) Sursilvan Romansch treebank. Our initia-
tive is not related to these treebank development
efforts—we had independently decided to develop
a deterministic mapping between our language-
specific label inventory and a UD-compatible an-
notation scheme, in order to pave the way for a
future Romansch-Tuaschin UD corpus. Together
with the dependency annotation of our data, this
will be the focus of future work.

4 Manual ressource development

4.1 TuatLex

We manually developed a morphological lexi-
con for Tuatschin. For that, we devised an ex-
plicit grammatical description of Tuatschin nom-
inal and verbal morphology based on our own
field work data. We implemented this descrip-
tion within the AlexinaPARSLI lexical framework
(Sagot and Walther, 2013). In addition to the
implemented morphological description, our Tu-
atschin lexicon, TuatLex, comprises a list of 2,176
lemmas, based on an updated version of the Tu-
atschin word-list by Caduff (1952) complemented
with our newly collected data, among which 780
verbs, 949 nouns, and 146 adjectives. The Alex-
ina inflection tool uses the grammar to produce
46,089 inflected entries, among which 29,361 ver-
bal, 15,137 nominal, and 762 adjectival forms.

4.2 Manual corpus annotation

After devising the tagset, we trained advanced lin-
guistic undergraduate students to manually anno-
tate our corpus data. The students were no na-
tive speakers of Romansh. They were asked to
annotate each token for (fine-grained) POS and
morphosyntactic information and to indicate an
English translation for each token’s base form.3

Using the WebAnno annotation tool (Eckart de
Castilho et al., 2014), annotators took approxi-
mately 15 to 25 hours for annotating files contain-
ing typically 1,000 to 2,000 words. Difficulties for
annotators mainly came from orthographic vari-

3For example, for the Tuatschin token nûrsas, they would
have provided the following annotations: POS = N, Mor-
phosyn = pl, and the English translation ‘EWE’.

91



ation, variation in the representation of word to-
kens,4 and dialectal variation.5 Weekly meetings
between two trained linguists, among whom one
Sursilvan native speaker, and all annotators were
organised to compare notes, discuss recurrent dif-
ficulties, and adapt the tagsets whenever neces-
sary.6

4.3 Manual corpus normalisation
In order to simplify the annotation task, we set
up a procedure for systematic orthographic cor-
rection. We first asked one of the native speakers,
who had been involved in the development of the
orthographic conventions, to manually correct al-
ready transcribed corpus data for orthographic er-
rors and individual-word-based code-switching in
a separate normalised tier within the corpus.7 We
then manually introduced an additional tier indi-
cating for each ‘normalised’ token whether it had
been corrected for orthography, code-switching,
child-speech, or actual pronunciation errors. This
intermediate layer, in addition to being useful for
subsequent acquisition or code-switching studies,
is meant to help the development of an automatic
spell-checker. Aside from variation in the usage
of diacritics, some of the most frequent errors in
the transcribed data involved the amalgamation of
words meant to be written as separate tokens.8

5 Automation and tools

5.1 Tokenisation and orthographic correction
In order to speed up the manual development of or-
thographically normalised corpora based on new
transcriptions, but also to prepare the fully auto-
matic processing of non-annotated text, we first
developed an automatic tokenisation and spelling
standardisation/correction tool. It is implemented

4E.g. vegni instead of vegn i ‘it comes’ (lit. ‘comes it’).
5For example, unexpected morphological forms that pre-

vented the recognition of inflected forms such as verbs end-
ing in Sursilvan -el instead of Tuatschin -a in the first person
singular.

6The project being mainly a documentation project on a
previously undescribed language, data collection, annotation,
and data analysis are currently being carried out in parallel.
Data annotation in particular has been performed as a collab-
orative task rather than as a task conducted by individual an-
notators, that would have to be evaluated for inter-annotator
agreement.

7The purpose of this normalised layer is solely to help
automatic (and, to a lesser extent, manual) annotation of the
data. It is not meant to replace the original transcription layer,
which remains the relevant layer for subsequent linguistic
analysis.

8Cf. the vegni/vegn i example from previous footnote.

in the form of a Tuatschin-specific parametrisa-
tion of the SXPipe shallow processing architecture
(Sagot and Boullier, 2008).

Note that the spelling standardisation/correction
tool is not meant to be used as a standalone tool. It
has been designed and developed only for speed-
ing up future corpus development and for serving
as a cleaning step before applying the POS tagger,
whose results are obviously better on (even only
partially) normalised data.

Our spelling standardisation/correction tool re-
lies on a list of deterministic rewriting patterns
that we automatically extracted and manually se-
lected based on the data described in Section 4.3.
More precisely, we applied standard alignment
techniques for extracting n-to-m correspondences
between raw and normalised text. Among the ex-
tracted rules, 695 were deterministic, which means
that there was a unique output in the corpus for
a given input. Out of these 695 candidate rules,
we manually selected 603, whose systematic ap-
plication could not result in any over-correction.9

Several others are non-deterministic. However,
a careful manual examination of these candidate
ambiguous rules showed that most of the ambi-
guity is an artifact of the rule extraction process,
and that true ambiguities can be resolved in con-
text.10 As a result, contextual information was in-
cluded in our standardisation/correction patterns,
thus resulting in a fully deterministic standardisa-
tion/correction module.

5.2 POS tagger

In order to assess and improve the quality of the
POS annotation, but also to have a POS pre-
annotation tool for speeding up future manual an-
notation, we trained the MElt POS tagger (Denis
and Sagot, 2012) on the manually POS-annotated
data available so far, using coarse POS to re-
duce sparsity (see Section 3.2). The 2,571 al-
ready annotated sentences, containing 9,927 to-
kens, were divided in training, development and
test sets by randomly selecting sentences with re-

9A few examples: stù→stu, sèl→sè’l, schia→schéia.
10For instance, vegnı̀ and all other verbs from TuatLex’s

inflection class Vi can produce ambiguous tokens such as
vegni, which must be changed into vegnı̀ (infinitive) before
pronouns such as ju, té, el, ella, el, i, nus, vus, els, ellas,
ins, but, in most other contexts, must be rewritten as vegn i
(V+PRN) with an expletive pronoun i. We applied the latter
to those verb tokens likely to appear with expletive subjects
like vegnı̀ ’to come’ while inserting the infinitive diacritic on
all other verb instances (such as capı̀ ’understand’).

92



spective probabilities 0.8, 0.1 and 0.1. We also ex-
tracted from the TuatLex lexicon described above
a set of 19,771 unique (form, POS) pairs, to be
used by MElt as a complementary source of infor-
mation, in addition to the training corpus.

We trained a first version of MElt, and ap-
plied the resulting POS tagger on the training data
themselves. Annotation mismatches allowed us to
identify several systematic errors in the training
data. Some of them came from individual errors
or annotator disagreement. But most were due to
changes made in the annotation guidelines while
manual annotation was already ongoing, and of
which some had not yet been correctly retroac-
tively applied to already annotated data.11 We
applied a series of POS correction rules to the
whole corpus (train+dev+test) as a result of this
training-corpus-based study, and re-trained MElt
on the corrected data. The result is a POS tag-
ger trained on 2,062 sentences (7,901 words) with
a 91.7% accuracy overall and a 65.3% accuracy
on words unknown to the training corpus. Inter-
estingly, if trained without TuatLex lexical infor-
mation, accuracy figures do not drop as much as
usually observed (Denis and Sagot, 2012): respec-
tively 91.6% and 62.5%. This suggests that lexical
information might not be as important for improv-
ing POS taggers for child-related speech as it is
for tagging standard text, a fact likely related to
the more limited vocabulary size in such corpora.

6 Conclusion

We have described ongoing efforts for developing
language resources (lexicon, annotated corpus)12

and basic NLP tools for the Romansh variety of
Tuatschin, in the context of a project on language
description and language acquisition dedicated to
a previously non-written language. Our next step
will consist in using our tools for pre-annotating
new raw data, in order to speed up annotation
while increasing its quality and consistency. They
will also be used for creating automatically anno-
tated data, which will complement the manually
annotated corpus.

On a longer term, our tools are also meant to
be used for automatically categorising tokens and
sequences of tokens into occurrences of child-
speech or various types of code-switching, relying

11For instance, the previously defined POS “V particle”
had been discarded at some point during corpus development,
yet it still had a number of occurrences in the training data.

12The lexicon and tools will all be made freely available.

on the information comprised within the interme-
diate tier introduced during the normalisation pro-
cedure (see Section 4.3). This intermediate layer
is meant to be ultimately automatically generated
by SXPipe. The richer and more accurate informa-
tion that our tools will be able to provide will also
facilitate subsequent quantitative linguistic studies
on Romansh Tuatschin, its acquisition by children
and its influences by surrounding languages, espe-
cially Sursilvan and (Swiss) German.

7 Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge the SNF
project number 159544 ”The morphosyntax of
agreement in Tuatschin: acquisition and contact”
whose funding has been instrumental to the work
presented here. We also thank our project col-
laborators and especially our annotators Nathalie
Schweizer, Michael Redmond, and Rolf Hotz for
their help in annotating the data, and Claudia Cath-
omas for her extremely valuable help and native
expertise on Romansh data. For their help in de-
veloping a new Tuatschin orthography we would
like to express our warmest thanks to Ciril Monn
and Norbert Berther.

References
Joan Bresnan, Anna Cueni, Tatiana Nikitina, and Har-

ald Baayen. 2007. Predicting the dative alterna-
tion. In G. Boume, I. Kraemer, and J. Zwarts,
editors, Cognitive Foundations of Interpretation,
Royal Netherlands Academy of Science, Amster-
dam, pages 69–94.

Léonard Caduff. 1952. Essai sur la phonétique du
parier rhétoroman de la Vallée de Tavetsch (canton
des Grisons - Suisse). Francke, Bern.

Pascal Denis and Benoı̂t Sagot. 2012. Coupling an
annotated corpus and a lexicon for state-of-the-art
POS tagging. Language Resources and Evaluation
46(4):721–736.

Richard Eckart de Castilho, Chris Biemann, Iryna
Gurevych, and Seid Muhie Yimam. 2014. Webanno:
a flexible, web-based annotation tool for clarin.
In Proceedings of the CLARIN Annual Conference
(CAC) 2014. CLARIN ERIC, Utrecht, Netherlands,
page online. Extended abstract.

Karën Fort and Benoı̂t Sagot. 2010. Influence of pre-
annotation on POS-tagged corpus development. In
Proceedings of the Fourth ACL Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop (LAW IV). Uppsala, Sweden, pages
56–63.

93



Michael Krauss. 1992. The worlds language in crisis.
Language (68).

Mitchell Marcus, Béatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics 19(2):313–330.

Bryan McWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project:
Tools for analyzing talk.. Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, Mahwah, NJ, 3 edition.

Benoı̂t Sagot and Pierre Boullier. 2008. SxPipe 2: ar-
chitecture pour le traitement pré-syntaxique de cor-
pus bruts. Traitement Automatique des Langues
49(2):155–188.

Benoı̂t Sagot and Géraldine Walther. 2013. Implement-
ing a formal model of inflectional morphology. In
Cerstin Mahlow and Michael Piotrowski, editors,
Proceedings of the Third International Workshop
on Systems and Frameworks for Computational
Morphology (SFCM 2013). Humboldt-Universität,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, volume 380 of
Communications in Computer and Information Sci-
ence (CCIS), pages 115–134.

Thomas Wasow, T. Florian Jaeger, and David Orr.
2011. Lexical variation in relativizer frequency.
In H. Simon and H. Wiese, editors, Expecting the
Unexpected: Exceptions in Grammar, de Gruyter,
Berlin, pages 175–195.

94


