



















































Insights into Analogy Completion from the Biomedical Domain


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2017 workshop, pages 19–28,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Insights into Analogy Completion from the Biomedical Domain

Denis Newman-Griffis†,‡ and Albert M. Lai♣ and Eric Fosler-Lussier†
†The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH

‡National Institutes of Health, Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD
♣Washington University in St. Louis, St Louis, MO

newman-griffis.1@osu.edu, amlai@wustl.edu,
fosler@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract

Analogy completion has been a popular
task in recent years for evaluating the se-
mantic properties of word embeddings,
but the standard methodology makes a
number of assumptions about analogies
that do not always hold, either in recent
benchmark datasets or when expanding
into other domains. Through an analy-
sis of analogies in the biomedical domain,
we identify three assumptions: that of a
Single Answer for any given analogy, that
the pairs involved describe the Same Re-
lationship, and that each pair is Informa-
tive with respect to the other. We pro-
pose modifying the standard methodology
to relax these assumptions by allowing for
multiple correct answers, reporting MAP
and MRR in addition to accuracy, and us-
ing multiple example pairs. We further
present BMASS, a novel dataset for eval-
uating linguistic regularities in biomedical
embeddings, and demonstrate that the re-
lationships described in the dataset pose
significant semantic challenges to current
word embedding methods.

1 Introduction

Analogical reasoning has long been a staple of
computational semantics research, as it allows
for evaluating how well implicit semantic re-
lations between pairs of terms are represented
in a semantic model. In particular, the recent
boom of research on learning vector space mod-
els (VSMs) for text (Turney and Pantel, 2010)
has leveraged analogy completion as a standalone
method for evaluating VSMs without using a full
NLP system. This is due largely to the obser-
vations of “linguistic regularities” as linear off-

sets in context-based semantic models (Mikolov
et al., 2013c; Levy and Goldberg, 2014; Penning-
ton et al., 2014).

In the analogy completion task, a system is pre-
sented with an example term pair and a query, e.g.,
London:England::Paris: , and the task is to
correctly fill in the blank. Recent methods con-
sider the vector difference between related terms
as representative of the relationship between them,
and use this to find the closest vocabulary term
for a target analogy, e.g., England - London +
Paris ≈ France. However, recent analyses re-
veal weaknesses of such offset-based methods, in-
cluding that the use of cosine similarity often re-
duces to just reflecting nearest neighbor structure
(Linzen, 2016), and that there is significant vari-
ance in performance between different kinds of re-
lations (Köper et al., 2015; Gladkova et al., 2016;
Drozd et al., 2016).

We identify three key assumptions encoded in
the standard offset-based methodology for anal-
ogy completion: that a given analogy has only
one correct answer, that all relationships between
the example pair and the query-target pair are the
same, and that the example pair is sufficiently in-
formative with respect to the query-target pair. We
demonstrate that these assumptions are violated
in real-world data, including in existing analogy
datasets. We then propose several modifications
to the standard methodology to relax these as-
sumptions, including allowing for multiple correct
answers, making use of multiple examples when
available, and reporting mean average precision
(MAP) and mean reciprocal rank (MRR) to give
a more complete picture of the implicit ranking
used in finding the best candidate for completing
a given analogy.

Furthermore, we present the BioMedical Ana-
logic Similarity Set (BMASS), a novel dataset for

19



analogical reasoning in the biomedical domain.
This new resource presents real-world examples
of semantic relations of interest for biomedi-
cal natural language processing research, and we
hope it will support further research into biomed-
ical VSMs (Chiu et al., 2016; Choi et al., 2016).1

2 Related work

Analogical reasoning has been studied both on its
own and as a component of downstream tasks,
using a range of systems. Early work used
rule-based systems for world knowledge (Reit-
man, 1965) and syntactic (Federici and Pirelli,
1997) relationships. Supervised models were
used for SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test) analo-
gies (Veale, 2004), and later for synonymy,
antonymy, and some world knowledge (Turney,
2008; Herdağdelen and Baroni, 2009). Analog-
ical reasoning has also been used in support of
downstream tasks, including word sense disam-
biguation (Federici et al., 1997) and morphologi-
cal analysis (Lepage and Goh, 2009; Lavallée and
Langlais, 2010; Soricut and Och, 2015).

Recent work on analogies has largely focused
on their use as an intrinsic evaluation of the prop-
erties of a VSM. The analogy dataset of Mikolov
et al. (2013a), often referred to as the Google
dataset, has become a standard evaluation for
general-domain word embedding models (Pen-
nington et al., 2014; Levy and Goldberg, 2014;
Schnabel et al., 2015; Faruqui et al., 2015), and
includes both world knowledge and morphosyn-
tactic relations. Other datasets include the MSR
analogies (Mikolov et al., 2013c), which describe
morphological relations only; and BATS (Glad-
kova et al., 2016), which includes both morpho-
logical and semantic relations. The semantic rela-
tions from SemEval-2012 Task 2 (Jurgens et al.,
2012) have also been used to derive analogies;
however, as with the lexical Sem-Para dataset
of Köper et al. (2015), the semantic relation-
ships tend to be significantly more challenging for
embedding-based methods (Drozd et al., 2016).
Additionally, Levy et al. (2015b) demonstrate that
even for some lexical relations where embeddings
appear to perform well, they are actually learning
prototypicality as opposed to relatedness.

1The dataset, and all code used for
our experiments, is available online at
https://github.com/OSU-slatelab/BMASS.

3 Analogy completion task

3.1 Standard methodology

Given an analogy a:b::c:d, the evaluation task is
to guess d out of the vocabulary, given a, b, c as
evidence. Recent methods for this involve using
the vector difference between embedded represen-
tations of the related pairs to rank all terms in the
vocabulary by how well they complete the anal-
ogy, and choosing the best fit. The vector differ-
ence is most commonly used in one of three ways,
where cos is cosine similarity:

argmaxd∈V
(
cos(d, b− a+ c)) (1)

argmaxd∈V
(
cos(d− c, b− a)) (2)

argmaxd∈V
cos(d, b)cos(d, c)
cos(d, a) + �

(3)

Following the terminology of Levy and Goldberg
(2014), we refer to Equation 1 as 3COSADD,
Equation 2 as PAIRWISEDISTANCE, and Equa-
tion 3 (which is equivalent to 3COSADD with log
cosine similarities) as 3COSMUL.

In order to generate analogy data for this task,
recent datasets have followed a similar process
(Mikolov et al., 2013a,c; Köper et al., 2015; Glad-
kova et al., 2016). First, relations of interest were
manually selected for the target domains: syntac-
tic/morphological, lexical (e.g., hypernymy, syn-
onymy), or semantic (e.g., CapitalOf). Then, for
each relation, example word pairs were manually
selected or automatically generated from existing
resources (e.g., WordNet). The final analogies
were then generated by exhaustively combining
the sets of word pairs within each relation.

3.2 Assumptions

Several key assumptions are inherent in this stan-
dard methodology that are not reflected in recent
benchmark analogy datasets. The first we refer
to as the Single-Target assumption: namely, that
there is a single correct answer for any given anal-
ogy. Since the target d is chosen via argmax, if we
consider the following two analogies:

flu:nausea::fever:?cough
flu:nausea::fever:?light-headedness

we must necessarily get at least one answer
wrong. Gladkova et al. (2016) convert these
analogies into a single case:

flu:nausea::fever:?[cough, light-headedness]

20



Pair Relations

brother:sister
FemaleCounterpart

SiblingOf

husband:wife
FemaleCounterpart

MarriedTo

Table 1: Binary semantic relations in “brother is to
sister as husband is to wife.” The target common
relation is shown in bold.

where either cough or lightheadedness is a cor-
rect guess. However, this still misses our desire
to get both correct answers, if possible. Relations
with multiple correct targets are present in all of
Google, BATS, and Sem-Para.

The second key assumption is that all the infor-
mation relating a to b also relates c to d. While the
pairs are chosen based on a single common rela-
tionship, each pair may actually pertain to multi-
ple relationships. An example from the Google
dataset is brother:sister::husband:wife; Table 1
shows the semantic relations involved in this anal-
ogy. While the target relation FemaleCounterpart
is present in both pairs, by comparing the offsets
sister − brother and wife − husband, we as-
sume that either all ways in which each pair is
related are present in both, or that FemaleCoun-
terpart dominates the offset. We refer to this as
the Same-Relationship assumption.

Finally, it is not sufficient for two pairs to
share a common relationship label; that relation-
ship must be both representative and informa-
tive for analogies to make sense (the Informa-
tivity assumption). Relation labels may be suf-
ficiently broad as to be meaningless, as we en-
countered when drawing unfiltered binary rela-
tions from the Unified Medical Language Sys-
tem (UMLS) Metathesaurus. One sample analogy
from the RO:Null relation (indicating “related in
some way”) was socks:stockings::Finns:Finnish
language. While both pairs are of related terms,
they are in no way related to one another.

Furthermore, even when two pairs are exam-
ples of the same kind of clearly-defined relation,
they may still be relatively uninformative. For ex-
ample, in the Sem-Para Meronym analogy apri-
cot:stone::trumpet:mouthpiece the meronymic re-
lationship between apricot and stone could plau-
sibly identify a number of parts of a trumpet:
mouthpiece, valves, slide, etc.2 The extremely

2While this is similar to the Single-Target assumption, it

high-level nature of several of the Sem-Para re-
lations (hypernymy, antonymy, and synonymy)
suggests that some of the difficulty observed by
Köper et al. (2015) is due to violations of Infor-
mativity.

4 BMASS

We present BMASS (the BioMedical Analogic
Similarity Set), a dataset of biomedical analogies,
generated using the expert-curated knowledge in
the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)3

(Bodenreider, 2004) in order to identify medical
term pairs sharing the same relationships. We fol-
lowed the standard process for dataset generation
outlined in Section 3.1, with some adjustments for
the assumptions in Section 3.2.

The UMLS Metathesaurus is centered around
normalized concepts, represented by Concept
Unique Identifiers (CUIs). Each concept can be
represented in textual form by one or more terms
(e.g., C0009443→ “Common cold”, “acute rhini-
tis”). These terms may be multi-word expressions
(MWEs); in fact, many concepts in the UMLS
have no unigram terms.

The Metathesaurus also contains 〈subject, re-
lation, object〉 triples describing binary relation-
ships between concepts. These relationships are
specified at two levels: relationship types (RELs),
such as broader-than and qualified-by, and spe-
cific relationships (RELAs) within each type, e.g.,
tradename-of and has-finding-site. For this work,
we used the 721 unique REL/RELA pairings as
our source relationships, and treated the 〈subject,
object〉 pairs linked within each of these relation-
ships as candidates for generating analogies.

To enable a word embedding–based evaluation,
we first identified terms that appeared at least 25
times in the 2016 PubMed baseline collection of
biomedical abstracts,4 and removed all 〈subject,
object〉 pairs involving concepts that did not corre-
spond to these frequent terms. Most relationships
in the Metathesaurus are many-to-many (i.e., each
subject can be paired with multiple objects and

bears separate consideration in that Single-Target refers to
multiple valid objects of a specific relationship, while this is
an issue of multiple valid relationships being described.

3We use the 2016AA release of the UMLS.
4We chose 25 as our minimum frequency to ensure that

each term appeared often enough to learn reasonable embed-
dings for its component words. To determine term frequency,
we first lowercased and stripped punctuation from both the
PubMed corpus and the term list extracted from UMLS, then
searched the corpus for exact term matches.

21



vice versa), and thus may challenge Single-Target
and Informativity assumptions; we therefore next
identified relations that had at least 50 1:1 in-
stances, i.e., a subject and object that are only
paired with one another within a specific relation-
ship. Since 1:1 instances are not sufficient to guar-
antee Informativity, we then manually reviewed
the remaining relations to identify those those that
we deemed to satisfy Informativity constraints.
For example, the is-a relationship between tongue
muscles and head muscle is not specific enough to
suggest that carbon monoxide should elicit gaso-
transmitters as its corresponding answer. How-
ever, for associated-with, sampled pairs such as
leg injuries : leg and histamine release : histamine
were sufficiently consistent that we deemed it In-
formative. This gave us a final set of 25 binary
relations, listed in Table 2.5

We follow Gladkova et al. (2016) in generating
a balanced dataset, to enable a more robust com-
parative analysis between relations. We randomly
sampled 50 〈subject, object〉 pairs from each re-
lation, again restricting to concepts with strings
appearing frequently in PubMed. For each sub-
ject concept that we sampled, we collected all
valid object concepts and bundled them as a sin-
gle 〈subject, objects〉 pair. We then exhaustively
combined each concept pair with the others in its
relation to create 2,450 analogies, giving us a to-
tal dataset size of 61,250 analogies. Finally, for
each concept, we chose a single frequent term to
represent it, giving us both CUI and string repre-
sentations of each analogy.

5 Evaluation

We assess how well biomedical word embeddings
can perform on our dataset, and explore modi-
fications to the standard evaluation methodology
to relax the assumptions described in Section 3.2.
We use the skip-gram embeddings trained by Chiu
et al. (2016) on the PubMed citation database,
one set using a window size of 2 (PM-2) and an-
other set with window size 30 (PM-30). All other
word2vec hyperparameters were tuned by Chiu et
al. on a combination of similarity and relatedness
and named entity recognition tasks.

Additionally, we use the hyperparameters they
identified (minimum frequency=5, vector dimen-
sion=200, negative samples=10, sample=1e-4,

5Examples of each relation, along with their mappings to
UMLS REL/RELA values, are available online.

ID Name Amb
Lab/Rx
L1 form-of 1.0
L2 has-lab-number 1.1
L3 has-tradename 1.5
L4 tradename-of 1.3
L5 associated-substance 1.6
L6 has-free-acid-or-base-form 1.0
L7 has-salt-form 1.1
L8 measured-component-of 1.3
Hierarchical
H1 refers-to 1.0
H2 same-type 10.4
Morphological
M1 adjectival-form-of 1.1
M2 noun-form-of 1.0
Clinical
C1 associated-with-malfunction-of-

gene-product
2.6

C2 gene-product-malfunction-
associated-with-disease

1.5

C3 causative-agent-of 4.6
C4 has-causative-agent 2.0
C5 has-finding-site 1.9
C6 associated-with 1.2
Anatomy
A1 anatomic-structure-is-part-of 1.6
A2 anatomic-structure-has-part 5.4
A3 is-located-in 1.4
Biology
B1 regulated-by 1.0
B2 regulates 1.0
B3 gene-encodes-product 1.1
B4 gene-product-encoded-by 2.4

Table 2: List of the relations kept after manual
filtering; Amb is the average ambiguity, i.e., the
average number of correct answers per analogy.

α=0.05, window size=2) to train our own embed-
dings on a subset of the 2016 PubMed Baseline
(14.7 million documents, 2.7 billion tokens). We
train word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013a) samples
with the continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) and
skip-gram (SGNS) models, trained for 10 itera-
tions, and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) sam-
ples, trained for 50 iterations.

We performed our evaluation with each of
3COSADD, PAIRWISEDISTANCE, and 3COS-
MUL as the scoring function over the vocabulary.
In contrast to the prior findings of Levy and Gold-

22



berg (2014) on the Google dataset, performance
on BMASS is roughly equivalent among the three
methods, often differing by only one or two cor-
rect answers. We therefore only report results with
3COSADD, since it is the most familiar method.

5.1 Modifications to the standard method

We consider 3COSADD under three settings of
the analogies in our dataset. For a given analogy
a:b::c:?d, we refer to 〈a, b〉 as the exemplar pair
and 〈c, d〉 as the query pair; ?d signifies the target
answer.

Single-Answer puts analogies in a:b::c:d for-
mat, with a single example object b and a single
correct object d, by taking the first object listed for
each term pair. This enforces the Single-Answer
assumption.

Multi-Answer takes the first object listed for
the exemplar term pair, but keeps all valid an-
swers, i.e. a:b::c:[d1,d2,. . . ]; this is similar to
the approach of Gladkova et al. (2016). There are
approximately 16k analogies in our dataset with
multiple valid answers.

All-Info keeps all valid objects for both the ex-
emplar and query pairs. The exemplar offset is
then calculated over B = [b1, b2, . . . ] as

a−B = 1|B|
∑

i

a− bi

Though this is superficially similar to 3COSAVG
(Drozd et al., 2016), we average over objects for a
specific subject, as opposed to averaging over all
subject-object pairs.

We report a relaxed accuracy (denoted AccR),
in which the guess is correct if it is in the set of
correct answers. (In the Single-Answer case, this
reduces to standard accuracy.) AccR, as with stan-
dard accuracy, necessitates ignoring a, b, or c if
they are the top results (Linzen, 2016).

In order to capture information about all cor-
rect answers, we also report Mean Average Pre-
cision (MAP) and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
over the set of correct answers in the vocabulary,
as ranked by Equation 1. Since MAP and MRR do
not have a cutoff in terms of searching for the cor-
rect answer in the ranked vocabulary, they can be
used without the adjustment of ignoring a, b, and
c; thus, they can give a more accurate picture of
how close the correct terms are to the calculated
guesses.

5.2 MWEs and candidate answers
As noted in Section 4, the terms in our analogy
dataset may be multi-word expressions (MWEs).
We follow the common baseline approach of rep-
resenting an MWE as the average of its compo-
nent words (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Chen et al.,
2013; Wieting et al., 2016). For phrasal terms
containing one or more words that are out of our
embedding vocabulary, we only consider the in-
vocabulary words: thus, if “parathyroid” is not in
the vocabulary, then the embedding of parathyroid
hypertensive factor will be

hypertensive+ factor
2

For any individual analogy a:b::c:?d, the vo-
cabulary of candidate phrases to complete the
analogy is derived by calculating averaged word
embeddings for each UMLS term appearing in
PubMed abstracts at least 25 times. Terms for
which none of the component words are in vocab-
ulary are discarded. This yields a candidate set
of 229,898 phrases for the PM-2 and PM-30, and
263,316 for our CBOW, SGNS, and GloVe sam-
ples.

Since prior work on analogies has primarily
been concerned with unigram data, we also iden-
tified a subset of our data for which we could
find single-word string realizations for all con-
cepts in an analogy, using the full vocabulary of
our trained embeddings. Even in the All-Info set-
ting, we could only identify 606 such analogies;
Table 3 shows MAP results for PM-2 and CBOW
embeddings on the three relations with at least
100 unigram analogies. The unigram analogies
are slightly better captured than the full MWE
data for has-lab-number (L2) and has-tradename
(L3); however, lower performance on the unigram
subset in tradename-of (L4) shows that unigram
analogies are not always easier. We see a small
effect from the much larger set of candidate an-
swers in the unigram case (>1m unigrams), as
shown by the slightly higher MAP numbers in the
UniM case. In general, it is clear that the difficulty
of some of the relations in our dataset is not due
solely to using MWEs in the analogies.

5.3 Metric comparison
Figure 1 shows AccR, MAP, and MRR results
for each relation in BMASS, using PM-2 embed-
dings in the Multi-Answer setting. Overall, per-
formance varies widely between relations, with all

23



Figure 1: AccR, MAP, and MRR for each relation, using PM-2 embeddings under the Multi-Answer
setting. Note that MAP is calculated using the position of all correct answers in the ranked list, while
MRR reflects only the position of the first correct answer found in the ranked list for each individual
query.

Figure 2: AccR per relation for PM-2 on BMASS, under Single-Answer, Multi-Answer, and All-Info
settings.

Figure 3: Per-relation MAP for all embeddings under the Multi-Answer setting.

three metrics staying under 0.1 in the majority of
cases; this mirrors previous findings on other anal-
ogy datasets (Levy and Goldberg, 2014; Gladkova
et al., 2016; Drozd et al., 2016).

MAP further fleshes out these differences by re-
porting performance over all correct answers for a
given analogy. This lets us distinguish between re-
lations like has-salt-form (L7), where noticeably
lower MAP numbers reflect a wider distribution
of the multiple correct answers, and relations like
regulates (B2) or associated-with (C6), where a
low AccR reflects many incorrect answers, but a
higher MAP indicates that the correct answers are
relatively near the guess.

MRR, on the other hand, more optimistically
reports how close we got to finding any correct
answer. Thus, for the has-causative-agent (C4) re-
lation, low AccR is belied by a noticeably higher
MRR, suggesting that even when we guess wrong,
the correct answer is close. This contrasts with
relations like refers-to (H1) or causative-agent-
of (C3), where MRR is more consistent with
AccR, indicating that wrong guesses tend to be
farther from the truth. Since most of our analo-
gies (45,178 samples, or about 74%) have only a
single correct answer, MAP and MRR tend to be
highly similar. However, in high-ambiguity rela-
tions like same-type (H2), higher MRR numbers

24



give a better sense of our best case performance.

5.4 Analogy settings

To compare across the Single-Answer, Multi-
Answer, and All-Info settings, we first look at
AccR for each relation in BMASS, shown for PM-
2 embeddings in Figure 2 (the observed patterns
are similar with the other embeddings). Unsur-
prisingly, allowing for multiple answers in Multi-
Answer and All-Info slightly raises AccR in most
cases. What is surprising, however, is that includ-
ing more sample exemplar objects in the All-Info
setting had widely varying results. In some cases,
such as same-type (H2), associated-substance
(L5), and gene-product-encoded-by (B4), the ad-
ditional exemplars gave a noticeable improvement
in accuracy. In others, accuracy actually went
down: form-of (L1) and has-free-acid-or-base-
form (L6) are the most striking examples, with
absolute decreases of 4% and 8% respectively
from the Multi-Answer case for PM-2 (the de-
creases are similar with other embeddings). Thus,
it seems that multiple examples may help with In-
formativity in some cases, but confuse it in oth-
ers. Taken together with the improvements seen
in Drozd et al. (2016) from using 3COSAVG, this
is another indication that any single subject-object
pair may not be sufficiently representative of the
target relationship.

5.5 Embedding methods

Averaging over all relations, the five embedding
settings we tested behaved roughly the same, with
our trained embeddings slightly outperforming the
pretrained embeddings of Chiu et al. (2016); sum-
mary AccR, MAP, and MRR performances are
given in Table 4. At the level of individual re-
lations, Figure 3 shows MAP performance in the
Multi-Answer setting. The four word2vec sam-

Rel PM-2 CBOWUni UniM MWE Uni UniM MWE
L2 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.11 0.13 0.06
L3 0.10 0.12 0.04 0.12 0.17 0.06
L4 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.04 0.05 0.07

Table 3: MAP performance on the three BMASS
relations with≥100 unigram analogies. Uni is us-
ing unigram embeddings on unigram data, UniM
is using MWE embeddings on unigram data, and
MWE is performance with MWE embeddings
over the full MWE data.

ples tend to behave similarly, with some incon-
sistent variations. Interestingly, CBOW outper-
forms the other embeddings by a large margin in
several relations, including regulated-by (B1) and
has-tradename (L3).

GloVe varies much more widely across the re-
lations, as reflected in the higher standard devia-
tions in Table 4. While GloVe consistently outper-
forms word2vec embeddings on has-free-acid-or-
base-form (L6) and has-salt-form (L7), it signif-
icantly underperforms on the morphological and
hierarchical relations, among others. Most no-
tably, while the word2vec embeddings show mi-
nor differences in performance between the Multi-
Answer and All-Info settings, GloVe AccR perfor-
mance falls drastically on form-of (L1) and has-
free-acid-or-base-form (L6), as shown in Table 5.
However, its MAP and MRR numbers stay simi-
lar, suggesting that there is only a reshuffling of
results closest to the guess.

5.6 Error analysis

Several interesting patterns emerge in review-
ing individual a:b::c:?d predictions. A num-
ber of errors follow directly from our word av-
eraging approach to MWEs: words that ap-
pear in b or c often appear in the predictions,
as in gosorelin:ici 118630::letrozole:*ici 164384.
Prefix substitutions also occurred, as with
mianserin hydrochloride:mianserin::scopolamine
hydrobromide:*scopolamine methylbromide.

Often, the b term(s) would outweigh c,
leading to many of the top guesses be-
ing variants on b. In one analogy, sodium
acetylsalicyclate:aspirin::intravenous im-
munoglobulins:?immunoglobulin g, the top
guesses were: *aspirin prophylaxis, *aspirin,
*aspirin antiplatelet, and *low-dose aspirin.

In other cases, related to the nearest neighbor-
hood over-reporting observed by Linzen (2016),
we saw guesses very similar to c, regardless
of a or b, as with acute inflammations:acutely
inflamed::endoderm:*embryonic endoderm; other
near guesses included *endoderm cell and epi-
blast.

Finally, we found several analogies where
the incorrect guesses made were highly related
to the correct answer, despite not matching.
One such analogy was oropharyngeal suction-
ing:substances::thallium scan:?radioisotopes;
the top guess was *radioactive substances, and

25



Setting Single-Answer Multi-Answer All-InfoAccR MAP MRR AccR MAP MRR AccR MAP MRR
PM-2 .08 (.16) .07 (.13) .07 (.13) .08 (.15) .07 (.12) .08 (.11) .07 (.13) .07 (.11) .07 (.11)

PM-30 .08 (.16) .08 (.13) .08 (.13) .09 (.16) .08 (.13) .09 (.13) .08 (.13) .08 (.12) .09 (.12)
GloVe .11 (.22) .09 (.16) .09 (.16) .11 (.22) .09 (.16) .10 (.15) .10 (.18) .09 (.16) .10 (.15)

CBOW .11 (.18) .11 (.14) .11 (.14) .12 (.18) .12 (.14) .12 (.14) .11 (.17) .12 (.14) .13 (.14)
SGNS .11 (.18) .11 (.14) .11 (.14) .11 (.18) .11 (.14) .12 (.13) .11 (.17) .12 (.14) .12 (.14)

Table 4: Average performance over all relations in the dataset, for each set of embeddings. Results are
reported as “Mean (Standard deviation)” for each metric.

Metric L1 L6SA MA AI SA MA AI
AccR 0.49 0.49 0.24 0.62 0.62 0.39
MAP 0.28 0.28 0.28 0.39 0.39 0.39
MRR 0.28 0.28 0.28 0.39 0.39 0.39

Table 5: AccR, MAP, and MRR performance
variation between Single-Answer (SA), Multi-
Answer (MA), and All-Info (AI) settings for
GloVe embeddings on form-of (L1) and has-free-
acid-or-base-form (L6)

*gallium compounds was two guesses farther
down. Showing some mixed effect from the
neighborhood of b, *performance-enhancing
substances was the next-ranked candidate.

6 Discussion

Relaxing the Single-Answer, Same-Relationship,
and Informativity assumptions by including mul-
tiple correct answers and multiple exemplar pairs
and by reporting MAP and MRR in addition to
accuracy paints a more complete picture of how
well word embeddings are performing on anal-
ogy completion, but leaves a number of ques-
tions unanswered. While we can more clearly see
the relations where we correctly complete analo-
gies (or come close), and contrast with relations
where a vector arithmetic approach completely
misses the mark, what distinguishes these cases
remains unclear. Some more straightforward rela-
tionships, such as gene-encodes-product (B3) and
its inverse gene-product-encoded-by (B4), show
surprisingly poor results, while the very broad
synonymy of refers-to (H1) is captured compar-
atively well. Additionally, in contrast to prior
work with morphological relations, adjectival-
form-of (M1) and noun-form-of (M2) are much
more challenging in the biomedical domain, as
we see non-morphological related pairs such as
predisposed:disease susceptibility and venous lu-
men:endovenous, in addition to more normal pairs
like sweating:sweaty and muscular:muscle. Fur-

ther analysis may provide some insight into spe-
cific challenges posed by the relations in our
dataset, as well as why performance with PAIR-
WISEDISTANCE and 3COSMUL did not notice-
ably differ from 3COSADD.

In terms of specific model errors, we did not
evaluate the effects of any embedding hyperpa-
rameters on performance in BMASS, opting to
use hyperparameter settings tuned for general-
purpose use in the biomedical domain. Levy et al.
(2015a) and Chiu et al. (2016), among others,
show significant impact of embedding hyperpa-
rameters on downstream performance. Exploring
different settings may be one way to get a bet-
ter sense of exactly what incorrect answers are
being highly-ranked, and why those are emerg-
ing from the affine organization of the embedding
space. Additionally, the higher variance in per-
relation performance we observed with GloVe em-
beddings suggests that there is more to unpack as
to what the GloVe model is capturing or failing to
capture compared to word2vec approaches.

Finally, while we considered Informativity dur-
ing the generation of BMASS, and relaxed the
Single-Answer assumption in our evaluation, we
have not really addressed the Same-Relationship
assumption. Using multiple exemplar pairs is one
attempt to reduce the impact of confusing extrane-
ous relationships, but in practice this helps some
relations and harms others. Drozd et al. (2016)
tackle this problem with the LRCos method; how-
ever, their findings of mis-applied features and
errors due to very slight mis-rankings show that
there is still room for improvement. One question
is whether this problem can be addressed at all
with non-parametric models like the vector offset
approaches, to retain the advantages of evaluating
directly from the word embedding space, or if a
learned model (like LRCos) is necessary to sepa-
rate out the different aspects of a related term pair.

26



7 Conclusions

We identified three key assumptions in the stan-
dard methodology for analogy-based evaluations
of word embeddings: Single-Answer (that there
is a single correct answer for an analogy), Same-
Relationship (that the exemplar and query pairs
are related in the same way), and Informativity
(that the exemplar pair is informative with respect
to the query pair). We showed that these assump-
tions do not hold in recent benchmark datasets or
in biomedical data. Therefore, to relax these as-
sumptions, we modified analogy evaluation to al-
low for multiple correct answers and multiple ex-
emplar pairs, and reported Mean Average Preci-
sion and Mean Reciprocal Recall over the ranked
vocabulary, in addition to accuracy of the highest-
ranked choice.

We also presented the BioMedical Analogic
Similarity Set (BMASS), a novel analogy comple-
tion dataset for the biomedical domain. In contrast
to existing datasets, BMASS was automatically
generated from a large-scale database of 〈subject,
relation, object〉 triples in the UMLS Metathe-
saurus, and represents a number of challenging
real-world relationships. Similar to prior results,
we find wide variation in word embedding perfor-
mance on this dataset, with accuracies above 50%
on some relationships such as has-salt-form and
regulated-by, and numbers below 5% on others,
e.g., anatomic-structure-is-part-of and measured-
component-of.

Finally, we are able to address the Single-
Answer assumption by modifying the analogy
evaluation to accommodate multiple correct an-
swers, and we consider Informativity in generat-
ing our dataset and using multiple example pairs.
However, the Same-Relationship assumption re-
mains a challenge, as does a more automated ap-
proach to either evaluating or relaxing Informa-
tivity. These offer promising directions for future
work in analogy-based evaluations.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the CLLT group at Ohio
State and the anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful comments. Denis is a pre-doctoral fellow at
the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center,
Bethesda, MD.

References
Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Med-

ical Language System (UMLS): integrating
biomedical terminology. Nucleic Acids Research
32(90001):D267–D270.

Danqi Chen, Richard Socher, Christopher D. Manning,
and Andrew Y. Ng. 2013. Learning New Facts
From Knowledge Bases With Neural Tensor Net-
works and Semantic Word Vectors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3618 pages 1–4.

Billy Chiu, Gamal Crichton, Anna Korhonen, and
Sampo Pyysalo. 2016. How to Train Good Word
Embeddings for Biomedical NLP. Proceedings
of the 15th Workshop on Biomedical Natural Lan-
guage Processing pages 166–174.

Edward Choi, Mohammad Taha Bahadori, Eliza-
beth Searles, Catherine Coffey, Michael Thomp-
son, James Bost, Javier Tejedor-Sojo, and Jimeng
Sun. 2016. Multi-layer Representation Learning for
Medical Concepts. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, San Francisco,
California, USA, KDD ’16, pages 1495–1504.

Aleksandr Drozd, Anna Gladkova, and Satoshi Mat-
suoka. 2016. Word Embeddings, Analogies, and
Machine Learning: Beyond king - man + woman
= queen. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the
26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers. The COLING 2016
Organizing Committee, Osaka, Japan, pages 3519–
3530.

Manaal Faruqui, Jesse Dodge, Sujay Kumar Jauhar,
Chris Dyer, Eduard Hovy, and Noah A Smith. 2015.
Retrofitting Word Vectors to Semantic Lexicons. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Denver,
Colorado, pages 1606–1615.

Stefano Federici, Simonetta Montemagni, and Vito
Pirelli. 1997. Inferring Semantic Similarity from
Distributional Evidence: An Analogy-Based Ap-
proach to Word Sense Disambiguation. Automatic
Information Extraction and Building of Lexical Se-
mantic Resources for NLP Applications pages 90–
97.

Stefano Federici and Vito Pirelli. 1997. Analogy, com-
putation, and linguistic theory. In New Methods in
Language Processing, UCL Press, pages 16–34.

Anna Gladkova, Aleksandr Drozd, and Satoshi Mat-
suoka. 2016. Analogy-based Detection of Morpho-
logical and Semantic Relations With Word Embed-
dings: What Works and What Doesn’t. Proceedings
of the NAACL Student Research Workshop pages 8–
15.

27



Amaç Herdağdelen and Marco Baroni. 2009. Bag-
Pack: A General Framework to Represent Semantic
Relations. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Ge-
ometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Athens,
Greece, pages 33–40.

David Jurgens, Saif Mohammad, Peter Turney, and
Keith Holyoak. 2012. SemEval-2012 Task 2: Mea-
suring Degrees of Relational Similarity. In *SEM
2012, Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2012). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Montréal, Canada, pages 356–364.

Maximilian Köper, Christian Scheible, and Sabine
im Walde. 2015. Multilingual Reliability and ”Se-
mantic” Structure of Continuous Word Spaces. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Computational Semantics. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, London, UK, pages 40–45.

Jean-François Lavallée and Philippe Langlais. 2010.
Unsupervised Morphological Analysis by Formal
Analogy, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, pages 617–624.

Yves Lepage and Chooi Ling Goh. 2009. Towards au-
tomatic acquisition of linguistic features. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Nordic Conference of Com-
putational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2009). North-
ern European Association for Language Technology
(NEALT), Odense, Denmark, pages 118–125.

Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. 2014. Linguistic Reg-
ularities in Sparse and Explicit Word Representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, pages 171–180.

Omer Levy, Yoav Goldberg, and Ido Dagan. 2015a.
Improving Distributional Similarity with Lessons
Learned from Word Embeddings. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
3:211–225.

Omer Levy, Steffen Remus, Chris Biemann, and Ido
Dagan. 2015b. Do Supervised Distributional Meth-
ods Really Learn Lexical Inference Relations? In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Denver,
Colorado, pages 970–976.

Tal Linzen. 2016. Issues in evaluating semantic spaces
using word analogies. In Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Evaluating Vector-Space Representa-
tions for NLP. pages 13–18.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013a. Efficient Estimation of Word
Representations in Vector Space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 pages 1–12.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed Representa-
tions of Words and Phrases and Their Composition-
ality. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 26. Curran Associates, Inc., NIPS ’13,
pages 3111–3119.

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013c. Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space
Word Representations. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia, pages 746–751.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global Vectors for
Word Representation. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Doha, Qatar, pages 1532–1543.

Walter R Reitman. 1965. Cognition and Thought: An
Information Processing Approach. John Wiley and
Sons, New York, NY.

Tobias Schnabel, Igor Labutov, David Mimno, and
Thorsten Joachims. 2015. Evaluation methods for
unsupervised word embeddings. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages 298–307.

Radu Soricut and Franz Och. 2015. Unsupervised
Morphology Induction Using Word Embeddings. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Denver,
Colorado, pages 1627–1637.

Peter D Turney. 2008. A Uniform Approach to Analo-
gies, Synonyms, Antonyms, and Associations. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA, COLING ’08, pages 905–912.

Peter D Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From Fre-
quency to Meaning: Vector Space Models of Se-
mantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research
37:141–188.

Tony Veale. 2004. WordNet Sits the S.A.T. A
Knowledge-based Approach to Lexical Analogy.
In Proceedings of the 16th European Conference
on Artificial Intelligence. IOS Press, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, The Netherlands, ECAI’04, pages
606–610.

John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2016. Towards Universal Paraphrastic
Sentence Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.

28


