



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 43–49,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Textual Relations and Topic-Projection: Issues in Text Categorization

Samir Karmakar
Jadavpur University

samir.krmkr@gmail.com

Lahari Chatterjee
Jadavpur University

lahari.chatterjee@gmail.com

Abahan Dutta
Jadavpur University

abahanjiriya@gmail.com

Abstract

Categorization of text is done on the ba-
sis of its aboutness. Understanding what
a text is about often involves a subjec-
tive dimension. Developments in linguis-
tics, however, can provide some impor-
tant insights about what underlies the pro-
cess of text categorization in general and
topic spotting in particular. More specifi-
cally, theoretical underpinnings from for-
mal linguistics and systemic functional
linguistics may give some important in-
sights about the way challenges can be
dealt with. Under this situation, this pa-
per seeks to present a theoretical frame-
work which can take care of the catego-
rization of text in terms of relational hier-
archies embodied in the overall organiza-
tion of the text.

1 Introduction

Multiplicity of text is the consequence of the way
textual components are selected and combined
into coherent wholes, apart from the factors con-
tributing to the content. One could be suspicious
about this structure-centric investigation; but it is
really hard to give up structure-centricity particu-
larly in a position when structure is crucial both in
formation and representation of the text.

Distinguishibility of one text from the other de-
pends on what sorts of textual components are se-
lected and how are they combined into the com-
plex structure of a text. This complex weaving of
whats and hows is often termed as textuality
- the property because of which a text attains its
uniqueness. Interpretation of text, therefore, arises
through the gradual unpacking of textuality. Sil-
verman (1994) argues, "[t]he interpretation of the
text brings the textuality . . . outside the text, so as
to specify and determine the text in a particular
fashion."

Specification and/or the determination of a text
in a particular fashion possess(es) a daunting chal-
lenge to linguistics in general and computational
linguistics in particular. In linguistics, this finds
its way through the study of discourse, text etc.
(Beaugrande and Dressler, 1981); whereas in com-
putational linguistics, interest is developed due the
growth of text categorization, information struc-
ture etc. (Nomoto and Matsumoto, 1996). A care-
ful investigation of these two lines will reveal the
fact that their respective queries and approaches
are built on the question of how a text is structured:
Since a structure is the embodiment of different
structuring principles out of which it is made up
of, explicating the process through which a text
comes into being remain a central concern. Note
that textuality as an account of constituents and
combinatorial principles is intrinsic to the text.
Therefore, the questions of specification and/or
determination of a text is translated into the way
the respective textuality is.

Under this situation, then, this paper is inter-
ested in understanding what textuality is. One
among many ways to investigate this question is to
answer how the topic of a text is projected through
the characteristic but hierarchical associations of
its constituents. In other words, the projection of
a topic in a text in some way brings out a nexus of
text-internal relations holding among constituent
statements of it. If so, then, topic-spotting in one
sense is an act to categorize a text with an empha-
sis on textuality.

If we consider topic-spotting as the single most
important criterion in categorizing a text, then the
paper seeks to develop an analytical account of
how the weaving of statements into a network re-
sults into the projection of its topic. This, in turn,
plays a crucial role in identifying the way a text is
categorized.

Since text and textuality are inseparable from
each other, our task will be of two folds: Firstly,43



we need to come up with an analysis of the rela-
tions holding among the constituents of the text;
and, secondly, how these relations are hierarchi-
cally organized in a text. Taken them togather,
a general description of the textuality will evolve
with a linguistic answer to the problem of topic-
spotting.

Above mentioned two tasks will be performed
over the news reports called brief. Broadsheet
newspaper – generally designed in 8 columns –
contains some brief news in the left most column.
They are typically restricted into single column
and consists of 5 to 10 sentences. The space,
alloted to the briefs, is termed as Doric column
for having symbolic resemblance with an archaic
form of architectural order developed in Greece
and Rome. A Doric column contains three to four
brief news and they are ordered according to their
significance which may vary from one news pa-
per to another depending on the editorial policies.
Briefs are structured.

2 Topic Projection and Textual Relations

To Taboada and Mann (2006), the communica-
tive function of a written text is the consequence
of the way words, phrases, grammatical structures
and other relevant linguistic entities are getting in-
volved into a coherent whole. In other words, a
text-construal consists of certain structural roles
performed by the constituents reflecting depen-
dencies among the statements within a text and
the way these roles are combined togather with the
help of relations. As a result, following schematic
representation of a text-construal is surfaced:

1. text_construal

structural_role

head
(H)

modifier
(M)

structural_combination

compound
(H-H)

complex
(H-M)

As per this scheme, structural roles could be of
two types namely (a) head (= H) and (b) modi-
fier (= M). It is often noticed that head is pro-
jected as the topic. Relative saliencies of state-
ments over each other often depends on their re-
spective structural roles in a structural combina-
tion. For example, in a text-construal if the state-
ments are connected with each other with the ex-
pressions - like ‘and’, ‘or’, ‘but’etc. - chances are

high for both the statements to enjoy the status
of head (ex. the moon was bright and the tem-
perature was moderate). This type of coordinat-
ing structure will be classified as compounded. In
contrast to compounding, complex type structural
combination distinguishes constituent clauses as
either principle or subordinate (ex. A guest is un-
welcome when he stays too long). Complexities
involved in identifying topic of text-construal is
often considered as the contribution of different
statements within a network of textual relations.

In an investigation, where the topic-based cate-
gorization of text is being talked about, one need
to know what is meant by topic. The topic of a
text is its aboutness. More technically, topic is a
statement which is entailed by the text. Following
Djik (1977), we can formulate the following for-
mal definition for the topic of a text - where text is
a collection of statements in particular order.

2. A statement σi is the TOPIC of a sequence of
statements Σ = 〈σ1, σ2, . . . , σn〉 iff for each
σi ∈ Σ there is a subsequent Σk of Σ such
that σi ∈ Σk and for each successive Σk there
exists σi such that Σk |= σi.

In other words, a statement will have the sta-
tus of the topic, iff it is entailed globally by a text
which it is a part of. By this, it is meant that all
other local entailment relations will never have the
status of topic in virtue of not being able to suc-
ceed across all subsequent collections of the state-
ments to the ultimate text.

The most important criterion, i.e. the concept of
entailment (represented with |=), for a statement
to be the topic of a sequence of statements mani-
fested through a text-construal needs some clarifi-
cation: A statement p entails q when the truth of
the first (p) guarantees the truth of the second (q),
and the falsity of the second (q) guarantees the fal-
sity of the first (p) (Saeed, 2009):

3.

p |= q
T → T
F → T or F
F ← F

T or F ← T

In continuation to our discussion, it could be
said that a statement will have the status of topic
in a text-construal, iff it is assigned to truth. As
per composite truth table of entailment (3), the ab-
solute truth of the entailed statement is subject to44



the truth of a statement which is entailing the en-
tailed. In other words, in order to have the status of
topic, a statement must be in congruence with an-
other statement in terms of the truth values. Note
that the implementation of the criterion assumes
a careful dissociation between sentence and state-
ment. We will comment on this issue in our dis-
cussion below.

In a text, the other statements, acting as entail-
ers, are used in modifying the entailed sentence
(i.e. the topic) in various capacities - say for ex-
ample elaborating, extending, enhancing etc. We
will call them relators. It is not always neces-
sary for a relator to be expressed explicitly in a text
construal. What is worth mentioning is the fact
that a statement with the status of topic is modi-
fied by modifiers in a structured manner. Having
said this, it is emphasized that topic of a text hier-
archically organizes various other functions with
which it is associated. As an example consider the
following piece from a brief published in Anand-
abazar on July 31, 2017:

4. (a) jhARkhaNDe
Jharkhand.loc

bhArI
heavy

briSTir
rain.poss

AshangkA
fear

nA
not

thAkAy
having

Dibhisir
DVC.poss

jal
water

chArA
release

kAmeche
reduce.perf.pres.3

Having no fear of heavy rain in Jhark-
hand, water release of DVC has reduced

(b) rAjya
State

prashAsan
administration

tAi
therefore

trAner
relief.poss

kAje
work-loc

bARti
extra

najar
attention

dicche
give.impf.pres.3

State administration, therefore, is giving
more attention to the relief work.

Note that (4a) and (4b) both of them separately
have their own topics: When (4a) is about the re-
duction in the release of water, (4b) is about pay-
ing extra attention to the flood situation. However,
when these two statements are put togather in a
text, the topic or aboutness of the resultant text is
determined by the characteristic relation holding
between (4a) and (4b). A careful look into (4) will
reveal the fact that the topic of it is (4a). Being
a topic, (4a) will enjoy the status of head (H) and
(4b), the status of modifier (M). But what type of
relation (4a) and (4b) are in? We can define the re-
lation as therefore, because (4a) is reporting a
situation that logically results into the situation re-
ported in (4a). Moreover, (4b) contains an explicit

lexical item tai in it to show how (4b) is modifying
(4a). Further, reporting of (4a) is more central to
reporter’s purpose in putting forth the H-M combi-
nation than the reporting of (4b). Thus the relation
could be termed as therefore - which licenses
complex strucural combination. This discussion
can be summarized in the following way:

5. therefore(4a, 4b) |= 4a
interpreted as ((4a), therefore (4b)) entails
(4a) with a reference to a text-construal

To distinguish a statement from a sentence, we
will introduce Greek alphabet σ with the provi-
sions of using subscripts. Later on, it would be
shown that a single sentence can have more than
one statements in it. For this time, lets consider
the statement expressed in (4a) is σi and the state-
ment expressed in (4b) is σj . As a result, (5) will
be converted into

6. therefore(σi, σj) |= σi
where therefore is a relator connecting a
head statement with its modifier statement
with a reference to a sequence of statements
corresponding to a text-construal

The local relation(s) holding between two state-
ments are getting modified when a third sentence
is added with it. Consider the following sentence
as the part of (4):

4. (c) rabibAr
Sunday

goghATe
Goghat.loc

jal
water

nAmleo
decreasing.prt

nadIgulir
river.pl.poss

jalastar
water

beshi
more

thAkAy
having

ghATAl
Ghatal

o
and

khAnAkule
Khanakul.loc

teman
such

nAmeni
decreasing.neg

On Sunday, in Goghat, though the water
level decreased, in Ghatal and Khanakul
no such change is noticed due to the
high water level in the rivers.

Inclusion of (4c) will have its impact on the ex-
isting relational pattern because of effecting the
distribution of roles and their combinatorial pat-
tern in the resultant text-construal: (4c) represents
a statement which is contradictory to the text-
construal comprised of (4a) and (4b). This time no
relation is explicitly mentioned. We will name this
relation contrarily - since (4c) is providing an
information which is contradicting with the previ-
ously stated information. Because of being com-
pound type structural combination, resultant text-45



construal will entail both (4a) and (4c): In com-
pound type structural combination both the state-
ments have the status of heads. As a consequence
both (5) and (6) will be augmented or modified in
the following ways:

7. contrarily(therefore(4a, 4b), 4c)

|=
{

4a

4c
Interpreted as,
(((4a) therefore (4b)), contrarily (4c)) en-
tails 4a and 4c with respect to a text-construal

Conversion to the relational scheme of corre-
sponding statements will give us the following re-
sult:

8. contrarily(therefore(σi, σj), σk)

|=
{
σi

σk
with respect to a sequence of state-

ments corresponding to the text-construal

Note that the entailment relation is changed
with the addition of newer statement. If this is
a deviation from what is claimed in (2), then
one should have some satisfactory answer to the
question of how topics are licensed to perco-
late from one text-construal to its successive text-
construals. No doubt, the answer to this problem
has to come from the characteristic interactions
holding between the structural aspect (= syntac-
tic) and the meaning aspect (= semantic) of a text-
construal. By strucural aspect, different combina-
tions of H(ead) and M(odifier) are meant; whereas
the meaning aspect is primarily concerned about
the topic as well as entailment relations. The pro-
posed solution to this problem will be explained in
Section 4.

2.1 Sentence Internally Topic Projection
Though we are concerned about the topic spotting
with a focus on the sequences of statements pri-
marily at the sentential level, it is possible to trace
back the topic from the sub-sentential level anal-
ysis - because a sentence can contain more than
one statements. Therefore, to trace back our anal-
ysis from the subsentential level, we need to iden-
tify the subsentential constituents in the following
way:

4(a) σi.1: jhARkhaNDe
Jharkhand.loc

bhArI
heavy

briSTir
rain.poss

aAshangkA
fear

nA
not

thAkAy
having

Having no fear of heavy rain in Jhark-
hand,

σi.2: Dibhisir
DVC.poss

jal
water

chArA
release

kameche
reduce.perf.pres.3

water release of DVC has reduced.

4(b) σj : rAjya
State

prashAsan
administration

tAi
therefore

trAner
relief.poss

kAje
work-loc

bARti
extra

najar
attention

dicche
give.impf.pres.3

State administration, therefore, is giving
more attention to the relief work.

4(c)σk.1: rabibAr
Sunday

goghATe
Goghat.loc

jal
water

nAmleo
decreasing.prt

On Sunday, in Goghat, though the water
level decreased

σk.2: nadIgulir
river.pl.poss

jalastar
water-level

beshi
more

thAkAy
having

having high water level in the rivers
σk.3: ghATAl

Ghatal
o
and

khAnAkule
Khanakul.loc

teman
such

nAmeni
decreasing.neg
in Ghatal and Khanakul no such change
is noticed

Now, consider the case of (4a) which is a col-
lection of following two statements: (i) there is no
fear of heavy rain (= σi.1), and (ii) DVC is reduc-
ing the water release (= σi.2). Here in this case
the former one is the modifier and the latter one
is the head. First one is the reason for the second
one. Alternatively, we can say, second one is the
consequence of the first one:

9. consequently(σi.1, σi.2) |= σi.2
Similarly, (4c) as a complex sentence is made up
of three distinct statements: (i) decreasing of the
water level in Goghat region on Sunday (σk.1),
(ii) having more water in the rivers (= σk.2), and
(iii) not decreasing water levels in Ghatal and
Khanakul regions (= σk.3). Here, (iii) is the head
modified with (ii).

10. consequently(σk.2, σk.3) |= σk.3
Being in contrast with topic-projection of (10), the
statement σk.1 will also have the status of head. As
a result, along with σk.3, σk.1 will also be entailed
by the resultant sequence of statements:

11. contrarily(σk.1, consequently(σk.2, σk.3))

|=
{
σk.1

σk.3
46



Later on, in Section 4, the rest of this story of
topic projection will be presented. Here, in this
point of our discussion, we would rather like to
turn towards the questions of how a particular re-
lation existing between two statements are identi-
fied, and how a statement is assigned to the topic.
To address these issues, in Section 3, the under-
lying conceptual framework for topic extraction is
explained.

3 Conceptual Framework for Topic
Extraction

The process involved in the categorization of text
in terms of its topic extraction, as is described in
Section 2, can be conceptualized in the follow-
ing way: As per our understanding, any text (like,
brief) can be conceived as the sequence of state-
ments. Each of these statements in isolation has a
topic - no matter, how trivial it may sound. As a
part of a text-construal, each one of them is related
with some other statement. As is discussed earlier,
(i) either one of the each pair has the status head
and the other is the modifier (as in subordina-
tion), or (ii) both of them are of head status (as in
coordination). Relator along with the concept of
structural saliencies plays a crucial role in deter-
mining the topic of the text-construal made up of
the constituent statements. Formally, a relator can
be defined as,

12. R : S × T where S is the set of statements
and T is the set of topics;

Assignment of a topic τi to a statement σi is a
subjective task. This subjective dimension can be
discussed in terms of a characteristic function:

13. f : R→ {1, 0}

Before getting into our final section, lets have a
look into the issues of relations.

3.1 Textual Relations
What seems to be central to the conceptual frame-
work discussed in Section (3) is an account of
different types of textual relations - for which
we have relators of both implicit and explicit
types. Few such relations - like therefore,
contrarily, and consequently - are al-
ready mentioned in our discussion. Relations
are important for the formation of complex state-
ments. More specifically, relators are crucial in
maintaining the coherence of a text. Three major

types of relators will be discussed in section fol-
lowing the proposal of Systemic Functional Lin-
guistics (Eggins, (Eggins, 2004)):

14. R-type

elaboration extension enhancement

These three types of relations are crucial in ex-
plaining the way text-construal incorporates the
newer forms of information through the gradual
increment of the relational network. While elabo-
rating we are restating a statement for better clar-
ity. In case of extending, additional statements are
supplied; and the act of enhancing is used to indi-
cate the further development of the meaning al-
ready communicated by a statement. Being the
part of the typological classification of the relators,
each of them are defined set-theoretically over a
set of relators. In (15), these three types of relators
are represented with their respective members:

15. (a) elaboration
clarify, restate, exemplify,
instantiate, illustrate,
in_other_words,
to_be_more_precise,
as_a_matter_of_fact,
actually, in_fact etc.

(b) extension
and, but, additionally,
furthermore, moreover,
excepting,
apart_from_that,
alternatively,
on_the_other_hand,
on_the_contrary, instead etc.

(c) enhancement
after, before, next, then,
therefore, simultaneously,
sequentially, until, since,
now, similarly, yet, still,
despite, though, consequently
etc.

The algebraic system underneath the process
of topic sorting as a most important criterion to
categorize a text, then, is a tuple 〈S,T,R, f〉 -
which consists of a non-empty set of statements,
a set of topics, a class of relations defined over
the cartesian product of S and T, and a charac-
teristic function assigning each of the relations to47



the set of values. In addition to the issues dis-
cussed above, what seems to be most crucial for
the relations mentioned in (15) is their classifica-
tion either as compound or complex type relations.
More specifically, it is important to know which
type of relations permit coordinate structures and
which ones permit subordinate structures. From
a gross observation, it seems the relations cate-
gorized as elaboration type and enhancement type
permits subordination; whereas extension type re-
lations are useful in constructing coordination.

4 Discussion

This section is dedicated to the hierarchical orga-
nization of the relations in a text-construal. This
is done with the help of attribute value matrix. As
per the conventions, set earlier, H and M are used
to mark the organizational roles associated with
the statements. Functional dependencies existing
between the statements, along with their respec-
tive entailments, are represented with the aid of
the relations. Apart from these, T and τ are used
as subscripts to mark the status of the statements
as topic. A statement marked with T is likely to
percolate as topic to the next stage of construal as
against the statement with subscipted τ confined
within the text-construal which it is a part of. Note
the identification of a topic (τ ) either as a head (H)
or as a modifier (M) is determined solely by the se-
mantics of the relations. The topic is marked as T
when it is identified as H. In addition to this, a con-
cept of rank needs to be introduced here: If a ma-
trix embeds another matrix in it, then the former
one would be considered as of higher rank con-
strual in comparison to the latter one. Consider
the following examples:

16. matrix with higher rank with respect to (17):

(16) is considered as a matrix of higher rank with
respect to the matrices enumerated in (17):

17. matrices with lower ranks

(a) (b)

However, (16) will be considered as a matrix with
lower rank with respect to (18).

18. Topic percolation through the network of tex-
tual relations:

For the sake of the brevity and the ease of the pre-
sentation, in (18), we have used following abbre-
viations: therefore = t, consequently = c,
contrarily = C.

Needless to say, matrices mentioned in (17)
would be of lowest rank because of not embed-
ding any other matrix; on the other hand, (18) will
be of greatest rank in virtue of not being embed-
ded in other matrix. Significance of relative ranks
is useful in explaining how the projection of topic
is taking place within the text-construal.

As per attribute value matrix of (18), the topic
of a sequence of statements, Σ corresponding to
a text construal (4), will be that statement which
is embedded in all successive matrices of higher
ranks as head (= H). In other words, topic of a
modifier is not licensed to be the topic of a ma-
trix with higher rank within which the modifier is
embedded. As per this assertion, then, it is not
hard to argue why the topics of the lowest rank
text-construals as modifier fail to percolate as a
topic in the text-construals which are in immedi-
ately higher ranks.

As the analytical framework outlined and dis-
cussed above, the text mentioned in (4) have two
distinct topics:

19. Σ |=
{
topic4a−b marked as 1

topic4c marked as 2

These two topics are projected by two differ-
ent text-construals which are in equal rank as is
obvious from the attribute-value matrix of (18).
Similar situation prevails in case of the matrices
marked with 3 and 4. If two topics are of equal
rank, then chances are high for the respective texts
to be independent of each other. In other words,
two topics with equal rank are combined togather
into a text-construal with the aid of those relations
which are crucial in producing compounded struc-
tures.

On the basis of this discussion, we can argue
that Dijk’s criterion (1977) for topic identification48



mentioned in (2) seeks the following modification:
Any text as a sequence of statements will have one
and only one topic iff the constituent textual rela-
tions are in complex type structural combination.
Compounding of constituent relations will indi-
cate their respective projections as independent of
each other. In such a situation, the text-construal
can be broken into two independently occurring
texts. This could be used as a potential clue to
the auto-editing of briefs in particular and news
reporting in general.

References
R. A. De Beaugrande and W. U. Dressler 1981. Intro-

duction To Text Linguistics Longman, New York.

M. Taboada and W. C. Mann 2006. Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory: Looking Back and Moving Ahead Dis-
course Studies, 8(3), pp. 423-459.

T. A. van Djik 1977. Text and Context: Explorations
in the semantics and pragmatics of discourse Long-
man, London.

J.I. Saeed 2009 Semantics (3rd edition) Wiley-
Blackwell, Oxford.

H. J. Silverman. 1994. Textualities: Between
Hermeneutics and Deconstruction Routledge, Lon-
don.

T. Nomoto and Y. Matsumoto 1996 Exploiting Text
Structure For Topic Identification Workshop On
Very Large Corpora, 101-112

S. Eggins 2004 An Introduction to Systemic Func-
tional Linguistics Second Edition Continuum, New
York

49


