



















































An Ontology-Based Method for Extracting and Classifying Domain-Specific Compositional Nominal Compounds


Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature.

,

Proceedings, pages 83–88, Vancouver, BC, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

An Ontology-Based Method for Extracting and Classifying
Domain-Specific Compositional Nominal Compounds

Maria Pia di Buono
TakeLab

Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
University of Zagreb, Croatia

mariapia.dibuono@fer.hr

Abstract

In this paper, we present our preliminary
study on an ontology-based method to ex-
tract and classify compositional nominal
compounds in specific domains of knowl-
edge. This method is based on the assump-
tion that, applying a conceptual model to
represent knowledge domain, it is possi-
ble to improve the extraction and classifi-
cation of lexicon occurrences for that do-
main in a semi-automatic way. We ex-
plore the possibility of extracting and clas-
sifying a specific construction type (nom-
inal compounds) spanning a specific do-
main (Cultural Heritage) and a specific
language (Italian).

1 Introduction

In the Cultural Heritage domain, as in many
other specific domains of knowledge, phrases and
word sequences present recursive formal struc-
tures. Some of these structures may form lists
of compounds that have specific meanings only
when used with reference to that domain and, for
this reason, constitute the terminology of that do-
main. This means that if such compounds present
a certain degree of polysemy, it will be possible
to disambiguate usages according to the differ-
ent specific domains they belong to. Thus, tak-
ing into account a specific domain of knowledge,
compounds become unambiguous and clear terms,
useful for conceptualizations, which contribute to
outline formalizations. In this sense, we can as-
sert that domain-specific compounds present two
levels of representation, which are separated but
interlinked: a conceptual-semantic level, pertain-
ing to the knowledge domain and its ontology, and
a syntactic-semantic level, pertaining to sentence
and word production. We adopt the expression

atomic linguistic units (ALUs) to indicate any kind
of lemmatizable terminological compound words
which, even being very often semantically compo-
sitional, can be lemmatized due to their particular
non-ambiguous informational content (Vietri and
Monteleone, 2013). In this paper, we explore the
possibility of extracting and classifying a compo-
sitional ALU type (nominal compounds) spanning
a specific domain (Cultural Heritage) and a spe-
cific language (Italian).

This paper is organized as follows, section 2 de-
scribes the background and related work. Our ap-
proach is detailed in section 3. The description of
testing and results is given in section 4. Section 5
concludes the paper and points to future work.

2 Related Work

The task of dealing with ALUs attracts the inter-
est of several researches, due to the issue of con-
sistently recognizing those groups of words, able
to carry a different semantic expressiveness and
charge than single words. Thus, the prediction
of these linguistic phenomena in natural language
processing (NLP) applications has been investi-
gated by several scholars from different point of
views. Due to the success for simple words, a
growing attention concerns the application of dis-
tributional approaches for coping with composi-
tional compounds (McCarthy et al., 2003; Reddy
et al., 2011; Salehi et al., 2014). Likewise, differ-
ent scholars aim at achieving distributed represen-
tations of word meanings using word embeddings
for various purposes (Mikolov et al., 2013; Patel
and Bhattacharyya, 2015).

We will see that, being both ontology and dic-
tionary based, our identification and classification
of ALUs is founded on a systematic and exhaus-
tive formalization of natural language.

83



3 Methodology

Our method lays its foundations in the Lexicon-
Grammar (LG) framework (Gross, 1984, 1986).
LG considers lexicon as a group of terminal val-
ues, in a formal grammar of natural languages,
which have to be associated to ordered sequences
on the basis of independent combinatory be-
haviours and rules. Thus, lexicon is not sepa-
rable from syntax, namely every lexical element,
occurring in a sentence context, holds a gram-
matical function which combines with grammat-
ical functions of other constituents. Combina-
tory behaviours are driven by co-occurrency and
restriction-selection rules. Furthermore, we deal
with compositional ALUs also according to se-
mantic expansion mechanisms, firstly attested by
Harris (1946). These mechanisms are useful to
fully account for compositional ALUs, or better
for free word groups. Due to the fact that this kind
of phenomena may have some possibility to be au-
tomatically and successfully parsed by means of
regular expressions1.

In our research, we focus on a specific construc-
tion type, which may be described and retrieved
as ALUs: nominal compounds which present a re-
stricted semantic expansion. It means that such
ALUs are formed by a head phrase, generally
fixed or semi-fixed, followed by variable elements
which belong to specific grammatical categories.
These variable elements are characterized by a
selection restriction, which is determined by the
head phrase, which functions as a predicate, and
by the semantic provisions which they represent.
We define such ALUs as semi-open nominal com-
pounds, namely word sequences formed by one or
more (semi)fixed elements and a restricted selec-
tion of co-occurring elements. As in the example
it follows:

(palmetta+semipalmetta+rosetta) +
Adjective + Preposition + DNUM
(petali + lobi + foglie).

In the previous ALU, we can recognize a re-
stricted head palmetta+semipalmetta+rosetta fol-
lowed by an adjective and a preposition, and

1On the contrary, non-compositional ALUs, as the re-
sult of a continuous interaction between langue and parole
(De Saussure, 1989), are formed according also to linguis-
tically motivated, manifold, deep-logic contiguous juxtapo-
sitions, and they present unpredictable formation routines.
For this reason, they cannot be stochastically coped with, and
must be necessary lexicalized if they present the even slight-
est non-compositional link among their components.

a numeral, characterized by a high variabil-
ity, and a restricted selection of nouns, i.e.,
petali+lobi+foglie.

In other words, in such lexical phenomena the
fixed or semi-fixed head defines grammatical and
semantic types of all variable elements. This phe-
nomenon is mainly observable inside the lexicons
of specific knowledge domains, even if it presents
features belonging to both common-usage lexicon
and terminology. Indeed, such semi-open ALUs
are characterized by a variability of non-fixed ele-
ments but, at the same time, they are also charac-
terized by a non-ambiguous meaning as a result of
the compositional process.

In the following sections, we will show how
we can recognize and, subsequently, classify by
means of a domain ontology, such linguistic phe-
nomena through a set of finite state automata
(FSA), basing our method on co-occurrence like-
lihood of elements in semi-open ALUs.

3.1 Linguistic and Semantic Features
The high variability of non-fixed elements is re-
lated to the possibility of selecting elements from
non-restraint sets of lexical items, the grammati-
cal categories of which are predictable thanks to
components constituting the head. On a lexical
level, such a feature is correlated to the paradig-
matic relationship which indicates words belong-
ing to the same part of speech (POS) class. On the
other hand, constraints deriving from heads com-
ponents are associated to the syntagmatic relation-
ship among words, that means to semantic aspects
of ALUs. Thus, for example, in the Cultural Her-
itage domain, we may observe this phenomenon
of semi-open ALUs in Coroplastic descriptions, as
the following example shows:

• (1) statua di (statue of) [NPREP]+N
• (2) *statua di (statue of) [NPREP]+A

’Statue of’ represents the head, which determines
the type of the element which comes afterwards,
that must be a noun (1), and not an adjective (2).
Indeed, if the head is composed by a noun, be-
longing to a specific semantic category, as statua
(statue), followed by a preposition, like di (of), the
element which comes afterwards must belong to
noun POS. Similarly, the head works as a con-
straint for the type of noun selected, which means
that we have a restricted semantic expansion con-
cerning the semantic type of noun. Thus, the semi-

84



open NP ‘statue of’ may select a proper noun as
‘Silenus’, or a noun as ‘woman’, but not a noun as
‘table’.

As far as syntactic aspects are concerned, some
semi-open ALUs, especially referred to Coroplas-
tic description, are sentence reductions in which
a present participle construction is used. For in-
stance,

• (3) statua raffigurante Sileno (statue repre-
senting Silenus) is a reduction (Gross, 1975;
Harris and Gross, 1976) of the sentence:

(3a) Questa statua raffigura Sileno (This
statue represents Silenus)

(3b) [relative] Questa è una statua che raf-
figura Sileno (This is a statue which repre-
sents Silenus)

(3c) [pr. part.] Questa è una statua raffig-
urante Sileno (This is a statue representing
Silenus)

These semi-open ALUs, which present sentence
reductions, may be retrieved using FSA which rec-
ognize specific verb role-sets. Therefore, such an
FSA recognizes sentence structures as they follow:

• NP(Head)+VP+NP
• NP(Head)+VP+NP+AP
• NP(Head)+VP+AP+NP
• NP(Head)+PREP+NP
• NP(Head)+PREP+NP+AP
• NP(Head)+PREP+AP+NP.
In the previous sample, the noun phrase (NP)

which stands for the head of semi-open ALUs is
composed by a group of non-restricted nouns re-
lated to Coroplastics. It means that in such a group
we insert nouns as statue, bust, figure and so on.

As for semantics, we also observe the presence
of semi-open ALUs in which the head does not oc-
cur in the first position. For example, the open se-
ries frammenti di (terracotta+anfora+laterizi+N)
(fragments of (clay+amphora+bricks+N)), places
the heads at the end of the compounds, being fram-
menti used to explicit the notion ‘N0 is a part of
N1’.

On the basis of our theoretical premises, and
applying these selection restriction rules, we may

identify syntactic and semantic sets of lexical ele-
ments which may co-occur in specific semi-open
ALUs. Such recursive formal structures allow the
development of non-deterministic FSA, suitable to
recognize all the elements of a specific open list
(di Buono et al., 2013).

3.2 Ontology-based Extraction and
Classification

In order to recognize and extract this kind of semi-
open ALUs, we develop a set of FSA, which takes
advantage from the semantic information stored
in electronic dictionaries developed by means of
NooJ (Silberztein, 2008). NooJ allows to for-
malize natural language descriptions and to ap-
ply them to corpora. NooJ is used by a large
community, which developed linguistic modules,
including Finite State Automata/Transducers and
Electronic Dictionaries, for more than twenty lan-
guages. The Italian linguistic resources (LRs)
have been built by the Computational Linguistic
group of University of Salerno, which started its
study of language formalization from 1981 (Elia
et al., 1981). Our analysis is based on the Ital-
ian module for NooJ (Vietri, 2014), enriched with
the LRs for the Archaeological domain (di Buono
et al., 2014). The Italian LRs are composed
of simple and compound word electronic dictio-
naries, inflectional, syntactic and morphological
grammars, annotated with cross-domain seman-
tic tags (e.g., ‘Human’ and ‘Animal’ label). The
LRs for the Archaeological domain present a tax-
onomic tagging, derived from the the Italian Cen-
tral Institute for the Catalogue and Documentation
(ICCD) guidelines, which indicate how to clas-
sify an object, and a reference to the CIDOC Con-
ceptual Reference Model (CRM), defined by the
Conseil International des Musees (Doerr, 2003) .
The CIDOC CRM is an object-oriented seman-
tic model, compatible with RDF, which stands for
a domain ontology which may be applied to de-
scribe Cultural Heritage items and the relations
among them. In this conceptual model, entity
classes are described by means of pertaining infor-
mation about the taxonomic relation among entity
classes (i.e., Subclass of), a description of class
essential properties (i.e., Scope note), sentences
which exemplify natural language representations
used to denote an element belonging to the class,
and the properties which may co-occur with the
given entity class.

85



Entry Kylix a labbro risparmiato
POS N
Int. Str. NPREPNA
FLX C610
SYN lip cup
DOM RA1SUOCR
CCL E22

Table 1: Sample of a semantic and taxonomic
annotated entry from the Archaeological Italian
Electronic Dictionary.

Each entry in the LRs presents taxonomic and on-
tological information, as it follows (Table 1):

• Its POS, internal structure and inflectional
code (+FLX), which recall a local grammar
suitable for generating and recognizing in-
flected forms.

• Its variants (VAR) or synonyms (SYN), if
any;

• With reference to the taxonomy, the per-
taining knowledge domain (DOM), e.g.,
RA1SUOCR stands for Archaeological Re-
mains/Tools/Kitchen Utensil;

• Finally, we insert a tag referring to the on-
tological entities derived from the CIDOC
CRM, e.g., E22 refers to Man-Made Object
class, that is a subclass of E19 Physical Ob-
ject.

In order to create the role sets suitable to extract
and classify the ALUs, we use these semantic in-
formation to apply a series of domain constraints.
Thus, we firstly employ information which refer to
the domain taxonomic hierarchy. For instance, in
the sample (1), our first selection restriction is con-
strained by the tag value which indicates Sculp-
ture class in the taxonomy. Therefore, we extract
all ALUs, labeled with this tag, through a semi-
automatic method. Consequently, a manual proce-
dure is employed to identify nouns which fit to the
meaningful sentence context.

In compounds containing present participle
forms, i.e., sample (3), semantic features can be
identified using local grammars built on specific
verb classes (semantic predicate sets); in such
cases, co-occurrence restrictions can be described
in terms of lexical forms and syntactic structures.
For these occurrences, we apply the specific se-
mantic set, descriptive predicates, in order to put

into evidence elements extracted from specific ver-
bal classes (i.e., 20A and 47B2). We also employ
grammatical and syntactic constraints referred to
tense and number of verb phrase; thus, we select
just present 3rd persons singular and plural (sam-
ple 3a and 3b) and present participle (sample 3c).
Due to the complexity of Coroplastic descriptions,
sub-graphs presents many recursive nodes, mainly
in noun phrases.

4 Testing and Results

Our methodology has been tested on Italian Cul-
tural Heritage texts. The corpus has been built
merging different datasets of catalographic data
provided by ICCD3. We refer to Archaeologi-
cal Remains datasets, classified according to the
guidelines of ICCD and released as open data4.
The total amount of the dataset is about 123K
records. Each record contains different informa-
tion, structured according to the Functional Re-
quirements for Authority Data (Patton, 2009). An
evaluation of the results produced by our approach
is given in Table 2. Our method is evaluated by
means of Precision, Recall and F-score results in
the extraction of the main entity classes, i.e. Build-
ing, Clothing, Furniture, Sculpture, and Tools. For
this evaluation we consider some of the higher
classes in the taxonomic classification of ICCD.
This choice is justified by the compositional struc-
tures of ALUs, which are comparable for the sub-
classes related to the same main class. Anyway,
the ontological tags used to classify them are fine-
grained, so a distinction between these categories
is performed any time. As we can notice, the val-
ues present a variability with reference to the dif-
ferent categories. Generally speaking, the cause of
mismatching results can be retrieved in the use of
too broad terms, which determines ambiguity hard
to solve, i.e., bitronconico, that can be referred to
an askos, belonging to the class of Tools, or to a
kind of necklace, an element in the class of Cloth-
ing. Furthermore, another source of mismatching
is related to the presence of references to the in-
ventory number, or other information related to the
ICCD classification, merged in the definition field,
e.g., description of materials used.

2Classes refer to Italian Lexicon-Grammar Tables, avail-
able at http://dsc.unisa.it/composti/tavole/combo/tavole.asp.

3http://www.catalogo.beniculturali.it/opendata/?q=dataset.
4http://www.catalogo.beniculturali.it/opendata/?q=dataset.

86



Class Precision Recall F-score
Building 0.87 0.77 0.81
Clothing 0.88 0.72 0.79
Furniture 0.79 0.66 0.72
Sculpture 0.89 0.68 0.77
Tools 0.85 0.75 0.80

Table 2: Evaluation for the main classes.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have presented our preliminary
study on an ontology-based strategy to extract
and classify compositional nominal compounds in
the Cultural Heritage domain for Italian. This
FSA-based system allows to retrieve a very large
amount of expressions and ALUs among those
present in the analysed corpus. The highly pro-
ductive formal structures are the following ones:

• Noun(Head) + Preposition + Noun + Prepo-
sition +Noun, i.e., fibula ad arco a coste
(ribbed-arch fibula), in which the fixed com-
ponent is represented by fibula (fibula);

• Noun(Head) + Preposition + Noun + Adjec-
tive, i.e., anello a capi ritorti (twisted-heads
ring), the head is represented by anello (ring);

• Noun(Head)+ Preposition + Noun + Adjec-
tive + Adjective, i.e., punta a foglia larga
ovale (oval broadleaf point).

The main hypothesis, leading the development of
our system, is that the precision and the recall of
extraction and classification systems for composi-
tional compounds can be improved by represent-
ing linguistic and semantic features in a more con-
sistent way. We consider the average results quite
satisfying, nevertheless we are already planning to
enrich our research outcomes with many other im-
provements in order to solve ambiguity and clas-
sification issues.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by the Unity Through
Knowledge Fund of the Croatian Science Foun-
dation, under the grant 19/15: EVEnt Retrieval
Based on semantically Enriched Structures for In-
teractive user Tasks (EVERBEST).

References
Ferdinand De Saussure. 1989. Cours de linguistique

générale: Édition critique, volume 1. Otto Harras-
sowitz Verlag.

Maria Pia di Buono, Mario Monteleone, and Annibale
Elia. 2014. Terminology and knowledge representa-
tion. italian linguistic resources for the archaeologi-
cal domain. In Workshop on Lexical and Grammat-
ical Resources for Language Processing. page 24.

Maria Pia di Buono, Mario Monteleone, Feder-
ica Marano, and Johanna Monti. 2013. Knowl-
edge management and cultural heritage reposito-
ries: Cross-lingual information retrieval strategies.
In Digital Heritage International Congress (Digital-
Heritage), 2013. IEEE, volume 2, pages 295–302.

Martin Doerr. 2003. The cidoc conceptual reference
module: an ontological approach to semantic inter-
operability of metadata. AI magazine 24(3):75.

Annibale Elia, Maurizio Martinelli, and Emilio
D’Agostino. 1981. Lessico e strutture sintat-
tiche: introduzione alla sintassi del verbo italiano.
Liguori.

Maurice Gross. 1975. Méthodes en syntaxe. Hermann.

Maurice Gross. 1984. Lexicon-grammar and the syn-
tactic analysis of french. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 22nd annual meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 275–282.

Maurice Gross. 1986. Lexicon-grammar: the represen-
tation of compound words. In Proceedings of the
11th coference on Computational linguistics. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–6.

Zellig S. Harris. 1946. From morpheme to utterance.
Language 22(3):161–183.

Zellig S. Harris and Maurice Gross. 1976. Notes de
Cours de Syntaxe: Traduit de l’anglais par Maurice
Gross. Seuil.

Diana McCarthy, Bill Keller, and John Carroll.
2003. Detecting a continuum of compositionality
in phrasal verbs. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003
workshop on Multiword expressions: analysis, ac-
quisition and treatment-Volume 18. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 73–80.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Dhirendra Singh Sudha Bhingardive Kevin Patel and
Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2015. Detection of multi-
word expressions for hindi language using word em-
beddings and wordnet-based features .

87



Glenn E. Patton. 2009. Functional requirements for
authority data: A conceptual model, volume 34.
Walter de Gruyter.

Siva Reddy, Diana McCarthy, and Suresh Manandhar.
2011. An empirical study on compositionality in
compound nouns. In IJCNLP. pages 210–218.

Bahar Salehi, Paul Cook, and Timothy Baldwin. 2014.
Using distributional similarity of multi-way transla-
tions to predict multiword expression composition-
ality. In EACL. pages 472–481.

Max Silberztein. 2008. Nooj v2 manual.

Simona Vietri. 2014. The italian module for nooj. In
Proceedings of the First Italian Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, CLiC-it.

Simona Vietri and Mario Monteleone. 2013. The en-
glish nooj dictionary. In Proceedings of NooJ 2013
International Conference, June. pages 3–5.

88


