



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 427–434,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Study on Visual Word Recognition in Bangla across Different Reader
Groups

Manjira Sinha
Conduent Labs India

Bangalore, India

Tirthankar Dasgupta
TCS Innovation Labs

Kolkata, India
{manjira87, iamtirthankar, anupambas}@gmail.com

Anupam Basu
IIT Kharagpur

Kharagpur, India

Abstract

This paper presents a psycholinguis-
tic study of visual word recognition in
Bangla. The study examines the relation-
ship among different word attributes and
word reading behaviors of the two tar-
get user groups, whose native language is
Bangla. The different target user groups
also offer insights into the subjectivity of
written word comprehension based on the
readers background. For the purpose of
the study, reading in terms of visual stimu-
lus for word comprehension has been con-
sidered. To the best of the knowledge of
the authors, this study is the first of its kind
for a language like Bangla.

1 Introduction

Recognition and understanding of words are ba-
sic building blocks and the first step in language
comprehension. At this stage, the form (visual
representation) joins the meaning (conceptual rep-
resentation). Therefore, the cognitive load asso-
ciated with word reading is a significant contrib-
utor to the overall text readability. The present
study aims to capture the salience effects of dif-
ferent word attributes on the word reading perfor-
mance in Bangla, the second most spoken (after
Hindi) and one of the official languages of India
with about 85 million native users in India 1 . The
features studied in this work, encompass ortho-
graphic properties of a word like length in terms
of the number of visual units or akshars; number
of unique orthographic shapes i.e, the characteris-
tic strokes and complexity measures based on the
familiarity of the akshars and strokes in a word.
Phonological properties of a word such as number
of syllables and spelling to sound consistency have

1http://www.ethnologue.com/statistics/size

also been taken into account along with the seman-
tic attributes of a word like number of synonyms
and number of senses. Moreover, the feature list
also includes word collocation attributes such as
orthographic neighborhood size and phonological
neighborhood size, which situate the given word
with respect to other members in the vocabulary.
The effects of the word attributes have been mea-
sured in terms of the reaction time and perfor-
mance accuracy data obtained from empirical user
experiments.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents the relevant literature study, section 3
describes the participants details; section 4 and
5 states data preparation and the psycholinguis-
tic experiment respectively; section 6 presents the
feature descriptions and the experimental observa-
tions against words and non-words; finally, section
7 concludes the paper.

2 Related Works

Research in word recognition has been central to
many areas in cognitive-neuroscience (Frost et al.,
2005), educational processes (Seidenberg, 2013),
attention (Zevin and Balota, 2000), serial versus
parallel processing (Coltheart et al., 1993), con-
nectionism (Plaut et al., 1996) and much more.
Typically, two different techniques are used to
study visual word recognition: the lexical decision
tasks and the naming task (Balota et al., 2004). In
lexical decision task, a letter string is presented
to a participants are asked to decide whether the
given string is a valid word in their language.
On the other hand, in the naming task, partici-
pants are asked to read allowed a letter string as
quickly as possible. The time taken by a subject
to complete each task after the visual presentation
of the target is defined as the response time (RT).
An analysis of the reaction times of the subjects427



reveals the actual processing of words in brain.
The early works in word recognition involves two
distinct models: the activation model or the lo-
gogen model (Morton, 1969) and the search model
(Forster and Bednall, 1976); both of these two
models are based on the fundamental premises of
the frequency effects in word recognition. The fre-
quency effect in word recognition claims that the
high frequency words are recognized more accu-
rately and quickly than the low-frequency words
(Murray and Forster, 2004). The logogen model
assumes recognition of words in terms of the acti-
vation of the constituent linguistic features (called
the logogens). Each logogen has got a base ac-
tivation value (also called the resting activation)
that facilitates the recognition process. The resting
activation of a given logogen is determined by its
frequency of occurrence. That is, high frequency
words have higher base activation value than the
low frequency words. The search model, on the
other hand, assumes that words are organized ac-
cording to their frequencies and are searched se-
rially. (Taft and Hambly, 1986) have a proposed
hybrid model that includes features of both the
activation and serial search process. The inter-
active activation (IA) model (Diependaele et al.,
2010) follows the connectionist approach and also
incorporates the logogen model. In this frame-
work, a word is initially perceived via the basic
orthographic, features which in turn activate the
higher level syntactic and semantic features. The
IA model also accounts for the word superiority
effect that assumes alphabets are recognized more
accurately and quickly when they occur in a word
as compared to a non-word (Grainger and Jacobs,
1996). An important extension of the IA model
is the dual-rout cascaded (DRC) model (Coltheart
et al., 2001). This model assumes two paral-
lel process of word recognition: the lexical route
and the sub-lexical route. The lexical route ac-
counts for the recognition process through the par-
allel activation of the orthographic and phonolog-
ical features of a word. On the other hand, the
sub-lexical route possesses a serial processor that
converts graphemic representations into phonemic
forms. As an alternative to two different process-
ing paths n the DRC model, the parallel distributed
processing model (PDP) (Seidenberg and McClel-
land, 1989) has proposed a single architecture to
explain different processing outputs. The model
incorporate the distributed nature by assuming that

each word is associated with some distinct activa-
tion pattern across a common set of features used
to recognize the word. The features may include,
orthography, phonology, morphology or semantic.
Generalizations of the PDP model for non-words
and irregular words have been proposed by (Plaut
et al., 1996)

3 Participants

In order to understand how the different cognitive
processes vary across different user groups, two
categories of users have been considered for each
user study. Group 1 consists of 25 native users
of Bangla in the age range 21-25 years, who are
pursuing college level education and group 2 con-
sists of 25 native users in the age range 13 to 17
years (refer to figure 1). In this paper, the vari-
ations in age and years of education have been
taken into account. Moreover, we have considered
a distribution over medium to low socio-economic
sections with monthly household income ranges
INR 4500 to INR 15000. The Socio-Economic
Classification (SEC) has been performed accord-
ing to the guidelines by the Market Research Soci-
ety of India (MRSI) 2. MRSI has defined 12 socio-
economic strata: A1 to E3 in the decreasing or-
der. The containment of the socio-economic range
was necessary as it directly affects education, lit-
eracy and thus the state of comprehension skills of
a reader. In addition, to capture the first-language
skill, each native speaker was asked to rate his/her
proficiency in Bangla on a 1-5 scale (1: very poor
and 5: very strong), see figure 2.

Figure 1: Participants’ details

2http://imrbint.com/research/The-New-SEC-system-
3rdMay2011.pdf428



Figure 2: Proficiency in the mother tongue

4 Data preparation

From a Bangla corpus 3 of about 400,000 unique
words, we have sampled 3500 words for the study.
The words were selected in such a way that they
represent the ‘average’ words over the corpus. The
median values of word frequency distribution and
length distribution lie at 368 and 5 respectively
(refer to figur 3 for some sample words used in
experiment). In a psycholinguistics, to preserve
the experimental standard, it is essential to restrict
the participants from making any strategic guess
about the input stimuli. This has been achieved by
randomly introducing non-words in between the
valid words during the experiment. However, de-
signing non-words are a non-trivial process, and
often the reader’s response to the different types
of non-words opens up new insights into the pro-
cess of word comprehension. Some examples of
non-words are provided in figure 4.

5 Experimental Procedure

We have conducted lexical decision task (LDT)
experiment (Meyer and Schvaneveldt, 1971) to
study the visual recognition of Bangla words by
native speakers. In this experiment, a participant
is presented with a visual input, generally, a string
of letters that can be words, non-words or pseudo
words. Their task is to indicate, whether the pre-
sented stimulus is a valid Bangla word or not. The
reaction time against each participant and the ac-
curacy against each experimental stimulus across
all the participants are recorded for further analy-
sis. The time window for a user to submit any re-
sponse has been set at 4 seconds, failing that a No

3The Unicode corpus of Bangla was developed by the au-
thors as a part of a broader study, the details are not in scope
of this paper.

Response is recorded. In either cases it is followed
by hash signs (####) followed by the next letter
string with 2.5 second delay. No response against
a stimulus is automatically recorded as wrong re-
sponse by the user.

Fifty users from the two target user groups par-
ticipated in the LDT experiment. The 5000 exper-
imental words (2500 words and 2500 non-words)
were distributed randomly among 67 equal sized
75-word sets. Each user was presented maximum
of three sets a day with at least one hour gap be-
tween two sets. Before recording experimental
data, a sample set made up of 20 words was pre-
sented to the users to make them accustomed with
the experiment.

6 Observations

All the incorrect responses and extreme reaction
times (RT: the time taken to respond to a stimuli)
have been discarded. Participants and experimen-
tal words having less than 70% accuracy have also
been discarded. Finally, 440 words with RT of 42
(22 from group 1 and 20 from group 2) partici-
pants have been used for further study.

The RTs of each user have been normalized by
z-transformation (Balota et al., 2007). The mean
z-score over all users for a word has been com-
puted. Negative z-scores indicate shorter response
latencies. Paired t-test has been performed be-
tween results of the two user groups and p < 0.05
has been found signifying the difference between
reading characteristics of the two user groups.
Next, we have studied the influence of different
word features on the outcome of the lexical deci-
sion task. The word features studied in this paper
have been selected based on their prominence in
the literature (Yarkoni et al., 2008) and their rele-
vance with respect to Bangla. The features are:
•Morphological Family size: The morpholog-

ical family size of a word w comprises of all the
inflected, derived and compound paradigms that
contains the word w (De Jong IV et al., 2000).
•Word length (linear): The length is measured

in terms of the number of visual units or akshars;
as Bangla belongs to the abugida group, mere al-
phabetic word length does not reflect the difficulty
encountered in reading (Sinha et al., 2012b).
•Number of complex characters in a word:

Complex characters are the consonant conjuncts
or jukta-akshars present in a word.
•Number of unique shapes in a word:429



Figure 3: Examples of valid-words for experiment 4

Figure 4: Construction of non-words for experiment

Bangla script uses the space in a non-linear way
and the akshars hangs from a distinct horizontal
head-stroke called mAtrA. The letters are made up
of combinations of different shapes or strokes. All
together 57 unique strokes have been identified
and indexed accordingly. The initial hypothesis is
that more the number of distinct shapes in a word;
the more difficult it is to comprehend.

•Orthographic word complexity: During vi-
sual word recognition, the reader has to recog-
nize the orthographic patterns (Selfridge, 1958).
Word level representations interact with the letter
level representations i.e, the characteristic shapes
or strokes (refer to). As no standard dataset on

Figure 5: characteristics strokes of Bangla akshars

shape combinations in Bangla letters is available,
the unique shapes or strokes have been identified
intuitively across all the Bangla letters including
the consonant conjuncts. The Bangla Akademi
font has been considered as standard Bangla or-
thography. All together 57 unique strokes have
been identified and numbered. Every Bangla letter
has been represented as a combination of the con-
stituent shapes. To capture the interactive nature

Figure 6: Mapping of Bangla akshars to character-
istics shapes

of visual complexity, an orthographic complexity430



model has been derived in the following way:

(a) The difficulty (d(s)) of a characteristic shape
(i) or stroke is inversely proportional to its fa-
miliarity or frequency (f(s)). The frequency
of the shapes has been calculated from the
unique word list of the Bangla corpus with-
out considering the frequency of each word.

d(s) = 1/f(s). (1)

(b) The difficulty (d(a)) of an akshar (a) depends
on the sum of the complexity of its shapes
normalized by the number of shapes (n)

d(a) = 1/n
∑

i

d(si) (2)

(c) Finally, the difficulty (d(w)) of a word (w) is
the sum of the complexity of its constituent
akshars normalized by word length (l) and
multiplied by the inverse of the word fre-
quency (f(w))

d(w) = 1/f(w)
[
1/l
(∑

j

d(aj)
)]

(3)

•Orthographic & phonological neighborhood:
We have constructed akshar based, orthographic
shape based and phonological pattern based
neighborhood structure. The akshar based
distance measure treats all akshars as of same
visual complexity regardless of their orthographic
properties, this is the reason distance among
words based on orthographic strokes has been
treated separately. At each level of orthographic
information, the neighbors have been categorized
into three groups based on their distance from the
given word.
•Number of syllables: The syllabification of

the Bangla words has been performed using a
Bangla Grapheme to Phoneme conversion tool,
developed inhouse.
•Semantic neighborhood: This measure

represents the number of semantic neighbors
of a word within the lexical organization of the
language. This is computed from the semantic
lexicon described in (Sinha et al., 2012a).

The mean and standard deviation values of the
word features described above have been pre-
sented in figure 7. We have analyzed the RT cor-
responding to the above features using Spearman’s

correlation coefficient. The coefficient values be-
tween each word attribute and word recognition
performance for the two user groups have been
presented in figure 8.

From 8 we can observe that the correlation
coefficients values for lexical decision latencies
and decision accuracies are always less than 0.5,
though they are different for different groups. The
difference in the coefficient values may be at-
tributed to the different reading patterns of the two
groups. Number of syllables has similar corre-
lation coefficients as word length because most
often the akshars boundaries match the phono-
logical syllable boundaries. The measure of or-
thographic word complexity possess low correla-
tion coefficients with reaction times and accura-
cies, this can be an outcome of considering only
the orthographic attributes of a word, isolating it
from the phonological or semantic dimensions. In
future, the measure needs to be augmented with
those word features.

Number of unique shapes and complex char-
acters also do not show significant correlation.
Spelling to sound consistency also has a moder-
ate correlation with the groups. This shows that
speakers are not much sensitive towards the minor
inconsistencies in spelling to sound mapping. The
correlation coefficients of distant orthographic and
phonological neighbors, immediate orthographic
neighbors at shape level and semantic neighbor-
hood are not significant for both groups. These in-
dicate that after a threshold distance, the similar-
ity or dissimilar-ity of the given word with other
words in vocabulary does not affect the readers
decisions. In addition, at shape level, the num-
ber of immediate orthographic neighbors may be
unimportant due to the fact that often an akshar is
constituted with more than 2 characteristic ortho-
graphic shapes and therefore, while reading, such
minor changes in orthographic properties may go
unnoticed.

Finally, the present calculation of semantic
neighborhoods has been based on exhaustive lan-
guage information (Sinha et al., 2012c), but the
actual users may not possess such deep language
knowledge and therefore are less affected by the
semantic neighborhood structure. On the other
hand, the number of senses or meaning of a word
does not have inhibitory effect on the decision
making process as the no ambiguity had to be re-
solved here, instead the use of a word in different431



Figure 7: Properties of valid words for experiment

contexts have increased its chance of encountering
with the native readers of Bangla more often.

Moreover, the decisions against non-words are
equally interesting to the decisions against the
valid words. Non-words such as kakShataNa [cor-
rect: (katakShaNa, time duration) ], AkampIta
[correct: (akampita, steady)] and TAlAN [cor-
rect: (cAlAna, transaction)] have almost always
been perceived as correct words by the readers due
to their orthographic and phonological proximity
to the correct words. On the other hand, proper
non-word i.e, an arbitrary letter string such as Na-
jatathI has been accurately classified as invalid.
This indicates that the cognitive processes of read-
ing are sensitive to the probability of what akshar
pattern can occur in a valid Bangla word.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented a study on the
comprehension difficulty of visual word recog-
nition in Bangla stored as a lexical decision
database. Number of interesting observations has
been made from the experimental data and the ob-
servations have been complemented with rational
inferences based on them. The correlation coef-
ficients among word attributes and reaction time

data has revealed that individually no feature has a
large covariance factor, but the collective effect of
all of them determines the cognitive load for com-
prehension. Moreover, using a reference language
corpus based only on text from printed sources has
proven to be a short-coming for drawing meaning-
ful inferences. Some initial insights on the deci-
sions corresponding to the non-words have also
been presented.

References
David A Balota, Michael J Cortese, Susan D Sergent-

Marshall, Daniel H Spieler, and MelvinJ Yap.
2004. Visual word recognition of single-syllable
words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
eral, 133(2):283.

D.A. Balota, M.J. Yap, K.A. Hutchison, M.J. Cortese,
B. Kessler, B. Loftis, J.H. Neely, D.L. Nelson,
G.B. Simpson, and R. Treiman. 2007. The en-
glish lexicon project. Behavior Research Methods,
39(3):445–459.

M. Coltheart, B. Curtis, P. Atkins, and M. Haller. 1993.
Models of reading aloud: Dual-route and parallel-
distributed-processing approaches. Psychological
Review; Psychological Review, 100(4):589.

Max Coltheart, Kathleen Rastle, Conrad Perry, Robyn
Langdon, and Johannes Ziegler. 2001. Drc: a dual432



Figure 8: Correlation analysis between word attributes and data from LDT (correlation coefficients
marked with # are not significant (p-value > 0.05)

433



route cascaded model of visual word recognition and
reading aloud. Psychological review, 108(1):204.

Nivja H De Jong IV, Robert Schreuder, and R Har-
ald Baayen. 2000. The morphological family size
effect and morphology. Language and cognitive
processes, 15(4-5):329–365.

K. Diependaele, J.C. Ziegler, and J. Grainger. 2010.
Fast phonology and the bimodal interactive activa-
tion model. European Journal of Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 22(5):764–778.

Kenneth I Forster and Elizabeth S Bednall. 1976. Ter-
minating and exhaustive search in lexical access.
Memory & Cognition, 4(1):53–61.

Stephen J Frost, W Einar Mencl, Rebecca Sandak,
Dina L Moore, Jay G Rueckl, Leonard Katz,
Robert K Fulbright, and Kenneth R Pugh. 2005. A
functional magnetic resonance imaging study of the
tradeoff between semantics and phonology in read-
ing aloud. NeuroReport, 16(6):621–624.

Jonathan Grainger and Arthur M Jacobs. 1996. Or-
thographic processing in visual word recognition:
a multiple read-out model. Psychological review,
103(3):518.

David E Meyer and Roger W Schvaneveldt. 1971. Fa-
cilitation in recognizing pairs of words: evidence of
a dependence between retrieval operations. Journal
of experimental psychology, 90(2):227.

John Morton. 1969. Interaction of information in word
recognition. Psychological review, 76(2):165.

Wayne S Murray and Kenneth I Forster. 2004. Serial
mechanisms in lexical access: the rank hypothesis.
Psychological Review, 111(3):721.

David C Plaut, James L McClelland, Mark S Seiden-
berg, and Karalyn Patterson. 1996. Understanding
normal and impaired word reading: computational
principles in quasi-regular domains. Psychological
review, 103(1):56.

Mark S Seidenberg and James L McClelland. 1989. A
distributed, developmental model of word recogni-
tion and naming. Psychological review, 96(4):523.

Mark S Seidenberg. 2013. The science of reading and
its educational implications. Language learning and
development, 9(4):331–360.

Oliver G Selfridge. 1958. Pandemonium: a paradigm
for learning in mechanisation of thought processes.

M. Sinha, T. Dasgupta, and Basu A. 2012a. A complex
network analysis of syllables in bangla through syl-
lablenet. In Sobha L Girish Nath Jha, Kalika Bali,
editor, Workshop on Indian Language and Data:
Resources and Evaluation, LREC, pages 131–138,
May.

M. Sinha, S. Sharma, T. Dasgupta, and Basu A. 2012b.
New readability measures for bangla and hindi texts.
Communicated in the 24th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics,2012, IIT Bombay,
August.

Manjira Sinha, Abhik Jana, Tirthankar Dasgupta, and
Anupam Basu. 2012c. A new semantic lexicon
and similarity measure in bangla. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexi-
con, pages 171–182, Mumbai, India, December. The
COLING 2012 Organizing Committee.

Marcus Taft and Gail Hambly. 1986. Exploring the co-
hort model of spoken word recognition. Cognition,
22(3):259–282.

T. Yarkoni, D. Balota, and M. Yap. 2008. Mov-
ing beyond coltheart?s n: A new measure of ortho-
graphic similarity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
15(5):971–979.

Jason D Zevin and David A Balota. 2000. Prim-
ing and attentional control of lexical and sublexi-
cal pathways during naming. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
26(1):121.

434


