



















































The Universal Dependencies Treebank for Slovenian


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 33–38,
Valencia, Spain, 4 April 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Universal Dependencies Treebank for Slovenian

Kaja Dobrovoljc1, Tomaž Erjavec2 and Simon Krek3

1Trojina, Institute for Applied Slovene Studies, Trg republike 3, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
2Dept. of Knowledge Technologies, Jožef Stefan Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

3AI Laboratory, Jožef Stefan Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
kaja.dobrovoljc@trojina.si

tomaz.erjavec@ijs.si
simon.krek@ijs.si

Abstract

This paper introduces the Universal De-
pendencies Treebank for Slovenian. We
overview the existing dependency tree-
banks for Slovenian and then detail the
conversion of the ssj200k treebank to
the framework of Universal Dependen-
cies version 2. We explain the mapping
of part-of-speech categories, morphosyn-
tactic features, and the dependency rela-
tions, focusing on the more problematic
language-specific issues. We conclude
with a quantitative overview of the tree-
bank and directions for further work.

1 Introduction

In syntactic parsing and the field of data-driven
natural language processing in general, there has
been a growing tendency to harmonize the nu-
merous annotations schemes, developed for lin-
guistic annotation of individual languages or spe-
cific language resources, that have prevented di-
rect comparisons of annotated data and the perfor-
mance of the resultant NLP tools. To overcome
this heterogeneity inhibiting both theoretical and
engineering advancements in the field, the Univer-
sal Dependencies1 annotation scheme provides a
universal inventory of morphological and syntac-
tic categories and guidelines for their application,
while also allowing for language-specific exten-
sions, when necessary (Nivre, 2015).

The scheme is based on previous similar stan-
dardization projects (Marneffe et al., 2014; Petrov
et al., 2012; Zeman, 2008), and has recently been
substantially modified to its second version (UD
v2), following five successive releases of tree-
banks pertaining to UD v1 (Nivre et al., 2016). In

1http://universaldependencies.org/

the v2.0 release2, 72 treebanks for 47 different lan-
guages have been released, including the reference
(written) Slovenian UD Treebank, set forward in
the remainder of this paper.

2 Dependency Treebanks for Slovenian

The Slovenian UD Treebank represents the third
generation of syntactically annotated corpora in
Slovenian. The first was the Slovene Depen-
dency Treebank (Džeroski et al., 2006), based on
the Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) annota-
tion scheme (Hajičová et al., 1999) and consist-
ing of approximately 30,000 tokens taken from the
Slovenian component of the parallel MULTEXT-
East corpus (Erjavec, 2012), i.e., the Slovenian
translation of the novel “1984” by George Orwell.

As the PDT’s scheme for analytical layer
proved to be too complex given the financial and
temporal constraints of subsequent projects, a new,
simplified syntactic annotation scheme was devel-
oped within the JOS project (Erjavec et al., 2010).
Within this scheme, the syntactic annotation layer
consists of only 10 dependency relations, follow-
ing the general assumption that specific syntactic
constructions can be retrieved by combining these
labels with the underlying word-level morphosyn-
tactic descriptions (MSDs), wherein the JOS MSD
tagset3 is identical to the tagset defined in the
MULTEXT-East Version 4 morphosyntactic spec-
ifications for Slovene (Erjavec, 2012).

The JOS annotation scheme was first applied
to the jos100k corpus (Erjavec et al., 2010) con-
sisting of approximately 100,000 tokens, sampled
from the FidaPLUS reference corpus of written
Slovene (Arhar and Gorjanc, 2007), and later ex-
tended to a larger sample of additional 400,000

2While work on the individual treebanks for UD v2.0 has
been finished, this version has, at the time of the writing of
this paper, not yet been officially released.

3http://nl.ijs.si/jos/msd/33



tokens in the Communication in Slovene (SSJ)
project,4 released as the ssj500k training corpus,
with the latest version being v1.4 (Krek et al.,
2015). The corpus is manually annotated with
MSDs and lemmas but, due to financial constrains,
only approximately one half (235,000) of the to-
kens were annotated on the syntactic layer. This
subcorpus, known as the ssj200k treebank, cur-
rently represents the largest and the most repre-
sentative collection of manually syntactically an-
notated data in Slovenian. It has been used in
the development of several data-driven annotation
tools (Grčar et al., 2012; Dobrovoljc et al., 2012;
Ljubešić and Erjavec, 2016) and was chosen as the
basis5 for the construction of the Slovenian UD
Treebank, using the conversion process described
below.

3 Conversion from JOS to UD

To maintain a long-term compatibility between
the two resources and maximize the level of con-
sistency, the ssj200k conversion from JOS to
UD annotation scheme was designed as a com-
pletely automatic procedure. Due to several dis-
crepancies between the two annotation schemes,
however, numerous conversion rules have been
compiled on both morphological and syntactic
level, whereas the tokenization, sentence segmen-
tation and lemmatization principles of the original
ssj200k treebank (currently) remain unchanged.
In particular, we haven’t used the option where to-
kens containing several (syntactic) words can be
decomposed; this remains as future work.

3.1 Mapping of Morphosyntax

In terms of POS categorization, UD introduces
a more fine-grained tagset of 17 POS categories
in comparison with 12 POS categories in JOS,
as it distinguishes between different types of
(JOS-defined) verbs (AUX vs. VERB), conjunc-
tions (CCONJ vs. SCONJ), characters (SYM vs.
PUNCT), on the one hand, and subsumes the JOS
Abbreviation POS as part of the X UD POS, on
the other. A particularly challenging new cate-
gory is the determiner (DET), reserved for nomi-
nal modifiers expressing the reference of the noun

4http://www.slovenscina.eu/
5It should be noted that several errata were discovered in

ssj500k v1.4 in the process of conversion to UD v2.0. These
were corrected and a new version of ssj500k will be released
shortly. It is the new version that was used as the basis for the
conversion to UD v2.0.

phrase in context, not traditionally used in Slavic
grammars. For its conversion, a lexicon-oriented
approach was adopted, in which pronominal sub-
categories in JOS were classified as either DET
or PRON based on their typical syntactic behavior
and their inflectional features, regardless of their
context-specific syntactic role (Figure 1). Thus,
predominantly pro-adjectival sub-categories (e.g.
possessive or demonstrative pronouns) were con-
verted to DET, while pro-nominal (e.g., personal
pronouns) remained annotated as PRON, with lem-
mas in some sub-categories distributed between
both POS categories (e.g., the JOS indefinite pro-
nouns nekdo.PRON “somebody” vs. mnog.DET
“many”). Similarly, a pre-determined list of indef-
inite quantifiers (e.g., nekaj “some”, več “more”,
veliko “a-lot”), annotated as adverbs in JOS, has
also been converted to DET.

vse to ga je spravilo v dobro voljo
all this him has put in good mood

DET PRON

nsubj
obj

Figure 1: The annotation of JOS demonstrative
(to) and personal (ga) pronouns in UD.

For the Slovenian UD Treebank 22 mor-
phological features have been adopted, among
which four are language- (Gender[psor],
Number[psor], i.e., gender and number of the
possessor with possessive adjectives) or treebank-
specific (NumForm, Variant). In addition to the
features not expressed morphologically in Slove-
nian (Evident), or not identifiable using auto-
matic procedures (Polite), the Slovenian Tree-
bank currently also lacks the universal Voice
feature, as no morphological distinction has been
made between predicative and attributive uses of
participles in the JOS annotation scheme (e.g.,
ukradena denarnica “a stolen wallet” vs. denar-
nica je bila ukradena “the wallet was stolen”).

The morphological layer conversion from JOS
to UD is performed by a script which uses two
semi-ordered tables (one for mapping the POS and
the other for features). In total, the POS mapping
contains 107 rules, of which 22 simply map a com-
bination of the JOS POS and features to an UD
POS, while 85 also specify the lemma of the to-
ken. There is only one rule that also takes into
account the syntactic relation of the token, namely34



that for mapping an JOS auxiliary verb to the UD
AUX or VERB. The feature mapping table con-
tains 106 rules, of which 85 map a combination
of the JOS POS and features, and possibly the al-
ready mapped UD POS to a UD feature, and 21
which are lemma-dependent.

3.2 Mapping of Syntax

Although both the JOS and the UD annotation
scheme are based on the dependency grammar the-
ory and adopt similar principles regarding the pri-
macy of content words over function words, there
are several significant differences between the two
frameworks. Most notably, the UD annotation
scheme introduces a much broader scope of syn-
tactic analysis in comparison with JOS, where pri-
ority was given to parsing of predicates and their
valency arguments, whereas semantically ’periph-
eral’ sentence elements, such as sentence adverbs,
discourse particles, interjections, vocatives, appo-
sition, punctuation, clausal coordination, juxtapo-
sition, etc. did not receive any syntactic analysis
in JOS (as exemplified in Figure 2).

Secondly, the UD scheme also incorporates
a much more detailed set of dependency re-
lations (37 universal labels) than JOS (10 la-
bels), as illustrated by the example given in
Figure 3, in which the JOS Atr relation, in-
tended for annotation of any head-modifier re-
lation in a nominal phrase, converts to vari-
ous types of nominal dependents in UD, such
as different types of modifiers (amod, nmod,
nummord, advmod, det, acl). In the
same way, no distinction is made in JOS regard-
ing the different syntactic structures of the depen-
dents, whereas UD differentiates between nominal
(nsubj, obj/iobj, obl) and clausal (csubj,
ccomp, advcl) dependents performing the same
syntactic role (see, for example, the two annota-
tions of JOS Obj in Figure 2).

On the other hand, some semantic information
is lost when converting data from JOS to UD, as
JOS distinguishes between different types of ar-
guments given their semantic role, such as be-
tween different types of adverbials or between se-
mantically (non-)obligatory prepositional phrases,
whereas UD only adopts the distinction between
core arguments (i.e., subjects, objects, clausal
complements) on the one hand, and oblique modi-
fiers on the other, regardless of the degree of their
obligatoriness in terms of valency and semantics.

In addition to categorization differences, the prin-
ciples for determining the head-dependant direc-
tion mostly remain the same, with the exception
of some specific constructions and the copula rela-
tion, in which the copula is dependent on the non-
verbal predicate (see the cop relation in Figures 2
and 3).

In total, 32 different dependency relations have
been used in the Slovenian UD treebank, includ-
ing three extensions, i.e., cc:preconj for anno-
tation of preconjuncts, flat:name for relations
within personal names, and flat:foreign for
relations within strings of foreign tokens. The
eight missing universal relations in the treebank
relate either to phenomena that do not occur
in Slovenian (clf, compound), have not been
found in the ssj200k treebank (dislocated,
goeswith, reparandum) or do not enable re-
liable automatic identification (list, orphan,
vocative).6

Among many syntactic particularities that have
also be identified in other Slavic languages (Ze-
man, 2015), language-specific issues requiring ad-
ditional consideration in the future include the
treatment of (in)direct objects (with the iobj la-
bel currently only assigned in case of two com-
peting objects), the inventory of TAMVE particles
that could have been annotated as AUX/aux (such
as ne ”not”, lahko “may” or naj “should”), and
the treatment of the se reflexive pronoun (currently
annotated as expl in Slovenian, regardless of its
specific semantic role).

In total, the script for conversion of syntactic
layer includes approximately 250 rules for depen-
dency relation identification and/or head attach-
ment, taking into account the lexical, morpholog-
ical and syntactic features of individual tokens,
their dependants or parents, as well as the features
of tokens in the surrounding context. The conver-
sion is performed in several iterations over tokens
of a sentence, starting with the conversion of ex-
isting JOS-annotated constructions, and followed
by different heuristics for annotation of previously
un-annotated phenomena, including rules for root
identification and punctuation attachment. In the
last stage of the conversion, some mistakes and in-
consistencies identified in the original ssj200k cor-
pus are also corrected.

6Some of these relations, however, do occur in the man-
ually annotated Spoken Slovenian UD Treebank (Dobrovoljc
and Nivre, 2016).35



Že vidimo , kajne , kako nam Kajn postaja bližji , kako nismo zaman njegovi potomci .

advmod punct

discourse

punct

advmod

obj

nsubj

ccomp

xcomp

punct

advmod

parataxis

advmod
det

cop

punct

Obj
Conj

Obj

Sb Atr Conj AdvO

Atr

Atr

Figure 2: The comparison of UD (above) and JOS (below) annotation schemes in terms of complexity
of dependency trees. All unanalysed tokens in JOS have been annotated as direct dependents of the root
element.

V Ardenih je zablestel Aerts , ki mu je bila to šele četrta zmaga v 7 - letni karieri profesionalca .

case
acl

cop amodnummod
case

nmod

Atr Atr Atr Atr
Atr

Atr Atr

Figure 3: The comparison of UD (above) and JOS (below) annotation schemes in terms of complexity
of dependency relation taxonomy.

4 The Slovenian UD Treebank

Many constructions in the ssj200k corpus could
not be converted automatically, among which dif-
ferent types of clausal coordination, juxtaposi-
tion and predicate ellipsis prevail. Sentences with
such constructions were therefore omitted from
the conversion and the resulting Slovenian UD
Treebank has about 40% less tokens than the orig-
inal ssj200k treebank. Nevertheless, it remains
comparable to UD treebanks available for other
languages (Nivre and et al., 2016), both in terms
of size and average sentence length (Table 1).

sl-ud ud-avg ssj200k
(UD 2.0) (UD 1.4) (v1.4)

tokens 140,670 191,697 235,865
sentences 8,000 10,560 11,411
tok./sent. 17.6 18.2 20.7

Table 1: The size of Slovenian UD Treebank (sl-
ud) in comparison with the average UD Treebank
(ud-avg) and the original ssj200k treebank.

This latest version of the Slovenian UD Tree-
bank is planned to be released as part of UD

version 2.0, scheduled for March 2017, under
the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license. The treebank
maintains full compatibility with the original
ssj200k treebank, encoded according to the XML-
based Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines
(TEI Consortium, 2012), by listing the original
JOS morphosyntactic and syntactic annotations
as part of the XPOSTAG and MISC CONLL-U7

columns, respectively, and by keeping the original
ssj200k/FidaPLUS sentence identifiers as part of
the CONLL-U comment line.

5 Conclusions

This paper presented the latest Slovenian UD
Treebank, obtained with automatic conversion
from the ssj500k Treebank, which uses the JOS
annotation scheme. This new language resource
represents a valuable contribution to the Slove-
nian NLP landscape, where research on depen-
dency parsing and syntactically annotated data is
still scarce (Krek, 2012). In addition to further
improvements of the treebank, both in terms of
size and annotation quality, priority in future work

7http://universaldependencies.org/
format.html36



should be given to evaluation of impact of the new
annotation scheme on tagging/parsing accuracy,
and its potential transfer to other reference corpora
for Slovenian.

Acknowledgments

The first author would like to than Joachim Nivre
and Dan Zeman for their invaluable inspiration
and help. The work presented here was supported
by the IC1207 COST Action PARSEME (PARS-
ing and Multi-word Expressions) and Slovenian
research programme P2-0103 “Knowledge Tech-
nologies”.

References
Špela Arhar and Vojko Gorjanc. 2007. Korpus Fi-

daPLUS: Nova generacija slovenskega referenčnega
korpusa (The FidaPLUS Corpus: A New Generation
of the Slovene Reference Corpus). Jezik in slovstvo,
52(2):95–110.

Kaja Dobrovoljc and Joakim Nivre. 2016. The Uni-
versal Dependencies Treebank of Spoken Slovenian.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016), Paris, France, May. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Kaja Dobrovoljc, Simon Krek, and Jan Rupnik. 2012.
Skladenjski razčlenjevalnik za slovenščino (Depen-
dency Parser for Slovene). In Zbornik Osme konfer-
ence Jezikovne tehnologije, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Sašo Džeroski, Tomaž Erjavec, Nina Ledinek, Petr Pa-
jas, Zdenek Žabokrtsky, and Andreja Žele. 2006.
Towards a Slovene Dependency Treebank. In Fifth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, LREC’06, Paris. ELRA.

Tomaž Erjavec, Darja Fišer, Simon Krek, and Nina
Ledinek. 2010. The JOS Linguistically Tagged Cor-
pus of Slovene. In Proceedings of the Seventh con-
ference on International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Tomaž Erjavec. 2012. MULTEXT-East: morphosyn-
tactic resources for Central and Eastern European
languages. Language Resources and Evaluation,
46(1):131–142.

Miha Grčar, Simon Krek, and Kaja Dobrovoljc. 2012.
Obeliks: statistični oblikoskladenjski označevalnik
in lematizator za slovenski jezik (Obeliks: a sta-
tistical morphosyntactic tagger and lemmatiser for
Slovene). In Zbornik Osme konference Jezikovne
tehnologije, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Eva Hajičová, Zdeněk Kirschner, and Petr Sgall. 1999.
A Manual for Analytic Layer Annotation of the

Prague Dependency Treebank (English translation).
Technical report, ÚFAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Simon Krek, Kaja Dobrovoljc, Tomaž Erjavec, Sara
Može, Nina Ledinek, and Nanika Holz. 2015.
Training corpus ssj500k 1.4. Slovenian language re-
source repository CLARIN.SI.

Simon Krek. 2012. Slovenski jezik v digitalni
dobi – The Slovene Language in the Digital Age.
META-NET White Paper Series. Georg Rehm and
Hans Uszkoreit (Series Editors). Springer. Avail-
able online at http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers.

Nikola Ljubešić and Tomaž Erjavec. 2016. Corpus vs.
Lexicon Supervision in Morphosyntactic Tagging:
the Case of Slovene. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France, may. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-
talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Uni-
versal Stanford Dependencies: a Cross-Linguistic
Typology. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Joakim Nivre and et al. 2016. Universal Dependencies
1.4. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at the Insti-
tute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles Uni-
versity in Prague. http://hdl.handle.net/
11234/1-1827.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual
Treebank Collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a Universal Grammar
for Natural Language Processing. In Alexander Gel-
bukh, editor, Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing, volume 9041 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 3–16. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A Universal Part-of-Speech Tagset. In Proceed-
ings of the Eight International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istan-
bul, Turkey. European Language Resources Associ-
ation (ELRA).

TEI Consortium, editor. 2012. TEI P5: Guidelines
for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. TEI
Consortium.37



Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable Tagset Conversion
Using Tagset Drivers. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2008), pages 213–218, Mar-
rakech, Morocco. European Language Resources
Association.

Daniel Zeman. 2015. Slavic Languages in Univer-
sal Dependencies. In Proceedings of the conference
”Natural Language Processing, Corpus Linguistics,
E-learning”, pages 151–163, Bratislava, Slovakia.
RAM-Verlag.

38


