



















































Detecting Personal Medication Intake in Twitter: An Annotated Corpus and Baseline Classification System


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2017 workshop, pages 136–142,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

  1

Detecting Personal Medication Intake in Twitter: 
An Annotated Corpus and Baseline Classification System 

 
 

Ari Z. Klein, Abeed Sarker, Masoud Rouhizadeh, Karen O’Connor, Graciela Gonzalez 
Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics 

Perelman School of Medicine 
University of Pennsylvania 

{ariklein,abeed,mrou,karoc,gragon}@upenn.edu 
 

Abstract 

Social media sites (e.g., Twitter) have been 
used for surveillance of drug safety at the pop-
ulation level, but studies that focus on the ef-
fects of medications on specific sets of indi-
viduals have had to rely on other sources of 
data. Mining social media data for this infor-
mation would require the ability to distinguish 
indications of personal medication intake in 
this media. Towards that end, this paper pre-
sents an annotated corpus that can be used to 
train machine learning systems to determine 
whether a tweet that mentions a medication in-
dicates that the individual posting has taken 
that medication (at a specific time). To demon-
strate the utility of the corpus as a training set, 
we present baseline results of supervised clas-
sification.  

1 Introduction 

Social media allows researchers and public 
health professionals to obtain relevant infor-
mation in large amounts directly from populations 
and/or specific cohorts of interest, and it has 
evolved into a useful resource for performing pub-
lic health monitoring and surveillance. According 
to a Pew report (Greenwood et al., 2016), nearly 
half of adults worldwide and two-thirds of all 
American adults (65%) use social media, includ-
ing over 90% of 18-29 year olds. Recent studies 
have attempted to utilize social media data for 
tasks such as pharmacovigilance (Leaman et al., 
2010), identifying user behavioral patterns (Struik 
and Baskerville, 2014), analyzing social circles 
with common behaviors (Hanson et al., 2013b), 
and tracking infectious disease spread 
(Broniatowski et al., 2015).  

A large subset of the public health-related re-
search using social media data, including our prior 

work in the domain, focuses on mining infor-
mation (e.g., adverse drug reactions, medication 
abuse, and user sentiment) from posts mentioning 
medications (Korkontzelos et al., 2016; Hanson et 
al., 2013b; Nikfarjam et al., 2015). Typically, 
these and similar studies focus on information at 
the population level, but processing and deriving 
information from individual user posts poses sig-
nificant challenges from the natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) perspective. Researchers attempt 
to overcome the noise and inaccuracies in the data 
by relying on large amounts of data. For example, 
Hanson et al. (2013b; 2013a) attempted to esti-
mate the abuse of Adderall® using Twitter by de-
tecting the total number of mentions of the medi-
cation. The authors did not attempt to assess if a 
mention represented personal intake or not. 

While such a strategy may suffice for deriving 
estimates “by proxy” at the population level (e.g., 
higher volume of chatter means higher rates of 
use), it has at least two limitations: (i) the actual 
number of tweets representing personal intake 
within a given sample of tweets is unknown, and 
(ii) it is not possible to assess the effects of medi-
cation intake on subsets of users of interest who 
take the medication. Studies focusing on specific 
subsets of individuals rely on other sources of 
data, such as electronic health records and pub-
lished literature from clinical trials, where infor-
mation about the individuals’ medication intake is 
explicit (e.g., Akbarov et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 
2016; Romagnoli et al., 2017). Harnessing social 
media for studying the effects of medications on 
specific cohorts would require developing sys-
tems that can automatically distinguish posts that 
express personal intake from those that do not.  

Due to the very recent incorporation of social 
media data in healthcare systems, published re-
search on our target task of creating a corpus for 
automatic detection of personal medication intake 

136



  2

information is scarce. The study by Alvaro et al. 
(2015) is perhaps the most closely related work to 
ours. The authors annotated 1,548 tweets for 
whether they contain “first-hand experiences” of 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) to prescription 
medications, and they used this annotated data in 
a supervised classification framework aimed at 
automatically identifying tweets that report per-
sonal usage. As far as we are aware, however, they 
have not made their annotated data public; none-
theless, we do not believe that it would have been 
exactly the right training set for our classification 
task. Because our focus is to help set the ground-
work for using social media data in medication-
related cohort studies, we included a subtle but 
key factor in our criteria for identifying personal 
intake: when the medication was taken. We will 
discuss this factor in more detail in the next sec-
tion. In this paper, we present (i) an analysis of 
medication-mentioning chatter on Twitter, (ii) a 
publicly available, annotated corpus of tweets that 
can be used to advance automatic systems, and 
(iii) baseline supervised classification results to 
validate the utility of the annotated data. 

2 Method 

We chose Twitter as the data source for this study 
because of its growing popularity in public health 
research, and its easy-to-use public APIs. We dis-
cuss the three primary tasks—data collection, an-
notation, and classification—in the following sub-
sections. 

2.1 Data Collection 
To build the corpus, we queried 73,800 Twitter 
user timelines (that we collected for related work) 
for 55 medication names, including both prescrip-
tion and over-the-counter medications, brand and 
generic names, and types of medications (e.g., 
steroid). Using a tool that was developed by 
Pimpalkhute et al. (2014), we generated frequent 
misspellings of the medications in order to expand 
the query. We then tokenized all of the tweets, us-
ing the ARK Twokenizer (O’Connor et al., 2010; 
Owoputi et al., 2013), and identified 35,075 
tweets containing a target medication. To account 
for the linguistic idiosyncrasies of how Twitter us-
ers might express their medication intake, we ran-
domly selected one medication tweet from the 
18,033 timelines that included such a tweet, and 
we prepared them for annotation. For this paper, 
                                                      
1 The annotation guidelines and a sample of the annotated 
data are available at: 
https://healthlanguageprocessing.org/twitter-med-intake/ 

10,260 tweets were annotated, with overlapping 
annotations for 1,026 (10%).  

2.2 Annotation 
 In order to control for studying the effects of med-
ication intake on subsets of individuals in a social 
media setting, we decided that tweets of interest 
should not only represent the author’s personal us-
age of the target medication in the tweet; they 
should also indicate the specific instance in which 
the user took the mentioned medication, since re-
searchers using social media data cannot physically 
observe and record when medications were taken. 
Only if the tweets provide this additional infor-
mation about the time of intake can we potentially 
use Twitter data to assess causal associations be-
tween users’ health information (also mined from 
social media data) and the usage of particular med-
ications. As we mentioned earlier, the way that time 
factors into our definition of “intake” marks an im-
portant distinction between our annotated data and 
Alvaro et al.’s (2015). 

We found that, under minimal guidance, intui-
tively agreeing on what constituted a personal in-
take of medication, given the above criteria, was 
very difficult. We attribute this difficulty to the 
wide range of linguistic patterns in which we found 
medication mentions occurring. In an effort to ob-
tain high inter-annotator agreement and address the 
human disagreement that Alvaro et al. seek to over-
come, we analyzed linguistic patterns in samples of 
the data and used this analysis to inform the devel-
opment of annotation guidelines;1 in addition, we 
limited the number of annotation classes to the 
three high-level classes that we thought were most 
directly relevant to the classification task at hand: 
intake, possible intake, and no intake.  

We will summarize our analysis of the three 
classes of tweets here. Intake tweets indicate that 
(i) the medication was actually taken, (ii) the author 
of the tweet personally took the medication, and 
(iii) the medication was taken at a specific time. To 
illustrate (i), consider the following tweets: 

 
(a) Migraine from hell… Took 6 Motrin and 

nothing’s touching it 
(b) I've been off adderall about a month now 

and I'm so much happier, but COM-
PLETELY useless. I'm like a child again. 

  
 
. 

137



  3

(c) A lot of people hate on prednisone but I feel 
better already. #stuffworksforme 

(d) this ibuprofen still ain't kicked in my head 
poundin 

 
While only (a) uses a verb phrase that explicitly 
indicates intake (took…), we can infer from fea-
tures of the other tweets that the medication was 
taken: (b) being off the medication, (c) experienc-
ing the effects of the medication, and (d) waiting 
for the medication to kick in all entail that the 
medication was taken.  

Moreover, intake tweets should indicate that 
the author of the tweet took the medication: 

 
(e) Sorry for this rant thingy, I took my 

Vyvanse today lol 
(f) Sick and only had a Tylenol PM at work so 

now i feel better but i am fighting sleep😂 
(g) Just threw back these Xanax 
(h) In soooo much pain tonight and Tylenol just 

isn't cutting it. Literally hurting all over 
 
Through the use of the first-person reference I, (e) 
explicitly states that the author took the medica-
tion, and (f) explicitly attributes the experiential 
effects of the medication (feel better, but fighting 
sleep) to the author. While (g) and (h) do not ex-
plicitly reveal that the author took the medication 
(threw back) or is (not) experiencing the effect of 
the medication (isn’t cutting it), respectively, the 
high degree of self-presentation in social media 
(e.g., Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010; Papacharissi, 
2012; Seidman, 2013) allows us to infer that the 
authors are writing about their own intake and ex-
periences.  

Finally, intake tweets also specify when the med-
ication was taken: 

 
(i) I've been sick for the last 3 days taking Ibu-

profen just feel better and to fight Infection 
"swelling" 

(j) Tylenol is my bestfriend at the moment 
(k) maybe i'm tired as had 2 tramadol my bk is 

sore sore sore... #scoliosis 
(l) Prednisone headache! Ahhhh 

 
Tweet (i) uses a temporal marker that explicitly 
specifies an instance of intake, and, similarly, (j) 
explicitly indicates when the effect of the intake 
occurred. Although (k) and (l) do not explicitly 
specify instances of intake, Twitter’s real-time na-

ture (Sakaki et al., 2010) gives us reason to be-
lieve that the author of (k) recently had the medi-
cation and that the effect in (l) is being currently 
experienced, which represents an intake in the re-
cent past (i.e., a specific instance).  

Unlike intake tweets, some tweets do not specify 
that the author actually took the medication or 
when the medication was taken, but, unlike no in-
take tweets, are generally about the author’s intake. 
Consider the following tweets: 

 
(m) I want to cry it's that painful 😭gonna take 

codeine this morning for sure 
(n) 800 mg of Advil cause this headache is 

real 
(o) I need a Xanax like right now 
(p) Codeine is one hell of a drug. 😴😴😴 
(q) 😭😭😭 I never understood why I get so an-

gryyyy omg I was so mellow on Xanax 🌚 
(r) I pretty much eat Advil like it's 

candy.💊🙆 
 
We consider a tweet to be a possible intake if it 
expresses the intake as a future event (m); it con-
tains merely a purpose for intake (n); it expresses 
a present-tense need for the medication (o); it ab-
stractly praises (or criticizes) the medication with-
out describing a concrete effect (p); it indicates 
that the author has used the medication in the past, 
but does not specify when (q); or, similarly, it in-
dicates that the author uses the medication fre-
quently, but does not specify an instance of intake 
(r). We decided to distinguish possible intake 
tweets because they can direct us to a user’s time-
line for manual probing, where we may find, for 
example, that a series of tweets aggregate to form 
a sort of composite intake tweet. 

In contrast to intake and possible intake tweets, 
no intake tweets are not about the author’s intake 
of the medication. While some no intake tweets are 
not about intake at all, some may be about the in-
take by others, not the author: 

 
(s) @[Username redacted] Mine hurt for days 

last year!! Take some paracetamol hun 😊 
(t) Gave James 2 ibuprofen pm and I'm being 

repaid by the sound of him snoring penetrat-
ing through my earplugs 

 
The act of suggesting a medication (s) or giving 
someone a medication (t) might be interpreted as 
implying that the author has taken the medication 
in the past (i.e., a possible intake), but, because the 

138



  4

tweets are not primarily about the author’s intake, 
we consider this inferential leap to be too large to 
warrant the same classification as other possible 
intake tweets.   

While (s) and (t) are explicitly not about the au-
thor’s intake, other tweets may not be as obvious, 
such as tweets that contain merely the name of a 
medication: 
 

(u) @[Username redacted] @[Username re-
dacted] @[Username redacted] 
@[Username redacted] methadone ! 

 
Although (u) also might be interpreted as indicat-
ing the author’s use of the medication, the textual 
evidence does not seem to favor this interpretation 
over other possible ones, such as mere question-
answering. We classify tweets that contain merely 
the name of a medication as no intake because, 
unlike intake and possible intake tweets, they do 
not contain enough information for us to conclude 
that they are about the author’s intake.  

The “addressivity” (Bakhtin, 1986) markers 
“@” in (u) reflect the “dialogic” (Bakhtin, 1981) 
space of social media, wherein the linguistic data 
that we are mining is not only textual, but “inter-
textual” (Kristeva, 1980)—that is, oriented to what 
has already been said by others. Tweets also mark 
this social orientation to others through features of 
“reported speech” (Voloshinov, 1973). Consider 
the following tweets: 

 
(v) @[Username redacted] "I don't either cause 

these Tylenol aren't doing crap!" Lol  
(w) I just wanna give a shoutout to adderall for 

helping me get through the semester - Flor-
ida State 

 
While (v) and (w) would otherwise be classified 
as intake tweets, the quotation marks in (v) and 
the hyphen in (w) mark that the authors are di-
rectly reporting the words of others—in (w), a stu-
dent at Florida State—not their own medication 
intake.  

Other cases of reported speech involve tweets 
that make cultural references about taking medica-
tions—for example, song lyrics or lines from mov-
ies. As our analysis of the three classes suggests, 
identifying indications of personal medication in-
take in social media required grappling with a num-
ber of annotation issues, which forecast the chal-
lenges of using this data to train classifiers.  
                                                      
2 Available at: http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/. Ac-
cessed: 5/25/2017. 

2.3 Classification 
We performed supervised classification experi-
ments using several algorithms. The goal for these 
experiments was not to identify the best perform-
ing classification strategy, but to (i) verify that au-
tomatic classifiers could be trained using this data, 
and (ii) generate baseline performance estimates.  

We used stratified 80-20 (training/test) split of 
the annotated set for the experiments. As features, 
we used only word n-grams (n = 1, 2, and 3) fol-
lowing standard preprocessing (e.g., stemming us-
ing the Porter stemmer (Porter, 1980) and lower-
casing). We experimented with four classifiers—
naïve bayes (NB), support vector machines (SVM), 
random forest (RF), logistic regression (LR), and a 
majority-voting based ensemble of the last three. 
Pairwise classification (i.e., 1-vs-1) is used to adapt 
the SVMs to the multiclass problem. Parameter op-
timization for the individual classifiers was per-
formed via 10-fold cross validation over the train-
ing set, with an objective function that maximizes 
the F-score for the intake class.  

Following the classification experiments, we 
performed brief error and feature analyses to iden-
tify common misclassification patterns and possi-
ble future approaches for improving classification 
performance. To identify informative n-grams for 
the intake class, we applied the Information Gain 
feature evaluation technique, which computes the 
importance of an attribute with respect to a class 
according to the following equation: 

 
, |   

 
 represents the information entropy for a given 

state (Yang and Pedersen, 1997). We used the Weka 
3 tool2 for all machine learning and feature analysis 
experiments. We present the results for these exper-
iments in the next section. 

3 Results and Discussion 

In this section, we present and discuss the results of 
annotation and the baseline classification experi-
ments, including a brief error analysis of misclassi-
fied intake tweets and a feature analysis to identify 
informative n-grams. 

3.1 Annotation 
For the corpus that we present in this paper, two 
expert annotators have annotated 10,260 tweets, 
 

139



  5

with overlapping annotations for 1,026 (10%). 
Their inter-annotator agreement was κ = 0.88 (Co-
hen’s Kappa). They disagreed on 81 tweets, which 
the first author of this paper resolved through in-
dependent annotation. In total, 1,952 tweets 
(19%) were annotated as intake; 3,219 (31%) 
were annotated as possible intake; and 5,089 
(50%) were annotated as no intake. These fre-
quencies suggest that a minority of tweets that 
mention medications represent personal intake, 
which substantiates the need for this classification 
when mining large amounts of social media data 
for drug safety surveillance. 

3.2 Classification 
Table 1 presents the performances of the different 
classifiers. The overall accuracy (Acc) over the 
three classes and the F-scores (F) for each of the 
three classes are shown. The no intake (NI) class 
has the best F-score due to the larger number of 
training instances. SVMs, RF and LR classifiers 
have comparable accuracies, and they outperform 
the NB baseline. SVMs have the highest F-score 
for the intake (I) class, suggesting that it might be 
the most suitable classifier for this task.  

The voting-based ensemble of the three classifi-
ers does not improve performance over the SVMs. 
Post-classification analyses revealed that this is be-
cause the individual classifiers in the ensemble, 
particularly the LR and SVMs classifiers, make al-
most identical predictions given the feature set of 
n-grams. The confusion matrices for the classifiers’ 
predictions are also alike, with strong inter-classi-
fier agreements in terms of false and true positives 
and negatives. The results and the analyses suggest 
that incorporating/generating features that are more 
informative is more likely to improve performance 
on this task, rather than combining multiple classi-
fiers on the same feature vectors.  

Table 1: Class-specific F-scores and accuracies 
for four classifiers and ensemble 

 
The promising results obtained from automatic 
classification verify that our annotated dataset 
may indeed be used for training automated classi-

fication systems. Including more informative fea-
tures is likely to further improve performance, 
particularly for the smallest (intake) class. 

3.3 Error and Feature Analyses 
An analysis of the false negative results of the in-
take class from the SVM classifier suggests that the 
majority of the errors (62%) could be attributed to 
the implicit indication that (i) the medication was 
taken, (ii) the author of the tweet personally took 
the medication, or (iii) the medication was taken at 
a specific time. In 69% of these cases, the intake 
tweet did not explicitly state (i), that the medication 
was taken. The next largest set of misclassified in-
take tweets comprised instances where the intake 
tweets contain lexical features that seem to fre-
quently occur in the other classes (e.g., negation). 
Incorporating semantic features into the SVM clas-
sifier is likely to improve classification of the in-
take tweets.  

Table 2 presents the 15 most informative n-
grams for distinguishing the intake class from the 
others, as identified by the information gain meas-
ure. The table suggests that certain personal pro-
nouns and explicit markers of personal consump-
tion (e.g., I took), information about effectiveness 
(e.g., not working), and expressions indicating the 
need for a medication (e.g., need a) are useful n-
grams for the classification task.  

i not helping i ve taken 
took i need not working 

i took ve been taking still in 
took some took two need a 
to kick in i ve taken just took 
Table 2: Most informative n-grams that distin-

guish the intake class from the others 

4 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented a brief analysis of what 
we consider to be linguistic representations of per-
sonal medication intake on Twitter. This linguistic 
analysis informed our manual annotation of 
10,260 tweets. We presented baseline supervised 
classification results that suggest that this anno-
tated corpus can be used for training automated 
classification systems to detect personal medica-
tion intake in large amounts of social media data, 
and we will seek to improve the performance of 
our classifiers in future work. We believe that this 
classification is an important step towards broad-
ening the use of social media for surveillance of 
drug safety. 
  

 I  
(F) 

PI  
(F) 

NI  
(F) 

Acc 
(%) 

95%  
CI 

NB 0.59 0.58 0.73 64.4 62.4-66.3 

SVM 0.67 0.69 0.80 73.4 71.5-75.1 

RF 0.60 0.68 0.80 72.2 70.4-74.0 

LR 0.65 0.68 0.79 72.5 70.7-74.3 

Ensemble 0.67 0.69 0.80 73.3 71.4-75.1 

140



  6

References 
 

Artur Akbarov, Evangelos Kontopantelis, Matthew 
Sperrin, Susan J. Stocks, Richard Williams, Sarah 
Rodgers, Anthony Avery, Iain Buchan, and Darren 
M Ashcroft. 2015. Primary care medication safety 
surveillance with integrated primary and secondary 
care electronic health records: A cross-sectional 
study. Drug Safety, 38(7):671–682, July. 

Nestor Alvaro, Mike Conway, Son Doan, Christoph 
Lofi, John Overington, and Nigel Collier. 2015. 
Crowdsourcing Twitter annotations to identify first-
hand experiences of prescription drug use. Journal 
of Biomedical Informatics, 58: 280-287, December. 

Mikhail M. Bakhtin. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination. 
University of Texas Press, Austin, TX. 

Mikhail M. Bakhtin. 1986. Speech Genres & Other 
Essays. University of Texas Press, Austin, TX. 

David Andre Broniatowski, Mark Dredze, Michael J. 
Paul, and Andrea Dugas. 2015. Using social media 
to perform local influenza surveillance in an inner-
city hospital: A retrospective observational study. 
JMIR Public Health Surveill 2015; 1(1):e5 
https://publichealth.jmir.org/2015/1/e5/, 1(1):e5. 

Shannon Greenwood, Andrew Perrin, and Maeve 
Duggan. 2016. PEW Research Center Social Media 
Update 2016. 

Carl L. Hanson, Scott H. Burton, Christophe Giraud-
Carrier, Josh H. West, Michael D. Barnes, and Bret 
Hansen. 2013a. Tweaking and tweeting: exploring 
Twitter for nonmedical use of a psychostimulant 
drug (Adderall) among college students. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 15(4):e62, April. 

Carl Lee Hanson, Ben Cannon, Scott Burton, and 
Christophe Giraud-Carrier. 2013b. An exploration 
of social circles and prescription drug abuse through 
Twitter. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
15(9):e189, January. 

Andreas M. Kaplan and Michael Haenlein. 2010. 
Users of the world, unite! The challenges and 
opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 
53(1):59-68, January-February. 

Ioannis Korkontzelos, Azadeh Nikfarjam, Matthew 
Shardlow, Abeed Sarker, Sophia Ananiadou, and 
Graciela H. Gonzalez. 2016. Analysis of the effect 
of sentiment analysis on extracting adverse drug 
reactions from tweets and forum posts. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 62:148–158, August. 

Julia Kristeva. 1980. Desire in Language: A Semiotic 
Approach to Literature and Art. Columbia 
University Press, New York.  

Robert Leaman, Laura Wojtulewicz, Ryan Sullivan, 
Annie Skariah, Jian Yang, and Graciela Gonzalez. 
2010. Towards Internet-Age Pharmacovigilance: 

Extracting Adverse Drug Reactions from User Posts 
to Health-Related Social Networks. In  Workshop 
on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 
117–125, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Azadeh Nikfarjam, Abeed Sarker, Karen O’Connor, 
Rachel Ginn, and Graciela Gonzalez. 2015. 
Pharmacovigilance from social media: Mining 
adverse drug reaction mentions using sequence 
labeling with word embedding cluster features. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 22(3):671–81, March. 

Brendan O'Connor, Michael Krieger, and David Ahn. 
2010. TweetMotif: Exploratory search and topic 
summarization for Twitter. In Proceedings of the 
Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs 
and Social Media, pages 384-385, Washington, DC. 

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan O'Connor, Chris Dyer, 
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. 
Smith. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for 
online conversational text with word clusters. In 
Proceedings of the Conference of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: Human Language 
Technologies, pages 380-391, Atlanta, GA. 

Zizi Papacharissi. 2012. Without you, I'm nothing: 
Performances of the self on Twitter. International 
Journal of Communication, 6:1989-2006,  

Pranoti Pimpalkhute, Apurv Patki, Azadeh Nikfarjam, 
and Graciela Gonzalez. 2014. Phonetic spelling 
filter for keyword selection in drug mention mining 
from social media. In AMIA Joint Summits on 
Translational Science proceedings AMIA Summit on 
Translational Science, pages 90–5. 

M. F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping. 
Program, 14(3):130–137. 

Katrina M. Romagnoli, Scott D. Nelson, Lisa Hines, 
Philip Empey, Richard D Boyce, and Harry 
Hochheiser. 2017. Information needs for making 
clinical recommendations about potential drug-drug 
interactions: a synthesis of literature review and 
interviews. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, 17(21). 

Takeshi Sakaki, Makoto Okazaki, and Yutaka 
Matsuo. 2010. Earthquake shakes Twitter users: 
Real-time event detection by social sensors. In 
Proceedings of the 19th International World Wide 
Web Conference, pages 851-860, Raleigh, NC. 

Gwendolyn Seidman. 2013. Self-presentation and 
belonging on Facebook: How personality influences 
social media use and motivations. Personality and 
Differences, 54(3):402-407, February. 

Laura Louise Struik and Neill Bruce Baskerville. 
2014. The role of Facebook in Crush the Crave, a 
mobile- and social media-based smoking cessation 
intervention: Qualitative Framework Analysis of 

141



  7

posts. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
16(7):e170, July.  

Valentin N. Voloshinov. 1973. Marxism and the 
Philosophy of Language. Seminar Press, New York. 

Yiming Yang, and Jan O. Pedersen. A Comparative 
Study on Feature Selection in Text Categorization. 
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International 
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 412–420. 

Li Zhou, Neil Dhopeshwarkar, Kimberly G 
Blumenthal, Foster R. Goss, Maxim Topaz, Sarah P.  
Slight, and David W. Bates. 2016. Drug allergies 
documented in electronic health records of a large 
healthcare system. Allergy, 71(9):1305–1313, 
September.

142


