



















































Semantic annotation to characterize contextual variation in terminological noun compounds: a pilot study


Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017), pages 108–113,
Valencia, Spain, April 4. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic annotation to characterize contextual variation in
terminological noun compounds: a pilot study

Melania Cabezas-Garcı́a
LexiCon Research Group

University of Granada
Granada, Spain

melaniacabezas@ugr.es

Antonio San Martı́n
LexiCon Research Group

Maynooth University
Maynooth, Ireland

antonio.sanmartin@nuim.ie

Abstract

Noun compounds (NCs) are semantically
complex and not fully compositional, as
is often assumed. This paper presents a
pilot study regarding the semantic anno-
tation of environmental NCs with a view
to accessing their semantics and explor-
ing their domain-based contextual varia-
tion. Our results showed that the semantic
annotation of NCs afforded important in-
sights into how context impacts their con-
ceptualization.

1 Introduction

In English, noun compounds (NCs) are the lexi-
cal units that are most often used to convey expert
knowledge (Daille et al., 2004; Nakov, 2013; Hen-
drickx et al., 2013). Terminological NCs can be
considered a type of multi-word term (MWT) be-
cause they are non-idiomatic multi-word units that
belong to a specialized domain and lie in the inter-
section between terms and multi-word expressions
(MWEs) (SanJuan et al., 2005; Frantzi et al., 2000;
Ramisch, 2015). They are characterized by their
semantic complexity since two or more concepts
are juxtaposed without any explicit indication of
the relation linking them (Ó Séaghdha and Copes-
take, 2013). This relation is determined largely by
the context and the frame (i.e. system of concepts
related in such a way that one concept evokes the
entire system (Fillmore, 1982)) to which the NC
belongs. In other words, they are not fully compo-
sitional and their conceptualization can differ de-
pending on the context and the semantic frame in
which it is embedded.

This paper describes the use of semantic anno-
tation to explore how domain-based context mod-
ulates the meaning of NCs. To this end, the anno-
tated concordance lines were used to identify and

analyze the argument structure of the propositions
underlying this kind of MWT. The micro-contexts
(i.e. the relation of a predicate with its arguments
and adjuncts) are directly related to the semantic
load of the compound term, because they spec-
ify the hidden relation between its components
(Cabezas-Garcı́a and Faber, 2016).

In the following section, a short account of the
particularities of NCs and the phenomenon of con-
textual variation is provided. Then, section 3 de-
scribes the materials and methods used in this pilot
study. Section 4 expounds the results of the study
and discusses their significance. Finally, section
5 presents the conclusions derived from this re-
search and mentions the issues that will be ad-
dressed in future work.

2 Contextual Variation in Noun
Compounds

2.1 Noun Compounds

NCs are very frequent in specialized texts writ-
ten in English (Daille et al., 2004; Nakov, 2013;
Hendrickx et al., 2013). They are a sequence of
nouns that function as a single noun (Downing,
1977), e.g., water loss or population growth. In
endocentric NCs, one term is the head and the
other is its modifier (Nakov, 2013) (e.g., power
generation). Alternatively, in exocentric NCs, the
MWT is not a hyponym of one of its elements,
and thus appears to lack a head (Bauer, 2008) (e.g.
saber tooth). Endocentric NCs (the focus of this
study) are characterized by their (i) headedness;
(ii) transparency, (iii) syntactic ambiguity; and (iv)
language-dependency (Nakov, 2013).

NCs have underlying propositions, which can
be inferred by the term formation processes high-
lighted in Levi (1978), involving predicate dele-
tion (e.g. power system, instead of a system pro-
duces power) and predicate nominalization (e.g.

108



heat transfer, instead of heat is transferred).
These propositions underlying the NCs take the
form of a predicate with its arguments, which are
necessary for the meaning of the verb, and its ad-
juncts (optional complements) (Tesnière, 1976).
The relation of a predicate to its argument struc-
ture is known as micro-context. This is a key fac-
tor that provides access to the conceptual load of
terms, since the predicate, which is the syntactic-
semantic core of the sentence, can only be success-
fully addressed through its complement structure
(Cabezas-Garcı́a and Faber, 2016).

2.2 Contextual Variation

The notion of context plays a crucial role in var-
ious disciplines that employ it in different ways.
In this paper, context refers to any factor that af-
fects the interpretation of a sign or an expres-
sion (Kecskes, 2014). This sense includes lin-
guistic factors (different types of co-text), dis-
cursive factors (channel, communicative purpose,
degree of formality, topic, and level of special-
ization), sociocultural factors (social activity in
which communication is embedded, and the rela-
tion between participants) as well as spatiotempo-
ral factors (San Martı́n, 2016).

Lexical units do not carry meaning in them-
selves, but rather trigger the mental representation
of meaning in context (Fauconnier, 1994). Mean-
ing is construed in every usage event. Depend-
ing on the context, certain segments of the knowl-
edge conventionally associated with a lexical unit
are activated and give rise to meaning. Therefore,
meaning does not exist outside of context. With-
out contextual restrictions, lexical units can be said
to have semantic potential, which is all the con-
ceptual content that a lexical unit is capable of in-
voking (Evans, 2009). The semantic potential of
a lexical unit constitutes a considerable amount of
information, all of which is never fully activated
in a single use event. It includes one or more con-
cepts and their underlying conceptual frames.

Given that context is never identical, the mean-
ing of a lexical unit is variable. This phenomenon
by which the semantic potential of a lexical unit
produces different meanings depending on the
context is called contextual variation. Although
in practice, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish
between a high degree of contextual variation and
polysemy, these two phenomena are theoretically
different. Polysemy occurs when the semantic po-

tential of a lexical unit refers to more than one con-
cept. For example, organism is a polysemic term
because it designates two different concepts: OR-
GANISM (living being) and ORGANISM (system or
organization). In contrast, ozone is an example of
contextual variation because it designates a single
concept (OZONE). When ozone appears in the con-
text of Atmospheric Science, it is conceptualized
as an important allotropic form of oxygen that is
present in the atmosphere. However, in the context
of Water Treatment and Supply, it is conceived as
a powerful virucidal agent used to disinfect water.

In this paper, we focus on domain-based contex-
tual variation because discourse topic is the con-
textual factor that best predicts how the seman-
tic potential of a term is restricted in actual usage
events (San Martı́n, 2016). In our analysis, domain
is synonymous to knowledge field.

3 Materials and Methods

A corpus of English texts on environmental sci-
ence was manually compiled. The corpus con-
sisted of 4,743,025 tokens, and was composed of
16 subcorpora of specialized and semi-specialized
texts. Each subcorpus had approximately 300,000
tokens and focused on a specific environmental
domain (e.g. Agronomy, Hydrology, etc.).

Each subcorpus was uploaded separately to
the term extractor TermoStat (Drouin, 2003)
(http://termostat.ling.umontreal.ca/). The search
was set to complex terms. The 16 resulting lists
of terms were automatically compared. In order
to ensure representativeness and significant con-
textual variation, we only retained the two-term
NCs designating processes that had a minimum of
10 occurrences in at least three subdomains (i.e.
10 NCs in total). The MWTs chosen were those
designating processes because these units have un-
derlying propositions with a clear argument struc-
ture, thus enabling the analysis of micro-contexts
(i.e. the relation between a predicate and its argu-
ments and adjuncts), which are key factors in the
conceptualization of this kind of MWT (Cabezas-
Garcı́a and Faber, 2016). This pilot study focuses
solely on the analysis of water loss, with a view to
developing an annotation protocol for the rest of
MWTs.

We also uploaded the corpus to
Sketch Engine (Kilgarriff et al., 2014)
(https://www.sketchengine.co.uk/), an online
corpus analysis application that allowed us to gen-

109



erate concordance lines, which were subsequently
processed with an annotation tool. As previously
mentioned, NCs designating processes all have
underlying propositions. Nakov and Hearst
(2006) confirmed that verb paraphrases are useful
for disambiguating these compound terms and
eliciting their meaning. Thus, in order to access
the concordances that allude to the semantics of
the MWT in question, we not only downloaded
the concordance lines where the NC appeared
but also the concordances where paraphrases had
been used (see Figure 1).

 
allows you to record how much water is lost through evaporation over a ti 

      of the unavoidable irrigation water losses percolating down into the und 
  ration. This is a combination of water lost by evaporation from the soil 

       eption loss. In general, more water is lost from a forested catchment tha 
   of a stone mulch is to reduce water loss from the soil and to eliminat 

 
 Figure 1: Concordance lines of water loss and its

verb paraphrases in the domain of Hydrology.

For example, in the case of water loss, concor-
dance lines such as “...combination of water lost
by evaporation from...” were analyzed, as well as
those where the NC occurred. This made it pos-
sible to access a larger number of examples of the
process conveyed by water loss (i.e. “a SOURCE
ceases to have [LOSE] a PATIENT [WATER]”). The
loss process is encoded by verbs conveying a sim-
ilar meaning though from different perspectives
(e.g. lose, evaporate, extract, release, etc.).

The next step was the annotation of the con-
cordance lines, following the semantic annota-
tion methodology in L’Homme (2012), which is
based on FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al., 2010).
Two human annotators, who established a com-
mon tagset and guidelines, annotated the concor-
dance lines with the help of the UAM CorpusTool
(O’Donnell, 2008) (http://www.corpustool.com/),
an open-source environment for the annotation of
text corpora. This tool also allows users to search
the corpus, perform statistical studies, analyze file
information, etc. The semantic labels 1used were:
(i) PREDICATIVE TERM, (ii) ARGUMENT, and (iii)
ADJUNCT. The predicative term was further spec-
ified as VERB or NOUN, and the arguments and

1It is well-known that the distinction between arguments
and adjuncts and the choice of the number and types of se-
mantic labels is problematic. Although this did not cause
problems in this work (due to the limited coverage of this
pilot study), it is an issue that will be carefully considered in
further research.

adjuncts as AGENT, PATIENT, SOURCE, TIME, LO-
CATION, RESULT, CAUSE, MANNER, QUANTITY,
MEDIUM, DESTINATION, INSTRUMENT, or AIM.
The annotation was performed on all the concor-
dance lines given the limited size of the study, but
larger annotation tasks would benefit from a selec-
tion of contexts, as proposed in L’Homme and Pi-
mentel (2012). Once the texts were annotated, the
UAM Corpus Tool software generated summaries
of the linguistic designations that filled the argu-
ments and adjuncts slots depending on the con-
textual domain, and their frequency of occurrence,
which were subsequently compared.

4 Results and Discussion

The analysis of the NCs by means of seman-
tic annotation afforded insights into their specific
conceptualization for each given contextual do-
main. Thanks to the annotated concordances, it
was possible to compare the conceptualization of
the micro-contexts of the NCs in each contextual
domain. Particularly, we made use of the auto-
matic generation of lists of the linguistic instanti-
ations that filled each argument and adjunct slots,
depending on the contextual domain. This allowed
the characterization and analysis of the argument
structure of the predicate (see Figure 2).

In a hypertonic environment[AD:LOCATION], most 
prokaryotes[AR:SOURCE] lose[PT:VERB] water[AR:PATIENT] and shrink 
away from their wall (plasmolyze). 

For example, marine fishes[AR:SOURCE], such as the cod in Figure 
44.4a, constantly[AD:MANNER] lose[PT:VERB] water[AR:PATIENT] by 
osmosis[AD:CAUSE]. 

Despite these and other adaptations, most terrestrial 
animals[AR:SOURCE] lose[PT:VERB] water[AR:PATIENT] through many 
routes: in urine[AD:MEDIUM] and feces[AD:MEDIUM], across their 
skin[AD:MEDIUM], and from the surfaces of gas exchange 
organs[AD:MEDIUM]. 

Figure 2: Annotation of propositions underlying
water loss in the domain of Biology.

Since the linguistic realizations of the argu-
ments and adjuncts were summarized in the an-
notation tool, it was possible to compare the con-
ceptualization of the NC, thus allowing the char-
acterization of contextual variation.

Therefore, the semantic annotation of the con-
cordance lines confirmed that contextual variation

110



in NCs is reflected in their argument structure. In
other words, the arguments and adjuncts of the
predicate underlying a NC, such as water loss,
were filled by different conceptual categories, de-
pending on the contextual domain.

In regard to water loss, the contextual varia-
tion was found to manifest itself in the SOURCE
of water loss, an argument that is not explicit in
the compound. This means that the SOURCE (as
reflected in its linguistic designations and those
of the adjuncts) varies, depending on the special-
ized domain. When used in Agronomy, the wa-
ter loss SOURCE was usually a plant entity (e.g.
plant, leaf, etc.). In contrast, in Hydrology, this
SOURCE was generally a waterbody (e.g. river,
aquifer, lake, etc.). Finally, in Biology, the pref-
erence was for animals (e.g. animal, animal cell,
blood, etc.) or some type of living organism. Ta-
ble 1 shows the linguistic instantiations of the wa-
ter loss SOURCE in Biology, which highlight the
frequency of animal entities in this argument slot.

Category Designations

ANIMAL

animal (7), animal cell (5),
blood (3), filtrate (3), egg (1),
waste (1), body (1), tissue (1)

PLANT plant (3), leaf (1), plant cell (1)

BACTERIA
prokaryote (2), endospore (1),
Halobacterium cell (1)

AIR air (2)
SOIL soil (1)

Table 1: Linguistic designations (with frequency
of occurrence) filling the SOURCE argument in Bi-
ology for water loss.

As previously noted, depending on the domain
context (Biology, Agronomy or Hydrology), the
argument slot (i.e. SOURCE of water loss) is des-
ignated by a different set of semantically related
units. Furthermore, this preference for a specific
semantic category in the argument determining the
variation (i.e. SOURCE of water loss) is reflected
in the linguistic realizations of the adjuncts. For
example, in Agronomy, the SOURCE argument is
filled by plant entities, and the most frequent ad-
juncts were MEDIUM or CAUSE with linguistic re-
alizations that also belong to the vegetable king-
dom: stoma and leaf, and transpiration and evap-
oration, respectively.

Moreover, even though the same NC (water
loss) sometimes involved the same SOURCE (wa-

terbody), its conceptualization was found to have
different nuances in each context. For instance,
when comparing water loss from a waterbody
in the domains of Agronomy and Hydrology, it
was found that their conceptualizations differed.
Whereas in Agronomy texts, water loss generally
referred to the natural loss of water, in Hydrology
texts, water loss referred to an artificial process
with specific purposes.

This was reflected in the adjuncts and their lin-
guistic realizations. For example, the INSTRU-
MENT adjunct in Hydrology texts was mainly des-
ignated by manmade structures, such as canal,
well, aqueduct, floodgate, etc. Contextual differ-
ences were also evident in the verbs used in the
paraphrases. More specifically in Agronomy, the
most frequent predicates were lose, evaporate, re-
move, transpire, absorb, draw, leave, and move,
whereas in Hydrology, there was a preference for
predicates with a human/instrument AGENT (e.g.
extract, release, transmit, transfer, draw, divert,
and abstract).

The analysis of micro-contexts and of the lin-
guistic realizations of the arguments and adjuncts
was also found to be a useful method for frame-
based terminological management (Faber, 2015;
L’Homme, 2016). When the argument structure
of water loss and its linguistic realizations are an-
alyzed, a general picture of the conceptualization
of the MWT in each subdomain can be obtained.
For instance, this analysis reveals the type of enti-
ties that can lose water, the medium in which water
is lost, the causes and results of the water loss, etc.
For this reason, the identification and annotation
of the arguments and adjuncts of the verbs pro-
vide insights into the conceptualization of terms
and their relations with concepts in larger frames.

5 Conclusions

This research focused on the use of semantic anno-
tation to characterize the micro-contexts that un-
derlie a NC. The results confirmed that contextual
variation in NCs designating processes is mani-
fested in their underlying argument structure. Ac-
cess to the domain-specific conceptualization was
accomplished by annotating the NCs as well as
the paraphrases that made the hidden verb explicit.
This made it possible to identify the conceptual re-
lations between the terms in the compound, which
is one of the difficulties of MWTs. Moreover, in
regard to the methodology, our results confirmed

111



that the semantic annotation of micro-contexts is
an effective technique to study the conceptualiza-
tion of NCs, namely those representing special-
ized processes.

In future work, a more in-depth research on the
advantages of semantic annotation will be carried
out with a view to identifying the role of micro-
contexts in NC formation. For the characterization
of the different phenomena arising from domain-
based contextual variation in MWTs, we also plan
to further refine our semantic annotation method-
ology using WordNet synsets and combine them
with the extraction of semantic relations by means
of knowledge patterns.

We will also implement the semantic annotation
of MWTs for the modeling of this kind of term in
the environmental terminological knowledge base
EcoLexicon (http://ecolexicon.ugr.es/). Since both
endeavors will be multilingual, the results will ul-
timately be applied to the development of transla-
tion rules for MWTs.

Acknowledgements

This research was carried out as part of
project FF2014-52740-P, Cognitive and Neurolog-
ical Bases for Terminology-enhanced Translation
(CONTENT), funded by the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness. Funding was also
provided by an FPU grant given by the Spanish
Ministry of Education to the first author. Finally,
we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their useful comments.

References

Laurie Bauer. 2008. Les composés exocentriques de
l’anglais. In D. Amiot, editor, La composition dans
une perspective typologique, pages 35–47. Artois
Presses Université, Arras.

Melania Cabezas-Garcı́a and Pamela Faber. 2016.
Exploring the Semantics of Multi-word Terms by
Means of Paraphrases. In EnTRetextos International
Conference on Specialized Translation, Valencia.

Béatrice Daille, Samuel Dufour-Kowalski, and Em-
manuel Morin. 2004. French-English multi-word
term alignment based on lexical context analysis. In
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’04),
pages 919–922.

Pamela Downing. 1977. On the creation and use of
English compound nouns. Language, (53):810–842.

Patrick Drouin. 2003. Term extraction using non-
technical corpora as a point of leverage. Terminol-
ogy, 9(1):99–115.

Vyvyan Evans. 2009. How Words Mean: Lexical Con-
cepts, Cognitive Models, and Meaning Construc-
tion. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Pamela Faber. 2015. Frames as a framework for termi-
nology. In Hendrik Kockaert and Frieda Steurs, ed-
itors, Handbook of Terminology, pages 14–33. John
Benjamins, Amsterdam / Philadelphia.

Gilles Fauconnier. 1994. Mental spaces: aspects of
meaning construction in natural language. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, New York.

Charles Fillmore. 1982. Frame Semantics. In The
Linguistic Society of Korea, editor, Linguistics in
the morning calm. Selected papers from SICOL-
1981, pages 111–137. Hanshin Publishing Com-
pany, Seoul.

Katerina Frantzi, Sophia Ananiadou, and Hideki
Mima. 2000. Automatic recognition of multi-word
terms: The C-value/NC-value method. Interna-
tional Journal on Digital Libraries, 3(2):115–130.

Iris Hendrickx, Zornitsa Kozareva, Preslav Nakov, Di-
armuid Ó Séaghdha, Stan Szpakowicz, and Tony
Veale. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 4: Free Para-
phrases of Noun Compounds. In Second Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics
(*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Se-
mEval 2013), volume 2, pages 138–143.

Istvan Kecskes. 2014. Intercultural Pragmatics. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, New York.

Adam Kilgarriff, Vı́t Baisa, Jan Bušta, Miloš
Jakubı́ček, Vojtěch Ková, Jan Michelfeit, Pavel
Rychlý, and Vı́t Suchomel. 2014. The Sketch En-
gine: ten years on. Lexicography, 1(1):7–36.

Judith Levi. 1978. The Syntax and Semantics of Com-
plex Nominals. Academic Press, New York.

Marie-Claude L’Homme and Janine Pimentel. 2012.
Capturing Syntactico-semantic Regularities among
Terms : An Application of the FrameNet Methodol-
ogy to Terminology. In Proceedings of LREC 2012,
pages 262–268, Istanbul.

Marie-Claude L’Homme. 2012. Adding syntactico-
semantic information to specialized dictionaries: an
application of the FrameNet methodology. Lexico-
graphica, 28(1):233–252.

Marie-Claude L’Homme. 2016. Terminologie de
l’environnement et Sémantique des cadres. In
Congrès mondial de linguistique française (CMLF
2016), Tours, France.

112



Preslav Nakov and Marti A. Hearst. 2006. Using Verbs
to Characterize Noun-Noun Relations. Artificial In-
telligence Methodology Systems and Applications,
4183:233–244.

Preslav Nakov. 2013. On the interpretation of noun
compounds: Syntax, semantics, and entailment.
Natural Language Engineering, 19(03):291–330.

Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha and Ann Copestake. 2013. In-
terpreting compound nouns with kernel methods.
Natural Language Engineering, 19(3):331–356.

Mick O’Donnell. 2008. Demonstration of the UAM
CorpusTool for text and image annotation. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-08:HLT Demo Session, number
June, pages 13–16, Columbus, Ohio.

Carlos Ramisch. 2015. Multiword Expressions Acqui-
sition: A Generic and Open Framework. Springer,
Cham.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, and Jan Johnson, Christopher R. Schef-
fczyk. 2010. Framenet II: Extended theory and
practice.

Antonio San Martı́n. 2016. La representación de
la variación contextual mediante definiciones ter-
minológicas flexibles. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Granada.

Eric SanJuan, James Dowdall, Fidelia Ibekwe-
SanJuan, and Fabio Rinaldi. 2005. A symbolic
approach to automatic multiword term structuring.
Computer Speech and Language, 19(4):524–542.

Lucien Tesnière. 1976. Eléments de syntaxe struc-
turale. Klincksieck, Paris.

113


