





































Core Arguments in Universal Dependencies

Daniel Zeman
Charles University

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Prague, Czechia
zeman@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We investigate how core arguments are
coded in case-marking Indo-European lan-
guages. Core arguments are a central con-
cept in Universal Dependencies, yet it is
sometimes difficult to match against ter-
minologies traditionally used for individ-
ual languages. We review the methodol-
ogy described in (Andrews, 2007), and in-
clude brief definitions of some basic terms.
Statistics from 26 UD treebanks show that
not all treebank providers define the core-
oblique boundary the same way. There-
fore we propose some refinement and par-
ticularization of the guidelines that would
improve cross-treebank consistency on the
one hand, and be more sensitive to the tra-
ditional grammar on the other.

1 Introduction

The opposition of core vs. oblique dependents is
one of the central concepts in Universal Dependen-
cies (Nivre et al., 2016); this distinction is inten-
tionally preferred to the argument/adjunct distinc-
tion. However, difficulties in recognizing core ar-
guments in individual languages, combined with
often incompatible traditional terminology, have
led to confusion and data inconsistency. UD doc-
umentation has greatly improved since its version
1 and provides now a list of potential criteria that
may help to draw the core vs. oblique borderline;
however, it is still just a set of hints, not a defi-
nition. The English UD uses a relatively simple
rule: as soon as a preposition is involved, the noun
phrase cannot be analyzed as a core argument. Un-
fortunately, there are many languages where the
situation is more complex. In the present work
we are particularly interested in languages that use
both case morphology and prepositions to mark ar-
guments.

We review one possible universal methodology
to identify coding of core arguments, and show
how it applies to these languages. Terms like ar-
gument, transitive verb or indirect object are of-
ten taken for known and granted (both in the UD
guidelines and in the literature) but the problem
is that their definition may differ by language or
by author, and it is not easy to see how they work
across languages. Therefore we briefly define the
necessary terms as well.

2 Core Arguments in Language Typology

In this section we provide a brief definition of core
arguments; for a much more detailed discussion
see (Andrews, 2007), which is our primary source.

2.1 Arguments and Adjuncts
Arguments are noun phrases that fulfill semantic
roles determined by verbs, or more generally by
predicates. Depending on language, the verb may
also specify requirements on the position of the in-
dividual arguments and on their form, such as mor-
phological case marking or preposition.
In contrast, adjuncts are noun phrases that spec-

ify additional circumstances such as location, time
and manner. Neither their form nor their meaning
is determined by the verb. They can accompany
any predicate; some collocations may be difficult
to interpret semantically but they are not ungram-
matical. Likewise, the form of the adjuncts is de-
termined by their meaning rather than by the verb.
Hence, the phrase marked by the preposition on

is an argument in I rely on him or in I will act on
the matter, but it is an adjunct in I will work on
Saturday or I live on an island. These examples
are relatively easy to understand; however, in gen-
eral the argument-adjunct distinction is not always
trivial, and UD avoids it (from the guidelines: “We
take the distinction to be sufficiently subtle (and its
existence as a categorical distinction sufficiently
questionable) that the best practical solution is to

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 287-296,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

287



eliminate it.”) Nevertheless, we will see that even
for the distinction between core and oblique argu-
ments, it is sometimes necessary to make sure that
the noun phrase is actually an argument and not an
adjunct. Whenever we say ‘argument’ in the rest
of the paper, we think of it as defined in the begin-
ning of this section.

2.2 Transitive Verbs

The most reliable means of distinguishing be-
tween core and oblique arguments are the encod-
ing strategies such as word order, adpositions and
morphological case. However, the strategies are
always specific to a language and cannot be used in
a cross-linguistically applicable definition. There-
fore we start with semantic roles to identify proto-
typical core arguments, then we observe the strate-
gies that the language uses to mark them, and fi-
nally generalize to other arguments using the same
strategy, despite their semantic roles being differ-
ent from the prototypical core arguments.
The prototypical core can be observed with pri-

mary transitive verbs, i.e. verbs that take two argu-
ments whose semantic roles are agent and patient,
respectively. The agent, typically an animate en-
tity, is responsible for an action, and the patient is
directly affected by the action. To kill is an exam-
ple of a primary transitive verb: in George killed
the dragon,George is the agent who did the killing
(note that it is not necessary for an agent to act
willingly; it could also be an accident). Without
any doubt, the dragon is the entity most affected
by the killing, and the killing caused a change of
the dragon’s state. Hence the dragon qualifies as
the patient.
Languages differ in how they make clear who

killed whom. In English, it is the position of the
arguments relative to the verb. In Czech, the agent
would be in its nominative form, and the patient
in the accusative.1 However, in good many lan-
guages the same coding strategy is also used with
verbs whose two arguments have other semantic
roles. For instance, to love takes two arguments
but it is not a primary transitive verb because the
roles of the arguments are better described as “ex-
periencer” and “goal” rather than “agent” and “pa-
tient”. Nevertheless, the verb is transitive in both
English and Czech because the two arguments are
marked in these languages in exactly the same way
as the arguments of to kill.

1Unless the verb is in its passive form.

Following (Andrews, 2007), if a noun phrase is
serving as an argument of a two-argument verb,
and receiving a morphological and syntactic treat-
ment normally accorded to an agent of a primary
transitive verb, it has the grammatical function
A; analogically, an argument receiving treatment
normally accorded to a patient of a primary transi-
tive verb has the grammatical function P.2

2.3 Intransitive Verbs

If a verb takes just a single argument, the verb is
called intransitive and its argument has the gram-
matical function S. Depending on language (and
in some languages depending on individual verbs),
the S argument of intransitive verbs may conform
to the same grammatical rules as the A argument
of transitive verbs, or as the P argument, or it can
be different from both A and P.

2.4 Core and Oblique Arguments in UD

S, A and P are considered core grammatical func-
tions (Andrews, 2007, p. 164). As UD refers to
Andrews,3 we can project to UD: Arguments that
have one of the S/A/P functions are core argu-
ments. Nominals whose grammatical function is
A or S are called subjects and their dependency re-
lation to the verb is nsubj. Nominals whose gram-
matical function is P are called (direct) objects and
their dependency relation to the verb is obj. Both
subject and object are considered core arguments.
In addition, UD uses a special relation iobj for
what it calls indirect objects; we will investigate
them in Section 4.
Using the concepts defined so far, it is now pos-

sible to lay down rules for core arguments in in-
dividual languages. For instance, in English, if a
bare noun phrase (i.e. without a preposition) is an
argument of a verb, it is a core argument; if it oc-
curs in a simple declarative clause and precedes the
verb, it is its subject; if it follows the verb, it is an
object. Note the important condition if it is an ar-
gument, not adjunct. While adjuncts usually take
prepositions in English, they occasionally appear
as bare noun phrases too; as an example, consider

2Note that some authors use the terms agent and patient to
refer to what we call A and P here, rather than to the semantic
roles; cf. the functors on the t-layer of the Prague Dependency
Treebank (Hajič et al., 2006). It is important not to confuse
that terminology with ours: for example, the two arguments
of to love would then be agent and patient, while we argue
that they are not.

3http://universaldependencies.org/u/
overview/syntax.html, retreived 2017-07-23

288



the temporal adjunct this week in I am not working
this week.
On the other hand, verbs in many languages

have arguments that are marked by coding strate-
gies that are also used by adjuncts, but that are
different from strategies used by core arguments.
Such arguments are called oblique. For instance,
the second argument of act in I will act on the mat-
ter is marked by the preposition on. Since core ar-
guments in English do not take prepositions, this
is an oblique argument. In UD, both oblique argu-
ments and adjuncts are attached to the verb via an
obl relation (if they are noun phrases).
Note that the methodology described in this sec-

tion is not the only possible. (Dixon, 2012, vol. 1
sec. 3.2 and vol. 2 sec. 13) defines core arguments
as those that “must be either stated or understood
from the context;” the opposite of core are pe-
ripheral arguments. Dixon’s core arguments are
in spirit similar to those of Andrews, but his defi-
nition does not guarantee that no verbs have their
core arguments marked by “oblique” strategies.

3 Languages with Case-Marking
Morphology

A number of Indo-European languages have the
morphological category of case. In these lan-
guages, the most typical coding of core argu-
ments is the nominative case (subject) and the ac-
cusative case (object). However, there are usu-
ally more cases than these two, and the question
arises whether arguments in other morphological
cases count as core arguments. (Andrews, 2007)
gives an example from German: the verb helfen
(“to help”) takes two arguments, one in nomina-
tive and the other in dative. We can say that helfen
is a primary transitive verb because the roles of the
two arguments are agent and patient. It can also be
passivized, which is a typical property of transi-
tive verbs; however, unlike verbs with accusative
objects, the dative argument of helfen stays in the
dative and does not become subject when the verb
appears in the passive voice. We thus have an ar-
gument whose grammatical behavior is not iden-
tical with the more typical accusative object, yet
it is sufficiently similar to qualify as a core argu-
ment. In consequence, all arguments that are bare
nominals in dative are core arguments in German.4

4Note that this finding is not without controversy. Some
authors classify the German dative as an oblique case, al-

A similar observation can be made in Slavic
languages. In fact everything that we just said
about the German verb helfen also applies to the
Czech verb pomoci (“to help”). However, Czech
has more cases than German, and there are two-
argument verbs whose second argument is neither
accusative nor dative. Bare genitives and instru-
mentals may act as arguments too; moreover, there
are prepositional arguments in genitive, dative, ac-
cusative, locative or instrumental. Many of these
verbs can be passivized in the same way as po-
moci. For example, the verb hýbat (“to move”)
takes an instrumental patient-object: in Martin
hýbá nábytkem “Martin moves the furniture”, the
noun nábytek (“furniture”) takes its instrumental
form. When passivized, the agent disappears and
the patient stays in instrumental: Nábytkem bylo
hýbáno “The furniture has been moved.”
A somewhat different example is the verb dot-

knout se (“to touch”). This verb is inherently re-
flexive, i.e. obligatorily accompanied by the re-
flexive pronoun se.5 It takes two arguments: the
agent is in nominative as usual, and the patient is in
genitive. According to the semantic roles we could
argue that it is a primary transitive verb. However,
reflexive verbs cannot be passivized in Czech:
*Bylo se ho dotknuto (“He has been touched”) is
not grammatical. Thus we have a two-argument
verb whose arguments pass the tests on coreness
laid out in Section 2, yet it does not permit pas-
sivization, an operation usually associated with
transitive verbs (note however that passivization is
not universal and cannot be added as a requirement
for transitive verbs).
So we have three types of transitive verbs w.r.t.

passivization (1. accusative; 2. non-accusative
non-reflexive; 3. reflexive). We can also observe
varying degree of coreness. The largest proportion
of primary transitive verbs will indisputably be
found among verbs with accusative objects. Verbs
taking objects in genitive, dative and instrumental
often select roles quite different from the (proto-)
patient; only a handful can be regarded as primary
transitive verbs. Even harder to find are patients
among prepositional arguments, but some of them
would deserve to be at least considered as candi-
though they do not specify what are the properties their clas-
sification is based on (Foley, 2007, p. 377).

5With inherently reflexive verbs, the reflexive pro-
noun (sometimes termed particle), although syntactically au-
tonomous, is part of the verbal lexeme, not an argument.
However, transitive verbs can take reflexive pronouns as their
objects.

289



dates. At the same time, bare accusative is very
rarely used for adjuncts, which are slightly more
common among other bare noun phrases, and the
majority of them are prepositional phrases.
Strictly following the tests from Section 2 and

from (Andrews, 2007), all Czech arguments would
be core and none of them would be oblique. While
this “classification” aligns with the notion of ob-
jects in the Czech grammar (see Section 5), it is of
no benefit. It does not make sense to delimit the
core of a set if it comprises the entire set; further-
more, the identification of core arguments would
now be reduced to the argument-adjunct distinc-
tion, which UD wanted to eliminate.
So, is there a way to interpret Section 2 with less

extreme results? There is one word that may pro-
vide the remedy. In 2.2 we say that the P func-
tion is recognized by treatment normally accorded
to a patient of a primary transitive verb. Now we
showed that bare accusative is the “most normal”
coding strategy and prepositional phrases are still
possible, but arguably “least normal” for patients.
Out of the three possible coding strategies (bare ac-
cusatives, bare non-accusatives and prepositional
phrases), we could decide that one or two are not
normal enough. Our cross-linguistic detection of
core arguments will become a bit less deterministic
but more flexible; it may be the right compromise
to use.

4 Ditransitive Verbs and Indirect Objects

Predicates may define more than two roles. In the
Czech sentence Firma mu zvýšila plat z dvaceti
na třicet tisíc korun lit. “Company him raised
salary from twenty to thirty thousand crowns”
(Lopatková et al., 2016) the verb zvýšit (“raise”)
has four or five arguments.6 With an extreme in-
terpretation of Section 2 we could even claim that
all of them are core arguments. It is usually not
assumed that languages have that many core ar-
guments; nevertheless, it is accepted that some
verbs in some languages have three. Such verbs
are called ditransitive.
Verbs of giving, taking and related concepts

(e.g. teaching = giving knowledge) are prototypi-
cal examples in many languages. Their arguments
correspond to the semantic roles of agent, theme
(or patient) and recipient (Dryer, 2007). In terms
of grammatical relations they correspond to sub-

6Depending on whether the beneficiary him is accepted as
argument rather than adjunct.

ject, direct and indirect object. There is a confu-
sion potential though. Some grammars will de-
fine indirect object as the argument with the recip-
ient role. However, this argument is not necessar-
ily a core argument by our definition: in English
in John gave Mary a flower, the recipient (Mary)
is a core argument; but in John gave a flower to
Mary, the recipient is oblique. When we restrict
ourselves to core arguments, there are clearly lan-
guages and verbs with two objects but it is less
clear whether (and why) one of them deserves a
special term. (Andrews, 2007) notes that “the sta-
tus of the notion of ‘indirect object’ is problematic
and difficult to sort out. The top priority is to work
out what properties recipients and themes do and
do not share with P arguments of primary transitive
verbs.”
In Universal Dependencies, the v2 guidelines

say that “The indirect object of a verb is any nom-
inal phrase that is a core argument of the verb but
is not its subject or (direct) object.” Such a defi-
nition is not sufficient for us—any core argument
that is not a subject is an object. The UD guide-
lines “define” the (direct) object as the secondmost
core argument after subject. They do not provide
means to quantify coreness, though. For our group
of languages, we could use the observation from
Section 3 that there are three coding strategies or-
dered by decreasing convincingness of their core
status. However, UD also assumes that the relation
iobj is only used with predicates that have more
than one object, i.e., the indirect object cannot ex-
ist without a direct one. This rule would have to
be changed, otherwise we cannot say that all bare
dative arguments are iobj. For example, the Ger-
man verb helfen does not have any accusative ob-
ject that could be labeled obj.

5 Traditional Terminology

Traditional grammars in good many languages use
less restrictive definitions of object than UD. It is
not unusual to encounter non-accusative and even
prepositional objects, no matter of their status as
core or oblique arguments.
The school grammar of Czech (Havránek and

Jedlička, 1966) is a concise but respected piece
of work, which does not diverge from the main-
stream terminology used by linguists. It provides
a definition of object that is identical to our def-
inition of argument in Section 2.1. Indirect ob-
ject is mentioned only briefly as a possible name

290



Nom Acc Dat Gen Abl Loc Ins Voc None
be 36/0 20/8 2/1 7/8 0/12 3/3
bg 9/1 14/1 3/0 46/27
cs 29/0 29/5 5/2 3/7 0/12 3/3 2/1
cs2 27/0 31/6 4/2 3/7 0/12 4/3 1/0
cs3 32/0 27/4 1/3 2/10 0/12 5/2 1/0
cu 26/0 21/9 15/4 7/4 0/7 2/2 2/0
de 35/0 19/6 3/20 0/1 6/11
el 35/0 29/29 1/2 1/0 2/1
got 28/0 26/6 15/20 2/1 1/0
grc 26/0 34/7 14/5 6/6 2/0
grc2 23/0 31/11 14/6 5/8 1/0 1/0
hr 32/0 30/7 3/0 4/7 0/10 2/2
la 24/0 33/8 8/0 16/9 1/0
la2 36/0 19/15 5/0 5/19 1/0 0/1
la3 24/0 31/11 9/0 1/0 9/13 1/0 1/0
lt 33/0 22/6 5/0 11/5 7/0 7/1 2/1
lv 37/0 21/6 8/5 2/4 15/0 1/0
pl 29/0 20/7 4/0 5/8 0/10 3/3 10/0
pt 1/0 6/0 1/0 57/35
ru 29/0 15/8 3/4 5/8 0/19 6/3
ru2 34/0 20/7 3/3 5/7 0/11 6/3
sa 43/0 30/0 1/0 4/0 3/0 6/0 9/0 3/0 1/0
sk 27/0 24/6 6/2 1/6 0/9 2/3 14/0
sl 22/0 24/8 6/1 6/4 0/14 0/6 10/0
sl2 25/1 25/7 6/0 6/3 0/10 0/4 14/0
uk 33/0 22/9 4/0 4/10 0/10 4/3

Table 1: Distribution (percentage) of morphological cases found at nominal dependents of verbs. Both
occurrences with / without adposition are counted. Only Indo-European languages with three or more
cases in UD 2.0 are shown. Languages are identified by their ISO 639 codes; when there are multiple
treebanks per language, numerical indices are used instead of identifiers for brevity. Highlight red =
mostly core relations (including expl). Highlight blue = mostly oblique, but significant (10% or more)
amount of core also present.

for the dative argument of ditransitives. Textbooks
use a question test to distinguish objects from non-
objects. If a dependent of the verb can be queried
by an interrogative adverb (where, when, how), or
by one of a few additional expressions such as for
what purpose, it is an adverbial modifier—even if
realized as a noun phrase! If we must use an in-
terrogative pronoun (who, what) it is either a sub-
ject (if the pronoun is in nominative) or an object
(otherwise). Thus in spoléhám na kamarády (“I
rely on friends”), the prepositional phrase is object
because the only plausible question is with a pro-
noun: Na koho spoléhám? (“Who do I rely on?”).
In contrast, the prepositional phrase in pojedu na
Slovensko (“I will go to Slovakia”) is not normally
queried by *Na co pojedu? “What will I go to?”

Instead, we use an adverb and ask Kam pojedu?
“Where will I go?” Thus this phrase is not an ob-
ject. If objects are defined this way, then most
objects are arguments and most adverbials are ad-
juncts; the notion of core arguments does not play
a role.
According to (Karlík et al., 2016), some more

detailed grammar descriptions do distinguish indi-
rect objects but they still do not restrict objects to
core arguments. Bare accusative objects are direct
(even in the rare cases when a verb has two ac-
cusative objects). Objects in other cases, including
prepositional objects, are indirect (even with verbs
like pomoci “to help” where no direct object is pos-
sible). A verb is transitive if it takes a direct object.
Looking back at Section 3, we see that these direct

291



objects are always core arguments and they belong
to the most core-like subset. Indirect objects may
or may not be core arguments depending on how
strictly we follow the principles from Section 2.
Such a perspective is not specific to Czech; it is

rather dominant in European linguistics.
In their comparative grammar of Slavic lan-

guages, (Sussex and Cubberley, 2006, p. 339, 351–
352) use the term transitive verb for verbs whose
object is a bare noun phrase in any case; verbs
with prepositional objects are neither transitive nor
intransitive. Direct object is a synonym for bare
accusative; other objects are referred to as non-
accusative objects and prepositional objects. Indi-
rect object seems to be used just for the semantic
role of recipient (expressed by bare dative), proba-
bly assuming that the English readership will find
the term familiar.
Another example, this time outside the Slavic

group, is the cannonical grammar of German.
(Helbig and Buscha, 1998, p. 53 and 545) distin-
guish accusative object, dative object, genitive ob-
ject and prepositional object. Adjunct-like noun
phrases are considered adverbial modifiers. Tran-
sitive verbs are those that take an accusative ob-
ject and this object can become subject in a pas-
sive clause. Verbs that take an accusative ob-
ject but cannot be passivized (enthalten “contain,”
bekommen “get” etc.) are calledmedial verbs (Mit-
telverben). Intransitive verbs are those that do not
take an accusative object, regardless whether they
take a non-accusative object, prepositional object,
obligatory adverbial or nothing at all.
It is neither prohibited nor unusual that the UD

terminology diverges from the “traditional” one.
Partly because there are many traditions, inconsis-
tent with each other. However, it would be nice
to at least preserve the distinctions expected in tra-
ditional grammar, and to be able to map the UD
data to whatever annotation is expected by vari-
ous communities. Even if UD does not aim at dis-
tinguishing arguments from adjuncts universally,
the distinction is obviously important in grammars
of many languages and there should be standard-
ized means to capture it on the language-particular
level.

6 Current UD Annotation

Let us now examine how the core-oblique distinc-
tion is dealt with in the current release (2.0) of Uni-
versal Dependencies. In order to stay focused on

the issues discussed in the previous sections, we
limit ourselves to Indo-European languages with
case morphology. Table 1 gives an overview. In
total, there are 26 UD treebanks (19 languages).
Verb-dependent nominals in the data take from 3
to 8 different case forms (including the vocative,
which marks a special type of dependent); some
nominals are “caseless” (meaning that their anno-
tation does not include the case feature, i.e. either
the word does not inflect, or the annotation is in-
complete).
Bulgarian and Portuguese represent a larger

group of languages where the case system has been
reduced to personal pronouns; but only in these
two languages the actual numbers for each case
surpassed 0.5% of examined nodes. Otherwise,
there are all Balto-Slavic languages, all classical
Indo-European languages (Ancient Greek, Latin,
Gothic, Sanskrit), Modern Greek and German.
Some languages have two or three treebanks pro-
vided by different groups. Case distribution dif-
fers across these treebank sets, but the difference
is usually not dramatic. The largest gap can be ob-
served between la2 and the other two Latin tree-
banks; besides domain differences, the likely rea-
son is that la and la3 contain classical Latin while
la2 is from the 13th century.
The differences are more significant when we

investigate for each case form whether and how
often it occurs with a core dependency relation.
Bare nominatives and accusatives are almost al-
ways core arguments. Bare datives and geni-
tives also appear as core arguments in convinc-
ing numbers. Then the coding seems to be more
and more oblique across the ablative, instrumental
and locative down to prepositions. Most treebank
providers seem to have simply adopted the English
rule that oblique are those arguments with preposi-
tions. Occurrences of the obl relation among bare
noun phrases might as well just mean that these
phrases are adjuncts; however, since UD does not
distinguish oblique arguments from adjuncts, we
cannot verify this hypothesis.
Table 2 is a zoom-in view of cases vs. relations

in UD Czech 2.0. The annotation is ported from
the Prague Dependency Treebank, which uses the
traditional definition where object = argument;
that is why the core relations appear in all nomi-
nal forms including those with prepositions.
Tables 3 and 4 demonstrate that while the cur-

rent UD Russian SynTagRus incorporates the En-

292



glish rule for obliqueness, the first release (1.3), di-
rectly converted from the original SynTagRus an-
notation, wasmuch closer to what we see in Czech.
In the 1.3 release, nmod under verbs (now labeled
obl), marked only nominals that are not traditional
objects, i.e. adjuncts. In 2.0, these can be no longer
distinguished from prepositional objects. Even if
it is correct to assume that prepositional arguments
are oblique in Russian, there is arguably a sub-
stantial amount of information that is important in
Russian grammar and was available in the original
data, but it is lost in the current UD release.

7 Refined Definition of Objects

Let us now summarize the issues identified in the
preceding sections and propose refined guidelines
that will hopefully address the issues better (at least
in the studied subset of Indo-European languages).
There are three groups of arguments that are tra-

ditionally called objects and could be considered
as object candidates in UD, ordered by decreas-
ing strength of evidence of their coreness: bare ac-
cusatives, bare non-accusatives and prepositional
phrases. UD assumes the core-oblique boundary
to be clear-cut but it isn’t, because identification of
primary transitive verbs is not always trivial, and
their distribution among the above groups is un-
balanced. Nevertheless, drawing the line between
bare nominals and prepositional phrases (which
is what the majority of treebanks already adopts)
seems a reasonable compromise.
In order to preserve the important distinction

between prepositional objects and adjuncts, we
propose to annotate prepositional objects by the
language-specific relation obl:arg (except for de-
moted subjects in passive constructions, which
should use obl:agent, a practice already estab-
lished in several UD treebanks).
Bare non-accusatives can be considered core

arguments in languages where there are reason-
able examples of primary transitive verbs using
these cases. (We have shown examples from Ger-
man and Czech but we have not proved that all
cases in all languages from Table 1 meet the cri-
teria. We do believe though that the criteria are
met for dative, genitive and instrumental in Slavic
languages.) It might be useful to mark them by
a language-specific label obj:nacc, although it
would be just a shortcut: one can obtain the case
information from the morphological features.

As for indirect objects, their current UD defi-
nition is problematic. It seems appealing to define
them as core arguments that are mostly object-like,
but grammatical rules applying to them are some-
what different from those used with the prevail-
ing type of objects (i.e. the type that covers the
largest group of primary transitive verbs). That is,
instead of obj:nacc proposed above, we would
use iobj for non-accusative objects (cf. (Karlík
et al., 2016)). However, it would also wipe out
indirect objects from English, which is a bit unfor-
tunate, given that English seems to be responsible
for introducing the very concept of iobj in UD.
Hence the new guideline should perhaps provide
more freedom for language-specific rules, saying
that it is possible to mark a subclass of objects as
secondary/indirect on language-specific grounds.
In the long term, the relation should probably be-
come a language-specific subtype of obj.

8 A Note on Subjects

In comparison to the various types of objects, iden-
tifying nominal subjects is relatively straightfor-
ward in our group of languages. They can be easily
recognized by the nominative case and by cross-
referencing on the verb (person, number and gen-
der); they can hardly ever be confused with ad-
juncts. Occasional confusion with objects may
stem from morphological ambiguity: in the Czech
sentence Krávy štípou mouchy, both the nouns
krávy “cows” and mouchy “flies” are in a form
shared by nominative and accusative; the (prob-
able) English meaning is “Flies sting cows” but
since word order is flexible in Czech, it could also
mean “Cows sting flies.”
Tables 2 to 4 reveal that a significant subset of

subjects in Slavic languages have a genitive form.
However, these genitives are caused by numer-
als in quantified phrases, not by the verb. Un-
der certain conditions, Slavic numerals and quan-
tifiers require that the counted noun takes the gen-
itive form.7 The numeral itself has its nomina-
tive/accusative form, and the entire phrase (nu-
meral + noun) behaves like nominative/accusative
singular neuter (gender and number are cross-
referenced on the verb). Hence in Přišlo jen pět
dětí “Only five children came,” the verb přišlo
“came” has a singular neuter form, the numeral

7In addition, the genitive can be used partitively without
an overt quantifier. In this case it no longer looks like a quan-
tified phrase but it could be understood as one with an elided
quantifier.

293



nsubj nsubj:pass obj iobj expl:pv expl:pass obl discourse
Nom (29%) 95 4
Acc (29%) 69 21 7 2
Dat (5%) 1 36 33 15 14 1
Gen (3%) 23 1 60 2 14
Ins (3%) 26 4 69
Acc+ADP (5%) 37 9 54
Dat+ADP (2%) 31 3 66
Gen+ADP (7%) 1 7 2 89
Loc+ADP (12%) 10 2 88
Ins+ADP (3%) 28 5 66
None (2%) 58 1 19 6 12
None+ADP (1%) 1 13 3 83

Table 2: UD Czech. Distribution of core and oblique relations for individual case forms. Numbers
indicate howmany%of the nominals in the given case got the given relation. ADP indicates a preposition.

nsubj nsubjpass dobj iobj nmod nmod:agent
Nom (27%) 85 13 1
Acc (17%) 97 2
Dat (2%) 36 64
Gen (4%) 30 4 51 2 13
Ins (5%) 32 51 16
Acc+ADP (7%) 31 69
Dat+ADP (3%) 29 70
Gen+ADP (7%) 1 24 17 57
Loc+ADP (11%) 98
Ins+ADP (3%) 27 73
None (12%) 60 3 26 10 1
None+ADP (2%) 30 7 63

Table 3: UDRussian SynTagRus 1.3. Distribution of core and oblique relations for individual case forms.
Numbers indicate how many % of the nominals in the given case got the given relation. ADP indicates
a preposition.

nsubj nsubj:pass obj iobj obl obl:agent
Nom (34%) 90 8 1
Acc (20%) 97 2
Dat (3%) 5 95
Gen (5%) 27 2 1 70
Ins (6%) 79 17
Acc+ADP (7%) 99
Dat+ADP (3%) 99
Gen+ADP (7%) 1 6 93
Loc+ADP (11%) 99
Ins+ADP (3%) 100

Table 4: UDRussian SynTagRus 2.0. Distribution of core and oblique relations for individual case forms.
Numbers indicate how many % of the nominals in the given case got the given relation. ADP indicates
a preposition.

294



pět “five” is in nominative and the noun dětí “chil-
dren” is in genitive. Counted phrases are headed
by nouns in UD, thus the genitive noun is attached
directly to the verb; but a language-specific rela-
tion between the noun and the numeral preserves
the information about who governs the case.
It has also been discussed8 whether certain con-

structions in Slavic languages sanction subjects in
the dative. An example (Russian) is Мне было
холодно / Mne bylo holodno lit. “To-me it-was
cold,” meaning “I was cold.” The dative argument
мне is called logical subject by some grammari-
ans. However, under the UD guidelines it will be
subject only if it receives the treatment normally
accorded to the single argument of a one-argument
predicate in Russian. This “normal treatment” in-
cludes nominative case marking, but not only that.
Its gender and number should be cross-referenced
on the predicate, but было холодно is neuter singu-
lar regardless of the referent of мне. And finally,
if the clause is converted to infinitive and comple-
ments another predicate, the infinitive should in-
herit the subject from the matrix clause. However,
the dative pronoun cannot be removed and make
room for an inherited subject. We still have it in
“he will stop to be cold”: ему перестанет быть
холодно / emu perestanet byt’ holodno. The verb
“to stop” takes a normal nominative subject but if
we provide it, the sentence becomes ungrammat-
ical: *он перестанет быть холодно. Thus the
dative argument failed on all three accounts; on
the other hand, the treatment it receives is not un-
like the dative objects in Russian. Note that we are
not saying that all subjects in all Indo-European
languages must be nominative.9 The point is that
there usually is some typical treatment of subjects
in the given language; the said dative argument
does not receive the treatment typical in Russian,
thus it is not subject.

9 Conclusion

We have reviewed the methodology proposed by
(Andrews, 2007) for distinguishing core/oblique
arguments; in particular, we have shown how it ap-
plies to the case morphology observed in a number
of Indo-European languages. While UD focuses
on core arguments in order to avoid distinguish-
ing arguments from adjuncts, we observe that the

8http://github.com/UniversalDependencies/
docs/issues/248

9In fact, (Andrews, 2007) gives an example of a dative
subject in Icelandic.

distinction is needed (to some extent) to recognize
core arguments. Similarly, UD does not label se-
mantic roles but we still must consider them in or-
der to recognize primary transitive verbs. Overall
we found the method very useful (actually the only
practically usable approach that has been proposed
so far in the context of UD) but it has to be applied
carefully and it does not provide absolute criteria
(probably nothing does). If the properties of core
arguments in all UD languages are defined follow-
ing the principles we showed for German, Czech
and Russian, the UD annotation will becomemuch
more consistent cross-linguistically than it is now.
We have also shown that defining objects in

terms of core arguments conflicts with the tradi-
tional view in some languages, where all argu-
ments are objects. We do not want to reject the
core-oblique perspective; nevertheless, we pro-
pose to use the obl:arg relation and preserve the
argument-adjunct distinction in UD if it is avail-
able.

Acknowledgments

The work was supported by the grant 15-10472S
of the Czech Science Foundation.

References
Avery D. Andrews. 2007. The major functions of
the noun phrase. In Timothy Shopen, editor, Lan-
guage Typology and Syntactic Description. Volume
I: Clause Structure. Second edition, pages 132–223.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Robert M. W. Dixon. 2012. Basic Linguistic Theory.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Matthew S. Dryer. 2007. Clause types. In Timothy
Shopen, editor, Language Typology and Syntactic
Description. Volume I: Clause Structure, pages 224–
275. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

William A. Foley. 2007. A typology of information
packaging in the clause. In Timothy Shopen, editor,
Language Typology and Syntactic Description. Vol-
ume I: Clause Structure, pages 362–446. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajičová, Petr
Sgall, Petr Pajas, Jan Štěpánek, Jiří Havelka,
Marie Mikulová, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, and Magda
Ševčíková-Razímová. 2006. Prague Dependency
Treebank 2.0. CD-ROM, Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, LDC Catalog No.: LDC2006T01, Philadel-
phia.

Bohuslav Havránek and Alois Jedlička. 1966. Stručná
mluvnice česká. Fortuna, Praha, Czechia.

295



Gerhard Helbig and Joachim Buscha. 1998. Deutsche
Grammatik. Ein Handbuch für den Ausländerunter-
richt (18. Auflage). Langenscheidt, Leipzig, Ger-
many.

Petr Karlík, Marek Nekula, Jana Pleskalová, et al.
2016. Nový encyklopedický slovník češtiny. Nakla-
datelství Lidové noviny, Praha, Czechia.

Markéta Lopatková, Václava Kettnerová, Eduard Be-
jček, Anna Vernerová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský.
2016. Valenční slovník českých sloves VALLEX.
Karolinum, Praha, Czechia.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 1659–1666, Por-
torož, Slovenia. European Language Resources As-
sociation.

Roland Sussex and Paul Cubberley. 2006. The Slavic
Languages. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK.

Appendix A. Czech Examples

(1)

Jiří zabil draka
Nom Acc

George killed dragon

nsubj obj

(2)

Drak byl zabit Jiřím
Nom Ins

Dragon was killed by-George

nsubj:pass

aux:pass obl:agent

(3)

Karel pomohl Jiřímu
Nom Dat

Charles helped George

nsubj obj:nacc

(4)

Jiřímu bylo pomoženo
Dat

George was helped

obj:nacc

aux:pass

(5)

Karel se dotkl draka mečem
Nom Gen Ins

Charles touched dragon with-sword

nsubj

expl:pv

obl

obj:nacc

(6)

Jiří se obešel bez meče
Nom Gen

George got-along without sword

nsubj

expl:pv

obl:arg

case

(7)

Karel zabránil drakovi v útěku
Nom Dat Loc

Charles prevented dragon from escape

nsubj obj:nacc

obl:arg

case

(8)

Drak pohnul skálou
Nom Ins

Dragon moved rock

nsubj obj:nacc

(9)

Drak se vrací každý rok
Nom Acc Acc

Dragon returns every year

nsubj

expl:pv

obl

det

(10)

Král dal Jiřímu zlato
Nom Dat Acc
King gave George gold

nsubj

obj

iobj

(11)

Zlato bylo Jiřímu dáno králem
Nom Dat Ins
Gold was George given by-king

nsubj:pass

aux:pass

iobj obl:agent

(12)

Král odměnil Jiřího zlatem
Nom Acc Ins
King rewarded George with-gold

nsubj

obl/obj:nacc?

obj

(13)

Karel učil Jiřího etiketu
Nom Acc Acc

Charles taught George etiquette

nsubj

obj

obj

296




