



















































Work With What You've Got


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 48–51,
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, USA, March 6–7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Work With What You’ve Got 
 
 

Lucy Bell 
Xaad Kihlgaa Hl Suu.u Society 

Box 543 
Old Massett, Haida Gwaii, BC 

V0T 1M0 
lucybell@uvic.ca 

 
Lawrence Bell 
Lawrence Bell 

C\O Simon Fraser University 
First Nations Language Dept. 

Burnaby, BC 
V5A 1S6 

 
 

Abstract 
It is a race against time when revitalizing an              
endangered language isolate.  We learned an 
important lesson over the years: we learned to 
work with what we’ve got.  We do not have time 
to reinvent the wheel or be indecisive in our 
language revitalization.  With our fluent elders 
passing away at such a fast rate and new learners 
scrambling to learn Xaad Kil, we have to be 
efficient.  We have to share resources between the 
dialects and value and learn from the precious 
resources we have each created.  By sharing 
across the dialects, we have been able to quickly 
create new resources like a digital Haida 
phrasebook.   

 
The Haida language is dangerously close to 

extinction.  With only a couple handfuls of fluent 
speakers from Haida Gwaii, British Columbia 
and Southeast Alaska, it is a race against time to 
pass Xaad Kil, the Haida language isolate to the 
next generation.  As with many endangered 
languages, it is a struggle to create resources, 
interest and fluency on limited budgets.  The 
Haida language is no exception.   
 

Sharing resources is such an important part 
of indigenous language revitalization.  
Aboriginal languages are not like English, 
French, Spanish or German.  There are not a ton 
of resources or a ton of speakers in the world.   

 
Grassroots language revitalization was 

happening in southeast Alaska and on Haida 
Gwaii.  There have been strong and very 
different efforts in all communities.  For 
instance, in Skidegate, the Skidegate Haida 
Immersion Program focused on recording elders.  
In Massett, we developed a strong cohort of 
immediate language learners through accredited 

courses.  In Alaska there were courses and 
publications happening. The International Haida 
Language conferences became a way to share 
resources, plan and work together on new 
projects.  This became a valuable part of Xaad 
Kil revitalization. There was some sporadic 
communication between the communities but it 
wasn’t until the International Haida language 
conferences that the sharing of resources and 
working towards a common orthography began.  
Once we began sharing dictionaries, glossaries, 
recordings and lessons our library of resources 
blossomed.   

 
One of our successful cross-dialect initiatives 

was an adult accredited class offered to a cohort 
of 30+ students in Old Massett and in Ketchikan 
Alaska.  The students in Alaska gathered with 
linguist Dr. Jordan Lachler.  The Old Massett 
students gathered with elder Claude Jones.  We 
worked from the Dii Tawlang lessons done by 
Dr. Lachler in the Alaskan dialect and 
orthography.  We used the Haida health centre’s 
video technology to connect to the Alaskans 
three evenings per week.  The system was great 
when the technology worked.  Having an elder in 
Massett present helped us tweak the lesson plans 
and all of the students were able to learn the 
subtleties between the two dialects.  Not only did 
the students’ language improve greatly, but our 
understanding of the dialect similarities and 
differences improved as well.  This course was a 
good lesson in the importance of cross-
communication between dialects.   

48



 
Jordan Lachler and Erma Lawrence.  Photo by Farah 

Nosh. 

We began a partnership with the Simon 
Fraser University with a 7-year grant from 
SSHRC called First Nations Languages in the 
21st Century: Looking Back, Looking Forward.  
The First Nations Language Centre at SFU 
coordinates many grassroots community 
projects across BC and academic linguists from 
SFU, UBC, UNBC, and many other universities 
to document, analyze, and revitalize Aboriginal 
languages. 

We decided to develop language lessons in 
an App, focusing on the Skidegate and Northern 
(combined Alaskan and Massett) Haida dialects.  
We also decided to work with what we had and 
we focused on already-developed lessons.  This 
saved valuable time and resources.  The lessons 
were further developed, recorded with fluent 
elders and learners and put into the App.  The Dii 
Tawlang App is a great introductory to the Haida 
language.  This wasn’t without challenges.  
There is great physical distance between the 
partners and the elders.  This made it a timely 
process.  With an aging population of fluent 
speakers, over time we lost valuable speakers 
who originally contributed to the project.  The 
App has been tested by language learners on a 
small scale.  The students agreed that the 40+ 
online lessons were a valuable tool.  We started 
to receive requests from schools, especially 
urban schools who want to offer their aboriginal 
students a second language other than French or 
Spanish.  We realized that we needed to make 
the App more accessible and form relationships 

with educators to offer the Dii Tawlang App to a 
broader audience.  

 

 
Book that we worked from to create the digital 

phrasebook. 
 

In 2017, we began working on a digital 
phrasebook to add to our App.   Following our 
use what you got philosophy, we decided to take 
an existing book and digitize it. We worked from 
the 240-page Xaat Kil hl Sk’at’aa!  Haida 
Phrasebook created by elder Erma Lawrence and 
Dr. Lachler in the Alaskan dialect (Lawrence, 
2010). We chose this book to work from for a 
couple of reasons.  First of all, the book is widely 
used by Massett learners.  Most of the beginner 
and intermediate learners have an understanding 
of how to read the language and know how some 
of the subtle differences between the two 
dialects.  It has been a valuable resource.  We 
chose to digitize this book because students 
requested to hear the phrases.  Dr. Lachler 
compiled the phrasebook with Erma Lawrence 
and informed us that he did not make a digital 
recording of the phrases but he thought it would 
be a useful tool to create.  We also heard from 
northern Haidas that they enjoy accessing the 
Skidegate app but would prefer to have an App 
in the dialect of their ancestors. 

 

49



This work brought us together in 
Lawrence’s hometown of Vancouver.  We 
worked on the project together for four months.  
We translated the phrases in to our orthography, 
making slight adjustments to the spelling, added 
to the phrases and most importantly, recording 
the phrases in our northern Haida dialect.  It was 
important for us to document and record the 
200+pages of everyday phrases.  We used the 
easy-to-use Amadeus Lite to make the 
recordings.  For $35, Amadeus Lite was a simple 
but effective program.  We systematically went 
through the phrasebook, recording 12 pages per 
day and making notes and changes to the spelling 
and pronunciation along the way.  Luckily, with 
our partnership with SFU, we were provided a 
classroom at the downtown campus to record in.  
To have our own soundproofed studio would 
have been ideal but we had to work with what we 
had.  Some days were noisier than others, and we 
ended up having to re-record some of our work 
or I had to do extra editing.   

 
After two months, we went back to 

Massett and showed a sample of the work to the 
beginner adult learners.  They gave some 
valuable feedback.  Some valuable advice they 
had included asking for a simple recording of the 
sounds of Xaad Kil and the dictionary.  We have 
since compiled this.  The students liked the 
format of the App since it follows the same 
format as the hardcover phrasebook that they 
have been using.   It was also important for us to 
hear from learners how they would be using the 
digital phrasebook.  All of them said they would 
prefer to use it on their phones or other devices 
while in a classroom situation and on their own.  
Students want to The App is being developed for 
smartphones.   

 
We recorded the phrasebook for a total 

of 4 months.  Then I began editing the 3000 raw 
sound-files.  This was a tedious process and I 
recruited the help of my family, including my 7-
year-old niece Nora-Jane who became quite 
efficient at sound-file editing. From there, we 
compiled these into the App with the help of the 
SFU team after receiving a crash-course in in-
putting our data.  I also recruited someone to 
input the written phrasebook to the App once I 
realized how much more work this would be.   

The digital phrasebook could be used in 
a number of ways.  First of all, language learners 
can put the App on their phones to learn from.  
Secondly, school programs can use the 
phrasebook alongside the recordings in their 
classrooms to teach students how to write the 
Haida language.  The phrasebook could also be 
used by the many people who just want to learn a 
few phrases related to a specific topic.  For 
instance, the fisheries department may use the 
phrases in their publications and around the 
office just as people can learn potlatch phrases 
when they are planning a potlatch.   

 
We will store the sound files at SFU for 

future uses.  The phrases are a good start towards 
a digital dictionary.  By saving them at SFU, we 
can guarantee secure access to the files and we 
can work with SFU to ensure they are saved and 
distributed appropriately to the Haida community 
and partners in language revitalization.   

 
The digital phrasebook work was good 

lesson for us.   We learned that being a small 
team was more time efficient than having a big 
team.  We also realized how important it is for 
the team to be in the same town! In the past, we 
relied on Lawrence coming to Massett once a 
month and squeezing in recording time with Dr. 
Ignace after they taught classes all day.  With 
Lawrence being the only fluent male speaker of 
the Massett dialect, this has been such a valuable 
resource to create and it would not have 
happened if I did not move to Vancouver to work 
1-on-1 with him on this project. Lawrence 
brought his language fluency and I brought my 
limited computer skills and Haida language 
reading and writing skills.  Lastly, it was 
beneficial for us to learn how to input the data 
and create the App ourselves with the help of the 
SFU technical team. 

 
On a personal level, the process of 

creating a digital phrasebook was beneficial for 
us both.  It gave us valuable 1-on-1 time to pass 
the Haida language from a fluent speaker to a 
learner.  This was quality mentoring time.  The 
process was good for Lawrence because it 
greatly improved his Xaad Kil reading skills.  By 
the end of the four months, he was reading the 
Haida phrasebook like a pro.  This process 

50



improved my speaking ability.  The recording 
time with Lawrence as well as the editing time I 
put in to the project added to my fluency.  I often 
refer to Lawrence as a walking Haida 
encyclopedia so the opportunity to sit with him 
for four months gave me the time to learn not 
only the Haida language but Haida genealogy 
and Haida history as well.   
 

The lesson for us is that we have to use 
the resources we already have.  We have to think 
creatively of the best way to quickly make 
resources and get them to learners.  We have to 
think of our audience.  We already had the 
phrasebook in another dialect.  We already had a 
good working relationship with a University to 
create the App.  We were also already willing 
and capable of recording, writing and inputting 
the data into the app.  By working with our 
already existing resources and working with our 
existing relationships, we were able to create a 
valuable everyday digital phrasebook. 

 

 
Lawrence Bell.  A typical day at work.  Photo by Lucy Bell. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We are grateful for the work of Erma Lawrence 
and Jordan Lachler who created the Alaskan 
Haida Phrasebook, Xaat Kil hl Sk’at’aa.  Your 
valuable work has guided us to create the digital 
version of the book.  Haw.aa. 

 
We are also so grateful for SFU and the SSHRC 
partnership grant that allowed us the time, space 
and funding to create this resource. 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
Lachler, Jordan.   2010.  Dictionary of Alaskan 
Haida.  Sealaska Heritage Institution, Juneau, 
AK. 
 
Lawrence, Erma.  2010.  Xaat Kil hl Sk’at’aa! 
Haida Phrasebook.  Sealaska Heritage Institute, 
Juneau, AK. 

51


