



















































Incorporating Dependency Trees Improve Identification of Pregnant Women on Social Media Platforms


Proceedings of the International Workshop on Digital Disease Detection using Social Media 2017 (DDDSM-2017), pages 26–32,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

 Incorporating Dependency Trees Improve Identification of Pregnant 
Women on Social Media Platforms

Abstract 

The increasing popularity of social media 
lead users to share enormous information 
on the internet. This information has vari-
ous application like, it can be used to de-
velop models to understand or predict user 
behavior on social media platforms. For 
example, few online retailers have studied 
the shopping patterns to predict shopper’s 
pregnancy stage. Another interesting ap-
plication is to use the social media plat-
forms to analyze users’ health-related in-
formation. In this study, we developed a 
tree kernel-based model to classify tweets 
conveying pregnancy related information 
using this corpus. The developed preg-
nancy classification model achieved an 
accuracy of 0.847 and an F-score of 0.565. 
A new corpus from popular social media 
platform Twitter was developed for the 
purpose of this study.  In future, we would 
like to improve this corpus by reducing 
noise such as retweets. 

1 Introduction  
The web has become a powerful medium for dis-
seminating information about diverse topics, peo-
ple can share information anytime and anywhere. 
Real-time user generated information on the web, 
epitomized by social media and in particular mi-
croblogs, are becoming an important data source 

                                                
  * Corresponding author 
 

to complement existing resources for disease sur-
veillance (Brownstein, Freifeld, & Madoff, 2009), 
behavioral medicine (Ayers, Althouse, & Dredze, 
2014), and public health (Dredze, 2012). Studies 
have shown that 26% of online adults discuss 
health information using social media(GE-
Healthcare, 2012), with approximately 90% 
women using online media for health-care infor-
mation, and 60% using pregnancy related apps for 
support. These statistics suggest that social media 
sources may contain key information regarding 
specific cohorts, such as pregnant women, and 
their drug usage habits. Twitter—a micro-blog-
ging site which is actively used by over 328 mil-
lion users1—is a very popular social network cur-
rently being extensively used for public health 
monitoring tasks (Chandrashekar, Magge, Sarker, 
& Gonzalez, 2017; Jonnagaddala, Jue, & Dai). It 
is also an attractive resource for biosurveillance 
related shared tasks and competitions because it 
carries health-related knowledge expressed by 
various cohorts(Adam, Jonnagaddala, Chughtai, 
& Macintyre, 2017). However, the noisy nature of 
data on Twitter demands sophisticated models 
and techniques for mining the knowledge encap-
sulated. 

The primary aim of this study is to detect 
whether a tweet convey pregnancy or not. This in-
formation further downstream can be used to 
study the safety of drugs in pregnancy are of par-
amount importance. Typically, pregnant woman in 
social media are detected using simple regular ex-
pressions and rules such as – matching the phrase 

1 https://about.twitter.com/company  

 Yi-Jie Huang1, Chu Hsien Su2, Yi-Chun Chang3, Tseng-Hsin Ting3,  
Tzu-Yuan Fu3, Rou-Min Wang3, Hong-Jie Dai3*, Yung-Chun Chang4*,  

Jitendra Jonnagaddala5 and Wen-Lian Hsu6 
 

1Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. 
2Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 
3Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taitung 

University, Taitung, Taiwan. 
4Graduate Institute of Data Science, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. 

5School of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia. 

6Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. 
 

26



“i am twenty weeks pregnant” (Chandrashekar et 
al., 2017; Wang, Paul, & Dredze, 2014). However, 
employing rule based detection can lead to many 
false positives since it doesn’t consider context or 
sentiment embedded in the tweet. Often, the 
tweets recognised by rule based methods seem to 
be sarcastic. For example, consider the tweet “I 
look like I’m 6 months pregnant”. This tweet is a 
sarcastic tweet and the user actually is not preg-
nant. Thus, in order to overcome this issue, we 
propose to use a tree kernel-based approach to de-
tect pregnant woman more effectively. Tree ker-
nel-based approaches have been applied to many 
different researches, such as relation extraction 
(Culotta and Sorensen, 2004), question classifica-
tion (Zhang and Lee, 2003) and protein interaction 
detection (Miwa et al., 2010). In recent years, tree 
kernel-based models were used to analyze Twitter 
data, but most of those studies were focused on 
opinion mining and sentiment classification 
(Agarwal et al., 2011; Alicante et al., 2016). In this 
study, we investigate the effectiveness of applying 
the approach on the task of determining whether a 
tweet is posted by a pregnant woman or not. 

2 Related Work 
Most of the studies in mining Twitter are focused 
on drug safety domain, e.g. drug abuse and adverse 
drug reaction (Dai, Touray, Wang, Jonnagaddala, & 
Syed-Abdul, 2016; Sarker et al., 2016). However, 
this information can also be used for health surveil-
lance of pregnant women. The study most related 
to ours is presented by  (Chandrashekar et al., 2017) 
in which they annotated 1,200 tweets with preg-
nancy announcements to allow the identification of 
pregnancy trimesters. Klein et. al, constructed an 
annotated corpus from Twitter focusing on per-
sonal medication intake (Klein, Sarker, 
Rouhizadeh, O’Connor, & Gonzalez, 2017). In an 
another related study an integrated corpus compos-
ing of 2,000 sentences from Twitter and PubMed 
called TwiMed was presented (Alvaro, Miyao, & 
Collier, 2017).  The corpus contains the annotations 
of diseases, symptoms and drugs, and their rela-
tions. 

Tree kernel-based approaches have been widely 
applied to text classification tasks. Zhang and Lee 
(2003) utilized tree kernel to question classification 
and demonstrated that syntactic structures is useful 
for questions classification. However, the space of 
tree fragments is too large to compute their inner 
products. In order to recursively and efficiently 
compute the common substructures similarity be-

tween two trees, Moschitti (2006) proposed convo-
lution tree kernel and developed a toolkit for public. 
Wang et al. (2009) adopted convolution tree kernel 
to find out similar questions from Yahoo Answers 
dataset. They observed that the convolution tree 
kernel function can effectively utilize the syntactic 
structure of a sentence. On the other hand, Agarwal 
(2011) applied partial tree kernel (PTK) to classify 
sentiment polarity of twitter data and achieved re-
markable performance. The kernel provides the 
ability to analyze additional semantic information 
by considering the contribution of shared subse-
quences containing all children of nodes. PTK 
compares words by the order of alphabets to deter-
mine word similarity for ameliorating the weak 
point of convolution tree kernel. Later on Croce et 
al. (2011) proposed smoothing partial tree kernel 
(SPTK) and improved the calculation method of 
word similarity by using singular value decompo-
sition (SVD) to transform all words into vectors for 
determining the cosine similarity between them. 

In this paper, we built models based on SPTK 
and three kinds of tree structures. Besides part-of-
speech (POS) tags, the new tree structures incorpo-
rate dependency tree and grammatical relations for 
extracting more useful features. Furthermore, we 
used word embedding to substitute the vectors gen-
erated by SVD. Many studies have demonstrated 
that word embedding is really useful in many natu-
ral language processing tasks. With this in mind we 
also investigated the effectiveness of combining 
word embedding with SPTK and different tree 
structures on the task of identifying pregnancy 
women on Twitter. 

 

 
Figure 1: System architecture 

27



3 Methods 
The Figure 1 shows the architecture of the pro-
posed pregnancy detection method. The architec-
ture comprises three key components: prepro-
cessing, tree representations, and smoothing par-
tial tree kernel classification. Firstly, the prepro-
cessing component processes a set of tweets that 
may convey pregnancy (called candidate tweets 
hereafter) through heuristic rules. Then, each can-
didate tweet is represented by three kinds of tree 
structures for capturing the information of syntac-
tic, content, and semantic of the tweet. Finally, the 
smoothing partial tree-kernel classification com-
ponent measures the similarity between tweet in 
terms of their tree structures, and the tree kernel is 
incorporated into support vector machine (SVM) 
for learning a classifier. We elaborate each com-
ponent in the following sub-sections. 

3.1 Preprocessing 
Given a tweet, we first apply the Stanford parser2 
to generate the output of parse tree and PoS tag-
ging. We further remove stop words and URLs 
from tweets. In addition, we observe that retweet 
is impossible to convey pregnancy since Twitter's 
retweet feature is to help users quickly share that 
tweet with all of users’ followers. Therefore, we 
filter out tweets if the text start with “RT” (i.e. re-
tweet). By filtering out retweets, the rest are the 
candidate tweets which may convey pregnancy. 
 

 
Figure 2: Constituency tree (CT) 

                                                
2 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml  

3.2 Tree Representations 
Different tree representations in tree kernel-based 
approach may lead to modeling more effective syn-
tactic or semantic feature spaces. In this paper, 
three kinds tree structure are used to represent 
tweet, they are constituency tree (CT), lexical cen-
tered tree (LCT), and grammatical relation cen-
tered tree (GRCT). To facilitate comprehension of 
the different tree representations, we take a preg-
nant woman’s Tweet “I'm so damn tired of being 
pregnant” as an example. 

Figure 2 is CT, which is the basic tree represen-
tation generated by Stanford Parser. The parser 
works out the grammatical structure of sentences 
by grouping words together as phrases that could 
represent the subject or object of a verb. However, 
CT only contain information of the grammatical 
structure. Croce et al. (2011) proposed GRCT and 
LCT to complement CT. GRCT and LCT involve 
grammatical relations (GR), PoS tags and depend-
encies. GRCT adds tags of grammatical relations 
and lexical information as new nodes in CT to em-
phasize grammatical relationship information 
while LCT enhance the lexical information by add-
ing grammatical relations and PoS-tags as the 
rightmost children. Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the 
same example sentence for GRCT and LCT. 

 

 
Figure 3: Grammatical relation centered tree 

(GRCT) 
 

 
 

Figure 4: Lexical centered tree (LCT) 

3.3 Smoothing Partial Tree Kernel Clas-
sification 

In SVMs, a kernel function is employed to cleverly 
compute the similarity between two instances 

28



without requiring the identification of the entire 
feature space. In the case of tree kernel, it repre-
sents tree in terms of their substructures and evalu-
ates the number of common tree fragments be-
tween two trees 1T   and 2T   through the following 
equation: 
 

∑ ∑∈ ∈ Δ= 11 22 ),(),( 2121 T TNn Nn nnTTK  (1) 
 
where 

1T
N   and 

2T
N   denote the sets of nodes in 

T1 and T2, respectively. The function ∆(n1, n2) is 
equal to the number of common fragments rooted 
in the 1n  and 2n  nodes. Since the number of dif-
ferent sub-trees is exponential with the parse tree 
size, it is computationally infeasible to directly 
use the feature vector.  

In recent years, multiple tree kernels have been 
proposed for resolving this computation issue, 
such as syntactic tree kernel (Collins and Duffy, 
2002), partial tree kernel (Moschitti, 2006), and 
lexical semantic kernel (Basili et al., 2005). How-
ever, the lexical in these tree kernels must belong 
to the leaf nodes of exactly the same structures 
limits its applications. Trivially, it cannot work on 
dependency trees. Croce et al. (2011) proposed a 
much more general smoothed tree kernel (i.e. 
smoothing partial tree kernel, SPTK) that can be 
applied to any tree and exploit any combination of 
lexical similarities, respecting the syntax enforced 
by the tree. Therefore, we adopt SPTK to capture 
the syntactic similarity between the above high di-
mensional vectors implicitly, as well as partial 
lexical similarity of trees. The ∆ SPTK (n1, n2) can 
be defined as follows: 
 
(1) If nodes n1 and n2 are leaves, then ∆ SPTK 

(n1, n2) = µλσ(n1, n2) 
(2)  Otherwise, calculate ∆ SPTK (n1, n2) recur-

sively as: 
 

),))(),((

(),(

),(

)(

1
2211

)()(,,

)()(2
21

21

1

2121

21

∏

∑

=

=

+

Δ

×+×

=Δ

Il

j
jnjn

IlIlII

IdId

IcIc

nn

nn

!

!!!!

!!

!!
σ

σ

λλµσ  
(2) 

 
where σ is any similarity between nodes, µ, 
λ∈[0,1] are two decay factors, 1I

!
 and 2I

!
 are  two 

                                                
3 https://github.com/linvi/tweetinvi 

sequence of indices, which index subsequences of 
children u, ),...,( 1 uiiI =

!
 , in sequences of chil-

dren s, sii u ≤<<≤ ...1 1  , i.e., such that 

uii ssu ...1=  , and 1)( 1 +−= iiId u
!

  is the dis-

tance between the first and last child. c  is one of 
the children of the node n , also in indexed by I

!
. 

This provides an advantage that tree fragments 
can be matched by applying word embedding 
similarity σ. Even those tree fragments are not 
identical but are semantically related. 

3.4 Dataset 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no openly 
available corpus for pregnant woman detection. 
Therefore, we compiled a dataset for the perfor-
mance evaluation. We employed Tweetinvi3  to 
collect tweets mentioning pregnancy written in 
English from May 1, 2017 to May 29, 2017. To 
retrieve the tweets, we used a list of pregnancy-
related query terms to search tweets online. For all 
14,824 collected raw tweets, we pre-processed 
them by removing emoticons, line feeds, extra 
spaces and dots based on regular expression. The 
collected tweets contain duplications owing to the 
same tweets retrieved by different queries and the 
retweets shared by different users. We removed 
duplicated tweets or tweets contain similar de-
scriptions by calculating Levenshtein distance 
among the collected tweets. If the similarity score 
of two tweets is larger than 70%, we discard the 
shorter one and reserve the longer one. Finally, we 
obtained 7,984 tweet sentences. 

We randomly selected 3,000 tweets from the 
collected dataset to build an initial corpus. Five 
annotators were recruited to annotate the corpus 
by using MAE (Multi-document Annotation En-
vironment) (Rim, 2016). They determined 
whether the tweet authors are pregnant or not 
based on the context information and gave “Yes” 
or “No” annotations indicating positive or nega-
tive cases. A preliminary consistency test was 
conducted on 500 tweets by having the first two 
of the annotators annotate the data, while the last 
one checked their annotations for consistency. 
The Fleiss' kappa coefficient value for the initial 
consistency test is 0.42 (moderate agreements). Af-
ter examining the consistency, all annotators ad-
justed their annotations and re-annotated the en-
tire data set. After finishing the annotation process, 
a voting method was employed to determine the 

29



final annotation for each tweet resulting in a cor-
pus containing 642 positive and 2,358 negative 
annotations. 

3.5 Experimental Setting 
We use the KeLP package (Simone Filice, 2015) 
to implement SPTK classification component, 
and develop three kinds tree representations. To 
derive credible evaluation results, we utilize the 
10-folds cross validation method (Manning and 
Schütze, 1999). The evaluation metrics used to 
determine relative effectiveness of the compared 
methods include the precision, recall, F1-score, 
and accuracy (Manning and Schütze, 1999).  

For computing lexical similarity, we collected 
approximating 15.8M tweets from Internet Ar-
chive4 instead of using existing pre-trained word 
embeddings. In the collected dataset, we removed 
non-English tweets and transformed each word to 
its lemma for learning word embeddings (300-di-
mension) through continuous bag of words with 
default settings of the word2vec5 toolkit (Mikolov 
et al., 2013). 

4. Results and Discussion 

The performance comparison of our methods with 
other methods is provided in the Table 1. In order 
to show complexity of pregnancy detection, the 
convolution tree kernel with constituency tree 
(TKCT) was used as the baseline method. We also 
compared the performance with other two tree 
structures that included grammatical functions and 
dependency (TKGRCT and TKLCT) respectively. 
Moreover, smoothing partial tree kernel with both 
dependency tree structures were also compared 
(SPTKGRCT and SPTKLCT). 
 

Method P. R. F1 Acc. 
TKCT 74.61 37.60 50.00 83.90 
TKGRCT 63.90 40.81 49.81 82.40 
TKLCT 70.82 44.24 54.46 84.17 
SPTKGRCT 65.50 40.81 50.29 82.73 
SPTKLCT 71.88 46.57 56.52 84.67 

Table 1: The pregnant woman recognition results 
of compared methods. 
 

As shown in Table 1, the TKCT with the basic 
tree kernel method can only achieve a mediocre 
performance. On the contrary, since GRCT and 
LCT encode the dependency information and 
                                                
4 A non-profit library of millions of free books, movies, so-
ftware, music, websites.  

grammatical relation in the tree structures, using 
both dependency tree can benefit the performance 
of pregnancy detection. It is worth mentioning that 
TKLCT outperforms TKGRCT, this indicates utilizing 
lexical features as central node is effective in rep-
resenting pregnancy information in a tweet. Finally, 
the SPTK considers lexical similarities on the tree 
structure to extract features of pregnant woman 
posts. Therefore, SPTKLCT achieves the best detec-
tion performance with an F1-score of 56.52%. 
 
Figure 5 illustrates a word cloud consisting of the 
top 100 words frequently occurring in the positive 
and negative tweets of the corpus. The pink words 
refer to the positive ones and the blue refer to the 
negative ones. We excluded mention tags (e.g. 
@John), numeric numbers, punctuations, and 
words listed in the stop word list6 . We observed 
that among the top 100 words, 55% of them ap-
peared in both positive and negative cases. We 
also checked the words that are only included in 
the positive and negative word frequency, and we 
did not find anything special except the positive 
words “father” and “husband” and negative word 
“abortion”. It seems that the use of words between 
positive and negative corpus are highly consistent. 
The reasons caused this condition we thought that 
we used the simple and similar queries to search 
twitter and the negative corpus is larger than the 
positive corpus. 

 

 
Figure 5: Word cloud of the compiled corpus. Colors 
and their corresponding category: Pink – Positive and 

Blue - Negative. 

5 Conclusion 
We presented a tree kernel-based model to identify 
tweets posted by pregnant women. Unlike tradi-
tional approaches which detect using regular ex-
pression patterns or rules, we employ different tree 

5 https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/ 
6 http://www.webconfs.com/stop-words.php  

30



structures together with two tree kernels that incor-
porate the dependency and grammatical relation in-
formation represented in the form of tree structures. 
We evaluated our models on manually annotated 
Twitter corpus specifically developed for the pur-
pose of this study. The results demonstrate that em-
ploying dependency tree can improve the perfor-
mance of pregnancy detection. We also observe 
that lexical features as central node is effective in 
representing pregnancy information in a tweet. The 
best performed model had an F-score of 0.5652 on 
our corpus.  The SPTK model considers lexical 
similarities on the tree structure. 

In future, we would like to explore different 
ways to integrate deeper semantics into tree struc-
ture for pregnancy detection on social media plat-
forms. Moreover, we also would like to improve 
the corpus by ignoring retweets, avoid possible 
noise and obtain more meta data such as timestamp 
details. In addition, the pregnancy related tweets 
may reveal the other health behaviour related infor-
mation of the of the pregnant authors like drug us-
age, food intake, any disease symptoms, and emo-
tion. We would like to use this information in future 
to conduct syndromic surveillance on pregnant 
women using social media. 

Acknowledgments 
We are grateful for the constructive comments 
from three anonymous reviewers. This work was 
supported by grant MOST106-3114-E-001- 002 
and MOST105-2221-E-001-008-MY3 from the 
Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan. 

Reference 
Alfred. V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 1972. The The-

ory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling, volume 
1. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.  

American Psychological Association. 1983. Publica-
tions Manual. American Psychological Association, 
Washington, DC. 

Ashok K. Chandra, Dexter C. Kozen, and Larry J. 
Stockmeyer. 1981. Alternation. Journal of the Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, 28(1):114-133.  

Association for Computing Machinery. 1983. Compu-
ting Reviews, 24(11):503-512. 

Dan Gusfield. 1997. Algorithms on Strings, Trees and 
Sequences. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK. 

Adam, D., Jonnagaddala, J., Chughtai, A. A., & 
Macintyre, C. R. (2017). ZikaHack 2016: A 

digital disease detection competition. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Digital Disease 
Detection using Social Media 2017, Taipei, 
Taiwan.  

Alvaro, N., Miyao, Y., & Collier, N. (2017). TwiMed: 
Twitter and PubMed Comparable Corpus of 
Drugs, Diseases, Symptoms, and Their 
Relations. JMIR Public Health and 
Surveillance, 3(2).  

Ayers, J. W., Althouse, B. M., & Dredze, M. (2014). 
Could behavioral medicine lead the web data 
revolution? Jama, 311(14), 1399-1400.  

Brownstein, J. S., Freifeld, C. C., & Madoff, L. C. 
(2009). Digital disease detection—harnessing 
the Web for public health surveillance. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 360(21), 2153-
2157.  

Chandrashekar, P. B., Magge, A., Sarker, A., & Gonzalez, 
G. (2017). Social media mining for 
identification and exploration of health-related 
information from pregnant women. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1702.02261.  

Dai, H.-J., Touray, M., Wang, C.-K., Jonnagaddala, J., & 
Syed-Abdul, S. (2016). Feature Engineering 
for Recognizing Adverse Drug Reactions from 
Twitter Posts. Information.  

Dredze, M. (2012). How social media will change public 
health. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 27(4), 81-84.  

GE-Healthcare. (2012). Twenty six percent of online 
adults discuss health information online; 
privacy cited as the biggest barrier to entry. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/201
21120005872/en/Twenty-percent-online-
adults-discuss-health-information 

Jonnagaddala, J., Jue, T. R., & Dai, H. Binary 
classification of Twitter posts for adverse drug 
reactions. 

Klein, A. Z., Sarker, A., Rouhizadeh, M., O’Connor, K., 
& Gonzalez, G. (2017). Detecting Personal 
Medication Intake in Twitter: An Annotated 
Corpus and Baseline Classification System. 
BioNLP 2017, 136.  

Rim, K. (2016). MAE2: Portable Annotation Tool for 
General Natural Language Use. Paper 
presented at the In Proceedings of the 12th 
Joint ACL-ISO Workshop on Interoperable 
Semantic Annotation, Portorož, Slovenia, May 
28, 2016. 

Sarker, A., O’Connor, K., Ginn, R., Scotch, M., Smith, 
K., Malone, D., & Gonzalez, G. (2016). Social 
Media Mining for Toxicovigilance: Automatic 
Monitoring of Prescription Medication Abuse 
from Twitter. Drug Safety, 39(3), 231-240. 
doi:10.1007/s40264-015-0379-4 

Wang, S., Paul, M. J., & Dredze, M. (2014). Exploring 
health topics in Chinese social media: An 
analysis of Sina Weibo. Paper presented at the 

31



AAAI Workshop on the World Wide Web and 
Public Health Intelligence. 

 Simone Filice, Giuseppe Castellucci, Danilo Croce 
and Roberto Basili. 2015. KeLP: a Kernel-based 
Learning Platform for Natural Language Processing. 
Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2015 System Demon-
strations, pages 19–24. 

Michael Collins and Nigel Duffy. 2002. New Ranking 
Algorithms for Parsing and Tagging: Kernels over 
Discrete Structures, and the Voted Perceptron. In 
Proceedings of ACL’02. 

Danilo Croce, Alessandro Moschitti and Robert Basili. 
2011. Structured lexical similarity via convolution 
kernels on dependency trees. In Proceedings of the 
2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1034–1046, 
Edinburgh, UK. 

Alessandro Moschitti. 2004. A Study on Convolution 
Kernels for Shallow Semantic Parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL’04. 

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making Large-scale Support 
Vector Machine Learning Practical. In Bernhard 
Schölkopf, Christopher J. C. Burges, and Alexander 
J. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, pages 169–184. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=299094.299104.  

Aron Culotta and Jeffrey Sorensen. 2004. Dependency 
tree kernels for relation extraction.  In Proceedings 
of ACL’04. 

Dell Zhang and Wee Sun Lee. 2003. Question classifi-
cation using support vector machines. In Proceed-
ings of the 26th Annual International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Infor-
maion Retrieval, New York, NY, pp. 26–32. ACM 
Press 

Makoto Miwa, Rune Sætre, Yusuke Miyao and 
Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2009. Protein-protein interaction ex-
traction by leveraging multiple kernels and parsers. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 
78(12):e39–e46. 

Apoorv Agarwal, Boyi Xie, Ilia Vovsha, Owen Ram-
bow and Rebecca Passonneau. 2011. Sentiment 
analysis of twitter data. In: Proceedings of ACL’11 
Workshop on Languages in Social Media. pp. 30–38. 

Anita Alicante, Anna Corazza and Antonio Piront. 
2016. In Proceedings of  Third  Italian  Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (CLiC-it 2016) & 
Fifth Evaluation Campaign of Natural Language 
Processing and Speech Tools for Italian. Final 
Workshop (EVALITA 2016). 

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey 

Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In Proceedings of ICLR’13 
Workshop. 

Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schütze. 1999. 
Foundations of statistical natural language pro-
cessing. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.  

Alessandro Moschitti. 2006. Efficient convolution ker-
nels for dependency and constituent syntactic trees. 
In Proceedings of The 17th European Conference on 
Machine Learning, pages 318–329, Berlin, Ger-
many. 

Kai Wang and Zhaoyan Ming and Tat-Seng Chua. 2009. 
A Syntactic Tree Matching Approach to Finding 
Similar Questions in Community-based QA Ser-
vices. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 187-194. 

Roberto Basili, Marco Cammisa, and Alessandro Mos-
chitti. 2005. Effective use of WordNet semantics via 
kernel-based learning. In Proceedings of CoNLL-
2005, pages 1–8, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 

 

32


