



















































Integrating the Management of Personal Data Protection and Open Science with Research Ethics


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pages 60–65,
Valencia, Spain, April 4th, 2017. c© 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Integrating the Management of Personal Data Protection and Open
Science with Research Ethics

David Lewis
ADAPT Centre

Trinity College Dublin
Ireland

dave.lewis
@adaptcentre.ie

Joss Moorkens
ADAPT Centre/SALIS
Dublin City University

Ireland
joss.moorkens

@dcu.ie

Kaniz Fatema
ADAPT Centre

Trinity College Dublin
Ireland

kaniz.fatema
@scss.tcd.ie

Abstract

This paper examines the impact of the EU
General Data Protection Regulation, in the
context of the requirement from many re-
search funders to provide open access re-
search data, on current practices in Lan-
guage Technology Research. We analyse
the challenges that arise and the oppor-
tunities to address many of them through
the use of existing open data practices
for sharing language research data. We
discuss the impact of this also on cur-
rent practice in academic and industrial re-
search ethics.

1 Introduction

Language Technology (LT) research is facing an
unprecedented confluence of issues in the man-
agement of experimental data. The EU’s adop-
tion of the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) (European Parliament and Council of
the European Union, 2016) imposes new require-
ments for tracking informed consent for the us-
age of personal data that may impact all European
LT research significantly. National guidelines now
need to be established on how GDPR applies to
scientific data, and given the large penalties in-
volved, this uncertainty presents significant insti-
tutional risk for those undertaking research with
the unanonymised or unanonymisable data often
needed in LT research.

In addition, the European Commission (EC)
and other research funding bodies increasingly en-
courage open science practices. The aim is to pub-
lish research data alongside research papers in or-
der to reduce the cost of obtaining research data
and improve the repeatability, replicability and re-
producibility of research. While this is a posi-
tive move for the quality and integrity of LT re-

search, it must respect the needs of data protection
legislation, including different EU member states’
implementation of GDPR, and the data protection
regimes in jurisdictions outside the EU. These may
greatly complicate and delay the benefits of open
science policies. This paper reviews these trends
and aims to distil the issues that researcher insti-
tutes as well as national and transnational research
bodies need to face in the coming years to effec-
tively manage research data amid these parallel
and sometime conflicting needs. In particular, we
highlight the interdependency between these is-
sues and how those who manage research ethics
will need to react.

2 GDPR and LT Research Data

As Hovy and Spruit (2016) point out, language
data contains latent characteristics of the person
producing it, and language technology therefore
has the inherent potential to expose personal char-
acteristics of the individual. Coulthard (2000)
notes that identification of authors is very difficult
from linguistic data alone, but has been success-
ful when accompanied by metadata “information
which massively restricts the number of possible
authors”. This presents a distinct data protection
challenge for the sharing and reuse of language re-
sources as they are difficult to reliably anonymise
and in some cases can already be used as a bio-
metric.

As the sharing of language resources is an es-
tablished feature of LT research internationally we
must carefully examine the provisions coming into
force in the EU with the introduction of GDPR. As
an example we can consider research conducted
into the productivity changes to translator practice
resulting from the use of LT. Translation mem-
ory (TM) data is often used for MT training, al-
though identifying metadata is almost always re-

60



moved beforehand. Measures to retain the meta-
data in order to strengthen copyright claims in
respect of translators, as suggested by Moorkens
et al. (2016), would create a risk of data breach
under the terms of GDPR. This means that one
possibility for extending human translator earn-
ings will almost definitely become an impossibil-
ity for creators of MT systems. Machine transla-
tion (MT) is another popular LT technique use in
translation practice. The impact of MT is being
increasingly assessed through detailed analyses of
keystroke logs of translators making corrections to
such translations. These logs may also be pub-
lished to accompany such studies (Carl, 2012), but
are known at the level of keystroke timings to pos-
sess biometric signals that can identify the transla-
tor. Another growing practice is translation dicta-
tion using automated speech translation. Here, re-
peatable studies may involve the sharing of record-
ings and transcripts of spoken translation, where
again speech recording could be used to identify
the speaker.

2.1 What is the GDPR?

The GDPR is an EU Regulation, adopted in April
2016 and due to come into force in May 2018. It
addresses protection of people with regard to the
processing and free movement of personal data,
replacing the 1995 Data Protection Directive. The
GDPR (Article 4) defines Personal Data as “in-
formation relating to an identified or identifiable
natural person”, who it refers to as a Data Sub-
ject. An identifier for the Data Subject may be a
name, an identification number, location data, an
online identifier or “one or more factors specific to
the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, eco-
nomic, cultural or social identity” of the Data Sub-
ject. It is these latter factors that perhaps lie latent
in language resources and data that is increasingly
subject to analysis by language technologies, such
as samples of utterances from specific data sub-
jects.

The organisation that collects and uses personal
information is the Data Controller, and bears the
primary responsibility for implementing the pro-
visions of GDPR. This role would be conducted
by research institute which will be responsible for
GDPR on many forms of personal data (e.g. stu-
dent, staff and alumni records) beyond that gen-
erated by research. Other organisations in receipt
of personal data from a controller is known as a

Data Processor, and in LT research this would cor-
respond to other research organisations receiving
and reusing research data from the controller. The
potential penalties for a data breach fall within two
categories with differing maximum fines. A fine of
up to 20 million or 4% of turnover (whichever is
greater) may be imposed for failure to adhere to
basic principles for processing, including condi-
tions for consent (Articles 5, 6, 7 and 9), infring-
ing on the rights of Data Subjects (Articles 20, 21,
22), or improper international data transfers (Arti-
cles 44-49). Other failures to comply, such as by
failing to obtain proper consent for childrens’ data,
to keep sufficient records, or to apply proper safe-
guards, may result in a fine of up to 10 million or
2% of turnover (whichever is greater). Both Data
Controllers and Data Processors may be consid-
ered liable for the security of personal data, and
any data breach must be reported within 72 hours.

The GDPR explicitly encompasses
pseudonymised data, which would require
additional information (stored separately) to
identify the Data Subject. This would include, for
example, TM data with a translation unit ID that
can be attributed to an individual. Personal data
should be retained for a period no longer than is
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which
it was collected. However long-term archiving
is permitted if this is in the public interest for
scientific and historical research purposes, or
statistical purposes, providing that there are some
safeguards. These exemptions for research aim
to reconcile privacy with data-driven innovation
and the public good that may result. The GDPR
states that the designation of scientific research
should be “interpreted in a broad manner” in-
cluding technological development, fundamental
research, applied research and privately funded
research. Importantly, therefore, consideration
of GDPR exemptions for LT research may have
widespread implications for industry as well as
for academia. GDPR might not apply to data
processing where the focus is not on “personal
data, but aggregate data” and is statistical rather
than referring to a particular individual. Where
personal data is processed however, separate
consents are required for different processing
activities. However, providing that safeguards
are implemented, secondary processing and
processing of sensitive categories of data may
be permitted for research purposes where data

61



has been collected lawfully. Article 89, which
addresses exemptions for scientific research that,
states these safeguards should include technical
and organisational measures to protect data,
following the principle of data minimisation, and
may include pseudonymisation or anonymisation
where possible or appropriate. As discussed above
however, these mechanisms may not be adequate
for protecting data subject identity in the sharing
and reuse of language resources. Significantly, the
precise nature of the safeguard required by Article
89 are left for EU member states to legislate on
(Beth Thompson, 2016). So while this enables
interpretation of GDPR that aligns with existing
national standards for research data, different
interpretations may impede efforts to share and
reuse experimental data internationally if differing
GDPR enforcement regimes emerge.

3 Requirements of Open Science

The requirement for open access research publica-
tion of the results of publicly funded research has
become common practice in recent years. How-
ever the central importance of data in all empiri-
cal research, in addition to the growth of big data
research approaches, has heightened the call for
common policies on publishing and sharing re-
search data associated with a publication (of Eu-
ropean Research Universities, 2013).

Major research funders, including the EC, have
widened their guidelines on open science to now
address open research data (European Commis-
sion, 2016). The aim in doing so is to make it eas-
ier for researchers to: build on previous research
and improve the quality of research results; col-
laborate and avoid duplication of effort to improve
the efficiency of publicly funded research; acceler-
ate progress to market in order to realise economic
and social benefits; and involve citizens and soci-
ety. It is anticipated that EC-funded projects will
transition from optional involvement in open data
pilots to working under a stronger obligation to
provide open access to research data. This how-
ever has to be provided within the constraints of
EU and national data regulations, now including
GDPR. Initiatives such as the Open Access Infras-
tructure for Research in Europe (OpenAIRE)1 pro-
vide additional information and support on linking
publications to underlying research data, and is de-
veloping open interfaces for exchange between re-

1https://www.openaire.eu/

search data repositories. However, for such open
access to work at scale, improved level of inter-
operability will be required for the meta-data as-
sociated with data sets made availalbe through
different institutional research data repositories.
Such meta-data interoperability is needed to sup-
port the aggregation, indexing and searching of
experimental data from different repositories so
that researchers can find suitable data with less
effort. Further, reflecting data protection and re-
search ethics properties in such meta-data will also
reduce the effort required to ensure that reusing
experimental data from another source does not in-
cur data protection compliance risks.

3.1 Open Data for Open Science
In parallel to other initiatives, Linked Open Data
based on open data standards of the World Wide
Web Consortium is being adopted as a common
means for sharing all types of data between organ-
isations, with strong uptake reported in the public
sector. Linked Open Data is based upon the prin-
ciple of interlinking resources and data with stan-
dardised Resource Description Framework (RDF)
and Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) that can
be read and queried by machines through powerful
standardised querying mechanisms (Bizer et al.,
2009).

Open RDF-based data vocabularies such as
DCAT 2 help in expressing authorship of research
data sets, while ODRL vocabulary3 can express
usage rights and licensing. The provenance of
an experiment, in terms of which people and pro-
grammes performed which actions on which re-
sources at what time, can be captured and mod-
elled using the PROV4 family of data vocabular-
ies. Garijo et al. (2014) build on these standards
to propose an open data format for recording both
the sequence of experimental steps and the data
resources passing between them. This would al-
low the publication and discovery of experimental
descriptions with specific metadata (such as usage
rights or data subject consent) associated with spe-
cific data elements.

Experiential description using these open vo-
cabularies can be collected or aggregated to form
linked repositories such as those supported by
OpenAire and Linghub5, which are being piloted

2http://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat/
3http://www.w3.org/TR/odrl/
4http://www.w3.org/TR/prov-0/
5http://linghub.lider-project.eu

62



for language resources. Existing research for these
standard vocabularies has provided best practice
for publishing data sets’ metadata as linked open
data (Brummer et al., 2014). The machine read-
able nature of metadata can make it easy for an
automated system to verify the correctness of the
data, or perform other operations such as check-
ing of data formats, completeness of metadata
and the provenance of data used (Freudenberg et
al., 2016). This approach is amenable to exten-
sion with domain-specific experimental metadata,
such as the machine learning metadata proposed
in the MEX vocabulary (Esteves et al., 2015). The
LT research community has already developed a
schema, termed META-SHARE (Piperidis, 2012),
for language resource metadata that shares many
characteristics with the OpenAire scheme. The
META-SHARE schema has also been mapped
onto RDF with relevant attributes mapped to spe-
cific properties from the standard vocabularies
previously mentioned, and is used by LingHub as
an aggregation source (McCrae et al., 2015).

4 Discussion

Combining the emerging imperative of GDPR
compliance and data science poses the following
challenges for organisations undertaking LT re-
search and concerned with research ethics. Firstly
the encouragement by funders for researchers to
provide open access to experimental data must be
tempered by the overriding legal requirements of
GDPR compliance. While GDPR offers deroga-
tion of certain rights when dealing with personal
data for the purposes of scientific research, this
does not remove the obligation for research per-
forming organisations in the EU to demonstrate
their conformance to GDPR, to conduct data pro-
tection impact assessments, and to ensure that the
appropriate safeguards for the derogation are in
place, especially in cases where anonymisation of
experimental data is not possible.

In GDPR terms, a data processor receiving data
from an LT experiment will need to know the
terms of consent agreed to by the data subject in
giving the primary data collector permission to use
their personal data for a stated purpose. This will
enable the receiving party to assess whether the
purpose to which they now intend to put the data
is compatible with that consent. Given that infor-
mation, the receiving data processor would also
need to give an undertaking that it will only per-

form processing of that data for purposes that are
compatible with that consent.

This will mean therefore that exchange of LT
research data with latent personal features can-
not proceed without an appropriate contract on the
usage of this data being signed and recorded for
GDPR compliance purposes. It should also in-
clude an undertaking by the data processor not to
attempt the identification of natural persons from
the data, including through analysis in aggregation
with other data. This goes beyond the standard
form license agreements already in place for reuse
of language resources, e.g. the META-SHARE li-
cences 6, which focus mostly on issues of copy-
right ownership and usage conditions related to
attribution or, in some cases, to compensation.
To avoid GDPR unduly impeding the sharing and
reuse of experimental data, we recommend that
bodies such as the EC and ELRA develop stan-
dard form contract terms for the reuse of research
data that the LT research community can use in
documenting this aspect of GDPR compliance.

GDPR, in Recital 33, acknowledges that it “is
often not possible to fully identify the purpose
of personal data processing for scientific research
purposes at the time of collection”. It allows data
subjects to provide consent to only specific parts of
a research activity “when in keeping with recog-
nised ethical standards for scientific research”.
This highlights the fact that good practice in re-
search ethics already incorporates many features
now formalised in GDPR, i.e. the need for a clear
explanation of the data collection and processing
purposes; the explicit gathering of informed con-
sent and the option of the data subject to with-
draw from any part of the research activity at any
time. If EU proposals for ePrivacy (European Par-
liament and Council of the European Union, 2017)
move on to become a regulation, the data subject
will have more control over whether data may be
repurposed by being offered “the option to prevent
third parties from storing information on the termi-
nal equipment of an end user or processing infor-
mation already stored on that equipment” (Article
10). Key to data subjects exercising such control
over the processing of personal data is their full
understanding of the scientific research purposes
to which their data will be subject.

Further research is required to assess the com-
prehensibility of plain language descriptions of

6http://wizard.elda.org/

63



purpose typically used by researchers for data sub-
jects. The META-SHARE schema, for example,
supports a ’purpose’ attribute, but it is populated
with names of different areas of LT research that
are unlikely to be accessible to data subjects. Fur-
ther, more applied research, perhaps conducted by
industry, may be conducted with the known in-
tention of supporting new service features, e.g.
personalisation, targeted marketing, or differential
pricing. As these are of direct concern to the data
subject, such intentions should not be concealed
by statements of purpose related to the broader
generation of knowledge when seeking informed
consent. From such research, the LT community
and research institutes should seek to find clas-
sifications of purpose that are both accessible to
data subjects and convey the differences in pur-
pose of basic and applied research. Current rules
and practices on academic research ethics tend to
vary from institution to institution, with the in-
tention of protecting participants and researchers
by making clear the purpose of data collection,
and requesting explicit consent to use personal
data for that purpose. Researchers may have to
make an undertaking with regard to data protec-
tion, but there is rarely any follow-up to ascer-
tain whether the data has been stored or destroyed
as promised. In contrast, GDPR compliance will
require rigorous organisational and technical sys-
tems for record keeping and tracking the use to
which data is put by data processors, including
data transfer to processors in other institutes and
other jurisdictions. Further, much LT research data
processing involves secondary processing of in-
dustrial data, such as TMs or glossaries. As these
are not collected from directly from experimental
data subjects but via industrial processes, this data
is collected, stored, retained, and shared without
a reliable trace of research ethics clearance. Fur-
ther, as LT research is increasingly undertaken by
large companies with access to vast data-sets of
customer information, the resulting experimental
data is typically not subject to the a priori scrutiny
of institutional review boards or ethics commit-
tees as is common with publicly funded research.
This disparity between public and private norms
for undertaking research ethics may create barri-
ers to research collaboration and impede the pro-
gression of reproducable research results into the
public domain. An opportunity therefore exists for
the LT research community to better leverage open

data standards tracking the transfer and use of per-
sonal data in a way that can support GDPR com-
pliance checking. Use of open data standards that
capture the detail of data processing workflows
may be annotated to better record the processes
by which: informed consent is gathered from in-
dividual data subjects; their individual objections
to specific uses of personal data is handled and the
purposes to which personal data is put is audited.
Consent must be first collected, then stored and
processed for checking compliance with data pro-
cessing.

Consent can be modified. The modification can
be initiated by the data subject or due to change
of context the controller can re-solicit for consent
that can lead to modification of consent. Consent
can be revoked. After revocation, the data may
be archived for the time necessary for research re-
sult verification and finally destroyed. Further re-
search is needed on how to annotate open experi-
mental workflow provenance records with details
of consent management and its impact on the life-
cycle management of the subject’s data. A pos-
sible benefit of an open data approach, is that it
may allow individual institutes to publish the at-
tributes of their differing ethics review processes,
allowing collection and analysis of variations that
may assist in normalising standards. This will also
allow those reusing others’ data to be reassured
that it was collected under ethical standards with
which they are familiar. Ultimately this could re-
sult is a simple badge system, similar to that em-
ployed for creative commons, that could simplify
the selection of LT research data according to the
compatibility of research ethics and data protec-
tion protocols under which it was produced with
those sought by the research hoping to use that
data. Design of such a seal for reuse of experimen-
tal data could benefit from the work already under-
way in developing data protection seals 7 given the
overlap between research ethics protocols and the
informed consent requirements of GDPR.

Acknowledgements

Supported by the ADAPT Centre for Digital Con-
tent Technology which is funded under the SFI
Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106)
and is co-funded under the European Regional De-
velopment Fund.

7https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/improve-your-
practices/privacy-seals/

64



References
Beth Thompson. 2016. Analysis: Research and the

general data protection regulation. Technical report,
July.

Chris Bizer, Tom Heath, and Martin Hepp. 2009. Spe-
cial issue on linked data. International Journal on
Semantic Web and Information Systems, 5(3):1–22.

Martin Brummer, Ciro Baron, Ivan Ermilov, Markus
Freudenberg, Dimitris Kontokostas, and Sebastian
Hellmann. 2014. Dataid: Towards semantically rich
metadata for complex datasets. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Semantic Sys-
tems (SEM’14), New York, USA. ACM.

Michael Carl. 2012. Translog-ii: a program for record-
ing user activity data for empirical reading and writ-
ing research. In Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey, may. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Malcolm Coulthard. 2000. Whose text is it? on
the linguistic investigation of authorship. In Srikant
Sarangi and Malcolm Coulthard, editor, Discourse
and Social Life, chapter 15, pages 270–288. Rout-
ledge, London.

Diego Esteves, Diego Moussallem, Ciro Baron Neto,
Tommaso Soru, Ricardo Usbeck, Markus Acker-
mann, and Jens Lehmann. 2015. Mex vocabulary:
A lightweight interchange format for machine learn-
ing experiments. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tional Conference on Semantic Systems, SEMAN-
TICS ’15, pages 169–176, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

European Commission. 2016. Guidelines on open ac-
cess to scientific publications and research data in
horizon 2020. Technical report, February.

European Parliament and Council of the European
Union. 2016. Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the euro-
pean parliament and of the council (GDPR). Official
Journal of the European Union, 119(1):1–88.

European Parliament and Council of the European
Union. 2017. Proposal for a regulation concern-
ing the respect for private life and the protection of
personal data in electronic communications.

Markus Freudenberg, Martin Brummer, Jessika Ruck-
nagel, Robert Ulrich, Thomas Eckart, Dimitris Kon-
tokostas, and Sebastian Hellmann. 2016. The meta-
data ecosystem of dataid. In Special Track on Meta-
data & Semantics for Open Repositories at 10th In-
ternational Conference on Metadata and Semantics
Research.

Daniel Garijo, Yolanda Gil, and Oscar Corcho. 2014.
Ninth workshop on workflows in support of large-
scale science (works). In Ninth Workshop on Work-
flows in Support of Large-Scale Science (WORKS),,
New Orleans, USA, Nov. IEEE.

Dirk Hovy and Shannon L. Spruit. 2016. The social
impact of natural language processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, pages 591–598, August.

John P. McCrae, Penny Labropoulou, Jorge Gra-
cia, Marta Villegas, Vı́ctor Rodrı́guez-Doncel, and
Philipp Cimiano, 2015. One Ontology to Bind Them
All: The META-SHARE OWL Ontology for the Inter-
operability of Linguistic Datasets on the Web, pages
271–282. Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Joss Moorkens, David Lewis, Wessel Reijers, Eva Van-
massenhove, and Andy Way. 2016. Translation re-
sources and translator disempowerment. In ETHI-
CA 2016: Workshop on ETHics In Corpus Collec-
tion, Annotation and Application, Portoroz, Slove-
nia, May.

League of European Research Universities. 2013.
Leru roadmap for research data. Technical report,
Dec.

Stelios Piperidis. 2012. The meta-share language
resources sharing infrastructure: Principles, chal-
lenges, solutions. In Proceedings of the Eight In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey, may. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

65


