



















































Simplifying metaphorical language for young readers: A corpus study on news text


Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 313–318
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 8, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Simplifying metaphorical language for young readers:
A corpus study on news text

Magdalena Wolska
Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen

LEAD Graduate School
magdalena.wolska@uni-tuebingen.de

Yulia Clausen
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg

Computational Linguistics
yulia.clausen@gmail.com

Abstract

The paper presents first results of an on-
going project on text simplification focus-
ing on linguistic metaphors. Based on
an analysis of a parallel corpus of news
text professionally simplified for different
grade levels, we identify six types of sim-
plification choices falling into two broad
categories: preserving metaphors or drop-
ping them. An annotation study on al-
most 300 source sentences with metaphors
(grade level 12) and their simplified coun-
terparts (grade 4) is conducted. The re-
sults show that most metaphors are pre-
served and when they are dropped, the se-
mantic content tends to be preserved rather
than dropped, however, it is reworded
without metaphorical language. In gen-
eral, some of the expected tendencies in
complexity reduction, measured with psy-
cholinguistic variables linked to metaphor
comprehension, are observed, suggesting
good prospect for machine learning-based
metaphor simplification.

1 Motivation and problem statement

Text simplification is the process of meaning pre-
serving reduction of discourse complexity whose
purpose is to adapt text for specific populations of
readers, for instance, children or language learn-
ers. The idea has been around since “My Weekly
Reader” in the 1920s and Palmer’s work (1932)
and over the past 20 years has attracted attention of
the computational linguistics community. While
broadly interpreted “lexical simplification” – in
general understood as substitution of “difficult”
words with “simpler” ones – is a common compo-
nent of automated simplification systems (see, for
instance, (Siddharthan, 2014)), studies of text sim-

plification dedicated to specific lexis-related se-
mantic phenomena are lacking. One class of such
understudied phenomena are those related to fig-
urative language; a surprising gap in the simpli-
fication research considering that metaphors have
been shown to cause difficulties in text compre-
hension and that developing metaphor interpreta-
tion competence is a complex developmental pro-
cess (for an overview, see, for instance, (Winner,
1997)). Since automated systems are trained on
corpora of simplified text, understanding patterns
of metaphor simplification based on corpus data
could help improve simplification models.

In this paper we present a study that is our first
step in this direction. We analyze linguis-
tic metaphors in a corpus of news texts pro-
fessionally simplified for different grade levels.
While editors’ guidelines instructed to avoid vivid
metaphors, such as “paint into a corner”, our goal
was to find out whether, and if so, how, linguis-
tic metaphors in general are simplified by pro-
fessional editors. Since ultimately we want to
build automated metaphor simplification models,
the purpose of this study is to investigate whether
metaphors in a corpus of professionally simpli-
fied text, that is, potential training data, are sim-
plified in systematic ways. Specifically, we were
interested in two questions: 1) What types of
discourse modifications do editors perform when
simplifying metaphorical language? (in other
words, whether a well-defined set of classes for
the metaphor simplification task can be specified).
2) Do professional editors simplify metaphor phe-
nomena in systematic ways? (if not, training sim-
plification models using machine learning based
on corpus data may not be promising).

The paper’s structure follows the data-driven
methodology adopted for this study: We first de-
fine the criteria used to identify the phenomenon
in question: linguistic metaphor. Next, we present

313



the setup of an annotation study and a typology of
simplification choices derived based on an analy-
sis of a corpus of simplified news text. Finally, we
present results of an exploratory analysis of the an-
notated data.

2 Data

2.1 The source corpus

Our data comes from Newsela,1 a company pro-
ducing professionally simplified news articles in
English and Spanish intended for classroom use.
Each Newsela article is available at 5 reading lev-
els spanning grades 2 through 12 of the US school
system (elementary school (grades K-4), middle
school (grades 5-8), and high school (grades 9-
12)). Two levels were used for this first study:
the source articles (we will refer to this version
as V0) and the most simplified version (V4), since
between these versions we expect to see most dif-
ferences.2

Documents were sampled from a subset of
Newsela compiled by Xu et al. This is a parallel
corpus of 1130 documents from the English por-
tion of Newsela where each article has been auto-
matically aligned sentence-wise with the four sim-
plified versions using Jaccard similarity; for de-
tails on the aligned corpus see (Xu et al., 2015).

2.2 Sample selection

The sample of V0 (source) and V4 (simplified)
sentences was drawn from the Xu et al.’s corpus as
follows: As shown in Figure 1, different Newsela
versions span multiple unevenly distributed grade
levels. In order to avoid effects due to differences
between grade levels within versions, from V0
only articles at grade level 12 were used and from
V4 only articles at grade level 4 (the largest sub-
sets). One sentence from each V0 document was
selected with its corresponding V4 sentence(s);
only sentences that were not identical between V0
and V4 were included in the sample. Sampling
was randomized across all documents to avoid ef-
fects due to specific editors’ decisions. This re-
sulted in 582 V0 sentences. Automatic sentence
alignments between the versions were manually
checked and corrected where necessary; for in-
stance, unaligned V4 sentences were linked appro-
priately, as in the following example (“i” marks

1https://newsela.com
2Analysis of metaphor simplification across other levels

is planned as further work.

1 2 13 19 2

1093

3 10 78

711

325
3

3 24

469 604

30

3 113

811

200
3

35 121

948

26

V
0

V
1

V
2

V
3

V
4

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

0

500

1000

0

500

1000

0

500

1000

0

500

1000

0

500

1000

Grade level

C
o

u
n

t

Figure 1: Distribution of grade levels by version
in the (Xu et al., 2015) corpus3

the inserted segment):

V0 Parts of the nation experienced severe but not unprece-
dented drought during the study, the researchers noted,
which might have reduced the amount of rain sustain-
ing their wetlands and ponds

V4-i Parts of the nation had very little snow or rain while the
study was going on.

V4 That might have meant that there was less water in the
wetlands and ponds where amphibians live.

The resulting corpus comprises 582 V0 sen-
tences and their V4 counterparts correctly aligned;
267 alignments have been manually corrected.

2.3 Metaphor identification

We identify linguistic metaphors using Steen
et al.’s (2010) refined Metaphor Identification
Procedure known as MIPVU.4 MIPVU pro-
vides guidelines for annotation of potentially
metaphorical words, where “words” are linguis-
tic units which receive a separate part-of-speech
tag. Phrasal verbs, compounds, and proper names
(multiword expressions) can be treated as lexical
units as exceptions. For the simplification study
we focus on the most common classes of content
words: nouns and verbs.

In MIPVU, a lexical unit is considered to be
metaphorically used when its meaning in a given
context can be contrasted as well as understood
in comparison with a more basic meaning that it
can have in other contexts. MIPVU strives not
to determine the most basic meaning of a word,

3Both plots were created using R’s (R Core Team, 2017)
ggplot2 package (Wickham, 2009)

4“VU” stands for Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam where the
authors of the procedure are based.

314



Simplification Source sentence Simplified sentence
Pr

es
er

ve
d

same
metaphor

. . . like the magnetized nails, unable to resist a
powerful magnetic force in the galactic bulge . . .

Like the magnetized nails, they would have been un-
able to resist a powerful magnetic force in the galactic
bulge . . .

other
metaphor

Obama also has grappled publicly with recon-
ciling King’s teachings on nonviolence . . .

Obama has wrestled publicly with living up to King’s
teachings on nonviolence . . .

phrase with
metaphor(s)

But now she’s struggling to obtain documents
required by the new law.

But now she’s having a hard time getting the papers
that the new law requires.

D
ro

pp
ed

content
dropped

Our goal is to provide Internet service to people
in areas that can’t afford to throw down fiber
lines . . .

Our goal is to provide Internet service to people in ar-
eas that can’t afford Ø usual Internet lines . . .

changed to
non-metaphor

In exchange for a 4 percent piece of their com-
panies, entrepreneurs in the program will gain
access . . .

. . . people in the program will give up a 4 percent share
of their companies. In exchange they will get . . .

phrase without
metaphor(s)

Utah officials say that since 2008, highway
crashes have dropped annually on stretches of
rural Interstate . . .

They say there have been fewer accidents where the
speed limit was raised.

Table 1: Metaphor simplification types.

but rather a meaning that is more basic that the one
in the given context. A more basic sense is defined
as a “more concrete, specific, and human-oriented
sense in the contemporary language use” (Steen
et al., 2010, p. 35). A corpus-based dictionary,
here: the Macmillan English Dictionary for Ad-
vanced Learners,5 is consulted for the basic and
the contextual senses of lexical units. Two senses
of one lexical unit are considered significantly dis-
tinct if they are listed under separate numbers in
the dictionary. MIPVU defines three metaphor
types: indirect (example (1)), direct (2) and im-
plicit (3):

Indirect metaphors occur when contrast as well
as comparison exists between the contextual and a
more basic meaning:

(1) Political cartoons engage and enrage more than arti-
cles do because they are visual and transcend language
barriers.

Direct metaphors display no contrast between the
contextual and a more basic meaning. In this case
contextual meaning is the basic meaning and com-
parison is expressed explicitly, for instance, by the
so-called metaphor flags (words such as like, as,
so-called, -shaped):

(2) Like the magnetized nails, they would have been un-
able to resist a powerful magnetic force in the galactic
bulge . . .

Implicit metaphors represent words pointing back
to recoverable metaphorical material:

(3) . . . unable to resist a powerful magnetic force in the
galactic bulge around when it was forming stars
around 8-13 billion years ago.

5http://www.macmillandictionary.com

Measure Count
No. of sentences containing metaphors 272
No. of metaphor occurrences 416

Verbs 267
Nouns 149

Mean No. of metaphors per sentence 1.53
No. of unique lexemes 314

Table 2: Quantitative information on the anno-
tated metaphor set

In the present study we focus on indirect
metaphors (the prevalent type; see (Steen et al.,
2010)) and identify metaphorical uses of all nouns
and verbs in the sampled original sentences (V0).

Metaphor annotation proceeded as follows:
Identification of candidate metaphor occurrences
was carried out by one of the authors. All unclear
cases were marked and discussed by both authors
until agreement was reached. If agreement could
not be reached, the case was excluded from further
analysis. The final set of metaphorical word uses
comprises only clear cases as per MIPVU.6

Quantitative information on the annotated
metaphors is summarized in Table 2.

6As one of the reviewers pointed out, MIPVU is not an
easy protocol to apply. It it precisely for this reason that,
since the focus of the present study was not on the metaphor
identification task, but on simplification types, we opted to
select only clear cases of metaphors in V0, as per agreement
on metaphor status by both authors. Because this agreement
was reached though a discussion in all cases, inter-annotator
agreement on metaphor annotation was not calculated. We
are planning to conduct a separate metaphor identification
study as part of further work.

315



3 Simplification types

Identification and annotation of simplification
types proceeded as follows: Both authors ini-
tially analyzed and discussed smaller subsets of
the metaphor-annotated corpus (20-30 instances).
Once the set of types stabilized to the final set (be-
low) one author annotated all the remaining in-
stances and the other author 99 instances in total
(1 erroneous instance had to be excluded). Both
annotators are non-native, but fluent, speakers of
English. Inter-annotator agreement on the com-
mon subset of 99 instances was 0.93 proportion
agreement (kappa=0.87) and was deemed reliable.
The 7 disagreement cases in the common subset
were discussed and resolved for the analysis.7

A typology of editors’ simplification choices
was derived in a data-driven fashion starting off of
two basic options: a metaphor can be preserved in
the simplified version or dropped. Corpus anal-
ysis revealed three subtypes of metaphor-related
discourse modifications within each of these high-
level categories: A metaphorically used word can
be preserved unchanged (same metaphor), re-
placed with another single word used metaphori-
cally (other metaphor), or reworded using multi-
word phrasing containing metaphor(s) (phrase
with metaphor(s)). It can be dropped by replac-
ing it with a single different word in a more basic
sense (changed to non-metaphor), with multi-
word phrasing not containing metaphors (phrase
without metaphor(s)), or the meaning portion ex-
pressed by the metaphor can be omitted altogether
(content dropped). Table 1 provides a summary
of the simplification types with examples.

4 Corpus analysis

Analysis of the annotated simplification types is
split into two parts: We start with a high-level
overview of the distribution of the simplifica-
tion types. Then, we perform an exploratory
analysis to investigate how four psycholinguistic
variables – age of acquisition (AoA), familiar-
ity, concreteness, and imageability –, previously
linked to metaphor comprehension (see, for in-
stance, (Paivio et al., 1968; Paivio and Walsh,
1993; Gibbs, 2006; Ureña and Faber, 2010)) and
also used in simplification models (e.g. (Cross-

7Further annotation will be conducted and inter-annotator
agreement recalculated for categories other than the prevalent
Preserved.same in order to reduce class imbalance and to add
instances of the smaller classes.

Simplification type Count
Preserved 288

same metaphor 240
other metaphor 34
phrase with metaphor(s) 14

Dropped 128
changed to non-metaphor 81
content dropped 37
phrase without metaphor 10

Table 3: Distribution of simplification types

ley et al., 2007; Jauhar and Specia, 2012; Cross-
ley et al., 2012; Vajjala and Meurers, 2014)), be-
have across simplification categories. The scores
have been extracted from the MRC Psycholin-
guistic Database (Wilson, 1988) and the Bristol
Norms (Kuperman et al., 2012).

Distribution of simplification types is shown
in Table 3. Most metaphors, 69%, are preserved
in V4, the majority with the same wording. Where
metaphorical words are omitted, they tend to be
replaced with their literal counterparts. Reword-
ing consisting of longer phrases is dispreferred.

Distributions of psycholinguistic variables are
shown in Figure 2. Since for the automated clas-
sification task the class imbalance (see Table 3)
will need to be countered, we reduce the class
imbalance already for distributions visualization
by randomly downsampling the largest class (Pre-
served.same) to 80 instances such that the two
basic classes, Preserved and Dropped, are of the
same size; Preserved.same mean was estimated by
randomly resampling the 80 instances 20 times.
Dependent variables are ordered by complexity
of intervention into the source semantics that the
manipulation they denote involves; for the Pre-
served class: preserving same meaning at one end
vs. paraphrasing by adding lexical material at the
other and for the Dropped class: merely replacing
the metaphorical lexeme with a non-metaphorical
one vs. omitting content altogether.

Within the Preserved type, low-AoA metaphors
tend to be preserved and high-AoA are rephrased.
In the Dropped class, low-AoA metaphors are
rephrased and high are dropped; also on aver-
age, as expected, lower AoA metaphors are pre-
served and higher dropped. Explicable pattern
of Imageability can be observed: within both ba-
sic types, the higher the score, the more radical

316



Figure 2: Distribution of psycholinguistic variables by simplification type (legend labels shortened for
space reasons; the red dots indicate Preserved and Dropped group means (20 resamplings of P.same))

the modification (rephrasing and dropping con-
tent, respectively); aggregated means display the
same pattern. This is consistent with the guideline
on avoiding vivid metaphors. The pattern of Con-
creteness measure is unclear. Familiarity scores
are the least discriminating.

5 Discussion and further work

Overall, some of the psycholinguistic variables
do exhibit patterns confirming systematicity of
professional simplification and good prospect for
training machine learning models based on pro-
fessionally simplified data; Xu et al. (2015) argue
likewise. AoA and Imageability exhibit a consis-
tent explicable pattern within and between the two
basic types suggesting they can be used as predic-
tors. This is not the case with the Familiarity mea-
sure. Interestingly, in the Preserved class, lexical
elaboration (Preserved.other) is performed within
narrow ranges of 3 of the variables, which could
be exploited. The high prevalence of the Preserved
class is surprising. On the one hand, it provides a
safe default for a basic automated system, on the
other hand, sets a high majority-based baseline.

Future work will involve investigating further
linguistically and cognitively-motivated variables
for metaphor simplification. Likewise, interac-
tions between psycholinguistic variables and their

relation to syntactic complexity variables require
further study. We also plan to annotate further
data, also at other grade levels, and train models
(2-way classification, Preserve vs. Drop, in the
first instance). Finally, the categorical approach
to metaphor simplification might be entirely re-
considered in view of recent studies showing ev-
idence that the literal-metaphorical distinction is
a graded (scalar) phenomenon ((Cameron et al.,
2009; Müller and Tag, 2010; Dunn, 2014), among
others). Simplification might be thus seen as con-
tinuous “reduction of metaphoricity”.8

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Newsela for making their
data available to the community and Wei Xu, Chris
Callison-Burch, and Courtney Napoles for sharing
their aligned corpus via Newsela; we are planning
to make our final annotations available in the same
way. We would also like to thank the reviewers
for the interesting comments. Magdalena Wolska
was supported by the Institutional Strategy of the
University of Tübingen (Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft, ZUK 63). Part of this work was con-
ducted while she was on a visiting appointment at
the Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg.

8This interesting suggestion for follow-up work and
pointer to Dunn’s papers is due to one of the reviewers.

317



References
L. Cameron, R. Maslen, Z. Todd, J. Maule, P. Strat-

ton, and N. Stanley. 2009. The discourse dynamics
approach to metaphor and metaphor-led discourse
analysis. Metaphor and Symbol doi:10.1080/
10926480902830821.

S.A. Crossley, D. Allen, and D.S. McNamara. 2012. Text
simplification and comprehensible input: A case for an
intuitive approach. Language Teaching Research doi:
10.1177/1362168811423456.

S.A. Crossley, M.M. Louwerse, P.M. McCarthy, and D.S.
McNamara. 2007. A linguistic analysis of simplified and
authentic texts. The Modern Language Journal doi:
10.1111/j.1540-4781.2007.00507.x.

J. Dunn. 2014. Measuring metaphoricity. In Proceedings of
the 52nd Annual Meeting of the ACL. http://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/P14-2121.

R.W. Gibbs. 2006. Metaphor interpretation as embod-
ied simulation. Mind & Language doi:10.1111/j.
1468-0017.2006.00285.x.

S.K. Jauhar and L. Specia. 2012. PUOW-SHEF: SimpLex–
lexical simplicity ranking based on contextual and psy-
cholinguistic features. In Proceedings of the 1st
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Se-
mantics (*SEM-12). http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/S12-1066.

V. Kuperman, H. Stadthagen-Gonzalez, and M. Brysbaert.
2012. Age-of-acquisition (AoA) norms for over 50 thou-
sand English words. In Behavior Research Methods.
http://crr.ugent.be/archives/806.

C. Müller and S. Tag. 2010. The dynamics of metaphor:
Foregrounding and activating metaphoricity in conversa-
tional interaction. Cognitive Semiotics doi:10.1515/
cogsem.2010.6.spring2010.85.

A. Paivio and M. Walsh. 1993. Psychological processes
in metaphor comprehension and memory. In Metaphor
and thought. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139173865.
016.

A. Paivio, J.C. Yuille, and S.A. Madigan. 1968. Con-
creteness, imagery, and meaningfulness values for 925
nouns. Journal of experimental psychology doi:10.
1037/h0025327.

Harold E. Palmer. 1932. The Grading and Simplifying of Lit-
erary Material. Institute for Research in English Teach-
ing.

R Core Team. 2017. R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Com-
puting, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.
org.

A. Siddharthan. 2014. A survey of research on text sim-
plification. International Journal of Applied Linguistics
doi:10.1075/itl.165.2.06sid.

G.J. Steen, A.G. Dorst, J.B. Herrmann, A.A. Kaal, T. Kren-
nmayr, and T. Pasma. 2010. A Method for Linguistic
Metaphor Identification: From MIP to MIPVU. John Ben-
jamins.

J.M. Ureña and P. Faber. 2010. Reviewing imagery in resem-
blance and non-resemblance metaphors. Cognitive Lin-
guistics doi:10.1515/cogl.2010.004.

S. Vajjala and D. Meurers. 2014. Readability assessment for
text simplification: From analysing documents to identi-
fying sentential simplifications. ITL–International Jour-
nal of Applied Linguistics doi:10.1075/itl.165.
2.04vaj.

H. Wickham. 2009. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data
Analysis. Springer. http://ggplot2.org.

M. Wilson. 1988. MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine-usable dictionary, version 2.00. In Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers. http:
//ota.ox.ac.uk/headers/1054.xml.

E. Winner. 1997. The Point of Words. Harvard University
Press.

W. Xu, C. Callison-Burch, and C. Napoles. 2015. Problems
in Current Text Simplification Research: New Data Can
Help. In Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. https://www.transacl.org/
ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/549.

318


