



















































Natural-language Interactive Narratives in Imaginal Exposure Therapy for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology, pages 48–57,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3, 2017. c© 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Natural-language Interactive Narratives in Imaginal Exposure Therapy
for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Melissa Roemmele, Paola Mardo, and Andrew S. Gordon
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California

roemmele@ict.usc.edu, paolamardo@gmail.com, gordon@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is
an anxiety-based disorder that affects
around 2.5% of the population. A com-
mon treatment for OCD is exposure ther-
apy, where the patient repeatedly con-
fronts a feared experience, which has the
long-term effect of decreasing their anx-
iety. Some exposures consist of read-
ing and writing stories about an imagined
anxiety-provoking scenario. In this paper,
we present a technology that enables pa-
tients to interactively contribute to expo-
sure stories by supplying natural language
input (typed or spoken) that advances a
scenario. This interactivity could poten-
tially increase the patient’s sense of im-
mersion in an exposure and contribute to
its success. We introduce the NLP task
behind processing inputs to predict new
events in the scenario, and describe our
initial approach. We then illustrate the fu-
ture possibility of this work with an exam-
ple of an exposure scenario authored with
our application.

1 Introduction

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debil-
itating anxiety condition characterized by recur-
rent, intrusive, and distressing thoughts (obses-
sions). A person may respond to these obsessions
by engaging in repetitive behaviors (compulsions)
aimed at reducing their anxiety. As with other
anxiety disorders, the standard approach to OCD
treatment, along with medication, is cognitive-
behavioral therapy (Butler et al., 2006; Clark,
2006; Rothbaum et al., 2000). Specifically, thera-
pists use exposure therapy to challenge patients to
experience their obsession without performing any

compulsions (Foa and Kozak, 1986; Lindsay et al.,
1997; Rowa et al., 2007). Initially, the exposure
results in intense anxiety. But by repeating it over
and over again, the anxiety decreases until eventu-
ally the patient can tolerate the feared thoughts in
the absence of compulsions. Exposure therapy is
used for treating many anxiety disorders, not just
OCD (Abramowitz et al., 2011).

In many cases, compulsions are outwardly ob-
servable behaviors: hand washing in response to
an obsession with contamination, for instance. In
these cases, it is straightforward to apply expo-
sure therapy to an action that evokes the obses-
sive thought: for instance, someone might touch
a ‘dirty’ surface and try to resist the urge to wash
their hands. In other cases, however, obsessions
focus more on distressing imaginary scenarios that
are not manifested in real life interactions. In
this case, exposure therapy targets these thoughts
through imaginal exposure, in which the patient is
mentally immersed in the worst-case scenario they
fear (Abramowitz, 1996; Foa et al., 1980). An ex-
ample is Harm OCD (OCDLA, 2016a), where the
patient has unwanted thoughts about causing in-
jury to other people. An exposure for this might
involve the patient imagining themselves actually
following through with hurting someone. Often
compulsions associated these these types of ob-
sessions are more internal, like trying to avoid
thinking about the feared outcome, checking for
evidence that it happened, or constantly reassur-
ing oneself that it won’t happen (Gillihan et al.,
2012; Wochner, 2012). Imaginal exposure chal-
lenges these mental compulsions.

There are different strategies for imaginal expo-
sure, which also depend on the patient’s progress
in treatment, as exposures should gradually in-
crease in intensity (Abramowitz and Arch, 2014;
Jacofsky et al., 2014; Kircanski and Peris, 2015).
To initiate the process, a therapist might ask the

48



patient to read or watch media related to the pa-
tient’s fears (e.g. for harm obsessions, this could
be biographies of serial killers). Then the therapist
might prompt the patient to imagine a feared sce-
nario and describe out loud what they are sensing
and feeling (Tompkins, 2016). Another technique
is for the patient and therapist to write a story
that vividly portrays the scenario from the pa-
tient’s perspective (Gillihan et al., 2012; Kazantzis
et al., 2005; Pedrick and Hyman, 2011; OCDLA,
2016b). Figure 1 shows an example story from
the OCD Center of LA website1. Once the story
is written, the patient reads it repeatedly on their
own, typically multiple times per day. In line with
the purpose of any exposure, the goal is to read
it until it becomes less anxiety-provoking. Thera-
pists often recommend reading it out loud, or the
patient can even record themselves reading it and
play back the audio.

Our paper focuses on this story-based approach
to imaginal exposure for OCD. We propose a tech-
nology that potentially facilitates this approach
through interactive versions of these stories. We
make use of a general application, called the
Data-driven Interactive Narrative Engine (DINE),
where users are presented with stories that require
their participation in order to advance the narra-
tive. Users participate by providing natural lan-
guage input, which is dynamically processed by
the application to simulate new events in the sce-
nario. By eliciting this input, the user becomes
an agent in the story. When used for the purpose
of imaginal exposure for OCD patients, a patient’s
choice of actions in the story lead to outcomes tar-
geted by their obsessions. This paper is organized
as follows: Section 2 provides some further back-
ground on OCD and the story-based approach to
imaginal exposure therapy. Section 3 mentions
some related work on incorporating technology
into exposure therapy. In Section 4, we introduce
the DINE system for interactive narrative. Section
5 presents the vision for conducting imaginal ex-
posure through DINE experiences, illustrated with
an example scenario. Finally, Section 6 briefly
summarizes the future possibilities of this work.

2 OCD and Imaginal Exposure Stories

It is currently estimated that around 2.5% of the
population is affected by OCD (Karno et al.,
1988). However, OCD is frequently misdiagnosed

1ocdla.com/imaginal-exposure-ocd-anxiety-4847

I am sitting on the sofa with my sister. Sud-
denly, I grab the scissors from the desk, and
lunge them into my sister’s right eye. My father
grabs me and pries the scissors out of my hand,
but the damage has already been done. My
sister is blinded and unable to continue with
her profession. I am arrested and convicted of
attempted murder and gross mutilation, which
carries a sentence of fifty years in state prison.
My family cuts all ties with me, and my friends
desert me. After forty years, I am paroled, but
don’t know a soul in the world. My dream of
raising a family is no longer possible. I spend
the rest of my life living with the fact that I de-
stroyed my sisters art career. When I die, my
soul is sent off to eternal damnation in hell.

Figure 1: Example of an imaginal exposure story
for Harm OCD

by medical professionals (Glazier et al., 2015).
While clinicians can often recognize some OCD
obsessions like contamination, there is less aware-
ness about other subtypes like Harm OCD men-
tioned above. Harm OCD falls under the larger
category of what is often referred to as Pure Ob-
sessional OCD (Pure-O) (Baer, 1994; OCDLA,
2016c), where obsessive thoughts may focus on
acts the patient deems violent, sexually deviant,
sacrilegious, or otherwise immoral. Patients with
these obsessions may be incorrectly treated as ag-
gressive and dangerous, making it even harder
for them to get the right treatment (GroundWork,
2017). Moreover, there are many myths about
OCD among society at large (Lopresti and Ry-
back, 2016), which are perpetuated by its inaccu-
rate portrayal in the media (Schuster, 2015; Wahl,
2000). For instance, OCD is often mistaken with
a preference for cleanliness or organization. In re-
ality, patients do not find their OCD valuable or
satisfying, as the symptoms can significantly inter-
fere with job performance, relationships, and gen-
eral well-being.

OCDLA (2016b) gives some general guidelines
for maximizing the therapeutic impact of personal
imaginal exposure stories. To summarize, they
recommend that stories 1) are written in the first-
person from the patient’s perspective (e.g. “I
stabbed my sister”, rather than “She stabbed her
sister”), 2) are written in the present tense, as if
the patient is experiencing the events in this mo-

49



ment, 3) depict a situation that actually provokes
the patient’s anxiety right now, not a previous con-
cern, 4) depict a scenario that the patient actually
imagines happening, not something entirely unbe-
lievable, 5) directly portray the feared outcomes
rather just working up to or alluding to them, and
6) portray the most extreme version of the obses-
sive thoughts, i.e. the patient’s worst fear.

There are a few reasons why imaginal exposure
stories are believed to be an effective therapeu-
tic tool (Abramowitz et al., 2011). The simplest
mechanism (and one that applies to exposure ther-
apy in general) is that repeated exposure to any
situation makes it less threatening, a general phe-
nomenon known habituation. Moreover, exposure
stories address thought-action fusion (Berle and
Starcevic, 2005; Shafran et al., 1996), which is of-
ten observed in OCD patients. Thought-action fu-
sion is the notion that thinking about an action is
morally equivalent to performing that action (e.g.
the patient imagining stabbing their sister is just
as bad as actually stabbing her). A related phe-
nomenon is magical thinking (Einstein and Men-
zies, 2004), the belief that thinking about an event
makes it more likely to occur. By constantly re-
reading the exposure story, the patient repeatedly
thinks about the event and observes that it doesn’t
occur in real life, thus distinguishing the thought
from the action. Additionally, many patients ex-
pect that reading the story will always be unbear-
ably distressing. After multiple re-readings the pa-
tient observes that their distress becomes more tol-
erable, giving them more confidence that they can
withstand the anxiety. OCDLA recommends read-
ing the story until it actually seems more boring
than scary.

3 Related Work

Lind et al. (2013) summarizes the existing work
on the use of computers in OCD treatment, which
has enabled patients to receive treatment in the
absence of face-to-face interaction with thera-
pists. Some of this research has started to explore
technology-based approaches to exposure therapy.
For instance, Kirkby et al. (2000) developed an
interface that depicted an avatar with contamina-
tion obsessions, where patients could manipulate
the avatar to touch dirt or wash its hands. They
asked patients to guide the avatar through an expo-
sure by directing it to dirty its hands without wash-
ing them. The interface showed an ‘anxiety ther-

mometer’ indicating the avatar’s level of anxiety,
which would go down as the patient repeatedly re-
sisted washing. Kim et al. (2008) created a virtual
reality scenario that prompted patients to engage
in checking compulsions before leaving the house
(e.g. making sure lights, stove burners, and faucets
were turned off), and then investigated patients’
behavior in this interaction as an assessment tool.

Virtual reality is now a well-recognized ap-
proach to exposure therapy for treating anxiety
disorders in general. Krijn et al. (2004) and Pow-
ers and Emmelkamp (2008) broadly review this
research and the evidence of its treatment effi-
cacy. Virtual reality has specifically been used
to develop exposure scenarios for phobias (Par-
sons and Rizzo, 2008, e.g.), social anxiety (An-
derson et al., 2003, e.g.), panic disorder (Botella
et al., 2007, e.g.), and posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) (Cukor et al., 2015, e.g.). For example, a
virtual reality exposure for a patient with a pho-
bia of spiders may visually depict spiders crawl-
ing on the patient’s body without the patient being
able to remove them. The interactivity afforded by
virtual reality may lead to a stronger sense of im-
mersion in the scenario and thus better treatment
outcomes (Krijn et al., 2004). Our paper explores
a way to incorporate interactivity in exposures that
are evoked through language rather than visually.

4 Data-driven Interactive Narrative
Engine

The Data-driven Interactive Narrative Engine2

(DINE) is a web-based platform for interactive fic-
tion. Interactive fiction is the digital equivalent
of a Choose Your Own Adventure book (Packard,
1982), where readers are presented with a story
and prompted to make choices that change the di-
rection of the story. In DINE, users specify their
choices through natural-language input (text or
voice) and the system processes the input to se-
lect the next segment of the story. The goal of
the system is to predict an outcome that fits co-
herently with the user’s intent. This narrative pre-
diction task is an emerging area of NLP research
(Mostafazadeh et al., 2016).

DINE has a simple interface both for ‘playing’
interactive scenarios as well as authoring them.
To author a story, the writer creates a sequence
of pages. Each page consists of a setup and a
list of potential outcomes. The text in the setup

2dine.ict.usc.edu

50



presents the user with a scenario and elicits an ini-
tial decision for what should happen next. Fig-
ure 2 shows an example DINE page, which is fur-
ther detailed in the next section. The setup of this
page is the initial three paragraphs opening with
“It’s 9pm. I’m just now leaving my office for the
day...”. The text of each outcome continues the
story and prompts the user to specify further ac-
tions leading to new outcomes. In Figure 2, each
italicized passage after the setup is an outcome.
For each outcome they define, authors can pro-
vide a list of example inputs that should trigger
that outcome, where each input typically consists
of a single sentence. The bolded sentences under
the outcomes in Figure 2 are examples of poten-
tial user inputs. An author can also link an out-
come to a new page so that when that the user
sees that outcome, they are sent to another page
with a whole new setup and outcome list. For in-
stance, the outcome that appears last on the page
in Figure 2 (“As I drive home...”) routes to the
second page shown in Figure 3. Alternatively, au-
thors can specify that a particular outcome should
end the scenario, as with the last outcome (“The
police take me away...”) in Figure 3. The advan-
tage of DINE from an authoring perspective is that
it requires no technical knowledge of the underly-
ing model for matching user inputs to outcomes,
so authors can focus on the writing task itself.

There is ongoing research on exploring different
approaches for automatically predicting the most
appropriate outcome for users’ natural-language
input on a given DINE page. The current work
uses a straightforward unsupervised approach that
measures lexical similarity between an input and
an outcome. It relies on word2vec embeddings
(Mikolov et al., 2013), which represent words as
n-dimensional vectors of real values. The prin-
ciple behind word embeddings is that words with
similar meanings will have similar embedding val-
ues. Accordingly, the similarity between two
words can be computed as the cosine similarity be-
tween their vectors. We use embeddings trained
on the 100-billion word Google News dataset3.
We compute the overall similarity between each
word w1 in the user input in and each word w2
in an outcome out, to score the likelihood that out

3code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec

should result from in:

Sim(in, out) =
∑

w1∈in maxw2∈out sim(w1, w2)
length(in)

(1)
where sim is vector cosine similarity. We call
this calculation Average Maximum Similarity, as
an alternative to just computing the average simi-
larity between all words in the input and outcome.
Instead, for each word in the input we find its
most similar word in the outcome and then aver-
age these maximum similarity scores across the
input. The motivation behind this is that it gives
high weight to keyword similarity, i.e. words that
are the same or almost the same appearing in both
the input and outcome.

When example inputs for an outcome are pro-
vided by the author, this same similarity measure
can be applied to compute Sim(in, ex) between
a user input in and an example input ex. The
scores for an outcome’s example inputs exins can
be combined with the score for the outcome itself
so that the overall score for out is:

max
ex∈exins

(Sim(in, ex), Sim(in, out)) (2)

In other words, for a given user input, the score
for an outcome is whichever sequence has the
highest similarity to the input, either one of the ex-
ample inputs or the outcome text itself. Outcomes
for a given input are ranked by score so that the
outcome with the highest score is the top predic-
tion. Since outcomes can consist of several sen-
tences, an initial evaluation showed that scoring
outcomes based only on their first ten words pro-
duced the highest accuracy. The same is done for
example inputs, though these are often less than
ten words long.

Each time the user provides input, the system
responds with the highest-scoring outcome and
proceeds to a subsequent DINE page if the au-
thor has made an explicit link. However, if no link
has been provided, the user is prompted for an ad-
ditional input on the same DINE page. In these
cases, the system will respond with the highest-
scoring outcome that has not already been pre-
sented to the user. This design allows authors to
create DINE pages where users can try several ac-
tions within a single narrative context, where only
a few might actually advance the story context
to subsequent DINE pages. In our initial evalu-
ations of DINE outcome-prediction accuracy, we
found that accuracy on gold-standard annotations

51



of user input varied widely based on writing of the
page setup and the order-dependance of outcomes.
In the current work, we modeled our pages after
previously-successful designs.

All of the narrative content presented to users of
DINE are static compositions of a human author,
rather than generated algorithmically. This affords
several options of digital media for content presen-
tations, including audio, video, or virtual reality
scenes. In the current work, we authored the same
narrative content both as text and as produced au-
dio files, one file for each page setup and outcome,
delivered over the web using the standard Web Au-
dio API. When using produced audio files, DINE
accepts voice input from users by capitalizing on
the high-accuracy cloud-based speech recognition
capability4 built into recent versions of Google’s
Chrome web browser. All speech input is con-
verted to text within the system, so the underlying
prediction approach is exactly the same. Audio
output and speech input allows for a hands-free
interactive experience, creating an aural perfor-
mance that can be recorded at run-time in which
the users themselves are part-narrators of the story.

5 An Imaginal Exposure Story in DINE

To demonstrate how DINE can be used for imag-
inal exposure, we authored an example story5,
shown in Figures 2 and 3. This example focuses
on a hit-and-run scenario, which is a common ob-
session related to Harm OCD (Seay, 2016). Each
figure depicts one page of the scenario. To summa-
rize, the first page (titled Driving Home) places the
patient in a situation where they are driving home
from work and they suddenly suspect they hit
something. In the second page (Almost Home), the
patient returns to the scene a second time where
it now appears to be a crime scene. The story is
written in the first person and the present tense,
consistent with the recommendations described in
Section 2.

The italicized text under the title of each page is
the setup, which prompts the patient for an initial
input. Each subsequent passage of italicized text is
an outcome that is triggered by the patient’s input.
For each outcome we show in bold three exam-
ple inputs that would have produced that outcome.
In both pages, the scenario prompts the patient to
specify actions that reassure themselves that noth-

4cloud.google.com/speech
5dine.ict.usc.edu/drivinghome.html

ing bad happened, since this reassurance-seeking
is a common OCD compulsion. The story captures
some of the accompanying features of OCD: for
instance, the patient’s anxiety symptoms (e.g. nau-
sea, sweating, difficulty breathing) as well as the
patient’s awareness that their desire for certainty is
an interference (e.g. “I should just go home”). The
second page shows that in spite of the patient’s at-
tempts to be sure, however, something bad has ac-
tually happened. Eventually it is revealed that they
hit and killed someone, and the story ends with the
patient suffering the consequences of this mistake,
just as in the Figure 1 example story.

The interaction is driven by references to poten-
tial actions that the patient could pursue. For in-
stance, the premise of the first page says “I should
get out and check”, suggesting that the patient’s
input could act on this thought. This initiates a se-
quence of outcomes where each suggests another
information-seeking action. Alternatively, on both
pages the patient may specify to drive home in-
stead of performing the hinted actions, but the
story has the same doomed ending regardless. As
such, the interaction will always terminate with
the last outcome in Figure 3, despite any previous
incorrectly predicted outcomes. Unlike a Choose
Your Own Adventure book, there is no option to
change the final trajectory of the story, because the
objective is to expose the patient to their ultimate
fear depicted by the ending. Thus the interactiv-
ity in this example serves not so much to allow the
patient to explore different outcomes, but to en-
able them to initiate outcomes as if they are caus-
ing them to occur. There is some evidence from
virtual reality research that this sense of immer-
sion and control may increase the intensity of ex-
posures and therefore increase their efficacy (Price
and Anderson, 2007; Walshe et al., 2003).

As mentioned in Section 2, therapists often sug-
gest that the patient listen to themselves reading
their exposure story. The voice-based audio in-
teraction enabled by DINE is well-suited for this
purpose, allowing the recording of a patient inter-
action at run-time, where the patient is the part-
narrator of the story. To support this use case, we
produced audio clips corresponding to each setup
and outcome in the hit-and-run scenario, and de-
ployed them on the web for use with DINE’s in-
teractive audio option. Both the text and audio
versions of the hit-and-run scenario are available
through the site.

52



Driving Home
It’s 9pm. I’m just now leaving my office for the day. It’s pitch black outside, I never get out this late.
I have an uneasy feeling as I unlock my car and get inside.

Shifting into reverse, I look behind me. The lot seems completely empty. But it’s really dark and I
can’t be sure. I feel a lump rising in my throat.

I drive out of the lot onto the street. Soon I pass my son’s elementary school. I told my husband I’d
be home to help with bedtime. The streetlights are far too dim. Just as I turn the radio on to try to
relax, I hear a thud underneath my car. I immediately hit my brakes. What was that? A pit forms in
my stomach. I should get out and check. But I really need to get home.

> I get out of the car. // I go outside to check. // I step outside to look around.

It’s silent out here except for the distant sound of a barking dog. I take a deep breath, trying to stay
calm. I know I heard something, but it’s too dark to see. I search my jacket for my cell phone.

> I turn on the phone flashlight. // I use the light on my cell phone. // I open my flashlight
app.

I shine my phone flashlight on the front of the car. The only mark I see is from where my son
accidentally hit it with a baseball a few years ago. But then I notice a thin trail of liquid emerging
from under the car.

> I look under the car. // I check where it’s coming from. // I bend down to examine the liquid.

Looking under the car, I see there’s something slowly dripping from its underbody. An oil leak,
probably. I’ll need to get that checked out tomorrow. Maybe the noise was something in the engine.
But it really sounded like it came from outside the car. I can see something shadowy near the back
bumper, but my flashlight doesn’t reach that far.

> I walk around to the back of the car. // I go look at the shadow. // I check the back bumper.

But the shadow is just from the trailer hitch we mounted when we went on vacation last month. I
stare out into the street. I could walk down a little further to check. But this is crazy, it’s getting so
late. It’s time to drive home.

> I go further down the street. // I walk over there. // I go down to check.

I walk further back, where there’s a little bit of light from the streetlamp. I turn in all directions, my
teeth clenched. My heart jumps when I notice a dark lump lying against the curb on my left. I feel
like I’m losing my mind. I just want to go see my family.

> I examine the lump. // I walk to the curb to find out what it is. // I go look at it.

My legs shaking, I touch my feet to the dark object. It’s soft and covered in what feels like plastic.
It’s a trash bag. For goodness sake. I sigh, wondering if there was even a noise to begin with or I
just hallucinated it. I take one final glance around. There’s nothing out here.

> I get back in the car. // I go home. // I decide to drive home.

As I drive home, I reassure myself: I checked. Nothing was there. I would’ve seen it if I had hit
something. But my mind is still spinning. I wonder if I should turn back to check one more time.

As I drive back, I hear sirens approaching. The place I stopped earlier is no longer an empty street.
A dozen police cars with flashing lights are parked in the middle of the road. I see the officers all
huddled together in one spot, and a wave of nausea hits me. But this obviously has nothing to do
with me. The best thing to do is not worry about it and go home. I told my son I’d be there to say
goodnight.

(Continued→)

Figure 2: Page 1 of an DINE interaction for a hit-and-run scenario

53



Almost Home
I see the neighbors coming out onto their lawn. If I could just quickly find out what happened, I
wouldn’t have to spend the rest of the night in doubt.

> I approach the neighbors. // I walk up to the people on the lawn. // I go talk to them.
I walk toward the growing crowd on the lawn. We’re several houses down from the swarm of activity,
but they’re putting up a wide perimeter of yellow caution tape to keep us from getting closer. Sweat
starts to drip off my forehead. When I reach the lawn, I ask the neighbors what happened. No one
responds. I wonder if they heard me.

> I ask again. // I repeat my question. // I ask louder if anyone knows what happened.
One woman finally acknowledges me and says “Not sure. They won’t tell us.” My stomach lurches
when I see an ambulance arrive. I desperately want to run away, but I know I won’t be able to stop
thinking about this when I get home. I can walk a bit further before reaching the caution tape. I
need to figure out what this is.

> I walk closer. // I approach the caution tape. // I move towards the officers.
As I move closer, I overhear a neighbor telling another: “We didn’t think much of it, but then our
dog was barking like crazy. Once we heard the sirens we came outside. The officers interviewed
us.” I stop and turn back toward the man. My throat is closing up. I have to know what he told the
police.

> I ask the man what he saw. // I ask him what he told the police. // I find out what the man
knows.
The man looks at me, surprised at my intrusion in the conversation. ”My wife and I woke up to a
thud noise. We didn’t look outside. But the way the officers were talking, it sounds like someone
got hit by a car.” There’s a punch to my gut and I gasp. I know this is just a terrible coincidence.
Nothing was there when I drove away. No one. I need to go home, this isn’t my business. I’ll find
out tomorrow what happened.

The man is looking at me suspiciously now. He asks if I live nearby.

> I tell the man no. // I lie and say yes. // I tell him I was just driving by.
Just as I answer him, I see it. The coroner’s van. I fall to the ground, unable to breathe. My vision
goes blurry. I can see the black body bag being lifted into the van. I shake my head vigorously and
pull at my hair, willing myself to wake up from this terrible nightmare. It doesn’t work. My only
escape option is to go home.

> I walk back to my car and go home. // I leave and drive home. // I go back my car.
When I pull into my driveway the officers are talking to my husband on the porch. His face is pale
and contorted. My son is standing behind him in the doorway, and when he sees me he starts to cry.
I go to hug him but the officers block my way.

For a moment I consider running away, but I know it’s useless. I have no idea how they got here, or
how they knew it was me, but it doesn’t matter. I’ve tried my whole life to deny my reckless nature.
I’ve always known that my own negligence and indifference would get someone killed one day. I
pretended all I had to do was be careful, but I was lying to myself. For the sake of my family, I know
I just need to confess so they know this is the real me, and they can move on with their lives. It’s
only fair to them.

> I admit that I ran someone over. // I confess. // I tell them I killed that person.
The police take me away. I am sentenced to life in prison for hit-and-run murder. My husband tells
me I will never see him or my son again. I spend each day hoping they’ll change their minds, but
they never come. I live the rest of my life regretting my unforgivable mistake. (End)

Figure 3: Page 2 of an DINE interaction for a hit-and-run scenario

54



6 Conclusion

This paper explores of the use of NLP technolo-
gies in computer-based treatments of obsessive-
compulsive disorder, creating interactive narra-
tives for use in imaginal exposure therapy. This
work is also applicable to other anxiety disorders,
but it is particularly motivated by the story-based
imaginal exposures used in OCD treatment. We
present one example of an interactive imaginal ex-
posure story as a way of demonstrating our vision.
Because our initial goal is to start a discussion
about the possible benefits of this type of interac-
tion, we have not yet examined any user interac-
tions with our example scenario. If evaluated in a
clinical setting, each DINE scenario would clearly
need to address the patient’s specific symptoms
and background. Moreover, our example showed
just one design for eliciting user inputs (e.g. in-
formation seeking to alleviate fear), but therapists
may envision alternative designs that better target
specific objectives for exposure therapy. For ex-
ample, the inputs could specify actually perform-
ing the feared actions, i.e. the patient might say
“I hit the person with my car”. One possibility is
that DINE scenarios could be authored by thera-
pists as a way of introducing imaginal exposure
to patients, since the authoring requires no pro-
gramming or technical knowledge. These interac-
tions could orient patients toward eventually writ-
ing their own personalized exposure stories.

7 Acknowledgments

The projects or efforts depicted were or are spon-
sored by the U. S. Army. The content or infor-
mation presented does not necessarily reflect the
position or the policy of the Government, and no
official endorsement should be inferred.

References
Jonathan S. Abramowitz. 1996. Variants of expo-

sure and response prevention in the treatment of
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis.
Behavior Therapy 27(4):583 – 600.

Jonathan S. Abramowitz and Joanna J. Arch. 2014.
Strategies for improving long-term outcomes in cog-
nitive behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive
disorder: Insights from learning theory. Cognitive
and Behavioral Practice 21(1):20–31.

Jonathan S. Abramowitz, Brett J. Deacon, and Stephen
P. H. Whiteside. 2011. Exposure therapy for anxi-

ety: Principles and practice.. Guilford Press, New
York, NY, US.

Page Anderson, Barbara O. Rothbaum, and Larry F.
Hodges. 2003. Virtual reality exposure in the treat-
ment of social anxiety. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice 10(3):240 – 247.

Lee Baer. 1994. Factor analysis of symptom subtypes
of obsessive compulsive disorder and their relation
to personality and tic disorders. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 55:Suppl 18–23.

David Berle and Vladan Starcevic. 2005. Thought–
action fusion: Review of the literature and future
directions. Clinical Psychology Review 25(3):263–
284.

C. Botella, A. Garcı́a-Palacios, H. Villa, R. M. Baños,
S. Quero, M. Alcañiz, and G. Riva. 2007. Virtual re-
ality exposure in the treatment of panic disorder and
agoraphobia: A controlled study. Clinical Psychol-
ogy & Psychotherapy 14(3):164–175.

Andrew C. Butler, Jason E. Chapman, Evan M. For-
man, and Aaron T. Beck. 2006. The empirical status
of cognitive-behavioral therapy: A review of meta-
analyses. Clinical Psychology Review 26(1):17 –
31.

David A. Clark. 2006. Cognitive-behavioral therapy
for OCD. The Guilford Press.

Judith Cukor, Maryrose Gerardi, Stephanie Alley,
Christopher Reist, Michael Roy, Barbara O. Roth-
baum, JoAnn Difede, and Albert Rizzo. 2015. Vir-
tual Reality Exposure Therapy for Combat-Related
PTSD, Springer International Publishing.

Danielle A. Einstein and Ross G. Menzies. 2004. The
presence of magical thinking in obsessive compul-
sive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy
42(5):539 – 549.

Edna B. Foa and Michael J. Kozak. 1986. Emotional
processing of fear: Exposure to corrective informa-
tion. Psychological Bulletin 99(1):20–35.

Edna B. Foa, Gail Steketee, Ralph M. Turner,
and Steven C. Fischer. 1980. Effects of imag-
inal exposure to feared disasters in obsessive-
compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and
Therapy 18(5):449 – 455.

Seth J. Gillihan, Monnica T. Williams, Emily Malcoun,
Elna Yadin, and Edna B. Foa. 2012. Common pit-
falls in exposure and response prevention (EX/RP)
for OCD. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Re-
lated Disorders 1(4):251 – 257.

Kimberly Glazier, Matt Swing, and Lata K. McGinn.
2015. Half of obsessive-compulsive disorder cases
misdiagnosed: vignette-based survey of primary
care physicians. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
76(6):e761–7.

55



GroundWork. 2017. The Center for Anxi-
ety and OCD - GroundWork Counseling:
OCD - misunderstood and misdiagnosed.
https://www.groundworkcounseling.com/ocd/ocd-
misunderstood-and-misdiagnosed-orlando-ocd-
therapist-raises-awareness-ocdweek/.

Matthew D. Jacofsky, Melanie T. Santos, Sony
Khemlani-Patel, and Fugen Neziroglu. 2014.
Exposure and response prevention (ERP) therapy
for obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
https://www.mentalhelp.net/articles/exposure-and-
response-prevention-erp-therapy-for-obsessive-
compulsive-and-related-disorders/.

Marvin Karno, Jacqueline M. Golding, Susan B. Soren-
son, and M. Audrey Burnam. 1988. The epi-
demiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder in five
us communities. Archives of General Psychiatry
45(12):1094–1099.

Nikolaos Kazantzis, Frank P. Deane, Kevin R Ronan,
and Luciano L’Abate. 2005. Using homework as-
signments in cognitive behavior therapy. Routledge.

Kwanguk Kim, Chan-Hyung Kim, Kyung Ryeol Cha,
Junyoung Park, Kiwan Han, Yun Ki Kim, Jae-Jin
Kim, In Young Kim, and Sun I. Kim. 2008. Anx-
iety provocation and measurement using virtual re-
ality in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
CyberPsychology & Behavior 11(6):637–641.

Katharina Kircanski and Tara S. Peris. 2015. Ex-
posure and Response Prevention Process Predicts
Treatment Outcome in Youth with OCD. Journal
of Abnormal Child Psychology 43(3):543–552.

K.C. Kirkby, G.E. Berrios, B.A. Daniels, R.G. Men-
zies, A. Clark, and A. Romano. 2000. Process-
outcome analysis in computer-aided treatment of
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry 41(4):259 – 265.

M. Krijn, P. M. G. Emmelkamp, R. P. Olafsson, and
R. Biemond. 2004. Virtual reality exposure therapy
of anxiety disorders: A review. Clinical Psychology
Review 24(3):259 – 281.

Christian Lind, Mark J. Boschen, and Shirley Morris-
sey. 2013. Technological advances in psychother-
apy: Implications for the assessment and treatment
of obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxi-
ety Disorders 27(1):47 – 55.

M. Lindsay, R. Crino, and G. Andrews. 1997. Con-
trolled trial of exposure and response prevention in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. The British Journal
of Psychiatry 171(2):135–139.

Courtney Lopresti and Ralph Ry-
back. 2016. 4 myths about OCD.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-
truisms-wellness/201605/4-myths-about-ocd.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Curran Associates Inc., USA, NIPS’13, pages 3111–
3119.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong
He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vanderwende,
Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A cor-
pus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding
of commonsense stories. In Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT . pages 839–849.

OCDLA. 2016a. OCD Center of LA: Harm OCD:
Symptoms and treatment. http://ocdla.com/harm-
ocd-1-1982.

OCDLA. 2016b. OCD Center of LA:
Imaginal exposure for OCD and anxiety.
http://ocdla.com/imaginal-exposure-ocd-anxiety-
4847.

OCDLA. 2016c. Ocd center of la: Pure Obses-
sional OCD (Pure O) symptoms and treatment.
http://ocdla.com/obsessionalocd.

Edward Packard. 1982. Cave of Time (Choose Your
Own Adventure #1). Bantam.

Thomas D. Parsons and Albert A. Rizzo. 2008. Af-
fective outcomes of virtual reality exposure therapy
for anxiety and specific phobias: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psy-
chiatry 39(3):250 – 261.

Cherlene Pedrick and Bruce M. Hyman. 2011.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Twenty-First Cen-
tury Books.

Mark B. Powers and Paul M.G. Emmelkamp. 2008.
Virtual reality exposure therapy for anxiety disor-
ders: A meta-analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders
22(3):561 – 569.

Matthew Price and Page Anderson. 2007. The role of
presence in virtual reality exposure therapy. Journal
of Anxiety Disorders 21(5):742–751.

Barbara Olasov Rothbaum, Elizabeth A. Meadows, Pa-
tricia Resick, and David W. Foy. 2000. Cognitive-
behavioral therapy. In E. B. Foa, T. M. Keane,
and M. J. Friedman, editors, Effective treatments for
PTSD: Practice guidelines from the International
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, Guilford Press,
New York, NY, US, pages 320–325.

Karen Rowa, Martin M. Antony, and Richard P. Swin-
son. 2007. Exposure and Response Prevention..
American Psychological Association, Washington,
DC, US.

Sarah Schuster. 2015. 5 times the inter-
net got OCD wrong and why it matters.
https://themighty.com/2015/08/how-the-internet-
misunderstood-obsessive-compulsive-disorder/.

56



Steve Seay. 2016. Hit-and-run OCD vs. other driv-
ing fears. http://www.steveseay.com/hit-and-run-
ocd-vs-other-driving-fears/.

Roz Shafran, Dana S. Thordarson, and S. Rachman.
1996. Thought-action fusion in obsessive com-
pulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders
10(5):379 – 391.

Michael A. Tompkins. 2016. San Francisco Bay Area
Center for Cognitive Therapy: Nuts and bolts of
imaginal exposure. https://sfbacct.com/from-ocd-
to-anxiety/nuts-and-bolts-of-imaginal-exposure/.

Otto F. Wahl. 2000. Obsessive-compulsive disorder
in popular magazines. Community Mental Health
36(3):307–312.

David G. Walshe, Elizabeth J. Lewis, Sun I. Kim, Kath-
leen O’Sullivan, and Brenda K. Wiederhold. 2003.
Exploring the use of computer games and virtual re-
ality in exposure therapy for fear of driving follow-
ing a motor vehicle accident. CyberPsychology &
Behavior 6(3):329–334.

Stacey K. Wochner. 2012. Pure Obsessional OCD
- symptoms and treatment. Social Work Today
12(4):22.

57


