10

Proceedings of the LT4DHCSEE in conjunction with RANLP 2017, pages 10–19,

Varna, Bulgaria, 8 September 2017.

http://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-046-5_002

Tools for Building a Corpus to Study the Historical and Geographical

Variation of the Romanian Language

Victoria Bobicev
Technical University

of Moldova
Chis¸in˘au

Republic of Moldova

victoria−bobicev@rol.md

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc

“Al. I. Cuza” University,

Iasi, Romania

Institute of Linguistics

“Iorgu Iordan Al. Rosetti”

Bucharest, Romania

catalinamaranduc@gmail.com

Cenel Augusto Perez
Al. I. Cuza University,

Ias¸i, Romania

augusto.perez@info.uaic.ro

Abstract

Contemporary standard language corpora
are ideal for NLP. There are few morpho-
logically and syntactically annotated cor-
pora for Romanian, and those existing or
in progress only deal with the Contem-
porary Romanian standard. However, the
necessity to study the dynamics of natu-
ral languages gave rise to balanced cor-
pora, containing non-standard texts.
In
this paper, we describe the creation of
tools for processing non-standard Roma-
nian to build a big balanced corpus. We
want
to preserve in annotated form as
many early stages of language as possi-
ble. We have already built a corpus in
Old Romanian. We also intend to in-
clude the South-Danube dialects, remote
to the standard language, along with re-
gional forms closer to the standard. We
try to preserve data about endangered id-
ioms such as Aromanian, Meglenoroma-
nian and Istroromanian dialects, and cal-
culate the distance between different re-
gional variants,
including the language
spoken in the Republic of Moldova. This
distance, as well as the mutual understand-
ing between the speakers, is the correct
criterion for the classiﬁcation of idioms as
different languages, or as dialects, or as re-
gional variants close to the standard.

1

Introduction

The UAIC-RoDia-DepTb (ISLRN 156-635-615-
024-0) is a balanced treebank that becomes the
core of a big corpus for the Old and Regional Ro-
manian and for its South-Danube dialects. The
treebank has now 16,187 sentences, with 322,404
tokens, illustrating all the styles of communica-

tion, between which there are 5,723 sentences in
old Romanian and 1,230 sentences in regional
variants of the Romanian.

If we know the non-standard, regional or ear-
lier forms, we can understand the laws of natural
language evolution; we can know how it functions
in the communication and process it. The use of
Old or Regional Romanian should not be judged
as mistaken reporting them to the standard rules,
but it is in accordance with other rules which we
must discover.

Linguists are increasingly interested in the
study of old languages with modern tools and their
demand for old language processing tools is grow-
ing worldwide. Consequently, the computational
linguists are building Diachronic and Old Cor-
pora for all the natural languages, some described
in many related works, as: Borin and Forsberg
(2008), Davies (2010), Prevost and Stein (2013),
etc.

We have built a sub-corpus for the Old Ro-
manian, another for the regional variants, but it
is more difﬁcult to build corpora for the South
Danube Romanian dialects (because they are very
different from the standard language, cannot be
understood by his speakers and two of them have
no written aspect).

The emergence of South-Danube dialects is his-
torically and politically determined. Due to their
isolation of the linguistic center, they are more
conservative than this one and retain many archaic
linguistic phenomena.

Matteo Giulio Bartoli 1925 formulates the the-
ory of isolated area or side areas, demonstrating
with some examples that these areas are more con-
servative than the center. The dialects conserve
more forms of the old languages or of the language
where they were inherited (in our case, the Latin
language).

For example, Istroromanian is the dialect of

11

the Romanian spoken by the smallest number of
speakers, in eight villages in Croatia by 1,000 peo-
ple, called ”Vlach”, only recently recognized as a
national minority. This is an isolated area, very
conservative for the Old Romanian. Through its
disappearance and the lack of collected and digi-
tized testimonies we could lose important data on
the evolution of the Romanian language.

The dialectal variations study is important for
the history of languages and for the etymology.
The big etymological dictionary of Roman lan-
guages DeRom1 has between its bibliographical
sources books of specialists in dialectology as:
Iosif Popovici 1909 and Richard Sarbu 1998 for
the Istroromanian dialect.

Besides their historical importance, these di-
alects are languages of disadvantaged minorities,
threatened with extinction, with limited access to
culture. Their folk creation and other contribu-
tions must be conserved and the people speaking
it have to be received into the family of European
languages.

2 Related Work

The need for a research infrastructure for the study
of historical lexical resources by digitization and
implication of language technology is increas-
ingly recognized by the historical research com-
munity. Historical documents are being digitized
on a vast scale in cultural heritage and digital li-
brary projects in many countries. Modern linguis-
tics studies pays increasing attention to diachronic
and dialectal variations of languages. Similar cor-
pora of other languages have started from con-
temporary language processing tools by adapting
them to their old or regional variants.

Digitized historical corpora are already created
for many languages: English Yanez-Bouza (2011),
Davies (2012), Spanish and Portuguese Davies
(2010), French Stein (2008) and so on. In another
paper, France Martineau 2007 analyze the use of
probabilistic parsing methods for old French texts.
Unfortunately, the described probabilistic parser
was trained and can be used only within the project
and cannot be adapted for other language and an-
notation conventions.

Thus, Nuria Yanez-Bouza 2011 describes the
building of a rule-based automate pre-annotator
which has around 30 rules to identify complex
verb forms (VCOMP), adjective phrases (AP),

1 http://www.degruyter.com/view/product/205712

noun phrases (NP) and prepositional phrases (PP).
The next phase is the manual annotation via a spe-
cial interface. We also have a hybrid POS-tagger
which permits the introduction of rules (see be-
low) and use the manual annotation for a part of
the semantic relations.

In another paper Borin et al. (2010) present
an ongoing work on the building of digitalized
diachronic Swedish lexical resource. The pa-
per presents a basic research infrastructure for
language technology called BLARK (Basic Lan-
guage Resource Kit) which includes basic lexical
resources, annotated corpora and basic NLP tools
for processing these corpora. The same authors
Borin and Forsberg (2008) describe the creation
of the tool for the morphological analyze of Old
Swedish words, which should be followed by syn-
tactic and semantic analysis. East European lan-
guages have several preprocessing issues. For ex-
ample, for some of them Cyrillic and Latin scripts
were used in various periods of time; hence some
documents need to be transliterated before fur-
ther processing (Gruszczynski and Ogrodniczuk,
2015).

3 Tools for Romanian Standard

Processing

3.1 The UAIC-Ro Hybrid Part Of Speech

(POS)-Tagger

The tools for the processing of the Contemporary
Romanian are the basis for creating the ones for
the old or regional Romanian processing. The lex-
icon of the UAIC-POS-tagger for Contemporary
Romanian also contains archaic words and forms,
extracted from dictionaries, while Old Romanian
also contains words and forms used today.

The UAIC-Ro POS-tagger is hybrid, i.e. suc-
cessfully combines a statistical model with a rule
based system (Simionescu, 2011). The speciﬁcity
of the hybrid model is that it applies a set of
rules to reduce the large set of valid pairs lemma
and POS-tag (abbreviated morphological analysis)
which can be applied at a word-form. In fact, there
are morphological homonyms, interpretable tak-
ing into account the words in the vicinity of their
occurrence. After the reduction of the set of pos-
sible analysis, the statistical system is put into op-
eration.

The dictionary of the POS-tagger is formed of
triplets: word-form, lemma (the basis form of
word, found in dictionaries), POS-tag (an abbrevi-

12

ated morphological analysis). The amount of the
POS-tagger lexicon is related with the accuracy of
the tool. The tool for the Contemporary Roma-
nian contains 1,15 million distinct words extracted
from dictionaries and 100,000 proper nouns ex-
tracted from Wikipedia. The set of 406 tags are a
reduced version of the tagset used by the Multext
East project Erjavec (2004).

The rule of big dimensions shows that

the
higher the number of tags is, the greater the gold
corpus for the training must be. The training cor-
pus for Contemporary Romanian consists in the
NAACL 2003 corpus (39,000 sentences), and an-
other 28,000 sentences extracted from the JRC-
ACQUIS. The corpus for evaluation was Orwell’s
novel 1984, manually annotated in the Multext
East project.

But these corpora were not have identical set
of conventions and not use our tagset. The train-
ing corpus is not entirely manually corrected. It is
possible that there are inconsistencies between the
annotation of these corpora. The accuracy of the
tool, evaluated on standard Romanian, is 95.12 %
without rules and 96.66 % with rules.

The POS-tagger has been trained on standard-
ized, but also on non-standardized language, be-
fore processing 2,570 sentences in Social Media
communication (Romanian chat). A method to in-
crease the accuracy on chat sentences was to dou-
ble the training corpus, with and without letters
with speciﬁc Romanian diacritics: s¸, ˘a, t¸, ˆı, ˆa, that
are not always used in chat communication.

For the diacritics only RO-POS tagger evaluated
on Orwell’s 1984 novel, we obtain an accuracy of
97.03 %. For the diacritics only RO-POS tagger,
evaluated on the chat corpus the accuracy was only
68.67 %, for the Mixed diacritics RO-POS tagger,
evaluated on mixed 1984, the accuracy was 94.38
%, and for the Mixed diacritics RO-POS tagger,
evaluated on the chat corpus, the accuracy was
84.78 %, as shown in Perez 2016.

For difﬁcult texts (old, non-standardized, new
styles of communication not yet
trained) we
largely use manual validation of the output of the
tool, and by the bootstrapping method, the cor-
rected sentences are added to the gold training cor-
pus.

3.2 The Malt Parser trained on Romanian
A variant of the Malt parser trained on UAIC-
RoDepTb began to operate satisfactorily. The con-

ventions of annotation used are in FDG (Func-
tional Dependency Grammar), with labels of
classical syntax, with numerous semantic sub-
classiﬁcations of modiﬁers. Creating the treebank
in 2007, Augusto Perez had the intention of target-
ing the treebank for didactic purposes, for medium
learning, even building a computer game to pre-
pare students for exams, but, of course, the learn-
ing system cannot be so easily convinced to adopt
the Dependency Grammar.

This system can be transposed both into the
modern syntactic system of Universal Dependen-
cies (UD) with loss of semantic information and
into a semantic annotation system by adding infor-
mation. This is why we will continue to use this
classic format, in which the processing tools were
trained, and then it will be automatically (super-
vised) converted into UD (Universal Dependen-
cies) and into a semantic annotation.

The parser is named multilingual or universal in
Hall et al. (2006), because its functioning is based
only on dependency relations, on the training and
on the morphological previously annotation in no
matter what language. The accuracy of the parser
is determined by the size of the training corpus,
more than 10,000 sentences, by the exactitude of
the morphological annotation, and by the consis-
tency of the syntactic conventions. Thus, the syn-
tactic parser will not cause problems if used for
annotation of ancient or regional texts, respecting
consistently the conventions of UAIC-RoDia Dep-
treebank, if the difﬁcult problem of correct mor-
phological annotation will be solved.

The parser was successfully used for syntactic
annotation in the 2,570 chat phrases. On this occa-
sion we found that the parser has a better accuracy
after being trained on a large corpus which con-
tains standard and non-standard sentences. After
the training only with chat sentences, the accuracy
on chat was 71.74 % for head attachment, 66.08 %
for label attachment and 62.31 % for both attach-
ment.

Using the same method, after the training with
15,000 sentences from all types of texts, including
4,000 sentences from the seventeenth century, and
after the creation of Old Ro POS-tagger, the ac-
curacy of our parser evaluated on Old Romanian
was, for both attachments, 77.06 %, for head at-
tachment, 83.79 %, and for label attachment, 82.5
%. The results are better than on chat corpus,
because the training corpus was bigger, and we

13

used the new Old Ro POS tagger (described be-
low) with a satisfactory accuracy, with the output
entirely manually corrected.

3.3 POS-tagger for the Old and Dialectal

Romanian

For building a series of Old Romanian processing
tools, we began by building a POS-tagger for Old
Romanian, which would give us basic annotation
for the syntactic and semantic parsers or for any
other type of annotation. To build a new POS-
tagger, a list of tags, a lexicon, and a training cor-
pus is needed. After the elaboration of these data,
we can make clones of the UAIC hybrid POS-
tagger, described above, and of the POS-tagger of
the Institute of Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence of Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, which can
analyze also Romanian words written in Cyrillic
letters.

3.3.1 The List of Tags for the Old Ro

POS-tagger

To establish the list of tags for the new POS-
tagger, we began with the list of the UAIC hy-
brid POS-tagger for Contemporary Romanian, re-
introducing some tags which had been eliminated,
i.e. the detailed analysis of personal and reﬂexive
pronouns (dative and accusative case, strong and
weak forms) and the complex tags for the rela-
tional words (prepositions, conjunctions, relative
adverbs). The ﬁrst category (personal and reﬂex-
ive pronouns) is useful to differentiate the direct
and indirect objects, to establish the co-references
and the expletives.

A new set of tags which we introduced, origi-
nal ones, were aimed at annotating language spe-
ciﬁc phenomenon of (Old) Romanian, namely the
negation of non-personal synthetic modes (partici-
ple, gerund and supine) by the preﬁx ne-. Words
as “neterminat”,“nestricat˘a”, “nes¸tiind” (En: un-
ﬁnished, unbroken, not knowing) have the lemma
“a termina” (to ﬁnish), “a strica” (to break), “a
s¸ti” (to know), because the verbs “*a netermina”,
“*a nestrica”, “*a nes¸ti” do not exist. The pos-
tag of these forms will be annotated as: “Vmp–
sm-z”, “Vmp–pf-z”, “Vmg—–z”. (participle nega-
tive singular masculine, participle negative plural
feminine, gerund negative). The opposite tag to
“Vmp–pf-z” has, on the eighth position, the p that
means “positive”.

The annotation of verbal participles as adjec-
tives is not acceptable, and has been corrected ev-

erywhere in the training corpus. We intend to build
a dictionary of predicate arguments and adjunct
structures (Cenel-Augusto Perez, 2015), and the
participle has the same possible (syntactic and se-
mantic) dependencies as the other verbal forms.
We do not accept the letters y / n for annotating
categories other than +/- deﬁniteness, because they
are not transparent and can be confusing, as shown
in M˘ar˘anduc et al. (2016).

Finally, if the above forms are possible, but un-
common in Contemporary Romanian, there are
tags needed to annotate speciﬁc forms only of the
Old language. The list of tags for the forms of
Dh (emphatic determiners) was also doubled as Ph
(emphatic pronouns), because these forms exist in
Old Romanian independently, not only as deter-
miners of a noun. The emphatic adjective has a lot
of speciﬁc forms in Old Romanian: “elus¸i”, “eis¸i”,
“luis¸i” (En: himself, themselves). Another phe-
nomenon is the imperative formed from the long
inﬁnitive. Example: “Nu v˘a teamet¸i!” (with short
inﬁnitive) “Nu v˘a teameret¸i!” (with long inﬁni-
tive) (En: Do not be afraid!)

In Contemporary Romanian, the relative pro-
noun “care” has a very reduced inﬂection, and in
Old Romanian the inﬂection is complex. Exam-
ples: “carele” Pw3msry, “carea” Pw3fsry, “cari”
Pw3mpr, “carii” Pw3mpry (En: which).

The new tagset for the Old Romanian has 540
tags. All these tags was annotated in the entire
corpus and the tags which do not exist in the tagset
was eliminated from all the sub-corpora and from
the lexicon of the POS-tagger. In this way we as-
sured the consistency of the training corpus with
the lexicon.

3.3.2 The Lexicon for the Old Ro POS-tagger
The collection of texts in Old Romanian is quite
advanced; it contains 23 documents in TXT for-
mat from the sixteenth century, 60 from the sev-
enteenth, 76 from the eighteenth and 325 from
the nineteenth century. These texts were cleaned
of the meta-text, specialists comments and notes,
then processed by a concordancer program that
builds indexes and makes statistics of the number
of occurrences for each form in all the 500 books
in text format opened. The concordancer used is
the Lucon 03.16, the C˘at˘alin Mititelu’s program,
available on Sourceforge site2.

However, the old Romanian texts were written

2https://sourceforge.net/directory/os:windows/?q=Lucon

14

in Old Cyrillic letters. The collection that we hold
contains both scans with Cyrillic and transcripts
in Latin letters made by specialists. There was
no Optical Character Recognizer (OCR) program
for such letters. The letters differ from one book
to another and there are many transitional alpha-
bets with mixed Latin and Cyrillic letters. Our
colleagues from the Institute of Mathematics and
Computer Science of the Academy of Sciences of
Moldova are now building an OCR which began
operating satisfactorily for some texts (Cojocaru
et al., 2017).

In the case of the Romanian language written
with Cyrillic, we used the same lexicon for the
Old-Romanian POS-tagger and for the OCR pro-
gram, having two variants, with the word forms
written in Latin letters and written in Cyrillic let-
ters, trying to help our colleagues to increase the
performances of the OCR for Romanian Cyrillic
letters. The lexicon is obtained from the annota-
tion of the Gospel, the ﬁrst part of the New Testa-
ment (1648) having 5,028 sentences, text partially
obtained by the cited above OCR program.

We have about 500 scanned old books without
transcription in Latin alphabet. We hope that the
new OCR will solve this problem. The solution
of transcriptions made by specialists is question-
able, because the specialists made sometimes in-
terpretative transcriptions, closer to the old text,
approaching it by the contemporary language (so
that the POS-tagger will not recognize them in the
text obtained by OCR) and introduced numerous
notes and comments in contemporary language,
while their elimination is time consuming.

Using the Lucon program, we created a lex-
icon to be introduced in the POS-tagger, with
120,000 word-forms. However, we do not know
which number of actualized forms of words it con-
tains; after the OCR processing of more printed
old books, we will construct a more authentic lex-
icon.

Using the program DEPAR (Dictionary Parser)
(M˘ar˘anduc et al., 2017) we extracted a list of 5,000
stable unanalyzable Multi Word Expressions from
a dictionary (M˘ar˘anduc, 2010), and also 98,000
lexical or spelling variants extracted from the The-
saurus Dictionary3. The variants are generally old
or regional, consequently their introduction in the
POS-tagger lexicon is useful for the processing
both of the Old and of the regional variants of the

Daco-Romanian dialect (the name used by the di-
alectologists for the language spoken in Romania),
but they are not useful for the South Danube di-
alects, that have special dictionaries.

The project Monumenta Linguae Dacoromano-
rum4, started in 1988 in cooperation with the
Freiburg University, has the purpose to digitize the
old religious books in Romanian. A new edition
of the ﬁrst Bible printed in Romanian (1688) has
been completed by using manually checked auto-
matic morphologic annotation; we have received
the indices of their edition, using another system
of abbreviations compatible with ours, to be intro-
duced in our Old Ro POS-tagger lexicon.

Finally,

the result will be processed with a
tool that generates complete paradigms of words
(adding possible forms that do not appear in the in-
dexed texts). We have such a tool for the Contem-
porary Romanian, called Anamorph (Timofciuc
et al., 2013), and now a variant for Old Romanian
has been built and its training must begin (Gˆıfu
and Simionescu, 2016). All variants of the word
are associated with the contemporary lemma, and
the inﬂexion is generated starting from the root of
the word form chosen in the text.

3.3.3 The training corpus for the Old Ro

POS-tagger

The third step is the construction of a training cor-
pus for the Old Romanian POS-tagger. We have
no other solution than to train the POS-tagger and
the Malt parser on the contemporary gold corpus,
then to process the old texts, and then to correct
the output of the tools, at the beginning having a
modest accuracy.

The manually corrected sentences will form in
time the training corpus for the Old Romanian.
The module attached of the POS-tagger will ex-
tract from these manually corrected annotations
the forms or the analysis that does not exist in
its lexicon and will add them. An increase of the
accuracy of the POS-tagger is expected after the
increasing of the training corpus, i. e. after the
manually correction of more books automatically
annotated with this tool. The training corpus (hav-
ing now 18,187 sentences, including 6,882 of the
17th to 19th centuries) is smaller than the one for
the Standard Romanian POS-tagger, but is consis-
tent with the tagset. The POS-tagger for the Old
Romanian has now an accuracy of 91.66 %.

3http://edtlr.info.uaic.ro/

4https://consilr.info.uaic.ro/ mld/monumenta/

15

3.3.4 Building POS-taggers for processing

the South Danube Dialects

Then, we will apply the same solution: to build a
few clones of the UAIC-Ro-POS-tagger for each
South-Danube dialect. The same steps must be
completed for each South-Danube dialect, begin-
ning with the difﬁcult step of the acquisition of
digitized sources.

The construction of the Regional lexicon begins
with the acquisition of a big collection of sources:
texts in each variant of the language, in editable
form. Then, two problems must be solved: ﬁrst,
it needs a big lexicon containing all the possible
word-forms in each dialect of the language, with
the lemmas and with the correct morphological
analysis for any form ﬁnd in texts, and secondly,
it needs a big gold corpus (manually checked) for
the training.

The greater difﬁculty lies in the fact that there
is a very big distance between these variants of the
language, we will need to start from zero the con-
struction of the training corpus for each dialect,
without using the large corpus of the other vari-
ants of the language. It can only be used as train-
ing corpus on regional variants spoken in Romania
and the Republic of Moldova

We have a collection of texts published by spe-
cialists from each dialect and some dictionaries. In
order to create a collection of sources, we should
do dialectal surveys in the villages where the di-
alects are spoken, because two of them do not have
a written aspect, to register and annotate the texts.
We have not yet a collection of annotated speci-
mens of Spontaneous spoken language in our cor-
pus.

We can extract lemmas from the dictionaries
using the program DEPAR (Dictionary Parser)
(M˘ar˘anduc et al., 2017), but the inﬂexion must
be manually introduced in the POS-tagger lexicon.
For this purpose, we will have to associate special-
ists in the South-Danube dialects in our project.
The existence of a lexicon with ﬂexionary forms
could also lead to the creation of OCR for the Aro-
manian dialect, that has a written aspect. The difﬁ-
culty is that various phonetic transcription systems
are used in different published collections.

Figure 1: The map of Aromanians localities, from
the http://www.theapricity.com/forum/showthread

4 Short Presentation of Romanian

Dialects

4.1 The Aromanian Dialect
Aromanian is the dialect with the most speak-
ers, approximately 250,000. They live in Albania,
in Greece, (the Pindos Mountains, the province
of Macedonia) or in the Republic of Macedonia,
hence the name of the Macedo dialect, that can be
confusing, because this is the name of a geograph-
ical region, and in that region there are also people
of other origins and languages.

There are numerous texts in this dialect, be-
cause more people speaking it migrated in Ro-
mania and ones of them become specialists in
dialectal linguistics. For example, Mariot¸eanu
(2006), Saramandu (2003) and Nevaci (2011), for
mentioning only the contemporary ones. Other
older collections are Capidan (1925), Obedenaru
and Bianu (1891), Bujduveanu (2005), and so on.
They have published collections of texts in more
styles of the language, written or oral popular lit-
erature, dictionaries, textbooks. This dialect has
been studied from the nineteen century and it has
historical variants (texts in Old Aromanian). It has
also different regional variants. (see Figure 1)

However, there are several difﬁculties. The pro-
nunciation is differently transcribed in different
books, depending on the period in which they were
collected and published. This dialect is also stud-
ied by the Greek linguists that have another set of
graphical conventions for the transcription. The
spelling interpretive conception, nearby the stan-
dard language, exists also on these specialists, also
the intention to approach the Aromanian dialect to
the standard language exists, especially since it is
the only one who enjoys the existence of schools

16

and manuals in the Aromanian.

Aromanian is no option in any OCR software,
neither in the automated programs for the trans-
lation, and various letters with diacritics are not
recognized. For the moment, the editable text ob-
tained by OCR is of poor quality and should be
carefully corrected by specialists in South-Danube
Romanian dialects. Probably we have to introduce
the three South-Danube dialects as independent
options in the OCR program, each with its lexi-
con, including the letters from all the transcription
systems.

4.2 The Meglenoromanian Dialect

The Meglenoromanians are an ethnic group liv-
ing in the Meglen region of Central Macedonia,
Greece. This ethnic group is less numerous than
the Aromanians. The researchers estimated their
number at 20,000 persons in the nineteenth cen-
tury. However, Thede Kahl 2006 estimated them
at 5,000 persons; the negative demographic dy-
namic is evident. The minorities are not recog-
nized in Greece, and in Turkey they are submit-
ted at an assimilation and islamization process.
There are no schools in the Meglenoromanian di-
alect. This idiom, having no written aspect, has
no cult literature. However, literary folklore texts
were published by many linguists. More collec-
tions were published by Pericles Papahagi 1902,
Ion Aurel Candrea 1925a, 1925b, and Theodor
Capidan 1925. There is only one cult publica-
tion, a brochure about silkworm rearing with the
script adapted, and terms borrowed from Roma-
nian. The Megleno idiom is endangered, it was
entered in the UNESCO Red Book on endangered
languages, the ”Languages in grave danger” and
UNESCO Atlas of Languages in danger in the
world. (Atanasov, 2014). Unlike the Aromanians,
who are mostly herdsmen, the Meglenoromanians
are traditionally occupied by agriculture. They are
not nomads, but sedentary and therefore this di-
alect suffered fewer external inﬂuences and was
kept as a native language spoken in the family.
In the Figure 2 there is a map of their localities,
extract from the Th. Capidan study, 1928. More
families emigrated in the Dobrudja region of Ro-
mania. (see Figure 2).

Therefore, we have to contribute to the preser-
vation of texts in the Meglenoromanian dialect,
and to facilitate the access of the European cul-
ture for this disfavored linguistic community, by

Figure 2: The map of Meglenoromanians locali-
ties, drew by T. Capidan

building an annotated corpus for this idiom and by
computerizing their dialect. A computerized form
of their dictionaries and lexicons is also necessary.
The annotated corpus and the electronic dictionary
will be used to build a machine translation.

4.3 Short Presentation of the Istroromanian

Dialect

Istroromanian is an Eastern Romance idiom spo-
ken in a few villages in the peninsula of Istria,
in Croatia. The number of Istroromanian speak-
ers is more than 500, the ”smallest ethnic group
in Europe”.
In the eighteen century the num-
ber of speakers was 10,000, and many toponyms
with origin in Istroromanian dialect demonstrate
this fact. Part of speakers are migrants in Europe,
USA, Canada or Australia.

It is listed among languages that are ”seriously
endangered” in the UNESCO Red Book of Endan-
gered Languages. Since 2010, the Croatian Con-
stitution recognizes Istroromanians as one of 22
national minorities. However, there have not been
signiﬁcant changes in preserving their language,
culture and ethnic identity. (see Figure 3).

Given the fact that Istroromanians have long
been in a gradual process of assimilation, and their
language was not used in writing, it is strongly
inﬂuenced by the Croatian language, and there
are no documents to be processed, except a small
number of texts collected by linguists: Feresini
(1996), Pus¸cariu (1906), Cantemir (1959). Cur-
rently there are some rescue actions for the preser-
vation of Istroromanian language, carried out by
cultural associations.

17

5.2 Aromanian: A Dialect or an Independent

Idiom?

We can establish with scientiﬁc arguments if this
dialect has the tendency to become an independent
natural language or to remain a dialect of Roma-
nian, without imposing any solution, but only to
ascertain if, as some experts have said, Aroma-
nian is a language independent appertaining of the
group of Romance languages.

The national consciousness of speakers, result-
ing on their texts,
is also important for estab-
lish whether it’s an independent idiom. Aroma-
nians are divided into three main groups: the ﬁrst,
living in northern and central Greek Macedonia,
called Gramushtenians, the second living in the
Pindos mountains, called Pindenians, the third liv-
ing in the south of Epirus, and in Thessaly, called
Farsherots. However, the speakers of this dialect
have different conceptions about their national-
ity. According with the testimonies of early re-
searchers, the ﬁrst two groups consider that they
are Aromanians, but the Farsherots consider that
they are Romanians. By studying texts collected
more soon we will see if these conceptions of Aro-
manians about themselves were kept or changed.

6 Future Work

The corpus which we intend to create can be use-
ful to create computerized dictionaries for the Ro-
manian dialects aligned with those of standard
Romanian language (and of Romanian Word Net
(RoWN), aligned at Princeton Word Net (PWN),
and to build a machine translation system for these
isolated idioms, to introduce them in the interna-
tional circulation. The cultural and linguistic iso-
lation of these speakers will cease, if a platform,
such as Babel, will be able to translate into these
dialects the information that the speakers ﬁnd on
the Internet in a well-known language.

6.1 Study of the Historical Variations and of

the Evolution Tendencies

Another important utility of the corpus that we
begin building now is the statistic demonstration
of the evolution tendencies. The Aromanian is
the most important dialect of the Romanian af-
ter the standard language, called the Dacoroma-
nian dialect. The comparative study of Aromanian
texts from different historical periods with statis-
tical methods will allow us to know what is their
evolution tendency, whether the trend of this idiom

Figure 3: The map of Istroromanians localities,
drew by Pericle Papahagi

A digitization of all the published texts in Istro-
romanian and their carefully annotation is neces-
sary. There are some lexicons to be computerized
and linked to the dictionaries of the other South-
Danube dialects and to the Romanian computer-
ized dictionaries. In the table 1, some differences
between the Romanian dialects are exempliﬁed.
We ignored here the different diacritics of letters.

5 Discussion
5.1 The Linguistic Correct Deﬁnition of the

Variants of the Romanian

The linguistic deﬁnition for the concept of dialect
is that this variant of the language is quite differ-
ent from the language standard, and mutual under-
standing between the speakers of the dialect and
the speakers of the standard language is quite difﬁ-
cult or even impossible. In cases where differences
are small and the understanding between speakers
is easy, these are not different dialects, but sim-
ple regional variants. Such is the case of the lan-
guage spoken in the Republic of Moldova, some-
times referred to as an independent language, or
as a different dialect of the Romanian, for no lin-
guistic reasons. However, to demonstrate this truth
we need big corpora in the language spoken in the
Republic of Moldova and in the South-Danube di-
alects, all morphologically and syntactically anno-
tated, and then we can statistically calculate the in-
dices of the approach or departure from the stan-
dard Romanian of each of these idioms. The cre-
ation of a big Romanian corpus with morpholog-
ical and syntactic annotations, illustrating all the
geographical and historical variations of this lan-
guage is a long time project, which will continue
probably since 2020 or more years. The corpus
had counted in 2014 only 4,600 sentences in Ro-
manian Standard (Perez, 2014).

18

Istro-Romanian Aromanian Megleno-Romanian Romanian

klieptu

bire
bliera
ﬁliu
ﬁlia
ﬂier
vit¸elu
(g)lierm

cheptu
ghine

azghirari

hilj
hilje
heru
yit¸al
iermu

klieptu

bini
zber
iliu
ilie
ieru
vit¸al

ghiarmi

piept
bine
zbiera

ﬁu
ﬁic˘a
ﬁer
vit¸el
vierme

English
chest

well, good

to roar

son

daughter

iron
calf
worm

Table 1: Differences between few words in the Romanian Dialects

is approaching the Romanian standard language or
the Greek language, whether it becomes an inde-
pendent idiom or not. We plan to compare parts
of our corpora using various comparison methods
in order to better understand their similarities and
dissimilarities.
7 Conclusions
In this paper we described an ongoing work on
the creation of a big balanced corpus of Old and
Regional Romanian texts, impossible without cre-
ating tools for its processing. Consequently, we
described some such as tools used for the develop-
ment of our corpus in several directions.

The balanced corpus does not have only a sci-
entiﬁc interest, but also practical consequences. If
the language spoken in the Republic of Moldova is
easily understandable by Romanian speakers with-
out consulting a bilingual dictionary, it demon-
strates that the Moldavian is not a dialect of Ro-
manian. However, in the case of South-Danube
dialects, there are dictionaries and also ﬁnal lexi-
cons in the published books, that being necessary
in order to allow Romanian readers to understand
the published texts. That is proof that they are di-
alects and there cannot be any mutual understand-
ing between their speakers.

References
1902. Meglenoromanians. Folk Ethnographic Study.

Socec & Co publisher, Bucharest.

Peter Atanasov. 2014. The current state of megleno-
romanians. megleno-romanian, an endangered id-
iom. Memoria Ethnologica XIV(52-53):3037.

Matteo Bartoli. 1925.

(princ`ıpi-scopi-metodi).

Introduzione alla neolin-
2. Biblioteca
guistica:
dell’ Archivum Romanicum - Serie II: Linguis-
tica. https://books.google.ro/books?
id=Zg0MAAAAIAAJ.

Lars Borin, Marcus Forsberg, and Dimitrios Kokki-
nakis. 2010. Diabase: Towards a diachronic blark
in support of historical studies.
In Proceedings of
LREC.. pages 35–42.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2008. Something
old, something new: A computational morpholog-
ical description of old swedish.
In LREC 2008
- Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural
Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2008) Conference Proceed-
ings. pages 9–16.

T˘anase Bujduveanu. 2005. The S˘ar˘ac˘acians. Aroma-

nian Book Publisher, Reading, Massachusetts.

Ion Aurel Candrea. 1925a. Meglenoromanian texts.

Speech and Soul I/I:261285.

Ion Aurel Candrea. 1925b. Meglenoromanian texts.

Speech and Soul I/II:100128.

Traian Cantemir. 1959.

Istroromanian Texts. Ro-
manian Academy Publisher, Institute of Linguistics
Cluj.

Theodor Capidan. 1925. Meglenoromanians. Their
History and Their Language. National Culture / Ro-
manian Academy, Bucharest.

Theodor Capidan. 1928.
Their Folk Literature.
Bucharest.

The Meglenoromanians.
Socec & Co publisher,

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc Radu

Simionescu Cenel-
Augusto Perez. 2015.
Ro-paas
a resource
linked to our uaic-ro-dep-treebank.
In Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Soft Computing 14th
Mexican International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, MICAI 2015. pages 29–46.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc Radu

Simionescu Cenel-
Augusto Perez. 2016. Social media processing
romanian chats and discourse analysis. Computacin
y Sistemas 20(3):404–414.

Svetlana Cojocaru, Alexander Colesnicov, and Lud-
mila Malahova. 2017. Digitization of old romanian
texts printed in the cyrillic script. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Digital Access to Tex-
tual Cultural Heritage. pages 143–148.

19

Mark Davies. 2010. Creating useful historical corpora:
A comparison of corde, the corpus del espanol, and
the corpus do portuguˆes pages 137–166.

Manuela Nevaci. 2011. The Gray of the Frontier Aro-
manians in Dobrogea. Cartea Universitar˘a Publish-
ing House, Bucharest.

Mark Davies. 2012. Expanding horizons in historical
linguistics with the 400 million word corpus of his-
torical american english. Corpora (7):121–157.

Gheorghiad Mihail Obedenaru and Ioan Bianu. 1891.
Macedoromanans Texts. Fairy Tales and Folk Poems
from Crushova. Carol G¨obl Publisher, Bucharest.

Cenel-Augusto Perez. 2014. Linguistic Resources for
Natural Language Processing. (PhD thesis). Al. I.
Cuza University, Ias¸i.

Iosif Popovici. 1909. The Romanian Dialects in Istria.

Halle.

Sophie Prevost and Achim Stein. 2013.

Syntactic
Reference Corpus of Medieval French (SRCMF).
ENS de Lyon; Universitt Stuttgart; Lattice, Lyon/S-
tuttgart/Paris.

Sextil Pus¸cariu. 1906.

Istroromanian studies. in col-
laboration with m. bartoli, a. belulovici and a. by-
han, vol. i. texts. Romanian Academy Annals series
II,(tom. XXVIII):117–182.

Nicolae Saramandu. 2003. Aromanian and Meglenoro-

manian Studies. Ex Ponto Publisher, Constant¸a.

Richard Sˆarbu and Vasile Fr˘at¸il˘a. 1998. Istroromanan
Dialect. Texts and Glossary. Amarcord publisher,
Timis¸oara.

Radu Simionescu. 2011. Hybrid pos tagger. Proceed-
ings of Language Resources and Tools with Indus-
trial Applications Workshop Eurolan 2011 Summer
school .

Achim Stein. 2008. Syntactic annotation of old french

text corpora. Corpus (7):157–172.

Ana Maria Timofciuc, Daniela Gˆıfu, and Corina
For˘ascu. 2013. A simple reliable web application
for public discourse analysis. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Intelligent Information
Systems (IIS). pages 158–162.

Nuria Yanez-Bouza. 2011. Archer past and present

(1990-2010). ICAME Journal (35):205–236.

Tomaz Erjavec. 2004. Multext-east version 3: Mul-
lexicons
tilingual morphosyntactic speciﬁcations,
and corpora.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC2004. http://nl.ijs.si/ME/.

Nerina Feresini. 1996. Il Comune Istro-romeno di Val-

darsa. Edizioni Italo Svevo, Trieste.

Daniela Gˆıfu and Radu Simionescu. 2016. Tracing
language variation for romanian.
In Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on Intelligent
Text Processing and Computational Linguistics, CI-
CLing.

Wlodzimierz Gruszczynski and Maciej Ogrodniczuk.
2015. The electronic corpus of the 17th and 18th
century polish texts (up to 1772) aims, methods,
current state, problems and prospects for develop-
ment. In Slavic Corpus Linguistics: The Historical
Dimension. pages 21–25.

Johan Hall, Joakim Nivre, and Jens Nilsson. 2006. Dis-
criminative classiﬁers for deterministic dependency
parsing.
In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING-ACL). pages 316–323.

Thede Kahl. 2006.

The islamisation of

the
meglen vlachs (megleno-romanians): The village
(n´otia) and the nˆantinets in present-
of nˆanti
day turkey.
Nationalities Papers 34(1):71–90.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00905990500504871.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc. 2010. The Dictionary of Roma-
nian Expressions, Syntagms and Phrases (DELS).
Corint Publishing, Bucharest.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, Ludmila Malahov, Cenel-Augusto
Perez, and Alexandru Colesnicov. 2016. Rodia
project of a regional and historical corpus for roma-
nian. In Proceedings of MFOI. pages 268–284.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, C˘at˘alin Mititelu,

and Radu
Simionescu. 2017. Parsing romanian specialized
dictionaries structured in nests.
In Proceedings of
Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage (DAT-
eCH). pages 35–41.

Matilda Caragiu Mariot¸eanu. 2006. Aromanians and
in Contemporary Conscious-

Aromanian Dialect
ness. Romanian Academy Publisher, Bucharest.

France Martineau, Constana Rodica Diaconescu, , and
Paul Hirschb¨uhler. 2007. Le corpus voies du fran-
cais : de lelaboration `a lannotation pages 121–142.

