



















































The similarity and Mutual Intelligibility between Amharic and Tigrigna Varieties


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects, pages 47–54,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Similarity and Mutual Intelligibility between Amharic and Tigrigna
Varieties

Tekabe Legesse Feleke
Verona Univerisity

Verona, Italy
hitakeleg@gmail.com

Abstract

The present study has examined the sim-
ilarity and the mutual intelligibility be-
tween Amharic and two Tigrigna vari-
ties using three tools; namely Levenshtein
distance, intelligibility test and question-
naires. The study has shown that both
Tigrigna varieties have almost equal pho-
netic and lexical distances from Amharic.
The study also indicated that Amharic
speakers understand less than 50% of the
two varieties. Furthermore, the study
showed that Amharic speakers are more
positive about the Ethiopian Tigrigna va-
riety than the Eritrean variety. However,
their attitude towards the two varieties
does not have an impact on their intelli-
gibility. The Amharic speakers’ familiar-
ity to the Tigrigna varieties seems largely
dependent on the genealogical relation be-
tween Amharic and the two Tigrigna vari-
eties.

Keywords: Language Similarity, Lan-
guage Distance, Mutual Intelligibility, At-
titude, Language Contact

1 Introduction

1.1 Language in Ethiopia

More than 85 languages are spoken in Ethiopia
(Demeke, 2001; Hetzron, 1972; Hetzron, 1977;
Hudson, 2013). The languages are classified un-
der four language families: Semitic, Cushitic,
Omotic and Nilo-Saharan (Bender and Cooper,
1976; Demeke, 2001; Hornberger, 2002; Hudson,
2013). In each family, there are many related lan-
guage varieties so that the speakers of one vari-
ety can sometimes communicate with the speak-
ers of another variety in the same language family

without major difficulties (Demeke, 2001; Gutt,
1980). However, the similarity among the lan-
guages is often obscured by the attitude of the
speakers since language is considered as a sym-
bol of identity (Lanza and Woldemariam, 2008;
Smith, 2008). Hence, there are cases where vari-
eties of the same languages are considered as dif-
ferent languages (Hetzron, 1972; Hetzron, 1977;
Hudson, 2013; Smith, 2008). Therefore, due to
politics, sensitivity to ethnicity and the lack of
commitment from the scholars, the exact number
of languages in Ethiopia is not known (Bender and
Cooper, 1976; Demeke, 2001; Leslau, 1969).Fur-
thermore, except some studies for example, Gutt
(1980) and Ahland (2003) cited in Hudson (2013)
on the Gurage varieties, and Bender and Cooper
(1971) on mutual intelligibility of Sidamo dialects,
the degree of mutual intelligibility among various
varieties and the attitude of the speakers towards
each others’ varieties has not been thoroughly in-
vestigated. Hence, the present study examined
the distance and the mutual intelligibility between
Amharic and two Tigrigna varieties together with
the effect of the attitude on the mutual intelligibil-
ity.

Amharic and Tigrigna are members of the
Ethiosemitic language family, a branch of proto-
Semitic family (Bender and Cooper, 1976; De-
meke, 2001; Hetzron, 1972; Hetzron, 1977).
According to Demeke (2001), Hetzron (1972),
Hetzron (1977) and Bender and Cooper (1971),
Ethiosemitic languages are divided into North and
South Ethiosemitc. While the Tigrigna varieties
are North Ethiosemitic languages, Amharic is one
of the South Ethiosemitic languages. Nowadays,
Amharic is spoken only in Ethiopia, but Tigrigna
is spoken both in Ethiopia and in Eritrea. Due
to the genealogical and typological relationship
between Amharic and Tigrigna (Demeke, 2001;
Hetzron, 1972; Hetzron, 1977), Amharic speak-

47



ers are supposed to understand the Tigrigna vari-
eties to a certain degree. Since Amharic has been
the national language of Ethiopia, it is a widely
used language compared to Tigrigna (Getachew
and Derib, 2008; Iyob, 2000; Lanza and Wolde-
mariam, 2008; Smith, 2008). The use of Amharic
as a national language helped many speakers of
Ethiopian Tigrigna to learn Amharic as a second
language (Smith, 2008). Moreover, Amharic has
also been given as a subject for Ethiopian Tigrigna
speakers, starting from elementary school. Some
speakers of Eritrean Tigrigna variety used to speak
Amharic before secession. However, after the in-
dependence, using Amharic in schools and in dif-
ferent offices was banned (Hailemariam and Wal-
ters, 1999; Rena, 2005). The relationship between
the peoples of the two countries was also strained
especially after Ethio-Eritrean war from 1988 to
2000. Hence, due to the border conflict, Eritrean
Tigrigna speakers do not also have an access to
Tigrigna speakers in Ethiopia and to the Amharic
speakers.

Studies on the language attitude of the speakers
of Amharic and the Tigrigna varieties are at scarce.
However, language, ethnicity and politics are very
interrelated in Ethiopia (Bulcha, 1997; May, 2011;
Smith, 2008). The link has been accelerated by
the ethnic-based federal system in Ethiopia (Lanza
and Woldemariam, 2008; Young, 1996; Vaughan
and Tronvoll, 2003).The atmosphere of politics in
Eritrea and Ethiopia could also affect the attitude
of the people in both countries. There has been an
anti-Ethiopia sentiment in Eritrea since 1993 (Ab-
bink, 2003; Assefa, 1996; Iyob, 2000). This hos-
tile situation could have an effect on the attitude
of the speakers of Amharic and the speakers of the
Ethiopian Tigrigna.

The study of the similarity between Amharic
and the Tigrigna varieties and the attitude of the
speakers of one language towards another has a
paramount significance in two ways. From prac-
tical point of view, there has been an attempt to
standardize Tigrigna and use it widely in media
and in schools. The study positively contributes
to this effort. From theoretical perspective, there
have been a number of attempts towards improv-
ing the enduring limitations of methods of di-
alectology. One of the positive contributions has
been complementing the traditional lexicostatis-
tics methods by the mutual intelligibility and per-
ceptive distance measures. Very promising results

have been reported by the studies conducted on
the Scandinavian languages and the Chinese di-
alects in this regard (see (Gooskens and Heeringa,
2004; Gooskens, 2013; Gooskens, 2007; Tang and
Heuven, 2007; Tang and Heuven, 2009; Tang and
Heuven, 2015)). The present study is an addition
to these contributions.

1.2 Measuring Language Distance and
Mutual Intelligibility

The study of the distance among related languages
has been a concern of many scholars for decades
(Sokal, 1988). Several previous studies employed
phonetic distance to measure the relative distance
between various languages (Bakker, 2009; Cohn
and Fienberg, 2003; Kessler, 1995). However,
the emergence of the Levenshtein algorithm has
enhanced the objective structural comparisons by
introducing a computer-based distance computa-
tion (Heeringa, 2004; Gooskens and Heeringa,
2004). This has probably contributed a lot in terms
of attracting many scholars towards the study of
language variation (Gooskens, 2013). Recently,
several studies have been conducted on European
languages and on Chinese dialects, for example,
(Gooskens and Heeringa, 2004; Heeringa, 2004;
Tang and Heuven, 2007; Tang and Heuven, 2009;
Tang and Heuven, 2015) by employing the Lev-
enshtein algorithm together with the mutual intel-
ligibility and perceptive distance measures. For
instance, Gooskens (2007) compared data from
Scandinavian languages (Danish, Swedish and
Norwegian) with that of West Germanic languages
(Dutch, Frisian and Afrikaans) and reported that
mutual intelligibility can be predicted based on
phonetic and lexical distances. Similarly, Bezooi-
jen and Gooskens (2007) investigated the intelli-
gibility of written Afrikaans and Frisian texts for
Dutch speakers and reported the association be-
tween the Levenshtien distance and mutual intelli-
gibility. Heeringa (2004) also employed the Lev-
enshtein distance for the comparison of Dutch and
Norwegian varieties.

The subjective measures often include percep-
tive distance and functional tests (Gooskens and
Heeringa, 2004; Tang and Heuven, 2007; Tang
and Heuven, 2009). According to Gooskens
(2013), functional intelligibility between related
languages can be measured by employing con-
tent questions, translation, recorded text testing,
observations and performance tasks. Tang and
Heuven (2009) employed word intelligibility test

48



and word recognition in a sentence to examine
the mutual intelligibility among the Chinese di-
alects. According to Gooskens (2013) and Tang
and Heuven (2009) , opinion test can be designed
without speech. For example, speakers of a cer-
tain variety can be requested to give their judg-
ment on the speakers of other varieties who live
in certain geographical areas (estimated linguistic
distance). Bezooijen and Gooskens (2007) used
cloze test to measure the functional ineligibility
of written Afrikaans and Frisian for the native
speakers of Dutch. Swarte and Gooskens (2014)
employed a word translation to measure the im-
portance of German for Dutch speaker to under-
stand the Danish language. Hence, in the present
study, the Levenshtein distance and the lexical dis-
tance were combined with intelligibility measure
to determine the distance and the degree of intel-
ligibility between Amharic and the Tigrigna vari-
eties. Only the intelligibility of the Tigrigna var-
ities for the native speakers of Amharic was ex-
amined; the intelligibility measure was one direc-
tional primarly since mesauring the degree of in-
telligibility of Amharic to the Tigrigna speakers
was difficult as many Tigrigna speakrs have an ac-
cess to Amharic.

To measure the phonetic and the lexical dis-
tances, a written short story ’The Baboon Chief’
was transcribed using IPA. Amharic and both
Tigrigna varieties use Ethiopic writing system
which means that there is a correspondance be-
tween the phonemes and graphemes; the dif-
ference is only on a few supra-segmental fea-
tures which may not be captured in the written
form. After the transcription, cognates in the
stories were identified and aligned. Then, the
distance between the cognates of each language
was computed using Levenshtein distance. Lex-
ical distance was determined by dividing non-
cognate words to the total number of words in each
text. Word translation was employed to measure
the mutual intelligibility between the languages.
Word translation was used since it was suitable
for on line administration. Due to the complex
socio-political situation in Ethiopia, the attitude of
Amharic speakers towards the two language va-
rieties and the contact between Amharic speak-
ers and the speakers of the two Tigrigna vari-
eties were also examined. Questionnaire was em-
ployed since it is suitable for on line administra-
tion (Agheyisi and Fishman, 1970). Bezooijen

and Gooskens (2007) also used questionnaires to
examine the language contact and language back-
ground of their participants.

2 Research objectives

The study was conducted to address, among oth-
ers, the following four specific objectives. 1) To
determine the distance between written Tigrigna
varieties and Amharic. 2) To determine the atti-
tude of the native Amharic speakers towards the
Tigrigna varieties. 3) To identify which Tigrigna
variety is more intelligible for the native speak-
ers of Amharic. 4) To indicate the relationship be-
tween the attitude of the speakers and the degree
of mutual intelligibility.

3 Method

3.1 Participants
The participants were 18 native Amharic speakers
who were attending MA program at Groningen,
Rotterdam and Wageningen universities. Four of
them were females and the remaining 14 were
males. The average age of the participants was
27 year. Students who lived outside Ethiopia for
more than two years were not included in the study
since the attrition of Amharic could affect their
responses and their performances on the mutual
intelligibility test. Those whose parents are from
Tigray Regional State-where Tigrigna is spoken or
from Eritrea were also not included in the study;
all of them were working in different colleges in
Ethiopia before joining the three universities. The
attitude and contact questionnaires were sent to
each participant via email.

3.2 Materials and Tests
To measure the phonetic distance, the lexical dis-
tance and the intelligibility of the two Tigrigna va-
rieties for the native speakers of Amharic, a fable
’The Baboon Chief’ was translated from Oromo
to Amharic by the researcher who is a balanced
bilingual. The translation was checked by two
independent bilingual experts (one is Oromo lan-
guage instructor at Haromaya University and the
second one Amharic instructor at Mekelle Uni-
versity). The selection of the fable from Oromo
was to minimize the priming effect that could hap-
pen if it were taken directly from Amharic, see
Tang and Heuven (2009) for the priming effect.
The Amharic version was translated to the two
Tigrigna varieties. The translators were native

49



speakers of the two varieties who were MA stu-
dents at University of Groningen. The translated
texts were checked by Tigrigna experts.

3.2.1 The Phonetic and Lexical Distance
The distances between Amharic and the two
Tigrigna varieties were examined at two linguistic
levels: phonetic and lexical. For the phonetic
distance, the Levenshtein distance was employed.
To apply the Levenshtein distance, the words in
the translated written texts were transcribed using
IPA symbols. To compute the phonetic distance,
cognates both in Amharic and in the two Tigrigna
texts were aligned. The distance between the
corresponding cognates were determined based on
a number of symbols which are inserted, deleted
or substituted. The method of costs assignment
was adopted from Gooskens (2007) with just a
minor modification. The coast assignment is as
follows: insertions and deletions 1 point, identical
symbols 0 points, and substitutions of a vowel
by a vowel or of a consonant by a consonant 0.5
point, substitutions of a vowel by a consonant
or a consonant by a vowel 1 point. Below is
an example of cost assignment which shows
the distance between the cognates of Ethiopian
Tigrigna and Amharic. In this example, the total
cost (0.5 + 0.5) is one (1). The phonetic distance
is the ratio of the total cost to the number of
alignment (in this case 6). Thus, the phonetic
distance is one divided by six (1/6) which is
0.167. In terms of percent, the distance between
Tigrigna and Amharic cognates in this particular
example is 16.7%.

k u l l o m Tigrigna
h u l l u m Amharic
.5 0 0 0 .5 0 Cost

The lexical distance between the two Tigrigna
varieties and Amharic was determined based on
the percentage of non-cognates in the total lexi-
cal items; the number of non-cognate words was
divided to the total number of lexical items, based
on Gooskens (2007). The cognates were identified
based on two parameters which were suggested in
Gooskens (2007): words in corresponding texts
with common roots and cognate synonyms-words
which are very similar in written form, but have
slight meaning differences (e.g. hajal ’powerful’
and hajl ’power’). Whether the pairs of words are
cognates or not was determined by two Amharic
and Ethiopian Tigrigna bilinguals and another two

Amharic-Eritrean Tigrigna bilinguals.

3.2.2 Language Attitude and Contact
To examine the attitude of the Amharic speakers
towards the two Tigrigna varieties, questionnaires
were adopted from Bezooijen and Gooskens
(2007). The questionnaires contained items which
focus on the two Tigrigna varieties, on the speak-
ers of the varieties and on areas where the two
Tigrigna varieties are spoken. For each area of in-
terest, three items and the total of eighteen items
were constructed. The participants provided their
responses on the items that contain five point
scales. For example, they rate whether Tigrigna
is an interesting language or not on the scale: 1
(interesting) to 5 (extremely boring).

Similarly, questionnaires were employed for the
assessment of the participants’ contact with the
two Tigrigna varieties. The questionnaires in-
cluded items related to the participants’ frequency
of contact with the speakers of the two varieties,
media, movies, and newsletters of the two vari-
eties. The participants rated the degree of contact
by using five rating scales (very often, often, oc-
casionally, very rarely and not at all). Ten ques-
tions were provided for each variety, and the items
designed to measure each variety were evenly dis-
tributed.

3.2.3 The Mutual Intelligibility
Word translation was used for the mutual intelli-
gibility measure due to its ease of administration.
In the translation task, Tigrigna words in the trans-
lated fable were listed based on alphabetical order,
and 100 words from each Tigrigna variety, a total
of 200 words were selected. Since there were 136
Eritrean and 130 Ethiopian words in the translated
texts, 36 words from Eritrean Tigrigna texts and
30 words from Ethiopian Tigrigna texts were ran-
domly left out, and the remaining 100 words in
each text were used for the test. Since translating
200 words could be a tiresome task for the par-
ticipants, the 200 words in the two Tigrigna vari-
eties were divided across the participants. Hence,
among 18 participants who took part in the test,
nine participants translated the first 50 words in
the lists of each of the varieties, and the remain-
ing nine participants translated the last 50 words
in the lists of each variety. Using this procedure,
each participant translated 100 words (50 from
each variety) to Amharic. Since translating the list
of words of one variety and shifting to the list of

50



words of another variety could lead to priming (see
Tang and Heuven (2009)), words from the two va-
rieties were mixed, but were written in a slightly
different font so that the researcher could identify
to which variety each word belongs.

Then, the mixed words were evenly distributed
in such a way that each translator received differ-
ent word order. To achieve this, the mixed 100
words were initially randomly ordered and num-
bered. Then, different word orders were created
using base ten as a point of classification. In this
manner, the first order begins with No.1 and ends
with No.100 (the default order). The second or-
der begins with No.10 followed by from 11-100
and then from 1-9. The third order begins with
No.20 followed by from 21-100 then from 1-19
and so on. In this manner nine different order for
each group, and the total of 18 list of orders were
created. The respondents were instructed to trans-
late each word within 30 seconds. However, it is
important to recognize that the participants could
take less or more than the allotted time since the
task was administered on line. The intelligibility
measure is the number of words which was trans-
lated correctly. One (1) point was given for fully
correct answer, and 0.5 point was given for cor-
rect answers but with tense, aspect, number and
other morphological/grammatical errors. The ap-
propriateness of the translation was checked by the
researcher and by the native speakers of the two
varieties.

4 Results

4.1 The Phonetic Distance

The two Tigrigna varieties have about 30% pho-
netic differences with Amharic. In other words,
the two varieties have equal phonetic distance
from Amharic; Ethiopian Tigrigna (M = 31%) and
Eritrean Tigrigna (M = 28.5%); independent t-
test, t = .023, p = .56. Among 136 total words,
there were 51 Eritrean Tigrigna cognate words,
and 85 non-cognates words. Hence, the lexical
distance between Amharic and Eritrean Tigrigna
variety is 62.5% (85/136). This means that the
lexical similarity between Amharic and the Er-
itrean Tigrigna variety is 37.5%. The Ethiopian
Tigrigna text contains 130 words. Among these,
59 (43.5 %) were cognates, and 71 (56.3) were
non-cognates. This shows that the lexical distance
between Amharic and the Ethiopian Tigrigna va-
riety is 45.4% (71/130). The results indicate that

Amharic is more closer to Ethiopian Tigrigna va-
riety than to the Eritrean Tigrigna Variety.

4.2 Language Attitude and Language
Contact

The Amharic speakers are more positive about
Ethiopian Tigrigna (M = 3.5) than the Eritrea
Tigrigna (M = 3), paired sample t-test, t = -2.754,
p = .01. The attitude of the Amharic speakers was
also examined specifically in terms of the three
areas of interest: attitude towards the language,
attitude toward the people, and attitude towards
the country. As Table 1 shows, Amharic speakers
are more negative about Eritrea. The difference is
significant in all cases except in their attitude to-
wards the people (paired t-test t = .849, p = 0.42).
With regard to the language contact, Amharic
speakers have stronger contact to Ethiopian
Tigrigna than to the Eritrean Tigrigna; paired
sample t-test: t = -7.923, p = .00. Nothing is
surprising about this finding since the speakers
of Amharic do not have a direct contact with
the Eritrean Tigrigna speakers due to the border
conflict between the two countries. Though the
contact between the speakers of Amharic and the
speakers of Ethiopian Tigrigna is higher that the
contact between the speakers of Amharic and
that of the speakers of Eritrean Tigrigna, it does
not seem that Amharic speakers have a frequent
contact with Ethiopian Tigrigna speakers as the
frequency of contact is very low (2.9 on 1-5 scale).

Focus ERT ETT t Sig
Lang 3.3 3.9 3.1 .01
Peop 3.6 3.7 .85 .40
Coun 1.9 2.8 2.8 .02
Mean 3.0 3.5 - 2.8 .01

Contact 1.8 2.9 -7.9 .00

The attitude of Amharic speakers towards
the Tigrigna varieties measured on (1-5) Linker
scale. ’ERT’ refers to Eritrea Tigrigna, ETT refers
to Ethiopian Tigrigna, ’Lang’ is language, and
’Coun’ refers to country.

4.3 Mutual Intelligibility

The mutual intelligibility test results indicate that
Amharic speakers have equal performances on
both languages; (M = 29.78%) on Ethiopian
Tigrigna and (M = 26.11%) on Eritrean Tigrigna,
paired sample t-test, p = 15. Besides, the atti-

51



tude and contact results do not correlate with in-
telligibility results, r = -.267 and r = 0.181 re-
spectively. Likewise, there is no correlation be-
tween Amharic speakers’ contact with the Eritrean
Tigrigna speakers and their performance on the Er-
itrean Tigrigna mutual intelligibility test.

5 Discussion

Results obtained from the phonetic and the lexical
distance measures show that the two Tigrigna va-
rieties have almost equal distance from Amharic.
The lexical distance between Amharic and the
Ethiopian Tigrigna is also similar with the one be-
tween Amharic and the Eritrean Tigrigna. The
speakers of Amharic are more negative about Er-
itrean Tigrigna variety than the Ethiopian Tigrigna
variety. The negative attitude towards Eritrea is
not astonishing since there was political and ethnic
hostility between the two countries which might
have affected the Amharic speakers attitude to-
wards Eritrea and Eritrean Tigrigna (Hailemariam
and Walters, 1999; Rena, 2005).

Though the attitude of the Amharic speakers
is more positive towards Ethiopian Tigrigna, the
magnitude of the attitude is not high. This can
be due to political reasons since there has been
a fierce power struggle between the Amhara and
the Tigray ethnic groups (Young, 1998). Amharic
speaker have a stronger contact with the Ethiopian
Tigrigna speakers than with the Eritrean Tigrigna
speakers. However, in both cases, the frequency
of contact is low. As presented earlier, contact-
ing the Eritrean people is almost impossible for the
Amharic speakers as the communication between
the two countries has been blocked due to the bor-
der conflict. The contact between the Amharic
speakers and the Ethiopian Tigrigna speakers is
also small. This could be due to economic, lan-
guage and social situation in the country. Tigray
region is found in the northern tip of the country,
very distant place from the capital. Usually, peo-
ple move from Tigray region to the central part of
the country where Amharic is used to seek job, ed-
ucation, recreation and other purposes. There is a
less possibility for Amharic speakers to move to
Tigray region.

The results obtained from the intelligibility
test show that both Tigrigna varieties are almost
equally difficult to the native Amharic speakers.
This can have two possible interpretations. In
one hand it shows that the two Tigrigna varieties

have almost equal distance from Amharic. On the
other hand, it indicates that native Amharic speak-
ers cannot communicate with the speakers of both
Tigrigna varieties using Tigrigna as a medium of
communication since the Amharic speakers scored
below the average on the mutual intelligibility
tests. According to Gutt (1980), two languages are
considered as intelligible if the speakers of one va-
riety understand more than 80% of another variety.
This means that the two Tigrigna varieties are not
intelligible for the native Amharic speakers. Be-
sides, Amharic speakers’ intelligibility scores on
both language varieties are not affected by both
language contact and attitude. This finding is
consistent with that of Bezooijen and Gooskens
(2007) and Gooskens and Heeringa (2004) that
there may not be a correlation between language
attitude and language intelligibility. The absence
of correlation between language contact and lan-
guage mutual intelligibility shows that the distance
and the magnitude of intelligibility which were
reported in the present study are due to the ge-
nealogical relationship between Amharic and the
two Tigrigna varieties.

In general, this study indicates that both the
Ethiopian and the Eritrean Tigrigna varieties have
almost a comparable phonetic and lexical distance
from Amharic. Native Amharic speakers under-
stand less than half of the two varieties which
hints that the two Tigrigna varieties are not in-
telligible for the Amharic speakers. Further-
more, the speakers of Amharic are more positive
about the Ethiopian Tigrigna variety than the Er-
itrean variety. Nevertheless, their attitude does
not have an impact on their intelligibility of the
two varieties. Moreover, the study has shown
that Amharic speakers have more frequent contact
with the Ethiopian Tigrigna speakers than with the
Ethiopian Tigrigna speakers. However, their fa-
miliarity to the two Tigrigna varieties has nothing
to do with the contact between the speakers of the
two languages.

The present study is perhaps the first attempt
towards establishing the mutual intelligibility and
measuring the relative distance between Amharic
and the two Tigrigna varieties. Future studies
ought to consider a large scale research which in-
cludes all the Amharic and the Tigrigna dialects.

52



References

Abbink. 2003. Badme and the ethio-eritrean border:
the challenge of demarcation in the post-war pe-
riod. Africa: Rivista trimestrale di studi e documen-
tazione dellIstituto italiano per lAfrica e lOriente,
58(2):219–231.

Agheyisi and Fishman. 1970. Language attitude stud-
ies: A brief survey of methodological approaches.
Anthropological linguistics.

Ahland. 2003. Interlectal intelligibility between
gurage speech varieties. In In North Conference on
Afroasiataic Linguistics, April.

Assefa. 1996. Ethnic conflict in the horn of africa:
myth and reality. Ethnicity and power in the con-
temporary world.

Bakker. 2009. Adding typology to lexicostatistics: A
combined approach to language classification. Lin-
guistic Typology,, 13(1):169–181.

Bender and Cooper. 1971. Mutual intelligibility within
sidamo. Lingua, 27(32-52).

Bender and Cooper. 1976. Language in ethiopia: Im-
plications of a survey for sociolinguistic theory and
method. Pub date notes, pages 75–191.

Bezooijen and Gooskens. 2007. Interlingual text com-
prehension: linguistic and extralinguistic determi-
nants. Hamburger Studies in Multilingualism, (249-
264).

Bulcha. 1997. The politics of linguistic homogeniza-
tion in ethiopia and the conflict over the status of
afaan oromo. African affairs, 96(384):325–352.

Ravikumar Cohn and Fienberg. 2003. A comparison
of string distance metrics for name-matching task. .
In IIWeb.

Demeke. 2001. The ethio-semitic languages (re-
examining the classification. Journal of Ethiopian
Studies, pages 57–93.

Getachew and Derib. 2008. Language policy in
ethiopia: History and current trends. Ethiopian jour-
nal of education and sciences, 2(1).

Gooskens and Heeringa. 2004. Perceptive evaluation
of levenshtein dialect distance measurements using
norwegian dialect data. Language variation and
Change, 16(03):189–207.

Gooskens. 2007. The contribution of linguistic fac-
tors to the intelligibility of closely related languages.
Journal of Multilingual and multicultural develop-
ment, 28(6):445–467.

Gooskens. 2013. Experimental Methods for Measur-
ing Intelligibility of Closely Related Language Vari-
eties. Oxford University Press.

Gutt. 1980. Intelligibility and interlingual comprehen-
sion among selected gurage speech varieties. Jour-
nal of Ethiopian Studies, 14:57–85.

Kroon Hailemariam and Walters. 1999. Multilingual-
ism and nation building: Language and education in
eritrea. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural
Development, 20(6):457–493.

Heeringa. 2004. Measuring dialect pronunciation dif-
ferences using Levenshtein distance. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Groningen.

Hetzron. 1972. Ethiopian Semitic: studies in classifi-
cation. Manchester University Press.

Hetzron. 1977. The Gunnn-Gurage Languages, vol-
ume 2. Istituto orientale di Napoli.

Hornberger. 2002. Multilingual language policies and
the continua of biliteracy: An ecological approach. .
Language policy, 1(1):27–51.

Hudson. 2013. Northeast African Semitic: Lexical
Comparisons and Analysis. Harrassowitz.

Iyob. 2000. The ethiopianeritrean conflict: diasporic
vs. hegemonic states in the horn of africa, 19912000.
The Journal of Modern African Studies, 38(04):659–
682.

Kessler. 1995. Computational dialectology in irish
gaelic. In In Proceedings of the seventh conference
on European chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc..

Lanza and Woldemariam. 2008. Language policy and
globalization in a regional capital of ethiopia. In
Linguistic landscape. Expanding the scenery.

Leslau. 1969. Toward a classification of the gurage
dialects. Journal of Semitic Studies, 14(1):96–109.

May. 2011. Language and minority rights: Ethnicity,
nationalism and the politics of language. Routledge.

Rena. 2005. Eritrean education-retrospect and
prospect. Journal of Humanities and Sciences,
5(2):1–12.

Smith. 2008. The politics of contemporary language
policy in ethiopia. Journal of Developing Societies,
24(2):207–243.

Sokal. 1988. Genetic, geographic, and linguistic dis-
tances in europe. In Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, volume 85 of 5, pages 1722–
1726.

Schppert Swarte and Gooskens. 2014. Does german
help speakers of dutch to understand written and
spoken danish words? the role of second language
knowledge in decoding an unknown but related lan-
guage. in press.

53



Tang and Heuven. 2007. Mutual intelligibility and
similarity of chinese dialects: Predicting judgments
from objective measures. Linguistics in the Nether-
lands, 24(1):223–234.

Tang and Heuven. 2009. Mutual intelligibility of
chinese dialects experimentally tested. Lingua,
119(5):709–732.

Tang and Heuven. 2015. Predicting mutual intelligi-
bility in chinese dialects from subjective and objec-
tive linguistic similarity. Interlinguistica, 17:1019–
1028.

Vaughan and Tronvoll. 2003. The culture of power in
contemporary Ethiopian political life. Sida, Stock-
holm.

Young. 1996. Ethnicity and power in ethiopia. Review
of African Political Economy, 23(70):531–542.

Young. 1998. Regionalism and democracy in ethiopia.
Third World Quarterly, pages 191–204.

54


