



















































Why We Speak


Proceedings of the 15th Meeting on the Mathematics of Language, pages 68–74,
London, UK, July 13–14, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Why We Speak

Rohit Parikh
City University of New York

Brooklyn College and
CUNY Graduate Center

rparikh@gc.cuny.edu

Abstract

We explain the relevance of Nash, Hoare
and others in explaining Gricean impli-
cature and cheap talk. We also develop
a general model to address cases where
communication is not cooperative, i..e
cases of deception as well as cases where
there is common knowledge of different
interests in speaker and hearer. Tow mod-
els, one qualitative and one quantitative
are introduced.

1 Introduction

In his book Making the Social World, John Searle
indicates that speech acts have two directions.
There is the world to word direction, as in the
statement “the cat is on the chair” which is true
if the world is as the sentence says it is, i.e., the
cat is indeed on the chair. There is also a word to
world direction as in “Please shut the door” where
the relevant proposition becomes true when the
door is closed. The speech act seeks to change
the world rather than represent it. However, an ut-
terance even of “The cat is on the chair” can be
seen as having a word to world direction in that
it could be a way to prevent someone from sitting
in the chair, and hence on the cat. An utterance is
a social act and seeks to change the mental states
of listeners and perhaps, eventually, change their
actions. So it has the same word to world direc-
tion as a request or a command. This fact was no-
ticed originally by Wittgenstein with his language
games, but he characteristically refused to give a
more formal account. But he was followed by
Austin, by Searle himself and various game the-
orists like Crawford, Farrell and Sobel. Clearly if
an utterance has a word to world direction, then it
is a move in a game and can be of interest to game
theorists. Thus, paradoxically, a sentence and an

utterance are of opposite types in Searle’s termi-
nology

2 A Taxonomy

The simplest case is where an utterance merely
seeks to inform someone of something. Suppose a
sentence A is uttered, the listener already believes
T and A is consistent with T. Then the listener
moves from T to T + A, the logical closure of T
∪ {A}. The listener has been informed of A.1

If T is not consistent with A then the listener
may apply a revision operator a la AGM (Alchour-
ron et al, 1985) and go from T to T – A (which
reduces T to a subtheory not containing ¬A and
then adds A to that subtheory) Note that in the sec-
ond case, some formula B which was in T will no
longer be in T – A and it could have been the aim
of the speaker to achieve the deletion of B more
than the addition of A in the listener. To a man ex-
pecting his wife any moment, one could say “Her
flight has been delayed by 3 hours,” the intention
being to remove from him the belief that he will
see her at 4 PM.

As we see, even the base case has complexi-
ties which Frege did not anticipate. But there is
more, namely the phenomenon of implicature no-
ticed and investigated by Paul Grice. Since the ut-
terance of A is a move, the listener not only knows
that A has been said, but that it has been said un-
der the particular circumstances of the conversa-
tion and can typically infer more than just A and it
logical consequences. A motorist says to a pedes-
trian, “My car is out of gas” and the pedestrian re-
sponds, “There is a gas station around the corner.”

1My usage here is the reverse of Searle’s own usage but
will seem more natural to those used to functions. In the one
case the world is operating on the word to give it a truth value
and in the other case the word is operating on the world to
make it as desired. Some of the material in this paper has
been presented in various venues but is unpublished. Some
other material, especially the model is new.

68



Grice points out that the implicature is that the gas
station is open as far as the pedestrian knows, for
otherwise why say what she has said. An exam-
ple from Pinker et al is where a representative of
the mob comes around to a store owner and says,
“Nice store you have here. It would be a pity if
something were to happen to it.” The store owner
already knows that it would be a pity and does not
need to be told. Here the message is in the fact
that it is said at all and by whom. The implicature
is likely to be something like “Give us $500 every
month and you will be fine.”

Deborah Tannen in her You Just Don’t Under-
stand gives an example of a husband and wife
travelling along a highway when they are near-
ing a restaurant. “Are you hungry?” says the wife.
“No,” says the husband and drives on. Later on he
is puzzled why she is angry. Here it is clear that
the signaling mechanism has not been sufficiently
established between husband and wife. He should
have said, “No, I am not hungry, but maybe you
are?” Should we call this also an example of an
implicature? If it is then it is one which did not
succeed for Grice asks that implicatures should be
calculable. Clearly the husband failed in his cal-
culation, or else it was not a genuine implicature
in Grice’s sense.
A particularly interesting but also difficult case is
where the utterance takes advantage of something
like a Nash equilibrium of communication and un-
derstanding.

Prashant Parikh gives an example of a man say-
ing, “I am going to the bank” where bank could
mean a financial institution or a river bank.

There are four possible situations here. It is
good if the speaker means financial institution and
the listener understands financial institution. A
bad one is where the speaker means financial in-
stitution and the listener understands river bank.
There are two more cases, one good and one bad.
It requires cooperation on the part of the speaker
and listener to agree to a good interpretation and
not a bad one. Perhaps common knowledge is in-
volved, perhaps something else.

A final case is one discussed by both Austin and
Searle. A minister says to a couple, “I now pro-
nounce you man and wife.” Here the minister is
not reporting on the world, nor is he suggesting a
future action. His statement is the action which
changes the world in the required way.

Can there be a general theory which deals with

all these cases? Perhaps there is no general theory,
but we want to suggest that there might well be a
general framework of which these are all special
cases. The general framework is one where there
is an existing social situation and the speaker is
using the utterance as a way of altering the situa-
tion in some way. One way the utterance can be
seen is as an operator applying to a situation S and
creating a new situation S’.

However, the “bank” example and the Deborah
Tannen example show that the situation contem-
plated by the speaker might not be the one which
does arise. So then we should think of an utterance
as non-deterministic operator which converts the
existing situation S into one of (a finite number of)
situations {S1;S2; ...Sn}. Perhaps the speaker in-
tends S1 and what comes about is S2. The speaker
might then have to repair the damage, or it may
happen that the damage is not easy to repair.

In the movie When Harry Met Sally, Harry tells
his friend Sally that she is a very attractive person.
“You are coming on to me!” says Sally. And when
Harry offers to take it back she says,“You can’t
take it back; it is already out there now!” Harry
does manage a repair but it takes him the rest of
the movie.

The notion of situation needed here would nec-
essarily be rich to handle all these cases. Some-
thing which would work in most cases would be
a contemplated game (or action) with a state of
knowledge (belief?) for the various actors, their
preferences (which might remain constant) and a
set of permitted sequences of action. What a par-
ticular actor would do (after an utterance) then
would depend on his perception of the (new) situa-
tion. As Parikh and Tasdemir point out, the action
of an agent can be manipulated by changing her
state of information, a point made also by Shake-
speare in his Much Ado about Nothing, where the
actions of Benedick and Beatrice are changed by
changing their beliefs.

3 Information versus Action

In this paper, we shall consider the cases where
the first speaker A has some goal in mind which
is common knowledge, and the second speaker B
makes a statement which is relevant to this goal.
In that case the (common) knowledge of the goal
is part of the context and is typically used to cal-
culate the implicature.

Prashant Parikh and Benz and van Rooij do

69



point out that some implicatures might help some-
one to make a decision even though other impli-
catures might just be informational.

It will turn out that some contributions made
by the computer scientist Tony Hoare and by the
economist John Nash will be relevant. The con-
nection of implicatures with these two eminent
scholars seems to have been overlooked thus far
in the literature.

3.1 Hoare Semantics
Here is how Hoare semantics enters. A Hoare as-
sertion takes the form

{X}α{G}

where X,G are propositions, X is the pre-
condition, G is the goal and α is a contemplated
action (actions are programs for Hoare).

Formally, S is a state space, X,G are subsets of
S, and α becomes a relation Rα on S.

Then the Hoare condition is
(∀s)(∀t)(s ∈ X & (s, t) ∈ Rα → t ∈ G)

If X holds when the program starts, then G will
hold when it finishes.

Now A wants to reach G using α. We will as-
sume thatG is common knowledge between A and
B, and B has some information which would affect
the possibility of reaching G.

This could happen in four ways.

1. B has part of the information which implies
a suitable X . Thus B is supporting both the
goal and the action.

2. B has information which would cause A to
modify α in some way (e.g. to replace it by
a more specific action, or, technically, a sub-
action.)

3. B has information which suggests a particu-
lar action α to A.

4. B has information which would cause A to
abandon the method α. (Which may mean
abandoning the goal altogether or using some
completely unrelated method.)

B volunteers information which indicates
whether 1) or 2) or 3) or 4) is the case and leaves
A to

1. Either supply some other information which
will complete the process of deducing X or

2. modify α in some way, or

3. Conclude that ¬{X}α{G}.

This other information or the modification, or
¬{X}α{G} is the implicature.

And note that the modification is not in itself a
proposition, it may be an imperative. Thus part
of our thesis is that while an implicature may be a
proposition, it might well be something else which
affects A in some way.

4 The Cooperative Case

Here we assume, as Grice does, that the utilities of
A and B are in accord. We do not assume that they
are the same since what A gains from receiving
the information is likely to be much more than the
pleasure that B gets from helping out.

Consider the case of the motorist. The goal of
the motorist2 is clear. She wants to fill her tank
with gas. The statement which B makes points to
an algorithm, go around the corner and get gas
there. Here it is unclear whether A should walk
there carrying a gas can, or has at least enough
gas to drive around the corner. But in either case,
going around the corner is indicated (by B) as the
α.

Our Hoare assertion is

{X1&X2&X3}α{G}

Where X1 is that there is a gas station around
the corner, X2 is that the gas station is open and
X3 is that A has enough money to pay for the gas.

Only A knows whetherX3 is true and this is not
B’s business. B has volunteered X1. It is obvious
that α is useless unless X2 is true. Since B has in-
dicated that he supports the action α it follows that
X2 is true as far as B knows. If he is not support-
ing the action then he should not have said X1. So
in this case X2 is the implicature.

4.1 The Hiring Problem

In this example A is the chair of the hiring
committee for some college, B is a professor
and C is the professor’s student who is an appli-
cant for a position at A’s college. B writes about C

He has excellent handwriting and he always
came to class on time.

2In Grice’s original version

70



Here A’s goal G is to have a colleague who will
be a good teacher and researcher, α is the action of
hiring C, and the precondition is that C is a good
philosopher.

B’s statement does not give A the information
which A needs, or even supports it in some rele-
vant way, and the implicature is that the precondi-
tion is false. A should abandon α. The implicature
is ¬{X}α{G} where X is any true condition.

But why doesn’t B simply say, “He is not a good
philosopher”? Clearly because B is C’s teacher
and professional ethics preclude him from saying
something negative about C. What he does instead
is to say something positive which is not good
enough.

Here is a joke which makes a similar point.

A tired and depressed looking man
walks into a restaurant and sits down.
A waiter comes over and asks what the
man wants.

“Two scrambled eggs with rye toast,
and a kind word,” says the man.

After a while the waiter comes back
and puts an order of eggs and rye toast
before the man.

As the waiter is walking away, the
man says, “What about the kind word?”

“Don’t eat them eggs,” says the
waiter.

Just like the professor, the waiter is forbidden to
say something negative about the restaurant. but
his “don’t eat them eggs” carries the implicature
that the eggs are not good, may even cause illness.
And that indeed is a kind word.

4.2 Modifying α

We note that in many cases actions are not disjoint
from each other. If we think of a (nondeterminis-
tic) action as a binary relation on the state space,
then two actions may be disjoint, may overlap, or
one may be included in the other.

One Hoare-like rule is

{X}α{G}, β ⊆ α
———————————————–

{X}β{G}
If a correctness condition is satisfied by α then

it is also satisfied by a subaction β but not neces-
sarily vice versa.

Here is an example.

A to B, “I am thinking of going to Times square
by public transport.”

B, “Buses will be very slow during the rush
hour.”

A likely implicature is “Take the subway.”
Here action α is the action of taking some pub-

lic transport, β is the action of taking the subway
and γ is the action of taking a bus.3 α is the union
of β and γ.

Let X be the current situation, and G be the
goal of getting to Times square on time. Then
{X}β{G} is true, but {X}α{G} is not4. B is sug-
gesting that the action be changed from α to β by
eliminating γ.

When an action satisfies a Hoare condition then
so does a sub-action. But this is not the case if we
are trying to maximize expected utility. It is quite
possible that the expected utility of α is higher
than that of β even though β ⊆ α.

For example, if I am betting on a horse, then it is
better to choose a horse at random than to choose
a specific horse which is well known to be a nag.

However, if satisficing is our desired condition
then subactions would be at least as good as an
action. If all outcomes of α are satisfactory, and β
is a subaction of α then all outcomes of β are also
going to be satisfactory.

5 Nash Bargaining

In Grice’s treatment of implicature, he assumes a
principle of cooperation. Thus for one of his first
examples, when a motorist says, “My car is out
of gas” and the pedestrian replies “There is a gas
station around the corner,” there is an implicature
that the station is open. And this follows from the
presumption that the pedestrian’s desires are the
same as those of the motorist, although perhaps
less intense and so the pedestrian wants the mo-
torist to get gas for his car. This tradition has been
followed in much of the subsequent literature.

However, there are exceptions. The economics
literature on cheap talk no longer assumes that the
utilities are aligned. What the speaker wants and
what the listener wants need no longer be fully
aligned, although some overlap is necessary for
communication to take place at all. Stalnaker in

3We assume it to be common knowledge that a taxicab is
out of the question given the traffic.

4This is a consequence of the nondeterminism of the two
actions. β is guaranteed to achieve the goal whereas αmight
but is not guaranteed to do so.

71



his paper Cheap talk and credibility, follows this
tradition as well.

Yet as we noted, some degree of cooperation is
requisite, for otherwise why communicate at all?

We would like to suggest a slight generalization
of the Grice principle which looks like it might
bridge the gap between cooperation and strategiz-
ing. This principle was originally formulated by
John Nash in his paper “The Bargaining problem.”

In Nash’s framework two players A and B are
trying to decide on a point in two space. There is
a convex set S of possible solutions and each point
p in S yields utilities u(p), v(p) to A and B respec-
tively. Nash presumes that the actual bargain, i.e.
the point p which is finally chosen will be Pareto
optimal. That is to say, Nash assumes that there is
no q in S such that u(q) ≥ u(p) and v(q) > v(p)
or that u(q) > u(p) and v(q) ≥ v(p). There is no
way to make one person better off without making
the other person worse off.

Nash assumes moreover that the space S is con-
vex.5

Using very natural axioms on the solution con-
cept Nash proves that the final bargain will be the
unique point p such that u(p)× v(p) is maximum.

It is obvious that assuming that the players are
choosing a Pareto optimal point, and there are at
least two such, then there is a conflict. Neither can
gain without the other losing.

The element of cooperation enters through
Nash’s notion of a fallback point. The fallback
point F is the point to which they “fall back” in
case they cannot arrive at a bargain, and this point
is worse (for both) than any other point in S.

Thus cooperation arises through the fact that
both players want to avoid the fallback point and
each needs the help of the other to achieve this.

Grice’s cooperative principle is a special case of
Nash’s. For suppose the utilities are aligned. I.e.,
if for any two points p and q we have u(q) > u(p)
iff v(q) > v(p), then the Nash bargaining point
which maximizes the product u(p) × v(p) is also

5To take an example rather like that of Nash’s original
example. Suppose that the two are restricted to a point in the
set {(x, y)|2x + y ≤ 3}. The utilities are x for A and y
for B. The fallback point is (0,0). Then the Pareto optimal
points will be all the points on the line 2x + y = 3. But
which particular point should be chosen? The product of the
utilities is maximized at the point (.75, 1.5).

But Nash does not speak about communication and there is
no guarantee even that a Pareto optimal point will be reached,
let alone Nash’s “ideal” point. To take a real life example,
it seems highly unlikely that a Pareto optimal point will be
reached in Ukraine.

the point which maximizes u(p). B gains by help-
ing A to gain. The pedestrian helps the motorist to
get gas for the sake of the small pleasure of help-
ing another6.

But as we noted this is not the only case. The
mere fact that the players both want to avoid X
does not imply that their utilities are fully aligned.

We now offer an example of how the Nash prin-
ciple works.

Suppose that an American tourist is in India and
wants to buy a carved wooden elephant. He has al-
ready seen such an elephant in a store for Rs. 500
but sees a hawker selling the identical elephant for
Rs. 400.

It is customary to bargain with hawkers but what
should the tourist offer?7

In this situation, the fallback situation is that the
tourist abandons the hawker and buys his elephant
in the store. But the hawker himself has bought
the elephant for Rs. 40 and so any price paid from
41 rupees to 499 rupees would be better for both
than the fallback situation, which is no sale for the
hawker and a cost of Rs. 500 for the tourist.

The element of cooperation arises because both
parties want to avoid the fallback situation, but
given this fact there is an element of conflict in that
the hawker wants to charge more and the tourist
wants to pay less.

Here we assume that the utilities of A and B are
not aligned although there must be some concord
for communication to take place at all.8

6 A Model

In the following I am going to make two assump-
tions and offer a caveat.

1. Each party in a two way conversation expects
to benefit from the conversation.

2. This expectation is common knowledge.

3. But the benefit might not be common knowl-
edge and might not even be true.

Thus suppose Ann says something, A, to Bob
in response to a query. Then Bob believes that he
has benefited by hearing A (which, in normal cases

6See for instance Tomasello, (2009)
7In a similar situation, Aumann offered 200, the offer was

accepted and Aumann bought the elephant, only to find that
the proper price would have been Rs. 50.

8We do not consider the important and interesting case
where A thinks they are aligned but they are not.

72



would also mean that Bob believes he benefits by
believing A).

And Ann, even if she does not benefit as much
expects to suffer no loss.

Thus suppose that the two of them were in states
(S, T) before A was said, and are now in states
(S’,T’), then Bob believes that T’ is better for him
than T and this is common knowledge. And Ann
believes that S’ is not worse for her than S, and
this too is common knowledge.

In a cooperative dialogue, and if Ann is well in-
formed, then both these beliefs will be true. They
could be false if Ann was mistaken about A, and
Bob believed her, or if Ann was trying to mislead
Bob by saying A and he was not aware that she
was doing so.

In order to define notions of better and worse
we need a notion of pragmatic belief.

A pragmatic belief for Bob is a formula of the
form X(a) = u which means that performing ac-
tion a will yield utility u to Bob. If Bob has n ac-
tions (a1, a2, , an) available then a pragmatic state
of belief is a mapX from {a1, ..., an} into the real
numbers.

A statement A made by Ann will cause a change
from one state S of pragmatic belief to another
state S’.

“But doesn’t the statement A cause a change in
Bob’s beliefs about the world?” To be sure it does.
But it might not mean the addition of A to Bob’s
beliefs if Bob does not believe Ann. Or it might
mean the addition of more than A, A+A’ where A’
is the implicature. And finally, the change in Bob’s
state of beliefs will eventuate in a change in what
he would do and why.

If Ann tells Bob that the bridge is closed, he
does normally come to believe that the bridge is
closed and hence not plan to take the bridge to
the other side. But it is his plan not to take the
bridge which will be our central concern. If Bob
had had no intention of going to the other side, he
would wonder why Ann had said that the bridge
was closed.

So facts result in actions, and it is actions that
will be our main concern.

So let us suppose that Bob’s initial pragmatic
state of beliefs was S, Ann’s saying A changes it
to S’ and the true state is S”. So let

S = {(a1, u1), , (an, un)}
S′ = {(a1, u′1), , (an, u′n)}

S” = {(a1, u”1), , (an, u”n)}
Let m be Bob’s best action according to S, m’

be the best action according to S’.
Thus suppose that u3 is the largest of u1, .., un,

and u′5 is the largest of u
′
1, , u

′
n then m is a3 and

m’ is a5.
Then Bob’s gain in utility is
S”(m’) – S”(m).
Bob was thinking according to S and would

have done m. After hearing A he will now do m.
But his real utilities should be evaluated according
to S”.

7 Applications of the Model

Consider the case of the motorist and the pedes-
trian. Initially the motorist had two options. To
keep driving hoping to come to a gas station and
go around the corner. Let these actions be a and
b. Then a has the higher utility for him since he
has no reason to think that b would do him any
good. After hearing Ann say, “There is a gas sta-
tion around the corner,” presumably his new best
action would be b. If it would still be a then why
should Ann bother to speak? Ergo b has a higher
utility. But, that is so only if the gas station is open.

Consider the case of the person who wants to go
to Times Square. She has two options. To take the
subway and take the bus. Perhaps they are equally
viable or at least both have a high enough utility.
But now consider the remark ”buses will be slow
during the rush hour.” That lowers the utility of the
bus and makes the subway the decisive choice.

This model does not yet accommodate cases
like that of the tourist in India since bargaining
goes beyond mere converation. But we hope to
deal with it in the next version of the paper.

The other cases are similar and can be dealt with
by looking at utilities and actions.

8 A Comparison

We have offered two models to understand the
phenomena of implicature and cheap talk. The
first model was based on Hoare and was quali-
tative. We do not need to assign numbers to the
value of getting faster to Times Square. The sec-
ond model makes shameless use of numerical util-
ities. Of course the first model is more general
and would apply also to situations where we have
no idea of utilities or probabilities. But the second
model has the potential for clean mathematical re-
sults.

73



Acknowledgements We thank Nicholas Allott,
Anton Benz, Luciana Belotti, Michael Devitt,
Stephen Neale, Prashant Parikh, Steven Pinker,
Adriana Renero, Robert Stainton and Cagil
Tasdemir for comments.

References

Nicholas Allott. 2006. Game theory and commu-
nication. In Benz, Jäger, and van Rooij, editors,
Game Theory and Pragmatics, pages 123–152.
Palgrave Macmillan, London.

Carlos E. Alchourrn, Peter Grdenfors, and David
Makinson. 1985. On the logic of theory change:
Partial meet contraction and revision functions.
Journal of Symbolic Logic 50(2): 510-530.

Anton Benz and Robert van Rooij. 2007. Optimal
assertions and what they implicate. Topoi 26(1),
63–78.

Joseph Farrell and Matthew Rabin, 1996, Cheap
talk, Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(3) ,
103-118.

Paul Grice,1989, Studies in the Way of Words, Har-
vard U. Press, Cambridge, Mass

C. A. R. Hoare, An axiomatic basis for computer
programming,1969, Communications of the
Association for Computing Machinery, 12(10),
576–580.

John Nash,1950, The bargaining problem, Econo-
metrica, 18(2), 155-162.

Rohit Parikh, Cagil Tademir, and Andreas Witzel,
2013,The power of knowledge in games, 2013,
International Game Theory Review 15(4), 1-28.

Steven Pinker, MA Nowak and JJ Lee, 2008 The
logic of indirect speech, Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 105(3), 833-838.

Prashant Parikh,2001 The Use of Language,
CSLI, Stanford.

John Searle, 2010, Making the social world: The
structure of human civilization, Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford

Robert Stalnaker, 2006, Saying and meaning,
cheap talk and credibility, In Benz, Jäger and
van Rooij, editors, Game Theory and Pragmat-
ics, pages 83-100, Palgrave Macmillan, London

Micchal Tomasello, 2009, Why we cooperate.
MIT press, Cambridge, MA

74


