



















































Evaluation of a Runyankore grammar engine for healthcare messages


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 105–113,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluation of a Runyankore grammar engine for healthcare messages

Joan Byamugisha and C. Maria Keet and Brian DeRenzi
Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town, South Africa,

{jbyamugisha,mkeet,bderenzi}@cs.uct.ac.za

Abstract

Natural Language Generation (NLG) can be
used to generate personalized health informa-
tion, which is especially useful when pro-
vided in one’s own language. However, the
NLG technique widely used in different do-
mains and languages—templates—was shown
to be inapplicable to Bantu languages, due
to their characteristic agglutinative structure.
We present here our use of the grammar
engine NLG technique to generate text in
Runyankore, a Bantu language indigenous to
Uganda. Our grammar engine adds to pre-
vious work in this field with new rules for
cardinality constraints, prepositions in roles,
the passive, and phonological conditioning.
We evaluated the generated text with linguists
and non-linguists, who regarded most text
as grammatically correct and understandable;
and over 60% of them regarded all the text
generated by our system to have been authored
by a human being.

1 Introduction

The vast majority of doctor-patient interactions in a
healthcare setting is through verbal communication.
The provision of written information to patients, to
complement and augment the face-to-face session,
increases the amount of information they retain (Di-
Marco et al., 2005). Additionally, studies in health
communication identified that patient information is
likely to be more effective if it is personalized for a
specific patient (Cawsey et al., 2000) and presented
in an understandable form and manner (DiMarco et
al., 2009). This however assumes that such informa-
tion is communicated in one’s first language, which,

however, may not be the case in multilingual soci-
eties. Language is important here because problems
with language exacerbate literacy difficulties, which
are further confounded in situations of health (Di-
Marco et al., 2009).

There are several Natural Language Generation
(NLG) systems that generate customized patient in-
formation (Cawsey et al., 2000; DiMarco et al.,
1995; de Rosis et al., 1999; Hussain et al., 2015;
Lindahl, 2005; Mahamood and Reiter, 2011). These
systems generate text in English, and one strategy to
account for other languages could be to translate the
generated English text to the target language. How-
ever, this requires correct machine translation for
medical information, which does not exist for most
languages, including our language of interest, Run-
yankore. Runyankore is a Bantu language indige-
nous to the south western part of Uganda (Asiimwe,
2014; Tayebwa, 2014; Turamyomwe, 2011), a coun-
try where English is the official language, whereas
indigenous languages are still predominantly spoken
in rural areas. There is therefore a need to investigate
NLG for Runyankore.

We have limited our scope to generating pa-
tient summaries, drug prescription explanations, and
treatment instructions. The kind of text generated
could include: the number of pills to be taken, list-
ing the active ingredient(s), what the medication
does not contain, and the general classification of
the medication (for example, that hydrocodone is an
opiate). These are largely knowledge-to-text cases,
for which ontologies, such as the medical terminol-
ogy SNOMED-CT, can easily be used. There are
several NLG systems that take ontologies as input,

105



mainly for English (Kaljurand and Fuchs, 2007), but
also Latvian and Lithuanian (Gruzitis et al., 2010;
Gruzitis and Barzdins, 2011), and Greek (Androut-
sopoulos et al., 2013). These systems apply the
template NLG technique. However, as was demon-
strated in (Keet and Khumalo, 2017), templates are
inapplicable to agglutinating Bantu languages, such
as Runyankore.

Runyankore, like other Bantu languages has a
complex verbal morphology (14 tenses), noun class
system with 20 noun classes, and is highly aggluti-
native. A noun class (NC) determines the affixes of
the nouns belonging to it, and this in turn determines
the agreement markers on the associated lexical cat-
egories such as adjectives and verbs. To illustrate
the agglutinative nature of Runyankore (taken from
(Turamyomwe, 2011)):
Verb: titukakimureeterahoganu
English: ‘We have never ever brought it to him’
Decomposition: ti-tu-ka-ki-mu-reet-er-a-ho-ga-nu
Our previous work for Runyankore NLG (Bya-
mugisha et al., 2016a; Byamugisha et al., 2016b)
is not adequate, as it neither covers cardinality con-
straints (e.g., ‘take [exactly] 3 pills’); nor the pas-
sive (e.g., ‘operated by’); and ignore phonological
conditioning of vowels in the agglutination process.
Additionally, no evaluation on grammatical correct-
ness of the generated text was done. All these as-
pects are needed for our scope of medical text gen-
eration. We undertook to address these shortcom-
ings by: analyzing further details of the language
to also process minimum, maximum, and exact car-
dinality, and devising algorithms for them; adding
the phonological conditioning rules required for the
scope; and extending the CFG of (Byamugisha et al.,
2016b) with the passive. Their algorithms together
with these novel ones were implemented and evalu-
ated with 100 Runyankore speakers in rural Uganda
and three Runyankore linguists. Most of the evalu-
ated sentences were regarded as grammatically cor-
rect and understandable, and all computer-generated
text was considered by a majority to have been writ-
ten by a human being.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 in-
troduces the new rules and algorithms required to
generate more expressive text. Section 3 presents
the experimental evaluation. We discuss in Section 4
and conclude in Section 5.

2 New rules and algorithms

Due to the limitations in our previous work for Run-
yankore NLG, as well as the structure of information
in our domain of interest, healthcare, we developed
new rules and algorithms to account for these gaps.
These rules are added to those which already take
care of the basic constructors in ontology languages,
being named class subsumption (‘is a’ v), conjunc-
tion (‘and’ u), negation (‘not’ ¬), existential quan-
tification (‘at least one’ ∃), and universal quantifica-
tion (‘all/each’ ∀) (Byamugisha et al., 2016a).

2.1 Cardinality constraints

In terns of the knowledge-to-text input, our pre-
vious language coverage was the description logic
(DL) language ALC. Adding qualified cardinality
constraints brings the language feature coverage to
ALCQ, which is an important fragment of OWL 2
DL (Motik et al., 2009). We describe the verbaliza-
tion patterns for maximum (≤), minimum (≥), and
exact cardinality (=) in this section.

Maximum cardinality is worded in English typ-
ically as ‘a maximum of’, ‘not more than’, or ‘at
most’. We use the Runyankore equivalent of ‘not
more than’, -tarikurenga, which is the preferred
word use. However, to form the full word for
‘not more than’, the subject prefix of the concept
quantified over is required. We illustrate this in
the following example. Consider Axiom 1 below,
where ‘symptom’ has to be pluralized to ‘symp-
toms’, which is in noun class (NC) 4. The plural
prefix for NC4 is emi (making emicucumo ‘symp-
toms’) that has a subject prefix gi that is attached
to the -tarikurenga, ‘not more than’. Compare this
with Axiom 2, where ‘courses’ amashomo is in NC
6, and therewith goes with the subject prefix ga.
Axiom1: Diabetes v ≤ 3 has.Symptoms

Buri ndwara ya shukari eine emicucumo
gitarikurenga 3.
‘Every disease of diabetes has at most 3 symp-
toms’

Axiom2: Student v ≤ 10 takes.Course
Buri mwegi natwaara amashomo
gatarikurenga 10.
‘Every student takes not more than 10 courses’

The algorithm to generate these coordinating ele-
ments is included in Algorithm 2.1.

106



Algorithm 2.1 Verbalization of Maximum Cardinal-
ity (≤)

1: A axiom; Variables: a1, o, n1, np, ncp, and spp;
and functions: getNumber(A), getNext(A),
getNoun(o), getP lural(n), getNC(np), and
getSubjectPrefix(ncp)

2: a1 ← getNumber(A) {get the number after
≤}

3: o← getNext(A) {get the role after the
number}

4: n1 ← getNoun(o) {obtain the noun from the
role}

5: if a1 = 1 then
6: nc1 ← getNC(n1) {get the noun class of

the noun}
7: sp1 ← getSubjectPrefix(nc1) {use the

noun class to obtain the subject prefix}
8: Result← “ sp1tarikurenga a1” {verbalize

with the appropriate subject prefix}
9: else

10: np ← getP lural(n1) {pluralize the noun}
11: ncp ← getNC(np) {get the plural noun

class}
12: spp ← getSubjectPrefix(ncp) {get the

plural subject prefix}
13: Result← “ spptarikurenga a1” {verbalize

with the plural noun and subject prefix}
14: end if
15: return Result

Minimum cardinality (≥) is typically rendered in
English as ‘a minimum of’, ‘not less than’, or ‘at
least’. We apply ‘at least’ as the Runyankore verbal-
ization, again because this is a more directly trans-
latable version. Like the verbalization of existential
quantification (∃) in (Byamugisha et al., 2016a), it
uses hakiri for ‘at least’. However, unlike ∃ where
we always have -mwe for ‘one’, ≥ has the number
instead (unless the number is 1). Thus, a verbaliza-
tion similar to ∃ is used, also using the subject prefix
of the concept quantified over. The examples below
illustrate this case; e.g., e is the subject prefix of NC
9, for diguri ‘degree’:
Axiom1: Panado v ≥ 4 has.ActiveIngredient

Buri Panado hakiri eine ebirungo by’amaani 4
‘Every Panado has at least 4 active ingredients’

Axiom2: Student v ≥ 1 has.Degree

Buri mwegi hakiri aine diguri emwe
‘Every student has at least 1 degree’

Similar to the verbalization of ≤, there is a need to
pluralize the noun whenever the number after ≥ is
greater than 1 (as is the case in Axiom 1, above).
Due to space limitations, we omit the algorithm, as
it is similar to Algorithm 2.1.

The English verbalization of exact cardinality (=)
is ‘exactly’. However, Runyankore does not have
a direct translation for ‘exactly’, but uses ‘only’ in-
stead. The word for ‘only’, -onka, requires the sub-
ject prefix to form the full word. In the following
examples, bw and ky are the subject prefixes of NC
14 and 7, respectively, to which the nouns obujuma
‘pills’ and ekitabo ‘book’ belong, respectively:
Axiom1: Patient v = 2 takes.Pill

Buri murweire natwara obujuma 2 bwonka
‘Every patient takes only 2 pills’

Axiom2: Child v = 1 has.Book
Buri mwana aine ekitabo 1 kyonka
‘Every child has only 1 book’

As is the case with ≤ and ≥, the noun is plural-
ized whenever the number is greater than 1. The
algorithm is fairly similar to the others and therefore
omitted due to space limitations.

2.2 Processing of Prepositions
The presence of prepositions in roles (relations),
such as ‘works for’, and passives, such as ‘operated
by’ changes the pattern in which the role is verbal-
ized. While the algorithms cannot yet deal with any
arbitrary preposition, we cover those that appeared
in our test ontologies. These include: ‘with’ na, ‘in’
omu, ‘of’ (depends on the NC of the noun), and ‘by’
w. Our implementation of ‘of’ and ‘by’ is limited
to the situation where the former is present after a
noun, and where the verb is in past tense for the lat-
ter. Examples of roles containing these prepositions
are: works with → naakora na; offered in → ne-
herezibwa omu; part of→ ekicweka kya; and driven
by→ naavugwa. ‘With’ and ‘in’ are translated as na
and omu respectively, except when the verb is in the
past tense, then the passive is introduced (as is the
case with neeherezibwa). This case is similar to the
verbalization of ‘by’ (see also Section 2.3). The ver-
balization of ‘of’ is different, as the NC of the noun
(NC 7 in the example above) is required to obtain
the genitive ekya, which then drops its initial vowel

107



to form kya. Algorithm 2.2 shows the verbalization
process of ‘of’. The corresponding rules have been
added to the ruleset.

Algorithm 2.2 Verbalization of ‘of’)
1: A axiom; Variables: n1 g1, nc1, and p1;

and functions: getNoun(A), getNC(n1),
getPreposition(n1), getGenitive(nc1), and
dropIV (g1)

2: n1 ← getNoun(A) {obtain the main noun in
the axiom}

3: p1 ← getPreposition(n1) {obtain the
preposition from the XML file}

4: nc1 ← getNC(n1) {obtain the noun class}
5: g1 ← getGenitive(nc1) {use the NC to obtain

the genitive}
6: g′1 ← dropIV (g1) {Drop the initial vowel of

the genitive}
7: Result← n1 g′1 {Verbalize with the noun and

the genitive}
8: return Result

2.3 The Passive in Context-Free Grammars
In Byamugisha et al., (2016b), we used a CFG for
verb conjugation. In order to cater for the pas-
sive as explained in Section 2.2, we added a new
non-terminal to our original CFG that had 6 non-
terminals. The passive is under the ‘extensions’
grammatical slot (Turamyomwe, 2011), represented
here as non-terminal EX , which is placed between
the verb stem V S and the final vowel FV . The new
CFG is now as follws:

S → IG FM V S EX FV
IG→ PN IT
PN → ti | ni
IT → a | o | n | tu | mu | ba | gu | gi | ri | ga | ki |

bi | e | zi | ru | tu | ka | bu | ku | gu | ga
FM → ∅
V S → kyendez | gw | vug | gend
EX → w | er | erer | ir | zi | is | n | ur | uur | gur |

V S | isPN
FV → a | e | ire

This extended CFG was also added to our ruleset.

2.4 Phonological Conditioning
Due to the agglutinative nature of Runyankore, the
text resulting from our algorithms sometimes con-

tains letter combinations that do not exist in Run-
yankore phonology. When this happens, phonolog-
ical rules are used to make the required changes
that reflect the sound change in language. This is
referred to as phonological conditioning, which is
considered as a last step of text generation. Table
1 shows a sample of the inputs into this step, un-
der which process it occurs, the output after phono-
logical conditioning, and the reason why this is the
case. Note that while some cases that require phono-
logical conditioning appear similar, and would thus
be assumed to have the same solution, this is actu-
ally not the case. Take the example of baona and
baonka, which could be assumed to both be solved
by a double vowel, leading to boona and boonka re-
spectively. Instead, each case is assessed individu-
ally, due to the presence of the nasal compound nk,
which therefore results in boona and bonka.

All algorithms and rules have been implemented
and first verified with four ontologies: SNOMED-
CT, university1, people2, and family3. We were able
to generate text for all axioms which contained our
selected constructors.

3 Evaluation of Generated Text

The typical method of evaluating the performance
of NLG systems is to ask subjects to read and judge
the generated text, as compared to human-authored
text (Bouayad-Agha et al., 2012). Another form of
evaluating NLG systems is to present people with
a text composed of both human-authored and com-
puter generated text, and ask them to identify which
is which (de Rosis et al., 1999; Hussain et al., 2015).
We used both methods in our evaluation. Similar to
Hussain et al., (2015), we both rated the generated
text for grammatical correctness and understand-
ability, as well as distinguished between human-
authored and computer generated text.

3.1 Materials and Methods

A questionnaire survey was used to evaluate the gen-
erated text. The questionnaire had three main sec-

1http://www.mindswap.org/ontologies/
debugging/university.owl

2http://owl.man.ac.uk/2005/07/sssw/
people

3http://www.mindswap.org/ontologies/
family.owl

108



Table 1: Examples of when phonological conditioning is required.

Before Process After Reason
abaegi Pluralization abeegi Vowel coalescence
kiona Agglutination kyona Whenever i is followed by a vowel, it is converted to y
baona Agglutination boona Vowel coalescence
baonka Agglutination boonka, then bonka When a double vowel (oo) precedes a nasal compound

(-nk-), vowel elision occurs
niavuga Conjugation navuga, then

naavuga
First, vowel elision occurs with ni, then the vowel is
doubled due to vowel harmony

tions: (1) age, highest level of education, occupa-
tion, and first language; (2) 10 generated sentences,
which were varied based on the DL constructor be-
ing verbalized, as well as the presence of special
conditions like prepositions, the passive, and defi-
nitions; and (3) 10 sentences, of which 5 human-
authored and 5 computer generated. The study was
conducted in Mbarara, a district in Uganda, where
Runyankore is ethnically and predominantly spo-
ken. We used purposive sampling by only select-
ing participants who could read, write, and speak
Runyankore. We evaluated with both linguists and
non-linguists. We obtained 100 non-linguists from a
single village, Mirama. In order to inform our tar-
get population that we were looking for study par-
ticipants, an announcement was made at the local
catholic church after the Sunday service. This in-
formation was related to the headmaster of a nearby
school, who agreed to let his students and staff take
part in our study. All our study participants were
at least 18 years old. We also contacted 3 linguists
from the Department of African Languages, College
of Humanities and Social Sciences, Makerere Uni-
versity in Uganda.

We used a modified version of the questionnaire
for linguists, which had 4 sections. The first 3 were
similar to the questionnaire given to non-linguists;
but we added a forth section to evaluate the output
from the CFG. This section had 99 conjugated verbs,
testing both the standard CFG and deviations from
the standard CFG, negation, several verb stems from
the ontologies, and phonological conditioning.

Grammatical Correctness and/or understand-
ability The 10 sentences were required to be
graded each according to four criteria: grammati-

cally correct and understandable, incorrect grammar
but understandable, grammatically correct but not
understandable, and incorrect grammar and not un-
derstandable. Table 2 shows all the sentences in the
questionnaire, as well as the DL axioms they verbal-
ize, and the specific constructor whose verbalization
we were testing for.

Sentence G originally had ‘ProfessorInHCIorAI’
and ‘AIStudent’ as concepts in the axiom. However,
‘AI’ and ‘HCI’ were replaced with ‘Science’ before
the evaluation, because they were unfamiliar to the
study participants, and this could have negatively af-
fected how the sentence was graded.

Computer Generated versus Human-Authored
10 sentences, with 5 authored by a Runyankore
Linguist (H) and 5 computer generated (C), were
presented to study participants. They were then
required to grade each sentence either as human-
authored or computer generated, based on its con-
struction. The sentences used in this part of the ques-
tionnaire are presented in Table 3.1, along with the
DL axioms verbalized.

All study participants received a questionnaire
containing the questions for evaluating grammati-
cal correctness and understandability, and computer
generated vs. human-authored.

3.2 Results and Analysis

99% of the 100 study participants were aged be-
tween 18 and 30 years of age. 94% were students,
5% were teachers, and 1% were retired nurse. 54%
were female, and 94% had high school as their high-
est level of education. All study participants spoke
Runyankore as their first language.

109



Table 2: Sentences evaluated for grammatical correctness and understandability.

DL Axiom Constructor In-
vestigated

Runyankore Sentence

A Chlordiazepoxide hydro
chloride v ∃ Has active
ingredient(Chlordiazepoxide)

∃ in medical do-
main

Buri mubazi gwa hydrochloride ya Chlor-
diazepoxide hakiri gwine ekirungo ekyamaani
kimwe kiri omubazi gwa Chlordiazepoxide.

B Giraffe v ∀ eats.Leaf ∀ Buri ntwiga nerya amapapa goona.
C Leaf v ∃ part of.Leaf ∃ with preposition Buri eipapa hakiri n’ekicweka kya omuti

gumwe.
D Newspaper v Publication v Buri rupapura rwamakuru n’ekihandiiko ek-

ishohoziibwe.
E Person v = 2 has.Parent = Buri muntu aine abazaire 2 boonka.
F Student v ≥ 1 hasDegree ≥ Buri mwegi hakiri aine diguri emwe.
G ScienceProfessor v ∀ advi-

sorOf.ScienceStudent
∀ with preposition Buri purofeesa wa sayansi n’omuhabuzi wa

boona abari abeegi ba sayansi.
H Man v ¬Woman disjointness (v ¬) Omukazi ti mushaija.
I Old Ladyv ∃ has pet.Animal

u ∀ has pet.Cat
u Buri mukaikuru hakiri aine enyamaishwa

erikutungwa abantu kuzaanisa emwe eri
enyamishwa, kandi aine enyamaishwa eriku-
tungwa abantu kuzaanisa zoona eziri enjangu.

J LecturerTaking4Courses v
= 4 takes.Course

= with noun
phrase

Buri mushomesa orikushomesa amashomo ana
natwara amashomo 4 goonka.

Grammatical Correctness and/or Understand-
ability Our preferred outcome during this evalua-
tion was to have all sentences graded as ‘grammati-
cally correct and understandable’ by more than 50%
of study participants. The results are summarised in
Figure 1. Sentences A, D, E, G, and H, which evalu-
ated the verbalization of: medical ∃, v, =, ∀ with
preposition, and ¬, were regarded as ‘grammati-
cally correct and understandable’ by over 50% of the
study participants (66%, 80%, 86%, 71%, and 92%
respectively), which was a very positive outcome.
Sentences B and J received the highest scores of
‘grammatically correct and understandable’ among
its scores (47% and 38% respectively), but this was
followed closely by ‘incorrect grammar but under-
standable’ (with 41% for B and 35% for J).

Sentences C, F, and I, which evaluated the ver-
balization of ∃-with preposition, ≥, and u,were re-
garded as ‘grammatically correct and understand-
able’ by only 8%, 34%, and 26% of the study par-
ticipants, respectively. They were graded for the
worst outcome (incorrect grammar and not under-
standable) by 18%, 13%, and 35% of study partic-

ipants respectively. The grading of sentences C, F,

Figure 1: Evaluation results: A, D, E, G, and H performed very
well (> 65%); C, F, and I performed poorly (< 35%); B and J

performed marginally

and I was due to a lack of vowel assimilation, issues
of syntax versus semantics, and wrong pluralization
of definitions, respectively. The algorithms were up-
dated to perform vowel assimilation and pluralize
definitions accordingly.

110



Table 3: Sentences evaluated as either computer generated (C) or human-authored (H)
Label DL Axiom Runyankore Sentence
C1 Dog v ∃ eats.Bone Buri mbwa hakiri nerya eigufa rimwe.
C2 Hydrocodone v Morphine derivative Buri mubazi gwa Hydrocodone n’omubazi

gwokukyendeeza obusaasi.
H1 Lecturer v ¬ Professor Omushomesa wa yunivasite ti purofeesa.
C3 Sheep v ∀ eats.Grass Buri ntaama nerya ebinyaansi byoona.
H2 Student v ≤ 7 studies.Course Buri mwegi naashoma amashomo gatarikurenga 7.
C4 TeachingFaculty v ≤ 3 takes.Course Abashomesa omu kitongore boona nibatwara

amashomo gatarikurenga 3.
H3 Hydrocodone v Opiate Buri mubazi gwa Hydrocodone gurimu ebirungo

ebirikukyendeeza obusaasi.
H4 Parent v ∃ hasChild Buri muzaire nomuntu oine haakiri omwana omwe.
C5 Cat v ¬ Dog Enjangu ti mbwa.
H5 Van v Vehicle Buri vaani nemotoka.

Computer Generated Versus Human-Authored
The desired outcome for this part of the evaluation
was to have all computer generated sentences graded
as human-authored by at least 66% of study partici-
pants. Hussain et al., (2015) evaluated for the same,
but with 3 professionals, and their best result was
that 64% of the overall text were regarded as human-
authored. Our results are summarised in Figure 2.
All computer generated sentences (C) except for C4
(with 64%) were above this bar. C1, C2, C3, and
C5 were regarded as human-authored by 78%, 71%,
90%, and 97% of study participants respectively.

On the other hand, some human-authored text per-
formed under the desired threshold. H2 just made it
with 66%, while H3 and H5 were below with 64%
and 56% of study participants respectively, regard-
ing them as human-authored. They actually per-
formed worse than computer generated text.

The implication that most study participants (>
60%) regarded all generated text as having been
written by a human being is positive outcome.

Results from Linguist We have so far received
feedback from one of the 3 linguists we contacted,
and we present that feedback here. From the same
sentences in Table 2 (except I) for evaluating gram-
matical correctness and/or understandability, A, D,
E, and G were graded as ‘incorrect grammar but un-
derstandable’, due to: the issue of translating med-
ical terminologies, the nature of the text from the
axiom, a lack of proper phonological conditioning,

Figure 2: Computer vs Human: C1, C2, C3, C5 considered hu-
man authored by more than 66%; H2, H3, H5 performed worse

than C

and the incorrect arrangement of the prepositional
phrase respectively. C was graded as both incor-
rect and not understandable because of an error in
the algorithm. This led to a modification of the
grammar rules and algorithms. After the poor per-
formance of sentence I in the non-linguists’ ques-
tionnaire, arising from the translation of ‘pet’, we
used a different axiom for the linguists, in order to
focus their evaluation on the verbalization of con-
junction. We used: Old Lady v ∃ reads.Publication
u ∀ reads.Tabloid. This was verbalized as: Buri
mukaikuru hakiri nashoma ekihandiiko ekishohozi-
ibwe kimwe, kandi naashoma taburoyidi zoona. It
was regarded as ‘grammatically correct but not un-

111



derstandable’ because ‘tabloid’ was naturalized as
taburoyidi. This is however the conventional way of
translating loan words, and its negative effect on the
grading of the sentence was unexpected. Sentences
B, F, H, and J (except for the issue with the nasal
compound) were graded as ‘grammatically correct
and understandable’. Except for H, the rest differ
from the evaluation by non-linguists, where F was
regarded as ‘incorrect grammar but understandable’
by 35%, 1% more than those who regarded it as
‘grammatically correct and understandable’. Sen-
tences B and J were only marginally regarded as
being grammatically correct and understandable. It
will be interesting to see whether all linguists will
have a similar evaluation. From the same sentences
in Table 3.1, C1, C2, H2, C4, and H3 were graded
as human-authored; while H1, C3, H4, C5, and
H5 were graded as computer generated. The rea-
sons for differences in assessing this between lin-
guists and non-linguists are unclear, as neither group
explained their choice. It is however encouraging
that more computer generated text was considered
human-authored by a linguist.

When evaluating the performance of the CFG, 11
of the 99 conjugated verbs presented in the question-
naire were considered as incorrect: 1 due to a wrong
subject prefix, 2 due to the need for an extra suffix,
and 8 because vowel harmony was not implemented.
The subject prefix and vowel harmony errors have
since been fixed. The need for an extra suffix was
only identified for the verb stem for ‘eat’ (ry). We
are still investigating this error.

4 Discussion

Our work here adds to the growing efforts to verbal-
ize ontologies in multiple languages. It has also pro-
vided a basis to consider that the underlying theories
could be generalizable to other Bantu languages. In
our previous work (Byamugisha et al., 2016a; Bya-
mugisha et al., 2016c), we showed that the factors
affecting verbalization in isiZulu and Runyankore
are the same, and both Runyankore and isiZulu had
similar exceptions to pluralizing nouns according to
the standard NC table. Further, the passive as a
grammatical slot is present in the verbal morpholo-
gies of both languages.

Perhaps most interestingly for our domain of in-

terest, is that the use of a small sample of SNOMED-
CT, a very large healthcare ontology, during test-
ing, helped to investigate how to translate medical
jargon to Runyankore. In some cases, the term is
maintained, which is the case for common terms
like ‘Panado’; in others, it is given context, e.g., hy-
drocodone translated as omubazi gwa hydrocodone
‘medicine of hydrocodone’; or a mixed transslation
and context approach, e.g., endwara ya shukari ‘dis-
ease of sugar’, where ‘sugar’ is a common trans-
lation for ‘diabetes’ in a healthcare context; while
in extreme cases, the term is defined, e.g., opiate
translated as omubazi ogukusinza ogukwejunisibwa
kukyendeza obusaasi ‘medicine which intoxicates as
treatment to reduce pain’. There are several terms
for anatomy, diseases, and drugs which are not di-
rectly translatable to Runyankore, but this offers a
starting point to show alternative ways to handle it.

Further, the results from the evaluation of the
generated text are very encouraging, both from a
linguist and non-linguists. Additionally, important
feedback was obtained, which enabled us to make
modifications to the initial rules and algorithms.

5 Conclusion

New algorithms for knowledge-to-text verbalisation
into Runyankore have been developed. These in-
clude: i) rules and algorithms for cardinality con-
straints (maximum, minimum, and exact), therewith
extending the language coverage, ii) handling some
prepositions in complex roles; iii) processing the
passive with a CFG, and iv) phonological condition-
ing. We have evaluated the text generated by the
algorithms and rules with a group from the general
population on grammatical correctness, understand-
ability, and whether they were computer generated
and human-authored text. The data demonstrated
that most sentences were evaluated as grammatically
correct and understandable, and human authored.
We are currently investigating the architecture re-
quired to implement this as a NLG system.

Acknowledgements This work is based on the
research supported by the Hasso Plattner Institute
(HPI) Research School in CS4A at UCT and the Na-
tional Research Foundation of South Africa (Grant
Number 93397).

112



References

Ion Androutsopoulos, Gerasimos Lampouras, and Dim-
itrios Galanis. 2013. Generating natural language
descriptions from owl ontologies: The naturalowl
system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
48:671–715.

Allen Asiimwe. 2014. Definiteness and Specificity in
Runyankore-Rukiga. Ph.D. thesis, Stallenbosch Uni-
versity, Cape Town, South Africa.

Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, and Leo Wan-
ner. 2012. Natural language generation in the context
of the semantic web. Semantic Web Journal.

Joan Byamugisha, C. Maria Keet, and Brian DeRenzi.
2016a. Bootstrapping a runyankore cnl from an isizulu
cnl. In CNL 2016, Aberdeen, Scotland. Springer LL-
NCS.

Joan Byamugisha, C. Maria Keet, and Brian DeRenzi.
2016b. Tense and aspect in runyankore using a
context-free grammar. In INLG 2016, Edinburgh,
Scotland.

Joan Byamugisha, C. Maria Keet, and Langa Khumalo.
2016c. Pluralizing nouns in isizulu and related lan-
guages. In CICLing 2016, Konya, Turkey.

J. Alison Cawsey, B. Ray Jones, and Janne Pearson.
2000. The evaluation of a personalized health infor-
mation system for patients with cancer. User Model-
ing and User-Adapted Interaction, 10(1):47–72.

Fiorella de Rosis, Floriana Grasso, and C. Dianne Berry.
1999. Refining instructional text generation after eval-
uation. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 17(1):1–36.

Chrysanne DiMarco, Graeme Hirst, Leo Wanner, and
John Wilkinson. 1995. Healthdoc: Customizing pa-
tient information and health education by medical con-
dition and personal characteristics. In Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence in Patient Education, Glasgow,
Scotland.

Chrysanne DiMarco, Peter Bray, Dominic Covvey, Don
Cowan, Vic DiCiccio, Eduard Hovy, Joan Lipa, and
Cathy Yang. 2005. Authoring and generation of
tailored preoperative patient education materials. In
Workshop on Personalization in e-Health User Model-
ing, Conference, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Chrysanne DiMarco, David Wiljer, and Eduard Hovy.
2009. Self-managed access to personalized healthcare
through automated generation of tailored health edu-
cational materials from electronic health records. In
AAAI Fall Symposium on Virtual Health Interaction,
Washington D. C.

Normunds Gruzitis and Guntis Barzdins. 2011. Towards
a more natural multilingual controlled language inter-
face to owl. In IWCS, pages 335–339.

Normunds Gruzitis, Gunta Nespore, and Baiba Saulite.
2010. Verbalizing ontologies in controlled baltic lan-
guages. In 4th International Conference on Human
Language Technologies-The Baltic Perspective, Riga,
Latvia.

Sazzad Mohammed Hussain, A. Rafael Calvo, Louise
Ellis, Juchen Li, Laura Ospina-Pinillos, Tracey Dav-
enport, and Ian Hickie. 2015. Nlg-based modera-
tor response generator to support mental health. In
CHI’2015, Seoul, South Korea. ACM.

Kaarel Kaljurand and E. Norbert Fuchs. 2007. Verbaliz-
ing owl in attempto controlled english. In Third Inter-
national Workshop on OWL: Experiences and Direc-
tions, Innsbruck, Austria.

C. Maria Keet and Langa Khumalo. 2017. Towards
a knowledge-to-text controlled natural language of
isizulu. Language Resources and Evaluation, 51:131–
157.

Fredrik Lindahl. 2005. Practical text generation in clin-
ical medicine. Chalmers Computer Science Depart-
ment Winter Meeting.

Saad Mahamood and Ehud Reiter. 2011. Generating af-
fective natural language for parents of neonatal infants.
In ENLG 2011, pages 12–21, Stroudsburg, Pa, USA.
ACM.

Boris Motik, Peter F. Patel-Schneider, and Bijan Parsia.
2009. OWL 2 web ontology language structural spec-
ification and functional-style syntax. W3c recommen-
dation, W3C, 27 Oct. http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-
syntax/.

Doreen Daphine Tayebwa. 2014. Demonstrative deter-
miners in runyankore-rukiga. Master’s thesis, Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology, Norway.

Justus Turamyomwe. 2011. Tense and aspect in
runyankore-rukiga: Linguistic resources and analysis.
Master’s thesis, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Norway.

113


