



















































Universal Dependencies for Greek


Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 102–106,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 22 May 2017.

Universal Dependencies for Greek

Prokopis Prokopidis
Institute for Language and

Speech Processing
Athena Research Center

Athens, Greece
prokopis@ilsp.gr

Haris Papageorgiou
Institute for Language and

Speech Processing
Athena Research Center

Athens, Greece
xaris@ilsp.gr

Abstract

This paper describes work towards the
harmonization of the Greek Dependency
Treebank with the Universal Dependen-
cies v2 standard, and the extension of
the treebank with enhanced dependen-
cies. Experiments with the latest version
of the UD_Greek resource have led to
88.94/87.66 LAS on gold/automatic POS,
morphological features and lemmas.

1 Introduction

The Universal Dependencies (Nivre et al., 2016)
community effort has led to the development and
collection of a large number of treebanks adher-
ing to common and extendible annotation guide-
lines. These guidelines aim to ease the annotation
process and improve the accuracy of parsers and
downstream NLP applications in generating use-
ful and linguistically sound representations.
Greek is represented in the UD effort with

UD_Greek1. In this paper, we provide more de-
tails on the annotated resource in section 2 and
its conversion to the UD standard. In section
3 we discuss ongoing work for extending GDT
with a subset of the enhanced dependencies pro-
posed by Schuster and Manning (2016). Sec-
tion 4 presents experiments with parsers trained
on the different-sized versions of the resource and
on manually/automatically annotated morphology
and lemmas.

2 The Greek Dependency Treebank and
its conversion to UD

UD_Greek is derived from the Greek Dependency
Treebank (GDT, Prokopidis et al. (2005)), a re-
source developed and maintained by researchers

1https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/
UD_Greek

at the Institute for Language and Speech Process-
ing2. Although the conversion and harmonization
toUD iswork in progress sinceUDv1.1, theGreek
dataset in the v2.0 release was the first one that in-
volved extensive manual validation and correction
of labeled dependencies generated from the orig-
inial annotations.
The original annotation scheme used for the an-

notation of the resourcewas based on an adaptation
of the guidelines for the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (Böhmová et al., 2003). Trees in the orig-
inal data were headed by words bearing, in most
cases, the Pred relation. Coordinating conjunc-
tions and apposition markers headed participating
tokens in relevant constructions. Prepositions and
subordinating conjunctions acted as mediators be-
tween verbs/nouns and their phrasal and clausal
dependents. The tagset used for the morphology
layer in the original resource contained 584 combi-
nations of basic POS tags and features that capture
the rich morphology of the Greek language. As
an example, the full tag AjBaMaSgNm for a word
like ταραχώδης/turbulent denotes an adjective of
basic degree, masculine gender, singular number
and nominative case. The three last features are
also used for nouns, articles, pronouns, and passive
participles. Verb tags include features for tense and
aspect, while articles are distinguished for definite-
ness. The top tree in Figure 1 presents an example
of a dependency tree with basic POS tags.
Annotated documents in GDT are stored in

XML files that integrate annotations for seman-
tic roles and events. A procedure based on
software described in Zeman et al. (2014) was
used for rehanging nodes and changing labels in
these files, so that annotations beyond the syn-
tactic level were kept intact. The original heads
and labels of the original annotation effort were
stored as attributes of the XML elements corre-

2http://www.ilsp.gr

102



Εξετάζουν φακέλους στους οποίους νομίζουν ότι υπάρχει ...
VbMn NoCm AsPpPa PnRe VbMn CjSb VbMn ...

they-examine folders in which they-think that it-exists ...

Pred

Obj

Atr
AuxP

Adv AuxC Obj

Εξετάζουν φακέλους σ τους οποίους νομίζουν ότι υπάρχει ...
VERB NOUN ADP DET PRON VERB SCONJ VERB ...

they-examine folders in the which they-think that it-exists ...

root

obj

acl:rel

oblcase

det

ccomp

mark

Figure 1: Annotation of a sentence fragment with
a non-projective arc, according to the the original
(top) and the current representation.

sponding to tree nodes. In view of the UD v2.0
release, the results of the automatic conversion
were manually examined and corrected, in an ef-
fort focusing on errors related to core arguments
of content words; heads of the copula; nodes
participating in coordinating conjunctions; non-
projective dependencies; and multi-word expres-
sions acting as clause-introductory markers. An-
other difference to previous versions of the re-
source concerned preposition-article combinations
(e.g. στις/in-the/case/Prep3rdPersFemPlurAcc).
These multi-word tokens were split into words that
were assignedmorphological information and syn-
tactic heads. The second tree in Figure 1 is an ex-
ample involving several of the conversions men-
tioned above. The acl:rel relation in the exam-
ple is a language specific extension used for the
annotation of relative clauses. Another extension
is obl:arg, which in the current version of the
resource is used for prepositional arguments that
cliticize and are described by many Greek gram-
mars (e.g. Holton et al. (1997)) as indirect objects.
GDT is regularly updated with new material

from different genres, and its current version
comprises 178207/7417 tokens/sentences. The
data in UD_Greek have also increased since
v1.1 and currently3 consist of 63441/2521 to-
kens/sentences. UD_Greek data are derived from
annotated texts that are in the public domain, in-
cluding Wikinews articles and European Parlia-
ment sessions. For the UD v2.* versions sen-
tences are not shuffled and documents are not
split across train/dev/test partitions. There are

3The dataset is available from https://github.com/
UniversalDependencies/UD_Greek/tree/dev. The ex-
periments described in Section 4 correspond to commit:
https://goo.gl/fhPmbN.

10927/5894/6375 types/lemmas/hapax legomena
in the resource, while the average sentence length
is 25.17 tokens. Non-projective trees (12.38%
of all sentences) allow for the intuitive represen-
tations of long-distance dependencies and non-
configurational structures common in languages
with flexible word order. The relatively free word
order of Greek can also be inferred when exam-
ining typical head-dependent structures in the re-
source. Although determiners and adjectives al-
most always precede their nominal heads, the sit-
uation is different for arguments of verbs. Of the
2776 explicit subjects in UD_Greek, 32.89% oc-
cur to the right of their parent, while the percent-
age rises to 46.12% for subjects of verbs heading
dependent clauses. The situation is more straight-
forward for non-pronominal objects, of which only
2.66% occur to the left of their head. Of those
subjects and objects appearing in “non-canonical”
positions, 21.58% and 29.63%, respectively, are
of neuter gender. This fact can pose problems
to parsing, since the case of nominative and ac-
cusative neuter homographs is particularly diffi-
cult to disambiguate, especially due to the fact that
articles and adjectives often preceding them (e.g.
το/the κόκκινο/red βιβλίο/book) are also invariant
for these two case values.

3 Enhanced dependencies

A recent addition to the resource is semi-automatic
annotation for the enhanced dependencies pro-
posed by Schuster and Manning (2016). We have
initially focused on a subset of these dependencies
involving coordination and control structures.
For coordination structures, we have exploited

the fact that conjunctions headed these construc-
tions in the previous representation and that the
ids of the heads of the conjuncts are still available
in the current annotation files. We were thus able
to convert trees like the one in Figure 2 to the en-
hanced dependency graph shown in the same ex-
ample.
In the latest GDT version, no ccomp/xcomp

distinction was included for Greek finite clauses
that depend on verbs of obligatory subject or ob-
ject control. We are currently using Lexis (Anag-
nostopoulou et al., 2000), a computational lexicon
with syntactic and semantic information for Greek
verbs, to annotate instances of these verbs with two
extensions of the xcomp relation, xcomp:sc and
xcomp:oc. These annotations allow us to gener-

103



Αναφέρθηκαν εξαφανίσεις και εξωδικαστικές εκτελέσεις ...
VERB NOUN CCONJ ADJ NOUN ...

were-reported disappearances and extra-judicial executions ...

nsubj

conj

cc

amod

nsubj

Figure 2: Enhanced dependency graph for a coor-
dination structure.

Κάλεσε τον βουλευτή να φύγει ...
VERB DET NOUN PART VERB.fin ...
Asked the MP to leave ...

xcomp:oc
obj

det mark

nsubj

Figure 3: Enhanced dependency graph for an ob-
ject control structure.

ate graphs like the object control one in Figure 3
and also the backward, subject control one in Fig-
ure 4.

4 Parsing experiments with the UD
representation

In this section, we report on experiments with the
current version of UD_Greek and its GDT super-
set. In all experiments reported below, we remove
the annotations related to the enhanced dependen-
cies described in Section 3, since they do not yet
cover the whole resource. We examined parsing
accuracy in scenarios involving manual and auto-
matic annotations for morphology and lemmas. In
the latter setting, POS tagging is conducted with
a tagger (Papageorgiou et al., 2000) with an ac-
curacy of 97.49 when only basic POS is consid-
ered. When all features (including, for example,
gender and case for nouns, and aspect and tense
for verbs) are taken into account, the tagger’s ac-
curacy drops to 92.54. As an indication of the rel-
atively rich morphology of Greek, the tags/word
ratio in the tagger’s lexicon is 1.82. Tags for a
word typically differ in only one or two features
like case and gender for adjectives. However, dis-
tinct basic parts of speech (e.g. Vb/No) is also a
possibility. Following POS tagging, a lemmatizer
retrieves lemmas from a lexicon of 2M different
entries. When a token under examination is asso-
ciated in the lexicon with two or more lemmas, the
lemmatizer uses information from the POS tags for

Άρχισε να γράφει το παιδί ...
VERB PART VERB.fin DET NOUN ...
Started to write the child ...

xcomp:sc nsubj

mark det

nsubj

Figure 4: Enhanced dependency graph for a back-
ward subject control structure.

disambiguation. For example, the token+POS in-
put εξετάσεις/Vb guides the lemmatizer to retrieve
the lemma εξετάζω (examine), while the lemma
εξέταση (examination) is returned for εξετάσεις/No.

We use the graph-based Mateparser (Bohnet,
2010) and the transition-based version of Bist-
parser (Kiperwasser and Goldberg, 2016). For
the latter, we projectivise datasets by lifting non-
projective arcs (Nivre and Nilsson, 2005), and we
use 100-dimensional word-embeddings obtained
with the fastText library (Bojanowski et al.,
2016) from a 350M token corpus.

Table 1 summarizes the results. Using the whole
resource with gold POS, morphological features
and lemmas (GDT-MPL), the Mate and Bist LAS
are 90.29/89.36, respectively. The difference be-
tween the two parsers on input with automatic
annotations (GDT-APL) is smaller (88.82/88.36).
When comparing the performance of both parsers
on the different size datasets, the LAS improve-
ment on the bigger dataset is more evident for Bist-
parser, with a 1.97% increase from the APL setting
with the UD_Greek dataset (UD-APL). For both
parsers, best LAS is observed for small sentences
of 5-15 tokens long, with the accuracy remaining
relatively stable for sentences of 15-25 tokens (cf.
Fig. 5).

In related work, Prokopidis and Papageorgiou
(2014) trained theMateparser on a version of GDT
of 130K tokens annotated according to the PDT-
compatible representation, and reported a LAS of
80.16 on manually validated POS tags and lem-
mas. The automatically converted UD_Greek
v1.* (59156/2411 tokens/sentences) has been used
in evaluations for multilingual parsing, includ-
ing the experiments by Straka et al. (2016),
where 79.4/76.7 LAS were reported for man-
ual/automatic POS tags, respectively.

104



UD-MPL UD-APL GDT-MPL GDT-APL
Bist Mate Bist Mate Bist Mate Bist Mate

LAS 86.47 88.94 86.39 87.66 89.36 90.29 88.36 88.82
UAS 89.29 90.78 89.49 90.49 91.49 92.01 91.06 91.38
LACC 92.73 93.68 92.45 92.22 94.55 94.70 93.56 93.33

Table 1: Results from parsing UD_Greek and GDT with the Bist- and Mate parsers. UD_Greek contains
63K tokens, a subset of GDT’s 178K tokens. (M/A)PL suffixes refer to training and testing on gold
and automatic POS, morphological features and lemmas, respectively. All scores are calculated with
punctuation excluded, on a test partition containing circa 10% of the tokens of each dataset.

5 15 25 35 45
Sentence length

82

84

86

88

90

92

LA
S

bist
mate

Figure 5: LAS relative to sentence length in the
UD-APL setting.

5 Conclusions

We presented work for the harmonization of the
syntactic trees in the Greek Dependency Tree-
bank to the UD v.2 standard. We also discussed
how we exploited previous annotations and a lex-
ical resource to generate enhanced dependencies
for the treebank. Finally, we reported a LAS of
88.94 for UD_Greek, by training the Mateparser
on gold POS and lemmas. A 90.29 LAS on a
larger version of the resource indicates that there
is still room for accuracy improvements with ad-
ditional data. While training on automatically pre-
processed data, we obtain LAS scores (88.82) that
are relatively high for morphologically rich lan-
guages like Greek. In future work, we plan to im-
prove the enhanced dependencies annotation and
augment the UD_Greek resource with sentences
involving questions and commands.

References

Anagnostopoulou, D., E. Desipri, P. Labropoulou,
E. Mantzari, and M. Gavrilidou (2000). Lexis
- Lexicographical Infrastructure: Systematis-

ing the Data. In: Computational Lexicography
(COMLEX 2000).

Böhmová, A., J. Hajič, E. Hajičová, and B.
Hladká (2003). The Prague Dependency Tree-
bank: A Three-Level Annotation Scenario. In:
Treebanks: Building and Using Parsed Cor-
pora. Kluwer.

Bohnet, B. (2010). Very High Accuracy and Fast
Dependency Parsing is Not a Contradiction. In:
Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, pp. 89–97.

Bojanowski, P., E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T.
Mikolov (2016). Enriching Word Vec-
tors with Subword Information. In: CoRR
abs/1607.04606.

Holton, D., P. Mackridge, and I. Philippaki-
Warburton (1997). Greek: A comprehensive
grammar of the modern language. London and
New York: Routledge.

Kiperwasser, E. and Y. Goldberg (2016). Simple
and Accurate Dependency Parsing Using Bidi-
rectional LSTM Feature Representations. In:
Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics 4, pp. 313–327.

Nivre, J., M.-C. de Marneffe, F. Ginter, Y. Gold-
berg, J. Hajic, C. D. Manning, R. McDonald, S.
Petrov, S. Pyysalo, N. Silveira, R. Tsarfaty, and
D. Zeman (2016). Universal Dependencies v1:
A Multilingual Treebank Collection. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016).

Nivre, J. and J. Nilsson (2005). Pseudo-Projective
Dependency Parsing. In: Proceedings of the
43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 99–106.

Papageorgiou, H., P. Prokopidis, V. Giouli, and
S. Piperidis (2000). A Unified POS Tagging
Architecture and its Application to Greek. In:
Proceedings of the 2nd Language Resources

105



and Evaluation Conference. European Lan-
guage Resources Association, pp. 1455–1462.

Prokopidis, P., E. Desypri, M. Koutsombogera, H.
Papageorgiou, and S. Piperidis (2005). Theoret-
ical and practical issues in the construction of
a Greek Dependency Treebank. In: Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-
guistic Theories.

Prokopidis, P. and H. Papageorgiou (2014). Ex-
periments for Dependency Parsing of Greek.
In: Proceedings of the First Joint Workshop
on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich
Languages and Syntactic Analysis of Non-
Canonical Languages, pp. 90–96.

Schuster, S. and C. D. Manning (2016). Enhanced
English Universal Dependencies: An Improved
Representation for Natural Language Under-
standing Tasks. In: Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Straka, M., J. Hajic, and J. Straková (2016). UD-
Pipe: Trainable Pipeline for Processing CoNLL-
U Files Performing Tokenization, Morphologi-
cal Analysis, POS Tagging and Parsing. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016).

Zeman, D., O. Dušek, D. Mareček, M. Popel,
L. Ramasamy, J. Štěpánek, Z. Žabokrtský, and
J. Hajič (2014). HamleDT: Harmonized multi-
language dependency treebank. In: Language
Resources and Evaluation 48.4, pp. 601–637.

106


