



















































Compositionality in Verb-Particle Constructions


Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017), pages 139–148,
Valencia, Spain, April 4. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Compositionality in Verb-Particle Constructions

Archna Bhatia1, Choh Man Teng2, and James F. Allen2,3

1Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 15 SE Osceola Ave, Ocala, FL 34471
2Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 40 S Alcaniz St, Pensacola, FL 32502

3Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627
{abhatia,cmteng,jallen}@ihmc.us

Abstract

We are developing a broad-coverage deep
semantic lexicon for a system that parses
sentences into a logical form expressed in
a rich ontology that supports reasoning. In
this paper we look at verb-particle con-
structions (VPCs), and the extent to which
they can be treated compositionally vs id-
iomatically. First we distinguish between
the different types of VPCs based on their
compositionality and then present a set of
heuristics for classifying specific instances
as compositional or not. We then iden-
tify a small set of general sense classes
for particles when used compositionally
and discuss the resulting lexical represen-
tations that are being added to the lexicon.
By treating VPCs as compositional when-
ever possible, we attain broad coverage in
a compact way, and also enable interpre-
tations of novel VPC usages not explicitly
present in the lexicon.

1 Introduction

Toward the goal of Natural Language Understand-
ing of full interpretation of a text fragment (or
a sentence), we want to produce a good seman-
tic representation of the sentence. This involves
combining rich grammatical information with in-
formation about specific lexical items in the sen-
tence, such as word senses, among other things.
Since multiword expressions (MWEs) constitute
a significant proportion of the lexicon in any nat-
ural language (Moreno-Ortiz et al., 2013), in fact,
Jackendoff (1997) estimated the number of MWEs
in a speaker’s lexicon to be of the same order of
magnitude as the number of single words, it is im-
portant to get a good interpretation of MWEs.

For this paper, we focus on a specific type
of MWEs, namely verb-particle constructions

(VPCs). These consist of a verb and an adverbial
or prepositional particle, e.g., eat up, fade out, go
on, show off and walk down.1 Adding every single
occurrence of such verb particle combinations in a
lexicon is possible but not ideal as, for example,
some VPCs may be interpretable compositionally,
i.e., the verb and the particle contribute their sim-
plex meanings, e.g. fly up. Other compositional
VPCs include cases such as finish up and made
away for which either the verb or the particle, re-
spectively, seems to contribute its simplex mean-
ing (Bannard et al., 2003).2 However, other VPCs
indeed are noncompositional and require special
interpretation, and hence need to be added into the
lexicon, e.g., bake off ’contest’ and egg on ’urge
someone for an action that might not be a good
idea’.

For an interpretation of the compositional types
above, we need to determine the best senses for
the verb and the particle in the VPCs. There are
many lexical resources for an inventory of senses
for verbs, such as WordNet (Miller, 1995), (Fell-
baum, 1998) and VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler, 2005).
But there is not much for the particles except for
a few attempts at the semantics for a few parti-
cles, such as up (Cook and Stevenson, 2006) and
out (Tyler and Evans, 2003). Our investigation
of hundreds of VPCs has shown that the seman-
tics of particles is also important, as can also be
gathered from others’ proposals for similar clas-
sifications of VPCs as mentioned above involving
VPC types where particles contribute to the mean-
ing, see Section 3 for details. Particles are not
just the vacuous entities structurally required by
the verbs in VPCs, they also have their own se-
mantics which is found to be general across verbs

1Note we focus on the particle usage in this paper, not
on the prepositional usage, i.e., a verb followed by a particle
not a prepositional phrase. However, there may be an overlap
in lexical semantic content (i.e., senses) of the homophonous
particles and prepositions, see Section 4.1.

2However, refer to Section 3 for our take on such cases.

139



in specific verb classes. For example, particle up
has a Direction sense when it appears in resultative
VPCs with verbs of motion, such as wander/strol-
l/go/run up (Villavicencio, 2006). Hence, in this
paper, we provide a set of senses that particles in
VPCs display across many verbs in a verb class.

To make use of these senses, we encode se-
mantics of particles in an ontology, namely TRIPS
(Allen et al., 2007) LF ontology which is designed
to be linguistically informed.3 The ontology en-
codes semantic types, the set of word senses and
semantic relations that can be used in logical form
(LF) graphs. Word senses are defined based on
subcategorization patterns and selectional restric-
tions driven by linguistic considerations. The se-
mantic types in the ontology are, to a large extent,
compatible with FrameNet (Johnson and Fillmore,
2000). The ontology uses a rich semantic fea-
ture set, the features used are an extended version
of EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1997). Unlike Word-
Net, the TRIPS ontology does not attempt to cap-
ture all possible word senses but rather focuses on
the level of abstraction that affects linguistic pro-
cessing. We use TRIPS, a broad coverage deep
semantic parser (driven by the ontology) to com-
bine semantic, ontological and grammatical infor-
mation to produce semantic representation. For a
more detailed overview of the TRIPS system, refer
Allen & Teng (2017) and Allen et al. (2008).4

The paper is organized as follows: Previous
work on VPCs is discussed in Section 2. In Sec-
tion 3, classification of VPCs is discussed based on
their compositionality. A set of heuristics are pre-
sented to identify different classes of VPCs in Sec-
tion 3.1. In Section 4, we discuss the semantics of
particles in VPCs. An inventory of general sense
classes for particles used in VPCs is provided in
Section 4.1. In Section 5, we present various gen-
eralizations corresponding to the identified sense
classes for the particles, and briefly discuss how
a computational lexicon (including a lexicon for
particles) is built for the computation of meaning
for VPCs. This also includes a discussion of phe-
nomena we cannot handle currently. In Section 6,
we demonstrate the procedure to compute mean-
ing of sentences involving compositional VPCs.
Finally, in Section 7, we present our conclusions.

3The TRIPS ontology can be accessed at:http://www.
cs.rochester.edu/research/cisd/projects/
trips/lexicon/browse-ont-lex-ajax.html

4The TRIPS parser can be accessed at: http://
trips.ihmc.us/parser/cgi/parse

2 Related work

A lot of computational literature on VPCs focuses
on identification or extraction of VPCs, or on com-
positionality of VPCs, as discussed below. There
are a few articles dealing with different senses of
particles but they usually focus on only one or two
specific particles rather than on a broader coverage
of particles.

Vincze (2011) presents the Wiki50 corpus that
has 446 VPCs (342 unique types) annotated. Ban-
nard (2002) makes an attempt to identify different
types of VPCs in terms of compositionality and
builds a (decision tree) classifier to identify the
four types. Bannard et al. (2003) also adopt a sim-
ilar approach for compositionality. As an annota-
tion experiment, they investigate various VPCs to
see whether the sense is contributed by the verb
and/or the particle. They build four classifiers for
automatic semantic analysis of VPCs. Patrick and
Fletcher (2004) also have a similar approach but
focus on automatic classification of different types
of compositionality. Unlike our work, in all these
works, the focus is on compositionality only, not
on actual senses of the particles.

Cook and Stevenson (2006) discuss various
senses for the particle up in cognitive grammar
framework and annotate a dataset and perform
some classification experiments to identify the
senses of up in unseen data. As a linguistic study,
Jackendoff (2002) provides a very nice discussion
of various types of VPCs involving particles such
as directional particles, aspectual particles, time-
AWAY constructions, and some idiomatic con-
structions. Our work differs from theirs in hav-
ing a broader coverage of particles and/or strong
emphasis on ontology with respect to the sense
classes of the particles and how different particle
sense classes relate to verbal ontological classes.

Fraser (1976) mentions semantic properties of
verbs affecting patterns of verb particle combina-
tions, e.g. semantically similar verbs bolt/cement/-
clam/glue/paste/nail all can combine with the par-
ticle down and specify the objects that can be used
to join material. Our approach is also based on
the similar assumption that there are generaliza-
tions, such as combinations of particles with spe-
cific verb classes or ontological classes result in
specific sense classes for the particles. Villavicen-
cio (2003) also adopts the same approach where
she tries to encode the information in terms of lex-
ical rules and restrictions etc, however her focus

140



is on obtaining productive patterns in VPCs rather
than on their interpretation.

Our work also differs from the previous works
mentioned above in the following respect: we
emphasize on building complete semantic repre-
sentations of the sentences, not just on particles’
semantics or just classification of VPCs. Simi-
lar to our criteria for compositionality, McCarthy
et al. (2003), Baldwin et al. (2003), Bannard et
al. (2003) have looked at distributional similar-
ity as a measure of compositionality of VPCs. In
contrast to the approaches focusing on statistical
classification based on word/syntax features, we
present our heuristics for classification of VPCs
based on WordNet and discuss how we compute
the semantics of the compositional classes.

3 Classification of VPCs

VPCs have often been classified in terms of their
compositionality/decomposability (i.e., whether
all constituents of a VPC, the verb and the par-
ticle, contribute their simplex meanings to the
overall semantic content of the VPC or not), the
classes following somewhere between the fully
compositional and fully idiomatic VPCs, e.g.,
see Fraser (1976), Chen (1986), O’Dowd (1998),
Dehé (2002) and Jackendoff (2002).5

In Figure 1, we present our classification of
VPCs which also mainly consists of two types, the
compositional and the noncompositional VPCs.
We further identify the compositional VPCs into
three subtypes, the symmetrically compositional
VPCs, the light particle compositional VPCs (LP-
compositional VPCs) and the light verb composi-
tional VPCs (LV-compositional VPCs). The sym-
metrically compositional VPCs refer to the VPCs
where both the constituents, the verb and the parti-
cle, contribute their lexical-semantic content. For
example, in The plane flew up in no time, the
senses for the verb fly (e.g., in WordNet, sense
fly%2:38:00) as well as the particle up (e.g., in
WordNet, sense up%4:02:00) combine together to

5Based on Hawkins’ (2000) classification, Lohse et
al (2004) provide another classification of VPCs, also related
to compositionality, in terms of whether the constituents of a
VPC are independently processable or if one or both of them
are dependent on the other for appropriate lexical-semantic
content. For example, in They turned off the lights, how off
is interpreted is independent of it appearing in the VPC, note
this sentence entails The lights are off, however the verb is
not independent of the particle in the VPC for its semantic
content, the sentence does not entail They turned the lights.

Their categories can also be largely mapped to the compo-
sitional and the noncompositional cases.

provide the meaning of the VPC fly up. We dis-
tinguish the other two compositional VPC types
from the symmetrically compositional VPCs only
in the aspect that in the other two types, the par-
ticle or the verb have a relatively lighter contri-
bution6 than the other constituent which adds its
regular lexical-semantic content.

1. Compositional VPCs:

(a) Symmetrically compositional: Both
verb and the particle contribute their
simplex meanings.
The plane flew up in no time.

(b) Light particle compositional (LP-
compositional): Verb contributes most
of the semantic content. Particle con-
tributes aspectual information.
Susan finished up her paper.

(c) Light verb compositional (LV-
compositional): Particle contributes
most of the semantic content. The verb
is generally a light verb contributing a
bleached meaning such as BECOME or
CAUSE etc.
The thief made away with the cash.

2. Noncompositional VPCs:

(a) Noncompositional with certain gen-
eralizations: Neither verb nor particle
contribute their literal senses but certain
generalizations are involved in interpre-
tation of the VPCs.
She took up photography/swimming
[activities]. vs. She took up her posi-
tion [responsibility/position].

(b) Idiosyncratic Noncompositional: Id-
iomatic usages
John wouldn’t have done the dangerous
experiment if his brother hadn’t egged
him on.

Figure 1: Classification of VPCs

The LP-compositional VPCs involve particles
which, instead of contributing a preposition like
lexical semantic content, contribute aspectual in-
formation to the VPC. For example, in Susan fin-
ished up her paper, the verb finish contributes its

6The term “light particle” is used in analogy with the term
“light verb” which is commonly used in the literature for
verbs with bleached content.

141



regular lexical content (e.g., in WordNet, sense
finish%2:30:02), however, the particle up, instead
of contributing its regular lexical-semantic content
(e.g., WordNet sense up%4:02:00) adds aspectual
information that the action was completed (i.e.,
the Completely sense in our sense inventory). See
Section 4.1 for the specific senses of particles.

Similarly, the LV-compositional VPCs involve
particles with their regular lexical-semantic con-
tent but have light verbs which carry bleached
meaning than the regular verbs, e.g., CAUSE, BE-
COME, etc. For example, in The thief made
away with the cash, the particle away con-
tributes its regular meaning (e.g., WordNet sense
away%4:02:00) but the verb make, instead of con-
tributing its regular meaning (e.g., WordNet sense
make%2:36:01), adds a bleached meaning (e.g.,
cause to be). For details on the procedure to com-
pute meanings of sentences with compositional
VPCs, see Section 6.

The noncompositional VPCs also seem to have
at least two subtypes based on whether their inter-
pretation involves certain generalizations or if it is
completely idiosyncratic. However, for the rest of
this paper, we focus on the compositional VPCs.

3.1 Heuristics for compositionality of VPCs

As a first step toward interpretation of VPCs, we
need to determine whether a given VPC is compo-
sitional or not. For this task, we employ a num-
ber of heuristics that make use of the rich inven-
tory of hierarchically organized word senses (i.e.,
synsets) in WordNet which contains over 100,000
words including 64188 multi-words. Heuristics 1-
7 below are used to identify compositional VPCs,
whereas heuristic 8 indicates a noncompositional
VPC.7

1. If the verb is among the list of light verbs, and
WordNet does not have an entry for the VPC,
it most likely is LV-compositional. For exam-
ple, the VPC make away uses the light verb
make and the VPC does not have an entry in
WordNet.

2. If a VPC exists and WordNet has an entry for
the verb as well as for the particle but no entry
for the VPC, VPC is (symmetrically) compo-
sitional. For example, fly with the sense key
fly%2:38:01 as well as up with the sense key

7Note that we do not claim that these heuristics cover the
VPCs exhaustively.

up%4:02:00 appears in WordNet but fly up
does not appear in any synset in WordNet.

3. If WordNet has the VPC as well as the verb
in the same synset, VPC is LP-compositional.
For example, sort out (sort out%2:31:00)
and sort (sort%2:31:00) both appear in the
same synset in WordNet.

4. If WordNet has verb as a hypernym for
the VPC, VPC is likely either symmetri-
cally compositional or LP-compositional.
For example, compositional VPC go
up (go up%2:38:00) has the verb go
(go%2:38:00) as its direct hypernym.

5. If WordNet has the verb in the definition
in the synset where VPC appears, VPC is
either symmetrically compositional or LP-
compositional. For example, the compo-
sitional VPC move up (move up%2:38:00)
has the verb move in its definition move up-
wards.

6. If WordNet has the relevant VPC as well
as another VPC with the particle replaced
with another particle in the same synset,
VPC is either symmetrically compositional
or LP-compositional (with the two particles
in the same sense class). For example, pull
up (pull up%2:35:00) as well as pull out
(pull out%2:35:00) are in the same synset.
In these VPCs, the particles up as well as out
have the same general sense Direction (see
Section 4.1 for an inventory of particle sense
classes).

7. If WordNet has the relevant VPC as well
as another VPC with the verb replaced
with another verb in the same synset,
VPC is compositional (either symmetrically
compositional or LP-compositional or LV-
compositional). For example, the compo-
sitional VPCs pull out (pull out%2:35:00)
and rip out (rip out%2:35:00) appear in the
same WordNet synset.

8. If none of the above are true and the VPC
in WordNet does not have any other item
in its synset, the VPC is likely idiomatic.
For example, the idiomatic VPC catch up
(catch up%2:38:00) does not have any other
item in its synset.

142



3.2 An evaluation of heuristics for
compositionality of VPCs

We conducted an evaluation of the heuristics 3-8
which is described as follows. From among all
the VPCs for which WordNet has an entry, we au-
tomatically extracted 25 random VPCs such that
each of the 12 particles (that we investigated, see
Section 4) was represented in the extracted VPCs.
These test VPCs were manually annotated by three
annotators for the compositionality labels, Com-
positional and Noncompositional. Since a VPC
may have both compositional and noncomposi-
tional usages in different contexts, we restricted
assignment of the annotation label for a specific
VPC to only one label by considering the first
synset/definition each of the VPCs had in Word-
Net. In case of disagreement among the three
annotations, the annotators discussed reasons for
their decisions and arrived at a consensus to cre-
ate the Gold annotations for the VPCs. One of the
VPCs was dropped from the test set as the annota-
tors could not reconcile with respect to the VPC.

A python implementation of the heuristics was
applied to the remaining 24 test VPCs. Like
the manual annotations mentioned above, for the
heuristics also, only those annotations were con-
sidered which were based on the first synset/def-
inition of the VPC in WordNet. The VPCs
that heuristics 3-7 identified as representative of
their category were annotated as Compositional,
whereas the VPCs identified by heuristic 8 were
annotated as Noncompositional. These annota-
tions were tested against the Gold annotations for
the VPCs.

As mentioned earlier, our heuristics do not
cover all the VPCs. Out of the 24 VPCs, the
heuristics did not assign a label to four VPCs. Also
additional two VPCs had to be disregarded due
to assignment of labels to them based on synset-
s/definitions other than the first synset/definition in
WordNet. For the remaining 18 VPCs, the heuris-
tics achieved an overall accuracy of 72%. For
compositional cases specifically, the heuristics got
82% correct labels, and for the noncompositional
cases, the heuristics achieved an accuracy of 57%.

One of the cases that the heuristics misidenti-
fied, namely fly by, was merely due to the current
implementation of the heuristic not involving in-
flectional variations of the verb. Note WordNet
definition includes the verb fly but in its inflected
form flying. The heuristic 5 could capture it if the

implementation is refined to cover inflected forms
of verbs.

Finally, note heuristics 1 and 2 could not be
evaluated using the same procedure by extracting
VPCs from WordNet randomly since heuristics 1
and 2 identify VPCs that are not included in Word-
Net.

4 Semantics of particles in VPCs

As mentioned in Section 3, particles contribute
to the overall semantics of compositional VPCs.
In order to study the contribution of parti-
cles in VPCs, we conducted an investigation of
VPCs consisting of verbs in the ontology class
ONT::EVENT-OF-CAUSATION in the TRIPS
ontology. Currently, there are 1383 words with
verb senses in this class (and a total of 1784 verb
senses of those words). Our investigation con-
sisted of combinations of these verbs with the fol-
lowing particles (wherever the combinations were
possible as VPCs): across, away, by, down, in,
into, off, on, out, over, through, and up. We
searched for examples for each of the combina-
tions using Google and manually went through
each of the examples to test various things. For ex-
ample, we checked if any of the verb or the parti-
cle contributed to the overall meaning of the VPC,
identified the senses particles had in the VPCs if
any, checked if the particle could be taken out
without a major change in meaning, if the parti-
cle expressed RESULT or could be replaced with
a RESULT-Prepositional Phrase,8 if a correspond-
ing VPC consisting of the particle with the oppo-
site polarity was also possible, e.g., take in vs take
out, if specific argument types, e.g., MANNER,
RESULT, LOCATION, AFFECTED etc were in-
stantiated in the sentence, etc. In the rest of this
section, we present the sense classes particles in
compositional VPCs tend to fall into.

4.1 Sense classes for particles in VPCs

While, on the one hand, particles may encode
subtle nuances of meanings in each of their oc-
currences in (compositional) VPCs, on the other
hand, they may display some general senses across
many VPCs. WordNet attempts to capture the nu-
ances by storing each of the VPCs as a separate

8RESULT is one of the argument roles identified in
TRIPS ontology. The argument roles signal different ar-
gument positions for predicates as well as have their own
inferential import, some other examples are AGENT, AF-
FECTED, MANNER, LOCATION, and FIGURE.

143



lexical item. However, this approach results in
having as many sense categories as there are VPCs
and we lose information about the common con-
tributions made by the particles in VPC semantics
which can be useful while producing semantic rep-
resentation of sentences with new VPCs not stored
in WordNet or another lexical resource. Hence, we
focus on the general senses particles display across
VPCs.

We identified three sense classes for the par-
ticles in compositional VPCs, namely Direction,
Ready/Active and Aspectual, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 2. These sense classes also correspond to the
VPC classes based on their compositionality men-
tioned in Section 3. For example, the Direction
sense class is generally instantiated by the sym-
metrically compositional and LV-compositional
VPCs. The Ready/Active sense class is instan-
tiated by the LV-compositional VPCs, and the
Aspectual sense class by the LP-compositional
VPCs.

1. Direction:

(a) Away: Can Modi unlock $1 trillion
worth of gold stashed AWAY in India’s
lockers?

(b) Out: My mom never threw it OUT.
(c) Up: The magic ketchup should sink

when you squeeze the bottle and float
UP when you release it.

2. Ready/Active [+/-]:

(a) Ready: That won’t take DOWN “the in-
ternet” though, just DNS resolution.

(b) Active: Baby was having a good sleep
and mom woke him UP.

3. Aspectual:

(a) Completely: He sorted OUT every
scrap of manuscript, every map, and the
native letters, he looked THROUGH the
files.

(b) Continuing: Day after day she worked
AWAY remaking the old Granville house
into a home.

(c) Starting: Ask AWAY the question.

Figure 2: Sense classes for particles in VPCs

The Direction sense class has a number of sub-

classes, each instantiated by a specific directional
particle, such as away, down, in, into, off, on, out,
up denoting a specific direction sense.9

The Ready/Active sense class also is a broad
class of senses for the particles ranging from us-
ages such as Take DOWN the internet to Wake him
UP. We consider these VPC usages compositional
since the particles display the same senses inde-
pendently of the VPC usages. For example, one
could say The network is DOWN where the parti-
cle down appears outside of a VPC with the same
Ready sense as in the VPC usage Take DOWN
the internet. Similarly, for Active sense, compare
I’m UP with Wake him UP. More examples for
this class of senses include: Bring UP the inter-
net/browser, Set UP an expertiment, Get UP, He
had passed OUT from an apparent drug overdose
and Turn ON/OFF the switch. The common theme
across these senses seems to be that these usages
involve as AFFECTED arguments cognitive en-
tities or processes/machines which may become
more ready/active or less ready/active.10

The Aspectual sense class has three subclasses,
namely Completely, Continuing, and Starting,
where the particle modifies the verb by providing
aspectual information.

We can employ certain heuristics to identify
some of these particle senses. Since, in the sym-
metrically compositional and LV-compositional
VPCs, particles contribute significantly in the
lexical-semantic content of the VPCs, if they are
removed from the construction, part of the mean-
ing is also lost or the meaning changes drastically,
as can be observed in the case of the Direction
sense particle out in the following: Then I can
move OUT vs. Then I can move, and in the case of
the Ready/Active sense particle Down in the fol-
lowing: That won’t take DOWN “the internet”
though vs. That won’t take “the internet” though.

Also, if a particle has a Direction sense, then
replacing the particle with another directional par-
ticle should result in a VPC with just a change
in the direction in the sense, e.g., pull UP-
/DOWN the screen. The directional particles
share their senses with the corresponding prepo-
sitional usages.11 Hence, the directional particles

9All of the sense subclasses of Direction are not illustrated
in Figure 2 to avoid redundancy.

10Even though we have identified Ready and Active as two
separate subclasses for this class of senses, there seems to
be more grey area for it to be difficult to always distinguish
between the two subclasses.

11The difference seems to be that in the directional parti-

144



are replaceable with corresponding Prepositional
Phrases (directional-PPs). For example, the par-
ticle down in I walked DOWN can be replaced
with a corresponding directional-PP, as in I walked
DOWN THE STREET.

Similarly, for LP-compositional cases, which
include all the Aspectual sense classes, we check
if the particle can be dropped without a ma-
jor change in meaning in VPCs. For example,
for Completely sense, the particle seems to en-
hance/emphasize the meaning of the verb or in-
dicates completion of the activity denoted by the
verb and can be dropped without a major change in
meaning, e.g., clean (UP) the room, EC is prepar-
ing to arrange (UP) elections in party lines as
well, Techstars has acquired (UP) Global. Also,
the particle can generally be replaced with MAN-
NER adverbials completely and thoroughly. For
the other two senses also, there is only a slight loss
of aspectual information in the VPC when the par-
ticle is dropped.

5 Building the computational lexicon (for
semantic parsing of VPCs)

In this section, we discuss our findings in regard
to the above mentioned sense classes. We find
that there are complicated interactions between the
verb ontology types and particles as well as argu-
ments of the VPCs. We first present some of these
interactions and discuss how corresponding infor-
mation is encoded in the TRIPS lexicon. This is
followed by the interactions which cannot be en-
coded in the ontology currently and are left for fu-
ture work.

Particles can express one or more of the senses
listed in Figure 2 in different VPCs. This infor-
mation is encoded in TRIPS ontology by adding
ontology types corresponding to these senses in
the particle’s lexicon. For example, the lexi-
cal entry for the particle up lists sense ontology
types ONT::DIRECTION, ONT::COMPLETELY
and ONT::READY among other possible senses.12

Simultaneously, WordNet sense keys correspond-
ing to the particle up may be added in the ontology
entries for these sense ontology types.

cle usage, there is an implicit argument which is explicitly
present in the prepositional usage.

12For a better idea of what information the lexical
entries and semantic/ontology classes carry in TRIPS
lexicon, browse http://www.cs.rochester.edu/
research/cisd/projects/trips/lexicon/
browse-ont-lex-ajax.html

Starting with the observation that the particle’s
sense may depend on the verb it combines with in
a VPC, further generalizations are possible. Our
investigation demonstrated that the sense of the
particle in a VPC may be conditioned by the type
of verb it appears with (rather than just a single
verb) in most of the cases. That is, particles may
convey the same sense when they appear with any
of the verbs in a specific verb ontology class.13 For
example, the particle down exhibits Completely
sense with the verbs in the TRIPS’ ontology class
ONT::PURSUE, as can be seen in The internet
tracked DOWN this guy’s stolen car ... and A
motorist chased DOWN, slapped and threatened
a boy ... .

In addition, we observed an interesting fact that
particles up and out seem to be in complemen-
tary distribution with respect to various verb on-
tology classes for the Completely sense. That is,
for Completely sense, either up or out is used but
not both with verbs from a specific verb ontology
class.14 For example, with verb ontology class
ONT::ACQUIRE, up is used with Completely
sense, out cannot be used with the verbs in this
ontology class with the same sense. Notice Com-
pletely sense in the VPC acquire UP in Techstars
has acquired UP Global but we do not observe
a VPC acquire OUT with the same sense. Simi-
larly, with the verb ontology class ONT::EVOKE-
TIREDNESS, out is used with Completely sense,
but up cannot be used. Notice Someone’s a bit
tuckered OUT but not tuckered UP.

There are certain other generalizations observed
for specific senses of particles corresponding to
the semantic relation labels. For example, the
verb takes a particle with an Aspectual sense as
its MANNER argument and the Aspectual sense
particle takes the verb as a FIGURE.

Such information is encoded in the ontology as
restrictions on the relevant arguments for the rele-
vant sense ontology types as well as relevant verb
ontology types. For simplification for demon-
stration, we use the three example cases men-

13We find that different verb ontology types that were dis-
tinguished for other reasons in TRIPS (Allen et al., 2007)
ontology also line up with the particles.

14This observation about the complementary distribution
of usage between up and out may not be accidental. The
Law of Differentiation (Paul, 1890), (Bréal, 1900), and the
Avoid Synonymy principle (Kiparsky, 1983), (Clark, 1987)
have been proposed in the lexico-semantic sphere which sug-
gest that languages prefer to not have a given semantic slot
be filled by two distinct lexical items.

145



tioned above and show how such information is
encoded in the ontology. First of all, as mentioned
above, the lexical entry for the particle lists the
senses it can convey. Hence, down, up and out
would include ONT::COMPLETELY in their lex-
ical entry. Also the entry for the sense ontology
type ONT::COMPLETELY would include Word-
Net sense keys for particles down, up and out.
The sense ontology type ONT::COMPLETELY
specifies for its FIGURE argument all the verb
ontology types with which a particle gets this
sense. Note here we list all the verb ontology
types with which we get the Completely sense ir-
respective of the specific particles with which we
get the sense.15 Hence, ONT::COMPLETELY
would specify for its FIGURE argument ontol-
ogy types ONT::PURSUE, ONT::ACQUIRE as
well as ONT::EVOKE-TIREDNESS. The restric-
tion with regard to specific particle is captured in
the verb ontology type. Each of the verb ontol-
ogy types specify for their MANNER argument
all the particles that can take that role (i.e., they
can get Completely sense). Hence, verb ontology
type ONT::PURSUE would specify for its MAN-
NER argument particle down, verb ontology type
ONT::ACQUIRE would specify particle up and
verb ontology type ONT:EVOKE-TIREDNESS
would specify particle out.

Similar generalizations are available for various
Direction senses and a similar approach is taken to
encode corresponding information. The main dif-
ference lies in the semantic roles, e.g., for Direc-
tion sense class particles, the verb assigns a RE-
SULT argument role instead of the MANNER ar-
gument role and the verb ontology types specify a
less restricted set of particles for the RESULT ar-
gument (since many of the direction particles can
constitute VPCs with the verbs in a specific verb
ontology class). One of the classic examples for
VPCs with direction sense particles is with verb
ontology types corresponding to motion verbs.

5.1 Difficult cases

We describe below a few interactions between the
verb ontology classes, particles, their senses and
the verb arguments which the ontology does not
have a way to handle currently. We leave these for
future work.

15However, note since the ontology is hierarchical, there is
no need to list all the children ontology types as well if the
parent ontology types are included.

We observe that the object (possibly the AF-
FECTED or AFFECTED-RESULT argument)16

of the VPC may have an impact on the sense a
particle gets. For example, in I cleaned OUT the
desk, the particle out is interpreted as having Com-
pletely sense whereas in I cleaned OUT the dirt, it
seems to have the Direction sense.

The order of the particle and the object may also
affect the interpretation the particle gets. For ex-
ample, in help OUT a friend, the particle only gets
the Completely sense. But in the reverse order for
the particle and the object, e.g., in help a friend
OUT as in “help a friend out of a difficult/unsafe
situation”, Direction sense is also possible.17

While ontology can specify semantic features
for the verbal arguments for correct assignment of
semantic roles to them, it cannot currently restrict
senses that the particles may get in VPCs based
on the semantic features of the verbal arguments.
Similarly, the link between the argument position
and the particle sense cannot be handled currently.

6 Procedure to compute meaning of
sentences with VPCs

For the task of interpreting sentences with VPCs,
we first need to determine if the VPC is composi-
tional or not. We use heuristics mentioned in Sec-
tion 3.1 to determine the compositionality of VPC.
For the compositional cases, we get the senses for
the verb and the particle from the ontology and/or
WordNet. In the rest of this section, we walk
through the process of computing the semantics of
a sentence containing a compositional VPC using
a broad coverage deep semantic parser driven by
ontology.

Let’s say the sentence we want to interpret is
She cleaned up her room. The sentence involves
the VPC clean up with the verb clean and the par-
ticle up. Let’s say, the particle up has the fol-
lowing senses encoded in the ontology: Direction,
Completely, and Ready. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 5, there are certain constraints on verb ontol-
ogy types (as well as verb/VPC arguments) for the
parser to pick one of these senses of the particle
when co-occurring with the verb. Depending on

16AFFECTED-RESULT is a semantic role our ontology
uses for entities that undergo a change at the end of the event.
The AFFECTED role is used for entities that changed over
the course of the event in some way.

17In fact, this seems to be a relatively general pattern as is
pointed out by Fraser (1976) that a directional adverbial tends
to follow the construction.

146



compliance or violations of all such constraints,
the parser assigns scores for various parse options
involving these senses. The parse with the high-
est score is selected as a semantic representation
of the sentence involving the VPC.

In the sentence She cleaned up her room, the
verb clean (ONT::CLEAN which appears under
ONT::CHANGE-STATE in the ontology) is not
among the list of relevant verb ontology types with
which a Direction sense is licensed for the particle
up. Additionally, a restriction on the verb argu-
ment for the Direction sense is that the argument
have a semantic feature [+moveable] which is also
violated in the given sentence, the room is gener-
ally not a moveable entity. Hence, the parser as-
signs a low score to the parse which involves the
Direction sense for the particle up in this sentence.

The Ready/Active sense requires restrictions on
the verbs that they take cognitive entities or pro-
cesses as their AFFECTED arguments. The AF-
FECTED argument for the verb clean, namely the
room, does not satisfy this restriction. Hence, the
parser assigns a low score for the parse involving a
Ready/Active sense for the particle up in the given
sentence.

The constraints for the Completely sense of
the particle up are satisfied for this sentence, the
verb clean is among the set of verbs in the on-
tology type (ONT::CHANGE-STATE) with which
the relevant particle has been identified in the on-
tology to get this sense. Hence, the parser as-
signs a higher score to the parse for the sen-
tence with the Completely sense for the particle
up. Among the three parses involving each of the
above-mentioned senses of the particle, since the
parse with the Completely sense gets the highest
score, the parse is selected as the semantic repre-
sentation of the sentence.

7 Conclusion

In order to attain broad coverage understanding, a
system need not only identify multi-word expres-
sions such as verb-particle constructions, but must
compute their meaning. It is not plausible to hand
enumerate all the possible combinations, although
WordNet is an admirable start. We have described
an approach where the meaning of a wide range
of VPCs are computed compositionally, with the
large advantage that VPCs not explicitly found in
the lexicon can be both identified and semantically
interpreted. To accomplish this, we identified the

core senses of particles that have broad application
across verb classes. This information is used while
building computational lexicons. We also dis-
cussed some difficult cases involving interesting
interactions between verb ontology classes, parti-
cles, their senses and the verb arguments which
the ontology does not have a way to handle cur-
rently. We leave these for future work. Finally,
we demonstrated through an example how gram-
matical/semantic/ontological information, that en-
ables compositional parsing, is used to obtain full
semantic representation of sentences.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by the
DARPA Big Mechanism program under ARO
grant W911NF-14-1-0391 and the DARPA CwC
program under ARO grant W911NF-15-1-0542.
We would also like to thank anonymous reviewers
for their useful feedback. Also we thank William
de Beaumont for technical support.

References
James F. Allen and Choh Man Teng. 2017. Broad cov-

erage, domain-generic deep semantic parsing. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium, Com-
putational Construction Grammar and Natural Lan-
guage Understanding 2017.

J. Allen, M. Dzikovska, M. Manshadi, and M. Swift.
2007. Deep linguistic processing for spoken dia-
logue systems. In Proceedings of the ACL 2007
Workshop on Deep Linguistic Processing, pages 49–
56. Association for Computational Linguistics.

J. Allen, M. Swift, and W. de Beaumont. 2008. Deep
semantic analysis of text. In Symposium on Seman-
tics in Systems for Text Processing (STEP).

Timothy Baldwin, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka, and
Dominic Widdows. 2003. An empirical model
of multiword expression decomposability. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment -
Volume 18, MWE ’03, pages 89–96, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Colin Bannard, Timothy Baldwin, and Alex Las-
carides. 2003. A statistical approach to the seman-
tics of verb-particles. In Proceedings of the ACL
2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analy-
sis, Acquisition and Treatment - Volume 18, MWE
’03, pages 65–72, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Colin Bannard. 2002. Statistical techniques for au-
tomatically inferring the semantics of verb-particle
constructions. Technical report.

147



M. Bréal. 1900. Semantics. Translated by Mrs. H.
Cust. Henry Holt, New York.

Ping Chen. 1986. Discourse and particle movement in
english. Studies in Language, 10:79–95.

E. V. Clark. 1987. The principle of contrast. In
B. MacWhinney, editor, Mechanisms of Language
Acquisition, pages 1–33. Academic Press.

Paul Cook and Suzanne Stevenson. 2006. Classifying
particle semantics in english verb-particle construc-
tions. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying
Properties, pages 45–53.

Nicole Dehé. 2002. Particle verbs in English: Syn-
tax, information structure and intonation. John Ben-
jamins.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press.

B. Fraser. 1976. The Verb-Particle Combination in
English. Academic Press.

John A. Hawkins. 2000. The relative order of prepo-
sitional phrases in english: Going beyond manner-
place-time. Language Variation and Change,
11:231–266.

Ray Jackendoff. 1997. The Architecture of the Lan-
guage Faculty. MIT Press.

Ray Jackendoff. 2002. English particle constructions,
the lexicon, and the autonomy of syntax. In Verb-
Particle Explorations. Mouton de Gruyter.

C. Johnson and C. J. Fillmore. 2000. The framenet
tagset for frame-semantic and syntactic coding of
predicate-argument structure. In Proceedings of the
first conference on North American chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
56–62. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

P. Kiparsky. 1983. Word-formation and the lexicon. In
F. Ingemman, editor, Proceedings of the 1982 Mid-
America Linguistics Conference, pages 47–78. Uni-
versity of Kansas, Dept. of Linguistics.

Karin Kipper-Schuler. 2005. VerbNet: A broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. thesis,
Computer and Information Science Dept., Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 6.

Barbara Lohse, John A. Hawkins, and Thomas Wasow.
2004. Domain minimization in english verb-particle
constructions. Language, 80:238–261.

Diana McCarthy, Bill Keller, and John Carroll.
2003. Detecting a continuum of compositionality
in phrasal verbs. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Ac-
quisition and Treatment - Volume 18, MWE ’03,
pages 73–80, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database
for english. 38(11):39–41.

Antonio Moreno-Ortiz, Chantal Pérez-Hernández, and
M. Ángeles Del-Olmo. 2013. Managing multiword
expressions in a lexicon-based sentiment analysis
system for spanish. In Proceedings of the 9th Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages
1–10. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Elizabeth M. O’Dowd. 1998. Prepositions and par-
ticles in English: A discourse-functional account.
Oxford University Press.

J. Patrick and J. Fletcher. 2004. Differentiating
types of verb particle constructions. In Proc. of
Australasian Language Technology Workshop 2004
(ALTW2004).

H. Paul. 1890. Principles of the History of Lan-
guage. Translated by H. A. Strong from the 2nd
German Edition. McGrath, Reprinted College Park,
MD. 1970.

Andrea Tyler and Vyvyan Evans. 2003. The Seman-
tics of English Prepositions: Spatial Scenes, Embod-
ied Meaning, and Cognition. Cambridge University
Press, New York.

Aline Villavicencio. 2003. Verb-particle constructions
and lexical resources. In Proceedings of the ACL
2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analy-
sis, Acquisition and Treatment - Volume 18, MWE
’03, pages 57–64, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Aline Villavicencio. 2006. Verb-particle constructions
in the world wide web. In P. Saint-Dizier, editor,
Computational Linguistics Dimensions of the Syn-
tax and Semantics of Prepositions, pages 115–130.
Springer.

Veronika Vincze, Nagy T. István, and Gábor Berend.
2011. Multiword expressions and named entities in
the wiki50 corpus. In Proceedings of Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing, pages 289–
295.

P. Vossen. 1997. Eurowordnet: a multilingual database
for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the DE-
LOS workshop on Cross-language Information Re-
trieval.

148


