



















































Discovery of Discourse-Related Language Contrasts through Alignment Discrepancies in English-German Translation


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation, pages 73–81,
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 8, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Discovery of Discourse-Related Language Contrasts through
Alignment Discrepancies in English-German Translation

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski
Saarland University
e.lapshinova

@mx.uni-saarland.de

Christian Hardmeier
Uppsala University

christian.hardmeier
@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

In this paper, we analyse alignment dis-
crepancies for discourse structures in
English-German parallel data – sentence
pairs, in which discourse structures in tar-
get or source texts have no alignment in
the corresponding parallel sentences. The
discourse-related structures are designed
in form of linguistic patterns based on
the information delivered by automatic
part-of-speech and dependency annota-
tion. In addition to alignment errors (exist-
ing structures left unaligned), these align-
ment discrepancies can be caused by lan-
guage contrasts or through the phenom-
ena of explicitation and implicitation in
the translation process. We propose a new
approach including new type of resources
for corpus-based language contrast ana-
lysis and apply it to study and classify
the contrasts found in our English-German
parallel corpus. As unaligned discourse
structures may also result in the loss of
discourse information in the MT training
data, we hope to deliver information in
support of discourse-aware machine trans-
lation (MT).

1 Introduction

All human languages provide means to create co-
herence and cohesion in texts, but the precise
structures used to achieve this vary even across
closely related languages. In this paper, we intro-
duce an automatic method to extract examples of
cross-linguistically divergent discourse structures
from a corpus of parallel text, creating a new type
of resource that is useful for the discovery and de-
scription of discourse-related language contrasts.
This type of analysis is useful from the point of

view of contrastive linguistics, and it can also
provide researchers interested in discourse-level
machine translation (MT) with a collection of data
to guide their intuitions about how text-level phe-
nomena are affected in translation. Our method
is strongly data-driven; it enables a bottom-up ap-
proach to linguistic analysis that starts from indi-
vidual occurrences of cross-linguistic correspond-
ences without being constrained by existing lin-
guistic assumptions and theoretical frameworks.

The data source in our analysis is a sentence-
and word-aligned parallel corpus, the same type
of resource that is typically used for training MT
systems. We begin by defining a set of surface pat-
terns that identify the discourse structures of in-
terest and permit their automatic extraction. We
then use the word alignments to establish corres-
pondences between the languages. We particu-
larly focus on those cases where there is a relev-
ant pattern in one language, but the word aligner
is unable to find a corresponding structure in the
other. Such alignment discrepancies can simply
be due to alignment errors, but they can also stem
from systematic language contrasts (Grishina and
Stede, 2015, p. 19–20) or from the phenomena
of explicitation and implicitation in the translation
process.

Our general goal is to explore these alignment
discrepancies and analyse their causes. We use
a corpus of English-German translations that we
automatically annotate for part-of-speech and de-
pendency information. Alignment discrepancies
are detected with the help of sentence and word
alignment of the annotated structures. Thus we
do not use any manually annotated resources, and
linguistic knowledge involved is rather of shal-
low character. Specific cases of extracted dis-
crepancies represented through linguistic patterns
are then manually analysed. We concentrate on
English-to-German translations, as although these

73



two languages are typologically close, this lan-
guage pair is still among those that are hard for
machine translation.

This paper is structured as follows: in the fol-
lowing section (Section 2), we define the phe-
nomenon under analysis and explain the problem.
Section 3 provides information on related works.
In Section 4, we describe the data, methods and
procedures applied for our analysis. Section 5
presents the results. In Section 6, we discuss the
outcome of the study and outline the ideas for fu-
ture work.

2 Defining the Problem

In this paper, we focus on the analysis of English-
German parallel data – aligned sentence pairs,
in which discourse-related structures in target or
source texts have no alignment in the corres-
ponding parallel sentences. The discourse-related
structures we consider are defined as potential ele-
ments of coreference chains that can be either per-
sonal or demonstrative pronouns. These structures
are designed in form of linguistic patterns based
on the information delivered by automatic part-
of-speech and dependency annotation and include
both bare pronouns, as she and it or this and that,
and determiners modifying nouns – parts of full
nominal phrases, as this system and the system in
(1).

(1) ..all these chemicals ultimately boost the
activity of the brain’s reward system...
goosing this system makes us feel good...
But new research indicates that chronic
drug use induces changes in the structure
and function of the system.

As these are parts of coreference chains, they
contribute to the overall coherence and hence
carry part of the discourse information in both the
source and the target language.

Linguistic means expressing coreference exist
in both languages. However, the choice between
referring expressions is governed by language-
specific constraints. For instance, pronouns and
adjectives in German are subject to grammatical
gender agreement, whereas in English, only per-
son pronouns have this marking and adjectives (for
instance, in nominal ellipsis) are unmarked. Such
differences in the realisation give rise to trans-
formation patterns in translation, for instance he
– der in (2), which can be obtained from parallel

data on the basis of word-level alignment.

(2) Then we take this piece of paper and give
it to a fellow student and he must make
us a drawing out of it. – Dann neh-
men wir dieses Blatt Papier und geben es
einem Kommilitonen und der muss uns da-
raus eine Zeichnung machen.

However, in some cases, these differences may
cause alignment discrepancies. For instance, Ger-
man pronominal adverbs like damit in example (3)
can function as a referring expression (damit refers
to an event expressed through the whole preceding
clause, but can also establish a conjunctive rela-
tion). English does not have a direct equivalent
for this form. So, the English translation example
from a parallel corpus does not preserve this core-
ference chain.

(3) Die demographischen Kurven verraten,
dass der Sozialstaat von den Jüngeren nicht
mehr zu finanzieren ist. Damit versinkt das
Land nicht in einer beinah unvergleichli-
chen Krise, wie manchmal behauptet wird.
– The demographic curves reveal that the
welfare state can no longer be financed by
the younger members of society. This does
not mean that the country is descending
into an unparalleled crisis ...

This would result in an alignment discrepancy at-
tributed to language contrasts.

At the same time, alignment discrepancies can
also be attributed to the translation process and the
phenomenon of explicitation based on the Expli-
citation Hypothesis, formulated in its most prom-
inent form by Blum-Kulka (1986), who assumes
elements in the target text are expressed more ex-
plicitly than in the source text. For example, the
full nominal phrase die Aufgabe (the task) in the
German translation in (4) is lexically more expli-
cit than the demonstrative that. Its counterpart is
called implicitation.

(4) You want your employees to do what you
ask them to do, and if they’ve done that,
then they can do extra. – Sie erwarten von
Ihren Angestellten, dass sie tun worum Sie
sie gebeten haben, wenn sie die Aufgabe
ausgeführt haben, können sie Zusätzliches
tun.

74



In a parallel corpus of English-German trans-
lations, we use automatic word alignment to ex-
tract transformation patterns. Those sentence
pairs which contain a discourse structure in either
the source or the target sentence and for which
no transformation patterns could be extracted are
defined as alignment discrepancies.

3 Related Work

The method that we use to extract transformation
patterns is similar to coreference annotation pro-
jection applied by Postolache et al. (2006) and by
Grishina & Stede (2015). Both studies use data
manually annotated for coreference relations. In
our approach, we use automatic annotations only
that allow us to define candidate referring expres-
sions – linguistic expressions that are potential
members of a coreference chain (not resolved by a
human annotator).

Postolache et al. (2006) mark patterns contain-
ing heads of the resulting referring expression
in the target language aligned with heads of the
source referring expressions. Although they men-
tion the situations when the source head is not
aligned with any target word or no words of the
source referring expressions are aligned with any
target words, they do not consider these cases of
alignment discrepancies in their analysis.

Grishina & Stede (2015) apply a direct projec-
tion algorithm on parallel data to automatically
produce coreference annotations for two target
languages without exploiting any linguistic know-
ledge of the languages. However, they describe a
number of projection problems, when a referring
expression is present in both source and target text
but is not projected correctly. They analyse non-
equivalences in translation from a linguistic point
of view but could not find enough evidence to
characterise them as systematic, as the dataset they
use is very limited. However, the cases that they
describe can be attributed to language contrasts or
the effects of translation process. In our study, we
use more data creating a resource that can be used
for further systematic description of alignment
discrepancies and their sources. We suggest that
these sources can be classified into three categor-
ies: (1) alignment errors; (2) language contrasts
and (3) translation process. A number of studies
(Kunz and Steiner, 2012; Kunz and Lapshinova-
Koltunski, 2015; Novak and Nedoluzhko, 2015)
have shown that although the coreference relation

is shared across all languages, they may differ con-
siderably in the range of referring expressions.

The phenomenon of explicitation in translation
is often understood to occur when a translation ex-
plicitly realises meanings that were implicit in its
source text. In terms of discourse phenomena, this
would mean that a source text does not contain lin-
guistic markers that trigger some discourse rela-
tions, whereas its translation does, as was analysed
by Meyer & Webber (2013) or by Becher (2011b),
including also the opposite process of implicita-
tion.

In other studies, explicitation is seen if a trans-
lated text realises meanings with more explicit
means than the source text does. In relation to
coreference, some referring expressions can be
more explicit than the others, as in example (4)
in Section 2 above. For instance, Becher (2011a,
p. 98) presents a scale for the explicitness of vari-
ous referring expressions for the language pair
English-German.

Most of these studies start from the descrip-
tion of the expressions existing in the language
systems they compare, and analyse the distribu-
tions of these categories with corpus-based meth-
ods. This can be defined as a top-down proced-
ure – starting from what is given (in theories and
grammars) and looking for the contrasts in a huge
number of language examples represented in cor-
pus data. In our approach, we perform in a differ-
ent way – we start with the corpus data and try to
detect patterns revealing language contrasts or the
phenomena of explicitation/implicitation that we
define in form of alignment discrepancies.

4 Resources, Tools and Methods

4.1 Data

Our corpus data consists of talks given at the TED
conference1. It is taken from the training set of the
IWSLT 2015 MT evaluation campaign2, which in
turn uses texts downloaded from the TED web site.

We need to mention that the translations of TED
talks are rather subtitle than translations, and con-
sequently, there exist some genre-/register specific
transformations in this parallel data. However, the
transformations in the TED talks are also interest-
ing, especially because the latter have been fre-
quently used as training data for MT.

1http://www.ted.com
2https://wit3.fbk.eu/mt.php?release=

2015-01

75



We automatically annotated the corpus data us-
ing a pipeline of standard tools. The texts in
both languages were preprocessed with Penn Tree-
bank tokeniser and Punkt sentence splitter with
the language-specific sentence splitting models
bundled with NLTK (Bird et al., 2009). Then,
the corpus was tagged with the Marmot tagger
(Mueller et al., 2013) for the part-of-speech in-
formation and parsed for dependency information
with the MATE tools (Bohnet, 2010). The tagger
and parser were trained on version 1.0 of the Uni-
versal Dependency treebank (Nivre et al., 2015).

Word alignment was performed in both direc-
tion with mgiza3 and models 1-HMM-3-4, using
the training scripts bundled with the Moses ma-
chine translation software4 and default settings.
The alignments were symmetrised with the grow-
diag-final-and heuristic (Koehn et al., 2003).

sentences tokens
English 214,889 3,940,079
German 227,649 3,678,503

Table 1: Corpus size

The total number of parallel segments amounts
to 194,370 (see details in Table 1).

4.2 Pattern extraction

Using the part-of-speech and dependency annota-
tions, we compiled lists of discourse-related struc-
tures defined in terms of lexico-grammatical pat-
terns (combination of part-of-speech tags and
grammatical functions that were produced by the
parser) for both English and German texts. While
the discourse structures we study may be com-
posed of multiple words, we find that they can
often be identified reliably with patterns anchored
to single words. We select pronouns and demon-
stratives (which also include definite articles) only
(corresponding to the part-of-speech tags ’DET’
and ’PRON’).

Then, we extracted parallel patterns from the
above described data using the word-level align-
ment. The patterns are based on 1 : N word align-
ments linking the word identified by our pattern
(for instance which DET-nsubj in example (5))
to 1 or more words in the other language (dies
PRON-dobj in example (5)). If a word has mul-
tiple alignment links, multiple output records were

3https://github.com/moses-smt/mgiza
4http://www.statmt.org/moses/

generated, one for each aligned target language
word.

(5) which DET-nsubj → dies PRON-dobj
Educational researcher Benjamin Bloom,
in 1984, posed what’s called the 2 sigma
problem, which he observed by studying
three populations. – 1984 veröffentlichte
der Bildungsforscher Benjamin Bloom et-
was, das ‘2-Sigma-Problem’ heißt. Er beo-
bachtete dies bei drei Populationen.

The resulting data also contains sentence pairs for
which no corresponding structure was found in
either the source or the target language. These are
the cases of alignment discrepancies in discourse-
related structures that we select for our analysis.
We count the occurrences of the alignment dis-
crepancy patterns with the aim to answer the fol-
lowing questions: (1) Which are the most frequent
ones in English? (2) Which are the most frequent
ones in German?

In our corpus, English is always the source and
German is the target, but we can search discourse-
related patterns in the English sources and see
what are the corresponding structures in the Ger-
man translations and which structures are missing.
And in the same way, we can search in the Ger-
man translations and analyse the aligned English
sources. This allows us to discover which dis-
course phenomena ‘get lost’ in the translation data
due to the missing alignment. We can also meas-
ure the amount of these discrepancies – perform
quantitative analysis, and analyse the underlying
causes of these discrepancies in a qualitative ana-
lysis. These might include: (1) language contrasts
that include both differences in language system
and differences of idiomatic character, e.g. col-
location use; (2) translation process phenomena
such as explicitation – when a German translated
sentence contains a discourse pattern which was
not aligned to any discourse structure in the cor-
responding English source sentence, and implicit-
ation – when the English original sentence con-
tains a marked discourse pattern which was not
aligned to any discourse structure in the corres-
ponding translated sentence in German; (3) other
possible causes, including errors.

76



5 Analyses and Results

5.1 General observations

On the total, we extract 26 patterns (types) of dis-
course structures marked in the German transla-
tions, for which no English alignment was auto-
matically assigned (explicitation candidates). The
total number of unaligned cases is around 11% in
both language settings.

In the English source sentences, there were 14
discourse patterns, for which the alignment in the
corresponding German translations is missing (im-
plicitation candidates). The total number of occur-
ring cases (measured by tokens) is also higher for
German (69,851) than for English (57,608), which
on the one hand, may be interpreted as an evidence
for more explicitation than implicitation phenom-
ena in translation. And on the other hand, it may
indicate that German has more discourse-related
structures that differ from those available in Eng-
lish.

In Table 2, we provide an overview of the
10 most frequent discourse-related structures that
were found in the German translation data, for
which no corresponding discourse structures were
aligned in the English sources.

freq.abs pattern example
29868 DET-det der Fall
18026 PRON-nsubj er, sie
10986 PRON-dobj ihn, sie

3525 PRON-nmod sein, ihr
3383 PRON-det diese, einige
1481 PRON-nsubjpass das, dieses
1439 PRON-iobj ihm, ihr

530 PRON-dep daran, dafür
297 PRON-neg kein

48 PRON-appos etwas, alles

Table 2: Patterns in German with no alignment in
the corresponding English data

freq.abs pattern example
23145 DET-det the things
19030 PRON-nsubj he, they
6798 PRON-nmod his, their
4341 PRON-dobj him, them
1764 DET-nsubj this, that

990 DET-nmod which, that
650 DET-dobj this, that
516 PRON-iobj him, them
253 DET-neg no

54 PRON-conj what

Table 3: Patterns in the English sentences with no
alignment in the corresponding German transla-
tions

pattern EN DE
DET-det 23145 29868
DET-dobj 650 24
DET-nmod 950 18
DET-nsubj 1764 44
PRON-det 14 3383
PRON-dobj 4341 10986
PRON-iobj 516 1439
PRON-nmod 6798 3525
PRON-nsubj 19030 18026

Table 4: Patterns shared by English and German

Table 3 presents an overview of the 10 most fre-
quent discourse-related structures in the English
sources, for which no alignment was found in the
corresponding translations into German.

DET-det is the most frequent structure in both
languages, followed by PRON-subj and PRON-
nmod or PRON-dobj (the ranking of the latter two
is different in English and German). Further (less
frequent) discourse-related structures vary across
languages, with English showing preferences for
demonstratives (DET) and German – for personal
pronouns (that also include relatives in the univer-
sal part-of-speech tagset). If the full lists (with 24
and 14 patterns) is considered, we see that PRON
and DET are more evenly distributed (53% PRON
vs. 47% DET) in English than in German (57%
PRON vs. 43% DET).

It is interesting that eight out of the most fre-
quent structures in the ‘English’ list are shared
(occur in both lists). We outline all the shared pat-
terns (nine in total) along with their frequencies in
both English and German in Table 4.

5.2 Observations on particular patterns

In the following, we perform a manual qualitat-
ive analysis of the most frequent patterns (DET-
det and PRON-nsubj) that are shared by both lan-
guages. The information on their categorisation
frequencies is derived automatically on the basis
of extracted patterns containing word informa-
tion. For instance, structures like der-DET-det5

are defined as cases of the definite article use, and
the structures like der-PRON-nsubj represent rel-
ative pronouns. This manual analysis provides us
with the information on possible causes of align-
ment discrepancies. However, at this stage, we do
not provide the information on the distribution of
these causes in our data.

5der is one of the forms of the German definite article

77



DET-det Most cases (ca. 96%) concern the Ger-
man translations containing definite articles that
may trigger a coreference relation between the
noun phrase that contains this article and another
noun phrase or a clause, as die Aufgabe in example
(4) in Section 2 above, and for which no alignment
was found in the English sources.

Manual analysis of the data sample shows that
the discrepancies are often caused by the variation
in article use in the expression of generic refer-
ence in both languages: in German, generic mean-
ing is expressed with a definite noun, whereas in
the English source, it is expressed with a bare
noun (often in plural), see examples people/die
Leute, conversations/die...Unterhaltung, techno-
logy/die Technologie in (6).

(6) a. You know, it’s just like the hail goes
out and people are ready to help. – Es
ist einfach so, jemand ruft um Hilfe,
und die Leute stehen zur Hilfe bereit.

b. And we use conversations with
each other to learn how to have
conversations with ourselves. –
Wir benutzen die gegenseitige
Unterhaltung, um zu lernen, wie wir
Gespräche untereinander führen.

c. We turn to technology to help us
feel connected in ways we can com-
fortably control. – Wir wenden uns
der Technologie zu, um uns auf Arten
und Weisen verbunden zu fühlen, die
wir bequem kontrollieren können.

Many studies have claimed that there is variation
in article use in the expression of generic reference
in German (Krifka et al., 1995; Oosterhof, 2004),
especially in relation to plural generics. German
plural generics can be used both as definite nom-
inal phrases and as bare nouns, whereas definite
plurals in English cannot be interpreted generic-
ally. However, Barton et al. (2015) provide the
only empirical analysis known to us, but concen-
trate on plural generics only. We believe that our
approach creates a good foundation (and resource)
for a more detailed quantitative analysis of such
cases.

In other cases, the discrepancy between defin-
ite constructions in German has a rather idiomatic
character, as in example (7).

(7) But in the process, we set ourselves up to

be isolated. – Aber dabei fallen wir der
Isolation direkt vor die Füße.

Some individual sentence pairs revealed the phe-
nomena of explicitation, for instance, der Fall (‘the
case”) in example (8) is used in German transla-
tion to explicate the information given through the
ellipsis of the clause but it’s not cheesy in English.

(8) You would expect it to be cheesy, but it ’s
not. – Man könnte annehmen, dass so et-
was kitschig ist, aber dem ist nicht der Fall.

Most cases of the DET-det structure in the English
sources missing alignment in the corresponding
German translations are also definite noun phrases
(ca. 85%). Manual analysis of a sample reveals
that most of these cases are alignment errors. This
means that the German translation also contains
the corresponding definite nominal phrase which
was not automatically aligned to the English art-
icle.

The phenomenon of implicitation was repres-
ented by individual cases that we observed in the
data, e.g. in (9), where the English source is more
explicit than the corresponding translation.

(9) Secondly, there had to be an accept-
ance that we were not going to be
able to use all of this vacant land
in the way that we had before and maybe
for some time to come. – Zweitens
musste es eine Übereinkunft geben, dass
wir das gesamte brachliegende Land nicht
wie vorher nutzen können würden, viel-
leicht für längere Zeit nicht.

PRON-nsubj In the German translations, many
PRON-subj structures with no alignment in the
corresponding English sources are represented by
personal pronouns (ca. 54% out of all cases).
Around 46% of these pronouns are 1st and 2nd
person pronouns that are used for speaker and ad-
dressee reference. In many cases, both the source
and the target sentence contain this reference type
that was not automatically aligned and thus, an
error occurred. Addressee and speaker reference
is very common in our dataset, as this is one
of the specific features of the register under ana-
lysis – public talks by experts (mostly addressed
to laypeople).

The remaining structures are 3rd person pro-
nouns, among which we observe some interesting

78



cases, for instances, differences in the expression
of impersonal meaning in English and German, as
seen in example (10).

(10) a. A reaction to the medication
the clinic gave me for my de-
pression left me suicidal. –
Die Medikamente, die sie mir
in der Ambulanz gegen meine De-
pressionen gaben, führten bei mir zu
Selbstmordgedanken.

b. People say, “I’ll tell you what’s
wrong with having a conversation...
– sagen sie, “Ich sage dir, was ver-
kehrt daran ist...

They are followed relative pronouns (ca. 31% out
of all cases) that introduce a relative clause in
the German translations. However, their English
sources do not contain any relative clauses and the
information is expressed in a different construc-
tion, as illustrated in example (11).

(11) a. A polar bear swimming in the
Arctic, by Paul Nicklen. –
Ein Eisbär, der in der Arktis
schwimmt, aufgenommen von Paul
Nicklen.

b. Across the generations, I see
that people can’t get enough of
each other... – Über alle Ge-
nerationen hinweg sehe ich
Menschen, die nicht genug von-
einander bekommen...

The English sentence in example (11-a) contains
a non-finite ing-clause. This clause type has dir-
ect equivalents in form of present participle in
German schwimmend (“swimming”). However,
the English ing-form is used much more widely
than the German present participle (Durrell, 2011,
p.281–285). In particular, participial clauses are
restricted to formal written registers in German
and can sound stilted and they are used much less
frequently than clauses with ing-forms in English
(Durrell, 2011, p.281–285). To our knowledge,
there are no corpus-based studies confirming this
quantitatively. Königs (2011) provides a number
of examples as possibilities of translation equival-
ents for English ing-clauses. However, statistical
evidence is missing. We believe that our dataset
can be used as a resource for this kind of empir-
ical evidence.

Explicitation examples related to this structure
include various way of the source reformulation,
as in example (12). Here, a nominal phrase was
reformulated into a nominal phrase with a clause
containing the exophoric pronoun es.

(12) Clouds are the most egalitarian of
nature’s displays, because we
all have a good, fantastic view
of the sky. – Wolken sind
die größten Gleichmacher, wenn es um
die Schönheit der Natur geht, weil wir
alle einen gleich guten Blick auf den
Himmel haben.

50% of the PRON-nsubj structures in the English
sources that were not aligned to any structures in
German include speaker and addressee references.
This discrepancy is a clear indicator of the con-
trasts in pragmatics and style of speeches in Eng-
lish and German and goes in hand with what was
stated by House (2014) who provides several di-
mensions of such contrasts, e.g. addressee (Eng-
lish) vs. content (German) orientation in texts.

(13) a. If you have fluid with no wall to sur-
round it and keep pressure up, you
have a puddle. – Eine Flüssigkeit
ohne eine Wand, die sie umgibt und
den Druck aufrechterhält, ist eine
Pfütze.

b. And if you go there, you say, “ Hey,
everybody’s really healthy.” Und
wenn man dorthin geht und sagt:
“Hey, jeder ist kerngesund.”

In example (13-a), the English you does not have
any correspondences in the German translation,
whereas you in example (13-b) is transferred to
man (“one”).

The other 50% of discrepancy cases include the
third person pronouns, with it being most frequent
among other forms (43% out of all 3rd person pro-
nouns and 21% of all the PRON-nsubj structures).

These cases also reveal language contrasts such
as differences between certain syntactic construc-
tions in English in German. For instance, the
German coordinated clause with a negation an
manchen Tagen nicht in (14-a) does not require
a repetition of the subject, whereas the English
clause does.

In example (14-b), it introduces a cleft sentence
construction. These are frequent in English but

79



used much less frequently in German, where the
topic can be shifted into initial position before the
verb (Durrell, 2011, p. 455).

(14) a. Some days it goes up and some days
it doesn’t go up. – An manchen Ta-
gen geht er hoch und an manchen
Tagen nicht.

b. And so it was that day that we de-
cided we needed to build a crisis text
hotline. – Und an diesem Tag be-
schlossen wir, dass wir eine Krisen-
SMS-Hotline einrichten mussten.

6 Discussion and Future Work

To our knowledge, this paper is the first attempt
to quantitatively describe alignment discrepancies
between English-German discourse-related phe-
nomena from a language contrastive perspective.
This approach is novel and can be characterised
as data-driven, as we use “bottom-up” procedures
instead of theory-driven ones that start from the
grammar-based contrasts and then use data to find
quantitative evidence. This is a new approach of
contrast discovery.

Although we concentrated on a limited num-
ber of patterns only and described some particu-
lar causes of the discrepancies, we were able to
obtain interesting observations, e.g. those on the
article use with generics or the use of non-finite
constructions and their alternatives in German in
English. Although these cases are described in
traditional grammars, corpus data shows a differ-
ent behaviour, especially when spoken data is con-
cerned.

We were not able to provide much evidence
for systematic translation-process-driven discrep-
ancies. However, we could see that they are
also present in our data. We believe that a more
detailed quantitative and qualitative analysis of
discrepancy sources would provide more corpus
evidence for the variation across the two languages
under analysis. Our approach, as well as the par-
allel dataset created allows for such an analysis.

Moreover, the information on systematic dis-
crepancies could serve the task of alignment im-
provement. For instance, we observed a great
number of cases when a pronoun does not have or
need a corresponding element in the parallel sen-
tence. These cases are important for MT model
development. Naive models for pronouns often
lead to overgeneration of such elements in the tar-

get language. Having the information on such
cases, we could think of ways of integrating them
into the models to avoid the overgeneration.

Our future work will include a more detailed
analysis of discrepancy sources. For language
contrasts, we will investigate further patterns that
are less frequent but not less important. It would
be also interesting to look into the patterns that
occur either in the English or in the German sen-
tences only. Besides, we will extend our analysis
on explicitation using Klaudy’s classification of
various types of explicitations as a starting point
(Klaudy, 2008). Then, we will define a scale for
coreferential explicitness based on Kunz’s reduced
scale of Accessibility (Kunz, 2010, p. 76) and ex-
isting analyses of connective explicitation (Den-
turck, 2012; Zufferey and Cartoni, 2014).

Acknowledgements

Christian Hardmeier was supported by the
Swedish Research Council under project 2012-
916 Discourse-Oriented Statistical Machine
Translation. We used computing resources on the
Abel cluster, owned by the University of Oslo and
the Norwegian metacenter for High Performance
Computing (NOTUR), provided through the
Nordic Language Processing Laboratory (NLPL).

References
Dagmar Barton, Nadine Kolb, and Tanja Kupisch.

2015. Definite article use with generic refer-
ence in german: an empirical study. Zeits-
chrift für Sprachwissenschaft 34:147–173.
https://doi.org/10.1515/zfs-2015-0009.

Viktor Becher. 2011a. Explicitation and implicita-
tion in translation. A corpus-based study of English-
German and German-English translations of busi-
ness texts. Ph.D. thesis, Universität Hamburg.

Viktor Becher. 2011b. When and why do translators
add connectives? a corpus-based study. Target 23.

Steven Bird, Edward Loper, and Ewan Klein.
2009. Natural Language Processing with Python.
O’Reilly Media.

Shoshana Blum-Kulka. 1986. Shifts of cohesion and
coherence in translation. In Juliane House and
Shoshana Blum-Kulka, editors, Interlingual and in-
tercultural communication, Gunter Narr, Tübingen,
pages 17–35.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast de-
pendency parsing is not a contradiction. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference

80



on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010). Col-
ing 2010 Organizing Committee, pages 89–97.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/C10-1011.

Kathelijne Denturck. 2012. Explicitation vs.
implicitation: a bidirectional corpus-based
analysis of causal connectives in french
and dutch translations. ACROSS LAN-
GUAGES AND CULTURES 13(2):211–227.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1556/Acr.13.2012.2.5.

Martin Durrell. 2011. Hammer’s German Grammar
and Usage. Routledge, London and New York, 5
edition.

Yulia Grishina and Manfred Stede. 2015. Knowledge-
lean projection of coreference chains across lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on
Building and Using Comparable Corpora, Beijing,
China. page 14.

Juliane House. 2014. Translation Quality Assessment.
Past and Present. Routledge.

Kinga Klaudy. 2008. Explicitation. In Mona Baker
and Gabriela Saldanha, editors, Routledge Encyclo-
pedia of Translation Studies, Routledge, London &
New York, pages 104–108. 2 edition.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics on Human Language Technology. Ed-
monton (Canada), pages 48–54.

Karin Königs. 2011. Übersetzen Englisch - Deutsch.
Lernen mit System. Oldenbourg Verlag, Olden-
bourg, 3 edition. Vollstäädig überarbeitete Auflage.

Manfred Krifka, Francis J. Pelletier, Gregory N.
Carlson, Alice ter Meulen, Gennaro Chierchia, and
Godehard Link. 1995. Genericity: An introduction.
In Gregory N. Carlson and Francis J. Pelletier, edit-
ors, The generic book, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL, pages 1–124.

K.A. Kunz. 2010. Variation in English and Ger-
man Nominal Coreference: A Study of Polit-
ical Essays. Saarbrücker Beiträge zur Sprach-
und Translationswissenschaft. Peter Lang. ht-
tps://books.google.de/books?id=F jmEbmeGnoC.

Kerstin Kunz and Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski.
2015. Cross-linguistic analysis of discourse vari-
ation across registers. Special Issue of Nordic
Journal of English Studies 14(1):258–288.

Kerstin Kunz and Erich Steiner. 2012. Towards a com-
parison of cohesive reference in english and german:
System and text. In M. Taboada, S. Doval Suárez,
and E. González Álvarez, editors, Contrastive Dis-
course Analysis. Functional and Corpus Perspect-
ives, Equinox, London.

Thomas Meyer and Bonnie Webber. 2013. Implicita-
tion of discourse connectives in (machine) transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse
in Machine Translation. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria, pages 19–26.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-3303.

Thomas Mueller, Helmut Schmid, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2013. Efficient higher-order CRFs for mor-
phological tagging. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Seattle, Washington, USA, pages 322–
332. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1032.

Joakim Nivre, Cristina Bosco, Jinho Choi, Marie-
Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Richárd Far-
kas, Jennifer Foster, Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg,
Jan Hajič, Jenna Kanerva, Veronika Laippala, Aless-
andro Lenci, Teresa Lynn, Christopher Manning,
Ryan McDonald, Anna Missilä, Simonetta Monte-
magni, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Sil-
veira, Maria Simi, Aaron Smith, Reut Tsarfaty, Ver-
onika Vincze, and Daniel Zeman. 2015. Universal
dependencies 1.0. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library
at the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics,
Charles University. http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-
1464.

Michael Novak and Anna Nedoluzhko. 2015. Cor-
respondences between czech and english core-
ferential expressions. Discours [En ligne] 16.
http://discours.revues.org/9058.

Albert Oosterhof. 2004. In Fred Karlsson, editor, Pro-
ceedings of the 20 th Scandinavian Conference of
Linguistics. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, page
1–22.

Oana Postolache, Dan Cristea, and Constantin Orasan.
2006. Tranferring coreference chains through word
alignment. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Sandrine Zufferey and Bruno Cartoni. 2014. A multi-
factorial analysis of explicitation in translation. Tar-
get 26(3):361–384.

81


