



















































Unsupervised Event Clustering and Aggregation from Newswire and Web Articles


Proceedings of the 2017 EMNLP Workshop on Natural Language Processing meets Journalism, pages 62–67
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Event Clustering and Aggregation from Newswire
and Web Articles

Swen Ribeiro
LIMSI, CNRS

Univ. Paris-Sud
Université Paris-Saclay

swen.ribeiro@limsi.fr

Olivier Ferret
CEA, LIST,

Gif-sur-Yvette,
F-91191 France.

olivier.ferret@cea.fr

Xavier Tannier
LIMSI, CNRS

Univ. Paris-Sud
Université Paris-Saclay

xavier.tannier@limsi.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we present an unsupervised
pipeline approach for clustering news arti-
cles based on identified event instances in
their content. We leverage press agency
newswire and monolingual word align-
ment techniques to build meaningful and
linguistically varied clusters of articles
from the Web in the perspective of a
broader event type detection task. We vali-
date our approach on a manually annotated
corpus of Web articles.

1 Introduction

In the context of news production, an event is the
characterization of a significant enough change in
a space-time context to be reported as newsworthy
content. This definition fits with definitions pro-
posed in other contexts such as the ACE 2005 and
TAC KBP Event evaluations or work such as (Cy-
bulska and Vossen, 2014; Mitamura et al., 2015),
which generally view each event as “something
that happens at a particular place and time”, im-
plying changes in the state of the world and in-
volving participants. In accordance with ontolo-
gies about events such as the Simple Event Model
(SEM) ontology (van Hage et al., 2011), events
can be categorized into different types, for exam-
ple “elections” or “earthquakes”, gathering mul-
tiple real-life instances, for example the “2017
UK General Election” or the “2012 French Pres-
idential Election”. These instances are reported
by journalists through varying textual mentions.
Event extraction is a challenging task that has re-
ceived increasing interest in the past years through
many formulations such as event identification or

event detection. It is also an important subtask of
larger NLP applications such as document sum-
marization and event schema induction. Several
approaches have been used to tackle the different
aspects of this task, particularly in an unsupervised
fashion, from linguistic pipelines (Filatova et al.,
2006; Huang et al., 2016) to topic modeling ap-
proaches (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2011; Cheung
et al., 2013) and more recently neural networks
(Nguyen et al., 2016). While the definition and
granularity of an event varies with the task and ob-
jectives at hand, most event identification systems
exploit mentions to produce type-level representa-
tions.

We propose to address the unsupervised event
extraction task through two subtasks: first, un-
supervised event instance extraction and second,
event type extraction. This paper will focus on our
efforts regarding the first step, e.g. unsupervised
event instance extraction. In this perspective, we
present a method based on clustering algorithms
leveraging news data from different sources. We
believe that this first step might act as a bridge
between the surface forms that are mentions and
the more abstract concept of instances and types of
events. Moreover, the context of this work is the
ASRAEL project, which aims at providing opera-
tional tools for journalists, and this instance/type
segmentation seems relevant in the perspective of
further event-driven processing developments.

Our clustering approach considers three dimen-
sions: time, space and content. A content align-
ment system is adapted from Sultan et al. (2014)
and a time and space-aware similarity function is
proposed in order to aggregate articles about the
same event.

We work with a large collection of English news

62



Figure 1: Overview of the system.

and Web articles, where each article describes an
event: the main topic of the article is a specific
event, and other older events are mentioned in or-
der to put it into perspective. Thus, we consider an
event associated with an article.

Our system’s objective is to build clusters of ar-
ticles describing the same exact real-life event, e.g
the same event instance. We adopt two definitions
of the relation “same event” (strict and loose) and
evaluate through these two definitions.

2 Two-step Clustering

Our approach is structured as a pipeline includ-
ing a two-step clustering with an additional filter-
ing step at the end. The first step leverages an
homogeneous corpus of news articles for build-
ing focused and “clean” clusters corresponding to
event instances. The second step exploits these
focused clusters for clustering documents coming
from the Web that are more noisy but also more
likely to bring new information about the consid-
ered events. Figure 1 illustrates this pipeline.

2.1 Corpora

The first clustering step (represented in blue on
Figure 1) is performed on a corpus from Agence
France-Presse (AFP) news agency. Each news ar-
ticle comes with several metadata providing addi-
tional information about its time-space context of
creation, such as its UTC time-stamp, and its con-
tent, through International Press Telecommunica-
tions Council (IPTC) NewsCodes. NewsCodes are
a standard subject taxonomy created and main-
tained by the IPTC, with a focus on text.

From the 1,400+ existing NewsCodes, we se-
lected 72 that can be viewed as event types1, cov-

1A user-friendly tree visualization of all the NewsCodes is
available at http://show.newscodes.org/index.
html?newscodes=subj.

ering as many event types as possible without
overlapping with one another, and retrieved all
news articles tagged with at least one of these
NewsCodes. This resulted in a corpus of about
52,000 documents for the year 2015.

The second clustering step (in orange on Fig-
ure 1) takes as input news articles crawled from
a list of Web news feeds in English. We used a
corpus of 1.3 million Web news articles published
in 2015, from about 20 different Web news sites
(3,700 documents/day in average) including the
RSS feeds of the New-York Times, the BBC or
the Wall Street Journal.

In both corpora, we process only the title and
first paragraph (usually one or two sentences) of
the documents, under the assumption that they fol-
low the journalistic rule of the 5Ws: the lead of
an article must provide information about what,
when, where, who and why.

2.2 Approach

2.2.1 Press Agency Clustering

The first clustering step computes the similarity
matrix of the AFP news by the means of the All
Pairs Similarity Search (APSS) algorithm (Ba-
yardo et al., 2007) and applies to it the Markov
Clustering (MCL) algorithm (van Dongen, 2000).
News are represented by a bag-of-word repre-
sentation including the lemmatized form of their
nouns, adjectives and verbs.

The similarity function between two documents
d1 and d2 is the following:

sim(d1, d2) =
cos(d1, d2)
eδ/24

where cos(d1, d2) is the cosine similarity and
δ is the difference between the documents creation
times (in hours). This time decay ensures that two
similar but different events, occurring at different
moments, will not be grouped together. Only simi-
larities above a threshold τ have been considered2.

This first step yields small and instance-focused
clusters of press agency news articles only. While
they can be considered high quality content, they
are quite homogeneous and lack variety in their
wording, and could not be used for broader tasks
such as event type-level detection. An example of
output for this step is provided in Figure 2.

2A grid search led to τ = 0.5.

63



Hundreds dead in Nepal quake, avalanche triggered on Ever-
est. A massive 7.8 magnitude earthquake killed hundreds of
people Saturday as it ripped through large parts of Nepal,
toppling office blocks and towers in Kathmandu and trigger-
ing an avalanche that hit Everest base camp.
Nepal quake kills 1,200, sparks deadly Everest avalanche. A
massive earthquake killed more than 1,200 people Saturday
as it tore through large parts of Nepal, toppling office blocks
and towers in Kathmandu and triggering a deadly avalanche
at Everest base camp.
Hundreds dead in Nepal quake, deadly avalanche on Everest.
A massive 7.8 magnitude earthquake killed more than 900
people Saturday as it ripped through large parts of Nepal,
toppling office blocks and towers in Kathmandu and trigger-
ing a deadly avalanche that hit Everest base camp.

Figure 2: 3 of 5 AFP news articles clustered to-
gether. While they indeed cover the same event
instance, there are few wording variations between
them, limiting their interest for broader event de-
tection and assimilated tasks.

2.2.2 Web Article Extension
In this step, we aim to alleviate the lack of vari-
ability of our AFP news article clusters by leverag-
ing their high focus to aggregate Web documents
about the same event instances.

To do so, we identify the first article published
in each AFP cluster (using the time-stamp) and re-
trieve all Web articles in the next 24 hours. This is
based on the assumption that press agencies are
a primary source of trustworthy information for
most news feeds, so it would be rare to find men-
tions of an event instance before an article was re-
leased, especially in an international context. We
call this article the “reference”.

We first perform a first “coarse-grain” ag-
glomeration by performing low-threshold cosine
similarity-based clustering between the AFP ref-
erence and all Web articles for the given 24-hour
timespan. This results in smaller subsets of data to
feed the next module in the pipeline.

We then use the monolingual word alignment
system described in Sultan et al. (2014). This sys-
tem performs a word-to-word alignment between
two sentences by applying a series of alignment
modules focusing each on a specific type of lin-
guistic units. The alignment process starts with
n-grams of words (with n > 2) including at least
one content word. Then, named entities are con-
sidered, followed by content words and finally,
stopwords. While alignment of n-grams of words
and named-entities is based only on string match-
ing (exact match for n-grams, partial for named
entities as the system uses Stanford NER to re-
solve acronyms and matching partial mentions),

the system also relies on contextual evidence for
other linguistic units, e.g: syntactic dependencies
and textual neighborhood. Textual neighborhood
is defined as a window of the next and previous 3
content words surrounding each word being con-
sidered for an alignment. The system then com-
putes a similarity score between each candidate
pair available based on this evidence, and selects
the highest scored pair for a given word as the cho-
sen alignment. We adapted the system to better
fit our needs by extending the stopword list, first
aligning unigram exact matches and using the ab-
sence of matching content words or named enti-
ties as an early stopping condition of the alignment
process.

For each AFP cluster, we perform alignment be-
tween the reference (earliest article) and each Web
article from the subset. This allows us to build a
word alignment matrix where each column con-
tains the words in a document and each line shows
how each word of the reference has aligned across
all documents.

We then compute a score for each document,
taking into account how many words in a docu-
ment have been aligned with the reference, and
how many times a reference word has found an
alignment across all documents.

Figure 3 illustrates how this score is computed.
We first build the binary alignment matrix B
where columns represent documents and rows rep-
resent term alignments. If a term i (out of M
aligned terms) from document j (out of N docu-
ments) has been aligned with a term from the ref-
erence, then Bi,j = 1, otherwise Bi,j = 0. We
then compute a weight for each alignment, lead-
ing to a vector Align such as for each term i:

Aligni =
N∑
j=0

Bi,j

The absolute alignment score of each docu-
ment j is then:

sj =
M∑
i=0

Wi,j

where W = B × Align. Finally, we normalize
these by the scores that the reference itself would
have obtained.

Once we have scored the documents of a clus-
ter, we sort them and find the greatest gap between

64



Figure 3: Document scoring.

two consecutive scores (scree test). Only the best-
ranked documents before this elbow value are kept
as event instance driven document clusters.

3 Evaluation and Results

In our evaluation, we focus on assessing the qual-
ity of the clusters produced at the end of the
alignment filtering step. We performed our ex-
periments on the AFP and Web data for the
whole year 2015. Considering that the AFP corpus
sometimes develops more “France-” and “Europe-
centric” content while our Web corpus is more
“Anglo-Saxon-centered”, we need to ensure that
we evaluate on event instances that are covered
in both corpora, which is the case in the resulting
outputs of the coarse-grain agglomeration phase,
by construction. We therefore selected 12 of these
“pre-clusters” of event instances, based on the no-
table events of the year 2015 as per Wikipedia3.
This selection is described in Table 1. The Web
articles in these intermediary outputs are sorted by
descending order of their cosine similarity to the
AFP reference. This ordering will serve as a base-
line to evaluate the capacity of the alignment mod-
ule to produce more relevant clusters, the docu-
ments processed at both steps being the same.

We ran AFP clustering and “coarse-grain” ag-
glomeration, identified the resulting intermediary
outputs that corresponded to our 12 selected event
instances (content and time-stamp wise). We then
ran the alignment phase, picked the 50 best-ranked
Web articles in each cluster obtained from the se-
lected outputs and tagged them manually with a
relevance attribute as follows:
• 0: The document is not related to the refer-
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2015

France seizes passports of
would-be jihadists. Febru-
ary 23rd

Protesters clash with police
in St Louis, Mo., USA. Au-
gust 20th

Cyclone Pam hit Vanuatu
archipelago. March 15th

Facebook vows to combat
racist content on German
platform. September 14th

UK General Election cam-
paign start. March 30th

Wildfires rampage across
northern California.
September 14th

Magnitude 7.9 earthquake
hits Nepal. April 25th

Paris Attacks. November
13th

Pakistan police kill head of
anti-Shiite group. July 7th

Swedish police arrest man
for plotting terror attack.
November 20th

ISIS Truck bombing in
Baghdad market. August
13th

Typhoon Melor causes
heavy flooding in Philip-
pines. December 16th

Table 1: The 12 events of our gold standard.

ence event considered;
• 1: The document has a loose relation to the

reference event;
• 2: The document has a strict relation to the

reference event.
We define strict and loose relation as follows: a
strict relation means that the document is focused
on the event and differ from the reference news
article only by its wording or additional/missing
information; a loose relation designates a docu-
ment that is not focused on the event, but provides
a news that is so specific to this event that its men-
tion is core to the overall information provided.
Examples of strict and loose relations are provided
in Figure 4.

This distinction was introduced when facing
two particular types of documents: death toll up-
dates and responsibility claims for terrorist at-
tacks. In both cases, the causal events (attack or
natural disaster) are first released as they are in-

65



Magnitude 7.5 earthquake hits Nepal: USGS. A powerful 7.5
magnitude earthquake struck Nepal on Saturday, the United
States Geological Survey said, with strong tremors felt across
the Himalayan nation and parts of India.
101 dead as 7.8 quake hits Nepal, causing big damage. A
powerful earthquake struck Nepal Saturday, killing at least
71 people as the violently shaking earth, collapsed houses,
leveled centuries-old temples and triggered avalanches in the
Himalayas.
Nepal quake toll reaches 688: government. KATHMANDU
(Reuters) - The death toll from a powerful earthquake that
struck Nepal on Saturday has risen to 688, a senior home
ministry official told Reuters, with 181 people killed in the
capital Kathmandu.

Figure 4: Examples of strict and loose relations.
The first text is from the reference news article,
the second one is assessed as “strict” relation, the
third one as a “loose” relation.

formation of their own. Afterwards, death tolls
and claims become stand-alone newsworthy con-
tent and are updated independently, yet remaining
tightly connected to their causal event.

We use the same metrics as described in Glavaš
and Šnajder (2013): mean R-precision (R-prec.)
and mean average precision (MAP) are computed
over the complete ordering of all the documents in
the cluster with:

R-prec =
r

R

where r = number of relevant retrieved docu-
ments and R = total number of relevant docu-
ments to retrieve. Average Precision (AP ) is given
by:

AP =

n∑
k=1

(P (k) ∗ rel(k))
R

where k = rank of the document, P (k) is the pre-
cision at cut-off k and rel(k) = 1 if document k
is relevant, 0 otherwise. We also compute preci-
sion, recall and F-score after applying the elbow
splitting to evaluate it separately.

Our results are detailed in Table 2 by distin-
guishing for each reference (strict or loose) the fig-
ures with (align) and without (no align) the use of
our final alignment algorithm. From that perspec-
tive, Table 2 clearly shows the interest of this last
step, with a significant increase of both MAP and
R-precision when the final alignment algorithm is
applied. This increase is particularly noticeable
for R-precision, which emphasizes the ability of
this last step to rerank the Web documents in a rel-
evant way. Unsurprisingly, the strict reference is
globally more difficult than the loose one, espe-
cially for precision: as loose documents are close

Strict Loose
no align align no align align

MAP 58.6 62.2 63.7 66.9
R-prec. 50.2 60 56.5 63.5

Precision – 70.7 – 77.1
Recall – 80.3 – 76.3
F-score – 75.2 – 77.7

Table 2: Performance of our event instance clus-
tering system. Average values for the 12 events.

to strict documents, the overall system tends to
select more false positives with the strict refer-
ence. Logically, the loose reference makes recall
decrease, but very slightly.

From a qualitative perspective, we observed
several phenomena. Sometimes, the journalis-
tic coverage of an event extends greatly from
the time-space context of the mentioned instance,
which tends to have a negative impact on preci-
sion. For example, in our corpus, the 13 Novem-
ber terrorist attacks of Paris have caused many of-
ficial reactions worldwide as well as actions taken
through social media that have been covered on
their own, all in a very short period of time. More-
over, the event itself might be complex in nature:
while the event “Paris Attacks” can be restricted
to the city of Paris on one particular night (uni-
fied time-space context), it is in fact composite,
consisting in multiple attacks of different natures
(shootings and bombings). For our system, this
results in clusters of abnormal sizes (700+ docu-
ments clustered in this case, against an usual max-
imum of 100+). In such cases, the number of an-
notated documents in the gold standard can be too
low, which is an obstacle to the correct evaluation
of the output. These abnormal clusters also have
another characteristic: being composed of signif-
icantly more documents, the distribution of their
alignment scores tends to be smoother, making the
scree-test less reliable.

4 Conclusion and Perspectives

In this paper, we introduced an unsupervised
pipeline aiming at producing event instance driven
clusters of news articles. To do so, we leverage ho-
mogeneous high-quality news agency articles to
identify event instances and find linguistic varia-
tions in their expression from Web news articles.
Our experimental results validate our approach as
a groundwork for future extensions in the broader
task of grouping events according to their type and
inducing a shared representation of each type of

66



event by identifying and generalizing the partici-
pants of events.

5 Acknowledgment

This work has been partially funded by French Na-
tional Research Agency (ANR) under project AS-
RAEL (ANR-15-CE23-0018). We would like to
thank the French News Agency (AFP) for provid-
ing us with the corpus.

References
Roberto J. Bayardo, Yiming Ma, and Ramakrishnan

Srikant. 2007. Scaling up all pairs similarity search.
In 16th International World Wide Web Conference
(WWW’07). pages 131–140.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2011.
Template-based information extraction without
the templates. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2011). Portland, Oregon, USA,
pages 976–986.

Jackie Chi Kit Cheung, Hoifung Poon, and Lucy Van-
derwenden. 2013. Probabilistic frame induction. In
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013. Atlanta, Georgia,
USA, pages 837–846.

Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2014. Using a
Sledgehammer to Crack a Nut? Lexical Diversity
and Event Coreference Resolution. In Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’14). Reykjavik, Iceland.

Elena Filatova, Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and Kath-
leen McKeown. 2006. Automatic creation of do-
main templates. In Proceedings of the COL-
ING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions.
pages 207–214.

Goran Glavaš and Jan Šnajder. 2013. Recognizing
identical events with graph kernels. In 51st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2013). Sofia, Bulgaria, pages 797–
803.

Lifu Huang, Taylor Cassidy, Feng Xiaocheng, Heng Ji,
Clare R. Voss, Jiawei Han, and Avirup Sil. 2016.
Liberal event extraction and event schema induc-
tion. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2016). Berlin, Germany, pages 258–268.

Teruko Mitamura, Yukari Yamakawa, Susan Holm,
Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Seth Kulick, and Stephanie
Strassel. 2015. Event Nugget Annotation: Processes
and Issues. In 3rd Workshop on EVENTS: Defi-
nition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation.
Denver, Colorado, pages 66–76.

Thien Huu Nguyen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ralph Grish-
man. 2016. Joint event extraction via recurrent neu-
ral networks. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016.
San Diego, California, USA, pages 300–309.

Md Arafat Sultan, Steven Bethard, and Tamara Sum-
mer. 2014. Back to Basics for Monolingual Align-
ment: Exploiting Word Similarity and Contextual
Evidence. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (TACL) 2:219–230.

Stijn van Dongen. 2000. Graph Clustering by Flow
Simulation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Utrecht.

Willem Robert van Hage, Véronique Malaisé, Roxane
Segers, Laura Hollink, and Guus Schreiber. 2011.
Design and use of the simple event model (sem).
Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the
World Wide Web 9(2):128–136.

67


