




































The Lemlat 3.0 Package for Morphological Analysis of Latin 

 
Marco Passarotti 

CIRCSE Research Centre 
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 

marco.passarotti@unicatt.it 

 
Eleonora Litta 

CIRCSE Research Centre 
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 

eleonoramaria.litta@unicatt.it 

Marco Budassi 
Università degli Studi di Pavia 

marcobudassi@hotmail.it 

 
 

Paolo Ruffolo 
CIRCSE Research Centre 

Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 
paolo.ruffolo@posteo.net 

 
  

Abstract 

This paper introduces the main components 
of the downloadable package of the 3.0 ver-
sion of the morphological analyser for Latin 
Lemlat. The processes of word form analysis 
and treatment of spelling variation performed 
by the tool are detailed, as well as the differ-
ent output formats and the connection of the 
results with a recently built resource for deri-
vational morphology of Latin. A light evalua-
tion of the tool’s lexical coverage against a 
diachronic vocabulary of the entire Latin 
world is also provided. 

1 Introduction 
A sector of the research area dealing with lin-
guistic resources and Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) tools that has seen a large growth 
across the last decade is the one dedicated to 
building, sharing and exploiting linguistic re-
sources and NLP tools for ancient languages. 
This has particularly concerned Latin and An-
cient Greek as essential means for accessing and 
understanding the so-called Classical tradition. 

Although Latin was among the first languages 
to be automatically processed with computers 
(thanks to the pioneering work done by the Ital-
ian Jesuit Roberto Busa since the late ‘40s), 
throughout history, computational linguistics has 
mainly focused on living languages. However, 
the start, in 2006, of the first two syntactically 
annotated corpora (treebanks) for Latin 1  gave 

                                                
1 These were the Index Thomisticus Treebank, based on 
texts of Thomas Aquinas (IT-TB; Passarotti, 2009) and the 
Latin Dependency Treebank (LDT; Bamman and Crane, 
2006), on texts of the Classical era. Later on, a third Latin 

rise to a kind of renaissance for linguistic re-
sources and NLP tools for ancient languages. 

Several textual and lexical resources, as well 
as NLP tools, are currently available for Latin. 
Given that out-of-context lemmatisation and 
morphological analysis of word forms are gener-
ally considered basic layers of linguistic analysis 
- in some way, feeding the subsequent ones - 
different morphological analysers were devel-
oped for Latin across the years. These are: Words 
(http://archives.nd.edu/words.html),  
Lemlat (www.lemlat3.eu), Morpheus 
(https://github.com/tmallon/morpheus),  
reimplemented in 2013 as Parsley 
(https://github.com/goldibex/parsley-
core), the PROIEL Latin morphology system 
(https://github.com/mlj/proiel-
webapp/tree/master/lib/morphology) and 
LatMor (http://cistern.cis.lmu.de).  
Morpheus, Parsley and LatMor are all capable of 
analysing word forms into their morphological 
representations including vowel quantity. 

Although Lemlat has proved to be the best 
performing morphological analyser for Latin to-
gether with LatMor2 and the one provided with 
the largest lexical basis (in terms of both selec-
tion of the lexicographic sources and processing 
of attested graphical variants), its impact on the 
research community has been narrowed for years 
by its limited accessibility. Only recently, the 
tool was made freely available, in its 3.0 version, 

                                                                       
treebank was made available in the PROIEL corpus (Haug 
and Jøndal, 2008), which includes the oldest extant versions 
of the New Testament in Indo-European languages and 
Latin texts from both the Classical and Late eras. All the 
three Latin treebanks are dependency-based. 
2 For the results of a comparison between the morphological 
analysers for Latin see Springmann et al. (2016, p. 389). 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 24



thanks to the collaboration between the CIRCSE 
Research Centre in Milan and the Istituto di Lin-
guistica Computazionale of CNR in Pisa (ILC-
CNR). This paper introduces the main compo-
nents of the downloadable package of Lemlat 
3.0.  

2 Lemlat 
First released as a morphological lemmatiser at 
the end of the 1980s at ILC-CNR (v 1.0; Bozzi 
and Cappelli, 1990; Marinone, 1990) and there 
enhanced with morphological features between 
2002 and 2005 (v 2.0; Passarotti, 2004), Lemlat 
relies on a lexical basis resulting from the colla-
tion of three Latin dictionaries (GGG: Georges 
and Georges, 1913-1918; Glare, 1982; Graden-
witz, 1904) for a total of 40,014 lexical entries 
and 43,432 lemmas, as more than one lemma can 
be included in one lexical entry. 

Lemlat was originally built for performing the 
automatic lemmatisation of the texts in the col-
lection of Latin grammarians by Heinrich Keil 
(1855-1880). Since the first version of Lemlat, 
one desideratum was pursuing a philological ap-
proach to lexical data, which was addressed by 
connecting the lexical basis of the tool with 
widely recognised reference dictionaries for Lat-
in, whose contents where collated and recorded 
carefully. In the light of such an approach, 
Georges and Georges (1913-1918) was chosen 
instead of Forcellini’s Lexicon Totius Latinitatis 
(1940). Indeed, although Forcellini is the Latin 
dictionary that comprises the highest number of 
lemmas, Lomanto (1980) demonstrates that 
Georges and Georges shows both a higher lexical 
richness and a better quality of the entries. 

Given that Forcellini is the Latin dictionary 
providing the largest Onomasticon, in the context 
of the development of the 3.0 version of Lemlat, 
its lexical basis was further enlarged by adding 
semi-automatically most of the Onomasticon 
(26,415 lemmas out of 28,178) provided by the 
5th edition of Forcellini (Budassi and Passarotti, 
2016).3 

2.1 Word Form Analysis 
Given an input word form that is recognised by 
Lemlat, the tool produces in output the corre-
sponding lemma(s) and a number of tags convey-
ing (a) the inflectional paradigm of the lemma(s) 
(e.g. first declension noun) and (b) the morpho-

                                                
3 For details about credits of the different versions of Lemlat 
see http://www.lemlat3.eu/about/credits/. 

logical features of the input word form (e.g. sin-
gular nominative), as well as the identification 
number (N_ID) of the lemma(s) in the lexical ba-
sis of Lemlat.4 No contextual disambiguation is 
performed. 

For instance, receiving in input the word form 
acrimoniae ‘pungency’, Lemlat outputs the cor-
responding lemma (acrimonia, N_ID: a0417), the 
tags for its inflectional paradigm (N1: first de-
clension noun) and those for the morphological 
features (feminine singular genitive and dative; 
feminine plural nominative and vocative). 

Lemlat is based on a database that includes 
several tables recording the different formative 
elements (segments) of word forms. The most 
important table is the “lexical look-up table”, 
whose basic component is the so-called LES 
(“LExical Segment”). The LES is defined as the 
invariable part of the inflected form (e.g. acri-
moni for acrimoni-ae). In other words, the LES is 
the sequence (or one of the sequences) of charac-
ters that remains the same in the inflectional par-
adigm of a lemma (hence, the LES does not nec-
essarily correspond either to the word stem or to 
the root). 

Lemlat includes a LES archive, in which LES 
are assigned an N_ID and a number of inflection-
al features among which are a tag for the gender 
of the lemma (for nouns only) and a code (called 
CODLES) for its inflectional category. According 
to the CODLES, the LES is compatible with the 
endings (called SF, “Final Segment”) of its in-
flectional paradigm, which are collected in a sep-
arate table in the database of Lemlat. For exam-
ple, the CODLES for the LES acrimoni is N1 (first 
declension nouns) and its gender is F (feminine). 
The word form acrimoniae is thus analysed as 
belonging to the LES acrimoni because the seg-
ment –ae is recognised as an ending compatible 
with a LES with CODLES N1. 

Segmenting a word form into the structure LES 
+ SF (acrimoni-ae) is just one of the possible op-
tions provided by Lemlat. Indeed, on one side, 
word forms can be analysed without any seg-
mentation like in the case of uninflected words 
(e.g. semper ‘always’). On the other side, more 
complex segmentation structures can be at work, 
including several different segments. This is the 
case, for instance, of the word form castigatissi-
musque ‘and the most punished’ (literal transla-
tion), which is segmented by Lemlat into castig-
at-issim-us-que, where castig is a LES (for the 

                                                
4  The tagset of Lemlat is compliant with EAGLES 
(http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/browse.html). 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 25



verb castigo, ‘to punish’), at and issim are two 
SM (“Middle Segments”) representing the infix 
respectively for perfect participle (–at–) and su-
perlative degree (–issim–), us is a SF (singular 
masculine nominative) and the enclitics que is a 
SPF (“Post Final Segment”). Overall, the segmen-
tation of castigatissimusque has the structure 
LES+SM+SM+SF+SPF. Each kind of segment is 
stored in a specific table in the database of Lem-
lat. 

Finally, if the analysed word is morphological-
ly derived or if it is the basis of one or more 
morphologically derived word(s), its derivation 
cluster is provided (see Section 3). For instance, 
the input word form amabilem is analysed by 
Lemlat as singular masculine/feminine accusa-
tive of the adjective amabilis ‘lovable’. This 
lemma is part of a derivation cluster: amabilis is 
derived from the verb amo ‘to love’ and it is the 
basis for two derived words, namely the noun 
amabilitas ‘loveliness’ and the adjective inama-
bilis ‘unlovely’. Relations are connected with the 
specific word formation rule they instantiate. For 
instance, amabilis is stored as a second class 
deverbal adjective with suffix -a-bil-is. 

2.2 Spelling Variation 
Textual material written in Latin is spread across 
a diachronic span wider than two millennia. Fur-
thermore, Latin texts are distributed all over Eu-
rope and cover various kinds of genres. 

Such a situation makes Latin a language fea-
turing a large amount of spelling variations, due 
to several reasons, among which are the influ-
ence of local dialects, the writing conventions 
(which are subject to changes across time and 
place), as well as the style and the level of educa-
tion of the authors. 

Since its first version, Lemlat was designed to 
address the question of spelling variation. As 
mentioned above, one distinctive feature of Lem-
lat is its strict connection with the reference lexi-
cographic sources. Such a connection motivates 
also the treatment of graphical variants in Lem-
lat. Indeed, the lexical look-up table featuring the 
list of LES includes also those that are used by the 
tool for processing spelling variations. 

In the lexical look-up table, each lexical entry 
in dictionaries corresponds to as many lines as 
are the different LES required by Lemlat to pro-
cess its full inflectional paradigm, spelling varia-
tions included. All lines belonging to the same 
lexical entry are assigned the same N_ID. 

For instance, Glare (1982) records the Faliscan 
spelling variation haba for the first declension 

noun faba ‘horse-bean’. In the lexical look-up 
table of Lemlat, this results into two separate 
lines with the same N_ID. One line reports the 
LES fab (for faba). The other has the LES hab (for 
haba). Both the LES are assigned a code for gen-
der (feminine) and the same CODLES (N1). A 
specific field in the table is reserved for selecting 
the LES to use for building the lemma in the case 
of lexical entries featuring more than one LES. 
For faba, the LES fab is the one used, as the 
lemma in Glare (1982) is faba (and not haba). 

Along with recording different LES for the 
same lexical entry, there is also another strategy 
used by Lemlat to process spelling variations. In 
the case of variations that apply to sets of words 
sharing some graphical properties, a field in the 
look-up table records a code that permits to alter 
the LES while processing the data. For instance, a 
large number of words including the prefix 
trans– have forms featuring graphical variations 
of trans–, namely tra– and tras– (trans– is the 
citation form of the prefix reported by Glare, 
1982). In Lemlat, there are 35 lexical entries 
showing this spelling variation. All their LES are 
assigned a specific code (t02) in the lexical 
look-up table, which permits the alternation be-
tween the graphical forms of trans–. An example 
is the lemma transfero ‘to transport’. Although 
its LES is transfer, the presence of t02 makes 
Lemlat able to process also the graphical variants 
trafero and trasfero. 

Such an approach to spelling variation is at the 
same time a pro and a con. On one side, it makes 
Lemlat lexicologically motivated, as only those 
variations that are recorded in the reference dic-
tionaries are processed by the tool. On the other, 
it makes Lemlat rigid, as it allows to process on-
ly those graphical variants that are explicitly rec-
orded in the lexical look-up table.  

3 Derivational Morphology 
The analysis of inflectional morphology provid-
ed by Lemlat has been recently enhanced with 
information on derivational morphology. Built 
within the context of an ongoing project funded 
by the EU Horizon 2020 Research and Innova-
tion Programme (under the Marie Skłodowska-
Curie Individual Fellowship), Word Formation 
Latin (WFL) is a derivational morphology re-
source for Latin that can also work as an NLP 
tool, thanks to its strict relation with Lemlat (Lit-
ta et al., 2016). 

In WFL the lemmas of Lemlat are connected 
by Word Formation Rules (WFRs). In WFL, 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 26



there are two main types of WFRs: (a) derivation 
and (b) compounding. Derivation rules are fur-
ther organised into two subcategories: (a) affixal, 
in its turn split into prefixal and suffixal, and (b) 
conversion, a derivation process that changes the 
Part of Speech (PoS) of the input word without 
affixation. 

WFL is built in two steps. First, WFRs are de-
tected. Then, they are applied to lexical data. Af-
fixal WFRs are found both according to previous 
literature on Latin derivational morphology (e.g. 
Fruyt, 2011; Jenks, 1911) and in a semi-
automatic manner. The latter is performed by 
extracting from the list of lemmas of Lemlat the 
most frequent sequences of characters occurring 
on the left (prefixes) and on the right (suffixes) 
sides of lemmas. The PoS for WFRs input and 
output lemmas as well as their inflectional cate-
gory are manually assigned. Further affixal 
WFRs are found by comparison with data. So 
far, 244 affixal WFRs have been detected: 94 
prefixal and 150 suffixal. 

Compounding and conversion WFRs are man-
ually listed by considering all the possible com-
binations of main PoS (verbs, nouns, adjectives), 
regardless of their actual instantiations in the lex-
ical basis. For instance, there are four possible 
types of conversion WFRs involving verbs: V-
To-N (claudo → clausa; ‘to close’ → ‘cell’), V-
To-A (eligo → elegans; ‘to pick out’ → ‘accus-
tomed to select, tasteful’), N-To-V (magister → 
magistro; ‘master’ → ‘to rule’), A-To-V (celer 
→ celero; ‘quick’ → ‘to quicken’). Each com-
pounding and conversion WFR type is further 
filtered by the inflectional category of both input 
and output. For instance, A1-To-V1 is the con-
version WFR that derives first conjugation verbs 
(V1) from first class adjectives (A1). 

Applying WFRs to lexical data requires that 
each morphologically derived lemma is assigned 
a WFR and is paired with its base lemma. All 
those lemmas that share a common (not derived) 
ancestor belong to the same “morphological fam-
ily”. For instance, nouns amator ‘lover’ and 
amor ‘love’, and adjective amabilis all belong to 
the morphological family whose ancestor is the 
verb amo. 

WFRs are modelled as one-to-may relations 
between lemmas. These relations are implement-
ed by a table in the database where they are en-
hanced with their attributes (type, category, af-
fix). So far, 299 WFRs have been applied, which 
build 5,348 morphological families and 23,340 
input-output relations. 

The contents of WFL can be accessed via a 
web application (available at 
http://wfl.marginalia.it; Culy et al., forth-
coming), which features a positive balance be-
tween potential of data extraction and simplicity, 
dynamism and interactivity. 

The web application represents the infor-
mation stored in the tables of the database as a 
graph. In this graph, a node is a lemma, and an 
edge is the WFR used to derive the output lemma 
from the input one (or two, in the case of com-
pounds), along with any affix used. The graph is 
represented as a collection of nodes and edges, 
and the set of morphological families is simply 
the set of connected subgraphs. 

Four distinct perspectives to query WFL are 
available from the web application: 
- by WFR – the primary interest is the WFR 

itself. This view enables research questions 
on the behaviour of a specific WFR. For ex-
ample, it is possible to view and download 
the list of all verbs derived from a noun 
through a conversive derivation process (e.g. 
radix ‘root’ → radicor ‘to grow roots’); 

- by affix – it acts similarly as above, but 
works more specifically on affixal behav-
iour. For example, this perspective enables to 
retrieve all masculine nouns featuring the 
suffix –tor and to verify how many of them 
correspond to a female equivalent ending in 
–trix; 

- by PoS – the primary interest is in the PoS of 
input and output lemmas. This view is useful 
for studies on macro-categories of morpho-
logical transformation, like nominalisation 
and verbalisation; 

- by lemma – it focuses on both derived and 
non-derived lemmas. It supports studies on 
the productivity of one specific morphologi-
cal family or a set of morphological families. 

The results of these browsing options are of three 
types: 
- lists of lemmas matching a query; 
- derivational clusters. This type of graph rep-

resents the derivational chain for a specific 
lemma, which includes all the lemmas de-
rived from the lemma selected, as well as all 
those the lemma is derived from; 

- summaries of the application of given WFRs 
to different PoS and the resulting lemmas. 
 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 27



4 Data Processing 
The database of Lemlat 3.0 is available at 
https://github.com/CIRCSE/LEMLAT3, where 
also a Command Line Interface (CLI) implemen-
tation of the tool for Linux, OSX and Windows 
can be downloaded. 

In particular, two versions are made available: 
(a) a client version, which requires a working 
MySQL server (www.mysql.com) containing the 
provided database and (b) a stand-alone version, 
which uses an embedded version of the database. 
Both the client and the stand-alone versions use 
the same CLI interface and can be run either in 
interactive or in batch mode. The interactive 
mode provides the user with the possibility of 
running Lemlat on one input word form at a 
time, selecting the lexical basis to use for analy-
sis (GGG only; Onomasticon only; GGG + On-
omasticon). The batch mode enables to process a 
bunch of word forms by entering either a file 
featuring the list of word forms to analyse or a 
full text. Three different formats are available for 
the output: plain text, XML and Comma-
Separated Values file (CSV). 

The output in the form of a plain text file re-
ports exactly the same information displayed in 
the interactive mode. For each analysis of a pro-
cessed word form, it provides (a) the segmenta-
tion of the word form into its formative elements, 
(b) its morphological features and (c) its lem-
ma(s) with the corresponding PoS. 

The XML output includes the complete analy-
sis for each processed word form organised into 
explicitly named elements and attributes, and can 
be validated against the provided DTD. 

The CSV file provides just basic lemmatisa-
tion, without morphological features. Each ana-
lysed word form is assigned its lemma and PoS 
(with gender for nouns). If a word form is as-
signed more than one lemma, these are provided 
on separate lines. 

The list of the not analysed word forms is pro-
vided in a separate plain text file with the same 
name of the input file and the extension “.unk”. 

Both in the plain text and in the XML output 
files, each lemma is assigned a feature coming 
from WFL that informs if it is morphologically 
simple, i.e. not derived, or complex, i.e. resulting 
from the application of a WFR. Each morpholog-
ically complex lemma is matched with (a) the 
lemma which it derives from (two lemmas, in 
case of compounding), (b) the type of WFR in-
volved, (c) the input and output PoS of the WFR 

and (d) the affix (prefix or suffix) if present in 
the derivation. 

5 Evaluation 
In order to evaluate the lexical coverage of Lem-
lat 3.0 on real texts, the full list of word forms 
extracted from Thesaurus Formarum Totius Lat-
inatis have been lemmatised (TFTL; Tombeur, 
1998). Widely recognised as the reference tool 
par excellence with regard to studies of Latin 
lexicon, TFTL is a large diachronic database col-
lecting the vocabulary of the entire Latin world 
ranging from the ancient Latin literature to Neo-
Latin works. Word forms are assigned their 
number of occurrences in the texts of the differ-
ent eras. 

400,886 out of the total 554,826 different 
forms of TFTL were analysed by Lemlat, for a 
total of 489,441 analyses, returning a coverage 
percentage of 72.254%.5 

However, among the 153,447 forms not ana-
lysed by Lemlat, there are prominently sequenc-
es of letters (e.g. aaa), numbers (e.g. CCC), and 
extremely rare word forms (e.g. aaliza, 1 occur-
rence in TFTL). Results are more reliably evalu-
ated by looking at the number of textual occur-
rences of the words analysed by Lemlat, com-
pared to the total number of occurrences in 
TFTL. The sum of absolute frequencies of all 
word forms in TFTL is 62,922,781. The sum of 
absolute frequencies of those analysed by Lemlat 
is 61,881,702. Thus, Lemlat can analyse 
98.345% of the occurrences in the TFTL texts. 

6 Discussion and Future Work 
Lemlat processes word forms by segmentation, 
finding compatible connections of formative el-
ements, which are recorded in the tables of a da-
tabase. Such rigid approach to morphological 
processing looks quite out-of-date if compared 
with the most widespread techniques currently 
used to perform automatic morphological analy-
sis. In particular, several finite-state packages are 
today available6, which feature both large lexical 
coverage and high flexibility, especially when 
they are connected to data driven techniques for 

                                                
5 The number of analyses is higher than the number of ana-
lysed forms, because a single word form can be assigned 
more than one lemma. 
6 See, for instance, the Helsinki Finite-State Transducer 
(Lindén et al. 2009), the Stuttgart Finite-State Transducer 
Tools (Schmid, 2005), the OpenFST library for weighted 
finite-state transducers (Allauzen et al., 2007) and the Foma 
finite-state library (Hulden, 2009). 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 28



statistical processing with weighted transducers 
(Pirinen, 2015) and for inflectional class infer-
ence (Dreyer et al. 2008). Moreover, the finite-
state approach makes it possible to use the same 
code to handle both analysis and generation. 

The segmentation-based approach pursued by 
Lemlat is due to two main reasons. 

First, despite its recent availability, Lemlat is 
an old tool, being conceived in the early 1980s 
(Marinone, 1983), a time when the finite-state 
turn in computational morphology was still in its 
infancy. 7  Actually, the process of word form 
analysis performed by Lemlat is quite similar to 
that of finite-state morphology, as they share the 
basic assumption that natural language words are 
formed of concatenated “pieces” which are com-
patible to each other. The formative elements 
recognised by Lemlat in word forms can be seen 
as states and their relations as directed arcs con-
trolled by rules. Basically, Lemlat formalises the 
lexicon as a finite-state transducer and analyses 
words as sequences of compatible segments. 
However, two (important) differences remain: (a) 
Lemlat is not meant to generate morphologically 
well-formed words; (b) Lemlat does not include 
rules for constraining lexical/surface correspond-
ences, as it treats phonological alternations just 
like regular sequences of explicitly recorded 
segments. 

Second, Lemlat was primarily built to address 
the needs of philologists, who are more interest-
ed in processing data according to reference lexi-
cographic sources than in having a flexible and 
computationally efficient tool able to perform 
(also) lexical generation. Indeed, one distinctive 
feature of Lemlat is the quality of its lexical ba-
sis, which enables the tool to process all the 
graphical inflectional variants attested for the 
lexical entries in the reference dictionaries. Alt-
hough such lexical basis allows for quite a broad 
textual coverage (see Section 5), several lemmas 
belonging to different phases of Medieval Latin 
are still missing. For this reason and to keep sup-
porting Lemlat with quality lexicographic 
sources, we plan to expand its lexical basis with 
all the entries of Du Cange’s (1883-1887) Glos-
sarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis. 

Furthermore, while still keeping the original 
philological approach Lemlat is built upon, in the 

                                                
7 The publication that mostly contributed to start such a turn 
is the 1983 dissertation by Kimmo Koskenniemi on a for-
malism to describe phonological alternations in finite-state 
terms, which he called “Two-Level Morphology” (Kosken-
niemi, 1983). An historical overview on finite-state mor-
phology is given by Karttunen and Beesley (2005). 

near future we plan to enhance it with a statisti-
cal guesser, which might process those word 
forms that are not recognised by Lemlat. 

As mentioned, Lemlat is an out-of-context 
morphological analyser. The structure of the 
running text is lost and no contextual disambigu-
ation of multiple analyses is performed. The cur-
rent availability of annotated corpora for Latin, 
like the three dependency treebanks (see Section 
1), made it possible to train a number of proba-
bilistic PoS taggers and lemmatisers. For in-
stance, two parameter files for Latin are available 
for TreeTagger (Schmid, 1999). One file is based 
on the IT-TB, while the other is built upon data 
joint from the three Latin treebanks. Recently, 
pre-trained tagging models for Latin (based on 
the versions of the three Latin treebanks availa-
ble in Universal Dependencies 1.3; 
http://universaldependencies.org/) were 
provided by RDRPOSTagger version 1.2.2 
(Nguyen et al., 2014) with those for other 40 
languages. Tagging accuracy ranges from 90.39 
for the LDT to 98.24 for the IT-TB, PROIEL 
standing somewhere in the middle (95.78).8 

The large lexical coverage and the high quality 
of analysis provided by Lemlat can be helpful for 
improving the performances of PoS taggers, by 
enhancing the tools with a morphological lexicon 
that provides all the possible pairs of lemma and 
morphological features for each word form. For 
instance, such a lexicon is used in popular PoS 
taggers like TreeTagger and MorphoDiTa (Stra-
ková et al. 2014). Although Lemlat was con-
ceived to analyse input words and not to generate 
morphologically well-formed words, the result of 
the analysis performed on TFTL (see Section 5) 
is just a morphological lexicon for Latin provid-
ing large coverage of attested word forms. 

Finally, a web application of Lemlat will be 
made available at www.lemlat3.eu, enabling 
users to process either single words or short 
texts. The web application of Lemlat will be 
linked and merged with that of WFL, thus 
providing one common environment for the on-
line processing and visualisation of both inflec-
tional and derivational morphology of Latin. 

Acknowledgements 
We thank three anonymous reviewers for their 
valuable comments and suggestions, which 
helped to improve the quality of the paper. 
                                                
8 A survey of the accuracy of several taggers based on a 
corpus of Medieval Church Latin is provided by Eger et al. 
(2015). 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 29



References 
Cyril Allauzen, Michael Riley, Johan Schalkwyk, 

Wojciech Skut, and Mehryar Mohri. 2007. 
OpenFst: A General and Efficient Weighted Finite-
State Transducer Library. In Proceedings of the 
Twelfth International Conference on Implementa-
tion and Application of Automata, (CIAA 2007), 
volume 4783 of Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pages 11–23, Springer, Prague, Czech Re-
public. 

David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2006. The De-
sign and Use of a Latin Dependency Treebank. In 
TLT 2006: Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories Conference, 
pages 67–78. 

Andrea Bozzi and Giuseppe Cappelli. 1990. A Project 
for Latin Lexicography: 2. A Latin Morphological 
Analyser. Computer and the Humanities, 24:421–
426. 

Marco Budassi and Marco Passarotti. 2016. Nomen 
Omen. Enhancing the Latin Morphological Ana-
lyser Lemlat with an Onomasticon. In Proceedings 
of the 10th SIGHUM Workshop on Language 
Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, 
and Humanities (LaTeCH 2016), pages 90–94, The 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin. 

Chris Culy, Eleonora Litta, and Marco Passarotti. 
Forthcoming. Visual Exploration of Latin Deriva-
tional Morphology. In Proceedings of the 30th In-
ternational Conference of the Florida Artificial In-
telligence Research Society (FLAIRS-30). 

Markus Dreyer, Jason R. Smith, and Jason Eisner. 
2008. Latent-variable modeling of string transduc-
tions with finite-state methods. In Proceedings of 
the conference on empirical methods in natural 
language processing, pages 1080–1089, Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. 

Charles du Fresne Du Cange et al. 1883-1887. Glos-
sarium Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis. L. Favre, Ni-
ort. 

Steffen Eger, Tim vor der Brück, and Alexander 
Mehler. 2015. Lexicon-assisted tagging and lem-
matization in Latin: A comparison of six taggers 
and two lemmatization methods. In Proceedings of 
the 9th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technol-
ogy for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and 
Humanities (LaTeCH 2015), pages 105–113. 

Egidio Forcellini. 1940. Lexicon Totius Latinitatis / 
ad Aeg. Forcellini lucubratum, dein a Jos. Furla-
netto emendatum et auctum; nunc demum Fr. Cor-
radini et Jos. Perin curantibus emendatius et auc-
tius meloremque in formam redactum adjecto alte-
ra quasi parte Onomastico totius latinitatis opera 
et studio ejusdem Jos. Perin. Typis Seminarii, Pa-
dova. 

Michèle Fruyt. 2011. Word Formation in Classical 
Latin. In James Clackson (ed.), A companion to the 
Latin language. Vol. 132, pages 157–175, John 
Wiley & Sons, Chichester. 

Karl E. Georges and Heinrich Georges. 1913-1918. 
Ausführliches Lateinisch-Deutsches Handwörter-
buch. Hahn, Hannover. 

Peter G.W. Glare. 1982. Oxford Latin Dictionary. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

Otto Gradenwitz. 1904. Laterculi Vocum Latinarum. 
Hirzel, Leipzig. 

Dag T.T. Haug and Marius L. Jøhndal. 2008. Creating 
a Parallel Treebank of the Old Indo-European Bi-
ble Translations. In Proceedings of the Second 
Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural 
Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2008), pages 27–34. 

Mans Hulden. 2009. Foma: a finite-state compiler and 
library. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of 
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 29–32. 

Paul Jenks. 1911. A Manual of Latin Word Formation 
for Secondary Schools. DC Heath & Company, 
Boston, New York etc. 

Lauri Karttunen and Kenneth R. Beesley. 2005. 
Twenty-five years of finite-state morphology. In 
Inquiries Into Words, a Festschrift for Kimmo 
Koskenniemi on his 60th Birthday, pages 71–83. 

Heinrich Keil. 1855-1880. Grammatici Latini. Teub-
ner, Leipzig. 

Kimmo Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level morphology: 
A general computational model for word-form 
recognition and production. Publication 11, Uni-
versity of Helsinki, Department of General Lin-
guistics, Helsinki. 

Kristen Lindén, Miikka Silfverberg, and Tommi 
Pirinen. 2009. HFST Tools for Morphology - An 
Efficient Open-Source Package for Construction of 
Morphological Analyzers. In Cerstin Mahlow and 
Michael Piotrowski (eds.), Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Systems and Frameworks for Compu-
tational Morphology, volume 41 of Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, pages 28–47, Springer, Zur-
ich, Switzerland. 

Eleonora Litta, Marco Passarotti, and Chris Culy. 
2016. Formatio formosa est. Building a Word 
Formation Lexicon for Latin. In Anna Corazza, 
Simonetta Montemagni, and Giovanni Semeraro 
(eds.), Proceedings of the Third Italian Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (CLiC–it 2016). 5-6 
December 2016, Napoli, Italy, pages 185–189, 
aAccademia university press, Collana dell'Associa-
zione Italiana di Linguistica Computazionale, vol. 
2. 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 30



Valeria Lomanto. 1980. Lessici latini e lessicografia 
automatica. Memorie dell’Accademia delle Scienze 
di Torino, 5.4.2:111–269. 

Nino Marinone. 1983. A project for a Latin lexical 
data base. Linguistica Computazionale, 3:175–187. 

Nino Marinone. 1990. A Project for Latin Lexicogra-
phy: 1. Automatic Lemmatization and Word-List. 
Computer and the Humanities, 24:417–420. 

Dat Quoc Nguyen, Dai Quoc Nguyen, Dang Duc 
Pham, and Son Bao Pham. 2014. RDRPOSTagger: 
A Ripple Down Rules-based Part-Of-Speech Tag-
ger. In Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 
14th Conference of the European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL), 
pages 17–20. 

Marco Passarotti. 2004. Development and perspec-
tives of the Latin morphological analyser 
LEMLAT. Linguistica Computazionale, XX-XXI: 
397–414. 

Marco Passarotti. 2009. Theory and Practice of Cor-
pus Annotation in the Index Thomisticus Treebank. 
Lexis, 27:5–23. 

Tommi A. Pirinen. 2015. Using weighted finite state 
morphology with VISL CG-3 – Some experiments 
with free open source Finnish resources. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on “Constraint Gram-
mar-methods, tools and applications” at 
NODALIDA 2015, May 11-13, 2015, pages 29–33, 
Institute of the Lithuanian Language, Vilnius, 
Lithuania. No. 113. Linköping University Electron-
ic Press. 

Helmut Schmid. 1999. Improvements in part-of-
speech tagging with an application to German. 
Natural language processing using very large cor-
pora. pages 13–25, Springer. 

Helmut Schmid. 2005. A Programming Language for 
Finite State Transducers. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Workshop on Finite State Methods in 
Natural Language Processing (FSMNLP 2005), 
Helsinki, Finland. 

Uwe Springmann, Helmut Schmid, and Dietmar Na-
jock. 2016. LatMor: A Latin Finite-State Morphol-
ogy Encoding Vowel Quantity. In Giuseppe Cela-
no and Gregory Crane (eds.), Treebanking and An-
cient Languages: Current and Prospective Re-
search (Topical Issue), Open Linguistics vol. 2, 
pages 386–392. 

Jana Straková, Milan Straka, and Jan Hajič. 2014. 
Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatiza-
tion, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition. 
In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: System 
Demonstrations, pages 13–18. 

Paul Tombeur (ed.). 1998. Thesaurus formarum totius 
latinitatis a Plauto usque ad saeculum XXum. 
Brepols, Turnhout. 

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 31


