



















































Breaking Sentiment Analysis of Movie Reviews


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Building Linguistically Generalizable NLP Systems, pages 61–64
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 8, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Breaking Sentiment Analysis of Movie Reviews

Ieva Staliūnaitė and Ben Bonfil
Utrecht University

i.r.staliunaite@students.uu.nl

Abstract

The current paper covers several strategies
we used to ‘break’ predictions of senti-
ment analysis systems participating in the
BLGNLP2017 workshop. Specifically, we
identify difficulties of participating sys-
tems in understanding modals, subjective
judgments, world-knowledge based refer-
ences and certain differences in syntax and
perspective.

1 Introduction

Participants in the BLGNLP2017 shared task were
invited to either build sentiment analysis systems
(as a Builder team) or break them, by compil-
ing linguistically motivated test cases that result
in false predictions (as a Breaker team). A data set
of movie reviews was provided as the domain for
participating systems and as a source for generat-
ing breaking test cases. As a Breaker team, our
goal was to construct minimal pairs consisting of
a review from the source data set, and a modified
version of the review that would be used to evalu-
ate the robustness or sensitivity of the participating
systems predictions. The modified version of each
review could either preserve the sentiment of the
original review, or reverse it.

Movie reviews from Rotten Tomatoes are a good
source for comments full of sentiment, as the in-
formal setting provides for humor, pathos, wild
comparisons, sarcasm, artistic expressions and the
like. Hence, it was probably not an easy task for
the Builder systems to analyze sentiments to begin
with, and we tried to make it even harder. Based
on the sentiment analysis of our linguistic exam-
ples it seems like there are several ways to trick
the Builder systems.

In our own judgments of the provided items, we
followed a positive/negative sentiment dichotomy,

which was not always straightforward given the
complexity of the data. However, even if a neu-
tral sentiment option was included (as found in
the predictions of some of the Builder system) it
would not have accounted for the whole variation,
as some items could have multiple plausible inter-
pretations, affecting their perceived valence. Thus,
it is important to bear in mind that the judgments
provided by us might not always coincide with
those of other people.

We begin this paper by describing the general
rationale we had employed in creating our test
cases. We then present some examples of sen-
tences that broke the Builder systems and discuss
the nature of the errors, and the main difficulties
in analyzing sentiment. In addition, we discuss
the linguistic processes that take place in inferring
sentiment from the various examples.

2 Breaking Strategy

Our approach to judging sentiment was based on
two implicit questions: “Would I watch this movie
based on the comment?” and “Would the com-
ment be likely accompanied by a five star eval-
uation?” Thus, our judgment relied on review-
ers’ description of enjoyment and quality as mea-
surements of sentiment. In making the minimal
pairs we employed a number of different strate-
gies. We used our intuitions and knowledge of
syntax, semantics and pragmatics in order to make
big differences in meaning with superficially small
changes. We tried to make realistic examples of
movie evaluations, focusing on linguistic infer-
ences that a machine might not be able to do.

When it comes to breaking predictions, the
largest number of errors appeared with examples
involving words that bear judgment, but are not
inherently positive or negative on their own. We
used modals and opinion adverbs to contribute to

61



the meaning of a phrase by providing informa-
tion about the speaker’s subjective stance. For in-
stance, adverbs such as ‘too’, ‘enough’, ‘hardly’,
‘supposedly’, ‘barely’, ‘seldom’, ‘rarely’ and ‘fi-
nally’ all convey a relative stance in certain con-
texts. The use of such expressions changes the
construal of the sentence so that the perspective
of the subject of consciousness is foregrounded
(Verhagen et al., 2007). Therefore, including such
an adverb can change the valence of the sentence,
such as in examples (1) and (2) below. While
the truth-conditions of (2) would not change if
‘hardly’ was substituted with ‘a little’, the judg-
ment of the speaker would disappear. Hence, the
sentiment in this example is expressed by fore-
grounding the speaker’s evaluation of the extent
of the difference between the two types of movies.
While most Builder systems classified (1) as posi-
tive, just about half of them classified (2) as nega-
tive:

(1) Munich is more measured and classy than
Spielberg’s action-adventures.

(2) Munich is hardly more measured and classy
than Spielberg’s action-adventures.

The examples above point to another tactic
found in our test items. Namely, besides the va-
lence that the adverb contributes in these exam-
ples, world-knowledge is also necessary to prop-
erly infer the speaker’s meaning. Since the sen-
tence uses a proper noun and refers to a well-
known figure, it can bear great influence on the
valence of the sentence as a whole. We used this
strategy in making minimal pairs that proved to
confuse the participating systems. It has been
claimed in the literature that proper nouns are
mostly used in objective or neutral sentences (Pak
and Paroubek, 2010). However, proper nouns can
also carry sentiments in certain contexts. For in-
stance, while Shakespearean is always a compli-
ment, E.L. James-ian might not be. Most systems
categorized (3) as positive, however a few of them
missed the negative connotations of (4).

(3) Shakespearean in its violence, Oldboy also
calls up nightmare images of spiritual and
physical isolation that are worthy of Samuel
Beckett or Dostoyevsky.

(4) EL James-ian in its violence, Oldboy also
calls up nightmare images of spiritual and
physical isolation that are worthy of Paulo
Coelho quotes.

We think that world-knowledge could be in-
cluded in the sentiment analysis systems and it
would benefit the judgment of examples such as
the one above. Even though this might appear as
a non-linguistic issue, references and comparisons
with well known directors or actors are found in
many of the original reviews and play a role in de-
termining the sentiment.

We have identified another difficulty in prag-
matics that is prominent in movie reviews. In
examples (5) and (6) below, the mention of the
reader’s expectations can mean very different
things depending on the context:

(5) Sharp dialogue and detailed observations
make it a good deal funnier than you might
expect.

(6) Horrible dialogue and abysmal acting make
it a good deal funnier than you might expect.

The minimal pair of (5) and (6) sheds light on
the issue of whether calling a movie funny is a pos-
itive comment. This brings us to the discussion
of the multi-layered sentiment structure. That is,
while ‘funny’ refers to a positive emotion experi-
enced by someone watching the movie, that might
not be a positive comment on the movie, if it is
the poor quality of acting that causes one to laugh,
such as in example (6). We constructed a similar
example where ‘emotional pain’ was experienced
when watching the movie, which could be used to
either admire or ridicule the movie. These exam-
ples show that the meaning of positive or negative
adjectives can change with varying circumstances,
such as expectations.

Furthermore, we used another strategy that is
based on expressing expectations. A concessive
relation, as found in (7) and (8), expresses a con-
trast between two statements. One of the state-
ments in each sentence is positive and the other
one is negative, however the overall sentiment of
the two sentences differs. This is achieved by the
fact that concessive relations have an expectation
in the first component and deny that expectation in
the second (Izutsu, 2008). This denial of expec-
tation puts argumentative emphasis on the second

62



part of the sentence, making the second judgment
of the sentence stronger. This is why (7) is nega-
tive, while (8) is positive. However, many of the
Builder systems had difficulty categorizing both
sentences, as they include both positive and neg-
ative statements.

(7) It’s harmless, sure, but it’s also charmless.

(8) It’s not harmless, sure, but it’s also not
charmless.

Another factor we found to affect the valence of
the whole sentence, is the use of positive or nega-
tive adjectives to refer to a character in the movie
or to the plot, but not to the movie itself. For ex-
ample, the ‘smoldering, humorless intensity’ in (9)
and (10) is a negative attribute of a person, but
it might make a great character, such as in (10).
However, a few of the Builder systems did not rec-
ognize it as a positive review.

(9) [Bettis] has a smoldering, humorless inten-
sity that’s unnerving.

(10) [Bettis] has a smoldering, humorless inten-
sity that’s hilarious.

As can be seen from the example above, treat-
ing words as separate entities with emotional va-
lence can sometimes fail in analyzing sentiment
of complete sentences. This leads to another strat-
egy, which is changing the structure of the sen-
tence with minimal changes in the lexical items
used. For example, the sentences in (11) and
(12) differ minimally in terms of the words used,
but they have completely different syntactic struc-
tures. The syntactic dependencies determine what
is the subject of the sentence and thus who is the
savior and who we are saved from.

(11) Someone has to save us from Lawrence’s
onslaught of cinematic dross.

(12) Lawrence is someone who has saved us
from an onslaught of cinematic dross.

Furthermore, syntactic structures can also in-
troduce implicatures. For instance, we changed
a sentence into a question or added a tag ques-
tion and it resulted in Builder system errors. It

can be seen from examples (13) and (14) that the
sentences are nearly the same, except one of them
is declarative and the second one is interrogative.
Especially in combination with the use of ellip-
sis, sentence (14) implies doubt by the speaker,
since they are asking a rhetorical question, pro-
vided the context is a movie review. Even though
there is no explicit negation, the speaker explicitly
does not commit to a positive statement. Implica-
tures are derived from the fact that the speaker did
not use a more informative or stronger expression
when they could have (Potts, 2015). In this case, if
the speaker had found the movie exceptional, they
would have said so. Many Builder systems did not
recognize it as carrying negative sentiment.

(13) An exceptional science fiction film. . .

(14) Is this an exceptional science fiction
film. . . ?

We also employed ellipsis to change perspective
and imply different content in the omitted part. In
elliptical sentences, a part of the syntactic struc-
ture is missing, as demonstrated in examples (15)
and (16) (the part in brackets was omitted in the
items). The addition of ‘please’ to sentence (16)
changes it from a declarative sentence to an imper-
ative one. Elliptical utterances are reduced, there-
fore knowing the discourse goal of the speaker
would facilitate the interpretation of the utterance
(Carberry, 1989). Hence, the difference between
sentences (15) and (16) can be inferred from the
fact that one is a claim and the other is a request.
Many of the Builder systems did not perform well
on sentence (16).

(15) [This is] more of the same. . .

(16) [I want/give me] more of the same, please!

In addition, a couple of hypothetical sentences
with implied content also confused the Builder
systems. For example, the difference between (17)
and (18) is simply the mood of the verb. The hy-
pothetical in (18) implies that in fact the movie is
not a good adaptation, as reality is different from
what could have been. In other items, we used the
verb ‘to try’ for an analogous effect, as claiming
that someone tried to achieve something, implies
that they did not succeed. In both cases almost all

63



of the systems predicted the direct statement cor-
rectly, but did not register the implicature.

(17) Pride and Prejudice is a gorgeous and well-
acted adaptation.

(18) Pride and Prejudice could have been a gor-
geous and well-acted adaptation.

A final strategy that we adopted in developing
our examples is the use of special characters and
punctuation marks to affect meaning. In example
(19), we used an explicit ‘A+’ grade, which frames
the comment as positive feedback, even if it is pre-
ceded by a proposition that is negative on its own.

(19) Ridiculous, confusing, vaguely noir-ish
nonsense. A+

All Builder systems failed to recognize it as a
good movie mark, probably because such charac-
ters are filtered from input. Similarly, the quota-
tion marks in (21) embed the speaker’s statement
as said by someone else, which in turn, together
with an opposing comment, contests the original
negative review. This was also not caught by the
Builder systems. The change of subject of con-
sciousness or speaker could even be done with-
out the quotation marks, as the very contradictory
statements could not both be held by one person,
and the second phrase in (21) is clearly a retort.

(20) Flawed, clich, contrived, and poorly devel-
oped. . .

(21) “Flawed, clich, contrived, and poorly devel-
oped. . . ” What do they know.

3 Conclusion

To conclude, we have shown how the rich and in-
formal domain of movie reviews allows for sen-
tences that are difficult to analyze for valence. Fur-
ther manipulation had succeeded in creating items
that are not properly understood by the participat-
ing systems. In particular, our results suggest that
the context of a movie review allows for pragmatic
and stylistic manipulations that pose difficulties
to current systems. The identification of some of
those difficulties might contribute to the improve-
ment of sentiment analysis systems.

References
Sandra Carberry. 1989. A pragmatics-based approach

to ellipsis resolution. Computational Linguistics,
15(2):75–96.

Mitsuko Narita Izutsu. 2008. Contrast, concessive, and
corrective: Toward a comprehensive study of oppo-
sition relations. Journal of Pragmatics, 40(4):646–
675.

Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twitter as
a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In LREc, volume 10.

Christopher Potts. 2015. Presupposition and implica-
ture. The handbook of contemporary semantic the-
ory, 2:168–202.

Arie Verhagen et al. 2007. Construal and perspectivi-
sation.

64


