



















































Measuring the Italian-English lexical gap for action verbs and its impact on translation


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Sense, Concept and Entity Representations and their Applications, pages 102–109,
Valencia, Spain, April 4 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Measuring the Italian-English lexical gap for action verbs and its impact
on translation

Lorenzo Gregori
University of Florence

lorenzo.gregori@unifi.it

Alessandro Panunzi
University of Florence

alessandro.panunzi@unifi.it

Abstract

This paper describes a method to measure
the lexical gap of action verbs in Italian
and English by using the IMAGACT on-
tology of action. The fine-grained cate-
gorization of action concepts of the data
source allowed to have wide overview of
the relation between concepts in the two
languages. The calculated lexical gap for
both English and Italian is about 30% of
the action concepts, much higher than pre-
vious results. Beyond this general num-
bers a deeper analysis has been performed
in order to evaluate the impact that lexi-
cal gaps can have on translation. In partic-
ular a distinction has been made between
the cases in which the presence of a lexi-
cal gap affects translation correctness and
completeness at a semantic level. The re-
sults highlight a high percentage of con-
cepts that can be considered hard to trans-
late (about 18% from English to Italian
and 20% from Italian to English) and con-
firms that action verbs are a critical lexical
class for translation tasks.

1 Introduction

Lexical gap is a well known phenomenon in lin-
guistics and its identification allows to discover
some relevant features related to the semantic
categorization operated by languages. A lexical
gap corresponds to a lack of lexicalization of a
certain concept in a given language. This phe-
nomenon traditionally emerged from the analysis
of a single language by means of the detection of
empty spaces in a lexical matrix (see the semi-
nal works by Leher (1974) and Lyons (1977); see
also Kjellmer (2003)). Anyway, lexical gap be-
comes a major issue when comparing two or more

languages, as in translation tasks (Ivir, 1977). In
this latter case, a lexical gap can be defined as the
absence of direct lexeme in one language while
comparing two languages during translation (Cvi-
likaitė, 2006). The presence of lexical gaps be-
tween two languages is more than a theoretical
problem, having a strong impact in several related
fields: lexicographers need to deal with lexical
gaps in the compilation of bilingual dictionaries
(Gouws, 2002); in knowledge representation the
creation of multilanguage linguistic resources re-
quire a strategy to cope with the lack of concepts
(Jansseen, 2004); the lexical transfer process is af-
fected by the presence of lexical gaps in automatic
translation system, reducing their accuracy (San-
tos, 1990).

Even if in literature it’s possible to find many
examples of gaps, it’s hard to estimate them. This
is due to the fact that most of the gaps are re-
lated to small semantic differences that are hard to
identify: available linguistic resources usually rep-
resent a coarse-grained semantics, so while they
are useful to discriminate the prominent senses of
words, they can’t capture small semantic shifts. In
addition to it, a multilanguage resource is required
for this purpose, but these resources are normally
built up through a mapping between two or more
monolingual resources and this cause an approx-
imation in concept definitions: similar concepts
tend to be grouped together in a unitary concept
that represent the core-meaning and lose their se-
mantic specificities.

2 IMAGACT

Verbs are a critical lexical class for disambiguation
and translation tasks: they are much more polyse-
mous than nouns and, moreover, their ambiguity
is hard to resolve (Fellbaum et al., 2001). In par-
ticular the representation of word senses as sepa-

102



rate entities is tricky, since their boundaries are of-
ten vague causing the senses to be under-specified
and overlapping. From this point of view the sub-
class of general verbs represent a crucial point, be-
cause these verbs are characterized by both high
frequency in the use of language and high ambi-
guity.

IMAGACT1 is a visual ontology of action that
provides a video-based translation and disam-
biguation framework for general verbs. The re-
source is built on an ontology containing a fine-
grained categorization of action concepts, each
represented by one or more video prototypes as
recorded scenes and 3D animations.

IMAGACT currently contains 1,010 scenes
which encompass the action concepts most com-
monly referred to in everyday language usage.
Data are derived from the manual annotation of
verb occurrences in spontaneous spoken corpora
(Moneglia et al., 2012); the dataset has been com-
piled by selecting action verbs with the highest
frequency in the corpora and comprises 522 Ital-
ian and 554 English lemmas. Although the set
of retrieved actions is necessarily incomplete, this
methodology ensures to have a significant picture
of the main action types performed in everyday
life2.

The links between verbs and video scenes are
based on the co-referentiality of different verbs
with respect to the action expressed by a scene
(i.e. different verbs can describe the same ac-
tion, visualized in the scene). The visual represen-
tations convey the action information in a cross-
linguistic environment and IMAGACT may thus
be exploited to discover how the actions are lexi-
calized in different languages.

In addition to it IMAGACT contains a semantic
classification of each lemma, that is divided into
Types: each verb Type identifies an action con-
cept and contains one ore more scenes, that work
as prototypes of that concept. Type classification
is manually performed in Italian and English in
parallel, through a corpus-based annotation pro-
cedure by native language annotators (Moneglia
et al., 2012); this allowed to have a discrimina-
tion of verb Types based only on the annotator
competence, without any attempt to fit the data
into predefined semantic models. Validation re-
sults (Gagliardi, 2014) highlight a good rate of

1http://www.imagact.it
2see Moneglia et al. (2012) and Moneglia (2014b) for

details about corpora annotation numbers and methodology.

Type discrimination agreement: a Cohen k of 0,82
for 2 expert annotators and a Fleiss k of 0.73 for 4
non-expert ones3.

For these features IMAGACT ontology is a re-
liable data source to measure the lexical gap be-
tween Italian and English: in fact verb Types are
defined independently, but linked together through
the scenes. The comparison of Types in different
language through their action prototypes allows to
identify the action concepts that are shared be-
tween the two languages and the ones that don’t
match with any concept in the other language; in
this case we have a lexical gap.

3 Type relations

In this frame we can perform a set-based compar-
ison, considering a Type as just a set of scenes.
A Type is a lexicalized concept, so a partition of
the meaning, but semantic features are not repre-
sented in the ontology and, in fact, they are un-
known: data are derived from the ability of com-
petent speaker in performing a categorization of
similar items with respect to a lemma, without any
attempt to formalize semes. So if we look at the
database we can say that Types are merely sets of
scenes.

Comparing a Type (T1) of a verb in source lan-
guage (V1) with a Type (T2) of a verb in target lan-
guage (V2) we can have 5 possible configurations:

1. T1 ≡ T2: two Types are equivalent if they
contain the same set of scenes;

2. T1 ∩ T2 = ∅: two Types are disjoint if they
don’t share any scene;

3. T1 ⊂ T2: T1 is a subset of T2 if any scene of
T1 is also a scene of T2 and the 2 Types are
not equivalent;

4. T1 ⊃ T2: T1 is a superset of T2 if any scene
of T2 is also a scene of T1 and the 2 Types are
not equivalent;

5. T1∩T2 6= ∅∧T1 * T2∧T1 + T2: two Types
are partially overlapping if they share some
scenes and each Type have some scenes not
belonging to the other one.

3Inter-annotator agreement (ITA) measured on WordNet
by expert annotators on comparable verb sets (score for fine-
grained sense inventories): ITA = 72% on SemEval-2007
dataset (Pradhan et al., 2007); ITA = 71% on SensEval-2
dataset (Palmer et al., 2007).

103



Figure 1: Two Equivalent Types belonging to the
Italian verb toccare and to the English verb touch.

It’s important to discuss these cases separately,
because each one of them highlights a different
semantic relation between verbs and has different
implications for translation.

When two Types are equivalents (case 1) the 2
languages share the action concept the Types rep-
resent: we could say that there is an interlinguistic
concept. This case is not problematic for transla-
tion: each occurrence of the verb V1 that belongs
to Type T1 can be translated with V2; moreover
we can apply V1 to translate any occurrence of V2
belonging to T2.

For example one Type of the English verb to
touch and one Type of the Italian verb toccare
are equivalent. They share 3 video scenes: Mary
touches the doll, Mary touches the table and John
touches Mary (see Fig. 1). Each scene is con-
nected to a different set of verbs (i.e. to brush, to
graze, to caress), representing a specific semantic
concept, but they are kept together by a more gen-
eral concept both in Italian and in English. So in
any of these actions the verb to touch can be safely
translated in Italian with toccare and vice versa.

If two Types are disjoint (case 2) the Types re-
fer to unrelated semantic concepts and we can as-
sume that translation between an occurrence of V1
belonging to T2 can not be translated with V2.

In cases 3 and 4 the Types are hierarchically re-
lated and we can assume the existence of a seman-
tic relation that links a general Type with a spe-
cific one. Although we can not induce the type
of this relation that could be hyponym, entailment,
troponym and so on. In this configuration we can
see that translation is safe from specific to general,
but not vice versa: in case 3 any occurrence of V1
belonging to T1 can be translated with V2, while
in case 4 V2 can not be safely applied, because it

Figure 2: Two Hierarchically related Types be-
longing to the Italian verb accoltellare and to the
English verb stab.

encodes only a sub-part of the concept represented
by T1.

For example Type 1 of the English verb to stab
and Type 1 of the Italian verb accoltellare cate-
gorize action where a sharp object pierces a body,
but while stab can be applied to describe actions
independently on their aim and the tool used, ac-
coltellare is applicable only when the agent vol-
untarily injures someone and the action is accom-
plished with a knife. In this case the Italian Type
is more specific than the English one, so transla-
tion is safe from Italian to English (stab can be
used to translate any occurrence of accoltellare-
Type 1), but not vice versa: stab-Type 1 can not be
always translated with accoltellare, because a part
of its variation is covered by other Italian verbs
like trafiggere, penetrare or attraversare.

Finally a partial overlap between Types (case
5) doesn’t allow to induce any semantic relation
between Types: in these cases we have differ-
ent concepts that can refer the same action. Nor-
mally these happen when the action is interpreted
from two different points of view and categorized
within unrelated lexical concepts. In this case
we have a translation relation between V1 and
V2 without having any semantic relation between
their Types.

For example the Italian verb abbassare, that is
frequently translated with lower in English, can
also be translated with position when applied to
some (but not every) actions belonging to Type 1,
categorizing actions involving the body; moreover
we have the same translation relation from En-
glish to Italian where sometimes (but not always)
position-Type 2 can be translated with abbassare.
Here there are two Types that represent semanti-

104



Figure 3: Two partially overlapping Types belong-
ing to the Italian verb abbassare and to the English
verb position.

cally independent concepts, but that can both be
applied to describe some actions, like Mary posi-
tions herself lower and other similar ones.

This happens rarely in Italian - English (14
Types on our dataset) and in any of these cases
there are other translation verbs as possible alter-
natives. Despite this, Type overlaps identification
is very relevant, because it allows to discover un-
expected translation candidates (i.e. target verbs
that have a translation relation but not a seman-
tic relation with the source verb) that can not be
extracted from a lexico-semantic resource. In ad-
dition to it Type overlaps identification is crucial
if the target verb is the only one translation pos-
sibility and this can happen, especially between
two languages that are very far: some evidences
for example have been discovered in Italian and
Chinese (Pan, 2016) through a deep comparison
of Italian Types with Chinese verbs that refer to
the same scenes. This work allowed to identify
some positive occurrences of this interesting phe-
nomenon, but can not be exploited for its numeric
quantification: indeed an exhaustive analysis that
involves the relation between action concepts can
be made only between Italian and English, since
IMAGACT contains the verb Type discrimination
in these two languages only.

4 Lexical gap identification

4.1 Dataset building

In order to measure the lexical gaps in Italian and
English we created a working dataset by select-
ing the set of Types that have a full mapping in
the two languages. We need to consider that IMA-
GACT annotation process has been carried out in

several steps: firstly verbs were annotated through
a corpus-based procedure and Types were created
and validated by mother tongue speakers on the
basis of their linguistic competence; then for each
concept a scene was produced to provide a proto-
typical representation of it; after that a mapping
between Italian and English was performed by
linking the scenes to the Types of each language;
finally annotators were requested to recheck each
scene and add the missing verbs that are applica-
ble to it. This last revision enriched the scene with
more verbs that don’t belong to any Type.

We decided to exclude from the dataset all the
scenes (and the related Types) that contain untyped
verbs, considering that a partial typing does not
ensure the coherence of verb Type discrimination:
in fact it’s not possible to be sure that the creation
of Types for these new instances would preserve
the original Type distinction.

After this pruning we obtained a set of 1,000
Italian Types and 1,027 English Types, that refer
to 501 and 535 verbs respectively (see Table 1).

IT EN
Types 1,000 1,027
Verbs 501 535
Scenes 980 917

Table 1: Number of Types, verbs and scenes be-
longing to the dataset.

4.2 Methodology

According to our dataset, we can easily estimate
the lexical gap by measuring the number of Types
in source language that don’t have an equivalent
Type in target language. Namely for each concept
in source language we are going to verify if there is
a concept in target language that refer to the same
set of actions (represented by video prototypes);
if the match is not found we have a lexical gap in
target language.

As we can see in table 2, the action concepts that
are lexicalized in Italian and without a correspond-
ing match in English are 33,6% (English gap); on
the contrary the Italian gap for English concepts is
29,02%.

Before going ahead we need to do some con-
siderations about these numbers. First of all we
can see that these percentages are much higher
than the ones calculated by Bentivogli and Pi-
anta (2000), that found 7,4% of gaps for verbs in

105



IT→ EN EN→ IT
Total Types 1,000 1,027
Equiv. Types 664 (66,4%) 729 (70,98%)
Lexical gaps 336 (33,6%) 298 (29,02%)

Table 2: Types in source language that have and
have not an equivalent Type in target language.

English-to-Italian comparison. This is a big shift,
but it’s not surprising if we consider the differ-
ences of the two experiments in terms of method-
ology and dataset:

• IMAGACT Type distinction is more fine-
grained in respect to WordNet synsets (Bar-
tolini et al., 2014);

• the experiment by Bentivogli and Pianta was
led on MultiWordNet, in which multilan-
guage Wordnets are created on the basis of
the Princeton Wordnet sense distinction (Pi-
anta et al., 2002); this methodology introduce
an approximation in the concepts definition;

• the 7,4% of Bentivogli and Pianta is a gen-
eral value on verbs, while our experiment is
focused on action verbs, which are a strongly
ambiguous lexical class (Moneglia, 2014a);

• the dictionary-based methodology proposed
by Bentivogli and Pianta is nearly opposite to
IMAGACT reference-based approach.

Beyond these general considerations a lemma-
by-lemma comparison with the experiment of
Bentivogli and Pianta (whose dataset is currently
not available) would better explain this numeric
difference.

5 Lexical gaps and translation problems

Besides a general measure of the gaps for action
concept it’s important to go a step beyond to ver-
ify in which cases the presence of a lexical gap
impacts the translation quality. In order to do this,
we divided the Types without an equivalent in tar-
get language in three categories:

• leaf Types: these Types in source language
represent concepts that are more specific than
other ones in target language; in this case the
only Type in target language that have a par-
tial match with the Type in source language
is a superset (case 3);

• root Types: these Types in source language
represent concepts that are more general than
other ones in target language: the only Type
in target language that have a partial match
with the Type in source language is a subset
(case 4);

• middle Types: these Types have a partial
match in target language both with a more
general Type and with a more specific one
(both cases 3 and 4).

As we mentioned before we did not find any
case in which a partial overlapping Type (case 5) is
the only one possible match in Italian and English
comparison; so these cases are counted within the
three categories above.

5.1 Root Types and uncertain translations

Starting from this classification we can see that
root Types are the critical ones in terms of trans-
lation: in fact we don’t have a unique lexicalized
concept in target language that is able to repre-
sent the concept in source language; instead we
have more than one Type (and multiple verbs) that
cover different subparts of the whole general con-
cept variation. In these cases we need to have extra
information about the action in order to translate it
properly. From a computational point of view we
can say that a word sense disambiguation of the
source verb is not enough to reach a correct trans-
lation verb.

The two sentences The cell phone lands on the
carpet and The pole vaulter lands on the mat, for
example, belong to the same action concept ac-
cording to the semantics of the verb to land4. In
Italian there is not a unique Type that collects these
two actions: it’s possible to use atterrare for the
athlete, but it is not allowed for the phone, for
which we need to make a semantic shift and use
the verb cadere (that is more similar to fall down).
Again cadere is not appropriate for the athlete, be-
cause it implies that the athlete stumbles and falls.

So this action concept that is lexicalized in En-
glish with to land does not have a unique trans-
lation verb in Italian, and extra informations are
required to translate it properly (if the theme is an
human being or an object, in this specific case).

Table 3 show the number of leaf, root and mid-
dle Types in Italian and English; we can see that

4unlike The butterfly lands on the flower or The airplane
lands that belong to different concepts of to land.

106



IT→ EN EN→ IT
Lexical gaps 336 298
Leaf Types 217 (64.58%) 200 (67.58%)
Root Types 47 (13.99%) 43 (14.43%)
Middle Types 72 (21.43%) 55 (18.46%)

Table 3: Number of Leaf, Root and Middle Types
in Italian and English (percentages on the lexical
gaps).

root Types represent the 14% of the lexical gaps in
both the languages, corresponding to 4-5% of the
total Types.

5.2 General Types and lossy translations

Root Types are the most critical case for a transla-
tion task, because they affect the correctness; be-
sides there are also other kinds of lexical gaps that
impact on translation. In particular is useful to
estimate how semantically far is the best transla-
tion candidate in the cases in which we can apply
a more general Type to translate the concept in the
source language. In fact in both leaf and middle
Types we have a Type in target language that is
more general to the source one, so it is safely ap-
plicable to any occurrence belonging to the source
Type. This is not free from problems, because in
translation we use a more general verb, so we miss
some semes that are encoded in the source verb.
In fact in this case we still have a translation prob-
lem, which is not in finding a possible target verb,
but in adding more information in other lexical el-
ement of the sentence to fill the lack of semantic
information. In this case the gap does not affect
the correctness of the translation, but its complete-
ness.

For example the English verb to plonk does not
have a correspondence in Italian. In particular a
sentence like John plonks the books on the table
belongs to a Type of plonk that is a leaf Type (so
there is a possible translation verb in Italian), but
for which the nearest Italian Type is much wider,
belonging to the very general verb mettere. In this
case it’s possible to translate in Italian with John
mette i libri sul tavolo, but losing all the informa-
tion regarding the way the books are placed on the
table (mettere is more similar with to put); an ad-
dition of other lexical elements to the sentence is
required to fill this gap in Italian.

Conversely we can say that a small distance be-
tween the source and the target Type does not have

a negative effect on translation. Type 1 of the En-
glish verb to throw and Type 1 of the Italian verb
lanciare categorize a wide set of actions in which
an object is thrown by a person independently on
the presence of a destination or on the action aim
(John throws the bowling bowl, John throws the
rock in the field, John throws the paper in the box
etc.). However these two Types are not equivalent,
because the Italian one comprise also actions per-
formed in a limited space with a highly controlled
movement, like Marco lancia una monetina, that
require another verb in English like to toss (Marco
tosses a coin). In this case the small gap between
the Italian concept and English one does not affect
the translation: in fact we can say that lanciare can
be used to translate properly any action belonging
to throw - Type 1.

Given this consideration a measure of the se-
mantic distance with the translation verb is use-
ful to evaluate the loss: this can be easily done
from IMAGACT dataset by calculating the ratio
between the cardinality (i.e. the number of scenes)
of the source Type, T1, and the one of the nearest
target Type, T2 (the Type with the minimum cardi-
nality among the Types in target language that are
supersets of the source Type). This ratio estimates
the overlapping between the Types:

overlap =
|T1|
|T2|

Data are represented in Figure 4, reporting the
number of Types (Italian and English) for each
overlap values, where this values are divided in 10
ranges.

We considered semantically distant those Types
with overlap < 0.4 (sharing less than 2 scenes
over 5). These high distance Types (see Table 4)
are 150 for Italian (51.9% of leaf + middle Types
and 15% of the total Types) and 145 for English
(56.86% of leaf + middle Types and 14.12% of the
total Types).

Basically we see that not only root Types, but
also a relevant part of leaf and middle Types (more
than 50% both in Italian and English) represent a
critical point for translation.

IT→ EN EN→ IT
Leaf+Mid T. 289 255
Low dist. T. 139 (48.1%) 110 (43.14%)
High dist. T. 150 (51.9%) 145 (56.86%)

Table 4: Distance from the nearest general Type in
target language.

107



Figure 4: Number of Italian and English Types for
each overlap range.

Within this numbers, that are quite homoge-
neous between the two languages, we can see that
in the overlap range from 0 to 0.2 there are much
more Italian Types than English ones (19% of leaf
+ middle Types against 9%); conversely English
Types are more distributed in the range from 0.3
to 0.4 (Figure 4). This means that in this area of
extreme distance between the source and the tar-
get concept, we have an higher semantic loss in
the translation from Italian to English.

Finally we can have have an overall value of
translation critical Types, by summing up the ones
belonging to high distance Types class and the root
Types. The verbs these Types belong to are the
verbs for which the selection of a good translation
candidate is problematic. Results are reported in
Tables 5 and 6 and confirm that lexical gaps in ac-
tion verbs have a strong impact on translation.

IT EN
Total Types 1,000 1,027
Root Types 47 (4.7%) 43 (4.2%)
High dist. T. 150 (15.0%) 145 (14.12%)
Critical Types 197 (19.7%) 188 (18.3%)

Table 5: Number of translation critical Types.

IT EN
Total Verbs 501 535
Verbs w/ r.T. 39 (7.78%) 38 (7.1%)
Verbs w/ h.d.T. 109 (21.76%) 125 (23.36%)
Critical Verbs 136 (27.15%) 154 (28.79%)

Table 6: Number of verbs with root Types and high
distance Types.

6 Conclusions

In this paper a methodology for measuring the lex-
ical gap of action verbs is described and applied to
Italian and English, by exploiting IMAGACT on-
tology. We measured 33.6% of English gap and
29.02% of Italian gap. Then this result have been
investigated, in order to discover when and why a
lexical gap can affect a translation task. The re-
sults show that 19.7% of Italian Types and 18.3%
of English ones represent action concept that are
critical from a translation perspective: these con-
cepts are lexicalized by 27.15% of the Italian verbs
and 28.79% of the English verbs that we consid-
ered in our analysis. In addition to it the distinction
between concepts that can not be correctly trans-
lated with a single lemma (root Types) and con-
cepts that can be translated with a sensible seman-
tic loss (high distance Types) is a relevant informa-
tion that can lead to a different translation strategy.

Finally we feel important to note that behind
these numeric values there are lists of verbs and
concepts and this information could be integrated
in Machine Translation and Computer Assisted
Translation Systems to improve their accuracy.

Acknowledgments

This research has been supported by the MOD-
ELACT Project, funded by the Futuro in Ricerca
2012 programme (Project Code RBFR12C608);
http://modelact.lablita.it.

References
Roberto Bartolini, Valeria Quochi, Irene De Felice,

Irene Russo, and Monica Monachini. 2014. From
synsets to videos: Enriching italwordnet multi-
modally. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Lofts-
son, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion
Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors,
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14),
Reykjavik, Iceland, may. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Luisa Bentivogli and Emanuele Pianta. 2000. Looking
for lexical gaps. In Proceedings of the ninth EU-
RALEX International Congress, Stuttgart, Germany.

Jurgita Cvilikaitė. 2006. Lexical gaps: resolution by
functionally complete units of translation. Darbai ir
dienos, 2006, nr. 45, p. 127-142.

Christiane Fellbaum, Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang,
Lauren Delfs, and Susanne Wolf. 2001. Manual and

108



automatic semantic annotation with wordnet. Word-
Net and Other Lexical Resources, pages 3–10.

Gloria Gagliardi. 2014. Validazione dellontologia del-
lazione IMAGACT per lo studio e la diagnosi del
Mild Cognitive Impairment. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Florence.

Rufus Hjalmar Gouws. 2002. Equivalent relations,
context and cotext in bilingual dictionaries. Hermes,
28(1):195–209.

Vladimir Ivir. 1977. Lexical gaps: A contrastive
view. Studia Romanica et Anglica Zagrabiensia,
(43):167–176.

M. Jansseen. 2004. Multilingual lexical databases,
lexical gaps, and simullda. International Journal of
Lexicography, 17(2):137–154.

Gran Kjellmer. 2003. Lexical gaps. In Extending
the scope of corpus-based research, pages 149–158.
Brill.

A. Lehrer. 1974. Semantic Fields and Lexical Struc-
ture. North-Holland linguistic series, 11. North-
Holland.

John Lyons. 1977. Semantics, volume i. Cambridge
UP, Cambridge.

Massimo Moneglia, Francesca Frontini, Gloria
Gagliardi, Irene Russo, Alessandro Panunzi, and
Monica Monachini. 2012. Imagact: deriving an
action ontology from spoken corpora. Proceed-
ings of the Eighth Joint ACL-ISO Workshop on
Interoperable Semantic Annotation (isa-8), pages
42–47.

Massimo Moneglia. 2014a. Natural Language On-
tology of Action: A Gap with Huge Consequences
for Natural Language Understanding and Machine
Translation. In Zygmunt Vetulani and Joseph Mar-
iani, editors, Human Language Technology Chal-
lenges for Computer Science and Linguistics, vol-
ume 8387 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 379–395. Springer International Publishing.

Massimo Moneglia. 2014b. The semantic variation of
action verbs in multilingual spontaneous speech cor-
pora. In T. Raso and H. Mello, editors, Spoken Cor-
pora and Linguistics Studies, pages 152–190. John
Benjamins Publishing Company.

Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang, and Christiane
Fellbaum. 2007. Making fine-grained and
coarse-grained sense distinctions, both manually
and automatically. Natural Language Engineering,
13(02):137–163.

Yi Pan. 2016. Verbi dazione in Italiano e in
Cinese Mandarino. Implementazione e validazione
del cinese nellontologia interlinguistica dell’azione
IMAGACT. Ph.D. thesis, Università degli Studi di
Firenze.

Emanuele Pianta, Luisa Bentivogli, and Christian Gi-
rardi. 2002. MultiWordNet: developing an aligned
multilingual database. In Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Global WordNet, pages
21–25.

Sameer S. Pradhan, Edward Loper, Dmitriy Dligach,
and Martha Palmer. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 17:
English lexical sample, srl and all words. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations, pages 87–92. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Diana Santos. 1990. Lexical gaps and idioms in
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume
2, COLING ’90, pages 330–335, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

109


