



















































Jejueo talking dictionary: A collaborative online database for language revitalization


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 122–129,
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, USA, March 6–7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

	  

Jejueo talking dictionary: 
A collaborative online database for language revitalization 

 
Moira Saltzman 

University of Michigan 
moiras@umich.edu 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes the ongoing development of 
the Jejueo Talking Dictionary, a free online 
multimedia database and Android application.  
Jejueo is a critically endangered language spoken 
by 5,000-10,000 people throughout Jeju Province, 
South Korea, and in a diasporic enclave in Osaka, 
Japan.  Under contact pressure from Standard 
Korean, Jejueo is undergoing rapid attrition 
(Kang, 2005; Kang, 2007), and most fluent 
speakers of Jejueo are now over 75 years old 
(UNESCO, 2010).  In recent years, talking 
dictionaries have proven to be valuable tools in 
language revitalization programs worldwide 
(Nathan, 2006; Harrison and Anderson, 2006).  
As a collaborative team including linguists from 
Jeju National University, members of the Jejueo 
Preservation Society, Jeju community members 
and outside linguists, we are currently building a 
web-based talking dictionary of Jejueo along with 
an application for Android devices.  The Jejueo 
talking dictionary will compile existing annotated 
video corpora of Jejueo songs, conversational 
genres and regional mythology into a multimedia 
database, to be supplemented by original 
annotated video recordings of natural language 
use.  Lexemes and definitions will be 
accompanied by audio files of their pronunciation 
and occasional photos, in the case of items native 
to Jeju.  The audio and video data will be tagged 
in Jejueo, Korean, Japanese and English so that 
users may search or browse the dictionary in any 
of these languages.  Videos showing a range of 
discourse types will have interlinear glossing, so 
that users may search Jejueo particles as well as 
lexemes and grammatical topics, and find the 
tools to construct original Jejeuo speech.  The 
Jejueo talking dictionary will serve as a tool for 
language acquisition in Jejueo immersion 
programs in schools, as well as a repository for 
oral history and ceremonial speech.  The aim of 
this paper is to discuss how the interests of 
diverse user communities may be addressed by 
the methodology, organization and scope of 
talking dictionaries.  
 

 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The purpose of this paper is to present the 
ongoing development of the Jejueo Talking 
Dictionary as an example of applying 
interdisciplinary methodology to create an 
enduring, multipurpose record of an 
endangered language. In this paper I examine 
strategies for gathering extensive data to create 
a multimodal online platform aimed at a wide 
variety of uses and user groups.  The Jejueo 
Talking Dictionary project is tailored to 
diverse user communities on Jeju Island, South 
Korea, where Jejueo, the indigenous language, 
is critically endangered and underdocumented, 
but where the population’s smart phone 
penetration rate is 75% (Lee, 2014) and semi-
speakers are highly proficient users of 
technology (Song, 2012).  The Jejueo Talking 
Dictionary is also intended for Jejueo speakers 
of varying degrees of fluency in Osaka, Japan, 
where up to 126,511 diasporic Jejuans reside 
(Southcott, 2013). A third aim of the Jejueo 
Talking Dictionary is to create extensive 
linguistic documentation of Jejeuo that will be 
available to the wider scientific community, as 
the vast majority of existing documentary 
materials on Jejueo are published in Korean.  
The Jejueo Talking Dictionary will serve as an 
online open-access repository of over 200 
hours of natural and ceremonial language use, 
with interlinear glossing in Jejueo, Korean, 
Japanese and English. 
 
2 Background 
 
2.1 Language context 
 
Very closely related to Korean, Jejueo is the 
indigenous language of Jeju Island, South 
Korea.  Jejueo has 5,000-10,000 speakers 

122



	  

located throughout the islands of Jeju Province 
and in a diasporic enclave in Osaka, Japan.  
With most fluent speakers over 75 years old, 
Jejueo was classified as critically endangered 
by UNESCO in 2010.  The Koreanic language 
family consists of at least two languages, 
Jejueo and Korean.  Several regional varieties 
of Korean are spoken across the Korean 
peninsula, divided loosely along provincial 
lines. Jejueo and Korean are not mutually 
intelligible, owing to Jejueo’s distinct lexicon 
and grammatical morphemes.  Pilot research 
(Yang, 2013) estimates that 20-25% of the 
lexicons of Jejueo and Korean overlap, and a 
recent study (O’Grady, 2015) found that 
Jejueo is at most 12% intelligible to speakers 
of Korean on Korea’s mainland. 1  Jejueo 
conserves many Middle Korean phonological 
and lexical features lost to MSK, including the 
Middle Korean phoneme /ɔ/ and terms such as 
pɨzʌp : Jejueo pusʌp ‘charcoal burner’ 
(Stonham, 2011: 97).  Extensive lexical and 
morphological borrowing from Japanese, 
Mongolian and Manchurian is evident in 
Jejueo, owing to the Mongolian colonization 
of Jeju in the 13th and 14th centuries, Japan’s 
annexation of Korea and occupation of Jeju 
between 1910 and 1945, and centuries of trade 
with Manchuria and Japan (Martin, 1993; Lee 
and Ramsey, 2000).  Several place names in 
Jeju are arguably Japonic in origin, e.g. Tamna, 
the first known name of Jeju Island 
(Kwen ,1994:167; Vovin, 2013).  Moreover, 
several names for indigenous fruits and 
vegetables on Jeju are borrowed from 
Japanese, e.g. mik͈aŋ ‘orange’.  Mongolic 
speakers left the lexical imprint of a robust 
inventory of terms describing horses and cows, 
e.g. mɔl ‘horse’. Jejueo borrowed grammatical 
morphemes from the Tungusic language 
Manchurian, e.g the dative suffixal particle 
*de < ti ‘to’ (Kang, 2005).  
 
2.2 Current status of Jejueo 

The present situation in Jeju is one of language 
shift, where fewer than 10,000 people out of a 
population of 600,000 are fluent in Jejueo, and 
features of Jejueo’s lexicon, morphosyntax 
and phonology are rapidly assimilating to 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1 In a 2015 study O’Grady and Yang found that speakers 
of Korean from four provinces on the mainland had rates 
of 8-12% intelligibility for Jejueo based on a 
comprehension task of a one-minute recording of Jejueo 
connected speech. 

Korean (Kang, 2005; Saltzman, 2014).  Recent 
surveys on language ideologies of Jejueo 
speakers (Kim, 2011; Kim, 2013) show that a 
roughly diglossic situation is maintained by 
present day language ideologies.  In a series of 
qualitative interviews on language ideologies, 
Kim (2013:33) finds common themes 
suggesting that Korean is used as a means of 
showing respect to unfamiliar interlocutors, as 
Korean “...is perceived as the language of 
distance and rationality”. Likewise Jejueo is 
considered appropriate to use whenever 
interpersonal boundaries, such as distinctions 
within social hierarchies are perceived less 
salient than the intimacy and mutual trust two 
or more people share. (Kim, 2013).  
 
Yang’s (2013) pilot survey on language 
attitudes finds that while community members 
recognize Jejueo as a marker of Jeju identity 
worth transmitting to future generations, few 
speakers feel empowered to reverse the pattern 
of language shift to Korean.  There are no 
longer monolingual speakers of Jejueo on Jeju 
or in Osaka.  The examples below are samples 
of the same declarative construction produced 
by a fluent Jejueo speaker in (1), a typical 
younger Jejueo semi-speaker in (2), and the 
Korean translation (3). Jejueo morphemes in 
(2) are in boldface. 
 
(1)  
harmang       -jʌŋ     sontɕi        -jʌŋ    mik͈aŋ  
grandmother-CONJ grandchild-CONJ orange- 
-ɯl    tʰa  -m               -su  -ta 
ACC pick-PRS[PROG]-FO-DECL 
“The grandmother and grandchild are picking 
oranges.” 

 
(2)    
harmang        -koa     sontɕa       -oa      kjul      
grandmother-CONJgrandchild-CONJ 
orange- 
-ɯl    t͈a   -ko       i                 -su-ta 
ACC pick-PROG-EXIST[PRS]-FO.DECL 
“The grandmother and grandchild are picking 
oranges.” 
 
 (3)  
harmʌni       -oa      sontɕa       -oa      kjul              
grandmother-CONJ grandchild-CONJ orange- 
-ɯl   t͈a    -ko       is͈                -ʌjo 
ACC pick-PROG EXIST[PRS]-FO.DECL 

123



	  

“The grandmother and grandchild are picking 
oranges.” 
 
While examples (1) and (3) have several 
cognate forms, the majority of grammatical 
particles are genetically unrelated.  The 
accusative particle -ɯl is shared by Korean 
and Jejueo, although in Jejueo the nominative 
and accusative markers are most commonly 
dropped. In example (2) the construction the 
Jejueo morphemes have been replaced by 
Korean morphemes, save ‘grandmother’ and 
the verbal ending, a pattern typical of non-
fluent speakers of Jejueo (Saltzman, 2014). 
 

3 Jejueo lexicography and sustainability 
 
Because most Korean linguists view Jejueo as 
a conservative dialect of Korean (Sohn, 1999; 
Song, 2012), lexical documentation of Jejueo 
has not been a scientific priority.  The few 
Jejueo lexicographic projects have been 
carried out in the last 30 years by linguists 
native to Jeju Island and are all bilingual in 
Korean and Jejueo.  Two large-scale Jejueo-
Korean print dictionaries were published 
(Song, 2007; Kang, 1995), though Kang’s oft-
cited dictionary was given a small distribution 
to local community centers and libraries, and 
was not made commercially available.  In 
2011 Kang and Hyeong published an abridged 
Korean-Jejueo version of the dictionary.  The 
remaining lexicographic studies of Jejueo are a 
handful of dictionaries tailored to individual 
semantic domains, such as 재주어 속담 사전 
[Jejueo Idiom Dictionary] (Ko, 2002), 
무가본풀이 사전 [Jeju Dictionary of 
Shamanic Terms] (Jin, 1991), and 문학 속의 
제주 방언  [Jeju Dialect in Literature] (Kang 
et al., 2010), an alphabetized introduction to 
the Jejueo lexicon through Jeju folk literature. 
No major reference materials on Jejueo’s 
lexicon or other linguistic features provide 
English glossing, although an English sketch 
grammar of Jejeuo is currently in development 
(Yang, in preparation).  
 
It is well established that lexicographic 
materials can contribute significant symbolic 
support to a given language variety (Corris et 
al., 2004; Crowley, 1999; Hansford, 1991), 
particularly for unwritten non-prestige codes. 
Bartholomew and Schoenhals (1983) note that 

publication of lexicographic materials may 
even help indigenous languages be perceived 
as ‘real languages’ in the sociolinguistic 
marketplace.  The lexicographic materials 
alone, however, do not engender sufficient 
motivation for a speech community to 
maintain the use of their heritage language.  
Fishman (1991) warns against dictionary 
projects that become ‘monuments’ to a 
language rather than stimulating language use 
and intergenerational transmission. 
 
A recent study by O’Grady (2015) found that 
the level of Jejueo transmission between 
generations shows a drastic decline.  Given the 
task of answering content questions based on a 
one-minute recording of Jejueo connected 
speech, heritage speakers in the 50-60 age 
bracket demonstrated a comprehension level 
of 89%, while heritage speakers between 20 
and 29 showed just 12% comprehension, equal 
to that of citizens of Seoul.  In my previous 
field work in Jeju I found fluent Jejueo 
speakers and most semi-speakers unmotivated 
to access available Jejueo lexicographic 
materials.  While these lexicographic works 
provide extensive data for the scholarly 
community, they arguably contribute to a 
growing body of Jejueo documentation and 
revitalization projects which are discrete, 
temporary and organized from the ‘top-down’ 
without community collaboration.  
 
Sun Duk Mun, a Jejueo linguist with the Jeju 
Development Institute (JDI), reasons that Jeju 
parents must take pride in Jejueo and use it in 
the home, as Jeju teachers should allow Jejueo 
in classrooms, in order to expand Jejueo’s 
declining domains of use (Southcott, 2015).  
However, in a highly competitive society 
where the majority of classroom hours are 
allocated to the Seoul-based national standard 
language (Song, 2012), and even 
entertainment media reflects the nation’s 
emphasis on ‘correct’ usage of Korean, status 
planning for Jejueo revitalization is crucial.  
Beyond Kim’s (2013) and Kim’s (2011) 
studies on Jejueo language ideologies, no 
sociolinguistic research on Jejueo has been 
conducted, leaving issues like bilingualism, 
domains of use and the socio-historical factors 
for language shift speculative at most in the 

124



	  

literature.  A successful campaign for the 
reversal of Jejueo language endangerment will 
hinge on the development of tools for 
documentation and language learning which 
reflect the socio-historical background and 
desires of the speech communities involved.  
To initiate such a campaign, ideological 
clarification and collaboration between the 
Jeju provincial government, Jejueo scholars, 
native speakers and educators is needed.  The 
aim of the Jejueo Talking Dictionary is to 
match the diverse desires of Jeju users with 
collaborative methodology for data collection, 
as we will see in the next section. 
 
4 Methodology 
 
4.1 Community-based data collection 
  
A primary goal of the Jejueo Talking 
Dictionary project is to train language activists 
in field linguistics to create a sustainable 
infrastructure for data collection, analysis, 
publication and archiving.  In this way, Jeju 
community members will drive the scope of 
the Jejueo Talking Dictionary, in terms of 
adding the types of linguistic data that are 
found most useful to Jejueo-speaking 
communities in Jeju and Osaka.  By training 
community members in linguistic 
documentation, Jejueo speakers and semi-
speakers will have a foundation in field 
linguistics from which to build collaborative 
networks for crowdsourcing and status 
planning with Jejueo scholars, the provincial 
government, educators and elderly fluent 
speakers.  At present, the team of foreign and 
local linguists developing the Jejueo Talking 
Dictionary is training local college students 
and activists at Jeju Global Inner Peace.  
Members of the team record elderly fluent 
speakers of Jejueo, annotate the recordings, 
and upload files into an open-access working 
corpus of data using Lingsync, a free online 
program for sharable audio and video files of 
annotated linguistic data.  Linguists from Jeju 
National University, Jejueo specialists from 
the Jejueo Preservation Society, and I analyze 
the Jejueo data and check its accuracy with 
native speakers, ensuring the quality of the 

corpus.  In September, 2016 we will develop 
the corpus into a free online program and an 
Android application for smartphones. 
 
4.2 Building an interdisciplinary network 
 
A second goal of the Jejueo Talking 
Dictionary project is to build an 
interdisciplinary network for data collection.  
Our team of linguists from Jeju and abroad, 
language preservationists, activists and 
community elders have recruited 
ethnomusicologists, historians, experts in the 
indigenous religion and anthropologists to lend 
their expertise to the collection of lexemes and 
texts of various genres.  In this way we aim to 
create a methodology of interdisciplinary data 
collection that builds a multidimensional 
record of Jejueo, to serve a wide range of uses 
and user groups.  At present we have 
incorporated approximately 200 hours of 
previously unpublished annotated video data 
including Jeju oral history, shamanic rituals, 
indigenous music and cuisine preparation.  
Our team aims to enlist the support of 
ethnobotanists and ethnozoologists who can 
assist the team in collecting data on the 
indigenous flora and fauna of Jeju Island. In 
the future, data collection can be connected to 
language revitalization programs, such as 
master-apprentice programs (see Hinton, 
1997), where semi-speakers join speakers of 
Jejueo in their usual activities farming, 
foraging for roots, herbs and vegetables in the 
mountains, picking seasonal fruit, and diving 
for seafood near Jeju’s shores.   

 
5 Contents of Jejueo Talking Dictionary
  
The Jejueo Talking Dictionary is intended to 
serve as a tool for both cultural education and 
language acquisition.  With this in mind, we 
give equal attention to the collection of archaic 
and ceremonial speech, and the most 
frequently used lexemes and expressions.  The 
Jejueo Talking Dictionary will compile 
existing annotated video corpora of Jejueo 
songs, conversational genres and regional 
mythology into a multimedia database, 

125



	  

supplemented by original annotated video 
recordings of natural language use.  Lexemes 
and definitions will be accompanied by audio 
files of their pronunciation, listings of frequent 
collocations, and occasional photos, for items 
native to Jeju.  The audio and video data will 
be tagged in Jejueo, Korean, Japanese and 
English, allowing users to search or browse 
the dictionary in any of these languages.  Like 
Korean, Jejueo features complex agglutination 
of case, TMA and discourse register particles 
on verbs and nouns (Sohn, 1999).  Videos 
showing a range of discourse types will have 
interlinear glossing, so that users may search 
Jejueo particles as well as lexemes and 
grammatical topics, and find the tools to 
construct original Jejeuo speech.  At the time 
of writing, we have recorded and annotated 
approximately 500 audio files of individual 
lexemes and 300 hours of video data.  Below I 
itemize genres of Jejueo speech we have 
collected. 
 
6.2 Inclusiveness versus usability 
 
As the Jejueo Talking Dictionary is intended 
to serve a variety of uses, creating a cultural 
and linguistic repository of Jejueo stands 
somewhat at odds with developing a user-
friendly dictionary for language education. We 
have found one solution to be to develop 
separate modules for the dictionary (see 
Vamarasi, 2013), so that it may be viewed 
according to individual purposes.  In addition 
to viewing the dictionary page translated in 
Jejueo, Korean, Japanese and English, users 
can access separate modules from the main 
page.  At present, these include modules for 
language lessons, browsing cultural topics, 
browsing photos, and browsing conversational 
genres and grammatical features.  In the 
language education module, users access 
Jejueo lessons based around the most 
frequently used lexemes in the language, 
illustrated with photos.  For this module we 
are also developing language-learning games 
and a ‘word of the day’ feature. All of the 
lexical entries in the dictionary and lexical 
items used in the narrative videos are tagged, 
so that searching a Jejueo word from any of 
the modules brings up a textual sample of the 

lexeme in a grammatical construction, and 
videos featuring the lexeme in natural 
language use, where that data is available.  
Transcripts of all of the videos may be 
downloaded and printed, and users may select 
a transcript with interlinear glossing, the 
Jejueo transcription only, or a translation in 
Korean, Japanese or English.  
 
6.3 Language standardization  
 
It is important to note that the standardization 
of Jejueo orthography is still ongoing, and 
among the several regional varieties of Jejueo, 
none has been designated as the standard.  For 
the Jejueo Talking Dictionary project we adopt 
the orthographic preferences of the most 
recent Jejueo lexicographic materials (Kang 
and Hyeon 2011; Kang, 2007), and list 
headwords and regional variants in the order 
assigned in those materials. 

 
7 Conclusion 
 
An open-ended lexicographic resource such as 
an online talking dictionary lends itself well to 
incorporating a variety of data designed to 
serve diverse uses and user groups.  The 
Jejueo Talking Dictionary can be continuously 
and cost-effectively modified as we obtain 
more data and gain feedback on the usability 
of the dictionary.  We aim for the Jejueo 
Talking Dictionary to be an accessible 
multipurpose repository of the Jejueo language, 
where the content and the collection of 
linguistic data are both driven by the Jeju 
community.  With Jejueo in a state of critical 
endangerment, incorporating community 
members in the development and 
dissemination of language-learning materials 
is key. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

126



	  

 
 

 

 
 

 
Table 1. Jejueo Talking Dictionary corpus

Audio recordings Video recordings 
anatomy conversations focusing on discourse markers 
common expressions game playing 
cuisine oral histories of 4.3 Massacre, Japanese 

occupation, marriage rituals, farming, fishing 
cardinal directions preparation of native cuisine 
flora preparation of rituals (Buddhist, shamanic) 
fauna shamanic rituals: major public rituals for lunar 

year, family rituals 
geography stories of indigenous mythology (regional 

varieties) 
grammatical suffixes work songs, chants (regional varieties) 
high frequency nouns, verbs, adjectives  
ideophones  
idioms  
kinship terminology  
mythological and shamanic terminology  
weather terminology (polysemic terms for wind, 
rain) 

 

127



	  

 
  
References 
 
Bartholomew, Doris and Louise Schoenhals. 1983.              

Bilingual dictionaries for indigenous languages.  
Hidalgo, Mexico: Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. 

Corris, Miriam, Christopher Mannig, Susan 
Poetsch and Jane Simpson. 2004. How useful 
and usable are dictionaries for  speakers of 
Australian indigenous people. International 
Journal of Lexicography, 17(1): 33-68.  

Crowley, Terry. 1999. Ura: A disappearing 
language of Southern Vanuatu. Canberra: 
Pacific Linguistics. 

Fishman, Joshua. 1991. Reversing language shift: 
Theoretical and empirical foundations of 
assistance to threatened languages. Bristol: 
Multilingual Matters. 

Hansford, Gillian. 1991. Will Kofi understand the 
white woman's dictionary? Some ways to make 
a bilingual dictionary more usable to a new 
literate. Notes on Linguistics, 52, 17-28. 

Harrison, K. David and Gregory D.S Anderson. 
2006. Tuvan Talking Dictionary.  Retrieved 
from http://tuvan.talkingdictionary.org  

Hinton, Leanne. 1997. Survival of endangered 
languages: The California master-apprentice 
program. International Journal of the Sociology 
of Language, 123, 177-191. 

Jin, Seong-Gi. 1991. Dictionary of Jeju Shamanic 
Terms.  Jeju: Minsokweon. 

Kang, Jeong-Hui. 2005. A study of morphological 
change in the Jeju dialect. Seoul: Yeokrak. 

Kang, Yeong-Bong. 1994. The language of Jeju. 
Jeju: Jeju Munhwa. 

Kang, Yeong-Bong. 2007. Jeju Language. Seoul: 
National Folk Museum, Jeju Special Self-
Governing Province. 

Kang, Yeong-Bong, Kim, Dong-Yun and Kim Sun-
Ja. 2010. Jeju Dialect in Literature. Jeju: 
Gukrimgukeoweon. 

Kang, Yeong-Bong. & Hyeon Pyeong-Hyo. 2011. 
Standard Language- Jejueo Dictionary. Jeju: 
Doseochongpan Gak. 

Kim, Soung-U. 2013. Language attitudes on Jeju 
Island - an analysis of attitudes towards 
language choice from an ethnographic 
perspective. Master’s thesis, School of Oriental 
and African Studies, London. 

Kim, Sun-Ja. 2011. A Geolinguistic Study on the 
Jeju Dialect. Ph.D. dissertation, Jeju National 
University, Jeju.  

Ko, Jae-Hwan. 2002. Jejueo Idiom Dictionary. Jeju: 
Minsokweon. 

Kwen, Sangno. 1994. A diachronic dictionary of 
Korean place names. Seoul: Ihwa Munhwa 
Chwulphansa. 

Lee, Iksop and Robert Ramsey. 2000. The Korean 
language. Albany: SUNY Press. 

Lee, Minjeong. 2014, December 12. Smartphone 
usage overtakes PCs in South Korea.  Wall 
Street Journal. 

Martin, Samuel E. 1993. A reference grammar of 
Korean: A complete guide to the grammar and 
history of the Korean language. Rutland, 
Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle. 

Nathan, David. 2006. Thick interfaces: mobilizing 
language documentation with multimedia. In J. 
Gippert, N.P. Himmelmann, & U. Mosel (Eds.), 
Essentials of Language Documentation (pp. 
363-390). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 

O’Grady, William. 2015.  Jejueo: Korea’s other 
language. Paper presented at ICLDC 5, 
Honolulu. 

Saltzman, Moira. 2014. Language contact and 
morphological change in Jejueo. Master’s 
thesis, Wayne State University, Detroit.  

Sohn, Ho-Min. 1999. The Korean Language. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Song, Sang-Jo. Big dictionary of Jeju language. 
Seoul: Hanguk Munhwasa. 

Song, Jae-Jung. 2012. South Korea: language 
policy and planning in the making. Current 
Issues in Language Planning, 13. 1-68. 

Southcott, Darren. 2013, September 10. The story 
of Little Jeju: Jaeil Jejuin. The Jeju Weekly, pp. 
2A. 

Southcott, Darren. 2015, May 13.  Parents must 
take pride in Jejueo.  The Jeju Weekly, pp. 3B. 

Stonham, John. 2011. Middle Korean ㅿ and the 
Cheju dialect. Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, 74. 97-118. 

UNESCO Culture Sector. 2010. Concerted efforts 
for the revitalization of Jeju language. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/e
ndangered-languages/news/dynamic-
contentsingleviewnews/news/concerted_efforts

128



	  

_for_the_revitalization_of_jeju_language/#.U1
WeFFeZi4Y. Accessed 10 February 2015. 

 

 

Vamarasi, Marit. 2013. The creation of learner-
centred dictionaries for endangered languages: a 
Rotuman example. Journal of Multilingual and 

Multicultural Development. 
doi:10.1080/01434632.2013.825266 

Vovin, Alexander. 2013. From Koguryo to Tamna: 
Slowly riding to the South with speakers of 
Proto-Korean. Korean Linguistics, 15. 222–240.  

Yang, Chang-Yong. 2013. Reference grammar of 
Jejueo. Manuscript in preparation.

 

129


