









































Universal Dependencies for Portuguese
Alexandre Rademaker

IBM Research and EMAp/FGV
Brazil

alexrad@br.ibm.com

Fabricio Chalub
IBM Research

Brazil
fchalub@br.ibm.com

Livy Real
University of São Paulo

Brazil
livyreal@gmail.com

Cláudia Freitas
PUC-Rio

Brazil
claudiafreitas@puc-rio.br

Eckhard Bick
University of Southern Denmark

Denmark
eckhard.bick@mail.dk

Valeria de Paiva
Nuance Communications

USA
valeria.depaiva@nuance.com

Abstract

This paper describes the creation of a Por-
tuguese corpus following the guidelines of
the Universal Dependencies Framework.
Instead of starting from scratch, we in-
vested in a conversion process from the ex-
isting Portuguese corpus, called Bosque.
The conversion was done by applying a
context-sensitive set of Constraint Gram-
mar rules to its original deep linguistic
analysis, which was carried out by the
parser PALAVRAS, with some additional
manual corrections. Universal Dependen-
cies offer the promise of greater paral-
lelism between languages, a plus for re-
searchers in many areas. We report the
challenges of dealing with Portuguese, a
Romance language, hoping that our expe-
rience will help others.

1 Introduction

The Universal Dependencies (UD) project,1 in its
ambitious and encompassing mission of provid-
ing a single set of tags and parallel analyses com-
mon to several different languages, not only pro-
vides for a multilingual natural language process-
ing (NLP) framework, but also allows the repre-
sentation of specific features of each language and
this motivates our interest in participating in the
project. Since it is a well documented project, we
asked ourselves to which extent the general UD
guidelines were enough to represent the features
of each individual language, in particular we asked

1http://universaldependencies.org

ourselves whether they were enough to properly
represent the grammatical features of Portuguese.

The release of the UD treebanks version 1.2, in
November 2015, was the first release to include
a Portuguese treebank. The UD_Portuguese
treebank is based on the corpus Bosque, part of
the Floresta Sintá(c)tica project (Afonso et al.,
2002), version used in the CoNLL-X Shared Task
in dependency parsing (2006); the CoNLL ver-
sion was taken and converted to the Prague depen-
dency style as a part of HamleDT (since 2011).
Later versions of HamleDT added a conversion to
the Stanford dependencies (2014) and to Univer-
sal Dependencies (HamleDT 3.0, 2015). The con-
version path from the original Bosque still goes
through the CoNLL-X format and the Prague de-
pendencies, which may occasionally lead to loss
of information. In the release 1.3 of UD, in
May 2016, one additional Portuguese treebank
was added, the UD Portuguese-BR, a conver-
sion of the original work of (McDonald et al.,
2013), as per the description in (et al., 2016).

This paper describes the consolidation of the
UD_Portuguese treebank in the UD Frame-
work. For that, between September 2015 and
March 2016, a set of UD conversion rules for
the CG input was written, as described in (Bick,
2016), and applied to the updated version of the
dependency-style Bosque (Linguateca version 7.5
of March 2016). For a team effort starting in Octo-
ber 2016, we were given a version of the this con-
verted corpus, and through consistency-checking
and discussion, aiming at full compatibility with
UD specification, converged to a further round of
manual treebank corrections and conversion rules

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 197-206,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

197



changes. The first version of our data, fully UD
1.4 compliant, was include it in the UD release
1.4 with the name UD_Portuguese-Bosque.
Latter, motivated by the inclusion of Portuguese
language on the ‘Multilingual Parsing from Raw
Text to Universal Dependencies’ CoNLL 2017
Shared Task, we accepted the challenge to update
UD_Portuguese-Bosque to UD 2.0 guide-
lines and replace the previous UD_Portuguese
corpus. This paper describes the technical and lin-
guistics hurdles of the conversion and of the man-
agement of the different versions of the corpus
Bosque available. The Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), has
a long history of shared tasks in which training
and test data are provided by the organizers, al-
lowing participating systems to be evaluated and
compared in a systematic way.

Many reasons supported our decision to re-use
the Bosque corpus, instead of creating an entire
new corpus from scratch. The Bosque corpus -–
created and maintained by Linguateca 2 -– was al-
ready annotated with dependencies and was man-
ually revised, saving us time. Besides, it was
already used in previous editions of CONLL –
CONLL-X Shared task on Multilingual Depen-
dency Parsing (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006) –, and
it is distributed in different versions, annotated
with different tagsets and formats.3 The existence
of different versions of the same material fosters
the study about different tagsest and its impacts
in NLP systems. Finally, the fact that we had on
the team two researchers who had already worked
on previous versions of Bosque also contributed
to this choice. However, the conversion to UD
scheme was much more complicated than initially
planned.

Different tagsets usually correspond to differ-
ent reifications of grammars, which indicates dif-
ferent conceptualizations of a language. For this
reason, a conversion of tagsets is rarely a purely
mechanical task of substitution. In our improved
conversion, we address both structural links (de-
pendencies labels) and part-of-speech tagsets, fol-
lowing the Universal Dependencies guidelines for

2http://www.linguateca.pt
3There is the original Bosque tagset and the CONLL

2006 tagset; there is also the CG (constraint grammar,
(Karlsson, 1990)) format, the AD format (phrase structure
tree), the graphical and tgrep format, the Penn TreeBank
and TIGER fomat. All these versions are available from
http://www.linguateca.pt/Floresta/download.html and http://
corpora.di.uminho.pt/linguateca/FS/fs.html.

version 2.0. This conversion also deals with phe-
nomena that needs manual revision, such as ap-
position, copular sentences and multiword expres-
sions (MWE) structures, among others.

We first describe how and why we chose the
corpus we decided to work from, then we describe
the process we used to improve this data. Very
many small and not so small decisions were taken
along the way, and we try to recap and explain the
main ones, why they are important for the spe-
cific language we are dealing with (Portuguese)
and how they impact our continued plans for Por-
tuguese NLP. We finish with preliminary conclu-
sions on the state of this data and the the tasks
ahead.

2 The Bosque versions

The Bosque corpus is a subset of the Floresta
Sintá(c)tica (syntactic forest) treebank, first de-
scribed in (Afonso et al., 2002). ‘Bosque’ means
‘woods’ in Portuguese. It consists of news run-
ning text from both Portugal and Brazil, chun-
ked into sentences, syntactically analyzed in tree
structures, making use of both automatic parsing,
PALAVRAS (Bick, 2014) and fully revised by lin-
guists.

Over its 15-year history, the corpora from Flo-
resta Sintá(c)tica have spawned several format
conversions, resulting in a somewhat complex mix
of editions. The original text corpora were pro-
cessed with PALAVRAS, a rule-based Constraint
Grammar (CG) system (Karlsson, 1990) designed
specifically for Portuguese. The parser produces
deep linguistic analyses, with tags at the morpho-
logical, syntactic and semantic levels. Despite
CG’s native dependency tags, the first published
version of the Floresta treebank opted for con-
stituent trees.

From 2006–2008, the Floresta treebank were
enriched with additional tags for cross-token mor-
phology (e.g. definiteness and complex tenses)
and some semantics, derived from a re-annotation
with an improved PALAVRAS parser. The
PALAVRAS native dependency annotation was
retained, and aligned with the hand-corrected con-
stituent version. The constituent version was then
revised up to version 8.0 (Freitas et al., 2008),4

while the dependency version was used for on-
going experiments. The first UD_Portuguese
treebank (published in 2006, UD 1.2) was also de-

4http://www.linguateca.pt/floresta/corpus.html

198



rived from Bosque, as said before, but it was inde-
pendently converted from the constituent version
7.3 to a dependency version, and it is this version
(i.e. without the later revisions in the treebank
project itself) that went through a Penn treebank
dependency-style conversion as part of HamleDT
(2011), then Stanford Dependencies and then UD
conversion (HamleDT 3.0).

For our own work, we opted to use the original
Bosque treebank from Floresta, converted to UD
by (Bick, 2016), rather than the existing CoNLL-
U edition of the Bosque (the UD_Portuguese
released in the UD 1.2), in part because we wanted
to: (a) incorporate changes and additions made
to the dependency version of the original tree-
bank after 2006; (b) circumvent possible informa-
tion loss due to previous conversions; and (c) be-
cause we thought that a comparison of the results
of two different conversions might yield interest-
ing insights. The most important reason, how-
ever, was methodological: we wanted to build a
framework where manual revision work and con-
sistency checks could be coordinated with auto-
matic parser annotation and conversion rules. On
the one hand, this would allow us to save work by
addressing systematic errors, and thus fix them au-
tomatically, based on a few examples, rather than
repeatedly fixing the same kind of error manually.
On the other hand, and more importantly in the
long run, we intend to enlarge the treebank, and
therefore deem it important to be able to main-
tain a close link between live parser output and the
UD conversion method. One of us is building a
parser pipeline with an integrated UD conversion
grammar, to support a semi-automatic system of
manual revisions and consistency checks, which
should allow for an efficient text-to-dependencies
creation of new treebank material in the future. We
also believe that having the corpus revised by na-
tive Portuguese linguists guarantees a better anno-
tation quality, since the conversion from the origi-
nal Bosque tagset to the UD tagset and relations is
far from obvious.

2.1 Annotations: similarities and differences

The conversion grammar ultimately used for the
first conversion of Bosque to UD contained some
530 rules. Of these 70 were simple feature map-
ping rules, and 130 were local MWE splitting
rules, assigning internal structure, POS and fea-
tures to the MWEs from Bosque. The remain-

der of the rules handled UD-specific dependency
and function label changes in a context-dependent
fashion (Bick, 2016). The main issues were
raising of copula dependents to subject comple-
ments, inversion of prepositional dependency and
a change from syntactic to semantic verb chain de-
pendency. In one respect, punctuation attachment,
the grammar actually went beyond conversion,
identifying meaningful head tokens for commas,
parenthesis etc., that all had been left unattached
in the original Bosque. Figure 1 shows an exam-
ple of sentence with the original PALAVRAS de-
pendencies (top, simplified) and the resulting UD
encoding after the conversion (bottom). The com-
plete PALAVRAS annotation of the same sentence
in the niceline format is presented below.

Esse [esse] <*> <dem> DET M S @>N #1->2
carro [carro] <V> N M S @SUBJ> #2->3
foi [ser] <fmc> <aux> V PS 3S IND VFIN @FS-STA #3->0
achado [achar] <vH> <mv> V PCP M S @ICL-AUX< #4->3
em [em] <sam-> PRP @<ADVL #5->4
o [o] <-sam> <artd> DET M S @>N #6->7
inı́cio [inı́cio] <temp> N M S @P< #7->5
de [de] <sam-> <np-close> PRP @N< #8->7
a [o] <-sam> <artd> DET F S @>N #9->10
tarde [tarde] <per> N F S @P< #10->8
em [em] <np-close> PRP @N< #11->10
Engenheiro Marcilac [Engenheiro=Marcilac] <civ> <*>
<heur> <foreign> PROP M S @P< #12->11

. #13->0

The new UD treebank retains the additional tags
for NP definiteness and complex tenses, as well as
the original syntactic functions tags and secondary
morphological tags, which makes it a more infor-
mative treebank. This way, the treebank keeps its
original linguistic focus, but in addition it can be
used for the new machine learning scenarios tar-
geted by the CoNLL-U format. To give an exam-
ple of the usefulness of having the deep, old an-
notations and the the new ones together, we could
mention that, for instance, Bosque tags roots of
sentences for their functions, such as question,
command or statement. We retain these tags in our
conversion. It would be very hard for a shallow
dependency representation to recover these differ-
ences were they to be erased to begin with and
for a question answering application these tags are
very useful.

In some cases, the stored original function tags
allow the user to recover a valency relation other-
wise lost in the underspecified UD edge label, such
as the distinction between free adverbial preposi-
tional phrases (e.g. trabalhar em (ADV) ‘work
at’ and valency-bound adverbial (e.g. morar em
(ARG) ‘live at’).

199



Esse carro foi achado em o inı́cio de a tarde em Engenheiro=Marcilac .
esse carro ser achar em o inı́cio de o tarde em Engenheiro=Marcilac .
DET N V V PRP DET N PRP DET N PRP PROP

> N

SUBJ >

root

ICL−AUX

< ADV L > N

P <

> N > N

P <

N < P <

root

Esse carro foi achado em o inı́cio de a tarde em Engenheiro Marsilac .
esse carro ser achar em o inı́cio de o tarde em Engenheiro Marsilac .
DET NOUN AUX VERB ADP DET NOUN ADP DET NOUN ADP PROPN PROPN PUNCT

det

nsubj:pass

aux:pass

root

case

det

obl

case

det

nmod

case

obl

flat:name

punct

Figure 1: The sentence ‘Esse carro foi achado no inı́cio da tarde em Engenheiro Marsilac/This car was
found in the beginning of the evening at ‘Engenheiro Marsilac’ (location)’ annotated with the parser
PALAVRAS and UD scheme.

2.2 Improving the data

Having a version of the corpus committed to
a common repository, work started on checking
first basic code conventions: do we have empty
CoNLL-U representations? Do we have the same
number of columns for all sentences? Are we al-
lowed to have many values for a single tag? Do all
sentences have a “root” node? Can we enforce the
UD requirement that representations are trees?

Then more linguistic questions began to
emerge. For example, gender is one of the hall-
marks of Romance languages and annotation can
be complicated, as some words appear to have an
underspecified gender. There are adjectives such
as grande (‘big’) or feliz (‘happy’) that have only
one form for both genders. So we cannot tell
whether they are masculine or feminine unless we
see the context they appear in. In many cases, even
looking at the full sentence, one cannot tell if the
word is masculine or feminine. For example, in
the sentence:

CP652-3 Por enquanto, estamos felizes só com o
reconhecimento implı́cito (‘For now, we are
happy with only the implicit recognition’)

we have no way of knowing what is the gender
of felizes. How should these expressions be an-
notated? After some discussion, it was decided

that these cases would be annotated as ‘Unsp’ (for
“unspecified” value) and that a similar annotation
would be used for unspecified number too.

Then the first main issue with the MWEs and
the different approaches to their annotation had
to be tackled. The PALAVRAS annotation has
MWEs tokenized as a single word, but this is
not the UD recommendation. The UD version
1 guidelines proposed the dependency relations
‘mwe’ or ‘compound’, so a process of dismem-
bering these single token MWEs and assigning
each of their components a POS-tag was initiated.
Things changed in UD version 2, different tags for
MWE are used (‘flat’, ‘fixed’ and ‘name’), but this
conversion could be done automatically.

How to deal with participles was also a chal-
lenging issue. PALAVRAS tags all participles as
verbs, with the ‘PCP’ (participle) feature. How-
ever, UD guidelines state: “Note that participles
are word forms that may share properties and us-
age of adjectives and verbs. Depending on lan-
guage and context, they may be classified as either
VERB or ADJ.”

We followed the criteria discussed in (Truggo,
2016) to define participles acting as verbs or ad-
jectives and worked on a set of linguistic rules to
semi-automatically re-tag participles.

Another change from UD version 1 to 2 is the

200



treatment of ellipsis. In version 1, ellipsis cases
were dealt with via a ‘remnant’ dependency re-
lation. This relation linked the core arguments
of the ellipsis clause to their corresponding argu-
ments in the complete clause. In the sentence bel-
low (CF349-2 – ‘Opala lasted 23 years, Chevette,
20 [. . . ]’), the token Chevette was related to Opala
and the token 20 to 23.

O Opala durou 23 anos , o Chevette , 20 . . .

det nsubj nummod

obj

det

remnant
remnant

In UD version 2.0, the ‘remnant’ relation was
discarded and a new treatment was proposed, us-
ing a new relation ‘orphan’. With this proposal,
only the first core argument of the ellipsis clause
is related to the main clause and the other core
arguments are related to it via the ‘orphan’ rela-
tion. In the example above, Chevette is related to
durou ‘lasted’ (the root of the main sentence) via
‘parataxis’ and 20 is related to Chevette via ‘or-
phan’. All ‘remnant’ cases were manually fixed.

O Opala durou 23 anos , o Chevette , 20

det nsubj nummod

obj

det

parataxis

orphan

Also there were many minor discrepancies, like
Bosque used ‘pret’ (for preterite), while UD used
‘past’, so we had some “unknown attribute-value
pairs” to translate. Using the UD provided scripts
and manual checking, the validator script was sat-
isfied with the representations and we could start
thinking about similarities and differences to the
other version of the Bosque, which we discuss in
the next section.

3 Portuguese annotation choices

Clear and detailed guidelines are the crucial data
in annotation projects. It is reasonable to expect
that the UD guidelines would be, as they are, less
specific than we would like them to be. Their main
motivation is to be universal, so special character-
istics of the target language are to be down-played,
for the sake of being able to compare features in
other languages. However, this lack of specificity
of the guidelines makes somewhat more explicit
the interpretative dimension of linguistic analysis.

In this section we discuss some of the issues that

we consider interesting, either because they were
not sufficiently described in the guidelines, or be-
cause they are issues that seem mainly important
for Portuguese.

3.1 Tokenization

While the first conversion grammar did con-
vert syntactic to semantic (UD) dependencies and
function-based edge labels to form-based (UD)
edge labels, it did not handle UD’s space-based
tokenization, maintaining the original treebank’s
MWE (e.g. complex conjunctions, prepositions
and named entities) and its - syntactically moti-
vated - splitting of Portuguese contractions (prepo-
sition plus article/determiner/pronoun, e.g neste to
em + este (‘in this’). Linguistically, the problem in
token-splitting is the need to assign (a) partial POS
tags, (b) additional internal dependency links and
(c) new internal hook-up points for existing outgo-
ing and incoming dependency links. Unlike sim-
ple label conversion for, say, morphological fea-
tures, this cannot be achieved with a systematic
conversion table only.

Our solution was to use CG-based retokeniza-
tion rules. Its most recent implementation (Bick
and Didriksen, 2015) offers context-based manip-
ulation (removal, substitution, addition etc.) of not
only tags, but also of entire (annotated) tokens.
We used this feature to split MWE tokens into
their sub-words, while at the same time adding
the missing POS, features, edge labels and depen-
dency links to the individual parts.

This solves the problem that while the UD treat-
ment of MWEs considers each part of an MWE
as a single POS, the set of words that compose
a given MWE may not contain a word that has
the same POS tag as the MWE as a whole. The
MWE ao vivo (‘live’), for instance, is an ADV as a
whole, while ‘ao’ is a contraction (ADP ‘a’ + DET
‘o’) and ‘vivo’‘live’ is an ADJ. Since it is clear that
the most important information for the entire sen-
tence structure is the POS tag of the whole MWE,
and not the POS tag of each of its constituents, we
keep a tag for the whole MWE in our representa-
tion. Then, at least for the Portuguese UD corpus,
both the internal structure and the functional POS
tag of a MWE are available. In the same fashion,
CG rules can be used to fuse Portuguese contrac-
tions that were split in Bosque (dos ‘of the’, pelas
‘by the’, nisto ‘in this’), assigning them a com-
pound pos and joint external dependency links.

201



Another issue related to tokenization is the
problem of clitics in Portuguese. As other Ro-
mance languages, Portuguese has enclisis and pro-
clisis. Moreover, in Portuguese we have mesocl-
itics, that is, clitics that come inside the verb and
change the verbal structure:

CP895-1 Poder-se-á dizer que o estilo resulta da
sua profissão, fotojornalista. (‘It can be said
that the style results from his profession, pho-
tojournalist.’)

After some discussion, we decided to follow
the traditional Portuguese grammars. Mesoclitics
seem to us a language specific issue that maybe
each group dealing with an UD specific language
corpus should manage on their own. Guidelines
seem to be emerging that consider mesoclisis as
two syntactic words: a verb plus a pronoun. In
the example above, poder-se-á is poderá/VERB
followed by se/PRON’ (‘it can’ in the future plus
the reflexive). The surface form poder-se-á is still
present in the tree analysis as a multi-word token.

3.2 The particle ‘se’
The analysis of the particle ‘se’ is well-known as
a complex phenomenon in Portuguese. Tradition-
ally, besides being a conjunction, the particle ap-
pears in:

(a) reflexive and reciprocal constructions
CF314-2 Você se acha louca? (Do you think
you are crazy?);

(b) pronominal verbs CF340-2 O ciclista es-
panhol, 48, se suicidou em Caupenne
d’Armagnac, no sul da França com um tiro.
(The Spanish cyclist, 48, killed himself in
Caupenne d’Armagnac, south of France, with
a single shot.);

(c) pronominal passive voice CF32-2 -
Primeiro aprova-se o texto enxuto e depois
negocia-se a aprovação, sem prazo definido,
das leis complementares e ordinárias. (First,
the short text is approved and then, without
a definite deadline, the approval of the
complementary and ordinary statutes is
negotiated.);

(d) undeterminate subject constructions
CP263-3 Pense-se em Kingsley Amis, Mal-
colm Bradbury e Albert Finney. (One can
think of Kingsley Amis, Malcolm Bradbury
and Albert Finney.)

The difference between (c) and (d) above, dis-
cussed in traditional grammars and textbooks, has
gradually been substituted for an analysis that
takes as primary the non-determination of the sub-
ject in both cases. The example in (c) corre-
sponds to Primeiro, alguém aprova o texto e de-
pois alguém. . . (‘First someone approves the text
and after that someone. . . ’). This is to be com-
pared to Primeiro, o texto é aprovado e depois a
aprovação é negociada. . . (‘First the text is ap-
proved and then the approval is negotiated. . . ’).
This means that we consider equivalent the analy-
ses where ‘se’ assumes the function of the subject,
which one cannot or does not want to make ex-
plicit. A strong argument for this interpretation is
the lack of verbal concordance, the verb remaining
in the singular form, even in formal registers, in
some traditional examples such as Vende-se casas
‘Houses are sold’. In this case, the verb vender
(‘sell’) must be a plural form (vendem), to agree
with the plural casas ‘houses’, but the actual use
is Vende-se casas.

In the context of the universal dependencies this
indicates that in both cases (c) and (d) we could
have the particle se as the subject of the verb,
although the subject remains non-explicit. This
analysis would have the advantage of making uni-
form constructions that the speakers of Portuguese
tend to consider the same. Nonetheless, according
to UD guidelines, this analysis should be avoided:
“The ‘nsubj’ role is only applied to semantic ar-
guments of a predicate. When there is an empty
argument in a grammatical subject position (some-
times called a pleonastic or expletive), it is labeled
as ‘expl’. If there is then a displaced subject in the
clause, as in the English existential ‘there is’ con-
struction, it will be labeled as ‘nsubj’. The UD
annotation creates a certain uniformity between
the cases (b), (c) and (d). Since we consider rel-
evant the distinction between (b) (which has an
explicit subject) and (c) and (d) (which do not),
we keep this information. Thus, to keep the addi-
tional information, cases (c) and (d) carry the label
SUBJ INDEF in the MISC field.

3.3 Additional annotations

In the corpus, we use extra fields to keep the lin-
guistic information that we have from the parsing
analysis and that we would not like to lose, even
if this information is not used by the UD project
presently. The CoNNL-U field MISC (miscella-

202



neous) is also used to keep any information that
is not reported in the other fields. The indefinite
subject, cited above, is one example of use of that
field. Another information we keep in the MISC
is the POS tags of MWE, which we had to unpack
for this annotation task as described in the Sec-
tion 3.1.

The indication of the POS tags in the case of
‘fixed’ MWEs is particularly relevant, as these ex-
pressions are crystallized in such way that their
components can have completely different POS
tags from the total expression. Having the infor-
mation about the POS-tag of the entire MWE in
the MISC field helps to justify some dependency
relations. In the example already mentioned, the
expression ao vivo is a MWE with POS-tag ‘adv’,
although it is not composed by adverbs.

3.4 Negation

The treatment of negation has changed from UD
version 1 to 2. In the earlier version, a depen-
dency relation ‘neg’ was used to link a negative
word, such as não (‘not’), to its head. In the UD
version 2, a polarity feature was introduced (‘Po-
larity=Neg’) to keep the negative information and
the ‘neg’ relation was removed from the set of uni-
versal relations.

We give negation in Portuguese a different treat-
ment than other UD corpora. In Portuguese, nega-
tion is commonly expressed with the word não.
This word cannot be contracted and it behaves
exactly like any other adverb. Traditional gram-
mars of Portuguese state that não is always an ad-
verb and we agree with this analysis. Because of
this, the negation treatment we propose is slightly
different from the one proposed by the universal
guidelines. We understand não – and other words
as some uses of nada (‘nothing’) – as adverbs.
Therefore one should be prepared to find in the
corpus fewer words tagged with the POS tag PART
than in other corpora, such as the English and the
French tree banks.

Another interesting aspect of negation in Por-
tuguese is the issue of double negation, which is
pervasive in Portuguese. For example in the sen-
tence:

CP153-4 Não estava nada à espera disto. (‘[I] was
not waiting nothing for it.’)

We tagged both the main negation, não in the
sentence above and the second element of the

negation nada as adverbs. Sometimes we tag the
second negative in a double negation as a pro-
noun, depending on the kind of structure they are
in. In the example above, nada was tagged as an
adverb, since nada here could be replaced by an-
other adverb, for example pouco (‘little’) or muito
(‘much’). In other cases of double negation, the
second element of the negation can be seen as a
direct object of the negated verb:

CP778-11 A coincidência de funerárias e quei-
jarias na nossa circunstância não significava
nada [. . . ] (‘The coincidence of mortuaries
and cheesemakers in our circumstances did
not mean nothing [. . . ]’)

In those cases, nada (‘nothing’) is indeed the di-
rect object of the verb, and therefore it was tagged
as a pronoun (PRON) and it has the ‘obj’ relation
with the verb.

For those interested in double negations in Por-
tuguese, the best way to look for them in the cur-
rent UD_Portuguese corpus will be to check
for the polarity feature (‘Polarity=Neg’) expressed
in words that surround the verbs. We expect that
the consistent use of the polarity feature in ad-
verbs, pronouns, conjunctions, as nem (‘neither’),
and others will provide us with a full analysis of
this phenomenon without loosing the surface syn-
tactic analysis provided by the UD relations.

3.5 Appositives

In our conversion process, we have chosen – so
far – to take into account the classic and com-
prehensive notion of appositives (non-restrictive
and restrictive) (Biber et al., 1999), since a) this
was already the original analysis provided by
PALAVRAS; b) this is a gray area of the UD
guidelines; c) in our view, the decision favors con-
sistent analysis. According to UD guidelines, the
‘appos’ relation “serves to define, modify, name,
or describe that noun” 5. Combinations like pres-
ident Obama would be ‘appos’ (restrictive appos-
itive), if we agree that Obama describes, defines
or modifies president. Yet UD guidelines explicit
state that cases like president Obama, or state sen-
ator Paul Mnuchin should not be considered ap-
positives, since the impossibility of the reversal

5It is interesting to note how this definition, essentially se-
mantic, overlaps with the ‘amod’ definition (“serves to mod-
ify the meaning of the noun.”). But we will not explore this
point here.

203



(*Paul Mnuchin state senator) indicates the pres-
ence of one and only nominal. However, guide-
lines also recognize that there are always border-
line cases. In the sentences I met the French actor
Gaspard Ullie and I met Gaspard Ulliel the French
actor, the reversal indicates, in both sentences, the
presence of apposition between actor and Gaspar
Ulliel. It is not clear to us why I met the president
Obama should receive a different analysis. So this
cases were also tagged as ‘appos’ in our corpus,
but we recognize the issue is still open.

4 Bosque UD in numbers

The Bosque corpus consists of 9.368 sentences
and 227.653 tokens, with 18.140 unique lemmas.
In Table 1 we present the frequency of all 17
UD POS tags in the corpus. The POS tag ‘X’
is used for foreign words. At the moment we
still have 957 ‘dep’ relations (Table 2), which
we want to investigate, since this dependency is
mostly used when no other relation is applicable.
We also plan to check the coverage of the classes
of verbs, nouns, adjectives and adverbs, against
OpenWordNet-PT.6

5 Improving Bosque analyses

To allow us to analyze the representations and the
effects of the automatically applied choices in the
pipeline, we feed the result of processed sentences
to the interface developed and distributed by the
Turku BioNLP Group (Luotolahti et al., 2015).7

This has been very helpful, as one can tell imme-
diately how big the issues are within the corpus.

The UD project provides a validation script that
allows us to check some basic generic facts, such
as that every sentence has a root and that CoNLL
representations have always the same number of
fields or that there are no multiple values for the
same tag. Some of these are mandatory, a cor-
pus needs to be validated to be part of the distri-
bution. But more sophisticated constraints, both
on the level of POS tags and of dependencies, can
also be checked. The Turku search tools make use
of a sophisticated query language, with Boolean
operators that helps ascertain whether the treebank
satisfies some more semantic properties too.

In the course of the project, we have also
started developing our own library for dealing with

6The open wordnet for Portuguese available at http://
openwordnet-pt.com/.

7https://github.com/fginter/dep search

tag count examples
ADJ 11560 grande, novo, primeiro,

bom, último, polı́tico, pe-
queno, próximo, segundo,
passado

ADP 36614 de, em, a, por, para, com,
como, entre, sobre, sem

ADV 8742 não, mais, já, também,
ainda, ontem, como, só,
quando, depois

AUX 6315 ser, estar, ter, poder, ir,
dever, vir, continuar,
começar, acabar

CCONJ 5222 e, mas, ou, nem, quer, mais,
&, tampouco

DET 35076 o, um, seu, este, todo,
outro, esse, muito, algum,
mesmo

INTJ 43 não, rarará, é, adeus, ah, ai,
alô, basta, bem, bingo

NOUN 41353 ano, dia, milhão, paı́s, pres-
idente, empresa, pessoa,
vez, tempo, estado

NUM 4312 um, dois, três, mil, cento,
quatro, cinco, 15, 30, seis

PART 4 anti, ex, pré, pós
PRON 7236 que, se, ele, o, eu, ela, isso,

quem, eles, tudo
PROPN 18984 Paulo, Portugal, Brasil,

José, Porto, Governo,
Nacional, Lisboa, EUA

PUNCT 29983 ,, ., , , (, ), , :, ?, ;
SCONJ 2201 que, se, porque, embora,

pois, como, caso, assim, e,
senão

SYM 415 %, US, R, CR$
VERB 19482 ter, fazer, dizer, haver, dar,

ser, ficar, ver, ir, querer
X 136 in, pole, position, body,

dream, jet, shopping, art,
center, centers

Table 1: POS tags in Bosque

204



rel count rel count
acl 2930 flat 11
acl:relcl 2562 flat:foreign 71
advcl 2440 flat:name 5832
advmod 8461 iobj 236
amod 8732 mark 4724
appos 3272 nmod 26493
aux 2444 nmod:npmod 473
aux:pass 1125 nmod:tmod 193
case 33170 nsubj 10958
cc 5263 nsubj:pass 976
ccomp 1567 nummod 2853
compound 536 obj 8211
conj 6145 obl 4933
cop 2748 obl:agent 727
csubj 376 orphan 8
dep 957 parataxis 463
det 34942 punct 29986
discourse 13 reparandum 1
dislocated 9 root 9368
expl 948 vocative 14
fixed 607 xcomp 1900

Table 2: The dependency relations in Bosque

CoNLL-U files. The cl-conllu library is im-
plemented in Common Lisp, it is open-source and
freely available.8 Since we have not yet decided in
our group to use any particular dependencies edi-
tor, we also implemented an online CoNLL-U val-
idation service. 9

6 Comparison and Assessment

As we said in the introduction, one of the reasons
for working with the same Bosque corpus, already
available in UD release 1.2, was to be able to com-
pare conversions. Some big discrepancies in num-
bers, as computed by the statistics script, were
easy to see. For instance, it was clear that in our
version had many more cases of auxiliary verbs
than UD_Portuguese in UD 1.2. The differ-
ence is probably due to the fact that, in Portuguese,
verbs like continuar (to continue), começar (to
start) and acabar (to end) can also be seen as
modal auxiliaries, and that was our decision. In
the previous UD_Portuguese corpus from UD
1.2, such verbs were considered full verbs:

CP269-3 O soldado disparou para o ar, mas o in-
8https://github.com/own-pt/cl-conllu
9https://github.com/own-pt/conll-workbench

divı́duo continuou a avançar e foi atingido
mortalmente. (The soldier fired into the air,
but the individual continued to advance and
was struck deadly.)

On the other hand, we found that our version
of the Bosque had many more cases of apposition
dependencies (‘appos’). In addition to our choice
to include restrictive appositives under the tag ‘ap-
pos’, the main difference in numbers reflects dif-
ferent choices in the alignment-conversion pro-
cess. In the annotation provided by PALAVRAS,
the syntactic function @N<PRED (non-identifying
apposition) can and should be converted into ap-
pos but, in the UD_Portuguese UD 1.2, all
these cases were converted into ‘nmod’ (see Ta-
ble 3). In the sentence below, there is an ‘appos’
relation between diretor (director) and Ailton Reis,
but in the first automatic conversion, the relation
was ‘nmod’.

CF103-4 Os documentos foram encontrados em
papel ou retirados de disquetes apreendidos
em a casa de Ailton Reis, diretor da Ode-
brecht. (The documents were found on pa-
per or removed from diskettes seized at Ail-
ton Reis’ house, director of Odebrecht.)

When we looked for the ‘appos’ relation, con-
sidering the possible cases of different POS tags
pairs being related, we were surprised to find
around 50 possibilities of POS tag pairs being re-
lated through the ‘appos’ relation.

Corpus UD PT 2.0 UD PT 1.2
UPOSTAG (appos) (nmod)
PROPN 234 218
NOUN 961 935

Table 3: Cases of @N<PRED from PALAVRAS
annotation.

One relevant difference between our version
and the previous UD_Portuguese version is
that all contractions are introduced also as a mul-
tiword token, allowing one to know the surface
structure of the sentence easily. The process of re-
tokenization of these contractions made us realize
many mistakes in the annotation of these contrac-
tions. For example, ‘a’ is a preposition but also
a determiner (definite article) and, in Portuguese,
two definite articles do not occur contiguously, so
we could easily correct, in contractions, all cases

205



where the preposition ‘a’ (that should be annotated
as ADP) was wrongly annotated as a determiner
(‘det’). Our version also keeps the raw text of all
annotated sentences.

7 Conclusions

We described how we took an existing corpus, pro-
duced for us by a careful, context-sensitive conver-
sion process using a Constraint Grammar frame-
work, and managed to validate it, using the UD
guidelines versions 1 and 2.

This required extensive work, mainly dealing
with contractions (a widespread phenomenon in
Portuguese) and with multiword expressions (a
universal problem). We had to re-annotate many
sentences and make some tough decisions. Some
of these decisions are far-reaching (like the one
on the treatment of negation), others are less so,
but cumbersome. We had to re-annotate all proper
nouns that were originally simply considered mul-
tiword expressions, to provide them with individ-
ual POS-tags and structural dependencies. This
showed us how useful it would be to have a lex-
ical resource like the English Multiword Expres-
sion Lexicons from CMU,10 which does not exist
for Portuguese, yet.

We should note that this work is not finished.
While our treebank once again is syntactically val-
idated by the UD script, we are sure that many er-
rors remain. First because, like other treebanks,
we still have so-called “semantic” failures, as de-
scribed by the UD second level of validation.11

But mostly because we know that many phenom-
ena are not as yet susceptible of validation. Coor-
dination, ellipsis and negation remain big issues.

References
Susana Afonso, Eckhard Bick, Renato Haber, and Di-

ana Santos. 2002. Floresta sintá(c)tica: a tree-
bank for Portuguese. In Proceedings of the 3rd In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), pages 1698–1703, Las Palmas,
Spain.

Douglas Biber, Stig Johansson, Geoffrey Leech, Susan
Conrad, and Edward Finegan. 1999. The Longman
grammar of spoken and written English. Longman,
London.

Eckhard Bick and Tino Didriksen. 2015. Cg-
3—beyond classical constraint grammar. In Pro-

10http://www.cs.cmu.edu/∼ark/LexSem/
11http://universaldependencies.org/svalidation.html

ceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Compu-
tational Linguistics, NODALIDA 2015, May 11-13,
2015, Vilnius, Lithuania, pages 31–39. Linköping
University Electronic Press.

Eckhard Bick. 2014. PALAVRAS – a constraint
grammar-based parsing system for portuguese. In
Tony Berber Sardinha and Thelma de Lourdes
São Bento Ferreira, editors, Working with Por-
tuguese Corpora, pages 279–302. Bloomsbury Aca-
demic.

Eckhard Bick. 2016. Constraint grammar-based con-
version of dependency treebanks. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (ICON), pages 109–114, Varanasi,
India, Dec. NLP Association of India (NLPAI).

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. Conll-x
shared task on multilingual dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, CoNLL-X ’06,
pages 149–164, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Joakim Nivre et al. 2016. Universal dependencies v1:
A multilingual treebank collection. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Cláudia Freitas, Paulo Rocha, and Eckhard Bick. 2008.
Floresta sintá (c) tica: bigger, thicker and easier.
In International Conference on Computational Pro-
cessing of the Portuguese Language, pages 216–
219. Springer.

Fred Karlsson. 1990. Constraint grammar as a frame-
work for parsing running text. In Proceedings of
the 13th conference on Computational linguistics-
Volume 3, pages 168–173. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Juhani Luotolahti, Jenna Kanerva, Sampo Pyysalo, and
Filip Ginter. 2015. Sets: Scalable and efficient
tree search in dependency graphs. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Demonstrations, pages 51–55. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

R. McDonald, J. Nivre, Y. Quirmbach-Brundage,
Y. Goldberg, D. Das, K. Ganchev, K. Hall, S. Petrov,
H. Zhang, O. Tc̈kström, D. Bedini, N. Castelló,
and J. Lee. 2013. Universal dependency annota-
tion for multilingual parsing. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2013. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, August.

Luiza Frizzo Truggo. 2016. Classes de palavras - da
grécia antiga ao google: um estudo motivado pela
conversão de tagsets. Master’s thesis, PUC-Rio.

206




