



















































From Treebank to Propbank: A Semantic-Role and VerbNet Corpus for Danish


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 202–210,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

From Treebank to Propbank:

A Semantic-Role and VerbNet Corpus for  Danish

Eckhard Bick
Institute of Language and Communication

University of Southern Denmark
eckhard.bick@mail.dk

Abstract

This paper presents the first version of a
Danish  Propbank/VerbNet  corpus,
annotated  at  both  the  morphosyntactic,
dependency  and  semantic  levels.  Both
verbal  and  nominal  predications  were
tagged  with  frames  consisting  of  a
VerbNet class and semantic role-labeled
arguments  and  satellites.  As  a  second
semantic annotation layer, the corpus was
tagged  with  both  a  noun  ontology  and
NER classes.  Drawing  on  mixed  news,
magazine,  blog  and  forum  data  from
DSL's  Korpus2010,  the  87,000  token
corpus contains over 12,000 frames with
32,000  semantic  role  instances.  We
discuss  both  technical  and  linguistic
aspects  of  the  annotation  process,
evaluate  coverage  and  provide  a
statistical break-down of frames and roles
for both the corpus as a whole and  across
different text types. 

1 Introduction

The  syntactic  potential  and  semantic  structure
of a language's  lexicon can either  be encoded
explicitly  in  a  dictionary  or  ontology,  or
implicitly  through  annotated  data.  Rule-based
natural-language processing (NLP) will typically
rely  on  the  former,  machine-learning  (ML)
systems on the latter. For the semantic annotation
of  predicate-argument  structures,  two  well-
known English ressources each addressing one of
these two approaches are FrameNet (Baker et al.
1998, Johnson & Fillmore 2000, Ruppenhofer et
al.  2010)  and  PropBank  (Palmer  et  al.  2005),

respectively.  While  FrameNet  categorizes  verb
senses  into  frames  with  semantically  restricted
"slot-filler"  arguments,  PropBank  departs  from
syntactically annotated corpus data to assign both
roles  and  argument  structure  to  each  verb
consecutively.  The  data-driven  approach  of
PropBank  promises  better  coverage  and
statistical  balance1,  and  therefore  better
automatic  ML  tagging,  but  its  semantic  role
inventory  and  numbered  arguments  are  highly
predicate-dependent,  and  do  not  support
semantic  generalization  and  interpretation  as
well  as  FrameNet.  A third  approach,  VerbNet
(Kipper et al. 2006), opts for less granularity and
a more limited set of roles and predicate classes.
In  recent  years,  corpora  with  such  medium-
granularity  semantic-role  annotation  have  been
published  for  various  languages,  e.g.  German
(Mújdricza-Maydt  et  al.  2009)  and  Dutch
(Monachesi et al. 2007).

For  Danish,  a  VerbNet-based  FrameNet  (Bick
2011),  with  similar  granularity  (35  roles,  200
predicate classes subdivided into 500), achieved
reasonable coverage in automatic annotation, but
so  far  no  manually  validated  corpus  has  been
published. The SemDaX corpus (Pedersen et al.
2016)  does  provide  human-validated  semantic
annotation of a Danish corpus, but only for word
senses,  and  (with  the  exception  of  20  highly
ambiguous  nouns)  only  for  WordNet  super-
senses (Fellbaum 1998),  not  for  semantic roles
and predicate frames. In this paper, we present a
corpus of similar size and composition, but with

1 Random or running text samples not only guarantees a 
real-life statistical representation of lexical items, but also 
forces annotators to confront - and resolve - unforeseen 
constructions and contexts.

202



the  full  structural  Verbnet  frame  annotation
proposed by (Bick  2011),  and augmented with
corresponding frames for  nominal  predications.
For verbs, this implies full sense disambiguation.
For  nouns,  senses  were  added  in  the  form  of
semantic-prototype  tags,  but  only  fully
disambiguated in the case of named entities.

2 The corpus

For our corpus, we use the term  PropBank in a
generic  sense,  agreeing with Merlo  & Van der
Plas  (2009)  that  VerbNet-style  generalizations
are important  in the face of new semantic role
instances,  and  that  they  complement  the
structural constraints that can be learned from a
PropBank.  Our  data  source is  Korpus2010
(Asmussen 2015), a sentence-randomized corpus
of Danish around the year 2010,  compiled and
distributed by the Danish Society of  Language
and  Literature  (Det  Danske  Sprog-  og
Litteraturselskab). The 44.1 million token corpus
has  a  fairly  broad  coverage  and  includes  both
printed,  electronically  published  and  non-
standard sources:

Danish PropBank section token percentage
Magazines (text files) 44.99%
Magazines (scanned) 12.97%
National newspapers 14.58%
Parliamentary speeches 10.51%
Chat fora, young adults 2.48%
Web sources (various) 5.9%
blogs 8.51%

Table 1: Corpus composition

Our  subcorpus  of  ca.  87,000  tokens  (4,924
sentences/utterances) was built using random id-
based  sentence  extraction.  Compared  to
Korpus2010  as  a  whole,  the  subcorpus  has  a
higher  percentage  of  blog  and  chat  data,  less
news and more magazines. A few excerpts were
discarded, mostly because the original automatic
sentence separation was erroneously triggered by
abbreviation  dots  resulting  in  incomplete
fragments.

3 Annotation levels

While  our  research  focus  is  on  the  semantic
annotation  of  verb-argument  structures,  and  -
widening this scope - the semantic annotation of
predications  and  roles  in  general,  this  higher-
level  annotation  is  built  upon  a  skeleton  of
syntactic  tags  and  dependency  links,  and  the
corpus  can  therefore  also  be  used  as  an

"ordinary" treebank. As such, it complements the
bigger,  but  older  Danish  Arboretum  treebank,
that  contains  data  from  Korpus90  and
Korpus20002.  Both resources are available in the
ELRA catalogue (http://catalog.elra.info/).

3.1 Tokenization and morpho-syntax

We use  functional  units  as  tokens,  rather  than
strictly  space-separated  strings,  in  order  to
facilitate  assignment  of  higher-level  syntactic
and semantic  tags.  Thus,  complex  prepositions
and  conjunctions  (i=stedet=for  [instead  of],
på=trods=af  [despite],  i=og=med  [though],
for=så=vidt [in so far as])  are used for syntactic
perspicuity,  and  named  entities  are  fused  for
semantic reasons. Non-adjacent parts of lexemes
(verb particles) are marked, but only linked at the
syntactic level.

Morphosyntactic  annotation  adopts  an
analytical  scheme,  with  separate  tags  for  POS,
syntactic  function  and  each  morphological
feature, rather than complex all-in-one tags. Due
to  the  underlying  automatic  pre-annotation,
native annotation uses Constraint Grammar (CG)
abbreviations,  but  the  corpus  is  available  in  a
variety of treebank output  formats,  such as the
cross-language  analytical  VISL  standard
(visl.sdu.dk),  MALT  xml,  TIGER  xml  and
Universal Dependencies in CoNLL format.

3.2 Valency and dependency relations

The corpus strives to make a connection between
a verb's valency potential, dependency relations
and semantic arguments. Thus, the latter can be
viewed as fillers for valency slots projected by
dependency  links.  We  therefore  mark  both  the
instantiated  valency  (e.g.  <v:vt>  for
monotransitive),  syntactic dependency links and
(separate) semantic argument links. This way, we
support a triple representation of tree structure:

(a) a  shallow,  verb-marked lexical  valency  tag,
chosen  according  to  which  arguments  are
actually present in a given sentence

(b) a traditional  syntactic dependency tree, with
prepositions and auxiliaries as heads of PP's
and verb chains,  respectively,  and conjuncts
chained onto each other

(c) a semantic (tectogrammatical) tree with only
content words as nodes (i.e.  main verbs and

2Like Arboretum, the new corpus will be distributed through
the ELRA catalogue of Language Resources.

203



PP-nominals  rather  than  auxiliaries  and
prepositions), and with conjuncts linked to the
same head in parallel

This  multi-layered  approach  is  similar  to  the
semantic role linking scheme used in the Prague
Dependency  Treebank  (Böhmová  et  al.  2003),
and different  from the Universal  Dependencies
scheme (McDonald et al. 2003), which  opts for
a 1-layer approach by  replacing syntactic links
with  semantic  ones,  while  still  maintaining
"surface-near" non-semantic labels.

3.3 Semantic prototype annotation

Our  annotation  scheme  maps  a  semantic
ontology onto nouns, with around 200 so-called
semantic  prototype  categories3,  organized  in  a
shallow  hierarchy.  Thus,  major  categories  like
<H>  (human),  <V>  (vehicle),  <tool>  etc.  are
further  subdivided,  e.g.  <Hprof>  (profession),
<Vair> (planes), <tool-cut> etc.  During treebank
generation,  these  tags  are  used  both  for
contextual disambiguation and as slot fillers for
the  identification  of  verb  frames.  Even  in  the
face  of  polysemy,  these  tags  are  usually
sufficient  to  pinpoint  a  given  verb  sense  and
frame, because the choice is further constrained
by the syntactic function of a verb's arguments,
as well as POS and morphological form.

Once frames and roles are established,  these
can be in turn used, to automatically discard non-
appropriate noun senses, ideally leaving only one
or  at  least  non-conflicting  sense  tags4.  In  the
current  version  of  the  Propbank,  manual
validation and disambiguation of sense tags has
not yet been concluded. Once finished, another
task will be to assign, where available, DanNet
senses (Pedersen et al. 2008) in a semiautomatic
way by mapping one ontology onto another.

3.4 NER annotation

Named  entity  recognition  and  classification
(NER)  of  proper  nouns  and  numerical
expressions  is  needed  to  supplement  semantic
noun classification, and important for verb frame
identification.  In  principle,  the  same  ontology
could be used, but the underlying parser already
implements  a  separate  scheme with  around 20

3 The category set adopted here is described at: 
http://visl.sdu.dk/semantic_prototypes_overview.pdf

4 A non-conflict is a combination of a subset tag with its 
superset tag, or underspecified <sem-r> (readable) and 
<sem-l> (listenable) for "værk" (work of art).

NER  categories,  which  can  be  seen  as  an
extension of - and in some cases synonyms of -
the  semantic  noun  tags.  Following  the  MUC
conference  standard,  there  are  six  main
categories:  person  <hum>,  organization  <org>,
place <top>, event <occ>, work of art <tit> and
brand  <brand>.  Because  some  names  have  a
cross-category  potential,  <civ>  (civitas)  was
added for places that can act (e.g. build or go to
war),  <inst>  for  site-bound  organizations  or
activities  and  <media>  for  names  that  can
function  as  both  titles  and  organizations  (e.g.
newspapers and certain websites). In these cases,
the  co-tagged  semantic  role  label  will
functionally complete the NER categorization of
a  given  name,  for  instance  §AG  (agent)  vs.
§LOC  (location)  for  towns  or  countries.
Tokenization  is  an  important  issue  in  NER,
because many names (almost half in our corpus)
are  multi-word  units  (MWU)  and  need  to  be
recognized before they can be classified. To do
so,  the  input  parser  relies  on  both  pattern
matching/reprocessing,  a  gazetteer  lexicon  and
contextual  rules  applied  after  the  POS-tagging
stage.  In  the  published  corpus,  both  NER
tokenization  and  classification  was  manually
revised. 3.6% of all non-punctuation words in the
corpus  are  names,  with  a  MWU proportion  of
42%, and an average MWU length of 2.4 parts.

3.5 Syntactic function and dependency

Dependency links are the necessary backbone of
a  predicate-argument  frame,  and  syntactic
function  tags  (subject,  different  object  types,
subject and object complements, valency-bound
adverbials etc.) are useful as argument slot-filler
conditions  in  the  automatic  assignment  of
frames.  Annotation errors  at  the  syntactic level
will therefore often lead to frame and verb sense-
errors.  Because  of  this  interdependency,
inspection/revision  of  either  annotation  level
helps  identifying  errors  at  the  other  one,  too,
effectively creating a traditional treebank and a
propbank at the same time.

Structurally,  however,  syntactic  trees  and
Propbank  trees  are  not  identical,  because  the
latter  propagate  ordinary  dependency  links  to
meaning-carrying words. Thus, each argument in
our corpus carries at least two head-id links, one
for  the  immediate  syntactic  head  (e.g.
preposition, first conjunct, auxiliary), and one for
the  semantic  relation  (to  a  verbal  or  nominal
predicator).  Furthermore,  while  traditional
dependency links only allow one head, semantic

204



relations  may  ask  for  multiple  heads  due  to
"transparent" arguments (e.g. relative pronouns) ,
unexpressed  arguments  (subjects  of  infinitive
verbs) or  coordination ellipsis.  Thus,  in Fig.  1,
Majbrit,  dependency-wise  the  subject  of  sige
("speak"), is not only role-linked to the latter as
§SP (speaker), but also - as §EXP (experiencer) -
to the predicate in a depending relative clause,
kan lide ("likes"), and finally - as §AG (agent) -
to  an  infinitive  clause,  bo  ...  ("live  ..."),  three
levels  further  down in the  dependency tree.  In
this case, ordinary treebank dependencies suffer
from an argument overlap,  impeding tasks  like
information extraction. Propbank annotation, on
the  other  hand,  clearly  marks  three  different
predications:

Majbrit
§SP

siger (says)
<fn:say>

...
§SOA / §MES

Majbrit
§EXP

kan lide (likes)
<fn:like>

at bo ... (to live)
§TH

Majbrit
§AG

at bo (to live) 
<fn:lodge>

sammen med fire 
andre (with four 
others) §AG-COM

Table 2: Overlapping propositions

Fig.1: Multiple semantic heads
(... says Majbrit, who likes the coziness in living

together with four others)

3.6 Verb frame annotation

Our  annotation  of  proposition-argument

structures  is  based  on  the  category  set  of  the
Danish  FrameNet  (Bick  2011),  which  uses  ca.
500 classes based on the original VerbNet senses,
albeit  with  a  modified  naming  system5 and
additional  subclassification.  Thus,  though
syntactic alternations such as diathesis or  word
order  are  not  considered  frame-distinctors,  the
Danish FrameNet differs from both WordNet and
VerbNet  by  introducing  polarity  antonyms like
increase - decrease, like - dislike, and a self/other
distinction (move_self, move_other). The scheme
also  avoids  large  underspecified  classes,
subdividing  e.g.  change_of_state into  new
classes like heat - cool, activate - deactivate and
open - close.

A first-pass frame annotation was performed
by  running a frame-mapper program exploiting
existing morphosyntactic and semantic class tags
as well as argument-verb dependencies assigned
by the DanGram parser. Action and event nouns
with argument slots and a de-verbal morphology
(in  particular  Danish  -else/-ing  verbs)   were
annotated  with  the  corresponding  verb  frames.
All  verbs  and  deverbal  nouns  were  then
manually  inspected  together  with  their

arguments,  which  led
to  corrections  in  15-
20%  of  all  frames.
About  a  quarter  of
these  were  due  to
syntactic  annotation
errors  or,  sometimes,
faulty  POS-tagging6.
Given the high lexeme
coverage of the Danish
FrameNet,  very  few
verbs  were  left
completely  frameless,
so  most  of  the  errors
were  mistaggings  due
to  frame  patterns  not
foreseen in the Danish
FrameNet  lexicon,
often involving phrasal
constructions  with
incorporated  adverbs

5 We wanted the class names to on the one hand be real 
verbs, on the other to reflect hypernym meanings wherever 
possible. Therefore, we avoided both example-based names 
(common in VerbNet) and - mostly - abstrac concept names 
(common in FrameNet) that are not verbs themselves.

6 The parser's error rate for POS is about 1%, and 5% for 
syntactic function.

205



and prepositions (e.g.  slå ned på [hit down at] -
"stop"-frame),  or  idiomatic  expressions  with
non-literal  nominal  arguments  (e.g.  bære  frugt
[carry fruit]  -  "succeed"-frame).  In these cases,
the frame tagger defaults to the first frame listed
for  a  given valency,  or  to  a basic  transitive  or
intransitive frame, if there is no valency match in
the lexicon either.

In  order  to  speed  up  manual  revision  work,
missing  frames  were  added  to  the  FrameNet
lexicon,  and  missing  valencies  to  the  parser
lexicon,  and  automatic  annotation  was  then
repeated for the remaining,  not-yet-revised part
of the Propbank in steps of about 20%.

3.7 Semantic role annotation 

Our  Propbank  assigns  semantic  roles  to  both
predicate  arguments  and  free  (adverbial)
satellites not  valency-bound by their  head.  The
former are automatically mapped onto syntactic
predicate-argument "skeletons", together with the
chosen verb sense, once a given frame is chosen.
For  a correct syntactic tree, errors in such roles
will always manifest as frame/sense errors, too.
Satellite roles, on the other hand, depend less on
the verb, and have to be tagged from local clues
alone,  e.g.  the  preposition  and  semantic  noun
class of an adverbial PP. The annotation scheme
distinguishes  between  38  argument-capable
semantic roles and an additional 14 roles that can
only occur as satellites.

Fig. 2: Semantic-role token percentages

As can  be seen from Fig. 2, the 5 main roles
account for over 60% of all cases. Compared to
the  unrevised  frame  annotation  of  newspaper

data  reported  in  (Bick  2011),  place  and  time
locations  (§LOC,  §LOC-TMP)  figure  more
prominently  and  there  are  more  incorporates
(§INC).  The most  likely explanation for this  is
not so much the difference in source genres, but
rather  the  more  complete  coverage  of  satellite
(free) adverbials and the exhaustive treatment of
all verb particles and incorporated nouns in the
corpus.

4 Annotation Procedure

The current annotation is a 1-annotator linguistic
revision of an automatic annotation, with parallel
improvements  in  the  underlying  DanGram
parser7 and Danish FrameNet lexicon8 followed
by  intermittent  re-annotation  of  not-yet-revised
portions,  in  20%-steps.  The  lack  of  multi-
annotator  cross-checks,  while  not  standard
procedure, has the advantage of reduced cost and
more data per time unit. As a side effect, there is
a certain consistency advantage compared to at
least an incomplete  multi-annotator setup where
not  all annotators  revised  all data,  or  where
annotators could not agree. 

The revision was performed twice - first with a
focus  on  main  verbs  and  valency-bound
arguments,  then  with  a  focus  on  non-verbal
predications  and  satellite  roles.  The  first  pass
also  resolved  V/N  part-of-speech  errors,  and
consequently major tree structure errors, together
with argument function errors. Unlike arguments
and  verbs,  which  warrant  100%  semantic
tagging,  there is  less linguistic consensus as to
which  tokens  should  be  marked  semantically,
with  satellite  roles.  Apart  from  lexically  pre-
marked  material  (in  particular  space,  direction
and time adverbs), nouns and names are the most
likely  semantic  role  carriers.  For  the  latter,  a
complete,  separate  inspection  pass  was  carried
out, for the former, a mini Constraint Grammar
was run on the already-annotated corpus to mark
missing roles. The simplified marker rule below
looks for nouns in the nominative without a §-
marked  role.  Excluded  are  top-level  nodes
(ADVL  [unattached  adverbial]  and  NPHR
[function-less  NP]),  plus  transparent  nouns
(slags/art  [kind of],  quantifiers etc.). In order to
ensure  that  only  the  main  noun  in  an  NP  is
addressed  (e.g.  amerikaneren  professor
Pentland),  there  are  NEGATE  checks  for

7  visl.sdu.dk/visl/da/parsing/automatic/parse.php

8  http://framenet.dk

TH
ATR
AG

LOC
LOC-TMP

PAT
COG
INC

SOA
ACT
BEN

TP
DES
SP

CAU
RES

0 5 10 15 20 25

206



immediate  parent  or  child  nodes  without
interfering frame carriers (such as verbs).

MAP (§NOROLE) TARGET N + NOM - (/§.*/r)
   (NEGATE *p (/§.*/r) - (<fn:.*>r) 

BARRIER (<fn:.*>r)) 
   (NEGATE *c (/§.*/r @N<) 

BARRIER (<fn:.*>r)) 
   (NOT 0 @ADVL/NPHR OR <transparent>) ;

5 Evaluation and statistics

We evaluate our propbank statistically, in order
to  assess  corpus  parameters  such  as  lexical
spread,  representativeness,  frame and role  type
frequencies. In addition, the relative distribution
of these semantic categories across text types, as
well as their interdependence with other, lower-
level  linguistic  categories  is  of  interest,  given
that  this  is  the  first  time  a  comprehensively
annotated and revised Danish corpus is available
for this level of annotation.

At the time of writing,  the corpus contained
10,708 instances  of main verbs,  covering 1275
different  lexemes,  100%  of  which  were
annotated  with  frames.  By  comparison,  only
9.6%  of  the  ca.  15,000  nouns  were  frame
carriers,  albeit  with  a  much  higher  type/token
ration (741 lexemes/1722 tokens) than for verbs.
Frames  for  other  word  classes  were  only
assigned  to  about  190  adjectives  (65  lexeme
types),  a  few  direction  adverbs  and  a  single
determiner:

 bange for [afraid of] + §CAU

 følsom over for [sensitive to] + §STI

 syd for [south of] + §LOC

 anden end [other than] + §COMP

In  addition,  81  attributively  used,  prenominal
participles  (52  types),  received  "naked"  verb
frame  senses,  without  arguments9,  mostly
9 This is a gray zone - a number of Danish deverbal 
adjectives could arguably also be read as -ende/-et 
participles [-ing/ed], but for now we simply followed the 
choices made in the parser lexicon, assigning frames to 
attributive participles only where they were productively 
derived from verbs. Another decision was not to tag the 
heads of such attributive participles with argument roles 
referring back to their own modifiers (e.g. voksende 
[growing] + §PAT. Postnominal participles, on the other 
hand, are all argument/satellite-carriers in Danish, and 
hence assigned roles.

corresponding  to  the  default  sense  of  the
underlying verb.

The corpus contains  examples  of  454 different
frames, covering 91.9% of all frame types in the
Danish  Framenet,  and  598  (or  44.7%)  of  the
possible  frame type combinations (e.g.  "udgive
sig  for"  -  <fn:  imitate  &&  role_as>).  Since
frames  are  used  to  disambiguate  the  valency
potential of a given verb and to define its senses,
it is also possible to quantify verb polysemy in
the corpus.  All  in all,  we found different  2153
verb senses10,  amounting to an average of 1.69
senses  per  verb  lexeme,  albeit  with  huge
differences between lemmas (table 3).

verb sen-
ses

3 most frequent frame senses
(number of instances)

gå 54 run 30, leave 14, 
reach&&participate 13

være 47 be_copula 1522, exist 260, 
be_place 217

komme 41 reach 69, appear 24, occur 17
tage 36 take 38, do 19, run 10
holde 27 run_obj 8, persist 8, defend_cog, 

endure, hold, keep, like, sustain 6
have 26 have 346, own 18, cope 13
stå 21 be_place 27, be_attribute 11, 

spatial_conf 8
sætte 21 put 12, start 6, decrease, 

change_body_position 4
lægge 20 put_spatial 14, suggest 5, 

create_semantic 3
slå 18 beat 6, confirm, deactivate, 

integrate, succeed 2
se 18 see 85, notice 22, be_attribute 16
gøre 18 do 78, turn_into 43, cause 11
få 18 get 165, cause 37, obtain 12

Table 3: Most polysemous verbs

In almost all cases, sense differences come with
differences  in  argument  structure  or  phrasal
particles etc., but the inverse is not true - there
may well be more than one syntactic realization
of  a  given  verb  sense.  Thus,  there  are  24.6%
more valency-sense combinations for  the verbs

10 By comparison, the Danish FrameNet contains 11174 verb
senses for 7033 lexemes, i.e. 1.59 senses per verb. Hence, 
our corpus data is slightly more ambiguous, even on a type 
basis, than the lexicon, probably because the corpus only 
covers the 18.1% most frequent verbs, and 19.7% of all 
senses in the FrameNet lexicon, lacking many rare, but 
unambiguous verbs.

207



in  the  corpus  than  just  verb  senses11.
Interestingly,  senses  have  a  much  more  even
frequency  distribution  for  some  verbs  (e.g.
"holde"  [hold]  and  "slå"  [hit])  than  for  others
("være" [be], "have" [have]).

Semantic  role  statistics  are  complicated due to
the fact that one token may participate in several
different  frames  across  the  sentence,  and
therefore carry multiple role tags. All in all, there
were  20,437  semantic  role  tags  for  verb
arguments, and 5252 role tags for verb satellites,
corresponding to a 79.6% /  20.4% distribution.
Arguments  were  more  likely  to  share  a  token
than satellites (with an average of 1.1 roles per
token for  the  former,  and 1.026 for the  latter).
For  the  rarer  non-verbal  frame-heads  (mostly
nouns),  the  argument-satellite  balance  was
almost the opposite (29.7% / 70.3%), with 1303
argument roles and 3077 satellite roles, and a few
multi-tag  tokens (1.007 tag/token for arguments
and 1.008 for satellites).

For  classifying semantic  roles  as  arguments  or
satellites,  and to mark them for verbal  or  non-
verbal  head  type,  we  used  the  same  method
described  in  ch.  4  for  consistency  checking,
namely  CG mark-up rules,  exploiting  syntactic
function tags and frame relation links as context.

6 Linguistic text profiling

We also examined the distribution of both frames
and  semantic  roles  across  different  text  types,
hoping  to  identify  text  type-  (or  even  genre-)
specific  traits  in  a  semantically  generalized
fashion,  different  from  -  and  arguably  more
linguistic  and  generalized  than  -  standard
techniques such as bag of words.

Role
rank

News Maga-
zines

Blog Forum Parlia-
ment 

Reci-
pes

4909 14898 1026 740 1412 317

1 ORI MES DES STI FIN CIRC

2 BEN CAU LOC-
TMP

COG TH-
NIL

PAT

3 SP TH-
NIL

COG EXP ACT EXT-
TMP

4 ID TP INC ATR RES BEN

5 EV ID AG TH TP DES

11 This count includes difference between transitive and 
ditransitive use and between NP and clausal objects, but not 
the difference between active and passive 

6 COMP SOA EXP COMP CAU LOC

7 EXP LOC ATR ID SOA TH

8 AG RES REC ORI ATR

9 SOA SP INC ACT

10 LOC REC BEN

Table 4: Relative role ranks across text types

The semantic role ranks in table 4 are computed
by  normalizing  in-text  relative  frequencies
according to all-corpus relative frequencies. Only
roles more frequent than the corpus average are
listed, and each role is bold-faced where it ranks
highest in the table overall. By using normalized
frequencies  rather  than  absolute  ranking,  text
differences are emphasized, and patterns become
more salient.

Thus,  the  reporting  style  of  news  text  rhymes
with top ranks for §SP (speaker), §ID (typical of
explaining name appositions) and §EV (events).
The high rank for §ORI (origin) is symptomatic
of  quote  sourcing  ("according  to  .."  etc.).
Furthermore,  the  news  texts  evaluate  facts  by
comparing  them  (§COMP)  and  by  discussing
who was affected,  profited or  suffered  (§BEN,
benefactive).  Magazines,  though  a  similar  text
type  in  other  linguistic  aspects,  address  more
specific audiences and topics (§TP), and are - by
comparison  -  more  interested  in  bringing  a
message  across  (§MES)  and  making  claims
(§SOA, state-of-affairs).

Blogs and discussion fora are the most personal
text types in our corpus, and are characterized by
opinions  and  cognitiveness  (§COG),  relaying
experiences  (§EXP,  §STI)  and  describing  or
judging  things  (§ATR,  attribute).  In  addition,
blogs,  often  written  as  a  personal  timeline  or
travel report, rank high for time markers (§LOC-
TMP)  and  destinations  (§DES).  Interestingly,
blog  writers  have  high  scores  for  non-literal
language,  with  a  lot  of  verb  incorporations
(§INC). While in theory also 1-person text types,
parliamentary  speeches  are  very  different  from
blogs and fora, and more argumentative than the
rest  of  the  corpus,  scoring  high  on
intention/planning  (§FIN),  results  (§RES)  and
discussed actions (§ACT). Also, these speeches
rank higher than even news texts for impersonal
constructions  linked  to  formal  subjects  (§TH-
NIL, "det er X der", "der + s-passive").

Finally, a small but "spicy" section of the corpus
is dedicated to recipes, which are known to stand

208



out  even  in  morphological  ways  (imperatives,
uninflected  nouns,  unit  numbers).  In  terms  of
semantic  roles,  recipe  sentences  are  all  about
changing (e.g.  frying)  things  (food,  §PAT
patient)  in certain  circumstances (§CIRC) for a
certain amount of time (§EXT-TMP). 

For  frames,  a  text-wise  break-down  is
informative, too, and provides a useful means of
abstraction  compared  to  simple  lemma
frequencies.  Thus,  frames  help  lump  together
both morphological and POS variation (unhire =
fyring,  massefyring,  fyre)  and  lexical  variation
(steal = snuppe, nappe, stjæle). For the weighted
ordering in table 5,  relative in-text frequencies
were used, with a weighting exponent of 1.5 for
the numerator. Compound frames were split into
atomic frames.

Text
type

Weighted top-ranking frames (absolute 
numbers in parentheses)

News be_copula (221); unhire (7); behave (8); 
dispute (5); trade (5); have (54); reach 
(30); succeed (13); run_obj (19); tell (22);
lower (4)

Maga-
zines

be_copula (712); say (137); have (163); 
exist (130); assume (69); become (97);  
affect (43); get (88); cause (68); relate 
(56); be_part (41)

Blog long (5); serve_to (2); steal (3); be_copula 
(138); belong_to (3); send (10); know (25)

Forum like (7); appear (9); be_copula (62); hear 
(3); add (3); know (10); inquire (3)

Parlia-
ment

compensate (7), exist (61); ensure (17); 
exempt (2); adjust (16); improve (15); 
unestablish (4); be_copula (160); agree 
(15); suggest (16); exaggerate (3)

Recipes prepare_food (23); supply (10); combine 
(7); cover_ize (4); add (5); pour (2); 
put_spatial (4); put_deposit (3) 

Table 5: Frame ranking across text types 

Frame analysis more or less supports the picture
suggested  by  semantic  role  distribution,  but  is
somewhat  more  concrete,  and  provides  more
insight into topics. Thus, news text is about firing
people (unhire),  disputes, trade and how to run
things (run_obj). Parliamentary debates are about
reform  (ensure,  improve,  unestablish)  and
discussion (agree, suggest). The high rank for the
exist-frame is a form-trait, and due to impersonal
constructions  (der er).  People in blogs and fora

are  a  bit  more  emotional  (long,  like),  and
information  is  essential  (know,  hear,  inquire).
The  most  concrete  text  type  is  recipes
(prepare_food),  where  frames  are  about
physically  manipulating  things  (combine,  add,
put, pour, cover_ize).

7 Conclusions and outlook

We have presented a  first  proposition bank for
Danish,  with  extensive  annotation  of  both
argument and satellite roles, for both verbal and
nominal VerbNet frames. Offering both syntactic
and semantic tree structures, and three levels of
node  annotation  (syntactic  function,  semantic
ontology and semantic role), the corpus aims to
serve multiple  ML and linguistic  purposes.  By
way of example we have discussed frame- and
role-based text profiling.

In terms of additional annotation, a useful next
step  would  be  to  improve  the  semantic
annotation  of  pronouns  by  adding  anaphorical
relations.  The  current,  sentence-randomized
corpus,    however,  will  allow this  only for in-
sentence relations. The same is true for another
type of relational annotation, discourse analysis,
and  a  future  version  of  the  corpus  should
therefore include a running text section from a
source, where this is not a copyright problem.

Also, using randomized sentences from a multi-
source corpus, while providing a good statistical
sample of a language, is not the best way to beat
Zipf's law. Therefore, in order to extend per-type
coverage  for  verb  senses  in  the  Danish
FrameNet, future work should include a second
propbank section, where sentences are extracted
from  an  automatically  pre-tagged  Korpus2010
not  randomly,  but  based on  which verb senses
they contain.

References 
Asmussen,  Jørg.  2015.  Corpus  Resources  &

Documentation.  Det  Danske  Sprog-  og
Litteraturselskab, http://korpus.dsl.dk

Baker, Collin F.; J. Charles Fillmore; John B. Lowe.
1998.  The  Berkeley  FrameNet  project.  In
Proceedings  of  the  COLING-ACL,  Montreal,
Canada

Bick,  Eckhard.  2011.  A FrameNet  for  Danish.  In:
Proceedings  of  NODALIDA  2011,  May  11-13,

209



Riga, Latvia. NEALT Proceedings Series, Vol. 11,
pp. 34-41. Tartu: Tartu University Library.

Böhmová,  Alena ;  Jan Hajič;  Eva Hajji;
Barbora Hladká.  2003.  The  Prague  Dependency
Treebank: A Three-Level Annotation Scenario. In:
Anne  Abeillé  (ed.):  Text,  Speech  and  Language
Technology Series. Vol. 20. pp 103-127. Springer

Ryan McDonald,  Joakim Nivre,  Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev,  Keith  Hall,  Slav  Petrov,  Hao  Zhang,
Oscar Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria  Bertomeu
Castelló,  and  Jungmee  Lee.  2013.  Universal
dependency annotation for multilingual parsing. In
Proceedings of ACL 2013

Fellbaum,  Christiane  (ed.).  1998.  WordNet:  An
Electronic  Lexical  Database.  Language,  Speech
and Communications. MIT  Press:  Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

Johnson, Christopher R. & Charles J. Fillmore. 2000.
The  FrameNet  tagset  for  frame-semantic  and
syntactic  coding  of  predicate-argument  structure.
In:  Proceedings  of  the  1st  Meeting  of  the  North
American  Chapter  of  the  Association  for
Computational Linguistics (ANLP-NAACL 2000),
April 29-May 4, 2000, Seattle WA, pp. 56-62.

Kipper, Karin & Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2006.  Extensive Classifications of
English verbs.  Proceedings of the 12th EURALEX
International  Congress.  Turin,  Italy.  September,
2006.

Merlo,  P.  &  Van  Der  Plas,  L.  (2009).  Abstraction
and  generalisation  in  semantic  role  labels:
Propbank,  Verbnet or both?   In: Proceedings of
the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of
the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference

on  Natural  Language  Processing  of  the  AFNLP:
Volume 1-Volume 1, pp 288–296. ACL

Monachesi,   P.;   G. Stevens;   J. Trapman.    2007.
Adding  semantic  role  annotation  to  a  corpus  of
written  Dutch.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  Linguistic
Annotation Workshop. pp 77–84. ACL 

Mújdricza-Maydt;  Éva  &  Silvana  Hartmann;  Iryna
Gurevych;  Anette  Frank.  2016.  Combining
Semantic Annotation of  Word Sense & Semantic
Roles:  A Novel  Annotation  Scheme for  VerbNet
Roles on German Language Data. In: Calzolari et
al. (eds). Proceedings of LREC 2016.

Palmer,  Martha;  Dan Gildea;  Paul Kingsbury. 2005.
The  Proposition  Bank:  An  Annotated  Corpus  of
Semantic Roles.  Computational Linguistics, 31:1.,
pp. 71-105, March, 2005. 

Pedersen,  B.S.;  S.  Nimb;  L.  Trap-Jensen.  2008.
DanNet:  udvikling  og  anvendelse  af  det  danske
wordnet. In: Nordiske Studier i leksikografi Vol. 9,
Skrifter  published  by  Nordisk  Forening  for
Leksikografi, pp. 353-370

Pedersen,  Bolette  Sandford;  Braasch,  Anna;
Johannsen,  Anders  Trærup;  Martinez  Alonso,
Hector;  Nimb,  Sanni;  Olsen,  Sussi;  Søgaard,
Anders;  Sørensen,  Nicolai.  2016.  The  SemDaX
Corpus  -  sense  annotations  with  scalable  sense
inventories.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  10th  LREC
(Slovenia, 2016).

Ruppenhofer, Josef; Michael Ellsworth; Miriam R. L.
Petruck; Christopher R. Johnson; Jan Scheffczyk.
2010. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Practice.
http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/  index.php?
option=com_wrapper&Itemid=126

210


