



















































Two Layers of Annotation for Representing Event Mentions in News Stories


Proceedings of the 11th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 82–90,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Two Layers of Annotation for Representing
Event Mentions in News Stories

Maria Pia di Buono1 Martin Tutek1 Jan Šnajder1 Goran Glavaš2
Bojana Dalbelo Bašić1 Nataša Milić-Frayling3

1 TakeLab, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb, Croatia
firstname.lastname@fer.hr

2 Data and Web Science Group, University of Mannheim, Germany
goran@informatik.uni-mannheim.de

3 School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
natasa.milic-frayling@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract

In this paper, we describe our prelimi-
nary study of methods for annotating event
mentions as part of our research on high-
precision models for event extraction from
news. We propose a two-layer annota-
tion scheme, designed to capture the func-
tional and the conceptual aspects of event
mentions separately. We hypothesize that
the precision can be improved by mod-
eling and extracting the different aspects
of news events separately, and then com-
bining the extracted information by lever-
aging the complementarities of the mod-
els. We carry out a preliminary annota-
tion using the proposed scheme and an-
alyze the annotation quality in terms of
inter-annotator agreement.

1 Introduction

The task of representing events in news stories and
the way in which they are formalized, namely their
linguistic expressions (event mentions), is interest-
ing from both a theoretical and practical perspec-
tive. Event mentions can be analyzed from var-
ious aspects; two aspects that emerge as particu-
larly interesting are the linguistic aspect and the
more practical information extraction (IE) aspect.

As far as the linguistic aspect is concerned,
news reporting is characterized by specific mech-
anisms and requires a specific descriptive struc-
ture. Generally speaking, such mechanisms con-
vey non-linear temporal information that complies
with news values rather than narrative norms (Set-
zer and Gaizauskas, 2000). In fact, unlike tradi-
tional story telling, news writing follows the “in-

verted pyramid” mechanism that consists of intro-
ducing the main information at the beginning of
an article and pushing other elements to the mar-
gin, as shown in Figure 1 (Ingram and Henshall,
2008). Besides, news texts use a mechanism of
gradual specification of event-related information,
entailing a widespread use of coreference relations
among the textual elements.

On the other hand, the IE aspect is concerned
with the information that can be automatically ac-
quired from news story texts, to allow for more
efficient processing, retrieval, and analysis of mas-
sive news data nowadays available in digital form.

In this paper, we describe our preliminary study
on annotating event mention representations in
news stories. Our work rests on two main as-
sumptions. The first assumption is that event
in news substantially differ from events in other
texts, which warrants the use of a specific anno-
tation scheme for news events. The second as-
sumption is that, because news events can be an-
alyzed from different aspects, it makes sense also
to use different annotation layers for the different
aspects. To this end, in this paper we propose a
two-layer annotation scheme, designed to capture
the functional and the conceptual aspects of event
mentions separately. In addition, we carry out a
preliminary annotation using the proposed scheme
and analyze the annotation quality in terms of
inter-annotator agreement.

The study presented in this paper is part of our
research on high-precision models for event ex-
traction from news. We hypothesize that the preci-
sion can be improved by modeling and extracting
the different aspects of news events separately, and
then combining the extracted information by lever-
aging the complementarities of the models. As a

82



Narrative News

When electricians wired the home of Mrs Mary Ume in Ho-
hola, Port Moresby, some years ago they neglected to install
sufficient insulation at a point in the laundry where a num-
ber of wires crossed.
A short-circuit occurred early this morning.
Contact between the wires is thought to have created a
spark, which ignited the walls of the house.
The flames quickly spread through the entire house.
Mrs Ume, her daughter Peni (aged ten) and her son Jonah
(aged five months) were asleep in a rear bedroom. They had
no way of escape and all perished.

A Port Moresby woman and her two children died in a
house fire in Hohola today.
Mrs Mary Ume, her ten-year-old daughter Peni and baby
son Jonah were trapped in a rear bedroom as flames swept
through the house.
The fire started in the laundry, where it is believed faulty
electrical wiring caused a short-circuit. The family were
asleep at the time.
The flames quickly spread and soon the entire house was
blazing.

Table 1: An example of narrative and news styles (Ingram and Henshall, 2008).

first step towards that goal, in this paper we carry
out a preliminary comparative analysis of the pro-
posed annotation layers.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
In the next section we briefly describe the related
work on representing and annotating events. In
Section 3 we present the annotation methodology.
In Section 4 we describe the annotation task, while
in Section 5 we discuss the results. In Section 6
we describe the comparative analysis. Section 7
concludes the paper.

2 Related Work

Several definitions of events have been proposed
in the literature, including that from the Topic De-
tection and Tracking (TDT) community: “a TDT
event is defined as a particular thing that hap-
pens at a specific time and place, along with all
necessary preconditions and unavoidable conse-
quences” (TDT, 2004). On the other hand, the
ISO TimeML Working Group (Pustejovsky et al.,
2003) defines an event as “something that can be
said to obtain or hold true, to happen or to occur.”

On the basis of such definitions, different ap-
proaches have been developed to represent and ex-
tract events and those aspects considered represen-
tative of event factuality.

In recent years, several communities proposed
different shared tasks aiming at evaluating event
annotation systems, mainly devoted to recognize
event factuality or specific aspects related to fac-
tuality representation (e.g., temporal annotation),
or tasks devoted to annotate events in specific lan-
guage, e.g., Event Factuality Annotation Task pre-
sented at EVALITA 2016, the first evaluation ex-
ercise for factuality profiling of events in Italian
(Minard et al., 2016b).

Among the communities working in this field,

the TimeML community provides a rich specifi-
cation language for event and temporal expres-
sions aiming to capture different phenomena in
event descriptions, namely “aspectual predica-
tion, modal subordination, and an initial treatment
of lexical and constructional causation in text”
(Pustejovsky et al., 2003).

Besides the work at these shared tasks, sev-
eral authors proposed different schemes for event
annotation, considering both the linguistic level
and the conceptual one. The NewsReader Project
(Vossen et al., 2016; Rospocher et al., 2016;
Agerri and Rigau, 2016) is an initiative focused
on extracting information about what happened
to whom, when, and where, processing a large
volume of financial and economic data. Within
this project, in addition to description schemes
(e.g., ECB+. (Cybulska and Vossen, 2014a))
and multilingual semantically annotated corpus of
Wikinews articles (Minard et al., 2016a), van Son
et al. (2016) propose a framework for annotating
perspectives in texts using four different layers,
i.e., events, attribution, factuality, and opinion. In
the NewsReader Project the annotation is based
on the guidelines to detect and annotate markables
and relations among markables (Speranza and Mi-
nard, 2014). In the detection and annotation of
markables, the authors distinguish among entities
and entity mention in order to “handle both the an-
notation of single mentions and of the coreference
chains that link several mentions to the same en-
tity in a text” (Lösch and Nikitina, 2009). Enti-
ties and entity mention are then connected by the
REFER TO link.

Another strand of research are the conceptual
schemes, rooted in formal ontologies. Several up-
per ontologies for annotating events have been de-
veloped, e.g., the EVENT Model F (Scherp et al.,

83



2009). This ontology represents events solving
two competency questions1 about the participants
in the events and the previous events that caused
the event in question. EVENT Model F is based
on the foundational ontology DOLCE+DnS Ultra-
lite (DUL) (Gangemi et al., 2002) and it focuses
on the participants involved in the event and on
mereological, causal, and correlative relationships
between events.

Most of the proposed ontologies are tailored for
financial or economic domains. A case in point is
The newsEvent Ontology, a conceptual scheme for
describing events in business events (Lösch and
Nikitina, 2009).

3 Methodology

Our methodology arises from the idea that events
in news call for a representation that is different
from event representations in other texts. We be-
lieve that a coherent and consistent description
and, subsequently, extraction of event mentions in
news stories should be dealt with conveying tem-
poral information (When), but also distinguishing
other information related to the action (What), the
participants (Who), the location (Where), the mo-
tivation (Why) and the manner in which the event
happened (How). This means that a meaningful
news/event description should cover the prover-
bial 5Ws and one H, regarded basic in information
gathering, providing a factual answer for all these
aspects.

The above assumption implies that events can-
not be considered black boxes or monolithic
blocks describable merely by means of the tem-
poral chain description. Instead, it is necessary
to capture the functional and conceptual aspects
of event mentions. Indeed, as previously claimed,
language used in news stories is characterized by
mechanisms that differ from the narrative one.
Such differences may manifest themselves in both
the syntactic structures and the patterns of discur-
sive features that effect the sentence structure.

In line with the above, our approach aims at
accomplishing a fine-grained description of event
mentions in news stories applying a two-layer an-
notation scheme. The first layer conveys the dif-
ferent syntactic structures of sentences, account-
ing the functional aspects and the components in

1Competency questions refer to natural language sen-
tences that express the scope and content of an ontology. An-
swering these question represents a functional requirement
for an ontology (Uschold and Gruninger, 1996).

events on the basis of their role. As noted by
Papafragou (2015), “information about individual
event components (e.g., the person being affected
by an action) or relationships between event com-
ponents that determine whether an event is coher-
ent can be extracted rapidly by human viewers”.
On the other hand, the second layer is suitable
also to recognize the general topic or theme that
underlies a news story, due to the fact that this
layer concerns conceptual aspects. This theme can
be described as a “semantic macro-proposition”,
namely a proposition composed by the sequences
of propositions retrievable in the text (Van Dijk,
1991). Thus, the conceptual scheme makes it pos-
sible to recognize these structures reducing the
complexity of the information and guaranteeing a
summarization process that is closer to users’ rep-
resentation.

3.1 Functional Layer

Following the previously-mentioned broad defini-
tion of an event in news as something that happens
or occurs, in the functional annotation layer we
focus on the lower level representation of events,
closer to the linguistic level.

We represent each event with an event action
and a variable number of arguments of different
(sub)categories. The event action is most com-
monly the verb associated with the event (e.g.,
“destroyed”, “awarded”), however it can also be
other parts of speech (e.g., “explosion”) or a mul-
tiword expression (e.g., “give up”). The action de-
fines the focus of the event and answers the “What
happened” question, and is the main part of an
event mention.

Along with the event action, we define four
main categories of event arguments to be anno-
tated, which are then split into fine-grained sub-
categories, as shown in Table 2. We subcate-
gorize the standard Participant category into the
AGENT, PATIENT, and OTHERPARTICIPANT sub-
categories. We further divide each of the afore-
mentioned subcategory into HUMAN and NON-
HUMAN subcategories. The AGENT subcategory
pertains to the entities that perform an action either
deliberately (usually in the case of human agents)
or mindlessly (natural causes, such as earthquakes
or hurricanes). The PATIENT is the entity that
undergoes the action and, as a result of the ac-
tion, changes its state. The TIME and LOCA-
TION categories serve to further specify the event.

84



Category Subcategory

PARTICIPANT AGENT HUMAN
NONHUMAN

PATIENT HUMAN
NONHUMAN

OTHERPARTICIPANT HUMAN
NONHUMAN

LOCATION GEOLOCATION
OTHER

TIME

OTHERARGUMENT

Table 2: Functional categories and subcategories.

Finally, the OTHERARGUMENT category covers
themes and instruments (Baker, 1997; Jackendoff,
1985) of an action. Table 3 gives an example of
sentence “Barcelona defeated Real Madrid yester-
day at Camp Nou” annotated using the functional
layer.

The action’s arguments focus on the specifics of
the event that occurred. We depart from the stan-
dard arguments that can be found in schemes like
ECB+ (Cybulska and Vossen, 2014a) or TimeML
(Pustejovsky et al., 2003) in that we included
the Other argument category. Furthermore, in
TimeML, predicates related to states or circum-
stances are considered as events, while in the
scope of this work, sentences describing a state,
e.g., “They live in Maine”, are not annotated. In
fact, we argue that they do not represent the fo-
cus in news, but merely describe the situation sur-
rounding the event.

Our functional annotation differs from Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al., 2005) definitions of semantic
roles as we do not delineate our functional roles
through a verb-by-verb analysis. More concretely,
PropBank adds predicate-argument relations to the
syntactic trees of the Penn Treebank, represent-
ing these relations as framesets, which describe
the different sets of roles required for the differ-
ent meanings of the verb. In contrast, our anal-
ysis aims to describe the focus of an event men-
tion by means of identifying actions, which can
involve also other lexical elements in addition to
the verb. This is easily demonstrated through the
example “fire broke out” from Figure 2a, where
we annotate “fire broke out” as an action, since it
fully specifies the nature of the event defining in a
less general way the action.

Text span Label

Barcelona AGENT
defeated ACTION
Real Madrid PATIENT
yesterday TIME
at Camp Nou GEOLOCATION

Table 3: Sample of functional event annotation.

Entity Property

PERSON IDENTITY MOVEMENT
ORGANIZATION ASSOCIATION LOCATION
ANIMAL PARTICIPATION CAUSE
OBJECT OCCURRENCE PERFORMANCE
PLACE ATTRIBUTION INFLUENCE
TIME CONSTRUCTION SUPPORT
MANIFESTATION CREATION PURPOSE

MODIFICATION CLASSIFICATION
DECLARATION DEATH

Table 4: Main entity classes and properties.

3.2 Conceptual Layer

In order to represent semantically meaningful
event mentions and, consequently, to develop an
ontology of the considered domain, we define also
a second layer of annotation, namely a conceptual
model for news stories. This model, putting for-
ward a classification of the main concepts retriev-
able in news stories, defines seven entity classes,
six entity subclasses, and eighteen properties (Ta-
ble 4).

Entities and properties. Entity classes are de-
fined in order to represent a set of different in-
dividuals, sharing common characteristics. Thus,
being representative of concepts in the domain, en-
tities may be identified by noun phrases. On the
other hand, properties describe the relations that
link entity classes to each other and can be repre-
sented by the verb phrase. For this reason, each
property is associated with some association rules
that specify the constraints related to both its syn-
tactic behaviors and the pertinence and the inten-
sion of the property itself. In other words, these
association rules contribute to the description of
the way in which entity classes can be combined
through properties in sentence contexts. To for-
malize such rules in the form of a set of axioms,
we take in consideration the possibility of com-
bining semantic and lexical behaviors, suitable for
identifying specific event patterns. Thus, for in-

85



stance, the property MOVEMENT may connect the
entity class PERSON and the entity classes PLACE
and TIME, but the same property cannot be used
to describe the relation between MANIFESTATION
and PLACE. The definition of these rules, and the
corresponding axioms, relies on word combina-
tion principles that may occur in a language, de-
rived from an analysis of work of Harris (1988),
and conceptual considerations related to the do-
main.

Factuality. To represent the factuality in event
descriptions, we specify three attributes for each
property: polarity, speculation, and passive mark-
ers. The polarity refers to the presence of an ex-
plicit negation of the verb phrase or the property
itself. The speculation attribute for the property
identifies something that is characterized by spec-
ulation or uncertainty. Such an attribute is asso-
ciated with the presence of some verbal aspects
(e.g., the passive applied to specific verbs as in
they were thought to be), some specific construc-
tions/verbs (e.g., to suggest, to suppose, to hypoth-
esize, to propose) or modality verbs. According to
Hodge and Kress (1988), the “modality refers to
the status, authority and reliability of a message,
to its ontological status, or to its value as truth or
fact”. Finally, we use an attribute for a passive
marker due to the fact that passive voice is used
mainly to indicate a process and can be applied
to infer factual information. Note that, although
the time marker is typically considered to be in-
dicative of factuality, we prefer to avoid annotat-
ing time markers in our schema. Thus, we infer
the temporal chain in event mentions by means
of both temporal references in the sentence, e.g.,
the presence of adverbs of time, and the syntactic
tense of the verb.

Coreference. To account for the coreference
phenomenon among entities, we introduce a
symmetric-transitive relation taking two entity
classes as arguments. This allows for annotation
of two types of coreference, identity and apposi-
tion, and can be used at inter-sentence level to an-
notate single or multiple mentions of the same en-
tity; an example is shown in Table 5.

Complex events. In the description of event
mentions in news stories we often encounter sen-
tence structures expressing complex events, i.e.,
events characterized by the presence of more than
one binary relation among their elements. Due to

Text span Label

Blasts MANMADEEVENT*
which MANMADEEVENT*
killed DEATH
38 COLLECTIVE
by stadium PLACE
claimed by DECLARATION (passive)
TAK ORGANIZATION

Table 5: Sample of coreference and attribute an-
notation (* denotes coreferring elements).

the fact that properties generally express binary re-
lationships between two entity classes, we intro-
duce N-ary relations, namely reified relations, in
order to describe these complex structures. The
reified relations allow for the description of com-
plex events composed by more than two entities
and one property. According to the recommen-
dation of the W3C,2 these additional elements,
which contribute to constitute complex events, can
be formalized as a value of the property or as other
arguments (entity classes) occurring in the sen-
tence. In our scheme, we decide to deal with some
of these reified relations creating three additional
entity classes – MANNER, SCOPE, and INSTRU-
MENT – which may hold heterogeneous elements.
Nevertheless, these elements present a shared in-
tensive property defined by the main property they
refer to.

4 Annotation Task

To calibrate the two annotation schemes, we per-
formed two rounds of annotation on a set of news
stories in English. We hired four annotators to
work on each layer separately, to avoid interfer-
ence between the layers.

We set up the annotation task as follows. First,
we collected a corpus of news documents. Sec-
ondly, we gave each of four annotators per schema
the same document set to annotate, along with the
guidelines for that schema. We then examined the
inter-annotator agreement for the documents, and
discussed the major disagreements in person with
the annotators. After the discussion, we revised
the guidelines and again gave the annotators the

2We refer to W3C protocols for representing these struc-
tures to warrant the compliance of our schema with Seman-
tic Web languages. More information can be found here:
https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/.

86



same set of documents. For the annotation tool,
we used Brat (Stenetorp et al., 2012).

We collected the documents by compiling a
list of recent events, then querying the web to
find news articles about those events from vari-
ous sources. We collected the articles from various
sources to be invariant of the writing style of spe-
cific news sites. We aimed for approximately the
same length of articles to keep the scale of agree-
ment errors comparable. For this annotator cali-
bration step, we used a set of five news documents,
approximately 20 sentences in length each.

We computed the inter-annotator agreement be-
tween the documents on sentence level in order to
determine the sources of annotator disagreement.
We then organized discussion meetings with all
of the annotators for each schema to determine
whether the disagreement stems from the ambigu-
ity of the source text or from the incomprehensive-
ness of the annotation schema.

After the meetings, we revised and refined the
guidelines in a process which mostly included
smaller changes such as adding explanatory sam-
ples of annotation for borderline cases as well as
rephrasing and clarifying the text of the guidelines.
However, we also made a couple of more substan-
tial revisions such as adding label classes and de-
termining what should or should not be included
in the text spans for particular labels.

5 Inter-Annotator Agreement

We use two different metrics for calculating the
inter-annotator agreement (IAA), namely Cohen’s
kappa coefficient (Cohen, 1960) and the F1-score
(van Rijsbergen, 1979). The former has been used
in prior work on event annotations, e.g., in (Cybul-
ska and Vossen, 2014b). On the other hand, F1-
score is routinely used for evaluating annotations
that involve variable-length text spans, e.g., named
entity annotations (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meul-
der, 2003) used in named entity recognition (NER)
tasks. In line with NER evaluations, we consider
two F1-score calculations: strict F1-score (both
the labels and the text spans have to match per-
fectly) and lenient F1-score (labels have to match,
but text spans may only partially overlap). In both
cases, we calculate the macro F1-score by averag-
ing the F1-scores computed for each label.

The motivation for using the F1-score along
with Cohen’s kappa coefficient lies in the fact that
Cohen’s kappa treats the untagged tokens as true

Kappa F1-strict F1-lenient

Functional layer
Round 1 0.428 ± 0.08 0.383 ± 0.04 0.671 ± 0.10
Round 2 0.409 ± 0.07 0.424 ± 0.04 0.621 ± 0.07

Conceptual layer
Round 1 0.280 ± 0.08 0.350 ± 0.06 0.680 ± 0.15
Round 2 0.476 ± 0.07 0.475 ± 0.03 0.778 ± 0.06

Table 6: Inter-annotator agreement scores for the
two annotation layers and two annotation rounds,
averaged across annotator pairs and documents.

negatives. If the majority of tokens is untagged,
the agreement values will be inflated, as demon-
strated by Cybulska and Vossen (2014b). In con-
trast, the F1-score disregards the untagged tokens,
and is therefore a more suitable measure for se-
quence labeling tasks. In our case, the ratio of
untagged vs. tagged tokens was less skewed (6:4
and 1:2 for the functional and conceptual layer, re-
spectively), i.e., for both annotation layers a fair
portion of text is covered by annotated text spans,
which means that the discrepancy between kappa
values and F1-scores is expected to be lower.

We compute the IAA across all annotator pairs
working on the same document, separately for the
same round of annotation, and separately for each
annotation layer. We then calculate the IAA aver-
aged across the five documents, along with stan-
dard deviations. Table 6 shows the IAA scores.

For the functional layer, the Cohen’s kappa co-
efficient is above 0.4, which, according to Landis
and Koch (1977), is considered a borderline be-
tween fail and moderate agreement. Interestingly
enough, the kappa agreement dropped between the
first and the second round. We attribute this to the
fact that the set of labels was refined (extended)
between the two rounds, based on the discussion
we had with the annotators after the first round
of annotations. Apparently, the refinement made
the annotation task more difficult, or we failed to
cater for it in the guidelines. Conversely, for the
conceptual layer, the agreement in first round was
lower, but increased to a moderate level in the sec-
ond round. The same observations hold for the F1-
strict and F1-lenient measures. Furthermore, the
IAA scores for the second round for the concep-
tual layer are higher than for the functional layer.
A number of factors could be at play here: the an-
notators working on the conceptual layer were per-
haps more skilled, the guidelines were more com-

87



prehensive, or the task is inherently less difficult
or perhaps more intuitive.

While the IAA scores may seem moderate at
first, one has to bear in mind the total number
of different labels, which is 17 and 28 for the
functional and conceptual layer, respectively. In
view of this, and considering also the fact that this
is a preliminary study, we consider the moderate
agreement scores to be very satisfactory. Nonethe-
less, we believe the scores could be improved even
further with additional calibration rounds.

6 Comparative analysis

In this section, we provide examples of a couple
of sentences annotated in both layers, along with a
brief discussion on why we believe that each layer
compensates the shortcomings of the other.

Fig. 1 provides an example of a sentence anno-
tated in the functional and conceptual layer. We
observe that the last part of the sentence, “read-
ing: Bye all!!!”, is not annotated in the functional
layer (Fig. 1a). This is due to the fact that the last
part is a modifier of the patient, and not the ac-
tion. Even though we could argue that in this case
the information provided by the modifier is unim-
portant for the event, we could conceive of a con-
tent of the note that would indeed be important.
Along with that, any modifier of the event argu-
ments that is not directly linked to the arguments
is not annotated in the functional layer, leading to
information loss. We argue that in such cases the
conceptual layer (Fig. 1b) is more suited towards
gathering the full picture of the event along with
all the descriptions.

Fig. 2a exemplifies the case where, in the func-
tional layer, the action is a noun phrase. Such
cases are intentionally meant to be labeled as ac-
tions as they change the meaning of the verb it-
self. In the conceptual case (Fig. 2b), as the occur-
rence we label “broke out”, a phrase that, although
clear, gives no indication of the true nature of the
event, and the conceptual layer relies on the “nat-
ural event” argument for the full understanding of
the event. We argue that having a noun phrase
as an action, such as in the functional layer, is a
more natural representation of an event as it fully
answers the “What” question. We also argue that
making a distinction between “fire broke out” and
“broke out” as actions is beneficial for the training
of the event extraction model as it emphasizes the
distinction between a verb and an action.

7 Conclusions

We have presented a two-layered scheme for the
annotation of event mentions in news, conveying
different information aspects: the functional as-
pect and the conceptual aspect. The first one deals
with a more general analysis of sentence struc-
tures in news and the lexical elements involved in
events. The conceptual layer aims at describing
event mentions in news focusing on the “semantic
macro-propositions”, which compose the theme of
the news story.

Our approach to event mentions in news is a part
of a research project on high-precision news event
extraction models. The main hypothesis, leading
the development of our system, is that the pre-
cision of models can be improved by modeling
and extracting separately the different aspects of
news events, and then combining the extracted in-
formation by leveraging the complementarities of
the models. As part of this examination, we have
presented also a preliminary analysis of the inter-
annotator agreement.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by the Unity Through
Knowledge Fund of the Croatian Science Foun-
dation, under the grant 19/15: “EVEnt Retrieval
Based on semantically Enriched Structures for In-
teractive user Tasks (EVERBEST)”.

References
Rodrigo Agerri and German Rigau. 2016. Robust

multilingual named entity recognition with shallow
semi-supervised features. Artificial Intelligence,
238:63–82.

Mark C. Baker. 1997. Thematic roles and syntactic
structure. In Elements of grammar, pages 73–137.
Springer.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement
for nominal scales. Educational and psychological
measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2014a. Guidelines
for ECB+ annotation of events and their coreference.
Technical report, Technical report, Technical Report
NWR-2014-1, VU University Amsterdam.

Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2014b. Using a
sledgehammer to crack a nut? lexical diversity and
event coreference resolution. In LREC, pages 4545–
4552.

88



(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Example of sentence annotated in the (a) functional and the (b) conceptual layer.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Example of sentence annotated in the (a) functional and the (b) conceptual layer.

Aldo Gangemi, Nicola Guarino, Claudio Masolo,
Alessandro Oltramari, and Luc Schneider. 2002.
Sweetening ontologies with dolce. In International
Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Knowl-
edge Management, pages 166–181. Springer.

Zellig Harris. 1988. Language and information.
Columbia University Press.

Robert Hodge and Gunther R. Kress. 1988. Social
semiotics. Cornell University Press.

D. Ingram and P. Henshall. 2008. The news manual.

Ray Jackendoff. 1985. Semantic structure and con-
ceptual structure. Semantics and Cognition, pages
3–22.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
biometrics, pages 159–174.

Uta Lösch and Nadejda Nikitina. 2009. The new-
sevents ontology: an ontology for describing busi-
ness events. In Proceedings of the 2009 Inter-
national Conference on Ontology Patterns-Volume
516, pages 187–193. CEUR-WS. org.

A-L Minard, Manuela Speranza, Ruben Urizar, Begona
Altuna, MGJ van Erp, AM Schoen, CM van Son,
et al. 2016a. MEANTIME, the NewsReader multi-
lingual event and time corpus.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Manuela Speranza, Tommaso
Caselli, and Fondazione Bruno Kessler. 2016b.
The EVALITA 2016 event factuality annotation task

(FactA). In Proceedings of Third Italian Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (CLiC-it 2016)
& Fifth Evaluation Campaign of Natural Language
Processing and Speech Tools for Italian. Final Work-
shop (EVALITA 2016).

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Anna Papafragou. 2015. The representation of events
in language and cognition. The conceptual mind:
New directions in the study of concepts, page 327.

James Pustejovsky, José M Castano, Robert Ingria,
Roser Sauri, Robert J Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer,
Graham Katz, and Dragomir R. Radev. 2003.
TimeML: Robust specification of event and tempo-
ral expressions in text. New directions in question
answering, 3:28–34.

Marco Rospocher, Marieke van Erp, Piek Vossen,
Antske Fokkens, Itziar Aldabe, German Rigau,
Aitor Soroa, Thomas Ploeger, and Tessel Bogaard.
2016. Building event-centric knowledge graphs
from news. Web Semantics: Science, Services and
Agents on the World Wide Web, 37:132–151.

Ansgar Scherp, Thomas Franz, Carsten Saathoff, and
Steffen Staab. 2009. F – a model of events based
on the foundational ontology DOLCE+DnS ultra-
lite. In Proceedings of the fifth international confer-
ence on Knowledge capture, pages 137–144. ACM.

89



Andrea Setzer and Robert J. Gaizauskas. 2000. Anno-
tating events and temporal information in newswire
texts. In LREC, volume 2000, pages 1287–1294.

Manuela Speranza and Anne-Lyse Minard. 2014.
NewsReader guidelines for cross-document annota-
tion NWR-2014-9.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. BRAT: a web-based tool for NLP-assisted
text annotation. In Proceedings of the Demonstra-
tions at the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 102–107. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Tdt TDT. 2004. Annotation manual version 1.2. From
knowledge accumulation to accommodation: cycles
of collective cognition in work groups.

Erik F Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder.
2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task:
Language-independent named entity recognition. In
Proceedings of the seventh conference on Natural
language learning at HLT-NAACL 2003-Volume 4,
pages 142–147. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Mike Uschold and Michael Gruninger. 1996. On-
tologies: Principles, methods and applications. The
knowledge engineering review, 11(02):93–136.

Teun A. Van Dijk. 1991. Media contents: the interdis-
ciplinary study of news as discourse, a handbook of
qualitative methodologies for mass communication
research.

C.J. van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information Retreival. But-
terworths.

Chantal van Son, Tommaso Caselli, Antske Fokkens,
Isa Maks, Roser Morante, Lora Aroyo, and Piek
Vossen. 2016. Grasp: A multilayered annotation
scheme for perspectives. In Proceedings of the 10th
Edition of the Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC).

Piek Vossen, Rodrigo Agerri, Itziar Aldabe, Agata Cy-
bulska, Marieke van Erp, Antske Fokkens, Egoitz
Laparra, Anne-Lyse Minard, Alessio Palmero Apro-
sio, German Rigau, et al. 2016. NewsReader:
Using knowledge resources in a cross-lingual read-
ing machine to generate more knowledge from mas-
sive streams of news. Knowledge-Based Systems,
110:60–85.

90


