



















































A Code-Switching Corpus of Turkish-German Conversations


Proceedings of the 11th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 34–40,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Code-Switching Corpus of Turkish-German Conversations

Özlem Çetinoğlu
IMS, University of Stuttgart

Germany
ozlem@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract

We present a code-switching corpus
of Turkish-German that is collected by
recording conversations of bilinguals. The
recordings are then transcribed in two
layers following speech and orthography
conventions, and annotated with sentence
boundaries and intersentential, intrasen-
tential, and intra-word switch points. The
total amount of data is 5 hours of speech
which corresponds to 3614 sentences. The
corpus aims at serving as a resource for
speech or text analysis, as well as a col-
lection for linguistic inquiries.

1 Introduction

Code-switching (CS) is mixing two (or more)
languages in spoken and written communication
(Myers-Scotton, 1993; Poplack, 2001; Toribio and
Bullock, 2012) and is quite common in multilin-
gual communities (Auer and Wei, 2007). With the
increase in multilingual speakers worldwide, CS
becomes more prominent.

In parallel, the interest in processing mixed lan-
guage is on the rise in the Computational Lin-
guistics community. Researchers work on core
tasks such as normalisation, language identifi-
cation, language modelling, part-of-speech tag-
ging as well as downstream ones such as auto-
matic speech recognition and sentiment analysis
(Çetinoğlu et al., 2016). The majority of the cor-
pora used in these tasks come from social media
(Nguyen and Doğruöz, 2013; Barman et al., 2014;
Vyas et al., 2014; Solorio et al., 2014; Choudhury
et al., 2014; Jamatia et al., 2015; Samih and Maier,
2016; Vilares et al., 2016; Molina et al., 2016).

Social media has the advantage of containing
vast amount of data and easy access. Depending
on the medium, however, limitations might arise.

For instance, Twitter, the most popular source so
far, allows the distribution of tweet IDs rather than
tweets themselves, which can be deleted. Hence it
is hard to use the full resource, reproduce previous
results or compare to them. Moreover the charac-
ter limit and idiosyncratic language of social me-
dia bring extra challenges of processing in addi-
tion to challenges coming from code-switching.

Spoken data has also been a popular source
in computational CS research (Solorio and Liu,
2008; Lyu and Lyu, 2008; Chan et al., 2009; Shen
et al., 2011; Li et al., 2012; Lyu et al., 2015; Yil-
maz et al., 2016). There are no limitations on the
length of sentences, idiosyncrasies are less pro-
nounced. Despite such advantages, it is almost
solely used in speech analysis. To our knowledge,
only Solorio and Liu (2008) have used transcrip-
tions of CS speech in text analysis. One reason
that researchers processing CS text prefer social
media could be that it is already text-based, and it
requires much less time and effort than speech col-
lection transcription. For the existing speech cor-
pora, discrepancies between the speech transcrip-
tions and the input text processing tools expect
could be a drawback. For instance the SEAME
corpus (Lyu et al., 2015) does not use punctuation,
capitalisation, or sentence boundaries in transcrip-
tions, yet standard text processing tools (POS tag-
gers, morphological analysers, parsers) are trained
on edited text, hence make use of orthographic
cues.

In this paper, we introduce a Turkish-German
code-switching corpus of conversations and their
two layers of transcriptions following speech and
orthography conventions. The data is annotated
with sentence boundaries and intersentential, in-
trasentential, and intra-word switch points. Our
aim is to provide a resource that could be used by
researchers from different backgrounds, e.g., for
speech recognition and language identification in

34



speech, for language identification and predicting
CS points in text, and as a corpus of empirical ev-
idence for linguistically interesting structures.

2 Related Work

Creating code-switching corpora for speech anal-
ysis has started with reading designed text rather
than spontaneous speech. Lyu and Lyu (2008) use
a Mandarin-Taiwanese test set for their language
identification system that consist of 4.8 hours of
speech corresponding to 4600 utterances. The
set is designed to have Mandarin as the main
language with one or two Taiwanese words re-
placed with their Mandarin counterparts. Chan
et al. (2009) introduce a Cantonese-English cor-
pus of read speech of 3167 manually designed
sentences. English is inserted into Cantonese as
segments of one or more words. Another read
speech corpus is created by Shen et al. (2011) for
Mandarin-English and consists of 6650 utterances.
Li et al. (2012) collected 5 hours of code-switched
Mandarin-English speech from conversational and
project meetings. Intersentential and intrasenten-
tial switches add up to 1068 in total.

Lyu et al. (2015) present the largest CS speech
resource, the SEAME corpus, which has 192
hours of transcribed Mandarin-English interviews
and conversations in the latest version.1 The code-
switching points naturally occur in the text, as both
languages are written in their own scripts. A recent
corpus of 18.5 hours is introduced by Yilmaz et al.
(2016) on Frisian-Dutch broadcasts. CS points are
marked in the transcriptions but not on the audio
level.

Solorio and Liu (2008) recorded a conversa-
tion of 40 minutes among Spanish-English bilin-
guals. The transcribed speech contains 922 sen-
tences with 239 switch points among them. The
authors used this data to train machine learning al-
gorithms that predict CS points of an incremen-
tally given input.

Speech collections have always been the pri-
mary source in sociolinguistic and pyscholinguis-
tic research. We list some of these spoken corpora
that employ code-switching instances of Turk-
ish and German, mixed with other languages or
with each other. The “Emigranto” corpus (Ep-
pler, 2003) documents conversations with Jewish
refugees settled in London in 1930s, who mix

1https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/
LDC2015S04

Austrian German with British English. In this cor-
pus, Eppler (2011) looks into mixed dependencies
where a dependent and its head are from different
languages. She observes that dependents with a
mixed head have on average longer dependencies
than ones with a monolingual head.

In a similar fashion, Tracy and Lattey (2009)
present more than 50 hours of recordings of el-
derly German immigrants in the U.S. The data
is fully transcribed and annotated, yet each ses-
sion of recordings is transcribed as a single file
with no alignment between transcript utterences
and their corresponding audio parts, and annota-
tions use Microsoft Word markings, e.g. bold,
italic, underline, or different font sizes, thus re-
quire format conversions to be processed by auto-
matic tools that accept text-based inputs.

Kallmeyer and Keim (2003) investigate the
communication characteristics between young
girls in Mannheim, mostly of Turkish origin, and
show that with peers, they employ a mixed form
of Turkish and German. Rehbein et al. (2009)
and Herkenrath (2012) study the language acqui-
sition of Turkish-German bilingual children. On
the same data Özdil (2010) analyses reasons of
code-switching decisions. The Kiezdeutsch cor-
pus (Rehbein et al., 2014) consists of conversa-
tions among native German adolescents with a
multiethnic background, including Turkish. As a
result, it also contains a small number of Turkish-
German mixed sentences.

3 Data

The data collection and annotation processes are
handled by a team of five Computational Linguis-
tics and Linguistics students. In the following sec-
tions we give the details of these processes.

3.1 Collection

The data collection is done by the annotators as
conversation recordings. We asked the annota-
tors to approach Turkish-German bilinguals from
their circle for an informal setting, assuming this
might increase the frequency of code-switching.
Similarly we recommended the annotators to open
topics that might induce code-switching, such
as work and studies (typically German-speaking
environments) if a dialogue started in Turkish,
or Turkish food and holidays in Turkey (hence
Turkish-specific words) in a German-dominated
conversation.

35



28 participants (20 female, 8 male) took part in
the recordings. The majority of the speakers are
university students. Their ages range from 9 to 39,
with an average of 24 and a mode of 26. We also
asked the participants to assign a score from 1 to
10 for their proficiency in Turkish and German. 18
of the participants think their German is better, 5
of them think their Turkish is better, and the re-
maining 5 assigned an equal score. The average
score for German is 8.2, and for Turkish 7.5.2

3.2 Annotation
The annotation and transcriptions are done using
Praat.3 We created six tiers for each audio file:
spk1_verbal, spk1_norm, spk2_verbal,
spk2_norm, lang, codesw. The first four tiers
contain the verbal and normalised transcription of
speakers 1 and 2. The tier lang corresponds
to the language of intervals and can have TR for
Turkish, DE for German, and LANG3 for utter-
ances in other languages. The first five tiers are
intervals, while the last one is a point tier that
denotes sentence and code-switching boundaries.
The labels on the boundaries are SB when both
sides of the boundary are in the same language,
SCS when the language changes from one sen-
tence to the next (intersentential), WCS when the
switch is between words within a sentence (in-
trasentential). Figure 1 shows a Praat screenshot
that demonstrates the tiers and exemplifies SCS
and WCS boundaries.

Since Turkish is agglutinative and case mark-
ers determine the function of NPs, non-Turkish
common and proper nouns with Turkish suffixes
are commonly observed in CS conversations. We
mark such words in the codesw tier as a intra-
word switch and use the symbol § following
Çetinoğlu (2016). Example (1) depicts the rep-
resentation of a mixed word where the German
compound Studentenwohnheim ‘student accom-
modation’ is followed by the Turkish locative case
marker -da (in bold).

(1) Studentenwohnheim
student accommodation

§
§

da
Loc

‘in the student accommodation’

For many proper names, Turkish and German
orthography are identical. Here, the speech data in
parallel becomes an advantage, and the language

2The metadata is also available in the CMDI format at the
IMS Clarin repository.

3www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat

is decided according to the pronunciation. If the
proper name is pronounced in German, and fol-
lowed by a Turkish suffix a § switch point is in-
serted. Otherwise it follows Turkish orthography.

3.3 Transcription

For speech analysis it is important to transcribe
utterances close to how they are pronounced. In
some transcription guidelines, capitalisation and
punctuation are omitted (e.g. in the SEAME cor-
pus (Lyu et al., 2015)4), in some others they are
used to mark speech information (e.g. in the
Kiezdeutsch corpus (Rehbein et al., 2014)5). Text
analysis on the other hand generally relies on stan-
dard orthography. This raises a conflict between
two tasks on how to transcribe speech. To avoid
this problem, we introduced two tiers of transcrip-
tion. The verbal tier follows the speech conven-
tions. If a speaker uses a contraction, the word is
transcribed as contracted. The acronyms are writ-
ten as separate characters. Numbers are spelled
out. Recurring characters are represented with the
single character followed by a colon. The nor-
malised tier follows the edited text conventions.
Words obey the orthographic rules of standard
Turkish and German, e.g. characters of acronyms
are merged back. Punctuation is added to the text,
obeying the tokenisation standards (i.e. separated
from the preceding and following tokens with a
space).

Example (2) gives a sentence showing the ver-
bal and normalised tiers for a Turkish sentence.
The r sound in the progressive tense suffix -yor is
not pronounced, hence omitted in the verbal tier.
The vowel of the interjection ya is extended dur-
ing speech, and the colon representation is used to
reflect it in the verbal tier, yet the normalised tier
has the standard form. Also, the question mark is
present in the normalised tier.

(2) verbal:
norm:

ne
Ne
What

diyosun
diyorsun
say.Prog.2PSg

ya:
ya
Intj.

?

‘What do you say??’

If a made-up word is uttered, it is preceded with
an asterisk mark in the transcription. Note that
dialectal pronunciation or using a valid word in

4https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/docs/
LDC2015S04/SEAME.V4.0.pdf

5http://www.kiezdeutschkorpus.
de/files/kidko/downloads/
KiDKo-Transkriptionsrichtlinien.pdf

36



Figure 1: A screenshot example from Praat annotations. It shows part of a Turkish sentence and a full
mixed sentence from speaker 1, and part of a Turkish sentence from speaker 2.

wrong context is not considered within this class.
Partial words are marked with two hyphens instead
of the common use of one hyphen, as the latter is
used in German to denote the initial part of a com-
pound when two compounds share a common part
and the first compound is written only as the un-
shared part (e.g. Wohn- und Schlafzimmer ‘living
room and bedroom’).

We also marked [silence], [laugh],
[cough], [breathe], [noise], and put the
remaining sounds into the [other] category.
Overlaps occur usually when one speaker is talk-
ing and the other is uttering backchannel signals
and words of acknowledgement. There are also
cases both speakers tend to speak at the same time.
In all such cases, both voices are transcribed, one
speaker is chosen to be the main speaker, and
an [overlap] marker is inserted to the sec-
ondary speaker’s verbal and normalised tiers. The
codesw and lang tiers are decided according to
the main speaker’s transcription.

3.4 Quality Control

Once the Praat annotation is completed its output
files are converted to a simpler text format for eas-
ier access from existing tools and for easier human
readability. 6 We ran simple quality control scripts
that check if all the tiers are present and non-

6The format of the text files is given with an exam-
ple in http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
institut/mitarbeiter/ozlem/LAW2017.html
The script that converts Praat .TextGrid files to that format is
also provided.

empty, if the lang and codesw tiers have values
from their label sets, and if the lang and codesw
labels are meaningful, for instance, if there are TR
labels on both sides of a SCS (intersentential CS)
boundary, either the boundary should be corrected
to SB or one of the language labels should be DE
or LANG3. Any mistakes are corrected by the an-
notators on a second pass.

For the quality control of the transcriptions
we employed Turkish and German morphologi-
cal analysers (Oflazer, 1994; Schmid et al., 2004)
and analysed all the tokens in the normalised tier
according to their languages. We then created a
list of tokens unknown to the analysers, which
are potentially mispelled words. The annotators
went through the list and corrected their mistakes
in both the verbal and normalised tiers. The re-
maining list also gives us the words unknown to
the morphological analysers.

4 Statistics and Observations

The durations of recordings range from 20 seconds
to 16 minutes. There are 47 transcribed files with
a total of 5 hours. Each file is accompanied with
a metadata file that contains speaker information,
that could be used to filter the corpus according
to age intervals, education levels, language profi-
ciency etc.

Table 1 gives the basic statistics on the nor-
malised version of the transcriptions. The to-
ken count includes punctuation and interjections,
and excludes paralinguistic markers and overlaps.

37



sentences 3614
tokens 41056
average sent. length 11.36
sentence boundaries (SB) 2166
intersentential switches (SCS) 1448
intrasentential switches (WCS) 2113
intra-word switches (§) 257
switches in total 3818
sent. with at least one WCS 1108

Table 1: Basic statistics about the data.

Switch Language Pair # %

SB
DE→ DE 1356 62.60
TR→ TR 809 37.35
LANG3→ LANG3 1 0.05

SCS

TR→ DE 754 52.07
DE→ TR 671 46.34
LANG3→ TR 7 0.48
LANG3→ DE 6 0.41
DE→ LANG3 5 0.35
TR→ LANG3 5 0.35

WCS

TR→ DE 1082 51.20
DE→ TR 914 43.26
DE→ LANG3 34 1.61
TR→ LANG3 31 1.47
LANG3→ DE 28 1.33
LANG3→ TR 24 1.14

§ DE→ TR 246 95.72LANG3→ TR 11 4.28

Table 2: Breakdown of switches from one lan-
guage to another, and their percentages within
their switch type.

Switch points split mixed tokens into two in the
transcriptions for representational purposes, but
they are counted as one token in the statistics.

The majority of the switches are intrasenten-
tial and the language of the conversation changes
when moving from one sentence to another in 40%
of the time. They also correspond to the 55.3% of
all switches. 38% of them happen between words,
and the remaining 6.7% are within a word. Table
2 shows the breakdown of switches. There are 614
overlaps and 648 paralinguistic markers.7

We have observed that many CS instances fall
into the categories mentioned in Çetinoğlu (2016),
like German verbs coupled with Turkish light
verbs etmek ‘do’ or yapmak ‘make’; Turkish lexi-
calised expressions and vocatives in German sen-
tences, and vice versa; subordinate clauses and
conjuctions in the one language while the remain-
ing of the sentence is in the other language. One
category we have seen more prominent in speech
data is non-standard syntactic constructions, per-
haps due to spontaneity. For instance, Example

7laugh: 279, noise: 148, silence: 113, breath: 74, other:
25, cough: 9.

(3), which is also given as Figure 1, is a question
with two verbs (Turkish in bold). Both German
hast du and Turkish var mı corresponds to ‘do you
have’.

(3) Hast
Have

du
you

auch
also

so
like

BWL
business studies

gibi
like

derslerin
class.Poss2Sg

var
exist

mı
Ques

so?
like?

‘Do you also have classes like business
studies?’

5 Conclusion

We present a corpus collected from Turkish-
German bilingual speakers, and annotated with
sentence and code-switching boundaries in audio
files and their corresponding transcriptions which
are carried out as both verbal and normalised tiers.
In total, it is 5 hours of speech and 3614 sentences.

Transcriptions are available for academic
research purposes.8 The licence agreement can be
found at http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
institut/mitarbeiter/ozlem/LAW2017.html

along with transcription examples. Audio files
will be manipulated before distribution in order
to conceal speakers’ identity, to comply with the
German data privacy laws9.

Acknowledgements

We thank Sevde Ceylan, Uğur Kostak, Hasret el
Sanhoury, Esra Soydoğan, and Cansu Turgut for
the data collection and annotation. We also thank
anonymous reviewers for their insightful com-
ments. This work was funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via SFB 732,
project D2.

References
Peter Auer and Li Wei. 2007. Handbook of multilin-

gualism and multilingual communication, volume 5.
Walter de Gruyter.

Utsab Barman, Amitava Das, Joachim Wagner, and
Jennifer Foster. 2014. Code mixing: A challenge
for language identification in the language of so-
cial media. In Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Code Switching,

8If parts of data contain information that can reveal the
identity of a specific person, they are anonymised.

9National: https://www.datenschutz-wiki.
de/Bundesdatenschutzgesetz, State: https:
//www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/
landesdatenschutzgesetz-inhaltsverzeichnis/

38



pages 13–23, Doha, Qatar, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Özlem Çetinoğlu, Sarah Schulz, and Ngoc Thang Vu.
2016. Challenges of computational processing of
code-switching. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Computational Approaches to Code Switch-
ing, pages 1–11, Austin, Texas, November. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Özlem Çetinoğlu. 2016. A Turkish-German code-
switching corpus. In The 10th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-16), Portorož, Slovenia.

Joyce YC Chan, Houwei Cao, PC Ching, and Tan Lee.
2009. Automatic recognition of Cantonese-English
code-mixing speech. Computational Linguistics
and Chinese Language Processing, 14(3):281–304.

Monojit Choudhury, Gokul Chittaranjan, Parth Gupta,
and Amitava Das. 2014. Overview of FIRE 2014
track on transliterated search. In Forum for Infor-
mation Retrieval Evaluation, Bangalore,India, De-
cember.

Eva Eppler. 2003. Emigranto data: A dependency ap-
proach to code-mixing. In Pereiro Carmen C., Anxo
M.L. Suarez, and XoÃąn P Rodriguez-Yanez, edi-
tors, Bilingual communities and individuals., pages
652–63. Vigo: Servicio de Publicacions da Univer-
sidade de Vigo, 1.

Eva Duran Eppler. 2011. The dependency distance hy-
pothesis for bilingual code-switching. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Dependency
Linguistics.

Annette Herkenrath. 2012. Receptive multilingual-
ism in an immigrant constellation: Examples from
Turkish–German children’s language. International
Journal of Bilingualism, pages 287–314.

Anupam Jamatia, Björn Gambäck, and Amitava Das.
2015. Part-of-speech tagging for code-mixed
English-Hindi Twitter and Facebook chat messages.
In Proceedings of the International Conference Re-
cent Advances in Natural Language Processing,
pages 239–248, Hissar, Bulgaria, September. IN-
COMA Ltd. Shoumen, BULGARIA.

Werner Kallmeyer and Inken Keim. 2003. Linguistic
variation and the construction of social identity in a
German-Turkish setting. Discourse constructions of
youth identities, 110:29.

Ying Li, Yue Yu, and Pascale Fung. 2012. A
Mandarin-English code-switching corpus. In Nico-
letta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012),
pages 2515–2519, Istanbul, Turkey, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA). ACL
Anthology Identifier: L12-1573.

Dau-Cheng Lyu and Ren-Yuan Lyu. 2008. Lan-
guage identification on code-switching utterances
using multiple cues. In Interspeech, pages 711–714.

D.-C. Lyu, T.-P. Tan, E.-S. Chng, and H. Li. 2015.
Mandarin–English code-switching speech corpus in
South-East Asia: SEAME. LRE, 49(3):581–600.

Giovanni Molina, Fahad AlGhamdi, Mahmoud
Ghoneim, Abdelati Hawwari, Nicolas Rey-
Villamizar, Mona Diab, and Thamar Solorio. 2016.
Overview for the second shared task on language
identification in code-switched data. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Code Switching, pages 40–49, Austin,
Texas, November. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

C. Myers-Scotton. 1993. Duelling languages: Gram-
matical structure in codeswitching. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Dong Nguyen and A. Seza Doğruöz. 2013. Word level
language identification in online multilingual com-
munication. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 857–862, Seattle, Washington, USA,
October. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kemal Oflazer. 1994. Two-level description of Turk-
ish morphology. Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, 9(2):137–148.

Erkan Özdil. 2010. Codeswitching im zweisprachigen
Handeln. Waxmann Verlag.

Shana Poplack. 2001. Code-switching (linguistic). In-
ternational encyclopedia of the social and behav-
ioral sciences, pages 2062–2065.

Jochen Rehbein, Annette Herkenrath, and Birsel
Karakoç. 2009. Turkish in Germany on contact-
induced language change of an immigrant language
in the multilingual landscape of europe. STUF-
Language Typology and Universals Sprachtypologie
und Universalienforschung, 62(3):171–204.

Ines Rehbein, Sören Schalowski, and Heike Wiese.
2014. The KiezDeutsch korpus (KiDKo) release
1.0. In The 9th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC-14), Reyk-
javik, Iceland.

Younes Samih and Wolfgang Maier. 2016. An Arabic-
Moroccan Darija code-switched corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
Portorož, Slovenia, may.

Helmut Schmid, Arne Fitschen, and Ulrich Heid.
2004. SMOR: A German computational morphol-
ogy covering derivation, composition and inflection.
In Proceedings of the IVth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2004, pages 1263–1266.

39



Han-Ping Shen, Chung-Hsien Wu, Yan-Ting Yang,
and Chun-Shan Hsu. 2011. Cecos: A chinese-
english code-switching speech database. In Speech
Database and Assessments (Oriental COCOSDA),
2011 International Conference on, pages 120–123.
IEEE.

Thamar Solorio and Yang Liu. 2008. Part-of-speech
tagging for English-Spanish code-switched text. In
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1051–1060, Honolulu, Hawaii, October. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Thamar Solorio, Elizabeth Blair, Suraj Mahar-
jan, Steven Bethard, Mona Diab, Mahmoud
Ghoneim, Abdelati Hawwari, Fahad AlGhamdi, Ju-
lia Hirschberg, Alison Chang, and Pascale Fung.
2014. Overview for the first shared task on language
identification in code-switched data. In Proceedings
of the First Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Code Switching, pages 62–72, Doha, Qatar, Octo-
ber. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Almeida Jacqueline Toribio and Barbara E Bullock.
2012. The Cambridge handbook of linguistic code-
switching. Cambridge University Press.

Rosemarie Tracy and Elsa Lattey. 2009. It wasn’t easy
but irgendwie äh da hat sich’s rentiert, net?: a lin-
guistic profile. In Michaela Albl-Mikasa, Sabine
Braun, and Sylvia Kalina, editors, Dimensionen
der Zweitsprachenforschung. Dimensions of Second
Language Research. Narr.

David Vilares, Miguel A. Alonso, and Carlos Gomez-
Rodriguez. 2016. EN-ES-CS: An English-Spanish
code-switching twitter corpus for multilingual sen-
timent analysis. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Confer-
ence Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Sara Goggi, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Helene Mazo, Asuncion Moreno,
Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
Paris, France, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Yogarshi Vyas, Spandana Gella, Jatin Sharma, Ka-
lika Bali, and Monojit Choudhury. 2014. Pos tag-
ging of English-Hindi code-mixed social media con-
tent. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 974–979, Doha, Qatar, Octo-
ber. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Emre Yilmaz, Maaike Andringa, Sigrid Kingma, Jelske
Dijkstra, Frits Van der Kuip, Hans Van de Velde,
Frederik Kampstra, Jouke Algra, Henk van den
Heuvel, and David van Leeuwen. 2016. A
longitudinal bilingual Frisian-Dutch radio broad-
cast database designed for code-switching research.
In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid
Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Marko Gro-
belnik, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Helene

Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2016), Paris, France, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

40


