



















































Gender Profiling for Slovene Twitter communication: the Influence of Gender Marking, Content and Style


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 119–125,
Valencia, Spain, 4 April 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Gender Profiling for Slovene Twitter Communication: The Influence of
Gender Marking, Content and Style

Ben Verhoeven
CLiPS Research Center
University of Antwerp

Prinsstraat 13, Antwerp, Belgium
ben.verhoeven@uantwerpen.be

Iza Škrjanec
Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School

Jamova cesta 39, Ljubljana, Slovenia
skrjanec.iza@gmail.com

Senja Pollak
Department of Knowledge Technologies

Jožef Stefan Institute
Jamova cesta 39, Ljubljana, Slovenia

senja.pollak@ijs.si

Abstract
We present results of the first gender clas-
sification experiments on Slovene text to
our knowledge. Inspired by the TwiSty
corpus and experiments (Verhoeven et al.,
2016), we employed the Janes corpus (Er-
javec et al., 2016) and its gender an-
notations to perform gender classifica-
tion experiments on Twitter text compar-
ing a token-based and a lemma-based ap-
proach. We find that the token-based ap-
proach (92.6% accuracy), containing gen-
der markings related to the author, outper-
forms the lemma-based approach by about
5%. Especially in the lemmatized ver-
sion, we also observe stylistic and content-
based differences in writing between men
(e.g., more profane language, numerals
and beer mentions) and women (e.g., more
pronouns, emoticons and character flood-
ing). Many of our findings corroborate
previous research on other languages.

1 Introduction

Various computational linguistic and text mining
tasks have so far been investigated for Slovene.
Standard natural language processing (NLP) tools
have been developed, such as preprocessing tools
for lemmatization (Juršič et al., 2010), tagging
(Grčar and Krek, 2012; Ljubešić and Erjavec,
2016) and parsing (Dobrovoljc et al., 2012),
more recently adapted also for preprocessing non-
standard texts, such as historical or computer-
mediated Slovene (Ljubešić et al., 2016). How-
ever, not much attention has been paid to com-
putational stylometry. While Zwitter Vitez (2013)

applied authorship attribution, author profiling re-
ceived nearly no attention. Recently Ljubešić and
Fišer (2016) have addressed the classification of
private and corporate Twitter accounts, while – to
the best of our knowledge – we are the first to ad-
dress gender profiling.

Author profiling is a well-established subfield
of NLP with a thriving community gathering data,
organizing shared tasks and publishing about this
topic. Author profiling entails the prediction of an
author profile – i.e., sociological and/or psycho-
logical characteristics of the author – based on the
text that they have written. The most prominent
author profiling task is gender classification, other
tasks include the prediction of age, personality, re-
gion of origin, and mental health of an author.

Gender prediction became a mainstream re-
search topic with the influential work by Koppel
et al. (2002). Based on experiments on a sub-
set of the British National Corpus, they found that
women have a more relational writing style (e.g.,
using more pronouns) and men have a more infor-
mational writing style (e.g., using more determin-
ers). Later gender prediction research remained
focused on English, yet the attention quickly
shifted to social media applications (Schler et al.,
2006; Burger et al., 2011; Schwartz et al., 2013;
Plank and Hovy, 2015). In the last few years, more
languages have received attention in the context of
author profiling (Peersman et al., 2011; Nguyen et
al., 2013; Rangel et al., 2015; Rangel et al., 2016),
with the publication of the TwiSty corpus contain-
ing gender information on Twitter authors for six
languages (Verhoeven et al., 2016) as a highlight
so far. We aim to contribute to the language diver-
sity of this research line by looking at Slovene.119



Slovene belongs to languages with a pro-
nounced morphology for gender. Nouns (and
personal pronouns) have a defined grammati-
cal gender (feminine, masculine, and neuter)
in agreement with which other parts of speech
can be inflected. Some of those structures al-
low for the identification of the author’s gen-
der in self-referring context. For example,
the author’s gender can be reflected in cor-
responding self-describing noun forms, e.g.,
učitelj/učiteljica (teachermale/fem), and even more
frequently in agreements of adjectives, e.g.,
lep/lepa (beautifulmale/fem), and non-finite verb
forms, such as l-participles,1 e.g., sem delal/delala
(I workedmale/fem), which makes these markings
a potentially useful feature for gender identifica-
tion. As the inflected gender features might over-
shadow other relevant features, such as content
and style, we investigate not only a token-based,
but also a lemma-based approach. Disregarding
easily manipulatable gender features (e.g., gram-
matical gender markings) can be seen as a first step
towards an adversarial stylometry system, where
we assume that the writer might not be who they
claim to be. A second step would be to disregard
content features, which can be easily manipulated
as well. The lemma-based approach also allows
for meaningful results to contribute to the field of
sociolinguistics.

For our research in Slovene, findings in author
profiling for related languages are of interest, es-
pecially with regard to feature construction due to
morphological richness. Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė et al.
(2015) predicted age and gender for Lithuanian lit-
erary texts. Lithuanian parliamentary texts were
used to identify the speaker’s age, gender and po-
litical view in Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė et al. (2014).
A study of Russian showed there is a correlation
between POS-bigrams and a person’s gender and
personality (Litvinova et al., 2015). Another rele-
vant contribution to the field for Russian was the
interdisciplinary approach to identifying the risk
of self-destructive behavior (Litvinova and Litvi-
nova, 2016). Experiments for gender identifica-
tion for Russian show the advantages of grammat-
ical features. Sboev et al. (2016) removed topi-
cal and genre cues from the corpus of picture de-
scriptions and personal letters in Russian and ran
tests for various features and machine learning al-

1Verb l-participles is the name for the Slovene participles
that end in letter ’l’ in the masculine form and can be used for
past, future and conditional constructions.

gorithms to find the combination of grammatical
information (POS-tags, noun case, verb form, gen-
der, and number) and neural networks performed
best. As far as we know, no gender classification
of tweets in these languages has been presented.

The present paper is structured as follows: in
Section 2, we describe the Janes Tweet corpus and
its modification for the experiments, which are
presented in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss
the results in terms of performance and feature in-
terpretation, while in Section 5 we conclude our
study and propose further work.

2 Corpus Description

For our experiments, the Janes corpus (Erjavec
et al., 2016; Fišer et al., 2016) of user-generated
Slovene was adapted to match the TwiSty corpus
setting (Verhoeven et al., 2016). We will first in-
troduce the Slovene source corpus and then de-
scribe our reformatting of it for the current re-
search.

The Janes corpus was collected within the Janes
national research project2 and consists of docu-
ments in five genres: tweets, forum posts, news
comments, blog entries, and Wikipedia user and
talk pages. The Twitter subcorpus is the largest
Janes subcorpus. The tweets were collected us-
ing the TweetCat tool (Ljubešić et al., 2014),
which was designed for building Twitter corpora
of smaller languages. Employing the Twitter
Search API and a set of seed terms, the tool identi-
fies users writing in the chosen language together
with their friends and followers. The tool outputs
tweets together with their metadata (tweet ID, time
of creation and retrieval, favorite count, retweet
count, and handle). In total, the corpus includes
tweets by 8,749 authors with an average of 850
tweets per author.

The authors were manually annotated for their
gender (female, male and unknown) and account
type (private and corporate). Personal accounts are
considered as private account types, while compa-
nies and institutions count as corporate ones. The
gender tag was ascribed based on the screen name,
profile picture, self-description (’bio’) and – in the
few cases that this was not sufficient – the use
of gender markings when referring to themselves.
The account type was annotated given the user
name, self-description and (typically impersonal)
content of tweets. Since the focus of our study

2http://nl.ijs.si/janes/120



WRB MAJ Accuracy Precision Recall F1-score
Token 56.9 68.5 92.6 92.7 92.6 92.6

Lemma 56.9 68.5 87.9 87.9 87.9 87.9

Table 1: Results of gender prediction experiments based on tokenized text and on lemmas. Abbrevia-
tions: WRB = Weighted Random Baseline, MAJ = Majority Baseline. Precision, Recall and F1-score
are averaged over both classes (since both classes matter).

was the binary prediction of female or male gen-
der, only private male and female accounts were
considered in the experiments.

Given the multilingual context of user-
generated content, each tweet had to undergo
language identification. For this the langid.py
program (Lui and Baldwin, 2012) was used.
The identified language tags were additionally
corrected with heuristics resulting in four possible
tags for the entire corpus: Slovene, English,
Serbian/Croatian/Bosnian, and undefined (Fišer et
al., 2016).

This subcorpus of Janes was reformatted to re-
semble the TwiSty corpus in order to address the
same task of author profiling. There are however
a few differences that we should mention for com-
pleteness. The Janes corpus does not have the per-
sonality type information available for the users
and the language identification was performed in
a different way.

3 Experiments

The experimental setup of this research is largely
based on the TwiSty experiments (Verhoeven et
al., 2016). We will briefly describe this approach
and explain our additions.

First of all, to ensure comparability of instances,
we construct one instance per author by concate-
nating 200 language-confirmed tweets. Authors
with less than 200 tweets are discarded. All user
mentions, hashtags and URLs were anonymized
by replacing them with a placeholder token to
abstract over different instances to a more gen-
eral pattern of their use. The final dataset con-
tains 3,490 instances with more men (68.5%) than
women (31.5%), see Table 2.

The gender prediction task is set up as a two-
class classification problem with classes male
and female in a standard tenfold cross-validation
experiment using the LinearSVC algorithm in
scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). We
used n-gram features on both word (n = [1, 2]) and
character (n = [3, 4]) level. We did not perform

Count Percentage
Male 2,391 68.5

Female 1,099 31.5
Total 3,490 100

Table 2: Corpus statistics: male and female private
Twitter users represented by 200 tweets per author.

any feature selection, feature weighting or param-
eter optimization.

The experiment was performed in two differ-
ent settings: on tokenized text,3 and on lemma-
tized text. The lemmatized text is available in
the Janes corpus (for lemmatization process see
Ljubešić and Erjavec (2016)). The results of these
experiments can be found in Table 1 and will be
discussed in Section 4.

We also performed the experiment on a nor-
malized version of the text that was available in
the Janes corpus. This means that substandard
spellings were corrected to the standard form, es-
pecially including the restoration of diacritics. Our
expectation was that standardizing the text would
allow for 1) certain features to cluster together and
get stronger and thus more generalizable; and 2)
disambiguation of certain words due to diacritics
restoration. However, the results of this experi-
ment were near-identical to the experiment on to-
kenized text, so we will not further discuss this
here.

4 Discussion

Our experiments show a very high and inter-
pretable result. Using tokenized text clearly out-
performs the use of lemmas by around 5%, but
both systems appear to work really well, signif-
icantly outperforming both the weighted random
baseline (WRB) and majority baseline (MAJ).

Interestingly, our results are higher than the
state-of-the-art results for the different languages

3Using the happierfuntokenizing script by
Christopher Potts (http://wwwbp.org), as also used by
Verhoeven et al. (2016).121



in TwiSty. The most comparable language in data
size would be Portuguese, which achieves 87.6%,
while we achieve 92.6% for Slovene. As our fea-
ture analysis below will show, the difference lies
in the gender markings.

Slovene encodes gender more extensively than
Romance languages do. Especially the frequently
used verb l-participles are important features for
gender profiling, because a gender marking for the
author is present every time the author is the sub-
ject of the past and future tense and conditional
verb mood that are expressed by the auxiliary and
the participle. Although agreement is partly in-
formative also in other Romance languages, i.e.,
through participle agreement in French, e.g., je
suis allé/allée (I wentmale/fem), Italian, e.g., io
sono andato/andata (I wentmale/fem), Spanish, e.g.,
yo fui invitado/invitada (I was invitedmale/fem),
or adjectival agreement in French, e.g., je suis
heureux/heureuse (I am happymale/fem) or Spanish,
e.g., yo soy viejo/vieja (I am oldmale/fem), the gen-
der markings are much less frequent than in Slavic
languages, such as Slovene.

By lemmatizing the text, we remove this effect
and we observe the performance of the system to
lower to 87.9% which is very comparable to that of
Portuguese and Spanish in the TwiSty paper (Ver-
hoeven et al., 2016).

We also investigated the most informative fea-
tures that scikit-learn outputs when retrain-
ing the model on the entire dataset (i.e., no ten-
fold). We extracted a ranked list of the 1,000 most
informative features per class4 and were able to
make a comparison between the genders and be-
tween the token- and lemma-based approaches.

The most informative features of the token-
based approach confirm very clearly our explana-
tion of the higher performance of this approach
compared with the lemma-based approach. The
bulk of the most informative features can be re-
lated to gender markings on verb l-participles
(e.g., MALE: mislil (thought), bil (been), vedel
(known), gledal (watched); FEMALE: mislila
(thought), dobila (gotten), rekla (said), videla
(seen)), as well as feminine adjective forms (e.g.,
ponosna (proud), vesela (happy)).

The informative features for the lemma-based
approach contain almost no gender markings.
However, many interesting stylistic and content-

4These lists are available online at: https://github.
com/verhoevenben/slovene-twisty.

based features become apparent, some of them
also occurring lower on the ranking with the
token-based approach.

We found several word and character features
associated with the use of profane language that
are strongly linked to the male category, e.g., je-
bati and fukati (to fuck), pizda and pička (cunt),
rit (ass), srati (to shit), kurec (dick), joške (boobs).
Another characteristic distinctive of the male class
is non-alphabetical symbols including symbols for
euro (e) and percent (%), and numerals (as dig-
its) – the latter were also found to be more indica-
tive of male authors and speakers in an English
corpus of various genres (Newman et al., 2008)
and the spoken part of BNC (Baker, 2014). Inter-
estingly, vulgar expressions do not occur among
the most informative features of the female cat-
egory, while a small number of numerals can be
found. The female category is distinguished by
the use of emoticons (;3, :*, :), r), however the
emoticon with tongue (:P) is related to the male
category. Among the most informative features
on both lemma- and token-level various interjec-
tions often combined with character flooding oc-
cur in the female category: (o)joj (oh), oh (oh),
ah (oh), ha (ha), bravo, omg, jaaa (yaaas), aaa
(argh), ooo (oooh), iii (aaaw). The female cate-
gory further displays linguistic expressiveness in
intensifiers (ful (very), čist (totally)) and adjec-
tives and adverbs denoting attitude (grozen (hor-
rible), lušten (cute), gnil (rotten), čuden (weird)),
but these require further support in analysis.

A strong stylistic feature of the female category
is referring to self with personal and possessive
pronouns in first person: jaz (me), zame (for me),
moj (my/mine) on the lemma-level, and meni (to
me), moje (my/mine), mene (meaccusative) on the
token-level with some of these features on both
levels occurring within word bigrams (biti moj
for be mine). Referring to others is also more
present in the female category, namely with pos-
sessive pronouns for third person singular (njen
(her/hers), njegov (his)) and first person plural (naš
(our/ours)). This corroborates prior findings for
English where women also use more pronouns
than men (Schler et al., 2006).

A minor feature that requires further analysis is
the use of diminutive endings in the female cate-
gory (-ček and -kica).

The lemma-based approach provides insight
into interesting tendencies regarding the content.122



The topics in the male category are associated
with drinking (pivo/pir (beer), bar; piti (to drink)
in the token-based list), sports (tekma (game),
šport (sports), fuzbal (football), zmaga (win))
and motoring (guma (tire), avto (car), voziti (to
drive/ride)). In the female category, a topic on
food and beverages is also present, but with a
different focus (hrana (food), čaj (tea), čokolada
(chocolate), sladoled (ice cream)). Both female
and male authors refer to other people, but they
focus on different agents. Referring to women
(ženska), men (moški), kinship (starš (parent),
mami (mom), otrok (child), babica (grandma), teta
(aunt)), female friends (prijateljica) and female
colleagues (kolegica) relates more with the female
category, while we can find references to wives
(žena), male colleagues (kolega) and male friends
(prijatelj) in the male category.

The token- and lemma-based levels of both cat-
egories display various modality markers: marati
(to like), ne moči (not able), zagotovo (defi-
nitely), želim (I wish) for the female category,
and rad (like/wantmale), verjetno (probably), hotel
(wantedmale), želel (wishedmale), potrebno (neces-
sary) for the male category.

It is interesting to note that these stereotype-
confirming gendered features strongly resemble
earlier results on social media data for English. In
their research on Facebook text, Schwartz et al.
(2013) also found men to use more swear words
and women to use more emoticons. Similarly, ac-
cording to a study by Bamman et al. (2014) on En-
glish tweets, emoticons and character flooding are
associated with female authors, while swear words
mark tweets by male authors. Again, both groups
use kinship terms, but with a divergence similar to
our finding.

5 Conclusions and Further Work

We conclude that the classification of Twitter text
by gender works very well for Slovene, especially
when the system can use the gender inflection on
the verb l-participles, but also in a lemmatized
form where the system can use stylistic and con-
tent features.

Should one wish to use gender classification in
an adversarial setting – i.e., when you take into ac-
count people trying to actively mislead a reader by
posing as a different person or gender – the content
features should also be removed from the experi-
ment as they too can be easily manipulated. Func-

tion words and POS-tags are the best features in
this setting, as they are not under conscious con-
trol (Pennebaker, 2011). Slovene would be an in-
teresting language to research this for, as pronouns
– which are considered to be very salient author
profiling features – are often not explicit.

Acknowledgements

The work described in this paper was partially
funded by the Slovenian Research Agency within
the national basic research project Resources,
Tools and Methods for the Research of Nonstan-
dard Internet Slovene (J6-6842, 2014-2017). The
first author is supported by a PhD scholarship from
the FWO Research Foundation – Flanders.

References
Paul Baker. 2014. Using Corpora to Analyze Gender.

Bloomsbury, London.

David Bamman, Jacob Eisenstein, and Tyler Schnoe-
belen. 2014. Gender identity and lexical varia-
tion in social media. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
18(2):135–160.

John D. Burger, John Henderson, George Kim, and
Guido Zarrella. 2011. Discriminating gender on
Twitter. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ’11, pages 1301–1309, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kaja Dobrovoljc, Simon Krek, and Jan Rupnik.
2012. Skladenjski razčlenjevalnik za slovenščino.
In Tomaž Erjavec and Jerneja Ž. Gros, editors,
Zbornik 15. mednarodne multikonference Informa-
cijska družba - IS 2012, zvezek C, pages 42–47. In-
stitut Jožef Stefan, October.

Tomaž Erjavec, Jaka Čibej, Špela Arhar Holdt, Nikola
Ljubešić, and Darja Fišer. 2016. Gold-standard
datasets for annotation of Slovene computer-
mediated communication. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Workshop on Recent Advances in Slavonic
Natural Languages Processing (RASLAN 2016).
Brno, Češka.

Darja Fišer, Tomaž Erjavec, and Nikola Ljubešić.
2016. Janes v0.4: Korpus slovenskih spletnih
uporabniških vsebin. Slovenščina 2.0, 4(2):67–99.

Miha Grčar and Simon Krek. 2012. Obeliks:
statistični oblikoskladenjski označevalnik in lemati-
zator za slovenski jezik. In T. Erjavec and J. Žganec
Gros, editors, Proceedings of the 8th Language
Technologies Conference, volume C, pages 89–94,
Ljubljana, Slovenia, October. IJS.123



Matjaz Juršič, Igor Mozetič, Tomaž Erjavec, and Nada
Lavrač. 2010. LemmaGen: Multilingual lemma-
tisation with induced ripple-down rules. J. UCS,
16(9):1190–1214.

Jurgita Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė, Ligita Šarkutė, and An-
drius Utka. 2014. Automatic author profiling of
Lithuanian parliamentary speeches: Exploring the
influence of features and dataset sizes. In Hu-
man Language Technologies The Baltic Perspective,
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
Baltic HLT 2014. Kaunas, Lithuania.

Jurgita Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė, Andrius Utka, and Ligita
Šarkutė. 2015. Authorship attribution and author
profiling of Lithuanian literary texts. In Proceedings
of the 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Hissar, Bulgaria.

Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, and Anat Rachel
Shimoni. 2002. Automatically categorizing writ-
ten texts by author gender. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 17(4):401–412.

Tatiana Litvinova and Olga Litvinova. 2016. Author-
ship profiling in Russian-language texts. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th International Conference on
Statistical Analysis of Textual Data (JADT). Nice,
France.

Tatiana Litvinova, Pavel Seredin, and Olga Litvinova.
2015. Using part-of-speech sequences frequencies
in a text to predict author personality: a corpus study.
Indian Journal of Science and Technology, 8(9):93–
97.

Nikola Ljubešić and Tomaž Erjavec. 2016. Corpus
vs. lexicon supervision in morphosyntactic tagging:
the case of Slovene. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France, may. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Nikola Ljubešić and Darja Fišer. 2016. Private or
corporate? Predicting user types on Twitter. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Noisy User-
generated Text, pages 38–46.

Nikola Ljubešić, Darja Fišer, and Tomaž Erjavec.
2014. Tweetcat: A tool for building Twitter corpora
of smaller languages. In Proceedings of the 9th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC
2014). ELRA, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Nikola Ljubešić, Katja Zupan, Darja Fišer, and Tomaž
Erjavec. 2016. Slovene data : historical texts vs.
user-generated content. In Heike Zinsmeister Ste-
fanie Dipper, Friedrich NeuBarth, editor, Proceed-
ings of the 13th Conference on Natural Language
Processing (KONVENS), pages 146–155.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid.py: An
off-the-shelf language identification tool. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2012 system demonstrations,
Jeju, Korea. ACL.

Matthew Newman, Carla Groom, Lori Handelman, and
James Pennebaker. 2008. Gender differences in lan-
guage use: An analysis of 14,000 text samples. Dis-
course Processes, 45(3):211236.

Dong Nguyen, Rilana Gravel, Dolf Trieschnigg, Theo
Meder, and C-M Au Yeung. 2013. TweetGenie: au-
tomatic age prediction from tweets. ACM SIGWEB
Newsletter, 4(4).

Fabian Pedregosa, Gael Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
M. Perrot, and Edouard Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-
learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Claudia Peersman, Walter Daelemans, and Leona
Van Vaerenbergh. 2011. Predicting age and gen-
der in online social networks. In Proceedings of the
3rd international workshop on Search and mining
user-generated contents, pages 37–44. ACM.

James W. Pennebaker. 2011. The Secret Life of Pro-
nouns: What Our Words Say About Us. Bloomsbury
USA.

Barbara Plank and Dirk Hovy. 2015. Personality traits
on twitter -or- how to get 1,500 personality tests
in a week. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sen-
timent and Social Media Analysis (WASSA). Lisbon,
Portugal.

Francisco Rangel, Fabio Celli, Paolo Rosso, Martin
Potthast, Benno Stein, and Walter Daelemans. 2015.
Overview of the 3rd author profiling task at pan
2015. In CLEF 2015 Working Notes. CEUR.

Francisco Rangel, Paolo Rosso, Ben Verhoeven, Wal-
ter Daelemans, Martin Potthast, and Benno Stein.
2016. Overview of the 4th author profiling task at
pan 2016: cross-genre evaluations. In CLEF 2016
Working Notes. CEUR-WS.org.

Aleksandr Sboev, Tatiana Litvinova, Dmitry Gu-
dovskikh, Roman Rybka, and Ivan Moloshnikov.
2016. Machine learning models of text catego-
rization by author gender using topic-independent
features. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Young Scientist Conference on Computational Sci-
ence. Procedia Computer Science, Krakow, Poland.

Jonathan Schler, Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon,
and James W Pennebaker. 2006. Effects of age
and gender on blogging. In AAAI Spring Sympo-
sium: Computational Approaches to Analyzing We-
blogs, volume 6, pages 199–205.

H. Andrew Schwartz, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Mar-
garet L. Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski, Stephanie M.
Ramones, Megha Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal
Kosinski, David Stillwell, Martin E.P. Seligman, and
Lyle H. Ungar. 2013. Personality, gender, and124



age in the language of social media: The open-
vocabulary approach. PloS one, 8(9).

Ben Verhoeven, Walter Daelemans, and Barbara Plank.
2016. TwiSty: a multilingual Twitter stylometry
corpus for gender and personality profiling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference (LREC 2016). ELRA, Portorož,
Slovenia.

Ana Zwitter Vitez. 2013. Le décryptage de l’auteur
anonyme : l’affaire des électeurs en survêtements.
Linguistica, 53(1):91–101.

125


