



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 356–361,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Coarticulatory propensity in Khalkha Mongolian

Ushasi Banerjee*, Indranil Dutta* and Irfan S.**

*The EFL University
**University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

banerjeeushashi@gmail.com, indranil@efluniversity.ac.in, irfans2@illinois.edu

Abstract

Acoustic variation brought about by V-to V
coarticulation needs to be perceptually compen-
sated by listeners, the lack of which results in a
language developing vowel harmony. This could
either be mechanico-inertial where the articula-
tory gestures of V1 perturb the V2 vowel space, or
anticipatory where the planning of the following
vowel perturbs the space of the former. Khalkha
Mongolian exhibits vowel-feature sharing of two
kinds: [ATR] and Round. In this paper we ex-
amine non-harmonic sequences in Mongolian to
verify coarticulatory directionality and propen-
sity. The results show that these non-harmonic
sequences exhibit a directionality and propensity
which is quite the opposite of those in harmonic
sequences. This finding suggests that coarticula-
tion works as an antithetical force in non-harmonic
patterns, the primary motive of which would be to
maintain contrast.

1 Introduction

Continuous acoustic variation in speech is un-
derstood to be brought about by overlapping ar-
ticulatory gestures (Öhman, 1966). Vowel-to-
Vowel (V-to-V) coarticulation is a special case of
non-contiguous coarticulation which helps model
acoustic patterns resulting from anticipatory artic-
ulatory planning on the one hand, and carryover
coarticulation on the other. Acoustic variation in
speech could also be attributed to vocal tract shape
differences, size, shape, and density of the seg-
mental inventory (Manuel, 1990; Manuel, 1999).
A uniform way of understanding the variation has
been to locate it in the dynamic and kinematic dif-
ferences in articulatory overlap. These differences
have been modelled variously in space and time
(Kirchhoff and Bilmes, 1999; Deng et al., 2006).
In V1CV2 sequences, the standard assumption has

been that the acoustics of V1 is perturbed by the
anticipatory production planning of V2 gestures,
while the mechanico-inertial properties of artic-
ulatory gestures of V1 are known to be respon-
sible for the acoustic perturbation of V2. Coar-
ticulatory acoustic variation in V-to-V sequences
once phonologized are known to provide the con-
ditioning for the development of vowel harmony
patterns (Przezdziecki, 2000; Ohala, 1994). Typ-
ically, in non-harmonic languages, acoustic vari-
ation resulting from coarticulation is perceptually
compensated by listeners. Lack of such percep-
tual compensation has been shown to be responsi-
ble for the development of vowel harmony patterns
(Beddor et al., 2002).

Coarticulatory propensity is the spatial and tem-
poral extent of coarticulation between or across
segments. Broadly speaking, coarticulatory re-
sistance or the intrinsic resistance to coarticula-
tion that segments with variable articulatory ges-
tures possess has also been shown to affect acous-
tic variation (Martin and Bunnell, 1981; Recasens,
1984). Nature and extent of coarticulation is
also governed by language specific properties such
as syllable structure (Manuel, 1999), coarticula-
tory resistance of the intervening consonant in V-
to-V segment sequences (Recasens et al., 1995).
In addition, the nature of contrast between seg-
ments has also been shown to affect the magnitude
of coarticulation in V-to-V sequences, especially
in languages that exhibit vowel harmony of the
type where distinctive features are shared between
vowels (Dutta et al., 2017) and in those where
vowel harmony results in vowel copying (Dutta et
al., 2016).

While there has been a substantial amount of
work on V-to-V coarticulation in both harmony
and non-harmony languages, in this paper we ex-
amine the magnitude and extent of V-to-V coartic-
ulation in Khalkha Mongolian. Khalkha Mongo-
lian exhibits both Advanced Tongue Root [ATR]356



harmony and rounding harmony. Unlike, suffixal
harmony systems like Assamese (Mahanta, 2008),
Bengali (Shamim, 2011), and Telugu (Wilkinson,
1974; Kissock, 2009) where the direction of the
harmony is right-to-left, Khalkha, primarily, but
not exclusively is a stem internal harmony sys-
tem where the direction of the harmony proceeds
from left-to-right. Specifically, we examine the ef-
fect of formants from V1 on V2 and vice-versa
using a set of linear fixed effect model. We ob-
serve that the direction of coarticulation in non-
harmonic sequences is greater in the anticipatory
direction which is opposite to the direction of suf-
fixal vowel harmony in Khalkha Mongolian. We
also find this effect only in the F1 values and not in
the F2, which suggests that the coarticulatory for-
mant perturbation runs in the tongue height dimen-
sion and not in the tongue front-back dimension.
In section 2, we present a detailed phonological
account of the vowel harmony system in Khalkha
Mongolian. Following that in section 3, we pro-
vide details of our experimental methodology and
speech materials. In section 4, we present the pri-
mary findings of our study, and we conclude in
section 5 by motivating the need to understand the
nature of vowel contrasts that mitigate the coartic-
ulatory propensity and directionality, especially in
vowel harmony languages.

2 Vowel Harmony in Khalkha Mongolian

Vowel harmony is a phonological process that
restricts the co-occurrence of vowels (usually)
within a non-compound word. The Mongolian
vowel inventory is unevenly distributed in fea-
tures, consisting of seven vowels i, e, a, o, O, u
and U. These can be classified as pharyngeal: i,
e, u, o and non-pharyngeal:a,U, O. As can be no-
ticed, i does not have a pharyngeal counterpart.
We find two types of vowel harmony in Khalkha
Mongolian : [ATR] and Rounding. It affects roots
as well as derivational/inflectional suffixes. While
the initial vowel is assumed to be specified, the
non-initial vowels can be underlyingly /i/, /E/, or
/U/. The archiphonemes /U/ and /E/ have missing
features that are filled in through vowel harmony.
/U/ undergoes just [ATR] harmony, becoming ei-
ther /u/ or /U/, while, /E/ undergoes both [ATR]
and [round] harmony, becoming /e/, /a/, /o/, or /O/
(Godfrey, 2012).

2.1 [ATR] Harmony
ATR Harmony distinguishes tense and lax vowels
in Mongolian, which Svantesson (2005) refers to
as ‘pharyngeal’ and ‘non-pharyngeal’. Vowels in
non-compound words must share values for [+/-
ATR], depending on the root/stem vowel (at the
morpho-phonemic level).

• Trigger vowels: o, O, u, U, a, e (in initial po-
sitions)

• Target vowels: Archiphonemes /E/ and /U/
Alternations:

• /E/: /e/, /a/, /o/, or /O/
• /U/: /u/, or /U/
The vowel i in the initial syllable also forces the

following vowels in the non-compound word to be
[+ATR] (Svantesson, 1985).

In Nevins (2010) and Godfrey (2012), the har-
mony is conceptualized as a search-copy mecha-
nism by ‘needy’ vowels instead of there being har-
mony ‘trigger’s. In [ATR] harmony, the search
proceeds leftward and looks for the nearest con-
trastive instance of [ATR]. Once found, the value
is copied. If none is found, default [+ATR] is in-
serted.

2.2 Rounding Harmony
This phonological process influences vowels to
surface as rounded when the neighbouring vowel
(the root/stem vowel for Khalkha Mongolian) is
rounded. However, in most cases, conditions re-
ferring to tongue body position (height and/or
backness) are imposed on either the triggering el-
ement, the target, or both (Kaun, 1995).

In Khalkha Mongolian, we observe two condi-
tions for rounding harmony:

• The trigger must be nonhigh.
• The trigger and target must agree in height.
This kind of a system is similar to one seen in

Sibe, a Tungusic language of China (Li., 1996).

• Trigger vowels: /o/, and /O/
• Target vowels: Archiphoneme /E/
The archiphoneme /E/ surfaces as open rounded

vowels o, or O in the non-initial syllable when pre-
ceded by the same vowel. An open vowel that fol-
lows a non-open rounded vowel (u, u) must be un-
rounded (e or a) (Svantesson, 1985)357



2.3 Transparent i

Transparent vowels are those vowels that may in-
tervene between the trigger and the target of har-
mony even when they bear the opposite value
for the harmonizing feature (Benus, 2010). Non-
initial i in Mongolian is transparent, i.e., it is com-
pletely ignored by vowel harmony; neither does it
participate in vowel harmony, nor does it block the
process. i is the only vowel phoneme that is fully
specified in non-initial vowels.

Example:
/po:r-ig-E/ po:r-ig-o *po:r-ig-e
(gloss) ’kidney-ACC-RFL’

In Benus (2010), phonetic and phonological in-
vestigation of transparent vowels under a dynamic
model show that transparent vowels are in fact
integral parts of harmonic domains. The pho-
netic properties of transparent vowels get inte-
grated over phonological selection of suffixal vow-
els.

2.4 Opaque u and U

Opaque vowels, in contrast, require a local agree-
ment relationship between the trigger and the tar-
get, i.e. there can be no intervening vowel (Be-
nus, 2010). In Khalkha, intervening non-open ve-
lar vowels block rounding harmony. Not only are
they not affected by vowel harmony, they also pre-
vent rounding harmony to spread across them.

Example:

/Or-Uŋ-ŋE/ Or-Uŋ-ŋa *Or-Uŋ-ŋO
(gloss) ’enter-CAUS-DPST’

This opacity, however, is restricted to rounding
harmony; these segments don’t behave so in the
process of [ATR] harmony (Godfrey, 2012). Pho-
netic factors have also been implicated in ground-
ing the phenomenon of opacity in ‘tongue root
harmony systems (Archangeli and Pulleyblank,
1994).

3 Materials and methods

Four female native Khalkha Mongolian speakers
were recorded at The EFL University. The mate-
rial block consisted of fifty-nine target words and
six distractors in carrier phrases of the type “pi
<target word/distractor> gesen”. Four repetitions
of each block were recorded for all speakers with

a five minute break within each block. Record-
ings were conducted in a quiet environment. The
total number of critical items was 59*4*4=944.
The data was presented to the speakers in Cyril-
lic script. The recorded speech was segmented
and annotated manually in Praat (Boersma and
Weenink, 2009).

Ten vowel formants from each V1CV2 sequence
were extracted using a Praat script (Boersma and
Weenink, 2009) FormantPro (Xu, 2007 2015). Ex-
tracted formants where normalized by using the
Lobanov method to eliminate specific speaker ef-
fects (Lobanov, 1971).

FNn[V ] =
(Fn[V ] −MEANn)

Sn
(1)

Where FNn[V ] is the normalized value for formant
n of vowel V. MEANn is the mean value for for-
mant n for the speaker in question and Sn is the
standard deviation for the speaker’s formant n.

Linear Mixed Effects model from the lme4
package in R (Bates et al., 2015) was implemented
on the formant data to ascertain the effects of
the distal and proximal formants on coarticula-
tion. Distal formant data consisted of F1 and
F2 data from vowel midpoints representing the
steady-state formants where the V-to-V coarticu-
lation effects are most distal from the formant per-
turbations due to the intervening consonant. Prox-
imal formant data consisted of F1 and F2 data from
vowel offsets of V1 and vowel onsets of V2.

4 Statistical analyses and results

Vowel F1 and F2 plots on an X-Y euclidean plane
where plotted using the PhonR package (McCloy,
2016). The formant data visualizations provided
information about the relative positions of the
vowels and the areas of the vowel polygons for V1
and V2. In Fig.1 below the left panel represents
the steady-state positions and the vowel area poly-
gons for V1 and the right panel represents the same
for V2. We make two observations with respect to
the relative positions and the polygonal areas. The
mid-front vowel e is raised and is overlapped sig-
nificantly with the high front vowel i, while the e
is lower than the i. This pattern suggests that the
F1 and F2 values of e are perturbed by the pres-
ence of a high vowel in the V2 position, which in
turn implies a stronger anticipatory effect, at least
for the vowel e.358



F2

F1

2 1 0 −1 −2

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

i

....

e

a:

..

u

a

..e:

....

u:u..

..:o

a..

e..

..:

i:

F2

F1

2 1 0 −1 −2

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

e

a..

i

....

u:

o
i..e:e..

..

u..
..

a

....

i:

Figure 1: Steady state distal formants: Vowel el-
lipses and polygons from V1T6, i.e., V1 mid-point
(Left panel) and V2T5; i.e.,V2 mid-point (Right
panel)

In Fig.2, the left panel represents proximal posi-
tions and vowel area polygons for V1 and the right
panel represents those for V2. It shows that in spite
of more overlapping effect due to the presence of
a consonant, the polygon area of V1 is still larger
than that of V2. From this, we make the observa-
tion that the effect of V2 on V1 is robust across
their different positions in time (vowel-mid posi-
tion, onset and offset). In Table 1., we present the
vowel polygon areas from these models (distal and
proximal). The values show that for all subjects,
the vowel polygon area for V1 is larger in compar-
ison to that of V2.

F2

F1

2 1 0 −1 −2

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

i
....

e

a:

..

u

a

..e:

....

u:u..
..:o

a..

e..

..:

i:

F2

F1

2 1 0 −1 −2

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

e

a..

i

....

u:
oi..e:e..

..

u....

a
....

i:

Figure 2: Proximal formants: Vowel ellipses and
polygons from V1T6, i.e., V1 mid-point (Left
panel) and V2T5; i.e.,V2 mid-point (Right panel)

We present results from a linear mixed effects
model which tested the variable and mutual ef-

Table 1: Vowel polygon areas of V1 and V2 from
distal and proximal formant measures

fect of F1 and F2 values from distal and proximal
V positions in order to quantify the coarticulatory
propensity in non-harmonic V1CV2 sequences.

In the first model, we test the effect of F1 from
T5 of V2 and a fixed effect of V2 on the F1 from V1
at T6. This model returns a t=3.543 with no sig-
nificant effect of V2. In the second model, we test
the effect of F1 from T6 of V1 and a fixed effect of
V1 on the F1 from V2 at T5. This model returns
a t=3.233 and a t=2.185 for vowel V1, /u:/. Here
Subject and Item function as random effects. Our
results indicate that there is significant covariation
of F1 values with slightly greater effect of V2 on
V1 suggesting that the directionality of coarticula-
tion as seen in the F1 values is in the anticipatory
direction, which is opposite to the direction of the
suffixal harmony system in Khalkha Mongolian.
Similar models on F2 do not show significant ef-
fects, with t=-0.044 and t=-0.020 for F2 of V1 at
T6 and F2 of V2 at T5, respectively.

5 Contrast and coarticulatory propensity
in vowel harmony systems

Stem-internal and stem + suffix harmonic se-
quences in Mongolian exhibit a left-right direc-
tionality. Lack of perceptual compensation (Bed-
dor et al., 2002) is known to contribute to the de-
velopment of vowel harmony systems, to the ex-
tent that it might regress to a radical case of vowel-
copying, such as in Telugu (Dutta et al., 2016;
Kissock, 2009; Sailaja, 1999). In this paper, we ar-
gue that in non-harmonic Khalkha Mongolian se-
quences the coarticulatory propensity is greater in
the anticipatory direction, opposite to the direction
of both ATR and rounding harmony, in an effort
to maintain contrast, where harmonic sequences
may lead to contrast obliteration in terms of fea-
tural neutralization. The directionality of coartic-
ulatory propensity, also suggests that articulatory
planing seeks to preserve contrast. Unlike the in-
tuitive notion of coarticulation as a force that con-
trives against contrast, Mongolian shows that it
might also be one that does not, and indeed it aug-359



ments the force of contrast. Coarticulation could
be viewed as a force that is not merely function-
ing at the production end of language but also at
the planning end. In vowel harmony languages,
where lack of perceptual compensation for coar-
ticulatory acoustic variation may have lead to the
development of complex feature sharing in V-to-
V contexts, the V-to-V coarticulation patterns in
non-harmonic sequences seek to enhance contrast
by providing perceptual advantage through vari-
able coarticulatory propensity.

References
D. Archangeli and D. Pulleyblank. 1994. Grounded

Phonology. Current Studies in Linguistics. MIT
Press.

Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve
Walker. 2015. Fitting linear mixed-effects mod-
els using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software,
67(1):1–48.

Patrice Speeter Beddor, James D. Harnsberger, and
Stephanie Lindemann. 2002. Language-specific
patterns of vowel-to-vowel coarticulation: acoustic
structures and their perceptual correlates. Journal of
Phonetics, 30(4):591 – 627.

S. Benus. 2010. Dynamics and Transparency in Vowel
Harmony. Universal Publishers.

Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2009. Praat: doing
phonetics by computer (version 5.1.13).

Li Deng, Dong Yu, and Alex Acero. 2006. A bidi-
rectional target-filtering model of speech coarticu-
lation and reduction: Two-stage implementation for
phonetic recognition. Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 14(1):256–265.

Indranil Dutta, S Irfan, and KRS Harsha. 2016. Using
ANNs for vowel identification from V-to-V coartic-
ulation in non-harmonic VCV sequences. Presented
at the 15th Conference on Laboratory Phonology,
Ithaca, NY.

Indranil Dutta, Irfan S., Pamir Gogoi, and Priyankoo
Sarmah. 2017. Nature of contrast and coarticu-
lation: Evidence from Mizo tones and Assamese
vowel harmony. In Proceedings of Interspeech
2017, pages 224–228.

Ross Godfrey. 2012. Opaque intervention in Khalkha
Mongolian vowel harmony: A contrastive account.
Technical report, McGill Working Papers in Lin-
guistics, Volume 22.1,Winter 2012.

Abigail R. Kaun. 1995. The Typology of Round-
ing Harmony: An Optimality Theoretic Approach.
Cambridge University Press.

Katrin Kirchhoff and Jeff A Bilmes. 1999. Statisti-
cal acoustic indications of coarticulation. In Proc.
ICPhS, volume 99. Citeseer.

Dworak Kissock. 2009. Telugu vowel assimilation:
Harmony, umlaut, or neither? In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Manchester Phonology Meeting.

Bing Li. 1996. Tungusic vowel harmony: description
and analysis. Holland, Institute of Generative Lin-
guistics, Amsterdam.

B. M. Lobanov. 1971. Classification of Russian vow-
els spoken by different speakers. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 49(2B):606–608.

Shakuntala Mahanta. 2008. Directionality and lo-
cality in vowel harmony: With special reference to
vowel harmony in Assamese. Netherlands Graduate
School of Linguistics.

S. Manuel. 1990. The role of contrast in limit-
ing vowel-to-vowel coarticulation indifferent lan-
guages. Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amer-
ica, 88:1286–1298.

S. Manuel. 1999. Cross-language studies: Relating
language-particular coarticulation patterns to other
language-particular facts. In W. Hardcastle and
N. Hewlett, editors, Coarticulation: Theory, data
and techniques. Cambridge University Press.

James G. Martin and H. Timothy Bunnell. 1981.
Perception of anticipatory coarticulation effects.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
69(2):559–567.

Daniel R. McCloy. 2016. Tools for phoneticians and
phonologists phonR. R package version 1.14.4.

Andrew Nevins. 2010. Locality in vowel harmony,
volume 55. MIT Press.

John J Ohala. 1994. Towards a universal, phonetically-
based, theory of vowel harmony. In Third Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing.

Sven EG Öhman. 1966. Coarticulation in vcv ut-
terances: Spectrographic measurements. The Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America, 39(1):151–
168.

Marek Przezdziecki. 2000. Vowel harmony and
vowel-to-vowel coarticulation in three dialects of
Yoruba. Working Papers of the Cornell Phonetics
Laboratory, 13:105–124.

Daniel Recasens, Jordi Fontdevila, and Maria Dolors
Pallarès. 1995. Velarization degree and coarticula-
tory resistance for /i/ in Catalan and German. Jour-
nal of Phonetics, 23(1–2):37 – 52.

Daniel Recasens. 1984. Voweltovowel coarticulation
in catalan vcv sequences. The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America, 76(6):1624–1635.360



P Sailaja. 1999. Syllable structure of Telugu. 4:743–
746.

Ahmed Shamim. 2011. A reanalysis of Bengali vowel
assimilation with special attention to metaphony.
Master’s thesis, Graduate Center, City University of
New York.

Jan-Olof Svantesson. 1985. Vowel harmony shift in
Mongolian. Lingua, 67(1985):283–327.

Jan-Olof Svantesson. 2005. The Phonology of Mongo-
lian. Oxford University Press Inc, New York.

Robert W Wilkinson. 1974. Tense/lax vowel harmony
in Telugu: the influence of derived contrast on rule
application. Linguistic Inquiry, pages 251–270.

Yi Xu. 2007–2015. Formantpro.praat.

361


