



















































Universal Dependencies for Serbian in Comparison with Croatian and Other Slavic Languages


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 39–44,
Valencia, Spain, 4 April 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Universal Dependencies for Serbian
in Comparison with Croatian and Other Slavic Languages

Tanja Samardžić
URPP Language and Space

University of Zürich
tanja.samardzic@uzh.ch

Mirjana Starović
Leksikom, Belgrade

djelmas@eunet.rs

Željko Agić
IT University of Copenhagen

zeag@itu.dk

Nikola Ljubešić
University of Zagreb

nljubesi@ffzg.hr

Abstract

The paper documents the procedure of
building a new Universal Dependencies
(UDv2) treebank for Serbian starting from
an existing Croatian UDv1 treebank and
taking into account the other Slavic UD
annotation guidelines. We describe the
automatic and manual annotation proce-
dures, discuss the annotation of Slavic-
specific categories (case governing quan-
tifiers, reflexive pronouns, question parti-
cles) and propose an approach to handling
deverbal nouns in Slavic languages.

1 Introduction

The notion Universal Dependencies (UD) refers to
an international movement started with the goal
to reduce to a minimum cross-linguistic variation
in the formalisms used to label syntactic structure
(McDonald et al., 2013; Nivre et al., 2016). This
goal was defined following multilingual parsing
campaigns (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006; Hajič et
al., 2009) that revealed substantial cross-linguistic
differences in the sets of labels and relations used
in different treebanks, making it hard to compare
parsers’ performances across languages (McDon-
ald and Nivre, 2007).

In this paper, we document the process of build-
ing a UD treebank for Serbian underlining the ad-
vantages of using the existing general framework,
but also data and tools already available for other
languages. The availability of shared resources
is especially important for languages such as Ser-
bian, which, more than 20 years after the publica-
tion of Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1994), still
has no resource with annotated syntactic structure,

lagging behind its close relatives for which UD an-
notation is available.

Labeled as automatic conversion with manual
corrections in the UD documentation,1 our ap-
proach consists of four steps: 1) automatic porting
of Croatian annotation to Serbian, 2) comparison
and adaptation, 3) automatic conversion and cor-
rection, and 4) manual correction.

Despite the fact that Serbian can be parsed with
the model already available for Croatian, as argued
by Agić and Ljubešić (2015), building a Serbian
treebank is useful for two reasons. First, it al-
lows learning a more precise model for Serbian,
taking into account important syntactic differences
such as, for instance, the use of infinitive (Tiede-
mann and Ljubešić, 2012). Second, improvements
and corrections in the Serbian treebank can be
ported back and used for updating Croatian tree-
bank. This does not only concern improvements
in consistency resulting from detailed manual in-
spection, but also version updating. In particular,
the currently available Croatian treebank follows
the UD guidelines version 1 (UDv1), while Ser-
bian follows the current version 2 (UDv2).

2 Applying Croatian Model to Serbian

To port the existing Croatian annotation to Ser-
bian, we use the Croatian data and tools described
by Agić and Ljubešić (2015).

The Serbian treebank consists of sentences
that are aligned with Croatian sentences in the
SETimes.HR corpus (Agić and Ljubešić, 2014)
used to produce the first version of the Croat-
ian UD treebank. As morphosyntactic annota-
tion is needed as input for syntactic parsing, we

1http://universaldependencies.org/39



(1) Obožavaoci iz regiona klicali su Roling Stounsima u ponedeljak u Crnoj Gori .
Fans from region greeted AUX Rolling Stones on Monday in Monte- -negro .

nmod

nmod

nmod

(2) Obožavaoci iz regiona klicali su Roling Stounsima u ponedeljak u Crnoj Gori .
Fans from region greeted AUX Rolling Stones on Monday in Monte- -negro .

nmod

obl

obl

Figure 1: The difference between UDv1 (1) and UDv2 (2) in applying the label nmod.

In Out Context
auxpass aux ALL
csubjpass csubj ALL
dobj obj ALL
iobj obl ALL
nsubjpass nsubj ALL
mwe fixed ALL
remnant orphan ALL
dislocated NA ALL
name flat ALL
foreign flat ALL
nmod obl if the PoS of the head is V or

A, or N if the lemma ends in
-nje

Table 1: Automatic conversion from UD v1 to UD
v2.

add morphosyntactic definitions (MSD) following
the modified Multext-East version 4 format (Er-
javec, 2012) documented in the draft of version 5.2

MSD annotation is first added automatically us-
ing the state-of-the-art Croatian tagger described
by Ljubešić et al. (2016), and then corrected man-
ually by two experts native in Serbian, resulting in
gold MSD labels.

Once morphologically annotated, the Serbian
side of SETimes.HR, coined SETimes.SR, was
then parsed using the mate-tools, a graph-
based dependency parser (Bohnet, 2010) trained
on the Croatian UD v1.2 treebank data. The parser
was trained with default parameters.

3 Category Comparison and Adaptation

In this step, we perform manual inspection of a
sample of parsed sentences in order to decide what
categories and relations to use for Serbian. We ex-
tract and evaluate a handful of examples of all an-
notated relations, comparing the annotation to the
general guidelines and to the language-specific en-

2http://nl.ijs.si/ME/V5/msd/html/

In Out Context
expl NA ALL
reparandum NA ALL
det det:numgov if the lemma is “koliko”
nummod nummod:gov if the word is a cardinal

number and the head is in
the genitive case

compound amod if the PoS is A
nmod if the PoS is N
flat otherwise if the lemma is

not “sebe”
ALL compound if the lemma is “sebe”
ALL det if the word is a “posses-

sive pronoun”
ALL xcomp if the head word is the

modal “moći”

Table 2: Automatic version-independent updates.

tries for Croatian and other contemporary Slavic
languages available in the current UD set: Bul-
garian, Croatian, Czech, Polish, Russian, Slovak,
Slovenian and Ukrainian.

We introduce two kinds of changes with respect
to the initial set of categories implemented by the
Croatian model. With the first set of changes, we
convert general relations UDv1 to UDv2. With
the second set of changes, we correct the exist-
ing annotation in order to resolve some of the is-
sues raised on the UD web site and improve the
descriptive adequacy of the annotation.

3.1 Version Updating

The most important conceptual novelty in the
UDv2 guidelines, at least when it comes to Slavic
syntax, is the treatment of core vs. oblique argu-
ments of predicates. Based on well-established
typological distinctions (Thompson, 1997; An-
drews, 2007), UDv1 guidelines stated that a dis-
tinction should be made between core and oblique
arguments, rather than between complements and
adjuncts. Both obj and iobj were intended to40



be used for core arguments only, while other la-
bels were intended for oblique arguments.

However, the Slavic treebanks that we consulted
systematically use iobj to annotate oblique de-
pendents. We believe that this is partly due to
sometimes underspecified general guidelines and
partly to the strong tradition of making the com-
plement vs. adjunct distinction, which creates the
need to distinguish between two kinds of oblique
dependents (complements obligatory, adjuncts op-
tional).

We adopt the distinction between core and
oblique arguments by implementing the rows 3
and 4 in Table 1. We use obj only for direct
objects (bare nominal dependents with accusative
case) and the new label obl for all the other verb
dependents, most of which are currently annotated
with iobj in Croatian and all the other Slavic
treebanks. Our new label obl includes Serbian
counterparts of “dative subjects” indicated as a
special construction in Russian documentation.

Another important change is narrowing the use
of the relation nmod to the nominal domain, as il-
lustrated in Figure 1. We implement this as shown
in Table 1, row 11.

Three changes, (rows 1, 2, 5 in Table 1) are
made following the UDv2 treatment of passive.
We note that the change in the new version of
the guidelines is convenient for describing Ser-
bian, as well as other Slavic languages, because
the distinction between passive and other intransi-
tive constructions is considerably blurred in these
languages.

Finally, we update the relations used for differ-
ent kinds of conventionalised expressions (rows 6-
10 in Table 1, NA as output means that the relation
is removed from the list).

3.2 Version-independent Updates

A number of changes are made after inspecting
Croatian counterparts of the constructions listed
under “special constructions” in the UD language-
specific documentations for Slavic languages
(available only for Czech, Russian, and Bulgar-
ian) with the goal to improve cross-linguistic par-
allelism. We make decisions on several issues dis-
cussed in this section.

The most prominent specific constructions, dis-
cussed in Czech and Russian documentations,
are those involving case governing quantifiers,
such as koliko, ‘how much, how many’, nekoliko

‘some, several’, mnogo ‘much, many’, malo ‘lit-
tle, few’. What is special in these constructions
is that the case of the head nominal does not de-
pend on the function of the nominal in a clause,
but is determined by the quantifier (genitive case
is required). To capture this phenomenon, gen-
eral labels nummod and det are extended to
nummod:gov and det:numgov, respectively.
This specification is applied only in Czech and
Russian, although it is relevant to the other Slavic
languages too. In this case, we decide to follow
Czech and Russian, as shown in Table 2, rows 3–
4. We do not follow Czech in using det:nummod
for those quantifiers that do not govern the case.
Since this relation is syntactically equivalent to
the simple det relation (quantifier agrees with the
quantified noun in case), we leave the simple label.

The other constructions addressed in Czech
documentation is “reflexive pronoun”, whose
short form can be assigned a whole range
of functions. Czech documentation lists the
following relations: dobj, iobj, nmod,
auxpass:reflex, expl, and discourse.
While annotation of this form is not explicitly ad-
dressed in the documentation of the other Slavic
languages, it can have similar functions, which
are likely to be annotated using different subsets
of the relations listed above (for instance, the la-
bel auxpass:reflex is not used in any other
Slavic language).

Croatian departs from all the other Slavic lan-
guages by using the relation compound for most
of the instances of this form, rather than annotating
fine-grained distinctions. This decision is based on
the view of this form as a detachable morpheme
belonging to the verb to which it is attached both
in lexical and morphological sense. In this view,
the “reflexive pronoun” becomes parallel with En-
glish or German verb particles, and the relation
used for these particles can be applied to it. We
note that this view is supported by substantial the-
oretical findings showing that the short reflexive
form is not just a prosodic variant of the full reflex-
ive pronoun and that, in fact, it is not a pronoun at
all (Sells et al., 1987; Moskovljević, 1997). Fur-
thermore, Reinhart and Siloni (2004) and Marelj
(2004) argue that this form should be analysed in
the same way in all its uses: as a free morpheme
marking absence of one of the verb’s core depen-
dents. The functions listed above, and a whole
range of other functions usually not mentioned in41



(3) Novi predsednik je rekao da će pridruživanje EU biti propritet .
new president AUX said that will joining EU be priority .

nsubj

obl

(4) Hrvatska je na putu da se pridruži Uniji kao njena 26. članica .
Croatia is on way to SE join Union as her 26th member .

acl
obl

Figure 2: Parallelism between deverbal nouns (pridruživanje) and their source verbs (pridružiti).

grammars, are higher-level interpretations of the
same syntactic form. Annotating these functions,
in our opinion, should not be part of UD.

Based on these arguments, we follow Croatian
in using the label compound, despite the fact that
this is not in accordance with the other Slavic tree-
banks. We extend this relation to all instance of the
short reflexive form and eliminate all the other la-
bels (e.g., dobj), that are occasionally found in
the initial annotation, as shown in the row 6 in Ta-
ble 2. We also eliminate all the other uses of the
relation compound (row 5 in Table 2).

The last specific construction, addressed in Bul-
garian documentation, is the particle used to form
YES/NO questions. This particle is assigned the
relation discourse in Bulgarian, while the rela-
tion mark is used in Croatian. In this case too, we
follow Croatian annotation as this particle does not
link the sentence to a broader context, but rather
marks the function of the sentence itself.

The revision of the relations resulted in remov-
ing two labels found not to be used in the annota-
tion (rows 1-2 in Table 2).

In addition to the constructions listed in
language-specific documentations, we note one
more form whose annotation needs to be specif-
ically documented: deverbal nouns. This cate-
gory is not specific to Slavic languages, but its an-
notation might be due to a specific realisation of
the distinction between result and process dever-
bal nominals (Grimshaw, 1990).

Deverbal nouns can have a different degree of
nominal and verbal properties across languages
and within a language. Those whose meaning is
a result are closer to the nominal side of the scale,
while those that describe a process are closer to
the verbal side. While result nouns can be an-
notated as other abstract nouns, process deverbal
nouns keep the initial verbal (non-finite) depen-
dencies, which means that their dependents should
be annotated in the same way as the dependents

Size in Automatic Manual Start–End
Tokens N % N % N %
26708 4499 17 3785 14 7423 28

Table 3: The amount of changed annotations in au-
tomatic conversion, manual correction, and in the
resulting treebank compared with the initial anno-
tation ported from Croatian (Start–End).

of the verbs from which they are derived (like in-
finitives and some participles). Some examples in
general UD guidelines suggest that English -ing
forms with nominal functions are treated as verbs
in this respect.

Serbian (and Croatian) morphology allows
drawing a relatively clear difference between re-
sult and process deverbal nouns: the suffix -nje
is used to derive process nouns in a rather regu-
lar way, while a number of idiosyncratic suffixes
are used to derive result nouns. We mark this dis-
tinction by annotating the dependents of deverbal
nouns ending in -nje ((3) in Figure 2) in the same
way as the dependents of the non-finite forms of
their source verbs ((3) in Figure 2), while keeping
their nominal function. We treat the other dever-
bal nouns (derived with other suffixes) as regular
nominals.

As a result of this step, we did not manage
to eliminate all the differences with other Slavic
treebanks, but we believe that our analysis pro-
vides a good basis for future steps in this direction.
Relatively frequent versioning planned within the
UD work framework makes room for continuous
improvements and adaptations. This can be ex-
pected to move the current annotation to a more
synchronised state through active cross-linguistic
exchange enabled by the common framework and
based on sound arguments.42



4 Automatic Conversion and Manual
Correction

Here we describe the implementation of the de-
scribed updates in 1200 sentences, out of the
planned 3900.

Tables 1 and 2 show the full list of changes
introduced automatically by means of a custom
Python script that takes as input parsed sentences
in the CoNLL-X format and outputs the same for-
mat with the changes. The tables contain all the
changes discussed in the previous section, together
with a number of changes performed to address
issues concerning the current Croatian annotation
that have been raised so far on the UD web site
and that have not been addressed through the ver-
sion updating (rows 5, 7, 8 in Table 2).

The processed files are then imported into
DgAnnotator3 and corrected by three experts,
Croatian native speakers, coordinated and super-
vised by a Serbian expert. Manual correction in-
cluded idiosyncratic or complex cases that could
not be performed automatically. In addition to
parser’s errors, these corrections addressed short-
comings identified on the UD web site. In par-
ticular, we manually correct instances of relative
pronouns, such as što ’what’, koji ‘which’, that
were annotated with mark. We assign such words
a function that they have in the subordinate clause,
mostly nsubj and obj.

Table 3 shows the amount of corrections made
in each step. The counts refer to the number of
tokens for which either the dependency link or re-
lations are changed. We can see that a total of 28%
tokens were changed between the initial ported an-
notation and the final Serbian treebank. Slightly
more changes were made automatically than man-
ually (17% vs. 14%). The fact that the sum of
the changes is higher than the difference between
initial and final annotation means that the annota-
tors had to change back a number of annotations
after the automatic conversion. This number is
rather low (3% of tokens) but further inspections
might show a way to improve automatic conver-
sion. The percentage of manually corrected anno-
tations is lower than it would be expected based
on the parsing accuracy score of 79.6% reported
by Agić and Ljubešić (2015). This is due to the
fact that the Serbian side of the SETimes corpus
is very similar to the Croatian side on which the

3http://medialab.di.unipi.it/Project/
QA/Parser/DgAnnotator/

parser was trained.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

By describing the development of a new UD tree-
bank for Serbian, we have demonstrated how the
existing UD infrastructure can be used to improve
cross-linguistic parallelism in syntactic annota-
tion, but also to reduce costs of development of
new treebanks. Such an infrastructure is especially
useful for Slavic languages, whose syntax is sim-
ilar enough to take advantage of cross-linguistic
automatic parsing and common annotation guide-
lines.

The remaining 2700 sentences will be annotated
and made available through the UD infrastruc-
ture by the end of April 2017, together with our
language-specific guidelines and detailed statis-
tics.

Acknowledgments

The annotation described in this paper is funded
by the Swiss National Science Foundation grant
No. 160501. We are thankful to our collabo-
rators Daša Farkaš, Danijela Merkler and Matea
Srebačić for their valuable contribution.

References
Željko Agić and Nikola Ljubešić. 2014. The SE-

Times.HR linguistically annotated corpus of Croa-
tian. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Željko Agić and Nikola Ljubešić. 2015. Universal
dependencies for Croatian (that work for Serbian,
too). In The 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural
Language Processing, pages 1–8, Hissar, Bulgaria,
September. INCOMA Ltd. Shoumen, BULGARIA.

Avery D. Andrews. 2007. The major functions of the
noun phrase. In Timothy Shopen, editor, Language
Typology and Syntactic Description Clause Struc-
ture, pages 132–223, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Cambridge University Press.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast depen-
dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 89–97, Bei-
jing, China, August. Coling 2010 Organizing Com-
mittee.

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-
X shared task on multilingual dependency parsing.43



In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-X),
pages 149–164, New York City, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Tomaž Erjavec. 2012. MULTEXT-East: Morphosyn-
tactic resources for central and eastern European
languages. Lang. Resour. Eval., 46(1):131–142,
March.

Jane Grimshaw. 1990. Argument Structure. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-
son, Daisuke Kawahara, Maria Antònia Martı́, Lluı́s
Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian
Padó, Jan Štěpánek, Pavel Straňák, Mihai Surdeanu,
Nianwen Xue, and Yi Zhang. 2009. The conll-
2009 shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependen-
cies in multiple languages. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL 2009): Shared Task,
pages 1–18, Boulder, Colorado, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Nikola Ljubešić, Filip Klubička, Željko Agić, and Ivo-
Pavao Jazbec. 2016. New inflectional lexicons and
training corpora for improved morphosyntactic an-
notation of Croatian and Serbian. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Sara Goggi, Marko Grobelnik, Bente
Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Helene Mazo, Asun-
cion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016), Paris, France, May. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1994. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: the penn treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Marijana Marelj. 2004. Middles and argument struc-
ture across languages. LOT, Utrecht.

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. Charac-
terizing the errors of data-driven dependency pars-
ing models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 122–131,
Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuz-
man Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao
Zhang, Oscar Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria
Bertomeu Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013. Uni-
versal dependency annotation for multilingual pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), pages 92–97, Sofia, Bulgaria,
August. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jasmina Moskovljević. 1997. Leksička detranzi-
tivizacija i analiza pravih povratnih glagola u srp-
skom jeziku. Južnoslovenski filolog, LII:107–114.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Sara Goggi, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Helene Mazo, Asuncion Moreno,
Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
Paris, France, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Tanya Reinhart and Tal Siloni. 2004. Against the un-
accusative analysis of reflexives. In Artemis Alex-
iadou, Elena Anagnostopoulou, and Martin Ever-
aert, editors, The Unaccusativity Puzzle: Studies on
the syntax-lexicon interface, pages 159–181. Oxford
University Press.

Peter Sells, Annie Zaenen, and Draga Zec. 1987. Re-
flexivization variation: Relations between syntax,
semantics, and lexical structure. In Masayo Iida and
Draga Zec Stephen Wechsler, editors, Working Pa-
pers in Grammatical Theory and Discourse Struc-
ture, pages 169–238, Stanford, CA. CSLI.

Sandra A. Thompson. 1997. Discourse motivations for
the core-oblique distinction as a language universal.
In Akio Kamio, editor, Directions in Functional Lin-
guistics, pages 59–82, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Benjamins.

Jörg Tiedemann and Nikola Ljubešić. 2012. Efficient
discrimination between closely related languages.
In Proceedings of COLING 2012, pages 2619–2634,
Mumbai, India, December. The COLING 2012 Or-
ganizing Committee.

44


