




































– Invited Talk –
Variance in Historical Data:

How bad is it and how can we profit from it for historical linguistics?

Stefanie Dipper
Linguistics Department

Ruhr-Universität Bochum
dipper@linguistics.rub.de

The most striking feature of historical language
data is probably the amount of variance, in particu-
lar variance of spelling. For example, in a Bavarian
manuscript from the 16th century, written by one
author, we find eight different spellings of the word
Kreuz ‘cross’:

creuecz, cruecz, kreevcz, kreucz, kreuecz,
krevcz, krevecz, kruecz.

If we look at the Anselm corpus 1 , which contains
about 50 manuscripts and prints from different di-
alects of Early New High German1 (1350–1650),
there are in total 50 different spellings of that word:

chraewcz, chrawcz, chrawecz, chreitz,
chreucz, chreuecz, chreutz, chrevcz, chrevtz,
chrewcz, chrewczt, chrewecz, chrewtz, chrvtz,
creucz, crecz, creuecz, creutz, cretz, crewcz,
crewtz, crucz, cruecz, cruetz, cruicz, cruitz,
cruiz, crutz, crtz, cruytz, crvitz, crvtz, kraitz,
kreevcz, kreitz, kreucz, krecz, kreuecz, kreutz,
kretz, krevcz, krevecz, krewcz, krewtcz, krewtz,
krewz, krucz, kruecz, kruicz, kruitz.

In the entire Reference Corpus of Middle High
German2 (REM, 10501350), there are 83 spelling
variants of the word Teufel ‘devil’:

dievel, diuel, diufal, diuual, diuvil, divel, di-
vuel, divuil, divvel, dufel, duoifel, duovel, du-
uel, duuil, duvel, duvil, dvofel, dvuil, dwowel,
teufel, tevfel, thufel, thuuil, tiefal, tiefel, tiefil,
tieuel, tieuil, tieuuel, tieuuil, tievel, tievil, tifel,
tiofel, tiuel, tiufal, tiufel, tiufil, tiuil, tiuofel,
tiuuel, tiuuil, tiuval, tiuvel, tiuvil, tivel, tivfel,
tivil, tivuel, tivuil, tivvel, tivvil, tivwel, tiwel,
tubel, tubil, tueuel, tufel, tufil, tuifel, tuofel,
tuouil, tuovel, tuovil, tuuel, tuuil, tuujl, tuvel,
tuvil, tvfel, tvivel, tvivil, tvouel, tvouil, tvovel,
tvuel, tvuil, tvvel, tvvil, tyefel, tyeuel, tyevel,
tyfel

1https://www.linguistics.rub.de/anselm/
2https://www.linguistics.rub.de/rem/

– minor differences, e.g., in the use of diacritics, are
ignored here.

Some of the variance is due to graphemic varia-
tion (e.g., u vs v as in crutz vs crvtz). Other variants
reflect phonetic differences between dialects (e.g.,
voiced d vs voiceless t as in dievel vs tievel).

I provide the full set of variants here to give the
reader an impression of the extent and systematic-
ity of the variance. For instance, looking at the
variants of Teufel ‘devil’, we see that almost all
of the individual word forms follow the general
scheme:

1. They all start with a dental consonant (voiced
or voiceless: d, t, th),

2. followed by some vowel or diphthong,
3. followed by a labiodental fricative (u, v, w, f,

or combinations thereof),
4. followed by some vowel,
5. and end with l.

The variants of the word Teufel that occur in REM
cover a surprisingly broad range of the forms that
can be generated by the scheme above. For in-
stance, we find dievel and tievel, but also divel and
tivel, and dvuil, tvuil, and diufal, tiufal. But also
tiufal, tiufel, tiufil and tubel, tufel, tuuel, tuvel, and
so on.

In my talk, I want to present some quantitative
and qualitative results of spelling variance in his-
torical data of German, but also address variance
of morphological and morpho-syntactic features to
some extent.

I present two different automatic approaches of
normalizing variance, by mapping it either to some
artificial form or to modern German. In recent
work, we have used the intermediate representa-
tions of these approaches – replacement rules and
Levenshtein-based mappings – for investigating
diatopic variation. First results from these investi-
gations will be presented.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 1


