



















































Connecting Documentation and Revitalization: A New Approach to Language Apps


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 151–155,
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, USA, March 6–7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Connecting Documentation and Revitalization:  

A New Approach to Language Apps 

Alexa N. Little 

7000 Languages 

12 Murphy Drive 

Nashua, NH 03062 

alittle@7000languages.org 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper introduces 7000 Languages, a 

nonprofit effort to adapt commercial lan-

guage-learning software for free use by 

endangered language groups. We discuss 

the advantages and challenges of our ap-

proach and suggest ways of converting 

corpus and archive data into language-

learning courses. We also demonstrate 

the capabilities of the software, both for 

the revitalization and the documentation 

of endangered languages. Finally, we 

discuss ideas for future expansion of our 

programs and seek feedback from others 

involved in endangered language work. 

1 Introduction 

Many endangered language communities are in-

terested in producing “language apps”: digital 

tools for teaching and learning their languages. 

Although these language apps are useful for lan-

guage revitalization efforts, building them re-

quires considerable time, funding, and technical 

skill. Even successful community projects may 

lack the resources for future updates to their lan-

guage apps.  

Researchers who study endangered languages 

also want to provide digital tools, so that their 

research and data will be helpful to communities. 

Creating and maintaining an entire language-

learning system, however, is more than a re-

searcher can reasonably accomplish. 

The current compromise is the digital archive. 

In a digital archive, language data is secure, ac-

cessible, and generally portable. XML-formatted 

data could even, with some manipulation, be in-

tegrated into a language app. However, the time 

and expense of building the rest of such an appli-

cation remains a challenge for both sides. 

We introduce a nonprofit effort, 7000 Lan-

guages, that seeks to resolve this problem. Our 

approach uses technology donated by the lan-

guage-learning industry to produce free commer-

cial-grade language apps in partnership with en-

dangered language advocates. 

2 The Programs 

We have organized our approach into two pro-

grams – one from a revitalization-first perspec-

tive, and one from a documentation-first perspec-

tive. Below is a brief description of these two 

programs, followed by an in-depth discussion of 

how projects starting from either perspective will 

ultimately benefit both sides. 

2.1 Partnership Program 

Our Partnership Program is a free program in-

tended for groups, such as endangered language 

communities, who have a revitalization-first per-

spective. The system works as follows: 

7000 Languages has an agreement with a for-

profit language-learning company, Transparent 

Language. This agreement allows 7000 Lan-

guages to use Transparent Language’s internal 

tools to develop online courses for endangered 

and low-resource languages. The tools include: 

 a program that converts an Excel template 
filled with language content (text, images, 

and recordings) into a functioning course 

 a program for designing a custom unit, les-
son, and activity layout 

 a graphical user interface (GUI) for creating 
individual lessons, ideal for those with lim-

ited technical experience (see Figure 1) 

151



 

 

 

7000 Languages trains interested groups, 

called Partners, to use these tools. The Partner 

decides what they want to teach, and they retain 

ownership rights of all the content they create. 

Once the course is finished, 7000 Languages 

contacts Transparent Language, who sets up a 

“node” for the Partner in their systems. This pub-

lishes the course online and lets the Partner cre-

ate user accounts. The Partner can add as many 

users as they want, for free. The course will also 

be made available, for free, on the 7000 Lan-

guages website and published through Transpar-

ent Language’s library and education subscrip-

tions. 

Published courses present an opportunity to 

produce documentation of the language. Because 

the courses accept and store language data from 

the tools in XML format, data can also be ex-

ported from the course in XML format. The 

XML entry for each item contains the phrase in 

the target language, a translation in the source 

language, a reference to the target language au-

dio file, and a reference to the source language 

audio file (if available). See Figure 2 for a partial 

sample of an XML file exported from a lesson.  

Once exported, the XML files can be submit-

ted for archival, used to form a corpus, or refor-

matted and used in another digital application, 

such as a searchable dictionary. It is our hope 

that this will allow endangered language groups 

to focus on revitalization without having to sacri-

fice documentation and other uses of their lan-

guage data. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 Archives Program 

Our Archives Program is a free program intend-

ed for groups, such as field linguists, libraries, 

and archivists, who have a documentation-first 

perspective, such as field linguists, libraries, and 

archivists. It assumes that some language materi-

als already exist, and that both the group holding 

the data and the larger language community are 

interested in a language app. The focus of the 

program is manipulating the existing data to be 

usable in a language app.  

Our goal for the Archives Program is to give 

documentation-focused researchers the oppor-

tunity to contribute, without much additional 

work, to language revitalization efforts in the 

relevant community. 

The Transparent Language courseware (i.e., 

the technical components of the language app 

that make it interactive) generally requires con-

tent in a specific XML format. If the linguist or 

archivist who holds the data is familiar with re-

writing XML, we ask them to rewrite their data 

Figure 1. A GUI for lesson authoring. 

Figure 2. Vocabulary items from a Balinese 

lesson, exported as an XML file. 

152



to match those specifications. If not, 7000 Lan-

guages can often create the appropriate conver-

sion programs. (In the future, we hope to create 

standard scripts capable of translating XML and 

other text schema commonly used for language 

documentation into courseware-compatible ver-

sions.)  

Once the data has been reformatted into a 

compatible XML file, and we have verified it 

will integrate properly with the courseware, we 

can create interactive lessons simply by import-

ing the data. Just as in the Partnership Program, 

those lessons can then be published online, and 

the community given control over a “node” 

where they can create unlimited free user ac-

counts. The course will also be distributed by 

7000 Languages, if the community permits, and 

made available through Transparent Language’s 

library and education subscriptions. 

3 The Software 

We will not attempt to show the entire function-

ality of the software in this short paper. Rather, 

we present examples that demonstrate the broad 

capabilities of the technology. 

7000 Languages Partners can choose from 

over 40 different activity types to create their 

courses. These include matching, multiple 

choice, and variations on reading, writing, listen-

ing, and speaking practice. Figure 3 shows ex-

amples of several core activities. The technology 

also supports simulated conversations (in which 

the learner provides audio for one of the roles), 

videos, and text-based reference materials. Les-

sons usually include assessments, and quizzes 

are also available as a type of practice drill.  

The system allows learners to track their pro-

gress. Each vocabulary item that a learner studies 

is stored in her “learned items.” Over time, 

learned items fade and must be “refreshed” with 

practice activities. The learner can also consult 

her list of learned items to see what words she 

has learned. This list is searchable both by source 

and target language. 

 

Teachers can also use the system to monitor 

their students’ progress; from the Instructor Por-

tal, they can assign specific lessons and track 

student activity.  

Finally, the online course connects to a 

smartphone app, which contains flashcard-based 

activities with the content from each lesson. See 

Figure 4 for an example. If the user’s phone is 

online, the learned items automatically synchro-

nize between the online and mobile versions of 

the course. The flashcards can also be download-

ed, then used even without an Internet connec-

tion. The next time the user is online, she can 

press the “sync” button to have her learned items 

synchronize between devices.  

Figure 3. Sample activities on the web app. 

Figure 4. Flashcard-style activities on the 

mobile app. 

153



4 Benefits 

We see several ways that our approach could 

benefit members and supporters of endangered 

language communities.  

4.1 Functionality 

As shown in Section 3, the software donated by 

Transparent Language offers a wide range of 

activity types and contains options for progress 

reporting, assessments, and mobile learning. All 

this functionality was originally funded by com-

mercial interests and intended for commonly-

taught languages. However, our approach allows 

endangered language communities to take ad-

vantage of this rich functionality as well. 

4.2 Stability and Portability 

As endangered language advocates strive to pro-

duce digital documentation and language apps, 

deprecation and portability has increasingly be-

come an issue (Bird and Simons, 2003). An app 

that works on today’s computer or smartphone 

may not work on the next generation model. 

And, with the speed of operating system updates, 

language apps must be updated frequently to re-

main functional. Finally, consumers can choose 

between several different operating systems, dif-

ferent types of smartphones, and even different 

web browsers. Ensuring that a language app will 

function on all of these systems is a significant 

challenge. 

Because the courses produced under 7000 

Languages rely on the same technology as 

Transparent Language’s commercial courses, 

they benefit from the same updates. This reduces 

the financial and technical burden on communi-

ties to keep their individual language apps up-to-

date, and helps ensure that the apps will remain 

usable across most common platforms. 

4.3 Reduced Cost to Community 

If the technology involved in creating a language 

app is available at no cost, communities can ded-

icate whatever resources they have to other pur-

poses, such as hiring teachers, paying linguistic 

consultants, or developing additional learning 

materials. 

4.4 Documentation and Revitalization 

Because our approach allows language-learning 

lessons to be downloaded as archivable XML, 

and materials archived as XML can likewise be 

converted into language-learning lessons, it of-

fers the potential for increased collaboration be-

tween revitalization-focused and documentation-

focused groups. For example, an endangered 

language community could create a language 

course, then export the material for archival and 

linguistic analysis. Meanwhile, a linguist could 

conduct fieldwork, save their language documen-

tation in XML format, and have that XML data 

converted into a usable language app for the 

community. 

5 Challenges 

Our work has been impacted by several challeng-

ing factors, and we are interested to hear the per-

spective of other endangered language advocates 

on these issues. 

5.1 Licensing and Control 

In order to use the technology of a for-profit lan-

guage-learning company, we agreed to certain 

conditions. They are as follows:  

 Transparent Language technology may only 
be used by 7000 Languages to produce 

courses for low-resource languages (i.e. not 

for commonly-taught world languages). 

 Finished courses will be published on 
Transparent Language’s library and educa-

tion services. This means that users who 

pay to subscribe to Transparent Language 

courses will receive access to these courses, 

also. 

 If a 7000 Languages Partner chooses to sell 
the course they created, they must pay a 

20% royalty to Transparent Language for 

the use of its technology. However, if they 

distribute the course for free, there is never 

any royalty required. 

 If Transparent Language ever chooses to 
sell a course created by a 7000 Languages 

Partner as a standalone course, they will 

pay a 20% royalty to the Partner. 

Many communities are willing to accept these 

conditions in order to gain free use of Transpar-

ent Language’s technology and the benefits we 

described in Section 4. However, we understand 

that some communities are not comfortable with 

a for-profit company controlling any aspect of 

their language, or with their language being 

widely available for anyone to learn. In such sit-

uations, our approach is not a good fit. 

154



5.2 Sensitive Material 

We have been approached by communities who 

wish to restrict access to some of their content, 

for cultural reasons. While we understand the 

need to both preserve this material and teach it 

only to the appropriate people, the technology 

does not have the sophisticated access controls 

required to make that possible. At the moment, 

we encourage these groups to design lessons 

with material that can be shown to the general 

public, and to use other resources to teach and 

archive sensitive material. 

5.3 Grants 

Although our approach greatly reduces the cost 

to endangered language groups by providing free 

access to a technological framework, it does not 

completely eliminate the costs of producing a 

language app. Designing a curriculum, making 

text and recordings, and learning to use the tools 

requires time and effort. Some of the groups who 

work with us have grant funding, but many do 

not—which means that they take on this work as 

volunteers.  

5.4 Internet Access 

Many of the communities facing language loss 

may also lack access to consistent, high-speed 

Internet service. Poor Internet infrastructure re-

mains a problem in remote areas of the United 

States and Canada, even after 20 years (Carpen-

ter et al., 2016). The inability to reliably access 

the Internet is a barrier for communities who are 

otherwise enthusiastic about adopting new tech-

nologies (Carpenter et al., 2016). 

Transparent Language technology does func-

tion offline in the form of a mobile flashcard app. 

However, the fully-featured software generally 

requires a computer and an Internet connection, 

or an iPad onto which the software can be down-

loaded. 

Because a computer and an Internet connec-

tion are used by Partners to develop courses in 

the first place, this has not yet been a major con-

cern. However, some Partners may be unable to 

distribute their courses as widely as they wish 

because community members lack reliable Inter-

net access. Furthermore, as the Archives Pro-

gram expands, the course creators and course 

users are increasingly likely to be different 

groups altogether, with different levels of access 

to technology. We have anticipated these prob-

lems and are considering possible solutions now, 

before they become an active concern.  

6 Future Work 

The mission of 7000 Languages is to connect 

endangered language communities with the tech-

nology they need to teach, learn, and revive their 

languages. We recognize that the difficulty of 

creating language apps is not the only technolog-

ical barrier that these communities face. In this 

paper, we have mentioned some possible future 

directions for increasing the impact of our pro-

gram. We intend to make data exported from 

completed courses compatible with other tech-

nologies, such as dictionary apps or Natural Lan-

guage Processing programs. We also plan to de-

velop scripts to smooth the conversion process 

between documentation and language app. In 

planning our next steps, we look to the language 

revitalization and documentation field for sug-

gestions, constructive criticism, and opportuni-

ties for collaboration. 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced 7000 Languages, a 

nonprofit effort that uses technology donated by 

the language-learning industry to create free en-

dangered language apps. We discussed the cur-

rent approach of 7000 Languages, we described 

some features of the software, and we sought 

feedback from other endangered language advo-

cates. 

Acknowledgments 

The programs described in this paper were made 

possible by the board of 7000 Languages, Trans-

parent Language, and the individual donors who 

support our organization. Thanks to R. Regan 

and C. Graham for their assistance. 

References 

S. Bird and G. Simons. 2003. Seven dimensions of 

portability for language documentation and de-

scription. In Bojan Petek (ed.), Portability issues in 

human language technologies: LREC 2002. 

Jennifer Carpenter, Annie Guerin, Michelle Kaczma-

rek, Gerry Lawson, Kim Lawson, Lisa P. Nathan, 

and Mark Turin. 2016. Digital Access for Lan-

guage and Culture in First Nations Communities. 

Knowledge Synthesis Report for Social Sciences 

and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Van-

couver, October 2016. 

155


