



















































Refer-iTTS: A System for Referring in Spoken Installments to Objects in Real-World Images


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 72–73,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Refer-iTTS: A System for Referring in Spoken Installments to Objects in
Real-World Images

Sina Zarrieß and David Schlangen
Dialogue Systems Group // CITEC // Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies

Bielefeld University, Germany
{sina.zarriess,david.schlangen}@uni-bielefeld.de

Commonly, the output of a referring expression
generation system is written text which is, typically,
presented to a human user as a one-shot expression.
Consequently, the majority of existing REG systems
interact with users in a very rigid and strictly turn-
based fashion: only after the system has fully com-
pleted and delivered the result of the REG process,
the user is able to read it and react accordingly. A lot
of human referential communication, however, hap-
pens in situated interaction and via spoken language.
Theoretically, it is well known that this change in
modality fundamentally changes human production
of referring expressions: Given the real-time con-
straints of situated interaction, a speaker often has
to start uttering before she has found the optimal
expression, but at the same time, she can observe
the listener’s reaction while speaking and extend,
adapt, or correct her referring expressions accord-
ingly (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Clark and
Krych, 2004). Practically, spoken and interactive
REG has been rarely studied empirically or imple-
mented in realistic systems, but see (DeVault et al.,
2005; Staudte et al., 2012; Striegnitz et al., 2012;
Fang et al., 2014).

We present Refer-iTTS, a system that is meant
to support research on real-time spoken REG and
builds upon recent approaches to REG from real-
world images (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Zarrieß and
Schlangen, 2016). We use the recently proposed
words-as-classifiers (WAC) model for generation
from low-level visual inputs and integrate it with
InproTk (Baumann and Schlangen, 2012b), an open-
source framework for incremental dialogue process-
ing (http://wwwhomes.uni-bielefeld.

de/dschlangen/inpro/). Importantly,
InproTk features an incremental text-to-speech
synthesis implementation (iTTS) (Baumann and
Schlangen, 2012a) allowing for fine-grained, in-
cremental manipulation of the audio signal (e.g.
interruption, pausing, resumption, continuation).

We will show an interactive demonstration of the
following set-up: the system presents an image with
several objects in a visual scene on the screen and
the user’s task is to click on the object referred to.
While generating and synthesizing the RE, the sys-
tem continuously observes the non-verbal reactions
of the user (i.e. her mouse movements) and adapts
the generated utterances to these actions in an incre-
mental fashion. At the same time, the system tries
to be as cooperative as possible: if the user shows
no reaction for a certain amount of time, the previ-
ous expression is expanded, i.e. the system splits its
referring expression over several utterances, which
is usually known as “reference in installments”, cf.
(Zarrieß and Schlangen, 2016).

Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of Refer-iTTS,
which conceptually follows the framework of the In-
cremental Unit (IU) model (Schlangen and Skantze,
2009), and two example interactions. User actions
and the system’s generation and synthesis decisions
happen concurrently, coordinated and monitored by
an action manager (AM) module. Thus, besides
decisions related to content planning and realiza-
tion (e.g. attribute selection and ordering), a spoken
installment-based REG system has to make a num-
ber of high-level decisions related to the delivery
and timing of its own output. Using the Zarrieß and
Schlangen (2016)’s generator, the system orders its

72



goal 
state

world 
state

NLG in front

AM

SYN

ne
xt

fe
ed

ba
ck

in 
front

hat guy 
in front

guy or 
mountain in 

front

in front
fantastic

goal 
state

world 
state

NLG in 
front

hat guy 
in front

AM

ne
xt

SYN hat guy in

guy or 
mountain in 

front

front
no or mountai

n

in
te

rr
up

t

ne
xt

fe
ed

ba
ck

sorry

ne
xt

frontin guy

Figure 1: Two example interactions with Refer-iTTS, user actions (mouse movements and clicks are shown as red points and
rectangles on the image), system decisions made by the NLG, AM (Action Manager) and SYN (synthesis) module are shown in

rounded rectangles that correspond to incremental units (IUs) in InproTk, arrows between IUs indicate grounded-in links

installments according to its internal confidence, i.e.
it first commits a phrase referring to the location, and
then a phrase referring to the object’s category. As
shown in Figure 1, the Action Manager then decides
when to initiate a new synthesis process for the next
installment phrase (NEXT), when to interrupt the on-
going formulation of an installment phrase, e.g. in
case the user clicks on an objects while the synthesis
is speaking (INTERRUPT) or when to provide FEED-
BACK that reacts to a user click or action. This archi-
tecture allows for highly dynamic interaction with a
user.

References

Timo Baumann and David Schlangen. 2012a. IN-
PRO iSS: A Component for Just-In-Time Incremental
Speech Synthesis. In Proceedings of the ACL 2012
System Demonstrations.

Timo Baumann and David Schlangen. 2012b. The In-
proTK 2012 release. In Proceedings of the NAACL-
HLT Workshop on Future directions and needs in the
Spoken Dialog Community: Tools and Data (SDCTD
2012), pages 29–32, Montreal, Canada.

Herbert H. Clark and Meredyth A. Krych. 2004. Speak-
ing while monitoring addressees for understanding.
Journal of Memory and Language, 50(1):62–81.

Herbert H Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Refer-
ring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1):1–39.

David DeVault, Natalia Kariaeva, Anubha Kothari, Iris

Oved, and Matthew Stone. 2005. An information-
state approach to collaborative reference. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2005 on Interactive poster and demon-
stration sessions, pages 1–4.

Rui Fang, Malcolm Doering, and Joyce Y. Chai. 2014.
Collaborative Models for Referring Expression Gen-
eration in Situated Dialogue. In Proceedings of the
28th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and
Tamara L Berg. 2014. ReferItGame: Referring to Ob-
jects in Photographs of Natural Scenes. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP 2014, pages 787–798, Doha, Qatar.

David Schlangen and Gabriel Skantze. 2009. A general,
abstract model of incremental dialogue processing. In
Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL 2009), pages 710–718, Athens, Greece.

Maria Staudte, Alexander Koller, Konstantina Garoufi,
and Matthew W Crocker. 2012. Using listener gaze
to augment speech generation in a virtual 3d environ-
ment. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.

Kristina Striegnitz, Hendrik Buschmeier, and Stefan
Kopp. 2012. Referring in installments: a corpus study
of spoken object references in an interactive virtual en-
vironment. In Proceedings of the 7th INLG Confer-
ence, pages 12–16.

Sina Zarrieß and David Schlangen. 2016. Easy things
first: Installments improve referring expression gener-
ation for objects in photographs. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

73


