



















































Toward Universal Dependencies for Ainu


Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 133–139,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 22 May 2017.

Toward Universal Dependencies for Ainu

Hajime Senuma
University of Tokyo

National Institute of Informatics
senuma@nii.ac.jp

Akiko Aizawa
National Institute of Informatics

University of Tokyo
aizawa@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

Ainu is a language spoken by the Ainu
people, a minority ethnic group in Japan.
The development of syntactic corpora for
Ainu is crucial both for the advancement
of linguistic theories and for language re-
vitalization. To solve the situation, we
experimentally annotated a short poem of
AinuwithUniversal Dependencies version
2 scheme. In this paper, we report several
language-specific suggestions for the UD
annotation of Ainu, obtained through the
experience of the initial experiments.

1 Introduction

“In the beginning was the Word”—assuming we
have the definition of word in the first place. For
many languages, the boundary between words and
sentences is clear in many cases, not to say in
most cases. For some languages, however, it is
inherently ambiguous. More than one hundred
years ago, linguists heatedly discussed a construc-
tion called noun incorporation, in which nouns
and verbs are combined to form one word which
has information comparable to a sentence, as a
challenging phenomenon to identify such a bound-
ary (Kroeber, 1910; Sapir, 1911; Kroeber, 1911).
Even in this age the discussion is not resolved at
all but further complicated (Mithun, 1984; Baker,
1988; Baker, 1996; Massam, 2001). Massam
(2009, p. 1091) claimed that “[noun incorporation]
studies all by themselves provide us with a micro-
cosm of linguistic theory, demonstrating the strug-
gle by linguists to answer major questions such as
what constitutes a construction, what are the dif-
ferences between words and sentences, and what
is the relation between meaning and form.”
Ainu is one of the representative languages

equipped with noun incorporation and polysynthe-
sis (words are synthesized by many morphemes),
and it has been used as an important tool to uncover
the universal nature of human languages (Baker,

1996). It has been spoken by the Ainu, an indige-
nous people in Japan who originally inhabited is-
lands around the border of what is now Japan and
Russia. It is a language isolate in the sense that
no languages are confirmed to be genetically re-
lated to Ainu. The language is in need of linguis-
tic resources, not only for its typological impor-
tance, but also for language preservation and re-
vival; Ethnologue classified Ainu as nearly extinct
(Lewis et al., 2016) and constant effort has been
taken to revitalize it (Sato, 2012).
Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge,

there is no syntactically annotated corpus on Ainu
thus far. Momouchi et al. (2008) annotated
some Ainu poems of Ainu Shinyoshu only with
part of speeches and parallel Japanese translation.
Bugaeva (2011b) released a freely-accessible dic-
tionary with in-depth glossing for sentence exam-
ples but the glossing system is mainly for tradi-
tional typological purposes. If we have syntac-
tic annotations, they will enable us to develop ad-
vanced natural language processing (NLP) tools
and may also serve as an educational tool to ex-
plain unique phenomena in Ainu clearly.
Considering the recent revival of dependency

grammar (Tesnière, 1959; Tesnière, 2015; Hays,
1960) by theoretical refinement (Järvinen and
Tapanainen, 1998; Kuhlmann, 2013; Nivre, 2015)
and success in statistical/neural dependency pars-
ing (McDonald et al., 2005; Nivre et al., 2007;
Chen and Manning, 2014; Kiperwasser and Gold-
berg, 2016), Universal Dependencies (UD) is a
natural choice to syntactically annotate Ainu texts.
One notable feature of modern dependency the-
ory such as UD is its simplicity in the annotation
scheme (Nivre, 2015). Because Ainu is a complex
language the theoretical aspect of which is not yet
fully understood, it is crucial to make its annota-
tion as easy as possible.
In addition, Tesnière (1959, Chapter 276)

claimed that dependency diagrams are a useful tool
for pedagogical purposes, e.g., deeper analysis of

133



sentences and learning new languages. On top
of that, it should be accessible to Japanese stu-
dents, because Japanese junior high school cur-
riculum includes the kakari-uke theory, a variant
of the dependency theory independently developed
by Hashimoto (1932).
Note that within the UD framework we do not

annotate noun incorporation and treat complex
verbs formed by noun incorporation as ordinary
one-word verbs, as the framework adopted the lex-
ical integrity principle and separated morphology
as being fundamentally different from syntax (de
Marneffe et al., 2014). We will try to discover the
nature of noun incorporation only when we resolve
the problems of syntactic side. Practically speak-
ing, this treatment will not be so problematic for
Ainu, because it is in poetry where noun incor-
poration is highly productive and for day-to-day
speech, noun incorporation is usually used only for
idiomatic expressions. Still, annotating Ainu is by
no means trivial. As we will see below, there are
several unique constructions other than noun in-
corporation and we will discuss how to annotate
them in UD.
To endeavor to develop the UD corpus of Ainu,

as an initial effort, we examined a short poem
in a collection of Ainu poetry and experimentally
annotated texts with UD. This tiny experimen-
tal “corpus” contains only 36 sentences and 516
words in total but through this experiment we de-
vised a prototype of the annotation scheme for
Ainu. In this paper, we report several findings
which may lead toward the complete corpus in the
future.

2 Notation

For glossing, we adopted the Leipzig Glossing
Rules (Comrie et al., 2008) with the following ad-
ditions: n-val for valency (e.g., 1val indicates
monovalent verbs) and int for intensifiers.
We omitted the root dependency from each de-

pendency diagram if visually redundant.

3 Resources

3.1 Source text
We used the poetry Ainu Shin’yōshū “Ainu Godly
Tales” written by a female poet Yukie Chiri (Chiri,
1923) as our raw corpus. It contains 13 short tra-
ditional Ainu poems (kamuyyukar “godly tales”)
in romanized form as well as Japanese transla-
tions by herself. In Japan, it has been recognized
as a great masterpiece and now published from
Iwanami Bunko, a series of paperbacks for literary

classics, similar to Penguin Classics and Reclam.
The English translation of the poetry by Peterson
(2013) is openly accessible.1
We chose the work as our text because of the

following reasons:

1. It is now under public domain and freely
available from Aozora Bunko.2

2. It uses Classical Ainu, a register of Ainu
which exhibits noun incorporation more ex-
tensively than colloquial one.

3. It was compiled by a native speaker.

In this experimental annotation, we used the
sixth poem Pon Horkewkamuy Yayeyukar: “Hote-
nao” “A little wolf-god recites a song about him-
self: ‘Hotenao’ ” (“6: The Song the Wolf Cub
Sang” in Peterson (2013)’s translation) as refer-
ence.
The result was uploaded as the first author’s

GitHub project under CC BY 4.0.3

3.2 Orthography
Traditionally the Ainu language has no writing
systems. From the 19th century, however, two
writing systems have been co-developed: one
with Latin characters and the other with Japanese
katakana. While katakana system has an advan-
tage that it is easy for Japanese people to learn,
it has a disadvantage that it generates ambiguity
for some cases. For instance, modern katakana or-
thography adopted by the Foundation of Research
and Promotion of Ainu Culture (FRPAC) uses the
same character ッ for germination and a conso-
nantal syllable t, resulting that both makkosanpa
“to brighten suddenly” (Tamura, 1996, p. 376)
and matkosanpa “to wake up suddenly” (Tamura,
1996, p. 380) are written as マッコサンパ. On
the other hand, the Latin-based writing system has
less ambiguity and thus is suitable for research pur-
poses, while elderly people and children in Japan
may feel difficulty to learn it.
The original text of our corpus was written in

Latin characters following Kyōsuke Kindaichi’s
romanization style. We, however, manually con-
verted it into modern (Latin-based) romanization
style because doing so will be useful for further re-
search analysis as it is adopted by modern scholars
(Tamura, 2000; Sato, 2008) and also for being read

1http://www.okikirmui.com
2http://www.aozora.gr.jp/cards/001529/

files/44909_29558.html
3https://github.com/hajimes/ud-ainu

134



by beginners of Ainu as it is adopted in textbooks
for non-experts by FRPAC (2011). Although there
are several minor differences between these work,
we basically followed FRPAC (2011) where there
are conflicts. To name a few, 1. we use “=” as a de-
limiter between pronominal morphemes and other
words (like ku=kor “I=have”), 2. the first letter of
each sentence is not capitalized, and 3. we prefer to
retain morphological values (e.g., sanpa because
it consists of san and pa, in spite that its sound is
sampa). We also corrected errors in the original
text by using critical studies on the work (Kirikae,
2003; Sato, 2004).
Tokenization is relatively simplewith the excep-

tion of treatment for pronominal clitics. See Sec-
tion 4 for the topic.

3.3 Dictionary and referential textbook
For dictionary and reference, wemainly referred to
Tamura (1996) and Tamura (2000) (English trans-
lation of Tamura (1988)), respectively. Strictly
speaking, Tamura (1996) deals with the Saru di-
alect while our text is in the Horobetsu dialect, but
two dialects are so close that they have few dif-
ferences in vocabulary and no grammatical differ-
ences.
We also used other dictionaries, e.g., Nakagawa

(1995), Kayano (2002), and Bugaeva (2011b). For
reference, we also consulted Refsing (1986), Shi-
batani (1990), and Sato (2008).

4 Pronominal Clitics and Polypersonal
Agreement

Polysynthesis often comes with polypersonal
agreement and Ainu is no exception. Ainu
verbs are obligatorily inflected with subject and
object. For example, a prefix e=un= denotes
2sg>1pl.excl “you (but not you all) [hit, took
care of, etc.] us (but not including you)”.
It is highly controversial whether these pronom-

inal morphemes are words, clitics (that is, rela-
tively dependent elements which are still separable
from other words), or affixes (that is, partial ele-
ments of other words). Bugaeva (2011a, Section
2.3) argued that =an and =as are words, a= and
eci= are clitics, and ku=, ci=, e=, en=, un=, i=
are “fully-fledged prefixes”. We applied the clas-
sical test of cliticness (Zwicky, 1985) and decided
to treat all of these morphemes as clitics. We an-
notated them with PART (particles) for their part-
of-speech category and used the aux relation when
they depend on verbs and nmod:posswhen nouns.
For convenience, we treated delimiters “=” as if

they are a part of pronominal clitics. For example,
sap=as “go=I” is tokenized as sap and =as rather
than sap, =, and as. This style is consistent with
Tamura (1996) and the glossary of FRPAC (2011)
in which pronominal clitics are affixed with the de-
limiters in their entries.

5 Relative Clauses as Adjectival
Expressions

In light of syntactic categories (or parts-of-
speech), the most noticeable feature of Ainu is a
lack of adjectives. Instead, the language employs
relative clause constructions to obtain the same
effect. This phenomenon is similar to Arapaho
(Wagner et al., 2016).
For example, since Ainu is SOV in most cases,

horkew pon
wolf be.small.1val ‘the wolf is small’

nsubj

On the other hand, if we place the verb at the
preceding position of the noun, it acts as relative
clause modification.

pon horkew
be.small.1val wolf ‘a wolf that is small’

or ‘a small wolf’

acl:relcl

For alienable nouns, pronominal possession is
also expressed by relative clause-like construction.
For example (Tamura, 2000, p. 87),

ku= kor tennep
1sg= have.2val baby ‘a baby that I have’

or ‘my baby’

acl:relclaux

A condition to form relative clauses is that the
remaining number of slots of a verb expression
must be one, so it actively interacts with the va-
lency property of verbs.

6 Pronominal Arguments

In traditional understanding, Ainu has polyper-
sonal agreement and we have the following anal-
ysis (the phrase is a shortened form of a sentence
ky-6-33 eani anak pon horkew sani e=ne ruwe
tasi an ne in our corpus):

135



eani anak horkew e= ne
you int wolf 2= cop

root

nsubj

advmod aux

cop

‘You are a wolf’

Here, eani is used as a common pronoun (PRON)
and a clitic e= is used as an auxiliary item (PART)
to the verb. The problem is that in almost all
cases explicit pronominal arguments like eani is
omitted. In 516 words of our corpus, these “pro-
nouns” occurred only once. To make the matter
worse, these “pronouns” often behave like adver-
bials rather than nominals.
Because of this, several linguists (cf. Baker

(1996)) claimed that the clitics are “true” argu-
ments to verbs in these polysynthetic languages
and the pronoun-like words such as eani in Ainu
are mere adjuncts. According to Baker, this analy-
sis was already pointed out by Wilhelm von Hum-
boldt for Aztec in the 1830s but it was not until
Eloise Jelinek discussed the matter in the 1980s
that the analysis is widely recognized. Although
Baker’s analysis is based on Chomskyian con-
stituency framework, if we somehow apply their
discussion to our text, we may have the following
analysis:

eani anak horkew e= ne
you.adv int wolf 2= cop

root

advmod

advmod nsubj

cop

‘Speaking of you, you are a wolf.’

In our annotation scheme, however, we main-
tain the first conservative approach. This approach
has an advantage that it can consistently annotate
a subtype of Ainu which adopted several construc-
tions from Japanese and was used in some dialects.
Izutsu (2006) reported that in some dialects the
construction of Ainu sentence became close to the
Japanese language and they lack pronominal clitics
even though in original Ainu they are mandatory.
Instead, they used pronoun-like words such as eani
as true core arguments to verbs. If we adopted
the first annotation scheme, there is no difficulty
to handle this exceptional situation as:

eani anak horkew ne
you int wolf are

root

nsubj

advmod cop

7 Language-Specific Features
7.1 Person: Fourth person
The Ainu language has a peculiar set of pronomi-
nal clitics: subject postfix=an for monovalent (in-
transitive) verbs, subject prefix a= for polyvalent
(transitive) verbs, and object prefix i=. It fulfills
various rolls depending on the context (Tamura,
2000, pp. 63–80): 1. most commonly first person
plural (1pl) inclusive (whereas an ordinary pre-
fix ci= for 1pl exclusive); 2. first person singular
(1sg) in quotational sentences (such as “I” in “He
said ‘I saw the man.’ ”); 3. 1sg in oral literature,
because the Ainu literature often employs the style
with which someone talks about himself/herself in
quotational sentences, 4. general laws (“In gen-
eral, people do ...”); 5. indefinite person; 6. used
for passive construction; and 7. at least in the Saru
dialect, traditionally used as second person polite
form from females to males of higher position such
as their own husbands and village-leaders.
There is no unanimous agreement what we

should call these pronouns. Nakagawa (1995) used
the term “fourth person”, while Tamura (2000)
used “indefinite person” and Shibatani (1990),
Sato (2008), and Bugaeva (2011a) used “first per-
son plural inclusive”.
In our scheme, we used Person=4 for expe-

dience, as available in UD version 2. Whereas
UD defines Person=4 as “a third person argument
morphologically distinguished from another third
person argument” that is suitable for Ainu to some
extent, its usage in Navajo, cited as a typical exam-
ple, is much different from that in Ainu. One pos-
sible solution (owing to Francis Tyers) is to anno-
tate it as first person inclusive with Clusive=Inc.
We hope to gain insights from research into other
languages in the future.

7.2 Number: pluractional
In Ainu, some verbs are inflected by pluractional-
ity, that is, the plurality of actions.
For example, tuypa, the pluractional form of

tuye “to cut” indicates (Tamura, 2000, Section
4.3.2.4): 1. two or more people do cutting, 2. one
person cuts two or more objects, or 3. one person
cuts one object more than once.

136



Pronominal clitics may enforce pluractionality.
Our corpus contains a phrase pis ta sap=as “I go
to the beach” where sap “to go” is in a pluractional
form though the action is semantically singular.
This is possibly because, as we stated in previous
section, in the oral literature 1pl inclusive (=as) is
used as 1sg.
To annotate this phenomenon, following the tra-

dition of Ainu studies in which it is treated as num-
ber, we tentatively used a language-specific fea-
ture Number=Pluract. However, this phenomo-
nenon clearly deviates from number, which ba-
sically serves as an agreement system between
nouns, often purely syntactically, rather than se-
mantically. In the literature of typology there
seems to be a difference of opinion as to whether
pluractionality is related to aspect or it is an in-
dependent feature. We will make further re-
search on this point, and we may adopt either
Aspect=Pluract or Pluract=Yes in the future.

7.3 Valency
Valency (number of core arguments attachable to
verbs) enjoys the central role in the Ainu morphol-
ogy and syntax. Morphologically it governs the
system of noun incorporation. It also affects syn-
tactic phenomena such as selection of pronominal
clitics and construction of relative clauses.
Commonly used valency are monovalent (in-

transitive), divalent (monotransitive), and trivalent
(ditransitive). In addition, avalent verbs are not so
rare, e.g., sirkunne (it expresses a sentential phrase
“it is dark” by one word). The maximum of va-
lency in Ainu is not known but Bugaeva (2015,
p. 828) reported the existence of a tetravalent
verb (Valency=4) korere “tomake somebody give
something to somebody”.
In the above example, kor-e-re is formed by

doubly suffixing causatives: “have-caus-caus”.
Here e / re (allophones of te) add valency and
causativity. The degree of modification depends
on morpheme; for example, while te obligato-
rily increases valency, an indefinite causative mor-
pheme yar does not change it. Turkish has a
similar system, which allows multiple causative
voices. In Ainu, however, causative is just a part
of verb formation and has no special status.
The morphological system of Ainu (notably

Classical Ainu) productively affects the valency of
verbs: e.g., valency-increasing operators such as
causative suffixes and applicative prefixes (such as
instrumental e-, adding an argument slot meaning
‘by using‘) and valency-decreasing ones such as
incorporated nouns and reflexive prefixes.

To annotate this phenomenon, we used
a language-specific feature Valency=0,
Valency=1, etc. Possibly we may borrow
the terminology of UniMorph (Sylak-Glassman
et al., 2015) features, that is, Valency: DITR,
IMPRS, INTR, TR in the future.

7.4 Inalienable possession
The only inflectional system of Ainu nouns is by
inalienable possession, with the form similar to
ezāfe in Persian (Bugaeva, 2011a, p. 520).
Only a handful of nouns are classified as being

inalienable, e.g., body parts (including names) and
family members. They are inflected if being pos-
sessed by someone. For instance, re “name” is
inflected to réhe; and with 1sg pronominal clitic
ku=, we obtain ku=réhe “my name”.
Likewise, a class of nouns called locative nouns

has possessed forms. For example, a locative noun
or is used as a concept of “place” as in atuy or un
“sea place to”, that is, “into the sea”, while its pos-
sessed form oro is used to indicate “its place” as in
oro wano “its.place from”, that is, “from there”.
Several nouns act as nominalizer in their pos-

sessed forms. For instance, hawe, the inflected
form of haw “voice”, is used as a nominalizer
related to auditory sense, as in itak=as hawe
“speak=I fact” or “the fact that I speak’. Unlike
relative clauses (see Section 5), these nominals
are prefixed only by complete sentences, and thus
we used acl relationship to mark the dependency
rather than acl:relcl.
To annotate this phenomenon, we used a

language-specific feature Possessed=Yes.

8 Conclusion

This paper proposed several UD annotation
schemes for Ainu as a prototype, obtained through
experimental annotation for a short poem. We plan
to annotate the whole collection of poetry by using
this scheme and publish it as an open-source cor-
pus. We hope this endeavor serves as a basis for
building huge corpora of Ainu in the future.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by CREST, Japan Sci-
ence and Technology Agency. We thank two
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments,
especially for indicating relation to Arapaho. We
are also deeply indebted to Francis Tyers for the
substantial improvement of this paper including
suggestions for the future treatment of fourth per-
son, pluractionality, and valency.

137



References
Mark C. Baker. 1988. Incorporation. Chicago Uni-
versity Press.

Mark C. Baker. 1996. The Polysynthesis Parameter.
Oxford University Press.

Anna Bugaeva. 2011a. A diachronic study of the
impersonal passive in Ainu. In Impersonal Con-
structions: A Cross-Linguistic Perspective, Studies
in Language Companion, pages 517–546. John Ben-
jamins.

Anna Bugaeva. 2011b. Internet Applications for En-
dangered Languages: A Talking Dictionary of Ainu.
Waseda Institute for Advanced Study Research Bul-
letin, 3:73–81.

Anna Bugaeva. 2015. Valency classes in Ainu. In
Bernard Comrie andAndreyMalchukov, editors, Va-
lency Classes in the World’s Languages. Mouton de
Gruyter.

Danqi Chen andChristopher D.Manning. 2014. A Fast
and Accurate Dependency Parser using Neural Net-
works. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 740–750, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yukie Chiri. 1923. Ainu Shin’yōshū [Collection of
Ainu Kamuyyukar]. Kyodo Kenkyusha.

Bernard Comrie, Martin Haspelmath, and Balthasar
Bickel. 2008. The Leipzig Glossing Rules. Tech-
nical report, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology and University of Leipzig.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-
talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Univer-
sal Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typol-
ogy. In In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), pages 4585–4592.

FRPAC. 2011. Chūkyū Ainugo: Horobetsu [Interme-
diate Ainu: Horobetsu Dialect]. FRPAC (The Foun-
dation of Research and Promotion of Ainu Culture).

Shinkichi Hashimoto. 1932. Kokugogaku Gairon [El-
ements of Japanese Linguistics]. Iwanami Shoten.

David G. Hays. 1960. Grouping and Dependency The-
ories. In Proceedings of the National Symposium on
Machine Translation, pages 258–266.

Katsunobu Izutsu. 2006. Ainugo no Hinshi Bunrui
Saikō: Iwayuru Ninshō Daimeishi o Megutte [Ainu
Parts of Speech Revisited: with Special Reference to
So-called Personal Pronouns]. Journal of Hokkaido
University of Education: Humanities and Social Sci-
ences, 56(2):13–27.

Timo Järvinen and Pasi Tapanainen. 1998. Towards an
implementable dependency grammar. In Process-
ing of Dependency-Based Grammars: Proceedings
of the Workshop, COLING-ACL’98, pages 1–10.

Shigeru Kayano. 2002. Kayano Shigeru no Ain-
ugo Jiten [The Ainu Dictionary by Shigeru Kayano].
Sanseido, 2nd edition.

Eliyahu Kiperwasser and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Easy-
First Dependency Parsing with Hierarchical Tree
LSTMs. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 4:445–461.

Hideo Kirikae. 2003. Ainu Shin’yōshu Jiten [Lexicon
to Ainu Shin’yōshū]. Daigaku Shorin.

A. L. Kroeber. 1910. Noun incorporation in Ameri-
can languages. In Verhandlungen der XVI Interna-
tionaler Amerikanisten-Kongress [Reprinted in The
Collected Works of Edward Sapir, Vol. 5, 1990],
pages 569–576. Hartleben.

A. L. Kroeber. 1911. Incorporation as a Linguistic Pro-
cess. American Anthropologist, 13(4):577–584.

Marco Kuhlmann. 2013. Mildly Non-Projective De-
pendency Grammar. Computational Linguistics,
39(2):355–387, June.

M. Paul Lewis, Gary F. Simons, and Charles D. Fen-
nig. 2016. Ethnologue: Languages of the World,
Nineteenth edition. SIL International.

Diane Massam. 2001. Pseudo Noun Incorporation in
Niuean. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory,
19(1):153–197.

Diane Massam. 2009. Noun Incorporation: Essentials
and Extensions. Linguistics and Language Com-
pass, 3(4):1076–1096.

Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajič. 2005. Non-projective Dependency Pars-
ing using Spanning TreeAlgorithms. InProceedings
of the Conference on Human Language Technology
and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing - HLT ’05, pages 523–530. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Marianne Mithun. 1984. The Evolution of Noun In-
corporation. Language, 60(4):847–894.

Yoshio Momouchi, Yasunori Azumi, and Yukio
Kadoya. 2008. Research Note: Construction and
Utilization of Electronic Data for Ainu Shin-yosyu.
Bulletin of the Faculty of Engineering at Hokkai-
Gakuen University, 35:159–171.

Hiroshi Nakagawa. 1995. Ainugo Chitose Hōgen Jiten
[The Ainu–Japanese Dictionary: Chitose Dialect].
Sōfūkan.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas
Chanev, Gülşen Eryiğit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav
Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser:

138



A language-independent system for data-driven de-
pendency parsing. Natural Language Engineering,
13(2):95–135, June.

Joakim Nivre. 2015. Towards a Universal Gram-
mar for Natural Language Processing. In Com-
putational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Process-
ing: 16th International Conference, CICLing 2015,
Cairo, Egypt, April 14-20, 2015, Proceedings, Part
I, pages 3–16. Springer International Publishing.

Benjamin Peterson. 2013. The Song The Owl God
Sang: The collected Ainu legends of Chiri Yukie.
BJS Books.

Kirsten Refsing. 1986. The Ainu Language: The Mor-
phology and Syntax of the Shizunai Dialect. Aarhus
University Press.

Edward Sapir. 1911. The Problem of Noun Incorpora-
tion in American Languages. American Anthropol-
ogist, 13:250–282.

Tomomi Sato. 2004. Chiri Yukie Ainu Shinyōshu no
Nandoku Kasho to Tokui na Gengo Jirei o Megutte
[Notes on Some Linguistic Problems and the Inter-
pretation of Lines Doubtful in Yukie Chiri’s Ainu
sin’yôshû]. The Annual Reports on Cultural Sci-
ence, Hokkaido University, 10.

Tomomi Sato. 2008. Ainugo Bunpō no Kiso [The Ba-
sics of the Ainu Grammar]. Daigaku Shorin.

Tomomi Sato. 2012. Ainugo no Genjō to Fukkō [The
Present Situation of the Ainu Language and Its Re-
vitalization]. Gengo Kenkyu, 142:29–44.

Masayoshi Shibatani. 1990. The Languages of Japan.
Cambridge University Press.

John Sylak-Glassman, Christo Kirov, David Yarowsky,
and Roger Que. 2015. A Language-Independent
Feature Schema for Inflectional Morphology. In
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 674–
680.

Suzuko Tamura. 1988. Ainugo [The Ainu Language].
In Gengogaku Daijiten, volume 1, pages 6–94. San-
seidō.

Suzuko Tamura. 1996. Ainugo Saru Hōgen Jiten [The
Ainu–JapaneseDictionary: SaruDialect]. Sōfūkan.

Suzuko Tamura. 2000. The Ainu Language. ICHEL
Linguistic Studies. Sanseidō.

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe struc-
turale [Elements of structural syntax]. C. Klinck-
sieck, Paris.

Lucien Tesnière. 2015. Elements of Structural Syntax.
John Benjamins Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
Translated by TimothyOsborne and SylvainKahane.

Irina Wagner, Andrew Cowell, and Jena D. Hwang.
2016. Applying Universal Dependency to the Ara-
paho Language. In Proceedings of the 10th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop held in conjunction with
ACL 2016 (LAW-X 2016), pages 171–179, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Arnold M. Zwicky. 1985. Clitics and Particles. Lan-
guage, 61(2):283–305.

139


