



















































Co-PoeTryMe: a Co-Creative Interface for the Composition of Poetry


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 70–71,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Co-PoeTryMe: a Co-Creative Interface for the Composition of Poetry

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira and Tiago Mendes and Ana Boavida
CISUC, Department of Informatics Engineering

University of Coimbra, Portugal
hroliv@dei.uc.pt, tjmendes@student.dei.uc.pt, aboavida@dei.uc.pt

Abstract

Co-PoeTryMe is a web application for poetry
composition, guided by the user, though with
the help of automatic features, such as the gen-
eration of full (editable) drafts, as well as the
acquisition of additional well-formed lines,
or semantically-related words, possibly con-
strained by the number of syllables, rhyme, or
polarity. Towards the final poem, the latter can
replace lines or words in the draft.

1 Context

PoeTryMe (Gonçalo Oliveira, 2012) is a platform
for automated poetry generation from a set of ini-
tial parameters, such as the poetry form, the lan-
guage (English, Portuguese or Spanish), a set of seed
words or a surprise factor. A semantic network and
a grammar are combined to produce semantically-
coherent lines, using the seeds or words related to
them, grouped according to the given poetry form,
with the corresponding number of syllables, and of-
ten with rhymes.

This was originally an autonomous procedure,
without user interaction but providing the initial pa-
rameters. Yet, after using PoeTryMe, creative writ-
ers and other interested people expressed their wish
to make changes in the resulting poems or to inter-
act with the system and take part in the creative pro-
cess. Some even confessed to have generated several
poems, keeping only some of the lines and, from
their manual selection, created a new poem, more
in line with their intents. Although the obtained re-
sults are generally ok, intention-related aspects can
always be improved (Gonçalo Oliveira et al., 2017),

not to mention that assessing the quality of poetry is
a subjective task and may diverge from user to user.

This was our main motivation for developing Co-
PoeTryMe, a creativity-support application that en-
ables the user to interact with some of the mod-
ules that constitute PoeTryMe. As it happens in
the Poetry Machine (Kantosalo et al., 2014) and jG-
noetry1, specifically for poetry, or DeepBeat (Malmi
et al., 2016) and LyriSys (Watanabe et al., 2017),
for song lyrics, Co-PoeTryMe enables the collabo-
ration between humans and a computational system
towards the co-creation of poems. Co-PoeTryMe
takes advantage of the architecture of PoeTryMe
and its unique functionalities, and adopts a rational
hands-on design, with few decorative elements, aim-
ing to make the process of poetry composition visu-
ally more interesting.

2 Co-Creative Poetry Composition

Developing Co-PoeTryMe was eased by the modu-
lar architecture of PoeTryMe and its web API, that
enables the production of full poems with a pre-
defined structure; single lines, given a set of seed
words; or words, semantically or structurally con-
strained. Co-PoeTryMe is a web-based application,
developed in JavaScript, and thus portable, as it does
not require the installation of additional software,
only a browser and a working Internet connection.

Co-PoeTryMe is based on several visual mod-
ules, each covering a specific group of functionali-
ties, and only visible when the actions they provide
are available. Modules are placed around a cen-
tral module that displays the current draft and en-

1http://www.eddeaddad.net/jgnoetry/

70



Figure 1: Poem edition and word generation.

ables its edition (Figure 1). To start co-creating, the
user can: (i) write a poem right away; (ii) import
an existing poem draft from a text file; (iii) use the
Drafts module, in the left-hand side, for generating
a draft, given a target language (English, Portuguese
or Spanish), a predefined or custom poetry form, a
surprise factor (0-4), and a list of seed words for set-
ting the semantic domain.

Once the central module has content, full lines
or words can be selected to be edited, swapped,
or to be used as input for the generation of new
words or lines. Selecting a line reveals the Lines
module (Figure 2, left), which enables the gener-
ation of alternative lines, using one of the given
seeds and with a target number of syllables. Se-
lecting a word reveals the Words module (Figure 1,
left), which can be used for the acquisition of words
combining a subset of the following constraints:
semantically-related (synonym, hypernym or hy-
ponym, co-hyponyn, antonym, or other), rhyming,
or same number of syllables as the target word; or
with a certain polarity (positive or negative). Re-
trieved words appear in the Generated module, on
the right-hand side. They can be added or swapped
with any word in the draft, or moved to the Bank,
below, in order to be used later. Words that were
once part of the draft appear in the Trash module. A
similar set of modules exists for the lines.

The top module has utility buttons for selecting
the application language (English or Portuguese),
showing or hiding tooltips, importing or exporting
a draft, sharing in social networks, undo, redo, as
well as tool for visualizing the changes made from
the initial draft to its current state (Figure 2).

Poem composition results from user interaction
with the available modules and their underlying in-

Figure 2: Line generation and visualizing the changes.

teraction with PoeTryMe’s API.

3 Conclusion

Co-PoeTryMe was developed to meet the wishes of
PoeTryMe users, who can now play with the avail-
able functionalities, hopefully towards the creation
of better poems. Co-PoeTryMe is freely available to
be used by anyone, on the Web2.

References
Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, Tiago Mendes, and Ana

Boavida. 2017. Towards finer-grained interaction
with a Poetry Generator. In Procs of ProSocrates
2017: Symposium on Problem-solving, Creativity and
Spatial Reasoning in Cognitive Systems, Delmenhorst,
Germany.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira. 2012. PoeTryMe: a versatile
platform for poetry generation. In Procs of Workshop
on Computational Creativity, Concept Invention, and
General Intelligence, C3GI 2012, Montpellier, France.

Anna Kantosalo, Jukka M. Toivanen, Ping Xiao, and
Hannu Toivonen. 2014. From isolation to involve-
ment: Adapting machine creativity software to support
human-computer co-creation. In Procs 5th Intl Conf
on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2014, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.

Eric Malmi, Pyry Takala, Hannu Toivonen, Tapani Raiko,
and Aristides Gionis. 2016. DopeLearning: A com-
putational approach to rap lyrics generation. In Procs
22nd SIGKDD Intl Conf on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 195–204, San Francisco, USA.

Kento Watanabe, Yuichiroh Matsubayashi, Kentaro Inui,
Tomoyasu Nakano, Satoru Fukayama, and Masataka
Goto. 2017. LyriSys: An interactive support system
for writing lyrics based on topic transition. In Procs
22nd Intl Conf on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI ’17,
pages 559–563, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
2http://poetryme.dei.uc.pt/˜copoetryme/

71


