



















































Understanding human values and their emotional effect


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, page 112
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Understanding human values and their emotional effect

Alexandra Balahur
European Commission Joint Research Centre
Directorate I, Unit I3 Text and Data Mining
Via E. Fermi 2749, 21027 Ispra (VA), Italy
alexandra.balahur@ec.europa.eu

Abstract

1 Abstract

Emotions can be triggered by various factors. Ac-
cording to the Appraisal Theories (De Rivera,
1977; Frijda, 1986; Ortony et al., 1988; Johnson-
Laird and Oatley, 1989) emotions are elicited and
differentiated on the basis of the cognitive evalua-
tion of the personal significance of a situa-tion, ob-
ject or event based on appraisal criteria (intrinsic
characteristics of objects and events, sig-nificance
of events to individual needs and goals, individuals
ability to cope with the con-sequences of the event,
compatibility of event with social or personal stan-
dards, norms and val-ues). These differences in
values can trigger re-actions such as anger, disgust
(contempt), sad-ness, etc., because these behav-
iors are evaluated by the public as being incom-
patible with their social/personal standards, norms
or values. Such arguments are frequently present
both in main-stream media, as well as social me-
dia, building a society-wide view, attitude and
emotional reac-tion towards refugees/immigrants.
In this demo, I will talk about experiments to
annotate and de-tect factual arguments that are
linked to human needs/motivations from text and
in consequence trigger emotion in the media au-
dience and pro-pose a new task for next year’s
WASSA.

References

A. Ortony, G.L. Clore, and A. Collins, The Cogni-
tive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1988.

J. De Rivera, A Structural Theory of the Emo-
tions, Psychological Issues, vol. 10, no. 4, 1977.

N. Frijda, The Emotions. Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1986.

P.N. Johnson-Laird and K. Oatley, The Lan-
guage of Emotions: An Analysis of a Semantic
Field, Cognition and Emotion, vol. 3, pp. 81-123,
1989.

112


