



















































Universal Dependencies for Swedish Sign Language


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 303–308,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

Universal Dependencies for Swedish Sign Language

Robert Östling, Carl Börstell, Moa Gärdenfors, Mats Wirén
Department of Linguistics

Stockholm University
{robert,calle,moa.gardenfors,mats.wiren}@ling.su.se

Abstract

We describe the first effort to annotate
a signed language with syntactic depen-
dency structure: the Swedish Sign Lan-
guage portion of the Universal Depen-
dencies treebanks. The visual modality
presents some unique challenges in anal-
ysis and annotation, such as the possi-
bility of both hands articulating separate
signs simultaneously, which has implica-
tions for the concept of projectivity in de-
pendency grammars. Our data is sourced
from the Swedish Sign Language Corpus,
and if used in conjunction these resources
contain very richly annotated data: de-
pendency structure and parts of speech,
video recordings, signer metadata, and
since the whole material is also translated
into Swedish the corpus is also a parallel
text.

1 Introduction

The Universal Dependencies (UD) project
(Nivre et al., 2016b) has produced a language-
independent but extensible standard for morpho-
logical and syntactic annotation using a formalism
based on dependency grammar. This standard has
been used to create the Universal Dependencies
treebanks (Nivre et al., 2016a), which in its
latest release at the time of writing (version 1.4)
contains 64 treebanks in 47 languages—one of
which is Swedish Sign Language (SSL, ISO
639-3: SWL), the topic of this article.

There are very few sign languages for which
there are corpora. Most of the available sign lan-
guage corpora feature only simple sign segmenta-
tion and annotations, often also with some type of
translation into a spoken language (either as writ-
ten translations or as spoken voice-overs). Sign
language corpora with more extensive syntactic

annotation is limited to Australian Sign Language,
which contains some basic syntactic segmentation
and annotation (Johnston, 2014). Apart from this,
smaller parts of the corpora of Finnish Sign Lan-
guage (Jantunen et al., 2016) and Polish Sign Lan-
guage (Rutkowski and Łozińska, 2016), have had
some syntactic segmentation and analysis, and an-
other such project is under way on British Sign
Language.1

To the best of our knowledge, we present the
first dependency annotation and parsing experi-
ments with sign language data. This brings us one
step closer to the goal of bridging the gap in avail-
ability between written, spoken and sign language
natural language processing tools.

2 Universal Dependencies

The Universal Dependencies project aims to pro-
vide uniform morphological and syntactic (in the
form of dependency trees) annotations across lan-
guages (Nivre et al., 2016b).2 Built on a language-
universal common core of 17 parts of speech and
40 dependency relations, there are also language-
specific guidelines which interpret and when nec-
essary extend those in the context of a given lan-
guage.

3 Swedish Sign Language

Swedish Sign Language (SSL) is the main sign
language of the Swedish Deaf community.3 It is
estimated to be used by at least 10,000 as one
of their primary languages, and is the only sign
language to be recognized in Swedish law, giv-
ing it a special status alongside the official minor-

1http://www.bslcorpusproject.org/projects/
bsl-syntax-project/

2Note that our work predates version 2 of the UD guide-
lines, and is based on the first version.

3Capital D “Deaf” is generally used to refer to the lan-
guage community as a cultural and linguistic group, rather
than ‘deaf’ as a medical label.

303



ity languages (Ahlgren and Bergman, 2006; Park-
vall, 2015). The history of SSL goes back at least
200 years, to the inauguration of the first Deaf
school in Sweden, and has also influenced the two
sign languages of Finland (i.e. Finnish Sign Lan-
guage and Finland-Swedish Sign Language) with
which SSL can be said to be related (Bergman and
Engberg-Pedersen, 2010).

4 Data source

The SSL Corpus Project ran during the years
2009–2011 with the intention to establish the
first systematically designed and publicly avail-
able corpus of SSL, resulting in the SSL Corpus
(SSLC). Approximately 24 hours of video data of
pairs of signers conversing was recorded, compris-
ing 42 signers of different age, gender, and ge-
ographical background, spanning 300 individual
video files (Mesch, 2012). The translation and an-
notation work is still on-going, with new releases
being made available online as the work moves
forward. The last official release of the SSLC in-
cludes just under 7 hours of video data (Mesch
et al., 2012) along with annotation files contain-
ing 53,625 sign tokens across 6,197 sign types
(Mesch, 2016).

The corpus is annotated using the ELAN soft-
ware (Wittenburg et al., 2006), and the annotation
files are distributed in the corresponding XML-
based .eaf format. Each annotation file contains
tiers on which annotations are aligned with the
video file, both video and annotation tiers being
visible in the ELAN interface (see Figure 1). The
SSLC annotation files currently include tiers for
sign glosses, and others for Swedish translations.
Sign glosses are written word labels that repre-
sent signs with approximate meanings (e.g. PRO1
for a first person pronoun). The sign gloss anno-
tation tiers are thus segmented for lexical items
(i.e. individual signs), and come in pairs for each
signer—each tier representing one of the signer’s
hands (one tier for the so-called dominant hand,
and another for the non-dominant hand) (Mesch
and Wallin, 2015).4 Sign glosses also contain a
part-of-speech (PoS) tag which have been derived
from manually correcting the output of a semi-
automatic method for cross-lingual PoS tagging
(Östling et al., 2015). The translation tier is seg-
mented into longer chunks, representing stretches

4The dominant hand is defined as the hand preferred by a
signer when signing a one-handed sign.

of discourse that can be represented by an id-
iomatic Swedish translation. However, the transla-
tion segmentations do not represent clausal bound-
aries in either SSL or Swedish (Börstell et al.,
2014). More recently, a portion of the SSLC was
segmented into clausal units and annotated for ba-
sic syntactic roles (Börstell et al., 2016), which led
to the current UD annotation work. Figure 1 shows
the basic view of the SSLC videos and annotations
in the ELAN software, with tiers for sign glosses
and translations on the video timeline.

5 Annotation procedure and principles
for SSL

For practical purposes, annotation was performed
by extending the ELAN files of our source mate-
rial from the SSLC project (see Figure 2 for an
example). These annotations were automatically
converted to the CoNLL-U format used by Uni-
versal Dependencies.

The annotation of UD based syntactic structure
started by coming up with a procedure for anno-
tating a signed language using ELAN. Signed lan-
guage is more simultaneous than spoken language,
particularly in the use of paired parallel articula-
tors in form of the signer’s two hands (Vermeer-
bergen et al., 2007). We handle this by allowing
signs from both hands into the same tree structure,
which leads to well-formed trees consistent with
the dependency grammar formalism’s single-head,
connectedness and acyclicity constraints. These
trees can however have some unusual properties
compared to spoken languages. For the purpose of
conforming to the CoNLL-U data format, which
requires an ordered sequence of tokens, we sort
signs by their chronological order. The chrono-
logical order spans both sign tiers per signer, and
is defined as the onset time of each sign anno-
tation. In the case of two signs on each hand
tier (i.e. dominant vs. non-dominant hand) hav-
ing identical onsets, favor is given to signs artic-
ulated by the signer’s dominant hand. This work-
ing definition is by no means the only reasonable
linearization, which means that the notion of pro-
jectivity to some extent loses its meaning. A tree
can be considered projective or non-projective de-
pending on how the ordering of simultaneously ar-
ticulated signs is defined—assuming one wants to
impose such an ordering in the first place.

Because the source material contains no seg-
mentation above the sign level, we decided to use

304



Figure 1: Screenshot of an SSLC file in ELAN. This is the material we base our dependency annotations
on, and the annotator can easily view the source video recording.

Figure 2: Screenshot zooming into the UD annotation tiers and sign–dependency linking for the utterance
from Figure 1. This is the interface used by the annotator.

verb verb verb noun det verb
SÄTTA-SIG ÄTA(Q) TITTA-PÅ SNÖˆGUBBE PEK ÄTA(Q)
SIT-DOWN EAT(Q) LOOK-AT SNOWˆOLD-MAN POINT EAT(Q)

root

conj

conj

dobj det

conj

‘He is sitting there eating looking out at the snowman.’

Figure 3: The example from Figure 1 and Figure 2 with dependency annotations visualized. The (Q)
suffix on the ÄTA(Q) gloss indicates which of the multiple signs for ‘eat’ in SSL is used in this case.

305



0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Number of sign tokens

0

5

10

15

20

25

Nu
m

be
r o

f t
re

es

Figure 4: Distribution of tree sizes for the Swedish
Sign Language Universal Dependencies treebank.

a bottom-up annotation procedure where subtrees
were connected until we could find no more suit-
able mergers. In other words, the segmentation is
entirely based on syntactic structure. The result-
ing fully connected trees were then used as “sen-
tences” in the CoNLL-U format.

One peculiar feature of many sign languages is
the repetition of verbs, sometimes referred to as
verb sandwiches, in which one verb occurs in the
middle of a sentence and also repeated at the end
(Bergman and Dahl, 1994). Such a construction is
found in Figure 3, in which the verb EAT appears
in two places. Whereas verb chains (i.e. multi-
ple verbs in one clause) were treated as coordi-
nated elements linked to the root verb using the
label conj, we decided to treat repeated verbs dif-
ferently by labeling the repeated verb as a coor-
dinated element linked to its first occurrence (see
Figure 3).

6 Treebank statistics

The SSL treebank released in version 1.4 of the
UD treebanks contains 82 trees with a total of 672
sign tokens (mean 8.2, median 7). The distribu-
tion of tree sizes (in tokens) is shown in Figure 4,
as described in Section 5 these were produced in
a bottom-up fashion and reflect our judgment of
the largest sensible syntactic segmentation of the
material. As could be expected from a corpus of
spontaneous conversation, there is a large num-
ber of small trees. For comparison, the only spo-
ken language (Slovenian) treebank has mean 9.1
and median 6, while the written Swedish treebank
has mean 14.3 and median 13 sentence length, not
counting punctuation.

7 Dependency parsing

Given that this is the first sign language UD tree-
bank, we decided to perform some dependency
parsing experiments to establish baseline results.
We use the parser of Straka et al. (2015), part of
the UDpipe toolkit (Straka et al., 2016), for our
experiments. The training (334 tokens), develop-
ment (48 tokens) and test (290 tokens) split from
UD treebanks 1.4 was used. A hundred itera-
tions of random hyperparameter search was per-
formed for each of their parser models (projective,
partially non-projective and fully non-projective),
and the model with highest development set accu-
racy was chosen. Unsurprisingly given the small
amount of training data, we found the most con-
strained projective model performed best, in spite
of the data containing non-projective trees (see
Figure 3). Development set attachment score was
60 and 56 (unlabeled and labeled, respectively)
while the corresponding test set scores were 36
and 28. The discrepancy can be partly attributed
to the much shorter mean sentence length of the
development set: 6.0 vs 10.4 for the test set. Such
low scores are not yet useful for practical tasks, but
we emphasize that our primary goal in this work
is to explore the possibility of UD annotation for a
sign language. Our annotation project is ongoing,
and we intend to further expand the SSL part in
future UD treebanks releases.

8 Conclusions and future work

In releasing the Universal Dependencies treebank
of Swedish Sign Language (SSL), the first such
resource for a signed language, we hope to en-
able new computational research into sign lan-
guage syntax. We have shown that even though
some theoretical and practical issues exist when
applying UD principles to a sign language, it is
possible to come up with a reasonable annotation
scheme. In the long run, we hope this will stim-
ulate the development of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) tools capable of processing sign
languages. Finally, because we have both parallel
data in Swedish and language-independent syntac-
tic annotations, we also believe this resource could
prove particularly useful in cross-lingual NLP.

Acknowledgments

Part of this work has been supported by an infras-
tructure grant from the Swedish Research Council
(SWE-CLARIN, project 821-2013-2003).

306



References
Inger Ahlgren and Brita Bergman. 2006. Det svenska

teckenspråket. In Teckenspråk och teckenspråkiga:
Kunskaps- och forskningsöversikt (SOU 2006:29),
pages 11–70. Statens offentliga utredningar.

Brita Bergman and Östen Dahl. 1994. Ideophones
in sign language? The place of reduplication in
the tense-aspect system of Swedish Sign Language.
In Carl Bache, Hans Basbøll, and Carl-Erik Lind-
berg, editors, Tense, Aspect and Action. Empirical
and Theoretical Contributions to Language Typol-
ogy, pages 397–422. Mouton de Gruyter.

Brita Bergman and Elisabeth Engberg-Pedersen. 2010.
Transmission of sign languages in the Nordic coun-
tries. In Diane Brentari, editor, Sign languages: A
Cambridge language survey, chapter 4, pages 74–
94. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Carl Börstell, Johanna Mesch, and Lars Wallin. 2014.
Segmenting the Swedish Sign Language Corpus: On
the possibilities of using visual cues as a basis for
syntactic segmentation. In Onno Crasborn, Eleni
Efthimiou, Evita Fotinea, Thomas Hanke, Jette
Kristoffersen, and Johanna Mesch, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 6th Workshop on the Representation and
Processing of Sign Languages: Beyond the Manual
Channel, pages 7–10, Paris. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Carl Börstell, Mats Wirén, Johanna Mesch, and Moa
Gärdenfors. 2016. Towards an annotation of syn-
tactic structure in Swedish Sign Language. In Eleni
Efthimiou, Stavroula-Evita Fotinea, Thomas Hanke,
Julie Hochgesang, Jette Kristoffersen, and Johanna
Mesch, editors, Proceedings of the 7th Workshop
on the Representation and Processing of Sign Lan-
guages: Corpus Mining, pages 19–24, Paris. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Tommi Jantunen, Outi Pippuri, Tuija Wainio, Anna Pu-
upponen, and Jorma Laaksonen. 2016. Annotated
video corpus of FinSL with Kinect and computer-
vision data. In Eleni Efthimiou, Stavroula-Evita
Fotinea, Thomas Hanke, Julie Hochgesang, Jette
Kristoffersen, and Johanna Mesch, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 7th Workshop on the Representation
and Processing of Sign Languages: Corpus Mining,
pages 93–100, Paris. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Trevor Johnston. 2014. The reluctant oracle: Adding
value to, and extracting of value from, a signed lan-
guage corpus through strategic annotations. Cor-
pora, 9(2):155–189.

Johanna Mesch and Lars Wallin. 2015. Gloss annota-
tions in the Swedish Sign Language Corpus. Inter-
national Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 20(1):103–
121.

Johanna Mesch, Lars Wallin, Anna-Lena Nilsson, and
Brita Bergman. 2012. Dataset. Swedish Sign Lan-
guage Corpus project 2009–2011 (version 1).

Johanna Mesch. 2012. Swedish Sign Language Cor-
pus. Deaf Studies Digital Journal, 3.

Johanna Mesch. 2016. Annotated files for the Swedish
Sign Language Corpus. Version 4.

Joakim Nivre, Željko Agić, Lars Ahrenberg, Maria Je-
sus Aranzabe, Masayuki Asahara, Aitziber Atutxa,
Miguel Ballesteros, John Bauer, Kepa Ben-
goetxea, Yevgeni Berzak, Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, Eck-
hard Bick, Carl Börstell, Cristina Bosco, Gosse
Bouma, Sam Bowman, Gülşen Cebirolu Eryiit,
Giuseppe G. A. Celano, Fabricio Chalub, Çar
Çöltekin, Miriam Connor, Elizabeth Davidson,
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Arantza Diaz de
Ilarraza, Kaja Dobrovoljc, Timothy Dozat, Kira
Droganova, Puneet Dwivedi, Marhaba Eli, Tomaž
Erjavec, Richárd Farkas, Jennifer Foster, Claudia
Freitas, Katarı́na Gajdošová, Daniel Galbraith, Mar-
cos Garcia, Moa Gärdenfors, Sebastian Garza, Filip
Ginter, Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola, Memduh
Gökrmak, Yoav Goldberg, Xavier Gómez Guino-
vart, Berta Gonzáles Saavedra, Matias Grioni, Nor-
munds Grūzītis, Bruno Guillaume, Jan Hajič, Linh
Hà M, Dag Haug, Barbora Hladká, Radu Ion,
Elena Irimia, Anders Johannsen, Fredrik Jørgensen,
Hüner Kaşkara, Hiroshi Kanayama, Jenna Kanerva,
Boris Katz, Jessica Kenney, Natalia Kotsyba, Si-
mon Krek, Veronika Laippala, Lucia Lam, Phng
Lê Hng, Alessandro Lenci, Nikola Ljubešić, Olga
Lyashevskaya, Teresa Lynn, Aibek Makazhanov,
Christopher Manning, Cătălina Mărănduc, David
Mareček, Héctor Martı́nez Alonso, André Martins,
Jan Mašek, Yuji Matsumoto, Ryan McDonald, Anna
Missilä, Verginica Mititelu, Yusuke Miyao, Simon-
etta Montemagni, Keiko Sophie Mori, Shunsuke
Mori, Bohdan Moskalevskyi, Kadri Muischnek,
Nina Mustafina, Kaili Müürisep, Lng Nguyn Th,
Huyn Nguyn Th Minh, Vitaly Nikolaev, Hanna
Nurmi, Petya Osenova, Robert Östling, Lilja Øvre-
lid, Valeria Paiva, Elena Pascual, Marco Passarotti,
Cenel-Augusto Perez, Slav Petrov, Jussi Piitulainen,
Barbara Plank, Martin Popel, Lauma Pretkalnia,
Prokopis Prokopidis, Tiina Puolakainen, Sampo
Pyysalo, Alexandre Rademaker, Loganathan Ra-
masamy, Livy Real, Laura Rituma, Rudolf Rosa,
Shadi Saleh, Baiba Saulīte, Sebastian Schuster,
Wolfgang Seeker, Mojgan Seraji, Lena Shakurova,
Mo Shen, Natalia Silveira, Maria Simi, Radu
Simionescu, Katalin Simkó, Mária Šimková, Kiril
Simov, Aaron Smith, Carolyn Spadine, Alane Suhr,
Umut Sulubacak, Zsolt Szántó, Takaaki Tanaka,
Reut Tsarfaty, Francis Tyers, Sumire Uematsu,
Larraitz Uria, Gertjan van Noord, Viktor Varga,
Veronika Vincze, Lars Wallin, Jing Xian Wang,
Jonathan North Washington, Mats Wirén, Zdeněk
Žabokrtský, Amir Zeldes, Daniel Zeman, and
Hanzhi Zhu. 2016a. Universal dependencies 1.4.
LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at the Institute of
Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University
in Prague.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Man-

307



ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016b. Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Sara Goggi, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Helene Mazo, Asuncion Moreno,
Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
Paris, France, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Robert Östling, Carl Börstell, and Lars Wallin. 2015.
Enriching the Swedish Sign Language Corpus with
part of speech tags using joint Bayesian word align-
ment and annotation transfer. In Beata Megyesi,
editor, Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference
on Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015),
NEALT Proceedings Series 23, pages 263–268, Vil-
nius. ACL Anthology.

Mikael Parkvall. 2015. Sveriges språk i siffror: vilka
språk talas och av hur många? Språkrådet.

Paweł Rutkowski and Sylwia Łozińska. 2016. Argu-
ment linearization in a three-dimensional grammar:
A typological perspective on word order in Polish
Sign Language (PJM). Journal of Universal Lan-
guage, 17(1):109–134.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajič, Jana Straková, and Jan
Hajič jr. 2015. Parsing universal dependency tree-
banks using neural networks and search-based or-
acle. In Proceedings of Fourteenth International
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories
(TLT 14), December.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajič, and Straková Jana. 2016. UD-
Pipe: trainable pipeline for processing CoNLL-U
files performing tokenization, morphological anal-
ysis, pos tagging and parsing. In Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’16), Paris, France,
May. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Myriam Vermeerbergen, Lorraine Leeson, and Onno
Crasborn, editors. 2007. Simultaneity in signed lan-
guages: Form and function. John Benjamins, Ams-
terdam/Philadelphia, PA.

Peter Wittenburg, Hennie Brugman, Albert Russel,
Alex Klassmann, and Han Sloetjes. 2006. ELAN: A
professional framework for multimodality research.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2006), pages 1556–1559.

308


