



















































Shared Task Proposal: Multilingual Surface Realization Using Universal Dependency Trees


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 120–123,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Shared Task Proposal: Multilingual Surface Realization Using Universal
Dependency Trees

Simon Mille
UPF

Barcelona, ES
simon.mille@upf.edu

Bernd Bohnet
Google Research

London, UK
bohnetbd@google.com

Leo Wanner
ICREA and UPF

Barcelona, ES
leo.wanner@upf.edu

Anja Belz
U of Brighton
Brighton, UK

A.S.Belz@brighton.ac.uk

Abstract

We propose a shared task on multilingual Sur-
face Realization, i.e., on mapping unordered
and uninflected universal dependency trees to
correctly ordered and inflected sentences in a
number of languages. A second deeper in-
put will be available in which, in addition,
functional words, fine-grained PoS and mor-
phological information will be removed from
the input trees. The first shared task on Sur-
face Realization was carried out in 2011 with
a similar setup, with a focus on English. We
think that it is time for relaunching such a
shared task effort in view of the arrival of Uni-
versal Dependencies annotated treebanks for
a large number of languages on the one hand,
and the increasing dominance of Deep Learn-
ing, which proved to be a game changer for
NLP, on the other hand.

1 Introduction

In 2017, three shared tasks on Natural Language
Generation (NLG) take place: Task 9 of SemEval
(May and Priyadarshi, 2017), WebNLG1 and E2E2.
The first starts from Abstract Meaning Representa-
tions (AMRs), the second from RDF triples, and
the third from dialog act-based Meaning Represen-
tations (MRs) respectively. With these efforts, the
focus is put on “real-life” generation, since the re-
spective inputs come from existing analyzers (for
AMRs) or existing databases (for RDF triples and

1http://talc1.loria.fr/webnlg/stories/
challenge.html

2http://www.macs.hw.ac.uk/
InteractionLab/E2E/

MRs). This shows that the research on NLG is on
the right track and that there is an interest in large
scale “deep” NLG. However, both the 2017 and the
past shared tasks (including the 2011 Surface Real-
ization Shared Task (Belz and et al., 2011)) focus on
English; multilingual generation has been neglected
largely so far.

On the other side, the last years saw a push in the
annotation of multilingual treebanks with so-called
Universal Dependencies (UDs), such that nowa-
days resources for a number of languages are avail-
able and can be used for shared tasks.3 Further-
more, recent years witnessed a shift of the process-
ing paradigm in applications such as parsing and
machine translation from traditional supervised ma-
chine learning techniques to deep learning.4 This is
also a chance for NLG, which could benefit from
deep learning to a greater extent than it currently
does.

Our objective is to set up a follow-up of the 2011
Surface Realization Shared Task (SR’11) at Gener-
ation Challenges (Belz and et al., 2011); this time
with an emphasis of multilingual surface genera-
tion from UD treebanks. The success of deep learn-
ing techniques in a number of areas of natural lan-
guage processing furthermore opens the avenue to a
broader range of system designs than have been seen
before.

As in SR’11, the proposed shared task comprises

3See the recent parsing shared task based on
UDs (Nivre and de Marneffe et al., 2016): http:
//universaldependencies.org/conll17/.

4See for instance the 1st NMT workshop, in which the NLG
topic is also addressed: https://sites.google.com/
site/acl17nmt/.

120



two tracks with different levels of difficulty:5

• Shallow Track: This track will start from gen-
uine UD structures from which word order in-
formation has been removed and the tokens
have been lemmatized, i.e., from unordered
dependency trees with lemmatized nodes that
hold PoS tags and morphological information
as found in the original annotations. It will con-
sist in determining the word order and inflect-
ing words.

• Deep Track: This track will start from UD
structures from which functional words (in par-
ticular, auxiliaries, functional prepositions and
conjunctions) and surface-oriented morpholog-
ical information have been removed. In addi-
tion to what has to be done for the Shallow
Track, the Deep Track will thus consist of the
introduction of the removed functional words
and morphological features.

The participating teams will be expected to pro-
duce outputs at least for the Shallow Track.

2 Data

Universal Dependencies6 (UD) have attracted in re-
cent years interest from many researchers across dif-
ferent fields of NLP. Currently, 70 treebanks cover-
ing about 50 languages can be downloaded freely7.

UD Treebanks facilitate the development of an
application that works potentially across all of the
UD treebank languages in a uniform fashion, which
is a big advantage for system developers. These tree-
banks are also a good basis for a multilingual shared
task: a system that has been built for some of the
languages may work for most of the other languages
as well.

For the SR’18 Task, we will use a subset of the
UD treebanks, selecting about 10 languages with
an annotation of high quality, which provides PoS
tags and morphological annotation (number, tense,
verbal finiteness, etc.). A subset of at least 4 tree-
banks will be used for the Deep Track. The tree-
banks will be selected according to (i) the expertise

5In what follows, we refer to the proposed task as ‘SR’18’.
6http://universaldependencies.org/#en
7https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/

xmlui/handle/11234/1-1983

of the task organizers in the corresponding language,
(ii) the availability of native speakers for conversion
and evaluation, (iii) the size of the treebank, (iv) the
feasibility of the format conversion, (v) the variety
of linguistic features captured in the annotation.

For the input to the Shallow Track, the UD struc-
tures will be processed as follows:

1. the information on word order will be removed
by randomized scrambling;

2. the words will be replaced by their lemmas or
stems, depending on the availability of lemma-
tization and stemming tools, respectively.

For the Deep Track, additionally:

3. functional prepositions and conjunctions that
can be inferred from other lexical units or from
the syntactic structure will be removed, as e.g.,
“by” and “of” in Figure 2;

4. determiners and auxiliaries will be replaced
(when needed) by attribute/value pairs, as, e.g.,
“Definiteness” and “Aspect” in Figure 3;

5. edge labels will be generalized into pred-
icate argument labels, following the Prop-
Bank/NomBank edge label nomenclature
(Meyers and et al., 2004; Palmer et al., 2005),
with three main differences: (i) there will be
no special label for external arguments (i.e.,
no “A0”), which means that all first arguments
of a predicate will be mapped to A1, and the
rest of the arguments will be labeled starting
from A2; (ii) all modifier edges “AM-...” will
be generalized to “AM”; (iii) there will be a
coordinative relation; and (iv) any relation that
does not fall into the first three cases will be
assigned an underspecified edge label.

6. morphological information coming from the
syntactic structure or from agreements will be
removed; in other words, only “semantic” in-
formation such as nominal number and verbal
tense will be maintained in the Deep input, as
opposed to verbal finiteness (which comes from
the structure) or verbal number (which comes
from agreement with the subject);

121



7. fine-grained PoS labels found in some tree-
banks (as, e.g., column 5 in Figure 2) will be
removed, and only coarse-grained ones will be
maintained (column 4 in Figures 2 and 3).

The idea beyond the Deep Track is to make the
input closer to a real-life input to NLG systems, in
which no syntactic or language-specific information
is available (see, e.g., the inputs in the SemEval,
WebNLG, E2E shared tasks), while keeping it rel-
atively simple. The main differences between the
proposed Deep input and AMRs are the following:
(i) no linking with NE databases; (ii) no abstraction
of nominal VS verbal events; (iii) no OntoNotes la-
beling; (iv) no shared arguments; (v) no typed cir-
cumstancials.

The inputs to the Shallow and Deep Tracks will
be distributed in the CoNLL-U format8, and in the
Human-Friendly Graph (HFG) format, as in SR’11
(Belz and et al., 2011). Figures 1, 2 and 3 show a
sample original UD annotation for English, a sam-
ple input for the Shallow Track, and a sample input
for the Deep Track respectively, in the 10-column
CoNLL-U format.

3 Evaluation

We will perform both automatic and manual evalua-
tions of the outputs of the systems.

For the automatic evaluation, we will compute
scores with the following metrics:

1. BLEU as geometric mean of 1 to 4-grams with
smoothing to compute sentence level scores,

2. NIST n-gram similarity weight,

3. METEOR lexical similarity based on stem, syn-
onym and paraphrase matches.

We will apply text normalization before scoring.
For n-best ranked system outputs, we will com-
pute a single score for all outputs by computing
the weighted sum of their individual scores, with a
weight assigned to an output in inverse proportion
to its rank. For a subset of the test data we may ob-
tain additional alternative realizations via Mechani-
cal Turk for use in the automatic evaluations.

8http://universaldependencies.org/
format.html

For the human-assessed evaluation, we are plan-
ning to use a type of evaluation that is based on pref-
erence judgements (Kow and Belz, 2012, p.4035),
using the existing evaluation interface described in
Kow and Belz’s paper. As in SR’11, we plan to use
students in the third year of an undergraduate de-
gree, from Cambridge, Oxford and Edinburgh. Two
candidate outputs9 will be presented to the evalua-
tors, who will assess them for Clarity, Fluency and
Meaning Similarity. For each criterion, they will be
asked not only to state which system output they pre-
fer, but also how strong is their preference.

We plan to organize a workshop collocated with
ACL ’18, COLING ’18, or EMNLP ’18 at which
the results of the SR’18 will be presented. To en-
sure a smooth setup of the Shared Task and a swift
evaluation of the system outputs, the organizers will
contribute with their research funds. Furthermore,
Google sponsorship will be solicited.

4 Conclusion

With this shared task, we aim to continue a very suc-
cessful first shared task on surface realization. We
think it is a good moment to take this topic up again
due to emerging new techniques and system designs,
new available data sets that can be used as basis for
data-preparation, and a broad interest in deep gener-
ation techniques that emerges from new applications
such as chat bots and personal assistants. We hope
to attract a number of submissions within these ap-
plication contexts (not only from the generation, but
also, for instance, from the parsing community) and
deepen the interest in text generation.

Beyond the possible impact of the tools developed
in the context of this shared task due to the standard
input sets and thus their easier reuse, we also see the
shared task as an interesting experiment on the us-
ability of UDs in the context of NLG. Our secondary
objective is to assess how feasible it is to connect
UD representations to predicate argument structures
commonly used in deep NLG systems.

A valuable by-product of the shared task will be
a set of input structures derived from UD data on a
shallow and deep levels, which will be useful for fur-
ther system development, application and research.

9Candidate outputs can also include a gold sentence, in ad-
dition to the system output.

122



Figure 1: A sample UD structure in English

Figure 2: A sample Shallow input

Figure 3: A sample Deep input

5 Proposed Timeline

Assuming that the presentation of the results will
not take place before mid-July 2018, the proposed
timeline for the shared task would be the following:

• Oct 1, 2017: Completion of the consultation process
regarding SR’18 input specifications and concerned
languages.
• Oct 1–Dec 8, 2017: Implementation of conversion
scripts and production of new inputs.
• Oct 6, 2017: Announcement of SR’18 and website.
• Nov 13, 2017: Call for interest in participation in
SR’18.
• Nov 13, 2017: SR’18 Trial datasets and documentation.
• Dec 11, 2017: Registration for the task.
• Dec 11, 2017: SR’18 training and development sets.
• April 2, 2018: Evaluation scripts available.
• May 14, 2018: SR’18 test sets available.
• May 18, 2018: SR’18 system outputs collected.
• May 21–June 30, 2018: Evaluation period.

References
Anja Belz and Mike White et al. 2011. The first Sur-

face Realisation Shared Task: Overview and evalua-
tion results. In Proceedings of ENLG, pages 217–226,
Nancy, France.

Eric Kow and Anja Belz. 2012. Lg-eval: A toolkit
for creating online language evaluation experiments.
In Proceedings of LREC, pages 4033–4037, Istambul,
Turkey.

Jonathan May and Jay Priyadarshi. 2017. Semeval-
2017 task 9: Abstract meaning representation pars-
ing and generation. In Proceedings of SemEval, pages
534–543, Vancouver, Canada, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Adam Meyers and Ruth Reeves et al., 2004. The Nom-
Bank project: An interim report, pages 24–31.

Joakim Nivre and Marie-Catherine de Marneffe et al.
2016. Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual tree-
bank collection. In Proceedings of LREC, Portorož,
Slovenia.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
105.

123


