



















































Combining Multiple Corpora for Readability Assessment for People with Cognitive Disabilities


Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 121–132
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 8, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Combining Multiple Corpora for Readability Assessment for People with
Cognitive Disabilities

Victoria Yaneva, Constantin Orăsan, Richard Evans, and Omid Rohanian
Research Institute in Information and Language Processing,

University of Wolverhampton, UK
{v.yaneva, c.orasan, r.j.evans, omid.rohanian}@wlv.ac.uk

Abstract

Given the lack of large user-evaluated cor-
pora in disability-related NLP research
(e.g. text simplification or readability as-
sessment for people with cognitive dis-
abilities), the question of choosing suit-
able training data for NLP models is not
straightforward. The use of large generic
corpora may be problematic because such
data may not reflect the needs of the target
population. At the same time, the avail-
able user-evaluated corpora are not large
enough to be used as training data. In
this paper we explore a third approach, in
which a large generic corpus is combined
with a smaller population-specific corpus
to train a classifier which is evaluated us-
ing two sets of unseen user-evaluated data.
One of these sets, the ASD Comprehen-
sion corpus, is developed for the purposes
of this study and made freely available.
We explore the effects of the size and type
of the training data used on the perfor-
mance of the classifiers, and the effects of
the type of the unseen test datasets on the
classification performance.

1 Introduction

When developing educational tools and applica-
tions for students with cognitive disabilities, it is
necessary to match the readability of the educa-
tional materials to the abilities of the students and
to adapt the text content to their needs. Both text
adaptation and readability research for people with
cognitive disabilities are thus dependent on evalu-
ation involving target users. However, there are
two main difficulties in collecting data from users
with cognitive disabilities: i) experiments involv-
ing those users are expensive to perform and ii)

the task of text evaluation is challenging for target
users because of their cognitive disability.

Following from the first difficulty, user-
evaluated data is scarce and the majority of NLP
research for disabled groups is done by exploit-
ing ratings or simplification provided by teachers
and experts (Inui et al., 2001; Dell’Orletta et al.,
2011; Jordanova et al., 2013). Examples of such
a corpora are the FIRST corpus (Jordanova et al.,
2013), which contains 31 original articles and ver-
sions of the articles that had been manually simpli-
fied for people with autism, and a corpus of man-
ually simplified sentences for congenitally deaf
Japanese readers (Inui et al., 2001). Henceforth
in this paper, we refer to such manually simpli-
fied corpora as population-specific corpora. These
corpora have not been evaluated by end users with
disabilities.

As a result of the second difficulty, the fact
that people with cognitive disabilities find text
evaluation challenging, the size of user-evaluated
datasets is rather limited. For example, to the
best of our knowledge, there is currently only one
readability corpus evaluated by people with intel-
lectual disability, called LocalNews (Feng, 2009).
This corpus contains 11 original and 11 simplified
news stories. In this paper we present another cor-
pus evaluated by people with autism containing a
total of 27 documents. Henceforth in the paper,
we refer to these type of corpora as user-evaluated
corpora.

Given the lack of large population-specific or
user-evaluated corpora in disability-related re-
search, the question of choosing suitable train-
ing data for NLP models is not straightforward.
While the use of large generic corpora as train-
ing data may be inadequate as such data may not
reflect the needs of the target population, the use
of population-specific and user-evaluated corpora
as training data is problematic due to the scarcity

121



of such data. In this paper we explore a third ap-
proach, in which a large generic corpus is com-
bined with a smaller population-specific corpus to
train

a system to predict the difficulty of text for peo-
ple with autism. We compare the performance of
this approach to: i) an approach exploiting only
the large generic corpus and ii) an approach ex-
ploiting only the small population-specific corpus.
We also compare the performance of the classifi-
cation models derived from two different machine
learning algorithms. All classifiers trained on the
different corpora are then evaluated on two small
sets of user-evaluated corpora (unseen data), one
of which was developed for the purpose of this
study (Section 3).

Contributions We developed the ASD Com-
prehension Corpus containing 27 educational
articles evaluated by readers with autism and
classified as easy and difficult based on partici-
pants’ answers to comprehension questions. The
texts and the answers of each participant for
each question are currently available at: https:
//github.com/victoria-ianeva/
ASD-Comprehension-Corpus1. Further,
we explore i) the effects of the size and type of
the training data on the external validity of the
classifiers and ii) the effects of the type of unseen
test datasets (only original versus original + sim-
plified articles) on the classification performance.
The system used in these experiments is available
at: http://rgcl.wlv.ac.uk/demos/
autor_readability

The rest of this paper is organised as follows.
The next section presents related work relevant to
this research, while Section 3 describes the pro-
cess for the development of the ASD Comprehen-
sion corpus. Section 4 describes the corpora used
in the study. Section 5 presents the derivation of
the classification models, and Section 6 presents
a discussion of the main findings, which are sum-
marised in Section 7.

1The repository also contains the answers of participants
from a control group (without autism), which were not ex-
plored in this article but may be useful to the community for
investigating between-group differences. For more informa-
tion about the control group see Yaneva (2016).

2 Related Work

Previous work from the fields of psycholinguis-
tics, pertaining to language and autism, readability
assessment, and domain adaptation are relevant to
the research presented in our current paper.

2.1 Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurode-
velopmental condition affecting communication
and social interaction. The reading difficulties of
some people with ASD include, but are not lim-
ited to, difficulties resolving ambiguity in mean-
ing (Happé and Frith, 2006; Happe, 1997; Frith
and Snowling, 1983; O’Connor and Klein, 2004),
difficulties comprehending abstract words (Happé,
1995), difficulties in the syntactic processing of
long sentences (Whyte et al., 2014), difficulties
identifying the referents of pronouns (O’Connor
and Klein, 2004), difficulties in figurative lan-
guage comprehension (MacKay and Shaw, 2004),
and difficulties in making pragmatic inferences
(Norbury, 2014). Adults with autism have also
been shown to process images inserted in easy-to-
read documents differently from non-autistic con-
trol participants (Yaneva et al., 2015).

2.2 Readability Assessment

Readability is a construct which has been defined
as the ease of comprehension because of the style
of writing (Harris and Hodges, 1995). Histori-
cally, the readability of texts has been estimated
via formulae exploiting shallow features such as
word and sentence length (Dubay, 2004); cog-
nitive models exploiting features such as age of
acquisition of words and text cohesion (McNa-
mara et al., 2014) and, more recently, thanks to
advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP),
readability has also been estimated via computa-
tional models (Collins-Thompson, 2014; François,
2015). Advances in the fields of NLP and Artifi-
cial Intelligence have enabled both the faster com-
putation of existing statistical features and the de-
velopment of new NLP-enhanced features (e.g.,
average parse-tree height, average distance be-
tween pronouns and their anaphors, etc.) which
can be used in more complex methods of assess-
ment based on machine learning. An example of a
readability model targeted to a specific application
of readability assessment are the unigram models
by Si and Callan (2001), which have been found
particularly suitable for assessment of Web con-

122



tent, where the presence of links, email addresses
and other elements biases the traditional formulae.

In terms of readability assessment for readers
with cognitive disabilities, previous research has
shown that readability features such as entity den-
sity per sentence and lexical chains (synonymy
or hyponymy relations between nouns) are useful
for estimating the readability of texts for readers
with mild intellectual disability (Feng et al., 2010).
This is due to the fact that these readers strug-
gle to remember relations that hold within- and
between-sentences (Feng et al., 2010). Similarly,
features such as word length or word frequency are
more relevant for readability assessment for peo-
ple with dyslexia because they struggle with de-
coding particular letter and syllable combinations
(Rello et al., 2012). In the case of autism, an im-
portant issue has been the lack of corpora whose
reading difficulty levels have been evaluated by
people with autism. For this reason most read-
ability research for this population has so far fo-
cused on texts simplified by experts (Štajner et al.,
2014). User-evaluated texts were used for the first
time in a study, where the discriminatory power of
a number of features was evaluated on a prelimi-
nary dataset of 16 texts considered easy or difficult
to comprehend by people with autism (Yaneva and
Evans, 2015).

2.3 Domain adaptation

Supervised machine learning and statistical meth-
ods like the ones used in this paper benefit from
the availability of large amounts of training data.
However, in many cases it is not easy to obtain
enough training data for specific domains or ap-
plications. As a result it is not uncommon that re-
searchers train on data from one domain and test
on data from a different one. As would be ex-
pected, this usually leads to lower levels of per-
formance. The field of domain adaptation is ad-
dressing this problem by proposing methods that
can perform well even when the training and test-
ing domains are different. In many cases this is
achieved by exploiting a small training corpus of
the same domain as the test documents. Domain
adaptation has been used for a variety of tasks
in NLP, including statistical machine translation
(Axelrod et al., 2011), sentiment analysis (Blitzer
et al., 2007; Glorot et al., 2011) and text classifi-
cation (Xue et al., 2008).

Recent studies in the field of readability and lan-

guage proficiency have used a similar approach
to the one proposed in this paper. For example,
Pilán et al. (2016) tackle the problem of data spar-
sity when classifying language proficiency levels
of learner-written output by incorporating knowl-
edge in the trained model from another domain
consisting of input texts written by teaching pro-
fessionals for learners. Their results indicated
that the weighted combination of the two types of
data performed best, even when compared to sys-
tems based on considerably larger amounts of in-
domain data. In this paper we go a step further by
applying this approach to readability classification
for people with cognitive disabilities.

3 Evaluation of Text Passages by
Readers with Autism

We present a collection of 27 individual
documents for which the readability was
evaluated by 27 different people with a for-
mal diagnosis of autism. The collection is
henceforth referred to as the ASD Compre-
hension corpus and is available at: https:
//github.com/victoria-ianeva/
ASD-Comprehension-Corpus. Participants
were asked to read text passages and answer three
multiple choice questions (MCQs) per passage.
Evaluation of the difficulty of the texts was then
based on their answers to the questions2.

Participants The evaluation of the texts was
performed in three cycles of data collection and in-
volved 27 different participants with autism. Texts
1-9 and 21-27 were evaluated by Group 1, con-
sisting of 20 adult participants (13 male, 7 female)
with mean age in years µ = 30.75 and standard
deviation σ = 8.23, while years spent in educa-
tion, as a factor influencing reading skills, were
µ = 15.31, with σ = 2.9. Texts 10-17 were
evaluated by Group 2, consisting of 18 adult par-
ticipants (11 male and 7 female) with mean age
µ = 36.83, σ = 10.8 and years spent in educa-
tion µ = 16, σ = 3.33. Group 3 evaluated texts
18-20 and consisted of 18 adults (12 male and 6
female) with mean age µ = 37.22, σ = 10.3 and
years spent in education µ = 16, σ = 3.33. All
participants had a confirmed diagnosis of autism

2While reading the texts and answering the questions, the
eye movements of the participants were recorded using an
eye tracker; however, the recorded gaze data was not used in
this study, hence we do not report details about the gaze data
except when describing the data collection procedure. More
details can be found in Yaneva (2016).

123



and were recruited through 4 local charity organi-
sations. None of the 27 participants had other con-
ditions affecting reading (e.g. dyslexia, intellec-
tual disability, aphasia etc.). All participants were
native speakers of English.

Materials A total of 27 text passages of varying
complexity were collected from the Web. The reg-
isters were miscellaneous, covering educational (7
documents), news (10 documents) and general ar-
ticles (3 documents), as well as easy-to-read texts
(7 documents). The average number of words
per text was µ = 156 with standard deviation
σ = 49.94. The texts covered a range of readabil-
ity levels, where the average was µ = 65.07 with
σ = 13.71 according to the Flesch Reading Ease
(FRE) score (Flesch, 1949), which is expressed on
a scale from 0 to 100 (the higher the score, the
easier the text).

A limitation of the study is the small size of the
corpus, which was necessary in order to avoid fa-
tigue in the participants and to comply with eth-
ical considerations. By comparison, LocalNews
(Feng, 2009), which is the only other corpus for
English whose readability has been evaluated by
people with cognitive disabilities contains 11 orig-
inal and 11 simplified texts.

Design of the Multiple-Choice Questions
Since people with ASD are generally known to
understand many parts of what they read literally
(Happé and Frith, 2006; Happe, 1997; Frith and
Snowling, 1983; O’Connor and Klein, 2004),
it is of interest to examine different types of
comprehension of the texts in the ASD corpus.
Impairment in specific types of reading com-
prehension merits the exploration of readability
features related to those specific types. Table
1 shows the main types of comprehension we
examine in our study following a taxonomy
formulated by Day and Park (2005). The table
also shows the relationship between the types of
comprehension examined and the reading profile
of people with autism.

These types of reading comprehension were ex-
amined through the inclusion of three multiple-
choice questions per text passage, each of which
contained three possible answers. The example
below is a question examining the ability to make
inferences:

Black peppered moths became more numerous in
urban areas because:

a) They were mutants
c) They were camouflaged due to the airborne

pollution
d) The airborne pollution blackened the white

moths with soot

Apparatus and Procedure All participants
were verbally instructed about the purpose and
procedure of the experiment and given a partici-
pant information sheet. Once they were familiar
with the implications of the research, they signed
a consent form, verbal instruction was reinforced
and demographic data about age, education and
diagnosis was collected. Eye tracking data was
recorded3, hence the eye tracker was calibrated by
each participant before the start of the experiment.
Texts were presented on a 19” LCD monitor. In or-
der to maximise the internal validity of the experi-
ment, the texts were presented in random order to
each participant. This controlled for factors such
as fatigue or participants becoming accustomed to
the types of questions asked. The order of ques-
tions after each text was also randomised, so that
it would not influence the answers given by the
participants. The effects of memory were con-
trolled by having the relevant passage constantly
displayed on the screen. Participants could there-
fore refer to it whenever they were not sure about
the information it contained. While the effects
of background knowledge could not be eliminated
entirely, the selection of texts was made in such
a way as to ensure that this effect would be min-
imised as far as possible. The participants read all
texts and answered all questions, taking as many
breaks as they requested. At the end of the experi-
ment, participants were debriefed.

Development of the Gold Standard for ASD
The 27 texts from the ASD corpus were used for
evaluation of the document-level classifiers. They
were divided into classes of easy and difficult texts
based on the answers to the multiple choice ques-
tions (MCQs). Each text was evaluated by three
MCQs and each correct answer was given 1 point,
while each incorrect answer was awarded 0 points.
Thus, if a participant had answered two out of
three questions correctly for a given text, then that
text had an answering score of two for this par-
ticipant. After that, all answering scores for the
participants were summed for each text. The texts

3The recorded eye tracking data is not examined in this
study.

124



Comprehension Characteristics (Day and Park, 2005) Relation to ASD
Literal Understanding of the straightforward meaning

of the text: facts, dates, vocabulary, etc
Readers with ASD have predominantly literal
understanding of language (MacKay and Shaw,
2004).

Reorganisation The ability to combine explicitly given informa-
tion from different parts of the text: “Maria
Kim was born in 1945”; “Maria Kim died in
1990”. How old was Maria Kim when she
died?”.

Since this type of question is based on literal
understanding it could provide insights exclu-
sively into the role of context, the use of which
is challenging for people with ASD (O’Connor
and Klein, 2004).

Inference The ability to use two or more pieces of infor-
mation to arrive at a third piece of information
that is implicit: “He rushed off, leaving his bike
unchained” => He left his bicycle vulnerable
to theft.

Types of inferences challenging for ASD: Infer-
ring given or presupposed knowledge as well as
new or implied knowledge derived from mental
state words, bridging inferences, figurative lan-
guage.

Table 1: Types of comprehension examined and their relation to ASD

were then ranked and partitioned at a threshold
into two groups. Application of a Shapiro-Wilk
test showed that the data was non-normally dis-
tributed and the two groups were thus compared
using the non-parametric Wilcoxon Signed Rank
test. The results indicated that the two groups of
texts were significantly different from one another
(z = −6.091, p < 0.0001). Thus 18 texts were
classified as easy and 9 texts were classified as dif-
ficult.

4 Corpora

This section describes the corpora used for train-
ing and evaluation of the readability classifiers.
We train classifiers on three corpora, presented be-
low: i) the WeeBit corpus (Vajjala and Meur-
ers, 2012), a comparatively large generic corpus
used in readability research; ii) the FIRST cor-
pus, a small corpus containing original and man-
ually simplified texts, a subset of which have been
evaluated in terms of readability in experiments in-
volving 100 people with autism (Jordanova et al.,
2013) and finally, iii) a combination of the two.
After that we tested our classifiers by applying
them to previously unseen user-evaluated data.
These data consist of two corpora, the readabil-
ity of which has been evaluated by people with
autism (The ASD Comprehension corpus, pre-
sented above), and by people with intellectual dis-
ability (LocalNews corpus (Feng et al., 2009)).

4.1 The WeeBit Corpus

The WeeBit corpus (Vajjala and Meurers, 2012)
contains educational documents obtained from
the Weekly Reader4 and BBC-BiteSize5 web-

4http://www.weeklyreader.com/
5http://www.bbc.co.uk/education

sites and comprises two sub-corpora of the same
names. The Weekly Reader is an educational web-
newspaper containing fiction, news and science ar-
ticles. The WeeklyReader is intended for children
aged 7-8 (Level 2), 8-9 (Level 3), 9-10 (Level 4)
and 9-12 (Senior level). BBC-BiteSize is also an
educational site containing articles at 4 levels cor-
responding to educational key stages (KS) for chil-
dren between ages 5-7 (KS1), 7-11 (KS2), 11-14
(KS3) and 14-16 (GCSE). The combined WeeBit
corpus comprises 5 readability levels correspond-
ing to the Weekly Reader‘s Level 2, Level 3 and
Level 4 and BBC-BiteSize KS4 and GCSE levels.
The corpus contains 615 documents per level. The
average document length measured in number of
sentences is 23.4 sentences at the lowest level and
27.8 sentences at the highest level.

The WeeBit corpus was the most appropriate to
use for the purpose of our work due to the fact that
it contains educational and generally informative
articles and due to its large size relative to other
readability corpora for English. Examples of other
corpora include Encyclopedia Britannica (Barzi-
lay and Elhadad, 2003) (40 documents), Literacy-
works (Petersen and Ostendorf, 2007) (around 200
documents) or the WeeklyReader (Allen, 2009)
on its own. An alternative was to use Wikipedia
and Simple English Wikipedia6 as they contain
a very large number of articles; however, claims
that Simple English Wikipedia articles are more
accessible than English Wikipedia articles have
been disputed (Xu et al., 2015; Štajner et al., 2012;
Yaneva, 2015).

As the primary purpose of our work is to build
two-level readability classifiers, we normalized
the WeeBit corpus to include texts of only two

6http://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main Page

125



readability levels: easy and difficult. Thus, the dif-
ficult texts in our corpus were the ones with class
labels BitGCSE and BitKS3 (age 11-16) and the
easy documents were the ones with class labels
WRLevel2 and WRLevel3 (age 9 -11). Texts from
Weekly Reader Level4 were excluded from the
dataset, as they were intended for students aged
9-12, which overlaps with Weekly Reader Level3
(9-10), BitKS2 (7-11), and BitKS3 (11-14). Thus,
the remaining data consisted of 1,610 documents
divided into two equally sized classes of easy and
difficult documents.

4.2 The FIRST corpus
The FIRST corpus consists of 25 documents of
the registers of popular science and literature (13
texts) and newspaper articles (12 texts) (Jordanova
et al., 2013). These texts were presented in both
their original and simplified forms, so that the cor-
pus contains 25 paired original and simplified doc-
uments (50 documents in total). The simplification
was performed by 5 experts working with autistic
people, who were given ASD-specific text simpli-
fication guidelines, specified in (Jordanova et al.,
2013), which contains full details of the simplifi-
cation procedure and the characteristics of the cor-
pus. In addition to the 50 texts contained in that
corpus, original and simplified versions of 6 ad-
ditional texts were produced in accordance with
the specified guidelines. These 12 texts were then
evaluated on a sample of 100 adults with autism
as part of the evaluation method in the EC-funded
FIRST project.7 Statistically significant differ-
ences in the levels of comprehension for texts
from the two classes are reported (Jordanova et al.,
2013). These texts were added to the FIRST cor-
pus, which thus contains 31 original and 31 simpli-
fied versions of documents, of which 6 documents
per class were evaluated by people with autism.

4.3 LocalNews Corpus
Similar to the ASD Comprehension corpus, the
LocalNews corpus (Feng et al., 2009) is used as
test data for evaluating the classifiers. The Local-
News corpus consists of 11 original and 11 simpli-
fied news stories and is, to the best of our knowl-
edge, the only other resource in English, for which
text complexity has been evaluated by people with
intellectual disability. The articles were first man-
ually simplified by humans, a process in which

7FIRST project. [online] available at: http://www.first-
asd.eu/[Last accessed: 19/05/2017]

long and complex sentences were split and im-
portant information contained in complex prepo-
sitional phrases was integrated in separate sen-
tences. Lexical simplification included the substi-
tution of rare words with more frequent ones and
the deletion of sentences and phrases not closely
related to the meaning of the text. The texts were
then evaluated by 19 adults with mild intellectual
disability, who showed significant differences in
their comprehension scores for the two classes of
documents (Feng et al., 2009).

5 Model Training and Evaluation

This section presents the experiments comparing
the performance of the different classifiers.

5.1 Algorithms

The document-level classifier was built using su-
pervised learning algorithms implemented in the
Weka toolkit (Frank and Witten, 1998). We evalu-
ated a number of algorithms in the WEKA toolkit
and selected the two which performed best when
evaluated using 10-fold cross validation over the
WeeBit corpus (Random Forests) and the FIRST
corpus (Bayes Net). The Random Forest algo-
rithm (Breiman, 2001) is a decision tree algorithm
which uses multiple random trees to vote for an
overall classification of the given input. The Bayes
Net classifier is the implementation of a Bayesian
Network classifier (Heckerman et al., 1995) avail-
able in Weka. Bayesian networks are probabilis-
tic graphical models which were shown to be very
successful in domain adaptation problems (for ex-
ample Finkel and Manning (2009)). For both
learning algorithms we used the default values for
their parameters as provided by Weka. Although
there is scope for tuning of these parameters, we
did not have access to enough data to explore this
direction.

5.2 Baseline

We use the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level readabil-
ity formula (Kincaid et al., 1981) as a baseline for
document classification due to the fact that it is one
of the best-performing predictors of text difficulty,
and has been used as a baseline in other readabil-
ity estimation models (Vajjala Balakrishna, 2015).
The baseline values are computed by using the
score of the formula as a single feature in the clas-
sification model.

126



Random Forests Bayes Net
Feature Description W F WF W F WF
1. Long words Proportion of words with 3 or more syllables − + − − − −
2. Average word length Average number of syllables, all words − + − − − −
3. Possible senses Sum of all senses for all words in the text − + − − − −
4. Polysemous words Words with more than one sense in WordNet − + − − − −
5. Polysemous type ratio Ratio polysemous word types / all word types − + + + − +
6. Type-token ratio Total number of types/number of tokens − − − − − −
7. Vocabulary variation Word types/ common words not in the text − − − − − −
8. Numerical expressions Number of numerical expressions − + − − − −
9. Infrequent words Not in 5,000 most freq. words in English − + − − − −
10. Total number of words Total number of words in the text − − − − − −
11. Dolch-Fry Index Fry 1000 Instant Word List/Dolch Word List − − − − − −
12. Number of passive verbs Number of passive verbs − + − − − −
13. Agentless passive density Incidence score of passive voice − − − − − −
14. Negations Number of negations + + + + + +
15. Negation density Incidence score of negations + − + + − −
16. Long sentences Proportion of sentences longer than 15 words + + + + − +
17. Words per sentence Total words / total sentences − + + + + −
18. Average sentence length Sentence length in words − + + + + +
19. Number of sentences Total number of sentences − + − − + −
20. Paragraph index 10 x total paragraphs / total words − + − − − −
21. Semicolons Number of semicolons − + − − + −
22. Unusual punctuation Number of occurences of &, %, + + + + − −
23. Comma index 10 x total commas / total words − + − − + −
24. Pronoun Score Occurence of pron. per 1,000 words − + − − − −
25. Definite description score Occurence of def. descr. per 1,000 words − + − − − −
26. Illative conjunctions Number of illative conjunctions − + + + − +
27. Comparative conjunctions Number of comparative conjunctions − + − − − −
28. Adversative conjunctions Number of adversative conjunctions − + + + − −
29. Word frequency Average frequency of words − + − − − −
30. Age of Acquisition (aver.) AOA norms from the MRC database + − + + − +
31. Familiarity (average) Familiarity norms from the MRC database − + − − − −
32. Concreteness (average) Concreteness norms from the MRC database − + − − − −
33. Imagability (average) Imagability norms from the MRC database − + + + − −
34. 1st pronominal reference Number of 1st pronominal ref. − − − − − −
35. 2nd pronominal ref. Number of 2nd pronominal reference + − + + − +
36. ARI ARI readability formula (Smith et al., 1989) − + − − + −
37. Coleman-Liau Coleman-Liau formula (Coleman, 1971) − + − − − −
38. Fog Index Fog Index formula (Gunning, 1952) + + + + + +
39. Lix Lix readability formula (Anderson, 1983) − − + + − −
40. SMOG SMOG formula (McLaughlin, 1969) − + − − − −
41. FRE Flesch Reading Ease (Flesch, 1948) − + − − − −
42. FKGL Flesch-Kincaid GL (Kincaid et al., 1981) − − − − + −
43. FIRST readability index FIRST readability ind. (Jordanova et al., 2013) − + − − − −

Table 2: A list of features, their description and their selection for the Random Forests and BayesNet
classifiers, where ‘W’ stands for WeeBit, ‘F’ stands for FIRST and ‘WF’ stands for WeeBit + FIRST

5.3 Features and feature selection

A total of 43 features were used in the experi-
ments. Table 2 presents the features, their descrip-
tions, and an indication of whether or not each
individual feature was selected for use in the fi-
nal model of the different readability classifiers.
The features used in this study included lexico-
semantic (numbers 1 - 14), syntactic (numbers 15-
22), cohesion (numbers 23 - 27), and cognitively-
motivated features (numbers 28 - 34), as well as 8
readability formulae (numbers 35 - 43) (Table 2).
The cohesion and cognitively motivated features
were inspired by those used in the Coh-Metrix

tool (McNamara et al., 2014). The source for
cognitively-motivated features were the word lists
in the MRC Psycholinguistic database (Coltheart,
1981), in which each word has an assigned score
based on human rankings. The number of personal
words in a text is hypothesised to improve ease
of comprehension (Freyhoff et al., 1998), which
is why evaluation of the number of first and sec-
ond person pronominal references were included
as features in the classification model.

Initially, the full-feature sets were used to ob-
tain the baseline models, which were subsequently
optimised using the attribute selection filter for su-

127



Table 3: F Score Results for 10-fold cross validation
Random Forests Bayes Net

Baseline All features Selected features Baseline All features Selected features
WeeBit 0.78 0.988 0.984 0.838 0.968 0.978
FIRST 0.651 0.794 0.825 0.778 0.810 0.841

WeeBit+FIRST 0.77 0.957 0.973 0.831 0.953 0.966

Table 4: F Score Results for the ASD Comprehension corpus and the LocalNews corpus
ASD Comprehension Random Forests Bayes Net

Baseline All features Selected features Baseline All features Selected features
WeeBit 0.673 0.927 0.820 0.667 0.746 0.820
FIRST 0.747 0.782 0.782 0.817 0.782 0.784

WeeBit+FIRST 0.746 0.817 0.855 0.667 0.746 0.892
LocalNews Random Forests Bayes Net

Baseline All features Selected features Baseline All features Selected features
WeeBit 0.818 0.861 0.954 0.817 0.908 0.954
FIRST 0.676 0.76 0.705 0.705 0.705 0.760

WeeBit+FIRST 0.818 0.861 0.908 0.817 0.908 1

pervised learning which is distributed with Weka
(Frank and Witten, 1998) and through iterative
elimination of redundant features. This was done
at the stage of model evaluation through ten-fold
cross validation. The last six columns of Table
2 indicate the lists of selected features for each
model. It can be argued that the Random Forest
model is already performing a certain degree of
feature selection and therefore it may be not nec-
essary to carry out this task on the experiments
involving Random Forest. However, analysis of
the Random Trees generated by the algorithm re-
vealed that they contain a larger number of fea-
tures than those selected by our feature selection
step. In addition, by performing feature selection
we wanted to learn which linguistic features are
good indicators of text complexity.

5.4 Evaluation

First, all classifiers were evaluated using 10-fold
cross-validation, using the WeeBit, FIRST and
WeeBit + FIRST corpora as training sets (Table
3). After that each classifier was tested on previ-
ously unseen user-evaluated data. The two sets of
unseen data are the ASD Comprehension corpus
described in Section 3 and the LocalNews corpus
described in Section 4.3. Results for the evalua-
tion on unseen data are presented in Table 4.

For Random Forests we notice that the model
trained on the WeeBit corpus performs best when
classifying texts from the ASD Comprehension
corpus (F = 0.927) and from the LocalNews cor-
pus (F = 0.954). However, when using the model
trained on the Bayes Net algorithm, we see that
best external validity for both the ASD Compre-

hension corpus (F = 0.892) and the LocalNews
corpus (F = 1) is achieved by using the combined
WeeBit + FIRST training set.

6 Discussion

In terms of the effects of the size and type of train-
ing data used, the results indicate that, in isolation,
smaller, population-specific corpora (e.g. FIRST)
are not sufficient to achieve optimal classification
accuracy; however, in certain cases such as the
classification of the LocalNews texts, they do have
the potential to boost the performance of a classi-
fication model when combined with larger generic
corpora (F = 1) . Nevertheless, this improvement
is subject to choosing a classification algorithm
that has optimal performance when trained on the
smaller corpus. It is important to note that the
most accurate classification of the ASD Compre-
hension corpus was achieved by training the Ran-
dom Forests classifier on the WeeBit corpus alone
(F = 0.927). Hence, the infusion of population-
specific and generic corpora is only useful in cer-
tain cases, as discussed below. This is in line
with results in other fields. For example, Blitzer
et al. (2007) investigate domain adaptation for sen-
timent analysis. Given a pair of source and target
domains, they show how it is possible to improve
the performance of a sentiment classifier on the
target domain when it is trained on data from the
source domain with the help of a small annotated
corpus from the target domain. However, they
show that it is necessary to consider the distance
between the two domains as not any pair will lead
to good results. For future research, we will con-

128



sider how it is possible to define a distance metric
that can prove useful in our context.

Regarding the effect of the type of the unseen
data, we notice that, surprisingly, the pairs of orig-
inal and simplified articles contained in the Lo-
calNews corpus were predicted 100% correctly by
the classifier trained on the combination of texts
from WeeBit + FIRST. A possible reason for this
is that the introduction of the FIRST corpus to-
gether with the larger WeeBit one enables the clas-
sifier to capture certain simplification operations
(e.g. sentence splitting and lexical simplification)
that are common in both LocalNews and FIRST.
Achieving such a high score could also have been
complemented by the fact that the genre of the
documents contained in the LocalNews corpus is
closer to the textual genre of the ones of both the
WeeBit and of the FIRST corpora. However, this
result was only achieved when combining FIRST
with the larger WeeBit corpus and was not other-
wise replicated by a classifier trained only on the
FIRST data. This implies that relatively large data
sets are still a prerequisite for the accurate classi-
fication of pairs of original and simplified texts. In
both cases, when using Random Forests and Bayes
Net, a better classification accuracy was achieved
for LocalNews (F = 0.954 and F = 1, respec-
tively) than for the ASD Comprehension corpus
(F = 0.927 and F = 0.892, respectively). This
suggests that corpora containing pairs of texts in
their original and simplified forms are generally
easier to classify than corpora containing only of
texts in their original form. This finding has im-
plications for general readability and text simplifi-
cation research where pairs of texts in their origi-
nal and manually simplified forms are commonly
used for evaluation purposes. In other words, eval-
uating on such corpora may result in overly opti-
mistic classification results which are less likely to
be replicated in a “real-world scenario” with natu-
rally written texts.

The experiments presented above have several
limitations. First, the small size of the corpora (a
key problem in disability-related research which
we target in this article) means that the texts used
in this study do not account for the great hetero-
geneity of natural language. In an attempt to com-
pensate for the small number of texts, we have
tried to include documents from miscellaneous
registers and with varying levels of readability.
Second, both the ASD Comprehension corpus and

the LocalNews corpus were evaluated by a rela-
tively small number of participants, which is why
individual differences in comprehension may have
larger effects on the definition of the gold standard
compared to generic readability studies. Never-
theless, as mentioned at the beginning of this ar-
ticle, collecting data from readers with cognitive
disabilities is a much needed but challenging task,
and the corpora used in this study are currently the
only ones of their kind. We contribute to future
research in this area by making available the ASD
Comprehension corpus.

7 Conclusion

This paper discussed the effects of algorithm se-
lection, training corpora and evaluation corpora
for readability research for people with cognitive
disabilities, with a view to addressing the prob-
lem of the scarcity of user-evaluated data in this
setting. First, we presented a collection of 27 in-
dividual documents, the readability of which was
evaluated by readers with Autism Spectrum Dis-
order. We then showed that the corpora used for
algorithm selection have an effect on the classi-
fication performance of the models and that com-
bining large generic readability corpora with small
population-specific ones has the potential to boost
the classification performance. Finally, we discuss
the effects of the type of evaluation data (original
articles versus pairs of original and simplified ar-
ticles) on the classification accuracy and we show
that original and simplified documents are easier
to classify, and that the combination of generic and
population-specific corpora is particularly useful
for the classification of such text pairs.

Acknowledgements

This research is part of the AUTOR project par-
tially supported by University Innovation Funds
awarded to the University of Wolverhampton.

References
Melissa L Allen. 2009. Brief report: decod-

ing representations: how children with autism
understand drawings. Journal of autism
and developmental disorders 39(3):539–43.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-008-0650-y.

Jonathan Anderson. 1983. Lix and rix: Variations on
a little-known readability index. Journal of Reading
26(6):490–496.

129



Amittai Axelrod, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao.
2011. Domain adaptation via pseudo in-domain data
selection. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
pages 355–362.

Regina Barzilay and Noemie Elhadad. 2003. Sen-
tence alignment for monolingual comparable cor-
pora. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, EMNLP ’03, pages 25–32.
https://doi.org/10.3115/1119355.1119359.

John Blitzer, Mark Dredze, and Fernando Pereira.
2007. Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and
blenders: Domain adaptation for sentiment classi-
fication. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association of Computational Linguistics.
Prague, Czech Republic, pages 440–447.

Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Machine Learn-
ing 45(1):5–32.

E. B. Coleman. 1971. Developing a technology of writ-
ten instruction: some determiners of the complexity
of prose, Teachers College Press, Columbia Univer-
sity, New York.

Kevyn Collins-Thompson. 2014. Computational as-
sessment of text readability: A survey of current and
future research. ITL-International Journal of Ap-
plied Linguistics 165(2):97–135.

Max Coltheart. 1981. The mrc psycholinguis-
tic database. The Quarterly Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology Section A 33(4):497–505.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14640748108400805.

Richard R. Day and Jeong-Suk Park. 2005. Developing
Reading Comprehension Questions. Reading in a
Foreign Language 17(1).

Felice Dell’Orletta, Simonetta Montemagni, and Giu-
lia Venturi. 2011. Read-it: Assessing readability of
italian texts with a view to text simplification. In
Proceedings of the second workshop on speech and
language processing for assistive technologies. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 73–
83.

William H. Dubay. 2004. The Principles of Read-
ability. Impact Information. http://www.impact-
information.com/.

Lijun Feng. 2009. Automatic readability as-
sessment for people with intellectual disabili-
ties. SIGACCESS Access. Comput. (93):84–91.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1531930.1531940.

Lijun Feng, Noémie Elhadad, and Matt Huenerfauth.
2009. Cognitively motivated features for readabil-
ity assessment. In Proceedings of the 12th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 229–237.

Lijun Feng, Martin Jansche, Matt Huenerfauth, and
Noémie Elhadad. 2010. A comparison of fea-
tures for automatic readability assessment. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Posters. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 276–284.

Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Hierarchical bayesian domain adaptation. In Pro-
ceedings of Human Language Technologies: The
2009 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. pages 602–610.

R. Flesch. 1949. The art of readable writing. Harper,
New York.

Rudolf Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick.
Journal of applied psychology 32(3):221–233.

Thomas François. 2015. When readability meets com-
putational linguistics: a new paradigm in readability.
Revue française de linguistique appliquée 20(2):79–
97.

Eibe Frank and Ian H. Witten. 1998. Generating ac-
curate rule sets without global optimization. In
J. Shavlik, editor, Fifteenth International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann,
pages 144–151.

G. Freyhoff, G. Hess, L. Kerr, B. Tronbacke, and
K. Van Der Veken. 1998. Make it simple. european
guidelines for the production of easy-to-read infor-
mation for people with learning disability. Technical
report, ILSMH European Association.

Uta Frith and Maggie Snowling. 1983. Reading
for meaning and reading for sound in autistic and
dyslexic children. Journal of Developmental Psy-
chology 1:329–342.

Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio.
2011. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment
classification: A deep learning approach. In ICML.

Robert Gunning. 1952. The technique of clear writing.
McGraw-Hill, New York.

F Happe. 1997. Central coherence and theory of mind
in autism: Reading homographs in context. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology 15:1–12.

Francesca Happé and Uta Frith. 2006. The weak co-
herence account: Detail focused cognitive style in
autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 36:5–25.

Francesca GE Happé. 1995. The role of age and ver-
bal ability in the theory of mind task performance of
subjects with autism. Child development 66(3):843–
855.

T. L. Harris and R. E. Hodges. 1995. The Literacy Dic-
tionary: The Vocabulary of Reading and Writing.
International Reading Association.

130



David Heckerman, Dan Geiger, and David M. Chick-
ering. 1995. Learning bayesian networks: The com-
bination of knowledge and statistical data. Machine
Learning 20(3):197–243.

Kentaro Inui, Satomi Yamamoto, and Hiroko Inui.
2001. Corpus-based acquisition of sentence read-
ability ranking models for deaf people. In NLPRS.
pages 159–166.

Vesna Jordanova, Richard Evans, and Arlinda Cerga
Pashoja. 2013. First project - benchmark report (re-
sult of piloting task). Central and Northwest London
NHS Foundation Trust. London, UK.

J. Peter Kincaid, James A. Aagard, John W. O’Hara,
and Larry K. Cottrell. 1981. Computer readability
editing system. IEEE transactions on professional
communications .

Gilbert MacKay and Adrienne Shaw. 2004. A compar-
ative study of figurative language in children with
autistic spectrum disorders. Child Language Teach-
ing and Therapy 20(13).

Harry G. McLaughlin. 1969. SMOG grading - a new
readability formula. Journal of Reading pages 639–
646.

Danielle S McNamara, Arthur C Graesser, Philip M
McCarthy, and Zhiqiang Cai. 2014. Automated eval-
uation of text and discourse with Coh-Metrix. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Courtenay Frazier Norbury. 2014. Atypical pragmatic
development. Pragmatic Development in First Lan-
guage Acquisition 10:343.

Irene M O’Connor and Perry D Klein. 2004. Explo-
ration of strategies for facilitating the reading com-
prehension of high-functioning students with autism
spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and develop-
mental disorders 34(2):115–127.

Sarah E Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text sim-
plification for language learners: a corpus analysis.
In SLaTE. Citeseer, pages 69–72.

Ildikó Pilán, Elena Volodina, and Torsten Zesch. 2016.
Predicting proficiency levels in learner writings by
transferring a linguistic complexity model from
expert-written coursebooks. In COLING. pages
2101–2111.

Luz Rello, Ricardo Baeza-yates, Laura Dempere-
marco, and Horacio Saggion. 2012. Frequent Words
Improve Readability and Shorter Words Improve
Understandability for People with Dyslexia (1):22–
24.

Luo Si and Jamie Callan. 2001. A statistical
model for scientific readability. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Infor-
mation and Knowledge Management. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, CIKM ’01, pages 574–576.
https://doi.org/10.1145/502585.502695.

Dean R. Smith, A. Jackson Stenner, Ivan Horabin, and
III Malbert Smith. 1989. The lexile scale in theory
and practice: Final report. Technical report, Meta-
Metrics (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No.
ED307577)., Washington, DC:.

S. Vajjala and D Meurers. 2012. On improving the
accuracy of readability classification using insights
from second language acquisition. In In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Workshop on Building Edu-
cational Applications Using NLP. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
pages 163–173.

Sowmya Vajjala Balakrishna. 2015. Analyzing Text
Complexity and Text Simplification: Connecting
Linguistics, Processing and Educational Applica-
tions. Ph.D. thesis, Universität Tübingen.

Sanja Štajner, Richard Evans, Constantin Orasan, and
Ruslan Mitkov. 2012. What can readability mea-
sures really tell us about text complexity? In
Luz Rello and Horacio Saggion, editors, Proceed-
ings of the LREC’12 Workshop: Natural Lan-
guage Processing for Improving Textual Accessibil-
ity (NLP4ITA). European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA), Istanbul, Turkey.

Sanja Štajner, Ruslan Mitkov, and Gloria Corpas Pas-
tor. 2014. Simple or not simple? A readability ques-
tion, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Elisabeth M Whyte, Keith E Nelson, and K Suzanne
Scherf. 2014. Idiom, syntax, and advanced theory
of mind abilities in children with autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hear-
ing Research 57(1):120–130.

Wei Xu, Chris Callison-Burch, and Courtney Napoles.
2015. Problems in current text simplification re-
search: New data can help. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics 3:283–297.

Gui-Rong Xue, Wenyuan Dai, Qiang Yang, and Yong
Yu. 2008. Topic-bridged plsa for cross-domain text
classification. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval. SIGIR
’08, pages 627–634.

Victoria Yaneva. 2015. Easy-read documents as
a gold standard for evaluation of text simpli-
fication output. In Proceedings of the Stu-
dent Research Workshop. INCOMA Ltd. Shoumen,
BULGARIA, Hissar, Bulgaria, pages 30–36.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/R15-2005.

Victoria Yaneva. 2016. Assessing text and web acces-
sibility for people with autism spectrum disorder.
Ph.D. thesis.

Victoria Yaneva and Richard Evans. 2015. Six good
predictors of autistic text comprehension. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing. INCOMA

131



Ltd. Shoumen, BULGARIA, Hissar, Bulgaria, pages
697–706. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/R15-
1089.

Victoria Yaneva, Irina Temnikova, and Ruslan
Mitkov. 2015. Accessible texts for autism:
An eye-tracking study. In Proceedings of the
17th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference
on Computers &#38; Accessibility. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, ASSETS ’15, pages 49–57.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2700648.2809852.

132


