



















































Proto-Indo-European Lexicon: The Generative Etymological Dictionary of Indo-European Languages


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 259–262,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

Proto-Indo-European Lexicon: The Generative Etymological 
Dictionary of Indo-European Languages 

 

Jouna Pyysalo 
Department of Modern Languages 

University of Helsinki 
jouna.pyysalo@helsinki.fi 

 

  

Abstract 

Proto-Indo-European Lexicon (PIE Lexicon) 
is the generative etymological dictionary of 
Indo-European languages. The reconstruction 
of Proto-Indo-European (PIE) is obtained by 
applying the comparative method, the output 
of which equals the Indo-European (IE) data. 
Due to this the Indo-European sound laws 
leading from PIE to IE, revised in Pyysalo 
2013, can be coded using Finite-State 
Transducers (FST). For this purpose the foma 
finite-state compiler by Mans Hulden (2009) 
has been chosen in PIE Lexicon. At this point 
PIE Lexicon generates data of some 120 
Indo-European languages with an accuracy 
rate of over 99% and is therefore the first 
dictionary in the world capable of generating 
(predicting) its data entries by means of 
digitized sound laws. 

1 Introduction: The IE language family, 
PIE and the generation of the data 

The Indo-European language family, with some 
three billion native speakers, is the largest in the 
world. The family comprises some six hundred 
languages including one hundred and fifty 
archaic, partly extinct ones, the oldest of which 
were attested more than three thousand years 
ago. The IE language family is divided into a 
dozen subgroups (e.g. Germanic, Italic, and 
Anatolian), each of which was given a specific 
character by the common vocabulary of the 
subgroup and the set of common sound changes 
distinguishing it from the other subgroups. 

The comparative method of reconstruction is 
the gold standard in the postulation of the proto-
language, PIE. The method is based on 
comparison of originally identical IE 
morphemes. The postulation of the proto-

language is exclusively determined by the 
measurable features of the data. Consequently 
the reconstruction of a data segment is the 
equivalent of the data set it was inferred from. 
By coding the sound laws of each Indo-European 
language the words of the languages can be 
generated by sound law (foma) scripts detailing 
the changes applying to the languages. 

In order to generate the data the most ancient 
Indo-European sound laws,1 critically chosen and 
revised in Pyysalo 2013, have been formulated in 
the foma finite-state compiler and arranged 
chronologically.2 By now also later sound laws 
have been added and the scripts have been 
implemented in PIE Lexicon at 
http://pielexicon.hum.helsinki.fi, generating the 
data in a manner explicated in this paper. 

2 On the coding of sound laws and 
generation of data in PIE Lexicon  

The digitization of the IE sound law system starts 
with the coding of the individual sound laws as 
the foma rules. These are then arranged in a 
chronological order into foma scripts of the 
languages. 

2.1 Coding of the IE sound laws 
The IE sound laws are of the implicational form 
PIE *x → IEz y (‘the PIE sound *x turns into 
sound y in the Indo-European language z’). 

                                                             

1 For the core of the traditional Indo-European 
sound law system, see Collinge 1985, 1995, and 1999.   

2 For a state-of-the-art formulation of the finite-
state technology, see Beesley & Karttunen 2003.   

259



In foma the equivalents of the IE sound laws 
are expressed together with the environments in 
which they are operational. In practice the foma 
rules assume the format A -> B || C _ D (‘A 
changes into B in environment C_D’). 
Corresponding to the principle of regularity of 
sound changes in comparative Indo-European 
linguistics, the replacement of A with B is 
obligatory in foma, i.e. it always occurs in all 
instances of the environment C_D. 

For example, the revised Brugmann’s law 
adds the glottal H to the environment: PIE 
*oHCV → PIIr. āCV (Pyysalo 2013: 121-125). 
This is written in foma as: 

 o -> ā || _ Glottal Consonant Vowel ; 

Each foma rule coded is tested by the compiler 
and then placed in the foma (sound law) scripts. 

2.2    Coding of the IE sound law foma 
scripts  

After the digitization of the IE sound laws, each 
IE language is equipped with a foma script 
consisting of chronologically ordered foma rules. 
The data of PIE Lexicon has required all major 
archaic sound laws (i.e. ones applying to at least 
two subgroups) to be coded. The foma scripts of 
some 120 languages or dialects have already 
been implemented on the PIE Lexicon site, and 
are available in the control bar at the bottom of 
the site. E.g. the Hittite sound law script can be 
opened by first clicking Select rule set, then Hitt., 
and finally Show rules, opening the file: 
http://pielexicon.hum.helsinki.fi/?showrule=24. 

Once the foma rules have been arranged into 
scripts, the consistency of the rules is tested both 
internally (with regard to the other rules of the 
script) and externally (with regard to the portion 
of the data the script is capable of generating). 

2.3 On the generation of the IE data in PIE 
Lexicon 

By March 2017 PIE Lexicon consists of some 
120 foma scripts and generates some 35000 
phonemes, some 175 of which are erroneous, i.e. 
the general accuracy rate is 99,5%. 

Since the choice of the material is random, the 
digitized glottal fricative theory (GFT) of 
Pyysalo 2013, now tested and digitally published 
in PIE Lexicon, is valid, i.e. sound and complete. 

The remaining errors – shown in red in PIE 
Lexicon – represent open research problems, for 
which foma rules cannot be specified, because 
the sound laws remain unknown. The errors can 
divided into two subsets: 

(a) The PIE accent/tone problem, not treated in 
Pyysalo 2013, accounts for almost half of the 
errors, making it the fundamental problem of 
Indo-European linguistics at this point. 

(b) A dozen minor sound law problems related to 
individual subgroups, languages and/or dialects 
are also open or only partially solved. In order to 
solve these problems the project has opened a 
journal, Proto-Indo-European Linguistics, at 
http://pielinguistics.org. 

2.4 On the explicit foma proof chains 
PIE Lexicon has added a special feature to the 
basic version of foma, which makes the proof 
chains of the generation of the data explicit for 
the PIE Lexicon users and editors. Consequently 
the entire generation of data can be immediately 
verified. Clicking the reconstruction on the left 
side of the individual IE data entries reveals the 
respective foma proof chain, and all foma chains 
can be opened simultaneously by clicking the 
Chains button at the bottom of the site. 

A proof chain explicitly detailing all sound 
laws applied and their mutual order in the 
generation is thus attached to every IE form. This 
makes the proofs fully explicit and to a degree 
confirms the PIE reconstructions serving as the 
starting point of the generation of the data. 

3 Concluding observations, remarks, 
and an outline of the project’s future 
development 

The high success rate of PIE Lexicon in the 
automatic generation of the IE data shows that 
managing historical sound laws by applying 
finite-state transducers provides a rigorous 
formal calculus for mapping cognates from PIE 
to the daughter languages and automatically 
evaluating the consistency of such a system. 

3.1 On the background of the successful 
generation of IE data  

The success rate achieved in the generation of 
the Indo-European data is also explained by the 
following factors: 

260



(a) In the comparative method the input (the PIE 
reconstruction) is not hypothetical, but a sum of 
the measurable features of the data and its 
comparison, hence the logical equivalent of the 
data. This in turn results in the respective success 
in its generation. 

(b) The GFT comprises all correct sound law 
proposals, perfected if necessary, of two 
centuries of research in IE linguistics. 
Consequently, the sound law system stands on 
the shoulders of giants. 

3.2 The coding of the IE language family 
tree  

By the spring 2017 the coding of the ancient 
sound laws of the most archaic languages has 
been completed. Only late, unproblematic sound 
laws need be added when appearing in the new 
data to be published in PIE Lexicon. 

Consequently the next, more abstract phase, 
the coding of the IE language family tree on the 
basis of the common sound laws, has already 
begun. For this purpose a foma rule bank, 
consisting of some 800 rules, has been coded. 
Instead of full sound law scripts the operating 
system uses the names of the rules which call the 
rules from the bank. This allows us to place the 
rules in an excel template in which identical rules 
are placed on the same row. 

By means of this procedure the first IE 
language family tree based purely on the 
common sound laws is already being coded and 
will be published in PIE Lexicon once ready. 

3.3 The coding of the decision method of 
Indo-European etymology  

Once the main features of the IE language family 
tree have been coded, the preconditions for the 
digitization of the decision method of IE 
etymology have been created. This feature, 
originally outlined by August Schleicher (1852: 
iv-v) 3 has a counterpart in language technology. 
Once the sound law (foma) scripts are ready it is 
possible to run them in reverse direction, i.e. 
starting from the bottom (“apply up”). The 
technology already exists and once implemented 
it will generate all possible PIE prototypes of an 

                                                             

3 For a precise formulation of the decision method 
with a data example, see Pyysalo 2013: 475-476. 

Indo-European word. The coding only requires 
the addition of tailored, language-family specific 
phonological constraints in order to eliminate 
potential infinite chains caused by historically 
lost phonemes. 

Once the disjunctions of possible PIE 
prototypes of all IE words have been digitally 
generated it is not complicated to code an 
intersection function that seeks identical PIE 
prototypes between the disjunctions and 
proposes an etymology when there is an 
intersection of the disjunctions of two languages. 
If the identity is semantically feasible, the 
computer has found a PIE etymology. 

After the coding of this feature it is in 
principle possible to test every etymology 
proposed during the history of Indo-European 
linguistics and to mechanically identify all 
potential etymologies, which in turn may reveal 
identities not noticed by the scholars, and thus 
revitalize the research. 

3.4 Conclusion: Coding of the comparative 
method of reconstruction in Indo-
European linguistics  

Taken together the coding of the IE sound law 
system (§3.1), the IE language family tree (§3.2), 
and the decision method of IE etymology (§3.3) 
mean that the critical components of the 
comparative method of reconstruction itself have 
been digitized.  

Once achieved, Operating System (OS) PIE 
Lexicon will be able to manage the comparative 
IE linguistics digitally for the first time in history. 
Thus in the 21st century, Indo-European 
linguistics will be in the frontline of digital 
humanities, equipped with a next-generation 
theory embedded in the methodic framework of 
natural sciences.  

Credits 

This paper summarizes a joint collaboration of 
Dr. Jouna Pyysalo (IE languages and their 
reconstruction), Prof. Mans Hulden (language 
technology and foma) and Mr. Fedu Kotiranta 
(web design and node.js), the coding of PIE 
Lexicon that started in the autumn 2014. 

References  
Kenneth E. Beesley & Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Finite 

State Morphology. Studies in computational 

261



linguistics 3. Center for the Study of Language and 
Information, Stanford.  

N. E. Collinge. 1985. The Laws of Indo-European. 
Benjamins, Amsterdam.  

N. E. Collinge. 1995. Further Laws of Indo-European. 
In: On Languages and Language: The 
Presidental Adresses of the 1991 Meeting of 
the Societas Linguistica Europaea. ed, Werner 
Winter. BTrends in Linguistics. Studies and 
Monographs, 78. Mouton, Berlin: 27-52. 

N. E. Collinge. 1999. The Laws of Indo-European: 
The State of Art. Journal of Indo-European 
Studies, 27:355-377.  

Mans Hulden. 2009. Finite-State Machine 
Construction Methods and Algorithms for 

Phonology and Morphology, PhD Thesis. 
University of Arizona.  

Jouna Pyysalo. 2013. System PIE: The Primary 
Phoneme Inventory and Sound Law System for 
Proto-Indo-European. Publications of the 
Institute for Asian and African Studies 15. 
Unigrafia Oy, Helsinki. 

August Schleicher. 1852. Die Formenlehre der 
kirchenslavischen Sprache, erklärend und 
vergleichend dargestellt. H. B. König, Bonn.  

 

 

 

262


