



















































Kurdish Interdialect Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects, pages 63–72,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Kurdish Interdialect Machine Translation

Hossein Hassani
University of Kurdistan Hewlêr

Sarajevo School of Science and Technology
hosseinh@ukh.edu.krd

hossein.hassani@stu.ssst.edu.ba

Abstract

This research suggests a method for ma-
chine translation among two Kurdish di-
alects. We chose the two widely spo-
ken dialects, Kurmanji and Sorani, which
are considered to be mutually unintelli-
gible. Also, despite being spoken by
about 30 million people in different coun-
tries, Kurdish is among less-resourced lan-
guages. The research used bi-dialectal
dictionaries and showed that the lack of
parallel corpora is not a major obstacle in
machine translation between the two di-
alects. The experiments showed that the
machine translated texts are comprehen-
sible to those who do not speak the di-
alect. The research is the first attempt for
inter-dialect machine translation in Kur-
dish and particularly could help in making
online texts in one dialect comprehensible
to those who only speak the target dialect.
The results showed that the translated texts
are in 71% and 79% cases rated as under-
standable for Kurmanji and Sorani respec-
tively. They are rated as slightly under-
standable in 29% cases for Kurmanji and
21% for Sorani.

1 Introduction

This paper discusses Intralanguage Machine
Translation (IMT) among Kurdish dialects. The
two most widely spoken Kurdish dialects are Kur-
manji and Sorani which are considered to be mu-
tually unintelligible (Hassanpour, 1992). Further-
more, the language is among less-resourced lan-
guages (Sheykh Esmaili, 2012; Sheykh Esmaili et
al., 2014). However, this research shows that, in
the absence of large parallel corpora, a word-for-
word translation approach based on a bidialectal

dictionary provides a reasonable translation output
between the dialects. This improves mutual intel-
ligibility among Kurmanji and Sorani users in the
online textual environment.

Our aim is to show that lack of corpus is not
a major obstacle for providing an inter-dialect
(intralingual) machine translation between Sorani
and Kurmanji. Our method intends to transfer the
general meaning of texts in online media in one
dialect to those audience who speak the other. To
that extent, the output is not considered to be a lit-
erary translation nor it is able to transfer all gram-
matic features of the source to the target dialect.

Machine Translation (MT) is primarily under-
stood as using computers for translating a lan-
guage into another, or in other words, as auto-
mated inter-language translation. The main mo-
tive of MT is to make a language L1 intelligible to
whom who do not speak it by presenting it in a lan-
guage L2, which might be the audiences’ own lan-
guage or a language which they are able to under-
stand. However, there are several languages such
as Chinese, Arabic, and Kurdish that encompass
several dialects which are mutually unintelligible
(Tang et al., 2008; Farghaly and Shaalan, 2009;
Sadat et al., 2014). In this respect, the translation
between the dialects are of the intralanguage na-
ture rather than interlanguage.

Kurdish is the name given to a number of dis-
tinct dialects of a language spoken in the geo-
graphical area touching on Iran, Iraq, Turkey, and
Syria. However, Kurds have lived in other coun-
tries such as Armenia, Lebanon, Egypt, and some
other countries since several hundred years ago.
The population who speak the language is esti-
mated about 30 million (Kurdish Academy of Lan-
guages, 2016; Hassani and Medjedovic, 2016).

Dialect diversity is an important characteris-
tic of Kurdish. This diversity, the name of di-
alects, and their geographic distribution have been

63



of interest for linguists who have been studying
Kurdish. Kurdish is multi-dialect from the Indo-
European root (Hassanpour, 1992). Although dif-
ferent scholars have categorized its dialects differ-
ently, a considerable majority refer to it as North-
ern Kurdish (Kurmanji), Central Kurdish (Sorani),
Southern Kurdish, Gorani, and Zazaki that include
several sub-dialects (Haig and Öpengin, 2014;
Hassani and Medjedovic, 2016; Malmasi, 2016).
The populations that speak different dialects of
the language differ significantly. The majority of
Kurmanji speakers are located in different coun-
tries, such as Turkey, Syria, Iraq, Iran, Armenia,
Lebanon, just to name the mainlands. The second
popular dialect is Sorani, which is mainly spoken
among Kurds in Iran and Iraq. Zazaki is spoken
in Turkey. Gorani is primarily spoken in Iran and
Iraq (Izady, 1992; Hassanpour, 1992). Kurdish
is written using four different scripts, which are
modified Persian/Arabic, Latin, Yekgirtû(unified),
and Cyrillic. The popularity of the scripts differ
according to the geographical and geopolitical sit-
uations. Latin script uses a single character while
Persian/Arabic and Yekgirtû in a few cases use two
characters for one letter. The Persian/Arabic script
is even more complex with its RTL and concate-
nated writing style auto(of Language, 2016).

We are facing the “knowledge acquisition bot-
tleneck”, which basically occurs in the early
stages of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and
Computational Linguistics (CL) studies (Schu-
bert, 2015), hence we are interested in investigat-
ing of interdialect Kurdish translation in the ab-
sence of parallel corpora. Our hypothesis is that
despite the mutual unintelligibility between the
two dialects, a word-for-word translation would be
able to transfer the core meaning of texts in one di-
alect into the other. To illustrate, Ballesteros and
Croft (1996) have reported on the applicability us-
ing dictionaries in certain situations such as Infor-
mation Retrieval (IR). This solution can be used
while the necessary background knowledge is pre-
pared for statistical MT.

The remainder of the article is organized in the
following sections. Section 2 reviews the litera-
ture. Section 3 provide the method that is used
in developing an IMT for Sorani-Kurmanji. Sec-
tion 4 presents the performed experiments on the
developed IMT and evaluates the results. Sec-
tion 5 discusses the findings and the outcome of
the experiments and analyzes the results. Finally,

section 6 summarizes the findings, provides the
conclusion, and addresses the future work.

2 Related Work

Zhang (1998) discusses inter-dialect MT between
Cantonese and Mandarin as the two most impor-
tant Chinese varieties, which are considered to be
mutually unintelligible. Zhang (1998) discusses
the differences between the two dialects at the
level of sound systems, grammar rules, and vocab-
ulary, based on which a method for inter-dialect
MT between the two dialects has been provided.
Zhang (1998) suggests that as the dialects of a
language usually share a common standard writ-
ten form, the target of inter-dialect MT is bet-
ter to be the spoken dialects. The method has
been implemented by using a Word collocation
list, a Mandarin-Cantonese dictionary and a hand-
ful number of rules to handle syntactic differences.
Zhang (1998) addresses the immediate purposes
of the developed systems as to facilitate language
communication and to help Hong Kong students
to write standard Mandarin Chinese. However,
he has not reported on the evaluation of the sys-
tem and the level of intelligibility of the system’s
output by the targeted audience. Furthermore, the
research reports that a Mandarin-Cantonese cor-
pus has been built, but it does not mention how
it has been created nor how it has been used in
inter-dialect MT. Moreover, although it has been
mentioned that the rules for the syntactic differ-
ence between the dialects are applied based on a
knowledge base, it is not clear whether this knowl-
edge base uses a Part-of-Speech (POS) tagger or
an annotated corpus or it has applied another ap-
proach.

Peradin et al. (2014) suggest a shallow-transfer
rule-based machine translation for Western group
of South Slavic language using Apertium platform
which is a modular machine translation system.
Peradin et al. (2014) have used morphological lex-
icons available on Apertium repository.

Nakov and Tiedemann (2012) worked on
Macedonian-Bulgarian machine translation as
close languages. They have put their assumption
based on the morphological and lexical similari-
ties and have used statistical approach combined
with word-for-word translation to show that MT is
possible without having large corpora. Although
the work technically could be of help for inter-
dialect MT, it is not an IMT study in principle.

64



Our search for finding more work on automatic
translation among dialects, which we called IMT,
did not yield any other significant work beyond
what has been done by Zhang (1998). To illustrate,
we refer to a recent publication, a comprehensive
handbook by Chan (2014), which covers different
aspects of MT and MT technologies. However,
although the book addresses the MT status with
regard to different languages, for the work related
to inter-dialect MT it only refers to the studies by
Zhang (1998).

As another evidence for lack of noticeable study
on IMT we refer to “The first workshop on Ap-
plying NLP Tools to Similar Languages, Varieties
and Dialects” was conducted in 2014 (Zampieri
et al., 2014) and consequently a “Joint Workshop
on Language Technology for Closely Related Lan-
guages, Varieties and Dialects” (Ass, 2015) took
place in 2015. Although these events fairly cov-
ered several areas of close languages, none of the
papers discussed IMT.

However, the literature on mutual intelligibility
has a longer background of scholarly work and is
also closely related to our research area in a broad
sense (Voegelin and Harris, 1951; Pierce, 1952;
Yamagiwa, 1967).

Cheng (1997) has measured the relationship
among dialects of Chinese . Also Szeto (2000)
tested the intelligibility of Chinese using a tape-
recorded text (RTT), asking the participant group
members to write down the recognized vocabu-
laries (Szeto, 2000). In a slightly recent attempt,
Kluge (2006) suggested some improvements with
regard to the question-answering approach of stan-
dard RTT. However, in none of theses studies the
computational aspects of the process have been of
concern to the researchers.

Tang and van Heuven (2009) have performed an
experiment on Chinese and assessed intelligibility
among a number of its dialects. They discuss the
adequacy of mutual intelligibility testing “to de-
termine how different two languages or language
varieties are”. Their method is based on speech
recognition at both word and sentence intelligibil-
ity level.

Munday (2009) refers to intralingual translation
as “rewording” and describes it as the process of
summarizing or rewriting a text in the same lan-
guage. However, the majority of this work has fo-
cused on interlingual, particularly bilingual trans-
lation.

From a different perspective, Beijering et
al. (2008) have studied the dialectal and inter-
language intelligibility and perceived linguistic
distance among Scandinavian dialects using Lev-
enshtein algorithm. According to Beijering et
al. (2008) the Levenshtein algorithm is able to
successfully predict intelligibility among different
languages/dialects.

3 Methodology

We were not able to apply the probabilistic ap-
proach in inter-dialect machine translation be-
cause of the lack of required infrastructure in
terms of parallel, annotated, and tagged corpora
at the time of conducting this project. Therefore,
we aimed to use a method for intralingual (inter-
dialect) MT between Sorani and Kurmanji that is
applicable in the absence of large data. As a re-
sult, we used a modified version of the method
suggested by Zhang (1998) in which a word collo-
cation list, a bidialectal dictionary and a series of
rules to handle syntactic differences between the
dialects are used to perform inter-dialect MT be-
tween Mandarin and Cantonese. In our adaptation,
we have not considered the grammatic differences
of Kurmanji. There are two reasons for this, first,
lack of the required resources such as tagged cor-
pora which does not allow us to implement an ef-
ficient syntactic analysis, and second, the regional
variations in Kurmanji (Öpengin and Haig, 2014)
makes the rules more complicated.

Therefore, we have based our method on the de-
velopment of the two bidialectal dictionaries, one
for Sorani to Kurmanji equivalents, and the other
for Kuramnji to Sorani. We have implemented a
word-for-word translation, which is also known as
word-by-word (in a number of texts it is also called
literal) or direct translation. This is an incremen-
tal transformation of the source-language text into
a target-language text without having any knowl-
edge about phrasing or grammatical structure in
the source or target language (Jurafsky and Mar-
tin, 2008).

3.1 Dictionary Development

We used web data, mainly websites of Kurdish
media and universities in Iraqi Kurdistan region,
for our data collection. In terms of the genre, we
selected the texts that were about art, literature,
sport, and education. The reason was that we were
interested in assessing the efficiency/adequacy of

65



our method in helping Kurmanji users to be able
to comprehend the online texts of ordinary day-
to-day social genres written in Sorani and vice
versa. We transliterated the texts in Persian/Arabic
to Latin. We processed these texts and extracted
their lexicon. We then used several Kurdish dictio-
naries to set the first sets of word equivalents, the
lexicon, in the target dialect. For this purpose, we
used (Demı̂rhan, 2007; Wı̂kı̂ferheng and Ferhenga
azad (Azad Dictionary), 2015; Ronahı̂, 2015; Mo-
hammed Ali, 2008). The first three items are avail-
able online and the last one is in printed format.
We also used our knowledge about the dialects
and consulted language informants in the cases
that the dictionaries could not resolve. This round
of dictionary development process produced 6792
words out of which 2632 words are in Kurmanji
and 4160 in Sorani.

3.2 Evaluation Method

We evaluated the efficiency of the implemented
IMT by adapting the human raters method, which
uses human experts to rate the translated texts.
In this method several parameters are used such
as fidelity or accuracy, intelligibility or clarity,
and style (Fiederer and O´Brien, 2009; Ahsan et
al., 2010). Although automated methods such
as BLEU ( bilingual evaluation understudy) (Pa-
pineni et al., 2002) have been implemented for
MT evaluation, they perform more efficiently in
the presence of proper corpora and language mod-
els, which were not available in our case.

We followed a combination of qualita-
tive/quantitative approach for the evaluation
process. In our adaptation of human raters, the
translated texts are given to several speakers
whose main dialects are not the same as the origi-
nal text. Also some speakers will be chosen who
have learned one of theses dialects as a second
language and they do not have any familiarity, or
at least any considerable familiarity, with the other
dialect. The method then quantitatively evaluates
the comprehensibility/understandability degree of
the translated texts using this parameter. We also
conduct a short interview with the human raters
after they rated the text to qualitatively assess the
result. We have not considered “style” parameter
of human rating in our experiment because we
have not evaluated the syntactic/parsing aspect of
the translated texts.

For comprehensibility evaluation, Fiederer and

O´Brien (2009) suggest 4 levels while Ahsan et al.
(2010) suggest 5 levels. In our approach the trans-
lated texts is ranked in 5 categories: not under-
standable, slightly understandable, understand-
able, and completely understandable. Neverthe-
less, as it was mentioned, the translation evalu-
ation is a subjective process no matter how one
tries to quantify it. We briefly explain to the par-
ticipants that they should rate a text as not under-
standable if they find that they cannot comprehend
what the text is about; as slightly understandable
if they know the meaning of a number of words
and even a sentence but they do not have an over-
all comprehension of the text; as understandable
if they comprehend the text but they do not know
a few words; as completely understandable if they
comprehend the text and they know the meaning
of all words.

After rating process by each participant, we
hold an interview to verify their understanding
level. In this interview, we ask participants to
tell us what the passages were about in their own
words. Furthermore, if the given rate is slightly
understandable or understandable, we ask the par-
ticipant to explain what is the reason that they have
not rated the text as completely understandable.

We also ask the participants to rank themselves
with regard to their fluency in reading Kurdish
texts in Latin, because many Kurdish speaking
people in Iraqi Kurdistan either cannot read Kur-
dish texts in Latin or they are not fluent in reading
this script 1. We will ask more precise questions
in the interview to verify the comprehensibility of
the text, if a participant rates their Latin reading
fluency below good.

Importantly, this study has not intended to con-
sider the aesthetic aspects of the translation as an
art, rather its intention is to evaluate the adequacy
of this approach in the absence of large data that
could support a high quality translation.

4 Experiments

We developed a transliterator to transliterate texts
in Persian/Arabic script into Latin script. The dic-
tionaries created in Latin script and where it was
necessary the vocabulary was transliterated from
Persian/Arabic into Latin. We manually removed

1In fact, most of the Kurdish speaking people, even if they
are well-educated, might not be fluent in reading Kurdish
texts either in Latin or Persian/Arabic or Cyrillic depending
on the region who they live or have grown up.

66



Yekgirtû double-sign letters, such as “sh” in Yek-
girtû and replaced with “ş” in Latin, when the
source was created using Yekgirtû alphabet. We
also uniformed the diacritics, for example by re-
placing “´” with “ˆ”.

For the evaluation of the implemented IMT, we
arbitrarily chose 3 passages from Kurdish media.
For the Sorani texts we transliterated the texts
from Persian/Arabic script into Latin script. We
then machine translated the texts and printed the
output with the intelligibility rating printed along-
side each translated text in the way that we men-
tioned in Section 3. We gave the texts to our partic-
ipants in the human rating process. Out of 11 par-
ticipants who were all native Kurdish speakers, 3
could only speak in Kurmanji, 5 could only speak
in Sorani, 2 could speak in both dialects. There
was one participant who was not native Kurdish
speaker and has learned basic Sorani dialect. Ex-
cept the latter case, the other participant ranked
their fluency in reading Latin texts at least very
good. Although one participant rated their Latin
reading fluency as beginner, we verified the eval-
uation in the interview and found it appropriate.
During the evaluation process, we did not explain
to the participants that the texts were a machine
translated results and only asked them to rate the
text based on their understanding. We did not in-
tervene or help in any case until the rating was fin-
ished.

The interviews showed that in all cases the rat-
ing was almost conforming with what had been
assigned. However, when we asked participants
who had rated a text understandable about why
they did not find it completely understandable, we
realized this was coming from the grammatical is-
sues of the translated text. The participants replied
that they had found the text not fluent from gram-
matical perspective.

Figures 1 and 2 show two snapshots of parts the
documents used in the IMT evaluation.

The results of this experiment is show in
Table 1.

The evaluation shows that none of the human
raters rated the output to be not understandable.
Importantly, the result shows that a significant per-
centage of the human raters have rated the output
as understandable. However, 8% of the partici-
pants in the test, ranked the results as completely

Understandability Sorani to
Kurmanji

Kurmanji
to Sorani

Not Understandable 0% 0%
Slightly Understandable 29% 21%
Understandable 63% 71%
Completely Understandable 8% 8%

Table 1: Understandability of the IMT output -
The table shows that 82% of the human raters,
rated the output of IMT to be quite understand-
able.

understandable.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no base-

line or golden-standard available for inter-dialect
translations at the time of writing this paper. To
illustrate, in the work by Zhang (1998) on inter-
dialect MT, neither a quantitative evaluation of the
developed system, nor any measures and baselines
with which the system’s performance could have
been evaluated, have been provided. This is, per-
haps, because this work seems to be the first study
of the kind. As an another example, Nakov and
Tiedemann (2012) who have studied MT among
closely-related languages have used BLEU (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002) as an evaluation method and
compared their suggested approaches using the
mentioned method. However, we were not able
to apply BLEU for the reasons we mentioned in
Section 3.2. Also in a recent work Shah and
Boitet (2015) have used raw machine translation
for translating Hindi tweets into English and have
used the measure of understandability without re-
ferring to a certain baseline. Therefore we based
our evaluation on the definitions that we suggested
in Section 3.2.

5 Discussion

The experiment showed that the system performs
at an acceptable level as about 82% of human
raters rated the results as understandable. The
evaluation also shows that none of the human
raters rated the output to be not understandable.
However, this rate for Sorani to Kurmanji is less
than the rate for Kurmanji to Sorani outputs. The
reason for this, as participants in the evaluation
also confirm it, is because in the translation pro-
cess, as the consequence of lack of underlying
language resources, we could not apply the tech-
niques of reordering the words and word align-
ment to make the output to completely conform
with the Kurmanji structure. This causes the out-

67



Fig. 1: IMT Evaluation - Kurmanji to Sorani

Fig. 2: IMT Evaluation - Sorani to Kurmanji

put to be seemed as an artificial and influent text
which makes the evaluation rate different for So-
rani to Kurmanji translation. But, because Sorani
does not recognize genders and also its structure is
more flexible as a result of borrowing more struc-
tures from other dialects, particularly, in the Iraqi
Kurdistan region, where the evaluation has been
conducted, the translated texts into Sorani have re-
ceived better ratings.

The results showed that the method performs at
an applicable level. However, we are also inter-
ested in finding the justifications for this fact from
computational perspective. As Table 2 shows, the
two bidialectal dictionaries do not share a high
percentage common vocabulary. That is, perhaps
the common vocabulary is not the only reason that
justifies the acceptable performance of the system.
Therefore, we will look into the Levenshtein dis-

Count Total Kurmanji Sorani
Words 6792 2632 4160
Common
Words

208 208 208

Percentage 3% 7% 5%

Table 2: The table shows the number of words
attributed to each dialect alongside the common
words among the dialects. It also shows the per-
centage of the common words to all words and to-
tal words in each dialect dictionary.

tance between our bidialectal dictionaries to assess
whether there is any correlation between this pa-
rameter and the our hypothesis about the efficiency
of IMT.

68



5.1 Levenshtein Distance and Intelligibility

We studied the results of our experiments from
the perspective of Levenshtein distance in both
bidalectal dictionaries in order to find any cor-
relations between the efficiency of the suggested
method and the similarities among the dialects vo-
cabulary. Researchers in the NLP and CL have
addressed the issue of intelligibility and similar-
ity among languages and dialects from different
points of view. For instance, Casad (1992) states
that “the set of variables that underlie linguistic
similarity are largely distinct from those that un-
derlie intelligibility”. Unlike “linguistic similar-
ity”, word similarity and word synonymy is one
of the most computationally developed ideas. It
has applications in several areas of NLP and CL
such as Information Retrieval (IR), summariza-
tion, and MT. Two words are considered as similar
if they share common meaning elements (Jurafsky
and Martin, 2008). Word similarity has been in-
vestigated in different contexts. As a related ex-
ample to this research subject, Bondi Johannessen
et al. (2005) have investigated word similarity in
the Scandinavian languages which are assumed as
mutually intelligible dialects. Also Ljubšić and
Kranjčić (2015) have studied Language Identifica-
tion (LI) on Twitter using word similarity (Ljubšić
and Kranjčić, 2015).

Word distance is another perspective of word
similarity. From this perspective, one can mea-
sure the differences between two words (the “dis-
tance”) instead of their similarities. That is, the
less the distance between the words, the more sim-
ilar the words are and the more the distance be-
tween te words, the less similar the words are.
The Levenshtein distance measures the distance
between the two words by counting the number of
deletions, substitutions, and insertions that trans-
fers one sequence into the other (Jurafsky and
Martin, 2008). In the context of our experiment,
Beijering et al. (2008) have applied this method in
their study about the dialectal and inter-language
intelligibility.

We calculated the Levenshtein distance among
our bi-dialectal dictionaries entries. Figures 3 and
4 show the results of this calculation for Kurmanji-
Sorani and Sorani-Kurmanji dictionaries respec-
tively.

...
..

0

.

100

.

200

.

300

.

400

.

500

.

600

.

700

.

800

.

900

.0 .
2

.

4

.

6

.

8

.

10

.

12

.

14

.

16

.

Word

.

D
is

ta
nc

e

Fig. 3: Levenshtein Distance, Kurmanji-Sorani
Bidialectal Dictionary - The plot shows the num-
bers of words with a certain distance in the dictio-
nary.

...
..

0

.

500

.

1,000

.

1,500

.

2,000

.

2,500

.

3,000

.

3,500

.0 .
2

.

4

.

6

.

8

.

10

.

12

.

14

.

16

.

Word

.

D
is

ta
nc

e

Fig. 4: Levenshtein Distance, Sorani-Kurmanji
Bidialectal Dictionary - The plot shows the num-
bers of words with a certain distance in the dictio-
nary.

As the Figures 3 and 4 show, except in a few
cases, the plots indicate that majority of vocabu-
lary of the two dialects have no more than 2 to 3
distances with each other. Based on this figures
and the data of in Table 2 we suggest two reasons
for the competency of our method. First, the Kur-
manji and Sorani dialects are sharing a common
vocabulary that although does not form a large
portion of their lexicon, plays an important role
as the basis for their lexicon structure. Second, the
differences in a majority of the vocabulary that is
used in social conversations differ by one or two
letters, or sometimes just phonemes, for example,
“ştêk” and “şêwezmanı̂” in Sorani versus “tştêk”
and “şêwezimanı̂” in Kurmanji. Further investiga-
tion is required perhaps with the help of Kurdish
linguists to come up with solid conclusion in the
future studies.

69



6 Conclusion

We implemented an Intralingual Machine Trans-
lation for translating texts in Kurmani to Sorani.
We used word-for-word translation (literal or di-
rect translation) among the dialects. The results
were tested using human raters method. The ex-
periments, according to different human raters,
showed that this naive approach could provide a
significantly intelligible results according to dif-
ferent human raters. The experiment also showed
that this approach might be able to be considered
as an immediate remedy for the current lack of
corpus issue. In fact, the approach, if incorporated
to the online resources, allow the speakers of one
dialect to have access to the resources of the oth-
ers with a reasonable degree of understandability.
It also allows Kurdish computational linguists to
focus on other aspects of the computational dialec-
tology through studying the intelligibility issues.

Nevertheless, this study has not intended to con-
sider the aesthetic aspects of the translation as an
art, rather its intention is to evaluate the adequacy
of this approach in the absence of large data that
could support a high quality translation. More-
over, the outcome of this study might help other
linguistics studies about the relation of the diverse
dialects of a language such as Kurdish. The ex-
periments showed that translated texts are under-
standable according to readers in 71% cases for
Kurmanji and 79% for Sorani. They are slightly
understandable in 29% cases for Kurmanji and
21% for Sorani.

However, there are several areas that we believe
might be of interest as future work. For exam-
ple, to investigate the extent to which the word-
for-word translation of Kurdish dialect could be
beneficial. For instance, to develop a system based
on a shallow-transfer and rule-based approach us-
ing Apertium platform (Peradin et al., 2014) and
to compare this method with the previous one in
terms of the quality of the output, the speed of
the system and the simplicity of reapplying the
method to other Kurdish dialects. In addition, the
evaluation approach can be changed from human
rating to automated methods for example, BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2002). Also to assess whether
these approaches eliminates the role of parallel
corpus in intralingual translation by adding gram-
matic rules, can be conducted as another research.
Moreover, to analyze the case of word ambiguity
in the implemented IMT, more investigation on the

role of the Levenshtein distance, the implication of
phonological/morphological differences, and sim-
ilarities between the dialects are other areas that
need to be studied further. Finally, the implemen-
tation of the method for translation between other
Kurdish dialects could reveal more enlightening
facts about the mutual intelligibility among these
dialects. This also helps in better understanding
the role of IMT with respect to making these di-
alects comprehensible among different audience,
particularly web users.

Acknowledgments

We would like to express our warm appreciations
to Dr. Dzejla Medjedovic an Assistant Professor
and Vice Dean of Graduate Program at the Uni-
versity Sarajevo School of Science and Technol-
ogy (SSST) for reviewing this paper and providing
influential recommendations. We would also like
to thank the anonymous reviewers who have pro-
vided constructive suggestions that have improved
the final version of this paper.

References
Arafat Ahsan, Prasanth Kolachina, Sudheer Kolachina,

Dipti Misra Sharma, and Rajeev Sangal. 2010.
Coupling Statistical Machine Translation with Rule-
based Transfer and Generation. In Proceedings of
the 9th Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas.

Association for Computional Linguistics. 2015. Joint
Workshop on Language Technology for Closely Re-
lated Languages, Varieties and Dialects. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Septem-
ber.

Lisa Ballesteros and Bruce Croft. 1996. Dictionary
Methods for Cross-lingual Information Retrieval. In
Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages
791–801. Springer.

Karin Beijering, Charlotte Gooskens, and Wilbert
Heeringa. 2008. Predicting intelligibility and per-
ceived linguistic distances by means of the Leven-
shtein algorithm. Linguistics in the Netherlands,
15:13–24.

Janne Bondi Johannessen, Kristin Hagen, Åsne Haa-
land, Andra Björk Jónsdottir, Anders Nøklestad,
Dimitris Kokkinakis, Paul Meurer, Eckhard Bick,
and Dorte Haltrup. 2005. Named entity recognition
for the mainland Scandinavian languages. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 20(1):91–102.

Eugene H. Casad. 1992. Windows on bilingualism.
Summer Institute of Linguistics.

70



Sin-wai Chan. 2014. Routledge Encyclopedia of
Translation Technology. Routledge.

Chin-Chuan Cheng. 1997. Measuring relationship
among dialects: DOC and related resources. Com-
putational Linguistics & Chinese Language Pro-
cessing, 2(1):41–72.

Umı̂d Demı̂rhan. 2007. Ferhenga Destı̂ -kurdı̂ bi kurdı̂
- çapa duyem a berfireh (Kurdish to Kurdish Dic-
tionary, expanded 2nd ed). weşanên SEWADê (SE-
WAD Publication). In Kurdish.

Ali Farghaly and Khaled Shaalan. 2009. Arabic nat-
ural language processing: Challenges and solutions.
ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information
Processing (TALIP), 8(4):14.

Rebecca Fiederer and Sharon O´Brien. 2009. Qual-
ity and Machine Translation: A Realistic Objective.
Journal of Specialised Translation, 11:52–74.

Geoffrey Haig and Ergin Öpengin. 2014. Introduc-
tion to Special Issue-Kurdish: A critical research
overview. Kurdish Studies, 2(2):99–122.

Hossein Hassani and Dzejla Medjedovic. 2016. Au-
tomatic Kurdish Dialects Identification. Computer
Science & Information Technology, 6(2):61–78.

Amir Hassanpour. 1992. Nationalism and language in
Kurdistan, 1918-1985. Edwin Mellen Pr.

Mehrdad R. Izady. 1992. The Kurds: A concise hand-
book. Taylor & Francis.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. Speech
and Language Processing. Prentice Hall, 2 edition.

Angela Kluge. 2006. RTT retelling method: An Al-
ternative Approach to Intelligibility Testing. Occa-
sional paper. Dallas: SIL International.

Kurdish Academy of Languages. 2016. The Kurdish
Population.

Nikola Ljubšić and Denis Kranjčić. 2015. Discrimi-
nating between closely related languages on twitter.
Informatica, 39(1):1.

Shervin Malmasi. 2016. Subdialectal differences in
sorani kurdish. In Proceedings of the VarDial Work-
shop, Osaka, Japan, December.

Ayishe Mohammed Ali. 2008. Kurdish-Kurdish Dic-
tionary. Ministry of Culture-KRG. In Kurdish.

Jeremy Munday. 2009. Introducing translation stud-
ies: Theories and applications. Routledge.

Preslav Nakov and Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Combining
Word-level and Character-level Models for Machine
Translation Between Closely-related Languages. In
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Short Papers
- Volume 2, ACL ’12, pages 301–305, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Kurdish Academy of Language. 2016. KAL Featured
Articles.

Ergin Öpengin and Geoffrey Haig. 2014. Regional
variation in Kurmanji: A preliminary classification
of dialects. Kurdish Studies, 2(2):143–176.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Hrvoje Peradin, Filip Petkovsky, and Francis M. Tyers.
2014. Shallow-transfer rule-based machine trans-
lation for the Western group of South Slavic lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the 9th SaLTMiL Work-
shop on Free/open-Source Language Resources for
the Machine Translation of Less-Resourced Lan-
guages, pages 25–30.

Joe E. Pierce. 1952. Dialect distance testing in algo-
nquian. International Journal of American Linguis-
tics, 18(4):203–210.

Erdal Ronahı̂. 2015. Lı̂steya soranı̂-kurmancı̂ (Sorani-
Kurmanji Dictionary). In Kurdish.

Fatiha Sadat, Farnazeh Kazemi, and Atefeh Farzindar.
2014. Automatic Identification of Arabic Dialects
in Social Media. In Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Workshop on Social Media Retrieval and
Analysis, pages 35–40. ACM.

Lenhart Schubert. 2015. Computational linguistics.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Spring
2015 Edition.

Ritesh Shah and Christian Boitet. 2015. Under-
standability of machine-translated Hindi tweets be-
fore and after post-editing: perspectives for a rec-
ommender system. In Tweet Translation Workshop
2015, pages 44–50. CEUR-WS.org.

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili, Shahin Salavati, and An-
witaman Datta. 2014. Towards kurdish information
retrieval. ACM Transactions on Asian Language In-
formation Processing (TALIP), 13(2):7.

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili. 2012. Challenges
in Kurdish Text Processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1212.0074.

Cecilia Szeto. 2000. Testing intelligibility among
Sinitic dialects. In Proceedings of ALS2K, the
2000 Conference of the Australian Linguistic Soci-
ety. Citeseer.

Chaoju Tang and Vincent J. van Heuven. 2009. Mu-
tual intelligibility of Chinese dialects experimentally
tested. Lingua, 119:24.

Chaoju Tang, Vincent J. van Heuven, et al. 2008. Mu-
tual intelligibility of Chinese dialects tested func-
tionally. Linguistics in the Netherlands, 25(1):145–
156.

71



Carl F. Voegelin and Zellig S. Harris. 1951. Methods
for determining intelligibility among dialects of nat-
ural languages. Proceedings of the American Philo-
sophical Society, 95(3):322–329.

Wı̂kı̂ferheng and Ferhenga azad (Azad Dictionary).
2015. Pêvek:soranı̂-kurmancı̂ (Amendment: Sorani-
Kurmanji). In Kurdish.

Joseph K. Yamagiwa. 1967. On dialect intelligibility
in Japan. Anthropological Linguistics, pages 1–17.

Marcos Zampieri, Liling Tan, Nikola Ljubešić, and
Jörg Tiedemann, editors. 2014. The 1 st Workshop
on Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages, Vari-
eties and Dialects, Dublin, Ireland, August. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Xiaoheng Zhang. 1998. Dialect mt: a case study be-
tween cantonese and mandarin. In Proceedings of
the 17th international conference on Computational
linguistics-Volume 2, pages 1460–1464. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

72


