



















































Toward Automated Early Sepsis Alerting: Identifying Infection Patients from Nursing Notes


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2017 workshop, pages 257–262,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Toward Automated Early Sepsis Alerting: Identifying Infection Patients
from Nursing Notes

Emilia Apostolova
Language.ai

Chicago, IL, USA
emilia@language.ai

Tom Velez
Vivace Health Solutions

Cardiff, CA, USA
tom.velez@cta.com

Abstract

Severe sepsis and septic shock are condi-
tions that affect millions of patients and
have close to 50% mortality rate. Early
identification of at-risk patients signifi-
cantly improves outcomes. Electronic
surveillance tools have been developed
to monitor structured Electronic Medical
Records and automatically recognize early
signs of sepsis. However, many sepsis
risk factors (e.g. symptoms and signs of
infection) are often captured only in free
text clinical notes. In this study, we de-
veloped a method for automatic monitor-
ing of nursing notes for signs and symp-
toms of infection. We utilized a creative
approach to automatically generate an an-
notated dataset. The dataset was used
to create a Machine Learning model that
achieved an F1-score ranging from 79 to
96%.

1 Introduction

Severe sepsis and septic shock are rapidly progres-
sive, life-threatening conditions caused by compli-
cations from an infection. They are major health-
care problems that affect millions of patients glob-
ally each year (Kim and Hong, 2016). The mortal-
ity rate for severe sepsis and septic shock is ap-
proaching 50% (Nguyen et al., 2006).

A key goal in critical care medicine is the early
identification and treatment of infected patients
with early stage sepsis. The most recent guide-
lines for the management of severe sepsis and sep-
tic shock include early recognition and manage-
ment of these conditions as medical emergencies,
immediate administration of resuscitative fluids,
frequent reassessment, and empiric antibiotics as
soon as possible following recognition (Dellinger

et al., 2008).
Early recognition of infections that can lead to

sepsis, severe sepsis and/or septic shock can be
challenging for several reasons: 1) these condi-
tions can quickly develop from any form of com-
mon infections (bacterial, viral or fungal) and can
be localized or generalized; 2) culture-dependent
diagnosis of infection is commonly slow and prior
use of antibiotics may make cultures falsely neg-
ative (Vincent, 2016); 3) systemic inflammatory
response syndrome, traditionally associated with
sepsis, may be the result of other noninfectious
disease processes (Bone et al., 1992). Conse-
quently, clinicians frequently rely on a myriad of
non-specific symptoms of infections and physio-
logical signs of systemic inflammatory response
for rapid diagnosis. Each hour of delay in the
administration of recommended therapy is associ-
ated with a linear increase in the risk of mortality
rate (Kumar et al., 2006; Han et al., 2003), driving
the need for automation of early sepsis recogni-
tion.

In response to this need, electronic surveil-
lance tools have been developed to monitor for the
arrival of new patient electronic medical record
(EMR) data, automatically recognize early signs
of sepsis risk in specific patients, and trigger alerts
to clinicians to help guide timely, effective inter-
ventions (Herasevich et al., 2011; Azzam et al.,
2009; Koenig et al., 2011). The automated deci-
sion logic used in many existing sepsis screening
tools, for example (Nguyen et al., 2014; Hooper
et al., 2012; Nelson et al., 2011), relies on consen-
sus criteria-based rules.

Structured EMR data, such as diagnostic codes,
vital signs and orders for tests, imaging and med-
ications, can be a reliable source of sepsis crite-
ria. However, many sepsis risk factors (e.g. symp-
toms and signs of infection) are routinely captured
solely in free text clinical notes. The aim of this

257



study is to develop a system for the detection of
signs and symptoms of infection from free-text
nursing notes. The output of the system is later
used, in conjunction with available structured data,
as an input to an electronic surveillance tool for an
early detection of sepsis.

2 Task Definition and Dataset

Depending on the infection source and the
specifics of the patient history, signs and symp-
toms of infection can vary widely. In addition,
similar symptoms can be stated using a number
of synonymous expressions, complicated by the
presence of abbreviations, variant spellings and
misspellings. Table 1 lists nursing note snippets
indicating a possible presence of infection with
various degrees of certainty. For example, line
items 1, 8, and 12 indicate increased temperature;
line items 1, 3, 6, 7, and 13 indicate the use of
infection-treating antibiotics; line items 4, 7, 9,
11, and 13 mention specific infectious diseases. A
number of examples mention additional infection
symptoms or infection detecting tests.

1 Afebrile on antibiotics.
2 Very large copious amount of secretions,sputum
3 ... medicated with iv cefazolin dose 2 of 3
4 UA positive for UTI.
5 Blood culture pos for gram neg organisms.
6 Elevated WBC count, on clindamycin IV.
7 ... continues on clindamycin(D6), pen-G(D5)

and doxycycline(D4) for LLL pneumonia
8 84 year old male with h/o throat cancer who

presented on [DATE] to [LOCATION] with fever,
diffuse rash, renal failure and altered mental status.

9 Pt had a positive sputum specs for GBS and GPC,
and he has HSV on lips.

10 ... blood, urine and sputum culture sent today ...
11 PEG tube to gravity, episodes of vomitting on day

shift,NPO. Contact precautions MRSA.
12 Pt had temp spike of 102.4
13 Levaquin started for pnuemonia.
14 Had infected knee prosthesis which led to wash out

of joint yesterday.

Table 1: MIMIC-III nursing note snippets indicating a pres-
ence of infection with various degrees of certainty. Abbrevi-
ations and misspellings are preserved to demonstrate the task
challenges.

In the literature of identifying patient phenotype
cohorts using electronic health records, most stud-
ies map textual elements to standard vocabular-
ies, such as the Unified Medical Language Sys-
tem (UMLS) (Shivade et al., 2014). The standard
vocabulary concepts are later used in rule-based,
and, in some cases, Machine Learning (ML) ap-
proaches to identify patient cohorts.

In the context of identifying infection from clin-

ical notes, however, such an approach poses a
number of challenges. Symptoms can vary widely
depending on the source of infection, for example,
redness, sputum, swelling, pus, phlegm, vomiting,
increased white blood cell count, etc. The same
symptom can also be expressed in a large num-
ber of ways, for example, afebrile, temp spike of
102.4, fever, etc. There is a large number of condi-
tions indicating infections, for example UTI, strep
throat, hepatitis, HIV/AIDS, etc. In addition, ab-
breviations and misspellings are quite common in
the context of ICU care, for example, pneumonia,
PNA, pnuemonia, pneu, etc.

Due to their nature, the dataset and task are bet-
ter suited for ML approaches that are not relying
on standard vocabularies or a structured set of fea-
tures. As with most ML tasks in the clinical do-
main, the challenge in this approach is obtaining a
sufficient amount of training data (Chapman et al.,
2011).

To address these challenges, we utilized the
MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016) and de-
veloped a creative solution to automatically gener-
ate training data as described in section 3. MIMIC
(Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care) is
a large, freely-available database comprising dei-
dentified health-related data associated with over
40,000 patients who stayed in critical care units
of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center be-
tween 2001 and 2012. The dataset contains over
2 million free-text clinical notes. We focused only
on nursing notes for adult patients, and our dataset
consists of a total of 634,369 nursing notes.

3 Rule-based Training Dataset Creation

To obtain a sizable training dataset we explored
the use of available MIMIC-III structured data,
such as test orders and results, prescribed medi-
cations, and diagnosis codes. However, this ap-
proach did not translate to accurately identifying
nursing notes suggesting infection for a number
of reasons1. Instead, we utilized a simple heuris-
tic. We observed that whenever there is an existing
infection or a suspicion of infection, the nursing
notes describe the fact that the patient is taking or
is prescribed infection-treating antibiotics. Thus,
identifying nursing notes describing the use of an-
tibiotics will, in most cases, also identify nursing
notes describing signs and symptoms of infection.

1Challenges include missing or incorrect data, discontin-
uous or disordered EMR data entry timestamps, etc.

258



To identify positive mentions of administered
antibiotics, we used a list of the 60 most com-
monly administered infection-treating antibiotics
in the MIMIC dataset (Misquitta, 2013). This ini-
tial list was then extended to include additional
antibiotic names, brands, abbreviations, spelling
variations, and common misspellings. We semi-
automated this laborious task by utilizing word
embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013). Word em-
beddings were generated utilizing all available
MIMIC-III nursing notes2. The initial set of an-
tibiotics was then extended using the closest word
embeddings in terms of cosine distance. For ex-
ample, the closest words to the antibiotic amox-
icillin are amox, amoxacillin, amoxycillin, ce-
fixime, suprax, amoxcillin, amoxicilin. As shown,
this includes misspellings, abbreviations, similar
drugs and brand names. The extended list was then
manually reviewed. The final infection-treating
antibiotic list consists of 402 unambiguous expres-
sions indicating antibiotics.

Antibiotics, however, are sometimes negated
and are often mentioned in the context of aller-
gies (e.g. allergic to penicillin). To distinguish
between affirmed, negated, and speculated men-
tions of administered antibiotics, we also devel-
oped a set of rules in the form of keyword trig-
gers. Similarly to the NegEx algorithm (Chapman
et al., 2001), we identified phrases that indicate
uncertain or negated mentions of antibiotics that
precede or follow a list of hand-crafted expression
at the sentence and clause levels. Word embed-
dings were again used to extend the list of triggers
with synonyms, spelling variations, abbreviations,
and misspellings. For example, the words allergic,
anaphylaxis, anaphalaxis, allerg, and anaphylax-
sis are all used as triggers indicating the negation
of an antibiotic use. The full list of keywords in-
dicating antibiotics, negation/speculation triggers
and conjunctions is available online3.

The described approach identified 186,158
nursing notes suggesting the unambiguous pres-
ence of infection (29%) and 3,262 notes suggest-
ing possible infection. The remaining 448,211
notes (70%) were considered to comprise our neg-
ative dataset, i.e. not suggesting infection.

2We used vector size 200, window size 7, and continuous
bag-of-words model.

3https://github.com/ema-/antibiotic-dictionary

4 Machine Learning Results

We modeled the task as a binary classification
of free-form clinical notes. It has been shown
that Support Vector Machines (Cortes and Vapnik,
1995) achieve superior results in most text clas-
sifications tasks and were selected as a sensible
first choice. The individual nursing notes were
represented as a bag-of-words (1-grams). The to-
kens were all converted to lower case and non-
alphanumeric characters were discarded. Tokens
that are present in more than 60% of all samples or
less than 6 times were also discarded. The tokens
were weighted using the tf-idf scheme (Salton and
McGill, 1986). We trained the model using lin-
ear kernel SVMs4 (Chang and Lin, 2011). We set
the positive class weight to 2 to address the un-
balanced dataset. 70% of the automatically gener-
ated dataset was used for training and the remain-
ing 30% for testing. This resulted in a precision of
93.12 and a recall of 99.04 as shown in Table 2.

Precision Recall F1-score
SVMauto 93.12 99.04 95.99
SVMgold 92.10 68.46 78.53

Table 2: Classification Results. SVMauto=Results from ap-
plying the SVM model on an automatically generated test
set of 190,000 nursing notes; SVMgold=Results from apply-
ing the SVM model on a manually reviewed dataset of 200
nursing notes.

As the training dataset was automatically cre-
ated, the above results do not truly reflect the
model performance. To evaluate the model on
the ground truth, a qualified professional manually
reviewed 200 randomly selected nursing notes.
These results are also shown in Table 2. While the
model precision remained high (92.10), the recall
dropped significantly to 68.46.

The drop in recall can be partially attributed
to the manner in which the testing data was cre-
ated. Nursing notes describing signs of infection
but failing to mention the use of antibiotics were
considered (incorrectly) negative examples. How-
ever, an error analysis revealed that the majority of
the false negatives (contributing to the low recall)
were actually all indicating low level of suspicion
of infection. For example, the human annotator
considered the following snippets sufficient to in-
dicate a possible infection afebrile, bld cx’s sent;
monitor temp, wbc’s, await stool cx results; lungs
coarse, thick yellow secretions suctioned from ett;

4We used the LibSVM library with both the cost and
gamma parameters set to 2 (obtained via grid-search param-
eter estimation).

259



awaiting results of CT, malignancy vs pneumonia.
In all cases, the note expresses only a suspicion for
infection, pending further tests.

We further attempted to improve the system per-
formance by utilizing Paragraph Vectors (Le and
Mikolov, 2014). Unsupervised algorithms have
been used to represent variable pieces of texts such
as paragraphs and documents as fixed-length fea-
ture representations (Paragraph Vectors). Stud-
ies have shown that Paragraph Vectors outperform
bag-of-words models on some text classification
tasks. We used the text from all nursing notes
to create Paragraph Vectors. We generated doc-
ument embeddings using a distributed memory
model and distributed bag-of-words model, each
of size 300 with a window size of 7. Combin-
ing the vectors of the distributed memory model
and the distributed bag-of-words model, we rep-
resented each document as a vector of size 600.
The paragraph vectors of the training instances
were then fed to a logistic regression, K-nearest
neighbors, and an SVM classifier. Results signif-
icantly under-performed the SVM bag-of-words
model and we were able to achieve a maximum
precision and recall of 63% and 77% respectively.

5 Related Work

A review of approaches to identifying patient phe-
notype cohorts using EMR data (Shivade et al.,
2014) describes a number of studies using clinical
notes, most often in combination with additional
structured information, such as diagnosis codes.
The study asserts that clinical notes are often the
only source of information from which to infer im-
portant phenotypic characteristics.

Demner-Fushman et al. (2009) note that clinical
events monitoring is one of the most common and
essential tasks of Clinical Decision Support sys-
tems. The task is in many respects similar to the
task of identifying patient phenotype cohorts and
it has been observed that free text clinical notes are
again the best source of information. For example,
Murff et al. (2003) found the electronic discharge
summaries to be an excellent source for detecting
adverse events. They also note that simple key-
words and triggers are not sufficient to detect such
events.

In the context of identifying infection from clin-
ical text, most studies map textual elements to
standard vocabularies, such as UMLS. For exam-
ple, Matheny et al. (2012) develop a system for de-
tecting infectious symptoms from emergency de-

partment and primary care clinical documentation,
utilizing keywords and SNOMED-CT concepts.
Bejan et al. (2012) describe a system for pneu-
monia identification from narrative reports using
n-grams and UMLS concepts. Similarly, Elkin
et al. (2008) encoded radiology reports using
SNOMED-CT concepts and developed a set of
rules to identify pneumonia cases.

Horng et al. (2017) develop an automated trig-
ger for sepsis clinical decision support at emer-
gency department triage. They utilize machine
learning and establish that free text drastically im-
proves the discriminatory ability of identifying
infection (increase in AUC from 0.67 to 0.86).
Arnold et al. (2014) develop an EHR screen-
ing tool to identify sepsis patients. They utilize
NLP applied to clinical documentation, providing
greater clinical context than laboratory and vital
sign screening alone. DeLisle et al. (2010) used
a combination of structured EMR parameters and
text analysis to detect acute respiratory infections.
Murff et al. (2011) develop a natural language
processing search approach to identify postoper-
ative surgical complications within a comprehen-
sive electronic medical record.

Halpern et al. (2014) describe a system for
learning to estimate and predict clinical state vari-
ables without labeled data. Similar to our ap-
proach, they use a combination of domain exper-
tise and vast amounts of unlabeled data, without
requiring labor-intensive manual labeling. In their
system, an expert encodes a certain amount of
domain knowledge (identifying anchor variables)
which is later used to train classifiers. Elkan and
Noto (2008) show that a classifier trained on posi-
tive and unlabeled examples predicts probabilities
that differ by only a constant factor from the true
conditional probabilities of being positive.

6 Discussion

We presented an approach to identifying nursing
notes describing the suspicion or presence of an
infection. We utilized the MIMIC-III dataset and
a creative approach to obtain an ample amount of
annotated data. We then applied ML methods to
the task and achieved performance sufficient for
practical applications. The ultimate goal of this
study is to utilize free-text notes, in combination
with structured EMR data, to build an automated
surveillance system for early detection of patients
at risk of sepsis.

260



References
R Arnold, J Isserman, S Smola, and E Jackson. 2014.

Comprehensive assessment of the true sepsis bur-
den using electronic health record screening aug-
mented by natural language processing. Critical
Care 18(1):P244.

Helen C Azzam, Satjeet S Khalsa, Richard Urbani,
Chirag V Shah, Jason D Christie, Paul N Lanken,
and Barry D Fuchs. 2009. Validation study of an au-
tomated electronic acute lung injury screening tool.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
ciation 16(4):503–508.

Cosmin Adrian Bejan, Fei Xia, Lucy Vanderwende,
Mark M Wurfel, and Meliha Yetisgen-Yildiz. 2012.
Pneumonia identification using statistical feature se-
lection. Journal of the American Medical Informat-
ics Association 19(5):817–823.

Roger C Bone, William J Sibbald, and Charles L
Sprung. 1992. The accp-sccm consensus confer-
ence on sepsis and organ failure. CHEST journal
101(6):1481–1483.

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. LIB-
SVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technol-
ogy 2:27:1–27:27. Software available at http://
www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/˜cjlin/libsvm.

Wendy W Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,
Gregory F Cooper, and Bruce G Buchanan. 2001.
A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings
and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal of
biomedical informatics 34(5):301–310.

Wendy W Chapman, Prakash M Nadkarni, Lynette
Hirschman, Leonard W D’avolio, Guergana K
Savova, and Ozlem Uzuner. 2011. Overcoming bar-
riers to nlp for clinical text: the role of shared tasks
and the need for additional creative solutions.

Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-
vector networks. Machine learning 20(3):273–297.

Sylvain DeLisle, Brett South, Jill A Anthony, Ericka
Kalp, Adi Gundlapallli, Frank C Curriero, Greg E
Glass, Matthew Samore, and Trish M Perl. 2010.
Combining free text and structured electronic med-
ical record entries to detect acute respiratory infec-
tions. PloS one 5(10):e13377.

R Phillip Dellinger, Mitchell M Levy, Jean M Carlet,
Julian Bion, Margaret M Parker, Roman Jaeschke,
Konrad Reinhart, Derek C Angus, Christian Brun-
Buisson, Richard Beale, et al. 2008. Surviving sep-
sis campaign: international guidelines for manage-
ment of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Inten-
sive care medicine 34(1):17–60.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Wendy W Chapman, and
Clement J McDonald. 2009. What can natural lan-
guage processing do for clinical decision support?
Journal of biomedical informatics 42(5):760–772.

Charles Elkan and Keith Noto. 2008. Learning classi-
fiers from only positive and unlabeled data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data min-
ing. ACM, pages 213–220.

Peter L Elkin, David Froehling, Dietlind Wahner-
Roedler, Brett E Trusko, Gail Welsh, Haobo Ma,
Armen X Asatryan, Jerome I Tokars, S Trent Rosen-
bloom, and Steven H Brown. 2008. Nlp-based iden-
tification of pneumonia cases from free-text radio-
logical reports. In AMIA.

Yoni Halpern, Youngduck Choi, Steven Horng, and
David Sontag. 2014. Using anchors to estimate clin-
ical state without labeled data. In AMIA Annual
Symposium Proceedings. American Medical Infor-
matics Association, volume 2014, page 606.

Yong Y Han, Joseph A Carcillo, Michelle A Dragotta,
Debra M Bills, R Scott Watson, Mark E Wester-
man, and Richard A Orr. 2003. Early reversal
of pediatric-neonatal septic shock by community
physicians is associated with improved outcome.
Pediatrics 112(4):793–799.

Vitaly Herasevich, Mykola Tsapenko, Marija Kojicic,
Adil Ahmed, Rachul Kashyap, Chakradhar Venkata,
Khurram Shahjehan, Sweta J Thakur, Brian W Pick-
ering, Jiajie Zhang, et al. 2011. Limiting ventilator-
induced lung injury through individual electronic
medical record surveillance. Critical care medicine
39(1):34–39.

Michael H Hooper, Lisa Weavind, Arthur P Wheeler,
Jason B Martin, Supriya Srinivasa Gowda,
Matthew W Semler, Rachel M Hayes, Daniel W
Albert, Norment B Deane, Hui Nian, et al. 2012.
Randomized trial of automated, electronic mon-
itoring to facilitate early detection of sepsis in
the intensive care unit. Critical care medicine
40(7):2096.

Steven Horng, David A Sontag, Yoni Halpern, Yacine
Jernite, Nathan I Shapiro, and Larry A Nathanson.
2017. Creating an automated trigger for sepsis clin-
ical decision support at emergency department triage
using machine learning. PloS one 12(4):e0174708.

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-
wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghas-
semi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo An-
thony Celi, and Roger G Mark. 2016. Mimic-iii,
a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific
data 3.

Won-Young Kim and Sang-Bum Hong. 2016. Sep-
sis and acute respiratory distress syndrome: re-
cent update. Tuberculosis and respiratory diseases
79(2):53–57.

Helen C Koenig, Barbara B Finkel, Satjeet S Khalsa,
Paul N Lanken, Meeta Prasad, Richard Urbani, and
Barry D Fuchs. 2011. Performance of an automated
electronic acute lung injury screening system in in-
tensive care unit patients. Critical care medicine
39(1):98–104.

261



Anand Kumar, Daniel Roberts, Kenneth E Wood,
Bruce Light, Joseph E Parrillo, Satendra Sharma,
Robert Suppes, Daniel Feinstein, Sergio Zanotti,
Leo Taiberg, et al. 2006. Duration of hypotension
before initiation of effective antimicrobial therapy is
the critical determinant of survival in human septic
shock. Critical care medicine 34(6):1589–1596.

Quoc V Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed rep-
resentations of sentences and documents. In ICML.
volume 14, pages 1188–1196.

Michael E Matheny, Fern FitzHenry, Theodore Sper-
off, Jennifer K Green, Michelle L Griffith, Eduard E
Vasilevskis, Elliot M Fielstein, Peter L Elkin, and
Steven H Brown. 2012. Detection of infectious
symptoms from va emergency department and pri-
mary care clinical documentation. International
journal of medical informatics 81(3):143–156.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Donald Misquitta. 2013. Early Prediction of Antibi-
otics in Intensive Care Unit Patients. Ph.D. thesis,
The Center for Biomedical Informatics at the Har-
vard Medical School.

Harvey J Murff, Fern FitzHenry, Michael E Matheny,
Nancy Gentry, Kristen L Kotter, Kimberly Crimin,
Robert S Dittus, Amy K Rosen, Peter L Elkin,
Steven H Brown, et al. 2011. Automated identifica-
tion of postoperative complications within an elec-
tronic medical record using natural language pro-
cessing. Jama 306(8):848–855.

Harvey J Murff, Vimla L Patel, George Hripcsak, and
David W Bates. 2003. Detecting adverse events
for patient safety research: a review of current
methodologies. Journal of biomedical informatics
36(1):131–143.

Jessica L Nelson, Barbara L Smith, Jeremy D Jared,
and John G Younger. 2011. Prospective trial of real-
time electronic surveillance to expedite early care
of severe sepsis. Annals of emergency medicine
57(5):500–504.

H Bryant Nguyen, Emanuel P Rivers, Fredrick M
Abrahamian, Gregory J Moran, Edward Abraham,
Stephen Trzeciak, David T Huang, Tiffany Osborn,
Dennis Stevens, David A Talan, et al. 2006. Severe
sepsis and septic shock: review of the literature and
emergency department management guidelines. An-
nals of emergency medicine 48(1):54–e1.

Su Q Nguyen, Edwin Mwakalindile, James S Booth,
Vicki Hogan, Jordan Morgan, Charles T Prickett,
John P Donnelly, and Henry E Wang. 2014. Auto-
mated electronic medical record sepsis detection in
the emergency department. PeerJ 2:e343.

Gerard Salton and Michael J McGill. 1986. Introduc-
tion to modern information retrieval .

Chaitanya Shivade, Preethi Raghavan, Eric Fosler-
Lussier, Peter J Embi, Noemie Elhadad, Stephen B
Johnson, and Albert M Lai. 2014. A review of
approaches to identifying patient phenotype co-
horts using electronic health records. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association
21(2):221–230.

Jean-Louis Vincent. 2016. The clinical challenge of
sepsis identification and monitoring. PLoS Med
13(5):e1002022.

262


