









































Non-Projectivity in Serbian: Analysis of Formal and Linguistic Properties

Aleksandra Miletic
CLLE, CNRS & University of Toulouse

France
aleksandra.miletic@univ-tlse2.fr

Assaf Urieli
CLLE, CNRS & University of Toulouse

and Joliciel Informatique
France

assaf.urieli@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper presents insights into non-
projective relations in Serbian based on
the analysis of an 81K token gold-standard
corpus manually annotated for dependen-
cies. We provide a formal profile of the
non-projective dependencies found in the
corpus, as well as a linguistic analysis of
the underlying structures. We compare the
observed properties of Serbian to those of
other languages found in existing studies
on non-projectivity.

1 Introduction

This contribution presents an initial analysis of
formal and linguistic properties of non-projective
structures in Serbian. The work is based on the
first freely available gold-standard corpus for
parsing Serbian. Previous experiments in parsing
this language (Agić et al., 2013; Jakovljević et
al., 2014; Agić and Ljubešić, 2015) did not lead
to the creation of a gold-standard corpus, and
whereas a Universal Dependency treebank is
under construction (Samardžić et al., 2017), it
has not yet been made available at the project
website at the time of writing this paper1. We
therefore (tentatively) consider that the corpus
used in the present contribution is the first freely
available gold-standard corpus of this kind for
Serbian. The corpus was developed as part of the
ParCoLab project, aimed at the constitution of a
Serbian-French-English parallel treebank, and it
can be downloaded from the project’s resource
page (http://parcolab.univ-tlse2.
fr/en/about/resources/).

The existence of this resource makes it possi-
ble to examine the properties of non-projectivity

1http://universaldependencies.org/
#upcoming-ud-treebanks. Last access: May 12,
2017.

in Serbian. Non-projectivity reflects syntactic
structures in which a dependant is separated from
its governor by an element of a different sub-
tree, leading to crossing edges in the dependency
tree. Typically, languages with richer morphology
and flexible word order tend to have more non-
projective structures. Since Serbian fits this cate-
gory, it can be expected to be an interesting object
of study from this point of view. This hypothesis is
further supported by the findings for other related
languages, such as Czech and Slovene, in both
of which over 2% of dependency edges are non-
projective, occurring in over 20% of sentences
(Havelka, 2007).

The phenomenon of non-projectivity holds in-
terest both for theoretical linguistics and for
parsing. Constituency-based theories approach
it through the notion of movement and traces
(in transformational grammars), or through that
of feature passing mechanisms (in the non-
transformational ones), whereas dependency-
based theories address it, for example, as
rising (Groß and Osborne, 2009), emancipa-
tion (Gerdes and Kahane, 2001), or climbing
(Duchier and Debusmann, 2001). In parsing, han-
dling non-projective structures increases compu-
tational complexity, and this type of processing
cannot be done by linear-complexity transition-
based parsers. For these reasons, non-projectivity
has been examined accross a number of languages
(Hajičová et al., 2004; Kuhlmann and Nivre, 2006;
Havelka, 2007; Bhat and Sharma, 2012; Mam-
brini and Passarotti, 2013). In these works, sev-
eral formal properties of dependency trees are
used to describe non-projectivity, such as well-
nestedness, maximum edge degree and maximum
gap degree (Kuhlmann and Nivre, 2006). There
is also an effort to identify the linguistic struc-
tures giving rise to non-projective syntactic re-
lations: see (Hajičová et al., 2004) for Czech,
(Bhat and Sharma, 2012) for Hindi, Urdu and

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 135-144,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

135



Bangla, (Mambrini and Passarotti, 2013) for An-
cient Greek. This allows for different types of
comparisons between languages. For example,
Mambrini and Passarotti (2013) underline the role
of clitics in non-projective structures in Ancient
Greek: these forms account for more than 40%
of words creating non-projectivity. Since the en-
clitics in Serbian behave the same way as those
in Ancient Greek (they follow Wackernagel’s law
and tend to occupy the 2nd position in the clause),
we can expect to find a comparable effect in our
corpus. Another example involves the fact that
both in Czech (Hajičová et al., 2004) and in Hindi
(Bhat and Sharma, 2012), non-projective nodes
can be caused by dependants of infinitives in con-
trol constructions moving out of their clause. The
same structure is possible in Serbian. An in-
depth analysis of non-projectivity in our corpus
would therefore allow us to draw parallels be-
tween Serbian and other languages, which could
be informative both from the processing perspec-
tive (tools and resources best suited for these lan-
guages) and from the typological one (types of
non-projective syntactic structures represented in
these languages).

Our goal in this contribution is to establish a
non-projectivity profile for Serbian: we examine
the formal properties of non-projective structures
in our corpus and accompany this account with
an analysis of the underlying linguistic phenom-
ena. We use this information to compare Serbian
to a number of different languages and bring for-
ward observations on both levels of analysis. The
remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
in section 2, we offer a brief presentation of our
working corpus, section 3 is dedicated to the anal-
ysis of the formal properties of non-projectivity in
the corpus and section 4 offers a linguistic analysis
of structures resulting in non-projectivity. Lastly,
in section 5, we give our conclusions and perspec-
tives for future work.

2 Working Corpus

The gold-standard treebank used in this work con-
tains 81K tokens annotated manually for POS-
tags, lemmas and syntactic dependencies. It is
based on two original literary texts in Serbian from
the 2nd half of the 20th century. It was developed
as part of the ParCoLab project, which goal is to
create a parallel treebank in Serbian, French and
English. The corpus is available at the following

address: http://parcolab.univ-tlse2.
fr/en/about/resources/.

Some basic corpus statistics are given in Table
1. Morphosyntactic annotation is done on 2 lev-
els: POS tags, and detailed morphosyntactic de-
scriptions (MSDs) including features such as case,
gender, number, person, tense, and degree of com-
parison. Given the relatively rich inflectional mor-
phology of Serbian, there are over 1000 possible
MSDs in our tagset, 647 of which occur in the cor-
pus.

Our syntactic annotation uses a project-specific
dependency set and annotation scheme2. The de-
pendency label set contains 50 basic labels, and
17 additional ones for treating ellipsis3. The la-
bels for core functions (subject, direct and indi-
rect object, predicatives) are based on the tradi-
tional Serbian syntax (cf. (Stanojčić and Popović,
2012; Ivić, 2005)). However, existing theoreti-
cal descriptions of verbal dependants other than
the ones cited above, as well as those of noun,
adjective and adverb dependants, are often based
on semantic rather than syntactic criteria, which
are ill-suited for parsing. We therefore introduce
a set of underspecified labels based on surface
properties of these elements: they identify the ele-
ment as a dependant, and indicate the morphosyn-
tactic nature of the head and dependant of the
relation. They correspond to the following pat-
tern: Dep(V|N|Adj|Adv)(Cas|Prep|Adj|Adv). For
instance, a dependant of a verb in form of a prepo-
sitional group is marked as DepVPrep, whereas a
nominal dependant in form of another noun in an
oblique case is given as DepNCas. Our goal is to
establish a reliable initial annotation of these ele-
ments that will allow for a corpus-based analysis
of their properties and lead to the creation of more
informative labels based on their syntactic charac-
teristics.

It is worth noting that the average sentence

2An alternative possiblity would have been to use the Uni-
versal Dependency annotation scheme. However, we agree
with some of the criticisms of the UD annotation scheme
pointed out by Groß and Osborne (2015) and prefer the
functional head approach to the lexical head one proposed
by UD. Furthermore, we found it relevant to keep a native
language-specific approach, especially given that there was
no other treebank for Serbian available at the beginning of
this project. Nonetheless, given the usefulness of the UD an-
notation scheme for a wide range of NLP research, automatic
conversion of the corpus into a UD-style resource is part of
the project’s perspectives

3We adopt the treatment for ellipsis used in Prague De-
pendency Treebank (Hajič et al., 1999), p. 204-221.

136



Tokens 81204 Sentences 2949
Wordforms 19681 Lemmas 10223
POS tags 15 MSDs 647
Dependency labels 67 (50+17)
Aver. sent. length 27.53 tokens
Aver. max. tree depth 7.23
Long-distance relations 5.78%
Non-projective trees 503
Non-projective edges 658
Non-projective nodes 725

Table 1: Gold corpus information

length in the corpus is relatively high. This is also
the case with the average maximum tree depth.
For this measure, we consider the node that is the
deepest in the tree and calculate its distance from
the root. The value given here is the average for all
the trees in the corpus. For the long-distance rela-
tionships, we used a threshhold of 7: 5.78% of the
edges in the corpus link nodes that are separated
by 7 or more tokens in the linear ordering of the
sentence.

3 Formal Analysis of Non-Projectivity in
Corpus

When defining projectivity, we follow the for-
mal definitions presented in (Kuhlmann and Nivre,
2006). We will now briefly describe the main
concepts used in this contribution less formally.
A sentence is formed of a sequence of tokens.
A syntactic tree drawn over a sentence is a con-
nected acyclic directed graph rooted at an artifi-
cial root node. The tokens represent the nodes of
this graph, and each directed arc from a governing
node to its dependant is an edge. A node is said to
dominate another node if the other node is its de-
scendent. A node is considered projective if the
subtree dominated by it contains no gaps, where
a gap occurs any time two adjacent nodes in the
subtree are separated by one or more tokens from
a different subtree—these tokens are then said to
be contained within the gap. A tree is projective if
all of its nodes are projective.

Over time, mechanisms for quantifying and
qualifying the non-projectivity in a language have
developed. In addition to direct indicators, such as
the percentage of non-projective nodes and trees
in a corpus, Kuhlmann and Nivre present various
other formal properties of projectivity, including
well-nestedness, maximum gap degree, and max-

imum edge degree. A well-nested tree is one
in which, for any two nodes A and B, if node
A does not dominate node B, then node A does
not dominate any gaps in node B’s subtree. A
node’s gap degree is the number of distinct gaps
in its subtree (regardless of each gap’s size). A
node’s edge degree is the number of edges orig-
inating outside the lower and upper boundaries
of the node’s sub-tree, and governing tokens con-
tained in the node’s gaps. For trees, these degrees
are taken to be the maximum degree among the
tree’s nodes. As in (Havelka, 2007), we also con-
sider non-projective edges (as opposed to nodes).
A non-projective edge is an edge from token i to
j, where at least one token between i and j is not
dominated by i. A single non-projective edge can
be responsible for multiple non-projective nodes,
as in example 1: here we have a single non-
projective edge, Tok5→Tok2, where Tok3 and
Tok4 are not dominated by Tok5. This edge is
responsible for two non-projective nodes, Tok5
(with Tok3 and Tok4 in the gap), and Tok4 (with
Tok3 in the gap).

(1)
Tok1 Tok2 Tok3 Tok4 Tok5

The frequency of non-projective edges, non-
projective trees and ill-nested trees in our corpus
is given in Table 2, whereas Table 3 gives de-
tails on gap degree and edge degree. For compar-
ison, we provide data for other languages based
on existing works4. We give data for Czech and
Slovene, as they are related to Serbian and it is rea-
sonable to expect comparable results for the three
languages, for Danish and Dutch, as European lan-
guages with well-known non-projective structures,
for Hindi as a relatively distant language, and for
Ancient Greek, as the language for which the ex-
isting works indicate the most prominent levels of
non-projectivity.

Based on the results in Table 2, we can see
that Serbian has a smaller percentage of non-
projective edges compared to other Slavic lan-
guages (Slovene and Czech), but the percentage of
non-projective trees is comparable. Ill-nested trees

4The data for Czech, Slovene and Dutch in Table 2 were
taken from (Havelka, 2007), whereas those for Czech and
Danish in Table 3 are from (Kuhlmann and Nivre, 2006).
The data for Ancient Greek and Hindi in both tables come
from (Mambrini and Passarotti, 2013) and (Bhat and Sharma,
2012), respectively.

137



Language Edges Trees
Tot. edges Non-proj.(%) Tot. trees Non-proj.(%) Ill-nested (%)

Serbian 81204 0.81 2949 17.06 0.17
Czech 1105437 2.13 72703 23.15 0.11
Slovene 25777 2.13 1534 22.16 0.20
Dutch 179063 5.90 13349 36.44 0.11
Hindi NA 1.65 20497 14.85 0.19

Table 2: Non-projective edges, non-projective and ill-nested trees in Serbian and other languages

Language Trees Gap degree (%) Edge degree (%)
Gd0 Gd1 Gd2 Gd3 Ed0 Ed1 Ed2 Ed3 Ed4 Ed5

Serbian 2949 82.94 16.58 0.44 0.03 82.94 15.36 1.66 0.03 - -
Czech 73088 76.85 22.72 0.42 0.01 76.85 22.69 0.35 0.09 0.01 <0.01
Danish 4393 84.95 14.89 0.16 - 84.95 13.29 1.32 0.39 0.05 -
Hindi 20497 85.14 14.56 0.28 0.02 85.14 14.24 0.45 0.11 0.03 -

A. Greek 24825 25.20 68.33 6.17 0.28 25.20 43.73 14.15 7.07 3.88 -

Table 3: Gap-degree and edge-degree in Serbian and other languages

comprising <1% of the trees in the corpus, well-
nestedness proves to be a useful relaxation of the
projectivity constraint for Serbian, as is the case
for all other languages considered.

Among the languages compared in Table 3, Ser-
bian has a similar profile to other modern lan-
guages (in contrast to Ancient Greek), with over
99% of the trees having a gap degree of 0 or 1,
and 98.30% of the trees with an edge degree of 0
or 1. Serbian and Danish are the only two mod-
ern languages where over 1.5% of the trees have
an edge degree ≥2.

4 Underlying Linguistic Structures

A corpus-based linguistic analysis of non-
projective structures has been done for several lan-
guages. Hajičová et al. (2004) analyze Czech us-
ing Prague Dependency Treebank. They identify
12 different non-projective constructions on the
surface syntax level and classify them according
to their underlying deep syntax structure. Man-
nem et al. (2009) worked on Hindi using a pilot
treebank of 35K words. They describe 9 different
non-projective structures, while giving special at-
tention to the identification of the constructions al-
lowing for projective reordering. Bhat and Sharma
(2012) used an expanded version of the same tree-
bank and extended their analysis to 3 more Indian
languages (Urdu, Bangla and Telugu). They an-
alyze 8 specific constructions with respect to the
type of discontinuity observed (topicalization, ex-
traposition, NP extraction, quantifier float, scram-

bling, or inherent non-projectivity). Mambrini and
Passarotti (2013) classify the non-projective struc-
tures in Ancient Greek according to the type of the
head (verb or noun) and analyze in more detail the
role of clitics.

In this section, we present the most prominent
non-projective structures identified in our corpus
and draw parallels when possible with the find-
ings in the works cited above. Most of the non-
projective structures found in our corpus belong to
well-established discontinuity types such as wh-
fronting, extraposition, topicalization and long-
distance scrambling5. Serbian also allows for split
constructions, which are mostly (but not exclu-
sively) nominal. We analyse the detachment of the
prefix of the negative pronouns form the base in-
side a PP as a separate category, as it does not seem
to belong to any of the types cited above.

Here a clarification is due as to the annotation
scheme of the corpus on which this work was
done, more specifically, about the status of the
auxiliary verbs. In our working corpus, auxil-
iary verbs are annotated as dependants to lexical
verbs, meaning that in a sentence with a complex
verb form, it is the lexical verb that is annalyzed
as the root of the sentence. Milićević (2009) ar-
gues that clitic auxiliary verbs in Serbian should
have this role, and this is also the case in a num-
ber of studies on other languagues (cf. (Abeillé

5For a definition of these discontinuities within the de-
pendency syntax framework, see for example (Groß and Os-
borne, 2009).

138



Non-projectivity type %
Splitting 33.7%
Wh-fronting 20.4%
Scrambling 17.0%
Extraposition 15.9%
Negative pronoun split 1.9%
Topicalization 1.5%
Other 9.8%
Text issues 0.4%
Annotation errors 0.8%

Table 4: Distribution of non-projectivity by type

and Godard, 2002) for French, (Kupść and Tseng,
2005) for Polish, (Krapova, 1995) for Bulgarian).
However, we chose to consider the lexical verb
as the governor, as this allows for a more im-
mediate representation of the argument structure
of the verb, with the subject and all other argu-
ments depending directly on the lexical verb. The
same choice was made in, e.g., French Depen-
dency Treebank (cf. (Candito et al., 2009), p.9)
and Prague Dependency Treebank (cf. (Hajič et
al., 1999), p.19). The examples hereafter contain-
ing non-projectivity linked to the auxiliaries (i.e.,
examples 2a, 3, 7d) would still be non-projective
if the auxiliary verb was considered the root of the
sentence, although the syntactic trees would not
be the same. It is also possible that the counts of
non-projective structures in the corpus would be
slightly different with this approach.

A total of 658 non-projective edges were iden-
tified in the corpus. The distribution of the
non-projective relations given the type of non-
projectivity is shown in Table 4. Some of the non-
projective edges identified in the corpus were due
to irregularities inherent to the text (i.e., subordi-
nate clauses missing their verb), and some were
due to manual annotation errors. All other exam-
ples were analyzed with respect to the types of
discontinuity cited above. The category “Other”
represents non-systematic cases with too few oc-
currences to allow for a meaningful analysis, such
as extrapredicative elements or reported speech.
We will discuss in more detail the four most
represented types of non-projectivity - splitting,
wh-fronting, scrambling, and extraposition, and
briefly present the negative pronoun split.

Serbian has a very flexible order of the base syn-
tactic relations: even though the SVO ordering is
the canonical one, all 6 permutations (SVO, SOV,

OVS, OSV, VOS and VSO) are grammatical, with
each of them expressing a different topicalization
of the sentence.

Another important property of the word-order
in Serbian is the behaviour of the enclitics: they
follow the so-called Wackernagel’s law and oc-
cupy the second position in the prosodic struc-
ture. Corbett (1987) identifies an enclitic cluster
containing 6 slots, dedicated to different auxiliary
and pronoun enclitics and the interrogative parti-
cle li. The morpho-syntactic structure of the clus-
ter is analyzed in (Groß, 2011). For the scope of
this contribution, their most important characteris-
tic is that the Wackernagel constraint can be strong
enough to lead to the splitting of the phrase occu-
pying the sentence-initial position by the enclitic
cluster. They are therefore an important factor in
the non-projective structures in Serbian. Their ef-
fect will be shown throughout the following sub-
sections.

Also, one property of Serbian that is not typi-
cal of other Slavic languages, but is shared with
other languages of the Balkans, is that the control
constructions (with two verbs sharing the same
subject) can be expressed by the typical infinitival
construction, but also by a full completive clause,
introduced by the conjunction da ‘that’ and having
a verb in present tense. The sentences such as Filip
želi kupiti knjigu ‘Filip wants to buy a book’ and
Filip želi da kupi knjigu lit. ‘Filip wants that he
buys a book’, are both grammatical, and have the
same meaning. Both of these constructions par-
ticipate in a number of non-projective structures,
which will be discussed below.

4.1 Split Constructions

Split constructions involve cases in which a head
of a group is separated from its dependant by an
element of a different node’s subtree. This type
of non-projectivity is the most productive in our
corpus, accounting for 33% of all non-projective
edges. Split nominal groups are an important
source of non-projectivity in Czech, too : Hajičová
et al. (2004) indicate that this construction rep-
resents 11% of non-projective edges observed in
Prague Dependency Treebank.

In our corpus, split constructions typically in-
volve an enclitic or an enclitic cluster occupying
the 2nd position in the sentence, immediately after
the left-most element of the sentence-initial group,
thus detaching this element from the rest of the

139



group. Since the enclitics typically depend on the
main verb, this often leads to non-projective edges
in the tree (see example 2a).

(2) a.

Naša je odluka bila mudra
our is decision been wise

PredicNomSuj
AuxV

DepNAdj

‘Our decision was wise.’

b.

Sve ja to razumem
all I that understand

ObjDir
Suj

DepNAdj

‘I understand all that.’

c.

Kičma se pepela polako truni
spine REF ashes.GEN slowly crumbles

Suj
Ref

DepVAdv
DepNCas

‘The spine of the ashes is slowly crumbling.’

Splitting can also be created by a non-clitic
word as in example 2b: ja ‘I’ is the full form of
the pronoun, and not a clitic. The split can also
occur between the head and its right branch, as in
2c, where the genitive noun pepela (from pepeo
‘ashes’) is the right dependant of the subject noun
kičma ‘spine’. And nominal heads are not the only
ones concerned: even though it is much less fre-
quent, the splitting can also happen inside an AP
or and AdvP, following the same principles. These
examples represent 16.4% of all the occurrences of
splitting found in the corpus.

An interesting specific case of splitting involves
NPs that are inside a sentence-initial PP. The
preposition being a proclitic, it forms a prosodic
unit with the content immediately after it. The
enclitic (or the enclitic cluster) therefore cannot
insert itself immediately after the preposition and
rather occupies the position after the first element
of the NP. This leads to double non-projectivity,
since both the subtree dominated by the preposi-
tion and the one dominated by the preposition’s
complement contain gaps (cf. crossing arcs in ex-
ample 3).

(3)

Na tim su crtežima prikazani vagoni
on those are drawings represented wagons

ObjDir

DepVPrep

ComplPrep
DepNAdj

AuxV

‘There are train wagons on those drawings.’

In the above examples, non-projectivity is op-
tional: the enclitic (cluster) can also occupy a po-
sition next to the verb without a major meaning
shift. Thus, the sentence in 3 can be reformulated
as Na tim crtežima su prikazani vagoni or as Na
tim crtežima prikazani su vagoni. On the other
hand, non-projectivity seems to be obligatory if
the enclitic causing the split is the main verb (cf.
4).

(4)

Dremljiv sam, spor, očajan.
sleepy am slow desperate

PredicNom
Coord

Coord

‘I am sleepy, slow, desperate.’

Here, the only way to resolve non-projectivity
would be for the verb to occupy either the
sentence-initial or the sentence-final position. The
former is impossible since the verb is an enclitic
and must be preceded by an accented form. The
latter receives aggramaticality judgments from our
informants, probably due to the fact that the verb is
a much “lighter” element than the predicative and
is therefore blocked from the sentence-final posi-
tion.

As mentioned in section 1, Mambrini and Pas-
sarotti (2013) draw attention to the fact that the 5
most frequent words occuring in gaps are postpos-
itives (mostly clitics), accounting for nearly 40%
of words found in gaps. Clitic-related observations
were also made on Czech: Hajičová et al. (2004)
indicate that the interrogative particle li occupying
the second position and leading to non-projectivity
appears in 5.1% of dependencies in a sample of
615 sentences. Our own observations presented
above confirm that the behaviour of clitics sub-
ject to Wackernagel’s law is an important source
of non-projectivity.

4.2 Wh-fronting
Like in many other languages, the wh-words in
Serbian tend to occupy the sentence-initial posi-
tion, be it in direct or indirect questions, or in rel-
ative clauses. Note that the Left Branch Condition
(Ross, 1967) does not hold in Serbian: unlike in
English, in Serbian an interrogative adjective can
be detached from its governor and fronted alone.
This makes both 5a and 5b possible, the differ-
ence between them being that in the former it is
the whole NP that is topicalized, whereas in the
latter it is only the wh-word. In the latter, non-
projectivity occurs.

140



(5) a.

Kakvih dokaza vi imate za to?
what.kinds of.proofs you have for that

Suj DepVPrepComplPrep

ObjDirDepNAdj

‘What proof do you have for that?’

b.

Kakvih vi imate dokaza za to?
what.kinds you have of.proofs for that

Suj

DepVPrep

ComplPrep
ObjDir

DepNAdj

(same as above)

This is another trait that Serbian shares with
Czech: following (Hajičová et al., 2004), wh-
words in Czech can also be fronted without pied-
piping, and this construction accounts for 1.6% of
non-projective relations in their corpus.

Stranding prepositions being impossible in Ser-
bian, if a wh-word is inside a PP, pied-piping of
the preposition is obligatory (cf. 6a). On the other
hand, the NP that is the complement of the prepo-
sition can be split, as in example 6b. This leads to
double non-projectivity following the same princi-
ples as in 3.

(6) a.

O kakvim dokazima vi govorite?
About what proof you talk

ObjIndirPrep

ComplPrep

DepNAdj Suj

b.

O kakvim vi dokazima govorite?
about what you proof talk

ObjIndirPrep

ComplPrep

DepNAdj
Suj

‘What proof are you talking about?’

In the case of infinitival and da+Vpres clauses,
the wh-word occupies the position in front of the
verb introducing those clauses (cf. 7a and 7b).

(7) a.

čovek čiji lik ne može sagledati
man whose face not can see

PredRel
ObjDir

DepNAdj DepVInfNeg

‘man whose face he/she cannot see’

b.

koprive od kojih je rešio da skuva čorbu
nettles of which is decided to make soup

PredRel

SubAuxV PredCompl ObjDir

DepVPrep

ComplPrep

‘nettles out of which he decided to make a
soup’

c.

čovek čiji se lik ne može sagledati
man whose REF face not can see

PredRel

DepVInfNeg

ObjDir
Ref

DepNAdj

‘man whose face cannot be seen’

d.
koprive o čijim je svojstvima hteo da priča
nettles of whose is properties wanted to talk

PredRel

Sub PredCompl

ObjIndirPrep

ComplPrep
DepNAdj

AuxV

‘nettles of whose properties he wanted to talk’

This leads to non-projectivity even with struc-
tures that would not be discontinuous in a simple
clause (i.e., with relative pronouns depending di-
rectly on the verb or in cases of pied-piping). This
type of non-projectivity is obligatory: there is no
alternative way to obtain wh-fronting with an em-
bedded or an infinitival clause.

Furthermore, these contexts do not exclude
splitting, cf. examples 7c and 7d. This is not a rare
occurrence: it appears in 31% of the wh-fronting-
related non-projective constructions in our corpus.
This additionally complexifies the syntactic struc-
ture of the sentence and can potentially make the
processing of the relative clauses even more diffi-
cult.

4.3 Long-Distance Scrambling
A dependant of an infinitival or da+Vpres clause
can appear outside of it independently of wh-
fronting. In other words, Serbian allows for long-
distance scrambling.

(8) a.

Tome nije mogao da se odupre
it.DAT isn’t could to REF resist

ObjIndir

AuxV Sub
PredCompl

Ref

‘This he could not resist.’

b.

Moje reči nisu ga mogle pokolebati
my words aren’t him could make.waver

DepVInf
ObjDir

AuxV
Suj

DepNAdj

‘My words could not make him waver.’

The scrambling of the dependants of an infini-
tive was also observed by Hajičová et al. (2004)
in Czech, and it accounted for 9% of the non-
projective relations in their corpus. This property
is also shared by Hindi; however, in this language
it only represents 1.5% of non-projective struc-
tures. Since in our corpus it covers 17%, it seems

141



that Serbian has a higher propensity for these con-
structions than the other two languages.

Whereas this type of discontinuity was obliga-
tory in the case of wh-fronting, it is not in the case
of scrambling, at least for the embedded clauses:
the extracted indirect object tome in 8a can eas-
ily occupy its canonical place inside the embedded
clause: Nije mogao da se odupre tome. The scram-
bled order contributes to topicalize the element
that appears out of its canonical position. How-
ever, it is less evident with the infinitival clauses:
both Moje reči nisu mogle ga pokolebati and Moje
reči nisu mogle pokolebati ga receive marginality
judgements from our informants. This seems to
be due to the enclitic nature of the pronoun ga
‘him’: if the full form njega is used, both sen-
tences become grammatical, but the pronoun re-
ceives a topicalized reading: Moje reči nisu mogle
njega pokolebati and Moje reči nisu mogle pokole-
bati njega both translate as ‘Him, my words could
not make waver’.

4.4 Extraposition

Examples of typical extraposition, with an infor-
mationally heavy element being positioned further
to the right, were found in the corpus (cf. exam-
ple 9a). There were also two specific construc-
tions that can be analysed as cases of extraposi-
tion. The first one, illustrated in 9b, is the cor-
relative structure involving a demonstrative word
in the main clause and a consecutive clause. The
adverb here occupies the canonical position of an
adverbial dependant of an adjective to the left of
its head. However, the consecutive clause it in-
troduces is too heavy to appear immediately af-
ter it; the clause is therefore moved to the right,
making the adverb node non-projective. A projec-
tive version of this construction is possible, with
the adverb moving to the right of the adjective:
Nisam bio bezuman toliko da poverujem. But in
this sentence, the adverb is topicalized: ‘I was not
so mindless as to believe her’.

(9) a.

Nije bilo to lako, da prestanem
wasn’t been that easy to stop

AuxV Suj
PredicNom Sub

PredCompl

‘It was not easy to stop’

b.

Nisam bio toliko bezuman da poverujem
wasn’t been so mindless to believe

AuxV

PredicNom
DepAdjAdv

Sub

PredSub

‘I wasn’t so mindless as to believe it.’

c.

Usisavao ga je više kožom nego plućima
inhaled it is more skin than lungs

INS INS

ObjDir
AuxV

DepVAdv
DepVCas

Sub
DepEx_DepVCas

‘He was inhaling it more with his skin than
with his lungs.’

The second specific construction involves the
comparative forms and their dependant introduced
by nego ’than’ (ex. 9c). Once again, a projec-
tive version is possible if the adverb is placed to
the right of the noun (Udisao ga je kožom više
nego plućima), but this gives a topicalized reading
for the first element of the comparison. This con-
struction was also observed in Prague Dependency
Treebank and it was the source of 2.7% of all non-
projective structures (Hajičová et al., 2004).

4.5 Negative Pronouns in PPs

This type of non-projectivity does not have a high
incidence in our corpus, but we present it as a spe-
cific type of non-projectivity on the frontier be-
tween the morphosyntax and syntax. It is all the
more interesting since we did not encounter de-
scriptions of a similar phenomenon for another
language.

Negative pronoun split occurs when a so-called
negative pronoun appears inside a PP. Negative
pronouns such as niko ‘nobody’ and ništa ‘noth-
ing’ derive respectively from interrogative pro-
nouns ko ‘who’ and šta ‘what’, prefixed with a
negative prefix ni. If such a pronoun appears in-
side a PP, the prefix detaches itself and is placed in
front of the preposition, leaving only the inflected
part of the pronoun to the right of the preposition
(ex. 10). At present, in our annotation scheme
this prefix is annotated as a part of the polylexical
unit and attached to the inflected part of the pro-
noun, which is in turn governed by the preposition.
Therefore, this structure generates non-projective
edges.

(10) a.

Nije govorio ni sa kim
aren’t speak no with who.INS

AuxV
DepVPrep

ComplPrep
Polylex

‘He spoke with no one.’

b.

Ne verujem ni u šta.
Not believe no in what.ACC

Neg DepVPrep ComplPrep
Polylex

‘I don’t believe in anything.’

142



This type of non-projectivity is sometimes ig-
nored in spoken language: Ne verujem u ništa lit.
‘I don’t believe in nothing’. However, the pro-
noun split is considered as the correct form from
the normative point of view, and it seems to be ob-
served systematically in our corpus.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this work, we offered a formal and linguis-
tic profile of non-projectivity in Serbian based on
the first freely available gold-standard treebank
for this language. The analysis showed that even
though Serbian has less non-projective edges than
other Slavic languages, it has a comparable pro-
portion of non-projective trees. Another interest-
ing feature of this language is that it has a higher
edge degree than the other languages examined,
implying that Serbian allows more easily for dis-
continuities created by disjoint subtrees. The anal-
ysis of the underlying linguistic structures showed
that non-projectivity in Serbian belongs to well-
known discontinuity types, such as wh-fronting,
extraposition, long-distance scrambling, and split-
ting. We also saw that some of the non-projectivity
types found in Serbian exist in other languages:
split constructions were also found in Czech, and
both Czech and Hindi allow for the long-distance
scrambling of the dependants in control construc-
tions. In a more general way, the remarks of Mam-
brini and Passarotti (2013) regarding the impor-
tance of clitics behaviour for non-projective struc-
tures in Ancient Greek were found to be relevant
for Serbian too: in our corpus, clitics had a signif-
icant role in different non-projectivity types, most
notably in split constructions and wh-fronting.

Given these initial observations on clitics, we
will continue examining their properties with the
goal of determining more precisely the propor-
tion of non-projectivity in Serbian that is caused
by the behaviour of these forms. Also, the work
presented in this contribution was carried out on
a corpus containing only literary texts. Our analy-
sis will be expanded to other text genres in order to
see if the non-projectivity properties observed here
are stable accross genres. We will also be inves-
tigating these questions from the point of view of
parsing: our future works will focus on conducting
parsing experiments and comparing performances
of different algorithms on different types of non-
projective structures found in Serbian.

References
Anne Abeillé and Danièle Godard. 2002. The syn-

tactic structure of French auxiliaries. Language,
78(3):404–452.

Željko Agić and Nikola Ljubešić. 2015. Universal De-
pendencies for Croatian (that work for Serbian, too).
In The 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Lan-
guage Processing (BSNLP 2015).

Željko Agić, Danijela Merkler, and Daša Berović.
2013. Parsing Croatian and Serbian by using
Croatian dependency treebanks. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Parsing of
Morphologically-Rich Languages.

Riyaz Ahmad Bhat and Dipti Misra Sharma. 2012.
Non-projective structures in Indian language tree-
banks. In Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT11), pages
25–30.

Marie Candito, Benoît Crabbé, and Mathieu Falco.
2009. Dépendances syntaxiques de surface pour le
français. Technical report, Paris 7.

Greville Corbett, 1987. The World’s Major Languages,
chapter Serbo-Croat, pages 391–490. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Denys Duchier and Ralph Debusmann. 2001. Topo-
logical dependency trees: A constraint-based ac-
count of linear precedence. In Proceedings of the
39th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 180–187. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Kim Gerdes and Sylvain Kahane. 2001. Word or-
der in German: A formal dependency grammar us-
ing a topological hierarchy. In Proceedings of the
39th annual meeting on association for computa-
tional linguistics, pages 220–227. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2009. Toward a
practical dependency grammar theory of discontinu-
ities. SKY Journal of Linguistics, 22:43–90.

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2015. The De-
pendency Status of Function Words: Auxiliaries. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Dependency Linguistics (DepLing2015), pages 111–
120.

Thomas Groß. 2011. Clitics in Dependency Morphol-
ogy. In Proceedings of the 1st International Confer-
ence on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2011).

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Buráňová, Zdeňka
Urešová, and Alla Bémová. 1999. Annota-
tions at analytical level. Instructions for annota-
tors. UK MFF ÚFAL, Praha, Czech Republic. URL
http://ufal. mff. cuni. cz/pdt2. 0/doc/manuals/en/a-
layer/pdf/a-man-en. pdf (2012-03-18).

143



Eva Hajičová, Jiří Havelka, Petr Sgall, Kateřina Veselá,
and Daniel Zeman. 2004. Issues of Projectivity
in the Prague Dependency Treebank. Prague Bull.
Math. Linguistics, 81:5–22.

Jiří Havelka. 2007. Beyond Projectivity: Mul-
tilingual Evaluation of Constraints and Mea-
sures on Non-Projective Structures. In AN-
NUAL MEETING-ASSOCIATION FOR COMPU-
TATIONAL LINGUISTICS, volume 45, page 608.

Milka Ivić, editor. 2005. Sintaksa savremenog srpskog
jezika. Institut za srpski jezik SANU, Beograd.

Bojana Jakovljević, Aleksandar Kovačević, Milan
Sečujski, and Maja Marković. 2014. A depen-
dency treebank for Serbian: Initial experiments. In
International Conference on Speech and Computer,
pages 42–49. Springer.

Iliyana Krapova. 1995. Auxiliaries and complex
tenses in Bulgarian. In W. Browne, E. Domisch,
N. Kondrašova, and D. Zec, editors, Annual work-
shop on Formal approaches to Slavic linguistics.
The Cornell meeting, pages 320–344. Ann Arbor:
Michigan Slavic Publications.

Marco Kuhlmann and Joakim Nivre. 2006. Mildly
Non-Projective Dependency Structures. In Proceed-
ings of the COLING/ACL on Main conference poster
sessions, pages 507–514. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Anna Kupść and Jesse Tseng. 2005. A new HPSG
approach to Polish auxiliary constructions. In
S. Müller, editor, Proceedings of the 12th Interna-
tional Conference on Head-Driven Phrase Structure
Grammar, pages 253–273. Stanford: CSLI Publica-
tions.

Francesco Mambrini and Marco Passarotti. 2013.
Non-Projectivity in the Ancient Greek Dependency
Treebank. In Proceedings of the 2nd Internantional
Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing
2013), volume 177.

Prashanth Mannem, Himani Chaudhry, and Akshar
Bharati. 2009. Insights into non-projectivity in
Hindi. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009
Student Research Workshop, pages 10–17. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Jasmina Milićević. 2009. Serbian Auxiliary Verbs:
Syntactic Heads or Dependents? In W. Cichocki,
editor, Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference
of the Atlantic Provinces Linguistics Association,
pages 43–53. PAMAPLA 31.

John Robert Ross. 1967. Constraints on variables in
Syntax. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

Tanja Samardžić, Mirjana Starović, Željko Agić, and
Nikola Ljubešić. 2017. Universal Dependencies
for Serbian in Comparison with Croatian and Other
Slavic Languages. In The 6th Workshop on Balto-
Slavic Natural Language Processing (BSNLP 2017).

Živojin Stanojčić and Ljubomir Popović. 2012. Gra-
matika srpskog jezika. Zavod za udžbenike.

144




