



















































Understanding Idiomatic Variation


Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017), pages 80–90,
Valencia, Spain, April 4. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Understanding Idiomatic Variation
Kristina Geeraert1, R. Harald Baayen2,3 and John Newman3,4

1Department of Linguistics, KU Leuven, Belgium
2Department of Linguistics, University of Tübingen, Germany

3Department of Linguistics, University of Alberta, Canada
4School of Languages, Literatures, Cultures & Linguistics, Monash University, Australia

kristina.geeraert@kuleuven.be, harald.baayen@uni-tuebingen.de,

john.newman@ualberta.ca

Abstract

This study investigates the processing of
idiomatic variants through an eye-tracking
experiment. Four types of idiom variants
were included, in addition to the canoni-
cal form and the literal meaning. Results
suggest that modifications to idioms, mod-
ulo obvious effects of length differences,
are not more difficult to process than the
canonical forms themselves. This fits with
recent corpus findings.

1 Introduction

Idioms have traditionally been regarded as multi-
word units whose meaning can not be derived
from the meaning of its parts (Bobrow and Bell,
1973). This has led some researchers to claim
that idioms are semantically opaque, that their
structure is syntactically fixed, and they are stored
whole as a ‘large word’. Thus, research inves-
tigating how idioms are understood has focused
predominantly on the canonical form and how it
differed from a literal paraphrase (Swinney and
Cutler, 1979; Gibbs, 1980; Cacciari and Tabossi,
1988; Titone and Connine, 1999).

Recent corpus-based research however has
shown that idioms can in fact occur with a range
of variation (Moon, 1998; Barlow, 2000; Langlotz,
2006; Schröder, 2013). Idioms can undergo syn-
tactic variation (e.g. they have really bitten the
bullet this time and her new-found reputation was
a bubble that would burst), be lexically varied
(e.g. throw/toss in the towel, miss the boat/bus),
truncated (e.g. [he who pays the piper] calls the
tune), and even modified with adverbials or ad-
jectives (e.g. spill royal beans, pulling political
strings, make rapid headway). This variation can
even occur with nondecomposable idioms (Duf-
fley, 2013), such as kick the bucket (e.g. no buck-
ets have been kicked, when his parents kick their

gold-plated bucket, and my phone kicked the pail
last week). These studies have illustrated that id-
ioms are not nearly as fixed or rigid in form as
previously assumed.

Few studies have investigated idiomatic varia-
tion from an experimental perspective. Gibbs and
colleagues (Gibbs et al., 1989; Gibbs and Nayak,
1989) explored lexical and syntactic variation of
decomposable and nondecomposable idioms us-
ing a semantic similarity rating task. They found
that decomposable idioms (i.e. idioms whose con-
stituents contribute to the meaning of the whole,
as in pop the question) were rated as more sim-
ilar in meaning to a literal paraphrase than were
nondecomposable idioms, or idioms whose con-
stituents do not contribute meaning to the whole
(e.g. kick the bucket). However, nondecompos-
able idioms can be modified in context while re-
taining their idiomatic meaning, as was demon-
strated by Duffley (2013). Moreover, replication
studies do not return consistent results. The role
of decomposability has not proven to be a reliable
measure, with participants performing at chance
when classifying idioms into decomposability cat-
egories (Titone and Connine, 1994b; Tabossi et al.,
2008). In addition, decomposable and nondecom-
posable idioms are not always found to be signif-
icantly different (Tabossi et al., 2008). Finally,
semantic similarity has been shown to be largely
predicted by the same local contexts as observed
in corpora (Miller and Charles, 1991), suggesting
that the semantic similarity measure collected in
these studies simply reflected how interchangeable
the variant is with its paraphrase and did not accu-
rately reflect the comprehension of these variants.

Meanwhile, McGlone et al. (1994) explored the
semantic productivity of idiom variation. Variants
in this study produced a new idiomatic meaning
based on the original (e.g. shatter the ice, from
break the ice, meaning ‘to break an uncomfort-
able or stiff social situation in one fell swoop’).

80



Using self-paced reading, they measured the reac-
tion time for participants to read the final sentence
of a story, which contained idioms, variants, or
literal paraphrases. They found that participants
were significantly faster at reading the canonical
form of the idiom, but that the variants were read
as fast as the literal paraphrases. They suggest
that canonical forms of idioms are accessed whole,
but that variants are processed like literal language
and are therefore processed slower. While the re-
sults show that modified idioms can be understood
in context, they did not control for the type of
variation. They used instances of lexical variation
(e.g. shatter the ice), quantification (e.g. not spill
a single bean), and even hyperboles (e.g. it’s rain-
ing the whole kennel). Based on their findings, it
is uncertain whether some types of variation are
easier to comprehend than others.

The current study explores the processing of
several types of variation, as well as the literal
meaning of the idiom, through an eye-tracking ex-
periment. Two research questions are explored:
(1) are variants processed differently from the
canonical form; and (2) are variants processed dif-
ferently from each other. The first question plans
to determine whether variants are still processed
differently from the canonical form when the type
of variation is controlled for (e.g. is lexical vari-
ation more difficult to comprehend than the orig-
inal idiom?). Second, by including several types
of variation and controlling for them, a compar-
ison can be made between the different types of
variants (e.g. Are there processing differences be-
tween, say, lexical variation and partial forms of
an expression?).

While this experiment was largely exploratory,
we did have some predictions about the results.
For example, formal idiom blends are typically re-
garded in the literature as ‘errors’ or ‘slips of the
tongue’ (Fay, 1982; Cutting and Bock, 1997). We
therefore hypothesized that idiom blends would be
more difficult to process due to this ‘error-like’ na-
ture. Meanwhile, some idioms can occur in “idiom
sets” or “clusters”, such as shake/quake/quiver
in one’s boots or down the drain/chute/tube/toilet
(Moon, 1998). We hypothesized that lexical varia-
tion would not be more difficult to understand than
the canonical form. Lastly, partial or truncated
forms of an expression have words omitted and
should be faster to read, whereas additional adjec-
tives inserted into the expression should take addi-

tional time due to the presence of an extra word.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows:

We first describe the design of the experiment and
the materials used. Next, we present the results,
focusing on two areas of interest: the idiom as a
whole and the altered word within the idiom. Fi-
nally, we discuss our findings and how they fit into
the larger discussion on idioms.

2 Methodology

2.1 Materials
Sixty idioms were extracted from the Oxford Dic-
tionary of English Idioms (Ayto, 2009) and the
Collins COBUILD Idioms Dictionary (Sinclair,
2011). The form listed in the dictionary was re-
garded as the canonical form. If more than one
form was listed then the form most familiar to the
first author was used, as she spoke the same va-
riety as the participants in the study. These id-
ioms varied in length and syntactic structure: 20
three-word idioms consisting of a verb and a noun
phrase (i.e. V-NP, e.g. rock the boat); 20 four-
word idioms consisting of a verb and a preposi-
tional phrase (i.e. V-PP, e.g. jump on the band-
wagon); and 20 five- or six-word idioms (10 each)
consisting of a verb, noun phrase, and a preposi-
tional phrase (i.e. V-NP-PP, e.g. hear something
through the grapevine). Two contexts were cre-
ated for each idiom: one literal and one figurative
(e.g. I used to pretend I could talk to plants, and
I would hear things through the grapevine = lit-
eral; and I used to be a socialite, and I would hear
things through the grapevine = figurative). Both
contexts had identical final clauses, with the idiom
in sentence-final position. As syntactic variation
is possible with idioms (Moon, 1998; Schröder,
2013), the contexts in this study were not restricted
to the present tense.

These idioms were manipulated for four types
of variation within the figurative context (i.e. the
context was identical for all variants), in addi-
tion to the canonical form. First, lexical vari-
ation, where one of the lexical items within
the expression was altered to a synonymous or
near-synonymous word (e.g. discover something
through the grapevine). Synonyms were selected
based on their naturalness in the context to con-
vey a similar meaning.1 Second, partial form of
the idiom, where only a portion of the idiom was

1An online thesaurus (http://www.thesaurus.com/) was
often utilized for synonymous words.

81



presented, usually a key word or words (e.g. use
the grapevine). In order for the sentence to still
be grammatically correct, pronouns or lexically-
vague words replaced the missing elements of the
expression, such as it, them, things for nouns, or
have, be, do, use for verbs. Third, integrated con-
cept, where an additional concept was integrated
into the idiom (e.g. hear something through the
judgemental grapevine). These additional con-
cepts expanded or emphasized the figurative con-
texts in which the idiom occurred. Finally, for-
mal idiom blend, where two idioms were blended
together (e.g. get wind through the grapevine –
blending hear something through the grapevine
with get wind of something). Each experimen-
tal idiom (i.e. the 60 idioms selected) was paired
with a non-experimental idiom for use in the id-
iom blend condition. These “blending” idioms
were chosen for their intuitive plausibility, but
controlled for their syntax and semantics (Cutting
and Bock, 1997).

Half of the idioms had the beginning portion
of the expression altered (verb), while the other
half had alternations made to the final portion
of the expression (noun). In total, there are six
conditions: one in a literal context and five in
a figurative context (i.e. one canonical form
and four variants). The experiment utilized a
Latin-square design, where every participant saw
each idiom once in one of the six conditions. Six
versions of the experiment were created, each one
containing 10 idioms in each of the six conditions.

CONDITIONS:

1. Literal Meaning of the idiom in its canonical form
(e.g. While the guys were reshingling, they suddenly
went through the roof.)

2. Canonical Form of the idiom in a figurative context
(e.g. Although these were new stocks, they suddenly
went through the roof.)

3. Lexical Variation of the idiom in a figurative context
(e.g. Although these were new stocks, they suddenly
went through the ceiling.)

4. Partial Form of the idiom in a figurative context
(e.g. Although these were new stocks, they suddenly
went through it.)

5. Integrated Concept within the idiom in a figurative
context
(e.g. Although these were new stocks, they suddenly
went through the investment roof.)

6. Idiom Blend of two idioms in a figurative context
(e.g. Although these were new stocks, they suddenly
went through the charts.)

Since the “blending idioms” only occurred in
one condition (i.e. Idiom Blend), they were used
as fillers in their canonical form in the other five
versions of the experiment, occurring in either a
figurative or literal context. Each blending idiom
was excluded as a control in the version of the
experiment where it occurred in the idiom blend
condition in order to avoid a bias in the materi-
als. Therefore, in each version of the experiment,
10 of the blending idioms occurred in the idiom
blend condition, while the remaining 50 appeared
in their canonical form as fillers. Of these fillers,
20 occurred in a figurative context and 30 occurred
in a literal context. This was done to increase the
number of literal contexts in the experiment so that
they were not so underrepresented. In sum, each
participant saw 110 items: 60 experimental idioms
(10 in each of the six conditions) and 50 blending
idioms as fillers.

Finally, six practice sentences were created us-
ing six “practice” idioms. These idioms all oc-
curred in their canonical form. Three were in a fig-
urative context and three in a literal context. These
were the same for all participants.

2.2 Procedure

This experiment used the Eye-Link 1000, desk-top
mounted video-based eye-tracking device, manu-
factured by SR Research. The eye-tracker sampled
the pupil location and size at a rate of 1000Hz,
and was calibrated using a 9-point calibration grid.
Calibration occurred at the beginning of the exper-
iment, after the practice, and again after every 22
sentences, for a total of five blocks. The computer
screen resolution was set to 1920 x 1080 pixels.

The stimuli were presented in two parts. Partici-
pants first saw the “context clause” (e.g. Although
these were new stocks,), followed by the “idiom
clause” (e.g. they suddenly went through the roof.)
on a separate screen. Each trial began with a fixa-
tion cross presented for 1,000 msec on the left side
of a light-grey screen. Next, they saw the context
clause, also on a light-grey background, in a bold,
black, Courier New 30-point font. Every clause
was displayed in full and fit on one line. To exit
this screen, participants had to trigger an invisi-
ble boundary in the bottom right corner. A blank,
light-grey screen was presented for 1,000 msec be-
fore the fixation cross preceding the idiom clause
appeared. The sequence of screens for the idiom
clause was identical to the context clause.

82



Ten percent of the stimuli were followed by
a true/false comprehension question, which per-
tained to the immediately preceding sentence, and
were presented randomly throughout the experi-
ment. Participants pushed one of two buttons on a
game controller to answer these questions, which
were clearly labelled on the question screen. The
experiment began with a practice session, which
consisted of six practice sentences and three ques-
tions. These were the same for all participants,
although their order varied.

All participants had normal or corrected-to-
normal vision. The right eye of each partici-
pant was tracked. Participants sat approximately
85cm from the computer screen, with the cam-
era placed on the desk about 35cm in front of the
computer screen. The participants sat in a sound-
proof booth, while the experimenter sat outside the
booth, running the experiment. The lights were
kept on. The experiment was self-paced and took
about 45 minutes to complete. Each participant
was given an opportunity for a short break half-
way through the experiment.

After the participants had completed the eye-
tracking portion, they were asked to indicate their
knowledge of each expression in a separate task.
Each idiom appeared on the computer screen, in its
canonical form, in a black, bold, 22-point Courier
New font, centered on a white background. Above
the idiom was the question “Do you know this ex-
pression?”; below were two boxes, one labelled
‘yes’ and the other labelled ‘no’. Using the mouse,
participants clicked on the appropriate box to re-
spond. The mouse repositioned itself to the center
of the screen on each trial.

At the end of this second task, participants
were presented with a few additional questions,
pertaining to their idiom usage (e.g. How often
do you use these expressions?; Do you like
using these expressions?). Below each question
was a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), which is
a continuous graphical rating scale (Hayes and
Patterson, 1921; Freyd, 1923; Funke and Reips,
2012). Participants responded by clicking the
mouse anywhere along the VAS scale. The scale
was labelled with a ‘thumbs-up’ image on the
right for a positive response and a ‘thumbs-down’
image on the left for a negative one. Lastly,
participants were asked to rate the acceptability of
seven prescriptively ‘incorrect’ sentences, shown
below, using the same VAS scale. These sentences

attempted to elicit a measure of the participant’s
flexibility with language and non-standard usage.

Language Questions (LQs):

1. The only option the school board has is to lay off a large
amount of people.

2. Slot machines are thought to be more addicting than
table games.

3. The document had to be signed by both Susan and I.

4. While cleaning the kitchen, Sally looked up and saw a
spider on the roof.

5. I thought it could’ve went either way.

6. She could care less what he had to say about it.

7. You have to balance your life, irregardless of what
anybody thinks.

2.3 Participants

Sixty University of Alberta linguistics undergrad-
uate students participated in this experiment. All
were native speakers of Canadian English. There
were 43 female and 17 male participants, ranging
from 17–29 years of age. Four participants were
left-handed. All participants were reimbursed for
their time with course credit.

3 Results

The results were analyzed using mixed-effects lin-
ear regression, using the lme4 package (Bates et
al., 2014) in R (R Core Team, 2014). Only the re-
sults for the Total Fixation Duration (i.e. the total
amount of time spent fixating on the Area Of In-
terest, or AOI) will be discussed. We focus on two
AOIs: the idiom as a whole (i.e. the summed fixa-
tions on all words within the idiom) and the altered
word within the idiom (i.e. the synonymous word
in lexical variation, the additional word in the in-
tegrated concept, the semantically vague ‘replace-
ment’ word in partial forms, and the word from
another idiom in the idiom blend). The analyses
focus on the 60 experimental idioms. Further in-
formation about this study and the results can be
found in Geeraert (2016).

Ten predictor variables appeared significant in
the models. Condition is a factor indicating the
type of variation with which the idiom occurred
(e.g. lexical variation, partial form). Length
specifies the number of words within the idiom’s
canonical form. PortionAltered is a factor
specifying which part of the idiom (i.e. begin-
ning/verb or ending/noun) was manipulated in the

83



variant. Trial is the standardized order of pre-
sentation of the stimuli in the experiment. As the
stimuli was presented randomly, this order will be
different for each participant.
MeanVariationRating is a standardized

mean measure of acceptability for the particular
idiom with a specific type of variation. This mea-
sure was collected in a separate experiment, where
participants were asked to rate the acceptability of
the variants in the same contexts. These ratings
were included to determine if participants’ prefer-
ences influence their ease of comprehension.

As the decomposability classification is unreli-
able (Titone and Connine, 1994b; Tabossi et al.,
2008), two measures reflecting the semantic con-
tribution of the constituents were utilized instead.
meanTransparencyRating is a standardized
average measure of transparency for the idiom’s
meaning as a whole. These ratings were collected
in a separate experiment, where participants saw
each idiom, along with its definition and an ex-
ample, and were asked to rate how obvious was
the meaning of the expression. The average rat-
ing for each idiom was included as a predictor to
determine whether the overall transparency of the
idiom influences speakers’ processing of variants.
LSA.Score.Paraphrase is a measure of sim-
ilarity using Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), be-
tween the words in the idiom and its paraphrase
(e.g. spill the beans ‘reveal a secret’). This score
was obtained from a pairwise comparison of two
texts (i.e. an idiom and its paraphrase), which
compares the local contexts in order to obtain a
value of similarity (Landauer et al., 1998).2 This
measure allows us to control for the idiom’s com-
positionality. If the exact words in the idiom have
little to do with the expression’s meaning, then the
LSA score will be small (e.g. cut the mustard –
‘be acceptable’ = 0.07). But if the words used
share meaning or contribute to the idiom’s mean-
ing, then the LSA score will be larger (e.g. stop
something in its tracks – ‘stop something’ = 0.87).

As idioms are multi-word expressions, multi-
ple frequency measures were obtained: the fre-
quency of the idiom, frequencies of the individ-
ual words, and all possible combinations of ad-
jacent words (e.g. word1 and word2; word2
and word3; word1 and word2 and word3). To
avoid collinearity, a Principal Components Analy-

2The LSA scores were obtained from the English
Lexicon Project (Balota et al., 2007), available at
http://lsa.colorado.edu/.

sis (PCA) was conducted on these frequency mea-
sures. Only the first Principal Component (hence-
forth PC1.logFrequency) is significant.

Several participant-related variables are also
significant. KnowIdiom is a factor indicating the
participant’s knowledge of each idiom (i.e. ‘yes’
or ‘no’). Gender is a factor specifying whether
the participant is male or female. Finally, a second
PCA was conducted on the rating responses for
the seven Language Questions (LQs) above. Only
PC2 (henceforth PC2.LQ) was significant. This
variable is used to reflect the participant’s flexibil-
ity with language usage.

3.1 Idiom as Area of Interest

The first model examines the summed fixation du-
rations on the idiom as a whole. The fixed effects
for this model are shown in Table 1. Condition
occurs in two significant interactions; the first, be-
tween Condition and KnowIdiom, is shown
in the left panel of Figure 1. The canonical form,
and the majority of variants, show the same gen-
eral pattern: shorter fixation durations on known
idioms. These variants (except integrated con-
cepts) are therefore shown in grey, as they do not
significantly differ from the canonical form. Par-
tial forms however show a different pattern. Fix-
ation durations on this variant are relatively simi-
lar regardless of whether the participant is familiar
with the expression or not; thus a facilitation ef-
fect for knowing the idiom is not observed as it is
with the other variants. This particular variant is
fixated upon less than the canonical form, likely
due to it being shorter in length (i.e. fewer number
of words). This is in line with longer fixations ob-
served on integrated concepts – an additional word
is integrated into the idiom, making it longer in
length and requiring additional fixations.

The second interaction, shown in the second
panel of Figure 1, is between Condition and
Length. The general pattern observed here is
that longer idioms show longer summed fixation
durations, as expected, due to the increased num-
ber of words in the idiom. Lexical variation,
formal idiom blends, and the literal meaning of
the idiom are not significantly different from the
canonical form (shown in grey). The other two
variants show a pattern that is significantly dif-
ferent from the canonical form. Idioms with in-
tegrated concepts show a slight inhibitory effect
of length, where an additional concept is more

84



●

●

6.
9

7.
0

7.
1

7.
2

7.
3

7.
4

7.
5

Idiom as AOI: 
Condition & Knowledge of Idiom

Knowledge of Idiom

lo
g 

To
ta

l F
ix

at
io

n 
D

ur
at

io
n

no yes

Canonical

●

●

C
on

di
tio

n

Concept

●

●

C
on

di
tio

n

Blend

●

●

C
on

di
tio

n

Lexical
●

●

C
on

di
tio

nLiteral

●
● C

on
di

tio
n

Partial

3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0

6.
8

7.
0

7.
2

7.
4

7.
6

Idiom as AOI: 
Condition & Length of Idiom

Length (number of words)

lo
g 

To
ta

l F
ix

at
io

n 
D

ur
at

io
n

Canonical

C
on

di
tio

n

Concept

Blend
Lexical

Literal

Partial
●

●

5.
8

5.
9

6.
0

6.
1

6.
2

6.
3

6.
4

Altered Word as AOI: 
Condition & Portion of Idiom Altered

Portion of Idiom Altered

lo
g 

To
ta

l F
ix

at
io

n 
D

ur
at

io
n

beginning ending

Canonical

●

●

C
on

di
tio

n

Concept

●

●

C
on

di
tio

nBlend

●

●

C
on

di
tio

n

Lexical

●

●

C
on

di
tio

n

Partial

−3 −2 −1 0 1 2

5.
5

5.
6

5.
7

5.
8

5.
9

6.
0

Altered Word as AOI: 
Language Flexibility & Knowledge of Idiom

PC2 on Language Questions

lo
g 

To
ta

l F
ix

at
io

n 
D

ur
at

io
n

no

K
no

w
le

dg
e 

of
 Id

io
m

yes

Figure 1: Interactions in the Mixed-Effects Linear Regression Models for the Summed Total Fixation
Duration on the Whole Idiom and the Altered Word as an Area of Interest. Lines in grey represent
factors levels which are not significantly different or slopes which are not significant.

difficult to integrate into shorter idioms (i.e. ex-
tra time is needed). However, partial forms of
shorter idioms have even fewer words to fixate
upon and therefore show considerably shorter fix-
ation durations. In sum, durations on integrated
concepts and partial forms are more comparable
to the canonical form when the idiom is longer.3

Interestingly, the literal meaning of the idiom
shows shorter fixation durations than the canonical
form. These fixations are not significantly shorter
(t = -1.94), but certainly trending towards signifi-
cance. The literality of the expressions (Titone and
Connine, 1994a) may be contributing to this result.
Nevertheless, a general pattern is evident based on
these two above interactions with Condition:
variants of the same length as the canonical form
are not processed significantly different from this
canonical form.

The model presented in Table 1 also shows six
main effects. Longer fixation durations are ob-
served on the whole idiom if the beginning of the
idiom (i.e. the verb) was altered. This is not
dependent on the type of variation, but rather all
variants are easier to process if the change comes
later in the expression (see PortionAltered).
This is a different result than that of Gibbs and
colleagues (Gibbs et al., 1989; Gibbs and Nayak,
1989) who found no difference with ratings in
whether the noun or verb was altered.

A significant main effect is also observed for
meanVariationRating. Variants which re-

3PC1.logFrequency was also significant in the Id-
iom as AOI model. However, this variable is strongly corre-
lated with Length (r = -0.9). This correlation is unsurpris-
ing given that PC1.logFrequency was created using ad-
jacent co-occurrence frequencies. Model comparison shows
that Length is the more significant predictor in this model,
producing a considerably lower AIC value, and therefore was
retained at the expense of PC1.logFrequency.

Estimate Std. Error t-value
Intercept 6.71 0.09 75.97
Condition=Concept 0.49 0.10 5.04
Condition=Blend 0.08 0.10 0.75
Condition=Lexical 0.01 0.10 0.05
Condition=Literal -0.19 0.10 -1.94
Condition=Partial -0.75 0.16 -4.80
KnowIdiom=Yes -0.18 0.04 -4.32
Length 0.11 0.02 6.76
PortionAltered=Ending -0.06 0.02 -2.52
PC2.LQ -0.07 0.03 -2.42
LSA.Score.Paraphrase 0.24 0.07 3.49
meanVariationRating -0.06 0.01 -7.23
Gender=Male -0.17 0.08 -2.17
Trial -0.04 0.01 -3.78
I(KnowIdiom=Yes|Condition=Concept) 0.06 0.05 1.16
I(KnowIdiom=Yes|Condition=Blend) 0.08 0.06 1.42
I(KnowIdiom=Yes|Condition=Lexical) 0.08 0.06 1.52
I(KnowIdiom=Yes|Condition=Literal) 0.03 0.06 0.55
I(KnowIdiom=Yes|Condition=Partial) 0.17 0.06 2.75
I(Length|Condition=Concept) -0.05 0.02 -2.62
I(Length|Condition=Blend) -0.01 0.02 -0.36
I(Length|Condition=Lexical) 0.00 0.02 0.20
I(Length|Condition=Literal) 0.02 0.02 1.04
I(Length|Condition=Partial) 0.08 0.03 2.48

Table 1: Fixed Effects for the Idiom as AOI

ceived higher acceptability ratings are fixated on
less long, suggesting preferred variants are easier
to understand and interpret (or perhaps variants
easier to interpret are preferred). Additionally,
longer fixation durations appear on idioms which
have higher LSA scores for the idiom’s paraphrase
(i.e. LSA.Score.Paraphrase). This finding
seems initially surprising, as previous analyses on
the comprehension of idioms suggest that idioms
are easier to understand when the individual com-
ponents contribute meaning to the whole (Gibbs
et al., 1989). However, the LSA scores indicate
how similar the local contexts are between the id-
iom and its paraphrase (i.e. how interchangable
is the expression with its paraphrase). When the
LSA score is high (i.e. the paraphrase is easily
interchangable) then looking time increases as the
contexts are not distinctive for the idiom. But if
the LSA score is low, then the idiom and its para-
phrase are less interchangable, making the context
more distinctive and the idiom more predictable.
Interestingly, meanTransparencyRating is

85



not significant. The degree to which the idiom is
considered ‘obvious in meaning’ does not seem to
influence the comprehension of idioms or variants.

A main effect was also observed for PC2.LQ, a
latent variable representing the participants’ flexi-
bility with language (i.e. the more they find non-
standard or erroneous forms acceptable). Shorter
fixations are observed on the idioms, both the
canonical form and variants, if speakers are more
flexible with language. It is interesting to note that
this finding is not restricted to variants. Gender
also shows a significant main effect – males tend
to fixate less long on the idiom than females, al-
though we are not quite sure why. Finally, a main
effect of Trial is also significant; participants
fixate less long on the idiom the further into the
experiment they get. But the degree to which each
participant is affected by the order of presentation
varies, as evidenced by significant by-Subject ran-
dom slopes for Trial. By-Item random slopes
for Condition with correlation parameters are
also significant in this model. These slopes indi-
cate that participants’ fixation durations vary de-
pending on which idiom occurred in which con-
dition – participants found certain idioms easier or
more difficult to understand depending on the con-
dition in which they occurred.4

3.2 Altered Word as Area of Interest

We also investigated the fixation duration on the
Altered Word (i.e. the word in the idiom that was
manipulated). The fixed effects for this model are
shown in Table 2. Since there is no altered word
in the literal condition, this section focuses on the
four idiom variants (i.e. lexical variation, partial
forms, idiom blends, and integrated concepts) and
how they compare to the canonical form.

The interaction between Condition and
PortionAltered is seen in the third panel of
Figure 1. The overall pattern is that longer fixa-
tion durations occur at the end of the idiom, which
is also true for the canonical form. Since the id-
iom occurs at the end of a sentence, these longer
fixations on the canonical form and variants may
reflect a sentence wrap-up effect (Rayner et al.,
2000; Hirotani et al., 2006). Nevertheless, the al-
tered word for most variants shows significantly
longer fixations than the canonical form. This is
not true of lexical variation, which is the only vari-
ant that does not have significantly longer fixations

4Both models have the same random effects structure.

than the canonical form (t = 1.54). In other words,
a lexically altered variant is just as easy to pro-
cess as the canonical form. Partial forms however
appear considerably different from the canonical
form. Longer fixations are observed on the altered
word when the beginning has been altered, such
as use the grapevine. But when the ending is al-
tered (e.g. spilled it), fixations on the altered word
are not significantly different from the canonical
form (t = -1.44). Since altering the verb does not
always result in significantly longer fixations (cf.
the non-significantly different lexical variant when
the beginning is altered), this finding suggests that
altering the verb to a semantically vague verb, in
order to make the sentence grammatical, signifi-
cantly inhibits processing.

The second interaction, shown in the last panel
of Figure 1, is between between knowledge of the
idiom (i.e. KnowIdiom) and the participant’s
flexibility with language (i.e. PC2.LQ). Flexibil-
ity with language only appears to be facilitative for
those who do not know the idiom, illustrated by
the non-significant slope for those who know the
expression (t = -1.29). Other strategies are appar-
ently relied upon to interpret the alternation when
knowledge of the expression is not available.

Additional main effects are also observed on the
altered word. Fixation durations are longer on the
altered word when the co-occurrence frequencies
of the idiom are higher. Thus, altering part of a
more frequent sequence causes greater processing
costs. In addition, participants have shorter fixa-
tion durations when the variant is rated as more ac-
ceptable (i.e. meanVariationRating). The
more the variation strategy is preferred for a par-
ticular idiom, the easier it is to interpret. Finally,
the further the participants get into the experiment
(i.e. Trial), the shorter their fixation durations
on the altered words.

Estimate Std. Error t-value
Intercept 5.70 0.06 98.48
Condition=Concept 0.47 0.06 8.28
Condition=Blend 0.15 0.06 2.67
Condition=Lexical 0.09 0.06 1.54
Condition=Partial 0.30 0.07 4.61
PortionAltered=Ending 0.27 0.06 4.49
KnowIdiom=Yes -0.04 0.03 -1.29
PC2.LQ -0.10 0.03 -3.12
PC1.logFrequency 0.03 0.01 4.70
meanVariationRating -0.07 0.02 -4.27
Trial -0.04 0.01 -2.79
I(PortionAltered=Ending|Condition=Concept) -0.12 0.08 -1.46
I(PortionAltered=Ending|Condition=Blend) -0.09 0.08 -1.17
I(PortionAltered=Ending|Condition=Lexical) -0.02 0.08 -0.26
I(PortionAltered=Ending|Condition=Partial) -0.40 0.09 -4.42
I(PC2.LQ|KnowIdiom=Yes) 0.06 0.02 2.27

Table 2: Fixed Effects for the Altered Word as AOI

86



3.3 Spillover from the Altered Word
As the idiom occurred in sentence-final position,
spillover effects from an altered noun (i.e. the end
of the idiom) are not able to be determined. How-
ever, for variants in which the beginning portion
of the idiom was altered (the verb), it may appear
to the participant reading the text as though the
ending was manipulated (e.g. as if the ‘blending
idiom’ was the intended idiom in call the strings,
or part of an idiom was inserted into an otherwise
non-idiomatic text, such as use the grapevine);
therefore, we examined the fixation duration on
the first content word after the verb when the verb
was manipulated (i.e. the alternation occurred at
the beginning of the idiom).

Only main effects are observed in the model,
shown in Table 3. Spillover effects are observed
for all variant types (i.e. Condition), but the
longest durations are for integrated concepts and
partial forms. Incorporating an additional word
into an idiom results in a processing cost likely
due to the surprisal of this extra word. Integrat-
ing this additional information into the idiom and
idiomatic context requires extra time. The largest
spillover effect is with partial forms. It appears
that the semantically vague words used in these
sentences (to make them grammatical) make these
partial forms more difficult to comprehend and
cause considerable spillover effects. It remains to
be determined whether partial forms from more
naturalistic language produce this same effect.

The last two effects are PC1.Frequency and
KnowIdiom. The higher the co-occurrences fre-
quencies of the idiom, the longer the fixation du-
ration on the first content word after the alterna-
tion. Modifying a frequent multi-word sequence
inhibits processing. However, these spillover ef-
fects are reduced if the idiom is familiar (i.e.
KnowIdiom).

Estimate Std. Error t-value
Intercept 5.95 0.08 73.41
Condition=Concept 0.27 0.07 3.76
Condition=Blend 0.17 0.06 2.75
Condition=Lexical 0.14 0.05 2.92
Condition=Partial 0.30 0.06 4.62
PC1.logFrequency 0.04 0.01 3.54
KnowIdiom=Yes -0.11 0.05 -2.32

Table 3: Fixed Effects for the First Content Word
After the Verb

4 Discussion

This study further confirms that idioms are not
nearly as fixed or frozen as previously assumed,

but can actually be modified in a variety of ways
while still retaining their idiomatic meaning. Fur-
thermore, this modification does not always end
in a processing disadvantage, answering our first
research question. Some variants, in fact, do not
show any ‘variant’ processing costs. Lexical vari-
ation, formal idiom blends, and a literal mean-
ing of the idiom are not processed significantly
longer than the canonical form. Longer fixations
are observed on the altered word (at least for idiom
blends) and some spillover effects are observed if
the verb was altered, but this does not result in
longer processing times for the idiom as a whole.
These results are partly in line with our predic-
tions. Only formal idiom blends were predicted to
be processed slower than the canonical form, due
to the potential surprisal at this ‘erroneous’ form.
But that is not what is observed. Intentional or not,
altering a word within an idiom to a synonymous
or non-synonymous word does not result in a pro-
cessing cost.

Some variants, on the other hand, are processed
differently from the canonical form. The variant
showing the greatest difference from the canoni-
cal form is the partial form of the idiom (e.g. use
the grapevine). This idiom variant is fixated on
less than the canonical form, as predicted, largely
due to the omission of a word (or words) from
the expression. Yet despite this overall shorter
fixation, participants fixated significantly longer
on the ‘replacement’ verbs (i.e. the semantically
vague verbs used to connect the idiom to the sen-
tence) and significant spillover effects were ob-
served on the first content word after these verbs.
A similar inhibitory effect was not observed if
the ending of the expression was modified (e.g.
spilled it). These results are likely due to the de-
sign of the experiment. Using tightly controlled
stimuli made these partial forms unnatural and dif-
ficult to interpret. A study investigating partial
forms in naturally occurring language may shed
more light on the degree of difficulty for process-
ing this variant.

Idioms with additional integrated concepts are
also processed significantly different from the
canonical form, but this longer fixation time ob-
served on the whole idiom is largely attributable
to the extra word in the expression. This extra
word makes the reading time longer, as expected.
This longer duration on the whole idiom is very
similar to the Altered Word AOI, suggesting that

87



this variant experiences very little processing costs
over and above having to read an extra word.

Meanwhile, not all variant types are processed
differently from each other, answering our second
research question. Lexical variation and formal id-
iom blends are actually processed quite similarly,
showing comparable durations to each other in ad-
dition to the canonical form. These variants main-
tain the same length as the original expression,
and perhaps better maintain the idiom’s original
metaphorical meaning, leading to comparable fix-
ation durations between these two variants. How-
ever, other variants are processed quite differently.
Adding an additional element (integrated concept)
or omitting part of the expression (partial form) re-
sults in processing differences – requiring longer
or shorter reading times, respectively.

These findings of course do not imply that all
idioms can be altered using all variation strate-
gies. Variability with the different strategies is
also evident in the results. The random effects
structure in both models had significant by-Item
random slopes with correlation parameters for
Condition. This indicates that specific idioms
can be easier or more difficult to process depend-
ing with which condition (i.e. variation strategy)
they occurred. Furthermore, idiom variants which
are preferred (i.e. rated as more acceptable) show
shorter reading times, or are easier to process.
These results reveal that the way in which each
idiom is modified can greatly affect how easy it is
to understand.

This study also incorporated additional, and
sometimes novel, predictor variables to shed new
light on idioms and idiomatic variation. An ob-
jective measure of compositionality (i.e. LSA
scores), was used in this study, and interestingly,
these scores are only predictive for the idiom as
a whole, and not at the word level, suggestive of
the analytical nature of idiom interpretation and
not necessarily reflective of a bottom-up (i.e. de-
composable) process (Gibbs et al., 1989). Mean-
while, length is surprisingly seldom investigated
in the literature (Fanari et al., 2010), yet appears
to play a role in idiomatic comprehension. The
same can be said for speaker-specific variables.
Every speaker’s independent knowledge of each
idiom (not just an average measure of familiarity),
as well as their general flexibility with nonstan-
dard or erroneous usage, proves facilitative in un-
derstanding idioms and idiom variants.

In sum, this study found that some variant types
are processed similarly to (i.e. not significantly
different from) the canonical form. Not all alterna-
tions to the canonical form resulted in a processing
disadvantage. These findings suggest then that id-
ioms are not processed differently from literal lan-
guage, as some scholars have claimed (Swinney
and Cutler, 1979; Sprenger et al., 2006). Propos-
ing that idioms are stored as ‘large words’ and un-
derstood, say upon activation of an ‘idiom key’
(Cacciari and Tabossi, 1988), runs into difficulty
when the idiom is varied but does not take any
longer to process than the canonical form (or a
literal meaning of this form). All variant forms
would therefore also have to be stored, burdening
the Mental Lexicon with a plethora of (infrequent)
forms.

More recent approaches to language challenge
the traditional view of the Mental Lexicon (i.e.
as a list of dictionary entries) and instead suggest
that words themselves do not possess meaning but
rather are cues to meaning, modulated by expe-
rience and context (Elman, 2004; Ramscar and
Baayen, 2013). Under this view, idioms would
not need to be regarded any differently, but would
simply be a sequence of words which are cues
to the intended meaning. Geeraert et al. (2017)
investigated this approach with idioms using the
Naive Discriminative Learner (NDL), which uti-
lizes wide learning networks to approximate error
implicit learning. They found that the idiomatic
meaning receives initial support upon encounter-
ing the first word, and continues to receive sup-
port for the duration of the idiom. Alternations
to the idiom affect the activation of the idiomatic
meaning. If a word is changed or omitted, there
is an abrupt decline in activation. However, the
idiomatic meaning can also be repaired after such
a decline, as with integrated concepts. Those find-
ings are in line with the results from this study. We
can manipulate idioms in various ways and still
understand them, and in some instances, without
any processing costs.

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by an Izaak Walton Kil-
lam memorial scholarship awarded to the first au-
thor. In addition, we would like to thank Lauren
Rudat for her suggestions on improving the stim-
uli, and to the anonymous reviewers for their sug-
gestions on improving the paper.

88



References
John Ayto, editor. 2009. From the horse’s mouth: Ox-

ford dictionary of English idioms. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford.

David A. Balota, Melvin J. Yap, Michael J. Cortese,
Keith A. Hutchison, Brett Kessler, Bjorn Loftis,
James H. Neely, Douglas L. Nelson, Greg B. Simp-
son, and Rebecca Treiman. 2007. English lexicon
project. Behavior Research Methods, 39(3):445–
459.

Michael Barlow. 2000. Usage, blends and grammar.
In Michael Barlow and Suzanne Kemmer, editors,
Usage-based models of language, pages 315–345.
CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.

Douglas Bates, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, and
Steven Walker. 2014. lme4: Linear mixed-effects
models using eigen and S4.

Samuel A. Bobrow and Susan M. Bell. 1973. On
catching on to idiomatic expressions. Memory and
Cognition, 1:343–346.

Cristina Cacciari and Patrizia Tabossi. 1988. The com-
prehension of idioms. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 27:668–683.

J. Cooper Cutting and Kathryn Bock. 1997. That’s
the way the cookie bounces: Syntactic and semantic
components of experimentally elicited idiom blends.
Memory & Cognition, 25(1):57–71.

Patrick J. Duffley. 2013. How creativity strains con-
ventionality in the use of idiomatic expressions. In
Mike Borkent, Barbara Dancygier, and Jennifer Hin-
nell, editors, Language and the creative mind, pages
49–61. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.

Jeffrey L. Elman. 2004. An alternative view of
the mental lexicon. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
8(7):301–306.

Rachele Fanari, Cristina Cacciari, and Patrizia Tabossi.
2010. The role of idiom length and context in spo-
ken idiom comprehension. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 22(3):321–334.

David Fay. 1982. Substitutions and splices: A study
of sentence blends. In Anne Cutler, editor, Slips
of the tongue and language production, pages 163–
195. Mouton de Gruyter, Amsterdam.

Max Freyd. 1923. The graphic rating scale. The Jour-
nal of Educational Psychology, 14:83–102.

Frederik Funke and Ulf-Dietrich Reips. 2012. Why
semantic differentials in web-based research should
be made from visual analogue scales and not from
5-point scales. Field Methods, 24(3):310–327.

Kristina Geeraert, John Newman, and R. Harald
Baayen. 2017. Idiom variation: Experimental data
and a blueprint of a computational model. In Morten
Christiansen and Inbal Arnon, editors, More than

words: The role of multiword sequences in language
learning and use, Topics in Cognitive Science. Wi-
ley, doi:10.1111/tops.12263.

Kristina Geeraert. 2016. Climbing on the bandwagon
of idiomatic variation: A multi-methodological ap-
proach. Ph.D. thesis, University of Alberta.

Raymond W. Gibbs and Nandini P. Nayak. 1989. Psy-
cholinguistic studies on the syntactic behavior of id-
ioms. Cognitive Psychology, 21:100–138.

Raymond W. Gibbs, Nandini P. Nayak, John L. Bolton,
and Melissa E. Keppel. 1989. Speakers’ assump-
tions about the lexical flexibility of idioms. Memory
& Cognition, 17(1):58–68.

Raymond W. Gibbs. 1980. Spilling the beans on un-
derstanding and memory for idioms in conversation.
Memory & Cognition, 8(2):149–156.

M. H. S. Hayes and D. G. Patterson. 1921. Experimen-
tal development of the graphic rating scale. Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 18:98–99.

Masako Hirotani, Lyn Frazier, and Keith Rayner. 2006.
Punctuation and intonation effects on clause and
sentence wrap-up: Evidence from eye movements.
Journal of Memory and Language, 54:425–443.

Thomas K. Landauer, Peter W. Foltz, and Darrell La-
ham. 1998. Introduction to latent semantic analysis.
Discourse Processes, 25:259–184.

Andreas Langlotz. 2006. Idiomatic creativity: A
cognitive-linguistic model of idiom-representation
and idiom-variation in English. John Benjamins.

Matthew S. McGlone, Sam Glucksberg, and Cristina
Cacciari. 1994. Semantic productivity and idiom
comprehension. Discourse Processes, 17:167–190.

George A. Miller and Walter G. Charles. 1991. Con-
textual correlates of semantic similarity. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 6(1):1–28.

Rosamund Moon. 1998. Fixed expressions and idioms
in English. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

R Core Team. 2014. R: A language and environment
for statistical computing.

Michael Ramscar and R. Harald Baayen. 2013. Pro-
duction, comprehension, and synthesis: A commu-
nicative perspective on language. Frontiers in Psy-
chology, May 02.

Keith Rayner, Gretchen Kambe, and Susan A. Duffy.
2000. The effect of clause wrap-up on eye move-
ments during reading. The Quarterly Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology, 53A(4):1061–1080.

Daniela Schröder. 2013. The syntactic flexibility of
idioms: A corpus-based approach. AVM, Munich.

John Sinclair, editor. 2011. Collins COBUILD idioms
dictionary. Harper Collins.

89



Simone A. Sprenger, Willem J. M. Levelt, and Gerard
Kempen. 2006. Lexical access during the produc-
tion of idiomatic phrases. Journal of Memory and
Language, 54:161–184.

David A. Swinney and Anne Cutler. 1979. The access
and processing of idiomatic expressions. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 18:523–534.

Patrizia Tabossi, Rachele Fanari, and Kinou Wolf.
2008. Processing idiomatic expressions: Effects of
semantic compositionality. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
34(2):313–327.

Debra A. Titone and Cynthia M. Connine. 1994a.
Comprehension of idiomatic expressions: Effects of
predictability and literality. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
20(5):1126–1138.

Debra A. Titone and Cynthia M. Connine. 1994b. De-
scriptive norms for 171 idiomatic expressions: Fa-
miliarity, compositionality, predictability, and liter-
ality. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 9(4):247–
270.

Debra A. Titone and Cynthia M. Connine. 1999.
On the compositional and noncompositional nature
of idiomatic expressions. Journal of Pragmatics,
31:1655–1674.

90


