



















































Cross-linguistic differences and similarities in image descriptions


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 21–30,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cross-linguistic differences and similarities in image descriptions

Emiel van Miltenburg
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

emiel.van.miltenburg@vu.nl

Desmond Elliott
University of Edinburgh
d.elliott@ed.ac.uk

Piek Vossen
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
piek.vossen@vu.nl

Abstract

Automatic image description systems are com-
monly trained and evaluated on large image de-
scription datasets. Recently, researchers have
started to collect such datasets for languages
other than English. An unexplored question is
how different these datasets are from English
and, if there are any differences, what causes
them to differ. This paper provides a cross-
linguistic comparison of Dutch, English, and
German image descriptions. We find that these
descriptions are similar in many respects, but
the familiarity of crowd workers with the sub-
jects of the images has a noticeable influence
on description specificity.

1 Introduction

Vision and language researchers have started to col-
lect image description corpora for languages other
than English, e.g. Chinese (Li et al., 2016), German
(Elliott et al., 2016; Hitschler et al., 2016; Rajendran
et al., 2016), Japanese (Miyazaki and Shimizu, 2016;
Yoshikawa et al., 2017), French (Rajendran et al.,
2016), and Turkish (Unal et al., 2016). The main
aim of those efforts is to develop image description
systems for non-English languages and to explore the
related problems of cross-lingual image description
(Elliott et al., 2015; Miyazaki and Shimizu, 2016)
and machine translation in a visual context (Specia et
al., 2016; Hitschler et al., 2016). We view these new
corpora as sociological data that is in itself worth
studying. Our research stems from the following
question: To what extent do speakers of different
languages differ in their descriptions of the same

images? Considering this question, we developed
a (non-exhaustive) list of factors that may influence
the descriptions provided by crowd workers. Under-
standing the effect of these factors will enable us
to improve the data collection process, and help us
appreciate the challenges of natural language genera-
tion in a visual context:

1. Task design effects: There are many possible
approaches to collecting descriptions of images.
Previous research has re-used the Flickr8K (Ho-
dosh et al., 2013) template and methodology.
Baltaretu and Castro Ferreira (2016) showed
that task design may influence the form of
crowd-sourced descriptions.

2. (Perceived) audience: Speakers adapt the style
of their messages to their audience (Bell, 1984).
Knowing how the descriptions will be used may
affect the style or quality of the corpora.

3. Individual/Demographic factors: Individual
features, like the demographics or personal pref-
erences of the workers, may explain part of the
variation in the descriptions.

4. Differences in (background) knowledge:
Workers can only provide as much information
as they know. Besides educational factors, the
background knowledge of a person can be influ-
enced by where they currently live and where
they have previously lived.

5. Language differences: Languages differ in
how they package information, which may be
reflected in the descriptions. This is close
to, but separate from linguistic relativity (see
e.g. (Deutscher, 2010; McWhorter, 2014)).

21



6. Cultural differences: Culture may influence
the descriptions on a group level by affecting
the social perspective of a population.

This paper focuses on the last three factors in a
cross-linguistic corpus study of Dutch, German, and
English image descriptions. Our work is a starting
point for understanding the differences in descrip-
tions between languages. The focus on the last three
factors is a consequence of our corpus study: the first
two factors require manipulating the experimental
set-up, and the third factor requires data about the
crowd workers that is not known (and should ideally
also be controlled). As we will see in Sections 4 and
5, we can make claims about the last three factors
based on the workers’ language and geolocations.

We believe that studying differences between lan-
guages shows us which phenomena are robust across
languages and thus important to consider when im-
plementing and deploying models. Also, differences
between languages can inform us about the feasibil-
ity of approaches to image description in different
languages by translating existing English data (Li et
al., 2016; Yoshikawa et al., 2017).

Our analysis combines quantitative and qualitative
studies of a trilingual corpus of described images. We
use the Flickr30K (Young et al., 2014) for English,
Multi30K for German (Elliott et al., 2016), and a new
corpus of Dutch descriptions (Section 3). We build on
earlier work that studies the semantic and pragmatic
properties of English descriptions (van Miltenburg,
2016; van Miltenburg et al., 2016). Those works
study ethnicity marking, negation marking, and un-
warranted inferences about the roles of people. The
main finding of our analysis is that all of these proper-
ties are stable across Dutch, US English, and German
(Section 4). We also show how differences in back-
ground knowledge can affect description specificity
(Section 5). We make the Dutch corpus available
online and we also release software to explore image
description corpora with the descriptions in differ-
ent languages side-by-side to encourage future work
with different language families.1

2 Related work

We review work on the theory about the image de-
scription process, and work on automatic image de-

1See: https://github.com/cltl/DutchDescriptions

scription in other languages.
Describing an image. Erwin Panofsky’s (Panof-

sky, 1939) hierarchy of meaning was originally in-
tended as a guide for interpreting works of art. It has
since been applied by Shatford (1986) and Jaimes and
Chang (1999) in the context of indexing and search-
ing for images in libraries. The hierarchy consists of
three levels that build on each other.

1. Pre-iconography: giving a factual description
of the contents of an image, and an expressional
indication of the mood it conveys.

2. Iconography: giving a more specific descrip-
tion, informed by knowledge of the cultural con-
text in which the image is situated.

3. Iconology: interpreting the image, establishing
its cultural and intellectual significance.

This hierarchy is useful to think about for descrip-
tions of images (Hodosh et al., 2013). As Panofsky
(1939) notes, these levels require more knowledge
as we move up the hierarchy. If we apply this hier-
archy to the image description domain, we can say
that image description corpora typically cover the
first two levels. An important factor in the ‘quality’
of a description is the amount of cultural or back-
ground knowledge that informs the description. We
will explore the influence of this factor in Section 5.

Descriptions in other languages. Work on image
description in other languages generally focuses on
system performance rather than cross-linguistic dif-
ferences (Elliott et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Miyazaki
and Shimizu, 2016). Thus far, any differences have
only been anecdotally described.

Li et al. (2016) collected Chinese descriptions of
images in the Flickr8K corpus (Hodosh et al., 2013).
They highlight the differences between Chinese and
English descriptions using a picture of a woman tak-
ing a photograph. The English annotators describe
the woman as Asian, whereas Chinese annotators
describe her as middle-aged. The authors note that
“Asian faces are probably too common to be visually
salient from a Chinese point of view.”

Miyazaki and Shimizu (2016) collected Japanese
descriptions for a subset of the MS COCO dataset,
which mostly contains pictures taken in (or by peo-
ple from) Europe and the United States (Lin et al.,
2014). They note that in their pilot phase, the im-
ages appeared “exotic” to Japanese crowd workers,

22



who would frequently use adjectives like foreign and
overseas. The authors actively tried to combat this
by modifying their guidelines to explicitly prevent
crowd workers using these phrases, but the observa-
tion remains that perspective can strongly influence
the nature of the descriptions.

In this paper we collect a new dataset of Dutch
image descriptions, but our work differs from previ-
ous work in two ways: (i) we aim to provide a more
systematic overview of the differences between de-
scriptions in three languages, and therefore (ii) we
do not empirically evaluate system performance in
reproducing the descriptions.

3 Collecting Dutch descriptions

We used Crowdflower to annotate 2,014 images from
the validation and test splits of the Flickr30K corpus
(Young et al., 2014) with five Dutch descriptions.

Following other work, our goal is to create a par-
allel corpus of image descriptions, using the images
as pivots. This requires us to stay as close to the
original task setup as possible, thus fixing the effect
of Task Design factor. We base our task on the tem-
plate used by (Hodosh et al., 2013) to collect English
descriptions, and by (Elliott et al., 2016) for German
descriptions. In this design, images are annotated in
batches of five images. The task for our participants
is to describe each of those images “in one complete,
but simple sentence.” Before starting on the task, we
ask participants to read the guidelines, and to study a
picture with example descriptions ranging from very
good to very bad. We include the instructions for our
task in the supplementary materials.

Participants. Crowdflower does not offer the op-
tion to select Dutch participants based on their native
language. Instead, we restricted our task to level 2
(experienced and reasonably accurate) workers in the
Netherlands. We had to continuously monitor the
task for ungrammatical descriptions in order to stop
contributors from submitting low-quality responses.

Other settings. Following (Elliott et al., 2016),
we set a reward for $0.25 per completed task (or
$0.05 per image), and required participants to spend
at least 90 seconds on each task, resulting in a theo-
retical maximum wage of $10 per hour. We initially
limited the number of judgments to 250 descriptions
per participant, but due to the small size of the crowd

we increased this limit to 500.
Results. A total of 72 participants provided 10,070

valid descriptions in 116 days, at a cost of $821.40.
We were surprised by the number of participants
who presumably used Google Translate to submit
their responses. These are identifiable through their
ungrammaticality, usually due to incorrectly inflected
verbs. An example is given in (1), with a literal
translation and original English description (verified
using Google Translate).

(1) Response generated with Google Translate.

a. *Een paar kussen (Description)
‘A couple of kisses’ (Translation)
A couple kisses (Original)

Altogether, we had to remove 60 participants due
to either submitting ungrammatical responses (60%),
Lorum Ipsum text (12%), random combinations of
characters (9%), non-Dutch responses (6%), or oth-
erwise low-quality responses (13%).

We conclude that crowdsourcing is a feasible way
to collect Dutch data, but it may still be faster to
collect image descriptions in the lab (in terms of time
to collect the data, not counting the time spent as an
experimenter overseeing the task). For large-scale
datasets, such as Flickr30K or MS COCO, the Dutch
crowdsourcing population seems to be too small to
collect descriptions for all the images in a reasonable
amount of time. This is a problem; with the current
data-hungry technology, low-resource languages and
languages with smaller pools of crowd workers are in
danger of being left behind. For example, Sprugnoli
et al. (2016) note that for Flemish, an example of
a small-pool language, they “were not able to get a
sufficient response from the crowd to complete the
offered transcription tasks.”

4 Characterizing English, German, and
Dutch image descriptions

We now examine the descriptions between languages
in more detail, focusing on the validation subset of
the Multi30K dataset (1,014 images, with 5,070 de-
scriptions per language).

4.1 General statistics
Table 1 shows the mean sentence length (in tokens
and words) for the three languages. The English de-
scriptions are the longest, followed by the Dutch and

23



Tokens σ Words σ

Dutch 11.14 4.5 10.32 4.3
English 13.60 5.6 12.48 5.3
German 9.76 4.2 8.81 3.9

Table 1: Mean sentence length across languages.

the German ones. However, German has the longest
average word length (5.25 characters per word), fol-
lowed by Dutch (4.62) and English (4.12). This dif-
ference seems due to German and Dutch compound-
ing, which is confirmed by the number of word types:
German has 31% more types than English (5709 ver-
sus 4355). Dutch has 19% more (5193).

Definiteness. The five most frequent bigrams that
start a description (showing the typical subjects of
the images) are given in Table 2. The majority starts
with an indefinite article, which is in line with the
familiarity theory of definiteness: the function of def-
inite articles is to refer to familiar referents, whereas
indefinite articles are used for unfamiliar referents
(Christophersen, 1939; Heim, 1982). The distribution
of (in)definite articles follows from the fact that the
participants have never seen the images before, nor
any context for the image in which the referents could
be introduced. A corollary is that systems trained on
this data are more likely to produce indefinite than
definite articles, and need to be told when definites
should be used.

4.2 Replicating previous findings for negation
and ethnicity marking

Previous work has studied the use of negation and eth-
nicity marking in English image description datasets
(van Miltenburg et al., 2016; van Miltenburg, 2016)
We now attempt to replicate these findings in the
Dutch and German data.

Negations. van Miltenburg et al. (2016) per-
formed a corpus study to categorize all uses of (non-
affixal) negations in the Flickr30K corpus. Negations
are interesting in descriptions because they describe
images by saying what is not there. Negations may
be used because something in the picture is unex-
pected, goes against some social norm, or because
non-visible factors are relevant to describe the picture.
If annotators consistently use negations, this can be
seen as evidence that the negated information is part
of their shared background knowledge and is a strong

requirement for producing human-like descriptions.
We readily found examples of negations in both the
Dutch and the German data. Some examples are
given in (2) and (3), respectively.

(2) Examples from the Dutch descriptions

a. De kinderen dragen geen kleding.
‘The kids are not wearing any clothing.’

b. Vrouw snijdt broodje zonder te kijken(!)
‘Woman slices a bun without looking(!)’

(3) Examples from the German descriptions

a. Zwei Buben ohne T-Shirt setzen auf der Straße.
‘Two boys without T-shirt sitting on the street.’

b. Eine Ansammlung von Menschen [. . . ] schaut auf
ein Ereignis, das nicht im Bild ist.
‘A crowd of people is watching an event not shown
in the picture.’

In total, we found 11 Dutch and 20 German de-
scriptions containing explicit negations in the corpus,
while van Miltenburg et al. (2016) found 27 in En-
glish for the same images (excluding false positives).
This confirms that workers in different languages
mark negations at approximately the same rate, given
a sample size of 5,070 sentences. We found almost
no images that consistently attracted the use of nega-
tions in all three languages: we found only four ex-
amples of co-occurring negation between languages.
One image is described by speakers of all three lan-
guages using a negation (a man with two prosthetic
legs, described as having no legs), and there are three
other images (all of shirtless individuals) where both
English and German workers use negations.

Racial and ethnic marking. van Miltenburg
(2016) found that the descriptions in the Flickr30K
data have a skewed distribution of racial and ethnic
markers: annotators used terms like asian or black
much more often than white or caucasian. If we find
the same disproportionate use of ethnicity markers in
Dutch and German, then we can conclude that this
is not a quirk in the English data, but a systematic
linguistic bias (Beukeboom, 2014).

Indeed, we did find that non-white people were
often marked with adjectives such as black, dark-
skinned, Asian, Chinese. In Dutch and German,
white people were only marked to indicate a contrast
between them and someone of a different ethnicity
in the same image. The English data contains five

24



Dutch Gloss Count

Een man A man 517
Een vrouw A woman 252
De man The man 105
Een jongen A boy 92
Twee mannen Two men 92

English Count

A man 760
A woman 367
A young 223
A group 211
Two men 127

German Gloss Count

Ein Mann A man 584
Eine Frau A woman 296
Zwei Männer Two men 120
Ein Junge A boy 108
Der Mann The man 93

Table 2: Top-5 most frequent bigrams at the start of a sentence, with their English translation.

Dutch German

English

17 18
12

11
35

33

15

Figure 1: Venn diagram of ethnicity markers by Dutch, English,
and German workers. Counts correspond to images.

exceptions to this rule, where white individuals were
marked without any people of another ethnicity being
present in the image. We do have to note, however,
that there are other ways to indirectly mark someone
as white, e.g. using adjectives like blonde or brunette.

Figure 1 shows a Venn-diagram of the use of
race/ethnicity markers in Dutch, English, and Ger-
man. We observe that English and German workers
use these markers slightly more often than Dutch
workers. However, we do not claim that this is evi-
dence that people living in Germany and the U.S.A.
are more racist than people living in the Netherlands.
Rather than trying to interpret the meaning of this
difference, we ask a different question: what drives
people to mention racial or ethnic features?

There are several reasons why people may mark
race/ethnicity in their descriptions. One common
theme is that annotators mark images where the peo-
ple are dressed in traditional outfits. Examples in-
clude traditional dancers from South-East Asia, and
Scotsmen wearing kilts. These items of clothing are
meant to signal being part of a group, and the annota-
tors picked up on this.

The distribution of the labels may be explained in
terms of markedness (Jakobson, 1972) and reporting
bias (Misra et al., 2016). In this explanation, white
is seen as the unmarked default, as it is the dominant
ethnicity in all three countries.2 The marker white

2The US population is 75% white, according to the 2010
census (Humes et al., 2011). The Dutch and German census

is only used to be consistent in the use of modifiers
within same sentence. This reasoning also explains
the observation by Miyazaki and Shimizu (2016) that
Japanese crowd workers often used the labels foreign
and overseas for the MS COCO images.

A final reason for crowd workers to mention eth-
nicity and skin color may be that the images are visu-
ally less interesting, but the description task still de-
mands that the workers provide a description. Work-
ers are thus pressured to find something worth men-
tioning about the image, because too general descrip-
tions might get their work rejected. This is a gen-
eral task effect that may have implications beyond
racial/ethnic marking.

Speculation. van Miltenburg (2016) also found
that that annotators often go beyond the content of
the images in their descriptions, making unwarranted
inferences about the pictures. If we find that Dutch
and German crowd workers also make such infer-
ences, we conclude that image descriptions in all
three languages are interpretations of the images that
may not necessarily be true.

We observed unwarranted inferences throughout
the Dutch and German data, especially about women
with infants, who were often seen as the mother. Fig-
ure 2 shows an image where both Dutch, English,
and German workers suggested the woman is the
grandmother. In the most extreme case, two KLM
stewards in pantsuits were described by a German
worker as well-dressed Lesben (‘lesbians’). It would
be undesirable for a model to associate all unseen
images of air stewards with lesbians. We expect that
having multiple descriptions alleviates this type of
extreme example, but there is an open question about
how to deal with more common types of speculation.

bureaus do not monitor ethnicity, and instead report that 77% of
the Dutch population is Dutch/Frisian (Centraal Bureau voor de
Statistiek, 2016) and 80% of the German population is German
(Statistisches Bundesamt, 2013).

25



Figure 2: Image 4634063005. The older woman in the picture
was often seen as the grandmother.

5 Familiarity and cultural differences

As the speakers of Dutch, English, and German have
different backgrounds, some images may be more
familiar to one group than to the others. Familiar-
ity enables speakers to be more specific (but doesn’t
necessarily cause them to be more specific). We will
look at three kinds of examples (selected after in-
specting the full validation set), where differences
in familiarity lead to differences in the description
of named entities, objects, and sports. These exam-
ples are illustrative of a larger issue, namely that
descriptions in one language may not be adequate
for speakers of another language (even if they were
perfectly translated). We discuss this issue in §6.2.
5.1 Named entities
The Dutch, English, and German descriptions differ
in their use of place and entity names. We study two
cases: one image that is more likely to be familiar to
European workers (German and Dutch), and one that
is more likely to be familiar to US workers (English).

The Tuileries Garden. Figure 3 shows a scene
from the Tuileries Garden in Paris, a popular tourist
attraction. It may be more likely for a European
crowd worker to have visited this location than for an
American crowd worker. Three Dutch people indeed
included references to the actual location in their
description. One mentioned the Arc de Triomphe
in the background, one said that this picture is from
a square in Paris, and the most specific description
(correctly) identified the location:

(4) Een man zit aan de vijver van het Tuilleries park
in Parijs.
‘A man is sitting by the pond of the Tuileries park
in Paris.’

Neither the German nor the American workers
identified the location or the monuments by name

Figure 3: Image 6408975653. This picture was taken at the
Tuileries Garden in Paris, and shows the Luxor Obelisk and the

Arc de Triomphe.

Figure 4: Image 4727348655. This picture shows a man wear-
ing a Denver Broncos hat and jersey.

(though one American worker thought this picture
was taken at the Washington Monument). Instead
of mentioning the location, the English and German
workers describe the scene in more general terms.
Two examples are given in Example 5.

(5) a. A person in a white sweatshirt is sitting in a
chair near a pond and monument.

b. A man in a white hoodie relaxes in a chair by
a fountain.

These examples reveal a common strategy to han-
dle unfamiliarity: focus on something else you do
know. This undermines the idea that crowd-sourced
descriptions tell us what is relevant about the picture.

The Denver Broncos. Figure 4 shows a man wear-
ing a Denver Broncos hat and jersey. The Denver
Broncos are an American Football team, which is
not so well-known in Europe. Two American crowd
workers but neither the Dutch nor the German work-
ers identified the Broncos jersey. Three out of five
American workers also described the activity in the
image as tailgating, a typical North-American phe-
nomenon where people gather to enjoy an informal
(often barbecue) meal on the parking lot outside a

26



Figure 5: Image 4897113571. This picture shows the back of a
street organ in the Netherlands.

sports stadium. As this concept is not so prevalent
in Dutch or German culture, there is no Dutch or
German word, idiom, or collocation to describe tail-
gating. Such ‘untranslatable’ concepts are called
lexical gaps. The presence of this gap means that
the Dutch and German workers can only concretely
describe the image without being able to relate the
depicted event to any more abstract concept.

5.2 Objects

Familiarity also plays a role in labeling objects. Con-
sider Figure 5, which shows (the backside of) a street
organ in a shopping street in the Netherlands. All
Dutch workers, as well as two German workers iden-
tified this object as a street organ, whereas the En-
glish workers are only able to provide very general
descriptions (Example 6).

(6) a. A yellow truck is standing on a busy street in
front of the Swarovski store.

b. A strange looking wood trailer is parked in
a street in front of stores.

c. An unusual looking vehicle parked in front
of some stores.

This example illustrates two strategies the crowd
may use to provide descriptions for unfamiliar ob-
jects: (1) signal the unfamiliarity of the object using
adjectives like strange and unusual looking. This
is similar to the finding by Miyazaki and Shimizu
(2016) that the Japanese crowd made frequent use of
terms like foreign and overseas for the Western im-
ages from MS COCO. (2) use a more general cover
term, like vehicle. Such terms may have a higher vi-
sual dispersion (Kiela et al., 2014), but they provide
a safe back-off strategy.

5.3 Sports

We found that unfamiliarity with different kinds of
sports leads to the misclassification of those sports.
We focus on three sports: American Football, Rugby,
and Soccer. Looking at images for these sports, we
compared how the three different groups referred
to them. We found that the German and Dutch
groups patterned together, deviating from the Ameri-
can crowd workers.

As expected, the Dutch and German workers make
the most mistakes categorizing American Football.
For all seven pictures of American Football, there is
at least one Dutch annotator who thinks it’s a game
of Rugby. For six of those, at least one German an-
notator made the same mistake. By contrast, workers
from the US made more mistakes identifying rugby
images. For all three pictures of Rugby, there is at
least one American calling it Soccer or Football. For
one of those images, a German annotator thought
it was American Football. All Soccer images were
universally recognized as Soccer.

6 Discussion

6.1 Description specificity

In Section 5 we observed that annotators differ in the
specificity of their descriptions due to their familiarity
with the depicted scenes or objects. One challenge
for image description systems is to find the right
level of specificity for their descriptions, despite this
variation. If a system can identify the exact category
of an object, it is probably more useful to produce
e.g. street organ rather than unusual looking vehicle.

Besides familiarity, there are also other factors
influencing label specificity. For example, cultures
may have differences in their basic level; i.e. how
specific speakers are generally expected to be (Rosch
et al., 1976; Matsumoto, 1995). For this reason, dog
is a more appropriate label than affenpinscher in most
situations, even though the latter is more specific.
Ideally, image description systems should recognize
when to use a more general term, and when to go
more into detail (Ordonez et al., 2015).

6.2 Limitations of translation approaches

One approach to image description in multiple lan-
guages is to use a translation system. For example,
Li et al. (2016) compare two strategies: early versus

27



late translation. Using early translation, image de-
scriptions are translated to the target language before
training an image description system on the trans-
lated descriptions. Using late translation, an image
description system is trained on the original data, and
the output is translated. Li et al. (2016) show that the
former strategy achieves the best result, and argue
that it is a promising approach because it requires no
extra manual annotation.

Our observations in Section 5 show that there
are limits to what a translation-based approach can
achieve. While translation provides a strong base-
line, it can only capture those phenomena that are
familiar to the crowd providing the descriptions. The
street organ example shows that there exists a ‘knowl-
edge gap’ between Dutch and English. Dutch users
would certainly not be satisfied with street organs
being labeled as unusual looking vehicles. If the
translation-based approach is to be successful, future
research should find out how to bridge such gaps.

6.3 Limitations of this study

Our focus on Germanic languages from the Western
world does not allow us to make general statements
about how people describe images. A comparison
with taxonomically and culturally different languages
might help us uncover important factors that we have
missed in this study. A surprising example comes
from Baltaretu et al. (2016), who discuss how writing
direction (left-to-right versus right-to-left) affects the
way people process and recall visual scenes. This
may have implications for the way that images are
described by (or should be described for) speakers of
languages differing in this regard.

Finally, there are limits to what a corpus study
can show. The phenomena described here are pre-
sented with post-hoc explanations. Plausible as these
explanations may be, they are still hypotheses. We
think these hypotheses are useful guides in thinking
about image description, but they still remain to be
validated experimentally.

7 Conclusion

We studied a trilingually aligned corpus of described
images to learn about how crowd workers of differ-
ent languages described the same images. The main
finding was that earlier observations about negation

marking and ethnicity marking by English workers
also hold for Dutch and German. Dutch and Ger-
man workers also use negations in their image de-
scriptions, showing that this is a robust phenomenon.
Dutch and German workers also make unwarranted
inferences about the images, this shows that crowd
workers regularly include extra-visual information
in their descriptions. In addition, Dutch and Ger-
man workers also disproportionately mark non-white
people in their descriptions, showing that image de-
scription corpora carry biases that we need to take
into account when working with this data.

We also explored the role of familiarity in image
description. We found images in our corpus that
were easily described by workers of one language,
but unidentifiable to the workers of another language.
This has consequences for image description mod-
els trained on automatically translated training data:
some images will not be properly described for the
target audience. But the problem is more general.
The success of image description systems trained on
datasets of described images is limited by the knowl-
edge of the annotators, regardless of the language.
While the available data is useful for us to learn and
discuss what human-like descriptions should look
like, it can only take us so far. Full coverage sys-
tems that could tailor their descriptions to particular
audiences are still out of reach.

We hope this work provides a starting point for
conducting cross-linguistic comparisons of image
descriptions. Future work includes replicating our
analyses across more diverse families of languages,
modifying the task design to contrast the results with
our findings, and using our inspection tool to explore
other linguistic phenomena. We are also interested in
scaling up our analyses to larger corpora, which will
require the development of automated comparison
methods. We believe that these steps will bring us
closer to an initial understanding of the diversity in
image descriptions across different languages and
social groups.

Acknowledgements

This research is funded through the NWO Spinoza
prize, awarded to PV. DE is supported by an Ama-
zon Research Award. We thank three anonymous
reviewers for their questions and comments.

28



References
Adriana Baltaretu and Thiago Castro Ferreira. 2016. Task

demands and individual variation in referring expres-
sions. In Proceedings of the 9th International Nat-
ural Language Generation conference, pages 89–93,
September 5-8.

Adriana Baltaretu, Emiel J Krahmer, Carel van Wijk, and
Alfons Maes. 2016. Talking about relations: Factors
influencing the production of relational descriptions.
Frontiers in psychology, 7.

Allan Bell. 1984. Language style as audience design.
Language in Society, 13(2):145––204.

Camiel J. Beukeboom. 2014. Mechanisms of linguis-
tic bias: How words reflect and maintain stereotypic
expectancies. In J. Laszlo, J. Forgas, and O. Vincze, ed-
itors, Social cognition and communication, volume 31,
pages 313–330. Psychology Press.

Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. 2016. Bevolking;
generatie, geslacht, leeftijd en herkomstgroepering, 1
januari. Part of the CBS database, last modified 15
September 2016, September.

Paul Christophersen. 1939. The articles: A study of their
theory and use in English. Copenhagen: Munksgaard.

Guy Deutscher. 2010. Through the language glass: How
Words Colour Your World. New York: Metropolitan
Books.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, and Eva Hasler. 2015.
Multilingual image description with neural sequence
models. CoRR.

Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and Lucia
Specia. 2016. Multi30k: Multilingual english-german
image descriptions. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop
on Vision and Language, pages 70–74.

Irene Heim. 1982. The semantics of definite and indef-
inite noun phrases. Ph.D. thesis, University of Mas-
sachusetts. New edition typeset in 2011 by Anders J.
Schoubye and Ephraim Glick.

Julian Hitschler, Shigehiko Schamoni, and Stefan Riezler.
2016. Multimodal pivots for image caption transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Micah Hodosh, Peter Young, and Julia Hockenmaier.
2013. Framing image description as a ranking task:
Data, models and evaluation metrics. Journal of Artifi-
cial Intelligence Research, 47:853–899.

Karen R. Humes, Nicholas A. Jones, and Roberto R.
Ramirez. 2011. Overview of race and hispanic origin:
2010. Published by the United States Census Bureau,
March.

Alejandro Jaimes and Shih-Fu Chang. 1999. Conceptual
framework for indexing visual information at multiple
levels. In Electronic Imaging, pages 2–15. International
Society for Optics and Photonics.

Roman Jakobson. 1972. Verbal communication. Scien-
tific American, 227:72–80.

Douwe Kiela, Felix Hill, Anna Korhonen, and Stephen
Clark. 2014. Improving multi-modal representations
using image dispersion: Why less is sometimes more.
In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 835–841.

Xirong Li, Weiyu Lan, Jianfeng Dong, and Hailong Liu.
2016. Adding chinese captions to images. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 ACM on International Conference on
Multimedia Retrieval, pages 271–275.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and
C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco: Com-
mon objects in context. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 740–755.

Yo Matsumoto. 1995. The conversational condition on
horn scales. Linguistics and philosophy, 18(1):21–60.

John H McWhorter. 2014. The language hoax: Why
the world looks the same in any language. Oxford
University Press, USA.

Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, Margaret Mitchell, and
Ross Girshick. 2016. Seeing through the human report-
ing bias: Visual classifiers from noisy human-centric
labels. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2930–
2939.

Takashi Miyazaki and Nobuyuki Shimizu. 2016. Cross-
lingual image caption generation. In Proceedings of
the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 1780–1790.

Vicente Ordonez, Wei Liu, Jia Deng, Yejin Choi, Alexan-
der C. Berg, and Tamara L. Berg. 2015. Predicting
entry-level categories. International Journal of Com-
puter Vision, pages 1–15.

Erwin Panofsky. 1939. Studies in Iconology. Oxford
University Press.

Janarthanan Rajendran, Mitesh M Khapra, Sarath Chandar,
and Balaraman Ravindran. 2016. Bridge correlational
neural networks for multilingual multimodal represen-
tation learning. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies.

Eleanor Rosch, Carolyn B Mervis, Wayne D Gray,
David M Johnson, and Penny Boyes-Braem. 1976. Ba-
sic objects in natural categories. Cognitive psychology,
8(3):382–439.

Sara Shatford. 1986. Analyzing the subject of a picture:
a theoretical approach. Cataloging & classification
quarterly, 6(3):39–62.

Lucia Specia, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and Desmond
Elliott. 2016. A shared task on multimodal machine

29



translation and crosslingual image description. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Transla-
tion, pages 543–553.

Rachele Sprugnoli, Giovanni Moretti, Luisa Bentivogli,
and Diego Giuliani. 2016. Creating a ground truth
multilingual dataset of news and talk show transcrip-
tions through crowdsourcing. Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 1–35.

Statistisches Bundesamt. 2013. Zensus 2011: 80,2 millio-
nen einwohner lebten am 9. mai 2011 in deutschland.
Press release, Nr. 188, May.

M. E. Unal, B. Citamak, S. Yagcioglu, A. Erdem, E. Er-
dem, N. Ikizler Cinbis, and R. Cakici. 2016. Tasviret:
Görüntülerden otomatik türkçe açıklama oluşturma
İçin bir denektaçı veri kümesi (tasviret: A benchmark
dataset for automatic turkish description generation
from images). In IEEE Sinyal İşleme ve İletişim Uygu-
lamaları Kurultayı (SIU 2016).

Emiel van Miltenburg, Roser Morante, and Desmond El-
liott. 2016. Pragmatic factors in image description: the
case of negations. In Proceedings of the 5thWorkshop
on Vision and Language at ACL ’16.

Emiel van Miltenburg. 2016. Stereotyping and bias in
the flickr30k dataset. In Proceedings of Multimodal
Corpora: Computer vision and language processing
(MMC 2016), pages 1–4.

Yuya Yoshikawa, Yutaro Shigeto, and Akikazu Takeuchi.
2017. Stair captions: Constructing a large-scale
japanese image caption dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.00823.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia Hock-
enmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to visual
denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic in-
ference over event descriptions. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:67–78.

30


