



















































Creating and Validating Multilingual Semantic Representations for Six Languages: Expert versus Non-Expert Crowds


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Sense, Concept and Entity Representations and their Applications, pages 61–71,
Valencia, Spain, April 4 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Creating and Validating Multilingual Semantic Representations for Six
Languages: Expert versus Non-Expert Crowds

Mahmoud El-Haj, Paul Rayson, Scott Piao and Stephen Wattam
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK

initial.surname@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract

Creating high-quality wide-coverage mul-
tilingual semantic lexicons to support
knowledge-based approaches is a chal-
lenging time-consuming manual task.
This has traditionally been performed by
linguistic experts: a slow and expensive
process. We present an experiment in
which we adapt and evaluate crowdsourc-
ing methods employing native speakers to
generate a list of coarse-grained senses un-
der a common multilingual semantic tax-
onomy for sets of words in six languages.
451 non-experts (including 427 Mechan-
ical Turk workers) and 15 expert partic-
ipants semantically annotated 250 words
manually for Arabic, Chinese, English,
Italian, Portuguese and Urdu lexicons. In
order to avoid erroneous (spam) crowd-
sourced results, we used a novel task-
specific two-phase filtering process where
users were asked to identify synonyms in
the target language, and remove erroneous
senses.

1 Introduction

Machine understanding of the meaning of words,
phrases, sentences and documents has challenged
computational linguists since the 1950s, and much
progress has been made at multiple levels. Differ-
ent types of semantic annotation have been devel-
oped, such as word sense disambiguation, seman-
tic role labelling, named entity recognition, senti-
ment analysis and content analysis. Common to
all of these tasks, in the supervised setting, is the
requirement for a wide coverage semantic lexicon
acting as a knowledge base from which to select
or derive potential word or phrase level sense an-
notations.

The creation of large-scale semantic lexical re-
sources is a time-consuming and difficult task. For
new languages, regional varieties, dialects, or do-
mains the task will need to be repeated and then
revised over time as word meanings evolve. In
this paper, we report on work in which we adapt
crowdsourcing techniques to speed up the creation
of new semantic lexical resources. We evaluate
how efficient the approach is, and how robust the
semantic representation is across six languages.

The task that we focus on here is a particularly
challenging one. Given a word, each annotator
must decide on its meaning[s] and assign the word
to single or multiple tags in a pre-existing seman-
tic taxonomy. This task is similar to that under-
taken by trained lexicographers during the process
of writing or updating dictionary entries. Even for
experts, this is a complex task. Kilgarriff (1997)
highlighted a number of issues related to lexicog-
raphers ‘lumping’ or ‘splitting’ senses of a word
and cautioned that even lexicographers do not be-
lieve in words having a “discrete, non-overlapping
set of senses”. Véronis (2001) showed that inter-
annotator agreement is very low in sense tagging
using a traditional dictionary. For our purpose, we
use the USAS taxonomy.1 If a linguist were un-
dertaking this task, as they have done in the past
with Finnish (Löfberg et al., 2005) and Russian
(Mudraya et al., 2006) USAS taxonomies, they
would first spend some time learning the seman-
tic taxonomy. In this experimental scenario, we
aim to investigate whether or not non-expert na-
tive speakers can succeed on the word-to-senses
classification task without being trained on the tax-
onomy in advance, therefore mitigating a signifi-
cant overhead for the work. In addition, further
motivation for our experiments is to validate the
applicability of the USAS taxonomy (Rayson et

1The UCREL Semantic Analysis System (USAS), see
http://ucrel.lancaster.ac.uk/usas/

61



al., 2004), with a non-expert crowd, as a frame-
work for multilingual sense representation. The
USAS taxonomy was selected for this experiment
since it offers a manageable coarse-grained set
of categories that have already been applied to a
number of languages. This taxonomy is distinct
from other potential choices, such as WordNet.
The USAS tagset is originally loosely based on
the Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English
(McArthur, 1981) and has a hierarchical structure
with 21 major domains (see table 1) subdividing
into three levels. Versions of the USAS tagger
or tagset exist in 15 languages in total and for
each language, native speakers have re-evaluated
the applicability of the tagset with some specific
extensions for Chinese (Qian and Piao, 2009) but
otherwise the tagset is stable across all languages.
For each language tagger, separate linguistic re-
sources (lexicons) have been created, but they all
use the same taxonomy.

Domain Description
A General and abstract terms
B The body and the individual
C Arts and crafts
E Emotion
F Food and farming
G Government and public
H Architecture, housing and the home
I Money and commerce in industry
K Entertainment, sports and games
L Life and living things
M Movement, location, travel and

transport
N Numbers and measurement
O Substances, materials, objects and

equipment
P Education
Q Language and communication
S Social actions, states and processes
T Time
W World and environment
X Psychological actions, states and

processes
Y Science and technology
Z Names and grammar

Table 1: USAS top level semantic fields

In terms of main contributions, our research
goes beyond the previous work on crowdsourc-
ing word meanings which requires workers to pick

a word sense from an existing list that matches
provided contextual examples, such as a concor-
dance list. In our work, we require the partici-
pants to define the list of all possible senses that a
word could take in different contexts. We also see
that our two-stage filtering process tailored for this
task helps to improve results. We compare inter-
rater scores for two groups of experts and non-
experts to examine the feasibility of extracting
high-quality semantic lexicons via the untrained
crowd. Non-experts achieved results between 45-
97% for accuracy, between 48-92% for complete-
ness, with an average of 18% of tasks having er-
roneous senses being left in. Experts scored 64-
96% for accuracy, 72-95% for completeness, but
achieve better results in terms of only 1% of erro-
neous senses left behind. Our experimental results
show that the non-expert crowdsourced annotation
process is of a good quality and comparable to that
of expert linguists in some cases, although there
are variations across different languages. Crowd-
sourcing provides a promising approach for the
speedy generation and expansion of semantic lex-
icons on a large scale. It also allows us to validate
the semantic representations embedded in our tax-
onomy in the multilingual setting.

2 Related Work

The crowdsourcing approach, in particular Me-
chanical Turk (MTurk), has been successfully ap-
plied for a number of different Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks. Alonso and Mizzaro
(2009) adopted MTurk for five types of NLP tasks,
resulting in high agreement between expert gold
standard labels and non-expert annotations, where
a small number of workers can emulate an ex-
pert. With the possibility of achieving good re-
sults quickly and cheaply, MTurk has been tested
for a variety of tasks, such as image annotation
(Sorokin and Forsyth, 2008), Wikipedia article
quality assessment (Kittur et al., 2008), machine
translation (Callison-Burch, 2009), extracting key
phrases from documents (Yang et al., 2009), and
summarization (El-Haj et al., 2010). Practical is-
sues such as payment and task design play an im-
portant part in ensuring the quality of the resulting
work. Many designers pay between $0.01 to $0.10
for a task taking a few minutes. Quality control
and evaluation are usually achieved through con-
fidence scores and gold-standards (Donmez et al.,
2009; Bhardwaj et al., 2010). Past research has

62



shown (Aker et al., 2012) that the use of radio but-
ton design seems to lead to better results compared
to the free text design. Particularly important in
our case is the language demographics of MTurk
(Pavlick et al., 2014), since we need to find enough
native speakers in a number of languages.

There is a growing body of crowdsourcing work
related to semantic annotation. Snow et al. (2008)
applied MTurk to the Word Sense Disambiguation
(WSD) task and achieved 100% precision with
simple majority voting for the correct sense of
the word ‘president’ in 177 example sentences.
Rumshisky et al. (2012) derived a sense inven-
tory and sense-annotated corpus from MTurkers
comparison of senses in pairs of example sen-
tences. They used clustering methods to iden-
tify the strength of coders’ tags, something that
is poorly suited to rejecting work from spammers
(participants who try to cheat the system with
scripts or random answers) and would likely not
transfer well to our experiment.

Akkaya et al. (2010) also performed WSD us-
ing MTurk workers. They discuss a number of
methods for ensuring quality, accountability, and
consistency using 9 tasks per word and simple ma-
jority voting. Kapelner et al. (2012) increased the
scale to 1,000 words for the WSD task and found
that workers repeating the task do not learn with-
out feedback. A set-based agreement metric was
used by Passonneau et al. (2006) to assess the
validity of polysemous selections of word senses
from WordNet categories. Their objective was to
take into account similarity between items within a
set, however, this may not be desirable in our case
due to the limited depth of the USAS taxonomy.

Directly related to our research here are the
experiments reported in Piao et al. (2015). A
set of prototype semantic lexicons were auto-
matically generated by transferring semantic tags
from the existing USAS English semantic lex-
icon entries to their translation equivalents in
Italian, Chinese and Portuguese via dictionaries
and bilingual lexicons. While some dictionar-
ies involved, including Chinese/English and Por-
tuguese/English dictionaries, provided high qual-
ity lexical translations for core vocabularies of
these languages, the bilingual lexicons, including
FreeLang English/Italian, English/Portuguese lex-
icons2 and LDC English/Chinese word list, con-
tain erroneous and inaccurate translations. To re-

2http://www.freelang.net/dictionary/

duce the error rate, some manual cleaning was car-
ried out, particularly on the English-Italian bilin-
gual lexicons. Because of the substantial amount
of time needed for such manual work, the rest of
the lexical resources were used with only minor
sporadic manual checking. Due to the noise intro-
duced from the bilingual lexicons, as well as the
ambiguous nature of the translation, the automati-
cally generated semantic lexicons for the three lan-
guages contain errors, including erroneous seman-
tic tags caused by incorrect translations, and inac-
curate semantic tags caused by ambiguous trans-
lations. When these automatically generated lexi-
cons were integrated and applied in the USAS se-
mantic tagger, the tagger suffered from error rates
of 23.51%, 12.31% and 10.28% for Italian, Chi-
nese and Portuguese respectively.

The improvement of the semantic lexicons is
therefore an urgent and challenging task, and we
hypothesise that the crowdsourcing approach can
potentially provide an effective means for address-
ing this issue on a large scale, while at the same
time allowing us to further validate the representa-
tion of word senses in the USAS sense inventory
(i.e. the semantic tagset) for these languages.

3 Semantic Labeling Experiment

We test the wisdom of the crowd in building
lexicons and applying the same multilingual se-
mantic representation in six languages: Arabic,
Chinese, English, Italian, Portuguese and Urdu.
These languages were selected to provide a range
of language families, inflectional and derivational
morphology, while covering significant number of
speakers worldwide. For each language, we ran-
domly selected 250 words. All experiments pre-
sented here use the USAS taxonomy to describe
semantic categories3 (Rayson et al., 2004).

3.1 Gold Standard Semantic Tags

To prepare gold standard data we asked a group
of linguists (up to two per language) to manu-
ally check 250 randomly selected words for each
of the six languages, starting from the data pro-
vided by Piao et al. (2015). For additional lan-
guages (those not in Piao et al. (2015)), the Arabic
and Urdu gold standards were completed manu-
ally by native speaker linguists who translated the
250 words, and we instructed the translators to opt
for the most familiar Arabic or Urdu equivalents

3http://ucrel.lancaster.ac.uk/usas/semtags.txt

63



of the English words. This was further confirmed
by checking the list of words by two other Arabic
and Urdu native speakers. Here the base form of
verbs in Arabic is taken to be the present simple
form of the verb in the interest of convenience and
because there is no part of speech tag for ‘present
tense of a lexical verb’. Hence, the three-letter
past tense verbs are tagged as ‘past form of lex-
ical verb’, rather than as base forms. Also, while
present and past participles (e.g., ‘interesting’, ‘in-
terested’) are tagged as adjectives in English, these
are labeled in Arabic as nouns in stand-alone po-
sitions but they can also function as adjective pre-
modifying nouns. Linguists then used the USAS
semantic tagset to semantically label each word
with the most suitable senses.

3.2 Non-expert Participants

Non-expert participants are defined as those who
are not familiar with the USAS taxonomy in ad-
vance of the experiment. We selected Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk4 – an online marketplace for
work that requires human intelligence – and pub-
lished “Human Intelligence Tasks” (HITs) for En-
glish, Chinese and Portuguese only. For Ara-
bic, Italian, and Urdu initial experiments using
MTurk showed that not enough native speakers
are available to complete the tasks. Therefore,
we employed 12 non-expert participants directly
with four native speakers for each of the three lan-
guages. All participants used the same interface
(Figure 1).

On MTurk, we paid workers an average of 7 US
dollars per hour. We paid Portuguese workers 50%
more to try and attract more participants due to
the lack of Portuguese native speakers on MTurk.
We paid the other directly contacted participants
an average of 8 British pounds per hour. Those
payments were made using Amazon5 and Apple
iTunes6 vouchers.

3.3 Expert Participants

Expert participants are defined as those who were
already familiar with the USAS taxonomy before
the experiments took place. For four languages
(Arabic, English, Chinese and Urdu) we asked a
total of 15 participants (3 for English and 4 for
the other languages) to carry out the same task as

4http://www.mturk.com
5https://www.amazon.co.uk
6http://www.apple.com

the non-experts. All expert and non-expert partici-
pants (whether MTurk workers or direct-contact)
used the same user interface (Figure 1) as de-
scribed in section 3.5.

3.4 Experimental Design
Obtaining reliable results from the crowd remains
a challenging task (Kazai et al., 2009), which
requires a careful experimental design and pre-
selection of crowdsourcers. In our experiments,
we worked on minimising the effort required by
participants through designing a user-friendly in-
terface.7 Aside from copying the final output code
to a text-box everything else is done using mouse
clicks. Poorly designed experiments can nega-
tively affect the quality of the results conducted
by MTurk workers (Downs et al., 2010; Welinder
et al., 2010; Kazai, 2011).

Feedback from a short sample run with local
testers helped us update the interface and provide
more information to make the task efficient. Fig-
ure 1 shows a sample task for the word ‘car’. The
majority of the testers were able to complete the
task within five minutes. In response to feedback
by some of the testers we provided the “Instruc-
tions” section in the six languages under consider-
ation.

Term to Classify

car
Tags

Please add tags to describe the term, arranging them from the most commonly used sense to the least.

 Please label the word below with a number of tags that represent its meaning. Attach as many (no 

 more than 10), or as few,  as you deem appropriate for all senses of the word, placing them in
 descending order of importance. Tags can be assigned in a (positive or negative manner (for example,

"occasionally" is tagged negatively for frequency

 To assign a tag, click on the add tag button, and select a box from the category selection. This will add 

an entry in the list, that .can then be sorted so that the most commonly used tag is at the top

Please remove any unrelated tags and make sure you do not exceed 10 tags in total

 To help you with identifying common senses of a word, we have provided a number of links to 

 dictionaries, thesauri, and  corpora (where you can see real­world usage). The References button will

bring these up over the top of other things, so you can still browse the tags

Example: "Jordan" could be : 'Geographical name' or 'Personal name'

 Please submit your selections by clicking in the Submit button at the end of the page and wait until you 

 receive a confirmation  message where you need to copy the output­code and provide it to us, as in

the following example: f962bed5616612c8c7053f6e97e72b129edb4990-b5f5-47ab-8e7e-

bfc61c6515ec

Instructions Istruzioni التعليمات 用户指南 Information Contact

 Movement/transportation: land

American football

SubmitAdd Tag             References

Figure 1: Sample Task for the word “Car”

3.5 Online Semantic Labeling
As shown in Figure 1, we asked the participants to
label each word presented to them with a number

7Our underlying code is freely available on GitHub at
https://github.com/UCREL/BLC-WSD-Frontend

64



 
References 

Click on any of the following links for more 

information about the word: happy 

 dictionary.com 

 thesaurus.com 

 British National Corpus 

hide 

Figure 2: Dictionary and Thesauri References

of tags that represent the word’s possible mean-
ings. The participants were asked to attach as
many, or as few, as they deemed appropriate for
all senses of the word, placing them in descending
order of likelihood.

To assign a tag, the participants click on the
Add Tag button, and navigate to a box from the
category selection where they can select a subcat-
egory (Figures 3 and 4). By following these steps
the participants add an entry in the list, that can
then be sorted by dragging and dropping the se-
lected tags so that the most commonly used tag is
at the top. We asked the users to remove any un-
related tags and make sure they do not exceed 10
tags in total.

 

General & Abstract 

Terms 

15 subcategories 

The Body & 

Individual 

5 subcategories 

Arts & Crafts 

1 subcategories 

Life & Living Things 

3 subcategories 

Numbers & 

Measurement 

6 subcategories 

Education 

1 subcategories 

Science & 

Technology 

2 subcategories 

Time 

4 subcategories 

Money & 

Commerce 

4 subcategories 

Figure 3: Categories

To help them when identifying common senses
of a given word, we provided a number of links to
dictionaries, thesauri, and corpora (where they can
see real-world usage) for each language. The Ref-
erences are displayed alongside the interface, so
they can still browse the tags (Figure 2). Partici-
pants are free to use other resources as they see fit.
The participants then needed to submit their selec-
tions by clicking the Submit button at the end of

 

Anatomy and 
physiology 

Terms relating to the (human) 
body and bodily processes 

 

Health and disease 

Terms relating to the (state of 
the) physical condition 

 

Cl  and personal 
 

Terms relating to 

other personal  

 

Cleaning and personal 
care 

Terms relating to 
domestic/personal hygiene 

 

+ Select ‒ Select + Select ‒ Select 

+ Select ‒ Select + Select ‒ Select 

Figure 4: Subcategories

the page and wait until they receive a confirmation
message where they need to copy the output-code
and provide it to us.

For each word we targeted a total of four non-
expert participants and four expert participants to
allow measurement and comparison of the agree-
ment within each group to investigate the variabil-
ity of task results and participants, rather than to
take a simple weighted combination to produce an
agreed list.

3.6 Filtering
Even though crowdsourcing has been shown to
be effective in achieving expert quality for a va-
riety of NLP tasks (Snow et al., 2008; Callison-
Burch, 2009), we still needed to filter out work-
ers who were not taking the task seriously or were
attempting to manipulate the system for personal
gain (spamming).

In order to avoid these spamming crowdsourced
results, we designed a novel task-specific two
stage filtering process that we considered more
suitable for this type of task than previous filtering
approaches. Our two stage process encompasses
filters that are appropriate for experts and non-
experts, and is applicable whether participants are
using MTurk or not.

In stage one filtering, we asked the MTurk
workers to select the correct synonym of the pre-
sented word from a list of noisy candidates in or-
der to avoid rejection of their HITs. The list con-
tained four words where only one word correctly
fitted as a synonym. In order to set up the first
filtering task for MTurk workers (on English, Chi-
nese and Portuguese tasks), we used Multilingual
WordNet to obtain the most common synonym for
each word. The stage one filtering was not needed
for Arabic, Italian and Urdu, since these non-

65



expert participants were directly contacted and we
knew that they were native speakers and would not
submit random results. The synonyms were vali-
dated by linguists in each of the three languages
and choices were randomly shuffled before be-
ing presented to the workers. Stage one filtering
removed 12% of English HITS, 2% of Chinese,
and 6% of the Portuguese submissions. In our re-
sults presented below, we only considered tasks by
workers who chose the correct synonyms and re-
jected the others.

For the stage two filter, we injected random er-
roneous senses for each of the 250 words into the
initial list of tags and the participants were ex-
pected to remove these in order to pass. We de-
liberately injected wrong and unrelated semantic
tags in between ‘potentially’ correct ones before
shuffling the order of the tags. For example, ex-
amining the pre-selected tags for the word ‘car’ in
Figure 1 we can see that the semantic tag ‘Ameri-
can Football’ is unrelated to the word ‘car’ and in
fact does not exist in the USAS semantic taxon-
omy. The potentially correct tag such as ‘Move-
ment/transportation: land’ does exist in the se-
mantic lexicon. Results where participants fail to
pass stage two are still retained in the experiment
and we report on the usefulness of this filter in
section 4. All participants (MTurk workers and
directly-contacted; experts and non-experts) un-
dertook stage 2 filtering. Our experimental design
did not reveal to the participants any details of the
two stage filtering process.

4 Results and Discussion

To evaluate the results8 we adopted three main
metrics (inspired by those used in the SemEval
procedures): Accuracy, Completeness, and Corre-
lation.

Accuracy: measure the accuracy of the partic-
ipant’s selection of tags (WTags) by counting the
matching tags between the worker’s selection and
the gold standards (GTags). To compute Accu-
racy we divide the number of matching tags by the
number of tags selected by the participants.

Accuracy =
WTags ∩GTags

WTags

Completeness: measure the completeness of the
participant’s selection of tags (WTags) by finding

8All expert and non-expert results are available as
CSV files on https://github.com/UCREL/Multilingual-
USAS/tree/master/papers/eacl2017 sense workshop

whether the gold standard tags (GTags) are com-
pletely or partially contained within the worker’s
selection. To compute Completeness we divide the
number of matching tags by the number of gold
standard tags.

Completeness =
WTags ∩GTags

GTags

Correlation: To test the similarity of tag selec-
tion between workers and gold standards we used
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.

In addition to the three metrics mentioned above
we used three factors that work as indicators of the
quality of the tagging process:

• Strict: Whether worker’s tags are identical to
the gold standard (same tags in the same or-
der);

• First Tag Correct: Whether the first tag se-
lected by the worker matches the first tag in
the gold standard;

• Fuzzy: Whether tags selected by a worker are
contained within the gold standard tags (in
any order).

For each language we asked for up to four an-
notators per word (1,000 HITs per language). For
Portuguese, where the participants were all from
MTurk, we only received 694 HITs even though
we paid participants working on Portuguese 50%
more than we paid for the English tasks.

Table 29 shows the aggregate averages of the
non-expert HITs. In total, direct-contact partic-
ipants and MTurk workers performed well and
achieved comparable results to the gold standard
in places. Around 50% of the English, Chinese,
Urdu, and Portuguese HITs had the correct tags se-
lected with around 15% being identical to the gold
standards. In nearly all of the cases, Portuguese
workers chose the correct tags although they were
in a different order than the gold standard. Arabic
participants achieved a high completeness score
relative to the gold standard tags, but a close anal-
ysis of the results show the participants have sug-
gested more tags than the gold standards.

The results for English suggest that the non-
expert workers are consistent as can be observed

9For this and the following tables, we use: Acc: Accuracy,
Com: Completeness, Corr: Spearman’s, Err: Erroneous tags,
Str: Strict, 1st: first tag correct, Fuz: Fuzzy.

66



Lang Acc Com Cor Err Str 1st Fuz
En 61.4 69.3 0.38 29% 16% 65% 38%
Ar 55.5 87.1 0.35 8% 8% 55% 19%
Zh 45.2 56.1 0.22 2% 15% 46% 27%
It 45.7 47.9 0.06 31% 7% 38% 22%
Pt 58.5 56.3 0.21 18% 19% 50% 94%
Ur 97.6 91.9 0.51 1% 53% 78% 95%

Table 2: Summary of performance [Non experts]

by looking at the Accuracy (Acc) and Complete-
ness (Com) results. Spearman’s correlation (Cor)
suggests that the workers correlate with the expert
gold standard tags, which is consistent with previ-
ous findings that MTurk is effective for a variety of
NLP tasks through achieving expert quality (Snow
et al., 2008; Callison-Burch, 2009). The majority
of the workers matched the first tag correctly (1st)
by ordering the tags so the most important (core
sense) tag appeared at the top of their selection.
The erroneous tags (Err) column shows that many
workers did not remove some of the deliberately-
wrong tags (see Section 3.5). This reflects the lack
of training of the workers, but our checking of the
results showed that the erroneous tags were not se-
lected as first choice. Strict (Str) and Fuzzy (Fuz)
show that many workers were consistent with the
gold standard tags in terms of both tag selection
and order. It is worth mentioning that languages
differ in terms of ambiguity (e.g. Urdu is less am-
biguous than Arabic) which can be observed in the
differences between language results.

As mentioned earlier, we did not use MTurk for
the Arabic lexicon, due to the lack of Arabic na-
tives speakers on MTurk. Instead, we found four
student volunteers who offered to help in seman-
tically tagging the words, again without any train-
ing on the tagset. The results show consistent ac-
curacy and completeness. It is worth noting that
the Arabic participants obtained higher accuracy
and completeness scores by having higher agree-
ment with the gold standard tags. The Arabic lan-
guage participants selected fewer erroneous tags
than the English ones. The majority of the par-
ticipants got the first tag correct. Arabic partici-
pants failed to match the order of tags in the gold
standards as reflected by lower correlation. This
is expected due to the fact that Arabic is highly
inflectional and derivational, which increases am-
biguity and presents a challenge to the interpreta-
tion of the words (El-Haj et al., 2014). Difficulties

in knowing the exact sense of an out of context
Arabic word could result in disagreement when it
comes to ordering the senses (see Section 3.1).

For the Chinese language, the result table shows
that there is a slightly lower correlation between
the non-expert workers’ tags and the gold stan-
dards. Observing the erroneous results column we
can see that the workers have made very few mis-
takes and deleted the random unrelated tags. The
Strict and Fuzzy scores suggest the results to be of
high quality. The participants managed to get the
first tag correct in many cases.

For the Italian language, we sourced four non-
expert undergrad student participants who are all
native Italian speakers but not familiar with the
tagset. The participants’ results do not correlate
well with the gold standards. As the tags descrip-
tion are all in English the annotators found it diffi-
cult to correctly select the senses and had to trans-
late some tags into Italian which could have re-
sulted in shifting the meaning of those tags, to
communicate with them we had an Italian/English
bilingual linguist as a mediator.

As with Arabic and Italian, for the Urdu lan-
guage we sourced four non-expert participants
who are all native Urdu speakers but not familiar
with the tagset. Urdu results show that participants
correlate well with the gold standards. We also
notice a lower percentage of erroneous tags than
other languages. The First Tag and Fuzzy scores
suggest the results to be of high quality. The par-
ticipants also managed to get the first tag correct in
many cases. The participants all agreed it was easy
to define word senses with the words being less
ambiguous compared to other languages. This is
shown in the high results achieved when compared
to non-experts of the other languages.

We received only 694 HITs for Portuguese tasks
on MTurk, which suggests there are fewer Por-
tuguese speakers compared to English and Chi-
nese speakers among the MTurk workers. The
results for Portuguese in some cases are of very
high quality. It should be noted that the gold stan-
dard tags were selected and manually checked by a
Brazilian Portuguese native speaker expert. There
is a difference between European and Brazil-
ian Portuguese which could result in ambiguous
words for speakers from the two regions (Frota
and Vigário, 2001).

Table 3 shows the results obtained by using the
second filtering mechanism to discard HITs where

67



Lang Acc Com Cor
En 70.4 69.0 0.36
Ar 56.6 87.6 0.34
Zh 45.6 55.9 0.22
It 54.4 53.5 0.09
Pt 61.3 54.0 0.20
Ur 97.6 91.9 0.51

Table 3: Summary of performance with Second
Filter [Non experts]

random erroneous tags were not completely re-
moved. This enables us to increase accuracy for
English by 9.0%, Italian by 8.7% and Portuguese
by 2.8% without negatively affecting complete-
ness or correlation.

In order to allow better interpretation of the non-
experts’ scores, we repeated the experiments on
a smaller scale with up to four experts per lan-
guage (English, Arabic, Chinese and Urdu), who
were already familiar with the USAS taxonomy
and were researchers in the fields of corpus or
computational linguistics. Experts used the same
task interface to assign senses to 50 words each.
The results are presented in Table 4. Most notably,
experts consistently excel at removing erroneous
tags, leaving only a very small number in the data.

English experts performed much better than
English non-experts on completeness, correlation
and strict measures while their accuracy scores are
comparable. Arabic experts performed much bet-
ter than Arabic non-experts on the accuracy, strict
and fuzzy scores while the 1st score is compa-
rable. Chinese experts performed slightly better
than Chinese non-experts on Accuracy, complete-
ness and Fuzzy while other scores were compa-
rable. Urdu experts scored relatively more highly
on strict and 1st measures while other scores were
comparable to Urdu non-experts. Finally, Tables 5
and 6 show the Observed Agreement (OA), Fleiss’
Kappa and Krippendorff’s alpha scores for the
inter-rater agreement between Expert and Non Ex-
pert participants. According to (Landis and Koch,
1977) our inter-rater scores show fair agreement
between annotators. This serves to illustrate the
task is complex even for experts.

Overall these results show that untrained crowd-
sourcing workers can produce results that are com-
parable to those of experts when performing se-
mantic annotation tasks. Directly-contacted and
MTurk workers achieved similar levels of results

Lang Acc Com Cor Err Str 1st Fuz
En 66.1 83 0.61 1% 31% 75% 40%
Ar 78.8 72.4 0.22 1% 39% 51% 73%
Zh 50.4 60.2 0.21 1% 15% 44% 31%
Ur 96.2 94.8 0.69 1% 63% 89% 93%

Table 4: Summary of performance [Experts]

Language Measure OA Fleiss K–alpha
English First Tag 0.82 0.46 0.46

Fuzzy 0.64 0.27 0.27
Strict 0.69 0.32 0.32

Arabic First Tag 0.77 0.55 0.55
Fuzzy 0.84 0.59 0.59
Strict 0.21 0.55 0.55

Chinese First Tag 0.62 0.23 0.24
Fuzzy 0.75 0.41 0.41
Strict 0.83 0.31 0.32

Urdu First Tag 0.83 0.10 0.10
Fuzzy 0.91 0.35 0.35
Strict 0.71 0.37 0.38

Table 5: Total Inter-rater agreement [Experts].

overall. This shows that the novel two-phase fil-
tering method used in our experiment is effective
for maintaining the quality of the results.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In order to accelerate the task of creating multilin-
gual semantic lexicons with coarse-grained word
senses using a common multilingual semantic rep-
resentation scheme, we employed non-expert na-
tive speakers via MTurk who were not trained
with the semantic taxonomy. Overall, the non-
expert participants semantically tagged 250 words
in each of six languages: Arabic, Chinese, En-
glish, Italian, Portuguese and Urdu. We analysed
the results using a number of metrics to consider
the correct likelihood order of tags relative to a
gold-standard, along with correct removal of ran-
dom erroneous semantic tags, and completeness
of tag lists. Crowdsourcing has been applied suc-
cessfully for other NLP tasks in previous research,
and we build on previous success in WSD tasks in
three ways. Firstly, we have specific requirements
for semantic tagging purposes in terms of placing
coarse-grained senses into a semantic taxonomy
rather than stand-alone definitions. Hence, our ex-
perimental set-up allows us to validate the sense
inventory in a multilingual setting, carried out here
for six languages. Secondly, we extend the usual

68



Language Measure OA Fleiss K–alpha
English First Tag 0.71 0.36 0.36

Fuzzy 0.58 0.11 0.11
Strict 0.79 0.20 0.20

Arabic First Tag 0.66 0.32 0.32
Fuzzy 0.71 0.05 0.05
Strict 0.86 0.03 0.03

Chinese First Tag 0.73 0.45 0.45
Fuzzy 0.74 0.38 0.38
Strict 0.85 0.41 0.41

Italian First Tag 0.67 0.31 0.31
Fuzzy 0.67 0.03 0.03
Strict 0.89 0.12 0.13

Portuguese First Tag 0.64 0.22 0.22
Fuzzy 0.63 0.13 0.13
Strict 0.80 0.18 0.18

Urdu First Tag 0.72 0.16 0.16
Fuzzy 0.95 0.45 0.45
Strict 0.74 0.49 0.49

Table 6: Total Inter-rater agreement [Non Ex-
perts].

classification task of putting a word into one of
an existing list of senses, instead asking partici-
pants to list all possible senses that a word could
take in different contexts. Thirdly, we have de-
ployed a novel two-stage filtering approach which
has been shown to improve the quality of our re-
sults by filtering out spam responses using a sim-
ple synonym recognition task as well as HITs re-
moving random erroneous tags. Our experiment
suggests that the crowdsourcing process can pro-
duce results of good quality and is comparable to
the work done by expert linguists. We showed that
it is possible for native speakers to apply the hier-
archical semantic taxonomy without prior training
by the application of a graphical browsing inter-
face to assist selection and annotation process.

In the future, we will apply the method on a
larger scale to the full semantic lexicons includ-
ing multiword expressions, which are important
for contextual semantic disambiguation. We will
also investigate whether adaptations to our method
are required to include more languages such as
Czech, Malay and Spanish. In order to pursue the
work beyond the existing languages in the USAS
system, we will extend bootstrapping methods re-
ported in Piao et al. (2015) with vector-based tech-
niques and evaluate their appropriateness for mul-
tiple languages. Finally, we will test whether
(a) provision of words in context through concor-

dances, (b) prototypical examples for each seman-
tic tag, or (c) semantic tag labels in the same lan-
guage as the task word, as part of the resources
available to participants would further enhance the
accuracy of the crowdsourcing annotation process.

Acknowledgements

The crowdsourcing framework and interface was
originally produced in an EPSRC Impact Accel-
eration Award at Lancaster University in 2013.
This work has also been supported by the
UK ESRC/AHRC-funded CorCenCC (The Na-
tional Corpus of Contemporary Welsh) Project
(ref. ES/M011348/1), the ESRC-funded Centre
for Corpus Approaches to Social Science (ref.
ES/K002155/1), and by the UCREL research cen-
tre, Lancaster University, UK via Wmatrix soft-
ware licence fees. We would also like to ex-
press our thanks to the many expert and non-expert
participants who were also involved in the ex-
periments including: Dawn Archer (Manchester
Metropolitan University, UK), Francesca Bianchi
(Universita del Salento, Italy), Carmen Dayrell
(Lancaster University, UK), Xiaopeng Hu (China
Center for Information Industry Development,
CCID, China), Olga Mudraya (Right Word Up,
UK), Sheryl Prentice (Lancaster University, UK),
Yuan Qi (China Center for Information Industry
Development, CCID, China), Jawad Shafi (COM-
SATS Institute of Information technology, Pak-
istan), and May Wong (University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China).

References

Ahmet Aker, Mahmoud El-Haj, Udo Kruschwitz, and
M-Dyaa Albakour. 2012. Assessing Crowdsourc-
ing Quality through Objective Tasks. In 8th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, Istan-
bul, Turkey. LREC 2012.

Cem Akkaya, Alexander Conrad, Janyce Wiebe, and
Rada Mihalcea. 2010. Amazon mechanical turk
for subjectivity word sense disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on
Creating Speech and Language Data with Ama-
zon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 195–203, Los Ange-
les, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Omar Alonso and Stefano Mizzaro. 2009. Can we get
rid of TREC Assessors? Using Mechanical Turk for
Relevance Assessment. In SIGIR ’09: Workshop on
The Future of IR Evaluation, Boston, USA.

69



Vikas Bhardwaj, Rebecca J. Passonneau, Ansaf Salleb-
Aouissi, and Nancy Ide. 2010. Anveshan: A frame-
work for analysis of multiple annotators’ labeling
behavior. In Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic
Annotation Workshop, LAW IV ’10, pages 47–55,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, Cheap, and Cre-
ative: Evaluating Translation Quality Using Ama-
zon’s Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 286–295, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Pinar Donmez, Jaime G. Carbonell, and Jeff Schneider.
2009. Efficiently learning the accuracy of labeling
sources for selective sampling. In Proceedings of
the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’09,
pages 259–268, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Julie S. Downs, Mandy B. Holbrook, Steve Sheng,
and Lorrie Faith Cranor. 2010. Are your partic-
ipants gaming the system?: Screening mechanical
turk workers. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’10, pages 2399–2402, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Mahmoud El-Haj, Udo Kruschwitz, and Chris Fox.
2010. Using Mechanical Turk to Create a Cor-
pus of Arabic Summaries. In Language Resources
(LRs) and Human Language Technologies (HLT) for
Semitic Languages workshop held in conjunction
with the 7th International Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC 2010)., pages 36–39,
Valletta, Malta. LREC 2010.

Mahmoud El-Haj, Udo Kruschwitz, and Chris Fox.
2014. Creating language resources for under-
resourced languages: methodologies, and experi-
ments with Arabic. Language Resources and Eval-
uation, pages 1–32.

Sónia Frota and Marina Vigário. 2001. On the
correlates of rhythmic distinctions: The Euro-
pean/Brazilian Portuguese case. pages 247–275.

Adam Kapelner, Krishna Kaliannan, H.Andrew
Schwartz, Lyle Ungar, and Dean Foster. 2012.
New insights from coarse word sense disambigua-
tion in the crowd. In Proceedings of COLING 2012:
Posters, pages 539–548, Mumbai, India. The COL-
ING 2012 Organizing Committee.

Gabriella Kazai, Natasa Milic-Frayling, and Jamie
Costello. 2009. Towards methods for the collec-
tive gathering and quality control of relevance as-
sessments. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’09, pages
452–459, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Gabriella Kazai. 2011. In search of quality in crowd-
sourcing for search engine evaluation. In Paul
Clough, Colum Foley, Cathal Gurrin, Gareth J.F.
Jones, Wessel Kraaij, Hyowon Lee, and Vanessa
Mudoch, editors, Advances in Information Re-
trieval, volume 6611 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 165–176. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg.

Adam Kilgarriff. 1997. “I Don’t Believe in Word
Senses”. Computers and the Humanities, 31(2):91–
113.

Aniket Kittur, Ed H. Chi, and Bongwon Suh. 2008.
Crowdsourcing user studies with mechanical turk.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’08, pages
453–456, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

J.Richard Landis and Gary Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33(1):159–174.

Laura Löfberg, Scott Piao, Asko Nykanen, Krista
Varantola, Paul Rayson, and Jukka-Pekka Juntunen.
2005. A semantic tagger for the Finnish language.
In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2005, Birm-
ingham, UK.

Tom McArthur. 1981. Longman Lexicon of Contem-
porary English. Longman, London, UK.

Olga Mudraya, Bogdan Babych, Scott Piao, Paul
Rayson, and Andrew Wilson. 2006. Developing
a Russian semantic tagger for automatic semantic
annotation. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics
2006, pages 290–297, St. Petersburg, Russia.

Rebecca Passonneau, Nizar Habash, and Owen Ram-
bow. 2006. Inter-annotator agreement on a
multilingual semantic annotation task. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06),
Genoa, Italy. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Ellie Pavlick, Matt Post, Ann Irvine, Dmitry Kachaev,
and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. The language de-
mographics of Amazon Mechanical Turk. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2:79–92.

Scott Piao, Francesca Bianchi, Carmen Dayrell, An-
gela D’Egidio, and Paul Rayson. 2015. Develop-
ment of the multilingual semantic annotation sys-
tem. In Proceedings of North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics –
Human Language Technologies Conference, Den-
ver, USA. (NAACL HLT 2015).

Yufang Qian and Scott Piao. 2009. The development
of a semantic annotation scheme for chinese kinship.
Corpora, 4(2):189–208.

70



Paul Rayson, Dawn Archer, Scott Piao, and Anthony
McEnery. 2004. The UCREL semantic analysis
system. In Proceedings of the Beyond Named En-
tity Recognition Semantic Labelling for NLP tasks
workshop, pages 7–12, Lisbon, Portugal.

Aanna Rumshisky, Nick Botchan, Sophie Kushkuley,
and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Word sense inven-
tories by non-experts. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Mehmet Uur Doan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Eight International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12),
pages 4055–4059, Istanbul, Turkey, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Andrew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and Fast – But is it
Good? Evaluating Non-Expert Annotations for Nat-
ural Language Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 254–263. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Alexander. Sorokin and David Forsyth. 2008. Utility
data annotation with amazon mechanical turk. In In
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops, pages 1–8.

Jean Véronis. 2001. Sense tagging: does it make
sense? In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2001,
Lancaster, UK. UCREL.

Peter Welinder, Steve Branson, Serge Belongie, and
Pietro Perona. 2010. The Multidimensional Wis-
dom of Crowds. In J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams,
J. Shawe-Taylor, R. S. Zemel, and A. Culotta, ed-
itors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 23, pages 2424–2432.

Yin Yang, Nilesh Bansal, Wisam Dakka, Panagio-
tis Ipeirotis, Nick Koudas, and Dimitris Papadias.
2009. Query by document. In Proceedings of
the Second ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’09, pages 34–43,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

71


