








































Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT16), pages 138–145,
Prague, Czech Republic, January 23–24, 2018. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 licence. 2017.

Keywords: Bambara, Mande, treebank

Towards a dependency-annotated treebank for Bambara

Ekaterina Aplonova
School of Linguistics

ВШЭ
Moscow

aplooon@gmail.com

Francis M. Tyers
School of Linguistics

ВШЭ
Moscow

ftyers@hse.ru

Abstract

In this paper we describe a dependency annotation scheme for Bambara, a Mande language spo-
ken in Mali, which has few computational linguistic resources. The scheme is based on Uni-
versal Dependencies. We describe part-of-speech tags, morphological features and dependencies
and how we performed a rule-based conversion of an existing part-of-speech annotated corpus
of Bambara, which contains approximately 900,000 tokens. We also describe the annotation of a
small treebank of 116 sample sentences, which were picked randomly.

1 Introduction

One of the basic language resources has, for a long time, been a part-of-speech tagged (or morphologically
disambiguated) corpus. In recent years, treebanks — collections of sentences annotated for syntactic
structure— have become increasingly available and vital resources, both for natural-language processing
and corpus linguistics. Current end-to-end pipelines like UDPipe (Straka et al., 2016), which perform
each stage of the classic NLP pipeline from tokenisation to dependency parsing, make it easy to go
from a situation where a language has no effective language resources to one where the language has a
functional pipeline in a few months as opposed to a few years of work.
A crucial prerequisite for building a treebank is to have a set of annotation guidelines which describe

how particular syntactic structures are to be represented. In our work on creating a treebank for Bambara
we have chosen version 2.0 of the Universal Dependencies scheme (Nivre et al., 2016) as it provides
ready-made recommendations on which to base annotation guidelines for part-of-speech tags, morpho-
logical features and dependency relations. This reduces the amount of time needed to develop bespoke
annotation guidelines for a given language as where the existing universal guidelines1 are adequate they
can be imported wholesale into the language-specific guidelines. In addition, the Universal Dependencies
project provides a free/open pool (in the terminology of Streiter et al. (2006)) which collects dependency
corpora in a single place, allowing for economies of scale in maintenance and ensuring that resources can
persist after any initial development effort.
The remainder of the paper is laid out as follows: In Section 2, we give a short typological overview

of Bambara, in Section 3, we describe an existing annotated resource for Bambara, the Corpus Bam-
bara de Référence (CBR). Section 4 describes the conversion process we used, Section 5 describes some
constructions in Bambara, which are not typologically common, and how we intend to annotate them.
Finally, Sections 6 and 7 describe future work and conclusions respectively.

2 Bambara

In the description of Bambara presented in this paper, we used as sources the Vydrin (2013) and Выдрин
(2017).2 Bambara is the most widely-spoken language of the Manding language group (Western Mande
< Mande < Niger-Congo). It is spoken mainly in Mali by 13–14 million people; of these, around four

1http://universaldependencies.org/guidelines.html
2Abbreviations are as follows: = perfective predicative marker; = singular; = possessive postposition; ; .

= suffix, which denotes an occasional actor; = postposition; = special predicative marker for qualitative verbs;

138



Section Sentences Tokens

Unannotated — 4,113,006
Disambiguated — 903,585
Dependency annotated 116 1307

Table 1: Composition of the Corpus Bambara de Référence as of December, 2017

million are L1 speakers. There are two variants of naming this language: Bambara and Bamana, both
of them are in use. Bambara is one of 13 “national languages” of Mali. Besides French, it is the major
language on Malian radio and television, there are periodicals in Bambara, it is broadly used in literacy
programmes and in primary schools; it is also taught at several universities in Europe and the US.
Bambara is a tonal language. It has two level tones and a down-drift. Tones can be lexical and grammat-

ical, i.e. every lexeme has its lexical tone(s), which can change depending on the context into grammatical
one(s). For instance, in the noun phrase jíri fìn ‘black tree’, the rule of tonal compactness is demonstrated
when the recessive syllables take the tone of dominant ones. The lexical tone of fìn ‘black’ is low, how-
ever, in an attributive position, it takes the tone of its head jíri ‘tree’, whose tone is high. Moreover, in
Bambara, there is a tonal definite article (indicated by a low floating tone). In the CBR it is not indicated.
For this reason, in the present paper, we do not indicate it either. Tones are never marked in Bambara
press and books published in Mali; tonal notation is present in publications of texts by linguists, however,
even in the latter case it desperately lacks uniformity.
As described by Vydrin (2013), Bambara is an isolating language with certain elements of agglutination

and incorporation. The basic word order is S AUX O V X. Therefore, in (1) Fúla is a subject, ye is an
auxiliary, á ká mìsi is a direct object, dí is a verb, í mà is an oblique.

(1)

Fúla ye à ká mìsi dí í mà.
NOUN AUX PRON ADP NOUN VERB PRON ADP
Fula 3 cow give 2 to

obl

nsubj

obj
nmod:poss
case

aux

case

‘The Fula man gave you his cow’.

The word order is fixed, however it is possible to remove a topicalised NP in the beginning of the
clause (see §5.5).

3 Corpus Bambara de Référence

Development of the Bambara Reference Corpus (usually known by its name in French, Corpus Bam-
bara de Référence) was started in April 2012. It is composed of texts of different kinds e.g. periodicals,
oral literature, manuals, religious publications, letters from newspaper readers, texts recorded and tran-
scribed by researchers etc. Since the Bambara orthographic standard is relatively undeveloped, the cor-
pus assumes different levels of orthographic normalisation. The corpus includes a non-disambiguated
sub-corpus and a disambiguated one (see Table 1 for statistics about its composition). In the non-
disambiguated sub-corpus, there is only Bambara texts without any annotation. Annotation in the dis-
ambiguated sub-corpus, consists of part-of-speech tags, glosses and a respective token in a normalized
orthography (with tones). A user is able either to search the entire corpus or to limit their search to the
disambiguated sub-corpus. Texts have been and continue to be disambiguated by volunteers using Daba
(Maslinsky, 2014), a morphological analyser based on a language-independent framework dictionary and
= presentative copula; = locative copula; = equative copula; = negative copula; = imperfective predicative
marker; = infinitive predicative marker; = quotative ‘copula’; = prohibitive predicative marker; = plural;
NP = noun phrase; = relative pronoun/determinative; . = negative perfective predicatve marker; = suffix, which
derives a dynamic verb from a qualitative verb.

139



Figure 1: Example of a disambiguated sentence. The output format is machine-readable HTML. A free translation of the
sentence into English would be ‘He greeted the president and swore that he has good thoughts’. The first line is the original
text, the second line is the tokenised text, the third line are the lemmas, and the fourth line has the part-of-speech tags. The fifth
line has a gloss following the Leipzig glossing rules. Subsequent lines give a morphemic breakdown and gloss.

a rule-based morphological analyser. Language-specific data used by the analyser consist of a dictionary
and a list of rules for splitting words into morphemes. Its output consists of seven lines: sentence in the
original orthography, separate tokens in the original orthography, separate tokens in normalised orthog-
raphy, part of speech tags, separate morphemes and glosses (cf. Figure 1).

4 Data conversion

To convert the corpus we used a Python script which reads the HTML format of the CBR performed
substitution of tags and wrote the output in CoNLL-U format. In order to generate the morphological
features, it was necessary to look at both the glosses and the morphological breakdown of the words.
We were able to maintain the original tokenisation scheme for the sentences, with the exception of

three auxiliaries, the affirmative progressive marker bɛ́ kà, the negative progressive marker tɛ́ kà, and the
emphatic perfective marker yɛ́ kà, which we treat as fixed units as it is not possible to give part-of-speech
tags to the individual parts.3
Regarding the lemmas, we left them as in the original corpus, where they appear as word forms with

the addition of tone marking. We do not treat compounding and derivation productively, so the lemma of
the compound jamanakuntigi ‘president’ is not split into its component parts jamana-kun-tigi ‘country-
head-master’.
Part-of-speech tags were largely able to be converted deterministically using a simple translation table,

however there was one tag, conj ‘conjunction’ which needed to be split into CCONJ ‘co-ordinating
conjunction’ and SCONJ ‘subordinating conjunction’. For this we made a list of lemmas for both types,
and converted based on this.
In the original annotation scheme, some words were annotated with two part-of-speech tags. This

was done in cases where a word could be annotated for part of speech differently according to syntactic
context. For example, a word which could be a determiner or pronoun would receive the tag dtm/prn
(determiner or pronoun). The majority of determinatives perform different syntactic functions, e.g. the
same word can act as an argument or as an attribute. Another example would be the tag conj/prep
(conjunction or preposition). Prepositions are closely connected to some subordinate conjunctions. There
are only seven prepositions and each of them can also act as a subordinate conjunction. These lexemes
are treated as preposition, if they introduce a NP. If they introduce a whole clause, they are treated as
conjunctions. We manually resolved these ambiguities, annotating them with the appropriate universal
tag according to context.
We used the following language-specific features for Bambara: AdjType=Attr was used for ad-

jectives with the suffix -/man/ and Valency=1 was used for intransitive verbs, while Valency=2
was used for transitive verbs. The feature AdjType=Attr is also used in the Afrikaans treebank to
mark attributive adjectives (in Afrikaans adjectives have separate attributive and predicative forms). The
feature Valency=1 has been proposed for use in the Ainu treebank (Senuma and Aizawa, 2017).

3A reviewer suggests that we could have these as separate tokens with the part of speech tag AUX for both parts and the
dependency relation fixed. As this would allow us to maintain the same tokenisation as the original we are planning to
implement this change.

140



In addition to converting the part-of-speech tags and morphological features a number of sentences
were annotated for dependencies using the UD A annotation tool (Tyers et al., 2018) by a
single annotator in discussion with various linguists while developing the guidelines.

5 Dependency scheme

In this section, we describe some of the features of Bambara, which are not typologically common, and
how they are annotated. We use the original glosses (partlymodified in order tomake it clearer for readers,
who are not familiar with Bambara) along with dependency relations from Universal Dependencies.

5.1 Qualitative verbs and adjectives
In Bambara, verbs are divided into two classes: dynamic verbs and qualitative verbs. Qualitative verbs
have special predicative marker, glossed as qual. They cannot express tense, aspect, modality values
(2a). Moreover, they cannot bear a direct object, but they can have adjuncts (2b). We annotated them as
VERB.

(2) a.
Sò ka téli.

NOUN AUX VERB
horse quick

nsubj
aux

‘The horse is quick’

b.
Sò ka téli fàli yé.

NOUN AUX VERB NOUN ADP
horse quick donkey

nsubj
aux caseobl

‘The horse is quicker than a donkey’

In predicative position, adjectives can be used only as secondary predicates. In the main predicative
position, there are only qualitative verbs.
A considerable number of adjectives are derived from qualitative verbs by adding a suffix -/man/: téli

‘quick’→ téliman. However, there are two other types of adjectives, which do not have a suffix -/man/.
In the first type, there are adjectives derived from qualitative verbs by conversion: mɔ́gɔ fìn ‘black (adj)
man (lit. ‘black man’)’ → mɔ́gɔ ká fìn ‘a man is black (verb)’. In the second type, there are simple
(non-derived) adjectives: kúra ‘new’, gánsan ‘simple’, sɛ̀bɛ ‘serious’, bèlebele ‘fat, bai’, bánga ‘without
sauce’, etc.

5.2 Non-verbal predication
There are three main types of non-verbal predication: presentative (3a), locative (3b) and equative (3c).

(3) a.
Mùsa dòn.
NOUN VERB
Musa .

nsubj

‘This is Musa’.

b.
Mùsa bɛ́ dùgu kɔ́nɔ.
NOUN VERB NOUN ADP
Musa village

nsubj obl case

‘Musa is in the village’.

c.
Mùsa yé dònso yé.
NOUN VERB NOUN ADP
Musa hunter

nsubj obl case

‘Musa is a hunter’.

We annotated all copulae as VERB. First of all, in presentative construction, the copula dòn is always
the last element of a clause. We cannot postulate an ellipsis of a predicate, so this is the copula, which
bears all predicative functions. Secondly, if we change an aspect in locative and equative constructions,
the copula will be replaced by a verb kɛ́ ‘do’ (4a, 4b).

(4) a.
Mùsa kɛ́ra dùgu kɔ́nɔ.
NOUN VERB NOUN ADP
Musa do. village .

nsubj obl case

‘Musa was in the village’.

b.
Mùsa kɛ́ra dònso yé.
NOUN VERB NOUN ADP
Musa do. hunter

nsubj obl case

‘Musa was a hunter’.

In negative clauses, in all these three types of predication, the negative copula tɛ́ is used (5).

141



(5)

Mùsa tɛ́ dònso yé.
NOUN VERB NOUN ADP
Musa hunter

nsubj obl case

‘Musa is not a hunter’

5.3 Infinitive marker
A verbal infinitive form is unmarked morphologically. It is introduced by a predicative marker kà. Verbs
introduced by kà cannot bear their own subjects, but they can bear objects and obliques.
An infinitive construction can be an argument of the verb in the main clause (6a), its adjunct with the

purpose meaning (6b) and it can express a sequential meaning (6c). We annotated kà as AUX.

(6) a.
Ń bɛ sé kà móbili bòli.

PRON AUX VERB AUX NOUN VERB
1 arrive car run

nsubj
aux obj

xcomp
aux

‘I can drive’.

b.
Ù ká ɲɔ́gɔn sɔ̀rɔ kà bɛ̀nkan sɔ̀rɔ.

PRON AUX PART VERB AUX NOUN VERB
3 together find agreement find

nsubj
aux

advmod obj

xcomp
aux

‘They met together in order to find an agreement’.

c.
Dúnan ye jí mìn kà kúma.
NOUN AUX NOUN VERB AUX VERB
guest water drink speak

nsubj
aux

obj
xcomp

aux

‘A stranger drunk a water, (then) he began to speak’.

Note that verbs of motion táa ‘go’ and nà ‘come’ take a verbal complement phrase without infinitive
marker (7).

(7)

Dàa ká cí-den táa-ra Farabugu dùgu-tigi wéele.
NOUN ADP NOUN VERB NOUN NOUN VERB
Dah send-child go- Farabugu village-master call

case
nmod:poss

objnsubj

xcomp

nmod:poss

‘Dah’s messager went to call the chief of Furabugu’.

The dependency relation is xcomp, because if a predicate of a main clause is negated, the subordinate
clause is in the scope of negation (8).

(8)

Dúnan ma jí mìn kà kúma.
NOUN AUX NOUN VERB AUX VERB
guest . water drink speak

nsubj
aux

obj
xcomp

aux

‘A stranger drunk a water, (then) he did not speak’.

142



5.4 Quotative ‘copula’
In CBR, kó is always annotated as a quotative copula, however, Выдрин (2017) mentions, that, per-
haps, we could postulate several homonymous lexemes. In (9a), the word kó has its own subject and it
introduces direct speech, but in (9b), it only introduces a subordinate clause.

(9) a.
Dénin kó né bɛ́ táa dùgu lá.
NOUN VERB PRON AUX VERB NOUN ADP

child. 1 go village

nsubj

parataxis:obj
nsubj

aux caseobl

‘The girl said: I am going to the village’.
b.

Bɛ́ɛ yé à fɔ́ kó à kàná síran.
PRON AUX PRON VERB SCONJ PRON AUX VERB
all 3 tell that 3 fear.

nsubj
aux

obj aux
nsubj

mark
ccomp

‘All tell him that he should not be afraid’

If kó has its own subject, we annotate it as VERB, unless it is annotated as SCONJ.

5.5 Topicalisation
Any NP can be placed in the beginning of the sentence and, thus, topicalised. A resumptive pronoun
takes its place (10).

(10)

Bàmakɔ sìgibagaw, òlu càman b’ à kɛ́nɛ kàn.
NOUN NOUN PRON ADJ VERB PRON NOUN ADP
Bamako residents that. numerous 3 surface

nmod:poss

dislocated
nsubj

amod
obl

casenmod:poss

‘Residents of Bamako, many of them are there’

This strategy is commonly used for introducing the subject of a main clause. We annotate the topi-
calised NP as dislocated and the resumptive pronoun gets the main function of the NP.

5.6 Adnominal clauses
Adnominal clauses include relative clauses and participle clauses. There are two main relativisation
strategies. In the first strategy a dependent clause precedes the main clause (11), while in the second one
a subordinate clause follows the main clause (12).
In the first strategy, the two clauses are combined into what, from a functional point of view, is a

relativising construction: one of the clauses narrows the potential reference of a referring expression
from the other clause.

(11)

{ Mùso mìn ye dén sɔ̀rɔ }, ò ma sé k’ à dén tó.
NOUN DET AUX NOUN VERB PRON AUX VERB AUX PRON NOUN VERB
woman child find that . arrive 3 child leave

objobj
aux

nmod:possaux

nsubj

nsubj
acldet:rel

aux
xcomp

‘A woman who had a child cannot leave her child’.

In (11), a relativised noun is followed by a determinative mìn in the subordinative clause, while in the
main clause there is a resumptive pronoun ò, which refers to this noun. As mentioned by Nikitina (2012),
such a strategy does not fit into any of widely recognised relativisation strategies.
The second type (12) is more typologically common. It is a simple correlative strategy similar to

European languages: a relativised noun in the main clause has a pronominal referent in the dependent
clause.

143



(12)

{ Í ka kán kà dúmuni dún }, mìn bɛ sín-ji cá-ya.
PRON AUX VERB AUX NOUN VERB PRON AUX NOUN VERB
2 equal food eat breast-water numerous-

nsubj
xcomp

aux obj
aux

nsubj
aux

obj

acl

‘You should eat a meal which will increase the quantity of breastmilk’.

There are also adnominal clauses which are not relative clauses (they are not marked with a relativiser).
This goes for the participle forms -/len/, -/ta/, -/bali/ and for the converb -/tɔ/ (13).

(13)

U ye a tɛmɛtɔ ye
PRON AUX PRON VERB VERB
3 . 3 passing.by seen

acl

nsubj
aux

obj

‘They have seen him passing by’.

These are also annotated with the acl relation.

6 Future work

In terms of linguistic analysis, there are a number of avenues for future research. Bambara syntax is
understudied and we would like to work on our analysis of relativisation strategies, the quotative kó and
the various predication/copula markers.
In terms of the treebank, the immediate objective is to annotate 10,000 tokens in order to solidify

the annotate scheme and produce a first version. After this, we aim to annotate up to 100,000 tokens.
We are planning to compile an annotation guide available to download. The work will be continued as
part of the first author’s masters thesis work. Moreover, there are also corpora for other Mande languages
which could be annotated under a similar scheme and we would also like to experiment with cross-lingual
parsing for this language group.

7 Concluding remarks

We have presented a large part-of-speech annotated corpus converted to Universal Dependencies along
with a small proof-of-concept section annotated for dependency relations. We have described how a
number of constructions in Bambara can be annotated and laid out the future work for the corpus.

Acknowledgements

Many thanks to Valentin Vydrin for his help and encouragement and for permission to use the Corpus
Bambara du Référence. We thank the anonymous reviewers for their extremely helpful advice and com-
ments.

References
Maslinsky, K. (2014). Daba: a model and tools for Manding corpora. In Proceedings of TALAf 2014 : Traitement

Automatique des Langues Africaines, pages 114–122.

Nikitina, T. (2012). Clause-internal correlatives in Southeastern Mande: A case for the propagation of typological
rara. Lingua, 122:319–334.

Nivre, J., de Marneffe, M.-C., Ginter, F., Goldberg, Y., Hajič, J., Manning, C., McDonald, R., Petrov, S., Pyysalo,
S., Silveira, N., Tsarfaty, R., and Zeman, D. (2016). Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual Treebank
Collection. In Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC’16).

144



Senuma, H. and Aizawa, A. (2017). Toward universal dependencies for Ainu. In Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa
2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 133–139.

Straka, M., Hajič, J., and Straková, J. (2016). UDPipe: trainable pipeline for processing CoNLL-U files perform-
ing tokenization, morphological analysis, POS tagging and parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16), Paris, France. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Streiter, O., Scannell, K., and Stuflesser, M. (2006). Implementing NLP projects for non-central languages: In-
structions for funding bodies, strategies for developers. Machine Translation, 20(4):267–289.

Tyers, F. M., Sheyanova, M., and Washington, J. N. (2018). UD A : An annotation tool for Universal
Dependencies. In Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, page
[this volume].

Vydrin, V. (2013). Bamana reference corpus (BRC). Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 95:75–80.

Выдрин, B. (2017). Бамана язык. In Vydrin, V., Mazurova, Y., Kibrik, A., and Markus, E., editors, Языки мира:
Языки манде, pages 46–143. РАН. Институт языкознания.

A Supplemental material

Table 2 gives the conversion table for part-of-speech tags from the CBR to UD annotation schemes. The
conversion table for morphological features is too long to include here but may be found online.4

Description CBR UD POS UD Feats

Adjective adj ADJ
Adverb adv ADV
Postpositional adverb adv.p ADV
Expressive adverb adv.ex ADV
Numeral num NUM
Noun n NOUN
Proper noun n.prop PROPN
Verb v VERB
Qualitative verb vq VERB
Participle ptcp VERB VerbForm=Part
Personal pronoun pers PRON PronType=Prs
Pronoun prn PRON
Modal word pm AUX
Copula cop VERB

Conjunction conj CCONJSCONJ
Postposition pp ADP
Determiner dtm DET
Particle prt PART

Table 2: Conversion table for the parts of speech. Choice of conjunction type is determined lexically.

4https://github.com/KatyaAplonova/UD_Bambara

145


