



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 322–327,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Acronym Expansion: A Domain Independent Approach

Aditya Thakker *
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi
College of Engineering

aditya.thakker@djsce.edu.in

Suhail Barot *
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi
College of Engineering

suhail.barot@djsce.edu.in

Sudhir Bagul
Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi
College of Engineering
sudhir.bagul@djsce.ac.in

Abstract

Acronyms are present in usually all docu-
ments to express information that is repet-
itive and well known. But acronyms
can be ambiguous because there can be
many expansions of the same acronym.
In this paper, we propose a general sys-
tem for acronym expansion that can work
on any acronym given some context infor-
mation it is used in. We present meth-
ods for retrieving all the possible expan-
sions of an acronym from Wikipedia and
AcronymsFinder.com. We propose to use
these expansions to collect the context in
which these acronym expansions are used
and then score them using a deep learn-
ing technique called Doc2Vec. All these
things collectively lead to achieving an ac-
curacy of 90.9% in selecting the correct
expansion for given acronym on a dataset
we scraped from Wikipedia with 707 dis-
tinct acronyms and 14,876 disambigua-
tions.

1 Introduction

Acronyms are short descriptors made from im-
portant initial letters of a phrase. The phrase
here is referred as an expansion of that acronym.
Acronyms are used within these documents to
shorten complicated or oft-repeated terms.

Acronym usage is becoming more and more
common in emails, tweets, blog posts, etc. And
with the increasing popularity of mobile devices,
the use of acronyms on social platforms has in-
creased even more because typing in these devices
is difficult and acronyms provide a succinct way to
express information.

Usually, acronyms will be conveniently defined
at the point of the first usage, but sometimes a
document will omit the definition entirely, assum-
ing the readers familiarity with the acronym. For

example, WHO is often used as an acronym for
World Health Organization and usually people are
expected to know the expansion of it. Or take CSS
as an example, most of the documents wont even
mention the expansion of CSS because its such a
common acronym for Cascading Style Sheets. But
CSS can also mean Content-Scrambling System,
Closed Source Software, and Cross-Site Scripting.

Also, many natural language processing appli-
cations require preprocessing of a document. Text
normalization is one of the most important phase
of these preprocessing tasks. The basic task of text
normalization is to convert non-standard words
like numbers, abbreviations, dates, etc. into stan-
dard words, though depending on the task and the
domain a greater or lesser number of these non-
standard words may need to be normalized. In
this phase of text normalization, we need to ex-
pand all the acronyms in the document. Acronyms
are typically ambiguous because several expan-
sions exist for the same acronym as we saw in the
example before. For example, Cable News Net-
work and Convolutional Neural Network are both
expansions for the common acronym CNN. To
disambiguate these acronyms, we can use context
paragraphs that surround these acronyms to find
the actual expansion. 1

In our work, we have studied and created
an information retrieval system which takes any
acronyms along with some context words and
then will expand the acronym based on the score
it gives to all the possible expansions on the
acronym. As shown in the figure, the system will
search for all the possible expansions of the given
acronym on Wikipedia and Acronymfinder.com.
Once it has the list of all the expansions then it
will start finding occurrences of those phrases in
Wikipedia to get all the contexts in which it is
used. Our system will then represent each poss-

1* indicates these author is an equal contributor to this
work322



Figure 1: Acronym Exoansion from Input to Output

bile expansion using a deep learning technique
called Doc2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2014) in high di-
mensional vector space. Doc2Vec (Mikolov et al.,
2014) which is used in our system can be seen as a
distributional semantic representation and this rep-
resentation is proved to be effective to compute the
semantic similarity between words based on the
context without any labeled data. The Doc2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2014) embeddings represents the
expansions of acronyms in vector space. The
placement of each acronym expansion depends on
the context that it is used in. Once the system
has represented all the possible context vectors
associated with each expansion using Doc2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2014), we can pick the expansion
whose context vector has the highest cosine sim-
ilarity score with the input context vector which
will then be our expansion for that given acronym.

To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
apply Doc2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2014) embeddings
to this task. Experimental results show that our
system achieves a comparable accuracy of 90.9%
accuracy and is close to humans performance.

Our paper is mainly divided into the following
sections:

• In Section 1, we begin with an introduction
to the task of acronym expansion and briefly
describe our approach.

• In Section 2, we mention the issues with
acronym expansion and provide an overview
of the past approaches to the same problem.

• In Section 3, we descibe our proposed ap-

proach to the task of acronym expansion and
the creation of document embeddings from
context of acronym usage which is at the core
of our model.

• In Section 4, we explain our experimental
setup, describe how we gathered the dataset
and give results and observations of testing
on the datasets.

• In Section 5, we give our conclusions from
the experiments and also describe methods to
extend our approach to similar problems.

2 Related Work

The task of acronym expansion has been inten-
sively studied by various researchers using super-
vised learning algorithms. However, the perfor-
mance of these supervised methods depends on a
large amount of labeled data which is extremely
difficult to obtain.

In Hippocratic Abbreviation Expansion (Roark
et al., 2014) paper, they have used SVM, N-Gram,
and many hand-crafted feature engineering tech-
niques to identify the correct expansion of an
acronym.

In Acronym-Expansion Recognition and Rank-
ing on the Web (Jain et al., 2007), they use a
very similar technique of information retrieval
to find all the expansions of any acronyms and
then ranked them using co-occurence between
acronym and expansion, popularity and reliability
of sources.323



One other difference between the work we re-
port from much of the recent work cited above is
that our work focuses on a more general system to
solve the problem. Most of the recent works we
have mentioned before are focused on some par-
ticular domain and hence use some domain spe-
cific techniques to achieve better accuracy. Our
system on the other hand only uses the textual
data present on Wikipedia to understand the con-
text and outputs the closest expansion similar to
input context.

3 Proposed Approach

Owing to the recent success in deep learning
frameworks, we sought to apply the techniques to
Acronym Expansion problem. But, the main chal-
lenge in these approaches is to identify the correct
expansion inspite of the many expansions for the
same acronym.

We propose to use the vast amount of data avail-
able on the internet to identify the correct expan-
sion for any acronym. Our approach involves us-
ing Document embeddings to understand the con-
text in which an acronym is used. Document em-
beddings (Mikolov et al., 2014) are a direct ex-
trapolation of the concept of Word Embeddings
(Mikolov et al., 2013). We extract the paragraphs
where the acronym was used and supply it to our
model. These paragraphs are then embedded in
high dimensional vector space, where vector prox-
imity is a direct measure of similarity of context.
This concept is explained further in detail in the
following sections.

Figure 2: Our Approach

3.1 Crawling Data

As shown in Figure 3, an acronym is given to our
system as input. The input is then used to search
for all the expansions that we can find for it. To
identify, whether any phrase is an expansion of the
given acronym, we have made 3 conditions that it
must follow:

• The first letters of the words must match the
acronym on the sequence

• The words can be separated using space ( ),
underscore( ) or dash (-)

• It can consist of stop words in between if the
first letters do not match

Implementing these rules, we were able to crawl
almost all the expansions that are possible of an
acronym.

After finding all the expansions that we could
crawl, we had a list of expansions that were pos-
sible expansions for the given input. Now, to find
the correct expansion, we wanted some contextual
data that was used when these expansions were
mentioned in any document. Our system would
then use the list of expansion to further search for
all the occurrences of that expansion and collected
some data that surrounds it. This surrounding data
is the contextual data that we need to identify the
correct expansion of the acronym given to us. The
amount of data (words) that we picked surroud-
ing the expansion was of size ranging from 2000-
5000 characters (at max). By 2000, we mean that
words in 1000 characters before the expansions
and words in 1000 characters after the expansion.

It might happen that our system would select an
expansion-context pair even if the same expansion
has already been fetched. We have purposely al-
lowed it because even if the expansion is same,
the context will be different in which the acronym
is used. The different contexts for same expansion
helps the system to find the correct expansion.

3.2 Model

It has become common practice to use word
embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) for semantic
analysis, the most famous implementations be-
ing Googles Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and
Stanfords GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014). How-
ever, researchers have been experimenting, with
great success, with sentence/paragraph/document324



Figure 3: Crawling and finding possible expansions

embeddings - commonly known as thought vec-
tors - for the past few years. Our model is based
on Googles Doc2vec (Mikolov et al., 2014) model.
It is a neural network architecture that outputs N
(number of paragraphs) labelled vectors each of
M dimensions.

We have trained our datasets on both the mod-
els proposed by Doc2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2014),
namely the distributed memory model and dis-
tributed bag of words model. The distributed
memory model takes into account the context of
the surrounding words while predicting a word,
while the distributed bag of words model does not.

According to Doc2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2014),
given a set of training words, we maximise aver-
age log likelihood as:

1

T

T−k∑

t=k

log p(wt|wt−k, ..., wt+k)

As per their model, prediction is handled by a
multiclass classifier (softmax) :

p(wt|wt−k, ..., wt+k) =
eywt∑
i e

yi

We got marginally better results on the Doc2Vec
model, as compared to the Distributed Bag of
Words model.

As mentioned earlier, our implementation was
based on the Doc2vec model.

4 Experiments

We wanted to be absolutely comprehensive in our
approach, so we scraped 707 distinct acronyms

with their occurences and context in which they
had occured.

We got marginally better results on the dis-
tributed memory model, as compared to the dis-
tributed bag of words model.

For each acronym, we train a model with all
the context possibilities. We then calculate the
cosine similarity between every input-context and
crawled-context pair. Following that, we extract
the pair with the highest cosine similarity value.
To give some physical intuition, this means that
this pair of vectors are the closest together in vec-
tor space. We predict that the full form associ-
ated with the context selected above is the same
as the full form associated with the meaning. Us-
ing pythons in built sequence matcher, we match
the predicted expansion with the expansion asso-
ciated with the input context to verify the models
prediction and calculate accuracy.

So, for example, if CNN is the acronym at hand,
we have one context paragraph and a expansion
(Convolutional Neural Network) associated with
it, and several crawled context paragraphs (i.e.
places on Wikipedia articles where the acronym
CNN has occurred). Each context paragraph also
has a distinct expansion associated with it. Lets
take two distinct context paragraphs, one with a
expansion of ”Cable News Network” associated
with it, and another with the expansion ”Convo-
lutional Neural Network” associated with it.

We plot all 3 paragraphs in vector space, and
calculate the cosine similarity of the input con-
text and all the crawled-contexts pair-wise. So325



Doc2Vec Model Embedding Size. Context/Source Length of Source/Context Traning Epochs Accuracy
Distributed Bag of Words 500 Context - 12 88.9%
Distributed Bag of Words 500 Context - 12 89.7%
Distributed Bag of Words 500 Context 2000 12 90.7%
Distributed Bag of Words 500 Context 2000 12 90.6%
Distributed Bag of Words 200 Source 2000 12 90.9%
Distributed Memory 200 Context 5000 12 88.4%
Distributed Memory 750 Context 2000 15 89.7%
Distributed Memory 200 Source 5000 15 86.1%
Distributed Memory 500 Context 5000 15 90.9%

Table 1: Results of experiments

here, cos sim(input context, crawled context 1)
and cos sim(input context, crawled context 2) are
compared. Now we select the pair with the
highest cosine similarity, lets say, (input context,
crawled context). meaning has a full form of
”Convolutional Neural Network” associated with
it. If crawled context also has a full form of
”Convolutional Neural Network” associated with
it, then our model has worked successfully, other-
wise not.

Figure 4: Doc2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2014) Plot for
Acronym ’API’

The Figure 4 is an approximate plot of the vec-
tor space for the acronym API. This was achieved
using Principal Component Analysis. Keeping in
mind that 500 dimensions are being condensed to
2 dimensions, this plot is for representation pur-
poses only, and is in no way indicative of the mod-
els accuracy.

Using the dataset mentioned before, we ran our
model on a total of 14,876 disambiguations for
707 distinct acronyms. We achieved an accuracy
of 90.9%.

4.1 Experimental Setup

We use this architecture for the network because
of the constraint on the dataset size caused by

scarcity of labelled data. We used a NVIDIA 970
GTX GPU and a 4.00 GHz Intel i7-4790 proces-
sor with 64GB RAM to train our models. As the
datasets in this domain expand, we would like to
scale up our approach to bigger architectures. The
results obtained on different experiments are given
in Table 1. We are able to achieve comparable ac-
curacies without using any domain specific feature
engineering.

4.2 Observations

A crawled input for our model ranges from 200
characters to 60,000 characters, as we wanted to
simulate real life scenarios as much as possible. A
learning rate of 0.025 was found to be ideal, cou-
pled with 12 epochs of training the same model.
Less than 10 epochs proved to cause a significant
decrease in accuracy due to undertraining. Greater
than than 15 epochs of training caused the same
problem, but due to overtraining, vectors of 500
dimensions for Distributed Memory model and
vectors of 200 dimensions for Distributed Bag of
Words model proved to be ideal on our datasets.
On smaller paragraphs, smaller dimensions of vec-
tors (100-150) seemed to lead to more accurate
predictions, whereas on larger prargraphs, larger
dimension vectors(800-1000) worked better.

In some special cases, if an acronym is found
in contexts with other acronyms, the models accu-
racy decreases. For example, in case of acronym
”ETC”, it can found in context of ”European
Travel Commission” also. So the cosine similar-
ity score of ”European Travel Commission” will
be very close to that of ”Et Cetera”. 2

5 Conclusion

The experimental results have shown that docu-
ment embeddings are a promising solution to the
acronym disambiguation problem. The results we

2Code available at: https://github.com/adityathakker/AcronymExpansion326



achieved are stable even without using any hand-
crafted feature engineering which proves that it’s
a general data-oriented system.

For further work, we want to try this approach to
make recommendation engines that use such con-
textual data that surrounds any (product) name to
identify similar (product) names and recommend
them to users.

References

Tomas Mikolov, Quoc V. Le. 2014. Distributed Rep-
resentations of Sentences and Documents. Proceed-
ings of the 31 st International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, Beijing, China,.

Brian Roark, Richard Sproat. 2014. Hippocratic Ab-
breviation Expansion. Proceedings of ACL 2014,.

Alpa Jain and Silviu Cucerzan and Saliha Azzam 2007.
Acronym-Expansion Recognition and Ranking on
the Web. IEEE International Conference on Infor-
mation Reuse and Integration (2007),.

Ronan Collobert,Jason Weston,Leon Bottou,Michael
Karlen,Koray Kavukcuoglu,Pavel Kuksa. 2011.
Natural Language Processing (almost) from Scratch.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2493-
2537, 2011,.

Dekang Lin and Xiaoyun Wu. 2009. Phrase cluster-
ing for discriminative learning.. Proceedings of the
Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the
ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP:,.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks
from Overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search,.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed Representa-
tions of Words and Phrases and their Compositional-
ity. Proceedings of Neural Information Processing
Systems,.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, Christopher D.
Mannin. 2014. GloVe: Global Vectors for Word
Representation. Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP),.

Sepp Hochreiter , Jrgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
Short-Term Memory. Journal Neural Computation
archive Volume 9 Issue 8, November 15, 1997 ,.

Diederik Kingma, Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A Method
for Stochastic Optimization. International Confer-
ence for Learning Representations,.

Ilya Sutskever,James Martens, George Dahl,Geoffrey
Hinton. 2013. On the importance of initialization
and momentum in deep learning. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research,

Mike Schuster and Kuldip K. Paliwal. 1997. Bidirec-
tional Recurrent Neural Networks. IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 45,
NO. 11, NOVEMBER 1997,.

Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, Paolo Frasconi 1994.
Learning Long-Term Dependencies with Gradient
Descent is difficult. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks ,

327


