



















































Learning how to Learn: An Adaptive Dialogue Agent for Incrementally Learning Visually Grounded Word Meanings


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Language Grounding for Robotics, pages 10–19,
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Learning how to learn: an adaptive dialogue agent for incrementally
learning visually grounded word meanings

Yanchao Yu
Interaction Lab

Heriot-Watt University
y.yu@hw.ac.uk

Arash Eshghi
Interaction Lab

Heriot-Watt University
a.eshghi@hw.ac.uk

Oliver Lemon
Interaction Lab

Heriot-Watt University
o.lemon@hw.ac.uk

Abstract

We present an optimised multi-modal dia-
logue agent for interactive learning of vi-
sually grounded word meanings from a
human tutor, trained on real human-human
tutoring data. Within a life-long interac-
tive learning period, the agent, trained us-
ing Reinforcement Learning (RL), must
be able to handle natural conversations
with human users, and achieve good learn-
ing performance (i.e. accuracy) while min-
imising human effort in the learning pro-
cess. We train and evaluate this system in
interaction with a simulated human tutor,
which is built on the BURCHAK corpus –
a Human-Human Dialogue dataset for the
visual learning task. The results show that:
1) The learned policy can coherently in-
teract with the simulated user to achieve
the goal of the task (i.e. learning visual at-
tributes of objects, e.g. colour and shape);
and 2) it finds a better trade-off between
classifier accuracy and tutoring costs than
hand-crafted rule-based policies, includ-
ing ones with dynamic policies.

1 Introduction
As intelligent systems/robots are brought out of
the laboratory and into the physical world, they
must become capable of natural everyday conver-
sation with their human users about their physi-
cal surroundings. Among other competencies, this
involves the ability to learn and adapt mappings
between words, phrases, and sentences in Natural
Language (NL) and perceptual aspects of the ex-
ternal environment – this is widely known as the
grounding problem.

The grounding problem can be categorised into
two distinct, but interdependent types of prob-
lem: 1) agent as a second-language learner: the

Image Human-Human Dialogue
T(utor): do you know this object?
L(earner): a suzuli ... wait no ... sako wakaki?
T: the color is right, but the shape is not.
L: oh, okay, so?
T: a burchak, burchak, sako burchak.
L: cool, got it.
L: what is this?
T: en ... a aylana suzili.
L: is aylana for color?
T: no, it’s a shape.
L: so it is an suzili aylana, right?
T: yes.

Figure 1: Human-Human Example Dialogues in
the BURCHAK Corpus (Yu et al., 2017)
(‘sako’ for ‘red’, ‘burchak’ for ‘square’, ‘suzuli’ for ‘green’,

‘aylana’ for ‘circle’, ‘wakaki’ for ‘triangle’)

agent needs to learn to ground (map) NL symbols
onto their existing perceptual and lexical knowl-
edge (e.g. a dictionary of pre-trained classifiers)
as in e.g. Silberer and Lapata (2014); Thoma-
son et al. (2016); Kollar et al. (2013); Matuszek
et al. (2014); and 2) the agent as a child: with-
out any prior knowledge of perceptual categories,
the agent must learn both the perceptual categories
themselves and also how NL expressions map to
these (Skocaj et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2016c). Here,
we concentrate on the latter scenario, where a sys-
tem learns to identify and describe visual attributes
(colour and shape in this case) through interaction
with human tutors, incrementally, over time.

Previous work has approached the grounding
problem using a variety of resources and ap-
proaches, for instance, either using annotated vi-
sual datasets (Silberer and Lapata, 2014; Socher
et al., 2014; Naim et al., 2015; Al-Omari et al.,
2016; Tellex et al., 2014; Matuszek et al., 2012,
2014), or through interactions with other agents
or real humans (Kollar et al., 2013; Tellex et al.,
2013; Thomason et al., 2015, 2016; Skocaj et al.,
2016; Yu et al., 2016c), where feedback from other

10



agents is used to learn new concepts.

However, most of these systems, which ground
NL symbols through interaction have two com-
mon, important drawbacks: 1) in order to achieve
better performance (i.e. high accuracy), these sys-
tems require a high level of human involvement –
they always request feedback from human users,
which might affect the quality of human answers
and decrease the overall user experience in a life-
long learning task; 2) Most of these approaches are
not built/trained based on real human-human con-
versations, and therefore can’t handle them. Natu-
ral human dialogue is generally more messy than
either machine-machine or human-machine dia-
logue, containing natural dialogue phenomena that
are notoriously difficult to capture, e.g. self- cor-
rections, repetitions and restarts, pauses, fillers,
interruptions, and continuations (Purver et al.,
2009; Hough, 2015). Furthermore, they often ex-
hibit much more variation than in their synthetic
counterparts (see dialogue examples in Fig. 1).

In order to cope with the first problem, recent
prior work (Yu et al., 2016b,c) has built multi-
modal dialogue systems to investigate the effects
of different dialogue strategies and capabilities on
the overall learning performance. Their results
have shown that, in order to achieve a good trade-
off between learning performance and human in-
volvement, the agent must be able to take initiative
in dialogues, take into account uncertainty of its
predictions, as well as cope with natural human
conversation in the learning process. However,
their systems are built based on hand-crafted, syn-
thetic dialogue examples rather than real human-
human dialogues.

In this paper, we extend this work to intro-
duce an adaptive visual-attribute learning agent
trained using Reinforcement Learning (RL). The
agent, trained with a multi-objective policy, is ca-
pable not only of properly learning novel visual
objects/attributes through interaction with human
tutors, but also of efficiently minimising human in-
volvement in the learning process. It can achieve
equivalent/comparable learning performance (i.e.
accuracy) to a fully-supervised system, but with
less tutoring effort. The dialogue control policy
is trained on the BURCHAK Human-Human Dia-
logue dataset (Yu et al., 2017), consisting of con-
versations between a human ‘tutor’ and a human
‘learner’ on a visual attribute learning task. The
dataset includes a wide range of natural, incre-

mental dialogue phenomena (such as overlapping
turns, self-correction, repetition, fillers, and con-
tinuations), as well as considerable variation in
the dialogue strategies used by the tutors and the
learners.

Here we compare the new optimised learning
agent to rule-based agents with and without adap-
tive confidence thresholds (see section 3.2.1). The
results show that the RL-based learning agent out-
performs the rule-based systems by finding a bet-
ter trade-off between learning performance and the
tutoring effort/cost.

2 Related Work

In this section, we review some of the work that
has addressed the language grounding problem
generally. The problem of grounding NL in per-
ception has received very considerable attention in
the computational literature recently. On the one
hand, there is work that only addresses the ground-
ing problem implicitly/indirectly: in this category
of work is the large literature on image and video
captioning systems that learn to associate an im-
age or video with NL descriptions (Silberer and
Lapata, 2014; Bruni et al., 2014; Socher et al.,
2014; Naim et al., 2015; Al-Omari et al., 2016).
This line of work uses various forms of neural
modeling to discover the association between in-
formation from multiple modalities. This often
works by projecting vector representations from
the different modalities (e.g. vision and language)
into the same space in order to retrieve one from
the other. Importantly, these models are holistic
in that they learn to use NL symbols in specific
tasks without any explicit encoding of the symbol-
perception link, so that this relationship remains
implicit and indirect.

On the other hand, other models assume a much
more explicit connection between symbols (ei-
ther words or predicate symbols of some logi-
cal language) and perceptions (Kennington and
Schlangen, 2015; Yu et al., 2016c; Skocaj et al.,
2016; Dobnik et al., 2014; Matuszek et al., 2014).
In this line of work, representations are both com-
positional and transparent, with their constituent
atomic parts grounded individually in perceptual
classifiers. Our work in this paper is in the spirit
of the latter.

Another dimension along which work on
grounding can be compared is whether groundings
are learned offline (e.g. from images or videos an-

11



notated with descriptions or definite reference ex-
pressions as in (Kennington and Schlangen, 2015;
Socher et al., 2014)) or from live interaction as
in, e.g. (Skocaj et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2015,
2016c; Das et al., 2017, 2016; de Vries et al., 2016;
Thomason et al., 2015, 2016; Tellex et al., 2013).
The latter, which we do here, is clearly more ap-
propriate for multimodal systems or robots that are
expected to continuously, and incrementally learn
from the environment and their users.

Multi-modal, interactive systems that involve
grounded language are either: (1) rule-based as
in e.g. Skocaj et al. (2016); Yu et al. (2016b);
Thomason et al. (2015, 2016); Tellex et al. (2013);
Schlangen (2016): in such systems, the dialogue
control policy is hand-crafted, and therefore these
systems are static, cannot adapt, and are less ro-
bust; or (2) optimised as in e.g. Yu et al. (2016c);
Mohan et al. (2012); Whitney et al. (fcmng); Das
et al. (2017): in contrast such systems are learned
from data, and live interaction with their users;
they can thus adapt their behaviour dynamically
not only to particular dialogue histories, but also
to the specific information they have in another
modality (e.g. a particular image or video).

Ideally, such interactive systems ought to be
able to handle natural, spontaneous human dia-
logue. However, most work on interactive lan-
guage grounding learn their systems from syn-
thetic, hand-made dialogues or simulations which
lack both in variation and the kinds of dialogue
phenomena that occur in everyday conversation;
they thus lead to systems which are not robust and
cannot handle everyday conversation (Yu et al.,
2016c; Skocaj et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2016a). In
this paper, we try to change this by training an
adaptive learning agent from human-human dia-
logues in a visual attribute learning task.

Given the above, what we achieve here is: we
have trained an adaptive attribute-learning dia-
logue policy from realistic human-human conver-
sations that learns to optimise the trade-off be-
tween a learning/grounding performance (Accu-
racy) and costs form human tutors,in effect doing
a form of active learning.

3 Learning How to Learn Visual
Attributes: an Adaptive Dialogue
Agent

We build a multimodal and teachable system that
supports a visual attribute (e.g. colour and shape)
learning process through natural conversational in-

teraction with human tutors (see Fig. 1 for exam-
ple dialogues), where the tutor and the learner in-
teractively exchange information about the visual
attributes of an object they can both see. Here we
use Reinforcement Learning for policy optimisa-
tion for the learner side (see below Section 3.2).
The tutor side is simulated in a data-driven fash-
ion using human-human dialogue data (see below,
Sections 4 & 5.2).

3.1 Overall System Architecture

The system architecture loosely follows that of Yu
et al. (2016c), and employs two core modules:

Vision Module produces visual attribute predic-
tions, using two base feature categories, i.e. the
HSV colour space for colour attributes, and a ‘bag
of visual words’ (i.e. PHOW descriptors) for the
object shapes/class. It consists of a set of binary
classifiers - Logistic Regression SVM classifiers
with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Zhang,
2004) – to incrementally learn attribute predic-
tions. The visual classifiers ground visual attribute
words such as ‘red’, ‘circle’ etc. that appear as pa-
rameters of the Dialogue Acts used in the system.

Dialogue Module that implements a dialogue
system with a classical architecture, com-
posed of Dialogue Management (DM), Natu-
ral Language Understanding (NLU) and Gen-
eration (NLG) components. The components
interact via Dialogue Act representations (e.g.
inform(color=red),ask(shape)). It is
these action representations that are grounded in
the visual classifiers that reside in the vision mod-
ule. The DM relies on an adaptive policy that
is learned using RL. The policy is trained to: 1)
handle natural interactions with humans and to
produce coherent dialogues; and 2) optimise the
trade-off between accuracy of visual classifiers
and the cost of the dialogue to the tutor.

3.2 Adaptive Learning Agent with
Hierarchical MDP

Given the visual attribute learning task, the smart
agent must learn novel visual objects/attributes
as accurately as possible through natural interac-
tions with real humans, but meanwhile it should
attempt to minimise the human involvement as
much as possible in this life-long learning pro-
cess. We formulate this interactive learning task
into two sub-tasks, which are trained using Re-
inforcement Learning with a hierarchical Markov

12



Decision Process (MDP), consisting of two inter-
dependent MDPs (sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2):

3.2.1 Adaptive Confidence Threshold
Following previous work (Yu et al., 2016c), we
also here use a positive confidence threshold: this
is a threshold which determines when the agent
believes its own predictions. This threshold plays
an essential role in achieving the trade-off be-
tween the learning performance and the tutoring
cost, since the agent’s behaviour, e.g. whether
to seek feedback from the tutor, is dependent on
this threshold. A form of active learning is taking
place: the learner only asks a question about an
attribute if it isn’t confident enough already about
that attribute.

Here, we learn an adaptive strategy that aims at
maximising the overall learning performance si-
multaneously, by properly adjusting the positive
confidence threshold in the range of 0.65 to 0.95.
We train the optimization using a RL library –
Burlap (MacGlashan, 2015) as follows, in detail:

State Space The adaptive-threshold MDP ini-
tialises a 3-dimensional state space defined by
NumInstance, Thresholdcur, and deltaAcc,
where NumInstance represents how many visual
objects/images have been seen (the number of in-
stances will be clustered into 50 bins, each bin
contains 10 visual instances); Thresholdcur rep-
resents the positive threshold the agent is currently
applying; and deltaAcc represents, after seeing
each 10 instances, whether the classifier accuracy
increases, decreases or keep constant comparing
to the previous bin. The deltaAcc is configured
into three levels, (see Eq.1)

deltaAcc =


1, if ∆Acc > 0
0, else if ∆Acc = 0
−1, otherwise

(1)

Action Selection the actions were either to in-
crease or decrease the confidence threshold by
0.05, or keep it the same.

Reward signal The reward function for the
learning tasks is given by a local function Rlocal.
This local reward signal was directly proportional
to the agents delta accuracy over the previous
Learning Step (10 training instances, see above).
The single training episode will be terminated
once the agent goes through 500 instances.

3.2.2 Natural Interaction
The second sub-task aims at learning an optimised
dialogue strategy that allows the system to achieve
the learning task (i.e. learn new visual attributes)
through natural, human-like conversations.

State Space The dialogue agent initialises a 4-
dimensional state space defined by (Cstate, Sstate,
preDAts, preContext), where Cstate and Sstate
are the status of visual predictions for the colour
and shape attributes respectively (where the status
is determined by the prediction score (conf.) and
the adaptive confidence threshold (posThd.) de-
scribed above (see Eq.2)), the preDAts represents
the previous dialogue actions from the tutor re-
sponse, and the preContext represents which at-
tribute categories (e.g. colour, shape or both) were
talked about in the context history.

State =


2, if conf. ≥ posThd
1, else if 0.5 < conf. < posThd.
0, otherwise

(2)
i.e. Cstate or Sstate will be updated to 2 also when
the related knowledge has been provided by the
tutor.

Action Selection The actions were chosen based
on the statistics of the dialog action frequency
occurred from the BURCHAK corpus, including
question-asking(for WH questions or polar ques-
tions), inform, acknowledgment, as well as listen-
ing. These actions can be applied for either spe-
cific single attribute or both. The action of inform
can be separated into two sub-actions according
to whether the prediction score is greater than 0.5
(i.e. polar question) or not (i.e. doNotKnow).

Reward signal The reward function for the
learning tasks is given by a global function Rglobal
(see Eq.3). The dialogue will be terminated when
both colour and shape knowledge are either taught
by human tutors or known with high confidence
scores.

Rglobal = 10− Cost − penal.; (3)
where Cost represents the cumulative cost by

the tutor (see more details about this setup in Sec-
tion 5.1) in a single dialogue, and penal. penalizes
all performed actions which cannot respond to the
user properly.

13



Dialogue Capability Speaker Annotation Tag
Listen Tutor/Learner Listen()
Inform Tutor/Leaner Inform(colour:sako&shape:burchak)
Question asking Tutor/Leaner Ask(colour), Ask(shape), Ask(colour&shape)
Question-answering Tutor/Leaner Inform(colour:sako), Polar(shape:burchak)
Acknowledgement Tutor/Learner Ack(), Ack(colour)
Rejection Tutor Reject(), Reject(shape)
Focus Tutor Focus(colour), Focus(shape)
Clarification Tutor CLr()
Clarification-request Learner CLrRequest()
Help-offer Tutor Help()
Help-request Learner HelpRequest()
Checking Tutor Check()
Repetition-request Tutor Repeat()
Retry-request Tutor Retry()

Table 1: List of Dialogue Capabilities/Actions and Corresponding Annotations in the Corpus

i.e. we applied the SARSA algorithm (Sutton and
Barto, 1998) for learning the multi-MDP learning
agent with each episode defined as a complete di-
alogue for an object. It was configured with a
ξ−Greedy exploration rate of 0.2 and a discount
factor of 1.

4 Human-Human Dialogue Corpus:
BURCHAK

BURCHAK (Yu et al., 2017) is a freely available
Human-Human Dialogue dataset consisting of 177
dialogues between real human users on the task of
interactively learning visual attributes.

The DiET experimental toolkit These dialogue
were collected using a new incremental varia-
tion of the DiET chat-tool developed by (Healey
et al., 2003; Mills and Healey, submitted), which
allows two or more participants to communicate
in a shared chat window. It supports live, fine-
grained and highly local experimental manipula-
tions of ongoing human-human conversation (see
e.g. (Eshghi and Healey, 2015)). The chat-tool
is designed to support, elicit, and record at a fine-
grained level, dialogues that resemble face-to-face
dialogue in that turns are: (1) constructed and dis-
played incrementally as they are typed; (2) tran-
sient; (3) potentially overlapping; (4) not editable,
i.e. deletion is not permitted.

Task The learning/tutoring task given to the par-
ticipants involves a pair of participants who talk
about visual attributes (e.g. colour and shape)
through a series of visual objects. The overall goal

of this task is for the learner to discover ground-
ings between visual attribute words and aspects in
the physical world through interaction. However,
since humans have already known all groundings,
such as “red” and “square”, the task is assumed in
a second-language learning scenario, where each
visual attribute, instead of standard English words,
is assigned to a new unknown word in a made-up
language (see examples in Fig. 1). (see more de-
tails in (Yu et al., 2017))

Dialogue Phenomena As the chat-tool is de-
signed to resemble face-to-face dialogue, the most
important challenge of this BURCHAK is that
it refers to a wide range of natural, incremental
dialogue phenomena, such as overlapping, self-
correction and repetition, filler as well as contin-
uation (Fig. 1). On the other hand, BURCHAK,
which focuses on the visual attribute learning task,
offers a list of interesting task-oriented dialogue
strategies (e.g. initiative, context-dependency and
knowledge-acquisition) and capabilities, such as
inform, question-asking and answering, listen (no
act), as well as acknowledgement and rejection.
Each dialogue action contains a huge variations in
the realistic conversation. All dialogue actions are
tagged in the dataset (as shown in Table 1).

i.e. we have trained and evaluated the optimised
learning agents on the cleaned-up version of this
corpus, in which spelling mistakes, emoticons, as
well as some snippets of conversations where the
participant misunderstood the task have been cor-
rected or removed.

14



5 Experiment Setup

In this section, we follow previous work (Yu et al.,
2016c) to compare the trained RL-based learning
agent with a rule-based system with the best per-
formance (i.e. an agent which takes the initiative
in dialogues, takes into account its changing con-
fidence about its predictions, and is also able to
process natural, human-like dialogues) from previ-
ous work. Instead of using hand-crafted dialogue
examples as before, both the RL-based system
and the rule-based system are trained/developed
against a simulated user, itself trained from the
BURCHAK dialogue data set as above. For
learning simple visual attributes (e.g. “red” and
“square”), we use the same hand-made visual ob-
ject dataset from Yu et al. (2016c).

In order to further investigate the effects of
the optimised adaptive confidence threshold on
the learning performance, we build the rule-based
system under three different settings, i.e. with a
constant threshold (0.95) (see blue curve in Fig.
2), with a hand-crafted adaptive threshold which
drops by 0.05 after each 10 instances (grey curve
in Fig. 2), and with a hand-crafted adaptive thresh-
old which drops by 0.01 after each 10 instances
(orange curve in Fig. 2).

5.1 Evaluation Metrics
To compare the optimised and the rule-based
learning agents, and also further investigate how
the adaptive threshold affect the learning process,
we follows the evaluate metrics from the pre-
vious work (see (Yu et al., 2016c)) considering
both the cost to the tutor and the accuracy of the
learned meanings, i.e. the classifiers that ground
our colour and shape concepts.

Cost The cost measure reflects the effort needed
by a human tutor in interacting with the sys-
tem. Skocaj et. al. (2009) point out that a com-
prehensive teachable system should learn as au-
tonomously as possible, rather than involving the
human tutor too frequently. There are several pos-
sible costs that the tutor might incur: Cinf refers
to the cost (i.e. 5 points) of the tutor providing in-
formation on a single attribute concept (e.g. “this
is red” or “this is a square”); Cack is the cost
(i.e. 0.5) for a simple confirmation (like “yes”,
“right”) or rejection (such as “no”); Ccrt is the cost
of correction for a single concept (e.g. “no, it is
blue” or “no, it is a circle”). We associate a higher
cost (i.e. 5) with correction of statements than that

of polar questions. This is to penalise the learning
agent when it confidently makes a false statement
– thereby incorporating an aspect of trust in the
metric (humans will not trust systems which con-
fidently make false statements).
i.e. differently to the previous evaluation metrics,
we do not take into account the costs of parsing
and producing utterances

Learning Performance As mentioned above,
an efficient learner dialogue policy should con-
sider both classification accuracy and tutor effort
(Cost). We thus define an integrated measure –
the Overall Performance Ratio (Rperf ) – that we
use to compare the learner’s overall performance
across the different conditions:

Rperf =
∆Acc
Ctutor

i.e. the increase in accuracy per unit of the cost, or
equivalently the gradient of the curve in Fig. 2c.
We seek dialogue strategies that maximise this.

5.2 User Simulation

In order to train and evaluate these learning agents,
we build an user simulation using a generic n-gram
framework (see (Yu et al., 2017)) on the BUR-
CHAK corpus. This user framework takes as in-
put the sequence of N most recent words in the
dialogue, as well as some optional additional con-
ditions, and then outputs the next user response on
multiple levels as required, e.g. full utterance, a
sequence of dialogue actions, or even a sequence
of single word outputs for incremental dialogue.
Differently to other existing user simulations, this
framework aims at not only resembling user strate-
gies and capabilities in realistic conversations, but
also at simulating incremental dialogue phenom-
ena, e.g. self-repair and repetition, and pauses,
as well as fillers. In this paper, we created an
action-based user model that predict the next user
response in a sequence of dialogue actions. The
simulator then produces a full utterance by follow-
ing the statistics of utterance templates for each
predicted action.

5.3 Results

Table 2 shows example interactions between the
learned RL agent and the simulated tutor on the
learning task. The dialogue agent learned to take
the initiative and constantly produces coherent
conversations through the learning process.

15



Dialogue Example (a)
T: what is this object called?
L: a red square?
T: the shape is correct, but the colour is wrong.
L: so what colour is this?
T: green.
L: okay, get it.

Dialogue Example (b)
L: blue?
T: yes, blue is for the colour. and shape?
L: sorry, i don’t know the shape.
T: the shape is circle.
L: okay, got it.

Table 2: User Simulation Examples for (a) Tutor
takes the initiative (b) Learner takes the initiative

Fig. 2a and 2b plot the progression of average
Accuracy and (cumulative) Tutoring Cost for each
of the 4 learning agents in our experiment, as the
system interacts over time with the tutor about
each of the 500 training instances.

As noted in passing, the vertical axes in these
graphs are based on averages across the 20 folds -
recall that for Accuracy the system was tested, in
each fold, at every learning step, i.e. after every 10
training instances.

Fig. 2c, on the other hand, plots Accuracy
against Tutoring Cost directly. Note that it is to
be expected that the curves should not terminate
in the same place on the x-axis since the differ-
ent conditions incur different total costs for the tu-
tor across the 500 training instances. The gradi-
ent of this curve corresponds to increase in Accu-
racy per unit of the Tutoring Cost. It is the gra-
dient of the line drawn from the beginning to the
end of each curve (tan(β) on Fig. 2c) that con-
stitutes our main evaluation measure of the sys-
tem’s overall performance in each condition, and it
is this measure for which we report statistical sig-
nificance results: there are significant differences
in accuracy between the RL-based policy and two
rule-based policies with the hand-crafted threshold
(p < 0.01 for both). The RL-based policy shows
significantly less tutoring cost than the rule-based
system with a constant threshold (p < 0.01). The
mean gradient of the yellow, RL curve is actually
slightly higher than the constant-threshold policy
blue curve - discussed below.

5.4 Discussion
Accuracy As can be seen in Fig. 2a, the rule-
based system with a constant threshold (0.95)
shows the fastest increase in accuracy and finally
reaches around 0.87 at the end of the learning pro-
cess (i.e. after seeing 500 instances) – the blue
curve. Both systems with a hand-crafted adap-
tive threshold, with an incremental decrease of
0.01 (grey curve) and 0.05 (orange curve), have
shown an unexpected trend in accuracy across 500
instances, where the orange curve flattens out at
about 0.76 after seeing only 50 instances, and the
grey curve shows a good increase in the begin-
ning but later drops down to about 0.77 after 150
instances. This is because the thresholds were
decreased too fast, so that the agent cannot hear
enough feedback (i.e. corrective attribute labels)
from tutors to improve its predictions. In contrast
to this, the optimised RL-based agent achieves
much better accuracy (i.e. about 0.85) by the end
of the experiment.

Tutoring Cost As mentioned above, there is a
form of active learning taking place in the exper-
iment: the agent can only hear feedback from the
tutor if it is not confident enough about its own
predictions. This also explains the slight decrease
in the gradients of the curves (i.e. the cumulative
cost for the tutor) (see Fig. 2b) as the agent is
exposed to more and more training instances: its
subjective confidence about its own predictions in-
creases over time, and thus there is progressively
less need for tutoring. In detail, the tutoring cost
progresses much more slowly while the system
was applying a hand-crafted adaptive threshold
(i.e. incrementally decreases by either 0.01 or 0.05
after each bin). This is still because there were not
interactions taking place at all once the threshold
is lower than a certain value (for instance, 0.65),
where the agent might be highly confident on all
its predictions. In contrast, the RL-based agent
shows a faster progress in the cumulative tutoring
cost, but achieves higher accuracy.

Overall Performance Here, we only compare
the gradients of the curves between the optimised
learning agent (yellow curve) and the rule-based
system with a constant threshold (blue curve) in
Fig. 2c, because others with the incremental de-
creased threshold cannot achieve an acceptable
learning performance. The agent with an adaptive
threshold (yellow) achieves slightly better over-
all gradient (tan(β1)) than the rule-based system

16



(a) Accuracy (b) Tutoring Cost

(c) Overall Performance

Figure 2: Evolution of Learning Performance

(tan(β2)), it achieves a comparable accuracy and
does it faster. We therefore conclude that the op-
timised learning agent, which finds a better trade-
off between the learning accuracy and the tutoring
cost, is more desirable.

6 Conclusion & Future Work

We have introduced a multi-modal learning agent
that can incrementally learn grounded word mean-
ings through interaction with human tutors over
time, and deploys an adaptive dialogue policy (op-
timised using Reinforcement Learning). We ap-
plied a human-human dialogue dataset (i.e. BUR-
CHAK) to train and evaluate the optimised learn-
ing agent. We evaluated the system by comparing
it to a rule-based system, and results show that:
1) the optimised policy has learned to coherently
interact with the simulated user to learn visual at-
tributes of an object (e.g. colour and shape); 2)
it achieves comparable learning performance to a
rule-based systems, but with less tutoring effort
needed from humans.

Ongoing work further applies Reinforcement

Learning at the word level to learn a complete, in-
cremental dialogue policy, i.e. which chooses sys-
tem output at the lexical level (Eshghi and Lemon,
2014; Kalatzis et al., 2016). In addition, instead of
acquiring visual concepts for toy objects (i.e. with
simple colour and shape), the system has recently
been extended to interactively learn about real ob-
ject classes (e.g. shampoo, apple). The lat-
est system integrates with a Self-Organizing Incre-
mental Neural Network and a deep Convolutional
Neural Network to learn object classes through in-
teraction with humans incrementally, over time.

Acknowledgements

This research is supported by the EPSRC, un-
der grant number EP/M01553X/1 (BABBLE
project1), and by the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No. 688147 (MuMMER
project2).

1https://sites.google.com/site/
hwinteractionlab/babble

2http://mummer-project.eu/

17



References
Muhannad Al-Omari, Eris Chinellato, Yiannis Gat-

soulis, David C. Hogg, and Anthony G. Cohn. 2016.
Unsupervised grounding of textual descriptions of
object features and actions in video. In Principles
of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Pro-
ceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference,
KR 2016, Cape Town, South Africa, April 25-29,
2016.. pages 505–508.

Elia Bruni, Nam-Khanh Tran, and Marco Baroni. 2014.
Multimodal distributional semantics. J. Artif. Intell.
Res.(JAIR) 49(1–47).

Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, Khushi Gupta, Avi
Singh, Deshraj Yadav, José M. F. Moura, Devi
Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2016. Visual dialog.
CoRR abs/1611.08669.

Abhishek Das, Satwik Kottur, José M. F. Moura, Stefan
Lee, and Dhruv Batra. 2017. Learning cooperative
visual dialog agents with deep reinforcement learn-
ing. CoRR abs/1703.06585.

Harm de Vries, Florian Strub, Sarath Chandar, Olivier
Pietquin, Hugo Larochelle, and Aaron C. Courville.
2016. Guesswhat?! visual object discovery through
multi-modal dialogue. CoRR abs/1611.08481.

Simon Dobnik, Robin Cooper, and Staffan Larsson.
2014. Type theory with records: a general frame-
work for modelling spatial language. In Proceed-
ings of The Second Workshop on Action, Perception
and Language (APL’2).

Arash Eshghi and Patrick G. T. Healey. 2015. Collec-
tive contexts in conversation: Grounding by proxy.
Cognitive Science pages 1–26.

Arash Eshghi and Oliver Lemon. 2014. How domain-
general can we be? learning incremental dialogue
systems without dialogue acts. In Proceedings of
SemDial.

P. G. T. Healey, Matthew Purver, James King, Jonathan
Ginzburg, and Greg Mills. 2003. Experimenting
with clarification in dialogue. In Proceedings of the
25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Soci-
ety. Boston, Massachusetts.

Julian Hough. 2015. Modelling Incremental Self-
Repair Processing in Dialogue. Ph.D. thesis, Queen
Mary University of London.

Dimitrios Kalatzis, Arash Eshghi, and Oliver
Lemon. 2016. Bootstrapping incremental dia-
logue systems: using linguistic knowledge to
learn from minimal data. CoRR abs/1612.00347.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.00347.

Casey Kennington and David Schlangen. 2015. Simple
learning and compositional application of perceptu-
ally grounded word meanings for incremental refer-
ence resolution. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual

Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing of the Asian Fed-
eration of Natural Language Processing, ACL 2015,
July 26-31, 2015, Beijing, China, Volume 1: Long
Papers. pages 292–301.

Thomas Kollar, Jayant Krishnamurthy, and Grant
Strimel. 2013. Toward interactive grounded lan-
guage acqusition. In Robotics: Science and Systems.

James MacGlashan. 2015. Burlap
http://burlap.cs.brown.edu/.

Cynthia Matuszek, Liefeng Bo, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
Dieter Fox. 2014. Learning from unscripted deictic
gesture and language for human-robot interactions.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, July 27 -31, 2014,
Québec City, Québec, Canada.. pages 2556–2563.

Cynthia Matuszek, Nicholas FitzGerald, Luke Zettle-
moyer, Liefeng Bo, and Dieter Fox. 2012. A joint
model of language and perception for grounded at-
tribute learning. In Proc. of the 2012 International
Conference on Machine Learning. Edinburgh, Scot-
land.

Gregory J. Mills and Patrick G. T. Healey. submitted.
The Dialogue Experimentation toolkit. xx (?).

Shiwali Mohan, Aaron Mininger, James Kirk, and
John E. Laird. 2012. Learning grounded language
through situated interactive instruction. In Robots
Learning Interactively from Human Teachers, Pa-
pers from the 2012 AAAI Fall Symposium, Arlington,
Virginia, USA, November 2-4, 2012.

Iftekhar Naim, Young Chol Song, Qiguang Liu, Liang
Huang, Henry A. Kautz, Jiebo Luo, and Daniel
Gildea. 2015. Discriminative unsupervised align-
ment of natural language instructions with corre-
sponding video segments. In NAACL HLT 2015,
The 2015 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Denver, Colorado,
USA, May 31 - June 5, 2015. pages 164–174.

Matthew Purver, Raquel Fernández, Matthew Framp-
ton, and Stanley Peters. 2009. Cascaded lexi-
calised classifiers for second-person reference res-
olution. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual SIG-
DIAL Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue (SIG-
DIAL 2009 Conference). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, London, UK, pages 306–309.
http://www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk/ mpurver/papers/purver-
et-al09sigdial-you.pdf.

David Schlangen. 2016. Grounding, justification,
adaptation: Towards machines that mean what they
say. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on the Se-
mantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (JerSem).

Carina Silberer and Mirella Lapata. 2014. Learn-
ing grounded meaning representations with autoen-
coders. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics

18



(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, volume 1,
pages 721–732.

Danijel Skocaj, Alen Vrecko, Marko Mahnic, Miroslav
Janı́cek, Geert-Jan M. Kruijff, Marc Hanheide,
Nick Hawes, Jeremy L. Wyatt, Thomas Keller,
Kai Zhou, Michael Zillich, and Matej Kris-
tan. 2016. An integrated system for interac-
tive continuous learning of categorical knowl-
edge. J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 28(5):823–848.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2015.1132268.

Danijel Skočaj, Matej Kristan, and Aleš Leonardis.
2009. Formalization of different learning strategies
in a continuous learning framework. In Proceed-
ings of the Ninth International Conference on Epi-
genetic Robotics; Modeling Cognitive Development
in Robotic Systems. Lund University Cognitive Stud-
ies, pages 153–160.

Richard Socher, Andrej Karpathy, Quoc V Le, Christo-
pher D Manning, and Andrew Y Ng. 2014.
Grounded compositional semantics for finding and
describing images with sentences. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
2:207–218.

Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. 1998. Rein-
forcement Learning: an Introduction. MIT Press.

Stefanie Tellex, Pratiksha Thaker, Joshua Mason
Joseph, and Nicholas Roy. 2014. Learning per-
ceptually grounded word meanings from unaligned
parallel data. Machine Learning 94(2):151–167.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-013-5383-2.

Stefanie Tellex, Pratiksha Thakerll, Robin Deitsl, Dim-
itar Simeonovl, Thomas Kollar, and Nicholas Royl.
2013. Toward information theoretic human-robot
dialog. Robotics: Science and Systems page 409.

Jesse Thomason, Jivko Sinapov, Maxwell Sevtlik, Pe-
ter Stone, and Raymond J. Mooney. 2016. Learn-
ing multi-modal grounded linguistic semantics by
playing ”i spy”. In To Appear: Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, IJCAI-16, New York City, USA,
July 9-15, 2016.

Jesse Thomason, Shiqi Zhang, Raymond J. Mooney,
and Peter Stone. 2015. Learning to interpret nat-
ural language commands through human-robot di-
alog. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 25-31,
2015. pages 1923–1929.

David Whitney, Eric Rosen, James MacGlashan, and
Lawson and Tellex Stefanie L.S. Wong. fcmng. Re-
ducing errors in object-fetching interactions through
social feedback. In Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation
ICRA 2017, May 29 – June 3, 2017, Marina Bay
Sands, Singapore.

Yanchao Yu, Arash Eshghi, and Oliver Lemon. 2015.
Comparing attribute classifiers for interactive lan-
guage grounding. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Vision and Language. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages
60–69. http://aclweb.org/anthology/W15-2811.

Yanchao Yu, Arash Eshghi, and Oliver Lemon.
2016a. Comparing dialogue strategies for learning
grounded language from human tutors. In Proceed-
ings of Semdial 2016 (JerSem). New Jersey.

Yanchao Yu, Arash Eshghi, and Oliver Lemon. 2016b.
Interactively learning visually grounded word mean-
ings from a human tutor. In Proceedings of the 5th
Workshop on Vision and Language, hosted by the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, VL@ACL 2016, August 12,
Berlin, Germany.

Yanchao Yu, Arash Eshghi, and Oliver Lemon. 2016c.
Training an adaptive dialogue policy for interactive
learning of visually grounded word meanings. In
Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2016 Conference, The
17th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue, 13-15 September 2016,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. pages 339–349.

Yanchao Yu, Arash Eshghi, Gregory Mills, and Oliver
Lemon. 2017. Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Vision and Language, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, chapter The BURCHAK cor-
pus: a Challenge Data Set for Interactive Learning
of Visually Grounded Word Meanings, pages 1–10.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W17-2001.

Tong Zhang. 2004. Solving large scale linear predic-
tion problems using stochastic gradient descent al-
gorithms. In Proceedings of the twenty-first interna-
tional conference on Machine learning. ACM, page
116.

19


