









































Enhanced UD Dependencies with Neutralized Diathesis Alternation
Marie Candito

Univ. Paris Diderot, CNRS
Laboratoire de Linguistique Formelle

France
marie.candito@linguist.univ-paris-diderot.fr

Bruno Guillaume
Inria Nancy Grand-Est, Loria

France
bruno.guillaume@loria.fr

Guy Perrier
Univ. de Lorraine, Loria, UMR 7503

France
guy.perrier@loria.fr

Djamé Seddah
Univ. Paris-Sorbonne, Inria

France
djame.seddah@paris-sorbonne.fr

Abstract

The 2.0 release of the Universal Depen-
dency treebanks demonstrates the effec-
tiveness of the UD scheme to cope with
very diverse languages. The next step
would be to get more of syntactic anal-
ysis, and the “enhanced dependencies”
sketched in the UD 2.0 guidelines is a
promising attempt in that direction. In
this work we propose to go further and
enrich the enhanced dependency scheme
along two axis: extending the cases of re-
covered arguments of non-finite verbs, and
neutralizing syntactic alternations. Do-
ing so leads to both richer and more uni-
form structures, while remaining at the
syntactic level, and thus rather neutral
with respect to the type of semantic rep-
resentation that can be further obtained.
We implemented this proposal in two UD
treebanks of French, using deterministic
graph-rewriting rules. Evaluation on a 200
sentence gold standard shows that deep
syntactic graphs can be obtained from sur-
face syntax annotations with a high accu-
racy. Among all arguments of verbs in
the gold standard, 13.91% are impacted
by syntactic alternation normalization, and
18.93% are additional deep edges.

1 Introduction

The Universal Dependencies initiative (UD,
(Nivre et al., 2016)) is one of the major achieve-
ments of the last few years in the NLP field. Orig-
inating from the need of a better interopability
in cross-language settings for downstream tasks
(Petrov et al., 2011; McDonald et al., 2013), it
has gathered dozens of international teams who

released annotated versions of their treebanks, fol-
lowing the UD annotation scheme.

Although UD has raised criticisms, both on the
suitability of the scheme to meet linguistic typol-
ogy (Croft et al., 2017) and on the current imple-
mentation of the UD treebanks (Gerdes and Ka-
hane, 2016), the existence of many treebanks with
same syntactic scheme does however ease cross-
language linguistic analysis and enables parsers
to generalize across languages at training time, as
demonstrated by Ammar et al. (2016).

The UD scheme favors dependencies between
content words, in order to maximize parallelism
between languages. Although this results in de-
pendencies that are more semantic-oriented, the
UD scheme lies at the surface syntax level and thus
necessarily lacks abstraction over syntactic varia-
tion and does not fit all downstream applications’
needs (Schuster and Manning, 2016).

This is partly why de Marneffe and Manning
(2008) proposed a decade ago, in the Stanford De-
pendencies framework, several schemes with var-
ious semantic-oriented modifications of syntactic
structures. Its graph-based, so-called collapsed,
representation layer1 has recently started to be
extended and implemented as “Enhanced Depen-
dencies” in the UD scheme family (Schuster and
Manning, 2016). Current UD specifications leave
open the possibility to include phenomena (cf.
section 2) that make explicit additional predicate-
argument dependencies. In practice, most current
UD treebanks contain either very few or no en-
hanced dependencies at all2.

1Among the various Stanford schemes, the collapsed
scheme is the furthest away from the plain dependency tree.

2Notable exceptions in the UD 2.0 release are the Syn-
tagRus and Finish treebanks. For English, a converter
including enhanced dependencies is available within the
Stanford parser (https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/stanford-
dependencies.shtml).

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 42-53,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

42



Of course, as noted by Kuhlmann and Oepen
(2016), competing proposals for deep syntactic
graphs already exist and are implemented through
diverse and, in some few cases, multilingual
graphbanks. More clearly semantic schemes
seem to depend on the needs of the downstream
application or impose their own constraints on the
syntactic layer it is either built upon or plugged in.
See for example the differences between abstract
meaning representations (Knight et al., 2014), de-
signed with Machine Translation in sight, and the
UDEPLAMBDA’s logical structures, very recently
proposed by Reddy et al. (2017) and evaluated on
a question-answering over a knowledge base task.

In this paper, we build on the work of (Can-
dito et al., 2014; Perrier et al., 2014) to propose
an extension to the current enhanced dependency
framework of Schuster and Manning (2016). First,
we extend the types of argumental dependencies
made explicit (taking into account participles, con-
trol nouns and adjectives, non-finite verbs and
more cases of infinitive verbs). Second, we neu-
tralize syntactic alternations, in order to make
linking patterns more regular for a given verb
form. We believe that making explicit and normal-
ize the predicate-argument structures, still remain-
ing at the syntactic level, can make downstream
semantic analysis more straightforward (as shown
for instance in (Michalon et al., 2016)), while re-
maining neutral with respect to what exact seman-
tic representation can be further derived.

The originality of our approach is to neutral-
ize syntactic alternations using canonical gram-
matical functions, which render linking patterns of
verbs more regular but are still syntactic in nature,
unlike what can be found for example in the tecto-
grammatical layer of the Prague Dependency bank
(Hajic et al., 2006).

This proposal is currently being implemented
for French, and tested on two UD treebanks (Can-
dito et al., 2014; Nivre et al., 2016) by the means
of a rule-based deterministic process. We evalu-
ated the deep syntactic graphs automatically con-
verted from gold UD trees and obtained a 94%
F-measure on a two-hundred sentences gold stan-
dard, similar to what reported Candito et al. (2014)
on a similar task. Both treebanks and building
rules are made available3 to foster further work
in other languages and to gather the opinion and
criticisms of the community regarding the level of

3http://github.com/bguil/Depling2017

abstraction we should reach when it comes to deep
syntax representation.
In the following, we first briefly introduce the cur-
rent Enhanced UD scheme, we detail extensions
concerning arguments of non-finite verbs in sec-
tion 3 and syntactic alternations for French in sec-
tion 4. We present and evaluate a system to obtain
enhanced graphs for French in section 5. We then
discuss related work and conclude.

2 Enhanced UD representation

The current version of universal dependencies
guidelines (v2.0) includes an enhanced dependen-
cies section4, leaving the possibility for UD tree-
banks to include all or only some of the following
phenomena:

1. Additional subject relations for control and
raising constructions

2. Propagation of conjuncts
3. Antecedent of relative pronouns in noun-

modifying relative clauses
4. Modifier labels that contain the preposition or

other case-marking information
5. Null nodes for elided predicates

In our implementation for French, we cope with
the two first phenomena. Phenomena 3 and 4
are quite systematic and may be handled auto-
matically and phenomenon 5 requires manual an-
notation. Note that while enhanced dependen-
cies (as were Stanford dependencies) are moti-
vated by downstream semantically-oriented appli-
cations, they remain syntactic in nature in their
current stage. This results in keeping syntac-
tic dependents that are not semantic arguments
of their syntactic head, in classic cases of syn-
tax/semantics mismatch. So for instance, sub-
jects of raising verbs are not removed from the
enhanced UD graph, although they are not a se-
mantic argument of the raising verb, as shown in
Fig. 1.

Ils
they

semblent
seem

vouloir
to-want

partir
to-leave

nsubj xcomp xcomp

nsubj
nsubj

Figure 1: Raising verb

Following the work of Candito et al. (2014) and
Perrier et al. (2014), we propose two extensions,

4
http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/

enhanced-syntax.html

43



that we detail in the next two sections: the first
one is to extend the cases for which arguments
are added to infinitive verbs and more generally
to non-finite verbs. The second one concerns the
neutralisation of syntactic alternations.

3 Recovering arguments of non-finite
verbs

The aim of enhancing UD dependencies is to fa-
cilitate the computation of predicate-argument re-
lations at the semantic level. In this perspective,
we propose to go beyond the explicitation of con-
trol and raising verbs subjects. We detail below
other cases of obligatory syntactic control, and
cases which are not as systematic but which prove
feasible with rather high accuracy using heuristics.

3.1 Cases fully determined by syntax

“Control nouns” In French, some nouns take a
nominal and an infinitive argument, that can be
both realized within the NP or as a predicative
complement (Fig. 2). In both cases, the subject
of the infinitive is the nominal argument.

l'
The

intention
intention

de
of

Paul
Paul

est
is

de
to

finir
finish

tôt
early

det case mark advmod
nmod xcomp

nsubj

nsubj

Figure 2: Paul’s intention is to finish early

The preposition introducing the infinitival
clause is determined by the control noun. It is gen-
erally de, more rarely à, as in example (1).

(1) votre
your

capacité
capacity

à
to

conduire
drive

un
a

véhicule
vehicle

“Control adjectives” Control adjectives take an
infinitive complement, whose understood subject
is the noun to which the adjective applies, as
shown in Fig. 3.

un
a

bandit
bandit

prêt
ready

à
to

tuer
kill

det amod mark
xcomp

nsubj

Figure 3: Control adjective

Tough movement Tough movement describes
constructions in which an adjective has an infini-
tive as complement and the noun to which the ad-
jective applies is the direct object of the infinitive.

The adjective can be attributive or used as a pred-
icative adjective (Fig. 4)5. These cases are easy to
detect using available lists of tough adjectives6.

ce
this

livre
book

est
is

difficile
difficult

à
to

lire
read

det cop mark
nsubj xcomp

obj

Figure 4: Tough movement

Noun-modifying participles When a past or
present participle modifies a noun, the noun is the
understood subject of the participle (Fig. 5).

ceux
those

arrivant
arriving

tôt
early

partent
leave

tôt
early

advcl advmod advmod
nsubj

nsub

ceux
those

apparus
appeared

en
in

2001
2001

sont
are

résolus
resolved

acl case cop
obl
nsubj

nsub

Figure 5: Noun-modifying participles

Infinitives behaving as noun modifiers In
French, a transitive infinitival clause introduced
with the preposition à can be the argument of the
noun (as in example (1) in the “control nouns” sec-
tion above, the noun capacité (ability) takes two
arguments, the entity having the ability, and an in-
finitival clause describing what it is able of). But
for any noun, an infinitival clause introduced by
à can function as an adjunct modifying the noun,
which is understood as either the object (Fig. 6) or
the subject (examples (2) and (3)), depending on
the transitivity of the infinitive.

Une
A

maison
house

à
to

vendre
sell

det mark
acl

obj

Figure 6: Infinitive modifying a noun, understood
as the object of the infinitive

(2) C’est
It’s

une
a

machine
machine

à
to

mesurer
measure

la
the

pression
pressure

5Note in this case, the modified noun is not a semantic
argument of the adjective, the dependency between difficile
(difficult) and livre (book) should be dropped in a semantic
representation.

6A few “tough nouns” exist too, as in ce livre est un plaisir
à lire (this book is a pleasure to read).

44



“It’s a pressure measuring machine”

(3) Elle
She

est
is

la
the

première
first

femme
woman

à
to

y
in-it

entrer
enter

“she is the first woman who ever entered it”

3.2 Cases requiring semantic or world
knowledge

The cases we just saw correspond to situations of
obligatory control, in which the argument to add to
the non-finite verb can be deterministically iden-
tified, given the syntactic construction, and given
the specific control or raising verb, control noun or
adjective. Other constructions involving an non-
finite verb are ambiguous with respect to which
non-local argument is understood as the argument
of the verb. In some of these cases though, among
all the potential positions for the non-local argu-
ment to retreive is particularly more frequent, al-
though not strictly obligatory. For the cases de-
tailed in this section, we performed a systematic
study of the occurrences in the Sequoia corpus,
and concluded that simple heuristics could be used
for retreiving the non-local argument of a non-
finite verb with sufficient accuracy.

Dislocated participle clauses: A participle
clause modifying a noun can appear “dislocated”
at the beginning or end of the sentence. In that
case, its subject is most often the subject of the
participle, although exceptions can be built7.

arrivé
arrived

hier
yesterday

,
,

Pierre
Peter

repart
is_leaving

demain
tomorrow

advmod nsubj advmod
advcl

nsub

Figure 7: Dislocation

Verb-modifying infinitival and participial
clauses For certain prepositions introducing
infinitival clauses, the subject of the infinitive is
most often the subject of the main clause, but
exceptions as illustrated in ex. (4) (the subject of
terminer is not provided in the sentence.).

(4) Cela
it

exige
takes

beaucoup
a lot

de
of

travail
work

pour
to

terminer
finish

à
on

temps
time

7We did not find any such exception in the Sequoia cor-
pus. The following built up example shows one: Exténués, on
les a envoyés dormir. (Exhausted, we them have sent to-sleep)
“Exhausted, they were sent to bed”).

We performed an in-depth study of these cases,
using the deep Sequoia corpus (Candito et al.,
2014), in which all subjects of infinitive verbs
present in the sentence are marked. Breaking
down the 143 infinitive heads of adverbial clauses
according to the voice of the main verb, we obtain
the following results:

• main verb in the active voice: there are 114
cases and among them, the subject of the in-
finitive is the subject of the main verb in 95
cases; in the 16 remaining cases, the subject
of the infinitive is absent of the sentence;
• main verb in passive voice (or modal intro-

ducing a passive): there are 29 cases; in 11
cases, the subject of the infinitive is the sub-
ject of the main verb; in the 18 remaining
cases, the subject of the infinitive is a virtual
agent of the passive verb, which is not present
in the sentence;
• main verb in medio-passive voice: there are

3 cases, in which the subject of the infinitive
is not present in the sentence.

A heuristic that triggers the sharing for active main
verbs only will obtain a 90% recall and 83% pre-
cision only.

In a similar construction, a present participle in-
troduced with a preposition (en in French and by
in English) plays the role of a modifier for a main
verb. The subject of the participle is generally the
subject of the main verb but again, this does not
hold if the main verb is in passive voice (or is a
modal introducing a passive, as shown in ex. (5).

(5) Ce
This

médicament
drug

doit
should

être
be

pris
taken

en
by

mangeant
eating
“This drug should be taken while eating”

In Sequoia, there are 39 such constructions. For
all the 30 cases in which the main verb is in active
voice, the subject of the main verb is understood
as the subject of the participle. For the 9 cases
in which the main verb is passive, for 8 of them
the subject of the participle is not present in the
sentence. Therefore, an automatic procedure tak-
ing into account the voice of the main verb should
produce only a very small number of errors.

Arbitrary control Arbitrary control is a con-
struction in which the subject of an infinitive
can have any position in the sentence (Baschung,
1996).

45



(6) Fumer
Smoking

est
is

dangereux
dangerous

pour
for

la
the

santé
health

(7) Fumer
Smoking

est
is

dangereux
dangerous

pour
for

lui
him

In Example (6), the subject of fumer is understood
as generic while in Example (7), the subject is lui.
While by definition such control cannot be easily
resolved, such constructions are fortunately very
rare in corpora and ignoring them produces few
missing subjects of infinitives.

4 Neutralizing syntactic alternations

Syntactic alternations (like passive) are known to
cause diversity in the observed linking patterns
in corpora, i.e. the grammatical functions born
by the semantic arguments of a verb. At least
some of the existing syntactic alternations are very
general and can be identified purely on syntac-
tic grounds, without resorting to semantic disam-
biguation. In this work, we advocate for neutraliz-
ing such variation in an “enhanced-alt UD” repre-
sentation (enhanced UD representation augmented
with syntactic alternation neutralization). Follow-
ing (Candito et al., 2014; Perrier et al., 2014),
we propose to distinguish canonical versus final
grammatical functions, and to normalize syntacti-
cally alternated verb instances by making explicit
the canonical grammatical functions of their argu-
ments. The objective is to cluster observed sub-
categorization frames into possibly one canoni-
cal frame, with thus one linking pattern between
canonical functions and semantic arguments.

We handle the French syntactic alternations
for which morpho-syntactic clues are available,
namely passive, medio-passive, impersonal and
causative. We detail these below, identifying for
each what is feasible using morpho-syntactic and
lexical clues only, and what requires semantic in-
formation.

4.1 Passive

Passive is by far the most frequent syntactic alter-
nation, and it is fortunately rather easy to identify
in a language such as French. Note that because
the UD scheme uses several labels for the same
argumental slot, depending on the argument’s cat-
egory, the basic rule of having the passive’s sub-
ject being the canonical direct object has to be
split. The nsubj:pass dependent is considered
the canonical obj. The csubj:pass dependent is

the canonical ccomp (for full clauses), or xcomp
(for infinitival phrases).

l'
The

accident
accident

a
has

été
been

vu
seen

par
by

tous
all

det aux:pass
aux

obl:agent@nsubj

nsubj:pass@obj

Figure 8: Passive with canonical functions made
explicit.

Although passive is identified unambiguously,
correctly identifying the argument that is subject
in the active form (the “by-phrase” in English)
is more problematic given the UD scheme. In
French, it is introduced by a PP with preposi-
tion par (Fig. 8) or for certain verbs, with prepo-
sition de. But both prepositions can also intro-
duce adjuncts, and the current French version of
UD scheme uses the same label obl in both cases,
leading to an ambiguity concerning the argumen-
tal status of the PP. In the following, we use a more
specific obl:agent label for the by-phrases, as is
done e.g. in the UD versions of the par-TUT par-
allel treebank (Sanguinetti and Bosco, 2014) (for
English, French and Italian). We detail in sec-
tion 5 how we can obtain this labeling for the other
French UD treebanks.

4.1.1 English passive and ditransitives

Although our focus is French, we also describe
here briefly how to handle passive of English di-
transitives, a case that does not exist in French.

Let us first note that the current marking of pas-
sive in the UD scheme (nsubj versus nsubj:pass
distinction, and aux:pass label for passive aux-
iliary) is not always directly usable to link syn-
tactic arguments to semantic ones. First, passive
forms without auxiliaries are not currently marked
as such (e.g. in the planet reached by astronauts).
Second, even for a passive form with passive aux-
iliary, the recommended nsubj:pass label is am-
biguous in case of a ditransitive verb: for instance
in He was given orders and Orders were given to
him, the nsubj:pass corresponds to different se-
mantic arguments8. If we choose the double object
frame as canonical frame for ditransitives, then the
canonical labels can be made explicit as shown in
figure 9. Note that the canonical function of the

8This is already identified by Gerdes and Kahane (2016),
who advocate for directly adding the semantic argument rank
(1,2,3...) on top of the syntactic label.

46



nsubj:pass argument is iobj if the verb has a di-
rect object (Fig. 9a) or obj otherwise (Fig. 9b).

(a) He was given orders by them

aux:pass obj case
nsubj:pass@iobj obl@nsubj

(b) Orders were given to him

aux:pass case
nsubj:pass@obj obl@iobj

(c) They often give orders to him

advmod obj case
nsubj obl@iobj

Figure 9: Syntactic alternation normalization for
ditransitives.

4.2 Medio-passive

The French reflexive clitic se has various status.
Roughly, it can mean true reflexivization (Jean se
voit (Jean SE sees) “Jean is seeing himself”), be
part of a compound verb (s’apercevoir (to real-
ize)), or mark a valency alternation in which the
object is promoted to subject. In the latter case, the
canonical subject argument cannot be realized lo-
cally, but from the semantic point of view, an agent
is either understood (Fig. 10b) or not (Fig. 10a).
Disambiguating the status of a given se instance
is a difficult task requiring semantic information.
Note though the phenomenon is not massive. For
instance in the Sequoia corpus (Candito et al.,
2014), about 5.7% of verbs bear a se clitic, among
which 16% correspond to a syntactic alternation.

(a) la
the

branche
branch

s'
SE

est
is

cassée
brokent

det aux
expl

nsubj@obj

(b) une
a

branche
branch

se
SE

casse
breaks

à
at

la
the

main
hand

det expl det
nsubj@obj case

obl

Figure 10: Medio-passive, with or without under-
stood agent (The branch broke and One can break
a branch by hand)

4.3 Impersonal

Impersonal constructions can also be viewed as
syntactic alternations: in French the postverbal
complement has object-like properties (in partic-
ular the pronominalization with the quantitative
clitic en (of-it)).

Il
It

est
is

arrivé
arrived

3
3

personnes
people

aux nummod
nsubj@expl obj@nsubj

Il
It

en
of-if

est
is

arrivé
arrived

3
3

aux obj@nsubj
nsubj@expl

nmod

Figure 11: Impersonal construction for sentences
“There arrived 3 people” (top) and “Three (of
them) arrived” (bottom).

The representation of such constructions in UD
is subject to debate. In the French-UD v2.0 tree-
bank, the non-referential il clitic is treated as a
nsubj, and the post-verbal argument as an ob-
ject. We thus handle impersonal constructions as
syntactic alternations (Fig. 11): the il receives an
expl label, and the post-verbal dependent receives
a canonical nsubj or csubj label (unless the verb
is passive).

4.4 Causative

Causative is another construction that can be
viewed as a syntactic alternation in French. It is
formed syntactically with a faire (to do) verb fol-
lowed by the infinitive of the “caused” verb. It
has complex properties described in a vast litter-
ature. For instance Abeillé et al. (1997) advocate
for two competing analyses, the main one repre-
senting the faire + Vinf as a complex predicate,
with the arguments of Vinf plus an argument for
the causer, which shows as final subject (we use
nsubj:caus as canonical function to mark it in the
enhanced UD representation). The causee, which
corresponds to the canonical subject of the Vinf,
can show as a direct object, an oblique with prepo-
sition à or preposition par, depending on the tran-
sitivity of the Vinf, and other complex factors. So
though detecting a causative construction is trivial,
detecting which surface argument of the complex
predicate corresponds to the causee is not. We pro-
vide in Fig.12 an example of ambiguity: Zola can

47



be understood as the author that is read or the per-
son who reads. The phenomenon is rather rare,
e.g. occurring roughly once every 100 sentences
in the Sequoia treebank.

Anna
Anna

fait
makes

lire
read

Zola
Zola

aux:caus obj
nsubj@nsubj:caus

Anna
Anna

fait
makes

lire
read

Zola
Zola

aux:caus obj@nsubj
nsubj@nsubj:caus

Figure 12: Ambiguous causative sentence, mean-
ing either “Anna makes someone read Zola” (top)
or “Anna makes Zola read” (bottom, Zola is the
canonical subject).

4.5 Interaction

Syntactic alternations can interact with all the
other “UD-enhanced” phenomena. For ease of
reading, we provide an English example in Fig. 13,
where coordination interacts with passive and a
secondary predicate construction9. We further fo-
cus on interaction between passive and added de-
pendents of verbs. For all the cases listed in sec-
tions 2 and 3 in which a subject is added to a non-
finite verb, the syntactic regularity concerns the
final grammatical subject, which does or doesn’t
correspond to the canonical subject, depending on
the voice of the verb. We develop below two ex-
amples: (i) noun-modifying particial phrases and
(ii) control verbs.

Passive and noun-modifying participial
phrases: We wrote in section 3 that a noun
modified by a participle corresponds to the subject
of the participle (Fig. 5). Yet, this generalization
only holds if subject is intended as final subject.
Fig. 14 shows examples of past participles, with
or without auxiliaries, that modify a noun. The
noun is the semantic first actant of the intransitive
participle (a), but the semantic second actant of
the transitive participle (b). Using the notion of
final versus canonical grammatical functions, we
can uniformely state that in all cases, the modified

9Note that for the secondary predicate construction X
demonstrates Y to be Z, the direct object Y is not a semantic
argument of the verb. Hence the dependency between demon-
strated and its canonical object charges should be dropped in
a semantic representation.

noun is the final subject of the participle (whether
past or present participle), and consider (i) all
present participles as active, (ii) the intransitive
participles as active, but (iii) the transitive partici-
ples as passive. For the latter, the final subject is
the canonical object, as usual for passives.

Note that from a practical point of view, it
is rather easy to decide whether a given noun-
modifying past participle falls under case (ii) or
(iii). Indeed, only a few intransitive verbs10 can
function as noun-modifying past participle phrases
(case (ii)), all other instances necessarily fall under
the passive case (iii).

Passive and control verbs: For control verbs
we have both a syntactic constraint and a seman-
tic (or lexical) constraint: a control verb controls
which of its semantic argument will necessarily be
the (final) subject of the infinitive. For instance,
let’s consider first the so-called “subject control
verbs” (e.g. vouloir (to want)) or movement verbs
(e.g. venir (to come)). The canonical subject of
such verbs (ceux (those) in Fig. 15) is the final
subject of the infinitive, but its canonical subject
for active infinitives (Fig. 15a and Fig. 15c) and
canonical objects for passive infinitives ((15b).

For “object control verbs”, the controller (final
subject of the infinitive) is their canonical object.
This holds both for active (Fig. 16a) or passive
object control verbs (Fig. 16b). For instance in
Fig. 16b, forcer (to force) is passive, the controller
(ceux (those)) is always its canonical object, but
shows as its final subject.

5 Producing enhanced graphs for French
UD treebanks

We have experimented the proposed enhanced
scheme on two French corpora of the UD project:
UD FRENCH and UD FRENCH-SEQUOIA.
UD FRENCH is in the UD projet since the version
1.0 (January 2015); data are taken from the
Google dataset (McDonald et al., 2013) where
annotations where verified by one annotator. It
was later converted into a UD version which has
not been manually corrected systematically. Nev-
ertheless, the data were corrected and enriched in
later versions. UD FRENCH-SEQUOIA is part of
the UD project since version 2.0 (March 2017).
It was automaticaly converted from the Sequoia

10These are the unaccusative verbs, which use être (to be)
tense auxiliary instead of avoir (to have).

48



The charges are false and can be demonstrated by the historical record to be false

det cop aux:pass amod cop
nsubj aux det mark

cc case
conj obl:agent@nsubj

xcomp

nsubj:pass@obj
nsubj

Figure 13: Enhanced UD graph, with neutralization of syntactic alternation: example with interaction of
coordination, passive and predicative complement.

(a) ceux
those

(étant)
being

apparus
appeared

en
in

2001
2001

aux case
acl obl

nsubj

(b) ceux
those

(ayant
having

été)
been

embauchés
hired

en
in

2007
2007

aux:pass case
aux obl

acl

nsub:pass@obj

Figure 14: Noun modified by a participial phrase,
with or without auxiliary

corpus11 (Candito and Seddah, 2012) but the
result was not manually corrected.

We developed two sets of rules, using two con-
ceptually different graph rewriting systems12, so
that an adjudication of two outputs could be done.

As pointed in section 4, the full process-
ing of syntactic alternations requires to disam-
biguate the argumental status of some comple-
ments: (a) which par-phrases are agents of pas-
sives, (b) which instances of the reflexive clitic se
correspond to an alternation promoting object to
subject, and (c) which complement of a causative
complex predicate faire+Infinitive correspond to
the subject of the infinitive.

For the Sequoia corpus, all this information
is already annotated in the original corpus, and
we simply had to report it on UD FRENCH-
SEQUOIA. For UD FRENCH, we manually anno-
tated our TEST data for the three kinds of infor-
mation listed above. In the full UD FRENCH, the
number of occurences to disambiguate are: 766
for (a), 635 for (b) and 519 for (c).

11http://deep-sequoia.inria.fr
12The GREW system (Guillaume et al., 2012) and the

OGRE system (Ribeyre et al., 2012)

(a) ceux
those

voulant
wanting

partir
to_leave

advcl xcomp

nsubj
nsubj

(b) ceux
those

voulant
wanting

être
be

embauchés
hired

advcl aux:pass
xcomp

nsubj
nsubj:pass@obj

(c) ceux
those

venus
come-PASTPART-pl

visiter
to_visit

le
the

musée
museum

acl xcomp det
obj

nsubj
nsubj

Figure 15: Subject-control verbs (necessarily ac-
tive): their canonical subject is the final subject of
the infinitive.

5.1 Evaluation gold corpus

For evaluating the rule-based systems, we pro-
duced a reference evaluation corpus, contain-
ing 200 sentences not used for tuning the rules
(half from UD FRENCH (UDtest) and half from
UD FRENCH-SEQUOIA (SEQtest)). The gold en-
hanced graphs were obtained in three steps: (1)
application of the two rule-based systems on the
gold UD trees, (2) manual adjudication of the two
ouputs and (3) systematic check of infinitive verbs,
past or present participles and coordinations.

Below, we consider two sets of edges: N is the
set of new edges, mostly argument of verbs (drawn
in blue and above words in our figures) and A the
set of edges impacted by an alternation (namely
with a canonical function different from the fi-
nal grammatical function and labeled with the ’@’
symbol in figures). Note that these two sets are not
disjoint (see for instance, Fig. 14b).

In the reference data, N represents 5.72% of the

49



(a) ceux
those

forçant
forcing

Paul
Paul

à
to

être
be

enfermé
trapped

advcl obj aux:pass
mark

xcomp

nsubj nsubj:pass@obj

(b) Ceux
those

forçés
forced

à
to

partir
leave

par
by

Paul
Paul

acl mark case
xcomp

obl:agent@nsubj

nsubj:pass@obj
nsubj

Figure 16: Object-control verb used in active and
passive voice: their canonical object is the final
subject of the infinitive

total number of edges in the 200 test sentences.
If we consider arguments of verbs only (the set
of core arguments of verbs and the obl relation),
edges in N represents 18.93% of the total num-
ber of verb arguments. The edges in set A are
2.77% of the total number of edges the full test
data. Again, if we consider arguments of verbs
only, these edges represent 13.91% in the 200 test
sentences.

5.2 Results and Error Analysis

We evaluated the production of enhanced UD
graphs in two settings, depending on whether the
input UD trees do (PA+) or do not (PA−) contain
manual disambiguation of cases (a), (b) and (c)
described above. For the PA− case, we applied
basic default rules instead, known to use insuffi-
cient information. Table 1 reports the F-measures
(computed considering all edges or N ∪ A edges
only). These results confirm the validity of our
approach and highlight the consistency of the re-
sulting graphbanks. Moreover, even if manual pre-
annotations are required in theory, we empirically
observe that they concern a small number of cases
and their effect is marginal (the difference between
PA− and PA+ settings is low).

The error analysis shows that the GREW and
OGRE systems have different weak points. Of the
52 errors produced by OGRE, 30 were due to a
lack of distribution of the governor or dependents
on the conjuncts of a coordination, while it missed
5 subjects of infinitives only. For GREW, the re-
sult is opposite. Only 4 errors out of 28 relate
to the distribution of dependencies within a co-

PA− PA+
SEQtest UDtest SEQtest UDtest

All OGRE 98.81 99.17 99.46 99.40
edges GREW 99.44 99.54 99.69 99.66
N ∪A OGRE 86.20 89.89 92.51 91.71
edges GREW 93.42 94.31 95.77 95.39

Table 1: Evaluation of rule-based systems produc-
ing enhanced graphs: F-measures computed on all
edges (top) or only on edges in N or A (bottom);
PA− and PA+ are respectively without and with
manual pre-annotation to help syntactic alterna-
tion disambiguation.

ordinated structure but 14 correspond to missing
subjects of infinitives. These divergences indeed
helped to improve the adjudicated gold version,
and were further used to improve both rule sets.

6 Discussion and Related Works

Since the rise of large annotated corpora and given
the cost of annotations of large scale project such
as the PDT (Böhmová et al., 2003), methods
aiming at automatically enriching syntactic trees
with deeper structures have peaked a decade ago
(Hockenmaier, 2003; Cahill et al., 2004; Miyao
and Tsujii, 2005) but have then been subsumed
by purely data-driven methods when corpora with
richer annotation have been made available (Hajic
et al., 2006; Oepen et al., 2014; Mille et al., 2013).
Space is missing for an in-depth comparison be-
tween these different annotation scheme, we refer
the reader to (Rimell et al., 2009; Ivanova et al.,
2012; Candito et al., 2014; Kuhlmann and Oepen,
2016) for a more complete overview. Here, we
will focus on the differences between the Meaning
Text Theory (MTT, (Melčuk, 1988)), as instanced
in the recent AnCora-UPF treebank (Mille et al.,
2013; Ballesteros et al., 2016), and our proposal.

The MTT defines an explicit deep syntac-
tic representation level13, hereafter DSyntS. The
AnCora-UPF Treebank follows its four layer
model: morphological, surface-syntactic, deep-
syntactic and semantic. The method used for an-
notating that corpus is similar to the procedure we
used. Starting from the surface-syntactic level, the
two other levels are automatically pre-annotated
step by step: the annotation of a given level is
rewritten to the next level using the MATE tools
(Bohnet et al., 2000).

13Kahane (2003) proposed to view the deep syntactic rep-
resentation as a derivation step between surface syntax and
semantic representation.

50



The DSyntS produced by Ballesteros et al.
(2016) share important properties with our ex-
tented enhanced UD graphs, in that they neutral-
ize syntactic alternations. However, they do not
contain additional arcs for argument sharing, as
subjects of infinitives for instance, as they stick to
tree structures. Besides the choice of represen-
tation structures, graphs in our cases, trees in the
other, important differences remain: Another dif-
ference concerns the dependency labels for argu-
ments: canonical function labels (nsubj, obj etc...)
in our case versus “argument relations” for MTT,
namely numbers (I, II, III etc...), ordered using a
“growing obliquity” order (Iordanskaja and Mel-
cuk, 2000). These numbers do not have a mean-
ing per se, and are intended to be read within a
lexical entry linking them to syntactic realizations.
We note that using argument numbering in a deep
syntactic representation, hence in the absence of
word sense disambiguation, leads to the loss of
plain syntactic information useful for disambigua-
tion. For example in French: apprendre is ambigu-
ous between to learn as in X apprend Y de Z, and
to teach, as in X apprend Y à Z. Both senses en-
tail different subcategorization frames (subj, obj,
obl:de) vs (subj, obj, obl:à), but bear the same ar-
gument numbers in the MTT (I, II, III), the mean-
ing of III being too underspecified in the absence
of semantic disambiguation14.

7 Conclusion

We proposed extensions of the current enhanced
universal dependencies scheme. We advocated in
particular for neutralizing syntactic alternations, in
order to limit the diversity of observed subcate-
gorization frames for a given verb, while staying
at the syntactic level, without resorting to word
sense disambiguation. We implemented rule-
based modules to obtain enhanced graphs from
French UD trees. Evaluation on a 200-sentence
sample shows we obtain over 90% of F-measure
on the enhanced edges (edges not present in the
input UD tree). Moreover, we report a 19% pro-
portion of enhanced edges among the edges for ar-
guments of verbs, meaning that the saturation of

14One of the anonymous reviewers pointed that because in
UD some labels are distinguished according to the category
of the dependent (e.g. nsubj vs. csubj), the MTT labels
would still better account for linking regularities. While we
do agree that the UD label distinctions multiply linking pat-
terns maybe uselessly, we believe that on the other hand, the
MTT deep labels do add ambiguity, and are thus insufficient
per se.

predicate-argument structures for verbs concerns
a non negligible amount of arguments. We hope
this proposal can be tested on other languages, the
most obvious ones being the Romance languages,
which show very similar syntactic alternations.
We position this proposal within the UD frame-
work and remain compatible with all choices al-
ready made by the current specifications (Nivre et
al., 2016; Schuster and Manning, 2016). More-
over, our de-facto adhesion to the CONLL-U rep-
resentation format allows for a straight-forward
use by current data-driven graph parsers. We leave
this promising path of study to further work.

Acknowledgments

We warmly thank our anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments. The first and the last
authors were partly funded by the ANR projects
ParSiTi (ANR-16-CE33-0021), SoSweet (ANR-
15-CE38-0011-01) and supported by the Program
Investissements d’avenir managed by the Agence
Nationale de la Recherche ANR-10-LABX-0083
(Labex EFL).

References
Anne Abeillé, Danielle Godard, and Philip Miller.

1997. Les causatives en français, un cas de
compétition syntaxique [in french]. Langue
française, 115(1):62–74.

Waleed Ammar, George Mulcaire, Miguel Ballesteros,
Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith. 2016. Many lan-
guages, one parser. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 4:431–444.

Miguel Ballesteros, Bernd Bohnet, Simon Mille, and
Leo Wanner. 2016. Data-driven deep-syntactic de-
pendency parsing. Natural Language Engineering,
22(6):939–974.

Karine Baschung. 1996. Une approche lexicalisée
des phénomènes de contrôle [in french]. Langages,
30(122):96–123.

Alena Böhmová, Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, and Barbora
Hladká. 2003. The prague dependency treebank. In
Treebanks, pages 103–127. Springer.

Bernd Bohnet, Andreas Langjahr, and Leo Wanner.
2000. A development environment for an mtt-based
sentence generator. In Proc. of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Natural Language Generation,
INLG ’00, pages 260–263.

Aoife Cahill, Michael Burke, Ruth O’Donovan, Josef
van Genabith, and Andy Way. 2004. Long-Distance
Dependency Resolution in Automatically Acquired

51



Wide-Coverage PCFG-Based LFG Approximations.
In Proc. of ACL, pages 320–327.

Marie Candito and Djamé Seddah. 2012. Le corpus
Sequoia : annotation syntaxique et exploitation pour
l’adaptation d’analyseur par pont lexical. In Proc. of
TALN.

Marie Candito, Guy Perrier, Bruno Guillaume,
Corentin Ribeyre, Karën Fort, Djamé Seddah, and
Éric De La Clergerie. 2014. Deep Syntax Annota-
tion of the Sequoia French Treebank. In In Proc. of
LREC, Reykjavik, Islande, May.

William Croft, Dawn Nordquist, Katherine Looney,
and Michael Regan. 2017. Linguistic typology
meets universal dependencies. In 15th Interna-
tional Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic The-
ories (TLT15), Indiana University, US.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D Man-
ning. 2008. Stanford typed dependencies manual.
Technical report, Stanford University.

Kim Gerdes and Sylvain Kahane. 2016. Dependency
annotation choices: Assessing theoretical and prac-
tical issues of universal dependencies. In Proc. of
the 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop held in
conjunction with ACL 2016 (LAW-X 2016), pages
131–140, Berlin, Germany, August.

Bruno Guillaume, Guillaume Bonfante, Paul Masson,
Mathieu Morey, and Guy Perrier. 2012. Grew : un
outil de réécriture de graphes pour le TAL. In Proc.
of TALN, Grenoble, France.

Jan Hajic, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajicová, Petr
Sgall, Petr Pajas, Jan Štepánek, Jiřı́ Havelka,
Marie Mikulová, Zdenek Zabokrtskỳ, and
Magda Ševcıková Razımová. 2006. Prague
dependency treebank 2.0. CD-ROM, Linguistic
Data Consortium, LDC Catalog No.: LDC2006T01,
Philadelphia, 98.

Julia Hockenmaier. 2003. Data and models for statisti-
cal parsing with Combinatory Categorial Grammar.
Ph.D. thesis.

Lidia Iordanskaja and Igor Melcuk. 2000. The no-
tion of surface-syntactic relation revisited (valence-
controlled surface-syntactic relations in french).
Slovo v tekste i v slovare. Sbornik statej k semides-
jatiletiju Ju.D. Apresjana, Moskva: Jazyki russkoj
kul’tury, pages 391–433.

Angelina Ivanova, Stephan Oepen, Lilja Øvrelid, and
Dan Flickinger. 2012. Who did what to whom?:
A contrastive study of syntacto-semantic dependen-
cies. In Proc. of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Work-
shop (LAW-VI 2012), pages 2–11.

Sylvain Kahane. 2003. On the status of deep syntactic
structure. In Proc. of the First Meaning-Text Theory
conference, Paris, France.

Kevin Knight, Lauren Baranescu, Claire Bonial,
Madalina Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Herm-
jakob, Daniel Marcu, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneifer. 2014. Abstract meaning representation
(amr) annotation release 1.0. Web download.

Marco Kuhlmann and Stephan Oepen. 2016. Towards
a catalogue of linguistic graph banks. Computa-
tional Linguistics, Volume 42, Issue 4, December.

Ryan T McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev, Keith B Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang,
Oscar Täckström, et al. 2013. Universal depen-
dency annotation for multilingual parsing. In ACL
(2), pages 92–97.

Igor Melčuk. 1988. Dependency syntax: theory and
practice. State University Press of New York.

Olivier Michalon, Corentin Ribeyre, Marie Candito,
and Alexis Nasr. 2016. Deeper syntax for bet-
ter semantic parsing. In Proc. of COLING 2016,
the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 409–420, Os-
aka, Japan, December.

Simon Mille, Alicia Burga, and Leo Wanner. 2013.
AnCoraUPF: A Multi-Level Annotation of Spanish.
In Proc. of DepLing 2013.

Yusuke Miyao and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2005. Probabilis-
tic disambiguation models for wide-coverage HPSG
parsing. In Proc. of ACL 2005, pages 83–90.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, et al. 2016. Universal dependen-
cies v1: A multilingual treebank collection. In Proc.
of LREC 2016, pages 1659–1666.

Stephan Oepen, Marco Kuhlmann, Yusuke Miyao,
Daniel Zeman, Dan Flickinger, Jan Hajic, Angelina
Ivanova, and Yi Zhang. 2014. Semeval 2014 task
8: Broad-coverage semantic dependency parsing. In
Proc. of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, pages 63–72.

Guy Perrier, Marie Candito, Bruno Guillaume,
Corentin Ribeyre, Karën Fort, and Djamé Sed-
dah. 2014. Annotation scheme for deep depen-
dency syntax of french (un schéma d’annotation
en dépendances syntaxiques profondes pour le
français) [in french]. In Proc. of TALN 2014 (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), pages 574–579, Marseille,
France, July.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2011.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1104.2086.

Siva Reddy, Oscar Täckström, Slav Petrov, Mark
Steedman, and Mirella Lapata. 2017. Universal se-
mantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03196.

52



Corentin Ribeyre, Djamé Seddah, and Éric Ville-
monte De La Clergerie. 2012. A Linguistically-
motivated 2-stage Tree to Graph Transformation. In
Chung-Hye Han and Giorgio Satta, editors, Proc. of
TAG+11, Paris, France. INRIA.

Laura Rimell, Stephen Clark, and Mark Steedman.
2009. Unbounded dependency recovery for parser
evaluation. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages 813–821.

Manuela Sanguinetti and Cristina Bosco. 2014. Part-
tut: The turin university parallel treebank. In
Roberto Basili, Cristina Bosco, Rodolfo Delmonte,
Alessandro Moschitti, and Maria Simi, editors, Har-
monization and development of resources and tools
for Italian Natural Language Processing within the
PARLI project. Springer Verlag.

Sebastian Schuster and Christopher D. Manning. 2016.
Enhanced english universal dependencies: An im-
proved representation for natural language under-
standing tasks. In Proc. of LREC 2016. Portorož,
Slovenia.

53




