



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 255–264,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

”A pessimist sees the difficulty in every opportunity; an optimist
sees the opportunity in every difficulty” – Understanding the

psycho-sociological influences to it

Upendra Kumar, Vishal Singh Rana, Srinivas PYKL and Amitava Das

Indian Institute of Information Technology, Sri City, AP, India, 517588

{upendra.k14, vishal.s14, srinivas.p amitava.das}@iiits.in

Abstract

This paper presents an empirical study to under-
stand how psycho-sociological factors influence
on optimism/pessimism at the individual level.
Optimists believe that future events are going to
work out for the best; pessimists expect the worst.
Their expectations manifest in their day-to-day be-
haviour and also reflects the way a person tweets
or behaves in online social media. To this end,
we have identified optimist/pessimist users from
Twitter, analyzed their personality (psychological)
and values & ethics (sociological) at the commu-
nity level. Empirical analysis reveals some inter-
esting insights and behavioral patterns related to
user level optimism/pessimism in different combi-
nations of psychological and sociological factors,
are reported.

1 Introduction

Optimists are people who tend to have favourable
outlook of their life whereas pessimists tend to
derive negative interpretations from the events
around them. Their approach towards life gen-
erally manifests in their day-to-day behaviour.
For example, they have different mechanisms to
cope with positive or negative events around them.
The first computational model to estimate the de-
gree of optimism/pessimism at tweet level as well
as user level has been introduced by [Ruan et
al.2016]. This paper could be seen as an exten-
sion to that work. Here we are trying to understand
how psycho-sociological factors influence on op-
timism/pessimism at individual level. To under-
stand psychological factors we have analyzed per-

sonality of each user using the Big5 Personality
Model [Goldberg1993]. On the other hand, to un-
derstand sociological factors we have used values
& ethics (Schwartz Values Model) [Schwartz1992]
model. Therefore, both the influencing factors
have been aggregated and analyzed at community
level (a community in a social network is consid-
ered to be a group of nodes densely connected in-
ternally and sparsely connected externally). The
presumption here was that two persons with same
personality trait but under distinct sociological in-
fluences at community level may react differently
and similarly people with different personalities
but in different sociological circumstances may re-
act exactly in the same way. However, [Ruan et
al.2016] had also discussed that personality is cor-
related with optimism [Sharpe et al.2011]. Pes-
simism is principally associated with neuroticism
and negative affect while optimism is primarily
associated with extraversion and positive affect
[Marshall et al.1992]. We draw motivations from
all these previous works and to this end this paper
reports a comprehensive empirical study to under-
stand how user level optimism/pessimism got in-
fluenced by person level psychology i.e. person-
ality and by societal level values & ethics at com-
munity level.

We report interesting results and correlations
related to influence of psycho-sociological factors
on optimists/pessimists on Twitter. A few societal
factors were found to to be more influencing than
other societal factors. For example, achievement
and conformity classes tend to be more influenc-
ing than other classes of values in promoting op-
timistic views in social media. Also a few social
factors (or community level factors) like achieve-

1

255



ment and stimulation were found to be more pos-
itively correlated than user level factors in opti-
mists. On the other hand, for pessimists power-
oriented and traditional settings seem to be more
correlated than other factors.

The paper is structured as follows. In Sec-
tion 2, we discuss the relevant research work
done in the area of computational models for op-
timism/pessimism as well as psycho-sociological
factors. The data sources used for building clas-
sifiers, fuzzy distributions of personality and val-
ues in the corpus and performance of classifiers
used to infer the distribution of different psycho-
sociological aspects are discussed in Section 2.
Section 3 describes the methodology used for ex-
tracting the semantic representation of a commu-
nity in terms of it’s values. Section 4 explains the
use of semantic interpretation of communities in
terms of their values and psycho-sociological pat-
terns of users for the calculation of aggregate de-
gree of optimism/pessimism under the influence of
different factors. In Section 5, important corre-
lations related to influence of different factors on
optimists/pessimists are discussed in detail.

2 Related Work

There has been a little research in the field
of computational models to predict the degree
of optimism. [Ruan et al.2016] developed the
first computational model for measuring the op-
timism/pessimism of users based on their social
media activity. 714 potential optimists and 614
potential pessimists were identified by searching
for specific phrases. After identification of poten-
tial optimists and pessimists, they created a ground
truth dataset through human annotation on a ran-
domly selected subset of corpus. In order to rank
the users according to degree of optimism and pes-
simism, Twitter users were sorted based on the
average scores assigned to their tweets.The top
25% were labelled as optimists whereas the bot-
tom 25% were labelled as pessimists.

Deeper understanding of human personality,
beliefs, ethics, and values has been a key research
agenda in Psychology and Social Science research
for several decades. One of the most accepted
and widely used frameworks for understanding
values is Schwartz Theory of Basic Human Val-
ues [Schwartz1992]. Schwartz’s 10-Values model
postulated and empirically verified (on data ob-

tained from a self-assessment questionnaire) the
existence of ten basic Values based on people’s
motivation. The Schwartz model was proved to be
very successful in psychological research as well
as in other fields. The ten basic Values are related
to various outcomes and effects of a person’s role
in a society [Argandoña2003]. The Values have
also proved to provide an important and powerful
explanation of consumer behaviour and how they
influence it [Kahle et al.1986].

In the recent years, there have been few ini-
tiatives to automatically identify various Big5
Personality traits of individuals from their lan-
guage usage and behaviour in social media [Gold-
berg1993]. A milestone in this area was the 2013
Workshop and Shared Task on Computational Per-
sonality Recognition1, repeated in 20142. Further
research work in the area of developing computa-
tional model for identifying Personality from lan-
guage usage on Facebook and Twitter has been
done in [Park et al.2015] and [Quercia et al.2011]
respectively. However, no computational model
for Schwartz’ Values has been tested or examined
before.

3 Obtaining Psycho-Sociological
Patterns of Users

The psycho-sociological backgrounds of an in-
dividual play a very crucial role in determin-
ing their inclination of being an optimist or pes-
simist. In our current work, we analyze two
psycho-sociolological aspects in correlation with
optimism/pessimism: personality and values. We
build two classifiers (by analyzing social media
content: tweets and activities) to estimate some-
one’s inclination towards optimism/pessimism:

Personality: [Goldberg1990] to determine
which personality types {openness, conscientious-
ness, extroversion, agreeableness, neuroticism}
are more inclined towards optimism/pessimism.

Values & Ethics: [Schwartz1992] to es-
timate the nature of values possessed by
optimism/pessimism, in terms of 10 values
{achievement, benevolence, conformity, he-
donism, security, self-direction, stimulation,
tradition, universalism} types proposed by
Schwartz.

1http://mypersonality.org/wiki/doku.php?id=wcpr13
2https://sites.google.com/site/wcprst/home/wcpr14256



The psycho-sociological patterns thus ob-
tained, can be used as metrics to gauge someone’s
inclination towards optimism/pessimism. Such
finding could be helpful for various practical pur-
poses like online recommendation system, Twit-
ter could improve its “who to follow” suggestions,
online advertisement and etc by biasing the ran-
dom walks procedure used in link prediction al-
gorithms or adding regularization terms in matrix
factorization methods.

3.1 Data Sources

We used four datasets for our analysis : (1) Op-
timism/Pessimism dataset for replication of com-
putational model proposed by [Ruan et al.2016],
(2) Personality dataset for developing the compu-
tational model for predicting five personality traits
at user-level, (3) Values & Ethics dataset for devel-
oping a model for prediction of Values & Ethics
at user-level and (4) SNAP Dataset for analyzing
distribution of optimists/pessimists in influence of
different psycho-sociological factors.

Optimism/Pessimism: For the purpose
of developing computational models for Opti-
mism/Pessimism, we used the dataset proposed
by [Ruan et al.2016]. The Twitter conversations
dataset was obtained by searching for key-phrases
such as ”I am optimistic” for identifying op-
timistic users and keywords such as “hate”,
“unfair”, and “disgust” for identifying potential
pessimists. They identified 718 potential optimists
and 640 potential pessimists with maximum of
2, 000 tweets per user. A small subset of 500
potential optimists and 500 potential pessimists
were selected. To create a human annotated
ground truth dataset, 15 tweets for each user
were randomly selected. Further, each tweet was
annotated as potimist or pessimist.

Personality: The personality labeled gold cor-
pus (10K Facebook status updates of 250 users
and their Facebook network properties), released
in WCPR’133 workshop, was used to build the
personality model. From the Table 1, we can ob-
serve that the Facebook Personality corpus used
in WCPR’13 is balanced corpus with almost equal
distribution of users across all five different per-
sonality traits.

Values & Ethics: The Values & Ethics data
for 367 users was crowd-sourced along with users’

3
http://mypersonality.org/wiki/doku.php?id=wcpr13

Table 1: Flat distribution of Big5 Personality
types in the Facebook Personality corpus: Open-
ness (O), Conscientiousness (C), Extraversion (E),
Agreeableness (A), Neuroticism (N), The last col-
umn gives the Average Majority Baselines.

O C E A N Avg
70.40 52.00 38.40 53.60 39.60 50.80

Twitter Ids using Amazon Mechanical Turk as a
service, while ensuring that the participants came
from various cultures and ethnic backgrounds:
the participants were equally distributed across
the globe – Americans (USA, Canada, Mexico,
Brazil), South Asia (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh),
and a few East-Asians (Singaporeans, Malaysian,
Japanese, Chinese). The selected Asians were
checked to be mostly English speaking.

We obtained data from self-assessment based
psychometric tests using male/female versions of
PVQ, the Portrait Values Questionnaire [Schwartz
et al.2001]. The PVQ asks participants to an-
swer each question on a 1–6 Likert rating scale4.
A rating of 1 means “not like me at all” and 6
means “very much like me”. An example ques-
tion is “He likes to take risks. He is always look-
ing for adventures.” where the user should an-
swer while putting himself in the shoes of “He”
in the question. The standard practice is to ask
a fixed number of questions per psychological di-
mension. Therefore, there are five questions for
each of the ten Values classes, resulting in a 50
item PVQ questionnaire. Once all the questions in
the PVQ have been answered, for each user and
for each Values class, a score is generated by av-
eraging all the scores (i.e., user responses) cor-
responding to the questions in that class, as de-
scribed by [Schwartz2012]. Further, the rescaling
strategy proposed by [Schwartz2012] was used to
eliminate randomness from each response given
by a user as follows: for each user, the mean re-
sponse score was first calculated considering all
the responses s/he provided, and then the mean
score from each response was subtracted. See
[Schwartz2012] for more details on PVQ and the
score computation mechanism.

The ranges of scores obtained from the pre-
vious rescaling method may vary across different
Values classes. For instance, the ranges of the
rescaled scores for the Twitter Values corpus are as

4http://www.simplypsychology.org/likert-scale.html257



Table 2: Flat distribution of Schwartz’ value
types in the corpora: Achievement (AC), Benev-
olence (BE), Conformity (CO), Hedonism (H),
Power (PO), Security (SE), Self-Direction (SD),
Stimulation (ST), Tradition (TR), Universal-
ism (UN). The last column gives the Average Ma-
jority Baselines.

AC BE CO HE PO SE SD ST TR UN Avg
81.00 78.70 73.30 77.10 50.10 76.30 83.40 73.60 52.60 82.00 72.80

follows: Achievement [−4.12, 3.36], Benevolence
[−1.56, 3.39], Conformity [−3.35, 3.01], Hedo-
nism [−5.18, 4.35], Power [−6.0, 2.27], Security
[−2.60, 2.40], Self-Direction [−1.61, 3.40], Stim-
ulation [−5.0, 2.63], Tradition [−4.49, 3.35], and
Universalism [−3.33, 3.30].5 Hence the follow-
ing normalisation formula was applied to move the
ranges of the different Values classes to the [−1, 1]
interval:

xscaled =
2 ∗ (x− xmin)
xmax − xmin

− 1

Further, for obtaining text data to train com-
putational model we collected tweets from users’
Twitter accounts. However, several challenges
have to be addressed when working with Twitter.
For example, several users had protected Twitter
accounts, so that their tweets were not accessi-
ble when using the Twitter API. In addition, many
users had to be discarded since they had tweeted
less than 100 tweets, making them uninteresting
for statistical analysis. In addition, some extreme
cases when users mentioned someone else’s (some
celebrity’s) Twitter account, had to be discarded.
Finally after filtering the data, we obtained a text
dataset of 367 users consisting of at least 100
tweets and maximum of 3200 tweets. Categori-
cal flat distributions of Values types are reported
in the Table 2.

SNAP Dataset: In order to analyze the be-
haviour of optimists/ pessimists at societal level,
the egocentric twitter network released by SNAP
is used. For the purpose of investigating the soci-
ological factors operating at societal level, 1,562
ground-truth communities spanning over 81306
nodes and 1, 768, 149 edges were considered for
further analysis (other communities having size

5The distribution of a particular value type over a corpus
was analysed using the Bienaymé-Chebyshev Inequality [Bi-
enaymé1853, Tchébichef1867], showing that, for example,
most of the Achievement instances (89%) were in the range
[−2.96, 2.84].

less than 5 and with number of tweets less than
100 were discarded).

3.2 Corpus Statistics

Categorical flat distributions of Personality and
Values types are reported in Table 1 and Ta-
ble 2, respectively. It is noteworthy that the
Facebook Personality corpus used in the Work-
shop on Computational Personality Recognition
shared task [Celli et al.2013] is quite balanced
because it was judiciously chosen from a larger
10K user data corpus collected in the myPersonal-
ity project.6 The shared task organisers chose the
right (desired) distribution for the released corpus,
but in a real-life setting it is almost impossible to
get a balanced data from any user population or so-
cial media platform. On the other hand, the Twitter
corpus, collected by us is skewed.

Moreover, both the Personality model and
Schwartz’ Values model support fuzzy member-
ship, which means that anyone having Open per-
sonality can have Agreeable nature as well, and
similarly that someone with Power orientation also
can have Achievement orientation. To understand
this notion, the fuzzy membership statistics of
Facebook Personality corpus and Twitter Values
corpus are reported in Figures 1 and 2 respectively.

On a careful analysis of Figure 1 one can
clearly observe how each Personality trait is over-
lapped with other Personality traits. For example,
for Openness (O), we can clearly see that almost
equal amount of people are positively oriented to-
wards all the remaining four Personality dimen-
sions. Similarly, Agreeable people are evenly dis-
tributed among three traits: Openness, Extrover-
sion and Conscientiousness, but very few of them
have in neurotic nature. On the other hand, the
class distribution of Neuroticism (N) is highly im-
balanced, as most of the people who are neurotic
are always eager to experience new things always
to satisfy their ever-changing mood. Further, it can
be inferred from the visualisation that very few ex-
troverts have neurotic nature, but many of them are
positively oriented towards Conscientiousness (C)
trait. It indeed makes sense as extrovert people
are outgoing and would like to mingle in differ-
ent circles of the society, and thus they are accom-
modative and less sentimental, i.e., less neurotic
but they are rather methodical i.e., conscientious.

6http://mypersonality.org258



Figure 1: Fuzzy distributions of Big5 Personality traits in the myPersonality corpus. Similar to
Schwartz’s fuzzy distribution this table attempts to present the interconnection between different Per-
sonality traits.

Figure 2: Fuzzy distributions of Schwartz’ values in the Twitter corpus. Schwartz’ theory explains how
the values are interconnected and influence each other, since the pursuit of any of the values results in
either an accordance with one another (e.g., Conformity and Security) or a conflict with at least one other
value (e.g., Benevolence and Power).

It is also clear that the fuzziness is much higher
among the Values classes than among the Person-
ality traits. One possible reason is that Person-
ality has fewer number of classes than Schwartz
Values. Such overlapping nature of psychologi-
cal classes makes the computational classification
problem much more challenging than the classical
sentiment analysis problem.

3.3 Psycholinguistic and Network Fea-
tures

We explored exhaustive set of features includ-
ing – (f1) Word N-grams; (f2) Lingustic Fea-
tures (LIWC7; Harvard General Inquirer, MRC
psycholinguistic feature; Sensicon8); (f3) Speech-
Act classes; (f4) Sentiment Amplifiers (Exclama-
tion Marks, Quotes, Ellipses, Interjections, Emoti-
cons, Word/Sentence Length); (f5) Sentiment/
Emotion lexica (NRC emotion Lexicon [Moham-
mad et al.2013], Sentiwordnet [Esuli and Sebas-
tiani2007]); (f6) Topics words obtained from topic
model. A brief overview about personality, values,

7
http://www.liwc.net/

8
https://hlt-nlp.fbk.eu/technologies/sensicon

Table 3: Features used in psycho-sociological
models

Models f1 f2 f3 f4 f5 f6 F-Score
Personality + + + - - - 79.35%

Values - + + - - + 80.10%
Optimism/Pessimism + + - - + - 77.89%

and optimism/pessimism models and features used
are illustrated in 3.

3.4 Building Classifiers

We collected data from several sources to build
three classification models. Here for each model
we report the best classifier. The feature engineer-
ing required for improving performance of Per-
sonality and Values models is discussed in detail
in [Tushar Maheshwari2016]. All the results re-
ported in Table 3 are based on 10-fold cross vali-
dation on respective datasets.

Personality: The personality labeled gold cor-
pus (10K Facebook status updates of 250 users
and their Facebook network properties), released
in WCPR’139 workshop [Celli et al.2013], is used

9
http://mypersonality.org/wiki/doku.php?id=wcpr13259



to build the personality model. Our SVM-based
model outperforms the state-of-the-art [Verhoeven
et al.2013] by 10%, achieving average F-Score of
79.35%. Features used in this model are reported
in Table 3.

Values & Ethics: For the values model we
crowd-sourced a Twitter corpus using the Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk10. Self-assessments were
obtained using the Portrait Values Questionnaire
(PVQ) [Schwartz et al.2001]. At the end of the
data collection process, data from 367 unique
users had been gathered, having 1,608 average
tweets per user (see supp. for details). The SVM-
based values classifiers achieves an average F-
Score of 80% using features reported in Table 3.

Optimism/Pessimism: A Multinomial Naive
Bayes classifier is trained on the dataset intro-
duced by [Ruan et al.2016], the state-of-the-art for
this work. We obtain an F-Score of 77.89% using
featues reported in Table 3), which is comparable
to the state-of-the-art i.e. 81% [Ruan et al.2016].

4 Semantic Interpretation of
Communities

In order to analyze the behaviour of opti-
mists/pessimists at societal level, the egocentric
twitter network released by SNAP is used. The
Twitter network, released by SNAP [Leskovec and
Krevl2015] (nodes: 81,306, edges: 1,768,149) has
been used to study community structure. We con-
sidered 1,562 ground-truth communities (after dis-
carding communities having size less than 5 and
with tweets less than 100).

In order to analyse whether people within the
same community tend to be homogeneous with re-
spect to their background values/ethics, we mea-
sure Shannon’s Entropy (measure of the uncer-
tainty) [Lin1991] for each dimension separately.

Higher entropy scores suggest lower simi-
larity. To calculate the entropy score vector
X(i) for a community C(i) consisting of n users
as u(1), u(2), u(3)...u(n), a matrix A(i) is created
where A(i,j) row vector represents the estimated
scores of each of the ten values for a user u(j)
and A(i,:,k) column vector represents the esti-
mated scores of kth class for all n users. The
A(i,:,k) column vector was transformed to a prob-
ability distribution vector N(i,:,k) using softmax-

10
https://www.mturk.com/

normalization:

N(i,j,k) =
exp(A(i,j,k))

||exp(A(i,:,k)||1

The entropy score X(i,k) for N(i,:,k) can be cal-
culated using the following formulation:

X(i,k) = −
n∑

j=1

N(i,j,k) ∗ logN(i,j,k)

Table 4: Illustrates entropy calculation for values
model. Here T(i) represents the binary estimate of
fuzzy distribution of values and S(i) represents the
zero-mean unit-variance scaled values of X(i) for
a community C(i). Similarly, binary estimates for
five personality traits P(i) of user u(i) are calcu-
lated.

AC BE CO HE PO SE SD ST TR UN
u(1) 0.91 0.47 0.02 0.07 0.32 0.24 0.65 0.78 0.94 0.10
u(2) 0.97 0.40 0.49 0.50 0.56 0.83 0.62 0.73 0.04 0.08
u(3) 0.99 0.75 0.50 0.72 0.38 0.60 0.75 0.02 0.57 0.62
u(4) 0.77 0.44 0.40 0.16 0.19 0.55 0.73 0.08 0.53 0.25
u(5) 0.29 0.02 0.26 0.56 0.41 0.23 0.95 0.02 0.79 0.86

X(i) 1.54 1.40 1.40 1.39 1.55 1.50 1.59 0.99 1.42 1.28
S(i) 0.87 -0.12 -0.12 -0.19 0.95 0.57 1.26 -2.35 0.00 -0.87
T(i) 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

After normalization, N(i,:,k) vector represents
the probability distribution of kth Value class
across n users where entropy score X(i,k) rep-
resents the randomness in community along kth

Value class. The lower the randomness, higher the
kth class is dominant in the C(i) community. Now,
in order to obtain binary estimates T(i) for each
of the ten values and classes in C(i) community,
the entropy score vector X(i) is scaled using zero-
mean unit-variance method and for numerical val-
ues greater than 0, 1 was assigned and for numeri-
cal values less than 0, 0 was assigned as class label
for C(i) community. Instead of labelling a com-
munity C(i) with a class having minimum entropy,
the scaling approach is used for the purpose of pre-
serving the fuzzy distribution of values at commu-
nity level. The obtained T(i) vector represents the
fuzzy distribution of values and is thus a represen-
tation to capture the semantic information about
the community.260



Figure 3: Openness Figure 4: Conscientiousness

Figure 5: Extraversion

Figure 6: Agreeableness Figure 7: Neuroticism

Figure 8: Psycho-Sociological Influences on Optimism/Pessimism over Twitter. For ith personality trait,
the radar chart visualizes I(i,:,0) and I(i,:,1) represents degree of optimism and pessimism respectively
over 10 classes of Values & Ethics. 261



5 Understanding Psycho-
Sociological Influences of Opti-
mism/Pessimism

The analysis for user-level estimation starts with
each user u(i) and it’s the binary estimates of
all five traits of the Personality (P(i)), proba-
bility estimates of ten classes of Values (V(i))
and probability estimates of degree of opti-
mism/pessimism (O(i)), obtained using the pre-
trained Big5 Personality model, Schwartz Values
model and optimism/pessimism models respec-
tively. The user-level estimation for the degree
of optimism/pessimism was done by averaging the
optimism/pessimism scores for each user. Further
the estimated scores for five personality traits, ten
values traits and degree of optimism/pessimism
was scaled using zero-mean unit-variance method
for each of the 16 classes independently.

To this extent, we have obtained P(j), V(j) &
O(j) representing the personality traits, values and
degree of optimism respectively for each user u(j)
and binary estimates T(i) representing the fuzzy
distribution of values for each community C(i).

Aggregate Analysis over Personality Traits:
For the purpose of understanding the distribution
of O(j) under the influence of P(j) and T(i) for
a user u(j) in community C(i), we divide our
analysis in five parts according to five different
traits of personality. The division of analysis ac-
cording to five personality traits will help us bet-
ter understand the influence of each of these per-
sonality traits on optimists/pessimists. Therefore,
for all users u(j) having a particular personality
trait, we go into the communities the user u(j)
belongs to and lookup the values of that com-
munity using T(i) as well as obtain the degree
of optimism/pessimism for that user from O(j).
In this way, we aggregate the degree of opti-
mism for each pair of personality trait and val-
ues class and obtain the distribution of degree of
optimism/pessimism under the influence of socio-
psychological factors. The aggregation of degree
of optimism/pessimism can be formulated as fol-
lows :

I(i,j,0) =
∑

u(k)|(P(k,i)=1)∩(T(k,j)=1)
O(k,j,0)

where I(i,j,0) represents the aggregate degree
of optimism for ith personality trait and jth value

class. Similarly, I(i,j,1) representing the degree
of pessimism is calculated by aggregating over
O(k,j,1).

6 Obtained psycho-sociological
patterns

On careful investigation of five radar plots (Fig-
ure 8) for each of the personality traits we discover
interesting patterns on how combination of per-
sonality trait and values influence the behaviour of
optimist/pessimist users on Twitter.

Influence of Psycho-Sociological Factors on
Optimists: In Figure 3, we can infer that people
with open personality are generally optimistic irre-
spective of the dominating values of their commu-
nity as individuals with high openness tend to seek
euphoric experiences resulting in positive expec-
tations. From Figure 4, it is evident that individu-
als high in conscientiousness are positively corre-
lated with very optimistic people in both achieve-
ment as well as stimulation oriented communities.
Since, people high in conscientiousness tend to
have obsession, they are expected to be optimistic
when they are surrounded by people aspiring to
achieve and face challenges. From Figure 5, it can
be observed that extroversion has positive corre-
lation with very optimistic people in communities
highly oriented towards achievement, conformity,
hedonism, security, self-direction and stimulation
owing to their high energy and positive emotions.
Further from Figure 6, we can observe that agree-
able people have very distinct radar profile por-
traying them as very optimistic people irrespective
of their social settings because of their compas-
sionate and cooperative nature.

Overall, from the radar charts, we propose the
order of dominance of societal factors (values &
ethics) over individual factors (personality) by ob-
serving that in certain social factors dominate over
all user-level factors : AC > CO > ST. For exam-
ple, achievement and stimulation oriented settings
encourage more optimistic views on social media
irrespective of different personality traits.

Influence of Psycho-Sociological Factors on
Pessimists: Open people in traditional or power
oriented settings seem to be more pessimistic ow-
ing to many restrictions posed in a traditional
community and quest for prestige in a power ori-
ented community. Similarly, for all other person-
ality traits, the traditional settings influence more262



than an individual’s personality traits in promot-
ing pessimistic views. Except for agreeable peo-
ple, we can observe that power-oriented commu-
nity also increases the sense of pessimism among
people. In addition, for conscientious users be-
longing to security or self-direction oriented com-
munities are very pessimistic. The pessimistic na-
ture of the conscientious users can be explained
by the fact that their sense of responsibility cou-
pled with pressure for maintaining stability, secu-
rity and making independent choices in life may
lead to lowering their positive expectations.

On the other hand, a few outliers in the anal-
ysis can be seen due to accumulation of inaccura-
cies in the trained models of Values & Ethics as a
result of biased training data which is clear from
flat distribution of values in Table 2. For exam-
ple, on an average, optimism in users belonging to
communities high in universalism as well as pes-
simism in users belonging to communities high in
conformity is relatively high irrespective of their
personality traits.

7 Conclusion and future direction

This paper presents an empirical study to under-
stand how psycho-sociological factors influence
on optimism/pessimism at individual level.

However, we have only analyzed intra-
community psycho-sociological patterns in this
study, but we strongly believe that neighbouring
communities also have influential roles to play on
person level optimism/pessimism. In addition, we
need to study the influence of communities which
are not power-oriented or not achievement ori-
ented along with different personality traits. We
are working on analyzing and inferring other in-
fluencing factors using computational models.

References

[Argandoña2003] Antonio Argandoña. 2003.
Fostering values in organizations. Journal of
Business Ethics, 45(1–2):15–28.

[Bienaymé1853] Irénée-Jules Bienaymé. 1853.
Considérations à l’appui de la découverte de
Laplace sur la loi de probabilité dans la
méthode des moindres carrés. Imprimerie de
Mallet-Bachelier.

[Celli et al.2013] Fabio Celli, Fabio Pianesi,
David Stillwell, and Michal Kosinski. 2013.
The workshop on computational personality
recognition 2013. In Proceedings of the AAAI,
pages 2–5. AAAI.

[Esuli and Sebastiani2007] Andrea Esuli and
Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2007. Sentiwordnet: A
high-coverage lexical resource for opinion
mining. Evaluation, pages 1–26.

[Goldberg1990] Lewis R Goldberg. 1990. An al-
ternative” description of personality”: the big-
five factor structure. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 59(6):1216.

[Goldberg1993] Lewis R Goldberg. 1993.
The structure of phenotypic personality traits.
American psychologist, 48(1):26.

[Kahle et al.1986] Lynn R Kahle, Sharon E
Beatty, and Pamela Homer. 1986. Alternative
measurement approaches to consumer values:
The list of values (lov) and values and life style
(vals). Journal of consumer research, pages
405–409.

[Leskovec and Krevl2015] Jure Leskovec
and Andrej Krevl. 2015. {SNAP
Datasets}:{Stanford} large network dataset
collection.

[Lin1991] Jianhua Lin. 1991. Divergence
measures based on the shannon entropy.
IEEE Transactions on Information theory,
37(1):145–151.

[Marshall et al.1992] Grant N Marshall,
Camille B Wortman, Jeffrey W Kusulas,
Linda K Hervig, and Ross R Vickers Jr. 1992.
Distinguishing optimism from pessimism:
Relations to fundamental dimensions of mood
and personality. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 62(6):1067.

[Mohammad et al.2013] Saif M Mohammad,
Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiaodan Zhu. 2013.
Nrc-canada: Building the state-of-the-art in
sentiment analysis of tweets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1308.6242.

[Park et al.2015] Gregory Park, H Andrew
Schwartz, Johannes C Eichstaedt, Margaret L
Kern, Michal Kosinski, David J Stillwell,
Lyle H Ungar, and Martin EP Seligman. 2015.263



Automatic personality assessment through
social media language. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 108(6):934.

[Quercia et al.2011] Daniele Quercia, Michal
Kosinski, David Stillwell, and Jon Crowcroft.
2011. Our twitter profiles, our selves: Pre-
dicting personality with twitter. In Privacy,
Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011
IEEE Third Inernational Conference on Social
Computing (SocialCom), 2011 IEEE Third
International Conference on, pages 180–185.
IEEE.

[Ruan et al.2016] Xianzhi Ruan, Steven R Wil-
son, and Rada Mihalcea. 2016. Finding op-
timists and pessimists on twitter. In The 54th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, page 320.

[Schwartz et al.2001] Shalom H Schwartz, Gila
Melech, Arielle Lehmann, Steven Burgess,
Mari Harris, and Vicki Owens. 2001. Extend-
ing the cross-cultural validity of the theory of
basic human values with a different method of
measurement. Journal of cross-cultural psy-
chology, 32(5):519–542.

[Schwartz1992] Shalom H. Schwartz. 1992. Uni-
versals in the content and structure of values:
theoretical advances and empirical tests in 20
countries. In Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, pages 1–65. In M. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 25), New York: Academic Press.

[Schwartz2012] Shalom H Schwartz. 2012. An
overview of the schwartz theory of basic val-
ues. Online Readings in Psychology and Cul-
ture, 2(1):11.

[Sharpe et al.2011] J Patrick Sharpe, Nicholas R
Martin, and Kelly A Roth. 2011. Optimism
and the big five factors of personality: Beyond
neuroticism and extraversion. Personality and
Individual Differences, 51(8):946–951.

[Tchébichef1867] Pafnuty Lvovich Tchébichef.
1867. Des valeurs moyennes (translated
into French by N.V. Khanykov). Jour-
nal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées,
12(2):177–184.

[Tushar Maheshwari2016] Upendra Kumar Ami-
tava Das Tushar Maheshwari, Aishwarya Re-
ganti. 2016. Semantic interpretation of com-
munity in social networks. AAAI.

[Verhoeven et al.2013] Ben Verhoeven, Walter
Daelemans, and Tom De Smedt. 2013. En-
semble methods for personality recognition.
Proceedings of WCPR13, in conjunction with
ICWSM-13.

264


