



















































Are Distributional Representations Ready for the Real World? Evaluating Word Vectors for Grounded Perceptual Meaning


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Language Grounding for Robotics, pages 76–85,
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Are distributional representations ready for the real world?
Evaluating word vectors for grounded perceptual meaning

Li Lucy1
lucy3@stanford.edu

Jon Gauthier1,2
jon@gauthiers.net

1Stanford Symbolic Systems 2Stanford NLP Group

Abstract

Distributional word representation
methods exploit word co-occurrences
to build compact vector encodings of
words. While these representations
enjoy widespread use in modern natural
language processing, it is unclear whether
they accurately encode all necessary facets
of conceptual meaning. In this paper, we
evaluate how well these representations
can predict perceptual and conceptual
features of concrete concepts, drawing
on two semantic norm datasets sourced
from human participants. We find that
several standard word representations fail
to encode many salient perceptual features
of concepts, and show that these deficits
correlate with word-word similarity
prediction errors. Our analyses provide
motivation for grounded and embodied
language learning approaches, which may
help to remedy these deficits.

1 Introduction

Distributional approaches to meaning representa-
tion have enabled a substantial amount of progress
in natural language processing over the past years.
They center around a classic insight from at least
as early as Harris (1954); Firth (1957):

You shall know a word by the company
it keeps. (Firth, 1957, p. 11)

Popular distributional analysis methods which
exploit this intuition such as word2vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013) and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014)
have been critical to the success of many recent

All project code available at github.com/lucy3/
grounding-embeddings.

large-scale natural language processing applica-
tions (e.g. Turney and Pantel, 2010; Turian et al.,
2010; Collobert and Weston, 2008; Socher et al.,
2013; Goldberg, 2016). These methods opera-
tionalize distributional meaning via tasks where
words are optimized to predict words which co-
occur with them in text corpora. These methods
yield compact word representations — vectors in
some high-dimensional space — which are opti-
mized to solve these prediction tasks. These vector
representations form the foundation of practically
all modern deep learning models applied within
natural language processing.

Despite the success of distributional represen-
tations in standard natural language processing
tasks, a small but growing consensus within the ar-
tificial intelligence community suggests that these
methods cannot be sufficient to induce adequate
representations of words and concepts (Kiela
et al., 2016; Gauthier and Mordatch, 2016; Lazari-
dou et al., 2015). These sorts of claims, which
often draw on experimental evidence from cog-
nitive science (see e.g. Barsalou, 2008), are used
to back up arguments for multimodal learning
(at the weakest) or complete embodiment (at the
strongest). Kiela et al. (2016) claim the following:

. . . the best way for acquiring human-
level semantics is to have machines
learn through (physical) experience: if
we want to teach a system the true mean-
ing of “bumping into a wall,” we simply
have to bump it into walls repeatedly.

Discussions like the one above have an intuitive
pull: certainly “bump” is best understood through
a sense of touch, just as “loud” is best understood
through a sense of sound. It seems inefficient —
or perhaps just wrong — to learn these sorts of
concepts from distributional evidence.

76



Despite the intuitive pull, there is not much
evidence from a computational perspective that
grounded or multimodal learning actually earns us
anything in terms of general meaning representa-
tion. Will our robots and chat-bots be worse off
for not having physically bumped into walls be-
fore they hold discussions on wall-collisions? Will
our representation of the concept loud somehow
be faulty unless we explicitly associate it with cer-
tain decibel levels experienced in the real world?
Before we proceed to embed our learning agents in
multimodal games and robot-shells, it is important
that we have some concrete idea of how grounding
actually affects meaning.

This paper presents a thorough analysis of
the contents of distributional word representa-
tions with respect to this question. Our results
suggest that several common distributional word
representations may indeed be deficient in the
sort of grounded meaning necessary for language-
enabled agents deployed in the real world.

2 Related work

This paper uses semantic norm datasets to eval-
uate the content of distributional word represen-
tations. Semantic norm datasets consist of con-
cepts and norms concerning their perceptual and
conceptual features, as provided by human partic-
ipants. They are a popular resource within psy-
chology and cognitive science as models of hu-
man concept representation, and have been used
to explain psycholinguistic phenomena from se-
mantic priming and interference (Vigliocco et al.,
2004) to the structure of early word learning in
child language acquisition (Hills et al., 2009). An-
drews et al. (2009) show how “experiential” se-
mantic norm information can be used to model hu-
man judgments of concept similarity. They show
that this semantic norm data provides information
distinct from the information found in basic word
representations. Our work extends the findings of
Andrews et al. to a larger semantic norm dataset
and evaluates particular implications within natu-
ral language processing.

A small NLP literature has compared distribu-
tional representations with semantic norm datasets
and other external resources. Rubinstein et al.
(2015) confirm that word representations are es-
pecially effective at predicting taxonomic features
versus attributive features. Collell and Moens
(2016) find that word representations fail to pre-

# word tokens # word types

GloVe (Common Crawl) 840B 2.2M
GloVe (Wiki+Gigaword) 6B 400K
word2vec 100B 3M

Table 1: Statistics of the corpora used to produce
the distributional representations used in this pa-
per.

dict many visual features of concepts, and show
how representations from computer vision mod-
els can help improve these predictions. Sev-
eral studies have used distributional representa-
tions to reconstruct aspects of these semantic norm
datasets (Herbelot and Vecchi, 2015; Fagarasan
et al., 2015; Erk, 2016).

The majority of the NLP work in this space
has focused on the downstream task of augment-
ing word representations with novel grounded in-
formation, often evaluating on standard semantic
similarity datasets (Agirre et al., 2009; Bruni et al.,
2012; Faruqui et al., 2015; Bulat et al., 2016).
Young et al. (2014) develop an alternative opera-
tionalization of denotational meaning using image
captioning datasets, and demonstrate gains over
distributional representations on textual similarity
and entailment datasets.

This applied work has demonstrated that some-
thing worthwhile is indeed gained by augmenting
distributional representations with some orthogo-
nal grounded or multimodal information. We be-
lieve it is critical to analyze the original successes
and failures of distributional representations in or-
der to motivate this move to grounded meaning
representation.

3 Meaning representations

3.1 Distributional meaning

This paper examines representations produced by
two popular unsupervised distributional methods.
Table 1 shows the statistics of the corpora used to
generate these vectors.

GloVe: GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) esti-
mates word representations wi by using them to
reconstruct a word-word co-occurrence matrix X
collected from a large text corpus:

L =
V∑

i,j=1

f(Xij)
(
wTi wj + bi + bj − logXij

)2
(1)

77



Dataset # concepts # features C/F F/C

McRae 541 2526 2.87 13.41
CSLB 638 2725 3.78 16.13

Table 2: Semantic norm datasets used in this pa-
per. The final two columns show the mean con-
cepts per feature / features per concept.

here f(Xij) is a weighting function on word pairs
and bi, bj are learned per-word bias terms.

We use two pre-trained GloVe vector datasets:
one trained on a concatenation of Wikipedia 2014
and Gigaword 5 (GloVe-WG), and another trained
on a Common Crawl dump (GloVe-CC).1

word2vec: word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013)
estimates word representations by optimizing a
skip-gram objective to predict all words wj within
a context window c of a word wi given their word
representations:

J =
1
T

T∑
i=1

∑
i−c≤j≤i+c

log p(wj | wi) (2)

where T is the total number of words in a cor-
pus. We use a publicly available word2vec dataset
trained on the Google News corpus.2

3.2 Semantic norms
Semantic feature norm datasets consist of reports
from human participants about the semantic fea-
tures of various natural kinds. A proportion of the
features contained in these datasets are properties
of concepts which may be obvious to humans but
are perhaps difficult to find written in text corpora.
For this reason, we selected two semantic norm
datasets to serve as gold-standard comparisons of
concept meaning. Table 2 displays basic statistics
about the semantic norm datasets we use in this
paper.

McRae Our initial experiments use the seman-
tic norm dataset from McRae et al. (2005), which
consists of 541 concrete noun concepts with as-
sociated feature norms, collected from 725 par-
ticipants. For a given concept, the McRae
dataset includes all feature norms which were re-
ported independently by at least five participants
(2,526 in total). After removing concepts indi-
cated to have ambiguous meanings to mitigate

1nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove
2code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec

polysemy effects (such as tank (army) and
tank (container)) and one concept without
a GloVe representation (dunebuggy), we had a
resulting set of 515 concepts for analysis. The
dataset groups features into several perceptual and
non-perceptual categories: taxonomic, encyclo-
pedic, function, visual-motion, visual-form and -
surface, visual-colour, sound, tactile, and taste
(McRae et al., 2005). We use the McRae dataset
and feature categories to perform basic pilot anal-
yses and form hypotheses about the nature of the
distributional representations tested.

CSLB We reproduce and extend our results on
a second semantic norm dataset collected by the
Cambridge Centre for Speech, Language and the
Brain (CSLB; Devereux et al., 2014). CSLB
contains 638 concepts provided by 123 partic-
ipants. Their data collection closely followed
McRae et al. (2005), though features were in-
cluded if at least 2 participants named that feature.
We removed concepts with two-word names, am-
biguous meanings, or missing vector representa-
tions to yield a vocabulary of 597 concepts from
this dataset. CSLB also includes a feature catego-
rization schema, though the categories are broader
than those in McRae: visual perceptual, other per-
ceptual, functional, taxonomic, and encyclopedic.

The mapping between the two categorization
schemes is far from perfect. While some per-
ceptual features in McRae are categorized as per-
ceptual features in CSLB, other features (e.g.
those related to swimming, flying, eating) are
reclassified as “functional” in CSLB. The two
datasets disagree on abstract conceptual properties
as well. For example, CSLB classifies is for -
football as a functional property, while McRae
classifies the comparable feature associated -
with football games as encyclopedic.

The encyclopedic category is somewhat diffi-
cult to distinguish in both datasets. It is com-
posed mainly of abstract factual features, but also
contains attributive features such as is cold -
blooded and does use electricity as
well as is scary and is cool.

Meanwhile, the functional category mixes fea-
tures for behaviors associated with the concept
(does dive) as well as functions that people
perform on or with the concept (is hit). This
classification system may need some readjust-
ments to provide a clear understanding of what is

78



perceptual and what is conceptual, and it may be
that some features, such as has a steering -
wheel, are both.

Given the significant noise of this classifica-
tion scheme, we focus our investigation on a sin-
gle contrast between features in clearly perceptual
categories (visual, tactile, sound, etc.) and non-
perceptual categories (functional and taxonomic).
Because the encyclopedic category contains an
ambiguous mix of both sorts, we exclude it from
our formal predictions later in the paper.

4 The feature view

We first investigate how well distributional word
representations directly encode information about
semantic norms.3 For each feature in a semantic
norm dataset, we construct a binary classification
problem which predicts the presence or absence of
the feature for each concept. Concretely, for each
feature fi we have a label vector yi ∈ {0, 1}nc ,
where nc is the total number of concepts in the
dataset, and yij is 1 when concept j has feature
fi and 0 otherwise. We build label vectors only
for features with five or more associated concepts.
After filtering, we have nf = 267 label vectors in
the McRae dataset and nf = 775 in CSLB.

For each feature, we construct a binary logistic
regression model pi which predicts the presence or
absence of the feature for a concept given its word
representation xj :

pi(yij | xj) = σ(wTi xj) (3)

This base model is extremely prone to overfit-
ting, as most features have only several associ-
ated concepts — that is, each classifier has only a
few positive examples — and the input word rep-
resentations are of a high dimensionality. In or-
der to prevent overfitting, we add an independent
L2 regularization term to each regression model.
For each feature fi, we use leave-one-out cross-
validation to select the regularization parameter λi
which maximizes the following modified logistic

3The remainder of this paper describes a general analysis
performed on both the McRae and CSLB datasets. We used
McRae as a pilot dataset to form hypotheses, and checked
these hypotheses on the CSLB dataset as a test set. All of
the graphs and numbers reported in this paper correspond to
results on CSLB.

objective:

Li(λi) =
1
|fi|

∑
xj∈fi

log pi,λi−j (yij = 1 | xj)
+

1
nc − |fi|

∑
xk 6∈fi

log pi,λi−j (yik = 0 | xk)


(4)

Here pi,λi−j (·) represents a regression model
(Equation (3)) trained without example (xj , yij)
in the training set and with regularization param-
eter λi. The first term of the summand calculates
the log-probability of the left-out concept having
the desired feature, and the second term calculates
the average log-probability that any other concept
(outside of the feature group fi) does not have the
feature. The regularization terms λi are selected
independently for each feature to maximize the
objective Li.

After fitting the regularized logistic regression
models, we calculate a set of “feature fit” met-
rics. For each feature fi, we evaluate the binary
F1 score of its classifier’s predictions pi(yi). Fig-
ure 1 shows each feature as a point in a swarm-plot
(grouped by feature category).

Pilot tests with the McRae dataset suggested
that the categories associated with strictly percep-
tual features were not well encoded in the dis-
tributional representations relative to strictly non-
perceptual categories (taxonomic and functional
features).

We use the CSLB dataset as a test set for this
prediction. We perform a bootstrap confidence
interval test on the difference between the me-
dian feature fit scores for CSLB features in non-
perceptual and perceptual categories. The 95%
confidence intervals on this bootstrap are positive
for two of the three representations tested (GloVe-
CC and word2vec).4 Figure 1 shows the fea-
ture fit scores on CSLB evaluated with GloVe-CC,
and the word2vec evaluation effectively shows the
same result: taxonomic and functional features
score higher on average than strictly perceptual
features. This comparison failed on GloVe-WG,
however, where features classed as “functional”
scored far lower on average than those in percep-
tual categories. Across all three sets of distribu-
tional representations, the median score of ency-

4GloVe-CC: (7.67%, 24.0%); word2vec: (7.13%,
20.6%); GloVe-WG: (-1.25%, 15.7%).

79



encyclopaedic visual perceptual functional other perceptual taxonomic
Feature category

0

20

40

60

80

100

F
ea

tu
re

 fi
t s

co
re

Figure 1: The CSLB feature fit metrics of GloVe-CC, where each point is a feature with at least 5
associated concepts. Feature categories are on the horizontal axis.

category feature fit < 50% feature fit > 50%

other perceptual is chewy, is solid, is high pitched is hard, does smell good nice, is juicy
visual perceptual is triangular, has a string, is curved, has a clasp, has a shell, has whiskers
encyclopedic is collectable, is powerful, made of -

tissue

is formal, does not fly, is kept in a -
cage

functional is roasted, is for weddings, is carried does shelter, does chop, is eaten edible
taxonomic is a home, is a vessel, is an ingredient is seafood, is a boat, is a tool

Table 3: Examples of features in each category with feature fit scores based on using GloVe-CC to predict
norms from CSLB.

clopedic features was well below all other feature
categories.

It is obvious from Figure 1 that each cate-
gory contains a wide range of feature fit values.
As discussed earlier in Section 3.2, this catego-
rization of features is far from perfect. Many
of the lower-scoring features classed as “ency-
clopedic” are simple attributive features not de-
serving of the category label, such as is fresh
and is filling. Many of the higher-scoring
encyclopedic features seem genuinely encyclope-
dic, such as is found on farms; other high-
scoring features are arguably “functional,” such
as does grow on trees. Many of the higher
scoring visual perceptual features state structural
part-whole relations, such as has legs and
has an engine.

Table 3 provides more examples of low- and
high-scoring features in each category. Despite
the rather noisy classification scheme used in this
dataset, we still managed to find a regular trend
in two of three evaluations, matching our expec-
tations from prior pilot experiments. We believe
that a revised classification scheme could help to

0 20 40 60 80 100
word2vec feature fit

0

20

40

60

80

100

G
lo
V
e
 (
C
o
m
m
o
n
 C
ra
w
l)
 f
e
a
tu
re
 f
it

Figure 2: A comparison of CSLB feature fit scores
for word2vec and GloVe-CC. Slope: 0.8773; Pear-
son r: 0.8260.

demonstrate a clear difference between perceptual
and non-perceptual features in all three datasets.

4.1 Matching word representation sources

For each feature, we compare its feature fit score
evaluated with GloVe-CC word vectors and its
score evaluated with word2vec vectors in Figure 2.

80



40 50 60 70 80 90 100

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
m(GloVe­CC,CSLB)

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

m
(G

lo
V

e­
C

C
, W

or
dN

et
)

(a) Concepts plotted according to the correlation between
their GloVe-CC embeddings and two other sources (CSLB,
horizontal axis; WordNet, vertical axis). The points are col-
ored according to their feature fit.

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
m(GloVe­CC,CSLB)

40

50

60

70

80

90

M
ed

ia
n 

fe
at

ur
e 

fit
 s

co
re

(b) A direct comparison of m(GloVe-CC, CSLB) (horizontal
axis) and the median feature fit scores associated with con-
cept (vertical axis). See main text for statistical tests.

Figure 3: Concept view results.

The trend in the figure suggests that both repre-
sentations have similar feature fit deficiencies and
strengths, though the trend becomes weaker near
the (100%, 100%) corner — the two representa-
tions correlate well at low feature fit scores, and
seem to fan out at higher scores. A large group
of points also sit in the figure at y = 100 and
x = 100; these features are perfectly captured by
one representation and not by the other.

This correlation is somewhat surprising, given
that the word2vec and GloVe vectors are the prod-
ucts of different algorithms executed on very dif-
ferent corpora. There are two likely explanations
behind this correlation:

1. Some features in the CSLB semantic norm
data are unusually difficult, or are perhaps
missing associated concepts. GloVe and
word2vec correlate in performance because
they don’t match these noisy or incomplete
features.

2. There are systematic deficiencies in the word
vectors due to their shared reliance on the dis-
tributional method.

It is difficult to differentiate these two explana-
tions on these small semantic norm datasets, but
we hope to distinguish these in the future by test-
ing new predictions for concepts not covered in
these datasets. We will return to this idea in the
conclusion of the paper.

5 The concept view

The previous section demonstrated that several
classes of perceptual features are not well encoded
on average by distributional word representations,
and that these deficiencies systematically match
across representations. How does this deficiency
in feature representation carry over into computa-
tions on the word representations themselves?

We evaluate the matching between distribu-
tional representations and representations from
other sources by comparing their predictions of
word-word similarity. For distributional word rep-
resentations, we compute word-word similarity by
cosine distance:

sim(i, j) = cos(xi, xj) (5)

We derive compact concept representations
from the semantic norm datasets with LSA (Lan-
dauer et al., 1998). We compute a truncated SVD
on the feature matrix Y ∈ {0, 1}nc×nf , which is
the concatenation of the binary feature label vec-
tors introduced in Section 4. We define concept-
concept similarity by the cosine distance between
their corresponding LSA vectors.

As a secondary data source, we also compute
word-word similarity judgments from the Word-
Net taxonomy (Miller, 1995). We use the Resnik
metric (Resnik et al., 1999) to compute the simi-
larity between concept names ci, cj :

simresnik(ci, cj) = max
c∈S(ci,cj)

− log p(c) (6)

81



where S(ci, cj) selects the common ancestors of
the concepts in the WordNet taxonomy, and p(c) is
the unigram probability of a concept as computed
on an external corpus. This selects the ancestor of
the two concepts in the taxonomy which has maxi-
mal information content (surprisal). We use Word-
Net as additional verification that the trends ob-
served between semantic norms and distributional
representations are non-coincidental.

We use these similarity metrics to compute pair-
wise distance measures for concepts present in the
semantic norm datasets. For each metric, we pro-
duce a symmetric pairwise distance matrix D ∈
Rnc×nc , where an element Dij indicates the dis-
tance between concepts i and j according to the
metric.

We next compute how well each concept’s
pairwise similarity is correlated between the
various metrics. For a given concept, we
compute the Pearson correlation between the
concept’s GloVe/word2vec pairwise distance
vector and the LSA and WordNet pairwise
distance vectors.5 The correlation values of
interest are m(GloVe/word2vec,CSLB) and
m(GloVe/word2vec,WordNet) — that is, the
correlations between the pairwise distance vectors
for GloVe/word2vec and CSLB and between the
pairwise distance vectors for GloVe/word2vec
and WordNet.

Figure 3a plots both of these correlation values
evaluated with GloVe-CC for all concepts. The
two m measures are evidently positively corre-
lated, though with some noise (r = 0.6160). This
is to be expected, as the CSLB dataset and Word-
Net overlap only partially in the semantic features
they encode.

Each concept in Figure 3 is colored according
to the median feature fit score of its associated fea-
tures. In Figure 3b, we show this feature fit metric
on the vertical axis. There is a positive relation-
ship here between feature fit scores and the corre-
lation metric m(GloVe-CC,CSLB) (r = 0.3323).
Because the correlation between m(·,CSLB) and
feature fit metrics is weaker than expected, we
run post-hoc multiple regression significance tests
for each distributional representation. An F-test
shows that the regression feature m(·,CSLB) sig-
nificantly improves predictions of feature fit val-

5The Pearson correlation between two vectors is equiv-
alent to the cosine distance between their mean-centered
forms.

Domain Feature fit Concepts

10 61.03% bread, cheese, chocolate, coffee, glue,
ham, jam, jelly, ketchup, moss, soup,
tea, yoghurt

15 67.18% artichoke, asparagus, aubergine, bean,
cabbage, flour, gherkin, leek, mango,
pineapple, potato, pumpkin, rhubarb,
seaweed

25 75.62% bouquet, buttercup, carnation, daffodil,
daisy, dandelion, fern, geranium,
hyacinth, lily, marigold, orchid, pansy,
poppy, rose, sunflower, tulip

31 78.22% bayonet, bomb, cannon, crossbow,
dagger, grenade, gun, pistol, revolver,
rifle, shotgun, sword

36 82.18% book, catalogue, menu, dictionary,
encyclopaedia, textbook

Table 4: Selected domains from the clustering
analysis on GloVe-CC, with median feature fit
scores over concepts.

ues relative to a baseline model for all three repre-
sentations6,7.

There is substantial variance in the predictions
of the distributional representations due to fac-
tors outside of the scope of the semantic norm
data. The mismatch in predictions between dis-
tributional representations is nevertheless a sta-
tistically significant predictor of feature fit met-
rics. This suggests that the feature-level deficien-
cies discovered in the previous section have con-
crete implications in terms of word-word similar-
ity measures.

5.1 Domain-level analysis
We next investigate whether some domains of con-
cepts are particularly affected by the deficiencies
discussed in the previous sections. We perform ag-
glomerative clustering on concepts from the CSLB
dataset using a custom distance metric:

d(i, j) = ||LSAi−LSAj ||2 +α(FFi−FFj)2 (7)
where LSAi is the LSA vector representation com-
puted from the semantic norm data for concept i
as introduced earlier in this section, and FFi is the
median feature-fit score for a concept i. We select
the weight αmanually to produce the most seman-
tically coherent clusters.

6The baseline regression model predicts a concept’s fea-
ture fit from these baseline features: log(word frequency in
Brown corpus), log(# associated features), log(total # feature
reports for the concept), # WordNet senses.

7GloVe-CC: F ∗ = 41.297, p < 10−9; GloVe-WG:
F ∗ = 68.783, p < 10−15, word2vec: F ∗ = 41.27, p <
10−9

82



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40
Domain ID

40

50

60

70

80

90

M
ed

ia
n 

fe
at

ur
e 

fit
 s

co
re

Figure 4: Concept domains derived from the CSLB semantic norm data. Each point represents a concept.
The vertical axis is the median feature fit score of the concept’s features on GloVe-CC.

Figure 4 shows the distribution of feature fit
scores for each of the resulting 40 domains. We
find that settings of αwhich yield semantically co-
herent clusters also yield groups of concepts with
very low variance in feature fit scores. In Table 4
we list select domains and their median feature fit
scores. This clustering suggests that deficiencies
at the feature level affect entire coherent semantic
domains of concepts.

6 Conclusion

This paper has analyzed how well various stan-
dard distributional representations encode aspects
of grounded meaning. We chose to use seman-
tic norm datasets as a gold standard of grounded
meaning, and tested how word representations
predicted features within these datasets. We
grouped these features into high-level categories
and found that, despite large within-category vari-
ance, several standard distributional representa-
tions underperformed on average in predicting
perceptual features. The difference in prediction
performance proved statistically significant on two
of the three representations we evaluated. These
deficiencies in feature encoding matched between
GloVe and word2vec representations trained on
different corpora, suggesting that certain classes
of features may be poorly represented by distribu-
tional methods in general.

We also examined the consequences of these de-
ficiencies in feature encoding for the word repre-
sentations themselves. We compared the word-
word similarity predictions made with distribu-
tional representations with those made with the
semantic norm dataset and with WordNet, and
found that words having features badly encoded
within the distributional representations were also

likely to make different similarity predictions than
the predictions from these two corpora. A fi-
nal domain-level concept analysis suggested that
some semantic domains are particularly impacted
by these issues in feature encoding.

The semantic norm datasets used in this paper
are subject to saliency biases: they only contain
the concept-feature mappings which experimental
subjects think to mention when queried. These
saliency effects add noise to our results, as men-
tioned in Section 4.1, and may have caused us to
generally underestimate the performance of distri-
butional models within all feature categories. In
future work, we plan to repeat the sorts of tests
conducted in this paper while avoiding possible
saliency confounds. We also plan to develop a
causal explanation for the deficiencies in the word
embeddings found in this paper, showing how co-
occurrence information (or lack thereof) present in
the training corpus can bias performance on these
tasks. Both of these studies will verify that the re-
sults we have found are due entirely to deficien-
cies in distributional methods rather than in the
datasets used here.

We think these deficiencies should be worry-
ing: if neural models of language are to have any
knowledge about concepts, it ought to be in their
word embeddings. Our findings show that these
embeddings are lacking in basic features of per-
ceptual meaning. These results suggest that dis-
tributional meaning (as operationalized by mod-
ern distributional models) may miss out on funda-
mental elements of semantics. We hope they will
help motivate further work in developing multi-
modal representations which can prepare us to de-
ploy more fluent language agents in the real world.

83



Acknowledgements

We thank Christopher D. Manning, Peng Qi,
Pakapol Supaniratisai, Keenon Werling, and mem-
bers of the Stanford, University of Washington,
and Berkeley NLP communities for useful discus-
sions, and the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments.

References
Eneko Agirre, Enrique Alfonseca, Keith B. Hall, Jana

Kravalova, Marius Pasca, and Aitor Soroa. 2009. A
Study on Similarity and Relatedness Using Distri-
butional and WordNet-based Approaches. In HLT-
NAACL.

Mark Andrews, Gabriella Vigliocco, and David Vin-
son. 2009. Integrating experiential and distribu-
tional data to learn semantic representations. Psy-
chological review 116(3):463.

Lawrence W Barsalou. 2008. Grounded cognition.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 59:617–645.

Elia Bruni, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni, and
Nam-Khanh Tran. 2012. Distributional Seman-
tics in Technicolor. In Proceedings of the 50th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume
1. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL ’12, pages 136–145.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2390524.2390544.

Luana Bulat, Douwe Kiela, and Stephen Clark. 2016.
Vision and feature norms: Improving automatic fea-
ture norm learning through cross-modal maps. In
HLT-NAACL.

Guillem Collell and Marie-Francine Moens. 2016.
Is an image worth more than a thousand words?
on the fine-grain semantic differences between
visual and linguistic representations. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers. The COLING 2016 Organiz-
ing Committee, Osaka, Japan, pages 2807–2817.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/C16-1264.

Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. 2008. A unified
architecture for natural language processing: Deep
neural networks with multitask learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th international conference on
Machine learning. ACM, pages 160–167.

Barry J Devereux, Lorraine K Tyler, Jeroen Geertzen,
and Billi Randall. 2014. The centre for speech, lan-
guage and the brain (cslb) concept property norms.
Behavior research methods 46(4):1119–1127.

Katrin Erk. 2016. What do you know about
an alligator when you know the company it
keeps? Semantics and Pragmatics 9(17):1–63.
https://doi.org/10.3765/sp.9.17.

Luana Fagarasan, Eva Maria Vecchi, and Stephen
Clark. 2015. From distributional semantics to fea-
ture norms: grounding semantic models in human
perceptual data. In IWCS.

Manaal Faruqui, Jesse Dodge, Sujay Kumar Jauhar,
Chris Dyer, and Eduard Hovy. 2015. Retrofitting
Word Vectors to Semantic Lexicons .

John Rupert Firth. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic the-
ory, 1930-1955. Studies in linguistic analysis .

Jon Gauthier and Igor Mordatch. 2016. A paradigm for
situated and goal-driven language learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.03585 .

Yoav Goldberg. 2016. A primer on neural network
models for natural language processing. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research 57:345–420.

Zellig S Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word
10(2-3):146–162.

Aurélie Herbelot and Eva Maria Vecchi. 2015. Build-
ing a shared world: mapping distributional to model-
theoretic semantic spaces. In EMNLP.

Thomas T Hills, Mounir Maouene, Josita Maouene,
Adam Sheya, and Linda Smith. 2009. Categori-
cal structure among shared features in networks of
early-learned nouns. Cognition 112(3):381–396.

Douwe Kiela, Luana Bulat, Anita L Vero, and Stephen
Clark. 2016. Virtual embodiment: A scalable
long-term strategy for artificial intelligence research.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.07432 .

Thomas K Landauer, Peter W Foltz, and Darrell La-
ham. 1998. An introduction to latent semantic anal-
ysis. Discourse processes 25(2-3):259–284.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Nghia The Pham, and Marco Ba-
roni. 2015. Combining language and vision with a
multimodal skip-gram model. In HLT-NAACL.

Ken McRae, George S Cree, Mark S Seidenberg, and
Chris McNorgan. 2005. Semantic feature produc-
tion norms for a large set of living and nonliving
things. Behavior research methods 37(4):547–559.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM 38(11):39–
41.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP). pages 1532–
1543. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1162.

84



Philip Resnik et al. 1999. Semantic similarity in a tax-
onomy: An information-based measure and its ap-
plication to problems of ambiguity in natural lan-
guage. J. Artif. Intell. Res.(JAIR) 11:95–130.

Dana Rubinstein, Effi Levi, Roy Schwartz, and Ari
Rappoport. 2015. How Well Do Distributional Mod-
els Capture Different Types of Semantic Knowl-
edge? In ACL.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
Christopher Potts, et al. 2013. Recursive deep
models for semantic compositionality over a senti-
ment treebank. In Proceedings of the conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing
(EMNLP). Citeseer, volume 1631, page 1642.

Joseph Turian, Lev Ratinov, and Yoshua Bengio. 2010.
Word representations: a simple and general method
for semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the
48th annual meeting of the association for compu-
tational linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 384–394.

Peter D Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of se-
mantics. Journal of artificial intelligence research
37:141–188.

Gabriella Vigliocco, David P Vinson, William Lewis,
and Merrill F Garrett. 2004. Representing the mean-
ings of object and action words: The featural and
unitary semantic space hypothesis. Cognitive psy-
chology 48(4):422–488.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to
visual denotations: New similarity metrics for se-
mantic inference over event descriptions. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics 2:67–78.

85


