Proceedings of Knowledge Resources for the Socio-Economic Sciences and Humanities associated with RANLP-17, pages 9–18,

9

Varna, Bulgaria, 7 Sep 2017.

https://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-040-3_002

A Multiform Balanced Dependency Treebank for Romanian

Mihaela Colhon

University of Craiova

Department of Informatics

Craiova, Romania

mcolhon@gmail.com

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc

“Al. I. Cuza” University,

Iasi, Romania

Institute of Linguistics

“Iorgu Iordan Al. Rosetti”

Bucharest, Romania

catalinamaranduc@gmail.com

C˘at˘alin Mititelu

Bucharest
Romania

catalinmititelu@yahoo.com

Abstract

The UAIC-RoDia-DepTb is a balanced
treebank, containing texts in non-standard
language: 2,575 chats sentences, old Ro-
manian texts (a Gospel printed in 1648,
a codex of laws printed in 1818, a novel
written in 1910), regional popular poetry,
legal texts, Romanian and foreign ﬁction,
quotations. The proportions are compara-
ble; each of these types of texts is repre-
sented by subsets of at least 1,000 phrases,
so that the parser can be trained on their
peculiarities. The annotation of the tree-
bank started in 2007, and it has classi-
cal tags, such as those in school grammar,
with the intention of using the resource
for didactic purposes. The classiﬁcation
of circumstantial modiﬁers is rich in se-
mantic information. We present in this pa-
per the development in progress of this re-
source which has been automatically an-
notated and entirely manually corrected.
We try to add new texts, and to make
it available in more formats, by keeping
all the morphological and syntactic in-
formation annotated, and adding logical-
semantic information. We will describe
here two conversions, from the classic syn-
tactic format into Universal Dependencies
format and into a logical-semantic layer,
which will be shortly presented.

1

Introduction

The annotation of UAIC-RoDia DepTb1 was
started in 2007, prompted by the need to com-
plete the lack of corpora for Romanian with a high
degree of annotated data. The creator, Augusto

1UAIC-RoDia = ISLRN 156-635-615-024-0

Perez, 2014, used classical tags with the inten-
tion to use the treebank for teaching purposes, in
preparing students for exams.

Since then, there have created more resources
and processing tools. Their creators are all in-
terested in standard contemporary language, over-
looking the complex structures, the originality of
expression. Their aim is to obtain superior accu-
racy by processing simple texts. A big corpus for
contemporary standard language (CoRoLA) has
been created (Tuﬁs, et al., 1998). It includes pub-
lications obtained from editors, spoken language
and also a treebank consisting of 9,500 sentences,
afﬁliated with the UD (Universal Dependencies)
group. UAIC-RoDepTb is a balanced corpus, hav-
ing more styles. We contribute our 4,500 sen-
tences, which are in contemporary standard lan-
guage, to the Romanian Treebank afﬁliated with
UD.

However, the UD group includes all kinds of
Treebanks, balanced, or containing old languages,
Social Media, and so on. The initial purpose of
this group was to build a universal parser. The
common features of all the languages have been
highlighted, admitting the peculiarities only as
sub-classiﬁcations that can be taken into consider-
ation or not, according to the user’s wish. More
and more treebanks for over 30 languages have
been afﬁliated. The uniformity of the ﬂexible an-
notation format has created the possibility of mul-
tiple alignments, useful in Machine Translation
and comparative language studies.

UAIC-RoDia DepTb can participate to this
project as another treebank, for non-standard Ro-
manian. Our Treebank has now 19,825 sentences
in progress, in the UAIC classic syntactic con-
vention of annotation.
If we subtract the 4,500
sentences already introduced into the UD, there
remain 15,325 sentences to be transposed in UD
conventions: 2,575 sentences from chat, 1,230

10

from regional folk poetry, 6,882 in Old Roma-
nian, a Gospel published in 1648 and a codex of
laws issued in 1818, Romanian ﬁction, a novel
by Matthew Caragiale The Princes of Old Palace,
written in 1910, and 3,894 quotations from the
thesaurus dictionary or its bibliography, contain-
ing poetry by known authors, too. The section al-
ready introduced in UD contains fragments from
the Romanian version of Orwell’s 1984 novel, sen-
tences from the Aquis Communitaire laws, from
Wikipedia in Romanian, and from the Frame Net
(Baker et al., 1998), translated in Romanian. The
sentences with complex structure have not been
avoided, neither have short, elliptical ones. The
average frequency is high, some sub-corpora have
25-29 words per sentence, and the general average
frequency is 19.91 words per sentence.

The differences between the UAIC annotation
conventions and UD ones have been shown in pre-
vious work (M˘ar˘anduc and Perez, 2015), (Mititelu
et al., 2015). Shortly, it’s about the annotation of
functional words, considered in UAIC as heads,
such as the copulative verbs, while in UD they
are subordinated, and another convention for the
annotation of coordination. Also, UAIC treebank
has the same tag to mark a relation expressed by a
word or by a subordinate clause, and UD use tags
as: ccomp, csubj, advcl where the ﬁrst c or the last
cl means clause.

The annotation in the UAIC conventions was
not renounced, for reasons of continuity. There
has also been created an Old-Ro-POS-tagger
for the complete morphological analysis of Old
Romanian (starting with the sixteenth century)
(M˘ar˘anduc et al., 2017b). This classic, annotated
with rich information format can be considered as
the pivot from which the other two formats have to
be automatically obtained.

that

The logical-semantic format

is actually
used to capitalize the semantic information present
in syntactic and morphological UAIC-RoDepTb
annotations is described in M˘ar˘anduc et al.
(2017a).
It has similarities with the Tectogram-
matic layer of the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (PDT) (Bohmov´a et al., 2003) and Abstract
Meaning Representation (AMR) (B˘an˘arescu et al.,
2013).

In this paper, we brieﬂy describe the semantic
format, showing how most classic-syntactic tags
can be automatically transformed into semantic
ones. Some of the syntactic tags are highly am-

biguous from the semantic point of view, and they
are manually transformed using an interface that
has drop-down lists (Hociung, 2016).

We will describe a program called TREEOPS
that automatically transforms non-ambiguous syn-
tactic tags. We shall give examples of rules for the
transformation of syntactic into semantic tags, and
then, we shall give examples of rules written in the
same program, for transforming the UAIC syntac-
tic structure of trees into the UD one.

2 Related Work

2.1 Dependency Treebanks

The UAIC-RoDia DepTb is annotated in Depen-
dency Grammar, a ﬂexible formalism founded
by Tesni`ere (1959), Kern (1883) and actualized as
Functional Dependency Grammar by Tapanainen
and Jarvinen (1998), Mel’ˇcuk (1988). Actually, a
big number of corpora in the world have adopted
the same formalism. All these corpora exist only
if the work is going on; if they grow organically,
if they have the ﬂexibility to change their format
into another, adopted by more universal resources,
and the creators always try to introduce more re-
ﬁned annotations of linguistic phenomena. Other-
wise, the amount of annotated information or of
texts introduced is exceeded by other resources,
and the format becomes obsolete, difﬁcult to com-
pare with the new modern ones. Consequently, the
users forget this resource and prefer another.

In 2003, the PDT authors described the three
level structure of their treebank and the Tec-
togrammatic level (that includes semantic, logical
and syntactic information) (Bohmov´a et al., 2003).
The PDT authors publish their updates every two
years (Bejˇcek et al., 2013). They have for a long
time been interested in semantics and its links with
syntax (Sgall et al., 1986).

BulTreeBank is another big member of the UD
community. This treebank has been previously an-
notated in the HPSG grammar and automatically
transposed into Dependency formalism. The au-
thors are also interested in semantics (Simov and
Osenova, 2011).

For the PENN Treebank, the third version was
available in 1999 (Marcus et al., 1999). Actually,
this treebank is also involved in semantics research
or in the annotation of entities and events (Song
et al., 2015).

11

2.2 Semantic Annotations
In the UAIC NLP group, about 1,000 sentences
from the English FrameNet have been translated
in Romanian (Trandab˘at,, 2010). Retaining the
semantic annotation from the English FrameNet,
the author has made a ﬁrst set of semantic anno-
tations on Romanian sentences. Just as the En-
glish FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), these annota-
tions only cover the core structure of the sentence,
called Semantic Frame.

The similarities between the system of seman-
tic annotations presented here and the AMR (Ab-
stract Meaning Representation) logical categories
(B˘an˘arescu et al., 2013) are obvious. However,
there are also important differences, since the re-
sulting graph of the AMR semantic annotation
is not a dependency tree, and the nodes are not
words, but concepts.

The similitudes with the Tectogrammatic layer
of the PDT (Prague Dependency Treebank) are
more important. They also have, like in our se-
mantic system, categories for annotating the se-
mantic information existing in the exclamatory, or
interrogative form of the sentence, in the modality
and the tense of verbs, considering the punctuation
or morphological annotation as containing seman-
tic information.

3 The UAIC-RoDepTb Logical-Semantic

Format

3.1 Short Characterization of the UAIC

Semantic Format

The circumstantial information gives us indica-
tions about the state of communication: succes-
sion in time, past, future, space: TEMP, PAST,
FTR, LOC, or information regarding logical re-
lationships:
cause, purpose, consequence, op-
position, concession, condition, exception, cu-
mulation, association, reference, restriction, re-
sult: CAUS, PURP, CSQ, OPPOS, CNCS, COND,
EXCP, CUMUL, ASSOC, REFR, RESTR, RSLT,
respectively.

Information on the names of objects or ac-
tors is derived from the classiﬁcation of the pro-
nouns: Appurtenance, Deictic, Emphatic, Unde-
ﬁned: APP, DX, IDENT, UNDEF. The classiﬁca-
tion of the functional words (considered as con-
nectors) give us a classiﬁcation of relations. There
are six types of connectors: CNADVS, CNCNCL,
CNCONJ, CNDISJ, CNSBRD, CNCOP, the ﬁrst
four being coordinating connectors, the ﬁfth be-

ing subordinating connector, and the last being the
copulative verb “to be”, considered as connector
between the subject and their description rendered
by the predicative noun. As a logical point of view,
the different type of connectors mark relations of
inclusion, reunion, disjunction, intersection, par-
ticularization or generalization of properties, be-
tween the set of things which the linguistic signs
refer to. The truth value of sentences par rapport
to the real World can also be established, and it re-
ceives modal values such as: existence, possibility
and necessity.

interrogative, exclamatory,

There is also information regarding the real-
ity of the action: optative, uncertain, potentiality,
generic, dynamic: OPTV, UNCTN, POTN, GNR,
DYN. Five quantiﬁers are considered: neces-
sity, possibility, existence, universality, and nega-
tion: QNECES, QPOSSIB, QEXIST, QUNIV,
QNEG. Other information qualiﬁes the type of
the communication:
addressee, blame, greet-
ing, politeness,
in-
cidence: ADDR, BLAM, GREET, POLIT, IN-
TROG, EXCL, INCID, respectively. The last tag
marks the change of the emitter and receiver roles,
i.e. it marks another communication state; the ﬁrst
and the second persons refer to other characters in
the INCID text, isolated by NOAPP punctuation,
than in the rest of the sentence. This is very impor-
tant for a future program that would automatically
establish the co-references. Also this information
about the communication state is important for fu-
ture pragmatics research.

EQUIVHEAD is the mark for the ellipsis.
This mark allows a connector or punctuation
to represent a copy of the meaning
element
its head and to have dependents with a
of
similar, and symmetrical structure.
The ex-
pletive is classiﬁed according to the value it
repeats: EXPL:BEN, EXPL:EXPR, EXPL:OBJ,
EXPL:RCPR,
EXLP:DFND,
EXPL:APP, EXPL:EXP. This
annotation is
also in view of a future program that would
automatically establish the co-references.

EXPL:PAT,

The punctuation elements also have a seman-
tic value in our system. The semantic value of
punctuation elements is shown in Drugus¸ (2015).
The ﬁnal ones are marks for the form: INTROG,
EXCL, END. The non-ﬁnal are annotated as CN-
CONJ if they mark the coordination, or NOAPP
(non-appurtenance) if they are subordinated to
an INCID, ADDR or interjection (ALERT, IMIT,

12

Judgment
Process
Performance
Actantial
Experience
Comunic.
Deﬁnition
Chang.idnt
Characteriz
Existence

nsubj
ACT
PERFR
ACT
EXPR
EMT
DFND
DFND
CTNT
QEXIST

dobj
RSLT
PERF
PAT
EXP
CTNT
-
-
-
-

npred
-
QLF
-
-
-
DFNS
DFNS
QLF
-

other
-
-
BEN
BEN
RCPT
CNCOP
CNCOP
CNCOP
LOC,TIME

Table 1: The semantic roles de-
pending on the type of judgment.

AFF) head. The others are markers of disloca-
tion (topical changes, frequent in Old Romanian)
or elaboration (structures providing additional in-
formation that can be omitted): DISL, ELAB.

Finally, since not all sentences contain events,
we have made a classiﬁcation of the types of sce-
narios that govern the roles in the sentence (see
Table 1 3.1).

3.2 Syntactic Relations Without Semantic

Ambiguity

the UAIC-
The classical syntactic format of
RoDepTb has 14 kinds of circumstantial modi-
ﬁers, carefully supervised by linguists. Actually,
the time and space automatic annotation is at the
core of the computational linguists interest; our
corpus can be a useful training corpus for future
automatic parsing of the communication situation
circumstances. The second edition of the work-
shop on “Corpus-based Research in the Humani-
ties” (CRH) Viena, January 25th-26th 2018, will
have a special topic concerning time and space an-
notation in textual data.2 The annotation of the
time and space is semi-automatically rendered; the
circumstantial modiﬁers are automatically anno-
tated, but words with the same meaning can have
syntactic ambiguous values, as nominal modiﬁer
or prepositional object, and must be manually an-
notated.

Besides the circumstantials, other syntactic re-
lations that can be transposed in a unique seman-
tic tag are:
superl., “superlative”, “=SUPER”,
comp., “comparative”,“=COMP”, ap., “apposi-
tion”, =RSMP, incid., “incident”, =INCID, neg.,
“negation”, QNEG, voc., “vocative”, =ADDR,

2 http://www.oeaw.ac.at/ac/crh2/

c.ag., “agent complement”, =ACT. Our classical
syntactic tagset has 44 relations; having 14 cir-
cumstantials and the 7 relations above, it results
that almost half of them (21) are semantically
monovalent. This is a consequence of the fact that
the classic format contains a lot of semantic infor-
mation.

3.3 Syntactic Relations with Semantic

Ambiguity

Besides the relationships with a single semantic
interpretation, it is also possible to make automatic
transformations by rules with more conditions, us-
ing morphological information or word lemma.
Examples:

• The syntactic tag det. can be transposed in
the semantic tag DX “Deixis”, if the mor-
phological analysis (POS-tag) begins with Td
“Demonstrative article”, or in the semantic
tag UNDEF, if the POS-tag begins with Ti
“undeﬁned article”, or in the semantic tag
DEF if the morphological analysis begins
with Tf “deﬁnite article”, or in the semantic
tag APP “appurtenance” if the morphologi-
cal analysis begins with Ts “possessive arti-
cle”.

• The syntactic tag aux.

“auxiliary” can be
transposed in the following semantic tags:
OPTV or PAST, if the form of the auxiliary
(and of the conjugate verb) indicate(s) the
verbal conditional or the past tense, FTR, if
the auxiliary is vrea “will” or PASS “pas-
sive”.

For similar situations, the tags can be automati-
cally transposed from the syntactic format into the
semantic one by writing rules with two or three
conditions in the TREEOPS program (see below).

3.4 Syntactic Tags Semantically Polyvalent
Syntactic relations classiﬁed by morphological
criteria, such as: a.subst.
(noun attribute), a.vb.
(verbal attribute), c.prep. (prepositional comple-
ment), have a great semantic ambiguity, and so do
those in the Table 1, the column 2 and 3 They
can have almost any semantic value. We au-
tomatically modify the monovalent relations, for
which we write rules with one condition. Other
relationships that depend on several factors need
rules with more conditions, and the structure of
the trees, too. TREEOPS makes all the changes

13

which are not ambiguous, in accordance with the
rules introduced, and the ambiguous relations re-
main unchanged (as syntactic tags). At this mo-
ment, they are manually changed by an expert,
simultaneously with supervising automatic anno-
tations. In this way, we are building the training
corpus for a semantic parser, see (Aho and Ull-
man, 1972). The training corpus has now 5,025
sentences in Old Romanian and 1,130 sentences
in Contemporary Romanian; we must increase and
balance it, adding approximately 3,500 sentences
in Contemporary Romanian.

We will use a statistical semantic parser.

It
will receive the documents having all the possi-
ble automatically processed transformations (con-
sequently having mixed syntactic and semantic re-
lations), and will statistically transform the syntac-
tic ambiguous ones into semantic relations. It will
be similar to a mixed parser, ﬁrst the rules written
in the TREEOPS program will be applied, to make
the transformations non-ambiguous, and then the
parser will receive the output of TREEOPS pro-
gram (that are correct since the resulting from the
supervised syntactic layer) so as to solve statisti-
cally the ambiguous syntactic relations.

The supervision of the automatic transforma-
tion simultaneously with the manual choice of se-
mantic values for the ambiguous syntactic rela-
tions is performed currently by using an interface
called Treebank Annotator (Hociung, 2016) that
has drop-down lists for each feature in each of the
three formats: UAIC, UD and semantic. The for-
mat is selected from a list of options before open-
ing a document.

4 The TREEOPS Program. Rules for

Transformations

4.1 Presentation of the Program
The automatic transformations are done using a
tool called TREEOPS. It is an all purpose rule-
based XML transformer, i.e. it is able to produce a
new XML structure, having an XML as input and
using a customized set of rules. It deﬁnes a new
simple language for XML transformations, where
each rule is described by the following pattern:

selector => action

During a transforming process the XML is tra-
versed node by node and the TREEOPS rule is
converted into an if-then statement as follows:

if (selector matches node) then action

(XPath)

TREEOPS requires the selector to be an
XML Path Language3
expression
and the action an internal deﬁned action
that can take parameters, as is,
for example,
changeAttrValue(<new value>) which
changes the value of the current XML attribute.
In fact, TREEOPS uses the power of the XSLT
language by transforming the set of rules into an
XSLT template that will be applied to the input
ﬁle to obtain the new desired structure.

For example, the rule deﬁned as:

//word[@deprel=’superl.’]/@deprel =>

changeAttrValue(’SUPER’)

becomes an XSLT template:

<xsl:template match="//word[@deprel=’

superl.’]/@deprel">

<xsl:call-template name="changeAttrValue

">

<xsl:with-param name="new_value" select=

"’SUPER’"/>

</xsl:call-template>
</xsl:template>

where the changeAttrValue template is pre-
deﬁned as:

<xsl:template name="changeAttrValue">
<xsl:param name="new_value"/>
<xsl:attribute name="{name(.)}">
<xsl:value-of select="$new_value"/>
</xsl:attribute>
</xsl:template>

4.2 Rules for the Transposition of Classical

Syntactic Format into Semantic One

For the 21 tags with a unique semantic value, we
have written 21 rules with a unique condition. Ex-
ample: the rule below transforms the negation into
a logical quantiﬁer:

//word[@deprel=’neg.’]/@deprel =>

changeAttrValue(’QNEG’)

The rule exempliﬁed below has two conditions.
It changes the syntactic value coord. in a connec-
tor for the reunion. We classiﬁed the coordination
relations in four logical categories, taking into ac-
count the lemma of the coordinating conjunction:
reunion (CNCONJ), adversative (QNADVS) (op-
position where the related entities do not exclude

3https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath/

14

each other), disjunction (QNDISJ i.e. exclusion,
and conclusive. The other three are written in the
same way.

//word[@deprel=’coord.’ and (@lemma=’s,i’

or @lemma=’nici’)]/@deprel =>

changeAttrValue(’CNCONJ’)

To give an example for a rule with three condi-
tions, the rule of the PAST relationship attribution
depends on the aux. syntactic relation, the word
form of the auxiliary, and the postag of the main
verb form, being a compound time. The informa-
tion needed has been previously annotated in the
syntactic format.

//word[@deprel=’aux.’ and (@form=’am’ or

@form=’ai’ or @form=’at,i’ or @form

=’a’ or @form=’au’) and following-
sibling::word [@postag=’Vmp’or
@postag=’Vap’]]/@deprel =>
changeAttrValue(’PAST’)

4.3 Rules for the Transposition of Classical

Syntactic Format into UD Format

To transpose the classic syntactic format into UD
conventions, we have formulated another set of
rules in a similar way. Here’s an example of a rule
with one condition:

//word[@deprel=’c.prep.’]/@deprel =>

changeAttrValue(’nmod:pmod’)

As a general observation, in the ﬁrst case, we
need to transpose a syntactic tag set of 44 classes
into a semantic tag set of 95, so more conditions
have to be done and more cases remain to be man-
ually solved. On the other hand, the transposition
of the UAIC syntactic tag set of 44 tags into the
UD tagset of 28 common tags is a simpler opera-
tion, based on uniﬁcations. Of course, these trans-
formations will also need to be supervised.

5 Structural Transformations of Trees

the structural

We decided that
transformations
should be applied both to obtain the UD for-
mat and also to the semantic format,
to make
it more accessible to alignments or comparisons
with other treebanks. The subordination of prepo-
sitions was a structural change also applied to
the PDT Tectogrammatic layer. Establishing re-
lationships between meaningful (also called self-
semantic) words is more appropriate for the se-
mantic analysis of the sentence.

Figure 1: “To the market, to the pharmacy” before
and after the subordination of prepositions.

5.1 Subordination of the Relational Words to

the Word Which It Introduces

The subordination of prepositions to the word
which they are introducing is the simplest and
most frequent of the operations. The order of the
operations is not random. Being the most com-
mon, usually located at the tree leaves, it must be
the ﬁrst transformation.

The rule for the ﬁrst transformation is described
in pseudocode in listing 1 and the result can be
seen in Figure 1.

Listing 1: Transformation 1

if word1[@id="x", @postag="Sp*"] and

word2[@head="x"]

then

word1/@head ← word2/@id
word2/@head ← word1/@head
foreach remaining wordN[@head="x"]
wordN/@head ← word2/@id

The subordination of relational words which in-
troduce the subordinated sentence is similar to the
ﬁrst; the aim is to subordinate the relational words
in a complex sentence. This rule must be applied
after the ﬁrst one, because it is no longer applied
to the leaves, but to the upper structure of the tree.
The rule is almost the same: if there is a word1
with the id=“x” and the postag=“Cs*”, or “Pw*”,
or “Rw*”, or “Qs” and a word2 with head=“x”
(usually the next word), then change the head of
word1 with the id of word2 and the head of word2
with the head of word1.

If the subordinate word is a relative pronoun
preceded by a preposition, then the preposition has
already been subordinated to it by the ﬁrst trans-

15

formation. Consequently, we must introduce a re-
striction of the type with the head=“x” and with-
out the postag=“Sp*”, because we search for an-
other subordinate word, which is the head of a sub-
tree.

A disadvantage of the UAIC annotation conven-
tion is that there is no information about the syn-
tactic relationship of the relative pronouns and ad-
verbs in the subordinated sentence, but only about
their role in the complex sentence. Therefore, they
can only get the tag mark, obtained by automati-
cally changing the subord. relationship..

A human annotator must specify their func-
tion in the subordinate sentence, because the rel-
ative pronoun, adjective and adverb are not marks.
Sometimes the relative pronoun is a nominal mod-
iﬁer in the subordinate sentence, and then its auto-
matic subordination to the head of the subordinate
sentence by the transformation 2 is erroneous and
will be manually corrected.

5.2 Subordination of the Copulative Verb
and of the Subject to the Predicative
Noun

This transformation has the aim of swapping the
places of the copulative verb and the predicative
noun, in the cases where the copulative verb is the
verb “to be”. In the UAIC conventions of anno-
tation, there are other 9 verbs annotated as copu-
lative. Their predicative nouns becomes xcomp in
the UD convention.

This transformation has the advantage that it
establishes an equivalence between the structure
of dependencies of the nominal predicate and the
passive voice, which is also built with the verb “to
be”, subordinated to the verbal participle, which
formally resembles an adjective predicative noun
(and it has the same number and gender with the
subject).

This transformation is as follows:

if there
is a word with id=“x”, and lemma=“ﬁ”, and
postag=“Vm*” and head=“q” (and if there is a
word with id=“y”, head=“x”, and deprel=“sbj.”)4
and if there is a word with the id=“z”, head=“x”
and deprel=“n.pred.”,
then the word with de-
prel=“n.pred.” changes head=“q” and the word
with id=“x” changes head=“z” and the word with
id=“y” changes head=“z”. The deprel=“n.pred.”
is changed with the deprel of the word with

4No mandatory condition, because in Romanian the sub-

ject is usually understood.

Figure 2: The UAIC format before and the UD
one after the subordination of the copulative verb:
“The dog is white and the cat is black.”

lemma=“ﬁ”, and this one take the deprel CNCOP.
A general condition must be observed for all the
rules: If the id of the head changes, then all the
other words having the changed head must also
change their head. Therefore, the dependencies
of the copulative verb “to be” become dependen-
cies to the predicative noun, i.e. they change the
head=“x” in head=“z” For this rule, the exception
are the words with morphological analysis (POS-
tag) Qn, aux., Qs.(see Figure 2).

5.3 Subordination of all Coordinated

Elements to the First One

In the UAIC convention, the coordination is ren-
dered by an asymmetrical tree, also having as head
the ﬁrst element, but each coordinating element
(word with full meaning, functional word or punc-
tuation) being subordinated to the element above
and acting as the head of the element below. Sim-
ilarly with the subordinated elements of relation
considered as heads, the coordination elements
also are heads and are positioned between the re-
lated elements.

Consequently, in the new conception, the rela-
tional words for the coordination must be subor-
dinated to the meaningful words which they intro-
duce, by a rule similarly formulated as the ﬁrst rule
in the 5.1 chapter.

Then, all the coordinated meaningful words
must be subordinated to the ﬁrst one. A rule for
retaining the previous head is added, because in
a sentence with more coordination relations they
must be subordinate to the ﬁrst element of their
chain, and not to another one.

The elements with the deprel=“coord.”, and the

16

Finally, the “ccomp” sentences 2 and 3 have
been subordinated to the ﬁrst one, and the comma
and the conjunction “s,i” (“and”), the two connec-
tors of the three coordinate sentences, are subor-
dinated of the closest coordinated element on the
left. (see Figure 4).

The rules for the transformations have been all
formulated in the same way of the listening in the
3.1 chapter.

6 Conclusions and Future Works

Transforming UAIC-RoDepTb so that it can be
used in multiple future applications and can be
compared to similar corpora is one of our priori-
ties.

TREEOPS, the program described in this pa-
per (section 4) is a very important tool. It is lan-
guage independent. For any resource in XML for-
mat to be transformed, another set of rules can
be written, depending on the original format and
on the one in which it is intended to be trans-
formed, regardless of the language. As we have
shown above, format ﬂexibility is very important
for all resources, so they can always be compati-
ble with newer resources created in more modern
formats. The TREEOPS program does not have
a variant for CONLLU, but we have transforma-
tion programs from XML to CONLLU and vice
versa. TREEOPS has been successfully tested to
transform the classic format of our UAIC treebank
into the semantic format, we will begin testing
TREEOPS for the conversion from classical UAIC
to the UD format; after completion, the program
will be available on the Sourceforge page. 5 The
evaluation of the accuracy is in progress. It is dif-
ﬁcult to evaluate it, because the program does not
transform all the semantic structure, but only the
non ambiguous relation; the manual transforma-
tion of the ambiguous one should not be evalu-
ated as a decrease in the accuracy of the conver-
sion program.

Another important task is to ensure optimal dig-
itization of the old Romanian language informa-
tion, starting with its ﬁrst attestations. Digitiza-
tion does not only mean scanning old manuscripts
and prints to avoid their disappearance with pa-
per damage, but also reading the data contained in
them.

For this, a very useful tool has been created
and, for the ﬁrst time ever, seventeenth-century

5https://sourceforge.net/

Figure 3: The UAIC format before, the UD and
the Semantic format after the transformation of the
coordination: “Go to the market, to the pharmacy
and in the park.”

postag=“COMMA”, are also subordinated to the
meaningful word which they coordinate. Simul-
taneously, the deprels of all these words change,
differently in UD and in the Semantic annotation.
The result of this transformation is shown in

Figure 3)

As can be seen, in Figure 3 and 4 3 the trans-
formation of relational words and of the copulative
verb has already been made.

Coordination in sentences takes place between
long-distance elements. Because it acts in the top
of the tree, this transformation must be applied af-
ter all the others.

In Figure 4, the following text is annotated in

two conventions:

“I think that there will come some days of effort
that will pass, that we will escape and that we will
be happy.”

The results of applying the other transforma-
tions can be seen in the ﬁgure 4 a: First, the
preposition de “of” has been subordinated to the
noun “effort”. Secondly, the conjunction “c˘a”
(“that”). repeated three times, and the relative pro-
noun “care” (“which”) have been subordinated to
the head of the subordinate sentences. Then, the
predicative noun “fericit,i” (“happy”) is the head
for the copulative verb.

17

Figure 4: The transformation of the coordination applied at the top of the tree, after all the other structural
transformations

Cyrillic Romanian letters have been made editable
by an optical character recognizer (OCR) built
in Chisinau (Colesnicov et al., 2016),
(Cojocaru
et al., 2017).

tool

Another

important

is the OldRoPOS-
tagger (M˘ar˘anduc et al., 2017b), which provides
the ﬁrst level of annotation of the texts obtained
after their transliteration into Latin characters. In
order to syntactically parse these texts with many
particularities, especially related to the very free
order of the words and subordinate sentences,
a continuous training of the syntactic parser is
needed.

By creating the converter described in this arti-
cle, we will transfer all these sentences in the UD
and Semantic format. The operation is under way.
Transformations will be supervised and the rules
for the conversions improved.

We also aim to include the oldest New Tes-
tament (Alba Iulia 1648) in the project Prag-
matic Resources in Old Indo-European Languages
(PROIEL), that is part of the Universal Dependen-
cies (UD) group, and align the oldest New Testa-
ments in Latin, Greek, Armenian, Slavonic. The
philological studies of old translations and the et-
ymological studies can beneﬁt from the alignment
of the ﬁrst printed Romanian New Testament in
this project. The ﬁrst part of the New Testament
(1648), the Gospel, was introduced in the classic
syntactic format and in the semantic one. We also
have to introduce the second part, the Acts of the
Apostles.

Since the UAIC-UD transformation does not re-

quire the introduction of new syntactic relation-
ships, we do not believe that we need to build a
syntactic parser on the UD format. A parser for
Contemporary Romanian in UD format has been
created (Mititelu and Irimia, 2015), and we can
train it on Old Romanian, too.

Once a large training corpus has been built in
the semantic format, we will create a semantic
parser. The semantic parser will complete the set
of tools for processing old Romanian.

References
Alfred V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 1972.

The
Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling, vol-
ume 1. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The berkeley framenet project. In Proceed-
ings of the COLING-ACL. Montreal Canada.

Eduard Bejˇcek, Eva Hajiˇcov´a, Jan Hajiˇc, P. J´ınov´a,
Vaclava Kettnerov´a, Veronika Kol´aˇrov´a, Marie
Mikulov´a, Jiri M´ırovsk´y, Anna Nedoluzhko, Jamila
ˇSevˇc´ıkov´a,
Panevov´a, Lucie Pol´akov´a, Magda
J. ˇStˇep´anek, and Sarka Zik´anov´a. 2013. Prague De-
pendency Treebank 3.0. Data/software. Univerzita
Karlova v Praze, Prague.

Alena Bohmov´a, Jan Hajiˇc, Eva Hajiˇcova, and Barbora
Hladka. 2003. The Prague Dependency Treebank: A
Three-Level Annotation Scenario. Text, Speech and
Language Technology. Springer Publisher, Prague.

Laura B˘an˘arescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, M˘ad˘alina
Georgescu, Kira Grifﬁtt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philip Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation

18

for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse. pages 178–186.

multimedia, multimodal and multilingual data pro-
cessing. Proceedings of ERRARE 2015. Sinaia, Ro-
mania, pages 195–204.

Cenel Augusto Perez. 2014. Linguistic Resources for
Natural Language Processing. (PhD thesis). Fac-
ulty of Computer Science, Al. I. Cuza University,
Ias,i.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajiˇcov´a, and Jarmila Panevov´a. 1986.
The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and
pragmatic aspects. Academic Press and Reide,
Prague, Dordrecht.

Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2011. Towards mini-
mal recursion semantics over bulgarian dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the RANLP 2011 Confer-
ence. Hissar, Bulgaria.

Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Stephanie Strassel, Tom Riese,
Justin Mott, Joe Ellis, Jonathan Wright, Seth Kulick,
Neville Ryant, and Xiaoyi Ma. 2015. From light
to rich ere: Annotation of entities, relations, and
events.
In Proceeding of 14th Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Pasi Tapanainen and Timo Jarvinen. 1998. Towards
an implementable dependency grammar. In CoLing-
ACL98 workshop Processing of Dependency-based
Grammars, Montreal.

Lucien Tesni`ere. 1959. El´ements de syntaxe struc-

turale. Klincksieck, Paris.

Diana Trandab˘at,. 2010. Natural Language Processing
Using Semantic Frames - PHD Thesis. Faculty of
Computer Science, Al. I. Cuza University, Ias,i.

Dan Tuﬁs,, Verginica Barbu-Mititelu, Elena Irimia,
S, tefan Dumitrescu, Tiberiu Boros,, Horia N. Teodor-
escu, Dan Cristea, Andrei Scutelnicu, Cecilia Bolea,
Alex Moruz, and Laura Pistol. 1998. Corola starts
blooming an update on the reference corpus of con-
temporary romanian language.
In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Challenges in the Management
of Large Corpora (CMLC-3).

Svetlana Cojocaru, Alexander Colesnicov, and Lud-
mila Malahova. 2017. Digitization of old romanian
texts printed in the cyrillic script. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Digital Access to Tex-
tual Cultural Heritage. pages 143–148.

Alexandru Colesnicov, Ludmila Malahov, and Tudor
Bumbu. 2016. Digitization of romanian printed
texts of the 17th century.
In Proceedings of the
12th International Conference Linguistic Resources
and Tools for Processing the Romanian Language.
Alexandru Ioan Cuza University Press, pages 1–11.

Ioachim Drugus¸. 2015. Metalingua: a metalanguage
for the semantic annotation of natural languages. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
Linguistic Resources and Tools for Processing the
Romanian Language. Alexandru Ioan Cuza Univer-
sity Press, pages 79–94.

Florinel Hociung. 2016. Treebank Annotator - diserta-
tion. Faculty of Computer Science, Alexandru Ioan
Cuza University, Ias¸i.

Franz Kern. 1883. Zur Methodik des deutschen Unter-
richts. Nicolaische Verlags-Buch-handlung, Berlin.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc and Cenel-Augusto Perez. 2015. A
romanian dependency treebank. International Jour-
nal of Computational Linguistics and Applications
6(2):25–40.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, Monica Mihaela Rizea, and Dan
Cristea. 2017a. Mapping dependency relations onto
semantic categories. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing (CICLing).

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, Radu Simionescu,

and Dan
Cristea. 2017b. Hybrid pos-tagger for old romanian.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing (CICLing).

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and Ann Taylor. 1999. Ldc.upenn
treebank 3. In Tehnical Repport. University of Penn-
sylvania, pages 1–230.

Igor Mel’ˇcuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and

Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, NY.

Verginica Mititelu, C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, and Elena Ir-
imia. 2015. Universal and language-speciﬁc depen-
dency relations for analyzing romanian. In Proceed-
ings of the Third International Conference on De-
pendency Linguistics, Depling. Uppsala University,
pages 28–37.

Verginica Barbu Mititelu and Elena Irimia. 2015.
Types of errors in the automatic syntactic parsing of
romanian.
In Errors by Humans and Machines in

