



















































Machine Translation and Automated Analysis of the Sumerian Language


Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature.

,

Proceedings, pages 10–16, Vancouver, BC, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Machine Translation and Automated Analysis
of the Sumerian Language

Émilie Pagé-Perron†, Maria Sukhareva‡, Ilya Khait¶, Christian Chiarcos‡,

† University of Toronto
e.page.perron@mail.utoronto.ca

‡ University of Frankfurt
sukhareva@em.uni-frankfurt.de
chiarcos@em.uni-frankfurt.de

¶ University of Leipzig
ges12bry@studserv.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract

This paper presents a newly funded in-
ternational project for machine transla-
tion and automated analysis of ancient
cuneiform1 languages where NLP special-
ists and Assyriologists collaborate to cre-
ate an information retrieval system for
Sumerian.2

This research is conceived in response to
the need to translate large numbers of ad-
ministrative texts that are only available in
transcription, in order to make them acces-
sible to a wider audience. The method-
ology includes creation of a specialized
NLP pipeline and also the use of linguis-
tic linked open data to increase access to
the results.

1 Context

The project Machine Translation and Automated
Analysis of Cuneiform Languages (MTAAC)3 fo-

1The Cuneiform script was invented in Ancient Iraq more
than 5000 years ago. Signs were drawn, and later impressed,
onto a tablet-shaped fresh lump of clay using a reed stylus.
This script was in use for 4000 years to record texts in differ-
ent languages such as Sumerian, Akkadian and Elamite. See
figure 1 in section 1b for an example.

2We would like to thank the reviewers, and Robert K. En-
glund and Heather D. Baker, for their insightful comments
and suggestions.

3The project is generously funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, the Social Sciences and Humani-
ties Research Council, and the National Endowment for the
Humanities through the T-AP Digging into Data Challenge.
See the project website at https://cdli-gh.github.io/mtaac.

cuses on the application of NLP methods to Sume-
rian, a Mesopotamian language spoken in the
3rd millennium B.C. Assyriology, the study of
ancient Mesopotamia, has benefited from early
developments in NLP in the form of projects
which digitally compile large amounts of tran-
scriptions and metadata, using basic rule- and
dictionary-based methodologies.4 However, the
orthographic, morphological and syntactic com-
plexities of the Mesopotamian cuneiform lan-
guages have hindered further development of au-
tomated treatment of the texts. Additionally, dig-
ital projects do not necessarily use the same stan-
dards and encoding schemes across the board, and
this, coupled with closed or partial access to some
projects’ data, limits larger scale investigation of
machine-assisted text processing.

The history and society of ancient Mesopotamia
are mostly known to the general public through
works that draw on myths and royal inscriptions as
primary sources, texts which are mostly translated
and readily available. Among these works the
Sumerian texts and their translations form a per-
fect testbed for distantly supervised NLP methods
such as annotation projection and cross-lingual
tool adaptation. However, the aforementioned
translated texts make up only around 10% of the
total amount of transcribed Sumerian data. The
majority of the Sumerian texts are administrative

4Among others, the Cuneiform Digital Library
initiative (CDLI) http://cdli.ucla.edu/ and the Open
Richly Annotated Cuneiform Corpus (ORACC)
http://oracc.museum.upenn.edu/ are two examples of
such endeavors.

10



and legal in nature. The manual annotation and
translation of these texts is hardly possible, ow-
ing to the large volume of the data and the need
for an extremely rare expertise in Mesopotamian
languages. However, having a parallel corpus,
the solution to automatic processing of these texts
lies in using machine translation (MT) techniques:
Sumerian texts can be automatically translated and
information extraction methods can be applied to
the resulting translations.

In this paper we present a newly funded interna-
tional project that will apply state-of-the-art NLP
methods to Sumerian texts. We seek to create a
pipeline for cuneiform languages with three ma-
jor components: NLP processing, machine trans-
lation, and information extraction. The NLP tools
for Sumerian created in the framework of the
project will also be applicable to other cuneiform
languages. The resource interoperability will be
achieved through linking the annotation with lin-
guistic linked open data ontologies (LLOD).

2 Data

The data for this project takes the form of unanno-
tated raw transliterations of almost 68,000 Sume-
rian texts of the Ur III period (21st century
B.C.) comprising 1.5 million transliteration lines.
Around 1600 of these texts have also been trans-
lated. Each text entry is augmented with a set of
metadata which describes the medium of the text,
its context, and some elements of internal analysis.
These texts are restricted in style and topic, and
include a large proportion of numero-metrological
elements. They are also repetitive, brief, and for-
mulaic. As the inscribed medium comes in var-
ied sizes and shapes, structural elements in the
transliterations indicate on which surface of the
artifact the text appears. Figure 1 shows an ex-
ample of an ASCII transliteration and translation
of a cuneiform text, accompanied with a picture of
the obverse and reverse of the artifact. 5

3 NLP Pipeline for Sumerian

State-of-the-art statistical NLP widely uses su-
pervised classifiers to produce automatic linguis-
tic annotation. Although some Sumerian and
Akkadian corpora have been annotated through

5Cuneiform text of the Ur III period from the settlement
of Garshana, Mesopotamia (Owen, 2011, no. 851) and its
transliteration as stored in the Cuneiform Digital Library Ini-
tiative (CDLI) database http://cdli.ucla.edu/P322539 (picture
reproduced here with the kind permission of David I. Owen)

the ORACC platform in the form of various
sub-projects,6 manual annotation of large enough
training sets to train a supervised classifier is not
possible as it demands a rare expertise and is
time-consuming. We thus propose a pipeline that
uses distantly supervised methods (e.g. annota-
tion projection) to create automatic linguistic an-
notation of Sumerian. Figure 2 shows the work-
flow of the NLP module. The majority of the data
at hand comprises untranslated Sumerian texts.
The distantly supervised methods will be applied
to Sumerian texts and their English translations.
The core of the pipeline is the annotation projec-
tion module that will produce morphosyntactically
and syntactically annotated training data for super-
vised NLP tools. This section will further discuss
in detail each module of the NLP pipeline.

3.1 Data Preprocessing

After verifying the uniformity in the standardiza-
tion of the texts, we will convert the data to a ma-
chine readable format and sign readings will be
verified against our digital syllabary. Translitera-
tions and translation of our gold standard will be
tokenized, lemmatized, and morphologically ana-
lyzed. The error rate of the corpus transliterations
will be calculated against the curated gold stan-
dard.

3.2 Morphological analysis

Our morphological analyzer will be partly based
on existing tools such as Tablan et al. (2006)’s
rule-based morphology and Liu et al. (2015)’s al-
gorithm to identify named entities. We will de-
sign a custom parser for numero-metrological con-
tent for the occasion. Since Sumerian affixes are
ambiguous, we will build on previous work on
the disambiguation of morphologically rich lan-
guages, such as Sak et al. (2007)’s neural meth-
ods for Turkish and Rios and Mamani (2014)’s
conditional random fields used to disambiguate
Quechua morphology. Morphological tags as-
signed following rule-based algorithms will be re-
ranked using different machine learning (ML) ap-
proaches. The disambiguated morphology will be
used for syntactic parsing, MT, and information
extraction. We plan to develop a lemmatizer that
will exploit a high-coverage dictionary. The avail-
able off-the-shelf lemmatizer for Sumerian7 was

6http://oracc.museum.upenn.edu/
7http://oracc.museum.upenn.edu/doc/help/languages/

sumerian/sumerianprimer/

11



(1) P322539 = CUSAS 03, 0851.

tablet.

obverse.

1. 1(disz) kusz udu niga
1 hide, grain-fed sheep;

2. 1(disz) kusz masz2 niga
1 hide, grain-fed goat;

3. kusz udu sa2-du11
sheep hides, regular offerings,

4. ki {d}iszkur-illat-ta
from Adda-illat,

reverse.

1. a-na-ah-i3-li2
Anah-ili;

2. szu ba-an-ti
did receive.

3. iti ezem-an-na
Month: An-festival,

4. mu na-ru2-a-mah mu-ne-du3
Year: He erected the great stele for them.

(a) ASCII transliteration and English translation (b) Example of a Sumerian source text

Figure 1: Artifact and its digitization

applied to our corpus during the preparation of
this project and it was revealed that its coverage
and accuracy are not sufficient for our needs since
headwords are assigned to tokens without taking
into account the textual context, although part of
this software might be reused.

3.3 POS tagging

An important part of the NLP pipeline is the dis-
tantly supervised POS Tagging. As the corpus is
currently unannotated, a supervised approach to
POS tagging would not be applicable as it de-
mands annotated training data. The creation of
such training data through manual POS annotation
of the data would demand an extremely rare exper-
tise and is a time-consuming process. Therefore,
we have to turn our attention to distantly super-
vised methods.

As we are in possession of parallel English
translations of Sumerian texts, an annotation pro-
jection (Tiedemann, 2014) approach would be a
most suitable distantly supervised method. En-
glish texts can be tokenized, stemmed, lemma-
tized, POS tagged and parsed by off-the-shelf
freely available NLP tools. Using an off-the-

shelf word-alignment tool Giza++ (Och and Ney,
2003), we can produce word alignment between
English and the Sumerian texts. After we auto-
matically tag English parallel texts, the assigned
POS will be projected onto the aligned Sumerian
words. The general assumption behind the anno-
tation projection based on the word alignment is
that translated words are likely to have the same
POS as the source words. It is quite clear that this
is a very bold assumption and there are a number
of exceptions. Thus, both manual and automatic
POS correction will be needed. However, the dis-
tantly supervised solution is temporary as there are
parallel efforts to annotate the texts manually to
produce training data for a supervised classifier.

3.4 Syntactic parsing

In order to facilitate MT and information extrac-
tion from our source texts, we will syntactically
parse the corpus. In a similar manner to POS tags,
dependency labels can be projected into Sumerian
texts. Annotation projections of both POS tags
and dependency labels need to be manually cor-
rected. Using an adapted scheme for Sumerian,
we will annotate a gold standard composed of a

12



total of 10,000 sentences with dependencies and
POS tags to train a supervised dependency parser
and POS tagger. The rest of the data will be tagged
and parsed automatically. The quality of the de-
pendency parses will be estimated by labeled and
unlabeled attachment score (UAS and LAS), and
different parsing toolkits will be evaluated (Chen
and Manning 2014, Nivre 2003, etc.).

4 Machine Translation

As MT for cuneiform languages is a novel task and
there is no prior research, we will have to exper-
iment with several approaches in order to estab-
lish the one most suitable for these languages. The
standard phrase-based translation will form a good
baseline.

Currently, there are over 1600 parallel Sumerian
and English texts which are aligned sentence-wise.
The baseline will be created by the Moses SMT
toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). It will be trained on
these parallel texts and applied to the rest of the
data to create automatic translations.

Nevertheless, due to the spelling variations and
morphological richness of the language, data spar-
sity is inevitable. Thus, the baseline will be com-
pared with a character-based MT system based
on Phrasal ITG Aligner (Pialign) (Neubig et al.,
2012) but tailored towards cuneiform data. Pi-
align uses synchronous context-free grammars and
substring prior probabilities to produce many-to-
many character alignment; it can thus efficiently
capture mid-distance dependencies, as required
for dealing with rich morphology and ideosyllabic
writing systems without explicit word separators
(e.g., Japanese).

In addition to this state-of-the-art SMT sys-
tem, we will also apply innovative neural tech-
niques to the translation of Sumerian cuneiform
text. Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Bah-
danau et al., 2014) has been applied to various
language pairs in the past few years, with success-
ful applications for translating structurally differ-
ent languages: Eriguchi et al. (2016) applied an
attention-based neural network on Japanese and
English that we will take as our point of departure,
as the writing system of Japanese is structurally
similar to cuneiform (using both ideographic and
syllabic components), and they demonstrated that
their approach is capable of generalizing over
smaller amounts of training data than normally re-
quired by NMT systems. Following their syntax-

Figure 2: NLP pipeline for Sumerian

based extension of the traditional sequence-based
encoder-decoder approach, we will integrate syn-
tactic dependency annotation.

5 Information Extraction

In this project, we intend to go beyond auto-
matic (morpho)syntactic annotation and colloca-
tion analysis to create an information extraction
system for the Sumerian language. This system
will aim to identify concepts and relations in the
text, and the results will be available in human-
readable format to integrate into the interface,
alongside their labels and definitions.

The main objective of this step is to prepare
data for prosopographical8 research into the Ur
III historical period. The Sumerian texts have an
abundance of individuals’ names but tracing them
throughout various texts is not a trivial task. For
example, the proper name diškur-illat can be found
1212 times in 1092 texts. Additionnaly, it can be
used as a toponym, a road name, or as a personal
name that occurs in at least five different cities.
Thus, it is impossible to tell at first sight whether
these occurrences represent a single individual or
five or more different people. In order to mitigate
this problem, we will apply automatic collocation-
based classification of proper names into specific
entity categories (people, places, gods, etc.). A
prosopographical study of extracted names will
include a profiling of the individuals, which will
entail identifying an individual’s activities, titles,

8Prosopography is the study of past individuals and their
relationships through sparse sources that give clues concern-
ing their activities as groups.

13



properties and other pertinent information. We
will then build a graph representation of the so-
cial connections of an individual. These structured
features will be used for the disambiguation of in-
dividuals’ profiles.

5.1 Research in Social History

Until now, prosopographical studies in Sumerian
have focused on specific private or institutional
archives (e.g. Dahl 2007) or have been based on a
specific topic of inquiry but restricted to a region
and period: their scope has always been limited.
This selective nature of prosopographical study in
Sumerian is largely due to the fact that the cre-
ation of the individuals’ profiles involves a sig-
nificant amount of manual work. The automatic
translations and annotations produced by our NLP
pipeline will enable us to automatically extract de-
scriptions of individuals which will in turn enable
us to perform large-scale social inquiries using a
full prosopographical network based on the corpus
at hand.

The main question that will be researched in
this context is looking at is the dynamics of so-
cial mobility in the Ur III period. Administra-
tive texts of the Ur III period are often dated with
a ruler name, year name and month, sometimes
days. This makes it possible to trace individu-
als through time when they appear in the archives.
With our social network graph in place, it will be
possible to identify clues to social mobility such as
displacement, change in role, responsibility level,
ego network variations, changes in property sta-
tus, name and title. We will also take into ac-
count the influence of political and environmental
changes through time. Such unprecedented large-
scale prosopographical study can reveal important
social and political trends that will shed light on
the processes that enable or limit social mobility
at that period.

6 Direct Applications

6.1 Linked Open Data

As an integral part to the project, all the man-
ual and automatic linguistic annotations will be
mapped to the Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation
(Chiarcos, 2008), a reference terminology of Lin-
guistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) which will en-
sure the interoperability of our annotation scheme
and greatly increase the reusability of our data.
As part of our prosopographical project, we will

map our results onto the Standards for Networking
Ancient Prosopographies (SNAP:DRGN)9 that we
will augment with a custom extension if needed.
Pleiades10 and Periodo11 will be considered for
mapping places and periods respectively. A ma-
chine readable interface will be developed to share
all these prepared linked data.

6.2 Interface

One way of interfacing with the data generated
will be through a new web facade designed with
known audiences in mind, but also applying prin-
ciples of universal design in order to increase
the accessibility of the data and interface to a
wider public of knowledge drawn from cuneiform
sources. Translations will be easily retrievable and
researchers will benefit from an advanced search
engine. Concepts and entities present in the texts
and metadata will be interlinked to permit navi-
gation through the texts. Other visualization tools
will be available, from dependency visualization
to automated plotting of network analysis graphs,
as well as traditional graphs to display statistics
concerning a chosen group of texts. Data will also
be available for download in full and in part, in
different open formats.

6.3 Future Applications

Following this project, we expect to extend the
scope of our pipeline to process other genres and
periods of Sumerian texts and then work with
the Akkadian language and other cuneiform lan-
guages. We expect that parts of our work can
serve as test cases for other languages such as
Basque and Turkish that share agglutinative and
split-ergative characteristics and also logo-syllabic
languages such as Japanese.

Having these tools available will foster future
research into Ur III texts since they will be more
accessible, including to machines. There is al-
ready a renewed interest in the study of Ur III texts
because Assyriologists are starting to employ sta-
tistical methods to study larger groups of texts, so
our project will also open doors for these inter-
ested scholars.

Because we will be using LLOD, new stud-
ies across languages, including Sumerian, will be-
come possible. This will enrich the pool of varia-

9https://snapdrgn.net/
10https://pleiades.stoa.org
11http://perio.do/

14



tions of language morphology, especially because
Sumerian is an isolate.

7 Challenges and Risks

The automatic processing of Sumerian texts is not
a trivial task. Among others, we will face most
of the traditional challenges of historical corpora.
First of all, data sparsity will be inevitable. Sume-
rian is an agglutinative language with productive
affixation which leads to an extremely high num-
ber of word forms, but we will significantly re-
duce data sparsity by means of lemmatization as
explained in section 3.2. Regional variations can
also increase the data sparsity: words can have dif-
ferent meanings, different readings, and different
spellings depending on contextual factors such as
the type of text, the period, the archive, and the
region. Code-switching and foreign words pose
an additional challenge for the morphological an-
alyzer, but the texts have been marked with a struc-
tural language switch for ease of processing since
Sumerian texts can be sprinkled with Akkadian
words, for example verbs and personal names.

Other difficulties arise in the annotation pro-
jection and machine translation from the fact that
the Sumerian language does not have any mod-
ern descendants. This is particularly important
for the annotation projection, as previous studies
have shown that diachronic relatedness is an im-
portant factor that affects the quality of annotation
projection (Sukhareva and Chiarcos, 2014). Thus,
we plan to conduct our pilot experiments on mod-
ern languages such as Turkish and Basque that are
grammatically similar to Sumerian (agglutinative,
split-ergative) to guarantee the scalability of our
implementation, but more importantly to be able
to conduct experiments in parallel with the mor-
phological and syntactic annotation of the Sume-
rian texts.

8 Conclusion

Even though some basic NLP methods are already
being employed in cuneiform studies, the use of
modern computer science methods is still in its
infancy and such powerful methods as ML and
statistics are yet to be properly introduced into the
field. Our MT and information extraction project,
based on a practical research need in the Human-
ities, will contribute a methodology, its imple-
mentation, and a body of translated and analyzed
texts. It will also assist in the processing of a

host of related datasets, as well as setting an ex-
ample for ML and MT in the Humanities. More-
over, it will facilitate studies of grammar and se-
mantics of a language that is still not fully under-
stood. The project will provide a unified access to
a highly representative corpus of early writing, and
will foster an unprecedented scholarly cooperation
among researchers in a variety of disciplines. We
think this is a unique opportunity to make a leap
forward in natural language processing for ancient
languages that will at the same time open up to a
networked public the heritage of ancient civiliza-
tions.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua

Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR
abs/1409.0473. http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473.

Danqi Chen and Christopher D Manning. 2014. A fast
and accurate dependency parser using neural net-
works. In EMNLP. pages 740–750.

Christian Chiarcos. 2008. An ontology of linguistic an-
notations. LDV Forum 23(1):1–16.

Jacob L Dahl. 2007. The ruling family of Ur III Umma:
a prosopographical analysis of an elite family in
Southern Iraq 4000 years ago. Nederlands Instituut
voor het Nabije Oosten.

Akiko Eriguchi, Kazuma Hashimoto, and Yoshimasa
Tsuruoka. 2016. Tree-to-sequence attentional neu-
ral machine translation. CoRR abs/1603.06075.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.06075.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Ses-
sions. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL ’07, pages 177–180.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1557769.1557821.

Yudong Liu, Clinton Burkhart, James Hearne, and
Liang Luo. 2015. Enhancing sumerian lemmati-
zation by unsupervised named-entity recognition.
In The 2015 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-Human Language Technologies
(NAACL HLT 2015).

Graham Neubig, Taro Watanabe, Shinsuke Mori, and
Tatsuya Kawahara. 2012. Machine translation with-
out words through substring alignment. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association

15



for Computational Linguistics: Long Papers - Vol-
ume 1. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL ’12, pages 165–174.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2390524.2390548.

Joakim Nivre. 2003. An efficient algorithm for pro-
jective dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the
8th International Workshop on Parsing Technologies
(IWPT). pages 149–160.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic
comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational Linguistics 29(1):19–51.

David I. Owen. 2011. Garsana studies. CDL Press.

Annette Rios and Richard Castro Mamani. 2014. Mor-
phological disambiguation and text normalization
for southern quechua varieties. COLING 2014
page 39.

Haşim Sak, Tunga Güngör, and Murat Saraçlar. 2007.
Morphological disambiguation of turkish text with
perceptron algorithm. In International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pages 107–
118.

Maria Sukhareva and Christian Chiarcos. 2014. Di-
achronic proximity vs. data sparsity in cross-lingual
parser projection. a case study on germanic. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Applying NLP
Tools to Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects.
Association for Computational Linguistics and
Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland, pages 11–
20. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W14-5302.

Valentin Tablan, Wim Peters, Diana Maynard, Hamish
Cunningham, and K Bontcheva. 2006. Creating
tools for morphological analysis of sumerian. In
5th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC), Genoa, Italy.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2014. Rediscovering annotation
projection for cross-lingual parser induction.
In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers. Dublin City
University and Association for Computational
Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, pages 1854–1864.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C14-1175.

16


