



















































Personalized Questions, Answers and Grammars: Aiding the Search for Relevant Web Information


Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 203–207,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 

Personalized Questions, Answers and Grammars: Aiding the Search for 

Relevant Web Information 

 
Marta Gatius 

Computer Science Department, Technical University of Catalonia,  

Jordi Girona Salgado, 1-3, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 

gatius@cs.upc.edu  

 

 

 

Abstract 

This work is about guiding the user web 

search by generating most relevant questions, 

answers and grammars from web documents. 

The proposed approach is based on the repre-

sentation of the main domain concepts as a set 

of attributes and relating these attributes to the 

user models and to a syntactico-semantic tax-

onomy, that describes the general relation-

ships between conceptual and linguistic 

knowledge. This taxonomy is used for both 

generating questions and answers and also for 

extracting data from the web. The data ex-

tracted from the web documents is represent-

ed as instances of the domain concepts. Ques-

tions, answers and grammars are generated 

from these instances. 

1 Introduction 

The large amount of data and services available on 

the web has increased the need of tools that may 

assist the different types of users when looking for 

information.  The approach described in this paper 

to guide the user search consists of providing the 

most relevant data in a particular domain as a set of 

questions and their corresponding answers.  

Presenting the main questions (and their an-

swers) could be valuable in different types of sce-

narios, especially when the information to search is 

voluminous and/or when the user is looking for 

relevant data that has to be understood perfectly. 

For example, including most relevant questions 

and answers in the web description of academic 

courses could result useful for students, as de-

scribed in the next sections. 

The generation of personalized questions for a 

specific domain involves reasoning skills as well 

as domain and linguistic knowledge. To reduce the 

human effort needed in this process, this work pro-

poses a general organization of the conceptual and 

linguistic knowledge involved, thus limiting the 

specific data that has to be incorporated for a new 

domain. In this proposal, the main domain con-

cepts are described by a set of attributes and those 

attributes are related to user models and to a 

syntactico-semantic taxonomy, which represents 

the general relationships between conceptual and 

linguistic knowledge. This taxonomy, described in 

a previous work (Gatius, 2013), was defined fol-

lowing (Bateman et al, 1994). It is used for gener-

ating questions, answers and grammar and also for 

extracting data from the web. 

This work is focused on the generation of ques-

tions and answers from (semi)structured web doc-

uments describing particular cases of general con-

cepts (i.e., university courses and types of foods). 

Information from these documents can be automat-

ically extracted and represented as instances of the 

general concepts, previously described by the ex-

pert. Questions, answers and grammars can be au-

tomatically generated from the resulting instances. 

The next section gives an overview of the ap-

proach proposed together with its adaptation in 

several languages (English, Catalan and Spanish) 

for two different domains:  university courses and 

cultural events. The Section 3 describes the im-

plementation and evaluation done. Finally, related 

work and discussion is given in the last section 

2 Approach Overview  

The approach proposed to generate personalized 

questions, answers and grammars from web docu-

ments in a particular domain is based in a separat-

ed representation of the different types of 

203



 
 
 

 

knowledge involved. This approach consists of the 

following five steps: 

1. Representing the most relevant domain con-

cepts as a set of attributes.  

2. Relating the attributes to the taxonomy.  

3. Relating the attributes to the users groups. 

4. Extracting the web data. 
5. Generating the personalized questions and 

answers (or grammars). 

 

The first three steps, studied in a previous work 

(Gatius, 2015), have to be done by a human expert. 

First, the main concepts have to be defined by a set 

of attributes and these attributes by facets, which 

describe details such as the cardinality.  

In a second step, the conceptual attributes have 

to be associated with the classes in the syntactico-

semantic taxonomy, defined in previous work. 

These classes are associated with the linguistic 

structures involved in the questions and answers 

about the conceptual attributes. They can be easily 

adapted to new languages. 

Figure 1 shows a partial description of the con-

cepts involved in this scenario: Course and Exam. 

The course description is represented by a set of at-

tributes. Each of the course exam is represented by 

an attribute, which value is an instance of the con-

cept Exam. As can be seen in the Figure, the con-

ceptual attributes have been associated with the 

corresponding syntactico-semantic classes. For ex-

ample, the attributes code and content are related 

to the class of, corresponding to general descrip-

tions  and there are others attributes related to its 

subclasses, describing more precise information:  

of_quantity (i.e., the credits, assessment and 

weight), of_time, of_date and of_place. 

 

 
Figure 1: The main concepts describing a course 

 

User models can also be incorporated by classi-

fying users in groups and associating each concep-

tual attribute with the group interested on it. In 

several scenarios, stereotypes could also be related 

to different values of the attribute. For example, in 

the nutrition domain, the values of the attributes 

describing the number of calories and physical ac-

tivity needed daily are different for each group 

(women, men and children). 

In the academic scenario two user groups can be 

distinguished: students and teachers. The attributes 

describing the course are considered relevant for 

the two groups, except for the attribute Code, only 

interesting for teachers. 

The two last steps proposed can be done auto-

matically, although human supervision of the data 

obtained is needed. First, from the web documents 

selected, the appropriate data is extracted and rep-

resented as instances of the domain concepts. The 

values of the conceptual attributes are obtained us-

ing general rules defined for that purpose. Finally, 

the questions and answers (or grammars) are gen-

erated from the conceptual instances.  

2.1 Personalized Questions and Answers 

Most university web sites include clear and de-

tailed descriptions about their courses. However, 

frequently, students ask teachers about this infor-

mation, especially that related to the exams. For 

this reason, including relevant questions and their 

answers in the course description could help. 

The extraction of the data in this domain re-

quires a limited human effort, because the descrip-

tions of university courses usually include similar 

content and are presented in a (semi)structured 

form. Several web documents from different facul-

ties in the same university have been analyzed. 

The web description of the courses analyzed, is 

placed in separated documents, with different for-

mats: The particular data related to the exams 

(date, time and room) is presented by tables while 

more general information is in textual form. 

The data related to a particular course is extract-

ed from the web documents and represented as in-

stances of the concepts Course and Exam. For this 

purpose, domain independent rules that use the 

facets describing the attributes (type, related terms 

and cardinality) are used. The data extracted is rep-

resented as the values of the instance attributes. 

204



 
 
 

 

   The general rule for obtaining the value of an at-

tribute from a textual document is:  “If the attribute 

related terms (or synonyms) are found, then extract 

the context words that correspond to the type of 

the attribute”. 

In this rule, context is a variable that indicates 

the maximum number of words before or after the 

attribute terms that have to be considered. Its value 

is obtained by analyzing the domain documents. 

A condition to this general rule has been added 

to extract all possible values of the attributes, con-

sidering its cardinality. 

Using this rule, the data describing the final ex-

am of a particular course is obtained from the doc-

ument giving general data and represented as the 

instance shown in Figure 2 (which belongs to con-

cept Exam in Figure 1). 

 

 

 

 

 
     Figure 2: Representation of data extracted as an instance 

 

 
Figure 3: Generated questions and answers about the exam 

 

More specific details about the exam have to be 

obtained from a separated document, where the 

date, time and room for the exams of several 

courses in the faculty are presented in a table. For 

this type of document a new rule is used: 

If one of the course identifiers is found in a row 

then extract the next words in the row that corre-

spond to the type of the attribute. 

Figure 3 shows examples of the generated ques-

tions and answers obtained from the instance Final 

Exam in Figure 2. 

2.2 Generating  Personalized Grammars 

Language interfaces have also been used to assist 

the user when accessing the web. They can incor-

porate domain-restricted grammars to help the user 

about the contents and the terms to be used to build 

the query, as can be seen in Figure 4. Those se-

mantic grammars can also be generated following 

the approach proposed. The processing of the re-

sulting query is simple, because the language to be 

considered is limited, i.e., the user will describe 

time by selecting one of the forms in the screen. 

 

 
Figure 4: Guiding the user to build the query to the service 

 

   Figure 4 shows an example of how the user is 

guided to build a query to a web service giving in-

formation about the cultural events in a particular 

city.  In this scenario, the grammar used has been 

generated from the concept Event, described by a 

set of attributes that correspond to the parameters 

of the service: title, type, place, time and audi-

ence. The same concept could be adapted for many 

of the web services about cultural activities. Two 

different user groups are distinguished, considering 

the value of the attribute audience, if they are in-

terested on activities for adults or for children. 

The interface shown in Figure 4 has been gener-

ated by the Grammatical Framework (GF, 

www.gramaticalframework.org), from the gram-

mar written in the GF formalism, although other 

formalisms and environments could also be used. 

3 Implementation and Evaluation 

The web documents are first analyzed and classi-

fied in two groups considering their structure. Do-

main and language independent rules to extract the 

relevant data from these two types of documents 

have been defined and implemented in C language. 

   To automatically generate the personalized lin-

guistic resources from the domain concepts, a 

Prolog program has also been developed. Prolog is 

FINAL EXAM 
Content: all units 
Weight : 40% 
Date: June 
Mandatory: Yes 
Minimun value: No 

 

205



 
 
 

 

an appropriate language because its unification 

mechanism facilitates the association of general 

conceptual categories with features indicating ad-

ditional information: stereotype, language and syn-

tactic details (such as gender, number and tense).  

 

 
Table 1: Results of the questionnaire 

 

The questions and answers related to the exams 

of a particular course on introduction to program-

ming were generated in three languages (English, 

Catalan and Spanish) and included in the course 

web page. In order to evaluate their usability, the 

students of two different degrees were asked to 

complete, anonymously, an online questionnaire, 

included in the same web page. There were 26 stu-

dents in the Group 1, enrolled in the Bachelor's 

Degree of Aerospace Vehicle Engineering and 27 

in Group 2, in the Bachelor's Degree of  Industrial 

Technology Engineering. Table 1 shows the ques-

tions and their results, rating scales are from 0 to 

10, 0 strongly disagree, 10 strongly agree. This re-

sult indicates that students think the generated 

questions and answers are useful: 8.4 over 10 in 

Group 1 and 8.12 in Group 2. Similar results were 

obtained from students in the same degrees, in an 

informal evaluation, done the previous semester. 

4 Related Work  and Discussion 

The generation of questions and answers has fo-

cused many research works in different areas, such 

as educational (Wyse and Piwek, 2009) and con-

versational systems (Varges et al., 2006), (Okoye 

et al., 2011).   

There are different techniques that can be used 

for generation, based on rules (Mazidi and Tarau, 

2009) and/or statistical methods (Jin and Le, 2016).  

Those techniques can be adapted to textual docu-

ments and/or to structured data (Duma and Klein, 

2013).  In the first case, the generation process is 

usually done by applying rules to the trees obtained 

from the syntactic analysis (Nouri et al., 2011), 

although there are also works that use the resulting  

semantic structure (Kuyten et al., 2012) and other 

use both  (Heilman, 2011). 

Generation from structured data has been stud-

ied for years in language interfaces, which usually 

obtain the system inquiries and responses from ap-

plication specifications and domain-restricted ba-

ses. Domain knowledge representation has been 

incorporated into a considerable number of rele-

vant dialogue systems (Guzzoni et al., 2006; 

Sonntag et al., 2007), because they facilitate the 

adaptation of knowledge to different domains, lan-

guages, user types and modes of communication. 

Additionally, they provide synonyms, hyponyms 

and hyperonyms terms to improve the query.  

There is an increasing interest in the combina-

tion of language and user model techniques to ob-

tain personalized linguistic resources (Brusilovsky 

and Millán, 2007; Milosavljevic and Oberlander, 

1998; Stock et al., 2007; Han et al., 2014). 

This article describes an approach to guide the 

user about the web contents based on the genera-

tion of personalized questions, answers and gram- 

mars from web documents, because they could re-

sult useful in different scenarios, as the students 

opinion on the questions generated about course 

exams ( shown in Table 1) indicates. 

   This work proposes an organization of the differ-

ent type of knowledge involved (conceptual, lin-

guistic and  about the user) that minimizes the hu-

man effort needed for a new domain and/or a new 

language, by separating the general facts that can 

be reused across domains from those more specif-

ic. The representation is based on relating the set of 

attributes describing main domain concepts to the 

user models and to a taxonomy representing gen-

eral relationships between conceptual and linguis-

tic knowledge.  The linguistic information associ-

ated with the taxonomy classes is used for both 

generating questions and answers and grammars 

and also for extracting data from the web. 

Future work could include the study of the adap-

tation of the set of rules developed to extract the 

data from the web documents to new domains. 

Acknowledgments 

This work has been partially supported by the 

FreeLing project http://nlp.cs.upc.edu/freeling. 

206



 
 
 

 

References  

John Bateman and Bernardo Magnini and Fabio Rinaldi. 

The generalized {Italian, German, English} upper 

model, In Proceedings of the ECAI94 Workshop: 

Comparison of Implemented Ontologies, Amsterdam, 

1994. 

 Peter Brusilovsky and Eva Millan. 2007. User models 

for adaptive hypermedia and adaptive educational 

systems. The Adaptive Web, 4321:3–53. 

Daniel Duma and Ewan Klein. Generating natural lan-

guage from linked data: Unsupervised template ex-

traction. In the proceedings of the 10
th

 International 

Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 83–

94, Potsdam, Germany, 2013. 

 Marta Gatius. Adaptive Generation of Multilingual 

Questions and Answers from Web Content. In: 26th 

International Workshop on Database and Expert Sys-

tems Applications, Valencia 2015. 

Marta Gatius. Improving Knowledge Representation to 

Speed up the Generation of Grammars for a Multi-

lingual Web Assitant. In Fernandez Raquel AND 

Isard Amy (ed.). Proceedings of the 17th Workshop 

on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue 

semdial, December, 2013. 

 Didier Guzzoni, Charles Baur and Adam Cheyer. Ac-

tive : A unified platform for building intelligent web 

interaction assistants. In: IEEE/WIC/ACM Interna-

tional Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent 

Agent Technology (WI-IAT 2006 Workshops), pp. 

417-420.  

Xiwu Han, Somayajulu Sripada, Kit Macleod and Anto-

nio Ioris. Latent User Models for Online River In-

formation Tailoring.  In the proceedings of the 7th In-

ternational Natural Language Generation conference, 

2014. 

 Michael Heilman. 2011. Automatic Factual Question 

Generation from Text. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon 

University. 

 Yiping Jin and Phu Le.  Selecting Domain-Specific 

Concepts for Question Generation with Lightly-

Supervised Method. In the proceedings of the 9th In-

ternational Natural Language Generation conference, 

pages 133–142, Edinburgh, UK, September 5-8 

2016.  

Pascal Kuyten, Timothy Bickmore, Svetlana Stoy- 

anchev, Paul Piwek,  Helmut Prendinger, and Mitsuru 

Ishizuka. 2012. Fully Automated Generation  of 

Question-Answer Pairs for Scripted Virtual Instruc-

tion, volume 7502 of LNAI. Springer-Verlag. 

Karen Mazidi and Paul Tarau. Infusing NLU into Auto-

matic Question Generation . In the proceedings of the 

9th International Natural Language Generation con-

ference, 2016. 

Maria Milosavljevic and Jon Oberlander. Dynamic hy-

pertext catalogues: helping users to help themselves. 

In:  HYPERTEXT, ACM,  1998. 

Elnaz Nouri, Ron Artstein, Anton Leuski, and David 

Traum. 2011. Augmenting conversational characters 

with generated question-answer pairs. In the proceed-

ings of the AAAI Fall Symposium. 

Ifeyinwa Okoye, Jalal Mahmud, Tessa Lau, and Julian 

Cerruti. 2011. Find this for me: mobile information 

retrieval on the open web. In Proceedings of the 16th 

international conference on Intelligent user interfaces 

(IUI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3-12. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1943403.1943407. 

Daniel Sonntag, Ralf Engel, Gerd Herzog, Alexander 

Pfalzgraf, Norbert Pfleger, Massimo Romanelli,  

Norbert Reithinger, (2007), “SmartWeb Handheld — 

Multimodal Interaction with Ontological Knowledge 

Bases and semantic web services”, Proceedings of 

the ICMI 2006 and IJCAI 2007 international confer-

ence on Artificial intelligence for human computing 

Pages 272-295. 

Oliviero Stock, Massimo Zancanaro, Paolo Busetta, 

Charles Callaway, Antonio Krüger, Michael Kruppa, 

Tsvi Kuflik, Elena Not, and Cesare Rocchi. 2007. 

Adaptive, intelligent presentation of information for 

the museum visitor in PEACH. User Modeling and 

User-Adapted Interaction 17, 3 (July 2007), 257-304. 

Sebastian Varges, Fuliang Weng, and Heather Pon-

Barry. 2009. Interactive question answering and 

constraint relaxation in spoken dialogue systems. Na-

tural Language Engineering. 

Wyse, Brendan and Piwek, Paul (2009). Generating 

questions from OpenLearn study units. In AIED 2009 

Workshop Proceedings Volume 1. The 2nd Workshop 

on Question Generation, 6-9 July 2009, Birghton, 

UK. 

207


