



















































Cross-lingual dependency parsing for closely related languages - Helsinki's submission to VarDial 2017


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects, pages 131–136,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cross-Lingual Dependency Parsing for Closely Related Languages –
Helsinki’s Submission to VarDial 2017

Jörg Tiedemann
Department of Modern Languages

University of Helsinki
first.lastname@helsinki.fi

Abstract

This paper describes the submission from
the University of Helsinki to the shared
task on cross-lingual dependency parsing
at VarDial 2017. We present work on an-
notation projection and treebank transla-
tion that gave good results for all three tar-
get languages in the test set. In particu-
lar, Slovak seems to work well with infor-
mation coming from the Czech treebank,
which is in line with related work. The
attachment scores for cross-lingual mod-
els even surpass the fully supervised mod-
els trained on the target language treebank.
Croatian is the most difficult language in
the test set and the improvements over the
baseline are rather modest. Norwegian
works best with information coming from
Swedish whereas Danish contributes sur-
prisingly little.

1 Introduction

Cross-lingual parsing is interesting as a cheap
method for bootstrapping tools in a new language
from resources in another language. Various ap-
proaches have been proposed in the literature,
which can mainly be divided into data transfer (i.e.
annotation projection, e.g. (Hwa et al., 2005))
and model transfer approaches (e.g. delexical-
ized models such as (McDonald et al., 2013)).
We will focus on data transfer in this paper us-
ing annotation projection and machine translation
to transform source language treebanks to be used
as training data for dependency parsers in the tar-
get language. Our previous work has shown that
these techniques are quite robust and show bet-
ter performance than simple transfer models based
on delexicalized parsers (Tiedemann and Agić,
2016). This is especially true for real-world test

cases in which part-of-speech (PoS) labels are pre-
dicted instead of given as gold standard annota-
tion while testing the parsing models (Tiedemann,
2015a).

Cross-lingual parsing assumes strong syntactic
similarities between source and target language
which can be seen at the degradation of model
performance when using distant languages such
as English and Finnish (Tiedemann, 2015b). The
task at VarDial, therefore, focuses on closely re-
lated languages, which makes more sense also
from a practical point of view. Many pools of
closely related languages and language variants
exist and, typically, the support in terms of re-
sources and tools is very biased towards one of
the languages in such a pool. Hence, one can
say that the task at VarDial simulates real-world
cases using existing resources from the universal
dependencies project (Nivre et al., 2016) and pro-
motes the ideas for practical application develop-
ment. The results show that this test is, in fact,
not only a simulation but actually improves the re-
sults for one of the languages in the test set: Slo-
vak. Cross-lingual models outperform the super-
vised upper bound, which is a great result in favor
of the transfer learning ideas.

More details about the shared task on cross-
lingual parsing at VarDial 2017 can be found in
(Zampieri et al., 2017). In the following, we will
first describe our methodology and the data sets
that we have used, before jumping to the results
and some discussions in relation to our main find-
ings.

2 Methodology and Data

Our submission is based on previous work and ba-
sically applies models and techniques that have
been proposed by (Hwa et al., 2005; Tiedemann,
2014; Tiedemann et al., 2014). We made very lit-

131



src1    src2   src3    src4

trg1    trg2    trg3

label 1

label 2

label 3

pos1      pos2      pos3      pos4

→
src1    src2   src3    src4

trg1    trg2    trg3

label 1

label 2

DUMMY 

dummy

dummy
label 2

label 3

label 3

DUMMY 

label 1

pos1      dummy     pos2      pos4           pos3

pos1      pos2      pos3      pos4

→
src1    src2   src3    src4

trg1    trg2    trg3

label 1

label 2

label 2

label 3

label 1

pos1      pos2      pos4          

pos1      pos2      pos3      pos4

Figure 1: Annotation projection heuristics with dummy nodes: One-to-many alignments create dummy
nodes that govern the linked target language tokens. Many-to-one alignments are resolved by removing
links from lower nodes in the source language tree. Non-aligned source language tokens are covered
by additional dummy nodes that take the same incoming and outgoing relations. The final picture to
the right illustrates that dumme leaf nodes can safely be deleted and internal dummy nodes with single
daughters can be removed by collapsing relations.

tle changes to the basic algorithms but emphasized
a systematic evaluation of different methods and
parameters which we tested on the development
data provided by VarDial 2017. All our results are,
hence, scored on data sets with predicted PoS la-
bels. In particular, we used three different cross-
lingual model types:

Projection: Annotation projection across word-
aligned parallel corpora using the data sets
provided by the workshop organizers (the
subtitle corpora). Source language parts are
tagged and parsed automatically with super-
vised taggers and parsers.

PBSMT: Treebank translation using a phrase-
based model of statistical machine translation
(SMT). Annotation are then projected from
the original source language treebank to the
translations to create a synthetic target lan-
guage treebank. Alignment is taken directly
from the translation model. The translation
and language models are trained on the pro-
vided parallel corpora. No extra resources are
used.

SyntaxSMT: Treebank translation using a tree-
to-string hierarchical SMT model. Depen-
dencies are transformed into constituency
representations using the spans defined by
the yield of each word in the sentence with
respect to the dependency relations. Con-
stituency labels are taken from the depen-
dency relations and PoS labels are used as
well for the labels of leaf nodes. After trans-
lation, we project the annotation of the source

language treebank using the same procedures
as for the other two approaches. Translation
models are trained on the provided parallel
corpora with automatically parsed source lan-
guage sentences.

There are various improvements and heuristics
for the projection of dependency trees. We ap-
plied two of them: (1) collapseDummy, which
deletes leaf nodes that are labeled as “dummy” and
also removes dummy nodes with just one daugh-
ter node by collapsing the parent and daughter
relations. (2) noDummy, which discards all sen-
tences that still include dummy nodes after apply-
ing collapseDummy. Dummy nodes appear with
the projection heuristics introduced by (Hwa et al.,
2005), which we also use for handling non-one-
ot-one word alignments. For example, unaligned
source language tokens are projected on dummy
target nodes to ensure the proper connection of
the projected dependency tree. This can lead to
dummy leaf nodes that can be ignored or dummy
nodes with single daughters, which can be re-
moved by collapsing the relations to head and de-
pendent. Figure 1 illustrates the projection heuris-
tics and the collapseDummy procedures. More de-
tails and examples are given in (Tiedemann and
Agić, 2016). Overall, noDummy leads to a drop
in performance and, therefore, we do not consider
those results in this paper. The differences were
small and most problems arose with smaller data
sets where the reduction of training data has a neg-
ative impact on the performance.

For annotation projection, we used various sizes
of parallel data to test the impact of data on parsing

132



performance. The translation models are trained
on the entire data provided by VarDial. Language
models are simply trained on the target side of the
parallel corpus.

We also tested cross-lingual models that exploit
language similarities on the lexical level without
translating or projecting annotation. The idea is
similar to delexicalized models that are trained
on generic features on the source language tree-
bank, which are then applied to the target lan-
guages without further adaptation. With closely
related languages, we can assume substantial lexi-
cal overlaps, which can be seen at the relative suc-
cess of the second baseline in the shared task (also
shown in Table 1). In particular, we used sub-
strings such as prefixes (simulating simple stem-
ming) and suffixes (capturing inflectional similar-
ities) to add lexical information to delexicalized
models. However, those models did not perform
very well and we omit the results in this paper.

For training the parsers, we used mate-tools
(Bohnet, 2010), which gave us significantly bet-
ter results than UDPipe (Straka et al., 2016) with-
out proper parameter optimization except for some
delexicalized models. Table 1 compares the base-
line models with the two different toolkits. We still
apply UDPipe for PoS and morphological tagging
using the provided tagger models for the target
languages and similar ones trained on the UD tree-
banks for the source languages except for Czech,
which did not work with standard settings due to
the complexity of the tagset and limitations of the
implementation of UDPipe. Instead, we apply
Marmot (Müller and Schütze, 2015) for Czech,
which also provides efficient model training for
PoS and morphology.

The only “innovation” compared to our previ-
ous work is the inclusion of target language tag-
ging on top of annotation projection. Earlier, we
only used projected annotation even for PoS infor-
mation. In this paper, we also test the use of target
language taggers (which are part of the provided
setup) to (i) over-rule projected universal PoS tags
and (ii) add morphological information to the data.
Especially the latter makes a lot of sense espe-
cially for highly-inflecting languages like Slovak
and Croatian. However, the risk of this procedure
is that noisy projection of dependency label may
not fit well together with the tags created by in-
dependent tools that are probably less noisy and
make different kinds of mistakes. This may mis-

lead the training algorithm to learn the wrong con-
nections and we can see that effect in our experi-
ments especially in connection with the tagging of
universal PoS labels. This actually degrades the
parsing performance in most cases. More details
will be presented in the following section in con-
nection with the results of our experiments.

3 Results

We considered all language pairs from the Var-
Dial campaign and here we present the relevant
results from our experiments. First of all, we
need to mention that we created new baselines us-
ing the mate-tools to have fair comparisons of the
cross-lingual models with respect to baseline ap-
proaches. The new figures (on development data)
are given in Table 1. The same table also sum-
marizes our basic results for all language pairs us-
ing the three approaches for data transfer as in-
troduced in the previous section. All projections
are made in collapseDummy mode as explained
above.

Target Croatian Slovak Norwegian
Source Slovenian Czech Danish Swedish

UDPipe
supervised 74.27 70.27 78.10

delex 53.93 53.66 54.54 56.71
cross 56.85 54.61 54.11 55.85

mate-tools
supervised 79.68 71.89 81.37

delex 53.39 55.80 50.07 56.27
cross 60.29 62.21 56.85 59.63

Projected
100,000 58.82 60.29 57.19 63.03
500,000 59.86 62.23 57.58 64.61

1,000,000 62.92 63.57 57.82 64.59
PBSMT 60.81 65.97 57.87 65.96

SyntaxSMT 58.57 63.13 58.36 66.31

Table 1: Basic results of cross-lingual parsing
models in terms of labeled attachment scores
(LAS) on development data: Annotation pro-
jection on automatically parsed bitexts of vary-
ing sizes (projected: number of sentence pairs);
treebank translation models (PBSMT and Syn-
taxSMT); compared to three baselines: delexical-
ized models (delex), source language models with-
out adaptation (cross) and fully-supervised target
language models (supervised).

The first observation is that all cross-lingual
models beat the delexicalized baseline by a large
margin. This is, at least, self-assuring and moti-
vates further developments in the direction of an-

133



notation projection and treebank translation. An-
other observation is that Croatian is surprisingly
hard to improve in comparison to the cross-lingual
model that applies a parser for Slovenian without
any adaptation.

Another surprise is the quality of the Norwe-
gian models coming from Danish. Both languages
are very close to each other especially in writing
(considering that we use bokmål in our data sets
for Norwegian). Projection and translation should
work well and should at least be on-par with us-
ing Swedish as the source language. However,
the differences are quite significant between Dan-
ish and Swedish as the source language and this
points to some substantial annotation differences
between Danish and the other two languages that
must be the reason behind this mystery. This con-
clusion is even more supported by the results of
the cross-lingual baseline model without adapta-
tion, which should perform better for Danish as
the lexical overlap is large, greater than the overlap
with Swedish. Yet another indication for the anno-
tation differences is the result of the delexicalized
parsers. There is also a big gap between Danish
and Swedish as the source language. The result
of these experiments demonstrate the remaining
difficulties of cross-linguistically harmonized data
sets, which is a useful outcome on its own.

We can also see, that treebank translation works
rather well. For most language pairs, the perfor-
mance is better than for annotation projection but
the differences are rather small in many cases. An
exception is Croatian for which annotation projec-
tion on parallel corpora works best, whereas trans-
lation is on par with Slovenian models applied to
Croatian data.

In contrast to our previous findings, we can also
see that the amount of data that is useful for an-
notation projection is bigger. Our prior work indi-
cated that small corpora of around 40,000 sentence
pairs are sufficient and that the learning curve lev-
els out after that (Tiedemann and Agić, 2016). In
this paper, we see increasing model performance
until around one million sentence pairs before the
scores converge (additional runs confirm this, even
though they are not reported in the paper). A rea-
son for this behaviour is that we now rely on movie
subtitles instead of sentences from the European
parliament proceedings. Subtitles are shorter in
general and the domain may be even further away
than parliament data, which explains the increased

amount of data to obtain reasonable lexical cover-
age.

Our next study looks at the impact of tag-
ging the target language with supervised models.
Our previous work on annotation projection and
treebank translation relied entirely on annotation
transfer from source to target when training tar-
get language parsing models. This means that we
discarded any language-specific features and mod-
eled parsing exclusively around universal PoS tags
and lexical information. For highly-inflecting lan-
guages, this is not very satisfactory and the per-
formance drops significantly compared to models
that have access to morphological features. There-
fore, we now test models that use projected data
with additional annotation from automatic taggers.
Table2 summarizes the results of those experi-
ments.

projected target-tagged
PoS morph PoS+morph

Projected
sl-hr 62.92 62.10 56.42
cs-sk 63.57 – 70.68
da-no 57.82 58.08 61.40
sv-no 64.59 64.78 62.35
PBSMT
sl-hr 60.81 61.60 61.10
cs-sk 67.81 – 73.90
da-no 57.87 58.46 63.67
sv-no 65.96 66.44 64.15
SyntaxSMT
sl-hr 58.57 60.15 56.85
cs-sk 63.13 64.05 65.02
da-no 58.36 58.59 64.74
sv-no 66.31 66.64 65.43
da+sv-no – 67.80

Table 2: Added PoS and morphological tagging
to projected data sets: LAS scores on develop-
ment data. Only morphological tagging added
(morph) or tagging both, PoS and morphology
(PoS+morph).

There are two models that we evaluate: (i) A
model that adds morphological features to the pro-
jected annotation, and (ii) a model that even over-
writes the universal PoS tags created through pro-
jection. The first variant adds information that
may contradict the PoS labels transferred from the
source. For example, it may assign nominal inflec-
tion categories to a word labeled as verb through
projection. The latter model should be more con-
sistent between PoS and morphology but has the
problem that those categories may not fit the de-
pendency relations attached to the corresponding
words when projecting from the source. This can

134



also greatly confuse the learning procedures.
As it turns out, overwriting the projected PoS

labels is more severe in most cases except Slovak
and Norwegian (only when projected from Dan-
ish). There, it seems to be beneficial to run com-
plete tagging after projection. In almost all other
cases the performance drops, often quite dramat-
ical. On the other hand, adding morphology al-
ways helps, except for Croatian annotation projec-
tion (which is a bit surprising again).

There is no clear winner between phrase-based
and syntax-based SMT. For Slovak and Croatian,
phrase-based systems seem to work best whereas
Norwegian performs better with syntax-based
models. A combination of Danish and Swedish
data gives another significant boost (retagging pro-
jected Danish including PoS and adding morphol-
ogy to projected Swedish).

We then used the best results on development
data for each of the three target languages to run
the cross-lingual models on the test set. No further
adjustments were done after tuning the models on
development data. The final results of the official
test are shown in Table 3.

LAS hr no sk
supervised 73.37 81.77 71.41
delex 50.05 58.13 53.87
cross 56.91 60.22 61.17
CUNI 60.70 70.21 78.12
our model 57.98 68.60 73.14

UAS hr no sk
supervised 80.16 85.59 78.73
delex 63.29 67.86 64.55
cross 68.52 69.31 70.60
CUNI 69.73 77.13 84.92
our model 69.57 76.77 82.87

Table 3: Final results on the test set (our model)
compared to baselines and fully supervised mod-
els. CUNI refers to a competing system – the
winning team of VarDial. For the Norwegian
baselines we report the results for Swedish as the
source language, which is much better than using
Danish.

The results on test data mainly confirm the find-
ings from the development phase. Slovak per-
forms clearly best in the cross-lingual scenario.
This is the only language pair for which the cross-
lingual model even outperforms the fully super-

vised “upper bound”. This is quite fascinating and
rather unexpected. Certainly, the Czech treebank
is by far the largest one in the collection and much
bigger than the corresponding Slovak treebank.
The languages are also very close to each other
and their morphological complexity requires suf-
ficient resources. This may explain why the large
Czech training data can compensate for the short-
comings of the small Slovak training data. Other
factors for the positive result may also include the
similarity in domains covered by both treebanks
and the closeness of annotation principles. The
performance for the other target languages is less
impressive. Norwegian performs similar to the
scores that we have seen in related work on anno-
tation projection and cross-lingual parsing. Croa-
tian is rather disappointing even though it also
beats the cross-lingual baselines.

The main scores in our evaluations is LAS but
it is also interesting to look at unlabelled attach-
ment scores (UAS). Table 3 lists those scores as
well and we can see that labelling seems to be a
major problems for our models. The difference to
LAS scores is dramatic, much more than the ab-
solute difference we see between UAS and LAS
in the fully supervised models. Compared to the
winning submission at VarDial (CUNI, see (Rosa
et al., 2017)), we can also see that the main dif-
ference is in LAS whereas UAS are rather similar.
This seems to be a shortcoming of our approach
that we should investigate more carefully.

4 Conclusions

Our experiments demonstrate the use of anno-
tation projection and treebank translation tech-
niques. The models perform well, especially for
Slovak, which even outperforms the fully super-
vised “upper bound” model. In this paper, we have
discussed the use of target language tagging on
top of annotation projection with the conclusion
that adding morphological information is almost
always useful. We observe a large gap between
LAS and UAS, which would require some deeper
investigations. A possible reason is the use of
language-specific dependency labels that are not
available from the projection. However, we actu-
ally doubt that explanation looking at the success
of the winning team. In their results, LAS did not
suffer that much. Some surprising results could
be seen as well, for example, the fact that Danish
does not work as well as a source for Norwegian as

135



Swedish does. This cannot be explained in terms
of linguistic grounds but need to refer to unex-
pected annotation differences or possibly a larger
domain mismatch. Croatian as a target language
was also surprisingly difficult and the performance
is the worst in the final among all test cases.
This improvement over the non-adapted Slovenian
parser is only very modest whereas large gains can
be observed for the other language pairs.

References

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top Accuracy and Fast Depen-
dency Parsing is not a Contradiction. In Proceedings
of COLING, pages 89–97.

Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, Clara
Cabezas, and Okan Kolak. 2005. Bootstrap-
ping Parsers via Syntactic Projection across Parallel
Texts. Natural Language Engineering, 11(3):311–
325.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuz-
man Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao
Zhang, Oscar Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria
Bertomeu Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013.
Universal Dependency Annotation for Multilingual
Parsing. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 92–97.

Thomas Müller and Hinrich Schütze. 2015. Robust
morphological tagging with word representations.
In Proceedings of NAACL.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, et al. 2016. Universal depen-
dencies v1: A multilingual treebank collection. In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 1659–1666, Portoroz, Slovenia.

Rudolf Rosa, Daniel Zeman, David Marec̆ek, and
Zdenĕk Z̆abokrtský. 2017. Slavic Forest, Norwe-
gian Wood. In Proceedings of the VarDial Work-
shop.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajič, and Straková. 2016. UDPipe:
trainable pipeline for processing CoNLL-U files per-
forming tokenization, morphological analysis, pos
tagging and parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’16), Paris, France, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Jörg Tiedemann and Željko Agić. 2016. Synthetic
treebanking for cross-lingual dependency parsing.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 55:209–
248, January.

Jörg Tiedemann, Željko Agić, and Joakim Nivre. 2014.
Treebank translation for cross-lingual parser induc-
tion. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference Natu-
ral Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (CoNLL), Baltimore, Mary-
land, USA.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2014. Rediscovering annotation pro-
jection for cross-lingual parser induction. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2014, Dublin, Ireland, August.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2015a. Cross-lingual dependency
parsing with universal dependencies and predicted
PoS labels. In Proceedings of the Third In-
ternational Conference on Dependency Linguistics
(Depling 2015), pages 340–349, Uppsala, Sweden,
August. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2015b. Improving the cross-lingual
projection of syntactic dependencies. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015), pages 191–
199, Vilnius, Lithuania, May. Linköping University
Electronic Press, Sweden.

Marcos Zampieri, Shervin Malmasi, Nikola Ljubešić,
Preslav Nakov, Ahmed Ali, Jörg Tiedemann, Yves
Scherrer, and Noëmi Aepli. 2017. Findings of the
VarDial Evaluation Campaign 2017. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for Similar Lan-
guages, Varieties and Dialects (VarDial), Valencia,
Spain.

136


