



















































Depictives in English: An LTAG Approach


Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+13), pages 21–30,
Umeå, Sweden, September 4–6, 2017. c© 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Depictives in English: An LTAG Approach

Benjamin Burkhardt and Timm Lichte and Laura Kallmeyer
CRC 991, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf

{burkhardt,lichte,kallmeyer}@phil.hhu.de

Abstract

In this paper, we explore different ways to
account for the peculiarities of depictive
secondary predication in English, which
we think can be characterized as long-
distance modification. Other than with re-
sultative secondary predication, the depic-
tive and its target, typically the subject or
direct object of a verbal phrase, do not
form a contiguous constituent. Instead,
the depictive attaches to the verbal domain
that also embeds the target phrase. This
sibling configuration, together with the
constrained flexibility in choosing a target,
obviously poses a challenge to the syntax-
semantics interface and we therefore com-
pare three general LTAG approaches to
deal with this. We eventually favor a
rather semantic approach that also allows
for a more principled view in terms of
Van Valin’s ACTOR-UNDERGOER distinc-
tion. Our analysis predicts that only the
verbal arguments which are the respective
lowest and highest entries in the ACTOR-
UNDERGOER hierarchy can act as targets
for a depictive. To our knowledge, this
is the first work that investigates the treat-
ment of secondary predication within the
TAG framework.

1 Introduction

The term SECONDARY PREDICATE refers to a typ-
ically sentence final, adjectival element that pred-
icates one of the (main) verbal predicate’s argu-
ments, which we will refer to as the TARGET
(see, e.g., Winkler 1997; Pylkkänen 2002; Müller
2002; Geuder 2004; Simpson 2005). Furthermore,
within the set of secondary predicates two kinds
are usually distinguished: DEPICTIVES and RE-

SULTATIVES. While resultative secondary predi-
cates characterize states that are brought about by
the event that is expressed by the main verb as in
(1), depictive secondary predicates, as in (2), ex-
press properties that hold for at least some part of
the event time, but do not immediately result from
the verb event.1

(1) Sean stomped the cani flati.

(2) a. Kim ate the steaki rawi.
b. Kimi ate the steak hungryi.

In (1), the flatness that is predicated of the can is
a result of the stomping it underwent. By contrast,
the rawness of the steak or Kim’s appetite in (2)
are rather peripheral to the overall act of eating –
even though they could influence the manner of
eating. However, we will put event semantic sub-
tleties of this distinction aside for the rest of the
paper. What we are interested in is the capability
of depictives to target different arguments of the
main verb, for instance the object in (2-a) and the
subject in (2-b). This is highly relevant to models
of the syntax-semantics interface in that it raises
the following questions: how can the relation be-
tween a depictive and its potential targets be estab-
lished? And how can the possible choice of con-
stituents that a depictive may target be correctly
captured? These are the questions addressed in
this paper, taking English as the object language
and, for the first time, Lexicalized Tree-Adjoining
Grammar (LTAG, Joshi and Schabes 1997; Abeillé
and Rambow 2000) as the syntactic framework.

2 Data

In this section, we will give a more detailed
overview over syntactic properties of depictives
that also pertains to the possible choice of targets.

1In the examples, we will use coindexation to mark the
secondary predicate and its target.

21



On this, we will base the discussion of previous
analyses in Section 3 as well as our own proposal
for an LTAG analysis in Sections 5 and 6.

2.1 Target ambiguity and stacking
In (2), we have seen clear-cut cases where the de-
pictive can target either the subject or the object
due to their respective semantic (in)compatibility.
Consequently, when semantics does not constrain
the possible readings, TARGET AMBIGUITY as in
(3) arises.

(3) Kimi ate the applej unwashedi/j.

Here, both verbal arguments are viable targets for
the depictive element unwashed, even though na-
tive speakers seem to generally prefer the subject
target readings.

Interacting with target ambiguity, depictives can
also be stacked as in (4).

(4) a. ? Kimi ate the steakj rawj hungryi.
b.?? Kimi ate the steakj hungryi rawj.
c.?? Kim ate the steakj rawj saltedj.

While STACKING OF DEPICTIVES generally de-
creases the acceptability of sentences, such stacks
with alternating targets and in the wellnested or-
der as in (4-a), i.e. object depictive followed by
subject depictive, seem more acceptable than the
illnested order in (4-b), or those in which both de-
pictives have the same target, as in (4-c).

2.2 Depictives and unrealized arguments
Another important property of depictives is that
the targeted constituent does not need to be syn-
tactically realized, as the passive constructions in
(5) show. In both examples, the depictive element
target the unrealized AGENT argument of the verb.

(5) a. The gamej was played barefooti/*j.
b. The bookj is to be read nakedi/*j.

The example in (5-a), discussed in Roberts (1987),
was originally used to raise the question whether
adjectival elements of this kind should actually be
treated as such or rather as adverbials that mod-
ify the event itself. In any case, assuming a non-
metaphorical meaning and sticking with the adjec-
tival use of barefoot, we must conclude that the
depictive in fact targets the unrealized AGENT ar-
gument rather than the THEME constituent. The
same is true for the book and naked in the pas-
sive infinitive construction in (5-b). Finally, as (6)

shows, it is also possible for depictives to target
unrealized direct objects.

(6) Wei usually bake gluten-free*i/j.

2.3 Depictives and oblique arguments

The examples discussed so far were only con-
cerned with depictives targeting either the sub-
ject or the verb’s direct object. What about
“oblique” arguments, that is, indirect objects and
PP-objects? Judging by the observations made this
far, one could assume that depictives can target ei-
ther one of the verb’s arguments. This does not
seem to be the case however, as shown in (7).

(7) a. The cash machinei gave Johnj the moneyk
hungry*i/*j/*k.

b. Peter crashed into himi tired*i.

As for (7-a), even though the verb’s indirect object
is the only animate argument, it cannot be targeted
by the depictive hungry. A similar observation can
be made for most verbs that require a prepositional
argument. In almost all cases, native speakers dis-
miss readings in which the nominal constituent in-
side the PP is targeted, as in (7-b).

However, there are counterexamples like (8).

(8) a. You can’t give themj injections
unconsciousj. (Simpson, 2005, (46))

b. Tomi talked to Megj drunki/j.

For (8-a), the possibility to target the indirect ob-
ject could be explained with the presence of a light
verb construction give injections, which doesn’t
assign argument status to injections. Similarly, the
targeting of the prepositional object in (8-b) could
be ascribed to the reanalysis into a verb-particle
construction talk to. This needs to be more care-
fully examined in future work.

2.4 Depictives and non-arguments

Finally, depictives cannot target constituents of
complex arguments, such as the genitive noun in
(9-a) or the single conjuncts in (9-b), nor modify-
ing constituents like PP-adjuncts as in (9-c).

(9) a. John met Maria’si father naked*i.
b. [Johni and Paulj]k met [Mariam and her

boyfriendn]o naked*i/*j/k/*m/*n/o.
c. John drilled a hole with a power tooli

new*i.

Again, single counterexamples like the one in (10)

22



can be found, where the depictive seems in fact to
be able to target the reflexive pronoun inside the
complex NP-argument.

(10) If you’re an investment banker, don’t choose
a profile of yourselfi [drunk at a house
party]i.2

It is yet unclear whether the putative locality vio-
lation in (10) could be explained with the involve-
ment of a multi-word expression. One reviewer
has noticed that the acceptability of (10) decreases
as soon as the PP at a house party is left out, which
could hint at the presence of a construction differ-
ent from the depictive one, for example some sort
of small clause. A closer inspection of such exam-
ples is left to future work.

3 Previous analyses

We will briefly report on two very different pro-
posals from other frameworks that precede our
work.

In the framework of Generative Grammar,
Geuder (2002, 2004), following Winkler (1997),
asserts that depictives always occur in postver-
bal position and are preceded by resultatives, as
shown in (11). This leads him to the assumption
that depictives must be right-adjoined.

(11) Johni kicked the doorj openj tiredj.

Furthermore, pointing to earlier work by Roberts
(1988), he states that depictives, without discrimi-
nating between subject and object depictives, must
be adjoined at VP-level and bases this on sev-
eral constituency tests, i.e. VP fronting, though-
movement, and pseudoclefts, as well as on the be-
havior of depictives under negation. Geuder fur-
ther strengthens this position through an obser-
vation made by Ernst (2001): depictives precede
manner adverbs, which themselves cannot adjoin
higher than at VP-level (see (12)).

(12) Ali sitsj clothedi quietlyj [...].

While the argument is valid in the context of
the Generative Grammar framework, LTAG is not
necessarily restricted in such a way. That said, the
analysis proposed here eventually adopts Geuder’s
view such that the depictive is adjoined at VP-
level as well. The main point in Geuder (2004),

2From the book The Short and Great Guide to Online
Business Networking by Michel Semienchuk from 2016.

however, is to tease apart the differences of the
semantics of depictives in comparison to “nor-
mal” adverbial modification and modification by
the class of so called transparent adverbs. Fur-
thermore, Geuder (2004) states that target resolu-
tion is not driven by syntax, but that the restictions
on possible targets of depictives “arise on an in-
terpretational level”. This runs contrary to, e.g.,
Wunderlich (1997) who assumes distinct adjunc-
tion sites for subject and object depictives. How-
ever, Geuder’s analysis remains at a rather infor-
mal level compared to what we are aiming at.

In contrast to Geuder (2004), the analysis of
depictives in Müller (2008) is based on Head-
Driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG) and
aims to give a mainly syntax-driven account of de-
pictive targeting phenomena. Following an exten-
sive discussion of both English and German data,
he summarizes that all verb arguments, including
indirect objects, are possible targets of depictives.
This contradicts the observations made in section
2 about indirect objects as targets of depictives,
e.g. in example (7-a). Additionally, he empha-
sizes that the target has to precede the depictive it-
self. In the provided analyses, which largely cover
German examples, Müller deviates from Pollard
and Sag (1994) by adopting a version of HPSG
in which the verb arguments in the SUBCAT list
are marked as realized, but are not deleted from
it. This assumption is essential for Müller’s anal-
ysis of English, because depictives are included
after the target has been combined with the ver-
bal head. Under standard assumptions, the target
would have been removed from the SUBCAT list
too early. With the distinction of realized and un-
realized items on the SUBCAT list, however, also
the stacking of depictives seems to be manageable,
even though Müller remains silent on this.

4 Modification in LTAG

Since we want to treat depictive secondary pred-
icates as long-distance modification, the ap-
proaches we present in the following section are
based on assumptions commonly followed in the
TAG literature, namely that, in accordance with
valency-driven design principles for elementary
trees (Abeillé and Rambow, 2000; Frank, 2002),
modifiers (or adjuncts) are attached via adjunction.
From this and the shape of the target trees, it im-
mediately follows that it must be possible to ad-
join a modifier to its target non-immediately, for

23



the simple fact that modifiers are seen as optional
material without argument status. As such, they
are not uniquely reflected in the elementary tree
of the target, for example, by a non-terminal leaf
node, which makes them act very differently from
arguments. Thus, when modifiers are stacked sim-
ilarly to the topicalized yesterday and in Paris in
(13), one is not adjoined to the elementary tree of
elected, but rather to the other modifier:3

(13) Yesterday, in Paris, Kim ate the steak.

This can be seen from the analysis sketch in Fig-
ure 1. Hence, in LTAG analyses, even rather stan-

S

AdvP

yesterday

S*

S

PP

in Paris

S*

NP

Kim

S

NP VP

V

ate

NP

NP

the steak

Figure 1: Analysis of topicalized modifier stack-
ing in (13)

dard instances of modification can turn out “long
distance”.

The situation with depictives is even worse, as
will become clear in the next section: (i) the aux-
iliary tree of the depictive can never adjoin imme-
diately to the elementary tree of the target if it is
the subject, and (ii) the depictive tree does not add
to the lexical projection of the target, namely the
NP. We suspect that the connection between a de-
pictive and its target can be more directly estab-
lished with some sort of MCTAG, but we also see
good reasons not to use tree sets here. One reason
that has been mentioned in Section 2.2 is that the
realization of the target can be optional. We will
therefore not fully explore this possibility in this
work and only provide some general thoughts in
Section 7.

5 LTAG approaches to depictives

Staying with LTAG, there are thus two primary
challenges when dealing with depictive secondary
predicates: firstly, one has to make sure that

3Yet multiple adjunction (Schabes and Shieber, 1994)
would allow for a direct adjunction of both modifiers to the
verbal elementary tree.

the depictive finds its target through the syntax-
semantics interface; secondly, one has to cope
with the fact that sometimes more than one con-
stituent can be chosen as target at a time. In other
words, there is the possibility of target ambigu-
ity. With respect to target ambiguity, one can think
of three general approaches, namely treating it ei-
ther in syntax or in semantics, or in the syntax-
semantics interface proper. Let us go through them
one by one.

5.1 Syntactic ambiguity approach

With a SYNTACTIC AMBIGUITY APPROACH, sub-
ject and object depictives induce different syntac-
tic derivations. Hence, either they anchor different
trees, that is, trees that differ in the structure or
labeling of the nodes, or they adjoin to different
nodes of the verbal tree, or both.

So one effect could be that the target of a depic-
tive is uniquely determined through the syntactic
position at which the elementary tree of a depictive
is adjoined. Hence, depictives targeting the sub-
ject are always adjoined at a different node than
depictives that target the object. A rough example
analysis of this kind is shown in Figure 2, which
models the postverbal stacking of subject and ob-
ject depictives in (14), repeated from (4-a) above:

(14) Kimi ate the steakj rawj hungryi.

NP[I = 3 ]

Kim

3

[
person
NAME Kim

]

S[I = 1 ]

NP[I = 1 ] VP[I = 2 ]

V

ate

NP[I = 2 ]

0




event

AGENT 1
[

animate
]

THEME 2
[

physical entity
]




S[I = 6 ]

S*[I = 6 ] AdjP

hungry

6

[
animate
STATE hungry

]

VP[I = 5 ]

VP*[I = 5 ] AdjP

raw

5

[
physical entity
STATE raw

]

NP[I = 4 ]

the steak

4

[
edible
KIND steak

]

Figure 2: Analysis of (14) with a syntactic ambi-
guity approach

24



The analysis we propose employs the syntax-
semantics interface of Kallmeyer and Osswald
(2013) where syntactic nodes are enriched with in-
terface features and the semantic representations
consist of semantic frames. Interface features such
as I(NDIVIDUAL) and E(VENT) contribute base la-
bels (i.e. boxed numbers) that also appear in the
semantic frames. Upon substitution and adjunc-
tion, the unification of interface features triggers
the identification of base labels and, consequently,
the unification of the linked semantic frames.

The example in Figure 2 is thus to be under-
stood in the following way: when adjoining the
elementary tree of the depictive hungry to the S-
node of the elementary tree of ate, the unfication
of their I-features triggers the identification of base
labels 1 , which is linked to the semantic content
of the subject, and 6 , which points at the seman-
tic contribution of the depictive. Interface features
therefore serve to establish but also limit the visi-
bility of a potential target to specific nodes.

The syntactic ambiguity then emerges from a
specific distribution of base labels as values of the
I-feature. In Figure 2, the subject is only visible in
the S-node (via 1 ) and the object only in the VP-
node (via 2 ). Hence, the target of the depictive is
determined by whether it is adjoined to S or VP.

Considering coverage and sparseness, this im-
plementation of the syntactic ambiguity approach
comes with certain drawbacks, some of which can
be overcome easily, and some with more difficul-
ties – if at all. Concerning grammar sparseness,
every depictive anchors at least two elementary
trees that differ only in their respective root/foot
category. Hence, in the grammar, the depictive
hungry would not only anchor the auxiliary tree
with S-root, but also the one with a VP-root in or-
der to be usable as an object depictive. Of course,
this duplication can be overcome easily by gener-
ally replacing the S-category for the VP-category
(and representing the S-category by, e.g., an extra
feature). With this change, depictives would only
adjoin to VP-nodes. Another challenge is posed
by unrealized arguments, e.g. involving passives
such as in (5). But here the answer would be to
leave the interface unchanged compared to the ac-
tive alternate. Hence, the subject position of the
passive would still be linked to the VP-node, while
the S-node would remain linked to the logical sub-
ject. Lastly, and most severely, the syntactic am-
biguity approach forces a certain linear order onto

the depictives, depending on which argument they
target: in postverbal position, depictives target-
ing the object can only precede subject depictives
since the latter are adjoined at a higher syntactic
position. Similarly, the presented syntactic am-
biguity approach predicts that only subject depic-
tives may appear in a topicalized position. Both
predictions seem to be too strong (see, e.g., (4-b)),
but are hardly adjustable when one wants to retain
the common verbal phrase structure.

Given these issues, an alternative worth consid-
ering seems to be one that assumes specific inter-
face features for the subject and the object. For ex-
ample, there could be interface features Isubj and
Iobj and they could be made accessible in both S
and VP. This would indeed help to relax the men-
tioned linearization constraints, but it would also
necessitate the duplication of entries on the side
of depictives, in order to be able to let a depictive
target either the subject or the object.

5.2 Interface ambiguity approach

Instead of representing target ambiguity by means
of distinct interface features or by assigning dif-
ferent values to the I-feature in distinct syntactic
nodes, one could as well trigger target ambiguity
with one value of the I-feature only. This is what
we want to call an INTERFACE AMBIGUITY AP-
PROACH. It consists of giving a local choice re-
garding the value of the I-feature, namely that it
is linked either to the subject or the object. We
formally write this as a disjunctive expression [I =
1 ∨ 2 ], using ∨ as the disjunction operator. The
sample analysis from above then turns into the one
in Figure 3.

The challenge here is to pass the disjunctive
value from the foot node to the root of the de-
pictive elementary tree without also projecting the
final value of the I-feature, which it receives af-
ter top-bottom unification – otherwise only either
subject or object depictives could be adjoined to
VP. To this end, we include a special variable α
that is valid during substitution and adjunction, but
becomes void when top-bottom unification is ap-
plied.

Obviously, this sort of disjunction helps to rem-
edy the duplication issue that can arise in the syn-
tactic ambiguity approach. Hence, in the interface
ambiguity approach, one can maintain a uniform
auxiliary tree for depictives without having to har-
monize syntactic categories (but see below). An-

25



NP[I = 3 ]

Kim

3

[
person
NAME Kim

]

S[I = 1 ∨ 2 ]

NP[I = 1 ] VP[I = 1 ∨ 2 ]

V

ate

NP[I = 2 ]




eat

AGENT 1
[

animate
]

THEME 2
[

physical entity
]




5

[
animate
STATE hungry

]

VP[I = α ]

VP*[I = 5 ][I = α ] AdjP

hungry

6

[
physical entity
STATE raw

]
VP

[I = β ]

VP*[I = 6 ]
[I = β ]

AdjP

raw

NP[I = 4 ]

the steak

4

[
edible
KIND steak

]

Figure 3: Analysis of (14) with an interface ambi-
guity approach

other advantage over the syntactic ambiguity ap-
proach in Figure 2 is that postverbal linearization
is left underspecified and the topicalized position
can be occupied by both the subject and the ob-
ject depictive. However, the critical drawback is
that one has to allow for logical operators to be in-
cluded into elementary trees. This is a big step,
formally speaking, because it means to treat the
syntactic feature structures in elementary trees as
descriptions and to introduce special variables for
descriptions such as α in Figure 3. Otherwise,
when first resolving disjunctions such as the one
in the I-feature, the duplication issue would return
back on the scene, not to mention the narrowing to
either subject or object depictives that can adjoin
at VP. Having said this, tree and feature structure
descriptions are widely used in metagrammars (cf.
Crabbé et al., 2013) and certain TAG variants (cf.
Rambow et al., 2001). So it is a possible strategy.

Nevertheless, we want to propose yet another
type of approach, namely the semantic ambiguity
approach, that circumvents this extension and is
also more explanatory with respect to the linking
aspects of target ambiguity.

5.3 Semantic ambiguity approach

At first glance, the SEMANTIC AMBIGUITY AP-
PROACH differs from the interface ambiguity ap-
proach in just one detail: disjunction does not ap-
pear in elementary trees (or their descriptions),
but in their semantics. Remember that we follow

Kallmeyer and Osswald (2013) in that we use de-
scriptions of semantic frames as semantic repre-
sentation, and in these descriptions, disjunction is
a natural ingredient.

We can thus recast the LTAG analyses from Fig-
ures 2 and 3 into the one in Figure 4, which now
embeds the disjunction AGENT ∨ THEME in the
semantics of the depictive.

NP[I = 3 ]

Kim

3

[
person
NAME Kim

]

S[E = 0 ]

NP[I = 1 ] VP[E = 0 ]

V

ate

NP[I = 2 ]

0




eat

AGENT 1
[

animate
]

THEME 2
[

physical entity
]




5




event
(AGENT∨

THEME

)
[

animate
STATE hungry

]

VP[E = 5 ]

VP*[E = 5 ] AdjP

hungry

6




event
(AGENT∨

THEME

)
[

physical entity
STATE raw

]

VP[E = 6 ]

VP*[E = 6 ] AdjP

raw

NP[I = 4 ]

the steak

4

[
edible
KIND steak

]

Figure 4: Analysis of (14) with the semantic
amibuity approach

This move has far reaching consequences re-
garding the interface and the semantics of the de-
pictive: instead of accessing the I-feature of the
respective target NPs, the depictive now reads off
the E-feature, which commonly points to the se-
mantics of the verbal head. The semantics of the
depictive has to reflect this, that is, the root type
has to be of type event, while its actual seman-
tic content, which either contributes to the AGENT
role or the THEME role of the event, is more deeply
embedded compared to the other two approaches.

As with the interface ambiguity approach, it
should be obvious that the semantic ambiguity ap-
proach avoids the unwanted proliferation of ele-
mentary trees that have to be assumed for a sin-
gle depictive. Similarly, no post- or preverbial
linearization constraints are imposed. But on the
other hand, the semantic ambiguity approach im-
proves on the interface ambiguity approach since
no additional descriptive means need to be in-

26



cluded ad hoc. Furthermore, it does not hinge
on making the I-features of subject and object ac-
cessible within the whole verbal phrase. Yet one
could criticize that this simplification in the syn-
tax puts additional burden on the semantics: the
possible targets of depictives are not immediately
determined by the syntactic argument structure of
the verbal head any more, but entirely follow from
the semantic roles that are specified in the frame-
semantic event descriptions assigned to the verbal
head and the depictive. Going back to Figure 4,
this means that semantic roles such as AGENT and
THEME and their linking to syntactic argument po-
sitions have to be taken into account, for instance,
in order to avoid depictive predication on non-
arguments. The following section will show, how
to achieve this in a principled manner.

6 A semantic approach with
actor-undergoer linking

The semantic solution discussed in the previous
section simply lists all semantic roles that are
potential targets for depictive modification. The
question is whether we can generalize this in some
way. One abstraction over semantic roles is pro-
vided by the MACROROLES actor and undergoer
introduced in Van Valin, Jr. (2005) (see also the
similar concepts of proto-agent and proto-patient
in Dowty, 1991). Van Valin, Jr. (2005) explains
how to determine actor and undergoer based on
the semantic characterization of an event, more
specifically based on the semantic roles of its par-
ticipants. A constraint-based LTAG implementa-
tion of his linking theory within the metagram-
mar (using XMG) has been proposed in Kallmeyer
et al. (2016). With the additional linking con-
straints in the metagrammar, the frame for eating
for instance gets enriched with marcorole informa-
tion, as shown in Figure 5.

0




eating

AGENT 1
[

animate
]

ACTOR 1

THEME 2
[

physical entity
]

UNDERGOER 2




Figure 5: eating frame with macroroles

The hypothesis we want to pursue in the fol-
lowing is that depictives target either the actor or
the undergoer of the event that they modify (see
Figure 6 for the revised elementary tree for raw).
This hypothesis is not just a generalization over

the analysis proposed in Section 5.3 but it comes
with the additional claim that non-macroroles can-
not be targeted by depictive modifiers or, more
precisely, the depictive has to target one of the
macroroles.

VP
[E= 6 ]

VP*[E= 6 ] AdjP

raw

6




event
( ACTOR∨

UNDERGOER

)
[

physical entity
STATE raw

]



Figure 6: Revised elementary tree for raw

This hypothesis clearly holds for the examples
in (2). The two arguments of the verb eat are the
actor and the undergoer and both are possible tar-
gets for depictives. The question is whether it also
holds that event participants that are neither actor
nor undergoer cannot be targeted by a depictive.
This seems to be supported by the data in (7-a).

Let us consider further examples involving par-
ticipants that are neither actor nor undergoer.

(15) Johni ran into the buildingj burningi/*j.

(16) Johni worried about the applesj unwashedi/*j.

In (15), the building, which is neither actor nor
undergoer, is actually not available as antecedent
for a depicitive. In (16), John is the undergoer
while the apples are neither actor nor undergoer.
And in fact, they do not seem to be available for
modification by a depictive.

(17) a. Chrisi ate the applesj with a fork
unwashedi/j.

b. Chrisi ate the soup with a spoonj
unwashedi/*j.

(17) gives examples where we have an actor and
an undergoer and, as a third participant, an instru-
ment. The instrument cannot be targeted by depic-
tive modification.

(15)–(17) suggest that particpants that are real-
ized as PPs are in general not available for mod-
ification by depictives. This seems to be the case
even for semantic roles that are relatively low on
the actor–undergoer hierarchy, as in (18). Accord-
ing to Van Valin, Jr. (2005), arguments that are se-
lected as undergoers are by definition not marked
by an oblique case or an adposition. For example,
Chris is not the undergoer in the sentences in (18).
But this is different for (19), where Chris becomes
the undergoer due to the passivization. And here

27



Chris is in fact accessible as a target for a depic-
tive.

(18) a. The car crashed into Chrisi unprepared*i.
b. The bewitched machine hammered on

Chrisi drunk*i.

(19) Chrisi was crashed into unpreparedi.

Even though these data indicate that actor and
undergoer are more easily accessible for depictive
modifiers, we need broader empirical evidence for
our hypothesis. Corresponding tests, including a
corpus study and acceptability judgment tests, are
planned for the very near future.

7 Remaining issues

Considering the still underresearched wealth of
depictive secondary predication, the presented
analyses are certainly not meant to be conclu-
sive. They are rather supposed to highlight general
LTAG-related options when dealing with some
critical challenges posed by depictive secondary
predication: the non-local relation between the de-
pictive and its target, the rather strict choice of tar-
gets, and the flexibility in stacking and lineariz-
ing depictives. Therefore, it might be that the pro-
posed analyses have to be revised in the light of
more data and more languages. In what follows,
we want to mention some of the potential “break-
ing points”.

One challenge to the analysis in Section 6 would
be that a depictive can target an argument of the
verb that does not bear a macrorole. While En-
glish seems to be largely consistent in only allow-
ing macroroles, there seem to be languages that are
less strict (e.g. Warlpiri, see Simpson 2005). For
these languages, a more syntactic approach might
be preferable. A more severe challenge would
be if a depictive was able to target a constituent
that cannot even be considered an argument of
the verb, for instance, a modifying expression or
some more deeply embedded part of an argument.
While it is hard to find acceptable data where a
depictive targets a modifier, there are indeed cases
that seem to challenge the locality restriction. If
they were possible in general and not just side ef-
fects of multi-word expressions as argued in Sec-
tion 2.4, either the set of interface features would
have to be considerably extended in order to make
the embedded targets accessible or the semantics
of the depictive would have to be more complex
in order to access elements embedded below the

event participants. On the other hand, restrictions
on linearization (and stacking) could be rather eas-
ily implemented using purely syntactic features.

Finally, our choice for LTAG as such could be
seen as another weakness. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 4, we deliberately decided against MCTAG,
even though we thereby rule out the possibility
to establish a more direct derivational relation be-
tween the depictive and its target. Within an MC-
TAG, depictives could be represented as tree sets
consisting of two trees: one tree anchored by the
depitive word, namely roughly the auxiliary tree
that was used above in the presented LTAG anal-
yses, and one degenerated elementary tree, the
scope taking part. The degenerated elementary
tree possibly only consists of a single node and
is supposed to either adjoin to the root node of the
target NP or to substitute into the target NP slot of
the verbal tree, yielding again a substitution node.
Similar tree sets can be found in works that deal,
for example, with reflexives (Ryant and Scheffler,
2006; Kallmeyer and Romero, 2007; Storoshenko
et al., 2008; Frank, 2008) and extraposed relative
clauses (Kroch and Joshi, 1987; Chen-Main and
Joshi, 2014). The approach in Frank (2008) adopts
a tree-local solution where reflexives introduce on
the syntactic side, in addition to the initial tree of
the reflexive, an initial single-node NP tree that
substitutes into the antecedent slot. A similar so-
lution might be possible for depicitves. The ap-
proach in Chen-Main and Joshi (2014) is interest-
ing because it remains tree-local even for illnested
dependency structures, thanks to flexible composi-
tion and multiple adjunction. As was shown with
(4-b), depictives can give rise to illnested depen-
dencies as well. Even so, the strongest argument
against using MCTAG for depictives is that the tar-
get does not have to be realized. Consequently,
there are cases where the target NP is missing as a
landing site for the scope part of the depictive tree
set, unless it is made part of the verbal elemen-
tary tree for this very reason. Therefore, in place
of decorating the verbal elementary tree in such a
way, we prefer to remain with LTAG.

8 Conclusion

Depictives challenge the syntax-semantics inter-
face in many ways: as for English, locality is ex-
tended, but still restricted to the verbal domain,
that is, maximally extending to the syntactic ar-
guments of the verbal head. But as flexible as it

28



might look, within this there is some additional re-
strictiveness that is hard to capture in only syntac-
tic or semantic terms. Therefore, among the three
LTAG approaches we developed in this paper, we
favour a semantic approach that is enhanced with
Van Valin’s argument linking mechanism. The
prediction then made is that depictives are re-
stricted to the syntactically and semantically de-
termined macroroles actor and undergoer. While,
from what we have seen in this paper, the pre-
diction seems to be empirically valid at least for
English, the data survey is still very preliminary.
This needs to be tackled in future work while also
broadening the scope crosslinguistically. Finally,
as one of the reviewers pointed out to us, there are
other constructions that also seem to involve long-
distance modification, such as absolutes and free
adjuncts (examples taken from Stump 1985):

(20) a. His father being a sailor, John knows all
about boats.

b. Walking home, he found a dollar.

The differences and commonalities with construc-
tions of this kind need to be investigated in future
work as well.

9 Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Wilhelm Geuder and the two
anonymous reviewers for detailed comments and
discussion. The work presented in this paper
was financed by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG) within the CRC 991 “The Structure
of Representations in Language, Cognition, and
Science”.

References
Anne Abeillé and Owen Rambow. 2000. Tree Ad-

joining Grammar: An overview. In Anne Abeillé
and Owen Rambow, editors, Tree Adjoining Gram-
mars: Formalisms, Linguistic Analyses and Process-
ing, CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA, number 107
in CSLI Lecture Notes, pages 1–68.

Joan Chen-Main and Aravind K. Joshi. 2014. A de-
pendency perspective on the adequacy of tree lo-
cal multi-component tree adjoining grammar. Jour-
nal of Logic and Computation 24(5):989–1022.
https://doi.org/10.1093/logcom/exs012.

Benoit Crabbé, Denys Duchier, Claire Gardent, Joseph
Le Roux, and Yannick Parmentier. 2013. XMG: eX-
tensible MetaGrammar. Computational Linguistics
39(3):1–66.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. Language 67(3):547–619.

Thomas Ernst. 2001. The syntax of adjuncts. Num-
ber 96 in Cambridge Studies in Linguistics. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Robert Frank. 2002. Phrase Structure Composition
and Syntactic Dependencies. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Robert Frank. 2008. Reflexives and TAG semantics.
In Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop
on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related Frame-
works (TAG+9). Tübingen, Germany, pages 97–104.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W08-2313.

Wilhelm Geuder. 2002. Oriented adverbs: Issues in
the lexical semantics of event adverbs. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Ger-
many.

Wilhelm Geuder. 2004. Depictives and trans-
parent adverbs. In Jennifer R. Austin, Ste-
fan Engelberg, and Gisa Rauh, editors, Adver-
bials: The interplay between meaning, context,
and syntactic structure, John Benjamins Pub-
lishing Company, Amsterdam, pages 131–166.
https://doi.org/10.1075/la.70.06geu.

Aravind K. Joshi and Yves Schabes. 1997. Tree-
Adjoining Grammars. In Grzegorz Rozenberg and
Arto Salomaa, editors, Handbook of Formal Lan-
guages, Springer, Berlin, volume 3, pages 69–124.

Laura Kallmeyer, Timm Lichte, Rainer Osswald, and
Simon Petitjean. 2016. Argument linking in LTAG:
A constraint-based implementation with XMG. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on
Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms
(TAG+12). Düsseldorf, Germany, pages 48–57.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-3305.

Laura Kallmeyer and Rainer Osswald. 2013. Syntax-
driven semantic frame composition in Lexicalized
Tree Adjoining Grammar. Journal of Language
Modelling 1:267–330.

Laura Kallmeyer and Maribel Romero. 2007. Reflex-
ives and reciprocals in LTAG. In Jeroen Geertzen,
Elias Thijsse, Harry Bunt, and Amanda Schiffrin,
editors, Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Computational Semantics IWCS-7.
Tilburg, pages 271–282.

Anthony S. Kroch and Aravind K. Joshi. 1987. Ana-
lyzing extraposition in a tree adjoining grammar. In
Geoffrey J. Huck and Almerido E. Ojeda, editors,
Syntax and Semantics: Discontinuous Constituency,
Academic Press, Inc., pages 107–149.

Stefan Müller. 2002. Complex Predicates. Verbal
Complexes, Resultative Constructions, and Particle
Verbs in German. Studies in Constraint-Based Lex-
icalism. CSLI Publications, Stanford.

29



Stefan Müller. 2008. Depictive secondary predicates
in German and English. In Christoph Schroeder,
Gerd Hentschel, and Winfried Boeder, editors,
Secondary Predicates in Eastern European Lan-
guages and Beyond, BIS-Verlag, Oldenburg, num-
ber 16 in Studia Slavica Oldenburgensia, pages 255–
273. http://hpsg.fu-berlin.de/ stefan/Pub/depiktiv-
2006.html.

Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar. Studies in Contempo-
rary Linguistics. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Liina Pylkkänen. 2002. Introducing Arguments. Ph.D.
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Owen Rambow, K. Vijay-Shanker, and David Weir.
2001. D-tree substitution grammars. Computa-
tional Linguistic 27(1):87–121.

Ian Roberts. 1987. The Representation of Im-
plicit and Dethematized Subjects. Number 10 in
Linguistic Models. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110877304.

Ian Roberts. 1988. Predicative aps. Linguistic Inquiry
19(4):703–710.

Neville Ryant and Tatjana Scheffler. 2006. Bind-
ing of anaphors in LTAG. In Proceedings
of the Eighth International Workshop on
Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related For-
malisms. Sydney, Australia, pages 65–72.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W06/W06-
1509.

Yves Schabes and Stuart M. Shieber. 1994. An Al-
ternative Conception of Tree-Adjoining Derivation.
Computational Linguistics 20(1):91–124.

Jane Simpson. 2005. Depictives in English and
Warlpiri. In Nikolaus P. Himmelmann and Eva
Schultze-Berndt, editors, Secondary Predication
and Adverbial Modification: The Typology of Depic-
tives, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pages 69–
106.

Dennis R. Storoshenko, Chung-hye Han, and David
Potter. 2008. Reflexivity in English: An STAG
analysis. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related
Frameworks (TAG+9). Tübingen, Germany, pages
149–156. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W08-
2320.

Gregory Stump. 1985. The semantic variability of ab-
solute constructions. Number 25 in Synthese lan-
guage library. D. Reidel Publishing, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands.

Robert D. Van Valin, Jr. 2005. Exploring the Syntax-
Semantics Interface. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Susanne Winkler. 1997. Focus and Secondary Predica-
tion. Number 43 in Studies in Generative Grammar.
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.

Dieter Wunderlich. 1997. Argument extension by lexi-
cal adjunction. Journal of Semantics 14(2):95–142.

30


