









































Annotating Italian Social Media Texts in Universal Dependencies

Manuela Sanguinetti
Cristina Bosco

Alessandro Mazzei
Università di Torino

Dipartimento di Informatica
Torino, Italy

{msanguin,bosco,mazzei}@di.unito.it

Alberto Lavelli
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Trento, Italy
lavelli@fbk.eu

Fabio Tamburini
Università di Bologna

FICLIT
Bologna, Italy

fabio.tamburini@unibo.it

Abstract

Social media texts have been widely used
in recent years for various tasks related
to sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing; nevertheless, they still feature a wide
range of linguistic phenomena that have
proved to be particularly challenging for
automatic processing, especially for syn-
tactic parsing. In this paper, we describe
a recently started project for the develop-
ment of PoSTWITA-UD, a novel Italian
Twitter treebank in Universal Dependen-
cies. In particular, the paper focuses on its
development steps, and on the challenges
such work entails, both for automatic sys-
tems and human annotators, by discussing
the errors produced, by parsers in partic-
ular, and the guidelines we adopted for
manual revision of annotated tweets. Such
guidelines aim to bring to the reader’s at-
tention the most critical cases (in them-
selves, but also in a UD perspective) en-
countered so far and stemming from the
specific characteristics of the texts we are
dealing with.

1 Introduction

In the last few years, the interest for automatic
evaluation of social media texts has grown con-
siderably; thanks to the various APIs available
from the platform, Twitter in particular has been
considered a valuable source of data that can be
used for different computational linguistics stud-
ies and applications. Nevertheless, the annota-
tion and exploitation of Twitter corpora are cur-
rently mainly referred to sentiment analysis and
opinion mining or other semantic-oriented forms
of processing, see e.g. tasks in SemEval 20171

1http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2017/
task4/

and EVALITA (Barbieri et al., 2016). Only a few
experiments have been done for developing tree-
banks and datasets from social media annotated
with Part-of-Speech tags and other morphological
features (see Section 2).

Regardless of the irregularities of Twitter lan-
guage, human beings do not seem to find it
excessively troubling to understand each other
when communicating via social media. Therefore,
among the research question that we would like to
address, there is also how much this performance
depends on human morpho-syntactic ability or on
other parts of linguistic competence.

Considering that the availability of a full or par-
tial syntactic analysis can improve the results of
semantic and pragmatic-oriented techniques, we
propose the development of PoSTWITA-UD, a
collection of social media texts annotated accord-
ing to a well-known dependency-based annotation
format: the Universal Dependencies (Nivre et al.,
2016)2.

The goal of this work is twofold. On one hand,
it consists in making available a resource currently
missing, for Italian in particular, which can be ex-
ploited for training NLP systems in order to en-
hance their performance on social media texts. On
the other hand, it may also contribute to the wider
debate about social media texts and their analy-
sis, for example by showing how much syntactic
information can be helpful for a given NLP task
or downstream application; we refer in particu-
lar to phenomena such as negation and coordina-
tion scope, which, if not correctly detected, can
strongly undermine the results obtained e.g. by a
sentiment analysis engine in classifying the polar-
ity of a message (Bosco et al., 2013b).

From a methodological point of view, our
choice to adopt the UD scheme stems from the
interest in a dependency-based representation for-

2http://universaldependencies.org/

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 229-239,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

229



mat that has gained full acceptance from the re-
search community over a few years, especially re-
garding Italian resources. The goal of creating
this resource goes hand in hand with that of shar-
ing it and validating its annotation according to a
shared standard, such as the one UD projects aims
to provide. In addition, UD format allows to ex-
tend the inventory of morphological features and
syntactic relations with further subtypes, accord-
ing to the language, genre or linguistic construc-
tion peculiarities. For all these reasons Universal
Dependencies proved to be the optimal represen-
tation choice.

This project benefits from the availability of a
Twitter corpus used as dataset for the task of Part-
of-Speech tagging on social media texts (PoST-
WITA) held at the 2016 edition of EVALITA,
the evaluation campaign for Italian NLP tools3.
For our current purpose, we further enriched the
corpus by adding the missing annotation layers,
i.e. lemmas, morphological features and syntac-
tic relations, all in compliance with the annotation
scheme and principles of Universal Dependencies.

The content of this paper is thus organized as
follows. Next section briefly surveys the litera-
ture on syntactic analysis of social media texts,
and Section 3 introduces the dataset used for our
project. Sections 4, 5 and 6 describe the various
annotation steps, while in Section 7 we discuss the
creation of the gold standard set. In particular, in
Section 7.2 we discuss the annotation guidelines
we followed for manual revision. Finally, Section
8 closes the paper with some considerations on the
current state of the project.

2 Related Work

Considering their increasing importance in NLP,
several efforts have been made to annotate, man-
ually or semi-automatically, social media texts.
However, the use of typical NLP tools and tech-
niques has proved critical, essentially by virtue of
the unconventional use of the language norms at
all levels (orthography, lexicon, morphology and
syntax) and the amount of noise such non-standard
linguistic behaviors and meta-textual elements can
bring about. Although various attempts to produce
such kind of specialized resources and tools are
described in literature (e.g. (Gimpel et al., 2011;
Owoputi et al., 2013; Lynn et al., 2015; Rei et
al., 2016)), most of these attempts mainly focus on

3http://www.evalita.it

PoS-tagged corpora, while few of them deal with
syntactic annotation as well. One of such works
is that of Foster et al. (2011), who built a dataset
containing 1,000 sentences including tweets and
forum posts, with the specific aim of investigat-
ing the problems of parsing social media texts.
Later on, other works attempted to overcome such
limits by creating ah hoc resources to be used as
training data for parsing. This is the case of the
French Social Media Bank (Seddah et al., 2012), a
set of 1,700 sentences from various types of user-
generated content (among those, tweets), anno-
tated using an adapted version of the French Tree-
bank (Abeillé et al., 2003) scheme, and TWEE-
BANK (Kong et al., 2014), built by manually
adding dependency parses to tweets drawn from
the PoS-tagged Twitter corpus of Owoputi et al.
(2013).
Finally, it is worth mentioning the English Web
Treebank (Silveira et al., 2014), a collection of
more than 16k sentences taken from various Web
media, including blogs, emails, reviews and Ya-
hoo! answers, and also available in UD format.
To the best of our knowledge, however, the one
presented here is the first work devoted to create a
Twitter treebank annotated according to UD spec-
ifications, and is almost certainly the first resource
of this kind created for Italian.

3 The Dataset

PoSTWITA-UD was not built from scratch, but
it has been developed by processing and further
enriching an already existing resource, that is
the dataset used for the EVALITA 2016 task on
Part-of-Speech tagging of social media, i.e. PoST-
WITA (Bosco et al., 2016). Therefore, data and
content are the same as those of the PoSTWITA
corpus released to the task participants, which
includes a development set composed of 6,438
tweets (114,967 tokens), and a test set of 300
tweets (4,759 tokens).
Its content, in turn, comes from the SENTIPOLC
corpus, i.e. the dataset used for the EVALITA
SENTIment POLarity Classification (SEN-
TIPOLC) task in 2014 (Basile et al., 2014)
and 2016 (Barbieri et al., 2016). Furthermore,
within the EVALITA 2016 campaign, the same
core dataset was made available with semantic-
oriented annotations for two other tasks as well:
the Named Entity Recognition and Linking in
Italian Tweets (NEEL-IT) (Basile et al., 2016)

230



and the Event Factuality Annotation (FactA)
task (Minard et al., 2016). Working on this
treebank thus collocates our current activity in the
perspective of the development of a benchmark
where a full pipeline of NLP tools can be applied
and tested in the future evaluation campaigns.

Considering its use for EVALITA, the PoST-
WITA dataset has already been automatically pre-
processed, tokenized and PoS tagged, as well as
entirely revised by human annotators, in order to
remove duplicate tweets and provide a gold anno-
tation. Such gold set is the starting point of the
PoSTWITA-UD project, whose development steps
are described in the next sections.

4 Tokenization and Part-of-Speech Tags:
from PoSTWITA to PoSTWITA-UD

For what concerns tokenization and tagging prin-
ciples, the PoSTWITA task organizers followed
the strategy proposed in the Italian section of
the UD guidelines, though applying some minor
changes. Assuming, as usual and more suitably
in PoS tagging, a neutral perspective with respect
to the solution of parsing problems (more relevant
in building treebanks), PoSTWITA format differs
from the one applied in UD, in that it leaves tokens
unsplitted in the two following cases:

• articulated prepositions (e.g. dalla (’from-the
[fem]’), nell’ (’in-the’), al (’to-the’), ...)

• clitic clusters, which are composed by one or
more clitic pronouns attached to the end of
a verb form (e.g. regalaglielo (’offer-it-to-
him’), dandolo (’giving-it’), ...)

For this reason, and according to the strategy as-
sumed in previous EVALITA PoS tagging evalu-
ations, two novel specific tags were assigned in
these cases: ADP A and VERB CLIT, for artic-
ulated prepositions and verbs with clitics respec-
tively.

Furthermore, all the Internet and Twitter-
specific tokens that, according to UD specifica-
tions, should be classified as SYM (symbol) were
further specified based on the token type. As
a result, all the categories that typically occur
in social media texts, like emoticons, Internet
addresses, email addresses, hashtags and Twit-
ter mentions had their own tag, i.e. EMO, URL,
EMAIL, HASHTAG and MENTION.

For the development of PoSTWITA-UD, we
had to restore the initial UD tokenization format,
thus re-splitting all ADP A and VERB CLIT
cases into the corresponding UD PoS tags (upos)
ADP+DET and VERB+PRON respectively. We
also had to restore all the Twitter-specific tags into
SYM.

Finally, it should be pointed out that no modi-
fication on the sentence splitting has been carried
out. Just like the original PoSTWITA dataset, the
reference unit is always the tweet in its entirety –
which may thus consist of multiple sentences – not
the sentence alone.

5 Lemmas and Morphological Features

In order to produce a correctly formatted corpus
in CoNLL-U format, we also inserted information
about lemmas and morphological features associ-
ated to each word. To speed up the process, we
relied on AnIta (Tamburini and Melandri, 2012),
an Italian morphological analyzer based on a large
lexicon (about 110,000 lemmas) able to analyze
the various word forms and produce all the possi-
ble lemmas and morphological features for these
forms. A two-step semi-automatic conversion be-
tween the different annotation schemes ensured a
full compatibility with the UD specifications.
In the first step we added lemmas and language-
specific PoS tags (xpos). As mentioned above, the
insertion was done partly with a script that con-
verts AnIta output into a UD-compatible form, and
matches the word forms on the PoSTWITA-UD
side with the lemmas provided by AnIta for the re-
spective upos. While the xpos tags (the same used
in UD Italian) were added with ad hoc heuristics
and manual disambiguation.
The insertion of lemmas was also performed man-
ually, by revising the automatic results of the script
and adding the missing lemmas. The choice we
made in this manual stage represented a guiding
principle for syntactic annotation as well (see Sec-
tion 7.2), i.e what is understandable by a human
should be annotated accordingly. With regard to
lemmatization in particular, this means that when-
ever possible, we assigned to a non-standard form
the lemma of the respective standard form (though
leaving the word form unchanged). Following
this principle, we thus assigned the corresponding
lemma to the various cases of abbreviation, capi-
talization, typos and grammatical errors, and word

231



lengthening.
An exception is made for punctuation, non-
intelligible word forms, dialectal forms and for-
eign words, in which cases the lemma remained
the same as the word form.

In the second step we then added the morpho-
logical features by following the same strategy de-
scribed above for lemmatization, that is by match-
ing the proper morphological features with a given
word form based on its lemma, upos and xpos tag.
The feature insertion step involved the following
parts of speech: adjectives, adverbs, determiners,
nouns, numerals, pronouns and verbs.

In order to preserve a higher consistency among
resources, we also used the language-specific fea-
tures introduced in UD Italian for clitic pronouns
(Clitic=Yes) and possessives (Poss=Yes).

6 Syntactic Analysis

The last step included the syntactic annotation of
the tweets according to UD specifications. We car-
ried out this task by running different parsers and
developing proper annotation guidelines. In this
and the next section we describe both aspects.

6.1 Data Parsing
Similar to the previous steps, we first automati-
cally analyzed the texts with state-of-the-art de-
pendency parsers, and then we manually revised
the annotation.

As regards Italian UD-compliant resources,
the only dataset that was suitable for train-
ing is UD Italian (Bosco et al., 2013a)4, ver-
sion 2, which includes texts from newspapers,
Wikipedia and legal Italian and European Com-
munity sources. Therefore, we performed an out-
of-domain parsing experiment, by training differ-
ent systems on this treebank, though being aware
that the result would be undermined by the deep
differences between the text types included in such
resources.

For the automatic annotation we used some of
the parsers that obtained the best performance in a
recent comparative study concerning an Italian de-
pendency treebank (Lavelli, 2016), in particular:

• the MATE tools, that include both a graph-
based (Bohnet, 2010) and a transition-based
parser (Bohnet and Nivre, 2012; Bohnet and

4The other resource is the Italian section of the parallel
treebank ParTUT (UD Italian-ParTUT), but it has many over-
lapping sentences with UD Italian, and it is much smaller.

Parser -LX -F -UD
MATE graph-based 62.53 67.05 91.26
MATE transition-based 64.92 66.65 91.44
RBG full 64.36 67.07 90.16

Table 1: Results of the parsers after the different
annotation stages, i.e. with lemmas and language-
specific PoS tags (-LX), and with morphological
features as well (-F). The parser outputs were eval-
uated against the gold standard of the test set (300
tweets, -LX and -F columns) but also against the
UD Italian test set (489 sentences, -UD column).

Kuhn, 2012); they were run using standard
parameters;

• RBG (Lei et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014b;
Zhang et al., 2014a), which is based on a low-
rank factorization method that enables to map
high dimensional feature vectors into low
dimensional representations; the full model
was chosen.

For the near future, we also plan to extend the
experiment to other state-of-the-art parsers as well
(namely TurboParser (Martins et al., 2013) and
ZPar (Zhang and Nivre, 2011)), and to combine all
the outputs produced to obtain an improved pars-
ing quality (Hall et al., 2010).

In order to get an overall picture of the parsing
results after each of the steps described in Section
5, we parsed both development and test set a) after
the insertion of lemmas and language-specific PoS
tags, and b) after the morphological features were
also added.

To get a measure of how much parsing quality
differs between standard and Twitter texts, in Ta-
ble 1 we report also the results of the parser on the
UD Italian test set (489 sentences).
For the evaluation step we used the script made
available for the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task5 with
the default setting (i.e. by reporting the Labelled
Attachment Score, LAS F1 score only).
The overall parsing results are discussed in the
next section.

6.2 Results and Discussion

The reported results actually show what we were
already expecting: the performance of the three

5http://universaldependencies.org/
conll17/evaluation.html

232



parsers improves when we add linguistic informa-
tion. Overall, however, the parsing quality for the
PoSTWITA test set is relatively poor considering
both the results on UD Italian test set and the fact
that the systems start from partially annotated and
corrected texts, rather than raw ones6. The expla-
nation we can give is also the most obvious, that
is, parsers have to deal with texts from a different
domain than those of the training set, and what is
more, having very specific - and challenging - fea-
tures. As a proof of this, we observed the behav-
ior of the three parsers on single relations, assum-
ing that their performance would remain stable on
well-known cases and decrease on poorly-covered
phenomena in the training set.
To verify this assumption, we observed the F-score
obtained by parsers on two sub-sets of relations
that reflect two different, though in a sense com-
plementary, aspects: the first one includes the 10
most frequent relations in UD Italian7, and the
second one comprises three of the relations where
parsers get the lowest results, i.e. discourse,
parataxis and vocative. These relations
are summarized in Table 2, along with their F-
score averaged over the three parsers and their dis-
tribution both in UD Italian training set and on
PoSTWITA-UD test set.

As it can be seen, just three relations exceed the
90% threshold (advmod, amod and cc), and just
one is between 80% and 90%, i.e. the relation
linking the direct object to its predicate (obj).
The relation with the lowest F-score, among the
most frequent in UD Italian, is the one represent-
ing adverbial clauses (advcl). This can be ex-
plained by the fact that most of the relations la-
beled by the parsers as adverbial clauses were
rather considered as paratactic constructions in the
gold set.
Interestingly enough, a quite low F-score is re-
ported for the nsubj relation, and the cases where
it was erroneously annotated are quite systematic
on all three parsers. They correspond to cases of
nouns that in the gold set we have chosen to con-
sider as the root of the whole tweet, because they
are followed by paratactic elements (see Section
7.2), or as addressees of a given utterance (hence

6This is also true for the UD Italian test set, which was
parsed starting from the CoNLL-U files with gold PoS tags,
rather than from raw texts.

7Excluding punct, det and case, which are poorly in-
dicative of the challenging aspects of this out-of-domain pars-
ing experiment.

UD relation F score % train % test
acl 58.00 1.18 0.46
advcl 50.98 1.26 1.05
advmod 96.85 3.52 6.22
amod 90.27 5.45 2.25
cc 97.27 2.74 2.43
conj 66.74 3.39 3.26
obj 82.75 3.41 4.72
obl 72.46 5.74 4.23
nmod 72.62 8.06 5.23
nsubj 65.37 4.26 3.62
discourse 0 0.02 3.18
parataxis 11.18 0.14 5.29
vocative 0 0.07 3.83

Table 2: Averaged results of the three parsers,
in terms of F-score, along with the relative fre-
quency in UD Italian training set (’train’) and
PoSTWITA-UD test set (’test’), of individual rela-
tions: the 10 most frequent relations in UD Italian
(upper part), and three of the relations with poorer
parsing results (lower part).

as vocative). This aspect, in turn, raises the is-
sue of the use, within the gold set, of labels such as
parataxis, vocative and discourse. For
the reasons outlined in Section 7.2, these three re-
lations are much more frequent in the PoSTWITA-
UD gold set than in UD Italian, as also reported in
Table 2. The far lower frequency of these rela-
tions in the training set and, as a result, in parsers
outputs, compared to the gold set, leads to the ex-
tremely poor parsing quality with respect to these
three phenomena.

7 Towards the gold standard

In this section we describe the creation of a fully
corrected PoSTWITA-UD, from the manual re-
vision of parsing output to the definition of the
guidelines for the annotators. The annotation
methodology, as conceived and tested so far for
the test set only, will also be applied to the devel-
opment set in the next project phase.

7.1 Manual revision and Inter-Annotator
Agreement

The manual post-processing of annotated texts,
while it was useful for parsers evaluation, repre-
sented the first step towards the goal of our work:
obtaining a reference gold standard for the fur-
ther manual annotation, for the current evaluation

233



of parsers and for their future training on Twitter
texts.

The revision was made by two trained annota-
tors who were familiar with the UD format and
using DGAnnotator8 as tree editor. Although
their work proceeded independently, some par-
ticularly critical phenomena were previously dis-
cussed. This allowed to come up with shared
guidelines (see Section 7.2). In order to take into
account the fact that the outputs of the different
parsers can be affected by different errors, the two
annotators used as starting dataset the output files
from two (of the three used) different parsers, ran-
domly selected.

As a result of the first correction phase, the
degree of inter-annotator agreement (on relations
alone) was calculated, using Cohen’s kappa as the
reference index (Carletta, 1996). The agreement
at this stage was k = 0.83.
Based on this result, and in particular on cases
with higher disagreement, a consistency check on
the application of the guidelines and a further re-
vision were made (after which the agreement went
up to k = 0.92); finally, the corrections of both an-
notators were merged into a single final file.

7.2 Annotation Guidelines

Several phenomena featuring social media texts
are poorly treated by existing morphological ana-
lyzers and parsing systems. In fact, it can be quite
difficult to decide their collocation within a sin-
gle layer of analysis (syntax, semantics or prag-
matics), since they better collocate in the broader
area of communication dynamics taking place in
social media conversation. In computer-mediated
communication, and specifically on Twitter, users
often resort to a language type that is closer to
speech, rather than written language. Narrowing
it down to Italian, this is found at various lev-
els, from orthography, with forms and expressions
that imitate the verbal face-to-face conversation,
to lexis (colloquialisms and vulgar language) and
syntax, with the prevalence of simple sentences or
paratactic forms, clefting, dislocations and syntac-
tic structures that do not respect the typical SVO
order of constituents (Zaga, 2012). The contin-
uous shift from written to spoken language and
vice versa, on the other hand, is also found in the
absence (at least in our corpus) of those typical

8http://medialab.di.unipi.it/Project/
QA/Parser/DgAnnotator/

mechanisms of spoken language, such as repairs
and restarts.
The absence of these phenomena, and, at the same
time, the presence of others (mentioned later in
this section) that are typical of the medium used,
make Twitter language a unique, for which - un-
like written and speech treebanks9 - we were not
able to find clear and shared guidelines.

For the purposes of our project, we had to
face the challenge of classifying all these Twitter-
specific phenomena within a syntactic framework
– rather than within pragmatics or semantics –
more specifically the one conceived for Univer-
sal Dependencies. For that purpose, we drafted
some tentative guidelines and followed them while
preparing the gold standard.

In the remainder of this section we briefly dis-
cuss these principles by showing some practical
annotation examples10.

Emoticons, emojis and similar aspects. As re-
gards these iconic elements, and emojis in partic-
ular, a wide debate has opened on whether they
should be considered as an emerging language in
itself11 or just a powerful communication tool that
does not substitute language, but rather comple-
ments it. While going into the substance of this de-
bate is well beyond the scope of this paper, and of
our project in general, we equally had to face the
issue on what status we should attribute to these
so-called pictograms, in an attempt to draw a line
between what should or should not be annotated
on the syntactic layer. In fact, emoticons and emo-
jis are typically used to express feelings and emo-
tions, reproduce facial expressions or even convey
the intonation of spoken language. Although per-
forming on a more pragmatic, than merely syntac-
tic level, they seem to function in a language-like
fashion12. In this sense, they could then be com-
pared to interjections and other discourse particles.
Bearing in mind what UD guidelines suggest for

9Regarding, in particular, UD-based speech treebanks,
we mention here the resource available for Slovenian (Do-
brovoljc and Nivre, 2016), and that for French (upcoming)
(Gerdes and Kahane, 2017).

10For the sake of readability, we kept just the more relevant
dependency edges and the corresponding relations.

11See, for example, the study on emojis in Italian language
(Chiusaroli, 2015) and the EmojitalianoBot and EmojiWorld-
Bot experiments (Monti et al., 2016)

12http://blog.oxforddictionaries.com/
2015/11/emoji-language/

234



such particles13, we labelled also emoticons and
emojis as discourse items, as in example (1).

(1)

i risultati usciranno tra quattro giorni :)))
(the results will-be-out in four days :))))

discourse

On the other hand, we also found few cases
where the tweet ends with an expression (typically
a verb) between asterisks that, conversely, substi-
tutes an iconic element (perhaps an emoji). De-
spite the similar pragmatic function these verbs
seem to have with respect to emoticons and emo-
jis, we considered them as independent clauses,
therefore as paratactic elements, and annotated as
shown in (2).

(2)

e io che cerco di aiutarti anche *sbuffa*

parataxis

Hashtags, mentions and replies. These are
meta-language items with manifold purposes.
The @ symbol that characterizes the so-called
mentions and replies is used to call out usernames
in tweets. Usernames preceded by the sign be-
come links to the respective Twitter profiles, and
can be used mainly in two ways: to just mention
another user or to reply another user/s’ tweet14.
The act of addressing to other users by resorting
to such conventions can be compared to a typical
vocative function, which made us lean on annotat-
ing these cases with the vocative relation, by
attaching the addressee to its host sentence, as in
example (3).

13http://universaldependencies.org/u/
dep/discourse.html

14https://support.twitter.com/articles/
464314

(3)

@ChiaZe93 io non sono d’ accordo
( @ChiaZe93 I disagree )

vocative

Hashtags are key words or phrases preceded by
the # symbol. They serve different purposes, of-
ten depending on their position within the tweet.
When placed in prefix (example (4)) or suffix po-
sition (example (5)), they are mainly used to de-
scribe and/or comment the main topic of the tweet,
making it more intelligible to other users; in most
cases they do not modify any word in particular,
nor they reflect any explicit coordination, subor-
dination, or argument relation with a given head
word. Similar to other run-on sentences, hashtags
are are not integrated into the sentence, rather be-
ing joined to the latter without any conjunction or
punctuation mark; therefore, we consider them as
paratactic elements

(4)

#notizie Piovono dollari su Blatter
( #news are-raining-down dollars on Blatter )

root

parataxis

(5)

canta ancora ti prego #edsheeransanremo2015
( sing again please #edsheeransanremo2015 )

parataxis

Hashtags and mentions, however, can also be
placed in infix position, i.e. by adding their respec-
tive sign to the word/phrase or username within
the tweet, even just to keep it simple and save char-
acter space. In these cases they can be considered
as fully syntactically-integrated elements, whose
removal could potentially make the sentence un-
grammatical (Chiusaroli, 2014); we thus assign
them their corresponding syntactic role. In tweets

235



(6) and (7), shown below, the tokens @matteorenzi
and #Boldrini are the actual subjects of the predi-
cates arriva and ha, respectively.

(6)

arriva @matteorenzi
(is-coming @matteorenzi )

nsubj

(7)

ma la #Boldrini ha qualche problema ?
( does #Boldrini have a problem ? )

nsubj

Unknown or mispelled words. Sometimes
tweets can also contain a whole host of uncon-
ventional elements that substitute actual words:
abbreviations, homophones, conflations, or just
spelling errors. Whenever we can guess what that
element stands for, we assign it the corresponding
syntactic role. In the example tweet (8), the
adverb perché is abbreviated to Xché (which is
a quite common form in any kind of informal
communication), while the two auxiliaries è
stata, the predicate premiata and the determiner
una were capitalized and conflated into a single
token. Considering, however, that among these
words, there is one, i.e. the predicate, that can be
promoted as the head of the remaining words, we
took this item as the sentence root.

(8)

Xché èStataPremiataUna “cosa” cosı̀ ?
( Why hasBeenAwardedA “thing” like this ? )

root

advmod obj

There are cases, however, where we cannot
determine which category the word belongs to,
nor its syntactic or pragmatic role: in the absence
of such information, the word is attached to the
nearest head with the dep relation, as shown in
tweet (9).

(9)

quanto sono bravi , fdgjdkjgd
( they’re so good , fdgjdkjgd )

dep

Incomplete tweets. Because of the 140-
character limit imposed to Twitter users, it often
appears that tweets are incomplete, and the
elided part is represented by an ellipsis (“...”).
In such cases, the full text can usually be read
by clicking on the URL that is appended to the
tweet; however, once the tweet is collected and
processed, the elided part is lost. Despite this,
most of the times, such part is quite predictable by
the reader/annotator, either because of the way the
remaining sentence is structured or because even
one word was partially replaced by the ellipsis,
as in example (11). We treat these two cases
a bit differently, though. In sentence (10), for
example, the fact that the ellipsis points occur
after the predicate Ascoltiamo and the determiner
la suggests that there may be a noun depending
on that predicate, and, in turn, representing the
head of the determiner. We then treat cases like
this as typical noun ellipsis, by promoting one of
its overt dependents (such as the determiner, in
the example) as head word, following the order
suggested in UD guidelines15.

(10)

Ascoltiamo la ...
( Listen-to the ... )

obj

punct

However, if the suspension ellipsis is used to re-
place also part of a word that has been cut off, and
considering that - in these cases - the dots are part
of the word itself16, the word is treated as it is,
without any head promotion of its dependents.

(11)

Il numero uno di Confindustria comme...
( The number one of Confindustria comme...)

root
nsubj

In tweet (11), for example, the word comme... is
likely to stand for the predicate commenta ((he)
comments); therefore we annotate it as the head.

15http://universaldependencies.org/u/
overview/specific-syntax.html/ellipsis

16This is a tokenization principle adopted from the begin-
ning of the corpus development for the PoSTWITA task and
that were left unchanged.

236



URLs. Another common practice in microblog-
ging, and in Twitter posts in particular, is to in-
corporate links to Web pages, blog entries or even
other tweets. These links are usually appended at
the end of the tweet and they are not part of its
syntactic structure. Therefore, we always consider
them as generic dependents of the root, using the
dep relation (see tweet (12)).

(12)

il programma dettagliato : http://t.co/OJq7hBcH
( the program detailed : http://t.co/OJq7hBcH )

root
dep

On the other hand, a URL may also happen
to occur within the sentence, as a syntactically-
integrated element. Although we have not
encountered similar cases in our treebank yet, we
consider the URL as a proper noun and apply
the same annotation criteria described above for
hashtags and mentions, i.e. we assign the proper
syntactic label according to the actual role the
URL plays within the sentence.

As mentioned before, these guidelines are pre-
liminary and refer to the trickiest phenomena en-
countered in the test set. It is not to be ruled out,
however, that in the manual revision of the devel-
opment set there will be other cases that will lead
us either to revise the criteria adopted so far or
to extend the inventory of uncertain cases. A fi-
nal version of the guidelines, to be considered as
an integration of those conceived for UD Italian,
will be released in the UD repository along with
the fully annotated PoSTWITA-UD treebank, by
November 2017, that is with the release of UD ver-
sion 2.1.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we presented a recently started
project of an Italian Twitter treebank in Univer-
sal Dependencies to be released as gold standard
for training and testing NLP tools on social media
texts. What we achieved so far is the complete an-
notation of the entire corpus on morphological and
syntactic levels, and the manual revision of the test
set (300 tweets) by two independent annotators. In

parallel with the annotation correction, we also de-
veloped some guidelines to properly deal with the
genre-specific most critical issues.

As stated above, the project is at an early stage,
therefore much work has to be done. First of
all, the complete revision of the development set
as well (approximately 6,000 tweets), which is
planned to be ready for the next release of Univer-
sal Dependencies, with a further revision and/or
extension of the annotation manual, if necessary.
Then we aim to train statistical parsers using this
newly-created gold standard and compare their re-
sults with the ones obtained in other similar exper-
iments (see, e.g. Petrov and McDonald (2012)).

We are aware of the debate on the nature of
NLP results obtained with Twitter-based datasets
and their poor generalization with other social me-
dia texts (Darling et al., 2012; Eisenstein, 2013).
Therefore, in the future we could also attempt
to incorporate texts from different social media
sources and provide a more balanced resource.

Finally, we would also like to widen the debate
on social media text processing by opening this
work to a multilingual comparison, which would
be made possible by the UD format, specifically
designed for that purpose. This would allow us to
asses the applicability of our annotation proposal
to other languages, thus further encouraging cross-
linguistic studies on social media communication.

References
Anne Abeillé, Lionel Clément, and François Toussenel.

2003. Building a treebank for French. In Anne
Abeillé, editor, Treebanks: Building and Using
Parsed Corpora, pages 165–187. Springer Nether-
lands, Dordrecht.

Francesco Barbieri, Valerio Basile, Danilo Croce,
Malvina Nissim, Nicole Novielli, and Viviana Patti.
2016. Overview of the Evalita 2016 SENTIment
POLarity Classification Task. In Proceedings of
Evalita 2016.

Valerio Basile, Andrea Bolioli, Viviana Patti, Paolo
Rosso, and Malvina Nissim. 2014. Overview of
the Evalita 2014 SENTIment POLarity Classifica-
tion Task. In Proceedings of Evalita 2014.

Pierpaolo Basile, Annalina Caputo, Anna Lisa Gen-
tile, and Giuseppe Rizzo. 2016. Overview of
the EVALITA 2016 Named Entity rEcognition and
Linking in Italian Tweets (NEELIT) task. In Pro-
ceedings of Evalita 2016.

Bernd Bohnet and Jonas Kuhn. 2012. The best of
both worlds – a graph-based completion model for

237



transition-based parsers. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 77–
87, Avignon, France. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Bernd Bohnet and Joakim Nivre. 2012. A transition-
based system for joint part-of-speech tagging and la-
beled non-projective dependency parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1455–1465, Jeju Island, Korea. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast depen-
dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 89–97, Bei-
jing, China. Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Cristina Bosco, Simonetta Montemagni, and Maria
Simi. 2013a. Converting Italian treebanks: Towards
an Italian Stanford Dependency treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop
and Interoperability with Discourse, pages 61–69.

Cristina Bosco, Viviana Patti, and Andrea Bolioli.
2013b. Developing corpora for sentiment analysis:
The case of irony and Senti-TUT. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 28(2):55–63.

Cristina Bosco, Fabio Tamburini, Andrea Bolioli, and
Alessandro Mazzei. 2016. Overview of the
EVALITA 2016 Part Of Speech on TWitter for ITAl-
ian task. In Proceedings of Evalita 2016.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classi-
fication tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational
Linguistics, 22(2):249–254, June.

Francesca Chiusaroli. 2014. Sintassi e semantica dell-
hashtag: studio preliminare di una forma di scritture
brevi. In Proceedings of the 1st Italian Conference
on Computational Linguistics (CLiC-it 2014), pages
117–121, Pisa, Italy.

Francesca Chiusaroli. 2015. La scrittura in emoji
tra dizionario e traduzione. In Proceedings of the
2nd Italian Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (CLIC-It 2015), pages 88–92, Trento, Italy.

William M. Darling, Michael J. Paul, and Fei Song.
2012. Unsupervised part-of-speech tagging in noisy
and esoteric domains with a syntactic-semantic
bayesian hmm. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Semantic Analysis in Social Media, pages 1–9,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kaja Dobrovoljc and Joakim Nivre. 2016. The Uni-
versal Dependencies treebank of spoken Slovenian.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation LREC
2016, Portorož, Slovenia, May 23-28, pages 1566–
1571. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Jacob Eisenstein. 2013. What to Do About Bad Lan-
guage on the Internet. Proceedings of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics : Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT), pages 359–369.

Jennifer Foster, Özlem Çetinoglu, Joachim Wagner,
Joseph Le Roux, Stephen Hogan, Joakim Nivre,
Deirdre Hogan, and Josef van Genabith. 2011.
#hardtoparse: POS tagging and parsing the twitter-
verse. In Analyzing Microtext, Papers from the 2011
AAAI Workshop, San Francisco, California, USA,
August 8, 2011.

Kim Gerdes and Sylvain Kahane. 2017. Trois schémas
d’annotation syntaxique en dépendance pour un
même corpus de français oral: le cas de la macrosyn-
taxe. In Actes de l’atelier ”ACor4French - Les
corpus annotés du français”, pages 1–9, Orléans,
France.

Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor,
Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills, Jacob Eisenstein,
Michael Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan,
and Noah A. Smith. 2011. Part-of-speech tagging
for twitter: Annotation, features, and experiments.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies: Short Papers - Volume 2,
HLT ’11, pages 42–47, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, and Joakim Nivre. 2010.
Single malt or blended? a study in multilingual
parser optimization. In Harry Bunt, Paola Merlo,
and Joakim Nivre, editors, Trends in Parsing Tech-
nology: Dependency Parsing, Domain Adaptation,
and Deep Parsing, pages 19–33. Springer Nether-
lands.

Lingpeng Kong, Nathan Schneider, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Archna Bhatia, Chris Dyer, and
Noah A. Smith. 2014. A dependency parser for
tweets. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP), pages 1001–1012, Doha, Qatar.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Alberto Lavelli. 2016. Comparing state-of-the-art
dependency parsers on the Italian Stanford Depen-
dency Treebank. In Proceedings of the Third Ital-
ian Computational Linguistics Conference (CLiC-it
2016).

Tao Lei, Yu Xin, Yuan Zhang, Regina Barzilay, and
Tommi Jaakkola. 2014. Low-rank tensors for scor-
ing dependency structures. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1381–1391, Baltimore, Maryland. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Teresa Lynn, Kevin Scannell, and Eimear Maguire.
2015. Minority language twitter: Part-of-speech
tagging and analysis of Irish tweets. In Workshop
on Noisy User-generated Text, Beijing, China.

238



Andre Martins, Miguel Almeida, and Noah A. Smith.
2013. Turning on the turbo: Fast third-order non-
projective turbo parsers. In Proceedings of the 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages
617–622, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Manuela Speranza, and Tommaso
Caselli. 2016. The EVALITA 2016 Event Factuality
Annotation Task (FactA). In Proceedings of Evalita
2016.

Johanna Monti, Federico Sangati, Francesca
Chiusaroli, Martin Benjamin, and Sina Man-
sour. 2016. Emojitalianobot and emojiworldbot
- new online tools and digital environments for
translation into emoji. In Proceedings of Third
Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics
(CLiC-it 2016) & Fifth Evaluation Campaign of
Natural Language Processing and Speech Tools for
Italian. Final Workshop (EVALITA 2016), volume
1749 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Napoli,
Italy. CEUR-WS.org.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip
Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher D.
Manning, Ryan T. McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo
Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel
Zeman. 2016. Universal dependencies v1: A
multilingual treebank collection. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation LREC 2016, Portorož,
Slovenia, May 23-28, 2016.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan OConnor, Chris Dyer,
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A
Smith. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for
online conversational text with word clusters. In
Proceedings of NAACL 2013, pages 380–390.

Slav Petrov and Ryan McDonald. 2012. Overview of
the 2012 Shared Task on Parsing the Web. Notes of
the First Workshop on Syntactic Analysis of Non-
Canonical Language (SANCL).

Luis Rei, Dunja Mladenić, and Simon Krek. 2016. A
multilingual social media linguistic corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th Conference on CMC and So-
cial Media Corpora for the Humanities, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.

Djamé Seddah, Benoı̂t Sagot, Marie Candito, Virginie
Mouilleron, and Vanessa Combet. 2012. The
French social media bank: a treebank of noisy user
generated content. In COLING 2012, 24th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
Proceedings of the Conference: Technical Papers,
8-15 December 2012, Mumbai, India, pages 2441–
2458.

Natalia Silveira, Timothy Dozat, Marie-Catherine De
Marneffe, Samuel Bowman, Miriam Connor, John

Bauer, and Chris Manning. 2014. A gold stan-
dard dependency corpus for English. In Proceed-
ings of the Ninth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), Reyk-
javik, Iceland. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Fabio Tamburini and Matias Melandri. 2012. AnIta:
a powerful morphological analyser for Italian. In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference 2012, pages 941–947.

Cristina Zaga. 2012. Twitter: un’analisi dell’italiano
nel micro blogging. Italiano LinguaDue, 4(1):167–
210.

Yue Zhang and Joakim Nivre. 2011. Transition-based
dependency parsing with rich non-local features. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 188–193, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Yuan Zhang, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. 2014a. Greed is good if randomized: New
inference for dependency parsing. In Proceedings of
the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1013–
1024, Doha, Qatar. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yuan Zhang, Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, Tommi
Jaakkola, and Amir Globerson. 2014b. Steps to ex-
cellence: Simple inference with refined scoring of
dependency trees. In Proceedings of the 52nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 197–
207, Baltimore, Maryland. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

239




