



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 402–407,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Cross Linguistic Variations in Discourse Relations among Indian  

Languages 

 
 

Sindhuja Gopalan 

AU-KBC Research Centre 

MIT Campus of Anna  
University, Chennai, India 

sindhujagopalan@au-

kbc.org 

Lakshmi s 

AU-KBC Research Centre 

MIT Campus of Anna  
University, Chennai, India 

lakssreedhar@gmail.com 

Sobha Lalitha Devi 

AU-KBC Research Centre 

MIT Campus of Anna 
University, Chennai, India 

sobha@au-kbc.org 

 
  

 

Abstract 

This paper summarizes our work on analysis 

of cross linguistic variations in discourse rela-

tions for Indo-Aryan language Hindi and 

Dravid ian languages Malayalam and Tamil. 

In this paper we have also presented an auto-

mat ic discourse relation identifier, which 

gave encouraging results. Analysis of the re-

sults showed that some complex structural in-

ter-dependencies existed in these three lan-

guages. We have described in detail the struc-

tural inter-dependencies that occurred. Dis-

course relations in the three languages thus 

exhibited complex nature due to the structural 

inter-dependencies. 

1 Introduction 

Discourse relations link clauses in text and com-
pose overall text structure. Discourse relations 
are used in natural language processing (NLP), 
including text summarization and natural lan-
guage generation. The analysis and modeling of 
discourse structure has been an important area of 
linguistic research and it is necessary for building 
efficient NLP applications. Hence the automatic 
detection of discourse relation is also important. 
The Indo-Aryan (Hindi) and Dravidian languages 
(Malayalam and Tamil) share certain similarities 
such as verb final language, free word order and 
morphologically rich inflections. Due to the in-
fluence of Sanskrit in these languages they are 
similar at lexical level. But structurally they are 
very different. In this work we have presented an 
analysis of the cross linguistic variations in the 
discourse relations among three languages Hindi, 
Malayalam and Tamil. Instead of identifying all 
possible discourse relations we have considered 

the analysis of explicit discourse relations and 
developed an automatic discourse relation identi-
fication system. During error analysis various 
structural interdependencies were also noted. 

Discourse tagging for Indian languages Hindi, 
Malayalam and Tamil has been done by Sobha et 
al., (2014)  Other published works on discourse 
relation annotations in Indian languages are in 
Hindi (Kolachina et al., (2012); Oza et al., 
(2009)) and Tamil (Rachakonda and Sharma 
(2011)). Menaka et al., (2011) in their paper have 
automatically identified the causal relations and 
have described about the structural interdepend-
encies that exist between the relations. Similarly, 
we observed the existence of structural interde-
pendencies between the discourse relations in 
three languages, which we have explained in de-
tail. From the previous works on discourse rela-
tion annotation for various Indian languages, we 
can observe that the study of discourse relations 
is carried out for specific Indian language and 
hence we attempted to discuss the cross linguistic 
variations among Hindi, Tamil and Malayalam 
languages. 

Researchers have performed identification and 
extraction of discourse relation using cue based 
or statistical methods. Penn Discourse Tree Bank 
(PDTB) is the large scale annotated corpora of 
linguistic phenomena in English (Prasad et al., 
2008). The PDTB is the first to follow the lexi-
cally grounded approach to annotation of dis-
course relations. Marcu and Echihabi (2012) 
have focused on recognition of discourse relation 
using cue phrases, but not extraction of argu-
ments. Wellner and Pustejovksy (2007) in their 
study considered the problem of automatically 
identifying the arguments of discourse connec-
tives in PDTB. They re-casted the problem to 
that of identifying the argument heads, instead of 

402



identifying the full extents of the arguments as 
annotated in PDTB. To address the problem of 
identifying the arguments of discourse connec-
tives they incorporated a variety of lexical and 
syntactic features in a discrimination log-linear 
re-ranking model to select the best argument pair 
from a set of N best argument pairs provided by 
independent argument models. They obtained 
74.2% accuracy using gold standard parser and 
64.6% accuracy using automatic parser for both 
arguments. Elwell and Baldridge (2008) have 
used models tuned to specific connectives and 
connective types. Their study showed that using 
models for specific connectives and types of 
connectives and interpolating them with a gen-
eral model improves the performance. The fea-
tures used to improve performance include the 
morphological properties of connectives and 
their arguments, additional syntactic configura-
tion and wider context of preceding and follow-
ing connectives. The system was developed on 
PDTB. They used Maximum entropy ranker. 
Models were trained for arg1 and arg2 selection 
separately. They achieved 77.8% accuracy for 
identifying both arguments of connective for 
gold standard parser and 73.6% accuracy using 
automatic parser. Ramesh and Yu (2010) have 
developed a system for identification of dis-
course connectives in bio-medical domain. They 
developed the system on BioDRB corpus using 
CRFs algorithm. For PDTB data they obtained F-
score of 84%. They obtained F-score of 69% for 
BioDRB data. For PDTB based classifier on Bi-
oDRB data, they obtained F-score of 55%. In this 
work they did not focus on identification of ar-
guments. Versley (2010) presented his work on 
tagging German discourse connectives using a 
German–English parallel corpus. AlSaif (2012) 
used machine learning algorithms for automati-
cally identifying explicit discourse connectives 
and its relations in Arabic language. Wang et al., 
(2012) used sub-trees as features and identified 
explicit and implicit connectives and their argu-
ments. Zhou et al., (2012) presented the first ef-
fort towards cross lingual identification of the 
ambiguities of discourse connectives. Faiz et al., 
(2013) did explicit discourse connectives identi-
fication in the PDTB and the Biomedical Dis-
course Relation Bank (BDRB) by combining 
certain aspects of the surface level and syntactic 
feature sets.  In this study we tried to develop a 
discourse parser for all three languages for iden-
tification of connectives and its arguments. 

Following sections are organized as follows. 
Corpus Collection and Annotation is described in 

section 2, cross linguistic variations in discourse 
relations among three languages is given in sec-
tion 3, method used for the automatic identifica-
tion of discourse relation and the results are de-
scribed in section 4 and the various structural 
interdependencies that occur in the three lan-
guages is described in section 5. The paper ends 
with the conclusion section. 

2 Corpus collection and Annotation 

Health related articles were chosen from web and 
after removing inconsistencies like hyperlinks a 
total corpus of 5000 sentences were obtained. 
Then we annotated the corpus for connectives 
and its arguments. The discourse relation annota-
tion was purely syntactic. The arguments were 
labeled as arg1 and arg2 and arg2 was chosen to 
be following arg1. When free words occur, we 
tag them separately and the discourse unit be-
tween which the relation is inferred is marked as 
arg1 and arg2. When the connectives exist as 
bound morphemes we keep them along with the 
word to which it is attached and include it under 
arg1. The annotated corpus contains 1332 explic-
it connectives in Hindi, 1853 in Malayalam and 
1341 in Tamil. From the data statistics we can 
observe that Malayalam language has more 
number of connectives than Tamil and Hindi. 
Annotated corpus is used to train the system and 
the models are built for the identification of con-
nectives and arguments.  

3 Cross Linguistic variations in Dis-
course Relations 

The discourse relation in Indian language can be 
expressed in many ways. It can be syntactic (a 
suffix) or lexical. It can be within a clause, inter-
clausal or inter-sentential. The various cross lin-
guistic variations in discourse relation among the 
three languages is analyzed and described below.  

3.1 Discourse Connectives 

Discourse relations can be inferred using Explicit 
or Implicit connectives. Explicit connectives 
connect two discourse units and trigger discourse 
relation. The explicit connectives can be realized 
in any of the following ways. 

 Subordinators that connect the main 
clause with the subordinate or dependent 
clause. (For example: agar-to, jabkI in 
Hindi, appoL, -aal in Malayalam and -
aal, ataal in Tamil). 

 Coordinators which connect two or more 
items of equal syntactic importance. 

403



They connect two independent clauses. 
(For example: “aur”, “lekin” in Hindi, “-
um”, “ennaal” in Malayalam and 
“anaal”, “athanaal” in Tamil). 

 Conjunct adverbs that connect two inde-
pendent clauses and modify the clauses 
or sentences in which they occur. (For 
example: “isliye”, “halaanki” in Hindi, 
“athinaal”, “aakayaal” in Malayalam and 
“enninum”, “aakaiyaal” in Tamil). 

 Correlative conjunctions which are 
paired conjunctions. They link words or 
group of words of equal weights in a 
sentence. (For example: “na keval balki” 
in Hindi, “maathramalla-pakshe” in Ma l-
ayalam and “mattumalla-aanaal” in Tam-
il). 

3.2 Position of Connectives 

In our approach we have done a syntactic based 
tagging. In Hindi, Malayalam and Tamil dis-
course connectives can occur within a sentence 
or between sentences. In all the three languages 
inter sentence connectives are said to occupy 
sentence initial position. Example 1 shows the 
inter sentence discourse relation in Malayalam. 
Example 1: 
[chila  aaLukaL mukhsoundaryam koottaan  
Some people     facial-beauty         increase  
kreemukaL upayogikkaaruNt.]/arg1 
creams         use 
ennaal [athu guNathekkaaLeRe     doshamaaN   
But        that goodness-more than    harm-is         
cheyyuka.]/arg2 
do 
(Some people use creams to increase their facial 
beauty. But that will do more harm than good.) 

We found that there exists a difference in the 
position of conjunct adverb “although” among 
the three languages. As in Example 2, in Hindi 
this connective occurs in the sentence initial po-
sition whereas in Tamil and Malayalam this con-
nective occurs in the middle position and remains 
agglutinated with the verb. 
Example 2: 
haalaaMki [yoga pakshaaGaath kii samasyaa kaa  
although     yoga paralysis               problem's     
sTaayii       samaaDhaan karthaa hai]/arg2, 
permanent  solution         do         is  
[yah samay lethaa hai evaM shramsaaDya  
This time    take    is   and     painstaking   
hai]/arg1 
is 
(Although yoga gives a permanent solution for 
paralysis, this is time taking and painstaking.) 

In Tamil and Malayalam the connective “and” 
exists in the form as in Example 3. In Hindi sin-
gle lexicon “aur” serves this purpose. 
Example 3: 
[muuttukaLiluLLa kuRuththelumpu vaLaraamal  
 in knee                  cartilage               without               
theymaanam   atainthaalum]/arg1,  
growing wear  if get-and                    
[angkuLLa vazhuvazhuppaana thiravam                     
there           smooth                    fluid 
kuRainthupoonaalum]/arg2 muuttukaLil uraayvu  
get less-and                           knee             friction 
eRpatum. 
will develop 
 (If cartilage in the knee gets wear without         
growing and if the smooth fluid present there      
becomes less, friction will develop in the knee.) 

3.3 Agglutinated and intra sentence 

In Malayalam and Tamil connectives can occur 
as free words or bound morphemes. But in Hindi 
only free word connectives exist as in Example 
2. 
Example 4: 
[vayiRRil    kutalpun irunthaal]/arg1 [vayiRu     
In stomach  ulcer       is there-if          stomach           
valikkum]/arg2. 
will pain 
(If there is ulcer in stomach, stomach will pain.) 

3.4 Paired connectives 

In Hindi some discourse connectives were seen 
as paired connectives. This type of connectives is 
not noticed in Malayalam and Tamil. 
Example 5: 
yadhii [lagaathaar buKaar aa rahaa hai]/arg1 tho  
if         constantly fever      coming  is            then 
[uskii jaaNca avashaya karaaye]/arg2. 
its    check   sure          do   
(If fever is coming constantly, then check it for       
sure.) 

In the above Example 5 “yadhii-to” is the 
paired connective that occurs at the start of arg1 
and arg2. Whereas in Tamil and Malayalam it 
occurs as a single connective as in Example 4 
and occurs agglutinated with verb. 

3.5 Arguments of Relations 

In our approach the label assignment is syntactic. 
Sometimes, the arguments can be in the same 
sentence as the connective. Sometimes, one of 
the preceding sentence acts as an argument. Also 
the argument can be a non-adjacent sentence. But 
the text span follows the minimality-principle. In 
Example 1 the connective “ennal” in Malayalam 

404



connects two discourse units inter sententially. 
The discourse unit that follows the connective is 
arg2 and the preceding unit is arg1. In Example 4 
the arguments for connective “-aal” in Tamil oc-
cur in same sentence. 

4 Automatic identification of discourse 

relation 

4.1 Method Used 

We have used the method adopted by Menaka et 
al., (2011) for the identification of discourse rela-
tions. We have preprocessed the text for morph 
analysis (Ram et al, 2010), part-of-speech tag-
ging (PoS) (Sobha et al, 2016), chunking (Sobha 
and Ram, 2006), clause tagging (Ram et al, 
2012). The implementation is done based on ma-
chine learning technique CRFs. 

4.2 Conditional Random Fields  

CRFs is an undirected graphical model, where 
the conditional probabilities of the output are 
maximized for a given input sequence. We chose 
CRFs, because it allows linguistic rules or condi-
tions to be incorporated into machine learning 
algorithm. Here, we have used CRF++ (Kudo, 
2005), an open source toolkit for linear chain 
CRFs. 

4.3 Features Used 

For the identification of connectives, we have 
used PoS tagging information, morphological 
suffixes and clause information as features for 
Malayalam and Tamil. Morphological suffixes 
such as conditional markers, causal markers, rel-
ative participle (RP) marker followed by postpo-
sition (PSP) and coordination markers were used. 
For connective identification in Hindi, word, PoS 
tagging information and chunk information were 
used. For argument identification we have taken 
PoS tagging information, chunk information, 
morphological suffixes, and clause information, 
combination of PoS and chunk information and 
connectives as features. 

4.4 Training and Testing 

For identifying the discourse connectives, we 
trained the system using the features for connec-
tives. In the next stage we train the system to 
identify the arguments and their text spans. Here 
we have built 4 language models for each of the 
4 boundaries – Arg2-START, Arg1-END, Arg1-
START and Arg2-END motivated by the work 
of Menaka et al., (2011). The system was trained 
in 4 phases to develop 4 models.  We used 4000 

sentences from the corpus for training and 1000 
sentences for testing. For testing, the sentences 
are pre-processed similarly as training data. The 
system identified the discourse markers in stage 
1 and this output becomes input to stage 2. In 
both the stages we used CRFs as the machine 
learning algorithm.  

The performance of our system is measured in 
terms of Precision, Recall and F score. Precision 
is the number of discourse relations correctly 
perceived by the system from the total number of 
discourse relations identified, Recall is the num-
ber of discourse relations correctly detected by 
the system by the total number of discourse rela-
tions contained in the input text and F-score is 
the harmonic mean of precision and recall. 

The results for connective identification are 
tabulated in Table 1. 

 
 Precision Recall F-

score 

Hindi  96.33 92.3 94.27 

Malayalam  96.3 91.6 93.89 

Tamil 95.35 94.18 94.76 

Table 1: Results for Connective Identification 

The argument identification results are given 
in Table 2, Table 3, Table 4 and Table 5. 

 Precision Recall F-

score 

Hindi  76 72.2 74.05 

Malayalam  78.5 72 75.1 

Tamil 81.53 73.6 77.36 

Table 2: Results for ARG1 Start 

 Precision Recall F-

score 

Hindi  75.9 72.2 74 

Malayalam  78.8 72 75.23 

Tamil 82 72.6 77 

Table 3: Results for ARG1 End 

 Precision Recall F-

score 

Hindi  77.4 73.2 75.24 

Malayalam  79.2 73 75.97 

Tamil 81.5 72.6 76.79 

Table 4: Results for ARG2 Start 

 Precision Recall F-

score 

Hindi  76.3 71.2 73.66 

Malayalam  78.7 72.4 75.42 

Tamil 82 72.7 77 405



Table 5: Results for ARG2 End 
  
During error analysis it is noted that a good 

number of errors are due to structural interde-
pendencies between discourse relations. When 
there are such structures, there is a considerable 
overlap in the arguments of two discourse rela-
tions leading to the improper identification of 
boundaries by the system. These are discussed in 
detail in the next section. 

5 Structural Interdependencies between 
discourse relations 

Some very unique pattern of interdependencies 
was seen existing between discourse relations for 
Hindi, Malayalam and Tamil mainly due to the 
free word order nature of those languages. Given 
below are such patterns. 

5.1 Embedding within itself 

Due to the free word order nature of Indian lan-
guages this type of structure comes into being. 
Consider the Malayalam Example 6 given below. 
Example 6: 
[pala     padhathikaLum [ee     karaaR  
many   plans                    this  contract 
sambhavikkaathathinaal]/arg1 natakkaathe    
not-happen-hence                           failed 
poyi.]/arg2          
(This contract didn’t happen, hence many plans 
failed.) 

Here arg1 and marker is seen embedded inside 
arg2. 

5.2 Between Two Discourse Relations – 
Containment 

One most frequently occurring structural de-
pendency is that of embedding or containment of 
the whole of a discourse relation within one of 
the arguments of another discourse relation. 
Example 7: 
[lagbhag            25 se     50   prathishath roobelaa  
approximately 25 from 50    percent       rubella    
saMkramaN kaa pathaa nahiM cal paathaa]/arg1i 
infection              know   not           get        
aur [agar[ iske lakshaN      paidhaa   hothe  
and   if       its    symptoms       develop 
haiM]/arg1j tho [[ve    bhahuth hii  
 is               then  they very 
halke hothe haiN]/arg2i]/arg2j 
light             is 
(Approximately 25 to 50 percent of rubella infec-
tion is not known and if its symptoms develop     
then they are very light.) 

The Example 7 shows that the arguments of 
connective “agar-to” are contained within the 
arg2 of connective “aur”. 

5.3 Between two Discourse Relations – 
Complete Overlap/Shared Argument 

An argument may be shared by two discourse 
relations in different ways. 
Example 8: 
naviina vaazhkkai muRaiyil vaakanagkalaip     
modern life            style        vehicles  
payanpatutthuvathaal]/arg1i [[nataippayiRci 
use-because                                walking 
enpathu kuRainthuvittathu]/arg2i]/arg1j.  
is           reduced                                    
ithanaal             [utalil     cerum           
Because of this    in body accumulate  
thevaiyaRRa  kalorikaL cariyaaka   
unwanted        calories    correctly     
erikkappatuvathillai]/arg2j. 
not burnt  
(Because of using vehicles in modern life style        
walking is reduced. Because of this, the unwant-
ed calories accumulated in the body is not burnt.) 

In Example 8 the arg2 of the first discourse re-
lation is the shared argument for the second dis-
course relation. 

5.4 Completely Independent Relations 

Example 9: 
[poshakaaharam   nalki   kuttiye               
nourishing-food   gave    child                         
paripaalichu.]/arg1i engilum [kuttiyute  
fostered                    But         child's          
arogyathil purogathiyilla.]/arg2i [atuthaghathathil 
health-in   no-progress                next-stage-in        
guLikakaL         nalki.]/arg1j  engilum [kuttiyte  
vitamin tablets  gave               But          child's     
arogyam athe   nilayil             thutarnnu.]/arg2j 
health      same condition-in   continued. 

(Nourishing food was given for the child. But 
the child's health had no progress. In the next 
stage gave vitamin tablets. But the child's condi-
tion remained the same.) 

In Example 9 there are two adjacent discourse 
relations which are independent of each other. 

6 Conclusion 

We have presented our work on discourse rela-
tion identification for Hindi, Malayalam and 
Tamil. An analysis of the discourse relations 
among the three languages was performed and an 
automatic identification system for discourse re-
lation was developed. By analyzing the results 406



structural dependencies were noted. By handling 
this issue the performance of the system can be 
improved which   makes up our future work. 

Reference 

John L AlSaif. 2012. Human and automatic annota-

tion of discourse relations for Arabic, Ph.D. thesis, 

University of Leeds. 

Ben Wellner and James Pustejovsky. 2007. Automati-

cally Identifying the Arguments of Discourse Connec-

tives, Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL, Prague, 92-

101. 

Balaji P. Ramesh and Hong Yu. 2010. Identifying 

discourse connectives in biomedical text,  Proceedings 

of AMIA Annual Symposium, Washington, DC 657-

661. 

Daniel Marcu and Abdessamad Echihabi. 2012. An 

unsupervised approach to recognizing discourse rela-

tions, Proceedings of 40th Annual Meeting on Associ-

ation for Computational Linguistics, 368-375.  

Robert Elwell and Jason Baldridge. 2008. Discourse 

connective argument identification with connective 

specific rankers, Proceedings of International Confer-

ence on Semantic Computing, Santa Clara, CA. 

Rashmi Prasad, Nikh il Dinesh, Alan Lee, Elen i 

Miltsakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie 

Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0, 

Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation 

Conference, Marrakech, Morocco. 

Lanjun  Zhou, Wei Gao, Binyang Li, Zhongyu Wei, 

and Kam-Fai Wong. 2012. Cross-Lingual Identifica-

tion of Ambiguous Discourse Connectives for Re-

source-Poor Language, Proceedings of International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics, Mumbai, 

India, 1409-1418. 

Ram, RVS, Bakiyavathi, T, Sindhujagopalan, R, 

Amudha, K and Sobha, L. 2012. Tamil Clause 

Boundary Identification: Annotation and Evaluation, 

Proceedings of 1st Workshop on Indian Language 

Data: Resources and Evaluation, Istanbul.  

Ravi T. Rachakonda, and Dipti M. Sharma. 2011. 

Creat ing an annotated Tamil corpus as a discourse 

resource, Proceedings of 5th Linguistic Annotation 

Workshop, Portland, Oregon, 119-123. 

Sudheer Kolachina, Rashmi Prasad, Dipt i M. Sharma, 

and Aravind Joshi. 2012. Evaluation of Discourse 

Relation Annotation in the Hindi Discourse Relation 

Bank, Proceedings of Language Resources and Eval-

uation Conference, Istanbul, Turkey, 823-828. 

S. Menaka, Pattabhi R.K. Rao, and Sobha L. Devi. 

2011. Automatic identification of cause-effect rela-

tions in tamil using CRFs, Proceedings of Computa-

tional Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6608:316-327. 

Sayeed I. Faiz, and Robert E. Mercer. 2013. Identify -

ing exp licit d iscourse connectives in text, Advances in 

Artificial Intelligence, Lecture Notes in Computer 

Science, 7884:64-76. 

Sobha, L and Vijay Sundar Ram, R. 2006. Noun 

Phrase Chunker for Tamil, Proceedings of the First 

National Symposium on Modeling and Shallow Pars-

ing of Indian Languages (MSPIL) , IIT Mumbai, India, 

194-198.  

Sobha L. Devi, S. Lakshmi, and Sindhuja Gopalan. 

2014. Discourse Tagging for Indian Languages, Pro-

ceedings of Computational Linguistics and Intelligent 

Text Processing, Berlin, Heidelberg, 469-480. 

Sobha L Devi, Pattabhi RK Rao and Vijay Sundar 

Ram, R. 2016. AUKBC Tamil Part-of-Speech Tagger 

(AUKBC-TamilPoSTagger 2016v1), web download, 

http://www.au-kbc.org/nlp/corpusrelease.html. 

Taku Kudo. 2005. CRF++, an open source toolkit fo r 

CRF, http://crfpp.sourceforge.net . 

Umangi Oza, Rashmi Prasad, Sudheer Kolach ina, 

Dipti M. Sharma, and Aravind Joshi. 2009. The Hindi 

discourse relation bank, Proceedings of Third Linguis-

tic Annotation Workshop, 158-161. 

Vijay Sundar Ram, R, Menaka, S and Sobha Lalitha 

Devi. 2010. Tamil Morphological Analyser”, in 

“Morphological Analysers and Generators, LDC-IL, 

Mysore, 1 –18. 

Xun Wang, Suj Ian Li, Jiwei Li, and Wenj Le Li. 

2012. Implicit Discourse Relat ion Recognition by 

Selecting Typical Training Examples, Proceedings of 

International Conference on Computational Linguis-

tics, Mumbai, India, 2757-2772. 

Yannick Versley. 2010. Discovery of ambiguous and 

unambiguous discourse connectives via annotation 

projection, Proceedings of Workshop on Annotation 

and Exploitation of Parallel Corpora (AEPC) , 83-82. 

407


