



















































Annotation of negation in the IULA Spanish Clinical Record Corpus


Proceedings of the Workshop Computational Semantics Beyond Events and Roles (SemBEaR), pages 43–52,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotation of negation in the IULA Spanish Clinical Record Corpus

Montserrat Marimon, Jorge Vivaldi, Núria Bel
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Roc Boronat 138
08018 Barcelona

{montserrat.marimon|jorge.vivaldi|nuria.bel}@upf.edu

Abstract

This paper presents the IULA Spanish
Clinical Record Corpus, a corpus of 3,194
sentences extracted from anonymized
clinical records and manually annotated
with negation markers and their scope.
The corpus was conceived as a resource to
support clinical text-mining systems, but
it is also a useful resource for other Natu-
ral Language Processing systems handling
clinical texts: automatic encoding of clin-
ical records, diagnosis support, term ex-
traction, among others, as well as for the
study of clinical texts. The corpus is pub-
licly available with a CC-BY-SA 3.0 li-
cense.

1 Introduction

With the deployment of Electronic Health Records
(EHR), much effort is being devoted to the devel-
opment of text-mining tools that assist in convert-
ing information described in texts into structured
data for applications that range from assisting in
medical diagnosis to the coding of clinical findings
and procedures to bill insurance companies. The
ultimate objective of these tools is the extraction
of factual knowledge from textual data. There-
fore, they are mainly interested in developing spe-
cial components that identify those facts that do
not hold true, as in patient without nodules. The
availability of annotated texts makes the use of su-
pervised machine learning methods possible, and
it also allows for a fair comparison and evaluation
of different methods, thus contributing to the im-
provement of the technology.

In what follows, we describe the IULA Span-
ish Clinical Record Corpus (IULA-SCRC), a cor-
pus of 3,194 sentences extracted from anonymized
clinical records and manually annotated with

negation markers and their scope, and the corre-
sponding annotation guidelines.1 To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first corpus of medical
Spanish texts manually annotated for negation, al-
though two test-sets of about 500 and 1000 sen-
tences for evaluating particular negation detection
systems already exist, as described later in the Re-
lated Work section.

Because no standard negation annotation
schema still exists, our annotation schema has
taken into account the currently existing English
corpora annotated for negation, trying to be
comprehensive with current practices (Mutalik
et al., 2001; Szarvas et al., 2008; Morante and
Daelemans, 2012).

After this introductory section, in Section 2 we
briefly describe negation structures in Spanish, in
Section 3 we describe the corpus design, in Sec-
tion 4 we present the guidelines we have followed
to identify and classify negation information and
in Section 5 we provide details of tags and statis-
tics of the resulting annotated corpus, then, in Sec-
tion 6 we review existing related corpora on which
we have designed our annotation schema and, fi-
nally, in Section 7 we conclude.

2 Negation in Spanish

The most prominent negation marker in sentential
negation in Spanish is the pre-verbal adverb no (1).

(1) Juan no come carne. (Juan does not eat
meat.)

Scope is the part of the sentence that is affected
by a preceding negation marker that syntactically
dominates it. Most frequently, sentential negation
is expressed with a negation marker that scopes

1The corpus described in this paper has been made
publicly available for research purposes and it is freely
downloadable from: http://eines.iula.upf.edu/
brat/\#/NegationOnCR_IULA

43



over the verb phrase. However, scope may also
correspond to non-verbal phrases, as in (2), where
the negation marker scopes over the adverb siem-
pre.

(2) Juan no siempre come carne. (Juan does not
always eat meat.)

In addition to the adverb no, there is a fairly
heterogeneous group of pre-verbal words which
also express sentential negation (3). These nega-
tion markers are: the pronouns nada (nothing) and
nadie (nobody); the determinant ninguno (none);
the adverbs nunca, jamás (never), tampoco (nei-
ther) and nada (nothing); and the phrases intro-
duced by the coordination particle ni (nor).

(3) Nadie ha venido. (Nobody has come.)

Examples in (4) show a second pattern where
these negation words follow the verb. In this posi-
tion, they require a negation preceding the verb.

(4) (a) No ha venido nadie. (Nobody has
come.)

(b) *Ha venido nadie. (Has come nobody.)

In this structure we distinguish two groups of
elements: a negative inducer and a negative polar-
ity item. The first one allows the presence of the
second one in post-verbal position.

Negative polarity items (NPIs) include: post-
verbal negation words, indefinite NPs (5.a), and
aspectual and scalar NPIs (5.b). Negative inducers
(NIs) include: rhetorical interrogatives; compara-
tive and superlative constructions (5.c); adverbial
and nominal quantifiers (5.d); negative adverbs;
negative verbs, nouns, and adjectives expressing
doubt, opposition, deprivation or absence, or emo-
tive factives (5.e); the conjunction ni (neiter); and
the preposition sin (without).

(5) (a) Juan apenas lee libro alguno. (Juan
hardly reads any books.)

(b) Esto no vale ni un pimiento. (This is
not worth a light.)

(c) Juan es más listo que nadie. (Juan is
smarter than anyone.)

(d) Este examen es demasido difı́cil para
que lo apruebe nadie. (This test is too
difficult for anyone to approve.)

(e) Es improbable que haya estado nunca
en mi casa. (It’s unlikely she/he’s ever
been in my house.)

In addition to sentences and phrases, in Spanish
single words can also be denied with the adverb
no and by prefixation. In word negation, prefixes
that express absence, opposition, falsehood, rever-
sal, deprivation or removal, such as a-, anti- and
des-, as in amoral (amoral), anticapitalista (anti-
capitalist), and desleal (disloyal) are used. Other
negative prefixes in Spanish are: in-, sin-, and
contra-.

Finally, coordination and enumeration of
negated words or phrases is also possible. In these
structures, the first element follows the rules we
have just presented, and the following coordinated
elements can be preceded or not by the conjunc-
tion ni, but the last element must include the neg-
ative conjunction.

3 Corpus description

The basic material for compiling this resource was
obtained from a set of 300 clinical reports from
several services of one of the main hospitals in
Barcelona (Spain). These reports were delivered
to us already anonymized. After a first examina-
tion of these reports, it was observed that there was
a set of 17 sections (e.g. ”Physical Examination”,
”Diagnostic”, ”Procedures”, ”Reasons for consul-
tation”,...) that appeared in most of these reports.
To compile the corpus only the five sections with
more data were considered. In Table 1 we show
the final number of sentences chosen from each
section. Up to 3,000 sentences from these sections
were separately collected and shuffled in order to
make sure that no traceability of personal data was
possible.

It is normal practice for automatic processing of
clinical records to work with correct texts (Lai et
al., 2015), thus, a simple set of regular expressions
was used to correct most common misspellings.
Remaining misspellings were manually corrected.
Before annotating these reports, they were pre-
processed for sentence identification.

Section Sent. % Chosen
Physical exploration 5,193 34.61 1,090
Evolution 5,463 36.41 1,147
Radiology 1,751 11.67 367
Current process 980 6.53 205
Comp. explorations 1,619 10.79 339

Table 1: Statistics about corpus composition.

44



4 Annotation guidelines

In this section, we first introduce the underlying
general annotation criteria. Second, we describe
the guidelines we have followed to identify nega-
tion cues and their scopes.2 Finally, we present the
different classes of medical terms we have identi-
fied.

4.1 Underlying criteria
Our approach for annotating negation aims at sup-
porting automatic processing for information ex-
traction, which is usually supported by a dictio-
nary coming either from a medical database or
from a Named Entities recognition system. In-
formation extraction systems are usually designed
for extracting relations among entities. Ultimately,
they are used to extract ”facts”. The presence of a
negation marker might change the status of what a
fact is.

Accordingly, in our annotation, first, negation
markers are lexically defined: they are a list of
words that change the factual status of what fol-
lows them, i.e. the scope. Second, we encode
negation scope on syntactic terms: it is the max-
imal syntactic unit that is affected by the negation
marker. However, as we will describe below, there
are linguistic phenomena that escape from these
general statements.

We annotate as negation markers only those
negation words that affect the assertion made by
other words in the sentence, because they change
its factual status. This is the case, for instance, of
the adverb no and some negative predicates, such
as ausencia de (absence of).

However, we do not consider as negation mark-
ers those predicates that bear more information
than bare negation. We discard verbs like desa-
parecer (to disappear), which indeed contains the
information of a change of state. Other examples
of predicates which are not considered negation
markers are the verbs retirar, suspenderse, and er-
radicar (to remove, to call off, and to eradicate),
and the noun retirada (removal). Also note that
we do not consider the verb negar (to deny), as in
el paciente niega sı́ntomas de abstinencia (the pa-
tient denies withdrawal symptoms), a negation cue
either, since, following clinician expert’s advice,

2In the examples we provide, cues are marked in bold and
their scopes are underlined; in the next section, we present
the actual tags we have used in the corpus. Also note that in
the translated examples, medical terms are not translated, but
they are replaced by ”X”.

this communication verb is considered, in factual
terms, an statement of what someone says.

As for terms like asintomático (asymptomatic),
which shows morphological prefixation (a-, des-,
dis-), we decided to follow the current practice in
medical text annotation for automatic processing
(see Table 5) and not to annotate them as nega-
tion markers. Besides the fact that it is normal
practice, we have considered the following moti-
vations.3 First, negative prefixed terms in Spanish
medical domain are mostly lexicalized and most
of them can easily be found in existing medical
term databases. Second, most of them, in partic-
ular nouns, are coined terms, as they have a dif-
ferent specialized meaning from that of the non-
prefixed counterpart and a different meaning, too,
from the bare negation of the positive term, for in-
stance deshitratación (dehydration) and no hitrat-
ación (no hydration) or degeneración (degenera-
tion) vs. no generación (no generation). Third,
not all prefixed words can be compositionally an-
alyzed, as the non-prefixed counterpart does not
exist (Dzuganova, 2006), a-febril (afebrile) vs. a-
morfo (amorphous) or ex-cluir (exclude), for in-
stance. Finally, prefixed words, as full words, can
be in the scope of another negation marker. The
interpretation of a double negation in these cases
is uncertain, consider, for instance, non-atypical
hyperplasia or no mitral valve insufficiency.

4.2 Negation cues
In our corpus, negation cues are words that ex-
press negation: adverbs, negative predicates, and
the preposition sin. Examples in (6) show nega-
tions expressed by the preposition.

(6) (a) Sin soplos audibles (Without audible
X); sin signos de TVP (without signs of
X).

(b) Sin que se observen claros defectos de
ventilación (With no clear X observed).

The most frequent negative adverb in the corpus
is the adverb no. This adverb negates verbal forms
(7.a), nouns (7.b), and adjectives (7.c).

(7) (a) No ausculto soplos (I don’t auscultate
X); no se palpan masas (X are not pal-
pated).

(b) No edemas en extremidades inferiores
(No X in lower extremities).

3Note that in Spanish there are no negative suffixes like
the English less.

45



(c) Temblor discal no continuo en mano
izquierda (No continuous X in left
hand).

Another negative adverb that we find in the cor-
pus is tampoco. This adverb only negates verbal
forms, as in (8).

(8) Tampoco objetiva focos sépticos (Neither ob-
jectify X).

We also mark as negation cues the following
predicates: the verb descartar (to rule out) (9.a),
the noun ausencia de (absence of) (9.b),4 and the
adjective incapaz de (unable to) (9.c).

(9) (a) Se descarta enolismo (X is ruled out).
(b) Ausencia de edemas (Absence of X).
(c) Incapaz de levantarse de la silla (Un-

able to get up from the chair).

The adjective negativo (negative), which is very
frequent in medical texts, expresses negation in
different ways. It may deny a sign, indicating on
physical examination that a finding is not present
(10.a); or it may deny a laboratory test, indicating
that a substance or a reaction is not present (10.b).
Sometimes, even though it clearly expresses nega-
tion, the specific bacteria or organism the cultures
are negative for is not explicitly said in the sen-
tence (10.c). We even have some examples where
the negated test or sign is not expressed in the sen-
tence: negativo is neither followed nor preceded
by the noun it modifies. Thus, the adjective nega-
tivo is always marked as cue, even when its scope
is not present in the sentence.

(10) (a) Murphy negativo (X negative).
(b) Serologı́as VHB y VHC negativos (X

negative).
(c) Hemocultivos de control negativos (X

negative).

Negative polarity items (11) (cf. Section 2) are
also annotated as such. Note that the most frequent
case is coordination.

(11) (a) No objetivando ninguna focalidad neu-
rológica mayor inmediata (Not objecti-
fying any inmediate main X).

4Note that the cue in (9.b) includes both the noun and the
preposition, and that the cue in (9.c) includes the adjective
and the preposition.

(b) No masas ni megalias (Neither X or Y);
sin soplos ni roces (without X or Y).

Double negation sentences (12.a), in which two
negatives yield affirmative, are not marked. Note
that example (12.b) is not a false negative, since
desaparecer (to disappear) is not considered a
negation marker.

(12) (a) No se puede descartar la etiologı́a
epiléptica de los episodios (X can not be
ruled out).

(b) Sin llegar a desaparecer del todo (With-
out disappearing altogether).

4.3 Scope
Traditionally, scope is the part of the sentence that
is being negated. The scope is determined on the
basis of syntax: the maximal syntactic phrase that
is affected by the marker. In our corpus, the nega-
tion cue is not included in its own scope.

As we show in (14), the scope of negated nouns
extends to their complements and/or modifiers that
follow them (14.a); the scope of negated adjec-
tives extends to their complements, but the mod-
ified noun that in Spanish precedes the adjective
is not annotated as scope (14.b); and the scope of
negated verbs includes every verb dependent that
follows it, and, we show in (14.c), constituents
that precede the verb are not annotated as scope.
This decision affects, in particular, verb subjects,
which are however annotated in the scope when
they are located after the verb (as in Bioscope).
The only exception to this rule is when there is an
unaccusative verb, for which we also annotate the
subject, as we will see in example (19.d) below.

(14) (a) No edemas en extremidades inferiores
(No X in lower extremities).

(b) Temblor discal no continuo en mano
izquierda (No continuous X in left
hand).

(c) El estudio realizado de forma am-
bulatoria hasta el momento no
mostró alteraciones significativas
(The study performed on an outpatient
basis so far showed no significant
alterations).

The preposition sin has a scope over the follow-
ing noun phrase (15.a) and verb phrase (15.b) and,
as before, all modifiers and complements of the
nominal and verbal heads are included.

46



(15) (a) Sin signos de TVP (Without signs of X);
sin contraindicaciones para el procedi-
miento (Without contraindications to the
procedure).

(b) Sin objetivar trombosis (Without objec-
tifying X), sin que se observen claros
defectos de ventilación (With no clear X
observed).

Negative predicate cues scope over their com-
plements (16).

(16) (a) Se descarta enolismo (X is ruled out).
(b) Ausencia de edemas (Absence of X))
(c) Incapaz de levantarse de la silla (Un-

able to get up from the chair).

Because of its special characteristics already
explained in section 4.2, the adjective negativo
scopes over its modified noun, which precedes it
(17.a) or over the PP that includes the denied test
or sign (17.b). When this adjective functions as an
attribute or a predicative complement (17.c), the
scope is the subject. Finally, when the subject is a
relative pronoun, we annotate as the scope its an-
tecedent (17.d).

(17) (a) Focalidad negativa (X negative).
(b) Negativo para FOP (Negative for X).
(c) Las serologı́as para VIH, VHB y VHC

resultaron negativas (X were negative).
El urocultivo es negativo (X is nega-
tive).

(d) Se tomó urocultivo, que resultó negativo
(It was taken X, which was negative).

In coordination, the cue scopes over all coordi-
nated elements (18).

(18) (a) No masas ni megalias (Neither X nor
Y).

(b) Sin soplos ni roces (Without X or Y).
(c) No refiere sı́ndrome miccional, cambios

en el ritmo deposicional ni otra sinto-
matologı́a acompanante (Does nor refer
X, or Y, or Z).

Discontinuous scopes are also annotated. These
are examples like (19.a), where the adjective ap-
pears between the noun and its modifier, ellipti-
cal constructions, such as (19.b), relative clauses,
where the antecedent of the relative pronoun is
also annotated as discontinuous scope (19.c), and

unaccusative verbs, whose subject is also included
in the scope of the negation cue, even though it
precedes the verb (19.d).

(19) (a) Hemocultivos negativos de control
(Control negative X).

(b) Parcialmente orientado (sı́ en tiempo y
persona, no en espacio) (Partially ori-
ented (yes in time and person, not in
space)).

(c) Se trató con antibiótico que no recuerda
(S/he was treated with antibiotics which
s/he does not remember).

(d) El dolor no mejorado con nolotil (Pain
has not improved with nolotil).

4.4 Medical term classes

Most of the cues that are present in the corpus
scope over medical named entities. Table 2 shows
the classes we have distinguished among these en-
tities. In the next section we will present the actual
tags we have used for manually annotating them in
the corpus.

Class Used for

Body structure

- Anatomical structure
- Body part
- Organ or organ component
- Deformity
- Tissue, ...

Substance &
Pharmacological/
biological
product

- Pharmacological substance
- Biological substance
- Enzyme
- Body substance
- Diagnostic substance, ...

Clinical finding

- Disease or syndrome
- Finding
- Sign/Symptom
- Abnormality
- Clinical state, ...

Procedure

- Diagnostic procedure
- Laboratory procedure
- Therapeutic Procedure
- Administration of medicine
- Health care activity, ...

Table 2: Medical term classes.

This classification was taken from the
SNOMED Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT), a
multilingual clinical healthcare terminology

47



used in clinical documentation.5 This resource
defines 19 top level hierarchies (or classes), we
have chosen five of them which are the most
frequent classes found in this type of reports. For
operative reasons we collapse SNOMED classes
”Substance” and ”Pharmacological/biological
product” in a single medical term class.

5 Corpus Annotation

The annotation was made with Brat, a web-based
tool for text annotation.6 In this section, we
present the actual tags we have used in the anno-
tation. We also discuss the annotation agreement
and provide some statistics of the corpus.

5.1 Tags

In Table 3 we show the list of tags that are used to
mark negation cues and the text spans that function
as scope. In addition, tagged links are used to de-
scribe the relationships between them: we use the
tag Scope to link scopes to negation cues (Figure
1 and Figure 2) and the tag DiscScope to an-
notate discontinuous scope phenomena explicitly
(Figure 3).

Tag Entity
Negmarker no, tampoco, sin
NegPredMarker negative verbs, nouns

and adjectives
NegPolItem ni, ninguno,...
BODY body structure
SUBS substance...
DISO clinical finding
PROC procedure
Phrase nonmedical text spans

Table 3: Tags for entities.

Negation cues are marked by two different tags.
We use the tag NegMarker for basic negation
markers (Figure 1.a-c): the adverbs no and tam-
poco, and the preposition sin. We use the tag
NegPredMarker for negative verbs, nouns, and
adjectives (Figure 1.d-f). In addition, the tag
NegPolItem (Figure 1.b-c) is used for NPIs.

We have used four tags for the medical named
entities (see Section 4.4) that are in the scope
of a negation marker: BODY for body struc-
tures, SUBS for substances and pharmacologi-

5http://www.ihtsdo.org/
6http://brat.nlplab.org/

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Annotation examples: tags for negation
cues.

cal/biological products, DISO for clinical findings
(Figure 1.c-e), and PROC for medical procedures
(Figure 1.b). In addition, we use the tag Phrase
for:

• Negated phrases that are not of the medical
domain (Figure 2.a).

• Text spans that are not headed by an entity
belonging to one of the medical classes we
have considered (Figure 2.b).

• Complete coordinated phrases (Figure 2.c-e).

5.2 Agreement analysis

In order to evaluate the guidelines, 500 sentences
were annotated by three computational linguists
advised by a clinician. Disagreements were dis-
cussed after three different annotation rounds until
reaching a consensus. Annotation guidelines were
updated accordingly. Then, we measured the con-
sistency of the annotations for the negation mark-
ers and their scope, but not of the entities annota-
tions which were validated using SNOMED. The
inter-annotator agreement Kappa rates were 0.85
between annotators 1 and 2, and 1 and 3; 0.88 be-
tween annotators 2 and 3.

48



(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 2: Annotation examples: tags for scope en-
tities.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Annotation examples: discontinuous
scopes.

5.3 Corpus statistics
Final annotated corpus details are in Table 4.
The most frequent tag for cues is Negmarker,
which appears 1,007 times (519 marking the ad-
verb no and 488 marking the preposition sin). The
most frequent NPI is ni, which appears 109 times,
whereas the most frequent negative predicate is
negativo, which appears 63 times.

6 Related work

Most of existing corpora in the biomedical domain
annotated with negation have been developed as
test sets of systems to detect negated expressions.
Most of these resources show a common set of
annotations (see Table 5). All annotate negation
markers and their scope. Negative predicates are

Number of sentences 3,194
Number of annotated sentences 1,093
Number of Negmarker entities 1,007
Number of NegPredMarker entities 86
Number of NegPolItem entities 114
Number of BODY entities 7
Number of SUBS entities 14
Number of DISO entities 1,064
Number of PROC entities 93
Number of Phrase entities 278

Table 4: Corpus statistics.

annotated by most of them, but each one consid-
ers a different list of predicates. None annotates
morphological-related negation phenomena (pre-
fixes or suffixes). In general, discontinuous scope
is not taken into account. Finally, no one annotates
the actual negation marker within the scope. Now,
we briefly describe the most salient characteristics
of each system and resulting annotation.

Negfinder by (Mutalik et al., 2001) uses a lex-
ical scanner with regular expressions to identify
negation and a context-free grammar parser to as-
sociate negation markers to their scope. In the test-
set only bare negative words are annotated, while
words (medical terms) whose meaning is change
of state, e.g. stopping or discontinuing a drug, are
not annotated, nor are medical terms having a neg-
ative prefix (akinesia).

Chapman et al. (2001) developed NegEx,
a simple regular expression-based algorithm to
determine whether a finding or disease men-
tioned within medical reports was present or ab-
sent. NegEx implements (up to 35) negative and
pseudo-negative phrases, limits their scope and
rules out sentences having double negation. There
are different versions of NegEx (South et al., 2007;
Harkema et al., 2009), and it has been adapted
to Swedish (Skeppstedt, 2011), French (Deléger
and Grouin, 2012), Dutch (Afzal et al., 2014),
and Spanish (Costumero et al., 2014). In addi-
tion, the systems developed by Sohn et al. (2012)
(DepNeg) and Mehrabi et al. (2015) (DEEPEN)
are based on or use NegEx complemented with a
dependency-based parser to improve scope detec-
tion. And, in another line of research, Goldin and
Chapman (2003) use Naive Bayes and Decision
Trees to increase the NegEx’s precision of nega-
tion with only the word ”not”. In these NegEx-
based systems, negative predicates such as denies,

49



C
or

pu
s/

Sy
st

em

L
an

gu
ag

e

Te
ch

ni
qu

e

U
nc

er
ta

in
ty

B
as

ic
N

eg
at

io
n

M
or

ph
.N

eg
.

N
eg

at
iv

e
Pr

ed
.

D
is

c.
Sc

op
e

Fo
cu

s

Negfinder EN lexical scanner no yes no yes no no
+ CFG

NegEx EN,ES Regular Expression no yes no yes no no
GE,SW pattern matching

DepNeg & EN dependency no yes no yes no no
DEEPEN parsing
Goldin & EN machine learning no yes no no no no

Chapman’s NB & DT
Cotik et al.’s ES rules PoS-tag no yes no yes no no

NegEx & ST
NegHunter EN rules based on no yes no yes no no

grammatical info
Elkin et al.’s EN negation ontology yes yes no yes no no

BioScope EN manual yes yes no yes no no
BioInfer EN manual no yes no no no no

IULA-SCRC ES manual no yes no yes yes no

Table 5: Comparison of different proposals to negation annotation in the biomedical domain.

declines and no complaints of are annotated.

Cotik et al. (2016) developed syntactic tech-
niques based in rules derived from PoS tagging
patterns, constituent tree patterns and dependency
tree patterns, and an adaptation of NegEx, to deter-
mine if a medical term is under the scope of nega-
tion in radiology reports written in Spanish. Since
they translate the Negative predicates provided by
the NEgEx tool, these are included in the test-set.

Another rule-based negation algorithm is
NegHunter, developed by Gindl et al. (2008),
which uses grammatic information such as tense
and part-of-speech to detect negation in clinical
practice guidelines lexically marked by adverbs,
prepositions and a few predicates (absence, free-
dom, deny, decline and lack).

Finally, Elkin et al. (2005) developed a mech-
anism for automated annotation of negation of
clinical concepts invoking an ontology. Nega-
tive predicates are annotated, including the verb
to deny.

As for other annotated biomedical corpora, the
following resources have been developed with ex-
plicit aim of somehow annotating negation. In
general, they annotate more cases of negation than
the test-sets just reviewed. In what follows we re-

view their most salient characteristics.7

The BioScope corpus (Szarvas et al., 2008)
gathers medical and biological texts (20,879 sen-
tences) annotated for negation cues, speculation
and their linguistic scope. The minimal unit that
expresses negation is marked as cue and its scope
is extended to the largest syntactic phrase. The
scope includes the negation cue, and leaves the
subject out, but only in active sentences.

The BioInfer corpus (Pyysalo et al., 2007) con-
tains 1,100 sentences from abstracts of research ar-
ticles where biomedical relations are annotated for
negation.

The 2010 i2b2/VA NLP Challenge Corpus (in-
formation extracted from (Wu et al., 2014)) con-
tains 871 de-identified reports from different hos-
pitals and medical centers. Negation as such is
not annotated, but each medical term is associated
with different tags, one of these being ”absent”
which seems to match with what others consider
negated expressions. This annotation includes also
what we have called morphology-related and in-
herently negated terms such as afebrile.

Finally, the BioNLP Genia Event Extraction
Corpus (Kim et al., 2008) is frequently mentioned

7Some of these corpus are only found in the literature and
are not publicly available.

50



in the related literature. However, although a nega-
tion attribute is mentioned at event level, cues and
their scope are not annotated.

7 Conclusions

In this article, we have introduced the annotation
guidelines of the IULA Spanish Clinical Record
Corpus annotated for negation. We have de-
scribed the underlying criteria and we have mo-
tivated the choice of a syntactically-based general
criterion, as well as the relation of our annotation
schema with other negation-annotated corpora al-
ready available, although all but one are for En-
glish. The corpus currently contains about 3000
sentences and it is licensed with Creative Com-
mons 3.0 CC-BY-SA license. This resource has
been developed for supporting text-mining sys-
tems either to serve as a test set for rule based
systems or as training data for machine learning
based systems. Nevertheless, it is also a good re-
source for the study of clinical texts.

Acknowledgments

We want to acknowledge the support of Dra. Pi-
lar Bel-Rafecas, clinician, and the comments and
suggestions of the two anonymous reviewers that
have contributed to improve the final version of
this paper. This work was partially supported
by the project TUNER (TIN2015-65308-C5-1-R,
MINECO/FEDER)

References
Zubair Afzal, Ewoud Pons, Ning Kang, Miriam

Sturkenboom, Martijn Schuemie, and Jan Kors.
2014. ContextD: an algorithm to identify contex-
tual properties of medical terms in a Dutch clinical
corpus. BMC Bioinformatics, 15(373):1–12.

Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,
Greogory F. Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001.
A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings
and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 34(5):301–310.

Roberto Costumero, Federico López, Consuelo
Gonzalo-Martı́n, Marta Millan, and Ernestina
Menasalvas. 2014. An approach to detect negation
on medical documents in Spanish. In Brain Infor-
matics and Health, volume 8609, pages 366–375.
Springer International Publishing.

Viviana Cotik, Vanesa Stricker, Jorge Vivaldi, and Ho-
racio Rodrı́guez. 2016. Syntactic methods for nega-
tion detection in radiology reports in spanish. In
Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Biomedical

Natural Language Processing (BIONLP 16), pages
156–166. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Berlin, Germany.

Louise Deléger and Cyril Grouin. 2012. Detect-
ing negation of medical problems in French clini-
cal notes. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT
International Health Informatics Symposium, pages
697–702.

Bozena Dzuganova. 2006. Bratislavske Lekarske
Listy, 107(8):332–335.

Peter L. Elkin, Steven H. Brown, Brent A. Bauer,
Casey S. Husser, William Carruth, Larry R.
Bergstrom, and Dietlind L. Wahner-Roedler. 2005.
A controlled trial of automated classification of
negation from clinical notes. BMC Medical Infor-
matics and Decision Making, 5(13).

Stefan Gindl, Katharina Kaiser, and Silvia Miksch.
2008. Syntactical Negation Detection in Clinical
Practice Guidelines. Studies in Health Technology
and Informatics, 136:187–192.

Ilya M. Goldin and Wendy W. Chapman. 2003. Learn-
ing to detect negation with ‘not’ in medical texts. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Text Analysis and
Search for Bioinformatics at the 26th Annual Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference (SIGIR-2003).

Henk Harkema, John N. Dowling, Tyler Thornblade,
and Wendy W. Chapman. 2009. Context: An al-
gorithm for determining negation, experiencer, and
temporal status from clinical reports. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):839–851.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii.
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical
events from literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(10).

Kenneth H. Lai, Maxim Topaz, Foster R. Goss, and
Li Zhou. 2015. Automated misspelling detection
and correction in clinical free-text records. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics, 55(C):188–195.

Saeed Mehrabi, Anand Krishnan, Sunghwan Sohn,
Alexandra M. Roch, Heidi Schmidt, Joe Kesterson,
Chris Beesley, Paul R. Dexter, C. Max Schmidt,
Hongfang Liu, and Mathew J. Palakal. 2015.
DEEPEN: A negation detection system for clinical
text incorporating dependency relation into NegEx.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 54:213–219.

Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2012. Conan
doyleneg: Annotation of negation in conan doyle
stories. In Proceedings of the Eighth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012), pages 1563–1568, Istanbul, Turkey.

Pradeep G. Mutalik, Aniruddha Deshpande, and
Prakash M. Nadkarni. 2001. Use of General-
purpose Negation Detection to Augment Concept
Indexing of Medical Documents: A Quantitative
Study Using the UMLS. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 8(6):598–609.

51



Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Bjorne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Jarvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. Bioinfer: a corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 8(50).

Maria Skeppstedt. 2011. Negation Detection in
Swedish Clinical Text: An Adaption of NegEx to
Swedish. Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 2(3):1–
12.

Sunghwan Sohn, Stephen Wu, and Christopher G.
Chute. 2012. Dependency parser-based negation
detection in clinical narratives. In AMIA Summits
on Translational Science Proceedings, pages 1–8.

Brett R. South, Shobha Phansalkar, Ashwin Deepak
Swaminathan, Sylvain Delisle, Trish Perl, and
Matthew H. Samore. 2007. Adaptation of the
NegEx algorithm to Veterans Affairs electronic text
notes for detection of influenza-like illness (ILI). In
AMIA Symposium, pages 11–18. American Medical
Informatics Association.

György Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas, and
János Csirik. 2008. The BioScope Corpus: Anno-
tation for Negation, Uncertainty and Their Scope in
Biomedical Texts. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language
Processing, pages 38–45, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Stephen Wu, Timothy Miller, James Masanz, Matt
Coarr, Scott Halgrim, and David Carrell. 2014.
Negation’s Not Solved: Generalizability Versus Op-
timizability in Clinical Natural Language Process-
ing. PLoS ONE, 9(11).

52


