



















































Swedish Prepositions are not Pure Function Words


Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 11–18,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 22 May 2017.

Swedish prepositions are not pure function words

Lars Ahrenberg
Department of Computer and Information Science

Linköping University
lars.ahrenberg@liu.se

Abstract

As for any categorial scheme used for
annotation, UD abound with borderline
cases. The main instruments to resolve
them are the UD design principles and, of
course, the linguistic facts of the matter.
UD makes a fundamental distinction be-
tween content words and function words,
and a, perhaps less fundamental, distinc-
tion between pure function words and the
rest. It has been suggested that adpositions
are to be included among the pure func-
tion words. In this paper I discuss the case
of prepositions in Swedish and related lan-
guages in the light of these distinctions. It
relates to a more general problem: How
should we resolve cases where the linguis-
tic intuitions and UD design principles are
in conflict?

1 Introduction

The Universal Dependencies Project, henceforth
UD, develops treebanks for a large number of lan-
guages with cross-linguistically consistent annota-
tions. To serve this mission UD provides a univer-
sal inventory of categories and guidelines to facil-
itate consistent annotation of similar constructions
across languages (Nivre et al., 2016). Automatic
tools are also supplied so that annotators can check
their annotations.

Important features of the UD framework are lin-
guistic motivation, transparency, and accessibility
for non-specialists. This is a delicate balance and
it would be hard to claim that they always go hand
in hand.

As for any categorial scheme used for anno-
tation, UD abound with borderline cases. The
main instruments to resolve them are the guide-
lines, which in turn rests on the UD design princi-
ples. UD makes a basic distinction between con-

tent words and function words and adopts a pol-
icy of the primacy of content words. This means
that dependencies primarily relate content words
while function words as far as possible should
have content words as heads. Thus, multiple func-
tion words related to the same content word should
appear as siblings, not in a nested structure. How-
ever, as content words can be elided and (almost)
any word can be negated, conjoined or be part of
a fixed expression, some exceptions must be al-
lowed.

It is suggested that there is a class of function
words, called ’pure function words’, with very
limited potential for modification. This class ’in-
cludes auxiliary verbs, case markers (adpositions),
and articles, but needs to be defined explicitly for
each language’ (UD, 2017c). The choice of candi-
dates is motivated by the fact that some languages
can do without them, or express corresponding
properties morphologically. In the case of prepo-
sitions in Germanic languages the similarity with
case suffixes in languages such as Finnish or Rus-
sian is pointed out. As noted in (Marneffe et al.,
2014) this is a break with the earlier Stanford De-
pendencies framework, one of the UD forerunners.
Thus, a special dependency relation, case, is asso-
ciated with prepositions in their most typical use
(see Figures 1 and 2).

It is not clear from the characterization of pure
function words if the identification must be made
in terms of general categories or in terms of indi-
vidual words. Given the examples it seems that a
combination of part-of-speech categories and fea-
tures may suffice. We can note that subjunctions
are not listed among the pure function words. On
the contrary, the UD guidelines include an exam-
ple, ’just when you thought it was over’ where
’just’ is analysed as an adverbial modifier, adv-
mod, of the subjunction ’when’ (UD, 2017c).

The aim of this paper is to discuss how well
Swedish prepositions fit the category of pure func-

11



tion words. In the next section I will present data
illustrating the range of uses for Swedish prepo-
sitions and review the current UD guidelines for
their analysis. In section 3, the actual analysis of
prepositions in Swedish and other Germanic tree-
banks will be reviewed. Then, in section 4, the
data and the analyses will be discussed with a view
to the problems of fuzzy borders in UD, in partic-
ular as regards the classification of words. Finally,
in section 5, the conclusions are stated.

2 Prepositions in Swedish

Consider the following Swedish sentences, all
containing the preposition på (on, in):

(1) Max säljer blommor på torget
Max sells flowers in the market-square

(2) Max sätter på kaffet
Max is making coffee

(3) Max litar på Linda
Max trusts Linda

A traditional descriptive account of these sen-
tences goes as follows: In (1) ’på torget’ is an ad-
verbial, providing an answer to the question ’Var
säljer Max blommor?’ (Where does Max sell
flowers). It may be moved to the front of the
clause as in ’På torget säljer Max blommor’. In
(2) ’på kaffet’ is not a constituent; it does not an-
swer a question about the location of something,
and it cannot be moved to the front. Instead, it is
construed with the verb as a verb particle, which
means that it will receive stress in speech, and the
word ’kaffet’ is analysed as an object of the com-
plex sätta på. In (3) ’på Linda’ is a prepositional
(or adverbial) object of the verb. It can be moved
to the front but it does not express a location, and
the preposition is not stressed.

In UD, the distinction between adverbials and
adverbial objects is not made. Thus, for both sen-
tences (1) and (3) the preposition will be assigned
the dependency case in relation to its head nom-
inal, which in turn will be an oblique dependent
(obl) of the main verb, as depicted in Figures 1 and
2. The prime motivation is this: The core-oblique
distinction is generally accepted in language ty-
pology as being both more relevant and easier
to apply cross-linguistically than the argument-
adjunct distinction (UD, 2017a). This position
then assumes that we should only have a binary

Max säljer blommor på torget .

nsubj
obj

obl

case

PNOUN VERB NOUN ADP NOUN

Figure 1: Partial analysis of sentence (1)

Max litar på Lisa .

nsubj

obl

case

PNOUN VERB ADP NOUN

Figure 2: Partial analysis of sentence (3)

division of the nominal dependents of a verb1.
Although its dependency is different in (2), på

can be tagged as an ADP there as well. Alterna-
tively, given the possibility of (4), it may be re-
garded as an adverb (ADV).

(4) Kaffet är på
Coffee is on i.e., in the making

Arguably, in (4) ’på’ must be analysed as the
root as the verb ’är’ (is) is a copula here, another
type of function word in UD. Hence it shouldn’t
be a function word, specifically not a pure function
word. Whatever decision we take on ’på’ in these
examples they illustrate that the border between
content words and function words is not always
clear-cut.

Another difference between (1) and (3) is the
interpretation of the preposition. In (1) it seems
to have more semantic content than in (3). It
has a lexical meaning which is independent of
the main verb and which can be used in con-
struction with any nominal that refers to an ob-
ject with a horizontal surface held parallel to the
ground. This independence is also shown by the
possibility of using a phrase of this type as the
title of a story or an image caption. This lexi-
cal meaning is not present in (3) where the oc-
currence and interpretation is wholly dependent on
the verb. Thus, (1) can answer a question such as
’Vad händer på torget?’ (What’s happening in the
market square?), whereas (3) cannot answer the
question ’Vad händer på Linda?’ (What’s happen-

1Formally, further specification could be implemented via
the :-technique, but this is reserved for relations assumed to
be language-specific

12



ing on Linda?).
The fact that we can distinguish between (1)

and (3) does not necessarily mean that we must
do so for any occurrence of a phrase that UD con-
siders to be oblique. In other cases the classifi-
cation can be much more difficult. UD, however,
demands of us to make many other distinctions at
the same level of difficulty, including that between
pure and non-pure function words and, as we just
saw, that between adpositions and adverbs. Other
fundamental distinctions concern clauses vs. noun
phrases, which have distinct sets of dependencies
and largely distinct sets of constituents. For ex-
ample, adpositions are regarded as different from
subjunctions, presumably because typically adpo-
sitions are found with noun phrases while subjunc-
tions are found with clauses.

For a scheme such as UD with its 17 part-of-
speech categories and some 37 dependency rela-
tions there are many borderline cases. The design
principles can help us decide, but sometimes they
are not informative enough, and may be in conflict
with linguistic intuitions. It can also be observed
that the design principles are much more devel-
oped for syntax than for parts-of-speech.

2.1 Recommended UD analyses

Sentences (1)-(4) showed us different uses of
Swedish prepositions. We have seen how UD
treats (1) and (3). For (2) the relation com-
pound:prt is used, telling us that we are dealing
with a specific subtype of multiword expressions.
For (4), it was suggested that the preposition is
root, although possibly re-categorized as an ad-
verb.

Sentences (5)-(8) illustrates other uses of prepo-
sitions in Swedish. They may be stranded as in
(5a), or isolated as in (5b) and (5c). They may
introduce a VP as in (6a), or a clause as in (6b).
They may be modified as in (7) and they may fol-
low after an auxiliary verb, as in (8).

UD has recommendations for all of these cases.
For stranded and isolated prepositions the recom-
mendation is When the natural head of a function
word is elided, the function word will be promoted
to the function normally assumed by the content
word head. Thus, in (5a) ’på’ will relate to ’lita’
via the obl relation. (5b) and (5c) can be treated in
the same way.

Another option used in both the English tree-
bank and Swedish LinES is to let the moved nom-

(5a) Vem kan man lita på?
Who can you trust?

(5b) Max fick en bild att titta på.
Max got a picture to look at.

(5c) Max sitter därborta och Linda
sitter bredvid.
Max sits over there and Linda
sits beside.

(6a) Max tröttnade på att vänta.
Max got tired of waiting

(6b) Max litar på att Linda ringer.
Max trusts that Linda will call.

(7) Max blev träffad mitt på näsan.
Max was hit right on his nose.

(8) Jag måste i nu.
I have to get in(to the water) now.

inal be the head of the case dependency. An En-
glish example (from UD English item 0029) sim-
ilar to (5a) is shown in Table 1. This solution can
be applied in (5a) and (5b) but not in (5c) except
via an enhanced dependency. In (5c), the lack of
an NP after the preposition can be attributed to the
discourse context.

1 He PRON 3 nsubj
2 obviously ADV 3 advmod
3 had VERB 0 root
4 no DET 5 det
5 idea NOUN 3 obj
6 what PRON 9 obl
7 he PRON 9 nsubj
8 was AUX 9 aux
9 talking VERB 3 ccomp
10 about ADP 6 case

Table 1: Example analysis from the UD English
treebank.

For (6a) and (6b) the recommendation is to use
the mark relation, which is otherwise typically
used for subjunctions. The issue was discussed
in the UD forum (issue #257) with the conclusion
that the preposition could keep its POS tag while
being assigned the relation mark. The main ar-
gument was that if the relation would be case, it
would not be possible to reveal an occurrence of an
ADP with the relation case to a VERB as an error
automatically. This is a good way to promote con-
sistency of annotation, but is quite arbitrary from
a linguistic point of view.

For (7) the UD recommendation is that the ad-

13



verb ’mitt’ (right) modifies the head noun ’nä]san’
(nose) rather than the preposition. This is in line
with the desired constraint that function words
should not have dependents, but is contrary to
semantic intuitions and the fact that the phrase
’*träffad mitt näsan’ is ungrammatical. Given that
subjunctions are allowed to have adverbs as modi-
fiers, just as predicates, the asymmetry in analyses
seems unmotivated. Note that ’på’ in ’mitt på’ has
spatial lexical meaning, in the same way as ’när’
(when) has a distinct temporal meaning in a phrase
such as ’just när’ (just when).

Sentence (8) is similar to (4) involving an aux-
iliary rather than a copula. The solution can be
the same, i.e., analysing the token i (in) as root but
tagged as adverb rather than as adposition.

3 Adpositions in UD treebanks

As expected, the most common dependency re-
lation assigned to adpositions in Germanic tree-
banks is case. Other alternatives fall far behind.
Overall relative frequencies for the treebanks of
the Scandinavian languages, English, and Ger-
man from the v2.0 release (Nivre et al., 2017) are
shown in Table 2. The counts are based on the
train- and dev-treebanks joined together. Note that
Table 2 does not show all alternatives.

Treebank case mark cmp:prt
Danish 0.842 0.110 0.009
English 0.923 0.005 0.041
German 0.952 0.008 0.029
No-Bokmaal 0.801 0.115 0.063
No-Nynorsk 0.795 0.108 0.067
Swedish 0.851 0.059 0.027
Sw-LinES 0.970 0.000 0.009

Table 2: Relative frequencies for some depen-
dency relations of ADP tokens in seven UD v2.0
treebanks.

Of the five Scandinavian treebanks all except
Swedish-LinES frequently give an ADP the rela-
tion mark. Swedish-LinES only has one example;
English and German have only a few instances,

The rightmost column of Table 2 shows that
there are marked differences in relative frequency
for the relation compound:prt as applied to ADP
tokens in these treebanks. This difference gets its
explanation when we look at what parts-of-speech
these particles are assigned, shown in Table 3. En-
glish and the Norwegian treebanks have a clear

dominance for adpositions, German a clear ma-
jority, while adverbs are in the majority in the
Swedish and Danish treebanks .

Treebank ADP ADV other
Danish 92 (0.25) 269 0
English 802 (0.98) 16 3
German 901 (0.61) 562 3
No-Bokmaal 2308 (1.00) 0 0
No-Nynorsk 2585 (1.00) 0 0
Swedish 236 (0.35) 411 37
Sw-LinES 64 (0.10) 500 62

Table 3: Frequencies for parts-of-speech assigned
the relation compound:prt in different treebanks.

Given the close relationship between these lan-
guages it is hard to believe that the differences
are solely due to language differences. It is more
likely that the annotators have followed different
principles both as regards parts-of-speech and de-
pendency relations. For instance, the Norwegian
treebanks analyse as ADP a number of verb par-
ticles that in the Swedish treebanks are analysed
as adverbs, such as (from the Norwegian-Bokmaal
treebank) bort (away), hjem (home), inn (in), opp,
oppe (up), tilbake (back), ut (out).

It is also interesting to look at cases where a
preposition has been analysed as the head of a de-
pendency. As expected we find many instances of
fixed and conj in most of the treebanks, but the dis-
tributions are not at all similar, as shown in Table
4. The differences are probably due both to differ-
ences in treebank-specific guidelines, and to errors
in applying them. An interesting fact, however, is
that all of them have instances of advmod, and just
not for negations. Some of these are likely to be er-
rors, but some reasonable examples are the follow-
ing: omedelbart efter lunch (Sw-LinES; immedi-
ately after lunch), langt fra hele (No-Bokmaal; far
from all), andre ting kan han gå sterkt imot (No-
Nynorsk; other things he may go strongly against),
up to 40 rockets (English), and genauso wie in Por-
tugal (German; just as in Portugal). All of them
also have instances of prepositions governing a
copula.

Table 5 shows data on part-of-speech assign-
ments for all words that have been analysed as
an adposition at least once. Note that the tree-
banks may have errors so that the figures should
not be taken as exact, but the differences in distri-
butions are nevertheless interesting. The first col-

14



Treebank fixed conj advmod other
Danish 0.34 0.03 0.03 0.61
English 0.65 0.03 0.03 0.28
German 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.87
No-Bokmaal 0 0.12 0.14 0.74
No-Nynorsk 0 0.10 0.14 0.76
Swedish 0.85 0.02 0.05 0.08
Sw-LinES 0.61 0.08 0.02 0.29

Table 4: Relative frequencies for dependency re-
lations headed by ADP tokens in seven UD v2.0
treebanks.

umn shows the number of words that have ADP as
their only part-of-speech tag. We can see that the
Norwegian treebanks are markedly different from
the others in recognizing a very high number of
non-ambiguous adpositional words.

The two Swedish treebanks have different dis-
tributions. This may partly be due to differences in
genre, but also to differences in the specific guide-
lines used. In both treebanks, however, we will
find tokens that are found in both ADP and ADV,
other tokens that are sometimes ADP and some-
times SCONJ and yet others having all three tags.

Treebank Instances
1 2 3 ≥ 4

Danish 20 20 13 1
English 34 29 31 35
German 48 48 26 28
No-Bokmaal 116 34 6 3
No-Nynorsk 121 33 13 4
Swedish 44 20 8 2
Sw-LinES 35 39 11 3

Table 5: Number of different POS assignments for
words that have been tagged as ADP at least once
in different UD v2.0 treebanks.

4 Discussion

The previous section shows with no uncertainty
that the UD guidelines and design principles are
not followed uniformly by all treebank developers.
There are natural explanations for this, such as dif-
ferences in the original pre-UD guidelines for the
different treebanks, and a lack of time for review-
ing treebank data. I suspect, however, that there is
also a certain conflict between the UD principles
and linguistic intuitions of treebank annotators.

4.1 UD part-of-speech categories

The POS tags used in UD are 17. They form an ex-
tension of the 12 categories of (Petrov et al., 2012).
We note in particular the addition of the category
SCONJ for subjunctions.

A treebank is allowed not to use all POS tags.
However, the list cannot be extended. Instead,
more fine-grained classification of words can be
achieved via the use of features (UD, 2017b). In
annotations only one tag per word is allowed, and
it must be specified.

The basic division of the POS tags is in terms
of open class, closed class, and other. The point
of dividing them this way is unclear, since most
of the syntactic principles referring to POS tags as
we have seen use the categories content words and
function words2.

The POS tags that will be of interest here are:
ADP(ositions), ADV(erbs), and SCONJ (subordi-
nating conjunctions). These classes are singled out
as they are hard to separate consistently and ac-
count for a large share of the homonymy found
in Table 4. Moreover, many linguists such as
(Bolinger, 1971; Emonds, 1985; Aarts, 2007) have
questioned the linguistic motivations behind the
distinctions. It may also be a problem for users
who may find the distinctions less than transpar-
ent. The definitions of these parts-of-speech in
the UD documentation are not always of help as
they focus on the most common and prototypical
examples. The categories ADP and SCONJ have
partly overlapping definitions. An SCONJ is de-
scribed as typically incorporating what follows it
as a subordinate clause, while an ADP, in addi-
tion to NP:s, may have a clause as its complement,
when it functions as a noun phrase3.

4.2 Prepositions and subjunctions

As many other prepositions ’på’ can in itself not
be used as a subjunction. Removing the infinitive
marker from (6a) or the subjunction ’att’ from (6b)
results in ungrammaticality. There are, however,
in Swedish, as in English, many words that can be
used both ways, specifically those expressing tem-
poral or causal relations, and comparisons. Com-
mon examples are sedan (since), på grund av (be-
cause of), än (than), efter (after), innan (before)

2A wish for an exact definition was expressed by Dan Ze-
man in the UD forum issue #122

3This description may refer to constructions headed by
a gerund, free relatives, and the like, but is fairly non-
transparent for a non-linguist.

15



and före (before). The latter two are the subject
of a constant debate on grammatical correctness
in Swedish where purists would hold that one is a
preposition and the other a subjunction, but speak-
ers tend not to follow suit.

For these words the meaning is quite the same
whether what follows is a noun phrase or a clause.
This fact has been taken as an argument that the
prepositions and subjunctions are sufficiently sim-
ilar to be regarded as one category. The difference
can be seen as one of complementation which, in
the case of verbs, is not sufficient to distinguish
two part-of-speech categories (Emonds, 1976). In
UD it may be seen as logical to distinguish the
two, given the emphasis on the distinction between
noun phrases and clauses. On the other hand,
this leads to certain oddities of the kind that al-
low these words to have dependents when they are
subjunctions, but not when they are adpositions.

Sentence (7) illustrated the fact that Swedish
prepositions may be modified. There are a number
of adverbs that can modify prepositions and some
of them can modify prepositions and subjunctions
alike. Examples are alldeles, (just) rakt, rätt (both
meaning ’right’), precis (exactly). Examples are
given in (9) and (10)4. Spatial and temporal prepo-
sitions may actually be modified by noun phrases
indicating distance in space and time, as in (11)-
(12). Thus, the potential of Swedish prepositions
to be modified is quite equal to that of subjunc-
tions.

(9) Hon kom precis före (oss).
She came just before us.

(10) Hon kom precis innan (vi kom).
She came just before we did.

(11) Hon kom en timme före (oss).
She came an hour before us.

(12) De sitter två rader bakom (oss).
They’re sitting two rows behind (us).

4.3 Adpositions as mark
As noted above, the current recommendation for
the analysis of (6b) in UD is that the preposi-
tion ’på’ should be assigned as a dependent of the
head of the following clause, in this case the verb
’ringer’ (call). This is so because ’på’ is not a verb
particle in (6b) and it can only attach to the main
verb if it functions as a particle. Then there are two

4The brackets indicate material that can be left out without
loss of grammaticality.

relations to choose from: case or mark. None of
them is ideal; if we choose case we add a depen-
dency to clauses which seems to be rare in other
languages and which blurs the distinction between
clauses and noun phrases; if we choose mark we
add a property to adpositions that make them more
similar to subjunctions.

Another issue is the relation assigned to the
clause itself. In the Swedish treebank it is ad-
vcl. Normally, a clause introduced by the sub-
junction ’att’ would be ccomp. However, in the
same way as a noun phrase introduced by a prepo-
sition would be obl it is logical to use advcl. Then
again, this makes the difference between preposi-
tions and subjunctions fuzzier.

Now, the clause ’att hon ringer’ is as indepen-
dent in (6b) as ’Linda’ is in (3). It can be moved
to the front (’Att Linda ringer litar Max på’), it
can be the target of a question (’Vad litar du på?’)
and it can be focused: (’Är det något jag litar på
är det att Linda ringer’). Thus, there is an NP-like
flavour of these verb-headed structures, just as for
prepositional objects, suggesting that ccomp may
be a viable alternative nevertheless.

An interesting observation is the UD recom-
mendation for the analysis of comparative sub-
junctions such as ’än’ (than) and ’som’ (as). Since
they can virtually combine with phrases of any
kind, including clauses, prepositional phrases, and
noun phrases, and may use nominative pronouns
in the latter case, the question arises as how they
should be analysed5. In a phrase such as ’än
Max’ (than Max), ’än’ could be an ADP with rela-
tion ’case’, or it could be an SCONJ with relation
’mark’. However, given the new option why not
an ADP with relation ’mark’? We may note that
the most detailed analysis of Swedish grammar re-
gards all instances ’än’ as subjunctions and allows
’subjunction phrases’ (Teleman et al., 2010). We
may even regard a phrase such as ’than on Sun-
days’ to have two case markers. The choice seems
arbitrary.

The UD decision not to make a distinction be-
tween complements and adjuncts serves the inter-
ests of transparency and ease of annotation. It
means, however, that the UD analyses do not make
all the differences that can be made so that what is
arguably different phenomena gets identical anal-
yses. When it comes to part-of-speech annota-

5In the UD Swedish treebank these two words are actu-
ally tagged CCONJ.

16



tion the situation is a bit different. Extensions are
not allowed, but sub-categorization is required (or
requested) for some parts-of-speech, specifically
pronouns and determiners via features.

We have noted that UD principles are fewer
and less developed for part-of-speech categories
than for syntax. In particular, there are no prin-
ciples regulating the degree of homonymy. The
current framework suggests that Swedish has three
homonyms for the word innan (before) although
they all have the same meaning. If the frame-
work allowed fewer part-of-speech categories, the
degree of homonymy would decrease and anno-
tation would be easier. In particular the degree
of homonymity of prepositions could decrease (cf.
Table 5).

The idea that prepositions must be pure func-
tion words due to their presumed equivalence with
case endings can be put into question. The sen-
tences (5)-(8) all illustrate uses that are specific to
prepositions. Also, when prepositions have clear
semantic content they can be modified in various
ways, just as corresponding subjunctions. At the
same time there are subjunctions, notably the com-
plementizers such as ’att’ (that) and ’som’ (that,
which) that cannot be modified easily, not even
negated. This fact speaks against the view that
all adpositions should be put into one basket as
pure function words whereas subjunctions should
be put into another.

4.4 Prepositions and adverbs

The words that need to be regarded as both prepo-
sitions and adverbs are numerous. It includes
common prepositions as illustrated in (4) and (8)
and a number of prepositions expressing spatial
relations such as utanför (outside), innanför (in-
side), nedanför (down, below), nerför (down), and
uppför (up). For the latter the differences in mean-
ing are minimal, whereas for the more common
prepositions such as på (on) or i (in), the mean-
ings may be varied.

We note that when a sequence of a preposi-
tion and a noun is lexicalized into a fixed expres-
sion, the result is almost always something ad-
verbial. Some examples are i kväll (tonight), i
tid (in time), på stört (at once), på nytt (again),
på land (ashore). In some treebanks, notably
UD Swedish, the preposition keeps its part-of-
speech while being assigned the dependency ’ad-
vmod’.

We can apply the same arguments and counter-
arguments in this case as for the previous case.
The difference may be seen just as a difference
in complementation, where some prepositions can
have both a transitive and an intransitive use and
still be prepositions. However, if prepositions are
pure function words, and adverbs are not, UD
forces a distinction to be made.

5 Conclusions

We have observed that the UD design principles
are more elaborated for syntax than for parts-of-
speech. This could be interpreted as a recommen-
dation not to take parts-of-speech too seriously;
we may assume as much homonymy as the syntac-
tic design principles demands of the data. On the
other hand, what the non-expert user would con-
sider to be ’the same word’ in a given language
should also be given some consideration. I would
like to see an attempt to define UD parts-of-speech
in more detail, preferably as lists of properties,
taking gradience into account. (Aarts, 2007) pro-
poses a simple model for this purpose, which may
be taken as an inspiration. In the case of some
adpositions and subjunctions such as before, how-
ever, Aarts sees no difference as it is only a ques-
tion of complementation possibilities.

To join the categories ADP and SCONJ and in-
clude some adverbial uses as well would reduce
ambiguity in part-of-speech assignment consider-
ably. If it is desirable to maintain the difference it
can be done in the feature column by, say, a type
feature (AdpType).

Swedish prepositions, and those of other Scan-
dinavian languages, are more varied in their us-
age than case suffixes. At the same time, they
share important properties with subjunctions and
adverbs. Semantically they span the same do-
mains and they share typical positions. The cur-
rent UD principles allow Swedish prepositions to
share the relation mark with subjunctions, and the
relation compound:prt with adverbs. In addition,
they share those relations that are common to all
parts-of-speech, such as fixed and conj. Linguisti-
cally, at least, Swedish prepositions can be modi-
fied adverbially when they have semantic content.
Thus, Swedish prepositions are not pure function
words.

The possibility to take dependents seems to be
more on the level of individual words than a prop-
erty across the board for any part of speech. In

17



Swedish it can be found also with subjunctions, in
particular complementizers such as att, (that), con-
junctions such as och (and), and adverbs such as ju
(approx. ’you know’). With this in mind, it can be
questioned what benefits are gained from dividing
function words further into pure and not-so-pure
on the basis of parts-of-speech.

References
Bas Aarts. 2007. Syntactic Gradience: The Nature

of Grammatical Indeterminacy. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Dwight L. Bolinger. 1971. The Phrasal Verb in En-
glish. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Joseph E. Emonds. 1976. A Transformational Ap-
proach to English Syntax. Academic Press, New
York.

Joseph E. Emonds. 1985. A Unified Theory of Syntac-
tic Categories. Foris, Dordrecht.

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-
talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Uni-
versal stanford dependencies: a cross-linguistic ty-
pology. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, may.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Joakim Nivre, Željko Agić, Lars Ahrenberg, Maria Je-
sus Aranzabe, Masayuki Asahara, Aitziber Atutxa,
Miguel Ballesteros, John Bauer, Kepa Ben-
goetxea, Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, Eckhard Bick,
Cristina Bosco, Gosse Bouma, Sam Bowman,
Marie Candito, Gülşen Cebirolu Eryiit, Giuseppe
G. A. Celano, Fabricio Chalub, Jinho Choi, Çar
Çöltekin, Miriam Connor, Elizabeth Davidson,
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Valeria de Paiva,
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Kaja Dobrovoljc, Tim-
othy Dozat, Kira Droganova, Puneet Dwivedi,
Marhaba Eli, Tomaž Erjavec, Richárd Farkas, Jen-
nifer Foster, Cláudia Freitas, Katarı́na Gajdošová,
Daniel Galbraith, Marcos Garcia, Filip Ginter, Iakes
Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola, Memduh Gökrmak,
Yoav Goldberg, Xavier Gómez Guinovart, Berta
Gonzáles Saavedra, Matias Grioni, Normunds
Grūzītis, Bruno Guillaume, Nizar Habash, Jan
Hajič, Linh Hà M, Dag Haug, Barbora Hladká,
Petter Hohle, Radu Ion, Elena Irimia, Anders Jo-
hannsen, Fredrik Jørgensen, Hüner Kaşkara, Hiroshi

Kanayama, Jenna Kanerva, Natalia Kotsyba, Simon
Krek, Veronika Laippala, Phng Lê Hng, Alessan-
dro Lenci, Nikola Ljubešić, Olga Lyashevskaya,
Teresa Lynn, Aibek Makazhanov, Christopher Man-
ning, Cătălina Mărănduc, David Mareček, Héctor
Martı́nez Alonso, André Martins, Jan Mašek,
Yuji Matsumoto, Ryan McDonald, Anna Mis-
silä, Verginica Mititelu, Yusuke Miyao, Simon-
etta Montemagni, Amir More, Shunsuke Mori, Bo-
hdan Moskalevskyi, Kadri Muischnek, Nina Musta-
fina, Kaili Müürisep, Lng Nguyn Th, Huyn Nguyn
Th Minh, Vitaly Nikolaev, Hanna Nurmi, Stina
Ojala, Petya Osenova, Lilja Øvrelid, Elena Pascual,
Marco Passarotti, Cenel-Augusto Perez, Guy Per-
rier, Slav Petrov, Jussi Piitulainen, Barbara Plank,
Martin Popel, Lauma Pretkalnia, Prokopis Proko-
pidis, Tiina Puolakainen, Sampo Pyysalo, Alexan-
dre Rademaker, Loganathan Ramasamy, Livy Real,
Laura Rituma, Rudolf Rosa, Shadi Saleh, Manuela
Sanguinetti, Baiba Saulīte, Sebastian Schuster,
Djamé Seddah, Wolfgang Seeker, Mojgan Ser-
aji, Lena Shakurova, Mo Shen, Dmitry Sichinava,
Natalia Silveira, Maria Simi, Radu Simionescu,
Katalin Simkó, Mária Šimková, Kiril Simov, Aaron
Smith, Alane Suhr, Umut Sulubacak, Zsolt Szántó,
Dima Taji, Takaaki Tanaka, Reut Tsarfaty, Fran-
cis Tyers, Sumire Uematsu, Larraitz Uria, Gert-
jan van Noord, Viktor Varga, Veronika Vincze,
Jonathan North Washington, Zdeněk Žabokrtský,
Amir Zeldes, Daniel Zeman, and Hanzhi Zhu. 2017.
Universal dependencies 2.0. LINDAT/CLARIN
digital library at the Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics, Charles University.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings
of the Eigth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Istanbul,
Turkey, may.

Ulf Teleman, Erik Andersson, and Staffan Hellberg.
2010. Svenska Akademins Grammatik. Norstedts,
Stockholm.

UD. 2017a. Core dependents in ud v2.
http://universaldependencies.org/v2/core-
dependents.html.

UD. 2017b. Morphology: General principles.
http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/mor-
phology.html.

UD. 2017c. Syntax: General principles.
http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/syn-
tax.html.

18


