









































Hungarian copula constructions in dependency syntax and parsing

Katalin Ilona Simkó
University of Szeged

Institute of Informatics
Department of General Linguistics

Hungary
simko@hung.u-szeged.hu

Veronika Vincze
University of Szeged

Institute of Informatics
MTA-SZTE

Research Group on Artificial Intelligence
Hungary

vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu

Abstract

Copula constructions are problematic in
the syntax of most languages. The paper
describes three different dependency syn-
tactic methods for handling copula con-
structions: function head, content head
and complex label analysis. Furthermore,
we also propose a POS-based approach to
copula detection. We evaluate the impact
of these approaches in computational pars-
ing, in two parsing experiments for Hun-
garian.

1 Introduction

Copula constructions show some special be-
haviour in most human languages. In sentences
with copula constructions, the sentence’s predi-
cate is not simply the main verb of the clause,
but the copula verb plus a nominal predicate (in
“Peter sleeps” the sentence’s predicate is the verb,
“sleeps”, while in “Peter is tired”, it is the copula
verb and the nominal predicate, “is tired”) . This is
further complicated by the fact that the copula verb
shows non-conventional behaviour in many lan-
guages: it is often not present in the surface struc-
ture for one or more slots of the verbal paradigm.

These constructions are widely studied: many
approaches are available in many different syntac-
tic frameworks, like in Den Dikken (2006), Partee
(1998) and É. Kiss (2002) in constituency gram-
mar; or Dalrymple et al. (2004) and Laczkó (2012)
in LFG.

In this paper, we focus on dependency syntac-
tic approaches. In dependency syntax, the syntac-
tic structure’s nodes are the words themselves and
the tree is made up of their hierarchical relations,
making both two-word predicates and the missing
verbal forms cause difficulties. Should the cop-
ula, the verbal part of the predicate, be the head
of the structure, parallel to most other types of

constructions? And if so, how can we deal with
cases where the copula is not present in the sur-
face structure?

In this paper, three different answers to these
questions are discussed: the function head analy-
sis, where function words, such as the copula, re-
main the heads of the structures; the content head
analysis, where the content words, in this case, the
nominal part of the predicate, are the heads; and
the complex label analysis, where the copula re-
mains the head also, but the approach offers a dif-
ferent solution to zero copulas.

First, we give a short description of Hungarian
copula constructions. Second, the three depen-
dency syntactic frameworks are discussed in more
detail. Then, we describe two experiments aim-
ing to evaluate these frameworks in computational
linguistics, specifically in dependency parsing for
Hungarian, similar to Nivre et al. (2007). The first
experiment compares the three previously men-
tioned frameworks, while the second introduces
our new approach, based on differentiating the
copula and existential “be” verbs on the level of
POS-tagging, which can improve the performance
of the content head analysis.

2 Copula constructions in Hungarian

The Hungarian verb van “be” behaves similarly to
“be” verbs in other languages: it has two distinct
uses: as an existential and as a copular verb. In
the existential use, van behaves just as any other
main, content verb: it is the only predicative ele-
ment in the clause and it is always present in the
surface structure. On the other hand, in the copu-
lar use van requires a nominal predicate, a noun or
an adjective in the nominative case; copular van is
never present in the surface structure for 3rd per-
son, present tense, declarative clauses, but its other
forms are the same as for the existential.

Below we illustrate Hungarian copula construc-
tions with several examples, see Table 1 and Ex-

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 240-247,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

240



Existential van Copular van
1st Sg PR vagyok vagyok
2nd Sg PR vagy vagy
3rd Sg PR van -
1st Pl PR vagyunk vagyunk
2nd Pl PR vagytok vagytok
3rd Pl PR vannak -
1st Sg PAST voltam voltam
2nd Sg PAST voltál voltál
3rd Sg PAST volt volt
1st Pl PAST voltunk voltunk
2nd Pl PAST voltatok voltatok
3rd Pl PAST voltak voltak

Table 1: Present and past tense paradigm for exis-
tential and copular van in Hungarian.

amples (1-4), where (1) and (2) are present and
past tense existential van sentences, while (3) and
(4) are copular. In Examples (1) and (2), van and
volt are the only predicative elements of the sen-
tence respectively. In the copular van sentences
(3) and (4), the first, present tense sentence has
the zero copula, in the surface structure only or-
vos “doctor”, the nominal predicate makes up the
predicative part of the sentence, while in Example
(4), where the copula is overt, the nominal predi-
cate and the copula, orvos “doctor” and volt “was”
jointly make up the predicative part of the sen-
tence.

(1) Péter a szobában van.
Peter.NOM the room.INE is.PR.3rdSG
Peter is in the room.

(2) Péter a szobában volt.
Peter.NOM the room.INE is.PAST.3rdSG
Peter was in the room.

(3) Péter orvos.
Peter.NOM doctor.NOM
Peter is a doctor.

(4) Péter orvos volt.
Peter.NOM doctor.NOM is.PAST.3rdSG
Peter was a doctor.

The copula’s behaviour in Hungarian is by no
means unique: for most languages, the copula
shows some difference from verbs in general and

zero copulas in the verbal paradigm are also rela-
tively common (Curnow, 2000).

3 Copula constructions in dependency
syntax

Copula constructions in languages like Hungar-
ian cause two problems for dependency syntax.
First, with the dual predicate (nominal + copula)
it is not obvious which one should be the head of
the construction: should the verbal element be the
head parallel to non-copular sentences or should
the nominal be the head as that element is always
overt? Second, how to handle the zero copula in
the syntactic structures?

In this section, three approaches are described
giving different answers to the questions above:
the function head approach, the content head ap-
proach and the complex label approach.

3.1 Function head approach
The function head approach to dependency syntax
goes back to the foundations of Mel’čuk’s (2009)
framework. He proposed that the function words
of the sentence should be the heads over content
words; function words should be the ones setting
up the basic syntactic structure of the sentence.

Mel’čuk also writes about copular constructions
and the above-mentioned issues in his work and
stands by the function head analysis: he proposes
that in languages where the copula is only zero in
certain slots of the paradigm, but overt in others, a
virtual, zero verb form should be inserted into the
syntactic structure. This zero copula is the head of
the structure, the nominal predicate is a dependent
of it. This way, we preserve a common structure
for all sentences in which the inflected verb is al-
ways the head of the clause, but we violate one of
the core principles of dependency syntax: surface
structure words are no longer the only nodes in the
tree.

The function head approach is the annotation
of the Szeged Dependency Treebank (Vincze et
al., 2010), the large Hungarian dependency tree-
bank used for the experiments described in the
paper. The first column of Table (2) shows the
Szeged Dependency Treebank’s annotation for the
existential sentence (Example (1)), and the copu-
lar sentences with overt and zero copula, Exam-
ples (3) and (4). The capitalized VAN is the in-
serted virtual node in zero copula sentences that
was added manually to all sentences of this type

241



in a preprocessing step.

3.2 Content head approach
The content head approach recently gained popu-
larity in computational dependency syntax due to
the Universal Dependencies project (Nivre, 2015).

This analysis considers content words the frame
of the syntactic structure: content words are the
heads and function words are their dependents.
This separates the copula from all other verbs,
even the existential verb. As all other verbs carry
content, they are heads in this analysis also, while
the copula, as a function word, becomes a depen-
dent in this analysis. This way we no longer have
a common structure for all clauses, but we have an
analysis that has no issues with the zero copula.

A section of the Szeged Dependency Treebank
has been converted to the Universal Dependen-
cies annotation (Vincze et al., 2015; Vincze et al.,
2017). In the experiments, this treebank is used as
the content head analysis. The second column of
Table (2) shows the sentences in Examples (1), (3)
and (4) again, this time with the content head anal-
ysis in the Szeged Universal Dependencies Tree-
bank.

3.3 Complex label approach
The complex label approach is a computational
linguistic variation of the function head analysis
detailed in Seeker et al. (2012).

They keep the function words as the heads,
therefore keeping the copula as the head of the
copular clause, but they deal with the zero copula
in a different way. The analysis does not use vir-
tual nodes, but instead “shows” the missing copula
in the dependency labels originating from where it
would be inserted. As in the zero copula example
for complex label in Table 2.

, the root node of the structure in the func-
tion head analysis would be a virtual VAN node,
the subject, Peter would be a dependent of VAN.
Therefore the Complex label dependency label
of the subject is ROOT-VAN-SUBJ: the original
“route” to it would be ROOT label to VAN, SUBJ
label to Peter, the virtual node is removed, but
the “route” is still shown. This approach gives a
similar structure for all clauses with overt verbs,
only distinguishing the zero copula. Due to com-
binations of the complex labels, the approach also
uses a lot more (potentially infinite) different de-
pendency labels in the analysis.

The Szeged Dependency Treebank has also
been converted to this analysis, which will be used
in the experiments. Dependency trees for Exam-
ples (1), (3) and (4) are shown again in the third
column of Table (2); in Figure (1) a sentence with
two coordinated clauses with zero copula to show
how the labels can combine.

Table 3 summarizes in which conditions the dif-
ferent approaches give syntactic structures differ-
ent from regular content verbs analysis for cop-
ular sentences. The content head approach gives
the most linguistically based distinction by draw-
ing the line between copula and non-copula main
verbs.

4 Experiments

We evaluated the three approaches in two parsing
experiments. We used the same corpus with three
different dependency annotations and the Bohnet
parser (Bohnet, 2010) for both.

4.1 The corpus
We used a section of the Szeged Dependency Tree-
bank that is available with all three analyses: the
original annotation is function head based, there is
an automatically converted complex label version,
and the converted, manually corrected Universal
Dependencies treebank for the content head ver-
sion.

The section contains about 1300 sentences,
27000 tokens in total. The data contains 300 in-
stances of virtual V, 230 overt copulas and 150 ex-
istential vans.

4.2 Experiment 1: Function head, content
head or complex label

In the first experiment, the Bohnet parser was
trained using the ten fold cross validation method
on the same corpora of texts for the function head,
the content head and the complex label representa-
tion separately, using gold POS tags and morpho-
logical features. In the evaluation of each model,
we used UAS and LAS scores for the whole corpus
as well as error analysis for the structures in ques-
tion. Table 4 shows the UAS and LAS scores for
each approach. We were interested in the parsing
performances regarding different types of van sen-
tences, so we created filtered subcorpora that con-
tain only the sentences with existential van, only
with overt copula and only with zero copula. We
report results calculated for these datasets too.

242



Function Content Complex

Existential

Péter a szobában van
Peter.NOM the room.SG.INE is.PR.3rdSG

ROOT

SUBJ

DET
LOCY

Péter a szobában van
Peter.NOM the room.SG.INE is.PR.3rdSG

ROOT

SUBJ

DET
LOCY

Péter a szobában van
Peter.NOM the room.SG.INE is.PR.3rdSG

ROOT

SUBJ

DET
LOCY

Overt cop.

Péter orvos volt
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM is.PAST.3rdSG

ROOT

SUBJ

PRED

Péter orvos volt
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM is.PAST.3rdSG

ROOT

SUBJ COP

Péter orvos volt
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM is.PAST.3rdSG

ROOT

SUBJ

PRED

Zero cop.

Péter orvos VAN
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM VAN

ROOT

SUBJ

PRED

Péter orvos
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM

ROOT

SUBJ

Péter orvos
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM

ROOT-VAN-PRED

ROOT-VAN-SUBJ

Table 2: Syntactic structures for existential, overt and zero copula sentences in function head, content
head and complex label approaches. Note how all three trees for the existential sentence are the same,
but the copular ones show differences in the analysis.

Figure 1: Complex label analysis of the coordinated copular clauses in Péter orvos, Mari tanár “Peter is
a doctor, Mary is a teacher”.

Péter orvos, Mari tanár
Peter.NOM doctor.SG.NOM, Mary.SG.NOM teacher.SG.NOM

ROOT-VAN-PRED

ROOT-VAN-SUBJ

ROOT-VAN-COORD-VAN-PRED

ROOT-VAN-COORD-VAN-SUBJ

243



Function Complex Content
Verb
Exist.
Overt cop.
Zero cop.

Table 3: Different analysis from conventional syn-
tactic structure in the different approaches.

Based on these UAS and LAS scores, the func-
tion head analysis gives the best results with the
complex label analysis as a close second, but we
were interested in the specific relations of van and
not the full sentences’ parsing output. We did
manual error analysis of the van verb’s closest re-
lations to investigate which dependency syntactic
theory describes these relations best for computa-
tional parsing. We considered the following four
errors in our analysis: incorrect head in the clause
with van; incorrectly labeled or attached subject of
van; incorrectly labeled or attached nominal pred-
icate; subject and nominal predicate mixed up.
Sentences showing none of the above errors were
considered correct in the results shown below, re-
gardless of other errors in the sentence. Table 5
shows the percentage of correct sentences for each
analysis in the three above mentioned subcorpora
and the overall results in the bottom row.

4.3 Experiment 2: POS-based approach to
the copula

In the second experiment, we investigated a way
to improve the content head analysis with a POS-
based approach. Our hypothesis is that the existen-
tial van and the overt copula van are better disam-
biguated on the level of POS tagging: as the cop-
ular van has a syntactic structure (in the content
head analysis), which is very different from the
one of all other verbs, not treating it as a normal
verb makes sense from a syntactic parsing point of
view. For this reason, the level of POS tagging is
a better fit to disambiguate existential and copular
van than the actual parsing. We used the previ-
ously introduced Hungarian Universal Dependen-
cies treebank with the content head annotation and
created a new, POS-based copula version, where
the copula van has a new POS tag, COP distin-
guishing it from all other verbs including the exis-
tential van, as shown in examples (5) and (6).

(5) Péter a szobában volt.
NOUN DET NOUN VERB
Peter.NOM the room.INE is.PAST.3rdSG
Peter is in the room.

(6) Péter orvos volt.
NOUN NOUN COP
Peter.NOM doctor.NOM is.PAST.3rdSG
Peter was a doctor.

In the experiment, we applied the Bohnet parser
this time for POS tagger, morphology tagger, and
dependency parser training and evaluation, using
ten fold cross validation on the original content
head treebank and the new version with the COP
POS tag. Table 6 gives the UAS and LAS results
for the two analyses on a subcorpus with only the
sentences with existential, overt or zero van and
on the full corpus.

The results in Table 6 show very little change on
the full corpus and marginally better results on the
van sentences for the POS-based approach. Again,
we focus on manual error analysis of the affected
structures.

In the new POS-based content head approach,
the new COP POS tag for the copula van is as-
signed with 0.699 F-score over the whole corpus
and the COP POS tag triggers the dependency
parser to assign the content head copula structure
as expected.

To evaluate the approach, we created a sub-
corpus of the sentences with existential and overt
vans, as those are the ones we aim to better dis-
ambiguate. On these sentences, we evaluated the
accuracy of dependency label prediction of van.
In both versions in the gold analysis the overt cop-
ula van has the dependency label cop, while the
existential van has the appropriate verbal depen-
dency label. In our results, for the original content
head analysis, the correct label is assigned with
58.14% accuracy, while our POS tag based con-
tent head approach assigns the correct label with
60.35% accuracy. Although this not a statistically
significant improvement, we believe that the ten-
dencies reported on this relatively small corpus are
of importance for parsing sentences with copulas.

5 Discussion

The most common error for all three linguistically
plausible analyses is incorrectly labeling or attach-
ing the subject of van and mixing it up with the

244



Function Content Complex
Existential - UAS 86.18 80.48 86.84
Existential - LAS 91.04 77.21 82.46
Overt copula - UAS 82.8 75.05 83.62
Overt copula - LAS 77.31 71.67 77.82
Zero copula - UAS 84.42 78.39 77.5
Zero copula - LAS 79.17 75.15 69.59
Full corpus - UAS 85.75 84.41 84.76
Full corpus - LAS 81.24 81.2 79.89

Table 4: UAS and LAS scores with the three analyses on different subcorpora.

Function Content Complex
Existential 78 80 80
Overt copula 62 42 52
Zero copula 70 68 30
Overall 70 63 54

Table 5: Percentage of correct sentences in the manual error analysis.

nominal predicate. Correctly identifying the sub-
ject and the nominal predicate is very hard: both
are nominative case nominal phrases and while
with first or second person subjects, the agree-
ment with the verb makes them easier to tell apart,
when both subject and predicate are third person
noun phrases, even native speakers of Hungarian
find it difficult to assign the correct structure to
the sentence (which can be further complicated by
the free word order). With the free word order
in Hungarian, both sentences in Figures (2) and
(3) can express the same meaning (without having
any additional contextual information or informa-
tion about stress patterns in spoken language), but
the subject and predicate relations are not straight-
forward to assign. In the gold annotation, the an-
notator must decide on one of the options, but in
some cases, both options are plausible, causing is-
sues for the parser.

The manual error analysis shows that the com-
plex label approach gives the worst results for cop-
ula constructions: it gives fewer correct copula
structures and wrongly assigns the complex labels
to parts of the sentence without zero copulas. The
training time is also an issue as the complex la-
bel model trains almost twice as long as the other
two because of the huge number of different labels
- the function head approach uses 26 different la-
bels, the content head 50, while the complex label
analysis in our case used over 200 distinct labels –
theoretically, an infinite number of labels are pos-
sible for it. The huge number of distinct depen-
dency labels used in this approach probably influ-
ences the lower scores achieved by the system as

well, as statistically the system has a much lower
chance of assigning the correct label out of a set of
200, than that of 26 or 50 labels.

The function and content head approaches
achieved similar results in most cases. Both show
the lowest scores for the overt copula cases that
are very hard to disambiguate between existential
and copular van. The two approaches score very
similarly on the different error types as well. In
interpreting the results, it is important to note that
the function head analysis requires a preprocess-
ing step to add the virtual VANs to the corpus in
order for them to be analyzed parallel to all other
types of verbs; these virtual nodes were already
present in both training and test data in the exper-
iment.

Our two experiments were done on the rela-
tively small (approximately 1800 sentences) sec-
tion of the Szeged Corpus available with function
head, content head and complex label gold syntac-
tic analysis, therefore our results are preliminary,
but we think the tendencies shown would hold us-
ing bigger corpora.

Based on the results of our two experiments, we
propose using content head dependency syntac-
tic structures for the analysis of Hungarian copula
constructions with our addition of treating the dis-
tinction of existential and copular van on the level
of POS tagging.

6 Conclusions

Our paper discussed Hungarian copula van and
different possible analyses of copula constructions
in dependency syntax, evaluating them in com-

245



Original POS-based
Only van sentences- UAS 71.67 72.08
Only van sentences- LAS 65.87 66.3
Full corpus - UAS 77.8 77.77
Full corpus - LAS 72.02 72.05

Table 6: UAS and LAS scores for the original and POS-based content head analyses.

Figure 2: Content head analysis of the copular sentence, A fiú a legjobb barátom “The boy is my best
friend”.

A fiú a legjobb barátom
The boy.SG.NOM the best friend.SG.NOM.POSS=1SG

ROOT

DET

SUBJ

DET

AMOD

Figure 3: Content head analysis of the copular sentence, A legjobb barátom a fiú “My best friend is the
boy.”.

A legjobb barátom a fiú
The best friend.SG.NOM.POSS=1SG the boy.SG.NOM

ROOT

DET

AMOD

DET

SUBJ

246



putational linguistics. We introduced the Hun-
garian verb van and its main linguistic proper-
ties, described the function head, content head
and complex label approaches to represent copula
constructions and showed the results of two pars-
ing experiments focusing on the Hungarian cop-
ula. Based on the outcome of our experiments, we
support the use of the content head approach with
the POS tagging based additions proposed in this
paper for the treatment of Hungarian copula con-
structions.

Our goals in this paper were to show how syn-
tactic analysis can be influenced by not just the
syntactic framework, but the specific approach
within it and to highlight the importance of man-
ual error analysis alongside the UAS and LAS val-
ues. Manual error analysis often shows nuances
in the analysis of specific phenomena hidden in
overall precision scores and offers more informa-
tive results from both computational and linguis-
tics points of view.

In the future, we plan to repeat our experiments
on bigger corpora and also for other languages, as
well as to investigate other challenging syntactic
constructions in a similar fashion.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the EU-funded
Hungarian grant EFOP-3.6.1- 16-2016- 00008.

References
Bernd Bohnet. 2010. Top accuracy and fast depen-

dency parsing is not a contradiction. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 89–97.

Timothy Jowan Curnow. 2000. Towards a Cross-
Linguistic Typology of Copula Constructions. In
John Henderson, editor, Proceedings of the 1999
Conference of the Australian Linguistic Society,
pages 1–9.

Mary Dalrymple, Helge Dyvik, and Tracy H. King.
2004. Copular Complements: Closed or Open? In
Proceedings of the LFG ’04 Conference, pages 188–
198, New Zealand. University of Canterbury.

Marcel Den Dikken. 2006. Relators and Linkers:
The Syntax of Predication, Predicate Inversion, and
Copulas. MIT Press.

Katalin É. Kiss. 2002. The Syntax of Hungarian.
Cambridge Syntax Guides. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Tibor Laczkó. 2012. On the (Un)Bearable Lightness
of Being an LFG Style Copula in Hungarian. In The
Proceedings of the LFG12 Conference, pages 341–
361, Stanford. CSLI Publications.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 Shared Task on
Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
Shared Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages
915–932.

Joakim Nivre, 2015. Towards a Universal Gram-
mar for Natural Language Processing, pages 3–16.
Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Barbara Partee. 1998. Copular Inversion Puzzles in
English and Russian. In Katarzyna Dziwirek, Her-
bert Coats, and Cynthia Vakareliyska, editors, For-
mal Approaches to Slavic Linguistics, pages 361–
395.

Alain Polguère and Igor Aleksandrovič Mel’čuk, edi-
tors. 2009. Dependency in Linguistic Description.
Studies in language companion series. Amsterdam
Philadelphia, Pa. J. Benjamins.

Wolfgang Seeker, Richárd Farkas, Bernd Bohnet, Hel-
mut Schmid, and Jonas Kuhn. 2012. Data-driven
dependency parsing with empty heads. In Proceed-
ings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1081–1090,
Mumbai, India, December. The COLING 2012 Or-
ganizing Committee.

Veronika Vincze, Dóra Szauter, Attila Almási, György
Móra, Zoltán Alexin, and János Csirik. 2010. Hun-
garian Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of
LREC 2010, Valletta, Malta, May. ELRA.

Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas, Katalin Ilona Simkó,
Zsolt Szántó, and Viktor Varga. 2015. Univerzális
dependencia és morfológia magyar nyelvre. In
XII. Magyar Számı́tógépes Nyelvészeti Konferencia,
pages 322–329, Szeged.

Veronika Vincze, Katalin Simkó, Zsolt Szántó, and
Richárd Farkas. 2017. Universal Dependencies
and Morphology for Hungarian - and on the Price
of Universality. In Proceedings of the 15th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers,
pages 356–365, Valencia, Spain, April. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

247




