














































The Component Unit 
Introducing a Novel Unit of Syntactic Analysis 

Timothy Osborne 
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
China 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

Ruochen Niu
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
China 

niuruochen@126.com 

Abstract 

This contribution introduces a novel unit of 

syntactic analysis, which is called the 

component. The validity and utility of the 

component unit are established in terms of 

chunking. When informants organize the 

words of sentences into groups, they are 

creating chunks, and these chunks then qualify 

as components in dependency syntax. By 

acknowledging the nature of chunking and the 

component unit, it is possible to cast light on 

controversial aspects of dependency 

hierarchies. In particular, the component unit, 

informant data, and the reasoning based on 

these provide an argument in favor of the 

traditional DG assumptions about hierarchical 

status of many function words (auxiliary verbs, 

prepositions, subordinators, etc.), and in so 

doing, they contradict the Universal 

Dependencies (UD) annotation scheme. The 

data discussed here are from English, but the 

methodology and reasoning employed are 

easily extendable to other languages.  

1 Introduction 

The purpose of this manuscript is to probe the 
extent to which dependency syntax provides a 
basis for discerning how words are grouped to-
gether into units of meaning. The words that 
constitute sentences are of course not arranged 
arbitrarily, but rather they are grouped in such a 
manner that phrases and clauses can be 
acknowledged. According to the principle of 
projectivity (Hays,1964; Gaifman, 1965; Robin-
son,1970; Melčuk, 1988), dependents should be 
grouped together with their head, as opposed to 
together with one or more words that do not in-
clude their head. For instance, given a three-word 

string such as walk really fast, a straightforward 
assumption is that the adverb really modifies the 
adverb fast and should hence be grouped together 
with fast before being grouped with walk. We 
therefore have walk [really fast], not [walk really] 
fast.  

While this analysis of walk really fast is not 
controversial, there are other cases where intui-
tion about how the words should be grouped is 
not as clear. For instance, should an auxiliary 
verb be grouped first with the subject or with 
what follows it, e.g. [I am] having lunch vs. I 
[am having lunch]. Most phrase structure gram-
mars (PSGs) would of course prefer the latter 
analysis. However, what does dependency syntax 
say about such examples? A DG analysis that 
subordinates both the subject I and the auxiliary 
verb am to the content verb having also predicts 
that the latter analysis, i.e. I [am having lunch], 
should, for a reason discussed below, be pre-
ferred, whereas the alternative DG analysis, 
which positions both the subject I and the light 
verb having as immediate dependents of the fi-
nite auxiliary am predicts that neither one of the 
two groupings shown should be significantly 
preferred.  

This manuscript makes and defends three 
major claims concerning the issue just sketched: 

Claim 1 
Exactly how speakers of a language or-
ganize the words of sentences into groups 
can be determined by simple chunking 
data collected from informants. 

Claim 2 
There is a novel unit of dependency syntax 
that helps predict how informants will 
chunk sentences. This unit is the compo-
nent.  

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 165-175,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

165



Claim 3 
One can use the component unit as a basis 
for motivating analyses of sentence struc-
ture. One can thus resolve areas of debate 
about the best hierarchical analysis.  

Returning to the phrase walk really fast, in-
formants can, for example, be prompted to divide 
the phrase into two chunks. The prediction in this 
area is that a significant majority of them will 
prefer to chunk the phrase as in (1a) rather than 
as in (1b): 

(1)  a.  walk | really fast  

  b.  walk really | fast. 

The same experiment can be conducted on the 
sentence I am having lunch, whereby there are 
three potential responses: 

(2)  a.  I | am having lunch. 

  b.  I am | having lunch. 
  c.  I am having | lunch. 

If a large majority of informants chunk the sen-
tence as in (2a), one could then conclude that the 
auxiliary verb am can be grouped together with 
having lunch to the exclusion of I. If, in contrast, 
a large majority opts for the analysis in (2b), then 
one could conclude that am can be grouped with 
I to the exclusion of having lunch. If the sentence 
is chunked as in (2c) or there is a more even dis-
tribution of informant choices across (2a–c), then 
it is more difficult to acknowledge a clear 
grouping of the words in the sentence.    

The component unit is the means by which 
the chunks just indicated in (1–2) can be inter-
preted. Our hypothesis is that informants prefer 
to chunk sentences in such a manner that the re-
sulting chunks are components, whereby a com-
ponent is a word or a combination of words that 
form a string and are linked together by de-
pendencies.1 This manuscript employs the com-
ponent as the basis for shedding light on areas in 
which there is some disagreement among de-
pendency grammarians about the best hierar-
chical analysis. In particular, it scrutinizes as-
pects of the Universal Dependencies (UD) anno-
tation scheme.  

                                                           
1 Another, more principled definition of the component unit 
is given in the next section. 

2  Units of structure  

The current DG is like many other DGs in un-
derstanding dependency as a one-to-one mapping 
of words to nodes and vice versa (e.g. Mel'čuk 
and Pertsov, 1987: 48, 57–8; Kahane, 1996: 45; 
Schubert,1987: 78–86, 129; Engel, 1994: 25, 28; 
Bröker, 2003: 297; Hudson, 2007: 183). In addi-
tion, the current DG assumes trees and is monos-
tratal in syntax, which means linear order (prec-
edence) and hierarchical order (dominance) are 
both primitive – as opposed to just hierarchical 
order being primitive and linear order being de-
rived from hierarchical order. What this means is 
that the dependency trees assumed here always 
encode actual word order.  
   Given these assumptions about the nature of 
dependency syntax, key units of syntax can be 
defined as follows: 

String 
A word or a combination of words that are 
continuous with respect to precedence 

Catena 
A word or a combination of words that are 
continuous with respect to dominance 

Component 
A word or a combination of words that are 
continuous with respect to both prece-
dence and dominance 

Constituent 
A component that is a complete subtree 

These units are illustrated using the following 
dependency tree: 

(3)       show B 

   Trees A              structure D 

               syntactic C 

   Trees  show  syntactic  structure. 

The capital letters abbreviate the words. All the 
distinct strings, catenae, components, and con-
stituents in (3) are listed next: 

10 distinct strings in (3) 
A, B, C, D, AB, BC, CD, ABC, BCD, and 
ABCD 

166



10 distinct catenae in (3) 
A, B, C, D, AB, BD, CD, ABD, BCD, and 
ABCD 

8 distinct components in (3) 
A, B, C, D, AB, CD, BCD, and ABCD 

4 distinct constituents in (3) 
A, C, CD, and ABCD 

Of these four units, the focus below is on the 
component. The reason the other three are pre-
sented here together with the component is the 
desire to increase understanding of the one 
through comparison with the other three. 
   Most theories of syntax acknowledge strings, 
and the validity of the catena unit as just defined 
has been thoroughly established in a series of 
articles (e.g. O’Grady, 1998; Osborne et al., 
2012). The constituent is generally viewed as a 
unit of phrase structure grammar. However, 
some DGs have also acknowledged constituents 
as just defined over dependency structures (e.g. 
Hudson, 1984: 92; Starosta, 1988: 105; Hellwig, 
2003: 603; Anderson, 2011: 92). 
  While the component has been acknowledged 
in the DG literature (Osborne and Groß, 2016: 
117), it has not been the focus of particular re-
search efforts until now. It is therefore necessary 
to establish a solid understanding of this unit. To 
do this here now, the two examples discussed in 
the introduction above are examined more care-
fully. The first example: 

(4)  walk 
               fast 

         really 

    walk  really  fast 

This hierarchical analysis is, as stated above, not 
controversial. Each individual word is a compo-
nent by definition. The word combinations that 
are strings and consist of two words are of par-
ticular interest in this case, since predictions 
made about chunking apply directly to them. 
There are two two-word strings: walk really and 
really fast. The former of these is not a compo-
nent according to the hierarchy in (4), whereas 
the latter is.  
   The prediction concerning chunking, then, is 
that informants will prefer to chunk this phrase in 
a manner that the two resulting chunks are com-
ponent strings, as opposed to one of them being a 

non-component string. In other words, inform-
ants will NOT chunk this phrase as walk really | 
fast because the chunk walk really would not be 
a component. They will instead chunk the phrase 
as walk | really fast, because the chunk really fast 
is a component (and so is the one-word string 
walk, of course).2 
   Turning to the second example, i.e. I am 
having lunch, there are two conceivable structur-
al analyses that DGs are likely to pursue: 

(5)          having 

      I  am         lunch 

   a.  I  am  having  lunch. 

        am 
      I      having 

                   lunch 

   b.  I  am  having  lunch. 

The analysis in (5b) has a long tradition in DG, 
reaching back to Franz Kern (1883, 1884). This 
tradition positions the finite verb as the clause 
root and then subordinates the subject to the fi-
nite verb. The type of analysis in (5a) has re-
cently gained many adherents; it is the one ad-
vocated by the Universal Dependencies (UD) 
annotation scheme (e.g. de Marneffe et al., 
2014).3 This scheme systematically subordinates 
function words such as the auxiliary am, to the 
content words with which they co-occur.  
   The account of chunking in terms of compo-
nents predicts that if the hierarchical analysis in 
(5a) is correct, then informants will prefer to 
chunk the sentence as I | am having lunch be-
cause the chunk am having lunch would then be 
a component; they would not chunk the sentence 
as I am | having lunch, because according to the 
hierarchy in (5a), I am would not be a component. 
The hierarchical analysis in (5b), in contrast, 
predicts that informants will chunk the sentence 

                                                           
2 In our original rounds of data collection, we did not test 
the phrase walk really fast. In a follow-up round of data 
collection, however, we did test it. The informant responses 
strongly verified expectation: 

  (i)  walk | really fast   – 30 responses 
  (ii)  walk really | fast   – 1 response 

3 At the time of writing this manuscript (April 2017), an 
over view of the Universal Dependencies project and of its 
annotation scheme were available at the following web ad-
dress: http://universaldependencies.org/. 

167



as I | am having lunch or I am | having lunch or I 
am having | lunch because in all three cases, each 
of the chunks shown would be a component. 
   The informant responses we have collected 
resolve this issue and others. The hierarchical 
analysis in (5b), which corresponds to the more 
traditional stance towards the hierarchical status 
of auxiliary verbs, receives support. Auxiliary 
verbs are heads over the content verbs with 
which they co-occur. 

3  Methodology 

Two rounds of handouts were designed to obtain 
data that reveal how speakers chunk sentences. 
The instructions at the beginning of each handout 
provided an introduction to the chunking concept 
as well as illustrations of how a sentence might 
be divided into chunks. The handout then 
prompted the informants to chunk a number of 
sentences. 

The first round of data collection, i.e. the pi-
lot test, consisted of ten English sentences that 
varied in length and type. The handout was ar-
ranged in such a way that sentences of the same 
type and in the same length were randomly scat-
tered. Participants were invited to divide the sen-
tences into three chunks by using two dividers 
“|”. 

The second round of data collection via a 
handout obtained participants’ responses to sen-
tences of which the hierarchical structure is un-
der debate. It consisted of two parts: part one was 
composed of five sentences containing auxiliary 
and content verbs, where informants were asked 
to divide the sentence into two chunks by insert-
ing only one divider “|”; part two had fifteen 
sentences concerning controversial issues, such 
as the status of auxiliary verbs, the status of 
prepositions, and the status of object predicatives. 
Informants were invited to divide each sentence 
into three chunks. 
   All the informants involved in the surveys 
were undergraduate students learning English at 
a major university in China.4 Their level of Eng-

                                                           
4 Since we were testing English sentences, native speakers 
of English would have been preferred as informants, of 
course. We unfortunately did not have access to large num-
bers of English native speakers at this stage of our project. 
Two important factors moderate this weakness in the in-
formant responses. The first is that the sentences we tested 

lish was evaluated as intermediate to advanced, 
CET3 (College English Test Band 3). The simple 
sentences in each handout were easy for them to 
read and understand. 
   All the responses obtained from the inform-
ants were recorded using Microsoft Office Excel 
2007. Exactly how informants divided each sen-
tence and how many informants did so in that 
way, i.e. the tokens, were recorded below each 
sentence. Handouts containing responses that did 
not follow the requirements were excluded from 
recording. The number of handouts recorded for 
the pilot test and the second round was 46 (two 
excluded) and 43 (one excluded), respectively.  

4   Discussion of results 

4.1  Auxiliary verbs 

As stated above, there are two competing analyses 
within DG regarding the status of auxiliary verbs. 
There is the traditional analysis that is assumed in 
DG frameworks such as Lexicase Grammar 
(Starosta,1988), Word Grammar (Hudson, 1990, 
2007) and Meaning-Text Theory (Mel'čuk, 1988), 
and in numerous prominent DG works such as as 
Kunze (1975), Schubert (1987), Heringer (1996), 
Eroms (2000). The central status of the finite verb, 
which is an auxiliary verb if an auxiliary verb is 
present, reaches back to the earliest works in DG, 
namely to the treatises of Franz Kern (e.g. 1883, 
1884) – Kern emphasized time and again the 
central role that the finite verb plays as the sen-
tence root. The competing analysis is more recent; 
it is associated mainly with the annotation scheme 
of Universal Dependencies (UD) – see footnote 3.  
   Of the 26 initial sentences we tested on in-
formants, 15 of them contained an auxiliary verb. 
The tendency in this area is that informants prefer 
to chunk the sentence immediately before the 
auxiliary verb if the subject is a noun (phrase) or 
immediately after the auxiliary verb if the subject 

                                                                                        
were simple sentences of English of the sort that certainly 
none of the informants had difficulty reading and under-
standing. The second is that we did a smaller, follow-up 
round of data collection from native informants, testing 
most of the key sentences presented in this manuscript. With 
one exception, the results we obtained from the native in-
formants were similar to the results obtained from the much 
larger number of Chinese informants. This issue is 
acknowledged and discussed briefly in the concluding sec-
tion.   

168



is a pronoun. This variation is best accommodated 
on the structural analysis illustrated above with 
(5b), where the finite auxiliary verb is the sen-
tence root. If the finite auxiliary verb is the sen-
tence root, both strings – the string consisting of 
the subject and the finite auxiliary as well as the 
string consisting of the finite auxiliary and eve-
rything following the finite auxiliary – qualify as 
components. 
  To make this point concrete, the results we 
obtained for the example sentence discussed 
above, i.e. I am having lunch, are presented next. 
When informants were asked to divide this 
sentence into two chunks, the following results 
obtained: 

(6) a. I am | having lunch.  – 26 responses 

   b. I | am having lunch.   – 10 responses 

   c. I am having | lunch.  – 7 responses 

These data reveal three things about how the 
words are organized into groups. The first is that 
they refute the initial binary division of the clause 
associated with most PSGs. Phrase structure 
syntax typically divides the clause into a subject 
NP and a predicate VP. If that division were real, 
the expectation would have been for a greater 
number of informants to chunk the sentence as in 
(6b). The fact that a significant majority of in-
formants chose to chunk the sentence as in (6a) 
refutes the NP-VP division of most PSGs. 
   The second thing that the data in (6a–c) reveal 
is that the string I am is likely a component. This 
then refutes the UD analysis of auxiliary verbs. 
The two competing structural analyses are re-
peated here as (7a–b):   

(7)              having  

        I   am            lunch  

     a.  I   am   having   lunch  

           am 

        I        having  

                        lunch 

b.  I   am   having   lunch 

On the UD analysis given as (7a), the string I am 
is NOT a component. Accordingly, the prediction 
is that informants should not choose to chunk the 
sentence in a way that produces this chunk. The 
fact that 26 of the informants, a significant ma-
jority, did choose to chunk the sentence in this 

manner refutes the UD annotation scheme con-
cerning auxiliary verbs.  
  The third thing that the data in (6a–c) reveal is 
that the traditional analysis given as (7b) receives 
support. On that analysis, the relevant strings (I, I 
am, having lunch, am having lunch, I am having, 
and lunch) are all components. Most importantly, 
the string I am is a component on that analysis, 
and so is having lunch. This dovetails with the 
fact that those two strings were the chunks cho-
sen by a majority of the informants, 26 of them. 
  An objection that can be raised at this point 
concerns the fact that the subject I in (6) is a 
prosodically weak definite pronoun and that this 
prosodic weakness might be more responsible for 
the status of I am as a chunk than anything in the 
syntax. In a follow-up round of data collection, 
we tested this possibility. The additional sentence 
we tested in this area and the informant respons-
es we collected are given next: 

(8) a.  Sam | has arrived.   – 28 responses 
   b.  Sam has | arrived.   – 3 responses  

These results support the insight that prosodic 
strength is indeed likely a factor influencing how 
informants chunk sentences. In this case, the 
preferred analysis was to grant the prosodically 
strong proper noun Sam alone the status of a 
chunk. 
  This insight, however, does not contradict the 
central claim in this contribution, namely that the 
chunks informants produce are components. In 
fact, it seems likely that both avenues of ad-
dressing chunking data are valid. In other words, 
there is a positive correlation between prosodic 
phrases and components. Prosodic phrases tend 
to be chunks and chunks tend to be components, 
which means prosodic phrases tend to be com-
ponents.  
   Concerning example (8), a traditional analy-
sis that positions the finite auxiliary has as the 
sentence root sees both of the strings Sam and 
has arrived as components: 

(9)       has 

    Sam      arrived   

    Sam  has  arrived. 

This means that the informant responses given in 
(8) do not contradict our hypothesis that inform-
ants chunk sentences in such a manner that the 
resulting chunks are components. What they do 

169



do, however, is reveal that prosodic factors in-
fluence which particular components will be 
chosen as chunks.   

4.2   Subject-auxiliary inversion 

Four of the sentences tested contained sub-
ject-auxiliary inversion. The responses we re-
ceived in this area reveal that informants are re-
luctant to chunk between the subject and auxil-
iary verb. This reluctance again supports the tra-
ditional analysis which maintains a direct de-
pendency between the subject and finite verb. 
   The four sentences we tested containing sub-
ject-auxiliary inversion are listed next: Have you 
told them the truth?, Why did he quickly leave?, 
Did you send it out?, and Where did you go?. 
The results for the first of these four sentences 
are provided here for discussion. The informants 
were invited to divide the sentence into three 
chunks. We received the following responses: 

(8) a. Have you | told them | the truth?   – 39  

   b. Have you told | them | the truth?   – 4  

   c. Have | you told them | the truth?   – 2 

   d. Have you | told | them the truth?   – 1  

The two relevant and competing structural anal-
yses of this sentence are as follows: 

(9)            told 

     Have you      them     truth 

                       the 

   a. Have you  told  them  the truth. 

     Have 

          you  told 

                  them     truth 

                       the 

   b. Have you  told  them  the truth. 

The analysis given as (9a) is that of UD; both the 
subject you and the auxiliary have appear as a 
dependent of the content verb told. The more 
traditional analysis is given as (9b); the finite 
verb, which is the auxiliary verb, is the root of 
the sentence there. 
   The fact that a large majority of the inform-
ants, 39 of 46, chose to chunk the sentence as in 
(8a) supports the traditional analysis given as (9b) 
over the UD analysis given as (9a). This conclu-
sion follows from the status of the string Have 

you as a non-component in (9a), but as a compo-
nent in (9b). Observe also that each of the five 
chunks indicated in (8a) and (8b) is a component. 
   Worth considering in this area is that only 3 
of the 46 informants chunked the sentence in a 
manner that was inconsistent with the traditional 
analysis given as (9b). The chunk you told them 
in (8c) is a not a component on the analysis in 
(9b), and the chunk them the truth in (8d) is also 
not a component on the analysis in (9a) and (9b). 
Anomalous responses like these were not unusu-
al. For most of the sentence we tested, there was 
a small minority of informants that chunked the 
sentence at hand in a manner that contradicted 
the traditional analysis. It was usually the case, 
however, that a large majority of informants 
chunked the sentence at hand in a manner that 
contradicted the UD annotation scheme.  
   The results for the other three sentences con-
taining subject-auxiliary inversion were similar. 
The results we obtained were more consistent 
with an analysis that takes the subject and auxil-
iary verb as forming a component than with one 
where the two do not form a component. 

4.3  Sentence negation 

We tested two sentences containing an auxiliary 
verb and the standard clausal negation not. The 
results we obtained again support the traditional 
hierarchical analysis of auxiliary verbs over the 
UD approach. Further, the results we obtained 
also support an analysis that positions the nega-
tion not as a postdependent of the auxiliary verb. 
   The two sentences containing not that we 
tested were Jill did not laugh and I may not help 
them. The informants were invited to divide 
these sentences into three chunks. The results we 
obtained for the latter sentence were as follows: 

(10) a. I | may not | help them.  – 27  

    b. I may not | help | them.  – 7 

    c. I may | not | help them.  – 6 

    d. I | may not help | them.  – 5 

    e. I may | not help | them.   – 4  

Four potential structural analyses of this sentence 
are as follows: 

(11)              help 

      I  may  not       them 

   a.  I  may  not  help  them. 

170



                 help 

      I  may           them 

             not 

   b.  I  may  not  help  them. 

        may 

      I       not  help   

                      them 

   c.  I  may  not  help  them. 

        may 

      I           help 

             not       them 

   d.  I  may  not  help  them. 

The UD annotation scheme would likely pursue 
the analysis in (11a) or (11b), whereas more tra-
ditional assumptions would be along the lines of 
(11c) or (11d). Given the component unit and 
chunking data, it is possible to discern which of 
the four analyses is the best. 
  The chunking in (10a) and (10b) reveal first 
and foremost that may not and I may not should 
have component status. Since the analysis in (11c) 
is the only one of the four that grants both of 
these strings component status, it is preferable. 
Observe as well that the chunks indicated in (10c) 
and (10d) are also all components on the analysis 
in (11c). Only the chunking in (10e), which was 
produced by just four informants, contradicts the 
hierarchical analysis given as (10c), because the 
chunk not help in (10e) is not a component in 
(11c).  

Concerning the other sentence containing not 
that we tested, i.e. Jill did not laugh, the results 
we obtained were as follows: 

(12) a. Jill | did not | laugh.   – 44 

    b. Jill did | not | laugh.   – 1 

    c. Jill | did | not laugh.   – 1 

These results are uninteresting insofar they do not 
clearly support one analysis over another, for if 
the negation not here is interpreted as a postde-
pendent of the auxiliary verb did, similar to the 
analyses shown in both (11b) and (11c), then did 
not is a component on both accounts, the UD 
account and the traditional account.   

4.4 Prepositions 

Most DGs acknowledge prepositional phrases, 
that is, they view prepositions as heads over the 
nouns with which they co-occur. The UD anno-
tation scheme, in contrast, positions prepositions 
as dependents of the nouns with which they 
co-occur. To shed light on these alternative anal-
yses of prepositions, we included sentences con-
taining prepositional phrases in our test sentences. 
The informant responses we obtained again sup-
port the traditional analysis over the UD ap-
proach. 
  Six of the sentences we tested contained a 
prepositional phrase. These six sentences are 
listed next: Friends of mine are arriving now, I 
am in the classroom, One of the people protested, 
We are looking out for the teacher, He sleeps on 
his bed, We waited for Susan. When invited to 
divide the last of these sentences into three chunks, 
the informants responded as follows:  

(13) a. We | waited for | Susan.   – 32 

    b. We | waited | for Susan.   – 6 

    c. We waited | for | Susan.   – 5 

The two relevant and competing hierarchical 
analyses of this sentence are given next:    

(14)          waited 

       We                 Susan 

                       for  

    a.  We    waited   for  Susan 

              waited  

         We          for  

                           Susan 

    b.   We  waited  for  Susan. 

The UD analysis is shown as (14a), and the more 
traditional analysis as (14b). The difference lies 
with the hierarchical position of the preposition. 
  The preferred way to chunk the sentence sup-
ports the traditional analysis. A large majority of 
informants, 32 of them, chunked the sentence in 
such a manner that waited for appears as a chunk. 
Since waited for is not a component on the UD 
analysis in (14a) but is a component on the tradi-
tional analysis in (14b), the traditional analysis is 
again more consistent with predictions based 
upon the component unit.  
   The results for the other five sentences con-

171



taining a preposition were similar. While there 
were a few anomalies, the informants by and large 
chunked the sentences in ways that support the 
existence of prepositional phrases. Note that an 
important caveat concerning the data in (13) is 
mentioned in the conclusion below. 

4.5 Determiners 

The status of determiners has been controversial 
since the term determiner phrase (DP) first be-
came established in the mid 1980s (e.g. Abney 
1987). While the dominant view among DGs was 
and still is that determiners are dependents of 
their nouns, there have been exceptions. Most 
notably, Richard Hudson has argued in a number 
of works (e.g. 1984: 90–2, 1990: 268–276), that 
determiners are heads over their nouns. The 
component unit and chunking tasks can be 
brought to bear on this issue. The results we have 
obtained support the traditional NP analysis of 
nominal groups over the DP analysis.  
  Of the sentences we tested, eight of them con-
tained a determiner, e.g. Give me a call tomor-
row. Concerning the nominal group a call in this 
example, the two competing views about the hi-
erarchical nature of nominal groups are present 
in the following analyses of the sentence: 

(15)   Give 

           me  a      tomorrow 

                 call 

   a.  Give  me  a  call  tomorrow. 

      Give 

           me    call  tomorrow 

               a 

   b.  Give  me  a  call  tomorrow. 

The DP analysis of a call shown in (15a) predicts 
that some informants would choose to chunk 
between a and call, since the structure in (15a) 
shows Give me a as a component. The NP analy-
sis of a call shown in (15b), in contrast, predicts 
that informants will not chunk between a and 
call, because on that account, Give me a and me 
a would not be components.  
   The informant responses in this area were 
mostly consistent. With only 13 exceptions 
(among hundreds of responses), the informants 
chunked the eight sentences containing deter-

miners in such a manner that the determiner was 
grouped together with the following noun. For 
instance, sentence (15) was chunked as follows: 

(16) a. Give me | a call | tomorrow.  – 44 

    b. Give | me | a call tomorrow.  – 2 

Not one of the informants who chunked this sen-
tence chose to chunk between a and call. The 
three chunks shown in (16a) are components. 
The latter chunk in (16b), i.e. a call tomorrow, is 
the exception, since it is not a component in (15b) 
(and 15a).  
   The conclusion concerning determiners is 
therefore that informants prefer to group deter-
mines together with the nouns that follow them. 
This fact supports the traditional NP analysis of 
nominal groups over the DP analysis.  

4.6  Object predicatives (“small clauses”) 

The hierarchical status of object predicative ex-
pressions, e.g. I judged him to have lied, has been 
a source of much debate among syntacticians. A 
ternary-branching analysis has been in competi-
tion with a strictly binary branching analysis. 
From the DG point of view, there are two con-
ceivable analyses of these predicatives. The 
component unit and chunking task can be brought 
to bear on this issue. They reveal that the ternary- 
branching analysis should be preferred. 
   We tested four sentences that contained object 
predicatives: I judged him to have lied, My par-
ents expect me to become a doctor, We believe 
Sam to be upset, and They want you to go home. 
Three possible structural analyses of the first of 
these four sentences are given next: 

(17)    judged 

     I        him          lied 
                 to  have 

   a. I  judged him  to  have  lied.    

        judged 

     I        him  to 

                    have 

                         lied 

   b. I  judged him  to  have  lied. 

172



       judged 

     I            to 

             him     have 

                         lied 

   c. I  judged  him  to  have  lied. 

The UD approach is likely to pursue (17a). A 
“small clause” analysis would be along the lines 
of (17c). Analysis (17b) can be viewed as the 
traditional analysis of object predicatives in DG 
(see Kunze, 1975: 111–2; Schubert, 1987: 94–6; 
and Heringer, 1996: 76–7).  
  The informant responses we received for this 
sentence are listed next: 

(18) a. I | judged him | to have lied.   – 25 

    b. I judged him | to | have lied.   – 4 

    c. I | judged him to | have lied.   – 4 

    d. I judged | him | to have lied.   – 3 

    e. I judged | him to | have lied.   – 3 

    f. I | judged | him to have lied.   – 3 

    g. I judged | him to have | lied.   – 1 

The fact that a majority of informants preferred to 
chunk this sentence immediately after the object 
him provides guidance about the structure. The 
small clause analysis (17c) can be immediately 
rejected because it does not grant the chunk 
judged him component status. Choosing between 
(17a) and (17b) is more difficult based on the 
informant responses. The informants that chunked 
the sentence as in (18c) did, however, provide 
some guidance insofar as the chunk judged him to 
is a component in (17b) but not in (17a). 
  Other considerations allow the approach to 
more confidently choose between (17a) and (17b). 
The discussion of auxiliary verbs above in Sec-
tions 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 established that auxiliary 
verbs are plausibly viewed as heads over the 
content verbs with which they co-occur. This fact 
hence points to (17b) as the best analysis, since 
(17b) does, but (17a) does not, position the aux-
iliary verb have as head over lied.  
  The informant responses we received for the 
other four sentences that contained an object 
predicative further support the conclusion. The 
traditional, ternary-branching analysis of object 
predicatives, as in (17b), is well motivated based 
upon the reasoning from chunking and the com-
ponent unit. 

5 Overall relevance of component unit 

Given the aspects of sentence structure estab-
lished in the previous sections, it has become 
possible to put everything together in order to 
arrive at a motivated analysis of the overall 
structures discussed. We calculated the overall 
component to non-component ratio given tradi-
tional structures as opposed to structures corre-
sponding to the UD annotation scheme. These 
overall numbers provide a cumulative argument 
in favor of the traditional structures. 
   The following points were established above: 

1. Auxiliary verbs are heads over content 
verbs. 

2. The nature of subject-auxiliary inver-
sion further supports the stance that auxil-
iary verbs are heads over content verbs. 

3. The sentence negation not is typically a 
postdependent of the auxiliary verb that 
precedes it. 

4. Prepositional phrases exist, that is, the 
preposition is the head of the phrase it in-
troduces. 

5. The traditional NP analysis of nominal 
groups is preferable over the DP analysis. 

6. Object predicatives are best analyzed 
with a ternary-branching structure that po-
sitions the object as an immediate de-
pendent of the matrix verb. 

To illustrate all of these points in one structure, 
we offer the following example: 

(19) Does 

         he  not view 

                   us  to 

                        be 

                           in 

                              trouble 

    Does  he  not view us  to be  in  trouble? 

  If one produces hierarchical analyses of this 
sort for all 25 of the original sentences we tested 
on informants, one can then check to see how 
many of the chunks (consisting of two or more 
words) produced by informants were and were 

173



not components.5 By doing so, one arrives at an 
overall number that can be used to summarize 
the validity of varying assumptions about syntac-
tic structure (e.g. traditional analysis vs. UD).    

We obtained a total of 2,252 chunks from in-
formants that consisted of two or more words. 
Among these 2,252 chunks, 2,124 of them were 
identified as components on traditional assump-
tions about sentence structure (as illustrated with 
19). Thus, the ratio of component strings to total 
strings (abbreviated as RC) reached 94%. In con-
trast, a smaller number of these chunks, i.e. 1,632 
of them, were components on competing UD 
assumptions about sentence structure, rendering 
RC at 72%. 
   The results just mentioned are given visually 
with the following pie charts:  

 
Figure 1. Component to non-component chunks on 

traditional analysis; RC = 94% 

 
Figure 2. Component to non-component chunks on 

UD annotation scheme; RC = 72% 

The higher number of component chunks on the 
traditional analysis supports traditional DG 

                                                           
5 The qualification “consisting of two or more words” is 
important. Individual words are always components by 
definition (regardless of the hierarchical analysis assumed). 
They were therefore excluded from the calculations in order 
to more strongly draw out the contrasts in the numbers 
across the two competing hierarchical analyses. 

assumptions about the structure of sentences in 
English over the UD annotation scheme. 

6 Concluding comments 

This manuscript has employed the component 
unit, which is a novel unit of dependency syntax, 
to shed light on aspects of sentence structure in 
English. It should be evident that the simple 
methodology and reasoning employed can be 
easily extended to other languages. As long as 
one has access to a significant number of speak-
ers of the language under investigation, the rele-
vant data can be easily collected and analyzed to 
resolve issues about the hierarchical structures of 
that language. Indeed, the methodology and rea-
soning we have employed in this study are cur-
rently being extended to Chinese to resolve is-
sues about the hierarchical analysis of Chinese 
sentences. 
  The principle objection that can be raised 
against the message delivered in this contribution 
concerns the informants – see note 4. Native 
speakers of Chinese may chunk English sentenc-
es differently than native speakers of English. In 
an effort to address this objection, a follow-up 
round of data collection was conducted on 13 
native speakers of English. Most of the sentences 
presented and discussed above were tested. The 
results obtained matched those of the Chinese 
informants, with one exception.  
  The exception is present in the following 
numbers: 

f.   We | waited | for Susan.     – 9 

   We | waited for | Susan.      – 3 

   We waited | for | Susan.     – 1 

Comparing these numbers with the numbers for 
sentence (13) above, there is an obvious differ-
ence. These numbers from native informants are 
more congruent with the UD analysis, which 
subordinates the preposition for to the proper 
noun Susan. 
  Caution is therefore warranted concerning the 
greater conclusion. Solid claims about syntactic 
structure of English sentences will become pos-
sible only after the project has been extended to 
include data from large numbers of native in-
formants.   
 

174



Acknowledgement 

The research presented in this article was funded 
by the Ministry of Education of the People’s 
Republic of China, Grant # 15YJA74001. 

References  

Paul Steven Abney. 1987. The English noun phrase in 

its sentential aspect. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, 

Cambridge, MA. 

John Anderson. 2011. The substance of language 

volume I: The domain of syntax. Oxford University 

Press.  

Norbert Bröker. 2003. Formal foundations of de-

pendency grammar. In Vilmos Ágel et al. (eds.), 

Dependency and valency: An international hand-

bookof contemporary research, vol. 1, 294–310. 

Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Ulrich Engel. 1994. Syntax der deutschen Gegen-
wartssprache, 3rd ed. Erich Schmidt Verlag, Berlin. 

Hans-Werner Eroms. 2000. Syntax der deutschen 
Sprache. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin.  

Chaim Gaifman. 1965. Dependency systems and 

phrase-structure systems. Information and Control 

8, 304–337.  

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2009. Toward a 

practical dependency grammar theory of disconti-
nuities. SKY Journal of Linguistics 22, 43–90.  

David Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A formalism 
and some observations. Language 40, 511–525. 

Peter Hellwig. 2003. Dependency Unification Gram-
mar. Dependency and valency: An international 
handbook of contemporary research, ed. by Vilmos 
Ágel et al., 593–635. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Hans Jürgen Heringer. 1996. Deutsche Syntax: De-
pendentiell. Stauffenburg, Tübingen.  

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil 

Blackwell, Oxford. 

Richard Hudson. 1990. An English Word Grammar. 
Basil Blackwell, Oxford. 

Richard Hudson. 2007. Language networks: The new 
Word Grammar. Oxford University Press. 

Sylvain Kahane. 1996. If HPSG were a dependency 

grammar… Actes de TALN, Marseille, 22–24, 

45–49. 

Franz Kern. 1883. Zur Methodik des deutschen Un-

terrichts. Nicolaische Verlags-Buchhandlung, 

Berlin.  

Franz Kern. 1884. Grundriss der Deutschen Satzlehre. 

Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung, Berlin. 

Jürgen Kunze. 1975. Abhängigkeitsgrammatik. Series: 

studia grammatika XII. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Natalia 

Silvaire, Katrin Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim 

Nivre, Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Universal 

Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typol-

ogy. LREC 14.  

Igor Mel'čuk. 1988. Dependency syntax: Theory and 

practice. Albany: State University of New York 

Press. 

Igor Mel'čuk and Nikolai Pertsov. 1987. Surface syn-

tax of English: A formal model with the Mean-

ing-Text Framework. Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

William O’Grady 1998. The syntax of idioms. Natural 
Language and Linguistic Theory 16, 79–312 

Timothy Osborne and Thomas Groß. 2016. The 
do-so-diagnositc: Against finite VPs and for flat 
non-finite VPs. Folia Linguistica 50, 1, 97-35 

Timothy Osborne, Michael Putnam, and Thomas Groß. 
2012. Catenae: Introducing a novel unit of syntactic 
analysis. Syntax 15, 354-396. 

Jane Robinson. 1970. Dependency structures and 
transformational rules. Language 46, 259–285. 

Klaus Schubert. 1987. Metataxis: Contrastive de-

pendency syntax for machine translation. Foris 

Publications, Dordrecht. 

Stanley Starosta. 1988. The case for Lexicase: An 
outline of Lexicase grammatical theory. Pinter 
Publishers, London. 

175




