














































Chinese Descriptive and Resultative V-de Constructions 
A Dependency-based Analysis 

Ruochen Niu 

Zhejiang University 
Hangzhou 

China 
niuruochen@126.com

Abstract 

This contribution presents a dependency 

grammar (DG) analysis of the so-called de-

scriptive and resultative V-de constructions in 

Mandarin Chinese (VDCs); it focuses, in par-

ticular, on the dependency analysis of the 

noun phrase that intervenes between the two 

predicates in a VDC. Two methods, namely 

chunking data collected from informants and 

two diagnostics specific to Chinese, i.e. bǎ and 

bèi sentence formation, were used. They were 

employed to discern which analysis should be 

preferred, i.e. the ternary-branching analysis, 

in which the intervening NP (NP2) is a de-

pendent of the first predicate (P1), or the 

small-clause analysis, in which NP2 depends 

on the second predicate (P2). The results ob-

tained suggest a flexible structural analysis for 

VDCs in the form of “NP1+P1-de+NP2+P2”. 

The difference in structural assignment is at-

tributed to a semantic property of NP2 and the 

semantic relations it forms with adjacent 

predicates.  

1   Introduction 

The aim of this paper is to assign dependency 
structures to a familiar construction of Chinese, 
the descriptive and resultative V-de constructions 
(abbreviated as VDCs in following discussions). 
Having attracted considerable interest both at 
home in China and abroad, VDC has also been 
referred to as 得字句、得句型 ‘de construction’, 
状态补语 ‘stative complement’ and 得字补语 
‘de complement’ according to different scholars.  

Until now, research efforts concerning VDCs 
have centered on the origin and lexical properties 
of de (e.g., Jinxi Li, 2000/1924, p. 178-181; 

Chao, 1968, p. 350-358; Wang, 1985, p. 98-100, 
103-105;  Lin, 2011/1957, p. 69-71), categori-
zation and typology (e.g., Li and Thompson, 
1981; Zhu, 1982, p. 133; Chao Li, 2015), and 
semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic properties of 
the construction (e.g., Linding Li, 1986, p. 
225-255; Huang, 1988; Yen-hui Audrey Li, 1990; 
Fan, 1993; Yafei Li, 1999; Gouguet, 2006; 
Zhang, 2006, p. 47-66, 155-161; Loar, 2011, p. 
331-367). The big picture is that although many 
aspects of VDC have been studied, little agree-
ment has been reached. This observation is par-
ticularly true of the hierarchical analysis.  

Examples (1) and (2) are illustrations of the 
widely-assumed dichotomy between the descrip-
tive and resultative VDCs (c.f., Li and Thompson, 
1981; Yen-hui Audrey Li, 1990; Huang et al., 
2009; Chao Li, 2015): 

(1) (from Huang, 1988, p. 274) 

Wǒ   pǎo  de   hěn   kuài. 

I    run  DE   very  (be)fast 

 ‘I run very fast.’ 
我跑得很快。

(2) (EM=Emphasis) 

Wǒ  pǎo  de  xiédài     dōu   diào  le. 

   I   run  DE shoelaces  EM   loosen LE 

‘I ran to the extent that even my shoelaces 

got loose’ 
我跑得鞋带都掉了。

That de is the marker of this construction is easy 
to see, but a proper analysis of de is much more 
difficult to produce. There are three distinct 
stances in this regard: De has been treated as a 
preposition (e.g., Jinxi Li, 2000/1924, p. 178), as 
a suffix (e.g., Zhu, 1982, p. 32), and as a 
结构助词 ‘structural function word’, as opposed 
to a content word (e.g., Fan, 1993, p. 60; Zhang, 
2006, p. 156). Following the majority position on 
this issue, i.e. the last of the three, the discussion 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 154-164,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

154



here takes de as a function word that “clings to” 
its preceding predicate P1, and it is glossed as 
-de in the syntactic structures. 

A notable feature of VDCs is the presence of 
two predicates.1 For instance, in (1), the verb 
pǎo ‘run’ is a predicate that takes NP1 wǒ ‘I’ as 
its agent; on the other hand, the adjective kuài 
‘(be)fast’ is also a predicate that takes either the 
entity wǒ ‘I’ or the proposition wǒ pǎo ‘I run’ as 
its argument. In example (2), where there is an 
intervening NP xiédài ‘shoelaces’, NP1 wǒ ‘I’ is 
the agent of the first predicate pǎo ‘run’, and 
xiédài ‘shoelaces’ is the theme of the second 
predicate diào ‘loosen’. The question, then, is 
which of the two predicates involved, the first 
predicate (P1) to the left or the second (P2) to the 
right, is the root of the sentence? 

There has been a longstanding debate on the 
basic structural analysis just sketched (e.g., Li 
and Thompson, 1981; Huang, 1988; Osborne and 
Ma, 2015). Researchers in this area have at-
tempted to address this problem by examining 
the forms of the two predicates during question 
formation, aspect marking and sentence negation. 
In particular, Huang (1988) has contributed to 
the establishment of the Secondary Predication 
hypothesis (in which P1 is the main predicate 
over P2) by reinvestigating the arguments for the 
opposite viewpoint and rebutting them cogently. 
Since the status of P1 and P2 is not the focus of 
this study, the discussion here takes Huang’s 
claim for granted (also following Ding, 1961; 
Linding Li, 1986; Gouguet, 2006; Loar, 2011). 
Thus sentence (1) has the following dependency 
analysis, where P2 is a dependent of P1: 

                                                      
1 To be precise, a small handful of adverbials can appear 

where P2 normally would be, adding intense extent to the 

statement denoted by P1. These degree adverbs, as noted by 

Chao Li (2015), are not predicative. Such adverbials include 

hěn ‘very’, duō ‘much’, yuǎn ‘far’, yàomìng ‘almost killed 

sb’, lìhài ‘severely’ and bùxíng ‘not ok’, e.g., 

(i) Wǒ  kùn       de   bùxíng  

I    (be)sleepy  DE   not ok 

‘I am extremely sleepy.’ 

我困得不行。 

(3)       pǎo-de 

 Wǒ              kuài  

             hěn  

 Wǒ  pǎo-de  hěn   kuài  

 ‘I run very fast.’ 

   Difficulty arises when one attempts to assign 
structures to VDCs such as sentence (2), in 
which an intervening NP (NP2) appears between 
P1-de and P2. In previous studies regarding the 
status of NP2, a series of diagnostics were em-
ployed to discern to which predicate the inter-
vening NP is closer in meaning and structure. 
These tests include: pause and interjection inser-
tion (e.g., Ding 1961, p. 65; Zhu 1982, p. 136; 
Yafei Li, 1999, p. 458; Huang et al., 2009, p. 85), 
bǎ and bèi constructions (see section 3.2), adver-
bial insertion (e.g., Zhu, 1982, p. 135; Yafei Li, 
1999, p. 459) and topicalization (e.g., Zhu, 1982, 
p. 136). Given that the diagnostics at times de-
liver contradictory results and that the validity of 
some of the tests are debatable (e.g., Chao Li 
2015), no consensus has been reached about the 
best hierarchical analysis. 

One noteworthy study that is directly related 
to VDCs with an intervening NP is Sun (2005). 
By examining how each type of construction be-
haves, Sun claims that there are four varying 
structures that have the form of 
“NP1+P1+‘de’+NP2+P2”. Insightful as it is, 
Sun’s analysis does not include any diagrams. 
Thus, it is difficult to see what his interpretations 
of hierarchical structures might be.  

Adopting DG as the theoretical framework, 
the account presented here strives to address the 
thorny issue just outlined: When there is an NP2 
in the Chinese V-de constructions, should it be 
analyzed as a dependent of P1, or of P2? Com-
pared to other theories of syntax, dependency 
grammar is by nature more straightforward and 
efficient in assigning hierarchical structures to 
natural languages. Nonetheless, there are few 
theoretically-oriented DG accounts of this con-
struction (e.g., Osborne and Ma, 2015), let alone 
an analysis on the particular issue of the inter-
vening NP.  

 To address the problem raised by contradic-
tory diagnostics, the current study also employed 
chunking data to discern the best hierarchical 
analysis. The results suggest that VDCs with an 

155



intervening NP enjoy flexible structures. Actual 
structure assignment, either as a ter-
nary-branching analysis (in which NP2 is a de-
pendent of P1) or a small-clause analysis (in 
which NP2 is dependent on P2), is determined by 
predicate-argument relationships between NP2 
and the two predicates, results of the bǎ and bèi 
tests, and a semantic property of NP2.  

2   Dependency grammar  

2.1 Some principles 

This subsection briefly introduces the theoretical 
framework adopted in this manuscript. Three 
principles of syntactic organization are assumed:  

1.  One-to-one mapping, 
2.  Strict headedness, and 
3.  Projective syntax 

Like many other DGs, the current approach as-
sumes one-to-one mapping whereby each atomic 
syntactic unit, i.e. each word, is mapped to ex-
actly one node in the syntactic structure, and vice 
versa (e.g., Mel'čuk and Pertsov, 1987, p. 48, 
57–8; Kahane, 1996, p. 45; Hudson, 2007, p. 
183). In addition, the syntactic structures adopted 
in this DG are entirely headed, meaning that ex-
ocentric units are not possible. The current DG 
also agrees that the root of a sentence is the (fi-
nite) verb (in Chinese just verb), and it allows 
ternary branching, as opposed to the strict bina-
rity of branching associated with many modern 
phrase structure grammars (PSGs). 

At the same time, the current DG is different 
from many other DGs in that it is projective (or 
mono-stratal) in syntax. This means that linear 
order (precedence) and vertical order (dominance) 
are both considered as primitive, as opposed to 
linear order being secondary to hierarchical order 
(e.g., Tesnière, 2015/1959; Mel'čuk and Pertsov, 
1987). The structures assumed in the study 
therefore always encode actual word order.  

2.2 Dependency grammar and Chinese 

The modern history of dependency grammar be-
gins primarily with the posthumously published 
oeuvre of Lucien Tesnière (1893–1954), Elements 
of Structural Syntax (2015/1959). While constit-
uency-based grammars have been dominant in the 
study of syntax and grammar, DG has enjoyed a 

following in Europe, particularly in Germany, 
likely because the verb centrality of Tesnière’s 
approach was more compatible with the verb 
second (V2) principle of word order in German 
and other Germanic languages. In China, it was 
not until the late 1970s and early 1980s that the 
first work introducing DG was published (e.g., 
Feng, 1983). Due to easily accessible and readily 
applicable structures, DG has become the wide-
ly-assumed approach for parsing in machine 
translation and natural language processing (e.g., 
Liu, 1997; Feng, 1998; Feng, 2008).  

In the last decade, work on DG concerning 
Chinese has been increasing in great number due 
to the development of computational linguistics. 
Focusing on the functional side of the grammar, 
Chinese computational linguists have made at-
tempt to deepen our understanding of human 
languages and cognition on the basis of their 
self-built DG tree banks (e.g., Liu, 2008; Jiang 
and Liu, 2015). At present, there are three 
true-born large-scale dependency tree banks of 
Chinese, one from Zhejiang University, one from 
Peking University, and another is the HIT-CIR 
from Harbin Institute of Technology.  

While there have been many computational 
and quantitative investigations into the nature of 
Chinese, purely linguistic questions about Chi-
nese have received less attention. It is therefore 
warranted that DG be employed to address syn-
tactic issues of the sort mentioned above, and to 
shed light on the potential structural analyses of 
various constructions, such as the VDCs.  

3   Methodology 

This section establishes the validity of the two 
means for discerning the best structural analysis, 
namely the chunking experiment and the bǎ and 
bèi diagnostics. It starts with the introduction of 
the experiment in which informants were asked 
to chunk sentences according to their intuition, 
and then moves to the illustration of how the 
widely-used bǎ and bèi tests are employed to 
help discern the status of the intervening NP. 

3.1 Chunking handouts 

Informants’ chunking responses were collected 
and used as guidance to discern the best hierar-
chical analysis for VDCs with an intervening NP. 

156



In this regard, the following claims are put forth 
for orientation: 

1. Native speakers of a language intui-
tively know how words in a sentence are 
organized into meaningful groups, and 
these groups can be identified using 
chunking data collected from informants.  

2. Words connected in meaning are more 
likely to be included within one chunk. 
i.e. dependents should be grouped to-
gether with their head, as opposed to-
gether with one or more words that do 
not include their head (think projectvity, 
e.g., Hays, 1964; Gaifman, 1965; Rob-
inson, 1970). 

By asking informants to divide sentences into 
chunks, the researcher is actually inviting them 
to group words together that are closely con-
nected in meaning and accordingly in structure. 
Take sentence (1) as an example, i.e. Wǒ pǎo-de 
hěn kuài ‘I run very fast’. The prediction is that 
informants will prefer to include hěn ‘very’ with 
kuài ‘fast’ rather than with pǎo ‘run’, because 
hěn is an adverb that modifies kuài, not pǎo. 
Similarly, if a significant majority of participants 
include the intervening NP and a particular pred-
icate within one chunk, then the intervening NP 
is more likely to a dependent of that predicate, 
rather than the other one. 

All together thirty sentences were tested via 
three rounds of data collection at a major univer-
sity in China. The chunking handout was ar-
ranged in such a manner that it contained mainly 
V-de sentences as well as a small number of fill-
er sentences, such as bǎ sentences. At the begin-
ning of each handout, the chunking concept was 
introduced and illustrated with examples. The 
handout then prompted the participants to chunk 
the sentences according to their intuition.   

All the handouts were collected in the class-
room with the permission of the teacher. The 
researcher arrived several minutes before class to 
explain the instruction. Students were encour-
aged to ask questions if they did not understand. 
At the end of the handout, participants were 
prompted to write down their suggestions as 
well.  

The results were recorded using Microsoft 
Excel 2007. Handouts that contained responses 
that are not consistent with the requirements of 

participation, i.e. containing sentences that are 
not chunked into three chunks, were excluded 
from recording. The number of meaningful set of 
results obtained from each round of data collec-
tion was 43 (two excluded), 47(one excluded), 
and 43, respectively.  

3.2 The bǎ and bèi diagnostics  

The bǎ and bèi diagnostics are two related, 
widely-used tests in the study of Mandarin 
grammar (e.g., Zhu, 1982, p. 135; Linding Li, 
1986, p. 241-242, 245-246; Huang, 1988, p. 
297-300; Yafei Li, 1999, p. 449-451; Loar, 2011, 
p. 364-366). Compatible with previous analyses 
that take bǎ and bèi as object markers (e.g., 
Liang, 1971; Wang, 1985, p. 82-92; Goodall, 
1986; Jinxi Li, 2000/1924, p. 37), the assumption 
of these tests is that what can follow bǎ or what 
precedes bèi in corresponding structures is the 
direct object of the main predicate in the normal 
active counterpart.  

Acknowledging that some doubt the 
assumption behind these dignostics (e.g., Xue, 
1987; Shen, 1997; Chao Li, 2015), the discussion 
here focuses on the dependency relations that the 
test is able to reveal. If a VDC with an 
intervening NP (NP2) can be transformed into bǎ 
and bèi constructions, then it seems plausible to 
assume NP2 as a dependent of P1, because P1 
denotes how NP2 is “disposed of”,2 whereas P2 
describes the result or the extent.  
    Take (4) as an example:  

(4)        zhào-de 

  Tàiyáng          wǒ  nuǎnyángyángde 

a. Tàiyáng zhào-de   wǒ  nuǎnyángyángde .  

Sun     shine-DE   I/me  (be)warm-happy 

‘The sun shined on me, making me feel warm 

and happy.’ 
太阳照得我暖洋洋的。 

                                                      
2  “The bǎ construction is often called the ‘disposal’ 

construction, a term due to Wang (1947)，who writes, ‘The 

disposal form states how a person is handled, manipulated , 

or dealt with; how something is disposed of; or how an 

affair is conducted.’ (translation by Y.-C. Li, 1974) ” (from 

Bender, 2000, p. 106).  

157



b. Tàiyáng bǎ wǒ  zhào-de  nuǎnyángyángde. 

Sun     BA me  shine-DE  (be)warm-happy 

‘The sun shined on me, making me feel warm 

and happy.’ 
太阳把我照得暖洋洋的。 

c. Wǒ  bèi tàiyáng  zhào-de  nuǎnyángyángde. 

   Me  BEI sun     shine-DE  (be)warm-happy 
‘I was shone by the sun, and as a result, I felt 

warm and happy.’ 
我被太阳照得暖洋洋的。 

The semantic relations in the sentence do not 
provide any clue about the best hierarchical 
analysis: Wǒ ‘I/me’ is the object argument of P1 
zhào ‘shine’ that is acted upon; it is also the sub-
ject argument of P2 nuǎnyángyángde 
‘(be)warm-happy’ that experiences the change.  

That NP2 can be passivized in (4b) and (4c) 
suggests that it should be analyzed as the de-
pendent of P1 instead of P2, supporting the ter-
nary-branching analysis shown in (4a). 

This use of the bǎ and bèi tests is also 
supported by another observation:  

 (5)      rènwéi 

      Wǒ                  bàng 

                 nǐ   hěn          

a.  Wǒ  rènwéi  nǐ   hěn  bàng. 

I    think    you  very  good. 

‘I think you are excellent.’ 
我认为你很棒。 

b. *Wǒ bǎ  nǐ  rènwéi hěn  bàng. 

    I   BA you  think   very excellent 

    Intended: ‘I think you are excellent.’ 
我把你认为很棒。 

c. *Nǐ    bèi  wǒ rènwéi hěn  bàng. 

You  BEI  I   think   very excellent 

Intended: ‘You are thought by me to be ex 

cellent.’ 
你被我认为很棒。 

Example (5a) is a sentence with a bridge verb 
rènwéi ‘think’. 3  As the root of the sentence, 
rènwéi ‘think’ takes the clause nǐ hěn bàng ‘you 
are excellent’ as its complement. NP2 nǐ ‘you’ is 
clearly a dependent of the root of the object 

                                                      
3 A bridge verb is a predicate of speaking and thinking that 

typically takes an object clause, e.g., rènwéi ‘think’, shuō 

‘say’, and zhīdào ‘claim’. 

clause bàng ‘good’ rather than of the matrix root 
rènwéi ‘think’. Taking the position of nǐ into 
consideration, the assumption is that it should 
indeed not be accessible for building the bǎ and 
bèi constructions. Attempts to form such sen-
tences support this prediction, as shown in (5b) 
and (5c). Note that similar attempts to form the 
passive in English also fail, e.g., *You are 
thought by me are excellent.  

The inference is thus that if an intervening 
NP can survive the bǎ and bèi tests, it seems  
more plausible to analyze it as a dependent of P1 
than of P2. 

4   Discussion of results 

The discussion in this section focuses only on the 
thorny issue of the hierarchical analysis of the 
VDCs with an intervening NP. Based on their 
predicate-argument relationships, VDCs were 
divided into three groups:  

1. The intervening NP is an argument of 
P1 only, 

2. The intervening NP is an argument of 
both P1 and P2 at the same time, and 

3. The intervening NP is an argument of 
P2 only. 

Chunking results obtained for each type of VDCs 
are reported and discussed in the following sub-
sections. 

4.1 Argument of P1 only 

When NP2 is semantically selected just by P1, 
P2 generally needs to be predicated of the other 
NP in the sentence, i.e. the matrix subject, form-
ing subject control (e.g., Sun, 2005, p. 125; Chao 
Li, 2015, p. 27). Take Wǒ děng-de tā hǎo xīnjiāo 
as an example. The matrix subject wǒ ‘I’ is the 
agent of the first predicate děng ‘wait’. 

(6) (from Chao Li, 2015, p. 25) 

         děng-de 

    Wǒ         tā         xīnjiāo 

                    hǎo         

a. Wǒ  děng-de tā   hǎo    xīnjiāo.  

I    wait-DE him very    anxious 

‘I waited for him so anxiously.’ 
我等得他好心焦。 

158



děng-de 

    Wǒ                    xīnjiāo 

                tā   hǎo         

b. Wǒ  děng-de tā   hǎo    xīnjiāo.  

#‘I waited, and he was anxious.’ 

In the ternary-branching analysis given as (6a), 
the intervening NP is the patient of P1. P2 
xīnjiāo ‘anxious’, on the other hand, is predicated 
of the matrix subject wǒ ‘I’, denoting the agent’s 
anxious state from the action of děng tā ‘waiting 
for him’. In the small-clause analysis shown in 
(6b), however, P2 seems to take NP2 as its 
subject argument, resulting in a pragmatically 
strange reading of tā ‘he’ being anxious while wǒ 
‘I’ was the one who waited. The prediction is 
therefore that the ternary-branching analysis will 
be preferred for this type of VDC. 

Results obtained from chunking handouts 
confirmed the prediction. For sentence (6), in-
formants produced the following responses: 

(7)    I  wait-DE him very anxious 

a. Wǒ | děng-de tā | hǎo xīnjiāo.    – 35 

   b. Wǒ děng-de tā | hǎo | xīnjiāo.     – 3 

   c. Wǒ | děng-de | tā hǎo xīnjiāo.    – 2 

   d. Wǒ děng-de | tā | hǎo xīnjiāo.    – 3 

‘I waited for him so anxiously.’ 

As stated in the previous section, dependents are 
normally grouped together with their head 
according to the principle of projectivity. The 
fact that a significant majority of informants 
chose to chunk the sentence as in (7a) and (7b) in 
which P1 and NP2 are in one chunk excluding P2 
supports the ternary-branching analysis that posi-
tions NP2 as a dependent of P1 as shown in (6a).  

Concerning the other sentence containing 
subject control that was tested, i.e. Wǒ xiǎng-de 
tā shuì-bù-zháo jiào ‘I missed her so much that I 
cannot fall asleep’,4 the results were similar: 

                                                      
4 It should be pointed out that, although all sentences tested 

are well-accepted Chinese, the use of this type of subject 

control VDCs that put NP2 directly after –de, as shown in 

(7) and (8), is decreasing (e.g., Linding Li, 1986, p. 244). 

The preferred way to express this meaning is the 

verb-copying construction (e.g., Chao Li, 2015, p. 27). For 

example, sentence (8) would be Wǒ xiǎng tā xiǎng-de 

shuì-bù-zháo jiào ‘I miss her miss-de that I cannot fall 

asleep’. 

(8)    I  miss-DE her  sleep-not-touch 

a. Wǒ | xiǎng-de tā | shuì-bù-zháo jiào. – 39 

   b. Wǒ xiǎng-de tā | shuì-bù-zháo | jiào. – 1 

   c. Wǒ xiǎng-de | tā | shuì-bù-zháo jiào.  – 3 

‘I missed her so much that I cannot fall 

asleep.’ 

While a significant majority of informants (40 
out of 43) grouped NP2 tā ‘he/him’ with P1 
xiǎng ‘miss’, no one grouped it with P2 
shuì-bù-zháo jiào ‘cannot fall asleep’ (0 out of 
43). Once again, three informants chose to chunk 
the sentence in a manner that NP2 alone appears 
as one chunk, which was not in favor of either 
one of the analyses. 

The conclusion is therefore that when NP2 is 
selected just by P1, a ternary-branching analysis 
should be preferred over the small-clause analy-
sis. 

4.2 Argument of both P1 and P2 

While the structure of subject control VDCs 
matched expectation, it is hard to predict which 
analysis should be preferred for the second type 
of VDC, in which NP2 is selected by both P1 
and P2. 

(9) (from Zhang, 2006, p. 47; gloss and transla-

tion mine) 

            bī-de  

   Dìzhǔ             tā    wúlùkězǒu   

a. Dìzhǔ      bī-de       tā     wúlùkězǒu.   

landowner  force-DE   he/him no-way-can-go                                        

‘The landowner drove him into a desperate 

situation. ’  
地主逼得他无路可走。 

            bī-de    

   Dìzhǔ                    wúlùkězǒu 

                     tā                 

b. Dìzhǔ     bī-de     tā     wúlùkězǒu.   

‘The landowner drove him into a desperate 

situation.’  

159



(10) (CL = classifier) 

                    tīng-de 

               kè           wǒ  húlihútu   

   Zhè  táng                      

  a. Zhè  táng     kè   tīng-de   wǒ  húlihútu. 

This CL    class listen-DE  I/me confused 

‘I listened to the class, and as a result, I was 

confused.’ 
这堂课听得我胡里胡涂。 

(10)                tīng-de   

              kè                húlihútu 

   Zhè   táng                 wǒ  

b. Zhè  táng    kè    tīng-de   wǒ   húlihútu. 

‘I listened to the class, and as a result, I was 

 confused.’ 

Sentences (9) and (10) demonstrate the case 
where NP2 is selected by both predicates. In (9), 
the intervening NP tā ‘he/him’ is the patient of 
P1 bī ‘force’ and the experiencer of P2 
wúlùkězǒu ‘no-way-can-go’. In (10), the syntac-
tic subject of P1, i.e. NP1, is the patient of P1 
and NP2 is both the agent of P1 and the experi-
encer of P2 (c.f., Huang, 1988, p. 299; Sun, 2005, 
p. 149-151; 450-452). 

Six of the sentences tested contained an in-
tervening NP that is semantically related to both 
predicates. Among them, two were “active” 
VDCs such as (9), and four were “passive” 
VDCs like (10).  

The two active sentences were sentence (9) 
and Tàiyáng zhào-de wǒ nuǎnyángyángde ‘The 
sun shined on me, making me feel warm and 
happy’, as illustrated in (4). The results obtained 
for sentence (9) were as follows: 

(11)  landowner force-DE him no-way-can-go 

a. Dìzhǔ  | bī-de  tā |  wúlùkězǒu.   – 37 

b. Dìzhǔ  | bī-de | tā   wúlùkězǒu.   – 3 

c. Dìzhǔ   bī-de | tā |  wúlùkězǒu.   – 3 

‘The landowner drove him into a desperate 

situation.’ 

Two potential structural analyses of the sentence 
are illustrated in (9) above. Example (9a) is the 
ternary-branching analysis and (9b) shows the 
small-clause analysis. Given the informants’ re-
sponses, it is possible to discern the best analysis.  
   The chunking results in (11) reveal that in-
formants were more willing to group the inter-

vening NP with P1 rather than with P2, support-
ing the ternary-branching analysis given as (9a).  

Concerning the other active sentence that was 
tested, i.e. Tàiyáng  zhào-de wǒnuǎnyángyáng- 
de ‘The sun shined on me, making me feel warm 
and happy’, the results were similar: 40 out 43 
participants chunked the sentence in such a 
manner that supports the ternary-branching anal-
ysis that views NP2 as a dependent of P1.  

The four “passive” sentences that were tested 
are listed next: Zhè táng kè tīng-de wǒ húlihútu ‘I 
listened to the class, and as a result, I was con-
fused’, Shǔ jià fàng-de wǒ bù xiǎng kaīxué ‘I had 
a summer vacation, and as a result, I did not feel 
like going to school’, Zhè dùn fàn chī-de wǒ bù 
kāixīn ‘I had the meal, and as a result, I was un-
happy’, and Zhè diànyǐng kàn-de wǒ hěn gāoxìng 
‘I watched the movie, and as a result, I was 
pleased’. The results for the first sentence i.e. 
sentence (10), are provided here for discussion. 
The informants were, again, invited to divide 
these sentences into three chunks, the following 
results obtained: 

(12)  This CL class listen-DE  I/me confused 

 a. Zhè táng kè  | tīng-de wǒ | húlihútu. – 35 

b. Zhè táng kè  | tīng-de| wǒ húlihútu.  – 4 

c. Zhè táng kè  tīng-de | wǒ | húlihútu. – 4 

‘I listened to the class, and as a result, I was 

confused.’ 

The preferred way of chunking again supports 
the ternary-branching analysis given as (10a) 
over the small-clause analysis given as (10b). 
While thirty-five informants chose to group the 
intervening NP with P1, four of them grouped it 
with P2. The results given in (12c) are not in fa-
vor of either one of the analyses.  
   The results for the other three passive sen-
tences were similar. Although there was a small 
minority of informants that chunked the sentence 
in a manner that contradicts the ter-
nary-branching analysis, it was usually the case, 
however, that a large majority of informants 
chunked the sentence in a manner that supports 
it. 

The conclusion so far is therefore that as long 
as the intervening NP is an argument of P1 (re-
gardless of its relation with P2), a ter-
nary-branching analysis in which the intervening 
NP is a dependent of P1 should be pursued.  

160



4.3 Argument of P2 only 

The feature of the third type of VDC is that the 
intervening NP is selected by P2 only. Unlike 
subject control VDCs, the hierarchy of which is 
predictable, the structure of this group of VDCs 
is hard to predict for two reasons: 

1. The arguments for the two competing 
analysis both seem well-motivated (e.g., 
Huang, 1988; Sun, 2005);  

2. The diagnostics used in the literature, 
e.g., the pause test and ya insertion, some-
times yield inconsistent results. 

By collecting informant responses to chunk-
ing tasks, it has become possible to shed light on 
this group of VDCs. A pilot test containing a 
couple of sentences was conducted first. Based 
on the results obtained, a ternary-branching 
analysis is preferable for sentences that can sur-
vive bǎ and bèi tests, whereas for those sentences 
that do not allow the insertion of bǎ and bèi, a 
small-clause analysis seems more plausible. 
These matters are illustrated with the following 
examples: 

(13) (from Yafei Li, 1999, p. 459; translation 

mine) 

a. Tāmen chàng-de wǒ  bù  xiǎng kàn  shū. 

  They   sing-DE   I    not want  read book 

‘They sang, and as a result, I did not feel like 

reading.’ 
他们唱得我不想看书。 

b. Tāmen bǎ wǒ chàng-de bù  xiǎng kàn  shū. 

   They   BA me sing-DE  not  want  read book 

‘They sang, and as a result, I did not feel like 

reading.’ 

他们把我唱得不想看书。 

c. Wǒ  bèi tāmen chàng-de bù  xiǎng kàn  shū. 

  I/me BEI  they sing-DE   not want  read book 

‘I did not not feel like reading because they 

sang.’ 

   我被他们唱得不想看书。 

(14) (adapted from Sun 2005: 141) 

a. Zhè  háizi zhǎng-de wǒ dōu  bú  rènshi    le.  

  This child grow-DE  I  even  not recognize LE 

 ‘The child has grown so much that I did not 

even recognize him.’ 

 这孩子长得我都不认识了。 

b.*Zhè háizi bǎ wǒ zhǎng-de dōu bú rènshi le. 

 This child BA I grow-DE even not  recognize 

Intended: ‘The child has grown so much that I 

did not even recognize him.’  
这孩子把我长得都不认识了。*  

c.* Wǒ bèi zhè háizi zhǎng-de dōu  bú  rènshi le. 

I  BEI  this child grow-DE even not recognize  

Intended: ‘I did not even recognize the child 

because he has grown so much.’  
我被这孩子长得都不认识了。*  

Sentence (13) and sentence (14) both contain an 
intervening NP that is semantically selected just 
by P2: in (13) the verb chàng ‘sing’ is used in-
transitively; in (14) zhǎng ‘grow’ is an intransi-
tive verb. As illustrated in (13b) and (13c), 
Tāmen chàng-de wǒ  bù  xiǎng kàn-shū can be 
transformed into bǎ and bèi constructions. Sen-
tence (14), however, failed to form the corre-
sponding bǎ and bèi constructions, as in (14b) 
and (14c). Their chunking results are listed as 
follows: 

(15) (=sentence (13)) 

They  sing-DE  I  not want  read book 

a. Tāmen | chàng-de wǒ | bù xiǎng kàn shū.–24 

b. Tāmen chàng-de wǒ | bù xiǎng | kàn  shū –1 

c. Tāmen |chàng-de| wǒ bù  xiǎng kàn  shū.–9 

d. Tāmen chàng-de |wǒ bù  xiǎng| kàn  shū.–2 

e. Tāmen chàng-de |wǒ  bù  xiǎng kàn| shū. –1 

f. Tāmen chàng-de | wǒ | bù xiǎng kàn shū. –6 

‘They sang, and as a result, I did not feel like 

reading.’ 

(16) (=sentence (14)) 

This child  grow-DE  I  EM  not recognize LE 

a. Zhè  háizi |zhǎng-de| wǒ dōu bú rènshi le. –30 

b. Zhè  háizi |zhǎng-de wǒ | dōu bú rènshi le.  –1 

c. Zhè  háizi zhǎng-de| wǒ dōu | bú rènshi le.  –7 

d. Zhè  háizi zhǎng-de| wǒ | dōu bú rènshi le.  –5 

‘The child has grown so much that I did not even 

recognize him.’ 

While the chunking results for sentence (13), a 
sentence that can be transformed into the bǎ and 
bèi constructions, suggest a ternary-branching 
analysis, the results in (16) imply that for sen-
tences like (14) that cannot survive the bǎ and 
bèi diagnostics, a small-clause analysis should be 
pursued.  

161



To test this observation, more sentences of 
the two types sketched above were tested. Sen-
tences that can form corresponding bǎ and bèi 
constructions include Wǒ pǎo-de xiédaì dōu diào 
le ‘I ran to the extent that even my shoelaces got 
loose’, Tāmen bèng-de fángzi dōu kāishǐ huàng 
le ‘They jumped to the extent that the house has 
started to shake’ and Tāmen chàng-de wǒ yilián 
sān-tiān dōu bù xiǎng kàn shū ‘They sang, and as 
a result, I did not feel like reading for three days 
in a row’ (adapted from (13)). Sentences that 
failed the bǎ and bèi diagnostics were Zhè yì qiú 
tī-de guānzhòng liánshēng jiàohǎo ‘The kick 
[‘goal’] was so good that the audience broke into 
loud cheers’ (from Sun, 2005, p. 141) and Zhè 
wénzhāng xiě-de shéi yě kàn bù dǒng ‘The article 
is written in such a way that no one can under-
stand’ (adapted from Zhu, 1982, p. 135).  

Chunking results for the sentences that 

failed the bǎ and bèi  tests were consistent with 

the small-clause analysis. Take Zhè wénzhāng 

xiě-de shéi yě kàn bù dǒng as an example; the 

following results obtained (Zhè wénzhāng ‘this 

article’ is abbreviated as NP1) 

(17) NP1 write-DE who also see not understand  

a. NP1 | xiě-de | shéi yě kàn bù dǒng.  –31 

b. NP1 | xiě-de shéi yě | kàn bù dǒng.   –1 

c. NP1 xiě-de | shéi | yě kàn bù dǒng.   –3 

d. NP1 xiě-de | shéi yě | kàn bù dǒng.   –8 

   ‘This article is written in such a way that no 

one can understand’ 

The fact that a significant majority of participants, 
31 of them, chose to group the intervening NP 
with P2 to the exclusion of P1 implies that NP2 
is a dependent of P2. Results obtained for the 
other sentence containing an intervening NP that 
fail the bǎ and bèi tests were similar, i.e. sup-
portive of the small-clause analysis.  

Results for the other subgroup of sentences 
that survived the bǎ and bèi diagnostics, however, 
were unexpected. For instance, the results for Wǒ 
pǎo-de xiédaì dōu diào le ‘I ran to the extent that 
even my shoelaces got loose’ were as follows: 

(18) (=sentence (2)) 

I  run-DE shoelaces EM loosen LE 

a. Wǒ | pǎo-de| xiédaì  dōu diào le.  –18 

b. Wǒ | pǎo-de xiédaì | dōu diào le.   – 5 

c. Wǒ pǎo-de xiédaì  | dōu | diào le.  –1 

d. Wǒ pǎo-de | xiédaì | dōu diào le.   –16 

e. Wǒ pǎo-de | xiédaì  dōu | diào le.  –3 

‘I ran to the extent that even my shoelaces 

got loose’ 

While 18 participants grouped NP2 together with 
P2, only five grouped it together with P1. Note 
that results shown in (18d) are not in favor of 
either analysis (because xiédaì ‘shoelace’ is 
grouped neither with P1 nor with P2). The result 
for Tāmen bèng-de fángzi dōu kāishǐ huàng le 
‘They jumped to the extent that the house has 
started to shake’ were similar, i.e. in favor of the 
small-clause analysis in which the intervening 
NP is a dependent of P2 rather than of P1. The 
chunking results for the sentence with an animate 
NP support the ternary-branching analysis, how-
ever.  

The contradictory results for this type of 
VDC are accommodated in terms of a semantic 
property of the intervening NP (NP2): 
(in)animacy.5 The success of the bǎ and bèi tests 
suggests that NP2 can be interpreted as an entity 
that is disposed of or affected by the matrix 
predicate P1, even though P1 is intransitive. 
When NP2 is animate, it is more accessible to P1 
allowing P1 to influence its, i.e. NP2’s, relation-
ship with P2. When NP2 is inanimate, however, 
despite the success of the bǎ and bèi diagnostics, 
its semantic property prevents P1 from estab-
lishing a syntactic relation with it.  
   The conclusion is therefore that when the 
intervening NP is an argument of P2 only, a 
flexible structural analysis should be pursued. 
When a VDC can survive the bǎ and bèi tests 
and has an animate NP2, a ternary-branching 

                                                      
5 One may object that this difference is not caused by a 

property of NP2, but rather by the features of predicates. For 

example, two of the tested VDCs with an inanimate NP2 (in 

favor of a small-clause analysis) both had an intransitive P1, 

i.e. bèng ‘jump’ and pǎo ‘run’. Two other examples with an 

animate NP2, on the other hand, had an unergative P1, i.e. 

chàng ‘sing’. To test this, one V-de sentence containing the 

same intransitive P1 bèng ‘jump’ and the same animate NP2 

wǒ ‘I/me’ was chunked by 20 informants. The results were 

supportive of the stance assumed here, namely that the 

(in)animacy of NP2 is the decisive factor: More informants 

chose to chunk NP2 with P1 this time, consistent with the 

results obtained for the VDCs that has an animate NP2 but a 

different P1.  

162



analysis is warranted; otherwise, i.e. when it sur-
vives the bǎ and bèi tests but has an inanimate 
NP2 or when it fails the tests, a small-clause 
analysis is preferred. 

5  Summary and conclusion 

This study has assigned dependency  structures 
to the descriptive and resultative V-de 
constructions (VDCs) in Mandarin Chinese. The 
focus has been on the status of the intervening 
NP (NP2) between the two predicates. The 
analyses arrived at above are visualized with the 
following syntactic diagrams:  

(19)            P1-de 

a.  NP1        P2/ADV 

            P1-de       

       b.  NP1        NP2  P2   

               P1-de 

          NP1              P2 

       c.             NP2    

Tree (19a) shows that when there is no interven-
ing NP in the construction, P2 is viewed as a di-
rect dependent of the first predicate (P1), in ac-
cordance with the Secondary Predication hy-
pothesis (e.g., Huang, 1988). In addition to pred-
icates (verbs and predicative adjectives), some 
adverbials can also appear in the position of P2, 
expressing a high degree of the action or event 
denoted by P1 (see footnote 1). 

The structure becomes much more compli-
cated when an NP intervenes between P1 and P2. 
As shown in (19b) and (19c), there are two pos-
sible dependency analyses concerning this matter. 
The structure in (19b) demonstrates the ter-
nary-branching analysis in which NP2 is a de-
pendent of P1, and (19c) shows the small-clause 
analysis in which NP2 is a dependent of P2. 
Based on chunking results collected from native 
speakers of Chinese, the account above proposed 
a flexible analysis for VDCs with an intervening 
NP, whereby the actual structure assignment is 
determined by predicate-argument relationships, 
results of the bǎ and bèi tests and a semantic 
property of NP2 ((in)animacy). 

According to the predicate-argument struc-
tures that NP2 forms with P1 and P2, VDCs are 
divided into three groups: 

1. The intervening NP is an argument of 
P1 only (e.g., (6), (8));  

2. The intervening NP is an argument of 
both P1 and P2 (e.g., (4), (9), (10)), and;  

3. The intervening NP is an argument of 
P2 only (e.g., (2), (13), (14), (17)). 

For the first two types, a ternary-branching anal-
ysis should be preferred. For the last type, how-
ever, some flexibility of analysis is necessary to 
accommodate all the data.  

Acknowledgement 

The research presented in this article was funded 
by the Ministry of Education of the People’s 
Republic of China, Grant # 15YJA74001. 

References  

Emily Bender. 2000. The syntax of Mandarin bǎ : 
reconsidering the verbal analysis. Journal of East 
Asia Linguistics, volume 9 (2), 105-145.  

Yuen Ren Chao. 1965.  A Grammar of Spoken Chi-
nese. Oakland, California: University of California 
Press. 

Shengshu Ding. 1961. Xiàndài hànyǔ yǔfǎ jiǎnɡhuà 
[Lectures on the Modern Chinese Grammar]. Bei-
jing: The Commercial Press. 

Xiao Fan. 1993. Fù dònɡ V-de jù [The verb-copying 
V-de construction]. Yǔyán jiàoxué yǔ yánjiū 
[Language Teaching and Linguistic Studies] 4, 
57-74. 

Zhiwei Feng. 1983. Tesnière de cóngshǔ guānxī yǔfǎ 
[The dependency grammar of Tesnière]. Dāngdài 
yǔyánxué [Contemporary Linguistics] 1, 63-65.  

Zhiwei Feng. 1998. Cóngshǔ guānxī yǔfǎ duì jīqì 
fānyì yánjiū de zuòyòng [The role dependency 
grammar plays in machine translation research]. 
Wàiyǔ xuékn [Foreign Language Research] 1, 
18-21.  

Zhiwei Feng. 2008. Zìrán yǔyán chǔlǐ de lìshǐ yǔ 
xiànzhuàng [The past and present of natural lan-
guage processing]. Zhōngguó wàiyǔ [Foreign 
Languages in China] 1, 14-22.  

 

163



Chaim Gaifman. 1965. Dependency systems and 

phrase-structure systems. Information and Control 

8, 304-337.  

Grant Goodall. 1986. On argument Structure and 
L-marking with Mandarin Chinese Ba. Proceed-
ings of NELS17, volume1, 232-242. 

Jules Gouguet. 2006. Adverbials and Mandarin argu-
ment structure. Empirical Issues in Syntax and 
Semantics 6, 155-173. 

David Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A formalism 
and some observations. Language 40, 511–525. 

James Huang. 1988. Wǒ pǎo de kuài and Chinese 
phrase structure. Language 2, 274-311. 

James Huang, Yen-hui Audrey Li, and Yafei Li. 2009. 
The Syntax of Chinese. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Richard Hudson. 2007. Language Networks: The New 
Word Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Jinyang Jiang and Haitao Liu. 2015. The effects of 
sentence length on dependency distance, depend-
ency direction and the implications–based on a 
parallel English–Chinese dependency treebank. 
Language Sciences 50, 93-104. 

Sylvain Kahane. 1996. If HPSG were a dependency 

grammar… Actes de TALN, Marseille, 22–24, 

45–49. 

Chao Li. 2015. On the V-DE construction in mandarin 
Chinese. Lingua Sinica 1: 6, 1-40. 

Linding Li. 1986. Xiàndài hànyǔ jùxínɡ [The Modern 
Chinese Constructions]. Beijing: The Commercial 
Press. 

Jinxi Li. 2000/1924. Xīnzhù guóyǔ wénfǎ [The 
Grammar of Mandarin Chinese: New Edition]. 
Beijing: The Commercial Press. 

Yafei Li. 1999. Cross-componential Causativi-
ty. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 17 (3), 
445-497. 

Yen-hui Audrey Li. 1990. Oder and Constituency in 
Mandarin Chinese. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 41-59. 

James Chaoping Liang. 1971. Prepositions, Co-verbs 
or Verbs? A Commentary on Chinese Grammar 
Past and Present. PhD dissertation, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

Tao Lin. 2011/1957. Xiàndài hànyǔ bǔzúyǔ lǐ de 
qīngyīn xiànxiàng [Grammatical and semantic is-
sues revealed by phonetic reductions in modern 
Chinese complements], Journal of Peking Univer-
sity 03, 61-74.  

 

Haitao Liu. 1997. Yīcún yǔfǎ hé jīqì fānyì [Depend-
ency grammar and machine translation]. Yǔyán 
wénzì yìngyòng [Applied Linguistics] 3, 91-95. 

Haitao Liu. 2008. Dependency distance as a metric of 
language comprehension difficulty. Journal of 
Cognitive Science 2, 159-191. 

Jian Kang Loar. 2011. Chinese Syntactic Gram-
mar. New York: Peter Lang.  

Igor Mel'čuk and Nikolai Pertsov. 1987. Surface Syn-
tax of English: A Formal Model with the Mean-
ing-Text Framework. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 

Timothy Osborne and Shudong Ma. 2015. A DG ac-
count of the descriptive and resultative 
de-constructions in Chinese. Depling 2015, 
261-270.  

Jane Robinson. 1970. Dependency structures and 
transformational rules. Language 46, 259–285. 

Yang Shen. 1997. Míngcí duǎnyǔ de duōchóng yíwèi 
xíngshì jí bǎ zì jù de gòuzào guòchéng yǔ yǔyì 
jiěshì [Formation process of bǎ-constructions and 
its semantic interpretation] Zhōngguó yǔwén 
[Studies of the Chinese Language] 6, 402-414. 

Yinxin Sun. 2005. Tóngxíngyìgòu de “NS + V + ‘de’ 
+ NP + VP” jù [Four structures of the “NS + V + 
‘de’ + NP + VP”]. Lìyún yǔyán xuékān [Academic 
Journal of Liyun (Language Volume)] 1, 125-159. 

Lucien Tesnière. 2015/1959. Elements of structural 
syntax (translated by Timothy Osborne and Syl-
vain Kahane). Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins.  

Li Wang. 1985. Zhōngguó xiàndài yǔfǎ [China 
Modern Grammar]. Beijing: The Commercial 
Press. 

Fengsheng Xue. 1987. Shì lùn bǎ zì jù de yǔyì tèxìng 
[Study on the semantic features of 
bǎ-constructions]. Yǔyán jiàoxué yǔ yánjiū [Lan-
guage Teaching and Linguistic Studies] 1, 4-22. 

Yufeng Zhang. 2006. Xiàndài hànyǔ jùzi yánjiū [Re-
search on Modern Chinese Sentences]. Shanghai: 
Xuelin Press. 

Dexi Zhu. 1982. Yǔfǎ jiǎnɡyì [Lectures on Grammar]. 
Beijing: The Commercial Press. 

 

  

 

 

 

164




