






















A study on irony within the context of 7x1-PT corpus

Silvia M. W. Moraes1, Rackel M. Machado1,
Matheus S. Redecker1, Rafael G. Cadaval1 and Felipe R. Meneguzzi1

1Pontı́ficia Universidade Católica Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS),
Avenida Ipiranga, 6681. Prédio 32, CEP 90619-900. Porto Alegre, RS-Brasil

{silvia.moraes, felipe.meneguzzi}@pucrs.br
{rackel.machado, matheus.redecker, rafael.cadaval}@acad.pucrs.br

Abstract. The increasing use of social networks to express consumer opinions
yields a large amount of potentially useful information for organizations to
gauge consumer perception of their products. Nevertheless, gauging informa-
tion by assigning polarities to opinionated text is not a trivial task, especially
when dealing with short and ironical text. In this paper, we evaluate the pres-
ence of irony at the sentence level within a Portuguese corpus extracted from
Twitter.

1. Introduction
Social media is a popular communication channel through which users often express their
opinions on products and services. In this virtual environment, both customers and orga-
nizations can find useful information. While customers can use the information to decide
if they should buy a product or not, organizations can improve their products and services
based on customer feedback and public opinion. The interest in social networks is greater
in Brazil than in other countries [Banks 2015], and although most Brazilian posts are pho-
tos and videos, much text in Portuguese circulates in such networks, especially Twitter.
Portuguese is among the top 10 most spoken languages in the world, around 240 million
people communicate in this language1, what makes it an interesting topic for research.
The automatic extraction of opinions is a difficult task, regardless of the language, espe-
cially when the source of information is web text [Kiritchenko et al. 2014]. Sentiment
Analysis, or Opinion Mining [Liu 2012], is the area that performs such task, determining
the evaluative nature of a text and defining whether it expresses a positive, a negative, or a
neutral sentiment [Kiritchenko et al. 2014]. [Liu 2010] calls this orientation of sentiment
polarity, which can be treated, basically, in three granularity levels: text, sentence, and
entity. Text level Sentiment Analysis defines the polarity of a document as a whole, being
especially suitable for product reviews since, in this case, a broader perspective about a
product is more important than an opinion about its components. Sentence level Senti-
ment Analysis determines the polarity of sentences, for example, a Twitter post or part of
it. Entity level Sentiment Analysis identifies positive and negative aspects of a particular
entity. For example, a user can praise the screen of a computer (entity) for its quality (as-
pect) but criticize it for its size (aspect). In this paper, we focus on Sentiment Analysis at
the sentence level. One of the challenges in this analysis process is detecting irony. Irony
is a figure of speech, often used implicitly, that inverts the polarity of the sentiment that
one expresses. When building automatic systems for irony detection, brief text messages

1Information obtained from http://www.brasil.gov.br and https://www.washingtonpost.com

Proceedings of Symposium in Information and Human Language Technology. Uberlândia, MG,
Brazil, October 2–5, 2017. c©2017 Sociedade Brasileira de Computação.

27



pose a greater obstacle than reviews, for example, given the lack of contextual informa-
tion. The identification of context is of great help in detecting irony. A corpus can provide
an overall context or a specific one to each sentence that composes it. In this paper, we
describe a work in progress whose aim is to study irony detection in web texts. For this
purpose, we carry out the analysis of the 7x1-PT corpus, which contains around 2,700
tweets in Brazilian Portuguese posted during the football match between Germany and
Brazil in the 2014 FIFA World Cup. Our goal is to study and annotate tweets in which
this linguistic phenomenon occurs, discuss the concept of irony, and the difficulties in the
annotation of this phenomenon.

2. Irony
According to Wilson [Wilson 2013], verbal irony has three distinctive features: a char-
acteristic attitude, normative bias, and tone of voice. Wilson discusses the echoic and
pretense accounts of irony, given that verbal irony necessarily involves the former, but
does not necessarily involves the latter. Contrarily to the traditional account of irony, in
which the speaker says one thing meaning the opposite, according to the echoic account,
actually, the speaker echoes a thought. Through an ironical utterance, the speaker criti-
cizes or complains about a situation or an event that does not fulfill his or her norm-based
expectations, that is, the speaker’s ideas about how such situation or event should be.
To the echoic account, an utterance is ironical when it expresses the speaker’s mocking,
scornful, or contemptuous attitude toward the echoed thought. In this sense, Wilson’s
[Wilson 2013] experimental work does not consider phenomena such as hyperbole, joc-
ularity, banter, teasing, understatement, and rhetorical questions as forms of irony, since
they do not display any of the distinctive features of irony. Nevertheless, while some
of these phenomena are similar to irony in form (e.g., banter), others can be combined
to irony (e.g., hyperbole), giving a cue to the speaker’s characteristic ironical attitude.
When performing an utterance, the speaker’s facial expression and intonation can also
indicate an ironical attitude; in written text, the ’tone of voice’ might be expressed by
splitting a word into syllables to convey an exaggerated monotone, or using exclamation
marks to show excessive enthusiasm, for instance. Since irony cannot be recognized only
by its linguistic form, Wilson and Sperber [Wilson and Sperber 1992] describes the role
of Relevance in explaining that to understand an ironical utterance, one needs linguis-
tic form and context. Context, in sum, is the information that the receptor access (prior
knowledge) in the moment that the communicator produces an utterance. This interaction
between form and context determines verbal comprehension.

3. 7x1-PT Corpus
Moraes et al. [Moraes et al. 2015] built the 7x1-PT corpus2 that we use in this study.
The corpus consists of 2,728 tweets in Brazilian Portuguese posted during the match
in which Brazil lost 7-1 to Germany in the 2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil. The tweets are
mostly about Brazil football players and political issues concerning the event. Two human
annotators from the Computer Science area manually annotated the corpus considering
three classes: negative, neutral, and positive. The kappa coefficient, which measures inter-
rater agreement, was of 0.53. Although Moraes et al. [Moraes et al. 2015] annotated

2A corpus is a large collection of written material in a machine-readable format; thus, corpora are
linguistic resources commonly used for research in Natural Language Processing (NLP).

A study on irony within the context of 7x1-PT corpus

28



ironical tweets in 7x1-PT corpus as neutral, they mentioned that the number of tweets
expressing irony in their corpus was significant. We chose, therefore, to annotate 7x1-
PT corpus, besides, we could analyze the tweets into an overall context, of football and
politics, which is crucial for irony recognition and classification.

3.1. Our Annotation

A human annotator from the Linguistics area revised the annotation of the corpus consid-
ering irony as a fourth class alongside positive, negative, and neutral. Table 1 shows the
polarity distribution in the corpus. In this annotation, we considered the broader defini-
tion of irony (including hyperbole, jocularity, banter, and the like), since it can give hints
about the user’s ironical attitude. The results show a considerable number of ironical
tweets (40%) in the corpus.

[Moraes et al. 2015]’s classification Our Classification
Polarity #Tweets(%) #Tweets(%)
Negative 800 (29%) 757 (27%)
Positive 1,771 (65%) 251(09%)
Neutral 157 (0.6%) 636 (23%)
Irony - 1,804 (40%)

Table 1. Number of tweets in the 7x1-PT corpus according to the classification of
Moraes et al. [Moraes et al. 2015] and our classification.

3.2. The Role of Context

We align information of the time in which a user posts a tweet with a timetable of goals
scored during the match between Germany and Brazil. In this way, considering Wilson’s
[Wilson 2013] features of verbal irony, we can infer the information users want to con-
vey through their utterances; in other words, we can understand their attitude or reaction
toward the echoed thought. Since the thought is the norm-based expectation, the context
helps to form such expectations. First, we need to consider that Brazil is widely known
as the country of the football for its love for the sport (prior knowledge). Most Twitter
users who posted within the period in which the tweets were collected, expected Brazil to
win and to become the six-time champion of the 2014 FIFA World Cup (this is the norm,
a socially shared idea). During the match, Brazil’s performance did not live up to users’
expectations who, consequently, started to complain about the situation and criticize the
team (this is the attitude). In the 7x1-PT corpus, the information about the goals scored
throughout the match works as the context for each tweet. Figure 1 shows the number of
ironic tweets in the corpus during the match so that, from the fifth goal to the end of the
second half of the match, the figure shows the highest peaks regarding user input. The
following tweets illustrate the importance of context when analyzing irony: (1) ”SOU
BRASILEIRO E VOU CANTAR COM MUITO ORGULHO COM MUITO AMOR ESSE
JOGO VAI VIRAR EU QUERO SER O VENCEDOR” (”I’M BRAZILIAN AND I’LL
PROUDLY AND PASSIONATELY SING [.] [BRAZIL] WILL REVERSE THE SCORE
[.] I WANT TO BE THE WINNER”). (2) ”Vamo que da pra vira AAHAUSHAUSHAU”
(”Come on there is still time to reverse the score HAHAHA”) (3) ”Copa das Copas”
(”Cup of the Cups”) (4) ”Quem diria que a seleção brasileira faria o maior protesto con-
tra os gastos da copa” (”Who would’ve thought that Brazil squad would make the biggest

A study on irony within the context of 7x1-PT corpus

29



demonstration against the Cup costs”) (5) ”Vem cá não era hj q os jogadores iam vir com
mais garra pelo Neymar?!” (”Hold on wasn’t it today that the players would show their
vigor for Neymar?!”). Considering that Brazil was playing at home and its background
on sports as a context for the tweets, we can infer that most of the users were support-
ing Brazil. Thus, when the score stood at 1-0 in Germany’s favor, we can classify (1) as
positive, since it might express a genuine belief in Brazil’s victory. When the score stood
at 7-1, at the end of the match, we can classify (2) as ironic, since a belief in Brazil’s
victory might be not genuine at all. One of the most frequent expressions in the corpus
was (3), meaning that this Cup would be the best of all Cups. At the beginning of the
match, we can classify (3) as positive, although at the end of the match, we can classify
(3) as ironic. (4) and (5) express irony; while in (4) the sentiment is toward the political
issues involving the Cup costs that resulted in various demonstrations across Brazil, in (5)
the sentiment is toward Brazil squad’s performance, since they had promised to play vig-
orously for Neymar, who was injured. Only when we put all these pieces of information
together, within a context, we can classify the polarity of the sentences accurately.

0x0 T1
0x1 T1

0x2 T1
0x3 T1

0x4 T1
0x5 T1

half-time
0x5 T2

0x6 T2
0x7 T2

1x7 T2

0
0,05

0,1
0,15

0,2
0,25

0,3

Game Score

A
m

ou
nt

 (%
)

Figure 1. Ironic tweets throughout the match.

4. Related Work
In works involving studies on irony as a sentiment analysis task, authors usually give
different definitions of irony, which makes the techniques highly dependent on context.
Freitas et al. [de Freitas et al. 2014] understand irony more as a complex mechanism
than merely as an unexpected property in an event. For them, sarcasm is a type of irony
that combines with jocularity, hyperbole, rhetorical questions, and understatements. They
also mention the importance of considering the speaker’s expectations to understand bet-
ter the implications of ironic utterances. Additionally, Freitas et al. establish thirteen
patterns for irony identification in corpora. Although these patterns are not closely re-
lated to irony, they might help in detecting it. For example, when users express an ironic
utterance, they frequently use laughter expressions (pattern 1), emoticons (pattern 2), and
punctuation marks (pattern 12) to make it clear. Nevertheless, we do not recognize irony
by this kind of hint, but by the context in which the utterance is expressed. Reys and
Rosso [Reyes and Rosso 2011] perform automatic detection of irony applying techniques
that use linguistic patterns to identify irony, such as n-grams and part-of-speech n-grams.
These patterns try to symbolize low-level and high-level properties of irony. In the paper,
the authors argue that irony is divided into two categories: verbal and situational. Verbal
irony expresses the opposite meaning of what is stated in a sentence, while situational
irony is a sentence that expresses a state of the world perceived as ironic. Their work
focuses on verbal irony, and they consider a sentence as ironic if its meaning intentionally
denies what is expressed. They state that irony is a challenge not only for automatic but
also for manual detection.

A study on irony within the context of 7x1-PT corpus

30



5. Final Considerations
In our work, we explain the linguistic phenomenon of irony and its particularities within
the context of 7x1-PT corpus. We also discuss the difficulties in irony detection due to its
dependence on context, which has an essential role in conveying more complexity to the
annotation especially when it comes to automatizing irony detection in short messages
like tweets. In the analysis of the 7x1-PT corpus, we could verify such dependence as we
compared similar tweets that, when posted in different moments of the match, expressed
a different attitude toward the event. Additionally, we discussed how previous knowledge
is essential to understand a context making it easier to identify irony. Without such pieces
of information, it is impossible to recognize an ironic attitude based only on code. Re-
gardless of Portuguese being one of the most spoken languages of the world, the number
of Portuguese corpora that are available for linguistic studies is still low, particularly cor-
pora that consider irony detection. The objective of our work is to provide a corpus with
an annotation of irony that can be of help to other studies on this subject. As for future
work, we intend to carry out an in-depth analysis of irony considering it as positive or
negative.

6. Acknowledgments
Our thanks to Dell and PUCRS (EDITAL N. 01/2016 - Programa de Apoio à Atuação de
Professores Horistas em Atividades de Pesquisa) for the financial support of this work.

References
Banks, A. (2015). Brasil digital future in focus 2015. http:
//blog.aotopo.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/
Futuro-Digital-do-Brasil-em-Foco -2015-ComScore.pdf.

de Freitas, L. A., Vanin, A. A., Hogetop, D. N., Bochernitsan, M. N., and Vieira, R.
(2014). Pathways for irony detection in tweets. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pages 628–633.

Kiritchenko, S., Zhu, X., and Mohammad, S. M. (2014). Sentiment analysis of short
informal texts. J. Artif. Int. Res., 50(1):723–762.

Liu, B. (2010). Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. Handbook of Natural Language
Processing, 2nd ed.

Liu, B. (2012). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining, volume 5. Morgan & Claypool
Publishers.

Moraes, S., Manssour, I., and Silveira, M. S. (2015). 7x1-pt: um corpus extraı́do do
twitter para análise de sentimentos em lı́ngua portuguesa. In X STIL, 4th BRACIS,
pages 21–25.

Reyes, A. and Rosso, P. (2011). Mining subjective knowledge from customer reviews: A
specific case of irony detection. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 118–124. ACL.

Wilson, D. (2013). Irony comprehension: A developmental perspective. Journal of Prag-
matics, 59:40–56.

Wilson, D. and Sperber, D. (1992). On verbal irony. Lingua 87, pages 53–76.

A study on irony within the context of 7x1-PT corpus

31


