


















































Segmentation Granularity in Dependency Representations for Korean

Jungyeul Park
Department of Linguistics

University of Arizona
jungyeul@email.arizona.edu

Abstract

Previous work on Korean language pro-
cessing has proposed different basic seg-
mentation units. This paper explores dif-
ferent possible dependency representa-
tions for Korean using different levels of
segmentation granularity — that is, differ-
ent schemes for morphological segmenta-
tion of tokens into syntactic words. We
provide a new Universal Dependencies
(UD)-like corpus based on different lev-
els of segmentation granularity for Ko-
rean. The corpus contains 67K words in
5,000 sentences which are split into train-
ing, development and evaluation data sets.
We report parsing results using the new de-
pendency corpus for Korean and compare
them with the previous Korean UD corpus.

1 Dependency Parsing and the Korean
Language

Language processing including morphological
analysis for Korean has traditionally been based
on the eojeol, which is a basic segmentation unit
delimited by a blank in the sentence. Let us con-
sider the sentence in (1), which contains ten eo-
joels (the corresponding morphological analysis
is found in Figure 1). The number of eojoels is
entirely based on the blank space character and
the tenth eojeol in (1) also includes the punctu-
ation mark. Almost all natural-language process-
ing systems that have been previously developed
for Korean have used the eojeol as a fundamen-
tal unit of analysis. As Korean is an agglutina-
tive language, joining content and functional mor-
phemes is very productive and they can be com-
bined exponentially. For example, yeoghal (‘role’)
is a content morpheme (a common noun) and -eul,
a case marker (‘ACC’, accusative), is a functional

morpheme.1 They form together a single eojeol
yeoghal-eul (‘role + ACC’). A predicate gangjo-
ha-ass-da (‘focused’) also consists of the con-
tent morpheme gangjo-ha (‘focus’) and its func-
tional morphemes, -ass (‘PAST’, past tense) and -
da (‘IND’, indicative), respectively.

In this paper, we analyze different levels of seg-
mentation granularity in dependency representa-
tions for syntactic annotation (§2). We then pro-
pose a scheme to build a new Universal Depen-
dencies (UD)-like corpus for Korean based on seg-
mentation granularity (§3). UD has been devel-
oped cross-linguistically using a consistent tree-
bank annotation scheme for many languages.2 We
provide 5,000 sentences based on each of the
segmentation granularity possibilities described in
this paper. We also present its UD parsing results,
compare them with previously proposed UD for
Korean (§4), and discuss future perspectives of de-
pendency annotation and parsing for Korean (§5).

2 Segmentation Granularity for Korean

We define the following four different levels of
segmentation granularity for Korean. These gran-
ularity levels have been independently proposed in
previous work on Korean language processing as
different basic segmentation units.

2.1 Eojeols
Most language processing systems and corpora
developed for Korean have used the eojeol as a
fundamental unit of analysis (Figure 2). For exam-
ple, the Sejong corpus, the most widely-used cor-
pus for Korean, uses the eojeol as the basic unit
of analysis as presented in (1). Most morpholog-
ical analysis systems have been developed based

1For convenience sake, we add the hyphen-minus (-) at
the beginning of functional morphemes, such as -eul to dis-
tinguish boundaries between content and functional mor-
phemes. The accusative case marker -eul or -leul vary de-
pending on the preceding character.

2http://universaldependencies.org

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 187-196,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

187

http://universaldependencies.org


(1) 황석영을 비롯해 도서전에 참가한 한국 작가들도 이구동성으로 번역자의 역할을 강조했다.

hwangseogyeong-eul
Hwang Seok-young-ACC

bilos-ha-a
including

doseojeon-e
book exhibition-LOC

chamga-ha-n
participated

hangug
Korean

jagga-deul-do
other authors-ALSO

igudongseong-eulo
with one voice

beonyeogja-ui
translators-GEN

yeoghal-eul
role-ACC

gangjo-ha-ass-da.
emphasize-PAST-IND-.

‘Hwang Seok-young and other Korean authors who participated in the book exhibition emphasized the role of trans-
lators with one voice.’

1 황석영을 황석영/NNP+을/JKO hwangseogyeong-eul
2 비롯해 비롯/XR+하/XSA+아/EC bilos-ha-a
3 도서전에 도서/NNG+전/NNB+에/JKB doseojeon-e
4 참가한 참가/NNG+하/XSV+ㄴ/ETM chamga-ha-n
5 한국 한국/NNP hangug
6 작가들도 작가/NNG+들/XSN+도/JX jagga-deul-do
7 이구동성으로 이구동성/NNG+으로/JKB igudongseong-eulo
8 번역자의 번역자/NNG+의/JKG beonyeogja-ui
9 역할을 역할/NNG+을/JKO yeoghal-eul
10 강조했다. 강조/NNG+하/XSV+았/EP+다/EF+./SF gangjo-ha-ass-da.

Figure 1: Sejong corpus-style POS tagging example

on eojeols as input and can yield morphologically
analyzed results, in which a single eojeol can con-
tain several morphemes. The dependency parsing
systems described in Oh and Cha (2010) and Park
et al. (2013) use eojeols as an input token to rep-
resent dependency relationships between eojeols.
Interestingly, Oh et al. (2011) presented a system
of phrase-level syntactic label prediction for eo-
jeols based on morpheme information. Petrov et
al. (2012) proposed Universal POS tags for Ko-
rean based on the eojeol and Stratos et al. (2016)
worked on POS tagging accordingly.

2.2 Separating words and punctuation

As eojeols have been used as a basic analysis unit
in Korean corpora, the tokenization task is often
ignored for Korean. However, there are corpora
which use an English-like tokenization (Figure 3).
Words in these corpora are already preprocessed:
for example, the Penn Korean treebank (Han et al.,
2002), in which punctuation marks are separated
from words. Note that among existing corpora for
Korean, only the Sejong treebank separates quo-
tation marks from the word. Other Sejong cor-
pora including the morphologically analyzed cor-
pus do not separate the quotation marks. While
the Korean Penn treebank separates all punctua-
tion marks, quotation marks are the only symbols
that are separated from words in the Sejong tree-
bank. Chung and Gildea (2009) used this granular-

ity of separating words and symbols for a baseline
tokenization system for a machine translation sys-
tem. Park et al. (2014) also used this granularity to
develop Korean FrameNet lexicon units.

2.3 Separating case markers

The Sejong corpus has been criticized for the
scope of the case marker, in which only a fi-
nal noun (usually the lexical anchor) in the noun
phrase is a modifier of the case marker. For ex-
ample, Emmanuel Ungaro-ga in the Sejong corpus
is annotated as (NP (NP Emmanuel) (NP Ungaro-
ga)), in which only Ungaro is a modifier of -ga
(‘NOM’). The Korean Penn treebank does not ex-
plicitly represent this phenomenon. It just groups a
noun phrase together: e.g. (NP Emmanuel Ungaro-
ga). Collins’ preprocessing for parsing the Penn
treebank adds intermediate NP terminals for the
noun phrase (Collins, 1997; Bikel, 2004), and NPs
in the Korean Penn treebank will have a similar
NP structure in the Sejong corpus (Chung et al.,
2010). To fix the problem in the previous tree-
bank annotation scheme, there are other annota-
tion schemes proposed in the corpus and lexical-
ized parsing grammars for the purpose to correctly
express the scope of the case marker (Figure 4).

Park (2006) considered case markers (or post-
positions) as independent elements in Tree adjoin-
ing grammars (Joshi et al., 1975). Therefore, he
defined case markers as an auxiliary tree to be ad-

188



...
5 한국 한국 NOUN NNP 6 nmod
6 작가들도 작가들 NOUN NNG+XSN+JX Case=aux 10 nsubj
...
8 번역자의 번역자 NOUN NNG+JKG Case=gen 9 nmod
9 역할을 역할 NOUN NNG+JKO Case=obj 10 obj
10 강조했다. 강조하았다. VERB NNG+XSV+EP+EF+SF Tense=past,Mood=ind 0 root

... hangug jagga-deul-do ... beonyeogja-ui yeoghal-eul gangjo-ha-ass-da.

... Korean other authors-ALSO ... translators-GEN role-ACC emphasize-PAST-IND-.

nmod

nsubj

nmod obj

root

Figure 2: CoNLL-U format for eojeols: the basic elements of dependency relationships are based on
eojeols delimited by a blank space character in the sentence. While the actual CoNLL-U data that we
provide in this paper contain the results of morphological analysis (such as강조/NNG+하/XSV+았/EP+
다/EF+./SF for line 10) to conserve the original structure of a combination of the word, for simplicity’s
sake we do not present them here.

...
5 한국 한국 NOUN NNP 6 nmod
6 작가들도 작가들 NOUN NNG+XSN+JX Case=aux 10 nsubj
...
8 번역자의 번역자 NOUN NNG+JKG Case=gen 9 nmod
9 역할을 역할 NOUN NNG+JKO Case=obj 10 obj
10 강조했다 강조하았다 VERB NNG+XSV+EP+EF Tense=past,Mood=ind 0 root SpaceAfter=No
11 . . X ./SF 10 punct

... hangug jagga-deul-do ... beonyeogja-ui yeoghal-eul gangjo-ha-ass-da .

... Korean other authors-ALSO ... translators-GEN role-ACC emphasize-PAST-IND .

nmod

nsubj

nmod obj

root

punct

Figure 3: CoNLL-U format for English-like tokenization by separating punctuation marks: it separates
the punctuation mark from the word gangjo-ha-ass-da (‘focused’) with punct. Otherwise, it still keeps
the original structure of the eojeols.

joined to a noun phrase. For example, the single
token jagga-deul-do becomes two tokens, jagga-
deul (‘author’) and -do (‘also’). However, verbal
endings on the inflected forms of predicates are
still in the eojoel and they are represented as ini-
tial trees for Korean TAG grammars. The lemma
of the predicate and its verbal endings are dealt
with as inflected forms instead of separate func-
tional morphemes.

2.4 Separating verbal endings

Government and binding (GB) theory for Ko-
rean often proposed a syntactic analysis, in which
the entire sentence depends on verbal endings.
For example, gangjo-ha-ass-da becomes gangjo-
ha (‘emphasize’), -ass (‘PAST’), and -da (‘IND’)

as described in Figure 5.
The Kaist treebank (Choi et al., 1994), the first

treebank created for Korean adapted this type of
analysis (Figure 6). While the Kaist treebank sep-
arates case markers and verbal endings with their
lexical morphemes, punctuation marks are not
separated and they are still a part of the preceding
token. Therefore, strictly speaking, this granular-
ity level is not exactly same as in the Kaist tree-
bank.

2.5 Discussion

The different levels of segmentation granular-
ity described in this section have been proposed
mainly because of different syntactic analysis
in several previously proposed Korean treebank

189



...
7 한국 한국 NOUN NNP 8 nmod
8-9 작가들도
8 작가들 작가들 NOUN NNG+XSN 16 id
9 도 도 X 도/JX Case=aux 8 case
...
12-13 번역자의
12 번역자 번역자 X NNG 14 id
13 의 의 X JKG Case=gen 12 case
14-15 역할을 역할 NOUN NNG+JKO 16 obj
14 역할 역할 X NNG 16 id
15 을 을 X 을/JKO Case=obj 14 case
16 강조했다 강조하았다 VERB NNG+XSV+EP+EF Tense=past,Mood=ind 0 root SpaceAfter=No
17 . . X ./SF 16 punct

... hangug jagga-deul do ... beonyeogja ui yeoghal eul gangjo-ha-ass-da .

... Korean other authors ALSO ... translators GEN role ACC emphasize-PAST-IND .

nmod

nsubj

case

nmod

case

obj

case

root

punct

Figure 4: CoNLL-U format by separating case markers, which requires a dependency relationship be-
tween the noun phrase and the case marker (case), for example yeoghal (‘role’) and eul (‘ACC’).

CP

C’

C

-da

IP

I’

I

T

-ass

VP

V

gangjo-ha

· · ·

NP

· · ·

Figure 5: X-bar schema for gangjo-ha, -ass, and
-da in Korean

datasets: Kaist (Choi et al., 1994), Sejong3, and
Penn (Han et al., 2002) treebanks. Even for the
segmentation granularity which we deal with, syn-
tactic theory is implicitly presented in the corpus
for Korean words. Granularity described in §2.1
and §2.3 is based on the Sejong treebank. Gran-
ularity described in §2.2 and §2.4 is based on the
Korean Penn treebank and the Kaist treebank, re-
spectively.

Many applications for Korean language pro-
cessing are based on another level of segmentation
granularity, in which all morphemes are separated:
phrase-structure parsing (Choi et al., 2012; Park
et al., 2016) and statistical machine translation
(SMT) (Park et al., 2016), etc. Such morpheme-

3https://www.sejong.or.kr

based analysis for the word can be generated by a
morphological analysis system, and most POS tag-
ging systems such as Hong (2009) and Park et al.
(2011) can produce all morpheme-based analysis.
For example, jagga-deul-do (‘authors-ALSO’) is
separated into jagga (‘author’), deul (‘PLUR’), and
do (‘ALSO’). However, we do not deal with this
granularity to represent dependencies. It shows
rather how words are formed, and it should in-
clude the fine-grained relationships between mor-
phemes. This type of representation of words does
not conform with the current dependency schemes
for other languages and especially, neither with
UD best practices.

3 UD for Korean

Since Universal Dependencies (UD) has been
released (Nivre et al., 2016), several studies
have been published, both theoretical (Schus-
ter and Manning, 2016) and practical (Zeman
et al., 2017). As for other morphologically rich
languages, specific Universal Dependencies for
Japanese were introduced relatively recently to
meet the requirement of UD’s cross-linguistically
consistent treebank annotation (Tanaka et al.,
2016). In the current UD, other morphologically
rich languages such as Kazakh (Tyers and Wash-
ington, 2015) and Turkish (Sulubacak et al., 2016)
are also available. In this section, we describe how
to build UDs for Korean based on the different lev-
els of segmentation granularity.

190

https://www.sejong.or.kr


...
9 한국 한국 NOUN NNP 10 nmod
10-11 작가들도
10 작가들 작가들 NOUN NNG+XSN 18 id
11 도 도 X JX Case=aux 10 case
...
14-15 번역자의
14 번역자 번역자 X NNG 16 id
15 의 의 X JKG Case=gen 14 case
16-17 역할을
16 역할 역할 X NNG 18 id
17 을 을 X JKO Case=obj 16 case
18-20 강조했다
18 강조하 강조하 VERB NNG+XSV 0 root
19 았 았 X EP Tense=past 18 fixed
20 다 다 X EF Mood=ind 18 id SpaceAfter=No
21 . . X SF 18 punct

... hangug jagga-deul do ... beonyeogja ui yeoghal eul gangjo-ha ass da .

... Korean other authors ALSO ... translators GEN role ACC emphasize PAST IND .

nmod

nsubj

case

nmod

case

obj

case

root

aux

aux

punct

Figure 6: CoNLL-U format that separates verbal endings, which requires a dependency relationship
between the verbal head and the verbal ending (aux), for example a verb gangjoha (‘focus’), and two
verbal endings ass (‘PAST’) and da (‘IND’) for tense and mood.

3.1 Universal POS

Using the eojeol and morpheme level mapping ta-
bles to Universal POS tags for the Sejong tagset
proposed in Petrov et al. (2012) and Park et
al. (2016), we can convert the single tags (mor-
phemes) and the sequences of tags (eojeols and
tokens) in the Sejong corpus into Universal POS
tags. We also use additional mapping rules by us-
ing the approach to find Universal POS tags de-
scribed in Oh et al. (2011) in which they predict
phrase tags for the eojeol. In addition, the Sejong
tags (morphemes) and the sequence of tags (to-
kens and eojeols) represented as immediate non-
terminal nodes in the eventual parse tree can be
used as a language-specific part-of-speech tag in
the CoNLL-U format. Figure 7 shows example
mapping rules for each segmentation granularity
level. Tagsets in the Sejong corpus are mapped
to the Universal POS tag sets either individu-
ally (NNP → PROPN) or by a sequence of the
POS tags (NNP+JKS → PROPN). Figure 8 rep-
resents the 1-to-1 mapping from the POS tags
in the Sejong corpus to Universal POS tags de-
scribed in Park et al. (2016). These 1-to-1 mapping
rules are used throughout segmentation granular-
ity schemes described §2.1 to §2.4 if the eojeol is
composed only by a single morpheme.

3.2 Universal features

Park (2006) detailed an approach to extract fea-
tures from the Sejong treebank. Syntactic tags and
morphological analysis allow us to extract syn-
tactic features automatically and to develop uni-
versal features. For example, NP-SBJ syntactic
tag is changed into NP and a syntactic feature
Case=Nom is added. Syntactic tags which end
with -sbj (subject), -obj (object) and -CMP
(attribute), we extract Case features which de-
scribe argument structures in the sentence. Along-
side Case features, we also extract Mood and
Tense from the morphological analyses in the
Sejong treebank. Since however morphological
analyses for verbal and adjectival endings in the
Sejong treebank are simply divided into ep (non-
final endings), ef (final endings) and ec (con-
junctive endings), Mode and Tense features can
not be extracted directly. Park (2006) analyzed
7 non-final endings and 77 final endings used
in the Sejong treebank to extract automatically
Mood and Tense features. In general, ef carries
Mood inflections, and ep carries Tense inflec-
tions. Conjunctive endings are not concerned with
Mood and Tense features and we only extract
ec features with their string value. We also add
Hor for the honorific feature, which we can ex-
tract from lexical information of non-final endings

191



참가한 작가들도 강조했다.
chamga-ha-n jagga-deul-do gangjo-ha-ass-da.

(‘participated’) (‘authors’) (‘emphasize-PAST-IND-.’)

eojeol §2.1 (S) chamga-ha-
n/NNG+XSV+ETM

jagga-deul-
do/NNG+XSN+JX

gangjo-ha-ass-
da./NNG+XSV+EP+EF+SF

(U) chamga-ha-n/VERB jagga-deul-do/NOUN gangjo-ha-ass-da./VERB

separating §2.2 (S) chamga-ha-
n/NNG+XSV+ETM

jagga-deul-
do/NNG+XSN+JX

gangjo-ha-ass-
da/VV+EP+EF

./SF
symbols (U) chamga-ha-n/VERB jagga-deul-do/NOUN gangjo-ha-ass-da/VERB

./PUNCT

separating §2.3 (S) chamga-ha-
n/NNG+XSV+ETM

jagga-deul/NNG+XSN
-do/JX

gangjo-ha-ass-
da/VV+EP+EF

./SF
case markes (U) chamga-ha-n/VERB jagga-deul/NOUN -do/ADP gangjo-ha-ass-da/VERB

./PUNCT

separating §2.4 (S) chamga-ha/NNG+XSV
-n/ETM

jagga-deul/NNG+XSN
-do/JX

gangjo-ha/VV -ass/EP
-da/EF ./SF

verbal endings (U) chamga-ha/VERB -n/PRT jagga-deul/NOUN -do/ADP gangjo-ha/VERB -ass/PRT
-da/PRT ./PUNCT

Figure 7: Example of the tag sequences at each granularity level. We show the examples for the convert-
ing mapping table between Sejong and Universal POS tag sets described in §3.1: e.g. NNG+XSV+ETM
is converted into VERB in §2.1. (S) and (U) are for the Sejong and Universal POS tag sets.

such as -si.

3.3 Universal dependency representations

We use basic dependencies (core, non-core, noun
dependents) for eojeols for segmentation gran-
ularity in §2.1. We add punct between word
and punctuation marks (§2.2), and case between
noun phrase and case markers (§2.3). We also em-
ploy fixed for verbal endings (§2.4). Initial de-
pendency labels are based on phrase information
in the Sejong treebank such as np-sub, np-obj,
etc. We create conversion rules to conform to Uni-
versal Dependency relations.
nsubj (nominal subject) and csubj (clausal

subject) can be assigned in which np-sbj oc-
curs and nouns ended with either jks (nomina-
tive marker) or jx (topic marker). We distinguish
nsubj and csubj as follows:

• if a subject noun is a derivational noun
from the verb or the adjective, which are
usually ended with etn+jks or etn+jx
(where etn is a derivational morpheme for
the noun), then csubj.

• otherwise, nsubj.

(2) a. unggaro-ga ... naseo-eoss-da
Ungaro-jx ... become-PAST-IND
‘Ungaro became ...’

b. unggaro-ga naseo-gi-ga ... sib-eoss-da
Ungaro-NOM become-etn-jx ... easy-PAST-
IND

‘Ungaro’s becoming ... was easy’

While the previous UD for Korean uses
nsubj:pass for the passive construction in Ko-
rean, we do not use it for the following two
reasons: First, passive and causative verbs are
often in the same form if they use passive or
causative derivational morphemes such as -i, -hi,
etc. and they are very ambiguous. Second, intran-
sitive verbs are also allowed in the passive con-
struction unlike in English.
obj (direct object) can be assigned in which

np-obj occurs and nouns ended with jko (ac-
cusative marker). There are several cases where
nouns can be ended with jx (topic marker). There
are also some cases where nouns can be ended
with jx (topic marker) for obj. iobj (second
core dependent) can be assigned when np-alt
(NP adjunct) occurs and nouns ended with jkb
(auxiliary marker) such as -ege, -e, -gge (dative
markers).

(3) ... sagoa-leul unggaro-ege ju-eoss-da
... apple-jko Ungaro-jkb give-PAST-IND
‘... gave an apple to Ungaro’

ccomp (clausal complement) can be assigned
when vp-cmp or vnp-cmp occurs. ccomp nor-
mally ends with ec and we identify 71 verbal

192



Sejong POS (S) description Universal POS (U)

NNG, NNB, NR, XR Noun related NOUN
NNP Proper noun PROPN

NP Pronoun PRON
MAG, Adverb ADV

MAJ Conjunctive adverb CCONJ
MM Determiner DET

VV, VX, VCN, VCP Verb related VERB
VA Adjective ADJ

EP, EF, EC, ETN, ETM Verbal endings PRT
JKS, JKC, JKG, JKO, JKB, JKV, JKQ, JX, JC Postpositions (case markers) ADP

XPN, XSN, XSA, XSV Suffixes PRT
SF, SP, SE, SO, SS Punctuation marks PUNCT

SW Special characters X
SH, SL Foreign characters X

SN Number NUM
NA, NF, NV Unknown words X

Figure 8: POS tags in the Sejong corpus and their 1-to-1 mapping to Universal POS tags.

ending (among 410) in the Sejong treebank for
ccomp. Otherwise, if vp or vnp occurs, and a
phrase ends with ec, we consider it as a non-
core dependent clause and assign advcl (adver-
bial clause modifier).

(4) ... unggaro-ga ... naseo-eoss-dago malha-eoss-da
... Ungaro-NOM ... become-PAST-ec tell-PAST-
IND

‘... told that Ungaro became ...’

acl (adnominal clause) and amod (adjectival
modifier) for Korean, in which vp-mod occurs,
are defined as follows:

• if a verb ends with etm (verbal/adjectival
ending for the relative clause) and it modifies
a noun, we assign acl.

• if a adj ends with etm and it modifies a
noun, we assign amod.

UD for Korean annotates acl:rel instead of
acl to specify a relative clause for the verb ended
with etm. ajt (adjunct) or nmod (nominal de-
pendents) can be assigned where np-ajt or np
occurs, respectively. det:poss is assigned for
noun ended with jkg (genitive marker). Other
UD relations such as advmod, det, etc can be as-
signed as a 1-to-1 mapping table by using Sejong
POS labels as described in Table 1.

4 Experiments and Results

We collected sentences from news articles in one
of Korean News websites published during 2016.4

We select the length of sentences in which there
4http://hani.co.kr

Sejong POS UD relations

mag advmod
maj cc
mm det
sn nummod

Table 1: Miscellaneous conversion between Se-
jong POS labels and UD representations

are words (eojeols) between 10 and 20 and the
sentence should end with the final verbal ending
such as -da (IND) or -gga (INT) and the punctua-
tion mark such as period or question mark (sf).5

We perform initial automatic preprocessing tasks
using existing tools for Korean such as POS tag-
ging (Hong, 2009), assigning Universal POS la-
bels (Petrov et al., 2012; Park et al., 2016), and
MaltParser-based dependency parsing (Park et al.,
2016). We manually correct the initial preprocess-
ing tasks especially focused on dependency rela-
tion as described in §3.3.6 First, we build a cor-
pus as described in §2.1, then convert it into other
levels of segmentation granularity as described in
from §2.2 to §2.4. As a result, we provide a new
UD for Korean which contain 5,000 sentences.
We split them into 3K-1K-1K sentences for train-
ing, development, and evaluation data sets. Ta-
ble 2 shows the brief statistics of the new UD
for Korean. The number of words indicates the
number of eojeols as described in §2.1. We train
and evaluate four different dependency segmen-

5Similar criteria for selecting sentences are used for the
Kaist and the Penn Korean treebank.

6Manual verification was done by two linguists in a
month.

193

http://hani.co.kr


sentences words

training 3,000 40,648
dev 1,000 13,492
eval 1,000 13,623

total 5,000 67,763

Table 2: Statistics of the new UD for Korean. A
number based on granularity §2.1)

tation schemes based on segmentation granular-
ity for Korean. Table 3 shows results produced by
UDPipe (Straka et al., 2016). Upper granularity
(towards granularity described in §2.4) generally
gives better results than lower granularity (towards
§2.1) because lexical items with functional mor-
phemes in lower granularity can yield data sparse-
ness. Bengoetxea and Gojenola (2010) presents a
system that also changes segmentation granularity.
They converted back the result of parsing to the
original granularity to decide whether the new rep-
resentation is effective for parsing. Additionally,
the usual attachment score metrics used to evalu-
ate dependency parsers are biased as described in
Nivre and Fang (2017) for the cross-lingual set-
ting. This bias can be equally applied to different
segmentation granularity for Korean. We leave the
evaluation as future work.

The current Universal Dependencies treebank
for Korean used for the CoNLL 2017 UD Shared
Task (Zeman et al., 2017)7 uses the same segmen-
tation granularity as described in §2.2. We obtain
59.64% (UAS) and 51.05% (LAS) using the cur-
rent version of UD for Korean (Nivre et al., 2017).
While the current UD for Korean has a more sen-
tences in the training data (4400 sentences vs.
3000), its results are comparable with the results
by our corpus of §2.2 where we obtain 65.72%
(UAS) and 48.44% (LAS).

5 Conclusion

The different levels of segmentation granularity
described in this paper are mainly due to different
representations of syntactic structure in the various
Korean treebank datasets. They have used differ-
ent word segmentation depending on their linguis-
tic and computational requirements. While a cer-
tain segmentation granularity may be well suited
for some linguistic phenomena or applications, it

7http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1983

case verbal
eojeol symbol marker ending
§2.1 §2.2 §2.3 §2.4

UPOS 93.04 94.13 97.12 98.31
XPOS 82.59 85.22 90.63 95.19

UAS 62.08 65.72 76.19 79.59
LAS 40.51 48.44 71.29 78.07

Table 3: POS tagging and parsing results using
UDPipe trained with four different UDs for Ko-
rean.

does not mean that this granularity is a better rep-
resentation than the other in general. We need to
find the most adequate segmentation granularity
to adapt to our requirements for Korean language
processing. The UDs corpus for Korean based on
different levels of segmentation granularity will be
publicly available.

Acknowledgement

We thank Francis Morton Tyers, Loı̈c Dugast, and
the anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments and suggestions.

References
[Bengoetxea and Gojenola2010] Kepa Bengoetxea and

Koldo Gojenola. 2010. Application of Different
Techniques to Dependency Parsing of Basque. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Work-
shop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically-Rich
Languages, pages 31–39, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

[Bikel2004] Daniel M. Bikel. 2004. Intricacies of
Collins’ Parsing Model. Computational Linguistics,
30(4):479–511.

[Choi et al.1994] Key-Sun Choi, Young S Han,
Young G Han, and Oh W Kwon. 1994. KAIST
Tree Bank Project for Korean: Present and Future
Development. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Sharable Natural Language
Resources, pages 7–14.

[Choi et al.2012] DongHyun Choi, Jungyeul Park, and
Key-Sun Choi. 2012. Korean Treebank Transfor-
mation for Parser Training. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2012 Joint Workshop on Statistical Parsing and
Semantic Processing of Morphologically Rich Lan-
guages, pages 78–88, Jeju, Republic of Korea. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

[Chung and Gildea2009] Tagyoung Chung and Daniel
Gildea. 2009. Unsupervised Tokenization for Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2009 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language

194

http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1983


Processing, pages 718–726, Singapore. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

[Chung et al.2010] Tagyoung Chung, Matt Post, and
Daniel Gildea. 2010. Factors Affecting the Ac-
curacy of Korean Parsing. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on Statistical
Parsing of Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages
49–57, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

[Collins1997] Michael Collins. 1997. Three Genera-
tive, Lexicalised Models for Statistical Parsing. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 16–23,
Madrid, Spain. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

[Han et al.2002] Chung-Hye Han, Na-Rae Han, Eon-
Suk Ko, Heejong Yi, and Martha Palmer. 2002.
Penn Korean Treebank: Development and Evalua-
tion. In Proceedings of the 16th Pacific Asia Confer-
ence on Language, Information and Computation.

[Hong2009] Jeen-Pyo Hong. 2009. Korean Part-Of-
Speech Tagger using Eojeol Patterns. Master’s the-
sis. Changwon National University.

[Joshi et al.1975] Aravind K. Joshi, Leon S. Levy, and
Masako Takahashi. 1975. Tree Adjunct Gram-
mars. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
10(1):136–163.

[Nivre and Fang2017] Joakim Nivre and Chiao-Ting
Fang. 2017. Universal Dependency Evaluation.
In Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop
on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 86–
95, Gothenburg, Sweden. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

[Nivre et al.2016] Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine
de Marneffe, Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan
Hajic, Christopher D. Manning, Ryan McDonald,
Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira, Reut
Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman. 2016. Universal De-
pendencies v1: A Multilingual Treebank Collection.
In Luis von Ahn, editor, Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Portorož, Slove-
nia. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

[Nivre et al.2017] Joakim Nivre, Željko Agić, Lars
Ahrenberg, et al. 2017. Universal dependencies
2.0 – CoNLL 2017 shared task development and test
data. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at the Insti-
tute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles Uni-
versity.

[Oh and Cha2010] Jin-Young Oh and Jeong-Won Cha.
2010. High Speed Korean Dependency Analy-
sis Using Cascaded Chunking. Korean Simulation
Journal, 19(1):103–111.

[Oh et al.2011] Jin-Young Oh, Yo-Sub Han, Jungyeul
Park, and Jeong-Won Cha. 2011. Predicting Phrase-
Level Tags Using Entropy Inspired Discriminative
Models. In International Conference on Informa-
tion Science and Applications (ICISA) 2011, pages
1–5.

[Park et al.2011] Jungyeul Park, Jeong-Won Cha, and
Seok Woo Jang. 2011. Korean POS Tagging using
Noisy Channel Model with Syllable Lattice Based
OOV Words Resolution. Information - an interna-
tional interdisciplinary journal, 14(8):2835–2843.

[Park et al.2013] Jungyeul Park, Daisuke Kawahara,
Sadao Kurohashi, and Key-Sun Choi. 2013. To-
wards Fully Lexicalized Dependency Parsing for
Korean. In Proceedings of The 13th International
Conference on Parsing Technologies (IWPT 2013),
Nara, Japan.

[Park et al.2014] Jungyeul Park, Sejin Nam, Youngsik
Kim, Younggyun Hahm, Dosam Hwang, and Key-
Sun Choi. 2014. Frame-Semantic Web : a
Case Study for Korean. In Proceedings of ISWC
2014 : International Semantic Web Conference 2014
(Posters and Demonstrations Track), pages 257–
260.

[Park et al.2016] Jungyeul Park, Jeen-Pyo Hong, and
Jeong-Won Cha. 2016. Korean Language Re-
sources for Everyone. In Proceedings of the 30th
Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information
and Computation (PACLIC 30), pages 49–58, Seoul,
Korea.

[Park2006] Jungyeul Park. 2006. Extraction automa-
tique d’une grammaire d’arbres adjoints à partir
d’un corpus arboré pour le coréen. Ph.D. thesis,
Université Paris 7 - Denis Diderot.

[Petrov et al.2012] Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and
Ryan McDonald. 2012. A Universal Part-of-
Speech Tagset. In Proceedings of the Eighth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-2012), pages 2089–2096, Istan-
bul, Turkey. European Language Resources Associ-
ation (ELRA).

[Schuster and Manning2016] Sebastian Schuster and
Christopher D. Manning. 2016. Enhanced English
Universal Dependencies: An Improved Represen-
tation for Natural Language Understanding Tasks.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016), Paris, France, 5. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

[Straka et al.2016] Milan Straka, Jan Hajic, and Jana
Straková. 2016. UDPipe: Trainable Pipeline for
Processing CoNLL-U Files Performing Tokeniza-
tion, Morphological Analysis, POS Tagging and
Parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2016), Paris, France, 5. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

195



[Stratos et al.2016] Karl Stratos, Michael Collins, and
Daniel Hsu. 2016. Unsupervised Part-Of-Speech
Tagging with Anchor Hidden Markov Models.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 4:245–257.

[Sulubacak et al.2016] Umut Sulubacak, Memduh
Gökırmak, Francis M. Tyers, Çağrı Çöltekin,
Joakim Nivre, and Gülşen Eryiğit. 2016. Universal
dependencies for Turkish. In Proceedings of
COLING 2016.

[Tanaka et al.2016] Takaaki Tanaka, Yusuke Miyao,
Masayuki Asahara, Sumire Uematsu, Hiroshi
Kanayama, Shinsuke Mori, and Yuji Matsumoto.
2016. Universal Dependencies for Japanese. In
Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2016), Paris, France, 5. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

[Tyers and Washington2015] Francis Morton Tyers and
Jonathan North Washington. 2015. Towards a
Free/Open-source Universal-dependency Treebank
for Kazakh. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Turkic Languages Processing (Turk-
Lang 2015), pages 276–289.

[Zeman et al.2017] Daniel Zeman, Martin Popel, Milan
Straka, Jan Hajič, Joakim Nivre, Filip Ginter, Juhani
Luotolahti, Sampo Pyysalo, Slav Petrov, Martin
Potthast, Francis Tyers, Elena Badmaeva, Memduh
Gökırmak, Anna Nedoluzhko, Silvie Cinková, Jan
Hajič jr., Jaroslava Hlaváčová, Václava Kettnerová,
Zdeňka Urešová, Jenna Kanerva, Stina Ojala, Anna
Missilä, Christopher Manning, Sebastian Schuster,
Siva Reddy, Dima Taji, Nizar Habash, Herman Le-
ung, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Manuela San-
guinetti, Maria Simi, Hiroshi Kanayama, Valeria
de Paiva, Kira Droganova, Hěctor Martı́nez Alonso,
Hans Uszkoreit, Vivien Macketanz, Aljoscha Bur-
chardt, Kim Harris, Katrin Marheinecke, Georg
Rehm, Tolga Kayadelen, Mohammed Attia, Ali
Elkahky, Zhuoran Yu, Emily Pitler, Saran Lertpra-
dit, Michael Mandl, Jesse Kirchner, Hector Fernan-
dez Alcalde, Jana Strnadova, Esha Banerjee, Ruli
Manurung, Antonio Stella, Atsuko Shimada, Sooky-
oung Kwak, Gustavo Mendonça, Tatiana Lando,
Rattima Nitisaroj, and Josie Li. 2017. CoNLL
2017 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw
Text to Universal Dependencies. In Proceedings of
the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing
from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

196


	Dependency Parsing and the Korean Language
	Segmentation Granularity for Korean
	Eojeols
	Separating words and punctuation
	Separating case markers
	Separating verbal endings
	Discussion

	UD for Korean
	Universal POS
	Universal features
	Universal dependency representations

	Experiments and Results
	Conclusion



