



















































Linguistic Reflexes of Well-Being and Happiness in Echo


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 81–91
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Linguistic Reflexes of Well-Being and Happiness in Echo

Jiaqi Wu, Marilyn Walker, Pranav Anand and Steve Whittaker

University of California Santa Cruz
{jwu64,mawalker,panand,swhittak}@ucsc.edu

Abstract

Different theories posit different sources
for feelings of well-being and happiness.
Appraisal theory grounds our emotional
responses in our goals and desires and
their fulfillment, or lack of fulfillment.
Self-Determination theory posits that the
basis for well-being rests on our assess-
ments of our competence, autonomy and
social connection. And surveys that mea-
sure happiness empirically note that peo-
ple require their basic needs to be met for
food and shelter, but beyond that tend to be
happiest when socializing, eating or hav-
ing sex. We analyze a corpus of private
micro-blogs from a well-being application
called ECHO, where users label each writ-
ten post about daily events with a happi-
ness score between 1 and 9. Our goal
is to ground the linguistic descriptions of
events that users experience in theories of
well-being and happiness, and then exam-
ine the extent to which different theoretical
accounts can explain the variance in the
happiness scores. We show that recurrent
event types, such as OBLIGATION and IN-
COMPETENCE, which affect people’s feel-
ings of well-being are not captured in cur-
rent lexical or semantic resources.

1 Introduction

There has recently been huge interest in well-
being, with a recent review arguing that psycho-
logical well-being plays a causal role in promot-
ing job success, physical health, and long-term re-
lationships (Lyubomirsky et al., 2005; Kahneman,
1999). In this paper we analyze a corpus of private
micro-blogs from a well-being application called
ECHO, with the aim to detect, understand, and fur-

RECORDING (Negative): I have to clean the kitchen since
it’s my chore this week, but I really don’t want to do it!
REFLECTION (Positive): I’m glad I did it!! The kitchen
was clean and I watched the kardashians while doing it!

RECORDING (Positive): I am having a lovely lunch with
my two friends. We are eating at Pacific Thai. Tom yu-
umm!!
REFLECTION (Negative): I miss hanging out with friends,
I’ve been so busy lately.

Figure 1: RECORDING and REFLECTION of Echo

ther advance systems that can improve both short
and longer-term issues with well-being.

ECHO initiates user-written reactions to daily
events, called RECORDINGS, as well as subsequent
REFLECTIONS on those events at points in the fu-
ture (Isaacs et al., 2013).1 Each reaction is labelled
at the time of recording or reflection by the user,
the first-person experiencer, with a happiness rat-
ing from 1 and 9. Note that all users’ posts and
ratings are private, distinguishing this corpus from
public sources like LiveJournal, where the content
of posts might be influenced by considerations of
self-presentation. Figure 1 shows a RECORDING
and REFLECTION from two users, after binning the
happiness ratings into positive and negative.

Our goal is to ground the linguistic descrip-
tions of events that users experience, such as those
in Figure 1, in theories of well-being and hap-
piness. Without such a grounding, it is difficult
for the ECHO system to make recommendations
to users to improve their well-being, or to explain
the relationships between different event types and
well-being, or to develop a policy that can do a
good job of selecting events for targeted reflec-
tion (Konrad et al., 2015; Isaacs et al., 2013). That
is, for ECHO’s purposes, we need techniques that

1The ECHO corpus is not publicly available because of
the ethical agreement with ECHO users. To protect users’
privacy, the uploaded images are not stored for analysis.

81



not only reliably categorize a user’s scalar happi-
ness level, but are explanatory with respect to the
sources of that happiness level.

There are two principal challenges to this goal.
First, different theories posit different sources for
feelings of well-being and happiness. Second,
the relevant computational resources for senti-
ment or mood are primarily lexically based, while
many of the events can only be characterized well
via their compositional semantics (Reschke and
Anand, 2011).

Other research also shares our motivation of un-
derstanding the relationship between what peo-
ple say and their levels of happiness and related
moods. Mishne (2005) used a corpus of 340,000
posts from Livejournal that were self-annotated
with the 40 most common moods. Lexical fea-
tures alone improved classification accuracy by 6
to 15% over a balanced baseline. These results
were then improved considerably (Keshtkar and
Inkpen, 2009). Mihalcea and Liu (2006) exper-
imented with the subset of happy/sad posts, and
used conditional probability to explore the “hap-
piness factor” of various terms, and the relation-
ship of these terms to well-being categories such
as human-centeredness and socialness. Schwartz
et al. (2016) extract 5,100 public status updates on
Facebook and have Turkers annotate them using
Seligman’s dimensions for well-being: Positive
Emotions, Engagement, Relationships, Meaning,
and Accomplish (Seligman et al., 2006; Forgeard
et al., 2011). They then predict each dimension
with lexical and LDA topic features.

A related line of work builds lexico-semantic
resources for sentiment analysis with a focus on
how the participants of an event are affected by it.
Goyal and Riloff (2013) bootstrap a set of patient-
polarity verbs from narratives and Ding and Riloff
(2016) extract event-triples from blogs that reli-
ably indicate positive or negative affect on one of
the event participants. Reed et al. (2017) take a
similar approach. Deng et al. (2013) annotate how
participants of an event are affected, and Deng
& Wiebe (2014) show that this assists inference
about the author’s sentiment towards entities or
events. Balahur et al. (2012) use the narratives
produced by the ISEAR questionnaire (Scherer
et al., 1986) for first-person examples of partic-
ular emotions (“I felt angry when X and then Y
happened”) and extract sequences of subject-verb-
object triples, which they then annotate for seven

basic emotions. Choi & Wiebe (2014) use Word-
Net to try to learn similar patterns, and Rupen-
hofer & Brandes (2015) annotate synsets in Ger-
maNet based on an event decomposition frame-
work. Russo et al. (2015) proposed a shared task
for recognition of a set of pleasant and unpleasant
events from a clinical framework for well-being
(MacPhillamy and Lewinsohn, 1982). Work on
AFINN, SentiWordNet and the Connotation Lexi-
con also aim to refine existing sentiment resources
to capture more subtle notions of sentiment (Feng
et al., 2013; Kang et al., 2014; Baccianella et al.,
2010; Nielsen, 2011).

Here we report an exploratory study where we
synthesize theoretical constructs associated with
well-being and happiness from different sources.
We then develop several methods for characteriz-
ing events in terms of these theories. We examine
the extent to which different theoretical accounts
can explain the variance in the happiness scores
in ECHO. We show that each theory explains a
part of the variance, but that our event character-
izations need to be more fine-grained. We show
that several recurrent event types which affect peo-
ple’s feelings of well-being, such as OBLIGATION
and INCOMPETENCE, are not captured in current
lexical or semantic resources.

2 Background and Motivation

ECHO is designed to encourage users to react to
daily events as well as to periodically reflect on
past events (Isaacs et al., 2013). Figure 2 depicts
the user interface, showing a RECORDING from to-
day, as well as prompts to reflect on events from
the past. ECHO has been deployed with 134 users,
in three different experiments on well-being (Kon-
rad et al., 2016b,a). The total corpus consists of
10354 posts, where 7573 are RECORDINGS and
2781 are REFLECTIONS. While the corpus could
be considered relatively small, these posts provide
a window onto users’ private thoughts as opposed
to what users are willing to make public on social
media. In addtion, the annotations for happiness
are provided by the user, the first-person experi-
encer, and not by a third party.

Our aim is to explain users’ emotional reac-
tions to different categories of events mentioned
in ECHO posts, linking the user reactions directly
to theories of well-being as exemplified in Table 1.

Influential accounts such as Appraisal Theory
(Scherer et al., 2001, 1986; Ortony et al., 1990)

82



Row # Source Subtype Affect Example

1 Goals Achieved POS I applied to an scholarship got a large chunk of my read-
ing done and got started cramming for next test .

2 Thwarted NEG Wasn’t able to get back in time for my class section .

3 Eudaimonics Autonomy POS Good day at work had the right support and students
were listening and behaving which was awesome.

4 Lack-Autonomy NEG Long list of things to do before going out tonight.
5 Competence POS After working hard and spending so many countless

hours, I finally finished my project for my psych class !
6 Incompetence NEG My midterm was really long and I didn’t finish.
7 Connection POS Having a nice time with my parents watching the Open-

ing Winter Olympic Ceremony.
8 Lack or Neg-Connection NEG My friend needs a bone marrow biopsy and chemo.

9 Hedonics Savouring POS I love home cooking! Especially if it’s Italian.
Savouring NEG The bus was rather packed and had a few people bump

into me from where I was sitting.

Table 1: Examples of Theoretical Categories and Instantiations in ECHO

Figure 2: Screenshot of the Echo Interface

argue that success or failure in personal goals di-
rectly mediates affect. Rows 1 and 2 in Table 1.
Such mediation arises because emotions have an
important adaptive signaling function that serves
to motivate future behaviors in relation to those
goals. Row 1 provides a description from ECHO
of successfully achieving goals. Appraisal the-
ory posits that goal achievement promotes posi-
tive affect, which then serves to reinforce the rele-
vant behavior. Row 2 provides an example of fail-
ing to achieve an important personal goal, which

is posited to promote negative affect, motivating
people to modify current behaviors to change that
negative outcome.

There are significant critiques of the adaptive
goal-based account espoused in Appraisal theory.
Appraisal theory focuses on short-term personal
goals, but Eudaimonic psychologists instead focus
on what determines long-term happiness. Eudai-
monic theorists suggest that certain fundamental
psychological needs have to be satisfied for people
to experience sustained positive long-term emo-
tions. Self-determination theory argues that there
are 3 basic psychological needs: AUTONOMY,
COMPETENCE and CONNECTION (Deci and Ryan,
2010; Ryan and Deci, 2000; Bandura, 1977). We
add these to our inventory in Table 1 in Rows 3
to 8. According to self-determination theory, sat-
isfaction of these basic needs results in positive
emotions. Row 3 describes a good day at work.
Row 5 describes feeling competent because hard
work led to an achievement, and Row 7 describes
feeling connected with family. On the other hand,
if these basic needs are not satisfied, then negative
emotions will regularly arise. For example, obli-
gations to do things one does not feel like doing
(Row 4), or a job that does not engage personal
decision making or involvement (lack of auton-
omy) can make one feel unhappy. Similarly, peo-
ple may feel unhappy due to an experience where
the demands of the situation outstrip one’s basic
abilities, such as doing poorly on a test (lack of
competence), as in Row 6. In addition, bad things
happening to friends (Row 8) as well as separa-
tion from family or friends often reduces happi-
ness (lack of connection).

83



In addition, there is strong evidence from
SAVOURING theory (Jose et al., 2012; Bryant
et al., 2011) arguing that people often experience
highly positive or negative emotions arising from
situations that aren’t directly goal-related, and that
relate more directly to basic drives (Maslow, 1943;
Elson, 2012). For example, experiences such as
eating, experiencing nature, sex and physical exer-
cise tend to engender positive emotions, whereas
pain, discomfort and inactivity have the opposite
effects, and these are documented in results from
happiness surveys (Kahneman et al., 2004; Selig-
man et al., 2006). Thus while experiences such as
eating may serve the survival goal of preventing
starvation, avoiding starvation is unlikely to be a
direct personal goal every time we eat, suggest-
ing that such experiences are not explained by Ap-
praisal theory. Similar arguments have been made
by Lewinsohn and colleagues who have shown
that encouraging people to engage in certain sim-
ple activities (shopping, mowing the lawn, driving,
personal hygiene) have quite predictable effects on
mood without engaging significant personal goals
(MacPhillamy and Lewinsohn, 1982; Lewinsohn
et al., 1985; Lewinsohn and Amenson, 1978).

3 Empirical Approach

Dataset Pos Neg Total

Train 4743 3180 7923
Test 810 515 1325

Table 2: Number of Sentences for Train and Test

We start with the 10354 posts from the ECHO
corpus and map happiness scores between [1, 4] to
negative, and scores between [6, 9] to positive. For
posts labelled 5 by the experiencer, we categorize
it as negative if its REFLECTION score decreases to
lower than 5, and positive if its REFLECTION score
increases. We label the rest of the 5s as neutral,
and leave them aside. We then have 5997 posi-
tive posts and 3573 negative posts. We randomly
sample 2868 posts as training data, and 478 as test
data. We keep the rest of the 6224 posts untouched
for future work. Then we split the posts into sen-
tences. Table 2 shows the splits for each class.

We first test the separability of the positive and
negative sentences with an SVM classifier from
Weka 3.8, using as baselines only unigrams and
LIWC (Pennebaker et al., 2001) as features. Re-
sults for these baseline classifiers are in Table 3,

Features Metric Pos Neg All

UniGram Prec 0.75 0.66 0.72
Rec 0.81 0.59 0.72
F1 0.78 0.62 0.72

LIWC Prec 0.72 0.72 0.72
Rec 0.89 0.45 0.72
F1 0.80 0.55 0.70

Table 3: Weighted Metrics for SVM on Test

Unigram LIWC

fun affect,posemo,leisure
good affect,posemo,drives,reward
we we,social,drives,affiliation
lunch bio,ingest
glad affect,posemo
want cogproc,discrep
why interrog,cogproc,cause
need cogproc,discrep
no negate
not negate,cogproc,differ

Table 4: The most informative UniGram features
weighted by Information Gain

LIWC Words

negemo stress*, sad, sick, hate
posemo fun, well, great, love
negate dont, didnt, no, cant, havent
anger hate, frustrat*, annoying
i i, my, me, im, myself
differ but, not, really, didnt
leisure fun, game*, relax*, family
discrep want, need, would, should
sad sad, miss, hurt*, missed
risk stop, problem*, avoid*
anx stress*, nervous, worried
ingest food*, dinner*, lunch*
body sleep, slept, stomach*
insight feel, know, think, found
affiliat we, friends, friend, love
reward good, got, get, great
feel feel, feeling, felt, hard
family family, mom, sister*, dad
we we, our, us, weve, lets

Table 5: The most informative LIWC features
ranked by Information Gain.

illustrating that the positive and negative classes
can be separated with F1 above .70, and that both
unigrams and LIWC perform worse on the nega-
tive class.

However, as discussed above, the word level
representations of the features in the baselines
do not help us with our goal to understand how
linguistic descriptions of events that affect well-
being map onto theoretical constructs. Table 4 and
Table 5 provide the most informative UniGrams

84



Well-Being Frames Example Lexical Units

Goal Desiring, Intentionally Act, Purpose want, feel like, hope, wanted, wish, do, did, done, doing, does,
plan, purpose, in order, intention, goals

Autonomy
& Obliga-
tion

Being obligated, Required event,
Avoiding, Inhibit movement,
Have as requirement, Complaining

complain, grumble, complaints, have to, had to, should, having
to, need, get to, had to, have to, got to, should, avoid , ducking,
take, need, needed, requires

Competence Activity done state, Attempt, Capabil-
ity, Bungling, Difficulty, Practice, Ac-
tivity finish, Accomplishment

finished, trying, try, tried, effort, attempt, efforts, can, could,
exercise, practice, rehearsal, exercising, able, ability, unable,
messed up; ruined; screwed up , ruin, hard, difficult, easy,
tough, easier challenging, impossible, a breeze, hardest, finish,
finishing, completed, accomplished, achieve

Connection
& Lack-of
Connection

Death, Forming relationships, So-
cial event, Kinship, People, Peo-
ple by residence, Telling, Communica-
tion response

birthday, married, divorce, befriend, dinner, social, party, pic-
nic, mom, family, parents, sister, cousin, told, tell, informed,
people, girl, man, roommate, reply, answers, answer, reacted

Savouring Emotions of mental activity, Feel-
ing, Annoyance, Desirability, Food,
Chemical-sense description, Ambi-
ent temperature, Emotions-by-stimulus,
Stimulus focus, Intoxicants, Commu-
nication noise, Experiencer Focus,
Perception experience, Biological urge,
Death

enjoyed, like, hate, glad, annoyed, cry, yelled, whooped,
honked, irritated, feel, feeling, yummy, alcohol, weed, drugs,
dope, see, felt, seeing, hear, experience, senses, experiences,
taste, feel, delicious, tasty, sweet, food, coffee, bread, cheese,
good, bad, great, better, best, horrible, worst wonderful, weird,
nice, relaxing, annoying, interesting, sad, weird enjoyable,
comforting, entertaining, unpleasant, hilarious, rest, relaxation,
exhilarating, tiring, nicer, disturbing, disappointing, embar-
rassing, irritating, upsetting, heartbreaking, consoling, tedious,
traumatic, chilling, calming, frightening touching, pleasure, sat-
isfying, fascinating, tired, exhausted, sleepy, hungry, nauseated,
horny

Table 6: Frame Categories and Associated Well-Being Classes.

and LIWC categories. We cannot recommend to
an ECHO user that they should for example, try to
use the word why less (Row 7) because it is corre-
lated with negative feelings, or try to use less nega-
tion (Rows 9 and 10). It is difficult to associate
these features with well-being classes. Even in
cases where the words seem to be strongly related
to a well-being category, a single word typically
fails to provide enough information, e.g., “it was
fun talking to him” and “worked on a fun project”
belong to different well-being classes. Moreover,
the mapping of LIWC categories to words are
many-to-many, e.g. the “discrep” category con-
tains words related to both Goals and Autonomy.
We posit that we need compositional semantic fea-
tures to ground our a Well-Being classification of
events.

We thus explore two different methods for map-
ping these well-being event categories into lexi-
cal descriptions, one of which is top-down and the
other which is bottom-up. Our top-down method
is based on mapping general event types from
FrameNet to the theoretical categories enumerated
in Table 1. We take frame specific features for
each theoretical category from the lexical units for
each frame. For example, GOALS are often dis-

cussed in terms of specific frames from the Desir-
ing and the Intentionally act classes, as shown in
the first two rows of Table 6.

We show that FrameNet features do pro-
vide an interesting level of generalization but
much of the compositional semantics of events
is still missing from this characterization (Sec-
tion 4). Thus, our bottom-up method applies
the AutoSlog linguistic-pattern learner to induce
lexically-grounded predicate patterns from the
ECHO data (Section 5). We show how many light
verbs acquire a specific semantics with their ar-
guments, and how common events like “Talking”
are separated into positive and negative events de-
pending on whether they are “Talking about” or
“Talking with”.

4 Frames and Well-Being

Table 6 provides our posited mapping from frame
categories to the appraisal category of GOALS as
well as to the eudaimonic categories of AUTON-
OMY, COMPETENCE and CONNECTION, and to
the hedonic category of SAVOURING. To develop
features related to these frame categories, we ap-
ply SEMAFOR (Das et al., 2013) to label the
ECHO posts with their corresponding frames using

85



FrameNet 1.5 (Baker et al., 2015; Baker, 2014).
We partition frame features into subsets corre-
sponding to the different theoretical constructs as
defined in Table 6. We acknowledge that our map-
ping may not be perfect, and that some frames
could conceivably be categorized as both goal re-
lated and eudaimonic.

Features Metric Pos Neg All

GOALS Prec 0.62 0.49 0.57
Rec 0.94 0.09 0.61
F1 0.75 0.15 0.51

EUDAIMONIC Prec 0.63 0.58 0.61
Rec 0.93 0.16 0.63
F1 0.75 0.25 0.56

SAVOURING Prec 0.61 0.44 0.55
Rec 0.97 0.04 0.61
F1 0.75 0.08 0.49

ALL FRAMES Prec 0.69 0.74 0.71
Rec 0.91 0.38 0.70
F1 0.78 0.50 0.67

Table 7: Coverage of Different Theoretical Cate-
gories.

We train an SVM with each feature subset, and
evaluate the models on our test set, with results in
Table 7. The general ALL FRAME feature is also
listed for comparison. The .67 F1 of FRAME is
slightly lower than LIWC in Table 3, but in our
view, more interpretable. In addition, the aver-
age count of FRAME features per sentence is an or-
der of magnitude less than LIWC features (hence,
much less than unigram features), suggesting the
targeted power of these features. See Table 8. We
posit that FRAMES are thus more discriminative
than LIWC for well-being classes, and that FRAME
features are more naturally categorized into well-
being categories at a semantic level.

Features Dataset Pos Neg Total

UniGram Train 8.5 9.9 9.1
Test 8.1 9.8 8.7

LIWC Train 25.4 31.4 27.8
Test 23.8 30.6 26.4

ALL FRAMES Train 2.7 5.2 3.7
Test 3.3 4.0 3.6

Table 8: Average Feature Counts for Sentence

The Goals section of Table 7 shows that Ap-
praisal theory does well at predicting positive
events, but performs poorly for negative events,
primarily due to low recall. All features achieve

Features Metric Pos Neg All

AUTONOMY Prec 0.0 0.39 0.15
Rec 0.0 1.0 0..39
F1 0.0 .56 0.22

COMPETENCE Prec 0.56 0.58 0.60
Rec 0.98 0.04 0.61
F1 0.76 0.07 0.49

CONNECTION Prec 0.62 0.58 0.60
Rec 0.97 0.06 0.62
F1 0.76 0.11 0.49

Table 9: Results for Individual Eudaimonic Cate-
gories.

good F1 for the positive class, but not the negative
class. This is consistent with the results in Table 3.

The EUDAIMONIC features include Autonomy
& Obligation, Competence and Connection. The
SVM trained with just eudaimonic features pro-
duces the highest F1 score for the negative class,
highlighting the role of eudaimonic related events
in negative well-being. See Table 7. The results
for an breaking eudaimonic into its constituent cat-
egories is in Table 9. The results show that most
of our autonomy categories are related to nega-
tive autonomy, to obligations that cause feelings
of negative well-being. On the other hand, the re-
sults indicate that competence and connection play
a large role in positive well-being.

The top 25 most informative frame features
are illustrated in Table 10 (out of 639 instanti-
ated in ECHO). These illustrate general events for
well-being, but compositional differences, such as
“spending my nights by the side of my textbook”
and “spending my nights with friends” are not cap-
tured. The first “spend (time)” evokes the theo-
retical construct of obligation, while “spend (time
with)” is related to connection.

5 Linguistic Pattern Learning

We also apply Autoslog-TS, a weakly supervised
linguistic-pattern learner as a way of learning
some compositional patterns. Autoslog only re-
quires training documents labeled broadly into
our two classes of POSITIVE or NEGATIVE. The
learner uses a set of syntactic templates to define
different types of linguistic expressions. In gen-
eral, this method tends to produce high precision
(and potentially low recall) markers of the partic-
ular classes that can seed further hypothesizing.

The left-hand side of Table 11 lists example pat-
tern template and the right-hand side illustrates

86



Well-Being Frame Affect Example

GOALS Desiring POS I think it went well and I hope I did a good job.
Intentionally act NEG My midterm was really long and I didn’t finish.

AUTONOMY Being obligated NEG I’m mad that I had to drive all the way to Fresno.
Required event NEG I need to stay awake and listen, but it ’s hard.

COMPETENCE Capability POS I feel so empowering whenever I’m able to help others.
Attempt NEG Tried to chat with some people online, did n’t work out.

CONNECTION Kinship POS My mom and I hung out and walked around for 6 hours .
Telling NEG I wonder how much they will tell me my teeth are bad today.

SAVOURING Chemical-sense description POS Yummy burgers and sides.
Food POS Made homemade ice cream with my husband:...cookie dough

Table 10: Top Frame Categories and Associated Well-Being Classes.

a specific lexico-syntactic pattern (in bold) that
represents an instantiation of each general pattern
template for learning well-being patterns in our
data.2

In order to enable selection of particular pat-
terns, AutoSlog-TS computes statistics on the
strength of association of each pattern with each
class, i.e. P(POSITIVE | p) and P(NEGATIVE | p),
along with the pattern’s overall frequency. We
define two tuning parameters for each class: θf ,
the frequency with which a pattern occurs, θp, the
probability with which a pattern is associated with
the given class. AutoSlog lets us systematically
explore tradeoffs with precision and recall. Here
we select θf and θp to optimize F1 on our test set.
For more detail, see (Riloff, 1996; Oraby et al.,
2015).

Our primary interest here is Autoslog’s ability
to learn compositional patterns. Autoslog can, in
principle, provide three kinds of information: i)
it can provide supplement the lexical units for a
given frame; ii) it can supplement the frames in a
well-being category; and iii) it can reveal reliable
markers of mood that well-being categories do not
capture. Because our interest in frames is ulti-
mately as a way of relating well-being categories
with linguistic signals, we will not distinguish (i)
and (ii) here.

Here we discuss all patterns with a θp > .7 Sev-
eral lexicosyntactic patterns fit within our well-
being categories but are not captured by frames,
while as expected there are overlaps between
FrameNet and Autoslog as well. Examples are
listed in Table 12. One large class includes
straightforward lexical patterns: FINISHED, FIN-

2The examples are shown as general expressions for read-
ability, but the actual patterns must match the syntactic con-
straints associated with the pattern template.

ISH, and FINALLY which we associate with feel-
ings of comptence. Verbal patterns with EAT
and ATE indicate savouring, with NOT EAT reli-
ably marking negative sentences. The frames also
show many specific types of food (cake), and we
use a comprehensive list from DBpedia (Lehmann
et al., 2014) to collapse all these to the general
type FOOD, allowing us to develop patterns such
as MADE FOOD.

Autoslog also discovers many patterns syntacti-
cally linking content (nouns and verbs) and func-
tion words (e.g., prepositions and light verbs). It
thus furnishes a ready source for multi-word, par-
tially compositional expressions of positivity or
negativity. In what follows, we provide some ex-
amples (note that in the patterns below, expres-
sions in brackets are used to indicate expressions
not part of the pattern that correlate with it in the
data).

There are 262 positive patterns of the form
Verb/Noun + “with”, e.g. TALKED WITH,
DINNER WITH, BREAKFAST WITH, STUDY-
ING WITH, PLAYED WITH, TIME WITH,
MET WITH, SHOPPING WITH, COFFEE WITH,
all of which describe activities that involve
connection. There are also 100 negative patterns
of this form, which are much more heteroge-
nous, involving both negative social experiences
(ARGUMENT WITH, DRAMA WITH, INFURI-
ATED WITH, FIGHT WITH), but also various
problematic events (STRESSED WITH, DIF-
FICULTIES WITH, DISSATISFIED WITH) and
instruments for negative events (STOP WITH,
POISONING WITH). Moreover, while the positive
patterns cover 523 sentences in the data, the
negative patterns cover only 133.

There are 62 patterns involving the string

87



Pattern Template Example Instantiations

1 <subj> PassVP <I> am so relaxed after
getting to sleep in and rest
all morning.

2 <subj> ActVP When it does happen, <I>
feel energized because IT
IS a special experience to
me.

3 <subj> ActVP Dobj <I> enjoy his efforts
lately to make me happier.

4 <subj> ActInfVP Found some some stuff but
I AM not sure if <I> want
to keep them.

5 <subj> PassInfVP 2 of <my housemates>
were supposed to clean
on Tuesday and they still
haven’t.

6 <subj> AuxVP Dobj We ate and <We> had a
glass of my favorite wine.

7 <subj> AuxVP Adj <All of the colors> are so
much more vibrant.

8 ActVP <dobj> Cannot wait to study while
eating <this>.

9 InfVP <dobj> Just realized I forgot to
turn in <my homework>.

10 ActInfVP <dobj> I really need to start <my
hw> sooner...

11 Subj AuxVP <dobj> IT IS the Super Bowl today
and THERE IS <a party>
at my house.

12 NP Prep <np> Driving in <the rain> is
scary.

13 ActVP Prep <np> Almost as if I forgot some-
thing terribly important or
I messed up <something>
important in my life.

14 PassVP Prep <np> And I feel like I did but
just this once I messed up
and I might be punished for
<it>.

15 InfVP Prep <np> Felt amazing to be done
with <finals>!

16 <possessive> NP <Her> attitude is not
working anymore.

Table 11: AutoSlog-TS Templates and Example
Instantiations

“talk”, 32 positive (71 items) and 30 negative
(66 items). The positive ones strongly indicate
connection (e.g., TALK WITH, HAVE TALK,
REMEMBER [TO] TALK, GOT [TO] TALK,
TALK THROUGH). In contrast, the negative index

either the obligation to talk (e.g., TRYING TALK,
NEED TALK, HAVE [TO] TALK) or a failure to
talk (e.g., NOT TALK TO, NOT WANT TALK,
STOP TALKING).

There are 36 patterns with the string ‘go’, 12
positive (16 items) and 24 negative (40 items).
There are 34 patterns involving the past tense form
“went”, which reverses the polarity to 25 posi-
tive patterns (273 items) and 9 negative (9 items).
Across the two versions of the lemma, the positive
patterns provide several expressions for savour-
ing (WENT/GO ON/FOR [a walk, a hike, a ride],
WENT/GO SHOPPING/SWIMMING, WENT/GO TO
[the mall, a movie]). For the negative, the predom-
inance of ‘go’ comes from the fact that they are
largely negated (NOT GO TO [the movies]) or in
infinitive contexts that suggest obligation ([HAVE
TO] GO TO [class], [HAVE TO] GO WORK). Sim-
ilarly, the positive class contains 9 patterns with
‘bought’ and 1 with ‘buy’ (ENTICED [TO] BUY)
and the negative class has 6 patterns with
‘bought’ and 16 with ‘buy’, all emphasiz-
ing buying necessities (BUY GROCERIES/TICKET,
NEED/WANT BUY, NOT BUY) Thus, even though
these expressions all involve the same verbs and
prepositions, the surrounding environments, as re-
flected in the form of the verb, split between posi-
tive and negative sentence classes.

There are 73 bigram patterns of the form
NEW X, 56 positive (83 items) and 17 negative (21
items). In general, the positive ones describe new
objects – SHIRT, SHEETS, COMPUTER, CLOTHES,
TEA – and acquaintances (NEW FRIEND), thus en-
compassing both Connection and possibly Savour-
ing. In contrast, the negative patterns describe
changes to routines – HABITS, school QUARTER,
PROFESSOR, LIVING [conditions], or SCHEDULE
– which are likely to engender a sense of instabil-
ity, and hence be Eudaimonically negative.

Thus, these patterns illustrate that Autoslog can
serve as a high-precision method of building addi-
tional patterns – especially compositional ones –
for a given well-being category.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we have advanced a synthetic cate-
gorization of the sources for well-being and hap-
piness. We have used a corpus of private micro-
blogs from the ECHO application to explore how
well we can map linguistic expressions of well-
being to this classification. We have shown that

88



Prob. Freq. Pattern and Text Match Sample Post
Positive Example Patterns

1.00 11 ActVp Prep <NP> (WENT ON) I just went on a hike this is the best thing ever.
1.00 7 <subj> ActVP Dobj (MADE FOOD) Made a German pancake for breakfast.
1.00 7 NP Prep <np> (CATCHING WITH) Catching up with old friends!
1.00 7 ActVP <dobj> (USED) Used the Laurel’s Kitchen Bread Book recipe.
1.00 6 ActVP Prep <np> (GOT OFF) Got off work.
1.00 4 NP Prep <np> (TALK WITH) Having a really nice talk with my aunt.
0.95 18 ActVP <dobj> (FINISHED) Finished my paper.
0.78 39 ActVP <dobj> (TOOK) Took a walk after class and truly enjoyed the outdoors!
0.78 25 <subj> ActVP (ATE) We ate and had a glass of my favorite wine.
0.73 11 InfVP Prep <np> (SPEND WITH) Happy to simply spend time with friends.

Negative Example Patterns
1.00 9 InfVP <dobj> (AVOID) Better buy ... in smaller packaging to avoid wasting again.
1.00 8 ActVP <dobj> (USE) All she did was use water and wipe a few corners.
1.00 7 InfVP <dobj> (STOP) I need to stop smoking.
1.00 6 <subj> ActVP Prep <np> (NOT TALK TO) And now my bf is busy and can’t talk to me.
1.00 5 <subj> ActVP Dobj (TEXTED ME) He texted me finally but then he randomly stopped.
1.00 5 <subj> ActVP (NOT SLEEP) Have to get up early and I can’t sleep.
1.00 4 ActVP <dobj> (NOT FIND) I did not find the time to finish my homework.
0.82 14 <subj> ActVP (REALIZED) I JUST realized that I have to go tomorrow.
0.81 13 <subj> ActVP (TAKE) Since I take around 35 minutes to get ready, I missed ...
0.80 20 ActVP <dobj> (TOLD) Told my mom about my grades.

Table 12: Examples of Characteristic ECHO Patterns using AutoSlog-TS Templates

FrameNet provides useful generalizations, while
the linguistic pattern learner AutoSlog illustrates
the details and challenges of the compositional na-
ture of user’s descriptions of their daily experi-
ences. Moreover, we have demonstrated that, in-
dependently, each of these methods can produce
performance similar to that of conventional lexical
methods with a feature space that is smaller, and,
in the case of FrameNet features, psychologically
grounded. Our Autoslog exploration moreover re-
veals a way of exploring the space of patterns
that our FrameNet mapping has missed. In future
work, we aim to automatically combine these two
methods and bring the Autoslog patterns under the
well-being categorization we have advocated here.
We also plan to investigate new models with the
untouched 6224 Echo posts, as well as larger pub-
lic corpus like LiveJournal.

In addition, we plan to explore the source of the
fact that there are more positive patterns (both as
types and the tokens they capture) than the nega-
tive ones, which directly relates to the lower Neg
recall for all classifiers we tested. While we could
not find any clear reason in our examination of the
data, this asymmetry may indicate that markers of
negativity are more syntactically distributed than

our current list of patterns looks for, or perhaps
less linguistically reliable.

Acknowledgments

This research was partially supported by NSF
Robust Intelligence #IIS-1302668-002 and NSF
HCC #IIS-1321102.

References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In LREC. volume 10, pages 2200–2204.

Colin Baker, Nathan Schneider, Miriam R L Petruck,
and Michael Ellsworth. 2015. Getting the roles
right: Using framenet in nlp. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Tutorial Abstracts. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Denver, Colorado, pages 10–12.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N15-4006.

Collin Baker. 2014. Framenet: A knowledge
base for natural language processing. In
Proceedings of Frame Semantics in NLP: A
Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore (1929-
2014). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Baltimore, MD, USA, pages 1–5.

89



http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W14/W14-
3001.

Alexandra Balahur, Jesus M. Hermida, and Andres
Montoyo. 2012. Building and exploiting emotinet, a
knowledge base for emotion detection based on the
appraisal theory model. IEEE Trans. Affect. Com-
put. 3(1):88–101.

A. Bandura. 1977. Self-efficacy: toward a unifying
theory of behavioral change. Psychological review
84(2):191.

Fred B Bryant, Erica D Chadwick, and Katharina
Kluwe. 2011. Understanding the processes that reg-
ulate positive emotional experience: Unsolved prob-
lems and future directions for theory and research on
savoring. International Journal of Wellbeing 1(1).

Yoonjung Choi and Janyce Wiebe. 2014. +/-
effectwordnet: Sense-level lexicon acquisition for
opinion inference. In EMNLP. pages 1181–1191.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2013.
Frame-semantic parsing. Computational Linguistics
XX(YY):WW–ZZ.

Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2010. Self-
determination. Wiley Online Library.

Lingjia Deng, Yoonjung Choi, and Janyce Wiebe.
2013. Benefactive/malefactive event and writer at-
titude annotation. In ACL. pages 120–125.

Lingjia Deng and Janyce Wiebe. 2014. Sentiment
propagation via implicature constraints. In EACL.
pages 377–385.

Haibo Ding and Ellen Riloff. 2016. Acquiring knowl-
edge of affective events from blogs using label prop-
agation. In AAAI.

David K. Elson. 2012. Modeling Narrative Discourse.
Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University, New York City.

Song Feng, Jun Seok Kang, Polina Kuznetsova, and
Yejin Choi. 2013. Connotation lexicon: A dash of
sentiment beneath the surface meaning. In Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Marie JC Forgeard, Eranda Jayawickreme, Margaret L
Kern, and Martin EP Seligman. 2011. Doing the
right thing: Measuring wellbeing for public policy.
International Journal of Wellbeing 1(1).

Amit Goyal and Ellen Riloff. 2013. A computational
model for plot units. Computational Intelligence
29(3):466–488.

Ellen Isaacs, Artie Konrad, Alan Walendowski,
Thomas Lennig, Victoria Hollis, and Steve Whit-
taker. 2013. Echoes from the past: how technol-
ogy mediated reflection improves well-being. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pages 1071–
1080.

Paul E Jose, Bee T Lim, and Fred B Bryant. 2012.
Does savoring increase happiness? a daily diary
study. The Journal of Positive Psychology 7(3):176–
187.

Daniel Kahneman. 1999. Objective happiness. Well-
being: The foundations of hedonic psychology 3:25.

Daniel Kahneman, Alan B Krueger, David A Schkade,
Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A Stone. 2004. A
survey method for characterizing daily life expe-
rience: The day reconstruction method. Science
306(5702):1776–1780.

Jun Seok Kang, Song Feng, Leman Akoglu, and Yejin
Choi. 2014. Connotationwordnet: Learning con-
notation over the word+sense network. In Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Baltimore, Maryland, pages 1544–1554.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-1145.

Fazel Keshtkar and Diana Inkpen. 2009. Using senti-
ment orientation features for mood classification in
blogs. In Natural Language Processing and Knowl-
edge Engineering, 2009. NLP-KE 2009. Interna-
tional Conference on. IEEE, pages 1–6.

Artie Konrad, Victoria Bellotti, Nicole Crenshaw, Si-
mon Tucker, Les Nelson, Honglu Du, Peter Pirolli,
and Steve Whittaker. 2015. Finding the adaptive
sweet spot: Balancing compliance and achievement
in automated stress reduction. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, pages 3829–3838.

Artie Konrad, Ellen Isaacs, and Steve Whittaker.
2016a. Technology-mediated memory: Is technol-
ogy altering our memories and interfering with well-
being? ACM Transactions on Computer-Human In-
teraction (TOCHI) 23(4):23.

Artie Konrad, Simon Tucker, John Crane, and Steve
Whittaker. 2016b. Technology and reflection: Mood
and memory mechanisms for well-being. Psychol-
ogy of well-being 6(1):1–24.

Jens Lehmann, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja
Jentzsch, Dimitris Kontokostas, Pablo Mendes, Se-
bastian Hellmann, Mohamed Morsey, Patrick van
Kleef, Sören Auer, and Chris Bizer. 2014. DBpe-
dia - a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base ex-
tracted from wikipedia. Semantic Web Journal .

Peter M Lewinsohn and Christopher S Amenson. 1978.
Some relations between pleasant and unpleasant
mood-related events and depression. Journal of ab-
normal psychology 87(6):644.

Peter M Lewinsohn, Robin M Mermelstein, Carolyn
Alexander, and Douglas J MacPhillamy. 1985. The
unpleasant events schedule: A scale for the measure-
ment of aversive events. Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology 41(4):483–498.

90



Sonja Lyubomirsky, Laura King, and Ed Diener. 2005.
The benefits of frequent positive affect: Does hap-
piness lead to success? Psychological bulletin
131(6):803.

Douglas J MacPhillamy and Peter M Lewinsohn. 1982.
The pleasant events schedule: Studies on reliability,
validity, and scale intercorrelation. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology 50(3):363–380.

Abraham Harold Maslow. 1943. A theory of human
motivation. Psychological review 50(4):370.

Rada Mihalcea and Hugo Liu. 2006. A corpus-based
approach to finding happiness. In AAAI Spring Sym-
posium: Computational Approaches to Analyzing
Weblogs. pages 139–144.

Gilad Mishne. 2005. Experiments with mood classifi-
cation in blog posts. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR
2005 workshop on stylistic analysis of text for infor-
mation access. volume 19, pages 321–327.

Finn Årup Nielsen. 2011. A new anew: Evaluation of a
word list for sentiment analysis in microblogs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1103.2903 .

Shereen Oraby, Lena Reed, Ryan Compton, Ellen
Riloff, Marilyn Walker, and Steve Whittaker. 2015.
And thats a fact: Distinguishing factual and emo-
tional argumentation in online dialogue. NAACL
HLT 2015 page 116.

Andrew Ortony, Gerald L Clore, and Allan Collins.
1990. The cognitive structure of emotions. Cam-
bridge university press.

J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis, and R. J. Booth. 2001.
LIWC: Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count.

Lena Reed, Jiaqi Wu, Shereen Oraby, Pranav Anand,
and Marilyn Walker. 2017. Learning lexico-
functional patterns for first-person affect. In Pro-
ceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Kevin Reschke and Pranav Anand. 2011. Extract-
ing contextual evaluativity. In Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Computational
Semantics. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 370–374.

Ellen Riloff. 1996. Automatically generating extrac-
tion patterns from untagged text. In Proceedings
of the national conference on artificial intelligence.
pages 1044–1049.

Josef Ruppenhofer and Jasper Brandes. 2015. Ex-
tending effect annotation with lexical decomposi-
tion. In 6TH WORKSHOP ON COMPUTATIONAL
APPROACHES TO SUBJECTIVITY, SENTIMENT
AND SOCIAL MEDIA ANALYSIS WASSA 2015.
page 67.

Irene Russo, Tommaso Caselli, and Carlo Strappa-
rava. 2015. Semeval-2015 task 9: Clipeval im-
plicit polarity of events. In Proceedings of the
9th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2015). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Denver, Colorado, pages 443–
450. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S15-2077.

R.M. Ryan and E.L. Deci. 2000. Self-determination
theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, so-
cial development, and well-being. American psy-
chologist 55(1):68.

Klaus R Scherer, Angela Schorr, and Tom Johnstone.
2001. Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory,
methods, research. Oxford University Press.

Klaus R Scherer, Harald G Wallbott, and Angela B
Summerfield. 1986. Experiencing emotion: A cross-
cultural study. Cambridge University Press.

H Andrew Schwartz, Maarten Sap, Margaret L Kern,
Johannes C Eichstaedt, Adam Kapelner, Megha
Agrawal, Eduardo Blanco, Lukasz Dziurzynski,
Gregory Park, David Stillwell, et al. 2016. Predict-
ing individual well-being through the language of
social media. In Pac Symp Biocomput. volume 21,
pages 516–527.

Martin EP Seligman, Tayyab Rashid, and Acacia C
Parks. 2006. Positive psychotherapy. American
Psychologist 61(8):774.

91


