



















































Gender as a Variable in Natural-Language Processing: Ethical Considerations


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pages 1–11,
Valencia, Spain, April 4th, 2017. c© 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Gender as a Variable in Natural-Language Processing: Ethical
Considerations

Brian N. Larson
Georgia Institute of Technology

686 Cherry St. MC 0165
Atlanta, GA 30363 USA
blarson@gatech.edu

Abstract

Researchers and practitioners in natural-
language processing (NLP) and related
fields should attend to ethical princi-
ples in study design, ascription of cate-
gories/variables to study participants, and
reporting of findings or results. This paper
discusses theoretical and ethical frame-
works for using gender as a variable in
NLP studies and proposes four guidelines
for researchers and practitioners. The
principles outlined here should guide prac-
titioners, researchers, and peer reviewers,
and they may be applicable to other social
categories, such as race, applied to human
beings connected to NLP research.

1 Introduction

Bamman et al. (2014) challenged simplistic no-
tions of a gender binary and the common quest in
natural-language processing (NLP) studies merely
to predict gender based on text, making the fol-
lowing observation:

If we start with the assumption that ‘fe-
male’ and ‘male’ are the relevant cate-
gories, then our analyses are incapable
of revealing violations of this assump-
tion. . . . [W]hen we turn to a descriptive
account of the interaction between lan-
guage and gender, this analysis becomes
a house of mirrors, which by design can
only find evidence to support the under-
lying assumption of a binary gender op-
position (p. 148).

Gender is a common variable in NLP stud-
ies. For example, a search of the ACL Anthology
(aclanthology.info) for the keyword “gen-
der” in the title field revealed seven papers in 2016

alone that made use of personal (as opposed to
grammatical) gender as a central variable. Many
others used gender as a variable without referring
to gender in their titles. It is not uncommon, how-
ever, for studies regarding gender to be reported
without any explanation of how gender labels were
ascribed to authors or their texts.

This paper argues that using gender as a variable
in NLP is an ethical issue. Researchers and prac-
titioners in NLP who unreflectively apply gender
category labels to texts and their authors may vio-
late ethical principles that govern the use of human
participants or “subjects” in research (Belmont
Report, 1979; Common Rule, 2009). By failing
to explain in study reports what theory of gen-
der they are using and how they assigned gender
categories, they may also run afoul of other ethi-
cal frameworks that demand transparency and ac-
countability from researchers (Breuch et al., 2002;
FAT-ML, nd; MacNealy, 1998).

This paper discusses theoretical and ethical
frameworks for using gender as a variable in NLP
studies. The principles outlined here should guide
researchers and peer reviewers, and they may be
applicable to other social categories, such as race,
applied to human beings connected to NLP re-
search. Note that this paper does not purport to
select the best theory of gender or method of as-
cribing gender categories for NLP. Rather, it urges
a continual process of thoughtfulness and debate
regarding these issues, both within each study and
among the authors and readers of study reports.

In summary, researchers and practitioners
should (1) formulate research questions making
explicit theories of what “gender” is; (2) avoid
using gender as a variable unless it is necessary
to answer research questions; (3) make explicit
methods for assigning gender categories to par-
ticipants and linguistic artifacts; and (4) respect
the difficulties of respondents when asking them

1



to self-identify for gender.
Section 2 considers theoretical foundations for

gender as a research construct and rationales for
studying it. Section 3 proposes ethical frame-
works for academic researchers and for practition-
ers. Section 4 examines several studies in NLP
that are representative of the range of studies us-
ing gender as a variable. Section 5 concludes with
recommendations for best practices in designing,
reporting, and peer-reviewing NLP studies using
gender as a variable.

2 Gender and rationales for its study

2.1 Three views of gender

There are many views of how gender functions as
a social construct. This section presents just three:
the common or folk view of gender, a performative
view of gender, and one social psychological view
of gender. None of these views can be seen as
correct for all contexts and applications. The view
that is appropriate for a given project will depend
on the research questions posed and the goals of
the project.

A folk belief, as the term is used here, refers to
the doxa or beliefs of the many that may or may
not be supported by systematic inquiry—common
beliefs distinguished from scientific knowledge or
philosophical theories (Plato, 2005). In the folk
conception, the “heteronormative gender binary”
(Larson, 2016, p. 365) conflates sex, the chro-
mosomal and biological characteristics of people,
with gender, their outward appearances and behav-
iors. The salience of these categories and their bi-
nary nature are taken as obvious and natural. Con-
sequently, the options available on a survey for the
question “Gender?” are frequently “male” or “fe-
male” (sex categories) rather than “masculine” or
“feminine” (gender categories). There is a grow-
ing understanding in contemporary western cul-
ture, however, that some individuals either do not
fall easily into the binary or exhibit gender char-
acteristics inconsistent with the biological sex as-
cribed to them at birth—these persons are some-
times referred to as being “transgender,” while
those whose sex and gender are congruent are “cis-
gender” (DeFrancisco et al., 2014). Various com-
munities of persons who are not cisgender have
other names they prefer to use for themselves, in-
cluding “gender non-conforming,” “non-binary,”
and “genderqueer” (GLAAD, nd b). According to
one academic report, there are 1.4 million trans-

gender people in the United States alone, and for
these persons, the language used to characterize
them can function as respectful on the one hand or
offensive and defamatory on the other (GLAAD,
nd a). Note that the gender labels that transgen-
der persons ascribe to themselves do not include
“other.” The folk view of gender might be an ap-
propriate frame for the NLP researcher seeking to
explore study participants’ use of language in re-
lation to their own conceptions of their genders.

Another view of gender sees it as performa-
tive. So, according to DeFrancisco et al. (2014,
p. 3) gender consists in “the behaviors and ap-
pearances society dictates a body of a particular
sex should perform,” structuring “people’s under-
standing of themselves and each other.” Accord-
ing to Larson (2016), an actor’s gender knowl-
edge comprises components of the actor’s cogni-
tive environment—beliefs about behaviors the ac-
tor expects to have a particular effect or effects on
another based on knowledge about a typified situ-
ation in the actor’s cognitive environment. Among
these behaviors is language. Butler (1993) charac-
terized gender as a form of performativity arising
in “an unexamined framework of normative het-
erosexuality” (p. 97). According to all these the-
ories, gender performativity is not merely perfor-
mance, but rather performances that respond to,
or are constrained by, norms or conventions and
simultaneously reinforce them. This approach to
gender could be useful, for example, in a study
exploring the ways that language might be used to
resist folk views of gender, especially in a context
like transgender communities, where resistance to
gender doxa is essential to building identity. Sim-
ilarly, it could be useful in studying cases where
persons of one gender attempt to appropriate con-
ventional communicative practices of another gen-
der without adopting a transgender identity. Bam-
man et al. (2014) made specific reference to this
family of theories in their study of Twitter users.

A third approach to thinking about gender is
to assume a gender binary, identify characteristics
that cluster around the modes of the binary, and as-
sess the gender of study participants based on their
closeness of fit to these modes. This is exactly the
approach of the Bem Sex Roles Inventory (Bem,
1974) and other instruments developed by social
psychologists to assess gender. This approach al-
lows the researcher to break gender down into con-
stituent features. So, for example, the BSRI asso-

2



ciates self-reliance, independence, and athleticism
with masculinity and loyalty, sympathy, and sen-
sitivity with femininity (Blanchard-Fields et al.,
1994). This approach might be useful, for exam-
ple, for an NLP practitioner seeking to identify
consumers exhibiting individual characteristics—
like independence and athleticism—in order to
market a particular product to those consumers
without regard to their gender or sex. Such ap-
proaches may not be available to NLP researchers,
though, as they require participants to fill out sur-
veys.

These are only three of many possible ap-
proaches to gender, and as the examples suggest,
they vary widely in the kinds of research questions
they can help to answer.

2.2 Rationales for studying gender

Broadly speaking, NLP studies focused on gen-
der stem from two sources: researchers and prac-
titioners. Borrowing from concepts in the field
of research with human participants, we can char-
acterize research as “activity designed to test an
hypothesis, permit conclusions to be drawn, and
thereby to develop or contribute to generaliz-
able knowledge” (Belmont Report, 1979). Prac-
titioners, by contrast, are interested in provid-
ing solutions or “interventions that are designed
solely to enhance the well-being of an individ-
ual. . . client”—in other words, the development of
commercial applications. These two rationales can
blend when academics disseminate research with
the intention of attracting commercial interest and
when practitioners disseminate study findings to
the academic community with a goal, in part, of
attracting attention to their commercial activities.
Practitioners may also intend to develop applica-
tions that serve the needs of multiple clients, as
when they seek to sell a technical solution to many
players within an industry.

The practitioner may have more instrumental
objectives, hoping, for example, for insights about
consumer behavior applicable to an employer’s or
client’s commercial goals. Practitioners engaged
in such studies need not be concerned about the
finer points of academic-researcher ethics. They
should be conscious, however, of the social effects
of their research when it is disseminated, covered
in the news, etc. Even if their research is used only
internally for their companies or clients, they may
use variables in machine learning applications in

such a way as to cause “algorithmic discrimina-
tion,” where “an individual or group receives un-
fair treatment as a result of algorithmic decision-
making” (Goodman, 2016). The ethical frame-
works discussed in the next section provide rea-
sons to avoid such discrimination.

3 Ethical frameworks

Academic researchers and commercial practition-
ers may draw their ethical principles from different
ethical frameworks, but they have similar ethical
obligations for ascribing category labels to persons
and for using and reporting the research resulting
from them.

In the United States, academic researchers
are generally guided by principles articulated in
the Belmont Report (1979), which calls on re-
searchers to observe three principles:

• Respect for persons represents the right of
a human taking part or being observed in
research (sometimes called a “subject” or
“participant”) to make an informed decision
about whether to take part and for a re-
searcher “to give weight to autonomous per-
sons’ considered opinions and choices.”

• Beneficence requires that the research first do
no harm to participants and second “maxi-
mize possible benefits and minimize possible
harms.”

• Justice demands that the costs and benefits
of research be distributed fairly, so that one
group does not endure the costs of research
while another enjoys its benefits.

Under regulations of the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services known as the Com-
mon Rule, “all research involving human subjects
conducted, supported or otherwise subject to regu-
lation by any federal department or agency” must
be subjected to review by an institutional review
board or IRB (Common Rule, 2009). As a practi-
cal matter, most research universities in the United
States require that all research involving human
participants be subject to IRB review. The Com-
mon Rule embodies many of the principles of the
Belmont Report and of the Declaration of Helsinki
(World Medical Association, 1964).

Other authorities argue that academic re-
searchers have ethical responsibilities regarding
their research, even if it does not involve human

3



participants. In that context, internal and exter-
nal validity (or validity and reliability) of research
findings are ethical concerns (Breuch et al., 2002;
MacNealy, 1998). Not being explicit about what
the researcher means by the research construct
gender raises a problem for readers of research re-
ports, as they cannot evaluate a researcher’s claims
without knowing in principle what the researcher
means by her central terms. Not being explicit
about the ascription of the category gender as a
variable to participants or communication artifacts
that they create brings into question internal and
external validity of research findings, because it
makes it difficult or impossible for other schol-
ars to reproduce, test, or extend study findings. In
short, doing good science is an ethical obligation
of good scientists.

Practitioners are bound by ethical frameworks
that are applicable to all persons generally. In
the West, these may be drawn from normative
frameworks that determine circumstances under
which one can be called ethical: “virtue ethics”—
having ethical thoughts and an ethical character
(Hursthouse and Pettigrove, 2016); “deontologi-
cal” ethics—conforming to rules, laws, and other
statements of ethical duty (Alexander and Moore,
2016); and “consequentialism”—engaging in ac-
tion that causes more good than harm (Sinnott-
Armstrong, 2015). Other western and non-western
ethical systems may prioritize other values (Hen-
nig, 2010). Deontological ethics is drawn from
sets of rules, such as religious texts, industry
codes of ethics, and laws. Deontological theo-
rists derive such rules from theoretical procedures,
such as Kant’s categorical imperative, where “all
those possibly affected” can “will a just maxim
as a general rule”; Rawl’s “veil of ignorance,”
in which participants cannot know what role they
will play in the society for which they posit rules;
or Habermas’s discourse ethics, rules resulting
from a “noncoercive rational discourse among free
and equal participants” (Habermas, 1995, p. 117).
In a sense the Belmont Report provides a set of
rules for deontological evaluation.

Consequentialist ethical systems like utilitarian-
ism evaluate actions not by their means but their
ends. They are thus consistent with the Belmont
Report edict that research’s benefits should out-
weigh its costs. But neither the Belmont Report
nor other ethical systems typically permit actors
to ignore the means they use to pursue their ends.

Some researchers/practitioners have argued for
fairness, accountability, and transparency as ethi-
cal principles in applications of machine learning,
a technology commonly used in NLP. Consider,
for example, Hardt (2014) and Wallach (2014),
and the group of researchers and practitioners be-
hind FAT-ML (FAT-ML, nd). In this literature, it is
not always clear what these three terms are meant
to represent. So, for example, fairness appears to
be a social metric similar to the Belmont Report’s
beneficence and justice. Wallach refers to it almost
strictly in the phrase “bias, fairness, and inclu-
sion.” This seems concerned with fairness in the
distributive sense of the Belmont Report’s justice
rather than the aggregate sense of consequentialist
ethical systems. Wallach’s uses of transparency
and accountability echo the ethical principles for
researchers suggested by Breuch et al. (2002) and
MacNealy (1998). She appears to view them as
principles to which researchers and practitioners
should aspire.

FAT-ML could be operationalized as an ethical
framework this way: NLP studies would expose
their theoretical commitments, describe their re-
search constructs (including gender), and explain
their methods (including their ascription of gen-
der categories). The resulting transparency per-
mits accountability to peer reviewers and other
researchers and practitioners, who may assess a
given study against principles intended to result
in valid and reliable scientific findings, principles
designed to ensure respect for persons, justice,
beneficence, and other evolving ethical principles
under the rubric of fairness. Identification of the
applicable rules awaits the rational non-coercive
discourse of which the First Workshop on Ethics
in NLP is an early and important example.

4 Applying frameworks to previous
studies

This section considers how previously published
and disseminated studies satisfy the ethical frame-
works noted above and whether those frameworks
may challenge the studies. Note that consider-
ation of these particular studies is not meant to
suggest that they are ethically flawed; they have
been selected because they are recent studies or
high-quality studies that have been widely cited.
Generally, the studies discussed in this section in-
cluded very careful descriptions of their methods
of data collection and analysis. However, though

4



each purported to tell us something about gender,
hardly any defined what they meant by “gender”
or “sex,” many did not indicate how they ascribed
the gender categories to their participants or arti-
facts, and some that did explain the ascription of
gender categories left room for concerns.

A great many studies have explored gender dif-
ferences in human communication. An early and
widely cited study is Koppel et al. (2002), where
the researchers used machine learning to predict
the gender of authors of published texts in the
British National Corpus (BNC). Koppel and col-
leagues noted that the works they selected from
the BNC were labeled for author gender, but they
did not indicate how that labeling was done.

Like Koppel et al., many study authors allow the
ascription of the gender category to be the result of
an opaque process—that is, they do not fully em-
brace the transparency and accountability princi-
ples identified above, making the validity of stud-
ies difficult to assess. For example, in a study of
computer-mediated communication, Herring and
Paolillo (2006) assigned gender to blog authors
“by examining each blog qualitatively for indica-
tions of gender such as first names, nicknames,
explicit gender statements. . . and gender-indexical
language.” The authors did not provide readers
with examples of the process of assigning these
labels—called “coding” here as it is frequently
by qualitative researchers, and not to be confused
with the computer programmer’s notion of “cod-
ing” or writing code—a coding guide, which is
the set of instructions that researchers use to as-
sign category labels to persons or artifacts, or a
statement about whether the researchers compared
coding by two or more coders to assess inter-rater
reliability (Potter and Levine-Donnerstein, 1999).

Rao et al. (2010) examined Twitter posts
(“tweets”) to predict the gender categories they
had ascribed to the texts’ authors. They identi-
fied 1,000 Twitter users and inferred their gender
based upon a heuristic: “For gender, the seed set
for the crawl came from initial sources including
sororities, fraternities, and male and female hy-
giene products. This produced around 500 users
in each class” (2010, p. 38). Of course, using lin-
guistic performances (profiles and tweets) to as-
sign gender to Twitter accounts and then using
linguistic performances to predict the genders of
those accounts is very like the “house of mirrors”
that Bamman et al. (2014) warned of above.

The approach of Rao and colleagues and Her-
ring and Paolillo also appears to put the researcher
in the position of deciding what counts as male
and female in the data. This raises questions of
fairness with regard to participants who have been
labeled according the researchers’ expectations, or
perhaps their biases, rather than autonomous deci-
sions by the participants.

Other studies make their ascription of gender
categories explicit but fail to cautiously approach
such labels. For example, two early studies, Yan
and Yan (2006) and Argamon et al. (2007), used
machine learning to classify blogs by their au-
thors’ genders. They used blog profile account
settings to ascribe gender categories. Burger et
al. (2011) assigned gender to Twitter users by fol-
lowing links from Twitter accounts to users’ blogs
on blogging platforms that required users to indi-
cate their genders. More recently, Rouhizadeh et
al. (2016) studied Facebook users from the period
2009–2011 based on their self-identified genders
(but these data were gathered before Facebook’s
current gender options, see below), and Wang et
al. (2016) looked at Weibo users, collecting self-
identified gender data from their profiles.

None of the studies in the previous paragraph
described how frequently account holders indi-
cated their own genders, what gender options were
possible, or how researchers accounted for ac-
count holders posing with genders other than their
own. The answers to such questions would make
the studies more transparent, helping readers to
assess the their validity and fairness. For exam-
ple, if many users of a site refused to disclose
their genders, it is possible that the decision not to
disclose might correlate with other characteristics
that would make gender distinctions in the data
more or less pronounced. The Belmont Report’s
concern about autonomy would best be addressed
by understanding the options given to participants
to represent themselves as gendered persons on
these blogging platforms. If there were only two
gender options—probably “male” and “female”—
we might well wonder whether transgender per-
sons may have refused to answer the question, or
if forced to answer, how they chose which gender.

One study deserves special mention: Bam-
man et al. (2014) compared user names on Twit-
ter profiles to U.S. Census data which showed
a gender distribution for the 9,000 most com-
monly appearing first names. Though some names

5



were ambiguous—used for persons of different
genders—in the census data, 95 percent of the
users included in the study had a name that was “at
least 85 percent associated with its majority gen-
der” (p. 140). They then examined correlations
between gender and language use. This approach
might fall prey to criticisms regarding category
ascription similar to those leveled at the studies
above. Bamman et al., however, exhibited much
more caution in the use of gender categories than
any of the other studies cited here and engaged in
cluster analyses that showed patterns of language
use that crossed the gender-binary boundary. By
describing the theory of gender they used and the
method of ascribing the gender label, they made
their study transparent and accountable. Whether
it is fair is an assessment for their peers to make.

5 Guidelines for using gender as a
variable

This section describes four guidelines for re-
searchers and practitioners using gender as a
variable in NLP studies that fall broadly under
these admonitions: (1) formulate research ques-
tions making explicit theories of what “gender” is;
(2) avoid using gender as a variable unless it is
necessary to answer research questions; (3) make
explicit methods for assigning gender categories to
participants and linguistic artifacts; and (4) respect
the difficulties of respondents when asking them
to self-identify for gender. It also includes a rec-
ommendation for peer reviewers for conference-
paper and research-article submissions. Note that
this paper does not advocate for a particular the-
ory of gender or method of ascribing gender cat-
egories to cover all NLP studies. Rather, it advo-
cates for exposing decisions on these matters to
aid in making studies more transparent, account-
able, and fair. The decisions that practitioners and
researchers make will be subject to debate among
them, peer reviewers, and other practitioners and
researchers.

5.1 Make theory of gender explicit

Researchers and practitioners should make ex-
plicit the theory of gender that undergirds their re-
search questions. This step is essential to make
studies accountable, transparent, and valid. For
other researchers or practitioners to fully interpret
a study and to interrogate, challenge, or reproduce
it, they need to understand its theoretical grounds.

Ideally, a researcher would provide an extended
discussion of the central variable in his or her
study. For example, Larson (2016) offered a def-
inition of “gender” used in the study along with a
lengthy discussion of the concept. Both the dis-
cussion and analysis in Bamman et al. (2014) en-
gaged with previous theoretical literature on gen-
der and challenged the gender constructs used in
previous NLP studies. But articles using gender
as a variable need not go to this extent. The goal
of making gender theory explicit can be achieved
by quoting a definition of “gender” from earlier re-
search and giving some evidence of actually hav-
ing read some of the earlier research. In the alter-
native, the researcher may adopt a construct def-
inition for gender; that is, the researcher may an-
swer the question, “What does ‘gender’ measure?”
Thus, researchers can either choose definitions of
“gender” from existing theories or identify what
they mean by “gender” by defining it themselves.

Practitioners may take a different view. Con-
sider, for example, a practitioner working at a
social media site that requires its users to self-
identify in response to the question “gender.” It is
reasonable for this practitioner to use NLP tools to
study the site’s customers based on their responses
to this question, seeking usage patterns, correla-
tions, etc. But a challenge arises as social me-
dia platforms recognize nuances in gender iden-
tity. For example, in 2015 Facebook began allow-
ing its users to indicate that their gender is “fe-
male,” “male,” or “custom,” and the custom option
is an open text box (Bell, 2015). A practitioner
there using gender data will be compelled to use
many labels or group them in a manner selected
by the practitioner. Using all the labels presents
difficulties for classifiers and for the practitioner
attempting to explain results. Grouping labels re-
quires the practitioner to theorize about how they
should be grouped. This takes us back to the ad-
monition that the researcher or practitioner should
make explicit the theory of gender being used.

5.2 Avoid using gender unless necessary

This admonition is perhaps obvious: Given the ef-
forts that this paper suggests should surround the
selection, ascription, use, and reporting of gender
categories in NLP studies, it would be foolish to
use gender as a category unless it is necessary to
achieve the researcher’s objectives, because the ef-
fort is unlikely to be commensurate with the pay-

6



off. It is likely, though, that the casual use of gen-
der as a routine demographic question in studies
where gender is not a central concern will remain
commonplace. It seems an easy question to ask,
and once the data are collected, it seems easy to
perform a cross-tabulation of findings or results
based on the response to this question.

The reasons for avoiding the use of gender as
a variable unless necessary are grounded in all
the ethical principles discussed above. A failure
to give careful consideration to the questions pre-
sented in this paper creates a variety of risks. Thus,
researchers should resist the temptation to ask: “I
wonder if the women responded differently than
the men.” The best way to resist this temptation
is to resist asking the gender question in the first
place, unless it is important to presenting findings
or results.

A reviewer of this paper noted that following
this recommendation might inadvertently discour-
age researchers and practitioners from checking
the algorithmic bias of their systems. Indeed, it is
thoroughly consistent with values described here
for researchers and practitioners to engage in such
checking. In that case, gender is a necessary cate-
gory, but where such work is anticipated, the other
recommendations of this Section 5 should be care-
fully followed from the outset.

5.3 Make category assignment explicit

Researchers and practitioners should make ex-
plicit the method(s) they use to ascribe gender
categories to study participants or communica-
tion artifacts. This step is essential to make the
researcher’s or practitioner’s studies accountable,
transparent, and valid. Just as the study’s theory
of gender is an essential basis for interpreting the
findings—for interrogating, challenging, and re-
producing them—so are the methods of ascribing
the variable of study. This category provides the
largest number of specific recommendations. (In
this section, the term “researcher” refers both to
researchers as discussed above and to practition-
ers who choose to disseminate their studies into
the research community.)

Researchers have several choices here. Outside
of NLP, they have very commonly ascribed gen-
der to study participants based on the researchers’
own best-guess assessments: The researcher in-
teracts with a participant and concludes that she
is female or he is male. For small-scale studies,

this approach will not likely go away; but the re-
searcher should consider at the time of study de-
sign whether and how to do this. Researchers re-
porting findings should acknowledge if this is the
approach they have taken.

A related approach makes sense where the re-
searcher is studying how participants behave to-
ward each other based on what they perceive oth-
ers’ genders to be. For example, if studying
whether a teacher treats students differently based
on student genders, the researcher may need to
know what genders the teacher ascribes to stu-
dents. The researcher should give thought to how
to collect information about this category ascrip-
tion from the teacher. The process could prove
challenging if the researcher and teacher operate
in an environment where students challenge tra-
ditional gender roles or where students outwardly
identify as transgender.

But participant self-identification should be the
gold standard for ascribing gender categories. Ex-
cept in circumstances where one might not expect
complete candor, one can count on participants to
say what their own genders are. On the one hand,
this approach to ascribing a gender label respects
the autonomy of study participants, as it allows
them to assert the gender with which they iden-
tify. On the other hand, it does not account for the
fact that each study participant may have a differ-
ent conception of gender, its meaning, its relation
to sex, etc. For example, a 76-year-old woman
who has lived in the United States her whole life
may have a very different conception of what it
means to be “female” or “feminine” than does a
20-year-old recent immigrant to Germany from
Turkey. Despite this, each may be attempting to
make sense of her identity as including a female
or feminine gender.

In theory, the researcher could address the con-
cerns regarding participant self-identification us-
ing a gender-role inventory. In fact, one study
looking for gender differences in writing did ex-
actly that, using the Bem Sex Role Inventory
(BSRI) to assess author genders (Janssen and Mu-
rachver, 2004). The challenge with these ap-
proaches is that gender is a moving target. Sandra
Bem introduced the BSRI in 1974 (Bem, 1974).
It has since been criticized on a wide variety of
grounds, but of importance here is the fact that
it was based on gender role stereotypes from the
time when it was created. Thus a meta-analysis by

7



Twenge (1997) of studies using the BSRI showed
that the masculinity score of women taking the
BSRI had increased steadily over 15 years, and
men’s masculinity scores showed a steady de-
crease in correlation over the same period. These
developments make sense in the context of a gen-
der roles inventory that is necessarily validated
over a period of years after it is first developed,
resulting in an outdated set of gender stereotypes
being embodied in the test, stereotypes that are not
confirmed later as gender roles change. This does
not mean that these inventories have no value for
some applications; rather, researchers using them
should explain that they are using them, why they
are using them, and what their limitations are.

Researchers should consider the following spe-
cific recommendations: First, if a study relies
upon a gender-category ascription provided by
someone else, as does Koppel et al. (2002), it
should provide as much information as possible
about how the category was ascribed and acknowl-
edge the third-party category ascription as a limi-
tation. This supports the goals of research validity,
transparency, and accountability.

Second, if the researchers relied upon self-
identified gender from a technology or social me-
dia platform, the study report should show that the
researchers have reflected on the possibility that
users of the platform have not identified their gen-
ders at all (where the platform does not require it),
that users may intentionally misidentify their gen-
ders, that transgender users may be unable to iden-
tify themselves accurately (if the platform presents
only a binary), or that they may have been in-
sulted by the question (if the platform presents
them with “male,” “female,” and “other,” for ex-
ample). All these reflections address questions of
validity, transparency, and accountability. The fi-
nal two, however, also implicate the autonomy and
respect for persons the Belmont Report calls for.

Third, if researchers use a heuristic or qualita-
tive coding scheme to assess an author’s gender,
it is critically important that readers be presented
with a full description of the process. This in-
cludes providing a copy of the coding guide (the
set of instructions that researchers use to assign
category labels to persons or artifacts) and describ-
ing the process by which researchers checked their
code ascriptions, including a measure of inter-rater
reliability. Studies that use automated means to
ascribe category labels should include copies of

computer code used to make the ascriptions. This
supports the goals of accountability, transparency,
and validity.

Fourth, researchers who group gender labels
collected from participant self-identification or use
a heuristic to assign gender categories to partici-
pants or artifacts should consider “denaturalizing”
the resulting category labels. This challenge is
only likely to increase as sites like social media
platforms recognize nuances in gender identity, as
this section previously noted with regard to Face-
book. For example, Larson (2016) asked partic-
ipants to identify their own genders, giving them
an open text box in which to do it. (See also the
detailed discussion of methods in Larson (2017).)
This permitted participants in the study to identify
with any gender they chose, and respondents re-
sponded with eight different gender labels. Larson
explained his grouping of the responses and chose
to denaturalize the gender categories by not us-
ing their common names. The article thus grouped
“F,” “Fem,” “Female,” and “female” together with
the category label Gender F and “Cis Male,” “M,”
“Male,” and “Masculine” with the label Gender M.
Such disclosure or transparency supports the goals
accountability and fairness.

The steps described here would have strength-
ened already fine studies like those cited in the pre-
vious section. Of course, they would not insulate
them from criticism. For example, Larson (2016)
collected self-identified gender information and
denaturalized the gender categories as explained
above, but the result was nevertheless a gender
binary consistent with that prevalent in the folk-
theory of gender. The transparency of the study
methods, however, provides a basis for critique;
had it simply reported findings based on “male”
and “female” participants, the reader would not
even be able to identify this basis for critique.

5.4 Respect persons

One final recommendation is applicable to re-
searchers and to practitioners who may have a role
in deciding how to collect self-identified gender
labels from participants. Here, the practitioner or
researcher should take pains to recognize differ-
ences and difficulties that respondents may face in
ascribing gender to themselves or to others. For
example, assuming that one is collecting demo-
graphic information with an online survey, one
might offer respondents two options for gender:

8



“male” and “female.” In contemporary western
culture, however, it is not unusual to have respon-
dents who do not easily identify with one gender
or another or who actively refuse to be classed in
a particular gender. Others are confidently trans-
gender or intersex. Thus, two options may not
be enough. However, the addition of an “other”
might seem degrading or insulting to those who do
not consider themselves to be “male” or “female.”
Another option might be “none of the above,” but
this again seems to function as an othering selec-
tion. There are so many ways that persons might
choose to describe their genders that listing them
might also be impractical, especially as the list it-
self might have reactive effects by drawing spe-
cial attention to the gender question. Such effects
might arise if the comprehensive nature of the list
tips research participants off that gender is an ob-
ject of study in the research. But even the “free-
form” space discussed above presents difficulties
for practitioners and researchers.

Grappling with this challenge, and in the case of
researchers and practitioners disseminating their
research, documenting that grappling, is the best
way to ensure ethical outcomes.

5.5 Reviewers: Expect ethical practices

The way to ensure that researchers (and practition-
ers who disseminate their studies as research) con-
form to ethical principles is to make them account-
able at the time of peer review. A challenge for
researchers and peer reviewers alike, however, is
space. A long paper for EACL is eight pages at the
time of initial submission. A researcher may not
feel able to report fully on a study’s background,
data, methods, findings, and significance in that
space and still have space to explain steps take to
ensure the use of the gender variable is ethical. At
least two possible solutions come to mind.

First, researchers may make efforts to weave ev-
idence of ethical study design and implementation
into study write-ups. It may be possible with the
addition of a small number of sentences to satisfy
a peer reviewer that a researcher has followed the
guidelines in this paper.

Second, a researcher could write up a supple-
mental description of the study addressing partic-
ularly these issues. The researcher could signal
the presence of the supplemental description by
noting its existence in the first draft submitted for
peer review. If the paper is accepted, the supple-

mental description could be added to the paper be-
fore publication of the proceedings without adding
excessive length to the paper. In the alternative,
the supplemental description could be made avail-
able via a link to a web resource apart from the
paper itself. ACL has provided for the submis-
sion of “supplementary material” at least at some
of its conferences “to report preprocessing deci-
sions, model parameters, and other details nec-
essary for the replication of the experiments re-
ported” (Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2016). Other NLP conferences and techni-
cal reports should follow this lead. In any case, it
may be helpful if the peer-review mechanisms for
journals and conferences include a means for the
researcher to attach the supplemental description,
as its quality may influence the votes of some re-
viewers regarding the quality of the paper.

6 Conclusion

This paper represents only a starting point for
treating the research variable gender in an ethical
fashion. The guidelines for researchers and prac-
titioners here are intended to be straightforward
and simple. However, to engage in research or
practice that measures up to high ethical standards,
we should see ethics not as a checklist at the be-
ginning or end of a study’s design and execution.
Rather, we should view it as a process where we
continually ask whether our actions respect human
beings, deliver benefits and not harms, distribute
potential benefits and harms fairly, and explain our
research so that others may interrogate, test, and
challenge its validity.

Other sets of social labels, such as race, eth-
nicity, and religion, raise similar ethical concerns,
and researchers studying data including those cat-
egories should also consider the advice presented
here.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to the anonymous reviewers for helpful
guidance. This project received support from the
University of Minnesota’s Writing Studies Depart-
ment James I. Brown fellowship fund and its Col-
lege of Liberal Arts Graduate Research Partner-
ship Program.

9



References
Larry Alexander and Michael Moore. 2016. Deonto-

logical ethics. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Re-
search Lab, Stanford University, Winter 2016 edi-
tion.

Shlomo Argamon, Moshe Koppel, James W. Pen-
nebaker, and Jonathan Schler. 2007. Mining the
blogosphere: Age, gender and the varieties of self-
expression. First Monday, 12(9).

Association for Computational Linguistics. 2016. Call
for papers. the 55th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics | ACL Member
Portal, November. Retrieved February 17, 2017
from https://www.aclweb.org/portal/content/55th-
annual-meeting-association-computational-
linguistics.

David Bamman, Jacob Eisenstein, and Tyler Schnoe-
belen. 2014. Gender identity and lexical varia-
tion in social media. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
18(2):135–160.

Karissa Bell. 2015. Facebook’s new gender
options let you choose anything you want.
Mashable. Retrieved January 1, 2017, from
http://mashable.com/2015/02/26/facebooks-new-
custom-gender-options/.

Belmont Report. 1979. The Belmont Report: Ethi-
cal principles and guidelines for the protection of
human subjects of research. Retrieved January 24,
2017, from https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-
and-policy/belmont-report/index.html.

Sandra L. Bem. 1974. The measurement of psycholog-
ical androgyny. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 42(2):155–162.

Fredda Blanchard-Fields, Lynda Suhrer-Roussel, and
Christopher Hertzog. 1994. A confirmatory factor
analysis of the Bem Sex Role Inventory: Old ques-
tions, new answers. Sex Roles, 30(5-6):423–457.

Lee-Ann Kastman Breuch, Andrea M. Olson, and An-
drea Frantz. 2002. Considering ethical issues in
technical communication research. In Laura J. Gu-
rak and Mary M. Lay, editors, Research in Techni-
cal Communication, pages 1–22. Praeger Publishers,
Westport, CT.

John Burger, John Henderson, George Kim, and Guido
Zarrella. 2011. Discriminating gender on Twit-
ter. Technical report, MITRE Corporation, Bedford,
MA.

Judith Butler. 1993. Bodies That Matter: On the Dis-
cursive Limits of “Sex”. Routledge, New York.

Common Rule. 2009. Protection of Human
Subjects. 45 Code of Federal Regulations
Part 46. Retrieved February 13, 2017, from
https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-
policy/regulations/45-cfr-46/.

Victoria Pruin DeFrancisco, Catherine Helen Pal-
czewski, and Danielle Dick McGeough. 2014. Gen-
der in Communication: A Critical Introduction.
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 2nd edition.

FAT-ML. n.d. Fairness, accountability, and trans-
parency in machine learning. Retrieved January 23,
2017, from http://www.fatml.org/.

GLAAD. n.d. a. Gay and Lesbian Alliance
Against Defamation. GLAAD media reference
guide. In focus: Covering the transgender com-
munity. Retrieved January 23, 2017, from
http://www.glaad.org/reference/covering-trans-
community.

GLAAD. n.d. b. Gay and Lesbian Alliance
Against Defamation. Glossary of terms: Trans-
gender. Retrieved January 23, 2017, from
http://www.glaad.org/reference/transgender.

Bryce W. Goodman. 2016. A step towards accountable
algorithms? algorithmic discrimination and the eu-
ropean union general data protection. In 29th Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS 2016), Barcelona. NIPS Foundation.

Jurgen Habermas. 1995. Reconciliation Through the
Public use of Reason: Remarks on John Rawls’s
Political Liberalism. The Journal of Philosophy,
92(3):109–131.

Moritz Hardt. 2014. How big data is unfair: Un-
derstanding sources of unfairness in data driven
decision making, September. Retrieved January
23, 2017, from https://medium.com/@mrtz/how-
big-data-is-unfair-9aa544d739de#.jr0yrklo0.

Alicia Hennig. 2010. Confucianism as corporate
ethics strategy. China Business and Research,
2010(5):1–7.

Susan C. Herring and John C. Paolillo. 2006. Gender
and genre variation in weblogs. Journal of Sociolin-
guistics, 10(4):439–459.

Rosalind Hursthouse and Glen Pettigrove. 2016.
Virtue ethics. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Re-
search Lab, Stanford University, Winter 2016 edi-
tion.

Anna Janssen and Tamar Murachver. 2004. The
relationship between gender and topic in gender-
preferential language use. Written Communication,
21(4):344 –367.

Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, and Anat Rachel
Shimoni. 2002. Automatically categorizing writ-
ten texts by author gender. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 17(4):401 –412.

Brian N. Larson. 2016. Gender/genre: The lack of
gendered register in texts requiring genre knowl-
edge. Written Communication, 33(4):360–384.

10



Brian N. Larson. 2017. First-year law stu-
dents’ court memoranda. Web download
LDC2017T03, Linguistic Data Consortium,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, February.
http://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2017T03.

Mary Sue MacNealy. 1998. Strategies for Empirical
Research in Writing. Longman, Boston.

Plato. 2005. Meno. In Plato: Meno and Other Dia-
logues, pages 99–143. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford.

W. James Potter and Deborah Levine-Donnerstein.
1999. Rethinking validity and reliability in content
analysis. Journal of Applied Communication Re-
search, 27(3):258–284.

Delip Rao, David Yarowsky, Abhishek Shreevats, and
Manaswi Gupta. 2010. Classifying latent user at-
tributes in Twitter. In Proceedings of the 2nd In-
ternational Workshop on Search and Mining User-
generated Contents, pages 37–44, Toronto, ON,
Canada, October. ACM.

Masoud Rouhizadeh, Lyle Ungar, Anneke Buffone,
and Andrew H. Schwartz. 2016. Using syntactic
and semantic context to explore psychodemographic
differences in self-reference. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2054–2059. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Walter Sinnott-Armstrong. 2015. Consequentialism.
In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stan-
ford University, Winter 2015 edition.

Jean M. Twenge. 1997. Changes in masculine and
feminine traits over time: A meta-analysis. Sex
Roles, 36(5-6):305–325.

Hanna Wallach. 2014. Big data, machine learning,
and the social sciences: Fairness, accountability,
and transparency. Retrieved January 23, 2017,
from https://medium.com/@hannawallach/big-
data-machine-learning-and-the-social-sciences-
927a8e20460d#.czusepxiz.

Yuan Wang, Yang Xiao, Chao Ma, and Zhen Xiao.
2016. Improving users’ demographic prediction via
the videos they talk about. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1359–1368. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

World Medical Association. 1964. Declaration of
Helsinki: Ethical Principles for Medical Research
Involving Human Subjects. World Medical Associa-
tion, Ferney-Voltaire, France, October 2013 edition.

Xiang Yan and Ling Yan. 2006. Gender classifica-
tion of weblog authors. In AAAI Spring Symposium:
Computational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs,
pages 228–230, Palo Alto, CA, March. Association
for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.

11


