



















































Functions of Silences towards Information Flow in Spoken Conversation


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Speech-Centric Natural Language Processing, pages 1–9
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Functions of Silences towards Information Flow
in Spoken Conversation

Shammur Absar Chowdhury and Evgeny A. Stepanov and Morena Danieli
and Giuseppe Riccardi

Signals and Interactive Systems Lab
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science

University of Trento, Italy

Abstract

Silence is an integral part of the most fre-
quent turn-taking phenomena in spoken
conversations. Silence is sized and placed
within the conversation flow and it is co-
ordinated by the speakers along with the
other speech acts. The objective of this
analytical study is twofold: to explore
the functions of silence with duration of
one second and above, towards informa-
tion flow in a dyadic conversation utilizing
the sequences of dialog acts present in the
turns surrounding the silence itself; and to
design a feature space useful for clustering
the silences using a hierarchical concept
formation algorithm. The resulting clus-
ters are manually grouped into functional
categories based on their similarities. It is
observed that the silence plays an impor-
tant role in response preparation, also can
indicate speakers’ hesitation or indecisive-
ness. It is also observed that sometimes
long silences can be used deliberately to
get a forced response from another speaker
thus making silence a multi-functional and
an important catalyst towards information
flow.

1 Introduction

Silence is a multifaceted natural phenomenon in
human conversations that carries information rich
in meaning and function. Even though “silence”
is generally defined as the absence of speech (Ja-
worski, 1993) or a break in a conversation flow,
its occurrence has the power to deliver a message,
as well as trigger human response similar to any
other conversational behavior. Silence in human
conversations provides insights into the thought
process, emotion, and attitude (Richmond et al.,

1991) among others. At the same time, silence
is used to convey power (dominance) (Saunders,
1985; Tannen, 1990), respect, and manage con-
flicts.

Along with speech, silence is an integral part of
human interaction, and the two complement and
provide information about each other. In the words
of Bruneau (Bruneau, 1973):

“Silence is to speech as the white of this paper is
to this print”

– Thomas J Bruneau.

Given that the reasons for silence are limitless,
it also has many functions. One function is “elo-
quent silences” that includes the use of silence
in the funeral, at religious ceremonies, as a le-
gal privilege, or in response to a rhetorical ques-
tion (Ephratt, 2008). Apart from this, silence can
be used to indicate topic avoidance, lack of infor-
mation to provide response, agreement, disagree-
ment, anger, frustration, uncertainty, hesitancy and
others.

Over the years, researchers have studied si-
lence with respect to, but are not limited to, the
location of silence in a conversation (Richmond
et al., 1991; Jensen, 1973) or its role in a conver-
sation (Cappella, 1980; Zimmermann and West,
1996; McLaughlin and Cody, 1982) or how its
duration changes with different emotions (Alam
et al., 2016). Silence has also been studied as a
method for non-verbal communication (Kogure,
2007; Bruneau, 2008) and its practices in different
cultures (Richmond et al., 1991), or in different
contexts. It has also been observed as a powerful
tool for conflict-management (Oduro-Frimpong,
2007), and within the context of psychotherapy
(Frankel et al., 2006; Gale and Sanchez, 2005;
Ladany et al., 2004; Ronningstam, 2006).

Unlike research on speech, the studies on si-
lence are either definitional (theoretical) or de-

1



D
ata Preparation 

Audio Signal and 
Speaker Information 

Manual 
Transcription 

Manual Dialog 
Act Annotation 

Turn Segmentation and Labeling 
Module 

Silence Filtering Module 

Feature Design and Extraction 

Unsupervised Silence Clustering 

Grouping Silence Clusters 

T = {t1, t2, ..., tk} 

SilInst = {s1, s2, ..., sh} 

Clusters C = {c1, c2, ..., cl} 

Groups G = {g1, g2, ..., gn} 

ti = {d1, d2, ..., da } 

Human 
Intervention 

Figure 1: Framework for categorizing functions of
long silences.

scriptive. Even within speech research commu-
nities, there are very few studies that have ana-
lyzed function of silence in a methodological man-
ner. Generally, in a dialog system, silence is not
acknowledged as a form of interaction, but rather
its function in a conversation is seen as a “pause”
or a “gap”. Whereas speech is viewed as the pri-
mary carrier of information. Thus, a further study
of silence and its functions is important, as si-
lence often does serve as a message, or at least as
means that offers contextual cues to the surround-
ing speech.

Therefore, the goal of this paper is to analyze
the function of long silences1 occurring between
and within speakers in dyadic spoken conversa-
tions. Our focus is on understanding the perceived
reasons of such functions towards the information
flow in spoken conversations.

The paper is organized as follows. An overview
of the experimental methodology used in this
study is given in Section 2. We present an analysis
of our findings in Section 3 and provide conclu-
sions in Section 4.

2 Methodology

The methodology followed for grouping functions
of the long silences is shown in Figure 1. The
pipeline includes a data preparation phase, which
involves extraction and selection of the long si-
lence instances; followed by the feature design and

1In our study, we defined long silences as having the du-
ration greater and equal to 1 second.

extraction phase. The next phase in the pipeline is
unsupervised clustering of the selected silence in-
stances, which are later grouped into hierarchical
clusters for the analysis of their functions.

2.1 Data Preparation

For this study, we have used conversations from
the SISL Human-Human Conversational Dis-
course Corpus. The data is a subset of a large
Italian call-center corpus where call center agents
are engaged in conversations with real customers.
The customers are calling to solve some specific
problem or seek information. The inbound Ital-
ian phone conversations are recorded on two sepa-
rate audio channels with a quality of 16 bits, 8kHz
sample rate. The collected conversations (≈ 10K)
have an average duration of 396.6±197.9 seconds.

To analyze the role of silence in information
flow of the conversation, we have selected 10 con-
versations that contain manual dialog act anno-
tations (Chowdhury et al., 2016b) following dia-
log Act Markup Language (DiAML) (Bunt et al.,
2010, 2012) annotation scheme. The details of
the dimensions and the communicative functions
considered for the annotation are given in Table
1. The dimensions such as: Discourse Structur-
ing, Speech and Turn Management dimensions are
mapped to the tag Other, as they are very infre-
quent.

2.1.1 Extraction of Silence
Silence positions, as well as turn types, such as
speakers’ turns, overlapping turns, are extracted
using the turn segmentation and labeling system
(Chowdhury et al., 2016a). The input to the sys-
tem is the audio of the conversation, the manual
transcription and speaker information.

The forced-aligned transcription is obtained us-
ing an in-domain Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) (Chowdhury et al., 2014). Lexical informa-
tion from these forced-aligned transcripts is used
to extract turn-taking sequences. The pipeline uses
the time aligned output as tokens to create Inter-
Pausal Units (IPUs) for each input channel. IPUs
are defined as segments of consecutive tokens with
no less that 50 ms gaps in-between. Using the
time information of inter-IPUs and intra-IPUs, we
then define steady conversation segments where
each segment maintains a steady time-line for both
interlocutor channels. The labels of each silence
segment are then defined by a set of rules as fol-
lows:

2



• Pause (P ): Gaps between the turns of the same
speaker with no less than 0.5 second. PA and
PC represent agent and customer’s pauses re-
spectively.

• Lapse between speakers (LB): Floor switches
between the speakers with a silence duration of
2 seconds or more.

• Lapse within speaker (LW ): Gaps between the
same speakers’ turns with a silence duration of
2 seconds or more.

• Switch (SS): Floor switches between the
speakers with silence duration of less than 2 sec-
onds or with overlapping frames not more than
20 ms. This category is also know as gaps.

The labeled turn sequences are then used to select
silence instances for the analysis.

2.1.2 Silence Filtering
From the 10 conversations we have extracted 433
instances of silences with the duration greater or
equal to 1 second. The instances are categorized
into two groups:

• Between-Speaker Silences (B): These in-
stances of silence include gaps between differ-
ent speaker turns that are greater or equals to 1
second. B = {Sl, LB}, where Sl stands for gaps
>= 1 second and < 2 seconds where as LB are
lapse between speakers >= 2 seconds.

• Within-Speaker Silences (W ): These instances
of silence include pauses between the same
speaker’s turns that are greater or equals to 1
second. W = {Pl, LW }, where Pl stands for
pauses >= 1 second and < 2 seconds where as
LW are lapse within speaker >= 2 seconds.

For the initial analysis, the instances of long
silences that occur after or before overlapping
speech (61 silence instances) are ignored. As a
result, the analysis is performed on 372 instances.

2.2 Feature Design and Extraction
Even though silence is an inherently valueless
phenomena that possesses no function on its own,
individual instances of silence gain its meaning
and function from the surrounding context. Con-
sequently, modeling functions of silences requires
conceptualization of the context and features that
capture it. Dialog acts carry specific communica-
tive functions such as question, answer, expression

of agreement, disagreement, etc. Since dialog acts
are assigned to the speech segments (turns) that
surround the long silences, they provide the infor-
mation that could be used to model the context of
silence instances.

Table 1: Core dimensions and communicative
functions from ISO 24617-2 standard considered
for dialog act annotation.

Dimension Comm.Function Group

General (Task)

Information Transfer Functions
Question

Information Seeking
Set Question
Choice Question
Propositional Question
Check Question

Inform

Information Providing

Answer
Confirm
Disconfirm

Agreement
Disagreement
Correction

Action Discussion Functions
Offer

Commissives

Promise
Address Request
Accept Request
Decline Request

Address Suggest
Accept Suggest
Decline Suggest
Suggest

Directives

Request
Instruct
Address Offer
Accept Offer
Decline Offer

Time Management Stalling, Pausing
Auto-Feedback Positive, Negative
Allo-Feedback Positive, Negative, Feedback Elicitation

Social Obligations
Management

Initial-Greeting, Return-Greeting
Initial-Self-Intro, Return-Self-Intro
Apology, Accept-Apology
Thanking, Accept-Thanking
Initial-Goodbye, Return-Goodbye

The dialog act dimensions and communicative
functions listed in Table 1 are used as features for
the analysis of between and within speaker silence
instances. Each turn preceding or following a si-
lence is transformed into a feature vector using
one-hot representation for dialog acts.

The vectors encode information such as the fol-
lowing. Feedback, a joined dimension of auto-
feedback and allo-feedback, (fb) = {0, 1}, where
fb=0 represent the absence of feedback dialog acts
in the turn and vice-versa. Similarly, the vec-
tor also includes other dialog act dimensions like
Time Management (tm), and Social Obligations
Management (s). The General dimension is split
into two: (a) information seeking (q) and (b) infor-
mation providing and action discussion functions

3



(ac). The motivation behind such a split is to dis-
tinguish between information seeking dialog acts
which impose an expected pattern on its recipient,
i.e an obligation to provide the requested informa-
tion.

Since according to the DiaML annotation stan-
dard a turn can contain several dialog acts, the vec-
tor representation specifically encodes the last di-
alog act of the preceding turn (lact) and the first
dialog act of the turn following the long silence
(fact). Both lact and fact ∈ χ, where as χ =
{Ac, Q, F, TimeM, Ap, Thank, Int, Other, None}.
In the set, χ, Ac represents communicative func-
tions from information providing and action dis-
cussion functions; Q represents Information Seek-
ing functions; F represents Feedback (auto-
feedback and allo-feedback) functions; Apo rep-
resents apology and accept-apology functions;
Thank represents thanking and accept-thanking;
Int represents initial and return greetings, self-
introductions, and goodbyes; Other represents all
the dialog acts not used for the analysis. None, on
the other hand, indicates absence of dialog acts.

The feature vectors of preceding, pr (|pr|=6)
turn, and succeeding (following), su (|su|=6) turn,
are merged to represent a silence instance for cat-
egorization (|sil| = 6 ∗ 2 = 12).

2.3 Unsupervised Annotation of Silence
Function

The described representation of silence instances
is applied for clustering using Cobweb clustering
algorithm (Fisher, 1987) – a well-known concept
formation system designed to model human con-
cept learning. Cobweb constructs clusters using
“concept hierarchy” that optimally and incremen-
tally accounts for the observed regularities on a
set of instances. In other words, given a set of
silence instances, Cobweb discovers a classifica-
tion scheme that covers the patterns with respect
to provided feature vectors. Instead of forming
concepts at a single level of abstraction, Cobweb
groups instances into a classification tree where
leaves represent similar instances, and internal
nodes represent broad concepts. The generality of
a broader concept increases as the nodes approach
the root of the tree. Each cluster is characterized
with a probabilistic description.

The classification tree is constructed incremen-
tally inserting the instances into the tree one by
one. When adding an instance, the algorithm tra-

verses the tree top-down starting from the root of
the tree. At each node, there are four possible op-
erations: (a) insert (b) create (c) merge and (d)
split. These operations are selected with respect
to the highest category utility (CU ) metric (Gluck
and Corter, 1985). The metric is derived from the
categorization studies in cognitive psychology and
is shown in Equation 1.

Category utility, CU , attempts to maximize
both (a) the probability of the instances in the same
category to have feature values in common; and
(b) the probability of the instances in different cat-
egories to have different feature values.

CU(Cl) =
∑

i

∑
j(Pr[fi = vij |Cl]2 − Pr[fi = vij ]2) (1)

In the equation, Pr[fi = vij ] represents the
marginal probability that feature fi has value vij ,
whereas Pr[fi = vij |Cl] represents the condi-
tional probability that feature fi has value vij ,
given the instance belongs in cluster Cl. CU(Cl)
estimates the quality of individual cluster.

To measure the quality of overall clustering of
the silences, we calculate the average category
utility function CU(C1, C2, .., Ck), as shown in
Equation 2.

CU(C1, C2, .., Ck) =
1
k
(
∑

l

Pr[Cl]) (2)

In the equation, k is the total number of categories.
The overfitting is controlled by 1k .

Therefore, for each set (B,W ), we applied Cob-
web clustering algorithm implemented in (Hall
et al., 2009) with acuityA = 1.0 and cutoff thresh-
old of C = 0.0028.

3 Analysis

3.1 Resulting Clusters
For between-speakers silences (B), we have ob-
tained 24 leave clusters, whereas for within-
speaker silences (W ), we have obtained 26 leave
clusters. The distribution of dialog act sequences
in each cluster is given in Tables 2 and 3.

3.2 Categorization of Silence Functions
Assuming that each cluster represents a specific
function of a silence, the clusters are manually
grouped with respect to their parents in the classi-
fication tree. The manual grouping of silence clus-
ters is performed considering conversation scenar-
ios surrounding the silence events. For instance,

4



Table 2: Preceding (column two) and succeeding (column three) turn communicative function sequences
for each clusters and their frequency inside parenthesis for between speaker silences. The first column
of the table represents the classification tree’s leaf id of the corresponding cluster.

Id Preceding turn dialog acts Succeeding turn dialog acts

2

question(19); checkquestion(9); inform ques-
tion(2); inform checkquestion(2); inform au-
topositive question(1); choicequestion(1); au-
topositive checkquestion(1)

answer(12); confirm(11); inform(3); answer in-
form(3); disconfirm(2); confirm inform(2); dis-
confirm answer(1); answer request(1)

3

question(2); initialselfintroduction initialgreeting
returnselfintroduction question(1); initialselfin-
troduction initialgreeting initialselfintroduction
question(1); inform checkquestion(1); choice-
question(1)

other(2); autopositive(2); autopositive return-
greeting stalling inform(1); allopositive(1)

5 question(2) stalling answer(2)
6 question(1) stalling checkquestion(1)

8 initialgreeting initialselfintroduction question(2)
returngreeting returnselfintroduction answer in-
form(1); returngreeting inform(1)

9 initialselfintroduction question(1) returngreeting returnselfintroduction(1)

11

inform(20); request(6); confirm(2); answer(2);
suggest(1); stalling request(1); offer(1); ini-
tialgreeting initialselfintroduction request(1); in-
form none inform(1); answer request(1); answer
autopositive inform(1); agreement(1); addressre-
quest(1)

inform(22); acceptrequest inform(4); inform in-
form(3); confirm(3); acceptrequest(2); inform
question(1); answer request(1); agreement(1);
addressrequest(1); acceptoffer inform stalling(1)

13 autopositive(16); allopositive(1) inform(15); inform request(1); correction(1)
15 other(6) inform(5); suggest(1)
17 answer thanking(1) inform(1)
18 pausing(2); stalling(1); inform stalling(1) inform(2); confirm(1); answer(1)
19 allopositive none(1) inform inform(1)

22
inform(23); answer(2); request(1); correction(1);
confirm(1); acceptrequest inform(1)

autopositive(19); autopositive inform(4); au-
topositive question(3); autopositive checkques-
tion(2); allopositive(1)

25 allopositive(1) autopositive(1)
29 pausing(1) autopositive(1)

31
inform(10); answer(4); confirm(3); request(1);
disconfirm(1); correction(1)

question(12); checkquestion(6); question in-
form(1); question checkquestion(1)

33 autopositive(2) question(2)
34 autopositive(1) question acceptthanking(1)
37 inform(2); confirm(2); offer(1) pausing(4); stalling(1)
38 inform(1) none(1)
43 other(5) other(5)
45 other(1) returnselfintroduction(1)

46
initialgreeting initialselfintroduction question
other(1)

returngreeting(1)

47
inform(2); request(1); other inform(1); de-
clinerequest(1); answer(1); acceptrequest(1)

other(5); other stalling(1); other other ques-
tion(1)

5



Table 3: Preceding (column two) and succeeding (column three) turn communicative function sequences
for each clusters and their frequency inside parenthesis for within speakers silences. The first column of
the table represents the classification tree’s leaf id of the corresponding cluster.

Id Preceding turn dialog acts Succeeding turn dialog acts

2

inform(95); answer(6); request(3); stalling in-
form(2); inform inform(2); correction(2); ques-
tion request(1); offer(1); inform request(1); con-
firm(1)

inform(90); request(5); answer(5); inform in-
form(4); offer(2); inform stalling(2); inform
question(2); suggest(1); inform stalling inform
stalling(1); correction(1); addressrequest(1)

3 none(1) inform(1)
7 pausing(2) question(1); checkquestion(1)
8 autopositive(1) question(1)

9
question(8); checkquestion(3); inform ques-
tion(1)

question(8); checkquestion(3); question in-
form(1)

10 question(1) other(1)
11 question(1) pausing(1)
12 question(1) autopositive autopositive(1)
14 other(1) apology inform(1)
15 other(3) other(3)
16 other(1) autopositive inform(1)
19 pausing(1) pausing(1)
20 inform stalling(1) stalling(1)
21 autopositive pausing(1) pausing autopositive inform(1)
22 stalling(1) other inform(1)
23 autopositive(1) other(1)

24 autopositive(5); autopositive autopositive(1)
autopositive(4); autopositive thanking(1); au-
topositive question(1)

25 autopositive(1) stalling inform(1)
29 inform none(1) none inform(1)
33 stalling(1); pausing(1); other stalling(1) inform(3)
34 autopositive(5) inform(4); inform autopositive question(1)
36 question(4) inform(3); inform inform(1)
37 other(1) inform(1)
39 inform(9) stalling inform(7); stalling(2)

40 inform(7)
question(4); question inform(2); choiceques-
tion(1)

41 inform(2); agreement Null inform(1) autopositive(3)

in a conversation a participant may expect an an-
swer to a question or a contribution from another
speaker that might yield a long silence due to the
time required to prepare an answer. It might take
long to get the information to the query or simply
be an act of noncompliance. This long silence pe-
riod is considered as a failure to contribute to an
ongoing conversation. To repair this speakers may
use strategies such as repeating the query, chang-
ing the topic, or ask for more time to respond.

Below we give example scenarios observed in
the silence cluster groups:
The Between-Speaker Silence cluster groups are:

• A mode of response preparation (RP ): In this
group, there can be two subcategories based on
the type of response given by the speaker after
the silence. The subcategories are:

– Response to the previous turn’s question in
the form of information that includes an an-
swer to the question, a feedback, or asking for

more time to answer. This category includes
clusters RP1={2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9}.

– A response can also be a question to the
information/feedback provided in the previ-
ous turn. This category includes clusters
RP2={31, 33, 34}.

• A mode of information flow (IF ): These si-
lences can either be a: 1) conversational silences
where both speakers are exchanging informa-
tion or feedback 2) forced silences (deliberate2),
where the current speaker is using a silence as a
tool to force the interlocutor to respond. The
member clusters of this group are IF={11, 13,
15, 17, 18, 19, 22, 25, 29, 37, 38}.
• Silences in Other categories (B − Oth): These

are the silences which are motivated by fac-
tors, such as discourse structuring, not consid-
ered in the study. This group includes clusters
2These silence instances are usually longer. For this study

the threshold for this type of silences is >= 2 seconds.

6



B-Oth={43, 45, 46, 47}.
The above-mentioned categories are presented

in Examples 1 and 2. In Example 1, we observe
that the caller is asking the call center operator a
reason behind an action, and the act is followed by
a long silence of 1.41 seconds. After the interval,
the operator is passing some information regard-
ing the earlier query by the caller. From the oper-
ational point of view, the interval might have been
used to either acquire information or to structure
it. Similarly, in RP2 scenario in Example 1, af-
ter the operator informs that the ‘electric power’
will not be activated, the caller is taking a long
silence of 1.38 seconds to respond to the given in-
formation, asking another question. This silence
could have been again used for preparing the an-
swer, or it might be the time taken by the respond-
ing speaker to compose the next action. In Ex-
ample 2, we present a scenario where the silence
category IF is used deliberately to force another
speaker to reply.

The silence in both examples may play other
cognitive functions such as controlling emotional
attitudes. However, as the focus of this study is
to understand the function of long silences in the
information flow, these cognitive functions are not
considered.
Example 1. Example of silence category RP : RP1

caller: al distacco perfetto ora eh eh
su che base mi perdoni

caller: the complete interruption ... perfect! now
ehm ehm due to what reason, excuse me?
(1.14) Category - RP1

operator: ah ascolti qui ci sono una
serie di fatture malgrado

operator: Listen (please) we have here a number of
unpaied bill in spite of

Example of silence category RP : RP2
operator: la luce non gliela riprist

non viene ripristinata
operator: the electric power will not be reactiv will

not be reactivated
(1.38) Category - RP2

caller: ma cosa devo pagare se io ho
gi conguagliato tutto con
trecentoquarantacinque euro mi
perdoni cosa devo pagare la

caller: but what do I have to pay if I have already
paid 345 euros I beg you pardon but what do I
need to pay the

Example 2. Example of silence category IF
caller: [lei deve fare una cosina

lei ha un delle]
caller: [You have to do a small thing you have

some]
operator: [per e se]
operator: [but and if]

caller: belle schermate a disposizione
mi deve aprire la mia ehe il mio
fax inviato il ventitr zero otto
duemiladodici cortesemente

caller: beautiful screens available you have to open
my own and you will find my fax sent on 23rd of
August 2016
(2.12) Category - IF (deliberate
silence)

operator: vediamo subito
operator: let us see immediately

The Within-Speaker Silence cluster groups are:

• Organizational silence (CS): The long pause
used for the purpose of organizing the informa-
tion flow in the conversation This group con-
tains clusters of silences where a speaker is
providing information and the silence between
turns can either be a time taken to think, find in-
formation, or to compose and plan the next turn.
CS={2, 3, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 33, 34,
39}.
• Indecision or Hesitation silence (H): In this

groups of silences, speaker is either confused
about some information, needs clarification, or
have some queries. The member clusters of this
groups are H={7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 36, 40}.
• Silences in Other categories (W −Oth): These

are the silences which are motivated by other
factors, not considered for the present study.
This group includes clusters W-Oth={14, 15,
16, 37, 41}.

Example 3. Example of silence category CS and H
caller: non riesco a parl devo

parlarle ho parlato con cinque
suoi colleghi e mi hanno
chiamato due consulenti

caller: I cannot tal ... I need to talk ... I talked with
five colleagues of you and two consultants called
me
(1.16) Category - CS

caller: io oggi pomeriggio devo andare
dall avvocato per denunziarvi
per diecimila euro al giorno di
danni che mi avete arrecato da
stamattina

caller: this afternoon I will go my lawayer for
sueing you due to ten thousand euros in damage
per day due to this morning (power) interruption
(1.65) Category - CS

caller: ehe perch io ho gi pagato
tutto nel

caller: ehm because I already paid all what I due
caller: senso che tutte queste

bollette sono state conguagliate
con una di
trecentoquarantacinque euro
incluso

7



caller: because all these bills were paied with
another one of 345 euros including

caller: il mese di luglio e agosto
caller: the months of July and August (as well)

(1.57) Category - CS
caller: ehe avevo gi chiarito il (.)

primo distacco l abbiamo sospeso
mi hanno richiamato perch non
trovate una vostra lettera di
risposta

caller: and I already told this when (.) there was the
first interruption (that) was suspended they
called me because you are not able to find a
reply letter from you
(1.01) Category - H

caller: ora devo (.) parlare con lei o
devo parlare con qualcuno sopra
di lei mi perdoni se sono
abbastanza

caller: now (I) have (.) to call with you or have (I)
to call with you boss? sorry but (I) am enough

In Example 3, we present dialog scenarios with
assigned categories. It is observed that the top
three long silence intervals are used either to plan
the next turn or to take the time to think. Whereas
in the last (shortest) silence of 1.01 second, before
threatening the operator, the caller either hesitates,
feels bad, or is not sure whether a threat is going
to work.

The duration distribution statistics for each cate-
gory of silence functions are presented in Tables 4
and 5. For between-speaker silence categories, in
Table 4, it is observed that median duration of si-
lence categoryRP2 along withB−Oth are longer
compared to RP1 and IF . As for within-speaker
silence categories, it is observed that median dura-
tion of H categories is longer than CS. The ob-
servation is explained as the speakers might need
more time to take the next turn when s/he is facing
indecision, hesitation, or need clarification about
something.

Table 4: Statistics of between-speaker long si-
lences categories.

Between-Speaker Silence RP1 RP2 IF B-Oth
1st Quadrant 1.21 1.33 1.27 1.36
Median 1.37 1.76 1.59 1.96
3rd Quadrant 1.62 2.67 2.13 2.93
No. Instances 47 23 107 12

Total 189

4 Conclusion

The main focus of this analytical study is to ex-
plore the functions of long silence within and be-
tween speakers towards the information flow in a
conversation. In an attempt to find such functions,
the study utilizes the sequences of dialog act tags

Table 5: Statistics of within-speaker long silences
categories.

Within-Speaker Silence CS H W-Oth
1st Quadrant 1.13 1.10 1.32
Median 1.36 1.42 1.63
3rd Quadrant 1.76 2.63 2.06
No. Instances 145 29 9

Total 183

present in the left and right context (concerning
speaker turns) surrounding the silence itself, and
designs feature vector to represent a long silence.
These designed feature vectors are later used to
cluster silences using a well-known hierarchical
concept formation system (Cobweb), which is de-
signed to model different aspects of human con-
cept learning. Following the clustering, we have
manually grouped the clusters into functional cate-
gories and have studied their significance, and du-
ration distribution.

The functions of silence we observe vary from
response preparation to hesitation to asking some
queries. It is also observed that sometimes these
long silences are used deliberately to get a forced
response from another speaker. It can also indicate
the indecisiveness of the current speaker.

Even though most of the research from speech
communities ignores the silences, our observation
shows that by considering the function of long
silences, we can better understand the informa-
tion flow in the conversation. As silences do con-
tribute to explaining the information presented by
the speech signals. Silence also has the potential to
explain long term behavioral traits and short term
states.

This study is our first attempt to analyse, under-
stand and group functions of long silence in dyadic
conversations. The observed functions, such as
hesitations, are also related to another speech phe-
nomenon – disfluencies. In future work we plan to
address the relationship between speech disfluen-
cies and long silences. This analysis will help us to
understand the factors and contexts that represent
cues of the silence function which is indeed nec-
essary to design computational models for such a
simple yet informative event of human conversa-
tion.

References
Firoj Alam, Shammur Absar Chowdhury, Morena

Danieli, and Giuseppe Riccardi. 2016. How inter-

8



locutors coordinate with each other within emotional
segments? In COLING: International Conference
on Computational Linguistics.

Thomas J Bruneau. 1973. Communicative silences:
Forms and functions. Journal of Communication
23(1):17–46.

Thomas J Bruneau. 2008. How americans use silence
and silences to communicate. China Media Re-
search 4(2).

Harry Bunt, Jan Alexandersson, Jean Carletta, Jae-
Woong Choe, Alex Chengyu Fang, Koiti Hasida,
Kiyong Lee, Volha Petukhova, Andrei Popescu-
Belis, Laurent Romary, et al. 2010. Towards an
ISO standard for dialogue act annotation. In Seventh
conference on International Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’10).

Harry Bunt, Jan Alexandersson, Jae-Woong Choe,
Alex Chengyu Fang, Koiti Hasida, Volha Petukhova,
Andrei Popescu-Belis, and David R Traum. 2012.
ISO 24617-2: A semantically-based standard for di-
alogue annotation. In LREC. pages 430–437.

Joseph N Cappella. 1980. Talk and silence sequences
in informal conversations ii. Human Communica-
tion Research 6(2):130–145.

Shammur A. Chowdhury, Giuseppe Riccardi, and Firoj
Alam. 2014. Unsupervised recognition and cluster-
ing of speech overlaps in spoken conversations. In
Proc. of Workshop on Speech, Language and Audio
in Multimedia.

Shammur Absar Chowdhury, Evgeny Stepanov, and
Giuseppe Riccardi. 2016a. Predicting user satisfac-
tion from turn-taking in spoken conversations. In
Proc. of INTERSPEECH.

Shammur Absar Chowdhury, Evgeny A. Stepanov, and
Giuseppe Riccardi. 2016b. Transfer of corpus-
specific dialogue act annotation to iso standard: Is
it worth it ? In Proc. of LREC.

Michal Ephratt. 2008. The functions of silence. Jour-
nal of Pragmatics 40(11):1909 – 1938.

D. H. Fisher. 1987. Knowledge acquisition via in-
cremental conceptual clustering. Machine Learning
2:139–172.

Ze’ev Frankel, Heidi M Levitt, David M Murray,
Leslie S Greenberg, and Lynne Angus. 2006. As-
sessing silent processes in psychotherapy: An em-
pirically derived categorization system and sampling
strategy. Psychotherapy Research 16(5):627–638.

John Gale and Beatriz Sanchez. 2005. The meaning
and function of silence in psychotherapy with par-
ticular reference to a therapeutic community treat-
ment programme. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy
19(3):205–220.

M. A. Gluck and J. E. Corter. 1985. Information, un-
certainty, and the utility of categories. Proceedings
Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Sci-
ence Society. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 11(1):10–
18.

A. Jaworski. 1993. The power of silence:
social and pragmatic perspectives. Lan-
guage and language behaviors. Sage.
https://books.google.mu/books?id=0NFoAAAAIAAJ.

J Vernon Jensen. 1973. Communicative functions of
silence. ETC: A Review of General Semantics pages
249–257.

Masato Kogure. 2007. Nodding and smiling in si-
lence during the loop sequence of backchannels
in japanese conversation. Journal of Pragmatics
39(7):1275–1289.

Nicholas Ladany, Clara E Hill, Barbara J Thompson,
and Karen M O’Brien. 2004. Therapist perspec-
tives on using silence in therapy: A qualitative study.
Counselling and Psychotheraphy Research 4(1):80–
89.

Margaret L McLaughlin and Michael J Cody. 1982.
Awkward silences: Behavioral antecedents and con-
sequences of the conversational lapse. Human com-
munication research 8(4):299–316.

Joseph Oduro-Frimpong. 2007. Semiotic silence: Its
use as a conflictmanagement strategy in intimate re-
lationships. Semiotica 2007(167):283–308.

Virginia P Richmond, James C McCroskey, and
Steven K Payne. 1991. Nonverbal behavior in inter-
personal relations. Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs,
NJ.

Elsa Ronningstam. 2006. Cultural function and psy-
chological transformation in psychoanalysis and
psychoanalytic psychotherapy. The International
Journal of Psychoanalysis 87(5):1277–1295.

George R Saunders. 1985. Silence and noise as emo-
tion management styles: An italian case. Perspec-
tives on silence pages 165–83.

Deborah Tannen. 1990. Silence as conflict manage-
ment in fiction and drama: Pinter???s betrayal and a
short story, great wits. Conflict talk: Sociolinguistic
investigations of arguments and conversations, ed.
AD Grimshaw pages 260–279.

Don H Zimmermann and Candace West. 1996. Sex
roles, interruptions and silences in conversation.
AMSTERDAM STUDIES IN THE THEORY AND
HISTORY OF LINGUISTIC SCIENCE SERIES 4
pages 211–236.

9


