



















































MultiNews: A Web collection of an Aligned Multimodal and Multilingual Corpus


Proceedings of the Workshop on Curation and Applications of Parallel and Comparable Corpora, pages 11–15,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27–December 1, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

MultiNews:
A Web collection of an Aligned Multimodal and Multilingual Corpus

Haithem Afli, Pintu Lohar and Andy Way
ADAPT Centre

School of Computing
Dublin City University

Dublin, Ireland
{FirstName.LastName}@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract

Integrating Natural Language Processing
(NLP) and computer vision is a promising
effort. However, the applicability of these
methods directly depends on the availabil-
ity of a specific multimodal data that in-
cludes images and texts. In this paper, we
present a collection of a Multimodal cor-
pus of comparable document and their im-
ages in 9 languages from the web news ar-
ticles of Euronews website.1 This corpus
has found widespread use in the NLP com-
munity in Multilingual and multimodal
tasks. Here, we focus on its acquisition
of the images and text data and their mul-
tilingual alignment.

1 Introduction

Although many Natural Language Processing
(NLP) applications can be developed by using ex-
isting corpora, there are many areas where NLP
could be useful if there was a suitable corpus avail-
able. For example, Multimodal Machine Transla-
tion and Crosslingual Image Description Genera-
tion tasks 2 are becoming interested in developing
methods that can use not only the texts but also
their relations with images. Such information can
neither be obtained from standard computer vision
data sets such as the COREL collection 3nor from
NLP collections such as Europarl 4 (Koehn, 2005).
Similarly, although the image near a text article on
a website may provide cues about finding more

1euronews.com
2 statmt.org/wmt16/multimodal-task.html
3 The COREL Database for COntent

based image REtrievaL https://sites.
google.com/site/dctresearch/Home/
content-based-image-retrieval

4www.statmt.org/europarl/

monolingual and multilingual comparable docu-
ments and information on the same topic of the
article. We therefore set out to collect a corpus of
images aligned with simple full-sentence texts in
different languages.

This paper describes our experiences with ac-
quising and aligning multimodal data. Although
we did not set out to run a scientific experiment
comparing different strategies of how to collect
images and texts, our experience points towards
certain recommendations for how to collect data
for computer vision and NLP domains from news
websites such Euronews.

2 Building Multimodal and Multilingual
Corpus

The construction of a multilingual corpus for the
use in a NLP application typically takes five steps:

(i) obtain the raw data (e.g., web pages)

(ii) align the articles (document alignment)

(iii) extract the texts

(iv) prepare the corpus for NLP applications
(normalisation, tokenisation)

(v) map sentences/phrases in one language sen-
tences in the other language (parallel data ex-
traction) In the following, we will describe in
detail the acquisition of the Euronews corpus
from the website of Euronews.

In this work, data is extracted from the avail-
able news (image and text modalities) on the Eu-
ronews website.5 Figure 1 shows an example of
multimodal comparable data coming from the Eu-
ronews website. An image source of a political
news item and its text version – both in English

5http://www.euronews.com

11



Figure 1: Example of comparable documents from the Euronews Web site.

– are available along with the equivalent news in
French (image and text modalities). These doc-
uments can be used to extract comparable docu-
ments and parallel data.

Euronews web site clusters news into several
categories including languages and sub-domains
(e.g. Sport, Politics, etc.). Table 2 shows the
statistics of our MMEuronews corpus created from
news article data from 2013, 2014 and 2105 in
9 languages including: fr(French), ar(Arabic),
en(English), de(German), es(Spanish), it(Italian),
tr(Turkish), ua(Ukrainian), and pt(Portuguese).

3 Aligning Comparable documents

3.1 Basic Idea

We propose an extension of the method described
in (Sennrich and Volk, 2010) to align our corpus.
The basic system architecture is described in Fig-
ure 2. We begin by removing the documents that
have very little contents in order to reduce the to-
tal number of all possible comparisons. Such doc-
uments are very rarely considered as candidates
for being comparable document because they con-
sist of only few sentences or words and it is ob-
served that in the reference for training data pro-
vided, these kind of documents are not included
in the reference set. Subsequently, we introduced
three methods as follows: (i) sentence-level scor-
ing, (ii) word-level scoring, and (iii) named entity
(NE)-based scoring.

Finally we added these three scores to select
the 1-best target document which has the highest
value.

Figure 2: Architecture of comparable alignment
system alignment

12



Language en fr ar de es it pt tr ua Total
# Articles 40421 39663 36836 37293 37218 36970 36854 37291 37021 339 567

Table 1: Size of the Euronews transcribed English audio corpus and English-French texts.

3.2 Sentence based scoring

Since there are a large number of source and tar-
get documents especially in the domains with with
a large amount of documents, we have to re-
strict the comparison process only to the source-
target document pairs that have close sentence-
length ratio. Otherwise they are very less likely
to be comparable documents. It is necessary since
comparing each source with each target document
would result in an undesirably large number of
comparisons(m ∗ n, with m and n being the total
number of source and target documents, respec-
tively in a specific domain) and therefore very long
time for the whole computation even for a single
domain. Let us assume that Ss and St are num-
ber of sentences in source and target document re-
spectively. Assuming this we follow very simple
formula to calculate source-target sentence-length
ratio(SLR) as follows:

SLR =
Min(Ss, St)
Max(Ss, St)

(1)

We construct this equation in order to confine
the value between 0 and 1 which implies that if
either of source and target document has no sen-
tences, SLR will be 0 and 1 if they have same num-
ber of sentences. Therefore, a value of 1 or even
very close to it has positive indication towards be-
ing comparable but this is not the only requirement
as there are many documents with same or nearly
same number of sentences. Due to this reason, we
consider word and NE-based scorings in sections
3.4 and 3.5 respectively.

3.3 Word based scoring

The reason behind using this method is very sim-
ilar to the method discussed in Section 3.2 except
that it is used at word level. Let us assume that Ws
and Wt are number of words in source and target
documents respectively. Hence our equation for
calculating source-target word-length ratio(WLR)
becomes:

WLR =
Min(Ws, Wt)
Max(Ws, Wt)

(2)

3.4 NE-based scoring

After a linguistic study on the comparable docu-
ments, we found that looking for NEs present in
both source and target documents can be a good
way to select the 1-best target document. We ex-
tracted NEs from all the documents to be com-
pared and calculate the percentage of source NE
matches(PSNM ) with target NEs.

However, in many cases a source and a target
documents can have huge difference in number of
NEs. For example, if a source document has 5
and a target document has 50 NEs respectively and
all of the source NEs match with target NEs, it is
probably a bad idea to simply calculate PSNM and
add to the sentence-based and to the word-based
scores. Due to this reason we consider the source-
target-NE-length ratio (NELR) and multiplied it
with PSNM . Hence the weight of PSNM is de-
creased from 100% to 10% which is a result from
depending upon NLR. Henceforth, the NE-based
score(NESC) is described as:

NESC = PSNM ∗ NLR (3)

3.5 Combining all scores

We propose to re-rank our possible alignments
based on adding sentence, word and NE-based
scores and call this as alignment-score (ASC)

ASC = SLR + WLR + NESC (4)

Using equation 4 we calculate scores for each
document pairs in comparison and retain the 1-
best pair that has the maximum value.

4 Results

The results are given in Table 2. Each row in
the table contains three numerical values that rep-
resent (from left to right) the total numbers of
source-language, target-language and aligned doc-
ument pairs, respectively. As we can see, we are
successfully aligning images and texts in 8 pair of
languages. We produced a total of more than 288k
of bilingual aligned multimodal documents. Our
corpus, alignment model and code will be made

13



Documents # Source # Target # Aligned
En-Ar 40421 36836 35761
En-De 40421 37293 36114
En-Es 40421 37218 36178
En-Fr 40421 37293 36762
En-It 40421 36970 36003
En-Pt 40421 36854 35863
En-Tr 40421 37291 35901
En-Ua 40421 37021 35922
Total 288 504

Table 2: Results of bilingual aligned image-text
MMEuronews data used in our experiments.

publicly for the computer vision and NLP com-
munity.

5 Related Work on Document Alignment

In the “Big Data” world that we now live in, it is
widely believed that there is no better data than
more data (e.g. Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier
(2013)). In line with this idea, many works use the
Web as resource for building corpus for document
alignment and parallel text extraction tasks. How-
ever, the extensive literature related to the problem
of exploiting comparable corpora takes a some-
what different perspective than we do in this pa-
per.

Typically, comparable corpora do not have any
information regarding document pair similarity.
They are made of many documents in one lan-
guage which do not have any corresponding trans-
lated document in the other language. Further-
more, when the documents are paired, they are not
literal translations one of each other. Thus, ex-
tracting parallel data from such corpora requires
special algorithms.

Many works use the Web as a comparable cor-
pus. An adaptive approach, proposed by Zhao
and Vogel (2002), aims at mining parallel sen-
tences from a bilingual comparable news collec-
tion collected from the Web. A maximum likeli-
hood criterion was used by combining sentence-
length models with lexicon-based models. The
translation lexicon is iteratively updated using the
mined parallel data to obtain better vocabulary
coverage and translation probability estimation.
Resnik and Smith (2003) propose a web-mining-
based system called STRAND and show that their
approach is able to find large numbers of similar
document pairs. In (Yang and Li, 2003), an align-

ment method is presented at different levels (title,
word and character) based on dynamic program-
ming (DP). The goal is to identify one-to-one title
pairs in an English–Chinese corpus collected from
the Web. They apply the longest common sub-
sequence to find the most reliable Chinese trans-
lation of an English word.

One of the main methods relies on cross-lingual
information retrieval (CLIR), with different tech-
niques for transferring the request into the target
language (using a bilingual dictionary or a full
SMT system). Utiyama and Isahara (2003) use
CLIR techniques and DP to extract sentences from
an English–Japanese comparable corpus. They
identify similar article pairs, and having consid-
ered them as parallel texts, then align sentences
using a sentence-pair similarity score and use DP
to find the least-cost alignment over the document
pair. (Munteanu and Marcu, 2005) use a bilin-
gual lexicon to translate some of the words of the
source sentence. These translations are then used
to query the database to find matching translations
using IR techniques.

There have been only a few studies trying to in-
vestigate the formal quantification of how similar
two comparable documents are. Li and Gaussier
(2010) presented one of the first works on develop-
ing a comparability measure based on the expecta-
tion of finding translation word pairs in the corpus.
Our approach follows this line of work based on a
method developed by Sennrich and Volk (2010).

6 Conclusion

Despite the fact that many researchers have inves-
tigated the use of comparable corpora to generate
initial training data for NLP, we still have a lack of
corpus in different modalities.

In this paper, we seek to build a corpus that
combine aligned images and texts in different lan-
guages. We use Euronews website as source of our
crawled raw data. We propose a new techniques to
align bilingual documents. Our method is based
on Matched source-to-target sentence/words and
Named Entity scoring.

Given this promising result, in future work we
would like to add more language pairs and data
to our corpus. In addition, we wish to investigate
its utility to improve the extraction of parallel data
from multilingual comparable corpora. We plan,
also, to develop a new model for building embed-
dings that are both multilingual and multimodal.

14



Finally, we hope that the availability of this kind
of resources (corpora, tools) continues to make
computer vision and NLP an exciting and produc-
tive fields.

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by Science Foun-
dation Ireland through ADAPT Centre (Grant
13/RC/2106) (www.adaptcentre.ie) at Dublin City
University.

References

Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. Proceedings of
MT Summit.

Li, B. and Gaussier, E. (2010). Improving corpus
comparability for bilingual lexicon extraction
from comparable corpora. In Proceedings of
the 23rd International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (Coling 2010),, pages 644–
652.

Mayer-Schönberger, V. and Cukier, K. (2013). Big
data: A revolution that will transform how we
live, work, and think. In London: Hodder &
Stoughton.

Munteanu, D. S. and Marcu, D. (2005). Improving
Machine Translation Performance by Exploit-
ing Non-Parallel Corpora. Computational Lin-
guistics, 31(4):477–504.

Resnik, P. and Smith, N. A. (2003). The web as a
parallel corpus. Comput. Linguist., 29:349–380.

Sennrich, R. and Volk, M. (2010). Mt-based sen-
tence alignment for ocr-generated parallel texts.
In The Ninth Conference of the Association for
Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA
2010).

Utiyama, M. and Isahara, H. (2003). Reliable
measures for aligning japanese-english news ar-
ticles and sentences. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ’03, pages
72–79.

Yang, C. C. and Li, K. W. (2003). Automatic con-
struction of english/chinese parallel corpora. J.
Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 54:730–742.

Zhao, B. and Vogel, S. (2002). Adaptive paral-
lel sentences mining from web bilingual news
collection. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Data Mining, ICDM
’02, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer
Society.

15


