



















































Can We Create a Tool for General Domain Event Analysis?


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 192–201,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

Can We Create a Tool for General Domain Event Analysis?
Siim Orasmaa

Institute of Computer Science,
University of Tartu

siim.orasmaa@ut.ee

Heiki-Jaan Kaalep
Institute of Computer Science,

University of Tartu
heiki-jaan.kaalep@ut.ee

Abstract

This study outlines a question about the
possibility of creation of a tool for general
domain event analysis. We provide rea-
sons for assuming that a TimeML-based
event modelling could be a suitable ba-
sis for general domain event modelling.
We revise and summarise Estonian ef-
forts on TimeML analysis, both at auto-
matic analysis and human analysis, and
provide an overview of the current chal-
lenges/limitations of applying a TimeML
model in an extensive corpus annotation.
We conclude with a discussion on reduc-
ing complexity of the (TimeML-based)
event model.

1 Introduction

It has been hypothesised in language comprehen-
sion research that human understanding of natu-
ral language involves a mental representation of
events (situations) described in texts (Zwaan and
Radvansky, 1998). As many texts can be inter-
preted as stories/narratives that are decomposable
into events, the hypothesis gains further support
from research in communication (Fisher, 1984)
and in computer science (Winston, 2011), which
emphasises the importance of the capability of un-
derstanding stories/narratives in natural language
understanding. Following this, a creation of an
automatic tool that analyses texts for events and
their characteristics (e.g. participants and circum-
stances of events) can be seen as a prerequisite for
applications involving text understanding, such as
automatic question answering and summarisation.
Furthermore, considering the vast amount of infor-
mation created in online news media on daily ba-
sis, one can argue for a clear need of such tool, as it
would help to provide a human intuitive overview
(e.g. focusing on questions who did what, when
and where?) on what is reported in online media
(Vossen et al., 2014).

Since the Message Understanding Conferences
(MUC) and the initiation of information extrac-

tion (IE) research, numerous works have attacked
the problem from a domain-specific side, focus-
ing on automatic analysis of specific “events of
interest”. Following Cunningham (2005), this is
due to automatic analysis of complex information
(such as events) requires restricting focus to a spe-
cific domain (on specific events) to maintain an ac-
ceptable performance level. However, a thread of
research, initiated by TimeML—a framework for
time-oriented event analysis—(Pustejovsky et al.,
2003a), suggests a possibility that event analysis
(the annotation of events in texts) could be con-
sidered as an extensive automatic language anal-
ysis task approachable in a general domain man-
ner, “not restricted to a specific domain” (Saurı́
et al., 2005). The TimeML-driven fine-grained
(word- and phrase-level) event analysis has gained
increasing research interest ever since, with the
analysis being conducted for different languages
(Bittar, 2010; Xue and Zhou, 2010; Caselli et al.,
2011; Yaghoobzadeh et al., 2012), tested in several
text domains (Pustejovsky et al., 2003b; Bethard
et al., 2012; Galescu and Blaylock, 2012) and
sub-domains (Bittar, 2010), and extended beyond
time-oriented analysis and towards generic event
analysis (Bejan and Harabagiu, 2008; Moens et
al., 2011; Cybulska and Vossen, 2013; Fokkens
et al., 2013). However, the question whether this
thread of research should lead to a creation of a
tool for general-domain automatic event analy-
sis—a tool allowing similar extensive automatic
analysis as grammatical level analysis tools (part-
of-speech tagging, morphological analysis and
syntactic parsing) allow—has not been outlined.

The current work outlines this question, revises
and summarises the Estonian efforts on TimeML-
based text annotation, both on automatic anno-
tation (Orasmaa, 2012) and human annotation
(Orasmaa, 2014a; Orasmaa, 2014b), and inter-
prets the results in the context of creation of
a tool for general domain event analysis (Oras-
maa, 2016). As the human performance (inter-
annotator agreement) on text analysis can be seen
as an upper limit for what automatic analysis can

192



achieve, this provides an overview of current chal-
lenges/limitations of applying a TimeML model in
an extensive corpus annotation. Observing these
limitations, we also discuss a simplified model that
could be explored in the future: a model that ap-
proximates event annotations to syntactic predi-
cates, and focuses straightforwardly on the anno-
tation of (temporal) relations, without the decom-
position of the task.

This paper has the following structure. The next
section gives a very general outline to the problem
of event analysis, and also the motivation to pursue
the problem from the perspective of time-oriented
analysis. Section 3 introduces the TimeML model,
and gives reasons why it could be considered as
a suitable basis for general domain event model.
Section 4 gives details on the basic assumptions
in TimeML markup, and also revises the Esto-
nian experience in contrast to these assumptions.
Subsections of Section 4 focus on event mention,
temporal relation and temporal expression anno-
tation. Finally, Section 5 provides a discussion on
reducing the complexity of (TimeML-based) event
model, and a conclusion that attempts to put the
time-oriented event modelling to a broader per-
spective.

2 The Problem of Event Analysis

Although not often emphasised, “the definition
of an “event” is ill-defined” in Natural Language
Processing (Bracewell, 2015), and the research
progress on event analysis has been hindered by
“linguistic and ontological complexity” of events
(Nothman, 2013). The struggle with the defini-
tion of “event” can also be encountered in other
fields, notably in philosophy, where “there is sig-
nificant disagreement concerning the precise na-
ture” of events (Casati and Varzi, 2014). In phi-
losophy, important characteristics of events could
be outlined, perhaps, only when contrasting events
against “entities from other metaphysical cate-
gories”, such as objects, facts, properties, and
times (Casati and Varzi, 2014).

Despite the lack of common theoretical under-
standing on the concept of event, ever-growing
volumes of digital and digitised natural language
texts provide a motivation to pursue the research
on event analysis. As our understanding of natural
language texts can be seen as residing in under-
standing the ”eventive” meanings encoded in texts
(Zwaan and Radvansky, 1998), successes in au-

tomatic event analysis promise to open up more
human-intuitive ways of automatically organising
and summarising large volumes of texts, e.g. pro-
viding an overview about events described in on-
line news media (Vossen et al., 2014).

While choosing a strong theoretical basis for
a tool for automatic analysis of events is rather
difficult, one could note that there seems to be
an agreement among philosophers that events are
generally related to time (“events /- - -/ have rela-
tively vague spatial boundaries and crisp temporal
boundaries”) (Casati and Varzi, 2014). Verbs—
a linguistic category most commonly associated
with events—often convey markers of temporal
meaning at the grammatical level, e.g. Estonian
verb tenses provide a general distinction between
past and present. Furthermore, some influential
theoretical works have generalised from lexical
and grammatical properties of verbs to models of
time: Reichenbach argued that tenses of verbs can
be abstracted to the level of temporal relations
(Reichenbach, 1947), and Vendler proposed that
verbs can be classified by their temporal proper-
ties (Vendler, 1957). This does suggest that it is
reasonable to start out approaching general do-
main event analysis focusing on modelling tem-
poral characteristics of events in natural language,
and this is also the approach used in the TimeML
framework (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a).

3 TimeML as a Base Model for
General-domain Event Analysis

TimeML (and also its revised version:
ISO-TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2010)) proposes
a fine-grained (word- and phrase-level) approach
to event analysis: firstly, event-denoting words,
such as verbs (e.g. meet), nouns (e.g. meeting)
and adjectives (e.g. (be) successful), and temporal
expressions (such as on 1st of February or from
Monday morning) are annotated in text, and then,
temporal relations holding between events, and
also between events and temporal expressions
are marked. For example, a TimeML annotation
would formalise that the sentence “After the
meeting, they had a lunch at a local gourmet
restaurant” expresses temporal precedence: the
event of meeting happened before the event of
lunch.

One can argue that TimeML’s approach is a par-
ticularly suitable basis for a general-domain event
analysis for the following reasons:

193



• TimeML’s event is ”simply something that
can be related to another event or temporal
expression”, and, given this very generic def-
inition, a TimeML-compliant event represen-
tation could be used for ”different genres,
styles, domains, and applications” (Puste-
jovsky et al., 2010);

• In TimeML, only a word that best represents
the event is annotated in text (Xue and Zhou,
2010), without the full mark up / analysis
of event’s argument structure (except time-
related arguments: temporal expressions).
Following Cunningham (2005), there is a
trade-off between an event model’s complex-
ity and its general applicability: an accu-
rate automatic analysis of an event’s com-
plex argument structure requires focusing on
a specific domain; however, TimeML’s light-
weight commitment to modelling argument
structure does suggest a possibility that an
accurate analysis could be extended beyond
specific domains;

• TimeML follows a principle that in case of
complex syntactic structures, only the head of
a construction is annotated as an event men-
tion (Saurı́ et al., 2009). As Robaldo et al.
(2011) argue, this makes it particularily fea-
sible to build TimeML annotations upon (de-
pendency) syntactic structures. In case of
a successful grounding of event annotations
on syntactic structures, one could inherit the
general domain analysis capabilities from a
syntactic analysis;

• The extensions and derivations of TimeML
event model indicate its potential as a generic
event model. For instance, TimeML-based
event models have been enriched with ad-
ditional relations holding between events,
such as subevent and causal relations (Be-
jan and Harabagiu, 2008) and spatial rela-
tions (Pustejovsky et al., 2011). A TimeML-
derived model has been extended with other
generic arguments, referring to participants
and locations of events, resulting in a four
component event model (expressing seman-
tics: who did what, when and where?)
(Fokkens et al., 2013; Cybulska and Vossen,
2013).

Considering the aforementioned reasons, we as-

sumed in this work that a TimeML model is a suit-
able basis for developing a general domain event
analysis tool.

4 Estonian Experience

In the next subsections, we will discuss the Es-
tonian experience on adapting the TimeML anno-
tation framework. Data and experimental results
we use as a basis are from Estonian TimeML-
annotated corpus (Orasmaa, 2014b; Orasmaa,
2014a).1 The corpus has the following character-
istics important to our study:

• The corpus is fully annotated by three inde-
pendent annotators (2 annotators per text),
thus it can be used for retrospective inter-
annotator agreement studies. Human agree-
ments on analysis indicate the possible upper
limits that automatic analysis could achieve;

• The corpus builds upon manually corrected
morphological and dependency syntactic an-
notations of Estonian Dependency Treebank
(Muischnek et al., 2014), thus it can be used
for studying how well event annotations can
be grounded on (gold standard) grammatical
annotations;

• The corpus is compiled from news domain
texts and covers different sub-genres of news,
including local and foreign news, sports, and
economy news. Given the heterogeneity of
news texts, we assume the corpus is varied
enough for using it as a testbed for a general
domain event modelling;

In the current work, the inter-annotator agreement
experiments on the corpus are revised, and the re-
sults are interpreted in the context of creation of a
tool for general domain event analysis.

In addition, we also discuss Estonian experi-
ence on automatic temporal expression tagging:
we contrast the Estonian results (Orasmaa, 2012)
with the state-of-the-art results in English, and
open up a discussion on the theoretical scope of
TimeML’s concept of temporal expression.

4.1 The Annotation of Event Mentions
Assumptions. TimeML assumes that before one
can capture semantics of events in text, e.g. the
temporal ordering of events and the placement

1The corpus is available at: https://github.com/
soras/EstTimeMLCorpus (Last accessed: 2017-01-13)

194



on a timeline, one needs to establish a consis-
tent event mention annotation, upon which se-
mantic relation annotation can be built. At the lin-
guistic level, the range of potential event-denoting
units is assumed to be wide, covering “tensed or
untensed verbs, nominalizations, adjectives, pred-
icative clauses, or prepositional phrases” (Puste-
jovsky et al., 2003a).

When examining more closely, however, one
could note that TimeML’s modelling of events is
leaning towards the verb category. Firstly, the
guidelines (Saurı́ et al., 2009) instruct to mark up
surface-grammatical attributes for characterising
the event, and most of these attributes describe
verb-related (or verb phrase related) properties
(e.g. tense, aspect2, polarity, or modality). For in-
stance, the attribute modality indicates whether the
event mention is in the scope of a modal auxiliary,
such as may, must, should. Secondly, if we make
a rough generalisation from English TimeML an-
notation guidelines (Saurı́ et al., 2006; Saurı́ et al.,
2009) , with an admitted loss of some specific de-
tails, it appears that: 1) most of the annotation of
non-verb event mentions focuses on nouns, adjec-
tives and pre-positions; 2) out of the three parts-of-
speech, only noun annotations cover a wide range
of syntactic positions, as event mention annota-
tions on adjectives and prepositions are limited to
predicative complement positions.

Considering this rough outline of the TimeML
event model, it is interesting to ask, how well does
one extend the annotation of event mentions be-
yond the category of verbs, which could be con-
sidered as a “prototypical” category for event men-
tions. The Estonian TimeML-annotated corpus al-
lows us to examine this question more closely.

Estonian experience. The Estonian TimeML
annotation project aimed for a relatively extensive
event mention annotation, attempting to maximise
the coverage on syntactic contexts interpretable
as “eventive”. The corpus was created on top of
a gold standard grammatical annotations, and it
contains (independent) annotations of three differ-
ent human annotators. Thus, the corpus allows
to take out grammatically constrained subsets of
event mention annotations, and to study the inter-
annotator agreements on these subsets.

Table 1 shows how the inter-annotator agree-

2Note that not all languages have the grammatical aspect
as a property of the verb, and this is also the case with Esto-
nian.

ment and the coverage on event mention annota-
tions changes when the annotations are extended
beyond prototypically “eventive” syntactic con-
texts. The highest agreement, F1-score 0.982,
was obtained in covering syntactic predicates with
event mention annotations. The syntactic predi-
cate consists of the root node of the syntactic tree
(mostly a finite verb), and, in some cases, also its
dependents: an auxiliary verb (in case of negation)
or a finite verb (e.g. in case of modal verb con-
structions, where an infinite verb dominates the
modal finite verb). The agreement remained rel-
atively high (F1-score 0.943) if all verbs, regard-
less of their syntactic function, were allowed to be
annotated as event mentions. However, including
part-of-speech categories other than verbs in the
event model caused decrease in agreements, and
the largest decrease (F1-score falling to 0.832) was
noted if nouns were included as event mentions.
The high-agreement model (verbs as event men-
tions) covered only ∼65% of all event mentions
annotated, and obtaining a high coverage (more
than 90% of all event annotations) required the
inclusion of the problematic noun category in the
model.

4.2 Enriching Event Annotations: Providing
Temporal Relation Annotations

Assumptions. Temporal semantics of events in
text can be conveyed both by explicit and implicit
means. Main explicit temporality indicators are
verb tense, temporal relationship adverbials (e.g.
before, after or until), and explicit time-referring
expressions (e.g. on Monday at 3 p.m.). The inter-
pretation of implicit temporal information usually
requires world knowledge (e.g. knowledge about
typical ordering of events), and/or applying tem-
poral inference (inferring new relations based on
existing ones).

It is stated that the ultimate goal of TimeML
annotation is to capture/encode all temporal re-
lations in text, “regardless of whether the rela-
tion is explicitly signaled or not” (Verhagen et al.,
2009). The TempEval-1 and TempEval-2 evalua-
tion campaigns (Verhagen et al., 2009; Verhagen
et al., 2010) have approached this goal by divid-
ing the task into smaller subtasks, and by provid-
ing systematic (relatively extensive in the cover-
age) annotations for these subtasks. Notably in

3In cases of counting EVENT coverage, each token with
a unique position in text was counted once, regardless of how
many different annotators had annotated it.

195



EVENT subset description EVENT
coverage3

IAA on
EVENT
extent

syntactic predicates 57.16% 0.982
verbs 65.18% 0.943
verbs and adjectives 70.18% 0.916
verbs and nouns 93.69% 0.832
verbs, adjectives and nouns 98.64% 0.815
all syntactic contexts 100.0% 0.809

Table 1: How the annotation coverage and inter-annotator agreement (F1-score) changed when extending
EVENT annotations beyond (syntactic predicates and) verbs. Gold standard grammatical annotations
were used as a guide in selecting subsets of EVENT annotations provided by three independent human
annotators, and inter-annotator agreements and coverages (of all EVENT annotations provided by the
annotators) were measured on these subsets. This is a revised version of the experiment firstly reported
by Orasmaa (2014b).

TempEval-2, the relation annotations were guided
by syntactic relations, e.g. one of the subtasks re-
quired the identification of temporal relations be-
tween two events in all contexts where one event
mention syntactically governed another.

Estonian experience. Following the TempEval-
2 (Verhagen et al., 2010) example, the Estonian
TimeML annotation project split the temporal re-
lation annotation into syntactically guided sub-
tasks, and attempted to provide a relatively ex-
tensive/systematic annotation in these subtasks.
However, the resulting inter-annotator agreements
showed that approaching the task in this way is
very difficult: on deciding the type of temporal re-
lation, the observed agreement was 0.474, and the
chance-corrected agreement (Cohen’s kappa) was
even lower: 0.355.

Still, the systematic coverage of the tempo-
ral annotations and the availability of gold stan-
dard syntactic annotations enabled us to inves-
tigate whether there existed grammatically con-
strained subsets of annotations exhibiting higher
than average agreements. It was hypothesised that
the human agreements were affected by explicit
temporal cues: verb tenses encoded in morphol-
ogy and temporal expressions syntactically gov-
erned by verb event mentions4. Table 2 shows
how the quality of temporal relation annotation,
measured in terms of the proportion of VAGUE re-
lations used by annotators and the inter-annotator
agreement, was affected by the presence of these

4Important explicit cues would also be temporal relation-
ship adverbials, such as before or until, however, these tem-
poral signals were not annotated in the Estonian corpus.

explicit temporal cues.

EVENT
subset de-
scription

Proportion
of VAGUE
relations

Avg
ACC

Avg κ

EVENTs in
simple past
tense

3.5% 0.574 0.333

EVENTs in
present tense

28.5% 0.43 0.271

EVENTs
governing
TIMEX

4.04% 0.607 0.476

EVENTs not
governing any
TIMEX

21.1% 0.447 0.291

Table 2: How presence of explicit temporal cues
affected the quality of manual temporal relation
annotation. The quality was measured in terms of
the proportion of VAGUE relations used by anno-
tators, and the average inter-annotator agreement
(accuracy and Cohen’s kappa) on specifying tem-
poral relation type. This is a revised version of the
experiment firstly reported by Orasmaa (2014a).

The results showed that the presence of tem-
poral expressions contributed most to the inter-
annotator agreements: the observed agreement
rose to 0.607 (kappa to 0.476), and the usage of
VAGUE relations dropped to 4.04% (from 21.1%).
The morphologically encoded verb tense, how-
ever, provided to be an ambiguous indicator of
temporal semantics: simple past contributed to

196



making temporal relations more clearer for an-
notators, while the present tense contributed to
increased temporal vagueness. This can be ex-
plained by the Estonian simple past serving mostly
a single function—expressing what happened in
the past—, while the present tense is convention-
ally used to express temporal semantics of present,
future, recurrence, and genericity.

4.3 Annotation of Temporal Expressions

Assumptions. Temporal expressions are usually
seen as an important part of event’s structure, pro-
viding answers to questions such as when did the
event happen (e.g. on 2nd of February or on Mon-
day morning), how long did the event last (e.g. six
hours), or how often did the event happened (e.g.
three times a week)?

The research on temporal expression (TIMEX)
annotation has a long tradition, starting along
side with named entity recognition in the MUC
competitions (Nadeau and Sekine, 2007), where
the focus was mainly on mark-up of temporal
expression phrases, and leading to the annota-
tion schemes TIMEX2 (Ferro et al., 2005) and
TimeML’s TIMEX3 (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a),
where, in addition to the mark-up, also expres-
sions’ semantics are represented in a uniform for-
mat. The representation of semantics (normal-
isation) in TIMEX2 and TIMEX3 builds upon
a calendric time representation from the ISO
8601:1997 standard. It allows to encode mean-
ings of common date and time expressions (such
as on 20th of May, last Wednesday, or 12 minutes
after midday), as well as meanings of calendric ex-
pressions with fuzzy temporal boundaries (e.g. in
the summer of 2014, or at the end of May), and
generic references to past, present or future (e.g.
recently or now). The TimeML scheme assumes
a relatively clear separation between temporal ex-
pressions and event mentions, with the encoding
of semantics of temporal expressions being con-
sidered as a straightforward task, while the encod-
ing of semantics of event expressions being con-
sidered a complex task of involving mark-up of
events, temporal expressions, and temporal rela-
tions connecting them.

From the practical point of view, the TimeML
TIMEX3 scheme has proven to be relatively suc-
cessful if one considers performance levels of au-
tomatic approaches. A recent evaluation of au-
tomatic temporal expression tagging in news do-

main, TempEval-3 evaluation exercise (UzZaman
et al., 2013), reports 90.32% as the highest F1-
score on detecting temporal expressions in English
(82.71% as the highest F1-score for detection with
strict phrase boundaries), and 77.61% as the high-
est F1-score on the task involving both detection
and normalisation of expressions.

Estonian experience. A large-scale evaluation
of an Estonian TimeML-based automatic tempo-
ral expression tagger was reported by Orasmaa
(2012). We took the results on the news portion
of that evaluation (a corpus in size of approxi-
mately 49,000 tokens and 1,300 temporal expres-
sions), and recalculated precisions and recalls as
TempEval-3 compatible F1-scores. The resulting
scores are in the Table 3.

Subcorpus F1 F1
(strict)

normal-
isation
(F1)

Local news 89.38 84.19 80.98
Foreign news 91.83 88.44 85.68
Opinions 87.77 80.19 75.13
Sport 94.48 89.29 81.44
Economics 86.16 79.92 77.99
Culture 86.86 81.36 76.61
Total
(macro-average)

89.41 83.90 79.64

Table 3: The state-of-the-art performance of Es-
tonian automatic temporal expression tagging on
different subgenres of news. The scores are based
on precisions and recalls reported by Orasmaa
(2012), recalculated as TempEval-3 (UzZaman et
al., 2013) compatible F1-scores.

The results indicate that the performance levels
on automatic temporal expression tagging in En-
glish (UzZaman et al., 2013) and Estonian com-
pare rather well. Although the evaluation settings
are not fully comparable, the initial comparison
confirms the potential of the TimeML’s TIMEX3
scheme in enabling high accuracy general domain
automatic temporal expression tagging across dif-
ferent languages. From the theoretical point of
view, however, we note that there is a room
for a discussion on how well the information-
extraction-oriented approach of TimeML scheme
covers the language phenomenon.

The Grammar of Estonian (Erelt et al.,
1993) describes a linguistic category similar to
TimeML’s temporal expressions: temporal adver-
bials. Temporal adverbials also express occur-
rence times, durations and recurrences. While

197



Marşic (2012) states that temporal expressions
form “the largest subclass” of temporal adver-
bials, we note that in addition to the large over-
lap, the two categories also have notable differ-
ences. Temporal adverbials in The Grammar of
Estonian are syntactically restricted to sentence
constituents that modify the meaning of the main
verb or the sentence. Temporal expressions, on
the other hand, are not restricted to the syntactic
role of an adverbial, e.g. they can also modify
the meaning of a single constituent in the sentence,
such as the expression today in the phrase today’s
meeting. Semantically, the class of temporal ad-
verbials in The Grammar of Estonian is open: it
also includes time expressions with no explicit cal-
endric information (such as in a stressful era) and
event-denoting time expressions (such as since the
congress). This contrasts to TimeML’s informa-
tion extraction perspective that restricts the focus
mainly on temporal expressions conveying calen-
dric information.

5 Discussion

TimeML proposes a compositional approach to
event analysis: first event mentions should be
identified in text, and then, temporal semantics of
the events should be encoded via markup of tem-
poral relations.

It can be argued that temporal annotation in
TimeML is inherently a very complex task, even
for humans (Marşic, 2012), and that a high con-
sistency in the process may not come from a sin-
gle effort, but rather from an iterative annota-
tion development process. An iteration in this
process involves modelling the phenomenon, an-
notating texts manually according to the model,
performing machine learning experiments on the
annotations, and finally revising both the model
and the machine learning algorithms before start-
ing a new iteration (Pustejovsky and Moszkowicz,
2012; Pustejovsky and Stubbs, 2012). However,
the aforementioned strategy may still not be suffi-
cient to tackle the problem, as one could humbly
remind that problems related to natural language
understanding “have not been studied in linguis-
tics nor anywhere else in the systematic way that is
required to develop reliable annotation schemas”
(Zaenen, 2006).

Reversing the compositional approach of
TimeML, we can argue that a perceivable pres-
ence of explicit temporal information is actually

one important indicator of “eventiveness”: that
one can interpret text units as “event mentions”
with a high degree of certainty only in contexts
that allow to place events reliably on a time-line or
temporally order with respect to each other. How-
ever, the Estonian experience on manual annota-
tion indicates these contexts are not pervasive in
news texts, like the grammatically analysable con-
texts are. Rather, the evidence shows that higher
than average consistency can be obtained only in
certain syntactic contexts characterised by explicit
temporal cues, such as temporal expressions and
past-indicating verb tenses. This calls for a dis-
cussion for an alternative modeling of events, with
the aim of reducing the complexity of the model.

Studies of narratology propose that the seman-
tics of events have a lot to do with events’ rela-
tions to other events. One could even go as far
as to argue that events “become meaningful” only
“in series”, and “it is pointless to consider whether
or not an isolated fact is an event” (Bal, 1997).
This suggests that the perspective that considers a
single event as an atomic unit for analysis could
be revised, and events could be analysed in se-
ries from the beginning. A minimal unit to be
annotated/detected would then be a pair of events
connected by a relation, e.g. by a temporal or a
causal relation. Note that while the ultimate aim
of TimeML is capturing temporal relations, be-
cause of the decomposition of the task, someone
employing the framework could easily get stuck
with the problems of event mention annotation
(e.g. how to reliably ground the concept of event at
the grammatical level), and may be hindered from
reaching temporal relation annotation.

A simpler annotation model could focus di-
rectly on annotation of relations between text
units, without the decomposition of annotations
into events and relations. Before the creation of
TimeML, a similar idea was proposed by Katz and
Arosio (2001), who did not use event annotation
and simply marked temporal relations on verbs
in their annotation project. The Estonian annota-
tion experience also showed a high inter-annotator
agreement on verbs as event mentions, and the
highest agreement on syntactic predicates (main
verbs). This suggests that syntactic predicates
could be a reasonable (although, admittedly, very
rough) approximation for event mentions, and the
simple model involving mark-up of relations on
syntactic predicates could be the first one to be de-

198



veloped and tested out in a general domain analy-
sis, before developing more complex models, e.g.
adding nouns as event mentions.

Lefeuvre-Halftermeyer et al. (2016) make a
similar proposal to ”characterize eventualities not
at the text level, but on the syntactic structures
of a treebank”, i.e. to mark nodes in a syntactic
tree as event mentions. The benefit would be that
the syntactic structure would already approximate
the event structure, and (to an extent) would pro-
vide an access to event’s arguments without the
need for an explicit markup of event-argument re-
lations. However, the authors do not discuss re-
ducing the complexity of the event model, which,
in our view, would also be worth experimenting
with. Focusing straightforwardly on the annota-
tion of relations could enable more simple designs
both for human annotation and machine learning
experiments, which, in turn, could foster more
experimentation and, hopefully, improvements on
the current results.

In the markup of temporal relations, the Esto-
nian experience showed increased agreements and
also less vagueness in the contexts of temporal ex-
pressions. As the results of automatic temporal ex-
pression tagging in Estonian (reported in Table 3)
were also rather encouraging, indicating that sat-
isfactory practical performance levels (95% and
above) may not be very far from the reach, one
could argue for focusing future temporal relation
annotation efforts on contexts with temporal ex-
pressions, taking advantage of their high accuracy
pre-annotation.

However, contrasting TimeML-compatible
temporal expressions with temporal adverbials
distinguished in Estonian grammatical tradition
revealed that the TIMEX (TIMEX2, TIMEX3)
annotation standards have been, to a large extent,
“optimised” for capturing “calendric” temporal
expressions, i.e. expressions whose semantics can
be modeled in the calendar system. A syntax-
based view suggests that TimeML’s temporal
expressions do not cover non-calendric temporal
references and also event mentions appearing in
the syntactic positions of temporal adverbials. In-
stead, event mentions in TimeML are considered
as markables clearly separable from temporal
expressions.

If we are to step back, and attempt to put the
problem in a broader philosophical context, we
may note that historically, (calendric) temporal

expressions also originate from event mentions.
They refer to “major cyclic events of the human
natural environment on earth”, such as “the alter-
nation of light and dark, changes in the shape of
the moon, and changes in the path of the sun across
the sky (accompanied by marked climatic differ-
ences)” (Haspelmath, 1997). One could say that
(driven by the need for expressing time) the natu-
ral language has developed rather systematic and
relatively unambiguous ways for expressing “cal-
endric events”.

This may also offer an explanation why the
task of generic event analysis is so difficult to
establish—compared to the task of analysing “cal-
endric events” / temporal expressions. Tempo-
ral expression tagging builds on the part of hu-
man language usage that is already systematic, as
it is based on a well-defined conventional system
of time-keeping. Yet, it is still an open question
whether there is a similar convention of express-
ing ”events in general” in natural language, upon
which a systematic general-domain event analyser
can be built. While tending towards answering
this question, we believe that it is also worthwhile
to revise the existing event models for their com-
plexity, and to test out simpler models building
straightforwardly on the syntactic structure, and
centring them on the explicit temporal cues avail-
able in texts.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Estonian Ministry of
Education and Research (grant IUT 20-56 “Com-
putational models for Estonian”).

References
Mieke Bal. 1997. Narratology: Introduc-

tion to the Theory of Narrative. Univer-
sity of Toronto Press. https://archive.org/details/
BalNarratologyIntroductionToTheTheoryOfNarrative

(Date accessed: 2017-01-10).

Cosmin Adrian Bejan and Sanda M Harabagiu. 2008.
A Linguistic Resource for Discovering Event Struc-
tures and Resolving Event Coreference. In LREC.

Steven Bethard, Oleksandr Kolomiyets, and Marie-
Francine Moens. 2012. Annotating Story Time-
lines as Temporal Dependency Structures. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eight International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Is-
tanbul, Turkey, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

199



André Bittar. 2010. Building a TimeBank for French:
a Reference Corpus Annotated According to the
ISO-TimeML Standard. Ph.D. thesis, Université
Paris Diderot, Paris, France.

David B Bracewell. 2015. Long nights, rainy days, and
misspent youth: Automatically extracting and cate-
gorizing occasions associated with consumer prod-
ucts. SocialNLP 2015 @ NAACL, pages 29–38.

Roberto Casati and Achille Varzi. 2014. Events.
In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2014 edition.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2014/entries/events/
(Date accessed: 2017-01-20).

Tommaso Caselli, Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, Rachele
Sprugnoli, Emanuele Pianta, and Irina Prodanof.
2011. Annotating Events, Temporal Expressions
and Relations in Italian: the It-Timeml Experi-
ence for the Ita-TimeBank. In Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop, pages 143–151. The Association for
Computer Linguistics.

Hamish Cunningham. 2005. Information Extraction,
Automatic. Encyclopedia of Language and Linguis-
tics, 5:665–677.

Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2013. Semantic Re-
lations between Events and their Time, Locations
and Participants for Event Coreference Resolution.
In RANLP, pages 156–163.

Tiiu Erelt, Ülle Viks, Mati Erelt, Reet Kasik, Helle
Metslang, Henno Rajandi, Kristiina Ross, Henn
Saari, Kaja Tael, and Silvi Vare. 1993. Eesti
keele grammatika. 2., Süntaks (Grammar of Esto-
nian: The syntax). Tallinn: Eesti TA Keele ja Kir-
janduse Instituut.

Lisa Ferro, Laurie Gerber, Inderjeet Mani, Beth
Sundheim, and George Wilson. 2005. TIDES
2005 standard for the annotation of tempo-
ral expressions. https://www.ldc.upenn.
edu/sites/www.ldc.upenn.edu/files/
english-timex2-guidelines-v0.1.pdf
(Date accessed: 2017-01-15).

Walter R Fisher. 1984. Narration as a human commu-
nication paradigm: The case of public moral argu-
ment. Communications Monographs, 51(1):1–22.

Antske Fokkens, Marieke Van Erp, Piek Vossen, Sara
Tonelli, Willem Robert van Hage, Luciano Serafini,
Rachele Sprugnoli, and Jesper Hoeksema. 2013.
GAF: A grounded annotation framework for events.
In NAACL HLT, volume 2013, pages 11–20. Cite-
seer.

Lucian Galescu and Nate Blaylock. 2012. A corpus of
clinical narratives annotated with temporal informa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT Inter-
national Health Informatics Symposium, pages 715–
720. ACM.

Martin Haspelmath. 1997. From space to time: Tem-
poral adverbials in the world’s languages. Lincom
Europa.

Graham Katz and Fabrizio Arosio. 2001. The anno-
tation of temporal information in natural language
sentences. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Temporal and Spatial Information Processing, vol-
ume 13, pages 15–22. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Anaı̈s Lefeuvre-Halftermeyer, Jean-Yves Antoine,
Alain Couillault, Emmanuel Schang, Lotfi Abouda,
Agata Savary, Denis Maurel, Iris Eshkol-Taravella,
and Delphine Battistelli. 2016. Covering various
Needs in Temporal Annotation: a Proposal of Exten-
sion of ISO-TimeML that Preserves Upward Com-
patibility. In LREC 2016.

G. Marşic. 2012. Syntactically Motivated Task Def-
inition for Temporal Relation Identification. Spe-
cial Issue of the TAL (Traitement Automatique des
Langues) Journal on Processing of Temporal and
Spatial Information in Language - Traitement au-
tomatique des informations temporelles et spatiales
en langage naturel, vol. 53, no. 2:23–55.

Marie-Francine Moens, Oleksandr Kolomiyets,
Emanuele Pianta, Sara Tonelli, and Steven
Bethard. 2011. D3. 1: State-of-the-art and
design of novel annotation languages and tech-
nologies: Updated version. Technical report,
TERENCE project–ICT FP7 Programme–ICT-
2010-25410. http://www.terenceproject.
eu/c/document_library/get_file?p_l_id=
16136&folderId=12950&name=DLFE-1910.pdf
(Date accessed: 2017-01-15).

Kadri Muischnek, Kaili Müürisep, Tiina Puolakainen,
Eleri Aedmaa, Riin Kirt, and Dage Särg. 2014.
Estonian Dependency Treebank and its annotation
scheme. In Proceedings of 13th Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories (TLT13), pages 285–
291.

David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A sur-
vey of named entity recognition and classification.
Lingvisticae Investigationes, 30(1):3–26.

Joel Nothman. 2013. Grounding event references in
news. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Sydney.

Siim Orasmaa. 2012. Automaatne ajaväljendite tuvas-
tamine eestikeelsetes tekstides (Automatic Recogni-
tion and Normalization of Temporal Expressions in
Estonian Language Texts). Eesti Rakenduslingvis-
tika Ühingu aastaraamat, (8):153–169.

Siim Orasmaa. 2014a. How Availability of Explicit
Temporal Cues Affects Manual Temporal Relation
Annotation. In Human Language Technologies—
The Baltic Perspective: Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference Baltic HLT 2014, volume
268, pages 215–218. IOS Press.

200



Siim Orasmaa. 2014b. Towards an Integration of Syn-
tactic and Temporal Annotations in Estonian. In
LREC, pages 1259–1266.

Siim Orasmaa. 2016. Explorations of the Problem of
Broad-coverage and General Domain Event Analy-
sis: The Estonian Experience. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Tartu, Estonia.

James Pustejovsky and Jessica Moszkowicz. 2012.
The Role of Model Testing in Standards Develop-
ment: The Case of ISO-Space. In LREC, pages
3060–3063.

James Pustejovsky and Amber Stubbs. 2012. Nat-
ural Language Annotation for Machine Learning.
O’Reilly Media, Inc.

James Pustejovsky, José Castaño, Robert Ingria, Roser
Saurı́, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and Gra-
ham Katz. 2003a. TimeML: Robust specification of
event and temporal expressions in text. In Fifth In-
ternational Workshop on Computational Semantics
(IWCS-5).

James Pustejovsky, Patrick Hanks, Roser Sauri, An-
drew See, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer,
Dragomir Radev, Beth Sundheim, David Day, Lisa
Ferro, et al. 2003b. The TimeBank corpus. In Cor-
pus Linguistics, volume 2003, pages 647–656.

James Pustejovsky, Kiyong Lee, Harry Bunt, and Lau-
rent Romary. 2010. ISO-TimeML: An International
Standard for Semantic Annotation. In LREC.

James Pustejovsky, Jessica L Moszkowicz, and Marc
Verhagen. 2011. ISO-Space: The annotation of spa-
tial information in language. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Joint ISO-ACL SIGSEM Workshop on Interop-
erable Semantic Annotation, pages 1–9.

Hans Reichenbach. 1947. Elements of symbolic logic.
Macmillan Co.

Livio Robaldo, Tommaso Caselli, Irene Russo, and
Matteo Grella. 2011. From Italian text to TimeML
document via dependency parsing. In Computa-
tional Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 177–187. Springer.

Roser Saurı́, Robert Knippen, Marc Verhagen, and
James Pustejovsky. 2005. Evita: a robust event rec-
ognizer for QA systems. In Proceedings of the con-
ference on Human Language Technology and Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 700–707. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Roser Saurı́, Jessica Littman, Robert Gaizauskas,
Andrea Setzer, and James Pustejovsky. 2006.
TimeML annotation guidelines, version 1.2.1.
http://www.timeml.org/publications/
timeMLdocs/annguide_1.2.1.pdf (Date ac-
cessed: 2017-01-20).

Roser Saurı́, Lotus Goldberg, Marc Verhagen, and
James Pustejovsky. 2009. Annotating Events in
English. TimeML Annotation Guidelines.
http://www.timeml.org/tempeval2/
tempeval2-trial/guidelines/
EventGuidelines-050409.pdf (Date accessed:
2017-01-15).

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczyn-
ski, Marc Verhagen, James Allen, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 1: TEMPEVAL-
3: Evaluating Time Expressions, Events, and
Temporal Relations. http://derczynski.com/
sheffield/papers/tempeval-3.pdf
(Date accessed: 2017-01-15).

Zeno Vendler. 1957. Verbs and times. The philosophi-
cal review, pages 143–160.

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Jessica Moszkowicz, and James
Pustejovsky. 2009. The TempEval challenge: iden-
tifying temporal relations in text. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, 43(2):161–179.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Sauri, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 task 13:
TempEval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th international
workshop on semantic evaluation, pages 57–62. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Piek Vossen, German Rigau, Luciano Serafini, Pim
Stouten, Francis Irving, and Willem Robert Van
Hage. 2014. Newsreader: recording history from
daily news streams. In Proceedings of the 9th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May 26-31.

Patrick Henry Winston. 2011. The Strong Story Hy-
pothesis and the Directed Perception Hypothesis. In
Pat Langley, editor, Technical Report FS-11-01, Pa-
pers from the AAAI Fall Symposium, pages 345–352,
Menlo Park, CA. AAAI Press.

Nianwen Xue and Yuping Zhou. 2010. Apply-
ing Syntactic, Semantic and Discourse Constraints
in Chinese Temporal Annotation. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages 1363–1372,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Gholamreza Ghassem-Sani,
Seyed Abolghasem Mirroshandel, and Mahbaneh
Eshaghzadeh. 2012. ISO-TimeML Event Extrac-
tion in Persian Text. In COLING, pages 2931–2944.

Annie Zaenen. 2006. Mark-up barking up the wrong
tree. Computational Linguistics, 32(4):577–580.

Rolf A Zwaan and Gabriel A Radvansky. 1998. Situ-
ation models in language comprehension and mem-
ory. Psychological Bulletin, 123(2):162.

201


