



















































The RepEval 2017 Shared Task: Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference with Sentence Representations


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Evaluating Vector-Space Representations for NLP, pages 1–10,
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The RepEval 2017 Shared Task:
Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference with Sentence Representations

Nikita Nangia1
nikitanangia@nyu.edu

Adina Williams2
adinawilliams@nyu.edu

Angeliki Lazaridou3
angeliki@deepmind.com

Samuel R. Bowman1,2
bowman@nyu.edu

1Center for Data Science
New York University

2Department of Linguistics
New York University

3DeepMind

Abstract

This paper presents the results of the
RepEval 2017 Shared Task, which eval-
uated neural network sentence represen-
tation learning models on the Multi-
Genre Natural Language Inference cor-
pus (MultiNLI) recently introduced by
Williams et al. (2017). All of the five
participating teams beat the bidirectional
LSTM (BiLSTM) and continuous bag
of words baselines reported in Williams
et al.. The best single model used stacked
BiLSTMs with residual connections to ex-
tract sentence features and reached 74.5%
accuracy on the genre-matched test set.
Surprisingly, the results of the competition
were fairly consistent across the genre-
matched and genre-mismatched test sets,
and across subsets of the test data rep-
resenting a variety of linguistic phenom-
ena, suggesting that all of the submit-
ted systems learned reasonably domain-
independent representations for sentence
meaning.

1 Introduction

The Second Workshop on Evaluating Vector
Space Representations for NLP (RepEval 2017)
features a shared task competition meant to evalu-
ate natural language understanding models based
on sentence encoders—that is, models that trans-
form sentences into fixed-length vector represen-
tations and reason using those representations.
Submitted systems are evaluated on the task of
natural language inference (NLI, also known as
recognizing textual entailment, or RTE) on the

Multi-Genre NLI corpus (MultiNLI; Williams
et al. 2017). Each example in the corpus con-
sists of a pair of sentences, and systems must pre-
dict whether the relationship between the two sen-
tences is entailment, neutral or contradiction in a
balanced three-way classification setting.

We selected the task of NLI with the intent to
evaluate as directly as possible the degree to which
each model can extract and manipulate distributed
representations of sentence meaning. In order for
a system to perform well at natural language in-
ference, it needs to handle nearly the full com-
plexity of natural language understanding,1 but its
framing as a sentence-pair classification problem
makes it suitable as an evaluation task for a broad
range of models, and avoids issues of sequence
generation, structured prediction, or memory ac-
cess that can complicate evaluation in other set-
tings.

The shared task includes two evaluations, a
standard in-domain (matched) evaluation in which
the training and test data are drawn from the same
sources, and a cross-domain (mismatched) eval-
uation in which the training and test data differ
substantially. This cross-domain evaluation tests
the ability of submitted systems to learn represen-
tations of sentence meaning that capture broadly
useful features.

This paper briefly introduces the task and
dataset, presents the rules and results of the com-
petition, and analyzes and compares the submitted
systems. All the submitted systems are broadly

1Entailment notably does not require a system to ground
its representations of sentence meaning to any outside repre-
sentational system, for better or worse. For related discussion
of entailment and natural language understanding see Chier-
chia and McConnell-Ginet (1991), Dagan et al. (2006), and
MacCartney (2009).

1



Met my first girlfriend that way. FACE-TO-FACE
contradiction

I didn’t meet my first girlfriend until later.

He turned and saw Jon sleeping in his half-tent. FICTION
entailment

He saw Jon was asleep.

8 million in relief in the form of emergency housing. GOVERNMENT
neutral

The 8 million dollars for emergency housing
was still not enough to solve the problem.

Now, as children tend their gardens, they have a new
appreciation of their relationship to the land, their
cultural heritage, and their community.

LETTERS
neutral

All of the children love working in their gar-
dens.

At 8:34, the Boston Center controller received a
third transmission from American 11

9/11
entailment

The Boston Center controller got a third trans-
mission from American 11.

In contrast, suppliers that have continued to inno-
vate and expand their use of the four practices, as
well as other activities described in previous chap-
ters, keep outperforming the industry as a whole.

OUP
contradiction

The suppliers that continued to innovate in their
use of the four practices consistently underper-
formed in the industry.

I am a lacto-vegetarian. SLATE
neutral

I enjoy eating cheese too much to abstain from
dairy.

someone else noticed it and i said well i guess that’s
true and it was somewhat melodious in other words
it wasn’t just you know it was really funny

TELEPHONE
contradiction

No one noticed and it wasn’t funny at all.

For more than 26 centuries it has witnessed count-
less declines, falls, and rebirths, and today contin-
ues to resist the assaults of brutal modernity in its
time-locked, color-rich historical center.

TRAVEL
entailment

It has been around for more than 26 centuries.

If you need this book, it is probably too late’ unless
you are about to take an SAT or GRE.

VERBATIM
contradiction

It’s never too late, unless you’re about to take a
test.

Table 1: Randomly chosen examples from each genre of the MultiNLI development set.

similar, and incorporate bidirectional recurrent
neural networks as a key component. We find that
all systems performed fairly well, outperforming
a simple bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM; Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) baseline. To our sur-
prise, no system performed dramatically worse on
the mismatched evaluation than on the matched
evaluation, and all systems performed reasonably
consistently across examples representing a range
of linguistic phenomena, suggesting that all were
able to produce systems for semantic representa-
tion which, while not perfect, were effective and
not tightly adapted to any particular style of lan-
guage or set of constructions.

2 Dataset

MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2017) consists of 393k
pairs of sentences from a broad range of genres of

written and spoken English, balanced across three
labels. Each premise sentence (the first sentence
in each pair) is derived from one of ten sources of
text, which constitute the ten genre sections of the
corpus. Each hypothesis sentence and pair label
was composed by a crowd worker in response to a
premise. MultiNLI was designed and collected in
the style of the Stanford NLI Corpus (SNLI; Bow-
man et al. 2015), but covers a broader range of
styles of text, rather than the relatively homoge-
neous captions used in SNLI.

Testing and development sets are available for
all genres, with 2000 examples per set per genre.
Only five genres have accompanying training sets.
So, for the matched development and test sets,
models are tested on examples derived from the
same sources as those in the training set, while for
the mismatched sets, the text source is not repre-

2



sented in the training data.
Table 1 presents example sentences from the

corpus and Table 2 presents some key statistics.
For a detailed discussion of the corpus, refer to
Williams et al. (2017).

3 Shared Task Competition

The purpose of the shard task is to evaluate tech-
niques for training and using sentence encoders.
To this end, we require that all models create
fixed-length vectors for each sentence with no
explicitly-imposed internal structure. Alignment
strategies like attention that pass information be-
tween the two encoders handling the two input
sentences in a pair are not allowed. Memory
models that represent sentences as variable-length
sets or sequences of vectors are also not permit-
ted. While systems that use methods like atten-
tion and structured memory are effective for NLI
(Rocktäschel et al., 2016; Wang and Jiang, 2016;
Chen et al., 2017a; Williams et al., 2017, i.a.),
much of the variation across models of this kind
lies in the way that they explicitly or implicitly
align related sentences, rather than the way that
they extract representations for sentences. As a re-
sult, we expect that focusing our evaluation on a
restricted subset of models will yield conclusions
that are more generally applicable to work on nat-
ural language understanding than would have been
the case otherwise.

Additional Rules We provide competitors with
labeled training and development sets, and unla-
beled test sets for which they must submit labels.
The development sets are meant to be used for
hyperparameter tuning and model selection, and
training on the development sets is not allowed.
We place no limits on the use of outside train-
ing data and resources except that they be publicly
available. We specifically encourage the use of the
SNLI training set. Multiple submissions from the
same team are allowed, up to a limit of two per day
during the two-week evaluation period. Individual
participants (i.e., PIs) are permitted to join multi-
ple teams within reason, but only when each team
reflects a fully independent engineering effort and
each team has a different lead developer.

Evaluation Competitors had approximately ten
weeks, starting with the release of the MultiNLI
training and development sets, to develop their
systems and two additional weeks—the evaluation

period—to run their systems on the unlabeled test
sets and submit results. The shared task evalua-
tion was hosted through the Kaggle in Class plat-
form using two competition pages—one each for
the matched2 and mismatched3 sections of the cor-
pus. The public leaderboard, which was displayed
during the evaluation period, showed results on a
random 25% of the test set labels, and the final
results were computed by evaluating the two best
systems from each competitor (chosen from the
public leaderboard) on the remaining hidden 75%
of the test set labels.

4 Results and Leaderboard

The competition results are shown in Table 3. All
evaluated systems beat the BiLSTM baseline re-
ported in Williams et al.. Furthermore, there is
only a marginal gap between accuracy on matched
and mismatched test sets for all systems.

The best performing single model is by Nie and
Bansal, who achieve the best result on the matched
competition and tie with Chen et al. in the mis-
matched competition. The Nie and Bansal model
architecture uses stacked BiLSTMs with residual
connections and, unlike the other high perform-
ing models, does not use within-sentence atten-
tion. The best performing system overall is an en-
semble by Chen et al., which is based closely on
the Enhanced Sequential Inference Model (ESIM;
Chen et al., 2017a) but with attention only within
each sentence, rather than between the two.

Looking toward the future, we also made avail-
able non-time-limited Kaggle in Class competition
pages4 to allow for further fair evaluations on the
MultiNLI test sets. Note that since these evalu-
ation sites report results on 100% of the test set,
rather than the 75% used in the shared task, num-
bers reported on that site may differ slightly from
those seen in the competition.

5 Model Comparison

All of the submitted systems are based on bidi-
rectional LSTMs, but each system uses this core
tool in a somewhat different way. This section sur-

2https://inclass.kaggle.com/c/
multinli-matched-evaluation

3https://inclass.kaggle.com/c/
multinli-mismatched-evaluation

4Matched: https://inclass.kaggle.com/c/
multinli-matched-open-evaluation
Mismatched: https://inclass.kaggle.com/c/
multinli-mismatched-open-evaluation

3



#Examples #Wds. ‘S’ parses
Genre Train Dev. Test Prem. Prem. Hyp. Agrmt. BiLSTM Acc.

SNLI 550,152 10,000 10,000 14.1 74% 88% 89.0% 81.5%

FICTION 77,348 2,000 2,000 14.4 94% 97% 89.4% 66.8%
GOVERNMENT 77,350 2,000 2,000 24.4 90% 97% 87.4% 68.0%
SLATE 77,306 2,000 2,000 21.4 94% 98% 87.1% 68.4%
TELEPHONE 83,348 2,000 2,000 25.9 71% 97% 88.3% 67.7%
TRAVEL 77,350 2,000 2,000 24.9 97% 98% 89.9% 66.8%

9/11 0 2,000 2,000 20.6 98% 99% 90.1% 68.5%
FACE-TO-FACE 0 2,000 2,000 18.1 91% 96% 89.5% 67.5%
LETTERS 0 2,000 2,000 20.0 95% 98% 90.1% 66.4%
OUP 0 2,000 2,000 25.7 96% 98% 88.1% 66.7%
VERBATIM 0 2,000 2,000 28.3 93% 97% 87.3% 67.2%

MultiNLI Overall 392,702 20,000 20,000 22.3 91% 98% 88.7% 67.4%

Table 2: Key statistics for the corpus broken down by genre, presented alongside figures from SNLI
for comparison. The first five genres represent the matched section of the development and test sets, and
the remaining five represent the mismatched section. The first three statistics shown are the number of
examples in each genre. #Wds. Prem. is the mean token count among premise sentences. ‘S’ parses is
the percentage of premises or hypotheses which the Stanford Parser labeled as full sentences rather than
fragments. Agrmt. is the percent of individual annotator labels that match the assigned gold label used
in evaluation. BiLSTM Acc. gives the test accuracy on the full test set for the BiLSTM baseline model
trained on MultiNLI and SNLI.

Team Name Authors Matched Mismatched Model Details

alpha (ensemble) Chen et al. 74.9% 74.9% STACK, CHAR, ATTN., POOL, PRODDIFF
YixinNie-UNC-NLP Nie and Bansal 74.5% 73.5% STACK, POOL, PRODDIFF, SNLI
alpha Chen et al. 73.5% 73.6% STACK, CHAR, ATTN, POOL, PRODDIFF
Rivercorners (ensemble) Balazs et al. 72.2% 72.8% ATTN, POOL, PRODDIFF, SNLI
Rivercorners Balazs et al. 72.1% 72.1% ATTN, POOL, PRODDIFF, SNLI
LCT-MALTA Vu et al. 70.7% 70.8% CHAR, ENHEMB, PRODDIFF, POOL
TALP-UPC Yang et al. 67.9% 68.2% CHAR, ATTN, SNLI
BiLSTM baseline Williams et al. 67.0% 67.6% POOL, PRODDIFF, SNLI

Table 3: RepEval 2017 shared task competition results. The Model Details column lists some of the key
strategies used in each system, using keywords: STACK: use of multilayer bidirectional RNNs, CHAR:
character-level embeddings, ENHEMB: embeddings enhanced with auxiliary features, POOL: max or
mean pooling over RNN states, ATTN: intra-sentence attention, PRODDIFF: elementwise sentence prod-
uct and difference features in the final entailment classifier, SNLI: use of the SNLI training set.

veys the key differences between systems, and the
Model Details column in Table 3 serves as a sum-
mary reference for these differences.

Depth Chen et al. and Nie and Bansal use three-
layer bidirectional RNNs, while others only used
single-layer RNNs. This likely contributes signif-
icantly to their good performance, as it is the most
prominent feature shared only by these two top
systems. They both use shortcut connections be-
tween recurrent layers to ease gradient flow, and
Nie and Bansal find in an ablation study that using
shortcut connections improves their performance
by over 1% on both development sets.

Embeddings Systems vary reasonably widely
in their approach to input encoding. Yang
et al. and Chen et al. use a combination of GloVe
embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014, not fine
tuned) and character-level convolutional neural
networks (Kim et al., 2016) to extract represen-
tations of words. Balazs et al. also use pre-trained
GloVe embeddings without fine tuning, but report
(contra Chen et al.) that an added character-level
feature extractor does not improve performance.

Vu et al. use pre-trained GloVe word embed-
dings augmented with additional feature vectors.
They create embeddings for part-of-speech (POS),
character level information, and the dependency
relation between a word and its parent, and con-

4



catenate these with the embedding for each word.
They find that this supplies a small but nontriv-
ial improvement to their development set perfor-
mance, especially in the mismatched setting.

Nie and Bansal use the simplest strategy, ini-
tializing embeddings with GloVe vectors and fine-
tuning them.

Pooling Vu et al. make a surprisingly effective
change to the baseline BiLSTM model, motivated
by Conneau et al.’s (2017) findings, by using max
pooling rather than mean pooling when collecting
the hidden states of the bidirectional LSTM for use
as a sentence representation. They find that this
yields an improvement of over 2.5% on both de-
velopment sets.

While Vu et al. show that the choice of pooling
strategy is quite important, Balazs et al. do not find
a substantial effect in a similar comparison. This
may be because Balazs et al.’s model also makes
use of intra-sentence attention following the pool-
ing layer, which dramatically reduces the impor-
tance of pooling.

Intra-Sentence Attention Chen et al. and Bal-
azs et al. both use attention over the BiLSTM
states of each sentence to compute a final repre-
sentation for that sentence. Chen et al. in partic-
ular uses a novel gated attention formulation, in
which the BiLSTM gate values supply the atten-
tion weights over hidden states according to

vg =
n∑

i=1

‖gi‖2∑n
j=1‖gj‖2

hi

where gi is the BiLSTM input gate and hi is
the output from the BiLSTM encoder. They
find that their use of gated attention helps perfor-
mance somewhat relative to an unspecified base-
line, though only in the matched setting.

Sentence Pair Classifier Every system but
Yang et al.’s uses elementwise product and dif-
ference features, comparing the two sentence en-
codings as part of the input to the classifier MLP
that predicts the final relation label. In an ablation
study, Chen et al. find this to be highly important,
yielding more than a 3% gain in performance on
both development sets.

Data and SNLI We observe relatively little vari-
ation in the training data used in submitted sys-
tems. All systems are trained only on labeled NLI
data—either the MultiNLI training set alone, or

the MultiNLI and SNLI training sets combined.
While Williams et al. find that the combined
training set yields somewhat better results on the
MultiNLI test set, Chen et al. nonetheless reaches
state-of-the-art performance without using it.

Interim Discussion We were particularly struck
by the effectiveness of the max pooling strategy
as a simple and highly effective improvement to
the baseline BiLSTM sentence encoder. Less sur-
prisingly, depth and intra-sentence attention ap-
pear to be broadly effective, and product and dif-
ference features appear to be valuable when us-
ing sentence encoders for the task of NLI. The
results surrounding embeddings and input encod-
ing were less clear, though Nie and Bansal’s use
of pre-trained GloVe embeddings with fine tuning
appears to be a simple and effective approach.

6 Error Analysis

In the interest of better understanding both the
corpus and the submitted models, we annotate a
1,000-sample subset of the development set. We
also provide a set of probe sentences and ask par-
ticipating teams to submit vectors for all sentences
in the probe set and test set. This section surveys
our methods findings.

6.1 Annotations

The annotated subset of the development set was
released to competitors during the model develop-
ment period, and consists of 1,000 examples each
tagged with zero or more of the following labels.
Labels were assigned manually except where clear
keyword-spotting techniques sufficed.

• CONDITIONAL: Whether either sentence
contains a conditional.
Example: P: Laser-cutting equipment must
be totally enclosed to be safe for human op-
erators. H: Even if the laser machine is
fully contained within, there still exist some
amount of risk for the workers in the close
proximity.

• ACTIVE/PASSIVE: Whether there is an
active-to-passive (or vice versa) transforma-
tion from the premise to the hypothesis.
Example: P: Hani Hanjour, Khalid Al Mi-
hdhar, and Majed Moqed were flagged by
capps. H: Capps never flagged anyone.

5



Annotation Tag Label Frequency BiLSTM Yang Balazs (S) Chen (S)

Matched

CONDITIONAL 5% 100% 100% 100% 100%
WORD OVERLAP 6% 50% 63% 63% 63%
NEGATION 26% 71% 75% 75% 75%
ANTO 3% 67% 50% 50% 50%
LONG SENTENCE 20% 50% 75% 75% 67%
TENSE DIFFERENCE 10% 64% 68% 68% 86%
ACTIVE/PASSIVE 3% 75% 75% 75% 88%
PARAPHRASE 5% 78% 83% 83% 78%
QUANTITY/TIME REASONING 3% 50% 50% 50% 33%
COREF 6% 83% 83% 83% 83%
QUANTIFIER 25% 64% 59% 59% 74%
MODAL 29% 66% 65% 65% 75%
BELIEF 13% 74% 71% 71% 73%

Mismatched

CONDITIONAL 5% 100% 80% 80% 100%
WORD OVERLAP 7% 58% 62% 62% 76%
NEGATION 21% 69% 73% 73% 72%
ANTO 4% 58% 58% 58% 58%
LONG SENTENCE 20% 55% 67% 67% 67%
TENSE DIFFERENCE 4% 71% 71% 71% 89%
ACTIVE/PASSIVE 2% 82% 82% 82% 91%
PARAPHRASE 7% 81% 89% 89% 89%
QUANTITY/TIME REASONING 8% 46% 54% 54% 46%
COREF 6% 80% 70% 70% 80%
QUANTIFIER 28% 70% 68% 68% 77%
MODAL 25% 67% 67% 67% 76%
BELIEF 12% 73% 71% 71% 74%

Table 4: This table shows the accuracy of different models for each tagged subset of our 1,000-example
development set sample. The ‘(S)’ indicates that results for the single model are shown. Some results
that stand out to us are shown in bold.

• PARAPHRASE: Whether the two sentences
are close paraphrases.
Example: P: Uh, lets see. H: Let us look.

• COREF: Whether the hypothesis contains a
pronoun or referring expression that needs to
be resolved using the premise.
Example: P: You and I, gentle reader, are ac-
credited members of the guild. H: We are
recognised as members of the guild.

• QUANTIFIER: Whether either sentence con-
tains one of the following quantifiers: much,
enough, more, most, less, least, no, none,
some, any, many, few, several, almost, nearly.
Example: P: We have provided an invoice
to facilitate your gift. H: There’s no invoice
available for your gift.

• MODAL: Whether either sentence contains
one of the following modal verbs: can, could,
may, might, must, will, would, should.
Example: P: Conversely, an increase in gov-
ernment saving adds to the supply of re-
sources available for investment and may put
downward pressure on interest rates. H: The
amount of resources available for investment

increases when government savings are in-
creased.

• BELIEF: Whether either sentence contains
one of the following belief verbs: know, be-
lieve, understand, doubt, think, suppose, rec-
ognize, recognize, forget, remember, imagine,
mean, agree, disagree, deny, promise.
Example: P: I trust that this is a fillip of
propaganda and not a serious query. H: I
believe this is to get attention and not a real
inquiry.

• NEGATION: Whether either sentence con-
tains negation.
Example: P: On reflection, the parts will hold
together. H: The parts will not hold together.

• ANTO: Whether the two sentences contain an
antonym pair.
Example: P: As united 93 left Newark, the
flight’s crew members were unaware of the
hijacking of American 11. H: As the flight
United 93 left Newark the crew members
were fully aware of the hijacking of American
11.

6



• TENSE DIFFERENCE: Whether the two sen-
tences use different tenses on any verbs.
Example: P: Does she like what she does?
H: Does she like what she is doing?

• QUANTITY/TIME REASONING: Whether un-
derstanding the pair requires quantity or time
reasoning.
Example: P: The vice chairman joined the
conference shortly before 10:00; the secre-
tary, shortly before 10:30. H: The secretary
joined before the vice chairman.

• WORD OVERLAP: Whether the two sen-
tences share more than 70% of their tokens.
Example: P: Let’s look for paua shells! H:
Let’s look for sticks.

• LONG SENTENCE: Whether the premise or
hypothesis is longer than 30 or 16 words re-
spectively.
Example: P: As invested with its dignity,
since the seventeenth century just as the
crown has been used for the monarch, or the
oval office has come to stand for the president
of the United States. H: Nobody in Britain
associates the crown with the monarchy.

Table 4 shows model results on tagged ex-
amples for the BiLSTM baseline and for the
three systems for which we were able to ac-
quire example-by-example development set re-
sults (submission of these results was optional).
Among those tags that are frequent enough to
yield clearly interpretable numbers, none indicates
a subset of the corpus that is dramatically harder
or easier for the submitted models than is the cor-
pus overall. This suggests that—as is typical with
neural network models—these models do not rely
strongly on any particular structural properties of
the input texts to the exclusion of others.

We note that the submitted systems that use
intra-attention (the three shown) do relatively well
on the LONG SENTENCE and NEGATION tags.
This technique likely helps the encoders to recover
the structures of long sentences and to correctly
identify the scope of instances of negation. We
also note that all systems do relatively poorly on
the QUANTITY/TIME REASONING section, sug-
gesting that these simple sentence feature extrac-
tors are not well situated to learn quantitative rea-
soning in this setting.

Authors 1-NN Genre Accuracy

Chen et al. 67.3%
Nie and Bansal 74.0%
Balazs et al. 69.2%
Vu et al. 67.0%
Yang et al. 54.7%

Table 5: A thousand sentences are randomly sam-
pled from the matched test set and their pairwise
distances to all sentences in the test set (premises
and hypotheses) are calculated. This table shows
the percentage of times the first nearest neighbor
belongs to the same genre as the sample sentence.

6.2 Nearest Neighbors

Test Set Sentences The competition participants
were asked to submit sentence vectors for all
the premise and hypothesis sentences in the test
sets. We randomly sample 1,000 sentences from
the matched test set and, using cosine similarity,
calculate their pairwise distances against all sen-
tences in the matched test set. Table 5 shows the
percentage of times the first nearest neighbor be-
longs to the same genre as the chosen sentence.
All models score fairly highly on this metric, sug-
gesting that the learned representations are not
genre-agnostic, despite their effectiveness in un-
seen genres. The models with higher percentage
accuracy on the NLI task (see Table 3) show bet-
ter performance on this metric as well, suggesting
that this genre clustering property correlates with
the overall quality of the metric space that each
model uses to represent sentences.

The better models are also more interpretable.
Table 6 shows example sentences and their three
nearest neighbors for all models. It appears
that entity identity is important for the Nie and
Bansal model, though not it a way that is tied to
syntactic position. For the Critics loved Merchant-
Ivory example, we see matches to critics. In the
Students love the rich culture example, we simi-
larly see many matches to school and love. Since
for each premise sentence in the MultiNLI corpus,
there are 3 associated hypothesis sentences, it’s
not surprising to see that the first nearest neighbor
is often one of these associated sentences, like in
the Critics example where the first nearest neigh-
bor for all systems is the premise sentence. We
found that for some examples, the better perform-
ing systems like Nie and Bansal’s had all three as-

7



Sample Model Nearest Neighbours

Students love the rich
culture and history of
the school. (TR.)

Chen TEL. my son loved learning about computers in high school
TR. Families love this city-within-a-city on the beach.
TR. The urban working class loved the new factories.

Nie TEL. my son loved learning about computers in high school
TEL. I really loved it when I was in middle school.
SL. A librarian and fellow patient kindled his love for literature more than school.

Balazs SL. School, more than anything else, was credited for his love of literature.
SL. A librarian and fellow patient kindled his love for literature more than school.
TEL. I really loved it when I was in middle school.

Vu SL. A librarian and fellow patient kindled his love for literature more than school.
TR. France’s oldest city is a wonderful destination, with rich history and extreme

beauty.
FIC. The rave had some of the best artists and celebrities.

Yang TR. The urban working class loved the new factories.
FIC. my son loved learning about computers in high school
TR. This area is a favorite of hikers who enjoy invigorating journeys through

dense forests and along the river valleys celebrated in the paintings of Gustave
Courbet.

Critics loved
Merchant-Ivory’s
final movie, which
was an adaption of
a novel written by
Kaylie Jones. (SL.)

Chen SL. Critics laud Merchant-Ivory’s exit from the 19th century in this adaptation of a
semiautobiographical novel by Kaylie Jones (daughter of novelist James Jones).

SL. I loved Begnigni’s movie!
SL. Mercer was the lifelong love of Franklin Roosevelt, and the revelation of their

affair nearly ended his marriage to Eleanor.

Nie SL. Critics laud Merchant-Ivory’s exit from the 19th century in this adaptation of a
semiautobiographical novel by Kaylie Jones (daughter of novelist James Jones).

SL. Critics find the book entertaining, praising digressions on gambling, laughing,
and love, as well as Pinker’s pop-culture references.

SL. Critics think that Lichtenstein was a contemporary genius.

Balazs SL. Critics laud Merchant-Ivory’s exit from the 19th century in this adaptation of a
semiautobiographical novel by Kaylie Jones (daughter of novelist James Jones).

TEL. The period of the civil war is very interesting to me, I’ve read about 3 novels
about that, including John Jakes ones.

SL. The most vivid moments in Kubrick’s films in the last 30 years have come
when he has turned his actor’s faces into Think of Malcolm McDowell in A
Clockwork Orange (1971), Jack Nicholson in The Shining (1980), and Vincent
D’Onofrio in Full Metal Jacket (1987).

Vu SL. Critics laud Merchant-Ivory’s exit from the 19th century in this adaptation of a
semiautobiographical novel by Kaylie Jones (daughter of novelist James Jones).

SL. Mercer was the lifelong love of Franklin Roosevelt, and the revelation of their
affair nearly ended his marriage to Eleanor.

SL. Critics find the book entertaining, praising digressions on gambling, laughing,
and love, as well as Pinker’s pop-culture references.

Yang SL. Critics laud Merchant-Ivory’s exit from the 19th century in this adaptation of a
semiautobiographical novel by Kaylie Jones (daughter of novelist James Jones).

TR. Visitors are encouraged to come during daylight hours, when the park is safer
and better patrolled by employees.

TR. All Ireland loves a horse, and County Kildare can claim to be at the heart of
horse country.

Table 6: Showing the three nearest neighbors for example sentences from a random 1,000-sample sub-
set of the matched test set. All results are for single (non-ensemble) models. The genres have been
abbreviated.

8



Figure 1: A heatmap showing the cosine similarity between sentence vectors. The vectors were rendered
by the Nie and Bansal model. The plots for other systems are very similar.

sociated sentences as their top three nearest neigh-
bors.

Probe Sentences During the competition, we
additionally provided a set of automatically gen-
erated probe sentences meant to aid error analysis.
These probe sentences are produced to vary along
dimensions relevant to probing for semantic role
and negation information. We asked submitting
teams to supply vectors for these sentences in ad-
dition to those in the test set. Figure 1 shows the
cosine similarity between a subset of these sen-
tence vectors rendered by Nie and Bansal’s (2017)
system. We find that all systems (except that of
Balazs et al., who did not submit these vectors)
show similar behavior on these sentences, and we
do not observe a clear correlation between behav-
ior here and model performance. Perhaps unsur-
prisingly, we observe that sentences tend to be
more similar to one another the more structural
features they have in common. We observe this

clearly for negation, identity of the subject, and
tense, though continuous tenses are not reliably
differentiated from others.

7 Conclusion

We find that BiLSTM-based models with max
pooling or intra-sentence attention represent a
popular and effective strategy for sentence encod-
ing, and that systems based on this technique per-
form very well at the task of NLI.

We note that all submitted systems performed
reasonably well across the many subsets of the
data reflected by our supplementary tags, suggest-
ing that none of these models exploit any par-
ticular narrow feature of the task or data to per-
form well. We also note that model performance
does not vary much between the matched and mis-
matched sections of the test set. This means that
submitted systems are likely capturing reasonably
general strategies for extracting representations of
meaning from text. As the systems get better, and

9



fit the training data more closely, the disparity be-
tween matched and mismatched sets may appear.
Both of these findings, though, bolster our expec-
tation that the best of the submitted systems rep-
resent some of the best general-purpose architec-
tures for sentence encoding available.

However, the task of NLI is far from being
solved, and no submitted system approaches hu-
man performance, suggesting that there is ample
room for further research on both the task and on
the more general problem of sentence represen-
tation learning. Since many of the examples in
MultiNLI require substantial commonsense back-
ground knowledge to solve fully, we suspect that
the use of large outside datasets and resources (la-
beled or otherwise) will be crucial to making sub-
stantial further progress in this setting.

Acknowledgments

This work was made possible by a Google Fac-
ulty Research Award to Sam Bowman and Ange-
liki Lazaridou, and was also supported by a gift
from Tencent Holdings. Allyson Ettinger con-
tributed the supplementary probe sentences. We
also thank George Dahl and the organizers of the
RepEval 2016 and RepEval 2017 workshops for
their help and advice.

References
Jorge Balazs, Edison Marrese-Taylor, Pablo Loyola,

and Yutaka Matsuo. 2017. Refining raw sentence
representations for textual entailment recognition
via attention. In The Second Workshop on Evaluat-
ing Vector Space Representations for NLP (RepEval
2017).

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proc. EMNLP.

Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhen-Hua Ling, Si Wei, Hui
Jiang, and Diana Inkpen. 2017a. Enhanced LSTM
for natural language inference. In Proc. ACL.

Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhen-Hua Ling, Si Wei, Hui
Jiang, and Diana Inkpen. 2017b. Recurrent neural
network-based sentence encoder with gated atten-
tion for natural language inference. In Proceedings
of The Second Workshop on Evaluating Vector Space
Representations for NLP (RepEval 2017).

Gennaro Chierchia and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 1991.
Meaning and Grammar. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loı̈c
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised
learning of universal sentence representations from
natural language inference data. In Proc. EMNLP.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine learning challenges. Evalu-
ating predictive uncertainty, visual object classifica-
tion, and recognising textual entailment, Springer.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural computation 9(8).

Yoon Kim, Yacine Jernite, David Sontag, and Alexan-
der M. Rush. 2016. Character-aware neural lan-
guage models. In Proc. AAAI.

Bill MacCartney. 2009. Natural Language Inference.
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

Yixin Nie and Mohit Bansal. 2017. Shortcut-stacked
sentence encoders for multi-domain inference. In
Proceedings of The Second Workshop on Evaluat-
ing Vector Space Representations for NLP (RepEval
2017).

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global vectors for
word representation. In Proc. EMNLP.

Tim Rocktäschel, Edward Grefenstette, Karl Moritz
Hermann, Tomáš Kočiskỳ, and Phil Blunsom. 2016.
Reasoning about entailment with neural attention.
In Proc. ICLR.

Hoa Trong Vu, Thuong-Hai Pham, Xiaoyu Bai Marc
Tanti, Lonneke van der Plas, and Albert Gatt. 2017.
LCT-MALTA’s submission to RepEval 2017 shared
task. In Proceedings of The Second Workshop on
Evaluating Vector Space Representations for NLP
(RepEval 2017).

Shuohang Wang and Jing Jiang. 2016. Learning nat-
ural language inference with LSTM. In Proc.
NAACL.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R. Bow-
man. 2017. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
sentence understanding through inference. CoRR
abs/1704.05426.

Han Yang, Marta R. Costa-jussà, and José A. R. Fonol-
losa. 2017. Character-level intra attention network
for natural language inference. In Proceedings of
The Second Workshop on Evaluating Vector Space
Representations for NLP (RepEval 2017).

10


