



















































The Scope and Focus of Negation: A Complete Annotation Framework for Italian


Proceedings of the Workshop Computational Semantics Beyond Events and Roles (SemBEaR), pages 34–42,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Scope and Focus of Negation:
A Complete Annotation Framework for Italian

Begoña Altuna
University of the Basque Country

(UPV/EHU), Spain
begona.altuna@ehu.eus

Anne-Lyse Minard Manuela Speranza
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK),

Trento, Italy
minard,manspera@fbk.eu

Abstract

In this paper we present a complete frame-
work for the annotation of negation in
Italian, which accounts for both negation
scope and negation focus, and also for
language-specific phenomena such as neg-
ative concord. In our view, the annota-
tion of negation complements more com-
prehensive Natural Language Processing
tasks, such as temporal information pro-
cessing and sentiment analysis. We ap-
plied the proposed framework and the
guidelines built on top of it to the annota-
tion of written texts, namely news articles
and tweets, thus producing annotated data
for a total of over 36,000 tokens.

1 Introduction

The digital era has enabled the creation of large
amounts of data that can be used in many knowl-
edge fields. These data, however, need to be “un-
derstood” to be useful. Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) aims at analyzing and extracting textual
information that can be employed in tasks such as
decision making (Demner-Fushman et al., 2009)
or event forecasting (Radinsky and Horvitz, 2013)
among many others.

The analysis and processing of the negation it-
self is relevant to areas such as event information
processing (Minard et al., 2016), sentiment anal-
ysis (Jia et al., 2009) and discourse relation iden-
tification (Asr and Demberg, 2015). On the one
hand, knowing whether an event is affirmed or
negated is of utmost importance in the domain of
temporal processing for determining the factual-
ity of an event. The positive or negative polarity
of an event, in fact, will determine its factuality
value, that is to say, whether an event is said to
happen or not. Knowing which part of the sen-

tence is most directly negated, on the other hand,
may help discriminate which entities participate in
an event, which can be very helpful when building
entity-based timelines and storylines (Laparra et
al., 2015).

The task of sentiment analysis consists predom-
inantly of determining whether a proposition has
a positive or a negative polarity. In this case, the
presence of a negation can revert the polarity of
the proposition and, thus, its identification is es-
sential. Finally in the domain of discourse anal-
ysis, the analysis of the expression of negation is
needed when extracting relations between parts of
the discourse, for example to find chose alterna-
tive relations or contrast constructions.

While affirmative sentences do not need any
syntactic marker, negation is typically expressed
by some kind of syntactic or lexical element that
changes the polarity of the whole sentence or of
some elements of the sentence. Each language
has its own means to express negation. Therefore,
these have to be identified and their features ana-
lyzed as a preliminary step towards the completion
of an annotation framework.

We propose a complete annotation framework
for the annotation of negation in Italian built on
the work by Morante et al. (2011) and Blanco and
Moldovan (2011). In our framework the seman-
tics of negation is represented through the identi-
fication of the negation cue (i.e. the lexical ele-
ment expressing negation), its scope (i.e. the text
section that is negated), its focus (i.e. that part of
the scope that is prominently or explicitly negated)
and, if present, its reinforcement (i.e. an auxiliary
negation). In (1) we give an example of negation
and its annotation1. The novelty of our framework

1In our examples we will use the following notational
conventions: if marked, a negation cue will be highlighted
in bold, its reinforcement will be in italics, its focus will be
included in square brackets and its scope will be underlined.

34



lies in considering all at once the annotation of the
scope and the focus of a negation, which implies
making some adaptation of the annotation of one
with regard to the other.

(1) Non ha parlato [con loro].
(He didn’t speak with them.)

We applied this annotation framework on sam-
ple sentences taken from written news articles and
produced detailed annotation guidelines2. Finally,
following these annotation guidelines, we anno-
tated two different typologies of written texts, i.e.
news articles and tweets, for a total of over 36,000
tokens.

The paper is divided as follows: in Section 2 we
summarize the related work on negation annota-
tion, in Section 3 we highlight the main features
of the proposed annotation framework, in Section
4 we provide details about the annotation effort we
have conducted and in Section 5 we explain how
our annotation can be useful for other NLP tasks.
Finally, in Section 6 we discuss future work.

2 Related Work

Many annotation efforts on negation have been
conducted in recent years for different purposes.
Some of the first attempts of negation annotation
were done in biomedical text corpora for which
annotation guidelines for negation were created.
On one hand, the GENIA corpus manual (Kim et
al., 2006) was employed for the annotation of GE-
NIA (Kim et al., 2008), a corpus of 1,000 abstracts
annotated with negated biological events and three
levels of uncertainty. On the other hand, the BioIn-
fer annotation scheme (Pyysalo et al., 2007) was
used for the annotation of entities and the relations
and dependencies among them in the BioInfer cor-
pus. The absence of such relationships as in “not
affected by” or “independent of” was annotated
with the special predicate NOT.

The biomedical corpus BioScope (Vincze et al.,
2008) is the first corpus in which negation was
specifically targeted; it consists of 20,000 sen-
tences, 13% of which contain some negative ex-
pression. BioScope is annotated not only with
negation cues but also with negation scope, whose

2The guidelines for the annotation of negation cues, focus
and scope in Italian are not public yet, as we are still im-
proving the document in terms of clarity of exposition and
examples, but is accessible at the following link: https:
//goo.gl/kAmRwN

extent is defined as the largest syntactic unit pos-
sible.

The guidelines followed in the annotation of
the BioScope corpus have been adapted to dif-
ferent domains. Morante et al. (2011), for ex-
ample, focused on narrative texts and defined
the annotation of negated events in addition to
negation cues and their scope. Following this,
Morante and Daelemans (2012) created and re-
leased the ConanDoyle-neg corpus, a corpus con-
taining Sherlock Holmes’ stories annotated with
negation and event information, as well as co-
reference, semantic roles and implicit arguments.
In addition, a further adaptation of the BioScope
guidelines has been used to annotate the SFU Re-
view Corpus (Konstantinova et al., 2012), a corpus
consisting of 400 customer reviews.

PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005) also contains
negation information: a NEG functional tag has
been assigned to the modifiers expressing nega-
tion such as “not”, “n’t”, “never” and “no longer”,
as defined in the PropBank guidelines (Bonial et
al., 2010). On top of this annotation Blanco and
Moldovan (2011) marked the focus of the nega-
tion, defined as the most directly and explicitly
negated part of the sentence. The resulting dataset
was employed, together with the ConanDoyle-neg
corpus, in the *SEM 2012 Shared Task Resolving
the Scope and Focus of Negation3.

Among corpora containing annotations of nega-
tion and its scope it is worth mentioning the Prod-
uct Review Corpus (Councill et al., 2010), which
was built automatically with a system trained on
the BioScope corpus.

While the work mentioned above focuses exclu-
sively on the English language, the only work on
negation in Italian we are aware of is that of At-
tardi et al. (2015) in the medical domain. They an-
notated a corpus of medical records in Italian with
medical entities (diseases, drugs, etc.) and added
a marker to indicate whether an entity appears in
a negative context. This annotation is limited to
the identification of the absence or presence of a
medical entity.

However, Spanish and Italian are closely re-
lated languages and share many features, which al-
lowed us to take into consideration work on nega-
tion in Spanish. Similar to the work on Italian
medical records, Stricker et al. (2015) have anno-

3http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/
sem2012-st-neg/

35



tated radiology reports with findings (observations
and medical conditions) and they have assigned a
value, “affirmed” or “negated”, to each of those
findings. More similar to our aim, we can cite the
Spanish section of the SFU Review Corpus (Martı́
et al., 2016), which has been annotated with nega-
tion by Jiménez-Zafra et al. (to appear), partially
following the ABSA guidelines used for Task 12
in SemEval-20154.

3 Annotation Specifications

We propose an annotation scheme for negation in
which we have defined the elements to be anno-
tated and their features based on (Morante et al.,
2011) and (Blanco and Moldovan, 2011), thus in-
cluding negation cues, negation scope and focus.

Having Italian as the target language, we re-
lied on the Italian grammar by Serianni and
Castelvecchi (1988) and on corpus observation for
language-specific phenomena related to negation.

3.1 Negation Cues
Negation is a linguistic phenomenon that inverts
the truth value of the proposition it is applied to
(Martı́ et al., 2016). Negation is usually expressed
by lexical and syntactic elements that are called
negation cues.

Following Morante et al. (2011), only negation
cues expressed by adverbs, such as non / “not”,
pronouns, as nessuno / “nobody”, determiners, as
nessun / “any”, and prepositions, as senza / “with-
out” have been taken into consideration in our an-
notation effort. Negation expressed by verbs or
nouns, on the other hand, (as in Rifiuto / “I refuse”,
see example (2)), remains out of our scope. It is
also relevant to note that we have not addressed
affixal negation (e.g. the negative prefixes in- and
a-, see example 3) as we do not want to go below
the unit of a token.

(2) Rifiuto di parlare.
(I refuse to talk.)

(3) Un impercettibile odore inondava la
stanza.
(An imperceptible smell invaded the
room.)

As a result of exhaustive research on nega-
tion cues in Italian, we have compiled a list that
includes both one-word constructions (e.g non /

4http://alt.qcri.org/semeval2015/
task12/

“not”, see example (4)) and multi-word expres-
sions (e.g. per niente / “(not) at all”, see example
(5)).

(4) Il dato non è ancora preciso.
(The data is not precise yet.)

(5) Era una donna per niente candida.
(*She was a woman not at all candid.)

Following Morante et al. (2011) we do not an-
notate as negation cues those negative forms that
do not actually express negation, such as the ex-
pletive non in non appena / “as soon as” or non
in fixed constructions such as non a caso / “not by
chance”.

In general, every negation cue is associated with
its scope and focus. Ellipsis, unfinished sentences
and other phenomena, however, may prevent it
from happening as it is the case of no / “no” when
it is a one-word answer to a question. In (6), for
example, no is annotated as a negation cue with
no focus or scope as the reference to winning is
expressed in the previous sentence, while the an-
notation of the scope and focus of a negation does
not go beyond sentence boundaries.

(6) Avete vinto? No.
(Did you win? No.)

3.2 Scope

As Morante et al. (2011) do, we consider the scope
of a negation cue to be the extent of the text af-
fected by the cue; more specifically, the scope of
a negation corresponds to the section of text ex-
pressing the proposition whose truth value is in-
verted by the negation. The suggested test to de-
termine the extent of the scope “it is not the case
that” proposed by Morante et al. is also employed
for Italian (non si dà il caso).

As a general rule, the negation cue remains out
of the scope since it does not change its own po-
larity (7)5. However, an innovative feature of our
framework is that negation cues which carry a
richer semantic meaning than plain negation are
included inside the scope; this is the case, among
others, of nessun / “no (determiner)” (8), mai /
“never”, nessuno / “nobody”, and nulla / “noth-
ing”.

We have taken the decision of including such
negation cues in the scope because they convey

5Note that, as a consequence of this, the extent of the
scope can be discontinuous, as in (7).

36



more than just a negative meaning. When turn-
ing negative sentences into affirmative sentences,
the plain negation cues will be removed whereas
richer semantic negation cues will be replaced by
a positive counterpart. For example the affirmative
version of the sentence (7) will be Il presidente
tratta con gli assassini / “The president deals with
the murderers”, and for the sentence (8) Qualche
militare italiano é rimasto ferito / “Some Italian
soldiers have been wounded”.

(7) Il presidente non tratta con gli assassini.
(The president does not deal with murder-
ers.)

(8) Nessun militare italiano è rimasto ferito.
(No Italian soldier has been wounded.)

3.3 Focus

Focus is defined as that part of the scope that is
most prominently or explicitly negated (Huddle-
ston and Pullum, 2002); as an example, con gli as-
sassini / “with the murderers” is the focus of non /
“not” in (9).

(9) Il presidente non tratta [con gli assassini].
(The president does not deal with murder-
ers.)

In some cases it is possible that the extent of the
focus coincides with the negation cue; this hap-
pens with negation cues which not only express
negation but carry a richer semantic meaning. For
example, mai / “never” expresses a reference to
time, while nessuno / “nobody” expresses a refer-
ence to human beings (10).

(10) [Nessuno] ha cercato di fermare l’uomo.
(Nobody tried to stop the man.)

It is worth underlining that this is perfectly in
tune with the decision explained above (Section
3.2) to include these negation cues within the ex-
tent of the scope.

3.4 Reinforcement

In Italian (as in other romance languages such
as Spanish), negations precede the verb (11 and
12). When the negation is moved after the verb
as in (13), an auxiliary negation (reinforcement) is
added to fill the position that has been left empty.
In this case, we annotate the negation cue and as-
sociate it with the reinforcement, besides associat-
ing it with its focus and scope as in all other cases.

(11) I militari italiani non sono [rimasti feriti].
(Italian soldiers have not been wounded.)

(12) [Nessun militare italiano] è rimasto ferito.
(No Italian soldier has been wounded.)

(13) Non è rimasto ferito [nessun militare
italiano].
(No Italian soldier has been wounded.)

3.5 Discussion

In our framework we address both scope and fo-
cus. Since, by definition, the focus is the most
prominently negated part of the scope, we explic-
itly added the constraint according to which the
focus should always be included in the scope.

In cleft sentences though, the focus is detached
from the clause where the negation cue is placed;
in (14), for instance, the focus is dal 30 agosto /
”since the 30th of August”. As a result, the focus
would be outside the extent of the scope (the anno-
tation of the scope, in fact, does not go over clause
boundaries). To ensure that the focus is included
within the scope, we decided to expand the extent
of the scope to include as well the detached part of
the cleft sentence.

(14) È [dal 30 agosto] che non si può più
comprare.
(It is since the 30th of August that it is no
longer possible to buy it.)

The annotation of relative pronouns and the el-
ements they refer to (noun, pronoun or phrase) is
also worth a more detailed discussion. In order
to be aligned with the annotation framework pro-
posed by Morante et al. (2011), we decided to in-
clude relative pronouns in the scope, but not their
antecedents. For example, in (15), we have anno-
tated che hanno voluto andarci / “who did want to
go there” as the scope.

However, one might argue that the inclusion of
the antecedents (i bambini che hanno voluto an-
darci / “the children who did want to go there”)
would have made the scope more informative and
that the “it is not the case that” test (see Section
3.2) suggests to include bambini / ”children” in the
scope.

(15) Sono i bambini [che] non hanno voluto
andarci.
(It is the children who did not want to go
there.)

37



4 Annotating Negation

The annotation framework described above has
been applied to an annotation task which included
two significantly different types of texts, i.e. news
articles and tweets.

4.1 Negation in Fact-Ita Bank

We annotated with negation 71 documents of
Fact-Ita Bank (Minard et al., 2014), a corpus
which consists of 169 news stories taken from Ita-
TimeBank (Caselli et al., 2011).

From Ita-TimeBank, it inherited the annota-
tion of events, which was performed following It-
TimeML (Caselli et al., 2011), the Italian version
of the TimeML annotation scheme.

For a subset of 6,958 events, Fact-Ita Bank con-
tains the annotation of the factuality attributes (i.e.
polarity, time and certainty) as defined for FactA
- Factuality Annotation (Minard et al., 2016), a
task which has been organised in 2016 in the
context of the EVALITA evaluation campaign6.
Fact-Ita Bank has been used as training corpus
for FactA and is distributed with a CC-BY-NC li-
cense7.

4.2 Negation in Tweets

We annotated with negation 301 tweets that were
used as test set for the FactA pilot task on social
media texts (Minard et al., 2016).

Also in this case, the texts contained the anno-
tation of events (following It-TimeML) and of the
event factuality attributes (as defined for the FactA
task at EVALITA 2016).

4.3 Annotation Task

The annotation task has been performed using
CAT8 (Content Annotation Tool) (Lenzi et al.,
2012), a web-based text annotation tool. The an-
notated data are in an XML-based stand-off for-
mat where different annotation layers are stored in
separate document sections and are related to each
other and to source data through pointers.

Four annotators were involved in the annotation
task. We estimate the annotation effort to be ten
working days of an expert annotator.

6http://www.evalita.it/
7http://hlt-nlp.fbk.eu/technologies/

fact-ita-bank
8http://dh.fbk.eu/resources/

cat-content-annotation-tool

4.4 Inter-Annotator Agreement

When we had completed a first version of the
guidelines we tested the inter-annotator agreement
(IAA) with three annotators (who had been in-
volved in the definition of the task) over 8 news
articles from Fact-Ita Bank, for a total of 47 nega-
tion cues9 (IAA-1).

We computed the F-measure on the exact match
for each annotator pair and for each markable
(negation cue, scope and focus). Hripcsak and
Rothschild (2005) shows that for tasks in which
the number of negative cases is unknown, un-
defined or very large, inter-annotator agreement
can be quantified using the average pairwise
F-measure. The first column in Table 1 shows
the average of the pairwise F-measure values ob-
tained, which is 0.93, 0.52 and 0.55 for the nega-
tion cue, the scope and the focus, respectively.

IAA - 1 IAA - 2
documents 8 4
# negation cues 47 30
negation cue 0.93 0.98
scope 0.52 0.67
focus 0.55 0.58

Table 1: IAA in terms of average pairwise F-
measure.

As we were not completely satisfied with the
results, we improved the annotation guidelines
and enriched them with examples taken from the
dataset used for the first test. Then, in order to
evaluate the improvement, we produced a small
gold standard (4 news articles from Fact-Ita Bank)
annotated by two expert annotators (who had been
involved in the previous test) and had it annotated
by another person who had the improved version
of the guidelines as its only source of information
(IAA-2).

The second column in Table 1 shows the re-
sults of this experiment in terms of F-measure.
The agreement on the annotation of the scope in
IAA-2 is much better than in IAA-1, with a aver-
age F-measure computed on the strict match close
to 0.7 (for the scope) and close to 0.6 (for the fo-
cus). Moving to a relaxed match (acceptance of
one-word difference when comparing two strings)
the average F-measure for the scope increases to
0.85 and for the focus it reaches 0.77.

9The number of negation cues was computed after the an-
notators completed the adjudication.

38



4.5 Discussion
In total we annotated 71 news articles from Fact-
Ita Bank, including those used for the IAA, and
301 tweets. In Table 2 we present a quantitative
description of the data. We can observe that the
average size of scope and focus is bigger in news
than in tweets. This is mainly due to the limita-
tion of characters in tweets and to the writing style,
which is closer to oral speech, with very short sen-
tences. Not surprisingly, in both corpora the most
frequent negation cue is non / “not”.

news tweet
articles corpus

docs 71 301
tokens 31,596 4,920
sentences 1,290 301
tweets/sent. w. neg. 278 59
negation cues 282 71
reinforcement 15 9
average size scopes 9.11 4.69
average size focus 3.2 1.61
non [not] 76% 80%
nessun(o/a) [no/nobody] 6% 3%
nulla/niente [nothing] 4% 8%
senza [without] 6% 4%

Table 2: Quantitative data about the annotated cor-
pora

During the annotation and the inter-annotator
agreement phases, we noticed that the annotation
of the focus in written texts is a very difficult task,
even for humans. Taking into account certain lin-
guistic phenomena can help in interpreting a nega-
tive sentence to some extent. For example, the fact
that a subject pronoun (which is usually omitted
in Italian) is expressed in a sentence indicates that
the focus is on the subject itself (e.g. in (16) the
focus is on the pronoun io / “I”). Word order can
also be used to determine the focus of a negation,
but prosody is undoubtedly the most useful aspect.
Since we work on written texts, and do not have
this kind of data, our focus annotation strongly re-
lies on the interpretation of the annotator, which
decreases inter-annnotator agreement.

(16) [Io] non sono d’accordo che abbiano
nominato grand Budapest hotel e il libro
della vita
(I don’t agree with the fact that they have
nominated grand Budapest hotel and The
Book of Life)

On the other hand, the annotation of the scope
is a more straightforward task. In the first inter-
annotator agreement phase the agreement for the
scope annotation was low due to some impreci-
sion in the guidelines, as well as small issues in
the management of nested annotation by the an-
notation tool. The main disagreements were re-
lated to i) the inclusion or not of the negation
cues in the scope, ii) the annotation of cleft sen-
tences, and iii) the treatment of parenthetical texts.
However, in the second inter-annotator agreement
phase, the disagreements concerned mainly the
discourse connectives which should be excluded
from the scope but were not excluded by one an-
notator.

The annotation of tweets enabled us to observe
new phenomena in the expression of negation and
so to add some annotation rules. The main dif-
ferences between news articles and tweets are the
size of the text, and as a result the amount of con-
text information available, and the style (which in
tweets is close to that of oral speech, with the use
of slang and sometimes vulgar language). In news
articles, sentences are well written and often quite
long; usually the reader has all the context needed
to understand a piece of information. On the other
hand, sentences in tweets are very short and some-
times incomplete. Incompleteness can lead to fo-
cus ambiguity and even to the absence of the fo-
cus. In (17), for example, there are dots where the
focus should be. We decided to annotate the verb
that is negated, but one could argue that the dots
should be annotated as focus instead or that no fo-
cus should be associated with the negation cue.

(17) Il Modena ha fatto vedere buone cose ma
non è . . .
(Modena has shown good stuff but it is
not. . . )

(18) #Paritàsessi non è [sfoggiare ascelle
pelose] o [#pisciare in un imbuto per farlo
in piedi].
(* #Equalrights is not showing off hairy
armpits or peeing in a funnel to do it
standing up.)

Another difference between tweets and news ar-
ticles is the use of non standard language. In
tweets we find abbreviations, repeated words,
non alpha-numeric symbols, grammar mistakes,
and sometimes missing words. When annotating
tweets, for instance, we added to our list a nega-

39



tion cue that we had not found before, nn, which
stands for non / “not”. Tweets also contain hash-
tags which are used to link tweets to some cate-
gory topics and they can include a negation. For
example the hashtag #Nonbeccomailaporta / “I
never strike the target” could be decomposed and
annotated with negation: “mai” will be the nega-
tion cue and the focus, “non” the reinforcement
and “beccomailaporta” the scope. But at the mo-
ment, as the annotation tool does not manage the
annotation of units smaller than a token, we do not
annotate it. Finally, one tweet contained the only
case we found of negation of coordinated phrases
(e.g. in (18)).

5 Relevance of Negation Annotation

As mentioned in the introduction, our research on
negation is motivated by the interest of employing
it for temporal information processing and, more
speciically, for the processing of events and their
factuality value.

The identification of the scope may help in fac-
tuality resolution. In our corpus, which has been
previously annotated with temporal information,
directly negated events like uccideranno / “will
kill” (19) are given a negative factuality value.
Events like ha rivendicato / “has claimed responsi-
bility” in (20), instead, have been given a positive
polarity as they are not directly negated. In fact,
they have a positive factuality value, although they
are implicitly counterfactual, since, in this case no
responsibility claim has been done.

(19) Non [ucciderano] il nostro futuro.
(They will not kill our future.)

(20) [Nessuno] ha rivendicato il sequestro.
(Nobody has claimed responsibility for the
hijack.)

In example (20), the event ha rivendicato falls
under the scope of the negation and its factuality
value has changed. Either because the event is di-
rectly negated (19) or because an argument of that
event is negated (20), the final factuality value of
an event will be negative.

However, the scope is not enough to decide on
the factuality value of an event. sequestro / “hi-
jack” in (20) falls also into the scope extent but
it preserves its positive polarity, since it is a sub-
ordinated event and the negation affects the main
clause. Therefore, we consider scope information
to be useful for factuality resolution, but it has to

be complemented by other linguistic information
such as sentence structure and argument informa-
tion.

As far as focus is concerned, we assume that in
some cases the identification of the focus may help
build entity-based timelines, that is to say, time-
lines that gather and organize the events in which
a certain entity participates. As counterfactual or
non-factual events have not happened or will not
happen, we will exclude those from the timeline.

When an entity is the focus of the negation, we
hold that it does not take part in the event, since it
is explicitly negated. As a consequence, that event
will not be considered for the timeline of that en-
tity. If we were to build a timeline from example
(21) taking “Putin” as the target entity, we should
include ha detto / “has said” and essere / “is” in
the timeline. On the contrary, si è recato / “has at-
tended” will not appear in the timeline, since it is
explicitly mentioned, through the negation of the
subject lui / “he”, that he did not attend the fu-
nerals. Finally, the event “funerals” has a factual
value (i.e. the funerals took place), but since Putin
did not go, they will not appear in Putin’s timeline.

(21) Putin ha detto di essere col cuore a Beslan,
anche se [lui] non si è recato ai funerali.
(Putin said his heart is in Beslan, even
though he did not attend the funerals.)

Although we have only worked on news docu-
ments, we expect that the processing of negation
will also be useful for sentiment analysis (e.g.in
movie or book reviews). The identification of
negation scope may help in defining the polarity
of the events in the scope, which is a highly rele-
vant feature in these kinds of texts.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented our work on defining
a common annotation framework for scope and
focus of negations and the annotation performed
on two corpora: Fact-Ita Bank, which is com-
posed of news articles, and a corpus of tweets. We
conducted this work on the Italian language but
we plan to use the annotation framework to per-
form annotation in other languages, in particular
in Spanish, French and Basque.

The interpretation of negation is an important
task for detecting the factuality of events and we
now have corpora annotated with both negation
and factuality at our disposal. In the short term we

40



expect to conduct a study about the relationship
between negation scope and factuality annotation.

As far as focus annotation is concerned, we will
use that information for the identification of the di-
rectly negated entities in order not to include them
in role structures. This information will also be
used to improve the entity-based timelines and sto-
rylines, keeping the events in which negated enti-
ties participate out of candidate events to form the
timeline.

Our framework does not include the annotation
of negation expressed by verbs or nouns (e.g. can-
cel) and affixal negation (e.g. illegal). We plan to
include these aspects as well and, consequently, to
verify to what extent the current annotation guide-
lines account for their annotation of scope and fo-
cus.

Negation does not always have the same inten-
sity and can be total or partial. Some words in-
crease the intensity of the negation and other re-
duce it. For example the negation in “not all the
students arrived” is partial, whereas in “he did not
arrive” the negation is total. For the moment, all
these cases are annotated in the same way and the
different nuances are not considered, but we in-
tend to add some markers of degree to the negation
cues, so as to normalize this information.

Finally, the annotated data will be soon made
available from the website of the HLT-NLP group
at FBK (http://hlt-nlp.fbk.eu/) and
used to implement and evaluate a system for nega-
tion detection in Italian.

References
Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Vera Demberg. 2015. Uni-

form information density at the level of discourse
relations: Negation markers and discourse connec-
tive omission. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computation Semantics, pages 118–
128.

Giuseppe Attardi, Vittoria Cozza, and Daniele Sar-
tiano. 2015. Annotation and extraction of rela-
tions from italian medical records. In Proceedings
of the 6th Italian Information Retrieval Workshop
(IIR 2015).

Eduardo Blanco and Dan Moldovan. 2011. Semantic
Representation of Negation Using Focus Detection.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 581–589, Portland,
Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Claire Bonial, Olga Babko-Malaya, Jinho D. Choi,
Jena Hwang, and Martha Palmer. 2010. Propbank
Annotation Guidelines (Version 3.0). Technical re-
port, Center for Computational Language and Edu-
cation Research, Institute of Cognitive Science, Uni-
versity of Colorado at Boulder.

Tommaso Caselli, Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, Rachele
Sprugnoli, Emanuele Pianta, and Irina Prodanof.
2011. Annotating Events, Temporal Expressions
and Relations in Italian: the It-Timeml Experience
for the Ita-TimeBank. In Proceedings of the 5th Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop, pages 143–151, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Isaac Councill, Ryan McDonald, and Leonid Ve-
likovich. 2010. What’s great and what’s not: learn-
ing to classify the scope of negation for improved
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language
Processing, pages 51–59, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
University of Antwerp.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Wendy W. Chapman, and
Clement J. McDonald. 2009. What can natural lan-
guage processing do for clinical decision support?
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):760 – 772.

George Hripcsak and Adam S. Rothschild. 2005.
Technical brief: Agreement, the f-measure, and reli-
ability in information retrieval. Journal of the Amer-
ican Medical Informatics Association, 12(3):296–
298.

Rodney D. Huddleston and Geoffrey K. Pullum. 2002.
The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language.
Cambridge University Press, April.

Lifeng Jia, Clement Yu, and Weiyi Meng. 2009. The
effect of negation on sentiment analysis and retrieval
effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Con-
ference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment, CIKM ’09, pages 1827–1830, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Salud M. Jiménez-Zafra, Mariona Taulé, M. Teresa
Martı́n-Valdivia, L. Alfonso Ureña-López, and
M. Antònia Martı́. to appear. SFU ReviewSP-NEG:
a Spanish corpus annotated with negation for Sen-
timent Analysis A Typology of negation patterns.
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, and
Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2006. GENIA corpus manual.
Technical report, Tsujiilab, University of Tokyo.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun’ichi Tsujii.
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical
events from literature. BMC bioinformatics, 9(1):1.

Natalia Konstantinova, Sheila C.M. de Sousa, Noa P.
Cruz, Manuel J. Maña, Maite Taboada, and Rus-
lan Mitkov. 2012. A review corpus annotated for
negation, speculation and their scope. In Nico-
letta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,

41



Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012),
pages 3190–3195, Istanbul, Turkey, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Egoitz Laparra, Itziar Aldabe, and German Rigau.
2015. From TimeLines to StoryLines: A prelimi-
nary proposal for evaluating narratives. In Proceed-
ings of the First Workshop on Computing News Sto-
rylines, pages 50–55, Beijing, China, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, Giovanni Moretti, and
Rachele Sprugnoli. 2012. CAT: the CELCT
Annotation Tool. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uğur Doğan,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, and
Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2012), pages 333–338, Is-
tanbul, Turkey, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

M. Antònia Martı́, M. Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia, Mar-
iona Taulé, Salud Marı́a Jiménez-Zafra, Montser-
rat Nofre, and Laia Marsó. 2016. La negación
en español: análisis y tipologı́a de patrones de
negación. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural,
57:41–48.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Alessandro Marchetti, and
Manuela Speranza. 2014. Event Factuality in
Italian: Annotation of News Stories from the Ita-
TimeBank. In Proceedings of CLiC-it 2014, First
Italian Conference on Computational Linguistic,
pages 260–264.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Manuela Speranza, and Tommaso
Caselli. 2016. The EVALITA 2016 Event Factu-
ality Annotation Task (FactA). In Pierpaolo Basile,
Franco Cutugno, Malvina Nissim, Viviana Patti, and
Rachele Sprugnoli, editors, Proceedings of the 5th
Evaluation Campaign of Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Speech Tools for Italian (EVALITA
2016). aAcademia University Press.

Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2012.
Conandoyle-neg: Annotation of negation cues and
their scope in conan doyle stories. In Nico-
letta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012),
pages 1563–1568, Istanbul, Turkey, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Roser Morante, Sarah Schrauwen, and Walter Daele-
mans. 2011. Annotation of negation cues and their
scope: Guidelines v1. Computational linguistics
and psycholinguistics technical report series, CTRS-
003.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Björne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Järvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. BioInfer: a corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 8(1):50.

Kira Radinsky and Eric Horvitz. 2013. Mining the
web to predict future events. In Proceedings of the
sixth ACM international conference on Web search
and data mining, pages 255–264. ACM.

Luca Serianni and Alberto Castelvecchi. 1988. Gram-
matica italiana: italiano comune e lingua letteraria,
suoni, forme, costrutti. Utet.

Vanesa Stricker, Ignacio Iacobacci, and Viviana Cotik.
2015. Negated findings detection in radiology re-
ports in spanish: an adaptation of negex to spanish.
In Workshop on Replicability and Reproducibility in
Natural Language Processing: adaptive methods,
resources and software at IJCAI 2015.

Veronika Vincze, György Szarvas, Richárd Farkas,
György Móra, and János Csirik. 2008. The bio-
Scope corpus: biomedical texts annotated for uncer-
tainty, negation and their scopes. BMC bioinformat-
ics, 9(11):1.

42


