



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 418–426,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

”Who Mentions Whom?”- Understanding the Psycho-Sociological Aspects
of Twitter Mention Network

R.Sudhesh Solomon Srinivas P Y K L Abhay Narayan Amitava Das
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Sri City

{sudheshsolomon.r,srinivas.p,abhay.n,amitava.das}@iiits.in

Abstract

Users in social network either unicast or
broadcast their messages. At mention is
the popular way of unicasting for Twitter
whereas, general tweeting could be con-
sidered as broadcasting method. Under-
standing the information flow and dynam-
ics within a Social Network and modeling
the same is a promising and an open re-
search area called Information Diffusion.
This paper seeks an answer to a funda-
mental question - whether the at-mention
or the uni-casting pattern in social me-
dia is purely random in nature or there
is any user specific selectional preference?
To answer the question we present an em-
pirical analysis to understand the psycho-
sociological aspects of Twitter mentions
network within a social network com-
munity. To understand the psychologi-
cal pattern we have analyzed personality
(Big5 model: Openness, Conscientious-
ness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, Neu-
roticism) of users and to understand the
the sociological behavior we analyze val-
ues (Schwartz model:Achievement, Benev-
olence, Conformity, Hedonism, Power, Se-
curity, Self-Direction, Stimulation, Tra-
ditional, and Universalism) of all the
users inside a community. Empirical re-
sults suggest that personality and values
traits are indeed salient cues to under-
stand how the mention-based communica-
tion network functions. For example, we
notice that achievement-oriented commu-
nities talk to each other more often than
other people. We also observe that neu-
rotic people are more involved in commu-
nication within their community.

1 Introduction

Information diffusion is a process of spreading in-
formation or content within a network via a par-
ticular path or pattern. A significant amount of
research has been done in this area in the past few
years. However, most of the previous efforts con-
sidered only network topology for the diffusion
process.

To understand the propagation process we need
to understand who is connected with whom and
in what manner. At mention on Twitter is the
way of one-to-one conversation. The question
we raise here is whether the at-mention pattern
is purely random in nature or is there any user
specific selectional preference? Selectional pref-
erence implies to the choice that certain kind of
people make for direct communication but, while
they are interested in broadcasting they behave
differently. To understand the notion this paper
presents an empirical analysis to understand the
psycho-sociological aspects of Twitter mentions
network within a social network community. To
this end, we analyze personality and values of all
the users in a social network community. First, we
categorize social network communities based on
values types and analyze mention network within
each type (i.e. power, hedonic, etc.) of communi-
ties. We notice that achievement-type communi-
ties talk to each other more often than other peo-
ple. Then we analyze how people with certain
personality type (i.e. open, extrovert, etc.) inter-
act with other types of people inside a community.
We observe that conscientious people are more in-
volved in communication within their network.

Empirical results suggest that personality and
values traits are indeed a salient cue to under-
stand how the mention-based communication net-
work functions. In our analysis, we found that
the members from stimulation, achievement, and
benevolent oriented communities are closely con-

418



nected among themselves while the members in
other communities do not show significant con-
nectivity among themselves. Thus in our analy-
sis, we were able to find that universal, extrovert,
and open people prefer broadcasting over unicast-
ing messages (via @ mention).

Communication dynamics in human society is
a complex phenomenon. Here, in this paper,
we present empirical results to establish correla-
tions of the user’s unicasting behavior vs his/her
psycho-sociological traits. We believe that there
are many properties that are not considered (con-
tent of the message, age, gender) which affect the
at-mention dynamics in the social network. How-
ever, we are not considering those aspects of this
paper. Our future research is motivated towards
that direction.

2 Related Work

The research paradigm called information diffu-
sion seeks to answer how information spreads in a
social network and model how a given piece of in-
formation will propagate through a social network
- more precisely what a user will do with a particu-
lar tweet (lets say), will he/she either retweet it, at-
mention somebody or broadcast it again to spread
it over to a wider audience within his/her reacha-
bility in the network. Essentially researchers seek
to answer to the following questions :(i) which
pieces of information or topics are popular and
diffuse the most, (ii) how, why and through which
paths is the information diffusing, and will be dif-
fused in the future, (iii) which members of the net-
work play important roles in the spreading pro-
cess?

A considerable amount of work has been done
in modeling the process of information diffusion
in online social networks. Previous works on in-
formation diffusion have considered several influ-
encing factors such as speed, scale, range, influ-
ential nodes, network topology, topics and etc. In
the following paragraphs we are describing such
related works.

Research endeavors by (Kimura et al., 2010)
and (Wani and Ahmad, 2014) discussed diffusion
process based on network topology and they ex-
plain about the concept of influential nodes or
in simple terms, which node/s will influence the
other nodes in the diffusion process. (Kimura et
al., 2010) explains about combinatorial optimiza-
tion problem, which is a way to find out the most

influential nodes in a social network. In (Wani
and Ahmad, 2014) the authors explain about un-
derstanding the dynamics of social networks and
modeling the same, dynamics here refer to the
topological structure of the network. The authors
also explained about various information diffusion
parameters (diffusion rate, who influenced whom
etc.) in this work. Research by (Gomez Rodriguez
et al., 2013), tried to capture time dimension of the
diffusion pattern. The main motivation of the au-
thors in this work was to infer the edges and the
dynamics of the underlying network.

Some of the other works discussed about the
topic based diffusion pattern. Work by (Romero
et al., 2011), analyzed diffusion pattern based on
hashtags categorizations such as celebrity, games,
idioms, movies, tv, music, politics, sports, and
technology. To describe the diffusion patterns the
authors took two measures - Stickiness: The mea-
sure of the contingency of an information. The
peak value of the curve. Persistence: The time
for which an information stays on a particular dif-
fusion rate. The measure of rate of decay after
the peak. Then they empirically show how topi-
cal variations affect stickiness and persistence of
information diffusion patterns. The other inter-
esting work by (Apolloni et al., 2009) proposed
a probabilistic model to understand how two peo-
ple will converse about a particular topic based
on their similarity: based on demographic infor-
mation. The popular idea of homophily and het-
erophily and familiarity: based on time that they
spend together in same topic.

Retweeting is the famous way of information
cascading in Twitter. There are research endeav-
ors to predict how retweeting diffusion pattern
will be. The work by (Zaman et al., 2010) mod-
uled the information diffusion task as a predicting
modeling. Using a large scale data on who has
retweeted and what was retweeted a probabilistic
collaborative filtering model was built to predict
the future retweeting pattern. The model learnt
on parameters like the tweet source (the tweeter),
the user who was retweeting and the retweet con-
tent. Works by (Yang and Counts, 2010) discussed
about several influencing factors such as speed,
scale and range of retweeting behavior. The first
factor analyzed was Speed – whether and when the
first diffusion instance will take place. To perform
the analysis on speed, two models were used. The
first model answers when a tweet containing a par-

2

419



ticular topic is likely to be mentioned by another
tweet containing the same topic. For example,
when user A posts a tweet related to a topic XYZ,
how quickly another user (say user B), responds to
the tweet consisting XYZ mentioning user A. Sec-
ondly, the Cox proportional hazards model (Cox
and Oakes, 1984) was used to quantify the degree
to which a number of features of both users and
tweets themselves to predict the speed of diffusion
to the first degree offspring. The second factor ex-
plained and analyzed in this work is Scale – the
number of affected instances at the first degree. In
this work, the number of times a person is men-
tioned in the retweet trail relating to a topic was
analyzed and a probabilistic diffusion model has
been proposed. The last factor considered in this
work is Range – how far the diffusion chain can
continue on in depth. The analysis on range was
done by tracing a topic from a given start node to
its second and third degree of offspring nodes, and
so on.

A few works have discussed about behavior of
group of individuals - Herd Behavior: a social
behavior occurring when a group of individuals
make an identical action, not necessarily ignoring
their private information signals. However, user
level sentimental preference is being ignored so
far. Therefore, our current work is on understand-
ing user societal sentiment behavior. Our theoreti-
cal point of departure is in psycho-socio-linguistic
models, the Schwartz model Achievement, Benev-
olence, Conformity, Hedonism, Power, Security,
Self-Direction, Stimulation, Traditional and Uni-
versalism.. We hypothesis that people have natu-
ral preferences for direct communications. That
means certain type of people who possess one
value type have preference over other kind of peo-
ple of different value within their range. For ex-
ample, we observe that the traditional people are
less likely involved in communication (i.e, unicas-
ting) compared to other communities of people of
different value types.

3 Computational Psycho-Sociological
Models

In recent years, there have been significant efforts
on determining the opinion or sentiment or emo-
tion about a specific topic held by the author of a
piece of text, and on automatic sentiment strength
analysis of text, classifying it into either one of the
classes – positive, negative or neutral, or into Ek-

man’s classes – happy, sad, anger, fear, surprise,
and disgust. However, grouping people based on
positive, negative, or neutral comments and then
understanding their behavior would be spurious.
Therefore we propose, psycholinguistic and soci-
olinguistic models in order to capture user’s intrin-
sic selectional preferences.

The Big 5 personality (Goldberg, 1990) model
and Schwartz values (Schwartz, 2012) model can
be considered as a person level sentiment model
(depicted in table 1) and a societal sentiment
model, respectively. Traditional sentiment analy-
sis systems detect sentiment at text-level, whereas
the personality model aims at understanding the
sentiment/personality of each individual whereas
the Schwartz model describes the societal senti-
ment of groups of individuals forming communi-
ties in social networks.

Personality- User Level Sentiment: There has
been a growing interest in the scientific commu-
nity on doing automatic personality recognition
from their language usage and behaviour in so-
cial media. A milestone in this area was the 2013
workshop and shared task on Computational Per-
sonality Recognition (WCPR) (Celli et al., 2013),
repeated in 2014 (Celli et al., 2014). Two corpora
were released for the 2013 task. One is a Face-
book corpus, consisting of about 10,000 Facebook
status updates from 250 users, plus their Face-
book network properties, labelled with personal-
ity traits. The other corpus comprises 2,400 es-
says written by several participants labelled with
personality traits. The best performing system (F-
score = 0.73) was developed by (Verhoeven et al.,
2013). The various features and methods used by
all the participant groups can be viewed as either
linguistic and non-linguistic. Another relevant re-
search work on developing computational models
for personality on Twitter corpus of 335 users was
the (Quercia et al., 2011). They showed that a
user’s personality traits can be predicted only us-
ing three features : following, followers and listed
counts.

Personality Description
Openness Imaginative, insightful and have wide interest

Conscientiousness Organised, thorough and planned
Extroversion Talkative, energetic and assertive

Agreeableness Sympathetic, kind and affectionate
Neuroticism Tense, moody and anxious

Table 1: Description for OCEAN Model

3

420



Schwartz Values - Societal Sentiment: The
societal sentiment model introduced by Schwartz
and Bilsky (1990) and modified by Schwartz
(1992). The model defines ten basic and distinct
personal ethical values (henceforth only values),
that respectively are given in the table 2:

Values Description
Achievement sets goals and aims at achieving them
Benevolence seeks to help others and provide general welfare
Conformity obeys clear rules, laws and stuctures
Hedonism seeks pleasure and enjoyment

Power controls and dominates others, control resources
Security seeks health and safety

Self-direction wants to be free and independant
Stimulation seeks excitement and thrills
Tradition does things blindly because they are customary

Universalism seeks peace, social justice and tolerance for all

Table 2: Description for Schwartz Values

The computational Schwartz model has been
first proposed by (Maheshwari et al., 2017). The
authors released a corpus of 367 unique users hav-
ing 1,608 average tweets per user labelled with
values traits. The highest number of tweets for one
user was 15K, while the lowest number of tweets
for a user was a mere 100.

3.1 Psycholinguistic and Network Features
Several different types of features are used de-
pending upon classifiers. An exhaustive set of
features include – (f1) Word N-grams; (f2) POS
tags; (f3) Lingustic Features (LIWC1; Harvard
General Inquirer, MRC psycholinguistic feature;
Sensicon2); (f4) Network properties (network size,
betweenness centrality, density and transitivity);
(f5) speech-act classes; (f6) sentiment amplifiers
(exclamation marks, quotes, ellipses, interjec-
tions, emoticons, word/sentence length); (f7) mis-
spelt words (SMS slang, stressed words, capital-
ized words, wrong spellings); (f8) presence of
umm/bint or abu in username (a common suffix
for women and men respectively in Arabic); (f9)
Sentiment/Emotion lexica (NRC emotion Lexi-
con (Mohammad et al., 2013), Sentiwordnet (Bac-
cianella et al., 2010)); (f10) Topics words obtained
from topic model. A brief overview about the So-
ciological models and features used are illustrated
below.

3.2 Building Classifiers and Performance
We collected data from several sources to build
five classification models. Here, for each model,

1
http://www.liwc.net/

2
https://hlt-nlp.fbk.eu/technologies/sensicon

Features Model F-Score (SVM) F-Score (LR) F-Score(RF)
Lexicon Personality 0.78 0.62 0.65

Values 0.74 0.59 0.62
+Non-Linguistic Personality 0.79 0.66 0.68

Values 0.76 0.61 0.65
+Speech-Act Personality 0.80 0.70 0.71

Value 0.81 0.63 0.67

Table 3: Performance of Personality and Values
Models.

we report the best classifier. All the results re-
ported in Table 3 are based on 10-fold cross val-
idation on the respective dataset. Personality: A
SVM-based model outperforms the state-of-the-
art (Verhoeven et al., 2013) by 10%, achieving av-
erage F-Score of 79.35%. Values and Ethics: A
SVM-based values classifiers achieves an average
F-Score of 81%. Features used in this model (both
personality and values) are reported in Table 3.

4 Semantic Interpretation of
Communities

A community in a social network is considered to
be a group of nodes densely connected internally
and sparsely connected externally. In this paper,
we attempt to understand whether individuals in
a community possess similar personalities, values
and ethical background.

In order to analyze the behaviour of opti-
mists/pessimists at societal level, the egocentric
twitter network released by SNAP is used. The
Twitter network, released by SNAP (Leskovec and
Krevl, 2015) (nodes: 81,306, edges: 1,768,149)
has been used to study community structure. We
considered 1,562 ground-truth communities (af-
ter discarding communities having size less than
5 and with tweets less than 100).

In order to analyze whether people within the
same community tend to be homogeneous with re-
spect to their background values/ethics, we mea-
sure Shannon’s Entropy (measure of the uncer-
tainty) (Lin, 1991) for each dimension separately.

Higher entropy scores suggest lower similar-
ity. To calculate the entropy score vector X(i)
for a community C(i) consisting of n users as
u(1), u(2), u(3)...u(n), a matrix A(i) is created
where A(i,j) row vector represents the estimated
scores of each of the ten values for a user u(j)
and A(i,:,k) column vector represents the esti-
mated scores of kth class for all n users. The
A(i,:,k) column vector was transformed to a prob-
ability distribution vector N(i,:,k) using softmax-
normalization:

4

421



N(i,j,k) =
exp(A(i,j,k))

||exp(A(i,:,k)||1
(1)

The entropy score X(i,k) for N(i,:,k) can be cal-
culated using the following formulation:

X(i,k) = −
n∑

j=1

N(i,j,k) ∗ logN(i,j,k) (2)

AC BE CO HE PO SE SD ST TR UN
u(1) 0.91 0.47 0.02 0.07 0.32 0.24 0.65 0.78 0.94 0.10
u(2) 0.97 0.40 0.49 0.50 0.56 0.83 0.62 0.73 0.04 0.08
u(3) 0.99 0.75 0.50 0.72 0.38 0.60 0.75 0.02 0.57 0.62
u(4) 0.77 0.44 0.40 0.16 0.19 0.55 0.73 0.08 0.53 0.25
u(5) 0.29 0.02 0.26 0.56 0.41 0.23 0.95 0.02 0.79 0.86

X(i) 1.54 1.40 1.40 1.39 1.55 1.50 1.59 0.99 1.42 1.28
S(i) 0.87 -0.12 -0.12 -0.19 0.95 0.57 1.26 -2.35 0.00 -0.87
T(i) 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

Table 4: Illustrates entropy calculation for values
model. Here T(i) represents the binary estimate of
fuzzy distribution of values and S(i) represents the
zero-mean unit-variance scaled values of X(i) for
a community C(i). Similarly, binary estimates for
five personality traits P(i) of user u(i) are calcu-
lated.

After normalization, N(i,:,k) vector represents
the probability distribution of kth value class
across n users where entropy score X(i,k) rep-
resents the randomness in community along kth

value class. The lower the randomness, higher the
kth class is dominant in the C(i) community. Now,
in order to obtain binary estimates T(i) for each
of the ten values and classes in C(i) community,
the entropy score vector X(i) is scaled using zero-
mean unit-variance method and for numerical val-
ues greater than 0, 1 was assigned and for numer-
ical values less than 0, 0 was assigned as class
label for C(i) community. Instead of labelling a
community C(i) with a class having minimum en-
tropy, the scaling approach is used for the purpose
of preserving the fuzzy distribution of values at
community level. The obtained T(i) vector rep-
resents the fuzzy distribution of values and is thus
a representation to capture the semantic informa-
tion about the community. Having built the model
and the classifiers we now try to understand the
Psycho-Sociological aspects of the mention net-
work in Twitter.

5 Understanding Psycho-Sociological
Aspects of Twitter Mention Network

Network Creation: From the obtained tweets of
the SNAP dataset, community level communica-

tion networks were created by looking at the @
mention in users tweets. For the network cre-
ation, Gephi API3 is used. In the networks each
node represents a user in the network and the
edge represents mention link. The users who are
never mentioned by somebody and never men-
tioned someone else were discarded at this stage
as they will not contribute anything in understand-
ing the dynamics of intra-community mention net-
work. Once networks were formed, we analyzed
their detailed characteristics. For example, let us
take into consideration the following network in
Figure 1 in order to analyze the following parame-
ters. The nodes in the network represent the users
are in the network and the edges represents the
connection between the users. It is also important
to note that not all the users in the network might
not be connected. For example, when we take Fig-
ure 1 into consideration we are able to find that
there are a total of 10 users labeled from A to J and
6 nodes(users) are connected within the network
whereas 4 nodes (users) are disconnected from the
network. After we created the network we tried to
understand the level of connectivity, after which
we analyzed the community type and the person-
ality type along with the mention pattern.

Figure 1: The network of users

Understanding the Level of Connectivity: To
understand the dynamics of intra-community men-
tion network we calculate user specific eigen-
vector centrality (Newman, 2008). Consider the
centrality of vertex i could be denoted by xi, could
be calculated by making xi proportional to the av-
erage of the centralities of i’s network neighbors
which is given in the below formula:

1/λ

n∑

j=1

Aijxj (3)

, where λ is a constant. Let us assume the exam-
3
https://gephi.org/

5

422



ple of Figure 1 here. In this case the eigen-vector
centrality for each node [A, B, C,....I, J] is calcu-
lated. The centrality measure is one of the most
fundamental measure in the network structure. It
is used to determine the central node, and helps in
identifying the centralized person who other peo-
ple are connected with in the social network (New-
man, 2008).

Community Type and Mention Patterns: Af-
ter calculating the eigen-vector centrality at the
user level i.e for each nodes, we calculated the
eigen-vector centrality for each community. This
analysis was done in order to determine how the
users behave with each others within their own
community. Now, lets say user ui is connected
with n number of users [uj , uk, ..., un,] via men-
tion links within a community. From Figure 1,we
are able to notice that A is connected to C,H,B and
I. D is connected indirectly to A via node H and
hence we consider D only while calculating the
eigen-vector centrality for node H. Now for user
A, we calculate pair-wise eigen-vector centrality
between each pair of users [(A, B), (A, C), (A, H),
(A, I)] and obtain a vector for the user A. To get the
final average intra-community connectivity score
for user A, all the n scores are further averaged
by dividing their sum by n. The score that is ob-
tained now is the average connectivity of the user
A within the community. Following this method
we obtain connectivity score of all the users within
the community and those scores are then further
averaged by the total number of users (excluding
users who never got mentioned or never mention
someone else) within the community. This score
obtained is the average score of the community
for that particular user. Similarly, average con-
nectivity scores are calculated for each community
in the SNAP network and further those obtained
scores are averaged based on community type (i.e.,
power, hedonic, etc.). These category-wise aver-
age connectivity scores are finally reported to un-
derstand the intra-community psycho-sociological
aspects of the Twitter mention network.

Personality Type and Mention Patterns: To
understand who is mentioning whom we consider
user specific average eigen-vector centrality. For
example, in the first iteration we take all the open
type people and find out their average eigen-vector
centrality over all communities. Then we further
divide them into 5 classes (i.e., open, conscien-
tious, etc.). Thus class-to-class average connec-

tivity (i.e., open-open, open-conscientious, open-
extrovert, open-agreeable, and open-neurotic) was
obtained. This process was repeated for all other
personality types.

Finally, for more granular understanding the
eigen-vector centrality scores were divided into
three bands - high, mid, and low. These values
were then scaled between 0-100 by looking at the
overall connectivity score (high, low) distribution
at corpus level as shown in Figure 3.

6 Obtained Mention Network Patterns

We present our findings in three parts. First part
details psycho-sociological patterns of the men-
tion network, whereas the second part tries to an-
swer the question – who-mentions-whom? Finally
we try to analyze the relationship between close-
ness and reciprocity of the community with differ-
ent community sizes.

Figure 2: Communication within each community
of the values model

Psycho-Sociological Patterns of Mention
Network: Figure 2 reports obtained results of our
empirical analysis. Results indicate that mem-
bers from stimulation, achievement, and benev-
olent communities are closely connected among
themselves while the members in other commu-
nities do not show significant connectivity among
themselves.

We also observe that people who are indepen-
dent, i.e, self-directed do not involve much in con-
necting themselves with other members in their

6

423



(a) Low connectivity (b) Medium connectivity (c) High connectivity

Figure 3: Psycho-sociological patterns of Twitter mentions network

community. Security oriented people i.e., those
who follow strict rules and regulations are found
to have reasonably balanced connectivity. Peo-
ple belonging to the traditional groups who fol-
low rituals blindly, are loosely connected to the
world. One significant observation was that the
universal people, who are the people tending to be
more inclined towards social justice and tolerance
show high connectivity with other people in the
community. Further analysis reveal that in general
universal people tend to unicast (i.e., @mention
someone specific) messages rather than broadcast
, which is justifiable to their nature. The mem-
bers of power-oriented communities are those who
seek to dominate other people in their community
and hence the communication is low among these
people.

Node Closeness
A 0.40
B 0.31
C 0.25
D 0.21
E 0.0
F 0.0
G 0.0
H 0.31
I 0.21
J 0.0

Table 5: Closeness Centrality for Figure 1

Who-Mentions-Whom: Results of this analy-
sis is reported in Figures 3a, 3b and 3c. The re-
sult is presented in three sets i.e., low, medium,
high connectivity. We notice that in the highly
connected communities, the neurotic people who
are mostly tense, moody, anxious are more con-
nected to other people in the network. Agreeable
and conscientious people also maintain a good re-

lationship with others. In the case of medium and
low connected communities , the neurotic peo-
ple tend to maintain good connectivity with oth-
ers than people possessing other values. We also
infer that extroverts (high,mid and low) also tend
to broadcast their messages rather than sending it
to someone specific, therefore their connectivity is
low in the mention network.

Similar practice has also been noticed by open
people in low connected group. Therefore, we
can conclude universal, extrovert, and open peo-
ple prefer broadcasting over unicasting messages
(via @ mention)

Closeness vs Reciprocity: In a connected
graph,the closeness or the closeness centrality of
a node is used to measure how close a particular
node is with respect to other nodes in the network.
It is calculated as the sum of the lengths of the
shortest paths between the particular node and the
other nodes in the graph. It can be seen that, the
more central the node is, the more closer it is to
the other nodes.

For example, in Figure 1 we are able to find
that node A is more closely associated with other
nodes and has the highest closeness centrality
among the other nodes. It is also observed from
Table 5 that those nodes which are not connected
in the network shown in Figure 1 are having 0 as
their closeness centrality measure.

The social norm of reciprocity is the expectation
that people will respond to each other in similar
ways. Therefore in a mention network, if a partic-
ular user mentions another user in his/her tweet
and the other user on the other hand mentions
him/her back then we can find that reciprocity can
be achieved between those two users. The result
is provided as an analysis of closeness vs reci-
procity for various sizes of the community in Fig-
ure 4. From the analysis, we observe that as the
size of the community increases the reciprocity de-

7

424



(a) Community Size = 6 (b) Community Size = 7 (c) Community Size = 8

(d) Community Size = 9
(e) Community Size = 11

(f) Community Size = 15

(g) Community Size = 16

Figure 4: Closeness vs. Reciprocity for various community sizes

creases and the closeness increases. This is be-
cause the closeness centrality is calculated for an
entire network and hence as the size of the network
increases the closeness tend to increase.

Reciprocity on the other hand is calculated for
the mentions network and as the size of the net-
work increases there is a high chance that two
users do not mention each other in their tweets.
Let us consider one example from our analysis,
here we consider the self-directed community of
people of community size 15 and 16 respectively.
From Figure 4 we are able to find that as the size
of the community increases from 15 to 16 the reci-
procity decreases and the closeness increases.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper presents an empirical analysis to un-
derstand the psycho-sociological aspects of Twit-
ter mentions network within a social network com-
munity. Here, we take the explanatory approach;
however, we strongly believe that the obtained em-
pirical results could be further used to predict indi-

vidual/group communication behavior. We would
be woking on finding similar patterns in (i) Twitter
favorite network i.e., who has liked whom, and (ii)
Retweets network i.e., who retweets whose tweet.
We would also like to understand inter-community
mention network pattern – i.e., is there any selec-
tional preference when someone chooses to com-
municate with someone outside his/her commu-
nity? We believe that this kind of models may
become extremely useful in the future for vari-
ous purposes like Internet advertising (specifically
social media advertising), community detection,
computational psychology, recommendation sys-
tems, sociological analysis over social media.Now
that we have calculated various measures and ob-
tained analytical results. In the future, based on
these results given a community we try to predict
who will mention whom?

References
Andrea Apolloni, Karthik Channakeshava, Lisa

Durbeck, Maleq Khan, Chris Kuhlman, Bryan

8

425



Lewis, and Samarth Swarup. 2009. A study of in-
formation diffusion over a realistic social network
model. In Computational Science and Engineering,
2009. CSE’09. International Conference on, vol-
ume 4, pages 675–682. IEEE.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In LREC, volume 10, pages 2200–2204.

Fabio Celli, Fabio Pianesi, David Stillwell, and Michal
Kosinski. 2013. Workshop on computational per-
sonality recognition (shared task). In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Personality Recog-
nition.

Fabio Celli, Bruno Lepri, Joan-Isaac Biel, Daniel
Gatica-Perez, Giuseppe Riccardi, and Fabio Pianesi.
2014. The workshop on computational personal-
ity recognition 2014. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM international conference on Multimedia, pages
1245–1246. ACM.

David Roxbee Cox and David Oakes. 1984. Analysis
of survival data, volume 21. CRC Press.

Lewis R Goldberg. 1990. An alternative” de-
scription of personality”: the big-five factor struc-
ture. Journal of personality and social psychology,
59(6):1216.

Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, Jure Leskovec, and Bern-
hard Schölkopf. 2013. Structure and dynamics of
information pathways in online media. In Proceed-
ings of the sixth ACM international conference on
Web search and data mining, pages 23–32. ACM.

Masahiro Kimura, Kazumi Saito, Ryohei Nakano, and
Hiroshi Motoda. 2010. Extracting influential nodes
on a social network for information diffusion. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 20(1):70–97.

Jure Leskovec and Andrej Krevl. 2015. {SNAP
Datasets}:{Stanford} large network dataset collec-
tion.

Jianhua Lin. 1991. Divergence measures based on the
shannon entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information
theory, 37(1):145–151.

Tushar Maheshwari, Aishwarya N Reganti, Upendra
Kumar, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Amitava Das.
2017. Semantic interpretation of social network
communities. In AAAI, pages 4967–4968.

Saif M Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiao-
dan Zhu. 2013. Nrc-canada: Building the state-
of-the-art in sentiment analysis of tweets. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1308.6242.

Mark EJ Newman. 2008. The mathematics of net-
works. The new palgrave encyclopedia of eco-
nomics, 2(2008):1–12.

Daniele Quercia, Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, and
Jon Crowcroft. 2011. Our twitter profiles, our
selves: Predicting personality with twitter. In Pri-
vacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011
IEEE Third Inernational Conference on Social Com-
puting (SocialCom), 2011 IEEE Third International
Conference on, pages 180–185. IEEE.

Daniel M Romero, Brendan Meeder, and Jon Klein-
berg. 2011. Differences in the mechanics of in-
formation diffusion across topics: idioms, politi-
cal hashtags, and complex contagion on twitter. In
Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
World wide web, pages 695–704. ACM.

Shalom H Schwartz and Wolfgang Bilsky. 1990. To-
ward a theory of the universal content and struc-
ture of values: Extensions and cross-cultural replica-
tions. Journal of personality and social psychology,
58(5):878.

Shalom H Schwartz. 1992. Universals in the content
and structure of values: Theoretical advances and
empirical tests in 20 countries. Advances in experi-
mental social psychology, 25:1–65.

Shalom H Schwartz. 2012. An overview of the
schwartz theory of basic values. Online readings in
Psychology and Culture, 2(1):11.

Ben Verhoeven, Walter Daelemans, and Tom
De Smedt. 2013. Ensemble methods for personality
recognition. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Computational Personality Recognition, pages
35–38.

Mudasir Wani and Manzoor Ahmad. 2014. Survey of
information diffusion over interaction networks of
twitter. International Journal of Computer Applica-
tion, 3(4):310–313.

Jiang Yang and Scott Counts. 2010. Predicting the
speed, scale, and range of information diffusion in
twitter. ICWSM, 10:355–358.

Tauhid R Zaman, Ralf Herbrich, Jurgen Van Gael, and
David Stern. 2010. Predicting information spread-
ing in twitter. In Workshop on computational social
science and the wisdom of crowds, nips, volume 104,
pages 17599–601. Citeseer.

9

426


