



















































Does the Geometry of Word Embeddings Help Document Classification? A Case Study on Persistent Homology-Based Representations


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, pages 235–240,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Does the Geometry of Word Embeddings Help Document Classification?
A Case Study on Persistent Homology Based Representations

Paul Michel∗
Carnegie Mellon University
pmichel1@cs.cmu.edu

Abhilasha Ravichander∗
Carnegie Mellon University
aravicha@cs.cmu.edu

Shruti Rijhwani∗
Carnegie Mellon University
srijhwan@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We investigate the pertinence of meth-
ods from algebraic topology for text data
analysis. These methods enable the de-
velopment of mathematically-principled
isometric-invariant mappings from a set of
vectors to a document embedding, which
is stable with respect to the geometry of
the document in the selected metric space.
In this work, we evaluate the utility of
these topology-based document represen-
tations in traditional NLP tasks, specifi-
cally document clustering and sentiment
classification. We find that the embed-
dings do not benefit text analysis. In fact,
performance is worse than simple tech-
niques like tf-idf, indicating that the ge-
ometry of the document does not provide
enough variability for classification on the
basis of topic or sentiment in the chosen
datasets.

1 Introduction

Given a embedding model mapping words to n di-
mensional vectors, every document can be repre-
sented as a finite subset of Rn. Comparing doc-
uments then amounts to comparing such subsets.
While previous work shows that the Earth Mover’s
Distance (Kusner et al., 2015) or distance between
the weighted average of word vectors (Arora et al.,
2017) provides information that is useful for clas-
sification tasks, we wish to go a step further and
investigate whether useful information can also be
found in the ‘shape’ of a document in word em-
bedding space.

Persistent homology is a tool from algebraic
topology used to compute topological signatures
(called persistence diagrams) on compact metric

∗*The indicated authors contributed equally to this work.

spaces. These have the property of being sta-
ble with respect to the Gromov-Haussdorff dis-
tance (Gromov et al., 1981). In other words, com-
pact metric spaces that are close, up to an isometry,
will have similar embeddings. In this work, we ex-
amine the utility of such embeddings in text clas-
sification tasks. To the best of our knowledge, no
previous work has been performed on using topo-
logical representations for traditional NLP tasks,
nor has any comparison been made with state-of-
the-art approaches.

We begin by considering a document as the set
of its word vectors, generated with a pretrained
word embedding model. These form the metric
space on which we build persistence diagrams, us-
ing Euclidean distance as the distance measure.
The diagrams are a representation of the docu-
ment’s geometry in the metric space. We then per-
form clustering on the Twenty Newsgroups dataset
with the features extracted from the persistence
diagram. We also evaluate the method on senti-
ment classification tasks, using the Cornell Sen-
tence Polarity (CSP) (Pang and Lee, 2005) and
IMDb movie review datasets (Maas et al., 2011).

As suggested by Zhu (2013), we posit that the
information about the intrinsic geometry of doc-
uments, found in the persistence diagrams, might
yield information that our classifier can leverage,
either on its own or in combination with other rep-
resentations. The primary objective of our work
is to empirically evaluate these representations in
the case of sentiment and topic classification, and
assess their usefulness for real-world tasks.

2 Method

2.1 Word embeddings

As a first step we compute word vectors for
each document in our corpus using a word2vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013) model trained on the Google

235



News dataset1. In addition to being a widely used
word embedding technique, word2vec has been
known to exhibit interesting linear properties with
respect to analogies (Mikolov et al., 2013), which
hints at rich semantic structure.

2.2 Gromov-Haussdorff Distance
Given a dictionary of word vectors of dimension
n, we can represent any document as a finite subset
of Rn. The Haussdorff distance gives us a way to
evaluate the distance between two such sets. More
precisely, the Haussdorff distance dH between two
finite subsets A, B of Rn is defined as:

dH(A, B) = max(sup
a∈A

d(a, B), sup
b∈B

d(b, A))

where d(x, Y ) = infy∈Y ‖x − y‖2 is the distance
of point x from set Y .

However, this distance is sensitive to transla-
tions and other isometric2 transformations. Hence,
a more natural metric is the Gromov-Haussdorff
distance (Gromov et al., 1981), simply defined as

dGH(A, B) = inf
f∈En

dH(A, f(B))

where En is the set of all isometries of Rn.
Figure 1 provides an example of practical

Gromov-Haussdorff (GH) distance computation
between two sets of three points each. Both sets
are embedded in R2 (middle panel) using isome-
tries i.e the distance between points in each set is
conserved. The Haussdorff distance between the
two embedded sets corresponds to the length of
the black segment. The GH distance is the min-
imum Haussdorff distance under all possible iso-
metric embeddings.

We want to compare documents based on their
intrinsic geometric properties. Intuitively, the GH
distance measures how far two sets are from being
isometric. This allows us to define the geometry
of a document more precisely:

Definition 1 (Document Geometry) We say that
two documents A, B have the same geometry if
dGH(A, B) = 0, ie if they are the same up to an
isometry.

Mathematically speaking, this amounts to defin-
ing the geometry of a document as its equivalence
class under the equivalence relation induced by the
GH distance on the set of all documents.

1https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
2f : Rn −→ Rn is isometric if it is distance preserving,

ie ∀x, y ∈ Rn, ‖f(x)−f(y)‖2 = ‖x−y‖2. Rotations, trans-
lations and reflections are examples of (linear) isometries.

Figure 1: Gromov-Haussdorff distance between
two sets (red, green). The black bar represents the
actual distance (given that the isometric embed-
ding is optimal).

Comparison to the Earth Mover Distance :
Kusner et al. (2015) proposed a new method for
computing a distance between documents based
on an instance of the Earth Mover Distance (Rub-
ner et al., 1998) called Word Mover Distance
(WMD). While WMD quantifies the total cost of
matching all words of one document to another,
the GH distance is the cost, up to an isometry, of
the worst-case matching.

2.3 Persistence diagrams

Efficiently computing the GH distance is still an
open problem despite a lot of recent work in this
area (Mémoli and Sapiro, 2005; Bronstein et al.,
2006; Mémoli, 2007; Agarwal et al., 2015).

Fortunately, Carrière et al. (2015) provides us
with a way to derive a signature which is stable
with respect to the GH distance. More specifi-
cally, given a finite point cloud A ⊂ Rn, the per-
sistence diagram of the Vietori-Rips filtration on
A, Dg(A), can be computed. This approach is
inspired by persistent homology, a subfield of al-
gebraic topology.

The rigorous definition of these notions is not
the crux of this paper and we will only present
them informally. The curious reader is invited to
refer to Zhu (2013) for a short introduction. More
details are in Delfinado and Edelsbrunner (1995);
Edelsbrunner et al. (2002); Robins (1999).

A persistence diagram is a scatter plot of 2-D
points representing the appearance and disappear-
ance of geometric features3 under varying reso-
lutions. This can be imagined as replacing each
point by a sphere of increasing radius.

We use the procedure described in Carrière et al.

3such as connected components, holes or empty hulls

236



Figure 2: Method Pipeline

(2015) to derive fixed-sized vectors from persis-
tence diagrams. These vectors have the follow-
ing property: if A and B are two finite sub-
sets of Rn, Dg(A) and Dg(B) are their persis-
tence diagrams, N = max(|Dg(A)|, |Dg(B)|)
and VA, VB ∈ R

N(N−1)
2 , then

‖VA − VB‖2 6
√

2N(N − 1)dGH(A, B)
In other words, the resulting signatures VA and VB
are stable with respect to the GH distance. The
size of the vectors are dependent on the underlying
sets A and B. However, as is argued in Carrière
et al. (2015), we can truncate the vectors to a di-
mension fixed across our dataset while preserving
the stability property (albeit losing some of the
representative ability of the signatures).

3 Experiments

3.1 Experiments
The pipeline for our experiments is shown in Fig-
ure 2. In order to build a persistence diagram,
we convert each document to the set of its word
vectors. We then use Dionysus (Morozov, 2008–
2016), a C++ library for computing persistence di-
agrams, and form the signatures described in 2.3.
We will subsequently refer to these diagrams as
Persistent Homology (PH) embeddings. Once we
have the embeddings for each document, they can
be used as input to standard clustering or classifi-
cation algorithms.

As a baseline document representation, we use
the average of the word vectors for that document
(subsequently called AW2V embeddings).

For clustering, we experiment with K-means
and Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) on a sub-
set4 of the Twenty Newsgroups dataset. The sub-
set was selected to ensure that most documents
are from related topics, making clustering non-
trivial, and the documents are of reasonable length
to compute the representation.

4alt.atheism, sci.space and talk.religion.misc categories

For classification, we perform both sentence-
level and document-level binary sentiment classi-
fication using logistic regression on the CSP and
IMDb corpora respectively.

4 Results

4.1 Hyper-parameters

Our method depends on very few hyper-
parameters. Our main choices are listed below.

Choice of distance We experimented with both
euclidean distance and cosine similarity (angular
distance). After preliminary experiments, we de-
termined that both performed equally and hence,
we only report results with the euclidean distance.

Persistence diagram computation The hyper-
parameters of the diagram computation are mono-
tonic and mostly control the degree of approxima-
tion. We set them to the highest values that al-
lowed our experiment to run in reasonable time5.

4.2 Document Clustering

We perform clustering experiments with the base-
line document features (AW2V), tf-idf and our PH
signatures. Figure 3 shows the B-Cubed preci-
sion, recall and F1-Score of each method (metrics
as defined in Amigó et al. (2009)). To further as-
sess the utility of PH embeddings, we concatenate
them with AW2V to obtain a third representation,
AW2V+PH.

With GMM and AW2V+PH, the F1-Score of
clustering is 0.499. In terms of F1 and precision,
we see that tf-idf representations perform better
than PH, for reasons that we will discuss in later
sections. In terms of recall, PH as well as AW2V
perform fairly well. Importantly, we see that all
the metrics for PH are significantly above the ran-
dom baseline, indicating that some valuable infor-
mation is contained in them.

4.3 Sentiment Classification

4.3.1 Sentence-Level Sentiment Analysis
We evaluate our method on the CSP dataset6. The
results are presented in Table 1. For comparison,
we provide results for one of the state of the art
models, a CNN-based sentence classifier (Kim,

5Selected such that the computation of the diagram of the
longest file in the training data took less than 10 minutes.

6For lack of a canonical split, we use a random 10% of
the dataset as a test set

237



Figure 3: Results for clustering on 3 subclasses of the Twenty Newsgroups dataset

Model Accuracy
CNN Non-Static 81.5%
PH + LogReg 53.19%
AW2V + LogReg 77.13%
AW2V + PH + LogReg 77.13%

Table 1: Performance on the CSP dataset

Model Accuracy
Paragraph Vector 92.58%
PH + LogReg 53.16%
AW2V + LogReg 82.94%
AW2V + PH + LogReg 83.08%

Table 2: Performance on the IMDb dataset

2014). We observe that by themselves, PH em-
beddings are not useful at predicting the sentiment
of each sentence. AW2V gives reasonable perfor-
mance in this task, but combining the two repre-
sentations does not impact the accuracy at all.

4.3.2 Document-Level Sentiment Analysis

We perform document-level binary sentiment clas-
sification on the IMDb Movie Reviews Dataset
(Maas et al., 2011). We use sentence vectors in
this experiment, each of which is the average of
the word vectors in that sentence. The results are
presented in Table 2. We compare our results with
the paragraph-vector approach (Le and Mikolov,
2014). We observe that PH embeddings perform
poorly on this dataset. Similar to the CSP dataset,
AW2V embeddings give acceptable results. The
combined representation performs slightly better,
but not by a margin of significance.

5 Discussion and Analysis

As seen in Figure 3, the PH representation does
not outperform tf-idf or AW2V, and in fact often
doesn’t perform much better than chance.

One possible reason is linked to the nature of
our datasets: the computation of the persistence
diagram is very sensitive to the size of the docu-
ments. The geometry of small documents, where
the number of words is negligible with respect
to the dimensionality of the word vectors, is not
very rich. The resulting topological signatures are
very sparse, which is a problem for CSP as well
as documents in IMDb and Twenty Newsgroups
that contain only one line. On the opposite side of
the spectrum, persistence diagrams are intractable
to compute without down-sampling for very long
documents (which in turn negatively impacts the
representation of smaller documents).

We performed an additional experiment on a
subset of the IMDb corpus that only contained
documents of reasonable length, but obtained sim-
ilar results. This indicates that the poor perfor-
mance of PH representations, even when com-
bined with other features (AW2V), cannot be ex-
plained only by limitations of the data.

These observations lead to the conclusion that,
for these datasets, the intrinsic geometry of doc-
uments in the word2vec semantic space does not
help text classification tasks.

6 Related Work

Learning distributed representations of sentences
or documents for downstream classification and
information retrieval tasks has received recent at-
tention owing to their utility in several applica-
tions, be it representations trained on the sen-

238



tence/paragraph level Le and Mikolov (2014);
Kiros et al. (2015) or purely word vector based
methods Arora et al. (2017).

Document classification and clustering (Willett,
1988; Hotho et al., 2005; Steinbach et al., 2000;
Huang, 2008; Xu and Gong, 2004; Kuang et al.,
2015; Miller et al., 2016) and sentiment classifi-
cation (Nakagawa et al., 2010; Kim, 2014; Wang
and Manning, 2012) are relatively well studied.

Topological data analysis has been used for var-
ious tasks such as 3D shapes classification (Chazal
et al., 2009) or protein structure analysis (Xia and
Wei, 2014). However, such techniques have not
been used in NLP, primarily because the theory is
inaccessible and suitable applications are scarce.
Zhu (2013) offers an introduction to using per-
sistent homology in NLP, by creating represen-
tations of nursery-rhymes and novels, as well as
highlights structural differences between child and
adolescent writing. However, these techniques
have not been applied to core NLP tasks.

7 Conclusion

Based on our experiments, using persistence di-
agrams for text representation does not seem to
positively contribute to document clustering and
sentiment classification tasks. There are certainly
merits to the method, specifically its strong math-
ematical foundation and its domain-independent,
unsupervised nature. Theoretically, algebraic
topology has the ability to capture structural con-
text, and this could potentially benefit syntax-
based NLP tasks such as parsing. We plan to in-
vestigate this connection in the future.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Information Innovation Office (I2O) under the
Low Resource Languages for Emergent Incidents
(LORELEI) program issued by DARPA/I2O un-
der Contract No. HR0011-15-C-0114. The views
expressed are those of the authors and do not re-
flect the official policy or position of the Depart-
ment of Defense or the U.S. Government.

We are grateful to Matt Gormley, Hyun Ah
Song, Shivani Poddar and Hai Pham for their sug-
gestions on the writing of this paper as well as to
Steve Oudot for pointing us to helpful references.
We would also like to thank the anonymous ACL
reviewers for their valuable suggestions.

References
Pankaj K Agarwal, Kyle Fox, Abhinandan Nath, Anas-

tasios Sidiropoulos, and Yusu Wang. 2015. Com-
puting the gromov-hausdorff distance for metric
trees. In International Symposium on Algorithms
and Computation. Springer, pages 529–540.

Enrique Amigó, Julio Gonzalo, Javier Artiles, and
Felisa Verdejo. 2009. A comparison of extrinsic
clustering evaluation metrics based on formal con-
straints. Information retrieval 12(4):461–486.

Sanjeev Arora, Yingyu Liang, and Tengyu Ma. 2017.
A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for sentence em-
beddings. In International Conference on Learning
Representations. To Appear.

Alexander M Bronstein, Michael M Bronstein,
and Ron Kimmel. 2006. Efficient computation
of isometry-invariant distances between surfaces.
SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 28(5):1812–
1836.

Mathieu Carrière, Steve Y Oudot, and Maks Ovs-
janikov. 2015. Stable topological signatures for
points on 3d shapes. In Computer Graphics Forum.
Wiley Online Library, volume 34, pages 1–12.

Frédéric Chazal, David Cohen-Steiner, Leonidas J
Guibas, Facundo Mémoli, and Steve Y Oudot. 2009.
Gromov-hausdorff stable signatures for shapes using
persistence. In Computer Graphics Forum. Wiley
Online Library, volume 28, pages 1393–1403.

Cecil Jose A Delfinado and Herbert Edelsbrunner.
1995. An incremental algorithm for betti numbers
of simplicial complexes on the 3-sphere. Computer
Aided Geometric Design 12(7):771–784.

Herbert Edelsbrunner, David Letscher, and Afra
Zomorodian. 2002. Topological persistence and
simplification. Discrete and Computational Geome-
try 28(4):511–533.

Mikhael Gromov, Jacques Lafontaine, and Pierre
Pansu. 1981. Structures métriques pour les variétés
riemanniennes .

Andreas Hotho, Andreas Nürnberger, and Gerhard
Paaß. 2005. A brief survey of text mining. In Ldv
Forum.

Anna Huang. 2008. Similarity measures for text doc-
ument clustering. In Proceedings of the sixth new
zealand computer science research student confer-
ence (NZCSRSC2008), Christchurch, New Zealand.
pages 49–56.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In In EMNLP.

Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Ruslan R Salakhutdinov,
Richard Zemel, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Skip-thought vectors. In
Advances in neural information processing systems.
pages 3294–3302.

239



Da Kuang, Jaegul Choo, and Haesun Park. 2015. Non-
negative matrix factorization for interactive topic
modeling and document clustering. In Partitional
Clustering Algorithms, Springer, pages 215–243.

Matt J Kusner, Yu Sun, Nicholas I Kolkin, Kilian Q
Weinberger, et al. 2015. From word embeddings
to document distances. In ICML. volume 15, pages
957–966.

Quoc V. Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed rep-
resentations of sentences and documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 31th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2014, Beijing, China, 21-
26 June 2014. pages 1188–1196.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham,
Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts.
2011. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Portland, Oregon, USA, pages
142–150. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-
1015.

Facundo Mémoli. 2007. On the use of gromov-
hausdorff distances for shape comparison .

Facundo Mémoli and Guillermo Sapiro. 2005. A the-
oretical and computational framework for isometry
invariant recognition of point cloud data. Founda-
tions of Computational Mathematics 5(3):313–347.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems. pages 3111–3119.

Timothy A Miller, Dmitriy Dligach, and Guergana K
Savova. 2016. Unsupervised document classifica-
tion with informed topic models. ACL .

Dmitriy Morozov. 2008–2016. Dyonisus : a c++ li-
brary for computing persistent homology. http:
//mrzv.org/software/dionysus/.

Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, and Sadao Kuro-
hashi. 2010. Dependency tree-based sentiment
classification using crfs with hidden variables.
In Human Language Technologies: The 2010
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, HLT ’10, pages 786–794.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1857999.1858119.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Exploit-
ing class relationships for sentiment categorization
with respect to rating scales. In Proceedings of the
ACL.

Vanessa Robins. 1999. Towards computing homology
from finite approximations. In Topology proceed-
ings. volume 24, pages 503–532.

Yossi Rubner, Carlo Tomasi, and Leonidas J Guibas.
1998. A metric for distributions with applications to
image databases. In Computer Vision, 1998. Sixth
International Conference on. IEEE, pages 59–66.

Michael Steinbach, George Karypis, Vipin Kumar,
et al. 2000. A comparison of document clustering
techniques. In KDD workshop on text mining.

Sida Wang and Christopher D. Manning. 2012.
Baselines and bigrams: Simple, good sentiment
and topic classification. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Short Papers - Volume
2. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL ’12, pages 90–94.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2390665.2390688.

Peter Willett. 1988. Recent trends in hierarchic docu-
ment clustering: a critical review. Information Pro-
cessing & Management 24(5):577–597.

Kelin Xia and Guo-Wei Wei. 2014. Persistent ho-
mology analysis of protein structure, flexibility, and
folding. International journal for numerical meth-
ods in biomedical engineering 30(8):814–844.

Wei Xu and Yihong Gong. 2004. Document
clustering by concept factorization. In Pro-
ceedings of the 27th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-
opment in Information Retrieval. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, SIGIR ’04, pages 202–209.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1008992.1009029.

Xiaojin Zhu. 2013. Persistent homology: An introduc-
tion and a new text representation for natural lan-
guage processing. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

240


