32

Proceedings of the LT4DHCSEE in conjunction with RANLP 2017, pages 32–38,

Varna, Bulgaria, 8 September 2017.

http://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-046-5_005

Language Technologies in Teaching Bulgarian at  

Primary and Secondary School Level: 

 The NBU Platform for Language Teaching (PLT) 

 

 

Maria Stambolieva, Milka Hadjikoteva, Mariya Neykova  

(Laboratory for Language Technologies, NBU),  

Valentina Ivanova, Mariana Raykova (Digital Innovation Laboratory, NBU)  

 

 
 
 
 

Abstract 

The  NBU  Language  Teaching  Platform 
(PLT)  is  a  versatile  tool  supporting  lan-
guage  learning.  So  far  used  for  FLSP  e-
tuition  or  blended  learning  in  general  for-
eign  language  classes,  it  is  now  being  ex-
tended  to  provide  e-support  for  teaching 
Bulgarian at primary and secondary school 
level.  Methodologically,  it  compensates 
for  some  of  the  major  drawbacks  of  the 
functional/CLT  approaches  to  language 
teaching.   The  article  presents  the  general 
structure of the platform and the function-
alities  specifically developed to  match  the 
standards  and  expected  results  set  by  the 
Bulgarian Ministry of Education. 

1  Aim of the project 

The  Platform  for  Language  Teaching  (PLT)  was 
developed as a teaching tool enhancing the Moo-
dle-supported  e-tuition  for  blended  learning  at 
NBU, as a complement to the standard communi-
cative methods of the language classroom. It was 
designed  by  a  team  of  university  experts  in  the 
field of pedagogy and the methodology of foreign 
language  learning  and  was  initially  devised  as  a 
necessary supplement to foreign language classes. 
In  view  of  its  new  application  to  Bulgarian  lan-
guage  teaching  at  primary  and  secondary  school 
level, new corpora and functionalities are now be-
ing  developed  in  accordance  with  standards  and 
programs  recently  published  by  the  Bulgarian 
Ministry  of  Education1,  and  with  the  new  chal-

                                                      
1 
http://zareformata.mon.bg/documents/naredba_6_11.08.2016
_bg_ezik.pdf, www.mon.bg/?h=downloadFile&fileId=546  

lenges posed by the need to teach Bulgarian (lan-
guage  skills,  basic  linguistic  knowledge  and  fa-
miliarity with Bulgarian literature) to students for 
whom  it  is  not  a  native  language.   The  platform 
provides  individualised  tuition  for  students  who 
prefer  to  work  on  their  own,  at  their  own  pace. 
Monitoring  is  fast  and  precise,  giving  teachers 
and students detailed feedback on overall perfor-
mance and specific errors. 

2  Methodological issues 

the 

The PLT offers teaching material and drills which 
complement 
functional/CLT  method  of 
first/second language classes by compensating for 
some often noted drawbacks2, namely: 
 

•  insufficient attention to structure and form; 

•  preference for fluency over accuracy;  

•  unsystematic  presentation  and  drilling  of 

grammar; 

•  insufficient drilling of vocabulary; 

•  reliance  on  group  and  pair  work  (which  is 
not  appropriate  to  all  classroom  environ-
ments and students); 

                                                      
2 Cf. Langeveldt, H., 2012. Communicative Language 
Teaching (CLT): Strengths and Weaknesses. Accessed at: 
https://issuu.com/miriamsheen/docs/_clt_strengths_and_weak
nesses; Sumhachalam Thamarana 2015. A Critical Over-
view of Communicative Language Teaching. International 
Journal of English Language Literature and Humanities, 
vol. III, Issue V, July 2015. Accessed at 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282877159_A_Criti
cal_Overview_of_Communicative_Language_Teaching. 

33

 

Figure 1. Structure of the platform: modules 

•  toleration of errors (seen by CLT as a natu-
ral part of the process of language learning); 

•  exclusion of the student’s native language; 

•  inappropriateness for beginners; 

•  problems of monitoring. 

The new functions of the PLT as a tool for Bul-

garian  language  teaching  as  both  a  native  and  
second/foreign  language  require  the  development 
of a new corpus and a new data base, the design of 
new sets of drills on:  

 
•  Bulgarian  vocabulary  (general  vocabulary 
and  terms3,  multi-word  lexemes,  colloca-
tions and phraseological units); 

•  Bulgarian  practical  grammar  (gender,  num-
ber,  plurality  of  nouns  and  noun  satellites, 
use  of  prepositions,  verbal  Aktionsart,  
aspect, tense, word order, etc.); 

•  Basic linguistic  knowledge  (of  morphology 
and syntax — for students in the 6th and 7th 
class); 

•  Familiarity with literary texts. 

                                                      
3 The Ministry of Education does not offer clear standards 
for vocabulary skills. For each grade and class, we base our 
general vocabulary and terminology drills on textbooks and 
recommended literature.   

for 

recommended 

The tests are based on excerpts from the literary 
works 
respective 
class/educational level; the choice of texts and ex-
ercise  types  for  the  two  educational  levels  and 
groups  of  target  students  are  consulted  with  ex-
perts from the regional inspectorates of education.  

the 

3  Structure of the platform  

In accordance with its aims and functions, the PLT 
integrates: 1/ an environment for creating, organ-
ising  and  maintaining  electronic  text;  for  extract-
ing text corpora and aligning corpora; 2/ a linguis-
tic database; 3/ a set of modules for the generation 
and  editing  of  practice  exercises  for  each  text  or 
corpus; 4/ functionalities for export from the plat-
form  and  import  to  other  educational  platforms 
(Figure 1). Special modules have been created for 
test generation, performance assessment and feed-
back, allowing thus not only centralised presenta-
tion of abundant teaching content, but also control 
of  the  educational  process,  plus  fast  and  reliable 
feedback on performance4. 
`The PLT is a web-based system developed using 
a  model-view-controller  (MVC)  open  source 
framework  –  CodeIgniter  and  PHP  programming 
language.  The  framework  provides  the  core  im-
plementation  of  the  interdependences  and  the  in-
terdependences  and  the  interactions  between  the 
three tiers of the MVC architecture, while the de- 

                                                      
4 Cf. also M. Stambolieva, M. Hadjikoteva, M. Neykova, 
M. Raykova, V. Ivanova 2017. 

34

Figure 2. Platform navigation menu – access to the modules. 

Figure 3. Grouping texts into corpora 

velopers focus on the PLT specific features. 

The  MVC  modular  architecture  is  selected  for 
its  extensibility,  supportability,  scalability,  and 
maintainability.  The  modules  of  the  platform  are 
implemented following the convention: 

•  new modules for generating new types of 

exercises;  

• 

export  to  new  e-learning  platforms  in 
addition to the export to MOODLE. 

 

• 

controllers:  class  ModuleName,  extends 
CI_Controller, 
name  
ModuleName.php; 

file 

Finally, 
research platform.  

the  PLT  could  be  utilized  as  a  

 

•  models: 
extends 
ModuleName_model.php; 

class  ModuleName_model,  
CI_Model, 
name  

file 

•  views: 

 

folder  ModuleName, 

a  
corresponding  .php  file  for  each  item 
from  the  items  list  of  the  module:  
index.php, create.php, etc. 

The  PLT  stores  the  linguistic  data  in  a  relational 
database with 46 tables implemented on MySQL. 
To  provide  enhanced  user experience  and  ease 
of  use,  the  PLT  user-interface  design  is  uniform 
for all modules. PLT look-and-feel is implemented 
using  CSS3.  The  interaction  between  the  system 
and the users is direct synchronous on load of the 
module 
communication 
through AJAX  requests  for  in-module  data  man-
agement and updates. 

asynchronous 

and 

The  PLT  is  designed  for  extensibility  and 

scalability. The platform may easily integrate:  

 

•  new  modules  for  collecting  linguistic  

data;  

4  PLT modules and features 

4.1  Creating texts and corpora 

The  environment  for  the  maintenance  of  the  elec-
tronic text archive organises a variety of metadata: 
bibliographical information on the publication, pro-
fessional  area  of  the  publication,  text  difficulty  – 
with recommended level of the European language 
framework.  These  metadata,  either  individually  or 
in different combinations, form the basis for the ex-
traction  of  text  corpora.  Linguistic  analysis  is  per-
formed on either a single text or a corpus of texts; at 
any time, corpora can be expanded with additional 
texts from the archive or in other ways reorganized, 
without loss of linguistic information. 

The word form lists generated by the platform 
and the results of lemmatisation are used to derive 
vocabulary lists for the respective educational lev-
el. General vocabulary words or terms can be pro-
vided  with  definitions,  synonyms  or  translations, 
to be used for the generation of multiple matching 
exercises5. 
                                                      
5 For the methodological foundations of the project and the 
design of the exercises, Cf. M.S. Hadjikoteva 2005 and M. 
Neykova 2014. 

 

35

Figure 4. Morphemic analysis 

 

Figure 5. Generating a Multiple choice exercise  

(Fill in the blanks with an appropriate Preposition). 

4.2  The linguistic database 

The  PLT  includes  an  up-to-date  system  of  
modules  designed  in  the  spirit  of  an  earlier  
Linguist’s  Workbench  package6,  but  integrated 
here into a new linguistic data base7. The corpora 
are  lemmatised  and  POS-tagged,  morphemically 
and syntactically analysed. Selected vocabulary  
items  are  provided  with  simple  definitions,  syno-
nyms or translations (Figure 4). 

4.3  Generating practice exercises  

The linguistic data base allows the generation of a 
large number of language drills. Most of these ap-
pear in the format of standard Open the brackets, 
Open  cloze,  Multiple  choice,  Multiple  matching 
or  Reorder  the  words/sentences/paragraphs  exer-
cises  (Figure  5).  Newly  developed  options  are 
based on the results of the morphemic and syntac-
tic analyzers (Open cloze or multiple choice exer-
cises  with  derivational  or  inflexional  affixes  or 

                                                      
6 M. Stambolieva 1996, M. Stambolieva, and D. Dragosti-
nov 2014. 
7 M. Raykova, V. Ivanova 2017 

roots; multiple matching exercises for word form - 
part of speech pairs; word form-grammatical cate-
gory pairs; phrase-syntactic function pairs). 

Drills  are  based  on  one  or  more  paragraphs 
from the corpus. The paragraphs need not be con-
secutive and can even come from different texts.  

The  generation  of  an  exercise  is  based  on  the 
choice  of  a  specific  set  of  options.  For  the  
multiple choice exercise above, the set of options 
chosen  is  POS:  Preposition,  Occurrence:  each, 
Lemma: unticked (i.e. the lemma will not appear). 
A  further  choice  relates  to  the  format:  Gapfill, 
Drag-and-drop or DropdownFormat. 

The platform also allows the generation of vo-
cabulary  drills  of  the  multiple  matching  type, 
based on definition, synonymy or, also, translation 
(for non-native speakers of the language).  

For reordering exercises, the following options 
are  available:  word  in  sentence  (suitable  for  both 
primary and secondary school level), sentences in 
paragraph  and  paragraphs 
text,  syntactic 
phrases in sentence/clause (suitable for secondary 
school level) (Figure 6).  

in 

 

 

36

Figure 6. Generating a Reordering exercise (sentences in paragraph). 

Figure 7. An Open-the-brackets exercises (ticked Lemma) 

Figure 8. A reordering exercise (words in sentence). 

 
 

5  From  the  PLT  to  other  educational 

platforms 

The training exercises generated in the E-platform 
can  be  exported  to  other  educational  platforms. 
There, the  exercises  can  be  organised  in  archives 
attached  to  each  level  (language  level  or  class) 
and can be combined to form tests. Figures 7 and 
8  illustrate  the  visualisation  of  the  exercises  in 
Moodle. 
 

5.1  Student performance assessment 

The results of students’ performance are generated 
automatically,  with  quantitative  information  for 
each student and group statistics. Students, teach-
ers,  headmasters  or  higher  institutions  (regional 
inspectorates,  Ministry  of  Education  administra-
tors  and  others)  can  receive  immediate  feedback 
for  each  student/class/school,  for  each  separate 
task and for the test overall. This feedback offers a 
mechanism of control and can be used in identify-
ing  areas  of  difficulty,  underperforming  students, 
classes and schools (Figure 9 and 10). 

37

Figure 9. Feedback on performance 

Figure 10. Statistical information on student performance 

6  Conclusions and future work    

The PLT offers a variety of options for corpus cre-
ation and corpus-based or text-based generation of 
educational content for one or more languages. It 
combines  the  general  advantages  of  e-learning 
with  blended  learning  and  teaching  supplementa-
tion 
function-oriented  or  communicative 
 teaching in the language classroom.  

to 

The flexible design of the system and its mul-
tiple functionalities make it an appropriate tool for 
e-teaching  of  native  or  second/foreign  languages 
at all educational levels.  

The  corpus  and  educational  content  presented 
are  designed  for  the  specific  needs  of  teaching 
Bulgarian  and  will  be  tested  in  the  course  of  the 
school year 2017/2008.  

 

References  

Hadjikoteva, M. S. 2005. Types of Students and Rele-
vant  Input.  BETA-IATEFL  Conference  Proceed-
ings. 
from 
http://www.beta-iatefl.org/1109/blog-
publications/types-of-students-and-relevant-input/ 

(2005).  Retrieved  May  2017 

Langeveldt,  H.  2012.  Communicative  Language 
Teaching  (CLT):  Strengths  and  Weaknesses.  Re-
trieved 
: 
https://issuu.com/miriamsheen/docs/_clt_strengths
_and_weaknesses 

from: 

2017 

May 

Neykova,  M.  2014.  An  Action-oriented  Approach  in 
the  Context  of  Blended  Learning.  BETA  E-
Newsletter.  Retrieved  2017  from  http://www.beta-
iatefl.org/cogitoergosum/wp-
content/uploads/2014/12/BETA_E-
Newsletter_November_December_2014.pdf 

 

 

 

 

38

Raykova,  M.,  Ivanova,  V.  2017.  NBU  E-Platform  in 
Teaching Foreign Languages for Specific Purposes 
–  Software  Engineering  Challenges.  Proceedings 
of  the  13th  Annual  International  Conference  on 
Computer Science and Education in Computer Sci-
ence.  Petya  Assenova,  Vijaj  Kanabar  (eds.)  New 
Bulgarian University, Hochschule Fulda University 
of Applied Science, Boston University. 

Sumhachalam  T.  2015. A  Critical  Overview  of  Com-
International 
municative  Language  Teaching. 
Journal  of  English  Language  Literature  and  Hu-
manities,  vol.  III,  Issue  V,  July  2015. Accessed  at 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/28287715
9_A_Critical_Overview_of_Communicative_Lang
uage_Teaching.  

Stambolieva  M.  A  1996.  Linguist’s  Workbench.  Pa-
pers  from  the  First  Conference  on  Formal  Ap-
proaches to South Slavic Languages. University of 
Trondheim  Working  Papers  in  Linguistics  28,  p. 
293 – 301. 

Stambolieva,  M.,  Dragostinov,  D.  2014.  The  NBU 
Linguist’s Workbench. Proceedings of the 10th An-
nual  International  Conference  on  Computer  Sci-
ence  and  Education  in  Computer  Science.  Petya 
Assenova,  Vijaj  Kanabar  (eds.)  New  Bulgarian 
University,  Hochschule  Fulda  University  of  Ap-
plied Science, Boston University, p. 259-266. 

Stambolieva,  M.,  Hadjikoteva,  M.,  Neykova,  M., 
Raykova,  M.,  Ivanova  V.  2017.  The  NBU  E-
Platform  in  Teaching  Foreign  Languages  for  Spe-
cific Purposes. Proceedings of the 13th Annual In-
ternational  Conference  on  Computer  Science  and 
Education  in  Computer  Science.  Petya  Assenova, 
Vijaj  Kanabar  (eds.)  New  Bulgarian  University, 
Hochschule  Fulda  University  of  Applied  Science, 
Boston University 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

