



















































Integrating Decompositional Event Structures into Storylines


Proceedings of the Events and Stories in the News Workshop, pages 98–109,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Integrating Decompositional Event Structures into Storylines

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, Michael Regan
MSC 03 2130 Linguistics

1 University of New Mexico
Albuquerque NM 87131-0001, USA

{wcroft,pavlinap,reganman}@unm.edu

Abstract

Storyline research links together events in
stories and specifies shared participants
in those stories. In these analyses, an
atomic event is assumed to be a single
clause headed by a single verb. However,
many analyses of verbal semantics assume
a decompositional analysis of events ex-
pressed in single clauses. We present a
formalization of a decompositional anal-
ysis of events in which each participant
in a clausal event has their own tempo-
rally extended subevent, and the subevents
are related through causal and other in-
teractions. This decomposition allows us
to represent storylines as an evolving set
of interactions between participants over
time.

1 Introduction

Stories are typically represented as a set of events
and temporal relations among events (Caselli and
Vossen, 2012). However, events are frequently
given a decompositional analysis in linguistics, as
surveyed in Levin and Rappaport Hovav (2005),
and also in computational linguistics, for exam-
ple Narayanan (1997). Many of the event de-
compositions in linguistics do not explicitly rep-
resent the temporal dimension, and distribute par-
ticipants across different event components. Such
representations do not lend themselves well to in-
tegration with storyline analysis.

The event decomposition proposed in Croft
(2012) and applied to event annotation in Croft
et al. (2016) is more suited to integration with sto-
ryline analysis. Croft’s analysis of events explic-
itly represents time as a geometric dimension, as
part of the representation of aspect—the structure
of events as they unfold in successive phases over

time. In addition to explicit representation of the
temporal dimension, Croft introduces a second di-
mension, qualitative states, to model change over
the course of the event. These two dimensions
allow one to represent directly the pre-state and
post-state of events (Im and Pustejovsky, 2010;
Segers et al., 2015), as different states on the qual-
itative dimension, and as different points of time
in the temporal dimension.

Croft’s analysis also decomposes events into
distinct subevents for each participant. The
subevents represent directly the interactions of
participants, instead of representing them indi-
rectly and incompletely by semantic role labels.
This decomposition allows for a smoother inte-
gration of complex event structure with story net-
works, albeit with a reinterpretation of the struc-
ture of stories.

The decompositional model of events allows us
to consider an alternative model of the structure
of stories. In this model, stories are made up of
participant histories, that is, the participant’s exis-
tence through time. A participant history is in turn
made up of subevents, namely the states and pro-
cesses that the participant has or undergoes during
each interval of time. The participant histories are
related to each other through participant interac-
tions, that is, subevent relations within events, at
certain times. This alternative decomposition of
stories is also suggested by van Erp et al. (2014),
who use a modified metro map visualization (Sha-
haf et al., 2012), with participants as “lines” and
events as “stations”. This alternative model can be
more fully realized using a decompositional anal-
ysis of events in which each participant has its own
subevent.

This alternative decomposition of stories is also
more independent of the linguistic expression, in
which events are realized as simple clauses with
one or more argument phrases denoting partici-

98



pants, and interclausal syntax expresses temporal
and other relations between events. Thus, it rep-
resents a story structure that must be derived in-
directly from the linguistic expressions. In this
paper we present a formalization of this alterna-
tive decomposition of stories and events, and show
how this formalization can be used to construct a
visualization of stories as an evolving network of
interactions among participants over time.

2 Event Decomposition and Annotation

2.1 Subevents and Aspect

In Croft’s decompositional analysis, each partici-
pant has its own subevent. Each subevent consists
of a sequence of temporal phases, representing
how the subevents unfold over time. A subevent is
made up of phases that are defined on two dimen-
sions, time and a dimension of qualitative states
that can be used to define different types of states
and processes. That is, instead of representing
the qualitative states and changes of an event as
an atomic predicate, a predicate is analyzed as a
path through a one-dimensional quality space over
time. Obviously, a one-dimensional representa-
tion of qualitative states/changes is a simplifica-
tion, but it is an advance on analyses in which the
qualitative event structure is left unanalyzed as the
verbal “root” (Levin and Rappaport Hovav, 2005).

Subevents have an aspectual type. Semanticists
have identified a number of different aspectual
types, most of which can be analyzed as special
cases of Vendler’s categories of states, achieve-
ments, activities and accomplishments (Vendler,
1957; Croft et al., 2016). States lack change on the
qualitative dimension. Some states are inherent
properties of an individual (She is French), while
others are reversible (The window is open) or ir-
reversible (The window is broken), and still oth-
ers exist only in a point of time (The sun is at its
zenith).

Achievements represent a transition, construed
as instantaneous, from one qualitative state to an-
other. Directed achievements transition to a re-
sult state (The window broke), while semelfac-
tives (called cyclic achievements by Croft) tran-
sition to the result state and back to the initial
state (The light flashed). Accomplishments rep-
resent a gradual change on a qualitative dimen-
sion over time, attaining a natural endpoint. Incre-
mental accomplishments represent a measurable,
monotonic change (She ran into the gym), while

nonincremental accomplishments describe an ac-
tivity that is not monotonic before achieving the
result state (He repaired the computer). Activities
represent change that does not have a natural end-
point. Directed activities represent a monotonic
change (The balloon rose), while the change de-
scribed by undirected activities is nonmonotonic
(The fans were dancing.).

We argue that there is another Vendler-like cat-
egory: processes that stop, returning to the base
state. These events, which we call endeavors, are
temporally bounded, but not by reaching a natural
endpoint. They may be directed or undirected. En-
deavors are not lexicalized as such in English, but
certain subevents in complex events are endeav-
ors. In Russian, there are lexicalized endeavors
(Forsyth, 1970). Undirected endeavors are derived
from undirected activities with the prefix po-, as in
On po-spal posle obeda ‘He had a sleep after din-
ner’. Directed endeavors are derived from directed
activities with the prefixes pri-, pod-, and nad-, as
in On pri-otkryl dver’ ‘He opened the door a little’.

Participant subevents cause other participant
subevents; this is the domain of force dynamics
(Talmy, 1988). Croft (2012) extends Talmy’s no-
tion of force dynamics to cover a wide range of
asymmetric relations between participants. The
commonest noncausal interaction is a spatial re-
lationship between two entities, the figure and the
ground, following Talmy (1983).

Many different event types are discussed in
the linguistic semantic literature: caused motion,
application, emission, change of state, and so
on. Construction grammarians argue that these
schematic event types represent the meanings of
argument structure constructions (Goldberg, 1995,
2006).

2.2 Force Dynamics and Types of Qualitative
Change

Croft et al. (2016) propose an analysis of the
semantic types of argument structure construc-
tions in terms of force-dynamic relations between
participants, causal and noncausal, and the type
of change that the theme participant undergoes.
Among the most common types of force-dynamic
relations are Force, the prototypical physical trans-
mission of force relation; Constrain, Talmy’s “cau-
sation of rest/stasis” (Talmy, 1988); and Path, the
spatial figure-ground relation.

Croft et al. define four types of physical

99



changes, based in part on different types of in-
cremental theme (Dowty, 1991; Hay et al., 1999).
The simplest change subevent of the affected en-
tity is a change of state of the entity, that is, a
change in a scalar property of the entity as a whole
(Hay et al., 1999).

Events involving change in a spatial figure-
ground relation proceed in two different ways.
Motion events of various kinds, such as The boy
ran across the road, define a spatial path on the
qualitative dimension that the figure traverses as a
whole; for this reason Dowty (1991) calls the fig-
ure a “holistic theme”.

Application, removal, combining and separat-
ing events, such as The man picked pears from
the tree, define a mereological change in the lo-
cation of figure on the qualitative dimension; this
is Dowty’s incremental theme proper. Covering
and uncovering events, such as I buttered the toast
with hazelnut butter and They stripped the trees of
bark, differ from application and removal events
in that the incremental change is conceptualized as
happening to the ground object (toast, trees) rather
than the figure.

Croft et al. define another type of theme change,
which they call Design for creation of an object
with a certain identity, for events of creation (They
built a shelter), formation (She carved a toy out of
a stick) and replication (He scanned the article).

We identify another type of physical change not
described by Croft et al. (2016): internal change of
a single participant, such as The flag fluttered. In-
ternal events often also express a locative relation:
The flag fluttered (over the fort). Finally, simple
static location is included as an internal event type,
albeit static: The flag is over the fort.

The relations between subevents and proper-
ties of subevents summarized above cover a large
range of the inventory of physical processes ex-
pressed by simple verbs in English. There are of
course many other events involving mental pro-
cesses and other interactions between humans and
other entities (perception, cognition, emotion, in-
tention, attention, etc.), and many other events in-
volving social interactions, which remain to be an-
alyzed in this decompositional framework.

2.3 Annotation and Visualization of Aspect
and Force Dynamics of Events

We proposed an annotation scheme for annotat-
ing clauses with their aspectual type and force-

dynamic type of change, based on the verb, tense-
aspect construction, and argument structure con-
struction (Croft et al., 2016). We retain this aspect
annotation, with the addition of directed and undi-
rected endeavors. The full list of aspectual types
is found in Table 4 in the Supplementary Material,
which also includes their formalization (see sec-
tion 3). We are developing a revised annotation of
aspectual types, a notoriously difficult area of lin-
guistic semantics, that we believe will be simpler
to use by annotators, yet still captures all of the
distinctions in Table 4.1

The force dynamic annotation scheme in Croft
et al. (2016) annotates only the type of change un-
dergone by the theme participant in the clausal
event. The revision and extension of the annota-
tion scheme described above is found in Table 5
in the Supplementary Material. The theme change
may be externally caused; annotation for external
and internal cause can be found in Table 6 in the
Supplementary Material.

A complete annotation of the structure of a
clausal event consists of three annotations: the
aspectual type (ideally, the fine-grained classifi-
cation in Table 4); and for the force dynamics,
the external/internal cause (Table 6) and the theme
change type (Table 5).

We applied this annotation scheme, with the
modifications described in this section, to clauses
in three Pear Stories (Chafe, 1980). The Pear Sto-
ries are a set of oral narratives produced by speak-
ers after viewing a short film which was designed
to analyze patterns of verbalization. Since there
is no language in the film, the narratives mostly
encode physical events of the type already ana-
lyzed by Croft et al. We chose the Pear Stories
since this allowed us to easily annotate most of
the events in the narrative. We believe that the
oral narratives share significant narrative structure
with news stories. However, temporal ordering of
events is much more regular in the Pear Stories.

Relations between clausal events in the Pear
Stories were annotated using predicates from the
temporal interval calculus (Allen, 1984; Mani and
Pustejovsky, 2012). Temporal relations expressed
by adverbial clauses and coordination are repre-
sented adequately for our purposes by the tem-
poral interval calculus predicates. The temporal
interval calculus predicates that expressed inter-

1The revised aspect annotation scheme, and annotation
guidelines for aspectual and force dynamic annotation, will
be found at http://www.unm.edu/∼wcroft.

100



Event FD 1 FD 2 Aspect TR
And he comes down, . . from the ladder, Self-volitional Motion Incremental Accomplishment AFT
[1.1] and he’s wearing an apron, Volitional Constrain Undirected Activity CONT
And he dumps them [.45] into some baskets . . Volitional Apply Incremental Accomplishment AFT

Table 1: Annotation of a passage from the Pear Stories

clausal relations occurring in the Pear Stories nar-
ratives that were annotated are Before (BEF), Af-
ter (AFT), Meets (MEET), Equal (EQ), Overlap
(OVER), and Contains (CONT). Coreference rela-
tions between participants across events were also
annotated by using the same values for recurrent
individuals in the constructional annotation (not
shown in Table 1).

Figure 1: Graphic representation of decomposi-
tional event structure for And he dumps them into
some baskets

A sample annotation is given in Table 1. From
this annotation, we construct predicate calcu-
lus representations of the decompositional event
structure based on the formalization in section
3. From the formal representation, we automati-
cally generate a graphic representation of a clausal
event. Figure 1 shows the graphic representation
of the third sentence in Table 1. The graphic rep-
resentation is a modified version of those found in
Croft (2012). In particular, we add structure to the
q dimension (the vertical dimension) for each par-
ticipant, as described in section 3.

Adding the annotation of temporal relations be-
tween clausal events allows us to generate a visu-
alization of the fragment of the story in Table 1;
see Figure 4 and the discussion in section 4.

3 A Formalization of Event Structure

Here we formalize the idea that stories are made
up of participant histories that interact over time.
This view of story structure informs the formaliza-
tion of the individual events in a story that express
the participant interactions. Since event structure
is complex, almost all of our attention here will be
focused on the event structure formalization. The
formalization expands the annotation to formulas
that allow for inference about events and their par-
ticipants, and allow for visualizations of the struc-
ture of events and the structure of stories.

3.1 Aspect and the Interval Calculus

Our formalization uses the interval calculus for
both the temporal and qualitative dimensions
(Allen, 1984; Mani and Pustejovsky, 2012), and
the commonsense knowledge axioms of Gordon
and Hobbs (2017).2 Since event decomposition
involves many composite entities, we use the nota-
tional simplification of x=a+b to describe a com-
posite entity x with exactly a and b component en-
tities, that is, CompositeEntity(x) & Component-
of(a, x) & Component-of(b, x) & a 6= b & ((y 6= a
& y 6= b) ⊃ ¬ Component-of(y, x)); likewise for
composite entities with more than two component
entities. The notation x=a indicates equality, that
is, there is exactly one component to the composite
entity. However, we will use Equal(i, j) for inter-
val equality following Allen (1984).

We begin with the formal analysis of subevents
and their participants. Each participant is identi-
fied with its own subevent. A participant is mod-
eled as a history, namely, the states and changes
that a participant has, performs or undergoes over
time. The identity of a participant as an individual
is expressed by the unity of the participant history.

A subevent is a component of a participant his-
tory. The subevent consists of qualitative states
and changes of the participant during a time inter-
val of the participant history. We model the quali-

2We use the axioms that are presented at
http://www.isi.edu/∼hobbs/csk.html, which
are basically identical to the axioms that will appear in
Gordon and Hobbs (2017).

101



tative structure of a subevent by the qualitative di-
mension q orthogonal to the time dimension t.

Different verbs or predicates define different
relevant qualitative states for each participant
subevent. Hence each subevent has a distinct set
of qualitative states. One can consider each predi-
cate’s set of qualitative states as an interval on the
q dimension. Alternatively, each predicate can be
thought of as representing a distinct qualitative di-
mension (see section 4). Where necessary, we will
distinguish qualitative state dimensions for differ-
ent predicates, for example for different subevents
of a multiparticipant event, as q1, q2 . . .

Following Allen (1984), we represent “points”
in time as very small intervals. Specifically, we
define a “point” interval as an interval that does
not contain a smaller interval, that is, Pnt(i) ≡
(¬∃j)During(j, i). Extended (Ext) intervals are
not punctual. One reason for treating points as
the smallest intervals is that an event that is con-
strued as occurring in an “instant” (The bridge col-
lapsed) may also be construed as occurring over
an interval (The bridge is collapsing). We would
represent these two construals as both occurring
over intervals with different granularities (Hobbs,
1985a) such that for the coarser-grained temporal
metric, there are no smaller intervals than the event
interval, but for a finer-grained temporal metric,
there are. (We have not yet modeled granularity
shifts.)

3.2 The Structure of the Qualitative
Dimension

We analyze the structure of the qualitative dimen-
sion q for each subevent also using the interval
calculus, which can be generalized beyond time
(Mani and Pustejovsky, 2012; Hobbs and Pan,
2004). Verbs and other predicates impose more
specific structure on q.

We distinguish four types of qualitative dimen-
sions that capture the potential variation of qual-
itative states defined by predicates over time. In-
herent predicates cannot vary over time for a par-
ticipant; for example one cannot start or stop be-
ing French. Hence only one point is defined on q,
which we label r. Complementary predicates can
vary between applying or not applying to a partic-
ipant; for example a window can be either whole
or broken. Only two points are defined on q, a
“base state” b called a “rest state” in Croft (2012),
and the “result state”, also labeled r. Graded pred-

icates vary dynamically in their states beyond the
base state b; for example, one can either dance or
not dance, but dancing involves various changes
on a dimension of bodily movements. Graded
predicates involve the base state b and a contin-
uous interval c for the process. Finally, telic pred-
icates such as entering a room have a base state
b (not being in the room), the central interval of
dynamically varying states c (the entering move-
ment), and a result state r (being in the room).

The types of predicates are defined in Table 3
in the Supplementary Material. The structure of a
telic predicate is illustrated in Figure 2.

3.3 Phases and Subevents

A phase is defined as a function from an interval i
on t to an interval j on the q dimension (see Table
3). Phases can be distinguished by properties of
the domain and/or range. A state is a phase whose
range is a point (that is, the smallest interval) on q.
A process is a phase whose domain and range are
extended on t and q respectively. Processes may
be monotonic (Mon(p)) or nonmonotonic.

A transition (Trans) is a phase derived from two
phases that meet: it is made up of the finish “point”
of the first phase and the start “point” of the sec-
ond phase. This is our solution to the “divided in-
stant” problem described by Mani and Pustejovsky
(2012, pg. 60); our solution is similar to that of
Hobbs and Pan (2004) (however they distinguish
instants from intervals). We divide the “instant”
of transition of two phases that meet into the fin-
ish point of the first phase and the start point of the
second phase. The transition phase is a composite
phase made up of those two point phases.

In order to define transitions, we first define start
and finish “points” of a temporal interval. We then
define start and finish phases of a larger phase,
namely the phases whose domains are the start and
finish points of the larger phase. A transition phase

Figure 2: The structure of a telic predicate on the
q dimension

102



is then defined as a composite phase made up of
the finish of the first phase and start of the sec-
ond phase. A transition phase is not a point inter-
val, but it is the smallest extended interval: that is,
there is no interval between the finish point of the
first phase and the start point of the second phase,
since the two phases meet.

Finally, for convenience we define specific
phases in terms of the interval on q that serves
as their range; these are b′, c′ and r′ in Table 3
in the Supplementary Material. Because of the
nature of b, c, r, it follows that State(b′, i, b, q),
Process(c′, i, c, q) and State(r′, i, r, q).

A subevent has an aspectual type. Aspectual
types are composite entities composed of one or
more phases. The four types of states differ with
respect to their domains (time intervals) on t, de-
fined on the interval calculus. Unbounded events,
that is noninherent states and activities, presup-
pose that there was a transition from the base state
to the asserted phase; the presupposed phase is
represented by an existentially quantified predi-
cate. Formalizations of all aspectual types can be
found in Table 4 in the Supplementary Material.

3.4 Events as Force Dynamic Chains of
Subevents

Events expressed by single clauses are informally
analyzed as interactions between participants for
multiparticipant events. For example, in The rock
broke the window, the rock acted on the win-
dow. We analyze these force-dynamic relations
as relations between subevents that are compo-
nents of the participant’s history. In our exam-
ple, the rock’s contact subevent caused the win-
dow’s change of state subevent (the specific qual-
itative state being contributed by the semantics of
the verb break). The rock’s contact subevent is a
component of the rock’s history, and likewise the
window’s change of state event is a component of
the window’s history.

The unity of an event expressed by a single
clause (verb and argument structure construction)
is defined by the fact that all subevents of an event
are simultaneous, what Croft (2012) calls the tem-
poral unity of events; and by the presence of force
dynamic relations between the subevents.

We model the type of incremental change that
a participant undergoes, described in section 2,
as a property of that participant’s subevent, or
more precisely the qualitative dimension of that

subevent. The types of change described in sec-
tion 2 are Property change (Prop), Motion (Mot),
Mereological change (Mer), Design change (Des),
and Internal change (Int). Mereological change
falls into four subtypes. Apply represents incre-
mental change of the spatial figure with respect to
the ground object, for example paint being grad-
ually applied to a wall. Apply and Remove are
inverses, represented by +Mer and -Mer. Cover
represents a construal by which the incremental
change happens to the spatial ground, for exam-
ple the wall being gradually covered by the paint.
Cover and Uncover are also inverses.

We also provide an analysis of the qualities of
subevents of the agent and instrument, not dis-
cussed by Croft et al. (2016). Agents interact in
physical processes using their body. Most of the
time what the agent does is volitional, that is, a
process involving mental as well as physical as-
pects of a person. For now, we model volitionality
as the type of action that an agent engages in, that
is, the agent’s subevent has the property Vol. In-
struments interact solely physically, of course, ul-
timately through some sort of contact. We model
the interaction of instruments by attributing the
property Contact to the instrument’s subevent.

The aspectual annotation of the overall event
describes the aspectual type of the theme partic-
ipant. For this reason, the formalization of the as-
pectual annotation of the overall event is distinct
from the representation of the aspectual type of
each subevent. The formalization of the force dy-
namic annotation that includes the theme partici-
pant specifies which participant is the theme. The
combination of the aspectual annotation predi-
cate and the force dynamic annotation predicate(s)
specifies the aspectual type of the theme partic-
ipant subevent. The physical force and mental
“force” applied by an instrument is dynamic but
nonmonotonic. The aspectual type of an agent or
instrument subevent varies depending on the as-
pectual type of the theme: an undirected activity if
the overall event is unbounded, an undirected en-
deavor if the event is bounded and durative, or a
semelfactive if the event is punctual.

Formalization of all of the force dynamic types
analyzed so far, including external/internal cause,
is found in Table 7 in the Supplementary Material.

103



Aspectual Types/Image Schemas all below ⊃ AspTyp(x, i, j, q)
Inherent state Inhst(x, i, r, q) ≡ Inherent(r, q) & Equal(i, t)
Inherent state phase InhStPh(b, i, j, q) ≡ Phase(b, i, j, q) & (∃p, l, m)[Inhst(p, l, m, q) & During(i, l) &

Maps(p, i, j)]
Incremental accomplishment IncrAcc(x, i, j, q) ≡ Telic(b, c, r, q) & x=p1+c′+p2 & Mon(c′) &

(∃b′, r′)[Trans(p1, b′, c′) & Trans(p2, c′, r′)]
Undirected endeavor UndEnd(x, i, j, q) ≡ Graded(b, c, q) & x=p1+c′+p2 & ¬Mon(c′) &

(∃b′)[Trans(p1, b′, c′) & Trans(p2, c′, b′)]
Force Dynamic Image Schemas
Volitional Volitional(e, x, y, i) ≡ Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Force(f, g) & Vol(q1)
Apply Apply(e, x, y, i)≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(g, y) & Component-of(h, z) &

Subevent(g, i, j, q1) & InhStPh(h, i, k, q2) & Path(g, h) & +Mer(q1) & Exist(q2)
Aspectual Type of Theme Participant
Incremental Accomplishment IncrementalAccomplishment(e, i) ≡ Theme-of(x, e) & Component-of(g, x) &

IncrAcc(g, i, j, q)
Predicate Calculus Representation of Example Sentence
He dumped them into some
baskets.

Dump(Farmer, Pears, Baskets) ≡ Component-of(f, Farmer) &
Component-of(g, Pears) Component-of(h, Baskets) & UndEnd(f, i, j, q1) &
IncrAcc(g, i, k, q2) & InhStPh(h, i, l, q3) & Vol(q1) & +Mer(q2) & Exist(q3) &
Force(f, g) & Path(g, h)

Table 2: Formalization of aspectual and force dynamic image schemas for example sentence.

Figure 3: Linking constructions to the semantic
representation

3.5 Deriving the Graphic Representation of
the Event Structure of a Sentence

To illustrate the formalization of the aspectual
and force-dynamic decomposition of events, we
briefly go through the derivation of the semantic
representation of the sentence represented graph-
ically in Figure 1. The first step is extracting the
argument structure construction and tense-aspect
construction forms from the sentence (not mod-
eled here). The associated meaning is represented
by the aspectual and force dynamic annotations,
with the arguments of the semantic annotations
bound to the participants in the construction; see
Figure 3.

The force dynamic annotation, in two parts, can
be expanded with the representations in Table 2. A
Volitional external cause involves the farmer’s vo-
litional subevent in a force relation with the pears’
subevent. The pears’ subevent involves mereolog-

ically moving the pears with respect to the bas-
kets’ subevent. The baskets’ subevent is simply
the phase of the inherent state of existing as an
entity with which the pears enter a spatial relation-
ship; this is represented by the inherent state phase
formalization in Table 2.

The incremental accomplishment aspectual
type is associated with the theme argument, as
noted above. The formalization of incremen-
tal accomplishments in Table 2 indicates that the
q dimension of an incremental accomplishment
defines base, center and result intervals. The
subevent spans the transition from the base state
to the central process and from the central process
to the result state, that is, the subevent is bounded;
it is also monotonic (see Figure 1).

The agent subevent is specified as an undirected
endeavor, since the overall event is temporally
bounded. As such, the q dimension defines base
and center intervals only. The subevent spans the
transition from the base state to the central process
and back to the base state.

The predicate calculus representation allows the
decompositional event structures and the relations
between clausal events to be used for inference us-
ing commonsense reasoning axiomatizations such
as those in Allen (1984), Hobbs (2005) and Gor-
don and Hobbs (2017). The predicate calculus
representations also specify the structures of the
events and their participants to the degree that vi-
sualizations can be constructed. These are de-
scribed in the next section.

104



4 Visualization

We are also developing a visualization to capture
the evolving interactions of participants over time.
The basic idea is a modified metro map (Shahaf
et al., 2012), in which the lines represent partici-
pant histories and the nodes represent interactions
among participants, that is, clausal events. Fig-
ure 4 presents a visualization of the events, partic-
ipants and interactions in the passage in Table 1
above.

Clausal events are related to other clausal events
through temporal relations and relations of shared
participants, as in van Erp et al. (2014). As
with other storyline visualizations, temporally se-
quenced events—Before, After, and Meets in the
interval logic—can be arranged horizontally, with
sequenced events sharing participants aligned hor-
izontally. Temporally overlapping events—Equal,
Overlap, During and Contain—can be arranged
vertically. Events whose temporal location is con-
strained but not totally specified would be situated
relative to those events to which they hold tempo-
ral relations.

Of course, such metro maps get very tangled
very quickly, since coherent narratives normally
express many interwoven events with many dif-
ferent combinations of many different partici-
pants. Algorithms such as that of Liu et al. (2013)
will, we hope, generate visually presentable metro
maps of more complex participant interactions
over time.

The primary innovation in the visualization is
that the interactions between participants in a sin-
gle clausal event are made explicit, as in Croft
(2012) and Croft et al. (2016). That is, the nodes
in the metro map visualization are elaborated as
interactions between the participants. The roles of
participants within a clausal event are kept sepa-
rate because each participant has its own subevent.
The qualitative states and changes of each partici-
pant are also explicitly represented. The visualiza-
tion therefore describes not only the interactions
that each participant engages in over the time of
the story, but also exactly what they do or what
happens to them.

Precise representation of participants and their
states in events requires addressing certain issues.
A group of participants may act as a unit in some
events but separately in other events:

41 [.6] they g [.25] gather all the pears

Figure 4: Event Decomposition and Interactions
of Participants

42 and put them in the basket,

43 a–nd one of the guys, helps him

44 brush off the dust,

45 [.9] and another guy picks up the rock,

In this case, we must allow the history for the
group of three boys to split in order to represent
the interaction of individual boys from the group
with other entities (the cyclist and the rock).

In other cases, the same participant is playing
different roles in two different events at the same
time:

140 then he . . takes a pear,

141 after carefully watching the man in the tree.

142 Who’s still picking.

The man in the tree is functioning as the target
of the watching event in 141 at the same time that
he is the agent of the picking event in 142.

Ideally, there would be a n-dimensional repre-
sentation with all the distinct relevant qualitative
dimensions to describe the states of a participant
during any given time interval. Of course, this is
not easily visualized. In order to represent the dis-
tinct qualitative states of the man in the overlap-
ping events, we allow a “virtual split” of the line
representing the man’s history, representing the

105



different qualitative states of being watched and
picking. Such virtual splits will be visualized in a
distinct way from actual splits as found in passage
41-45 above. In Figure 4, we represent the virtual
split of the man by dot-dashed lines.

5 Conclusion and Future Prospects

The participant-oriented description of storylines
presented here allows for the representation of the
qualitative state(s) that each participant is in at any
temporal interval in the participant’s history, and
hence the storyline.

At this point, we have not represented the qual-
itative states of participants between events. How-
ever, some general patterns can easily be imple-
mented. The identification of the theme partic-
ipant indicates which participant undergoes and
change, and the resulting state for that participant,
if there is one, can be assumed to hold, other things
being equal. Even for the case of events without
a result state for the participant, the event can be
assumed to persist. The subevents of agent and
instrument participants will end at the end of the
event; they will return to the base state.

In some cases, grammatical elements provide
information that allows one to infer qualitative
states between events. For example, in line 142,
Who’s still picking, the aspectual adverb still in-
dicates that the picking activity described there
is a continuation of the same picking activity re-
ported earlier in the narrative. As we model ad-
ditional tense-aspect constructions, including as-
pectual adverbs, we will be able to represent the
persistence or not of subevents past the reported
event.

However, in many cases, the persistence (or lack
thereof) of qualitative states can only be inferred
using world knowledge. These inferences can be
done using the formalization in section 3, com-
bined with representations of relevant common-
sense knowledge.

The representation we have developed applies
only to events presented as having actually hap-
pened in the narrative. Many events in narratives,
including news stories, are unrealized in various
ways at the point that they are introduced: they
may represent planned events, desired events, or
events reported with a degree of uncertainty. Even
so, they can often be sequenced relative to realized
events: planned events follow the current realized
event, negated events are “simultaneous” with the

actual state of affairs (which is the opposite of the
negated event in relevant respects), and so on.

We have not included unrealized events in our
annotation and representation. We are developing
a model of non-real events using mental spaces
(Fauconnier, 1985, 1997) or worlds (McCawley,
1993) in which the non-real events hold in their
own mental space/world, and can be related to real
events in different ways. Mental spaces would be
represented by using the Holds predicate (Allen,
1984; Hobbs, 1985b), with a world argument w
added, relativized to an agent holding the belief
or intending a plan etc.: Holds(e,a,w). The re-
lationship between mental spaces and their basis
in reality will be modeled following Clark (1996).
Other predicates represent relations between men-
tal spaces or between agents and their mental
spaces, building on Fauconnier (1985, 1997) and
McCawley (1993).

Acknowledgments

The research was supported in part by grant
HDTRA1-15-1-0063 by the Defense Threat Re-
duction Agency to the first author.

References
James Allen. 1984. Towards a general theory of action

and time. Artificial Intelligence 23:123–154.

Tommaso Caselli and Piek Vossen. 2012. The Story-
line Annotation and Representation Scheme (StaR):
a proposal. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Computing News Storylines, Stroudsburg, Penn: As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 67–
72.

Wallace Chafe, editor. 1980. The pear stories. New
York: Ablex.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

William Croft. 2012. Verbs: aspect and causal struc-
ture. Oxford University Press.

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, and Michael Regan.
2016. Annotation of causal and aspectual struc-
ture of events in RED: a preliminary report. In
4th Events Workshop, 15th Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association of
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (NAAACL-HLT 2016), Stroudsburg, Penn:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 8–
17.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. Language 67:547–619.

106



Gilles Fauconnier. 1985. Mental Spaces. Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press.

Gilles Fauconnier. 1997. Mappings in thought and lan-
guage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

James Forsyth. 1970. A grammar of aspect: usage
and meaning in the Russian verb. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Adele E. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Con-
struction Grammar Approach to Argument Struc-
ture. Chicago: University of Chicago Pres.

Adele E. Goldberg. 2006. Constructions at Work: The
Nature of Generalization in Language. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.

Andrew S. Gordon and Jerry R. Hobbs. 2017. A
Formal Theory of Commonsense Psychology: How
People Think People Think. Cambridge University
Press, to appear.

Jennifer Hay, Christopher Kennedy, and Beth Levin.
1999. Scalar structure underlies telicity in “de-
gree achievements”. In Tanya Matthews and Devon
Strolovitch, editors, Proceedings of SALT , Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, volume 9, pages 127–144.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985a. Granularity. In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, Volume 1, San Francisco, Calif.:
Morgan Kaugmann, pages 432–435.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985b. Ontological promiscuity. In
Proceedings of the 12th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg,
Penn: Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 2005. Toward a useful concept of
causality for lexical semantics. Journal of Seman-
tics 22:181–209.

Jerry R. Hobbs and Feng Pan. 2004. An ontology of
time for the semantic web. ACM Transactions on
Asian Language Information Processing 3(1):66–
85.

Syeohun Im and James Pustejovsky. 2010. Anno-
tating lexically entailed subevents for textual in-
ference tasks. In Proceedings of the 23rd In-
ternational Florida Artificial Intelligence Research
Society Conference (FLAIRS-23), Daytona Beach,
Florida, pages 204–209.

Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Argu-
ment realization. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Shixia Liu, Yingcai Wu, Enxun Wei, Mengchen Liu,
and Yang Liu. 2013. Storyflow: tracking the evolu-
tion of stories. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 19(12):2436–2445.

Inderjeet Mani and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Inter-
preting motion: grounded representations for spa-
tial language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

James D. McCawley. 1993. Everything that linguists
have always wanted to know about logic (but were
ashamed to ask). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2 edition.

Srini Narayanan. 1997. Knowledge-based action rep-
resentations for metaphor and aspect (KARMA).
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science, Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley.

Roxane Segers, Piet Vossen, Marco Rospocher, Lu-
ciano Serafini, Egoitz Laparra, and German Rigau.
2015. ESO: a frame-based ontology for events and
implied situations. In Proceedings of the MAPLEX-
2015 Workshop.

Dafna Shahaf, Carlos Guestrin, and Eric Horvitz. 2012.
Trains of thought: generating information maps. In
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
World Wide Web, New York: Association of Com-
puting Machinery, pages 899–908.

Leonard Talmy. 1983. How language structures space.
In Herbert L. Pick (Jr.) and Linda P. Acredolo, edi-
tors, Spatial orientation: theory, research and appli-
cation, New York: Plenum Press, pages 225–282.

Leonard Talmy. 1988. Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science 2:49–100.

Marieke van Erp, Gleb Satyukov, Piek Vossen, and
Marit Nijssen. 2014. Discovering and visualiz-
ing stories in the news. In Proceedings of the
9th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC2014), European Language Resources Asso-
ciation, pages 3277–3282.

Zeno Vendler. 1957. Verbs and times. The Philosophi-
cal Review 66:143–60.

107



A Supplementary Material: Annotation and Formalization of Aspect and Force
Dynamic Structure of Events

Structure of q: Phases:
Inherent(r, q) ≡ Pnt(r) & Equal(r, q) Phase(p, i, j, q) ≡ Function(p, i, j) & Interval-on(i, t) & Interval-on(j, q)
Complementary(b, r, q) ≡ q=b+r & Pnt(b) &
Pnt(r) & Meets(b, r)

b′: Phase(b′, i, b, q) & (Complementary(b, r, q) ∨ Graded(b, c, q) ∨
Telic(b, c, r, q))

Graded(b, c, q) ≡ q=b+c & Pnt(b) & Ext(c) &
Meets(b, c)

c′: Phase(c′, i, c, q) & (Graded(b, c, q) ∨ Telic(b, c, r, q))

Telic(b, c, r, q) ≡ q=b+c+r & Pnt(b) & Ext(c)
& Pnt(r) & Meets(b, c) & Meets(b, r)

r′: Phase(r′, i, r, q) & (Inherent(r, q) ∨ Complementary(b, r, q) ∨
Telic(b, c, r, q))

Transitions:
Start point: Spt(x, i) ≡ Starts(x, i) & Pnt(x) Finish point: Fpt(x, i) ≡ Finishes(x, i) & Pnt(x)
Start phase: Sph(s, p) ≡ Phase(s, i, j, q) &
Phase(p, k, l, q) & Spt(i, k) & Maps(p, i, j)

Finish phase: Fph(f, p) ≡ Phase(f, i, j, q) & Phase(p, k, l, q) & Fpt(i, k)
& Maps(p, i, j)

Transition phase: Trans(p, p1, p2) ≡ Phase(p, i, j, q) & Phase(p1, k, l, q) & Phase(p2, m, n, q) & Meets(k, m) &
Fph(f, p1) & Sph(s, p2) & p=f+s

Table 3: Structure of q dimensions and types of phases. These axioms and definitions underlie the phasal
geometrical model of aspect.

Aspectual types/image schemas
Inherent States
Full state Inhst(x, i, r, q) ≡ Inherent(r, q) & Equal(i, t)
Phase of state InhStPhase(b, i, k, q) ≡ Phase(b, i, k, q) & (∃p, l, m)(Inhst(p, l, m, q) & During(i, l) &

Maps(p, i, k))
Noninherent States
Reversible RevSt(x, i, r, q) ≡ Complementary(b, r, q) & Ext(i) & (∃p, b′)Trans(p, b′, x)
Irreversible IrrSt(x, i, r, q) ≡ Complementary(b, r, q) & Finishes(i, t) & (∃p, b′)Trans(p, b′, x)
Point PntSt(x, i, r, q) ≡ Complementary(b, r, q) & Pnt(i) & (∃p, b′)Trans(p, b′, x)
Achievements
Directed DirAch(x, i, j, q) ≡ Complementary(b, r, q) & (∃b′, r′)Trans(x, b′, r′)
Cyclic CycAch(x, i, j, q) ≡ Complementary(b, r, q) & x = p1 + p2 & (∃b′, r′)(Trans(p1, b′, r′) &

Trans(p2, r′, b′)) & OverlapPnt(p1, p2)
Activities
Undirected UndAct(x, i, c, q) ≡ Graded(b, c, q) & ¬Mon(x) & (∃p, b′)Trans(p, b′, x)
Directed DirAct(x, i, c, q) ≡ Graded(b, c, q) & Mon(x) & (∃p, b′)Trans(p, b′, x)
Accomplishments
Incremental IncrAcc(x, i, j, q) ≡ Telic(b, c, r, q) & x = p1 + c′ + p2 & Mon(c′) & (∃b′, r′)(Trans(p1, b′, c′)

& Trans(p2, c′, r′))
Nonincremental NonincrAcc(x, i, j, q) ≡ Telic(b, c, r, q) & x = p1 + c′ + p2 & ¬ Mon(c′) &

(∃b′, r′)(Trans(p1, b′, c′) & Trans(p2, n, c′, r′))
Endeavors
Undirected UndEnd(x, i, j, q) ≡ Graded(b, c, q) & x = p1 + c′ + p2 & ¬ Mon(c′) & (∃b′)(Trans(p1, b′, c′)

& Trans(p2, c′, b′))
Directed DirEnd(x, i, j, q) ≡ Graded(b, c, q) & x = p1 + c′ + p2 & Mon(c′) & (∃b′)(Trans(p1, b′, c′) &

Trans(p2, c′, b′))

Table 4: Definitions of aspectual contours as composites of phases. The terms in the left hand column
make up the annotation of the aspectual type of the overall event. The aspectual type of the overall event
is identical to the aspectual type of the subevent of the theme participant; see Table 7. This mapping is
done by rules of the type illustrated in the formalization of the example sentence in Table 2.

108



Direct Inverse
Force (contact, force exertion) Resist (maintain)

Theme Direct Reverse
Property Change of State
Path Motion (directed motion, manner of motion)

Mereological Apply (application, combining) Remove (removal, separation)Cover ( covering, filling) Uncover (uncovering, emptying)

Design CreateForm

Existence InternalLocation Dynamic Texture

Table 5: Force-dynamic image schemas for annotation: theme change type. The terms in the second and
third columns make up the annotation.

External Cause Example
Autonomous no external cause Paint spilled onto the floor.
Self-Volitional no external cause; theme argument brings about

action volitionality
Wanda ran out of the room.

Physical external physical cause The baseball shattered the window.
Volitional external volitional cause; no distinct instrument I painted the wall.
Instrumental external volitional cause with distinct instrument I painted the wall with a roller.

Table 6: External/Internal cause. The terms in the first column make up the annotation.

Initial part of causal chain
Volitional Volitional(x, y, i) ≡ Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) & Subevent(f, i, j, q1) &

Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Force(f, g) & Vol(q1)
Physical Physical(x, y, i) ≡ Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) & Subevent(f, i, j, q1) &

Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Force(f, g) & Cont(q1)
Instrument Instrument(x, y, z, i) ≡ Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) & Component-of(h, z) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Subevent(h, i, l, q3) & Force(f, h) & Vol(q1) &
Force(h, g) & Cont(q3)

Self-volitional Self-Volitional(x, i) ≡ Component-of(f, x) & Subevent(f, i, j, q) & Vol(q)
Central part of causal chain
COS COS(x, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Subevent(f, i, j, q) & Prop(q)
Motion Motion(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & InhStPh(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & Mot(q1)
Apply Apply(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & InhStPh(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & +Mer(q1) & Exist(q2)
Remove Remove(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & InhStPh(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & -Mer(q1) & Exist(q2)
Cover Cover(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, y) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & +Mer(q2) & Int(q1)
Uncover Uncover(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, y) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & -Mer(q2) & Int(q1)
Create Create(x, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Subevent(g, i, j, q) & Des(q)
Form Form(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, y) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Transform(f, g) & Des(q2) & Int(q1)
Internal Internal(x, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Subevent(f, i, j, q) & Int(q)
Location Location(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, x) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & InhStPh(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & Int(q1) & Exist(q2)
Dynamic Texture DynamicTexture(x, y, i) ≡ Theme-of(e, y) & Component-of(f, x) & Component-of(g, y) &

Subevent(f, i, j, q1) & Subevent(g, i, k, q2) & Path(f, g) & Int(q2) & Int(q1)

Table 7: Formal definitions of event types. The terms in the first column correspond to the force dynamic
annotations in Tables 5 and 6. The aspectual type of the Theme-of argument is the aspectual type of the
entire event. The the aspectual types of subevents are determined by the overall aspectual type of the
event, based on rules not included here for reasons of space.

109


