



















































Scope, Time, and Predicate Restriction in Blackfoot using MC-STAG


Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms (TAG+13), pages 53–60,
Umeå, Sweden, September 4–6, 2017. c© 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Scope, Time, and Predicate Restriction in Blackfoot using MC-STAG

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko
University of Calgary

2500 University Dr. NW
Calgary, AB, Canada, T2R 1H4
dstorosh@ucalgary.ca

Abstract

We use STAG to model the interaction
between demonstratives and tense found
in Blackfoot (Algonquian). In clauses
with no tense or aspect marking, past
tense can be encoded through a distal
demonstrative on either the internal argu-
ment (transitives, unaccusatives) or the ex-
ternal argument (unergatives). A fourth
class of predicate, semantically transi-
tive but syntactically intransitive with a
pseudo-incorporated object, does not al-
low either argument to mark tense. Us-
ing the scope mechanics described in
Frank and Storoshenko (2012), we first
model the unique scope properties of
pseudo-incorporation, following on the
Bliss (2013) claim that predicate satu-
ration in these cases derives from the
Chung and Ladusaw (2004) operation of
predicate restriction, not function appli-
cation. Modelling the predicate restric-
tion operation within a STAG derivation is
shown to correctly predict the scope facts
in a way such that the tense facts are also
easily captured.

1 Tense and Demonstratives

In this section, we present the basic tense data,
and discuss the challenges it presents for a
GB/Minimalism-style analysis before moving on
to STAG. Blackfoot is an Algonquian language
of Southern Alberta and Montana with a largely
polysynthetic morphology. While the language
has a range of tense and aspect markers, clauses
may appear untensed. As described in Lewis
(2014), untensed predicates may receive an oblig-
atory temporal interpretation from a demonstrative

on one of their arguments:1

(1) amo ninaa ispii
DEM.PROX man dance
‘This man is dancing/danced.’
(either tense)

(2) oma ninaa ispii
DEM.DIST man dance
‘That man danced.’
(past only, Lewis 2014 ex19b)

As shown, while the proximal demonstrative does
not fix the tense, a distal demonstrative fixes the
interpretation in the past. The task of writing a
function which could accomplish this is simply a
matter of lambda gymnastics:

(3) JF K = λPλs′.P (s′) ∧ DIST (s′) →
s′ < s∗

F , a recursive function of type 〈〈s,t〉,〈s,t〉〉 on
the verbal projection inspects its complement for
situation variables in the scope of a DIST func-
tion (assuming demonstratives to also carry situa-
tion variables, see Elbourne (2008)), dictating that
such situations be interpreted as prior to the utter-
ance time s∗. The proposal is not that demonstra-
tives themselves carry any temporal interpretation,
rather that is built into the verbal projection (and
therefore inherently part of the predicate) which
interacts with demonstratives in its scope.

The same pattern of past tense following from
distal demonstratives has been shown for unac-
cusative predicates:

(4) amo ninaa o’too
DEM.PROX man arrive
‘This man arrives/arrived.’(either tense)

1In the interests of space, we will only give the mini-
mal morphemic breakdown necessary to illustrate the facts
salient to our discussion. Readers are encouraged to consult
the sources cited in this paper to appreciate the complexity of
the morphology.

53



(5) oma ninaa o’too
DEM.DIST man arrive
‘That man arrived.’ (past only)

However, in (syntactically) transitive construc-
tions, only the internal argument fixes the tense:

(6) oma ninaa si’kataa amo
DEM.DIST man kick.TR DEM.PROX
ninaa
man
‘That man kick/kicked this man’
(either tense, Lewis 2014 ex20a)

(7) amo ninaa si’kataa oma
DEM.PROX man kick.TR DEM.DIST
ninaa
man
‘This man kicked that man.’
(past only, Lewis 2014 ex20c)

The fact that distal demonstratives do not always
trigger a past interpretation is taken as evidence
that the demonstratives themselves do not inher-
ently carry tense, and that the F operator must be
a part of the predicate, with a narrowly defined
scope. The challenge therefore lies in locating the
position of this F function on the verbal spine. To
account for the transitives and, by extension, unac-
cusatives, the scope of F must exclude the external
argument (specifier of vP); however the unergative
cases show that the specifier of vP can also be in
the scope of F . An additional complication arises
when considering a fourth construction, known in
the literature as the Animate Intransitive + Object
(AI+O) construction:

(8) amo ninaa ooyi mamii
DEM.PROX man eat.INTR fish
‘This man is eating/ate fish.’

(9) oma ninaa ooyi mamii
DEM.DIST man eat.INTR fish
‘That man is eating/ate fish.’

In (8) and (9), the predicates are syntactically in-
transitive, lacking the morphological marking of
transitives, though they still take two arguments
semantically. According to Bliss (2013), the ob-
ject (mamii in this case) is pseudo-incorporated
into the verbal predicate as an NP, not a full DP.
As shown in our data, the subject of this type of
intransitive does not fix the tense, while the object
by definition has no ability to do so as a bare NP.

Assuming that the relevant function which in-
spects demonstratives is contributed by some
functional head on the verbal spine, it would need
to be in a flexible position, sometimes above vP
(unergatives) and sometimes below vP (all oth-
ers). This would also imply that in the case of
a transitive, the function would not even scope
over a fully-saturated predicate, surely an unde-
sirable state of affairs if we want to assume a sin-
gle operator is responsible for this phenomenon.
To solve this, one could adopt a Kratzer (1996)-
inspired deconstruction of predicates, in which ex-
ternal arguments are introduced to a fully satu-
rated predicate through event identification. Tak-
ing this step, and then defining the position of F
as the first opportunity to merge a function of the
semantic type 〈〈s,t〉,〈s,t〉〉 would again correctly
capture the subjects of unaccusatives, objects of
transitives, and correctly exclude the subject of the
AI+O construction saturated by object incorpora-
tion, but would miss the unergatives, as the neces-
sary condition for applying the F function would
be met before event identification ever took place.
The only solution would be to then add a syntactic
constraint in the form of some uninterpretable fea-
ture requiring the functional head to have at least
one nominal (NP or DP) in its scope. While such a
move is possible, the necessary syntactic feature is
not a natural one in the framework, and the notion
of merging a functional head as soon as seman-
tically possible in a derivation, regardless of the
syntactic form of the object derived to that point,
goes against most notions of functional cartogra-
phies. However, the clear judgement particularly
in the case of the intransitive subject of AI+O not
triggering a past tense interpretation strongly sug-
gests that there is some interplay with the mechan-
ics of argument saturation underlying this phe-
nomenon, and that it should not be downplayed as
a spatial metaphor residing in the pragmatics. This
paper argues that implementing an STAG analy-
sis of the Blackfoot clause provides a more natural
way to characterize the position of F .

In an STAG context, this means we should be
looking to define a position for F on the seman-
tic side of the derivation rather than the syntactic
one. However, this first requires a semantics for
pseudo-incorporation. In the next section we look
at the scope differences between canonical transi-
tives with animate agents (so-called TA construc-
tions) and the AI+O construction. This will serve

54



as independent motivation for the STAG account
of these predicates which will in turn more easily
capture the tense data.

2 Blackfoot Scope

Quantification in Blackfoot can be expressed via a
verbal suffix, which is able to associate with either
the subject or the object of a transitive predicate:

(10) nit-ohkana-ohpommatoop-innaan-
1ST-all-buy.TR-1PL-
iaawa
PL.OBJ
‘We all bought them.’ or
‘We bought all of them.’
(Weber & Matthewson 2013 ex10)

Following the Constraint on Elementary Tree Min-
imality defined in Frank (2002), we treat these
quantifiers as being part of the verb’s elementary
tree. This is shown in Figure 1. The only elements
of the morphology we take to be part of the verb’s
elementary tree here are the quantification and the
verb root itself including morphological marking
of valence. The argument positions are DP substi-
tution sites, and the additional agreement affixes
arise as a result of the arguments which substitute
in, both ϕ-feature valued instances of pro in the
case of (10). A discussion of how this agreement
is manifested in an STAG context is orthogonal to
the present discussion. However, it is worth noting
that the universal quantification can also combine
with full DPs:

(11) óm-iksi aakı́ı́koan-iksi
DEM.DIST-PL girl-PL
ik-ohkana-issta-yi-aawa...
DEG-all-want.INTR-3PL-PL.OBJ ...
‘Those girls all want...’
(Weber & Matthewson 2013 ex13)

So, while these argument positions may be oc-
cupied by pro or by overt DPs with determiners,
they take on a complex meaning incorporating the
meaning of the quantifier that originates in the ver-
bal predicate.

Extending further to the Frank and Storoshenko
(2012) treatment of scope, wherein the semantic
form of a predicate in STAG is broken into a pred-
icate part and a scope part, we place this quantifier
in the scope part. Whereas traditional STAG anal-
yses of scope ambiguity make use of an undeter-
mined order of operations leading to two distinct

TP

1 DPi↓ T′

T QuantP

Quant

ohkana

vP

ti v′

v VP

V

ohpommatoo’p

DP↓ 2

Figure 1: Basic syntactic tree for the predicate in
(10)

derivations (Schabes and Shieber, 1994), here we
claim that the Blackfoot facts must be captured
by two different semantic elementary tree sets for
the verbal predicate, shown in Figure 22. Though
not strictly necessary for the example in (10) with
pronominal arguments, the form presented here
is robust enough to accommodate interaction be-
tween predicate modifying affixes and DPs with
determiners, yielding complex expressions such as
all the men. For the moment, we assume that defi-
nite and demonstrative DPs in this language are of
type 〈e〉, consisting of definite descriptions closed
using the iota operator:

(12) Jthe manK = ιx.man(x)

We further assume that forms such as (12) are not
specified for number; following Link (1983), the
unique x variable here may also denote a plurality
of entities. Following the quantification presented
in Figure 2, the semantic content of the argument
DP substitutes into the restrictor of the quanti-
fier, rather than directly into an argument position.
This restrictor contains a simple set membership
function, in this case defining all entities that be-
long to the set defined by the plurality which sub-
stitutes in.

Having established the basic mechanics of the
verbal quantification, we move on to the interac-

2This may be thought of as the output of two distinct el-
ementary tree building operations. The construction of ele-
mentary tree sets in STAG remaining a somewhat unexplored
realm, we step back from this issue and simply assert the two
tree sets.

55



{ t
∀y′′ t

1 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λy.y′′ ∈ y

t

y′′ 〈e,t〉

λy′ t

2 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λx′ t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.buy(y, x)

e

x′

e

y′

}

{ t
1 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λy′ t

∀x′′ t

2 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λx.x′′ ∈ x

t

x′′ 〈e,t〉

λx′ t*

t

〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉

λxλy.buy(y, x)

e

x′

e

y′

}

Figure 2: Semantic tree sets for the predicate in (10)

tion with quantified DPs and the AI+O construc-
tion. In the following examples, the verbal pre-
fix iihkana (a phonological variant of the prefix
in (10)) denotes universal quantification, now in-
teracting with another quantified DP in the same
clause:

(13) iihkana-inoyiiya anniskey piita
all-see.TR one certain eagle
‘They all saw this one eagle’
1 > ∀, *∀ > 1
(Weber & Matthewson 2013 ex21)

(14) iihkana-yaapiiya piita
all-see.INTR eagle
‘They all saw a different eagle’
*1 > ∀, ∀ > 1
(Weber & Matthewson 2013 ex26)

Weber and Matthewson (2013) note that in exam-
ples such as (13), a transitive clause with a quanti-
fied object DP, the DP quantifier obligatorily takes
wide scope over the verbal prefix quantifier, which
in turn associates with the subject. That the ob-
jects obligatorily outscope the verb-affixed quan-
tifiers means that in such cases, the affixed quan-
tifier must associate with the subject. In other
words, only the upper MCS configuration in Fig-
ure 2 is available. We propose that this may be the

result of a semantic well-formedness constraint.
While the affixal quantifiers may associate with
DPs bearing simple determiners or demonstratives
(i.e. objects of type 〈e〉), the available data show
no examples of the affixal quantifier associating
with an independently quantified DP. Such quan-
tified DPs, we assume, combine using the typi-
cal two-tree semantic multi-component set (MCS)
consisting of a type 〈e〉 variable substituting at
the argument site and a 〈t〉-recursive scope tree
which must adjoin high enough to bind the vari-
able. This would be the familiar type of quantifi-
cational MCS as in Figure 3. A constraint against
“overloading” an argument with two quantifiers,
essentially preventing a quantified DP from com-
bining into an argument position already part of
a verb’s quantifier, would block a derivation for
(13) using the lower MCS in Figure 2 and creat-
ing a clash between the verbal suffix universal and
the DP’s specific numeral in this case. From here,
we turn to the type-shifting operation defined in
Storoshenko and Frank (2012) and applying it to
the scope tree in the upper MCS, targeting the root
node as the adjoining site for the DP’s scope, al-
lowing the specific ‘one’ to scope wide3 The sub-

3Another possibility for blocking the unwanted derivation
for (13) may be to invoke a constraint against targeting the

56



{ t
1x t

eagle(x)

t*

e

x

}

Figure 3: Semantic tree set for DP quantifier as in
(13)

ject, again a pronoun, associates with the verbal
quantifier by way of set membership. Note this
is contra Weber and Matthewson who derive the
wide scope of the object through a choice func-
tion.

In the AI+O case (14), they find that the in-
corporated singular object obligatorily takes nar-
row scope, yielding only an interpretation where
each person sees a different eagle. Translated into
STAG, this means that the object is not compos-
ing with the scope tree of the predicate in the
same way as a quantified object. Following Bliss
(and Weber and Matthewson for this example), the
semantic operation is Predicate Restriction (PR).
As defined by Chung and Ladusaw (2004), PR is
an alternative to Function Application (FA) as a
means of saturating the argument position of a
given predicate. PR is a two step process: first the
argument is taken to be of type 〈e,t〉, and acts as
a restrictor on the targeted argument position in-
side the predicate. Then, existential closure binds
the argument position. In an STAG context, this
will of course be a single operation, a compos-
tion of the predicate’s MCS with the tree set of the
incorporated argument. The key distinction will
be that such pseudo-incorporated arguments will
have unique tree sets, shown in Figure 4. Again,
as with a standard GQ, there is a variable portion
of type 〈e〉 which will substitute into the relevant
argument position of a predicate’s scope tree. The
difference here is that the recursive “scope part” of
the MCS is not recursive on 〈t〉, but rather on 〈e,t〉.
The function from 〈e,t〉 to 〈e,t〉 within the auxil-
iary tree accomplishes the operations of restriction
and closure in one step. The type 〈e〉 component
is associated with the restricted and existentially-
closed variable by way of an identity function. Ad-
joining the auxiliary tree into the lowest 〈e,t〉 node
of scope tree in the upper (subject universal quan-
tifier) MCS in Figure 2, while substituting the type
〈e〉 variable into the 2 -linked argument position

2 node in the lower MCS from type shifting.

{ 〈e,t〉
〈e,t〉 〈〈e,t〉,〈e,t〉〉

λPλx∃x′′.P (x′′)∧ eagle(x′′) ∧ID(x, x′′)

e

x

}

Figure 4: Semantic tree set for incorporated object
(first attempt)

yields the form in (15), composed up to the 〈t〉
node immediately dominating 2 in the scope tree.

(15) ∃x′′.see(y′, x′′)∧eagle(x′′)∧ID(x, x′′)

Though inelegant, and leaving the x variable free
but identified with the existentially bound x′′, the
method in Figure 4 allows us to retain the same ba-
sic predicate tree sets regardless of the type of ar-
gument (DP or incorporated object), and to easily
derive the obligatory narrow scope of the object.

An alternative approach would be to take more
seriously the syntactic differences between not just
the objects in (13) and (14), but also the predicates,
which do have different morphology, and assume
that the predicate trees will be different as well.
For (13), we assume the object to be a full DP,
combining into predicate trees similar to those in
Figures 1 and 2. However, a predicate taking a
pseudo-incorporated object may have a distinct se-
mantics, mirroring the fact that on the syntax side
it combines with a bare NP rather than a DP. This
is the scenario sketched in Figure 5. Here, the
scope part of the predicate does not contain an ab-
straction over the object position; instead, the ob-
ject position 2 , which would be an NP substitu-
tion site in the syntax, is now linked to the 〈e,〈e,t〉〉
node in the lower predicate part of the semantic
tree.

The gain from this method can be seen in Figure
6, where we present the updated semantic trees for
the incorporated argument. Here, the only contri-
bution of the nominal is to act as a function over
the semantically transitive predicate, and incorpo-
rate the restriction on the object. The existential
closure is already built into the root of the predi-
cate’s lower tree, which will necessarily be under
the scope of the subject combining into the scope
tree for the same predicate. Simplification of the
resulting expression yields (16) as the final deno-
tation of the lower member of the predicate’s MCS
after the incorporated object adjoins.

(16) ∃x′.see(y′, x′) ∧ eagle(x′)

57



{ t
∀y′′ t

1 e↓ 〈e,t〉

λy.y′′ ∈ y

t

y′′ 〈e,t〉

λy′ t*

t

∃x′ t

〈e,t〉

〈e〈e,t〉〉 2

λxλy.see(y, x)

e

x′

e

y′

}

Figure 5: Alternate Predicate for PR (including universal quantifier over subject)

{ 〈e,〈e,t〉〉
〈e,〈e,t〉〉* 〈〈e,〈e,t〉〉,〈e,〈e,t〉〉〉

λPλx′′λy′′.P (x′′)(y′′)∧ eagle(x′′)

}

Figure 6: Alternate semantic tree set for incorpo-
rated argument

Avoiding the issue of the unbound variable makes
this method preferable, and we will adopt it go-
ing forward, but it comes at the apparent cost of
proposing a different tree set for the predicate. In-
cidentally, this approach also directly encodes the
fact that incorporation is uniquely available for ob-
jects but not subjects, which the prior attempt does
not. With the basics of handling different types of
arguments and quantification settled, we return to
the matter of tense in the next section.

3 Accounting for Tense

To get back on track, recall the formula from (1),
repeated below as (17):

(17) JF K = λPλs′.P (s′) ∧ DIST (s′) →
s′ < s∗

What we need to get the temporal interpretation
correct is a function which inspects a predicate of
type 〈s,t〉 from situations to propositions (truth val-
ues), and dictates that if the current situation has
been taken as the argument of a DISTal function,
then the current situation is in the past relative to
the present speech time defined as s∗. As noted
earlier, this calls upon a treatment of demonstra-
tives described in Elbourne (2008) where situa-
tion variables proliferate; one place predicates are
of type 〈〈s,e〉,〈s,t〉〉, arguments normally taken to
be type 〈e〉 are 〈s,e〉, and so on. Essentially, all
entities and propositions are interpreted with re-
spect to situations. Having already motivated a

treatment of demonstratives and definite DPs as
type 〈e〉, the lift to type 〈s,e〉 is no great stretch.
Revised trees, showing only one argument under
the universal quantifier for the sake of brevity, are
given in Figure 7.

For a definite DP, the update is quite simple:

(18) Jthe manK = λs.ιx.man(x) in s
Combining this form with our updated univer-
sal quantification yields the following (abstracting
away from tense and the object position for the
time being):

(19) λs∀y′′[y′′ ∈ ιx.[man(x) in s] in s]
[kick(y′′, x(s))]

While there is some redundancy, this gives all y′′

who, in the given situation, are part of the plurality
defined as being men in the given situation.

The next ingredient of our account for tense will
be a form for the distal demonstrative. Again, this
is accomplished with a minor simplification of El-
bourne’s form, here conflating temporal and world
variables into the single type 〈s〉 for convenience:
(20) Joma ninaaK = λs.[[[ιx.x is a man in

s] = z] ∧DIST (z, a, s)]
Following Elbourne, the iota operator defines an
x as a man, and then associates that x with an-
other variable of the same type (z here). This
second variable is passed along as an argument
of a second function defined as DIST, here tak-
ing three arguments. The first is the associated en-
tity, while the third is the given situation in which
x’s man-hood is defined. The middle variable a
is a contextually-defined indexical, providing the
frame of reference for distance. In essence, “z is
distant with respect to a in the situation s”.

Once this argument has composed into the pred-
icate tree, the function defined in (17) comes into
play. The action of this function is to check the

58



{ 〈s,t〉
∀y′′ 〈s,t〉

1 〈s,e〉↓ 〈〈s,e〉,〈s,t〉〉

λy.y′′ ∈ y(s) in s

〈s,t〉

y′′ 〈〈s,e〉,〈s,t〉〉

λy′ 〈s,t〉

λPλs′.P (s′) ∧DIST (s′) → s′ < s∗ 〈s,t〉

2 〈s,e〉↓ 〈〈s,e〉,〈s,t〉〉

λx′ 〈s,t〉*

〈s,t〉

〈〈s,e〉,〈s,t〉〉

〈〈s,e〉,〈〈s,e〉,〈s,t〉〉〉

λxλyλs.kick(y(s), x(s) in s)

〈s,e〉

x′

〈s,e〉

y′

}

Figure 7: Semantic tree set for the predicate in (10), updated to situations and including F . For (un-
quantified) unergatives and unaccusatives, F appears at the root, still immediately above the lowest 〈s,e〉
substitution site.

object of type 〈s,t〉 in its scope for any DIST func-
tions taking the given situation as an argument.
The presence of such a function triggers an im-
plication that the given situation is in the past rela-
tive to the present situation of utterance. Recalling
the facts in Section 1, the relevant syntactic po-
sitions triggering this implication were the inter-
nal argument of transitives, and the sole argument
of unergatives and unaccusatives. The latter two
are simplest, as while their arguments may have
different positions in the syntax, the semantic tree
sets for both will have the same basic shape. For
these, we need simply to posit that they will have a
scope tree similar to that for the AI+O case in Fig-
ure 5, and that this function from 〈s,t〉 to 〈s,t〉 is
generated at the root of the scope tree, being a part
of the verb’s semantics. For the syntactically tran-
sitive case, we must make an uncomfortable stipu-
lation, placing the function immediately above the
node marked 2 in Figure 7. This will guarantee
scope over the substitution position for the object
but not the subject.

The crucial step in the derivation of (7), with the
distal demonstrative triggering a past tense inter-
pretation, comes at the stage where F takes its ar-
gument. Assuming the object of kick to have been
oma ninaa, the expression would be as in (21):

(21) λs′.kick(y′(s′),ιx.x is a man in s′ = z∧
DIST (z, a, s′)) ∧ DIST (s′) → s′ <
s∗

Crucially, the material implication is calculated
immediately, such that in this case the statement
that the bound s′ is temporally prior to the present

s∗ is coordinated to the expression for the duration
of the final computation. If s′ is not the argument
of a DIST function at this stage, then F takes no
action and is inert for the rest of the interpretation.

Turning to the AI+O cases, we capitalize on the
conclusion that the best solution to dealing with
PR is to say that the semantic elementary trees of
the predicates involved are substantially different.
It is then not unreasonable to claim that another
consequence of this is that the F function is not
a part of the Figure 5 tree set. This allows us to
claim that for the rest, F is built into the pred-
icate’s scope tree immediately above the lowest
〈s,e〉 substitution site during the generation of the
predicate’s elementary tree. Assuming F has a
syntactic analogue, the separation of syntax and
semantics provided by STAG allows us to define a
consistent syntactic position for F which maps to
an equally consistent semantic one.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper has dealt with three major challenges
arising from an examination of Blackfoot argu-
ments: quantification from the verbal predicate,
predicate restriction as a combinatory operation,
and the definition of a function for deriving past
tense from distal demonstratives. The STAG ap-
proach to the first issue is reasonably straightfor-
ward, building the quantification into the verbal
predicate’s scope tree, while having the DP sub-
stitute into a position linked to the restrictor inside
of a generalized quantifier structure. What is less
clear is how the two different elementary tree sets

59



for this quantification are defined. A quantifier on
a transitive predicate may bind either the subject
or the object; our solution to this has been to stip-
ulate there must be different elementary tree sets
for each eventuality. This suggests that there is
some room for variability in the mapping between
syntax and semantics during the process of ele-
mentary tree construction. More work in this area
is called for, as the complicated interactions be-
tween verbal morphology and argument structure
in this language do suggest that a parallel deriva-
tional process is also at work before the TAG com-
binatory operations begin.

This is reinforced by the second issue, that of
Predicate Restriction. The ideal solution seems to
be to follow the lead of the verb morphology and
again assume that there is a fundamentally differ-
ent semantic tree set for what is essentially the
same predicate. Once this leap is made, the im-
plementation of PR is relatively simple, with the
two steps split between the two lexical items in-
volved: the verb’s semantic MCS provides the ex-
istential closure, while the incorporating argument
provides the restriction over the argument position
by way of a function over the predicate.

The issue of the positioning of the function
which determines temporal interpretations from
the presence of a demonstrative is where the ben-
efits of the STAG approach to semantics shine
though. As discussed above, the expanded scope
trees adopted in this paper allow not only for the
function to be divorced from a given syntactic
position, but they allow for a consistent position
above a saturated predicate in the scope trees to
be defined. The position unifying the subject of
unergatives and unaccusatives, along with the ob-
ject of transitives is that they are all associated
with the lowest λ-abstractor in the scope tree. No
such generalization is possible in a mainstream
framework. We also now have a principled rea-
son for treating the AI+O cases as distinct. The
STAG account may feel somewhat ad hoc, but it
still seems preferable to conceive of this as a func-
tion of syntactic elementary tree building interfac-
ing with a distinct semantic tree than trying to read
the semantics off the syntactic tree directly.

Lastly, we must point out that beyond the contri-
butions of derivational morphology to elementary
tree building in both the syntax and the semantics,
there is a rather intricate agreement system at work
in this language which we have made no effort to

capture. This remains for future work.

Acknowledgments

Thanks go first to the members of the Blackfoot
community for sharing their language; unless oth-
erwise cited, data in this paper are from fieldwork
carried out at the University of Calgary with the
support of a Faculty Start-Up Grant. This paper
has been improved by the detailed comments of
the TAG+ reviewers. All errors are my own.

References
Heather Bliss. 2013. The Blackfoot configurational-

ity conspiracy: Parallels and differences in clausal
and nominal structures. Ph.D. thesis, University of
British Columbia.

Sandra Chung and William Ladusaw. 2004. Restriction
and Saturation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Paul Elbourne. 2008. Demonstratives as individual
concepts. Linguistics and Philosophy 31:409–466.

Robert Frank. 2002. Phrase Structure Composition
and Syntactic Dependencies. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Robert Frank and Dennis Ryan Storoshenko. 2012.
The shape of elementary trees and scope possibili-
ties in STAG. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tional Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammars and
Related Formalisms.

Angelika Kratzer. 1996. Severing the external argu-
ment from its verb. In Johan Rooryck and Laurie
Zaring, editors, Phrase Structure and the Lexicon,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pages
109–138.

Blake Lewis. 2014. The syntax and semantics of
demonstratives: A DP-external approach. In Laura
Teddiman, editor, Proceedings of the 2014 An-
nual Conference of the Canadian Linguistics Asso-
ciation. http://cla-acl.ca/wp-content/uploads/Lewis-
2014.pdf.

Godehard Link. 1983. Logical semantics for natural
language. Erkenntnis 19(1-3):261–283.

Yves Schabes and Stuart M. Shieber. 1994. An alterna-
tive conception of tree-adjoining derivation. Com-
putational Linguistics 20(1):91–124.

Dennis Ryan Storoshenko and Robert Frank. 2012.
Deriving syntax-semantics mappings: node linking,
type shifting and scope ambiguity. In Proceedings
of the 11th International Workshop on Tree Adjoin-
ing Grammars and Related Formalisms.

Natalie Weber and Lisa Matthewson. 2013. The se-
mantics of Blackfoot arguments. In Papers of the
45th Algonquian Conference.

60


