





























Finite-State Morphological Analysis for Marathi

Vinit Ravishankar

Faculty of ICT

University of Malta

Msida MSD 2080, Malta

vinit.ravishankar@gmail.com

Francis M. Tyers

School of Linguistics

Higher School of Economics

Moscow, Russia

francis.tyers@uit.no

Abstract

This paper describes the development of

free/open-source morphological descriptions

for Marathi, an Indo-Aryan language spoken

in the state of Maharashtra in India. We de-

scribe the conversion and usage of an existing

Latin-based lexicon for our Devanagari-based

analyser, taking into account the distinction

between full vowels and diacritics, that

is not adequately captured by the Latin.

Marathi displays elements of both fusional

and agglutinative morphology, which gives

us different ways to potentially treat the mor-

phology; philosophically, we approach our

analyser by treating the morphology system

as a three-layer affixing system. We use the

lttoolbox lexicon formalism for describing the

finite-state transducer, and attempt to work

within a morphological framework that would

allow for some consistency across Indo-Aryan

languages, enabling machine translation

across language pairs. An evaluation of our

finite-state transducer shows that the coverage

is adequate, over 80% on two corpora, and the

precision is good (over 97%).

1 Introduction

This paper describes the development of free/open-

source morphological descriptions of Marathi, an Indo-

Aryan language spoken in the state of Maharashtra in

India. Morphological descriptions are computational

models of a language’s morphology, and are used to

output morphological analyses from word forms and

vice versa.

In section 2, the paper gives an overview of Marathi

morphology, and talks about some of the grammatical

decisions we made during development of the analyser.

Section 3 is a literature review of previous work done in

the field. Section 4 describes the methodology we fol-

lowed whilst working on the analyser, the formalisms

we have used, and describes our lexicon. We continue

with section 6, describing the evaluation metrics we

have chosen, and how well our analyser performs on

them. Section 7 describes potential future work we

could do.

2 Marathi

Marathi is an Indo-Aryan language spoken primarily

in the west Indian state of Maharashtra, and has ap-

proximately 62 million speakers, as of 2003 (Pandhari-

pande, 2003). Despite being an Indo-European lan-

guage, Marathi has borrowed several features - such as

clusivity, and certain retroflex consonants (such as the

retroflex lateral flap), either absent or relatively uncom-

mon in other Indo-Aryan languages.

Whilst Marathi retains some fusional morphological

aspects of its proto-language, Sanskrit, it displays mor-

phological agglutination within many contexts. Our

analysis broadly follows the perspective of Masica

(1993). They consider the split morphological to be a

form ofmorphological “layering”; with a primary layer,

comprising mainly of inherited fusional elements (the

“oblique” case), a secondary agglutinative layer, and a

tertiary postpositional layer. These layers are, to a cer-

tain extent, universal amongst Indo-Aryan languages:

they differ largely in the conditions under which they

occur, and language-specific variations that may oc-

cur. A brief, specific definition of the layers in Marathi

would, therefore, look like:

1. The “oblique” case; complex morphophonemic

changes in the lemma. eg. मुलगा mulagā “boy”
→ मुला mulā

2. Agglutinative suffixes, similar to traditional cases

that mark noun functions, like the nominative or

the genitive.

3. Postpositions; morphologically and semantically

complex elements. These can attach to an (op-

tional) oblique genitive suffix in layer 2.

Certain particles, such as an emphasis particle -च -
c, or particles like -ही -hī and -सु ा -suddhā “as well
as”, are quite common, and can attach as a suffix to

most words, with the exception of conjunctions. Verbs,

along with the optional negation particle, decline for

50

Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Finite State Methods and Natural Language Processing, pages 50–55,

Umeå, Sweden, 4–6 September 2017. © 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-4006

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-4006


tense, aspect and mood, and have adjectival and adver-

bial derivations. (1) is an example with two of the three

case layers and two suffix particles.

(1) (to)

(he)

ghar-ā-māge-hī

house-obl-behind.post-too.ptcl
ge-l-ā-c

go-pfv-3msg-foc
“He definitely went behind the house too”

3 Prior work

There have been a number of efforts to develop mor-

phological analysers for Marathi over the years. While

morphological analysis for Marathi is fairly well stud-

ied, one downside of previous work is that the soft-

ware and lexicon is not freely available. Dixit et al.

(2005) present a spellchecker for the language based

on a lexicon of 13,000 root words and morphologi-

cal rules. They did an evaluation of spell-checking

accuracy showing that out of 10,648 words classified

as correctly spelt, only 0.45% were actually false pos-

itives. The morphological analyser of Bapat et al.

(2010) is based on a word–paradigm approach mod-

elled with a finite-state transducer and contains a lex-

icon of 24,035. They evaluate 21,096 unique word

forms from a corpus and find that 97.18% receive all

and only the correct morphological analyses; it is worth

noting, however, is that their dictionary was created to

specifically fit their evaluation corpus. Another anal-

yser based on finite-state technology is described by

Dabre et al. (2012), based on a gold standard of 1,341

words, achieved an accuracy of 72.18%. The size of the

lexicon was not specified. Gawade et al. (2013) also use

a finite-state transducer to model Marathi morphology,

although their paper does not evaluate its effectiveness.

Resources like BabelNet1, generated by statistically

machine translating WordNet ontologies, do not appear

to be very useful - whilst BabelNet does contain some

Marathi nouns, common verbs are all absent.

4 Development

We initially worked on the open word classes, many

of which could be successfully scraped from the re-

sources of the Language Technologies Research Cen-

tre (LTRC), at the International Institute of Information

Technology, Hyderabad.2 As the lexicon was in WX

notation,3 a transliteration script was used along, along

with standard UNIX command line utilities, to extract

and convert noun paradigms. Adjective paradigms

were fairly trivial to convert; a significant number of

adjectives do not inflect at all, and most others are very

1http://babelnet.org/
2Available from the LTRC website at http:

//ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=
onlineServices/morph/index.htm

3WX is an ASCII-based transliteration scheme for Indian

languages; the name derives from the use of ‘w’ and ‘x’ for

dental stops.

regular. Words were then scraped (extracted) from the

lexicon and assigned to their respective paradigms.

Verbal declensions were stored with a differ-

ent method; separate files existed, not for separate

paradigms, but for separate word forms. Each file had

a set of words, declined to match the particular form

described by the file. The lexicon, however, was simi-

lar to the nominal lexicon, in that verbs were assigned a

particular verb paradigm. Rather than merge these mul-

tiple files into a single paradigm, we created our own

verbal paradigms, with Dhongade and Wali (2009) and

Masica (1993) as references. The verb list, however,

primarily consists of entries from the LTRC lexicon.

4.1 Formalisms

For the finite-state transducer we employ the lttoolbox

formalism, an XML-based format used in the Apertium

project (Forcada et al., 2011). This formalism is widely

used for encoding language data, with Apertium hav-

ing over 40 language pairs for machine translation. Al-

though we could have used an FST toolkit like HFST

(Lindén et al., 2011) or Foma (Hulden, 2009), with sep-

arate layers for processing morphonology and morpho-

tactics, the lack of significant morphophonological pro-

cesses relevant to Marathi orthography made lttoolbox

a perfectly adequate choice.

4.2 Lexicon

The main source of lexical material for our analyser

is from an existing morphological analyser published

by the Language Technology Research Centre (LTRC)

at IIIT Hyderabad. Unlike other work on Marathi, the

lexicon is available under the free/open-source GPL li-

cence. The source lexicon (see example in Figure 3) is

composed of a dictionary table containing six columns.

All text in Marathi is written in a Latin-based translit-

eration scheme.

The paradigms in the LTRC lexicon are essentially

lists of different forms of a word; words are assigned

paradigms based on their conformance to the inflection

of the paradigm word. One of the biggest problems

with this is the inefficient noun paradigm system; each

paradigm lists forms that include bound postpositional

morphemes (including adjectival postpositions); this is

quite unnecessary, as postpositions (layer 3) are largely

regular, and attach to the oblique case (layer 1) with an

optional clitic (layer 2). This results in 968 forms per

paradigm, where four would suffice - the singular and

plural nominative and oblique. There were other mi-

nor problems, such as the inclusion of plural forms for

uncountable nouns or abstract nouns.

4.3 Paradigms

The Apertium paradigm system essentially func-

tions using finite-state transducers, defined in XML.

Paradigms are expressed as an input side (within

‘<l></l>’ tags), and a corresponding output side
(within ‘<r></r>’ tags); the transducer is made to re-

51

http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=onlineServices/morph/index.htm
http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=onlineServices/morph/index.htm
http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=onlineServices/morph/index.htm


^ठेचा/ठेचा<n><m><sg><nom>$
^ मरची/ मरची<n><f><sg><nom>$
^,/,<cm>$
^ चच/ चच<n><f><sg><nom>$
^व/व<cnjcoo>$
^मीठापासून/मीठ<n><nt><sg><obl>+पासून<post><adv>$
^तयार केला/तयार करणे<vblex><perf><p3><m><sg>$
^जातो/जाण<ेvblex><impf><p3><m><sg>$
^./.<sent>$

Figure 1: Example output from the analyser for the sen-

tence ठेचा मरची, चच व मीठापासून तयार केला जातो ṭhēcā miracī,
ciṃnca vamīṭhāpāsūna tayāra kelā jāto “Pickles are prepared

using chilis, tamarind and salt.” Note that the example has

been manually disambiguated for brevity. The tag cnjcoo
is coordinating conjunction, and cm is comma.

turn the lemma of a word and the corresponding tags.

The Marathi dictionary had a few caveats regarding

transliteration of the lexicon to Unicode; a paradigm

with the invariant part of the word ending before a

vowel would require additional entries in Unicode, de-

pending on whether the final letter of the invariant part

was a vowel sound or not. For instance, consider the

pair A/I and t/I: the Unicode equivalents for this pair

would be आ/ई and त/◌ी, with the vowel displayed as
a diacritic in the second case. Both characters — the

full vowel and the diacritic— are distinct Unicode code

points. Whilst we can infer, from the WX translitera-

tion equivalent, that the vowel ought to be a diacritic

and not a full vowel, the distinction is explicit in the

Unicode.

For several morphological contexts in whichMarathi

displays some form of agglutinativity, we have used the

“join” operator, which essentially redirects the FST to

another paradigm after it consumes the input for the

first. This has resulted in a lot of ‘minor’ paradigms

in the dictionary.

There are significant phonological differences be-

tween spoken and literary Marathi; these often reflect

in informal written Marathi, which tends to modify

spellings to match the spoken variant. Most paradigms

include, therefore, multiple forms mapping onto the

same analysis; there are, however, restrictions placed

on the non-standard forms to prevent them from being

generated during morphological generation. The most

common example of this is neuter agreement - whilst

literary Marathi uses the vowel /e/ ◌े e to mark the third-
person neuter, informal Marathi uses a schwa, repre-

sented by a nasalisation diacritic ◌.ं

5 Grammar

During the development of this analyser, we made sev-

eral linguistic decisions, some of which we shall at-

tempt to describe and justify.

5.1 Light verbs

Marathi, like many other Indo-Iranian and Turkic lan-

guages, has frequent light verbs. These are, essentially,

^तयार करण/ेतयार करणे<vblex><inf>$
^तयार/तयार<adv> करणे/करणे<vblex><inf>$

Figure 2: Example analyses for the light verb construct तयार
करणे tayār karṇe “to prepare”. The first analysis is what we
use; the second is an intended addition.

noun + verb constructs that represent a verbal predi-

cate. These constructs have been fairly widely stud-

ied, particularly within the context of Persian (Karimi-

Doostan, 2005). Whilst N + V combinations are, by

far, the most common type of construct, there are sev-

eral constructs where the first element cannot exist as

an independent term (but are glossed as adverbs). (2)

is an example of a sentence with a light verb construc-

tion, using the relatively uncommon verb मारणे mārṇe
“to hit”.

(2) mī

I

(zamīn-ī-lā)

(floor-obl-dat)
zhāḍū

broom.n
mār-t-o

hit.v-ipfv-1msg
I sweep (the floor)

In our analyser, we attempt to create separate entries

for every semantically valid light verb pair - i.e., an en-

try for each noun + verb combination, with a whites-

pace token separating the two. Whilst this approach

does make things easier from the perspective of ma-

chine translation, it has two disadvantages - it is very la-

borious work, and it is not completely compatible with

other linguistic resources, like the Universal Dependen-

cies treebank project (Nivre, 2015), which requires that

both the noun and the verb have separate analyses. We

intend to eventually add support for both forms of anal-

ysis; Figure 2 shows the difference between the two

analyses.

5.2 Verbal morphology

An issue we faced during development of the analyser

was finding suitable names for all verb forms. Marathi’s

relative verbal complexity, and the lack of consistency

amongst our reference grammars along with the ab-

sence of descriptions of several verb forms, made this

a fairly difficult task. We describe some of the forms:

• Supine: <sup>; name derived from the Latin
supine, these forms indicate purpose for the action

denoted by the verb; i.e. “in order to” carry out the

action.

• Transgressives: <trans>; similar to Slavic
transgressives, the forms indicate simultaneous

(imperfective) and consecutive (perfective) ac-

tions.

• Inceptives: <incp>; inceptives typically form
compounds with the verb लागणे lāgṇe “to attach”,
and indicate the starting of the action denoted by

the verb.

• Predictive: <pred>; these forms indicate an in-
tent to carry out the action denoted by the verb.

52



Corpus Tokens Cov. (%) Mean ambig.

Wikipedia 4.0M 80.2 1.7

Bible 751K 80.7 1.9

Average – 80.45 1.8

Table 1: Corpora used for naïve coverage tests

The same forms are also used for the desiderative,

to imply a desire to do something - we, however,

chose to use <pred>, similar to Dhongade and
Wali (2009).

It is worth noting that gerunds4, like nouns, can take

affixes functionally similar to the second and third layer

in nominal affixing. The gerund itself is assumed to be

the oblique, and therefore does not undergo any further

modification before it takes case or postpositional suf-

fixes. (3) is an example of a gerund with a postposition.

(3) tu-jhyā

you-gen
basṇ-yā-nantar

sit-ger-after.post
mī

I

ge-l-o

go-pfv-1msg
I went after you sat (after your sitting)

6 Evaluation

We have evaluated the morphological analyser in two

ways. The first was by calculating the naïve coverage

and mean ambiguity on freely available corpora. Naïve

coverage refers to the percentage of surface forms in

a given corpora that receive at least one morphologi-

cal analysis. Forms counted by this measure may have

other analyses which are not delivered by the trans-

ducer. The mean ambiguity measure was calculated as

the average number of analyses returned per token in

the corpus.

Our analyser was also used by Ravishankar (2017) to

evaluate coverage on generated back-transliterated cor-

pora; their coverage was comparable to our evaluation,

at 72.65% for their best system.

6.1 Corpora

We used two freely-available corpora for the evalua-

tion. The first is theMarathiWikipedia,5 and the second

is the Bible in Marathi.6

6.2 Precision and recall

Precision and recall are measures of the average ac-

curacy of analyses provided by a morphological trans-

ducer. Precision represents the number of the analyses

given for a form that are correct. Recall is the percent-

age of analyses that are deemed correct for a form (by

4Dhongade and Wali (2009) do not treat these forms as

gerunds; we disagree.
5The dump file used was mrwiki-20150901-

articles.xml.bz2 from http://dumps.
wikimedia.org.

6Downloaded from https://www.wordproject.
org/bibles/mar/. Corpus statistics and coverage are
presented in table 1.

Precision Recall

Known tokens 0.97 0.97

All tokens 0.97 0.71

Table 2: Precision and recall over all tokens and only known

tokens. Out of 699 tokens which were checked, the stems of

347 were not in the lexicon.

comparing against a gold standard) that are provided by

the transducer. To calculate precision and recall, it was

necessary to create a hand-verified list of surface forms

and their analyses. We extracted 1,000 unique surface

forms at random from aWikipedia corpus, and checked

that they were valid words in the languages and cor-

rectly spelled. Where a word was incorrectly spelled or

deemed not to be a form used in the language, it was

discarded.

This list of surface forms was then analysed with the

most recent version of the analyser, and each analysis

was checked. Where an analysis was erroneous, it was

removed; where an analysis wasmissing, it was added.7

This process gave us a ‘gold standard’ morphologically

analysed word list of 699 forms. The list is publicly

available for each language in Apertium’s SVN reposi-

tory.

We then took the same list of surface forms and ran

them through the morphological analyser once more.

Precision was calculated as the number of analyses

which were found in both the output from the morpho-

logical analyser and the gold standard, divided by the

total number of analyses output by the morphological

analyser.

Recall was calculated as the total number of analyses

found in both the output from the morphological anal-

yser and the gold standard, divided by the number of

analyses found in the morphological analyser plus the

number of analyses found in the gold standard but not

in the morphological analyser.8

The results for precision and recall are presented in

table 2.

6.3 Qualitative

After performing the manual evaluation, we found that

a majority (59.6%) of the missing analyses were nouns

or proper names. For the former class, the missing anal-

yses were often English loanwords; amongst these, we

rejected ones that would not conventionally occur in

7By this we mean that analyses which the morphological

analyser produced which were erroneous were removed from

the gold standard in order to be able to determine how fre-

quently the analyser produces erroneous analyses.
8For example, for the surface form wound in En-

glish, if the gold standard has {wound<n><sg>,
wind<vblex><pp>, wind<vblex<past>,
wound<vblex><inf>, wound<vblex><pres>}
and the output of the morphological analyser is

{wound<n><sg>, wound<vblex><inf>,
wound<vblex><pres>} then the recall will be
3

3+2
= 3

5
= 0.6.

53

http://dumps.wikimedia.org
http://dumps.wikimedia.org
https://www.wordproject.org/bibles/mar/
https://www.wordproject.org/bibles/mar/


Marathi. Compound nouns were also quite common;

many of these were loanwords from Sanskrit, a lan-

guage with significant compounding, or from Perso-

Arabic. For proper nouns, the missing analyses are eas-

ily explainable by the fact that many foreign names are

not part of the lexicon, and by the fact that we have not

yet split proper names into multiple paradigms: we as-

sume similar inflectional paradigms for all of them.

Amongst the incorrect analyses, a few were due to

our duplication of the -त -t suffix; we treated it as both
the locative case, and as a postpositional suffix. Both

have exactly the same semantic meaning, and treating

it as a case suffix is largely due to convention and di-

alectal differences. Most other errors were ambiguities

between verbs and nouns. There were also several er-

rors with distinctions between verbal adverbs and post-

positional adverbs; this distinction was removed in sub-

sequent revisions of the analyser.

7 Future work

Most of our future work will involve expanding the size

of the lexicon to improve coverage. Two specific do-

mains, however, would make for interesting future ex-

pansions:

7.1 Apertium

By modifying the morphology standards to fit the en-

tire Indo-Aryan language family, creating rule-based

machine translation systems across Indian languages

would be an interesting future project. The syn-

tactic differences between Indo-Aryan languages are

relatively more minor than the morphological differ-

ences, which make them very suitable to Apertium’s

chunking-based transfer system.

7.2 Universal Dependencies

The Universal Dependencies project (Nivre, 2015) is

a collection of dependency parsed treebanks in several

languages. The ConLL-U format used by UD contains,

along with dependency labelling, fields with morpho-

logical analyses of each word. Using Apertium’s mor-

phological analyser, along with a script to automatically

convert Apertium-style tags to UD-style tags, would

simplify the process of creating a Marathi treebank.

8 Conclusions

We have presented, to our knowledge, the first

free/open-source morphological descriptions for

Marathi. The analyser has reasonable coverage over

two available test corpora, and the precision is high

(over 0.97).

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for

their insight and helpful comments. We would also like

to thank Memduh Gökırmak for inspiring discussion.

The first author of this paper is funded by a stipend

Column

1 2 3 4 5 6

boWatapaNe AVY avy
wAra basa v
pusakata hAwa adj
tAMgava basava v
anuBavI AVY avy
meNekarI BikArI nm

Figure 3: A random sample of entries in WX notation from

the LTRC Marathi lexicon. The first column is the stem, the

third column is the inflection paradigm name, and the fourth

column is the part of speech (avy uninflected, v verb, adj
adjective, nm masculine noun). The second, fifth and sixth
columns are not relevant to our work.

from the Erasmus Mundus Language and Communica-

tion Technology programme.

References

Bapat, M., Gune, H., and Bhattacharyya, P. (2010). A

paradigm-based finite state morphological analyzer

for Marathi. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on

South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Pro-

cessing (WSSANLP), pages 26–34.

Dabre, R., Amberkar, A., and Bhattacharyya, P. (2012).

Morphological analyzer for affix stacking languages:

A case study of Marathi. In COLING 2012, 24th In-

ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-

tics, Proceedings of the Conference: Posters, 8-15

December 2012, Mumbai, India, pages 225–234.

Dhongade, R. and Wali, K. (2009). Marathi. Lon-

don Oriental and African language library. John Ben-

jamins Publishing Company.

Dixit, V., Dethe, S., and Joshi, R. K. (2005). Design and

implementation of a morphology-based spellchecker

for Marathi, an Indian language. Archives of Control

Sciences, 15:301–308.

Forcada, M. L., Ginestí-Rosell, M., Nordfalk, J.,

O’Regan, J., Ortiz-Rojas, S., Pérez-Ortiz, J. A.,

Sánchez-Martínez, F., Ramírez-Sánchez, G., and Ty-

ers, F. M. (2011). Apertium: a free/open-source plat-

form for rule-based machine translation. Machine

Translation, 25(2):127–144.

Gawade, P., Madhavi, D., Gaikwad, J., Jadhav, S., and

Ambekar, R. (2013). Morphological analyzer for

Marathi using NLP. International Journal of Engi-

neering Research and Applications, 3(2).

Hulden, M. (2009). Foma: a finite-state compiler and

library. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of

the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-

tational Linguistics: Demonstrations Session, pages

29–32. Association for Computational Linguistics.

54



Karimi-Doostan, G. (2005). Light verbs and structural

case. Lingua, 115(12):1737–1756.

Lindén, K., Axelson, E., Hardwick, S., Pirinen, T. A.,

and Silfverberg, M. (2011). Hfst—framework for

compiling and applying morphologies. In Interna-

tional Workshop on Systems and Frameworks for

Computational Morphology, pages 67–85. Springer.

Masica, C. (1993). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Cam-

bridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University

Press.

Nivre, J. (2015). Towards a universal grammar for nat-

ural language processing. Computational Linguistics

and Intelligent Text Processing, 9014:3–16.

Pandharipande, R. (2003). Marathi. In Cardona, G. and

Jain, D., editors, The Indo-Aryan Languages, pages

698–728. Routledge, Abingdon.

Ravishankar, V. (2017). Finite-State Back-

Transliteration for Marathi. The Prague Bulletin of

Mathematical Linguistics, 108(1).

55


