



















































Characterization of Divergence in Impaired Speech of ALS Patients


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2017 workshop, pages 149–158,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Characterization of Divergence in Impaired Speech of ALS Patients

Archna Bhatia1, Bonnie J. Dorr1, Kristy Hollingshead1, Samuel L. Phillips2, and Barbara McKenzie2

1Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 15 SE Osceola Ave, Ocala, FL 34471
2James A. Haley VA Hospital, 13000 Bruce B. Downs, Tampa, FL 33612

1{abhatia,bdorr,kseitz}@ihmc.us
2{samuel.phillips,barbara.mckenzie}@va.gov

Abstract

Approximately 80% to 95% of patients
with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)
eventually develop speech impairments
(Beukelman et al., 2011), such as defective
articulation, slow laborious speech and hy-
pernasality (Duffy, 2013). The relation-
ship between impaired speech and asymp-
tomatic speech may be seen as a diver-
gence from a baseline. This relationship
can be characterized in terms of measur-
able combinations of phonological charac-
teristics that are indicative of the degree
to which the two diverge. We demon-
strate that divergence measurements based
on phonological characteristics of speech
correlate with physiological assessments
of ALS. Speech-based assessments offer
benefits over commonly-used physiologi-
cal assessments in that they are inexpen-
sive, non-intrusive, and do not require
trained clinical personnel for administer-
ing and interpreting the results.

1 Introduction
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or Lou
Gehrig’s Disease, the most common form of mo-
tor neuron disease, is a rapidly progressive, neu-
rodegenerative condition. It is characterized by
muscle atrophy, muscle weakness, muscle spastic-
ity, hyperreflexia, difficulty speaking (dysarthria),
difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), and difficulty
breathing (dyspnea). Mean survival time for ALS
patients is three to five years from the time it
is diagnosed; however, death may occur within
months, or survival may last decades.

Most physiological assessments used to deter-
mine the functional status of patients with ALS are
invasive, involving the use of expensive equipment

and requiring trained clinical personnel to admin-
ister the tests and interpret the results. This is the
case for a number of standardized objective assess-
ments of bulbar function in ALS patients (Green
et al., 2013), for example: breathing patterns, ar-
ticulatory patterns, and voice loudness. These are
generally measured by technologies that record
chest wall movements, oral pressures and flows,
oral movement and strength, and speech acoustics.

This paper lays the foundation for the devel-
opment of less invasive phonologically-inspired
measures that correlate strongly with (more inva-
sive) physiological measures of ALS. Speech im-
pairments eventually affect 80% to 95% of pa-
tients with ALS (Beukelman et al., 2011). In
fact, Yorkston et al. (1993) noted that speech im-
pairments may be present up to 33 months prior
to diagnosis of ALS. Several previous studies
(Yunusova et al., 2016) have shown that speech
impairments correlate with physiological changes
associated with ALS. Thus, we focus on corre-
lating measures based on phonological features
with standard physiological measures, thus en-
abling new, non-invasive measures for assessing
the functionality of an ALS patient without signif-
icant overhead for personnel training and adminis-
tration.

To bring this about, we determine the degree of
divergence of symptomatic speech from asymp-
tomatic speech taken as a baseline.1 This determi-
nation is based on phonological features in speech,
most of which have been previously identified in
the literature as being associated with ALS, e.g.,
monoloudness, hypernasality and distorted vow-
els, see (Duffy, 2013). These are annotated, for
the current study, by specialists, i.e., a phonolo-

1As part of a longitudinal study, we are exploring indi-
vidual baselines for each ALS speaker: speech from each
speaker’s first visit is taken as an individual baseline for the
speaker.

149



gist and a speech therapist experienced in working
with ALS patients. The degree of divergence is
correlated with physiological assessments of ALS,
namely %FVC (Forced Vital Capacity) in sitting
(%FVC-SIT) as well as supine (%FVC-SUP) po-
sitions.2

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section 2 we discuss related work that motivates
and informs our research. Section 3 describes data
used for our experiments. A discussion of speech
divergence is presented in Section 4. Section 5
presents an assessment of the degree to which
divergent characteristics in the speech match the
level of progress of the ALS condition. This is
followed by a discussion of future work and con-
clusions in Section 6.

2 Related Work
A number of past studies have investigated the
utility of measuring the “voice signal” in order
to answer questions about a speaker’s state from
their speech (Schuller et al., 2015, 2011). One
such study attempts to distinguish classes of in-
dividuals with various speech impairments, such
as stuttering (Nöth et al., 2000), aphasia (Fraser
et al., 2014), and developmental language dis-
orders (Gorman et al., 2016). The recognition
of impaired speech has been employed to de-
tect Alzheimer’s (Rudzicz et al., 2014). Various
speech-related features have been employed to de-
tect whether the speech is affected by Parkinson’s
Disease (Bocklet et al., 2011). Relatedly, varia-
tions in speech properties under intoxicated and
sober conditions have also been conducted (Bi-
adsy et al., 2011).

Our work differs from prior approaches in that
we explore perceivable phonological characteris-
tics through the analysis of language divergences.
One of the motivations for using phonological fea-
tures exclusively rather than also using other fea-
tures employed in prior studies was that phono-
logical features did not require expensive equip-
ment to collect data from speakers as e.g., a fea-
ture like maximum subglottal pressure would re-
quire. Since the goal of this work is to develop
a measure that is completely based on speech fea-
tures that can be identified with a simple click on a

2%FVC-SUP refers to the percent value of the Forced
Vital Capacity while the person is in supine position, and
%FVC-SIT refers to the percent value of the Forced Vital Ca-
pacity while the person is in sitting position. See (Brinkmann
et al., 1997; Czaplinski et al., 2006) for additional informa-
tion about use of FVC in ALS assessments.

device such as a phone, we focused on phonologi-
cal features on which a machine can be trained to
analyze automatically. Our focus on correlations
with phonological features—tied to the notion of
divergence from a baseline—is a significant con-
tribution beyond what has been investigated previ-
ously.

The notion of divergence itself is not a new one
in natural language processing. The characteriza-
tion of divergence classes (Dorr, 1994) has been at
the heart of solutions to many different problems
ranging from word alignment (Dorr et al., 2002)
to machine translation (Habash and Dorr, 2002)
to acquisition of semantic lexicons (Olsen et al.,
1998). Finding the minimal primitive units—and
determining their possible combinations—was the
foundation for this earlier work. However, in these
earlier studies, primitives consisted of properties
that were syntactic, lexical, or semantic in nature,
whereas the primitives for the current work consist
of properties that are phonological in nature.

Beukelman et al. (2011), Duffy (2013), Green
et al. (2013), and Orimaye et al. (2014) have es-
tablished that pronunciation varies systematically
within categories of speech impairment. (Silber-
gleit et al., 1997; Carrow et al., 1974) have shown
that ALS speech shows deviant characteristics.
For example, (Ball et al., 2001) observe that ALS
speakers manifest altered voice quality. A num-
ber of speaker-level characteristics associated with
impaired speech studied in prior work have been
leveraged for our speech-related divergence detec-
tion. For example, Duffy (2013) specifically has
enumerated speaker-level characteristics, such as
monopitch and monoloudness.

Rong et al. (2015; 2016), and Yunusova et
al. (2016) have previously attempted to iden-
tify measures of speech motor function for ALS
speech. While certain components of speech such
as speaking rate, breathing patterns, and voice
loudness have proven too variable to provide a re-
liable marker (Green et al., 2013), we demonstrate
that divergence measurements based on phonolog-
ical characteristics of speech correlate with physi-
ological assessments of ALS.

In addition to speaker-level characteristics and
associated properties, our work defines divergence
in terms of speech/span-level characteristics, as
described in Section 3. Smaller vowel space ar-
eas have been found in ALS speech (Turner et al.,
1995; Weismer et al., 2001) which suggests that

150



vowels may be distorted in ALS speech. Simi-
larly, Kent et al (Kent et al., 1990) found place
and manner of articulation for some consonants,
and regulation of tongue height for vowels to di-
verge from asymptomatic speech; these were ex-
pected to result in imprecise consonants and dis-
torted vowels. Caruso and Burton (1987) observed
that ALS speakers and asymptomatic speakers ex-
hibited significant differences in stop-gap dura-
tions as well as in vowel durations.

Yunusova et al. (2016) have also previously
shown a correlation between speaking rate and
physiological measures of ALS, specifically ALS
Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS).3 Our own
work differs from this prior work in that we de-
fine divergence in terms of a wider range of speech
characteristics—beyond speaking rate—and then
demonstrate that divergence measures correlate
with physiological measures of ALS.

3 Data: Transcriptions and Phonological
Annotations

The data for our experiments consist of recorded
speech of 16 recruited subjects with ALS in a clin-
ical setting, collected quarterly for each subject.
The subjects range between 35-74 years of age.
Their age distribution is as follows: one subject
in the 30s, two subjects in their 40s, one subject
in their 50s, five subjects in their 60s, and seven
subjects in their 70s. Out of the 16 subjects, only
one of them is female, the other 15 subjects are
male. In terms of race of the subjects, we have
the following distribution: White (12), Asian (1),
African-American (1), Not reported (2).

The criteria for the recruitment of a particular
subject are that the subject: (1) has been diagnosed
with ALS; (2) is a native monolingual speaker
of American English; (3) has bulbar involvement
identified during initial ALS inpatient evaluation;
(4) has a forced vital capacity (FVC) of greater
than 50% of the expected value for age; and (5) has
an ALSFRS-R score4 of 40 or greater. Excluded
from the study are those who have received a diag-
nosis of dementia, FVC of less than 50%, inability
to speak, or inability to follow directions.

As part of their standard clinical care, each
ALS-diagnosed subject reports for a quarterly

3ALSFRS is a standard questionnaire-based scale to mea-
sure functionality of a person in carrying out daily activities,
see (Cedarbaum and Stambler, 1997; Brooks, 1997).

4ALSFRS-R is a revised ALSFRS that incorporates as-
sessments of respiratory function (Cedarbaum et al., 1999).

evaluation during which the following measures
are collected: Forced Vital Capacity (FVC;
(Brinkmann et al., 1997; Czaplinski et al.,
2006)), Penetration-Aspiration Scale (a paper-
pencil screen; (Rosenbek et al., 1996)), ALSFRS-
R (Cedarbaum and Stambler, 1997; Cedarbaum
et al., 1999), and Speech Intelligibility Test (SIT
(Beukelman et al., 2011; Yorkston et al., 2007)).

1. She held your dark suit in greasy wash water all year.
2. Don’t ask me to hold an oily rag like that.
3. The big dog loved to chew on the old rag doll.
4. Chocolate and roses never fail as a romantic gift.

Table 1: Four TIMIT Sentences

Speech recordings of the same four sentences,
that have been preselected, are made during each
(quarterly) visit of each of the patients.5 The four
sentences, presented in Table 1, are selected from
the Texas-Instrument/MIT (TIMIT) corpus (Garo-
folo et al., 1993) and were designed to be pho-
netically rich, thus providing solid coverage of the
phonetic space from each subject.6

The data also include recordings of four control
(asymptomatic) subjects, two of whom are female
and two are male, reading the same four TIMIT
sentences in the same setting as the symptomatic
subjects. These are used as the baseline speech
against which divergence scores (defined in the
next section) are calculated for the ALS symp-
tomatic speech.

Our hypothesis is that a higher divergence is in-
dicative of the progression of the ALS condition.
This study focuses on divergence with respect
to asymptomatic speech—taken as a baseline—
to determine whether the divergence is speaker
dependent or whether it is more generally in-
dicative of ALS progression. If the latter, this
would help diagnose patients for which no previ-
ous/longitudinal data is available.7

ALS speech data for the 16 subjects was tran-
scribed and annotated via speech-analysis soft-
ware called Praat (Boersma and van Heuven,
2001) for the 14 phonological characteristics
enumerated in Table 2. These characteristics

5All uses of these data as reported in this paper have been
approved by the relevant Institutional Review Board (IRB).

6Note the TIMIT sentences 1 and 2 are slightly different
from the original TIMIT sentences; the original TIMIT sen-
tences are as follows: (1) She had your dark suit in greasy
wash water all year; (2) Don’t ask me to carry an oily rag
like that.

7However, as longitudinal data becomes available to us
in our future work, we will also look at divergence based on
speaker dependent baselines.

151



Speaker level characteristics
monopitch Voice lacks inflectional changes; pitch does not change much.
monoloudness Voice for which the volume/loudness does not change, hence lacking normal variations in loudness.

Speech/span related characteristics
harshness Voice seems harsh, rough and raspy—sometimes referred to as pressed voice—similar to what hap-

pens when a person talks while lifting a heavy load.
imprecise
consonants

Consonant sounds lack precision. There may be slurring, inadequate sharpness, distortions, lack of
crispness, and clumsiness in transitioning from one consonant to another. For example, a “w” may
be produced instead of a “b”.

distorted
vowels

Vowel sounds distorted throughout their total duration. For example, a “a” may be produced instead
of “i”.

prolonged
phonemes

A phoneme (i.e., a consonant or a vowel) is prolonged, i.e., its sound (when it is produced) continues
over an unusual period of time.

inappropriate
silences

Pauses that are produced not at syntactic or prosodic boundaries.

hypernasality Vowels that are supposed to be non-nasalized are instead nasalized in speech.
strained or
strangled
quality

Tenseness in voice (as with overall muscular tension). Perceived as increased effort, may seem tense
or harsh as if talking and lifting at the same time or as if talking with breath held.

breathiness Voice seems breathy, weak and thin. May seem like a sighing sound. There may be non-modulated
turbulence noise in the produced sound, i.e., audible air escape in voice or bursts of breathiness.

audible inspi-
ration/stridor

Noisy breathing and wheezing may accompany inhaling. There may be a harsh, crowing, or vibra-
tory sound of variable pitch resulting from turbulent air flow caused by partial obstruction of the
respiratory passages.

unusual stress Speech sounds where most important parts of a sentence may be de-stressed or all parts of a sentence
are stressed as if all are important or speech sounds may be perceived as robotic, with the same
stress—where there is no variation in stress throughout sentence/phrase/word/syllable.

hoarseness Abnormal voice changes, where voice may sound breathy, raspy, strained, or there may be changes
in volume (loudness) or pitch (how high or low the voice is).

vocal fry Popping or rattling sound of a very low frequency—also known as a creaky voice.

Table 2: Phonological characteristics annotated in symptomatic speech

were pre-identified mostly based on the clini-
cal research literature on ALS speech, e.g., see
Duffy (2013): p248. The phonological annota-
tions were made by two specialists: one of whom
was a phonologist and the other was a speech ther-
apist with experience working with ALS speakers.

Two classes of phonological characteristics
served as the basis of annotations, each with a set
of primitive phonological features: speaker level
characteristics and speech/span related character-
istics. Speaker level characteristics refer to fea-
tures in speech that are more characteristic of a
specific speaker’s voice—independent of individ-
ual sounds/spans, e.g., monopitch which indicates
the lack of inflectional changes in voice. These
were annotated only once for each speaker.

Speech/span related characteristics, on the
other hand, refer to features in speech that are
characteristic of a specific sound or are observed
for a portion of speech—as opposed to features
that are characteristic of the voice itself. For ex-
ample, the feature imprecise consonants refers to
the portion of speech where a specific consonant
is produced imprecisely, it may involve slurring
or inadequate sharpness, e.g., producing a “w”
instead of a “b”. For these annotations, spans
in speech were marked over which these features

were observed.

For each of these characteristics, the annotators
also assigned a 1-10 Likert scale (Likert, 1932)
rating to indicate the severity of the characteris-
tic when it is observed, where 10 indicates “very
severe” and 1 indicates “negligible.”

4 Divergence in Speech
Understanding the relationship between impaired
speech and asymptomatic speech is facilitated
by measuring the degree to which symptomatic
speech diverges from a baseline. For the cur-
rent study, asymptomatic speech—which serves
as a baseline—was created from a combination
of recordings from asymptomatic speakers as de-
scribed in Section 3. Simplistically, the degree of
divergence is defined as the sum of the changes in
a speech utterance from its asymptomatic equiv-
alent. For a correlation to be supported, a large
number of changes in speech (i.e., a strong diver-
gence from asymptomatic speech) would corre-
spond to advanced progression of the disease. The
relationship between impaired speech and asymp-
tomatic speech is characterized in terms of mea-
surable combinations of phonological characteris-
tics that are indicative of the degree to which the
two diverge. The degree of divergence can be used

152



as a diagnostic tool at regular intervals for check-
ing the severity of physiological changes.

Multiple methods have been applied in order to
calculate divergence scores:
1. Feature count based divergence score: Fea-

ture count refers to the number of character-
istics observed in the speech samples.8 The
Feature count based divergence score for each
ALS speaker is the difference between the fea-
ture count for the ALS speech and the feature
count for the control asymptomatic speech.
Four variations of this score are used based on
how the feature count for the control asymp-
tomatic speech is obtained:
(a) Average feature count for controls: It is

assumed that asymptomatic speakers may
display characteristics identified in Table 2
but to a much smaller extent. Thus, taking
a simple average of the feature count for
control speakers is taken to be most rep-
resentative of all asymptomatic speakers.
The feature count for the control asymp-
tomatic speech is the average of the feature
count for all the control speakers.

(b) Minimum feature count for controls:
The control speaker with the minimum
number of characteristics in his/her speech
is assumed to be the most asymptomatic.
Hence, the feature count for the control
asymptomatic speech is the minimum of
the feature counts for all control speakers.

(c) Gender dependent average feature
count for controls: The presence (or
absence) of characteristics may be de-
pendent on the gender of the speaker. To
calculate divergence scores, it is best if
speakers of the same gender are compared.
Hence, the feature count for the control
asymptomatic speech is the average of the
feature count for all the control speakers
of the same gender as the ALS speaker.

(d) Gender dependent minimum feature
count for controls: It is assumed the con-
trol speaker with the minimum number
of characteristics in his/her speech is the
most asymptomatic, but the presence (or
absence) of characteristics may be gender
dependent. To calculate divergence scores,
it is best if speakers of the same gender

8The counts from the two annotators were combined to-
gether in five different ways described in Section 5.1.

are compared. Hence, the feature count
for the control asymptomatic speech is the
minimum of the feature count for all the
control speakers of the same gender as the
ALS speaker.

2. Total frequency based divergence score: For
each speaker, an observed frequency score is
computed as an aggregate of the frequencies
of all observed characteristics in the speech of
the speaker.9 The average of the observed fre-
quency score of both the annotators for a given
speaker is taken as the frequency score for the
speaker. The divergence score for an ALS
speaker is the difference between the frequency
score for the ALS speech and the frequency
score for the control asymptomatic speech.
The same four variations of this score are ex-
amined as described in the case of Feature
count based divergence score, depending on
how the frequency score for the control asymp-
tomatic speech is obtained.

3. Likert Scale rating based divergence score:
It is assumed that each of the characteristics
may be as indicative of the condition as other
characteristics in various ALS speakers. It is
also assumed that the severity of the charac-
teristics indicates progression of ALS. An ob-
served Likert score of the speech samples from
a speaker is taken to be an aggregate of the mul-
tiples of Likert Scale rating assigned by an an-
notator for each occurrence of a characteristic
with the weight of the characteristic (which is
uniformly taken to be 1 for all the character-
istics in the current analysis). A Likert score
for a speaker is calculated as an average of
the two annotators’ observed Likert scores of
the speech samples from the speaker. A Likert
Scale rating based divergence score for each
ALS speaker is then taken to be the difference
between the Likert score for the ALS speech
and the Likert score for the control asymp-
tomatic speech. The same four variations of
this score are examined as described in the case
of Feature count based divergence score, de-
pending on how the Likert score for the control
asymptomatic speech is obtained.
For each of the three divergence measures de-

fined above, a higher score indicates that the
patients speech diverges from an asymptomatic

9For example, if a characteristic, say distorted vowels, is
observed 6 times, the frequency for distorted vowels is 6.

153



Spkr %FVC-
SUP

%FVC-
SIT

Feature
count

Total fre-
quency

Likert
scale

18 79 88 -0.75 -5 52.5
9 77 78 4.25 7 53.25
1 77 77 0.25 -2.5 37.75
6 75 79 0.5 0.5 29.5
14 66 41 4.5 10.25 83.5
10 53 64 7 13.75 98.75
5 52 56 7.5 22 127.25
4 51 44 8.75 29.5 189.75
8 50 56 5.75 13.75 53.25
17 50 52 4.25 16 150.25
2 38 78 9.25 87 593
11 32 26 6.25 7 82.75
13 29 46 9.25 36 263.46
19 29 40 3.5 1.25 52.5
7 29 29 6.75 36.5 297.25
12 25 26 4.75 12 123.25

Table 3: Physiological Scores (%FVC) and Di-
vergence Scores (D.S.) variant (d) for average of
all four utterances for ALS speakers. The feature
count was based on a union of features across the
two annotators. Total frequency and Likert scale
values were computed as a maximum across the
two annotators.

speech baseline more than would be indicated by
a lower score. Divergence scores are expected to
correlate with physiological measures of changes
associated with ALS. Increasing divergence scores
would thus serve as an indicator of the disease
progression, analogous to decreasing physiologi-
cal outputs (lower scores) associated with ALS—
thus, the two measures are expected to be nega-
tively correlated.

5 Results and Discussion
Table 3 presents two physiological assessment
scores (%FVC-SUP and %FVC-SIT) and three di-
vergence scores (defined above) for the 16 ALS
speakers.10 The scores are sorted by %FVC-SUP.
The table indicates that the %FVC scores tend to
drop as the divergence scores go up. As expected,
a decrease in %FVC scores indicates disease pro-
gression, and similarly, a higher divergence score
indicates disease progression.

5.1 Dealing with differences in Annotations
to Calculate Divergence Scores

Since the nature of the annotated phonological
characteristics was such that multiple characteris-
tics might share various aspects of speech, anno-
tators were asked to mark all characteristics that

10Only the variant (d) for each of the divergence scores
computed using the three methods is presented in the table
to maintain clarity. Note variant (d) refers to the divergence
scores calculated with Gender dependent minimum feature
count for controls setting, as described in Section 4 above.

Divergence Score Type Correlation p-value
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Union 0.65 0.007
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Avg 0.58 0.017
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Max 0.58 0.018
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Min 0.58 0.019
Feature ct D.S.(d)-
Intersection

0.51 0.045

Likert D.S.(a)-Max 0.49 0.055

Table 4: Correlations between the Physiological
Scores (%FVC) and Divergence Scores (D.S.) for
all four variants

seemed relevant to them. The general descriptions
provided in Table 2 were used as heuristics by the
annotators, providing additional help in identify-
ing the characteristics.11 In order to resolve dif-
ferences across annotations, we used five different
methods to combine the two sets of annotations.
Table 3 shows a representative combination of the
first case below for the feature count measure and
the third case below for both total frequency mea-
sure and Likert scale measure:
1. Union: The characteristics identified by both

the annotators were considered only once.
2. Intersection: Only the features annotated by

both the annotators were considered.
3. Max: The maximum of the two annotators’ fea-

ture counts was used.
4. Min: Minimum of the two annotators’ feature

counts was used.
5. Avg: An average of the two annotators’ feature

counts was used.

5.2 Association between Divergence Scores
and Physiological Scores

To determine whether there was an association be-
tween any or all of the divergence scores and the
physiological measures of ALS, we correlated the
divergence scores with the physiological assess-
ment scores, %FVC-SUP and %FVC-SIT, using
Pearson’s correlation coefficient. The results are
presented in Table 4. For simplicity, we report
the correlations in the table as−1∗〈correlation〉.
Refer Section A for correlations with all the diver-
gence scores.

We observe that while divergence scores do not
seem to correlate with the %FVC-SIT score, they
do show a moderate correlation with the %FVC-

11Although these descriptions were somewhat coarse-
grained, the idea was to start at this level and to learn more
precise features associated with acoustic inputs correspond-
ing to these characteristics. These precise features are ex-
pected to be critical for automatic classification of speech
samples with respect to ALS progression and, correspond-
ingly, predictive of the physiological scores for patients.

154



SUP score (0.49 < r < 0.66) with moderate p-
values (p < 0.05). The stronger correlation effect
we observe with %FVC-SUP than with %FVC-
SIT may be due to higher difficulty in breathing
that a patient may experience when (s)he is in
supine position than in sitting position.

Consistent with the point above, patients with
other pulmonary conditions have also been re-
ported to experience higher difficulty in breathing
when in supine position than in sitting or standing
positions. Since the patients need to exert higher
effort to achieve the same result in supine position
than in sitting position, they may not be physio-
logically able to perform the same in the two po-
sitions, i.e., %FVC-SUP may be more sensitive
than %FVC-SIT to the condition’s progression.
Since speech symptoms have also been found to
be more readily apparent than other physiologi-
cal symptoms (Yorkston et al., 1993), this results
in a stronger correlation of the speech divergence
scores with %FVC-SUP than with %FVC-SIT.

The table also indicates that divergence scores
based on a simple measure—counts of features ob-
served in ALS speech—correlate even better with
%FVC-SUP scores than divergence scores that are
based on slightly more complicated measures such
as features’ frequency or the Likert Scale ratings.

6 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper has presented a case for viewing the
relationship between impaired speech and asymp-
tomatic speech as a divergence from a base-
line. Novel divergence measures have been devel-
oped for distinguishing asymptomatic speech from
symptomatic speech, and these have been tested
for correlations with physiological measures of
ALS progression.

These speech divergence measures are a first
step toward developing automated speech-based
assessments of progression of the ALS condition
that are both less expensive and less intrusive than
their physiological counterparts. The current ap-
proach has enabled the identification speech-based
measures that correlate well with other physiolog-
ical measures currently used to monitor the pro-
gression of the ALS condition. The next step is
to test if these measures can be used to predict the
values for the currently used physiological mea-
sures including %FVC.

Also, the current study is based on manual an-
notations provided by human specialist annota-
tors. Future research will involve exploration of

approaches that can be trained to produce such an-
notations automatically. These could, in turn, be
used to calculate divergence scores and eventually
to predict values for other physiological measures.

The theoretical groundwork for developing
speech-based measures defines speech diver-
gence in terms of clinically-informed phonolog-
ical speech characteristics associated with ALS
symptomatic speech. We presented three methods,
with four variants apiece, to compute speech di-
vergence scores for symptomatic speech. We also
showed that speech divergence scores are indeed
correlated with physiological assessment scores
for the progression of the disease.

Future research will investigate other methods
to compute divergence between the symptomatic
and asymptomatic speech that yield even stronger
correlations with the physiological assessments
measures. For example, it would be useful to ex-
plore whether the proportion of speech that is af-
fected by the characteristics listed in Table 2 has
any relation to the progression of the disease. Di-
vergence scores that incorporate characteristics re-
lated to a proportion of the span are expected to be
strongly correlated with the progression of ALS.

Two possible variants of how one may com-
pute divergence scores based on such proportion-
related information are as follows:

(1) Take proportion to be the proportion of
speech that is affected by any of the characteris-
tics.12 One may calculate a divergence score for
each ALS speaker as the difference between the
proportion of speech of the ALS speaker affected
by these characteristics and the proportion of con-
trols’ speech affected by these characteristics. An
average of the proportion in the annotators’ anno-
tations may be used for the calculation of the di-
vergence score.

(2) As a simple analytic, one may also con-
sider proportion-based divergence scores corre-
sponding to each of the characteristics for each
ALS speaker. This analytic may be useful for pro-
viding a direct relation between a specific charac-
teristic and the progression of the condition. How-
ever, it may also be useful to explore divergence
classes based on groupings of characteristics that
are similarly affected due to the progression of the
condition, if any.13

12Note there may be overlapping spans for more than one
characteristics.

13For the calculation of this variant, an average across the
portions of speech for which a characteristic is annotated may

155



Some characteristics may be grouped to further
explore divergences. Green et al. (2013) grouped
features according to the speech subsystem in-
volved (e.g., respiratory, phonatory, resonatory
and articulatory). A reviewer also mentioned that
gender-specific degree of severity of certain fea-
tures would be interesting to explore. For ex-
ample, there seems to be evidence that voicing
control is more vulnerable in male patients (Kent
et al., 1994). Such findings suggest that character-
istics such as gender and possibly age may also
need to be considered while developing speech
divergence-based measures.

In addition, for the current study, each of the
characteristics was treated uniformly with respect
to ALS. Future work will explore the hypothesis
that certain characteristics are more indicative than
others with respect to the progression of ALS.

Finally, while prior studies indicate that
prosodic recognition is not affected in ALS speak-
ers (Zimmerman et al., 2007), articulatory or
phonatory deficits might alter the correct produc-
tion of interrogative, imperative, or declariative
sentences (Congia et al., 1987). These may be
found to be useful in the development of speech-
based measures of ALS. Thus, future work will in-
vestigate the extent to which these variables would
be more or less difficult to analyze automatically.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by the VA Office of
Rural Health Program “Increasing access to pul-
monary function testing for rural veterans with
ALS through at home testing” (N08-FY15Q1-S1-
P01346) and Award Number 1I21RX001902 titled
“DESIPHER: Speech Degradation as an Indicator
of Physiological Degeneration in ALS.” Addition-
ally, the work is supported by resources and the
use of facilities at the James A. Haley Veterans’
Hospital. The contents of this paper represents
solely the views of the authors and not the views of
the Department of Veterans Affairs or the United
States Government. The authors are also grate-
ful for constructive feedback from anonymous re-
viewers. An additional thank you is extended to
the two specialists for their time and expertise in
providing us with annotations of the phonological
features in ALS speech that enabled us to conduct
the analyses reported herein.

be used to determine the proportion of speech for a specific
speaker that is affected by the characteristics.

References

L.J. Ball, A. Willis, D.R. Beukelman, and G.L. Pattee.
2001. A protocol for identification of early bulbar
signs in als. Journal of the Neurological Sciences
191:43–53.

D. Beukelman, S. Fager, and A. Nordness. 2011. Com-
munication support for people with ALS. Neurology
Research International .

F. Biadsy, W.Y. Wang, and A. Rosenberg. 2011. In-
toxication detection using phonetic, phonotactic and
prosodic cues. In Proceedings of INTERSPEECH.

T. Bocklet, E. Nöth, G. Stemmer, H. Ruzickova, and
J. Rusz. 2011. Detection of persons with Parkin-
son’s disease by acoustic, vocal, and prosodic anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of ASRU.

P. Boersma and V. van Heuven. 2001. Praat, a system
for doing phonetics by computer. Glot International
5(9/10):341–345.

J.R. Brinkmann, P. Andres, M. Mendoza, and M. San-
jak. 1997. Guidelines for the use and performance of
quantitative outcome measures in als clinical trials.
Journal of the Neurological Sciences 147(1):97–
111.

B.R. Brooks. 1997. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
clinimetric scales guidelines for administration and
scoring. In Herndon R., editor, Handbook of clinical
neurologic scales, Demos Vermande, pages 27–80.

E. Carrow, V. Rivera, M. Mauldin, and Shamblin L.
1974. Deviant speech characteristic in motor neu-
ron disease. Archives of Otolaryngology - Head and
Neck Surgery Journal 100:212–218.

A.J. Caruso and E.K. Burton. 1987. Temporal acoustic
measures of dysarthria associated with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research 30(1):80–87.

J.M. Cedarbaum and N. Stambler. 1997. Performance
of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating
scale (ALSFRS) in multicenter clinical trials. Jour-
nal of Neurological Sciences 152(Suppl 1):S1–S9.

J.M. Cedarbaum, N. Stambler, E. Malta, C. Fuller,
D. Hilt, B. Thurmond, and A. Nakanishi. 1999. The
ALSFRS-R: a revised ALS functional rating scale
that incorporates assessments of respiratory func-
tion. Journal of the Neurological Sciences 169(1-
2):13–21.

S. Congia, S. Di Ninni, F. Zonza, and M. Melis. 1987.
Prosody alterations in amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis. In Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Springer US,
pages 121–123.

A. Czaplinski, A.A. Yen, and S.H. Appel. 2006.
Forced vital capacity (fvc) as an indicator of survival
and disease progression in an als clinic population.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry
77(3):390–392.

B.J. Dorr. 1994. Machine translation divergences: A
formal description and proposed solution. Compu-
tational Linguistics 20(4):597–633.

B.J. Dorr, L. Pearl, R. Hwa, and N. Habash. 2002.
DUSTer: A method for unraveling cross-language

156



divergences for statistical word-level alignment. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the Asso-
ciation for Machine Translation in the Americas
(AMTA). pages 31–43.

J. Duffy. 2013. Motor Speech Disorders: Substrates,
Differential Diagnosis, and Management. Elsevier
Health Sciences, 3rd edition.

K.C. Fraser, G. Hirst, N.L. Graham, J.A. Meltzer, S.E.
Black, and E. Rochon. 2014. Comparison of dif-
ferent feature sets for identification of variants in
progressive aphasia. In Proceedings of the ACL
CLPsych Workshop. pages 17–26.

J. Garofolo, L. Lamel, W. Fisher, J. Fiscus, D. Pallett,
N. Dahlgren, and V. Zue. 1993. TIMIT acoustic-
phonetic continuous speech corpus. http://
web.mit.edu/course/6/6.863/share/
nltk_lite/timit/allsenlist.txt.

K. Gorman, L. Olson, A.P. Hill, R. Lunsford, P.A. Hee-
man, and J.P.H. van Santen. 2016. Uh and um in
children with autism spectrum disorders or language
impairment. Autism Research 9(8):854–865.

J.R. Green, Y. Yunusova, M.S. Kuruvilla, J. Wang,
G.L. Pattee, L. Synhorst, L. Zinman, and J.D.
Berry. 2013. Bulbar and speech motor assessment
in ALS: Challenges and future directions. Amy-
otrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal De-
generation 14:494–500.

N. Habash and B.J. Dorr. 2002. Handling transla-
tion divergences: Combining statistical and sym-
bolic techniques in generation-heavy machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the Ameri-
cas, AMTA-2002. pages 84–93.

R.D. Kent, J.F. Kent, G. Weismer, R.L. Sufit, J.C.
Rosenbek, R.E. Martin, and B.R. Brooks. 1990. Im-
pairment of speech intelligibility in men with amy-
otrophic lateral sclerosis. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Disorders 55:721–728.

R.D. Kent, H. Kim, G. Weismer, J.F. Kent, J.C. Rosen-
bek, B.R. Brooks, and M. Workinger. 1994. La-
ryngeal dysfunction in neurological disease: Amy-
otrophic lateral sclerosis, parkinson disease, and
stroke. Journal of Medical Speech-Language
Pathology 2(3).

R. Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement of
attitudes. Archives of Psychology 140:1–55.

E. Nöth, H. Niemann, T. Haderlein, M. Decher,
U. Eysholgt, F. Rosanowski, and T. Wittenberg.
2000. Automatic stuttering recognition using hid-
den Markov models. In Proceedings of ICSLP.

M.B. Olsen, B.J. Dorr, and S. Thomas. 1998. Enhanc-
ing automatic acquisition of thematic structure in a
large-scale lexicon for mandarin chinese. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth Conference of the Association
for Machine Translation in the Americas, AMTA-
2002. Langhorne, PA, pages 41–50.

S.O. Orimaye, J. Wong, and K.J. Golden. 2014. Learn-
ing predictive linguistic features for Alzheimer’s
disease and related dementias using verbal utter-
ances. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on

Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology:
From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality. pages
78–87.

P. Rong, Y. Yunusova, J. Wang, and J.R. Green. 2015.
Predicting early bulbar decline in amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis: A speech subsystem approach. Be-
havioral Neurology .

P. Rong, Y. Yunusova, J. Wang, L. Zinman, G.L. Pattee,
J.D. Berry, B. Perry, and J.R. Green. 2016. Predict-
ing speech intelligibility decline in amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis based on the deterioration of individual
speech subsystems. PLoS ONE 11(5).

J.C. Rosenbek, J.A. Robbins, E.B. Roecker, J.L. Coyle,
and J.L. Wood. 1996. A penetration-aspiration
scale. Dysphagia 11(2):93–98.

F. Rudzicz, L. Chan Currie, A. Danks, T. Mehta, and
S. Zhao. 2014. Automatically identifying trouble-
indicating speech behaviors in Alzheimer’s disease.
In Proceedings of ASSETS. ACM, pages 241–242.

B. Schuller, S. Steidl, A. Batliner, S. Hankte, F. Hönig,
J.R. Orozco-Arroyave, E. Nöth, Y. Zhang, and
F. Weninger. 2015. The interspeech 2015 computa-
tional paralinguistics challenge: nativeness, parkin-
son’s & eating condition.

B. Schuller, S. Steidl, A. Batliner, F. Schiel, and J. Kra-
jewski. 2011. The INTERSPEECH 2011 speaker
state challenge. In Proceedings of INTERSPEECH.
pages 3201–3204.

A.K. Silbergleit, A.F. Johnson, and B.H. Jacobson.
1997. Acousticanalysis of voice in individuals with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and perceptually nor-
mal vocal quality. Journal of Voice 11:222–231.

G.S. Turner, K. Tjaden, and G. Weismer. 1995. The in-
fluence of speaking rate on vowel space and speech
intelligibility for individuals with amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research 38:1001–1013.

G. Weismer, J.-Y. Jeng, J.S. Laures, R.D. Kent, and J.F.
Kent. 2001. Acoustic and intelligibility character-
istics of sentence production in neurogenic speech
disorders. Folia Phoniatr Logop 53:1–18.

K. Yorkston, D. Beukelman, M. Hakel, and M. Dorsey.
2007. Sentence intelligibility test, speech intelligi-
bility test.

K.M. Yorkston, E. Strand, R. Miller, A. Hillel, and
K. Smith. 1993. Speech deterioration in amy-
otrophic lateral sclerosis: implications for the timing
of intervention. Journal of medical speech-language
pathology 1:35–46.

Y. Yunusova, N.L. Graham, S. Shellikeri, K. Phuong,
M. Kulkarni, E. Rochon, D.F. Tang-Wai, T.W. Chow,
S.E. Black, L.H. Zinman, and J.R. Green. 2016.
Profiling speech and pausing in amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia
(FTD). PLoS ONE 11(1).

E.K. Zimmerman, P.J. Eslinger, Z. Simmons, and A.M.
Barrett. 2007. Emotional perception deficits in amy-
otrophic lateral sclerosis. Cognitive and Behavioral
Neurology 20(2):70–82.

157



A Supplemental Material
The correlation results between each of the three
types of speech divergence scores with all of their
variants and the %FVC-SUP are presented in Ta-
bles 5, 6, and 7. As mentioned before, for sim-
plicity, we report the correlations in the tables as
−1 ∗ 〈correlation〉.
Divergence Score Type Correlation p-value
Feature ct D.S.(a)-Max 0.58 0.018
Feature ct D.S.(a)-Min 0.58 0.019
Feature ct D.S.(a)-Ave 0.58 0.017
Feature ct D.S.(a)-Union 0.65 0.007
Feature ct D.S.(a)-Intersection 0.51 0.045
Feature ct D.S.(b)-Max 0.58 0.018
Feature ct D.S.(b)-Min 0.58 0.019
Feature ct D.S.(b)-Ave 0.58 0.017
Feature ct D.S.(b)-Union 0.65 0.007
Feature ct D.S.(b)-Intersection 0.51 0.045
Feature ct D.S.(c)-Max 0.58 0.018
Feature ct D.S.(c)-Min 0.58 0.019
Feature ct D.S.(c)-Ave 0.58 0.017
Feature ct D.S.(c)-Union 0.64 0.007
Feature ct D.S.(c)-Intersection 0.50 0.045
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Max 0.58 0.018
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Min 0.58 0.019
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Avg 0.58 0.017
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Union 0.65 0.007
Feature ct D.S.(d)-Intersection 0.51 0.045

Table 5: Correlations between the Physiological
Scores (%FVC) and Feature Count Based Diver-
gence Scores (D.S.) for all four variants

Divergence Score Type Correlation p-value
Feature freq D.S.(a)-Max 0.45 0.077
Feature freq D.S.(a)-Min 0.42 0.103
Feature freq D.S.(a)-Ave 0.44 0.085
Feature freq D.S.(b)-Max 0.45 0.077
Feature freq D.S.(b)-Min 0.42 0.103
Feature freq D.S.(b)-Ave 0.44 0.085
Feature freq D.S.(c)-Max 0.45 0.083
Feature freq D.S.(c)-Min 0.42 0.106
Feature freq D.S.(c)-Ave 0.44 0.09
Feature freq D.S.(d)-Max 0.46 0.075
Feature freq D.S.(d)-Min 0.42 0.103
Feature freq D.S.(d)-Avg 0.45 0.083

Table 6: Correlations between the Physiological
Scores (%FVC) and Feature Frequency Based Di-
vergence Scores (D.S.) for all four variants

Divergence Score Type Correlation p-value
Likert Scale D.S.(a)-Max 0.49 0.055
Likert Scale D.S.(a)-Min 0.44 0.089
Likert Scale D.S.(a)-Ave 0.47 0.068
Likert Scale D.S.(b)-Max 0.48 0.061
Likert Scale D.S.(b)-Min 0.43 0.095
Likert Scale D.S.(b)-Ave 0.46 0.074
Likert Scale D.S.(c)-Max 0.48 0.059
Likert Scale D.S.(c)-Min 0.43 0.094
Likert Scale D.S.(c)-Ave 0.46 0.071
Likert Scale D.S.(d)-Max 0.47 0.067
Likert Scale D.S.(d)-Min 0.43 0.094
Likert Scale D.S.(d)-Avg 0.46 0.076

Table 7: Correlations between the Physiological
Scores (%FVC) and Likert Scale Based Diver-
gence Scores (D.S.) for all four variants

158


