



















































A modernised version of the Glossa corpus search system


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 251–254,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

A modernised version of the Glossa corpus search system 

 

Anders Nøklestad
1
 

anders.noklestad@iln.uio.no 

Kristin Hagen
1
 

kristin.hagen@iln.uio.no 

Janne Bondi Johannessen
1,2

 

jannebj@iln.uio.no 

Michał Kosek
1
 

michal.kosek@iln.uio.no 

Joel Priestley
1
 

joel.priestley@iln.uio.no 

 

 

1
The Text Laboratory, ILN, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1102 Blindern, N-0317 Oslo, Norway 

2
MultiLing, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1102 Blindern, N-0317 Oslo, Norway 

 

 
 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents and describes a 

modernised version of Glossa, a corpus 

search and results visualisation system 

with a user-friendly interface. The system 

is open source and can be easily installed 

on servers or even laptops for use with 

suitably prepared corpora. It handles 

parallel corpora as well as monolingual 

written and spoken corpora. For spoken 

corpora, the search results can be linked 

to audio/video, and spectrographic 

analysis and visualised geographical 

distributions can be provided. We will 

demonstrate the range of search options 

and result visualisations that Glossa 

provides. 

1 Introduction 

The paper presents and describes Glossa, a 

corpus search and results visualisation system. 

Glossa is a web application that allows a user to 

search multilingual (parallel) corpora as well as 

monolingual written and spoken corpora. It 

provides the user with advanced search options, 

but at the same time great care has been taken to 

make the interface as user-friendly as possible. 

The system supports login via eduGAIN as well 

as local accounts. Figure 1 shows the search 

interface of the Lexicographic Corpus of 

Norwegian Bokmål.  

Glossa is open source and can be freely 

downloaded from GitHub. It can easily be 

installed on servers or even laptops for use with 

corpora that have been suitably prepared. 

 

Figure 1: Leksikografisk bokmålskorpus 

(Lexicographic Corpus of Norwegian Bokmål). 

The metadata filtering options are located to the 

left, the linguistic search box is in the middle.  

The version of Glossa presented in this paper 

is a modernised, reimplemented and improved 

version of the search system described in 

Johannessen et al. (2008). Glossa is part of the 

CLARINO infrastructure at the Text Laboratory, 

University of Oslo, and is financed by the 

CLARINO project. In the following months, all 

corpora in the Text Lab portfolio will be 

searchable in this new version. Already, 

important corpora like NoWaC, CANS, 

NORINT, ELENOR, and the Nordic Dialect 

Corpus are included.  

Several alternative corpus interfaces are 

available, see e.g. Bick (2004), Hoffmann and 

Evert (2006), Meurer (2012) and Borin et. al 

(2012). What makes Glossa special compared to 

251



other systems is its combination of user 

friendliness, especially with respect to 

approachability for non-technical users, ease of 

installation, and a unique set of search result 

visualisations that includes audio and video clips, 

spectrographic analysis and geographical map 

views. 

2 Technical details 

The server code in Glossa is written in Clojure, a 

modern dialect of Lisp that runs on the Java 

Virtual Machine. Likewise, the client/browser 

code is written in ClojureScript, a variant of 

Clojure that is compiled to JavaScript in order to 

run in the browser. Metadata pertaining to texts 

or speakers in a corpus is recorded in a MySQL 

database.  

Running on the JVM enables Clojure to take 

advantage of the huge number of libraries 

available in the Java ecosystem. At the same 

time, Clojure syntax is extremely concise 

compared to that of Java, and its functional 

rather than imperative nature typically helps 

reduce bugs, especially when doing parallel 

processing like we do in Glossa. 

Glossa is agnostic with respect to search 

engines, and different search engines may be 

used for different corpora within the same Glossa 

installation. Out of the box, Glossa comes with 

built-in support for the IMS Open Corpus 

Workbench (CWB, with the CQP search engine) 

as well as the Federated Content Search 

mechanism defined by the CLARIN 

infrastructure. 

Glossa is able to take advantage of multiple 

CPU cores by automatically splitting a corpus 

into a number of parts corresponding to the 

number of cores on the machine. This leads to a 

significant reduction in search time, especially 

for heavy searches in large corpora. Search 

speeds will keep increasing as the number of 

cores grows, since Glossa automatically utilizes 

all cores. 

For instance, when searching for a first person 

pronoun followed by a past tense verb in the 700 

million words NoWaC corpus, a search directly 

in CWB (on a single core) returns 1,190,403 

occurrences in 38 seconds (measured on the 

second run of the same query in order to allow 

CWB to take advantage of any result caching). 

The same search in Glossa, running on the same 

machine but taking advantage of all of its 8 cores, 

returns the same results in 12 seconds, i.e., about 

one third of the time. Furthermore, the first 8775 

results are displayed within a couple of seconds, 

making the perceived search speed very high. 

3 Querying with Glossa 

A corpus user can query the corpus for linguistic 

features or non-linguistic features, or a 

combination. Glossa offers three different search 

interfaces, ranging from a simple Google-like 

search box for simple word or phrase queries, via 

an extended view that allows complex, 

grammatical queries, to a CQP query view that 

allows the user to specify the CQP query 

expression directly, potentially taking advantage 

of all the sophisticated options that the CQP 

search engine provides, see figure 1. 

The most common linguistic queries involve 

specifying a token by given attributes: word, 

lemma, start or end of word, part of speech, 

morphological features, and sentence position. 

These queries can always be done in a user-

friendly way.  

In (1) we exemplify what a search using a 

search language of regular expressions would be 

like, in order to search for a plural noun starting 

with the letter sequence dag. In figure 2 we see 

the same query in Extended Search in Glossa. 

Noun plural is chosen from the box in figure 3. 

(Example 1 is translated by Glossa into regular 

expressions.)  

(1) [word="dag.*" %c & ((pos="noun" & num="pl"))] 

All searches are done using checkboxes, pull-

down menus, or writing simple letters to make 

words or other strings. Lists of metadata 

categories are conveniently located to the left of 

the search results, allowing the results to be 

gradually filtered through successive selections 

of metadata values (see figure 4a). 

 

Figure 2: Extended Search in Glossa. 

252



 

Figure 3: Choosing parts of speech in Glossa. 

4 Result visualisations in Glossa 

The default result visualisation is in the form of a 

concordance as in figure 5, but results can also 

be shown as frequencies as in figure 4b or as 

locations on a geographical map as in figure 6. 

The results can also be downloaded as Excel or 

CSV files. 

 

Figure 4: a) Filtering metadata in the left menu. 

b) Results shown as frequency list. 

 

Figure 5: Results shown as concordance. 

 

Figure 6: Geographical distribution of phonetic 

forms. 

With spoken corpora, search results can be 

linked to audio and video files (figure 7), and 

spectrographic analysis of the sound can be 

displayed (figure 8).  

 

Figure 7: Video of search result with 

transcription. 

 

Figure 8: Spectrogram view of search result. 

5 Future work 

In the future we plan to implement search in 

syntactic annotations. We also plan to include 

more result views such as collocations, syntactic 

structures, and topic models.  

253



References 

Eckhard Bick. 2004. Corpuseye: Et Brugervenligt 

Webinterface for Grammatisk Opmærkede 

Korpora. Peter Widell and Mette Kunøe (eds). 

Møde om Udforskningen af Dansk Sprog, 

Proceedings. Denmark: Århus University. 46-57. 

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg and Johan Roxendal. 

2012. Korp – the corpus infrastructure of 

Språkbanken. Proceedings of LREC 2012. Istanbul: 

ELRA, pages 474–478. 

Sebastian Hoffmann and Evert, Stefan. 2006. Bncweb 

(cqp-edition): The Marriage of two Corpus Tools. 

S. Braun, K. Kohn, and J. Mukherjee (eds). Corpus 

Technology and Language Pedagogy: New 

Resources, New Tools, New Methods, volume 3 of 

English Corpus Linguistics. Frankfurt am Main: 

Peter Lang. 177 - 195. 

Janne Bondi Johannessen, Lars Nygaard, Joel 

Priestley, Anders Nøklestad. 2008. Glossa: a 

Multilingual, Multimodal, Configurable User 

Interface. Proceedings of the Sixth International 

Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'08). 

Paris: European Language Resources Association 

(ELRA). 

Paul Meurer. 2012. Corpuscle – a new corpus 

management platform for annotated corpora. In: 

Gisle Andersen (ed.). Exploring Newspaper 

Language: Using the Web to Create and 

Investigate a large corpus of modern Norwegian, 

Studies in Corpus Linguistics 49, John Benjamins, 

2012. 

Web sites 

CANS (Corpus of Norwegian-American Speech): 

http://tekstlab.uio.no/norskiamerika/english/ 

index.html 

CLARIN federated content search: 

https://www.clarin.eu/content/ 

federated-content-search-clarin-fcs 

CLARINO: http://clarin.b.uib.no/ 

Clojure: https://clojure.org/ 

ELENOR: 

http://www.hf.uio.no/ilos/studier/ressurser/elenor/ 

index.html 

Glossa on GitHub: https://github.com/textlab/cglossa 

IMS Open Corpus Workbench: 

http://cwb.sourceforge.net/ 

Leksikografisk bokmålskorpus:https://tekstlab.uio.no/ 

glossa2/?corpus=bokmal 

MySql: https://www.mysql.com/ 

Nordic Dialect Corpus: http://www.tekstlab.uio.no/ 

nota/scandiasyn/index.html 

NORINT: 

http://www.hf.uio.no/iln/english/about/organi 

zation/text-laboratory/projects/norint/index.html 

NoWaC (Norwegian Web as Corpus): 

http://www.hf.uio.no/iln/om/organisasjon/tekstlab/ 

prosjekter/nowac/index.html 

 

 

 

254


