



















































Gapping Constructions in Universal Dependencies v2


Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017), pages 123–132,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 22 May 2017.

Gapping Constructions in Universal Dependencies v2

Sebastian Schuster Matthew Lamm
Department of Linguistics and Department of Computer Science

Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
{sebschu,mlamm,manning}@stanford.edu

Christopher D. Manning

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a detailed ac-
count of sentences with gapping such as
“John likes tea, and Mary coffee” within
the Universal Dependencies (UD) frame-
work. We explain how common gapping
constructions as well as rare complex con-
structions can be analyzed on the basis of
examples in Dutch, English, Farsi, Ger-
man, Hindi, Japanese, and Turkish. We
further argue why the adopted analysis
of these constructions in UD version 2 is
better suited for annotating treebanks and
parsing than previous proposals, and we
discuss how gapping constructions can be
analyzed in the enhanced UD representa-
tion, a graph-based semantic representa-
tion for shallow computational semantics
tasks.

1 Introduction

An important property of natural languages is that
speakers can sometimes omit redundant material.
One example of this phenomenon is so-called gap-
ping constructions (Ross, 1970). In such construc-
tions, speakers elide a previously mentioned verb
that takes multiple arguments, which leaves be-
hind a clause without its main predicate. For ex-
ample, in the sentence “John likes tea, and Mary
coffee”, the verb likes was elided from the second
conjunct.

Sentences with gapping pose practical as well
as theoretical challenges to natural language pro-
cessing tasks. From a practical point of view, it is
challenging for natural language processing sys-
tems to resolve the gaps, which is necessary to
interpret these sentences and extract information
from them. Further, these sentences are hard for
statistical parsers to parse as part of their structure
deviates significantly from canonical clause struc-
tures.

From a more theoretical point of view, these
constructions pose challenges to designers of de-
pendency representations. Most dependency rep-
resentations that are used in natural language pro-
cessing systems (e.g., the adaptation of Mel’čuk
(1988) for the CoNLL-08 shared task (Surdeanu
et al., 2008); de Marneffe et al. (2006); Nivre et
al. (2016)) are concerned with providing surface
syntax descriptions without stipulating any addi-
tional transformations or empty nodes. Further,
virtually all dependency representations consider
a verb (either the inflected or the main verb) to
be the head of a clause. Consequently, the verb
governs all its arguments and modifiers. For these
reasons, it is challenging to find a good represen-
tation of clauses in which a verb that has multiple
dependents was elided, because it is not obvious
where and how the remaining dependents should
be attached in these cases.

In recent years, the Universal Dependencies
(UD) representation (Nivre et al., 2016) has be-
come the dominant dependency representation for
annotating treebanks in a large variety of lan-
guages. The goal of the UD project is to provide
guidelines for cross-linguistically consistent tree-
bank annotations for as many languages as pos-
sible. Considering that gapping constructions ap-
pear in many languages, these guidelines neces-
sarily also have to include guidelines on how to
analyze gapping constructions. While the official
guidelines1 provide basic instructions for the anal-
ysis of gapping constructions, they lack a detailed
discussion of cross-linguistically attested gapping
constructions and a thorough explanation why the
adopted guidelines should be preferred over other
proposals. The purpose of the present paper is
therefore to discuss in detail how different gapping
constructions can be analyzed in a variety of lan-

1See http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-
syntax.html#ellipsis. The first and the last author were both
involved in developing these guidelines.

123



guages and to provide a theoretical comparison of
different proposals based on these examples. We
further discuss how gapping constructions should
be represented in the enhanced Universal Depen-
dencies representation, which aims to be a better
representation for shallow natural language under-
standing tasks and how these design choices can
potentially help in downstream tasks.

For the purpose of this paper, we consider con-
structions in which a verb that has multiple depen-
dents was elided, including classic cases of gap-
ping (Ross, 1970). Throughout this paper, we call
the elided material (a verb and occasionally also
some of its arguments) the GAP. Further, we re-
fer to the dependents of the gap as ORPHANS or
REMNANTS, and we refer to the dependents of the
verb in the clause with the overt verb as the COR-
RESPONDENTS, as illustrated with the following
annotated sentence.

John likes tea and Mary coffee
CORRE- OVERT CORRE- ORPHAN/ ORPHAN/

SPONDENT VERB SPONDENT REMNANT REMNANT

2 Coordination, ellipsis, and gapping in
UD v2

Before we discuss how gapping constructions are
analyzed in UD v2, we give a brief overview how
UD analyzes coordinated clauses and other forms
of elliptical constructions.

Coordinated clauses are analyzed like all other
types of coordination: By convention, the head of
the first conjunct is always the head of the coordi-
nated construction and all other conjuncts are at-
tached to the head of the first conjunct with a conj
relation. If there is an overt coordinating conjunc-
tion, it is attached to the head of the succeeding
conjunct. This captures the fact that the coordi-
nating conjunction forms a syntactic unit with the
succeeding conjunct (Gerdes and Kahane, 2015).
A sentence with two coordinated clauses is then
analyzed as follows.

(1) John drinks tea and Mary eats cake

nsubj obj

cc

nsubj

conj

obj

For constructions in which a head nominal was
elided, UD promotes the highest dependent ac-
cording to the hierarchy amod > nummod > det
> nmod > case. The promoted dependent is at-
tached to the governor of the elided nominal with

the same relation that would have been used if the
nominal had not been elided. All the other depen-
dents of the elided noun are attached to the pro-
moted dependent with their regular relations. For
example, in the second conjunct of the following
sentence, the head noun bird was elided. We there-
fore promote the determiner some to serve as the
object of saw.

(2) She saw every bird but he saw only some

nsubj det

obj cc

nsubj

conj

advmod

obj

In some cases of ellipsis, a verb phrase is elided
but there is still an overt copula or auxiliary verb.
In these cases, we promote the copula or auxiliary
verb to be the head of the clause and attach all or-
phans to the auxiliary.

(3) Sue likes pasta and Peter does , too

nsubj obj

cc

nsubj

conj

advmod

For the constructions we are mainly concerned
with in this paper, i.e., gapping constructions in
which the governor of multiple phrases was elided,
UD v2 adopts a modified version of a proposal by
Gerdes and Kahane (2015). We promote the or-
phan whose grammatical role dominates all other
orphans according to an adaptation of the oblique-
ness hierarchy,2 to be the head of the conjunct.
The motivation behind using such a hierarchy in-
stead of a simpler strategy such as promoting the
leftmost phrase is that it leads to a more parallel
analysis across languages that differ in word or-
der. We attach all other orphans except for co-
ordinating conjunctions using the special orphan
relation. Coordinating conjunctions are attached
to the head of the following conjunct with the cc
relation. This leads to the analysis in (4) of a sen-
tence with three conjuncts of which two contain a
gap.

(4) Sue ate meat , Paul fish , and Mary noodles

nsubj

conj

obj orphan cc

conj

orphan

2Our adaptation prioritizes phrasal over clausal depen-
dents. Translated to UD relations, our adaptation of the
obliqueness hierarchy is as follows: nsubj > obj > iobj >
obl > advmod > csubj > xcomp > ccomp > advcl. See,
for example, Pollard and Sag (1994) for a motivation behind
this ordering.

124



The motivation behind using a special orphan
relation is that it indicates that the clause contains
a gap. If we used a regular relation, it might not
be clear that a predicate was elided. For exam-
ple, if instead, we attached the orphaned subject to
the orphaned object using an nsubj relation, one
could confuse gapping constructions with copular
constructions, especially in languages with zero-
copula.

In the rest of this paper, we argue in favor of this
proposal for several reasons. First, as we show in
the following section, it can be used to analyze a
wide range of gapping constructions in many dif-
ferent languages. Second, as we argue in Sec-
tion 4, there is evidence that the conjunct with the
gap forms a syntactic unit, and this fact is captured
by the adopted analysis. Finally, as discussed in
Section 6, this representation is potentially better
suited for automatic parsing than previous propos-
als.

3 Gapping constructions

We now discuss how a range of attested gapping
constructions in a variety of languages can be an-
alyzed according to the above proposal.

3.1 Single verbs
The most common form of gapping constructions
are two or more conjoined clauses in which a sin-
gle inflected verb is missing in all but one of the
conjuncts. As illustrated in (4), in SVO languages
such as English, the overt verb typically appears
in the first conjunct and is elided from all subse-
quent conjuncts. In languages with other word or-
ders, the overt verb can also appear exclusively in
the last conjunct. For example, in the following
sentence in Japanese (an SOV language), the verb
appears in the last conjunct and the gap in the first
conjunct.

(5) John-ga hon-o sosite Mary-ga hana-o katta
John book and Mary flower bought

orphan

conj

cc

nsubj

obj

‘John bought books, and Mary flowers.’ (Kato, 2006)

In some languages with flexible word orders
such as Turkish, the overt verb can appear in the
first or the last conjunct. The orphans typically
appear in the same order as the correspondents in
the other conjunct as in (6a-d) (Bozsahin, 2000).

(6) a. Adam kitabı çocuk da dergiyi okudu
man book child CONJ magazine read

S O S O V

orphan

conj

cc

nsubj

obj

b. Kitabı adam dergiyi de çocuk okudu
O S O S V

orphan

conj

cc

obj

nsubj

c. Adam kitabı okudu çocuk da dergiyi
S O V S O

nsubj

conj
obj cc

orphan

d. Kitabı adam okudu dergiyi de çocuk
O S V O S

obj

conj

nsubj

orphan

cc

‘The man read the book, and the child the magazine.’
(Bozsahin, 2000)

As mentioned above, in order to achieve higher
cross-linguistic consistency, the first conjunct is
always the head of a coordinated structure in UD.
Therefore, the head of the first conjunct is always
the head of the coordination, but the internal struc-
ture of each conjunct is the same for all four vari-
ants in (6).

In some cases, e.g., in certain discourse settings,
the clause with the gap is not part of the same sen-
tence as the clause with the overt verb (Gerdes and
Kahane, 2015). In these cases, we promote one of
the orphans to be the root of the second sentence;
the internal structure of the two clauses is the same
as when they are part of an intra-sentential coordi-
nation.

(7) Sue likes coffee. And Paul tea.

nsubj obj orphancc

Further, conjuncts with a gap can also contain
additional types of arguments or modifiers. For
example, in the sentence in (8), the oblique modi-
fier for good does not correspond to any phrase in
the first conjunct.

(8) They had left the company , many for good

nsubj obj

parataxis

orphan

125



(9) Mahsā in ketāb ro dust dār-e va Minu mi-dun-e ke māmān-esh un ketāb ro
Mahsa this book OBJ like have and Minu know that mother that book OBJ

nsubj

obj

case

cc

nsubj

conj

ccomp orphan

case

‘Mahsa likes this book and Minu knows that her mother (likes) that book’ (Farudi, 2013)

Figure 1: Basic UD tree of a Farsi sentence with a gap within an embedded clause.

3.2 Verbs and their arguments or modifiers
Many languages also allow gapping of verbs along
with their arguments or modifiers as illustrated in
the following two examples in Hindi (10) and En-
glish (11).

(10) M. ne P. ko kitaab dii aur T. ne V. ko
M. ERG P. OBJ book give and T. ERG V. OBJ

case obj

nsubj

case

obl

conj

cc

orphan

case case

‘Manu gave a book to Pari and Tanu to Vimla’ (Kush, 2016)

(11) Sue gave a book to Paul and John to Mary

nsubj

conj

cc

orphanobj

obl

We analyze these cases as analogous to sentences
in which only a verb was elided. The subject
is promoted to be the head of the second con-
junct and the oblique argument is attached with an
orphan dependency.

3.3 Verbs and clausal complements
Ross (1970) points out that gaps can also corre-
spond to a finite verb and one or more embedded
verbs. For example, in the following sentence, it
is possible to elide the matrix verb and all or some
of the embedded verbs.

(12) I want to try to begin to write a novel, ...
a. ... and Mary to try to begin to write a play.
b. ... and Mary to begin to write a play.
c. ... and Mary to write a play.
d. ... and Mary a play. Ross (1970)

In all of these variants, the matrix verb was elided
from the second conjunct. While this is an exam-
ple of subject control and therefore Mary is also
the subject of all the embedded verbs, it would be
misleading to attach Mary to one of the embed-
ded verbs because this would hide the fact that the

matrix verb was elided. For this reason, we treat
Mary as the head of the second conjunct and at-
tach the remainder of the embedded clause with
an orphan relation.

(13) ... and Mary to write a play.

conj

cc

orphan obj

3.4 Non-contiguous gaps
In the previous examples, the gap corresponds to a
contiguous sequence in the first conjunct. How-
ever, as highlighted by the following examples,
this is not always the case.

(14) Arizona elected X Senator , and Florida Y

nsubj

conj

cc orphanobj

xcomp

(adapted from an example in Jackendoff (1971))

(15) Farmehr be arus rose dād va Pari lāle
Farmehr to bride roses gave and Pari tulips

nsubj

case

obl

obj

conj

cc orphan

‘Farmehr gave roses to the bride and Pari (gave) tulips (to the
bride).’ (Farudi, 2013)

While the interpretation of the second conjunct
is only possible if one fills both gaps, we are also
in these cases primarily concerned with the elided
verb because neither of the phrases in the second
conjunct depend on the second gap. We can there-
fore analyze constructions with non-contiguous
gaps in a similar manner as constructions with
contiguous gaps, namely by promoting one orphan
to be the head of the conjunct and attaching all
other orphans to this head.

3.5 Gaps in embedded clauses
Farudi (2013) notes that in Farsi, gaps can ap-
pear in embedded clauses even if the correspond-
ing verb in the first conjunct is not part of an em-
bedded clause. For example, in (9) in Figure 1,

126



(16) weil P. seinen Freund besuchen wollte , was mich beruhigte , und J. seine Kinder , was mich amüsierte
because P. his friend visit wanted , which me reassured , and J. his children , which me amused

nsubj

obj xcomp

advcl

obj

nsubj

conj

orphan nsubj

obj

orphan

“because Peter wanted to visit his friend which reassured me, and Johann (wanted to visit) his children, which amused me“
(Wyngaerd, 2007)

Figure 2: Basic UD tree of a German subordinate clause with an adverbial clause modifying a gap.

(17) Jan heeft met het meisje dat de rode en Piet heeft met de jongen die de witte wijn binnenbracht gesproken
Jan has with the girl who the red and Piet has with the boy who the white wine in-brought talked

nsubj

obl

conj

acl:relcl orphan

cc

nsubj

aux

obl

nsubj

obj

acl:relcl

‘Jan (talked) to the girl who (brought in) the red (wine), and Piet talked to the boy who brought in the white wine.’
(Wyngaerd, 2007)

Figure 3: Basic UD tree of a Dutch sentence with a gap in a relative clause.

dust (‘like’) is the main verb of the highest clause
of the first conjunct but in the second conjunct, the
verb was elided from a clause embedded under mi-
dun-e (‘think’). In these cases, we consider the
matrix verb to be the head of the second conjunct
as we would if there was no gap, and we promote
the subject of the embedded clause (māmān-esh)
to be the head of the embedded clause. We at-
tach the remaining orphans to the subject with the
orphan relation.

Note that this construction is different from con-
structions in which parenthetical material (Pollard
and Sag, 1994) appears in the second conjunct, as
in the following English example.

(18) [...] I always had a pretty deep emotional connec-
tion to him, and I think he to me.3

(19) ... and I think he to me

conj

cc

nsubj orphan case

orphan

In these cases, we promote the subject of the sec-
ond conjunct (he) and attach the parenthetical I
think as well as to him to the subject.

3Source: hhttp://www.ttbook.org/book/transcript/transcript-
humour-healing-marc-maron

3.6 Relative clauses
Several Germanic languages such as German and
Dutch show more complex gapping behaviors in
sentences with adverbial and relative clauses. For
example, Wyngaerd (2007) points out that German
also allows a verbal gap in clauses modified by
an adverbial clause such as the one in Figure 2.
In this example, the two verbs besuchen wollte
(‘wanted to visit’) are missing from the second
clause, which leaves three orphans, namely a sub-
ject, a direct object, and an adverbial clause with-
out a governor. As in the case of two orphaned
constituents, we promote the subject to be the head
of the clause as it is the highest type of argument
in the obliqueness hierarchy, and we attach the two
other constituents to the subject with an orphan
relation.

Dutch even allows gaps to appear within rela-
tive clauses that modify a constituent in each of
the conjuncts. In the example sentence in Fig-
ure 3, there are in total two elided verbs, and one
elided noun. First, the left conjunct is missing
the main verb gesproken (‘talked’) in its matrix
clause; second, the relative clause of the object in
the first conjunct is missing its verb binnenbracht
(‘brought in’); and third, the noun wijn (‘wine’)
was elided from the object in the relative clause.
The matrix clause of the first conjunct still con-

127



tains an auxiliary which we promote to be the head
of the first conjunct. We further promote the sub-
ject of the relative clause, i.e., the relative pronoun,
to be the head of the relative clause, and we attach
the adjective, which modifies the elided noun, to
the promoted subject with an orphan relation.

4 Dependency structure

In the previous section, we showed that the
adopted orphan analysis can be used to consis-
tently annotate a large number of attested gapping
constructions in different languages, which is an
important consideration in deciding on an analy-
sis. A second important question is whether our
adopted analysis leads to sensible tree structures.
Our analysis indicates that a conjunct with a gap
forms a syntactic unit, which raises the question
whether there is evidence for such a structure.

Many constituency tests such as topicalization,
clefting, and stripping suggest that conjuncts with
a gap often do not qualify as a constituent. For
example, Osborne (2006a) argues against treating
the gapping in (20) as the coordination of [the dog
a bone] and [the man a flower], which would sug-
gest that both conjuncts are constituents. He bases
his argument on the observation that the former
conjunct fails most constituency tests when it is
used in a sentence without coordination (21).

(20) She gave the dog a bone, and the man a flower.

(21) a. *The dog a bone, she gave. (Topicalization)
b. *It was the dog a bone that she gave. (Clefting)
c. ?She gave a dog a bone, not a cat some fish.

(Stripping)

However, this argument is based on the assump-
tion that [the dog a bone] and [the man a flower]
form a coordinate structure. If we assume instead
that the second conjunct is a clause with elided
nodes, then none of the above tests seem appli-
cable. At the same time, as already mentioned
above, Gerdes and Kahane (2015) point out that
phrases such as “and the man a flower ” can be ut-
tered by a speaker in response to someone else ut-
tering a phrase such as “she gave the dog a bone”.
They take this behavior as evidence for treating the
entire conjunct with a gap (including the conjunc-
tion) as a syntactic unit.

Such an analysis is also in line with most ac-
counts of gapping in the generative literature.
While there is disagreement on what the deep
structure of sentences with gapping should look

like and what transformations are employed to de-
rive the surface structure, there is broad consensus
that all remnants are part of the same phrase (e.g.,
Coppock (2001); Johnson (2009)). We take all of
these facts as weak evidence for treating conjuncts
with gaps as syntactic units.

This argument based on constituency criteria
might seem surprising considering that such evi-
dence was dismissed when deciding on analyses
for other constructions in UD, such as preposi-
tional phrases. One of the major criticisms of
UD has been that we attach prepositions to their
complement instead of treating them as heads of
prepositional phrases because this decision ap-
pears to be misguided when one considers con-
stituency tests (see, e.g., Osborne (2015)). How-
ever, this decision should not be interpreted as
UD completely ignoring constituency. It is true
that following Tesnière (1959), UD treats content
words with their function words as dissociated nu-
clei and thus ignores the results of constituency
tests for determining the attachment of function
words – an approach that is also taken by some
generative grammarians, for example, in the form
of the notion of extended projection by Grimshaw
(1997). But importantly, UD still respects the
constituency of nominals, clauses and other larger
units. For this reason, it is important to have an
analysis of gapping that respects larger constituent
boundaries as it is the case with the adopted “or-
phan” analysis.

5 Enhanced representation

One of the drawbacks of the adopted analysis is
that the orphan dependencies do not encode in-
formation on the type of argument of each rem-
nant, which complicates extracting relations be-
tween content words in downstream tasks. How-
ever, UD also defines an enhanced representation,
which may be a graph instead of a tree and which
may contain additional nodes and relations (Nivre
et al., 2016; Schuster and Manning, 2016). The
purpose of this representation is to make implicit
relations between words more explicit in order to
facilitate shallow natural language understanding
tasks such as relation extraction. One property of
the enhanced representation is that it resolves gaps
by adding nodes to basic UD trees. Remnants at-
tach to these additional nodes with meaningful re-

128



lations just as if nothing had been elided,4 thus
solving the issue of the uninformative orphan de-
pendencies. The general idea is to insert as many
nodes as required to obtain a structure without
orphans while keeping the number of additional
nodes to a minimum. On top of additional nodes,
we add relations between new nodes and exist-
ing content words so that there exist explicit re-
lations between each verb and its arguments and
modifiers. We now illustrate how different cases
of gapping can be analyzed in the enhanced rep-
resentation based on the following representative
examples

The simplest cases are constructions in which a
single verb was elided. In these cases, we insert a
copy node5 of the elided verb at the position of the
gap, make this node the head of the conjunct, and
attach all orphans to this copy node. For example,
for the following sentence, we insert the copy node
likes′ and attach Mary as a subject and coffee as an
object.

(21) John likes tea and Mary likes′ coffee

nsubj obj

cc

nsubj

conj

obj

Similarly, we insert a copy node as the new root of
a sentence in cases in which the leftmost conjunct
contains a gap as, for example, in (5).

(22) John-ga hon-o katta′ sosite Mary-ga hana-o katta
John book bought and Mary flower bought

nsubj

obj

conj

cc

nsubj

obj

‘John bought books, and Mary bought flowers.’
(adapted from Kato (2006))

In cases in which arguments or modifiers were
elided along with the verb, we still only insert one
copy node for the main verb. However, in order
to make the relation between the verb and all of
its arguments explicit, we also add relations be-
tween the new copy node and existing arguments
and meaningful modifiers. In (23), we add a copy

4A similar analysis was used in the tectogrammatical
layer of the Prague Dependency Treebank (Bejček et al.,
2013).

5Similar copy nodes are already used for some cases of re-
duced conjunctions in the collapsed and CCprocessed Stan-
ford Dependencies representations (de Marneffe and Man-
ning, 2008) and in the enhanced UD representation (Schuster
and Manning, 2016).

node for the elided verb elected and a relation be-
tween the copy node and Senator.

(23) Arizona elected X Senator and Florida elected′ Y

nsubj obj

xcomp cc

nsubj

conj

obj

xcomp

In cases in which a finite verb was elided along
with one or more embedded verbs, as in the sen-
tence “I want to try to begin to write a novel, and
Mary a play.”, we insert one copy node for each
elided verb. However, unlike in the previous ex-
ample, we do not add relations between the copy
nodes and the semantically vacuous function word
to because it is not required for the interpretation
of the sentence.

(24) ... and M. want′ try′ begin′ write′ a play

cc

nsubj

conj

xcomp xcomp xcomp

obj

The motivation behind these design choices is to
have direct and meaningful relations between con-
tent words. Many shallow natural language under-
standing systems, which make use of UD such as
open relation extraction systems (Mausam et al.,
2012; Angeli et al., 2015) or semantic parsers (An-
dreas et al., 2016; Reddy et al., 2017), use depen-
dency graph patterns to extract information from
sentences. These patterns are typically designed
for prototypical clause structures, and by aug-
menting the dependency graph as described above,
many patterns that were designed for canonical
clause structures also produce the correct results
when applied to sentences with gapping construc-
tions.

6 Comparison to other proposals

6.1 Remnant analysis
The first version of the UD guidelines (Nivre et al.,
2016) proposed that orphans should be attached to
their correspondents with the special remnant re-
lation. This proposal is very similar to the analysis
of string coordination by Osborne (2006b), which
adds special orthogonal connections between or-
phans and correspondents. According to the “rem-
nant” proposal, a sentence with a single verb gap
is analyzed as follows.

129



(25) John likes tea and Mary coffee

obj

remnant

remnant

nsubj

This is arguably a more expressive analysis than
the “orphan” analysis because there is a direct link
between each orphan and its correspondent, and
one is able to determine the type of argument of
each orphan by considering the type of argument
of its correspondent. However, this analysis comes
with several problems. First, it makes it impossi-
ble to analyze sentences with orphans that do not
have a correspondent such as the sentence with an
additional modifier in (8), or sentences whose cor-
respondents appear in a previous sentence as in
(7). Second, the remnant relations appear to be
an abuse of dependency links as they are clearly
not true syntactic dependency relations but rather a
kind of co-indexing relation between orphans and
correspondents. Further, such an analysis intro-
duces many long-distance dependencies and many
non-projective dependencies, both of which are
known to lower parsing performance (McDonald
and Nivre, 2007). Lastly, as mentioned above, and
Mary coffee forms a syntactic unit, which is not
captured by this proposal.

6.2 Gerdes and Kahane (2015)
Gerdes and Kahane (2015) propose a graph-based
analysis of gapping constructions, which inspired
the analysis of gapping constructions in UD v2.
Their proposal is, by and large, a combination of
the “remnant” analysis and the “orphan” analysis
that we described in this paper. They further add
a lat-NCC (lateral non-constituent coordination)
relation between the correspondents in the clause
with the overt verb. According to their proposal,
we would analyze a sentence with a single verb
gap as follows.6

(26) John likes tea and Mary coffee

nsubj obj cc

conj

orphan

nsubj

obj

remnant

remnantlat-NCC

The advantage of this proposal is that it captures
two different things: The orphan relation captures

6We translated their relation names to the appropriate UD
relations to make it easier to compare the various proposals.

the fact that and Mary coffee forms a syntactic unit
and the remnant relations allow one to determine
the type of argument of each orphan. Neverthe-
less, this proposal also comes with several draw-
backs. First, this analysis leads to graphs that are
no longer trees and it is therefore not suited for
the basic UD representation, which is supposed to
be a strict surface syntax tree (Nivre et al., 2016).
This would not be an issue for the enhanced rep-
resentation, which may be a graph instead of a
tree, but the remnant relations in this analysis
can lead to the same problem as mentioned above.
That is, if an orphan does not have a correspon-
dent within the same sentence, we cannot use this
type of dependency. Further, the copy nodes in our
enhanced representation capture the fact that this
sentence is describing two distinct “liking” events,
which is not captured in this analysis. Finally,
while their lat-NCC relation seems unproblematic
from a theoretical point of view, we do not see its
advantage in practice. For these reasons, we adopt
only part of their proposal for the basic represen-
tation and introduce copy nodes in the enhanced
representation.

6.3 Composite relations
Joakim Nivre and Daniel Zeman developed a
third proposal7 as part of the discussion of the
second version of the UD guidelines. Their
proposal is based on composite relations such
as conj>nsubj, which indicates which relations
would be present along the dependency path from
the first conjunct to the orphan if there was no
gap. For example, X conj>nsubj Y indicates
that there would have been a conj relation be-
tween X and an elided node, and an nsubj rela-
tion between the elided node and Y. According to
this proposal, we would analyze a sentence with a
single verb gap as follows.

(27) John likes tea and Mary coffee

nsubj obj

conj>cc

conj>nsubj

conj>obj

The advantages of this proposal are that the re-
lation names provide much more information on
the type of dependent than the generic orphan re-
lation, and that in most cases, the enhanced rep-
resentation can be deterministically obtained by

7See http://universaldependencies.org/v2 prelim/ellipsis.html
for a more detailed description of their proposal.

130



splitting up the relation name and inserting a copy
of the governor of the composite relation. For ex-
ample, for the above sentence, one could obtain
the enhanced representation by copying likes and
attaching and, Mary, and coffee with a cc, nsubj,
obj relation, respectively.

However, this representation also comes with
several drawbacks. First, it drastically increases
the size of the relation domain as in theory, an un-
bounded number of relations can be concatenated.
For example, in the sentence in (12d), we would
end up with a conj>xcomp>xcomp>xcomp>obj
relation8 between want and play. This is highly
problematic from a practical point of view as vir-
tually all existing parsers assume that there is a
finite set of relations than can appear between two
words. Further, such an analysis also introduces
many more long-distance dependencies. For these
reasons, it seems unlikely that a parser would be
able to produce this representation (and conse-
quently also not the enhanced representation) with
high accuracy. Finally, also in this case, the second
conjunct does not form a syntactic unit.

To summarize this comparison, the main draw-
back of the orphan analysis is that it does not cap-
ture any information about the type of arguments
in the basic representation. Despite this drawback,
we believe that the analysis of gapping construc-
tions in UD version 2 is better with regard to theo-
retical and practical considerations than any of the
previous proposals, because (a) it can be used to
analyze sentences in which orphans do not have
correspondents; (b) it does not increase the num-
ber of relations; (c) it does not introduce additional
long-distance dependencies or non-projective de-
pendencies; and (d) it captures the fact that the
second conjunct forms a syntactic unit.

8As pointed out by a reviewer, one could limit the relation
name to the first and last relation in the hypothetical depen-
dency path, e.g., conj>obj in this example. While this would
put an upper bound on the number of relations, it would no
longer be possible to deterministically obtain the enhanced
representation in these cases. Further, we would assign the
same relation label to different arguments in some cases. For
example, we would add a conj>obj relation between want
and John and between want and play in the analysis of the
following sentence despite the fact that these two phrases are
arguments to different verbs.

(28) Mary wants Tim to write a novel, and (wants) John
(to write) a play.

7 Conclusion and future directions

We discussed which kind of gapping constructions
are attested in a variety of languages, and we pro-
vided a detailed description how these construc-
tions can be analyzed within the UD version 2
framework. We further explained how sentences
with gaps can be analyzed in the enhanced UD
representation, and we argued why we believe that
the current proposal gives the best tradeoff be-
tween theoretical and practical considerations.

While we discussed what enhanced UD graphs
of sentences with gapping should look like, we did
not provide any methods of obtaining these graphs
from sentences or basic UD trees. One future di-
rection is therefore to develop methods to auto-
matically obtain this representation.

Acknowledgments

We thank the entire UD community for develop-
ing the guidelines and for providing feedback to
various proposals as part of the the discussion of
the second version of the UD guidelines. We also
thank Joakim Nivre for providing comments on an
early draft of this paper. Further, we thank the
anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful feed-
back. We especially appreciated the thorough and
insightful feedback by the second reviewer, and
while we were not able to incorporate all of it due
to space and time constraints, we hope to address
most of the remaining points in future versions of
this work. This work was supported in part by gifts
from Google, Inc. and IPSoft, Inc. The first author
is also supported by a Goodan Family Graduate
Fellowship.

References
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and

Dan Klein. 2016. Learning to compose neural net-
works for question answering. In Proceedings of the
2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies (NAACL 2016).

Gabor Angeli, Melvin Johnson Premkumar, and
Christopher D Manning. 2015. Leveraging linguis-
tic structure for open domain information extrac-
tion. Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing of the Asian Federation of Natural
Language Processing (ACL-IJCNLP).

Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlı́na
Jı́nová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová,

131



Marie Mikulová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko,
Jarmila Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda
Ševčı́ková, Jan Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová.
2013. Prague Dependency Treebank 3.0. LIN-
DAT/CLARIN digital library at the Institute of
Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University.

Cem Bozsahin. 2000. Gapping and word order in
Turkish. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Turkish Linguistics.

Elizabeth Coppock. 2001. Gapping: In defense of
deletion. In Mary Andronis, Christopher Ball, Heidi
Elston, and Sylvain Neuvel, editors, Papers from
the 37th Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society,
Chicago. Chicago Linguistic Society.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. Stanford typed dependencies manual.
Technical report, Stanford University.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006).

Annahita Farudi. 2013. Gapping in Farsi: A Crosslin-
guistic Investigation. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

Kim Gerdes and Sylvain Kahane. 2015. Non-
constituent coordination and other coordinative con-
structions as dependency graphs. In Proceedings of
the Third International conference on Dependency
Linguistics (Depling 2015).

Jane Grimshaw. 1997. Projection, heads, and optimal-
ity. Linguistic Inquiry, 28(3):373–422.

Ray S. Jackendoff. 1971. Gapping and related rules.
Linguistic Inquiry, 2(1):21–35.

Kyle Johnson. 2009. Gapping is not (VP-) ellipsis.
Linguistic Inquiry, 40(2):289–328.

Kumiko Kato. 2006. Japanese Gapping in Minimalist
Syntax. Ph.D. thesis, University of Washington.

Dave Kush. 2016. Notes on gapping in Hindi-Urdu:
Conjunct size and focus parallelism. Linguistic
Analysis, 40(3-4):255–296.

Mausam, Michael Schmitz, Robert Bart, Stephen
Soderland, and Oren Etzioni. 2012. Open language
learning for information extraction. In Proceed-
ings of Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL).

Ryan McDonald and Joakim Nivre. 2007. Charac-
terizing the errors of data-driven dependency pars-
ing models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL).

Igor A. Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory
and Practice. State University of New York Press,
Albany.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Timothy Osborne. 2006a. Gapping vs. non-gapping
coordination. Linguistische Berichte, 207:307–337.

Timothy Osborne. 2006b. Shared material and gram-
mar: Toward a dependency grammar theory of
non-gapping coordination for english and german.
Zeitschrift für Sprachwissenschaft, 25(1).

Timothy Osborne. 2015. Diagnostics for constituents:
Dependency, constituency, and the status of function
words. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling
2015).

Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-driven
phrase structure grammar. University of Chicago
Press.

Siva Reddy, Oscar Täckström, Slav Petrov, Mark
Steedman, and Mirella Lapata. 2017. Universal se-
mantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03196.

John Robert Ross. 1970. Gapping and the or-
der of constituents. In Manfred Bierwisch and
Karl Erich Heidolph, editors, Progress in Linguis-
tics. De Gruyter, The Hague.

Sebastian Schuster and Christopher D. Manning. 2016.
Enhanced English Universal Dependencies: An im-
proved representation for natural language under-
standing tasks. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2016).

Mihai Surdeanu, Richard Johansson, Adam Meyers,
Lluı́s Màrquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The
CoNLL-2008 Shared Task on Joint Parsing of Syn-
tactic and Semantic Dependencies. In Proceedings
of the Twelfth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL 2008).

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Eléments de Syntaxe Struc-
turale. Klincksieck, Paris.

G. Vanden Wyngaerd. 2007. Gapping constituents.
Ms., FWO/K.U. Brussel.

132


