










































%


 
 
 

49 
Proceedings of the Linguistic Resources for Automatic Natural Language Generation Workshop, pages 49–

52, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4, 2017. © 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics 

Using Serious Games to Correct French Dictations: Proposal for a New 

Unity3D/NooJ Connector 

Ikram Bououd and Rania Fafi 

Higher Institute of Management of Gabes 

ikram.bououd@gmail.com, ranyafafi93@gmail.com 

Abstract 

 The remarkable growth in serious games use 

has gradually pushed them to be present in 

every single domain. However, in language 

learning we did not find any reliable games de-

veloped for dictation exercises, commonly 

used for the teaching of French. This involves 

natural language processing in the form of an 

interactive game that can automatically gener-

ate corrections and assess game users. In order 

to fill this research gap, we propose to take ad-

vantage of the assets provided by the NooJ 

platform and develop a game combining NooJ 

and the 3D game platform Unity3D. 

1 Introduction 

Serious Games (SG) constitute a new educational 

frame. This oxymoron represents a powerful means 

to spread serious content in an entertaining way 

(Abt, 1970). SG are experiencing a huge increase 

within our societies and invading every single do-

main: healthcare, the military, education, advertise-

ment, coaching, etc. (Alvarez and Rostaing, 2014).  

The important use of these games has gradually put 

them as an important research area, especially when 

SG are dealing with an attractive and crucial topic 

such as education and language learning. 

Developing a serious game for language learn-

ing, in particular for a dictation exercise, led us to 

make use of different resources from Natural Lan-

guage Processing (NLP). The main challenge was 

to create a successful connection between the game 

platform, here Unity3D, and the NLP platform, here 

NooJ. To the best of our knowledge such a connec-

tion between these two platforms has never been 

proposed. 

This game allows better interactivity along with 

automatic correction of a French dictation exercise 

for the language learner. This will offer added value 

to language learning and can make the gamer more 

sophisticated.  

2 Serious Games 

Alvarez defines SG as “computer applications hav-

ing as original intention to combine both serious as-

pects (serious), with fun aspects from video games 

(game). Such an association is achieved by provid-

ing a learning scenario corresponding, from a pro-

gramming point of view, to implement a decor 

(sound and graphics), story and suitable rules; 

therefore it moves away from restricting the game 

to entertainment” (Alvarez and Rostaing, 2014).  

Indeed, SG are entertaining games for educa-

tional purpose. The main objective is to exploit the 

entertaining aspect of video games to facilitate 

learning concepts, traditionally taught through con-

ventional teaching methods. The range of usage ar-

eas of SG is very wide such as scientific explora-

tion, medicine and education. More precisely, the 

educational aspect of SG is one of their greatest as-

sets. Indeed, SG are promoting and opening new 

horizons for active learning and provide a learning-

by-doing experience. Thanks to their graphics and 

design, SG are well accepted among the young gen-

eration since they succeed in keeping them concen-

trated on their tasks and engage them in the learning 

process (Berta et al., 2016). 

The learning part of the game is the most im-

portant. Many discussions have explored reward 

systems as ways to motivate student participation 

and practice. However, when people began to look 

at the potential of games for student engagement, 

they found that the games fit well within the theo-

ries of learning. 

This approach can potentially help students mas-

ter the learning process. The use of online gaming 

integrated into education has a positive impact on 

student learning thanks to their graphics and design, 

since SG keep them concentrated on their tasks and  

mailto:ikram.bououd@gmail.com
mailto:ranyafafi93@gmail.com


 
 
 

50 

 

 

engage them in the learning process (Berta et al., 

2016). 

3 Learning languages and games 

Learning languages is crucial and requires several 

competencies: listening, speaking, pronunciation, 

reading, writing, as well as dictation, which com-

bines listening and writing. Language learning re-

quires concentration and endurance, which are hard 

to maintain for a long periods of time. Conse-

quently, learners will quickly feel bored, lose con-

centration and then neglect the engagement to learn.  

Games overcome this point by integrating heavy 

learning materials in a playful way and make learn-

ing processing smooth and encouraging (Graesser, 

2016). The literature of serious games provides sev-

eral games for language learning such as English 

pronunciation (Trooster et al., 2016) or German 

learning (Alyaz et al., 2017). Some games are pro-

posed for children with Down syndrome (Simao et 

al., 2016) to learn phonetics, etc. Existing games 

did not provide an automatic language processing 

of users’ input and did not correct their responses 

with a customized way. Indeed, they need to write 

down their responses and compare them later with 

the right responses provided by the game (Alyaz et 

al., 2017).  

We decided to take advantage of the NooJ plat-

form to create an automatic language-learning pro-

cess that reinforces dictation and writing skills. To 

the best of our knowledge, a game dealing with in-

teractive correction of dictation has not yet been 

proposed.  

4 SG Proposal based on NLP 

4.1 NooJ/Unity connection: Approach over-
view 

Building the connection between Unity3D and 

NooJ was the first step we took (Figure 1). Dicta-

tion is designed to build various language skills - 

listening, pronunciation, spelling and writing words 

correctly from individual letters. First of all, we 

concentrated on building new NooJ resources (dic-

tionaries and grammars) to recognize certain word 

forms from their components (prefixes, affixes and 

suffixes) (Silberztein, 2003). This task allows us to 

determine whether each word entered by the player 

is written correctly or not. 

Figure 1: Approach overview 



 
 
 

51 

 

But this is not enough for dictation correction or 

detecting the incorrect agreement between subject 

and verb or any mistaken combinations in the sen-

tence. So we have resorted to building another syn-

tactic grammar that describes full sentences, and 

decides whether the formulated sentences are con-

sistent in terms of agreement, gender, number and 

person or not. 

Secondly, after building the linguistic resources, 

we moved on to compile them to be used as param-

eters in the command-line noojapply within NooJ 

(Silberztein and Tutin, 2005). 

When the player listens to the provided dictation, 

he/she enters his/her response in a text box inside 

the game. After sending his/her response, Unity3D 

(using C# code) will divide the entered sentence 

into separate words in a new generated text file; 

each of these words would be a NooJ platform entry 

to be processed. 

Noojapply is then called from the C# code inside 

the game. At this point, we are able to connect the 

entry of the player, saved automatically to a text 

file, to the compiled lexical resources, the parame-

ters that noojapply needs.  

NooJ then applies the provided linguistic re-

sources word by word in a loop to detect eventual 

misspelled words and sends the index of each word 

to Unity3D to be saved in an index file. And then it 

will apply syntactic resources to detect any wrong 

agreement within the sentence.  

The coherent answer is the one that matches one 

of the grammars’ paths. This index file is what we 

use to display the correction to the player. The final 

result is displayed to the player as a correction to 

his/her mistakes. 

4.2 Experimentation 

The player explores the terrain searching for a 

sound source, once he/she finds it; he/she will be 

able to control the listening with a keyboard key. 

When the player finishes listening to the French 

dictation, a new panel appears, giving him a place 

to write the sentence heard (Figure 2).  

 
Figure 2: The entry field 

After writing the sentence heard and by clicking 

on the “Envoyer” button (Figure 3) the correction 

process begins in the game’s background. 

 
Figure 3: The entry field after listening to the message 

Some examples of detected mistakes and their 

corrections can be seen in Figure 4 and Figure 5. 

 

 
Figure 4: Example 1 



 
 
 

52 

 

 
Figure 5: Example 2 

 

5 Conclusion 

Serious games are powerful educational tools that 

can achieve pedagogical goals and engage players 

in deep learning. However, they need strong sup-

port from NLP platforms, such as NooJ, in order to 

be able to perform automatic dictation tasks and 

correct players’ answers. This paper is a proposal 

for the creation of a connection between NooJ and 

Unity3D. This connection will open horizons to 

several future jobs mixing serious games and natu-

ral language processing. 

References  

Arthur C. Graesser 2016. Reflections on Serious Games. 

Book chapter from Instructional Techniques to Facil-

itate Learning and Motivation of Serious Games, pp 

199-212. 

Clark C. Abt 1970. Serious Games. Viking Press. 

Julian Alvarez and Aurélia Rostaing 2014. Autour des 

jeux sérieux (serious games): Définition générale et 

terminologie.  PowerPoint Presentation. Bibliothèque 

Nationale de France, Paris. http://www.ludosci-
ence.com/FR/diffusion/893-Autour-des-

jeux-serieux-serious-games--Definition-

generale-et-terminologie.html. Date Ac-

cessed: May 12, 2017. 

José Simao, Louisa Cotrim, Teresa Condeco, Tiago Car-

doso, Miguel Palha, Yves Rybarczyk and José Barata. 

2016. Using games for the phonetics awareness for 

children with Down Syndrome. Serious Games, Inter-

action and Simulation: 6th International Conference 

SGAMES 2016 Porto Portugal, (eds. C. Vaz de Car-

valho, P. Escudeiro, A. Coelho), Springer Interna-

tional Publishing, pp 1-8 

Max Silberztein. 2003. NooJ Manual Available for 

download at: www.nooj4nlp.net.  

Max Silberztein and Agnès Tutin. 2005. NooJ, un outil 

TAL pour l’enseignement des langues. Application 

pour l’étude de la morphologie lexicale en FLE. 

Special Atala, 8(2), pp 123-134. 

Riccardo Berta , Francesco Bellotti, Erik van der Spek 

and Thomas Winkler. 2016. A Tangible Serious Game 

Approach to Science, Technology, Engineering, and 

Mathematics (STEM) Education. Handbook of Digi-

tal Games and Entertainment Technologies, pp 571-

592. 

Wim Trooster, Sui Lin Goei, Anouk Ticheloven, Es-

ther Oprins, Gillian van de Boer-Visschedijk, 

Gemma Corbalan and Martin Van Schaik. 2016. The 

Effectiveness of the Game LINGO Online: A Serious 

Game for English Pronunciation. In Simulation and 

Serious Games for Education, pp 125-136. 

Yunus Alyaz, Dorothea Spaniel-Weise and Esim Gursoy. 

2017, A Study on Using Serious Games in Teaching 

German as a Foreign Language. Journal of Education 

and Learning 6(3), pp 250-264.

 

https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Arthur_Graesser
http://www.ludoscience.com/FR/diffusion/893-Autour-des-jeux-serieux-serious-games--Definition-generale-et-terminologie.html
http://www.ludoscience.com/FR/diffusion/893-Autour-des-jeux-serieux-serious-games--Definition-generale-et-terminologie.html
http://www.ludoscience.com/FR/diffusion/893-Autour-des-jeux-serieux-serious-games--Definition-generale-et-terminologie.html
http://www.ludoscience.com/FR/diffusion/893-Autour-des-jeux-serieux-serious-games--Definition-generale-et-terminologie.html
mailto:berta@elios.unige.it

