











































Instructions for Depling 2011 Proceedings


Syntax-Semantics Interface: A Plea for a Deep Dependency Sentence 

Structure 

Eva Hajičová 

Charles University  

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics 

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics 

Prague, Czech Republic 

hajicova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 

In collaboration with Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová, Markéta Lopatková, Jarmila Panevová, 

and Dan Zeman (and with technical support of Jiří Mírovský) 

The aim of the contribution is to bring arguments for a description for natural language that (i) 

includes a representation (i) of a deep (underlying) sentence structure and (ii) is based on the 

relation of dependency. Our argumentation rests on linguistic considerations and stems from 

the Praguian linguistic background, both with respect to the Praguian structuralist tradition as 

well as to the formal framework of Functional Generative Description and to the experience 

with building the Prague Dependency Treebank. The arguments, of course, are not novel but 

we will try to gather and report on our experience when working with deep syntactic depend-

ency relations in the description of language; the basic material will be Czech but multilingual 

comparative aspects will be taken into account as well. 

Speaking about a “deep” sentence structure, a natural question to ask is how “deep” this lin-

guistic structure is to be. Relevant in this respect is the differentiation between ontological 

content and linguistic meaning. Two relations will be discussed in some detail and illustrated 

on examples from Czech and English, namely the relation of synonymy and that of ambiguity 

(homonymy). The relation of synonymy will be specified as an identity of meaning with re-

spect to truth conditions and it will be demonstrated how this criterion may help to test sen-

tences and constructions for synonymy. The relation of ambiguity will be exemplified by two 

specific groups of examples, one concerning surface deletions and the necessity to reconstruct 

them in the deep structure, and the other group involving the notion of deep order of sentence 

elements with examples related to the phenomenon of information structure. 

The necessity to distinguish surface and deep structure has led to several proposals of a multi-

level description of language, both in the domain of theoretical linguistics and in the domain 

of annotation schemes of language corpora, such as LFG or CCG. We will describe in a nut-

shell the Prague Dependency Treebank, focusing on the deep (so-called tectogrammatical) 

level of annotation. 

After some observations on the history of the dependency-based syntactic relations, attention 

will be focused on two basic topics, namely the issue of headedness and the notion of valency. 

We will outline an approach to the distinction between arguments and adjuncts and their se-

mantic optionality/obligatoriness based on two operational criteria and we will demonstrate 

on the example of several Czech valency dictionaries how a dependency-based description 

brings together grammar and lexicon. 

Among the many challenges that still await a deeper analysis, two will be briefly character-

ized, namely the phenomenon of projectivity and the representation of coordination. 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 2-3,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

2



To summarize, we argue that both attributes of our approach, namely “deep” and “dependen-

cy-based” are important for a theoretical description of language if this description is sup-

posed to help to reflect the relation between form and meaning, that is, when it is supposed to 

serve as a basis for language understanding. Despite undisputable recent progress in NLP 

which relies more on computational methods than linguistic representations or features, we 

believe that for true understanding, having an adequate theory is worth the effort. 

This work has been supported by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education, 

Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic (project LM2015071) and by the project GA17-

07313S of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic. 

3




