
























 
 
 

“Haters gonna hate”: challenges for sentiment analysis of Facebook 
comments in Brazilian Portuguese 

 
 

Juliano Desiderato Antonio 
Universidade Estadual de Maringá 

jdantonio@uem.br 

Ana Carolina Leatte Santin 
Universidade Estadual de Maringá 

leattesantin@gmail.com 
 
 

Abstract

The aim of this paper is to present reflections 
from Discourse Analysis and from Construc-
tion Grammar on the creation of a dictionary 
for sentiment analysis of Facebook comments. 
The reflections from Discourse Analysis ad-
dress problems such as the identification of 
the semantic orientation of words that present 
opposite polarities depending on the ideologi-
cal formation of the speaker. Another reflec-
tion from Discourse Analysis regards the fact 
that the writers of the comments use nouns 
and noun phrases not only to name some enti-
ty, but also to build discourse objects in a way 
that the label they give to the discourse ob-
jects reveals an evaluation. In order to analyze 
constructions larger than words, such as idi-
oms, we draw on Construction Grammar prin-
ciples. The investigation of constructions and 
idioms can provide a better understanding of 
sentiment in text. The corpus consists of 
comments extracted manually from Facebook 
public discussion pages related to diverse 
themes, such as politics, education, religion, 
music, lifestyle etc.  

1 Introduction 

Facebook is one of the websites with higher data 
traffic on the internet. On December 2016 it regis-
tered 1.86 billion monthly active users (nearly 1 in 
4 people worldwide). In Brazil, the ratio is even 
higher: nearly 55.5% of the population were active 
Facebook users in November 2016 (Facebook, 
2017). Thus, linguists who are interested in 
investigating language in use have on Facebook an 
immeasurable research field. 

Wilson et al.’s (2012) comprehensive review 
about scientific research conducted about Face-

book in the social sciences points to the need for 
social engagement as the main motivation for peo-
ple to use Facebook. Seidman (2014) investigated 
the expression of the “true self” on Facebook, 
which “consists of qualities that an individual cur-
rently possesses but does not normally express to 
others in everyday life”. The need for social en-
gagement and the expression of the true self are 
encompassed within the metafunctions1 proposed 
by Halliday (1985). The ideational metafunction 
regards self-expression, as it concerns the 
grammatical features used to construct both the 
speaker's inner experiences and the experiences 
with the world around him. On the other hand, the 
interpersonal metafunction is related to the 
grammatical resources used by the speaker to 
interact with his/her interlocutors, assuming social 
roles and roles concerning the communicative 
situation (social engagement). Whilst the ideational 
and the interpersonal are extralinguistic 
metafunctions, the textual metafunction deals with 
the presentation of interpersonal and ideational 
content in the form of information that can be 
shared by the speaker and his / her interlocutors by 
means of texts. In other words, texts produced by 
Facebook users and their linguistic behavior 
deserve being studied by linguists. 

According to Iruskieta et al. (2013), 
Computational Linguistics depends on discourse 
annotated corpora for the creation of automatic 
applications. The research that resulted in this 
paper intends to create a dictionary for sentiment 
analysis by extracting comments from Facebook 
public pages related to diverse themes, such as 
politics, education, religion, music, lifestyle etc. 
                                                     
                                                       
1 “Metafunction refers to the different modes of mean-

ing construed by the grammar.” 

64
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop Recent Advances in RST and Related Formalisms, pages 64−72,

Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4 2017. c�2017 Association for Computational Linguistics



 
 
 

However, as we started analyzing the semantic 
orientation of the comments, we noticed that the 
same words said by different people had polar 
opposite semantic orientation, as in examples (1) 
and (2). 

 
(1) Só come "pala" da Direita quem for analfa-

beto político e funcional. 

Only functional and political illiterate peo-
ple believe in the lies of the right wing. 

(2) ... nós da Direita não temos político de es-
timação. 

We, who are right wing, do not have pet 
politicians. 

In (1) “right wing” is considered negative by the 
writer of the comment, as it can be presupposed 
that assumptions endorsed by right wing are lies. 
On the other hand, in (2) the writer of the 
comment, who assumes to have a right wing 
political orientation, suggests that left wing people 
have pet politicians, whilst right wing people do 
not. Therefore, in (2), “right wing” is evaluated 
positively. That happens because the comments 
collected were produced by people with different 
views on the issues discussed in the pages and we 
decided to draw attention to such problem, as it 
certainly creates difficulties for sentiment analysis.  

Thus, this paper presents some challenges for 
the creation of a dictionary for sentiments analysis 
of Facebook comments in Brazilian Portuguese 
caused by the different positions assumed by the 
producers of the comments. Furthermore, it is also
a goal of the paper to analyze other forms rather 
than nouns, adjectives, verbs, NPs. The 
investigation of constructions and idioms can 
provide a better understanding of sentiment in text. 

In terms of structure, besides the introduction, 
this paper is divided in 4 more sections. In Section 
2 we present a short view of what has been done 
about sentiment analysis in Linguistics and in 
NLP. We also introduce in Section 2 some 
theoretical assumptions from Discourse Analysis 
in order to face the challenges which are addressed 
in the paper. A brief review of Constructional 
Grammar is also presented in Section 2. In Section 
3 we present the methodology used in the research 
and the discussion of the data is provided in 

Section 4. The last section of the paper is the 
Conclusion, followed by the references. 

2 Theoretical background 

In this section we provide a general background 
about what has been done regarding sentiment 
analysis and also some contributions from Dis-
course Analysis which are essential for the chal-
lenges discussed in the paper. A brief review of 
basic assumptions of Constructional Grammar is 
presented in order to provide a better understand-
ing of the concepts of “construction” and “idiom”. 

2.1 Sentiment analysis 
According to Taboada (2016), “sentiment analysis 
is a growing field at the intersection of linguistics 
and computer science that attempts to automatical-
ly determine the sentiment contained in text”. Sen-
timent is conceived as positive or negative evalua-
tion conveyed by linguistic expression, both lexical 
and grammatical. Beyond defining sentiment anal-
ysis, Taboada (2016) also presents a broad view of 
the contributions of Linguistics to automatic sen-
timent analysis. 

Two main approaches are used for automatic ex-
traction of sentiments: machine learning and lexi-
con based (Taboada, 2016). We will focus on the 
latter, as it is the type of method we intend to im-
plement in the subsequent stages of the project we 
are developing.  

Among the lexicon based approaches, Taboada 
(2016) mentions some dictionaries for sentiment 
analysis: SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010) 
catalogues about 38,000 words regarding their po-
larity; also based on polarity, Macquarie Semantic 
Orientation Lexicon (Mohammad et al., 2009) 
classifies almost 76,000 words; Subjectivity dic-
tionary (Wilson et al., 2009) not only presents the 
polarity of the words, but also groups them accord-
ing to their strength (strong positive, weak posi-
tive, neutral, weak negative, strong negative); Se-
mantic Orientation Calculator (SO-CAL) (Taboada 
et al., 2011) stratifies about 5,000 words in a 10-
point scale which ranges from -5 to +5. 

In Brazilian Portuguese, among many works 
that deal with sentiment analysis, Sentimeter-Br 
(Rosa, 2015) is a mechanism for calculating se-
mantic orientation. It is based on a dictionary of 
words divided according to the area they belong to, 

65



 
 
 

e.g. music, technology, beauty, business. The sys-
tem also implements a mechanism (Enhanced 
Sentimeter) which uses the user’s profile of a so-
cial media to calculate sentiment. 

2.2 Contributions from Discourse Analysis 
Regarding the problem presented in the introduc-
tion of the paper with the different evaluations of 
“right wing” held by the writers of the comments, 
which have opposite political views, Pêcheux 
(1975) states that words, expressions, propositions 
etc do not have a self-contained meaning. On the 
contrary, their meanings change according to the 
positions supported by the speakers who use them, 
i.e, their ideological formations. In (1) “right wing” 
has a negative evaluation because the comment 
was written by a person of left wing ideological 
formation. On the other hand, in (2) “right wing” 
has a positive evaluation because the writer of the 
comment belongs to a right wing ideological for-
mation. Thus, ideological formation is an im-
portant feature to be taken into account in order to 
identify sentiment towards propositions. 

Another important reflection from Discourse 
Analysis regards the difference between reference 
and référenciation2 proposed by Mondada and Du-
bois (1995). When one makes reference, he / she 
names in an objective way anything that is in the 
world (designatum, according to Lyons [1977]). 
On the other hand, in the référenciation process, 
the speaker builds discourse objects in a way that 
they can be categorized and recategorized. In (3) 
the writer of the comment, which was taken from a 
left wing Facebook page, uses the “communist 
doctrinators” NP in order to show how a group of 
right wing people refers to teachers. Obviously, it 
is not only naming. If it were like this, the group 
which is criticized in the comment would use the 
noun “teachers”. Actually, the “communist 
doctrinators” NP reveals the treatment of the right 
wing group towards the discourse object “teach-
ers”. External world class “teachers” is not affected 
by the way the right wing group refers to it, as 
“communist doctrinators” is a discourse object. 

 

                                                     
                                                       
2 We will use the French word “référenciation” (as Mondada 
and Dubois 1995) because there is not such word in English. 

(3) Por isso mesmo, para isso funcionar, é pre-
ciso demonizar a classe dos professores 
como “doutrinadores comunistas”, isto é, 
duas palavras que a direita adora usar. 

For this reason, for this to work, it is neces-
sary to demonize the class of the teachers as 
“communist doctrinators”, i.e., two words 
that right wing loves to use. 

In other words, in the view of référenciation, 
nouns and noun phrases do not only name a 
designatum, they also present an evaluation of the 
discourse object. 

2.3 Constructions and idioms 
Beyond nouns, adjectives, verbs, NPs, other forms 
should be investigated for a better understanding of 
sentiment in text. Constructions and idioms are 
widely used by speakers not only in face to face in-
teractions, but also on social media. 

According to Traugott and Trousdale (2013), 
constructions are form-meaning pairings and in-
clude morphemes, words, idioms, and abstract 
phrasal patterns (Goldberg, 2013; Hoffmann and 
Trousdale, 2013). 

The term “construction grammar” (CG hence-
forth) refers to a group of distinct frameworks 
which share some tenets, summarized by Goldberg 
(2013) as follows: 

 
i. Constructions are the basic units of 

grammar;  

ii. Semantic structure is associated directly 
with syntactic structure without trans-
formations or derivations; 

iii. Constructions form a network in which 
nodes are related by inheritance links; 

iv. Cross-linguistic variation can be ex-
plained in terms of domain-general cog-
nitive processes or by the functions of 
the constructions involved; 

v. Items and generalizations are part of the 
knowledge of language (this last tenet is 
shared by most, but not all approaches). 

66



 
 
 

Unlike Generative Grammar, CG considers 
grammar in a holistic way, i.e., no grammatical 
level is considered core or autonomous; a construc-
tion is formed by simultaneous work of phonology, 
morphosyntax, semantics and pragmatics (Traugott 
and Trousdale, 2013). 

3 Methodology  

The first step of the Methodology was to collect 
comments from public Facebook pages which dis-
cuss issues such as politics, education, religion, 
music, lifestyle etc. Nearly 1,000 comments were 
collected, segmented into EDUs3 and classified 
either as subjective (present an evaluation) or 
objective (do not present an evaluation). The latter 
were eliminated from the corpus.  

The remaining 649 EDUs were classified 
manually by two annotators as positive, negative or 
neutral, regarding the evaluation of a discourse ob-
ject. The words and expressions responsible for the 
evaluation were extracted manually and divided 
according to their formal classes. 

In Table 1 we present the quantity of words per 
class. Other features such as intensifiers, adverbs, 
interjections, signals of irony, laughing etc were 
also annotated but will not be discussed here as 
they do not refer directly to the main issue dis-
cussed in this paper. It is important to remark that 
words were counted only once, even if they were 
used more times in the corpus. Thus, the quantity 
in Table 1 refers to the quantity of words found 
and not to the amount of times they were used. 

                                                     
                                                       
3 “minimal building blocks of a discourse tree” (Carlson and 
Marcu, 2001). In general, EDUs are paratactic or hypotactic 
clauses, but not restrictive of completive clauses. 

4 Discussion and analysis 

In order to stress the importance of taking con-
structions into account in sentiment analysis, this 
Section is divided in two subsections: one for 
commonly investigated classes and forms such as 
nouns, adjectives, verbs, NPs, and one for con-
structions and idioms. 

4.1 Nouns, adjectives, NPs, verbs 
Within the view of référenciation, the speaker’s 
communicative intentions govern his / her linguis-
tic choices (Koch, 2002; 2007), as in example (4). 

 
(4) Escola é um depósito de criança, APENAS, 

no fundo ninguém tá nem aí pro que é ensi-
nado, só se interessam em ter um lugar pra 
deixar os “presentes de Deus” enquanto es-
tão trabalhando. Por isso que quando tem 
greve os pais ficam tão irados. 

School is a children warehouse, ONLY, ac-
tually nobody cares about what is taught, 
they are only interested in having a place to 
leave “God’s gifts” while they are working. 
That’s why parents get so mad when there 
is a teacher’s strike. 

In example (4) the writer of the comment quotes 
the opinion of people in general about Brazilian 
public schools, which are considered “depósito de 
criança” (“children warehouse”), i.e., a place 
where people leave their kids when they go to 
work. NP “depósito de criança” creates a discourse 
object which reveals a general conception about 
the designatum school. 

Although NP “presentes de Deus” (“God’s 
gifts”) carries nouns of positive semantic orienta-
tion, it is written between “quotation marks”, in a 
sarcastic way, which results in a negative evalua-
tion of that discourse object. In other words, the 
writer of the comment means that there are mo-
ments when children are a nuisance to parents, 
who are not interested in their education, but only 
in having a place to leave them while they are at 
work. 

Depreciatory collective nouns reveal the speak-
er’s negative evaluation of a discourse object, es-
pecially when the referent is human (Neves, 2000). 
It is the case of the noun “bando” (which could be 

Formal classes  N 
Nouns 136 
Adjectives 156 
Verbs 117 
Constructions 22 
Idioms 28 

 

Table 1:  Quantity of items per class. 
 

67



 
 
 

roughly translated into English as “gang”). In ex-
ample (5), scoping adjective “demente” (“dement-
ed, in English), it evaluates negatively a group of 
people. In example (6), it is used to convey nega-
tive evaluation of a group of “machos” (“chauvin-
ists”, in English), which are also strongly qualified 
in a negative manner as “asquerosos” (“loathful). 
 

(5) É só o reflexo de como viramos um bando 
de dementes. 

It is only the reflex of how we became a 
gang of demented. 

(6) Bando de macho asqueroso! 

Gang of loathful chauvinists! 

However, negative characteristics may be as-
sumed by a group and transformed into positive 
evaluation. That’s what happens with the expres-
sion “gang of crazy people”4, in example (7), used 
by the supporters of Brazilian football team Sport 
Club Corinthians as a motivation yell. 

 
(7) Aqui tem um bando de loucos, loucos por 

ti, Corinthians. 

Here there is a gang of crazy people, crazy 
for you, Corinthians. 

The comparison between examples (5) and (7) 
shows similarities – both NPs have the noun 
“gang” scoping an adjective from insanity seman-
tic field – and also differences – in example (5) the 
evaluation is negative, while, in example (7), the 
evaluation is positive. To explain the differences, 
we have to cite Pêcheux (1975) again, to whom the 
meanings of words change according to the posi-
tions supported by the speakers who use them. 

Nouns may lose their referential function in or-
der to express quality (Neves, 2000) and, in such 
use, they can convey negative or positive evalua-
tion. In example (8), noun “massa” (“mass”) is not 
used to refer to “matter with no definite shape”, but 
to qualify noun “página” (“page”) as “cool”. 
                                                     
                                                       
4 In Brazilian Portuguese, the NP “bando de loucos” (“gang of 
crazy people”) does not have the noun “people”, as the adjec-
tive “crazy” can be used as a noun. Roughly, the literal trans-
lation would be “gang of crazies”. 

 
(8) Aparece uma página que parece ser massa. 

A page that seems to be cool shows up. 

The same happens to noun “show” in example 
(9). Instead of naming a spectacle, it classifies the 
“debate” as “amazing, spectacular”. 

 
(9) O debate foi show. 

The debate was amazing. 

In example (10) noun “shit” qualifies noun 
“time” (“team”) in an extremely pejorative way. In 
examples (11) and (12), besides the the change of 
position in the NP, the negative evaluation as-
signed to noun “filme” (“film”) remains the same5. 
The possibility of such positional change is a par-
ticular characteristic of the grammar of Brazilian 
Portuguese. As it can be noticed, the translation in-
to English is not even possible. 

 
(10) Que time merda. 

*What a shit team.  

(11) Merda de filme. 

*Shit of film. (The appropriate translation 
would be “shitty film”.) 

(12) Filme de merda. 

*Film of shit. (The appropriate translation 
would be “shitty film”.) 

Adjectives have been widely investigated in sen-
timent analysis due to their nature. According to 
Taboada (2016), “adjectives convey much of the 
subjective content in a text”. However, not all ad-
jectives can be used to evaluate. Classifier adjec-
tives only subcategorize the nouns that they modi-
fy (Neves, 2000). As a result, they are not suitable 
for subjective evaluation, as in example (13), in 
which adjective “sexual” only specifies the type of 

                                                     
                                                       
5 In examples (10), (11) and (12), the correct translation would 
be “shitty”. As in Brazilian Portuguese the noun “merda” 
(“shit”) functions as an adjective, the same construction in 
English is ungrammatical. 

68



 
 
 

“option” (“opção”) mentioned by the writer of the 
comment. 
 

(13) O que que a gente tem a ver com a opção 
sexual do outro? 

What do we have to do with other people’s 
sexual options? 

On the other hand, qualifier adjectives, in a 
predication process, attribute properties to the 
nouns they modify. In example (14), the adjective 
assigns the quality “feliz” (“happy”) to anyone 
who fulfills the conditions presented in the subject 
clause. 
 

(14) Feliz é aquele que encontra a felicidade 
nos pequenos gestos. 

Happy is the one who finds happiness in the 
small gestures. 

Regarding syntactic use, adjectives can be pre-
dicative, as in example (15), in which “feio” (“ug-
ly”) is the nucleus of the VP, or adnominals, as in 
example (16), in which “louca” (“crazy”), 
“desequilibrada” (“unbalanced”) and 
“insuportável” (“unbearable”) modify noun 
“gente” (“people”) within the NP. 

 
(15) … se vier me perguntar se tu é feio… 

… if you ask us if you are ugly… 

(16) … gente muito louca, desequilibrada e in-
suportável… 

… very crazy, unbalanced and unbearable 
people… 

The semantic orientation of the NP is usually 
given by the adjective. In example (17), adjective 
“maravilhoso” (“wonderful”) is responsible for the 
positive semantic orientation of the NP, whilst in 
example (18) adjective “fake” is responsible for 
the negative semantic orientation of the NP. 

 
(17) Bar maravilhoso 

Wonderful pub 

(18) Sorriso falso 

Fake smile 

Verbs occupy the central role of a predication 
(Ilari and Basso, 2008). Thus, the correct identifi-
cation of the semantic orientation of a clause de-
pends to a great extent on the verb. 

Some verbs convey negative (“odeio” – “hate”) 
or positive (“adooooro” – “loooove”; “prefiro” – 
“prefer”) evaluation by their basic meaning, as in 
examples (19) and (20). 

 
(19) Pão com ovo. Adooooro. 

Bread with fried egg. I loooove it. 

(20) Eu não uso isso. Eu odeio. Prefiro meus 
tênis. 

I don’t wear this. I hate it. I prefer my ten-
nis shoes. 

On the other hand, evaluation conveyed by other 
verbs can only be identified by the analysis of their 
arguments. In example (21) and (22) verb 
“merecer” (“to deserve”) can point to a negative or 
to a positive evaluation, depending on the semantic 
orientation of its second argument (A2). In (21) 
semantic orientation is positive (“compliments”), 
while in (22) it is negative (“jail”).  

 
(21) Acompanho e continuarei acompanhando 

seu trabalho, que merece, sim, elogios em 
muitos pontos. 

I follow and I will keep on following your 
work, which deserves, yes, compliments in 
many aspects. 

(22) Ela merece cadeia. 

She deserves jail. 

However, there are constructions in which ob-
jects cannot be considered arguments of the verb. 
Neves (2002), following Ashby and Bentivoglio 
(1993), calls them “constructions with support 
verbs”. In such constructions, the object NP forms 
a predicate with the verb and thus the construction 
must be analyzed as a whole. In Brazilian Portu-
guese, the most productive verbs in such construc-
tions are “dar” (“to give”) and “fazer” (“to do”, “to 
make”). In example (23), constructions with sup-

69



 
 
 

port verb “dar” have opposite polarities, and the 
semantic orientations of the comment must be de-
termined by discourse structure (Taboada, 2016). 
Conjunction “e” (“and”) is usually associated with 
the idea of  additive parataxis. However, it has oth-
er uses in Brazilian Portuguese, such as signaling 
contrast (Camacho, 1999), which is the case in ex-
ample (23). 

 
(23) Tinha tudo pra dar errado e deu certo. 

It had everything to go wrong and it went 
right. 

Neves (2002) presents some reasons why speak-
ers use support verbs, such as the obtainment of 
more communicative adequacy, more semantic 
precision and more syntactic versatility. In exam-
ple (24), the construction with support verb pro-
vides more syntactic versatility by the determina-
tion of reflexive possession. 

 
(24) Os pais nunca se dão conta disso não, eles 

acham q o professor não faz mais do que a 
obrigação deles... e se quiser ganhar mais 
trabalhe mais 

Parents do not realize this, they think that 
teachers don’t do more than their obliga-
tion… and if teachers want to earn more, 
they have to work more. 

4.2 Constructions and idioms 
The construction presented in example (25) is used 
to convey positive evaluation. The noun 
“tatuadores” (“tattoo artists”) can be replaced by a 
variety of nouns which nominate, among other 
possibilities: i) professions such as “teachers”, “po-
licemen”, “doctors” etc; ii) human referents such 
as “mothers”, “students”, “children” etc; iii) ani-
mate referents, such as “dogs”, “cats”, “dolphins” 
etc; iv) inanimate referents, such as “cars”, 
“softwares”, “cell phones” etc; v) places such as 
“schools”, “churches”, “malls” etc. 

 
(25) Por mais tatuadores como esse… 

For more tattoo artists like this… 

In example (26), the construction conveys nega-
tive evaluation. In the first six clauses, the writer of 

the comment criticizes characteristics and actions 
of a politician. In the seventh clause, he / she pre-
sents the action which he / she considers to be the 
worst of all. In terms of argumentation, this con-
struction saves the strongest argument for last and 
can be represented as Não basta PREDICATION, tem 
que PREDICATION. 

 
(26) Não basta ser golpista, não basta ser cor-

rupto, não basta comprar a grande maioria 
dos parlamentares, não basta criar 14 mil 
cargos desnecessários, não basta conceder 
aumento desproporcional ao STF, não basta 
extinguir os ministérios da cultura e da pre-
vidência social: ele tem que aniquilar os di-
reitos sociais e trabalhistas! 

It’s not enough to be a state stroker, it’s not 
enough to be corrupt, it’s not enough to buy 
the majority of the parliamentarians, it’s not 
enough to create 14 thousand unnecessary 
public job roles, it’s not enough to grant a 
disproportionate pay rise to STF, it’s not 
enough to wipe out the ministries of culture 
and social care: he has to annihilate the so-
cial and labor rights! 

In idioms, words do not have independent mean-
ings and the idiosyncrasy (meaning cannot be pre-
dicted from form) must be stored in the speakers’ 
long-term memory (Jackendoff, 2013). In example 
(27), idiom “chutar cachorro morto” (literal trans-
lation: “to kick a dead dog”) in Brazilian Portu-
guese means being aggressive or even doing harm 
to somebody who is not able to defend him / her-
self and is insignificant to society. The idiom is 
used by the writer of the comment to convey a 
view of society towards teachers which is growing 
common: teachers are not important. 

 
(27) Mexer com professor é como chutar ca-

chorro morto, ninguém liga mais. 

Messing with teachers is like kicking a dead 
dog, nobody cares. 

In example (28), idiom “beijinho no ombro”, lit-
erally translated as “little kiss over the shoulder” 
has become one of the most widely used idioms in 
Brazil after it was used as the chorus and the title 
of a song by a popular Brazilian funk singer. A 

70



 
 
 

quick search on Google, for instance, leads to more 
than two million results. As it happens with idiom 
“chutar cachorro morto”, its meaning cannot be 
predicted from the form, as it expresses a gesture 
of superiority over envious people, negative people 
who only criticize, haters etc. In the context of the 
example, the writer of the comment uses the idiom 
“beijinho no ombro” in order to show that he / she 
does not care about peoples’ critics towards the 
Facebook page she follows. She sends to those 
people a “beijinho no ombro” to show that she is 
superior to their negative and critical behaviour. 

 
(28) Não curto página de escola, a única com a 

qual me identifiquei foi essa por justamente 
mostrar meus medos, anseios enquanto pro-
fessora. Se não estão satisfeitas, só lamento.  
Beijinho no ombro. 

I don’t follow pages of schools, the only 
one I identified myself with was this one 
exactly because it shows my fears, my 
yearnings as a teacher. If they are not happy 
with it, I’m sorry. Little kiss over the shoul-
der. 

5 Conclusion and future work 

This paper aimed at discussing some challenges 
found for the creation of a sentiment analysis dic-
tionary for Facebook comments in Brazilian Portu-
guese.   

The analysis of the corpus showed that the same 
words spoken by different people may have polar 
opposite semantic orientations. We also noticed 
that the writers of the comments use nouns and 
noun phrases not only to name some entity, but al-
so to build discourse objects in a way that the label 
they give to the discourse objects reveals an evalu-
ation. We propound reflections about such prob-
lems within the Discourse Analysis framework, 
mainly Pêcheux (1975) and Mondada and Dubois 
(1995). 

Besides taking into account reflections from 
Discourse Analysis, another suggestion of the pa-
per is to use assumptions from Construction 
Grammar to analyze constructions and idioms ra-
ther than only nouns, adjectives, NPs, verbs etc. 
The investigation of constructions and idioms can 
provide a better understanding of sentiment in text. 

In future works, we intend to expand the dic-
tionary and create a test corpus in order to try to 
create algorithms for automatic evaluation of sen-
timent of Facebook comments in Brazilian Portu-
guese. 

References  
W. J. Ashby and P. Bentivoglio. 1993. Information flow 

in spoken French and Spanish: a comparative study. 
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio 

Sebastiani. 2010. SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced 
Lexical Resource for Sentiment Analysis and 
Opinion Mining. Proceedings of the Seventh 
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’10), 0(January):2200–2204. 

Roberto Gomes Camacho. 1999. Estruturas 
coordenadas. In Maria Helena Moura Neves, editor, 
Gramática do português falado - volume 7, pages 
351–405. Humanitas/FFLCH/USP, S. Paulo. 

Lynn Carlson and Daniel Marcu. 2001. Discourse 
Tagging Reference Manual. Technical report, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles. 

Facebook. Company Info. Available at 
<www.facebook.com>. Accessed in <07/04/2017>. 

Adele E. Goldberg. 2013. Constructionist Approaches. 
In Elizabeth Closs Traugott and Graeme Trousdale, 
editors, The Oxford Handbook of Construction 
Grammar, pages 15–31. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford. 

Michael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday. 1985. An 
introduction to functional Grammar. Edward Arnold, 
Baltimore. 

Thomas Hoffmann and Graeme Trousdale. 2013. The 
Oxford Handbook of Construction Grammar. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 

Rodolfo Ilari and Renato M. Basso. 2008. O verbo. In 
Rodolfo Ilari and Maria Helena Moura Neves, 
editors, Gramática do português culto falado no 
brasil - volume 2, pages 163–365. Ed. da Unicamp, 
Campinas. 

Mikel Iruskieta, Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, and Mikel 
Lersundi. 2013. Establishing criteria for RST-based 
discourse segmentation and annotation for texts in 
Basque. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory:1–
32. 

Ray Jackendoff. 2013. Constructions in the parallel 
architecture. In Thomas Hoffmann and Graeme 
Trousdale, editors, The Oxford Handbook of 
Construction Grammar, pages 70–92. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 

Ingedore G. V. Koch. 2002. Desvendando os segredos 
do texto. Cortez Editora, S. Paulo. 

Ingedore G. V. Koch. 2007. O texto e a construção dos 
sentidos. Contexto, S. Paulo. 

71



 
 
 

John Lyons. 1977. Semantics.volume 2. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 

Saif Mohammad, Cody Dunne, and Bonnie Dorr. 2009. 
Generating high-coverage semantic orientation 
lexicons from overtly marked words and a thesaurus. 
EMNLP ’09 Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 
2(August):599–608. 

Lorenza Mondada and Danièle Dubois. 1995. 
Construction des objets de discours et cátegorisation: 
una approche des processus de référenciation. Tranel, 
23:273–302. 

Maria Helena Moura Neves. 2000. Gramática de Usos 
do Português. Ed. da Unesp, São Paulo. 

Maria Helena Moura Neves. 2002. Estudo das 
construções com verbo-suporte em português. In 
Ingedore G. V. Koch, editor, Gramática do português 
falado - volume 6, pages 209–238. Editora da 
Unicamp, Campinas, 2. ed. edition. 

Michel Pêcheux. 1975. Les vérités de la Palice. 
Maspero, Paris. 

Renata Lopes Rosa. 2015. Análise de sentimentos e 
afetividade extraídos das redes sociais. Ph.D. thesis, 
USP. 

Gwendolyn Seidman. 2014. Expressing the “true Self” 
on Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior, 
31(1):367–372. 

Maite Taboada. 2016. Sentiment Analysis: An Overview 
from Linguistics. Annual Review of Linguistics, 
2(1):325–347. 

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, 
Kimberly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-
Based Methods for Sentiment Analysis. 
Computational Linguistics, 37(2):267–307. 

Elizabeth Closs Traugott and Graeme Trousdale. 2013. 
Constructionalization and constructional changes. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford. 

R. E. Wilson, S. D. Gosling, and L. T. Graham. 2012. A 
Review of Facebook Research in the Social Sciences. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(3):203–
220. 

Theresa A. Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 
2009. Recognizing Contextual Polarity: an 
exploration of features for phrase-level sentiment 
analysis. Computational Linguistics, 35(3):399–433. 

72


