Proceedings of Knowledge Resources for the Socio-Economic Sciences and Humanities associated with RANLP-17, pages 26–30,

26

Varna, Bulgaria, 7 Sep 2017.

https://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-040-3_004

 

Educational Content Generation  

for Business and Administration FL Courses  

with the NBU PLT Platform 

Associate Prof. Dr. Maria STAMBOLIEVA 

Laboratory for Language Technologies, New Bulgarian University 

mstambolieva@nbu.bg 

 

 

 
 
 

Abstract 

The paper presents a project of the Labora-
tory  for  Language  Technologies  of  New 
Bulgarian University (NBU) – “E-Platform 
for Language Teaching (PLT)1” – the devel-
opment  of  corpus-based  teaching  content 
for  Business  English  courses. The  follow-
ing  methodological  issues  are  briefly  dis-
cussed to present the background for the de-
velopment of the platform:  1. problems of 
e-learning;  2.  problems  of  communicative 
foreign  language  teaching;  3.  problems  of 
teaching foreign languages for specific pur-
poses; 4. E-learning at NBU. The structure 
and functionalities of the platform are then 
outlined,  with  a  focus  on  corpus  develop-
ment and test generation in teaching foreign 
languages for specific purposes (TFLSP). 

 

1  E-learning 

E-learning is an important part of modern foreign 
language  acquisition.  The  Internet  abounds  in 
freely  accessible  language  tests,  graded  presenta-
tions of thematic vocabulary and grammar. It also 
offers freely  accessible  authentic texts,  audio and 
visual information – which can be used for the pur-
pose  of  language  learning.  Most  often  used  as  a 
supplement  to  traditional  classroom  tuition,  e-
learning can be an invaluable means of increasing 
                                                      
1 Project funded by the Central Fund for the Strategic De-
velopment of NBU for the period 2016-2017. 

the overall effectiveness of the process of teaching– 
especially  if  sufficiently  well  planned  and  con-
ceived as an integral part of this process. 

The  integration  of  digital  instruction  with  the 
traditional  educational  context  –  known  as 
“blended learning”, has been gaining ground since 
the early years of the new millennium. Bonk and 
Graham2 define it as the combination of “face-to-
face  instruction  with  computer  mediated  instruc-
tion”. The technological equipment and know-how 
of  teachers  and  students  now  being  more  or  less 
taken for granted, blended learning takes advantage 
of  the  versatility  of  the  Internet  as  a  medium  of 
communication. While providing opportunities for 
personalisation of educational content and individ-
ualisation  in  timing  and  pace,  effective  blended 
learning requires no less careful planning and prep-
aration  than  traditional  brick-and-mortar  classes; 
and the simple addition of available online videos 
or tests to existing educational content might lend 
a course flavor but will not necessarily increase its 
effectiveness.  

The need to plan and organise teaching mate-
rial has resulted in the development of educational 
platforms.  Platforms  with  ready-for-use  content 
are offered by many publishing houses specialis-
ing in foreign language teaching aids and are very 
popular  in  schools;  most  universities  however 
make use of their own platforms, where lecturers 
develop their own courses. The PLT educational 
content can be integrated in both. 

2  Bonk,  C.J.  &  Graham,  C.R.  (2006).  The  handbook  of 
blended  learning  environments:  Global  perspectives,  local 
designs. San Francisco: Jossey‐Bass/Pfeiffer. p. 5. 
 

27

Figure 1.   Structure of the platform: modules 

2  E-learning at NBU 

New  Bulgarian  University  is  unique  not  only  in 
Bulgaria, but also in the area of Central and Eastern 
Europe  in  that  1/  it  offers  its  students  over  120 
hours per semester of compulsory foreign language 
teaching and 2/ it makes extensive (again, compul-
sory) use of the Moodle educational platform.  

While Moodle is compulsory, not all of its func-
tionalities are made use of  by all lecturers. Some 
simply post additional reading, homework or short 
messages  to  the  group,  others  use  the  forum  for 
group discussions. The necessity to make fuller use 
of  the  platform  in  foreign  language  classes  arose 
from  a  recent  survey  showing  a  drop  in  student  
attendance and performance. Accordingly, the year 
2016  marked  the  development  of:  1/  a  unified 
“backbone” educational content for blended or dis-
tance learning for each CEFRL; 2/ the development 
of  the  PLT  as  an  additional  support  to  Moodle-
based general language courses and a main support 
to  courses  in  foreign  languages  for  specific  pur-
poses. One of the major aims  of the PLT project is 
to provide course support for lecturers and students 
in the over 50 BA programs of the university in the 
form  of  domain-specific  online  texts,  text-based 
exercises  and  tests  for  both  regular  and  distance-
learning programmes and courses. 

3  Teaching FL for specific purposes  

Following several successful pilot tests during the 
academic  year  2016/2017,  from  October  2017 
weekly PLT-based tuition will be available for stu-
dents taking courses in the “Applied Foreign Lan-
guages  for Administration  and  Management”  BA 
programme.  In designing the course, we have fol-
lowed  McDonough  and  J.S.  Shaw  (1993:  243ff.) 
who  define  the  ideal  system  for  teaching  foreign 
languages for specific purposes as one that allows 
individualisation  of  the  learning  process.  In  the 
usual conditions (classroom, group) such individu-
alisation can hardly be achieved: while the needs of 
the trainees are symmetrical, the groups are often 
heterogeneous – which can significantly reduce the 
motivation  of  the  learners.  As  P.  Hemingway 
(1987: 18) points out,  

“a mixed level class can be demotivating 
for students if they are not encouraged to 
work  to  their  own  limits,  and  enabled  to 
fully participate in the lesson. The student 
whose English is more advanced than the 
rest  may  feel  cut  off  from  the  group  if 
he/she  is  constantly  given  work  to  do 
alone, while the others catch up”. 

Foreign language teaching for specific purposes 
does not necessarily follow training in the general-
purpose language; it can successfully be conducted 
alongside with it, or even on its own (Cf. Dudley-
Evans & St. John, 1998: 4-5). It should provide the 
trainees  with  the  freedom  to  choose  the  learning 
content and provide them with appropriate teach-
ing material and sufficient training exercises. The 
learning process has a greater degree of autonomy 
and  greater  freedom  of  choice  as  to  when,  what, 
and how to study. The role of the lecturer is reduced 
to that of a professional consultant who designs the 
course, selects (possibly adapts) the teaching mate-
rials,  designs  and  arranges  the  exercises  to  them, 
checks and evaluates the work of the students. (Cf. 
Carver 1989: 134).  

4  Structure  and  functionalities  of  the 

Platform 

The PLT system comprises: 

  a repository of domain-specific texts, further 
classified  in  accordance  with  the  Common 
European Framework of Reference for Lan-
guages (CEFRL); 

  a module for corpus creation; 

  a linguistic data base integrating the results 
of  lemmatisation,  POS-tagging,  morphemic 
and  syntactic  analysis,  term  identification 
and  definition,  multiple-word  term  identifi-
cation; 

  a  set  of  test-generation  modules  generating 
drills based on: a. text degradation, b. reor-
dering, c. multiple matching; 

  a concordance and a parallel texts aligner.  

28

Figure 2. The PLT text classifier 

Figure 3. Generation of a Fill in the Blanks exercise in the PLT 

5  Creating  a  Domain-  and  CEFRL-

based corpus 

The corpus for the domain of Administration and 
Business is, for now, subdivided into four sub-cor-
pora – for the CEFRL levels A1, A2, B1 and B2 (to 
be extended shortly to C1 and C2). Most texts have 
been selected from freely accessible sites for busi-
ness,  business  news  and  business  writing.  In  as-
sessing difficulty levels, Laurence Anthony’s Ant-
WordProfiler3 is used alongside with personal ex-
pertise.  

The corpora can be united to form general do-
main-based  or  other  text  profile-based  corpora; 
they  can  also  be  split.  New  corpora  can  be  
created by corpus-merging operations or by docu-
ment selection.  

                                                      
3 http://www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antwordprofiler/ 
releases/AntWordProfiler141/help.pdf 

6  Task  Generation  and  the  Language 

Task Bank 

The platform allows the creation of a variety of lan-
guage drills of the following main types:  

  Text  degradation  exercises  based  on  lem-
mtisation (open the brackets using an appro-
priate  word form), POS tagging (e.g. fill in 
the blanks with an appropriate noun / verb / 
adjective  article  /  preposition,  etc.),  mor-
phemic analysis (e.g. select/type in an appro-
priate prefix/ suffix / root). The format of the 
exercises can be Drag-and-drop, Drop-down 
or Fill in (Open cloze). 

  Multiple  matching  of  terms  with  defini-
tions, synonyms, information from encyclo-

29

Figure 4. Exercises generated on the platform 

 

Figure 5. Text-based test 

Figure 6. Rearranging task (sentences in paragraph) 

pedia, translations –  whatever has been  en-
tered  in  the  definition  box  for  the  term 
marked  at  the  bottom  of  the  POS  analyser. 
While  the  methodology  of  communicative 
language  teaching  (CLT)  excludes  transla-
tion,  establishing  translation  equivalence  in 
terminology  is  an  important  element  of 
TFLSP  –  hence  the  option  for  translation 
equivalents of terms in the data base, plus the 

recent addition of a parallel texts aligner to 
the system (integration: in development). 

  Reordering  drills. The  platform  allows re-
ordering drills for words, phrases and clauses 
in sentence, sentences in paragraphs and par-
agraphs  in  text.  Exercises  can  be  edited,  if 
necessary,  both 
task-generation  
module and in the task bank.  

the 

in 

30

Figure 7. Terminology: Multiple choice 1 

7  Test generation 

The exercises are exported from the platform to a 
directory and, from there, imported into the educa-
tional platform used by the university, school, insti-
tute, publishing house, etc. In Moodle, they can be 
grouped in different ways in tests designed by the 
tutor.  These  tests  can  be  either  based  on  one  or 
more texts (and include a variety of lexical or gram-
matical exercises), or else on task types (e.g. mul-
tiple matching exercises for terminology, Fill in the 
blanks exercises for articles, etc.).   

Figure 6 above is a screenshot of a text-based 
test with 27 different tasks, where task 24 is a mul-
tiple  choice  drop-down  exercise  on  word  for-
mation. Task 18 in Figure 6 is a reordering exercise. 
The task in Figure 7 is a multiple choice exercise 
on  terminology. The  order in  which  the  tasks  ap-
pear in the test can be fixed or variable. Tests can 
be repeated a limited or unlimited number of times. 
 

8  Concluding remarks 

The  NBU  E-platform  for  language  teaching  is  a 
flexible, versatile tool which can be used for both 
education and research. In its application to foreign 
language teaching for specific purposes, it can suc-
cessfully  support  the  development  of  blended  or 
distant courses, offering most of the advantages of 
e-learning  over  bricks-and-mortar  classes:  abun-
dance of drilling material with special attention to 
structure/form and accuracy, individualisation and 
personalisation of the learning process, attention to 

the  learner’s  native  language  and  to  accuracy  of 
translation, development of self-reliance and moti-
vation, immediate student and tutor feedback and 
easy centralized monitoring.  

After less than a year of successful testing, the 
PLT is gradually becoming part and parcel of the 
general and specialised language teaching at NBU. 
The  creation  and  constant  development  of  the 
CEFRL corpus in the domain of business and ad-
ministration allows the introduction of PLT-based 
tuition from the academic year 2017/2018. 
 

References  

Anthony,  Laurence  2014.  http://www.laurence-
anthony.net/software/antwordprofiler/releases/Ant-
WordProfiler141/help.pdf 

   Bonk, C.J. & Graham, C.R. (2006). The handbook of 
blended  learning  environments:  Global  perspec-
tives, 
local  designs.  San  Francisco:  Jossey‐
Bass/Pfeiffer. p. 5. 

   Carver, D. 1983. Some propositions about ESP. The 

ESP Journal, 2, pp. 131-137. 

   Dudley-Evans, T, M. St John, 1998. Developments in 
ESP:  A  multi-disciplinary  approach.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

   Hemingway, P., 1986. Teaching a mixed-level class,  

Practical English Teaching, pp. 18-20. 

   McDonough, J., С. 1993. Shaw. Materials and Meth-

ods in ELT. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell. 

 

