



















































Projection of Argumentative Corpora from Source to Target Languages


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Argument Mining, pages 67–72
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 8, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Projection of Argumentative Corpora from Source to Target Languages

Ahmet Aker
University of Duisburg-Essen

a.aker@is.inf.uni-due.de

Huangpan ZHANG
University of Duisburg-Essen

huangpan.zhang@stud.uni-due.de

Abstract

Argumentative corpora are costly to cre-
ate and are available in only few languages
with English dominating the area. In this
paper we release the first publicly avail-
able Mandarin argumentative corpus. The
corpus is created by exploiting the idea of
comparable corpora from Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. We use existing cor-
pora in English and manually map the
claims and premises to comparable cor-
pora in Mandarin. We also implement a
simple solution to automate this approach
with the view of creating argumentative
corpora in other less-resourced languages.
In this way we introduce a new task of
multi-lingual argument mapping that can
be evaluated using our English-Mandarin
argumentative corpus. The preliminary
results of our automatic argument map-
per mirror the simplicity of our approach,
but provide a baseline for further improve-
ments.

1 Introduction

Identifying argument, i.e. claims and their asso-
ciated pieces of evidence (premises) in large vol-
umes of textual data has the potential to revolu-
tionarise our access to information. Argument
based search for information would for example
facilitate individual and organisational decision-
making, make learning more efficient, enable
quicker reporting on present and past events, to
name just a few broad applications. Even more
important is argument mining in the multi-lingual
context, by which argument based search would be
available to people in the language of their prefer-
ence.

Argument mining is a new, but rapidly grow-
ing area of research within Computational Lin-
guistic that has gained a great popularity in the
last five years. For instance, since 2014 the meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL) is hosting a workshop specifically dedi-
cated to Argument Mining.1 Current studies report
methods for argument mining in legal documents
(Reed et al., 2008), persuasive essays (Nguyen
and Litman, 2015), Wikipedia articles (Levy et al.,
2014; Rinott et al., 2015), discussion fora (Swan-
son et al., 2015), political debates (Lippi and Tor-
roni, 2016) and news (Sardianos et al., 2015; Al-
Khatib et al., 2016). In terms of methodology, su-
pervised machine learning is a central technique
used in all these studies. This assumes the avail-
ability of data sets – argumentative texts – to train
and test the argument mining models. Such data
sets are readily available in English and – al-
though in comparably smaller quantities – in very
few European languages such as German or Ital-
ian. Languages other than these are currently ne-
glected. We are only aware of the study conducted
by Chow (2016) who manually annotated Chinese
news editorial paragraphs about whether they con-
tain an argument or not. However, the boundaries
of the arguments and their claims and premises
were not annotated. Due to this lack of data the
research and development of argumentation min-
ing outside English and few European languages
is very limited, rendering multi-lingual argument
mining and language independent argument based
search impossible.

In this research we aim to fill this gap. We
aim to map existing argument annotations from
a source language to a target language. For this
purpose an ideal situation would be if there ex-
isted parallel documents where the source docu-

1http://argmining2016.arg.tech/

67



ments are annotated for arguments and where ev-
ery sentence in the source document had a transla-
tion in the target document. In this case one could
easily map any argumentative annotation from the
source language to the target one. However, paral-
lel data are sparse. In particular there exist no an-
notated argumentative corpora with parallel doc-
uments in any other language, expect the one de-
scribed by Peldszus and Stede (2015) who report
argumentative microtexts corpora in German that
is also translated into English. Instead, inspired
by the statistical machine translation (SMT) meth-
ods, we explore the idea of comparable corpora
to obtain argumentative data sets. A compara-
ble corpus contains pairs of documents written in
two different languages. The document pairs usu-
ally share the same topic but the documents in
a pair are not necessarily entirely translations of
each other. However, they may share few sen-
tences that are translation of each other. Related
work has shown the usefulness of such corpora
for training SMT system for under-resourced lan-
guages, cross-lingual information retrieval and as-
sisted machine translation (Marton et al., 2009;
Aker et al., 2013; Hashemi and Shakery, 2014; Ku-
mano et al., 2007; Sharoff et al., 2006; Aker et al.,
2012; Skadiņa et al., 2012; Munteanu and Marcu,
2005, 2002; Rapp, 1999). Given the difficulty and
the cost of creating an argumentative corpus, ex-
tracting arguments from comparable corpora by
automatically mapping arguments from the source
language corpus to their translations in the target
language seems an attractive avenue. In this work,
we take a preliminary step to evaluating the viabil-
ity of such an approach.

This paper reports on the first Mandarin argu-
mentative corpus that is obtained using compara-
ble corpora. We make use of the existing corpora,
in which English documents are annotated for ar-
guments, i.e. where sentences within the docu-
ments are marked as claims and premises. We
manually map these English sentences to the tar-
get documents, by determining sentences in Man-
darin that are translations of the English argumen-
tative sentences. In addition, we report the results
of our attempt to automatise this manual process
of cross-lingual argument mapping. This data set
will be publicly available for the research commu-
nity.

Overall the paper contributes the following:

• We make available a first freely available ar-

gumentative corpus of Mandarin, also con-
taining projected argumentative sentences
from English to Mandarin comparable arti-
cles.

• We introduce a new task of creating multilin-
gual argumentative corpora based on the idea
of mapping argumentative sentences between
articles that are comparable. Our manually
generated data can be used to evaluate per-
formance of automatic approaches.

• We establish and evaluate the possibility of
obtaining argumentative corpora in any lan-
guage with lower cost. To this end we pro-
pose a first baseline system for mapping En-
glish argumentative sentences into Mandarin.

2 Data

We work with the argumentative data published
by Aharoni et al. (2014). The data contains the
annotation of English Wikipedia articles for topic
specific claims called Context Dependent Claims
(CDCs) and premises referred as Context Depen-
dent Evidence (CDE). A topic is a short phrase
and frames the discussion within the article (Levy
et al., 2014). A CDC is a general, concise state-
ment that directly supports or contests the given
topic (Levy et al., 2014). A CDE is a text segment
that directly supports a claim in the context of the
topic (Rinott et al., 2015). The data released in
2014 contains 1392 labeled claims for 33 different
topics, and 1291 labeled premises for 350 distinct
claims in 12 different topics (Aharoni et al., 2014).
The average number of premises for each claim is
3.69.

To create the comparable corpora we used the
inter-language links provided by Wikipedia to link
the English articles to the articles in the target lan-
guage Mandarin. The original data has 315 En-
glish articles of which have 160 corresponding
Mandarin articles. These 160 pairs of English-
Mandarin articles build the basis for mapping ar-
guments from the English to Mandarin.

3 Manual mapping

In our manual process we first mapped Context
Dependent Claims (CDCs) and then for each suc-
cessfully mapped CDC its Context Dependent Ev-
idence (CDEs). To do this we first automati-
cally determined the sentences within the English
Wikipedia articles that contained those CDCs and

68



Language CDC CDE
Only English 1392 1291
English-Mandarin 79 27

Table 1: Statistics about the CDCs and CDEs.

CDEs.2 Next, we manually marked sentences that
convey the same meaning as the English argumen-
tative sentences. This process was performed by
an annotator who is a native speaker of Mandarin
and fluent in English.3

Table 1 summarizes the results of this pro-
cess. In total 79 CDCs out of 1392 (5.7%)
were mapped. These mappings were found in
34 English-Mandarin article pairs. The remaining
126 article pairs did not share any argumentative
sentences. For the 79 CDCs we also analysed their
premises (CDEs) and repeated the mapping pro-
cess to determine corresponding Mandarin CDEs.
In total we found 27 CDEs belonging to 18 CDCs.
Table 2 shows an example CDC along with its
CDEs in both languages.

Compared to the English the number of CDCs
and CDEs mapped into Mandarin is substantially
smaller. We have noted three major reasons for
this data reduction:

• No article to match an English one: In this
case there is no Mandarin article to match
an English one. In most cases this is due
to the topic of the article being very specific,
so there are only limited language versions
available. This is the reason why only 160
Mandarin articles could be identified for 315
English articles.

• Dissimilar contents: In this case there
is a matched Mandarin article for the En-
glish one, but the contents of the arti-
cle are not similar. This happens in ar-
ticles which talk about topics whose con-
tent is country specific. Like Google
China (https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Google_China) that talks about
country specific events or government con-
trol wheres the corresponding English ver-
sion does not contain any of Mandarin topics.

2In the data of (Aharoni et al., 2014) few CDCs and CDEs
go over sentence boundaries. We ignore such cases and focus
only on those that are bordered by a single sentence.

3Note that the annotation or mapping does not contain ex-
act boundary information of the actual argument but only that
the Mandarin sentence conveys similar meaning as its English
counterpart.

• Missing sections: The matched Mandarin ar-
ticle has missing sections. When the English
claims are in those missing parts then there is
no corresponding Mandarin mapping.

In a final step it was important to verify that
the matched argument pairs are indeed compara-
ble. This assessment was performed by three na-
tive Mandarin speakers fluent in English educated
to post-graduate level. Their task was to indi-
cate whether the sentences containing claims and
premises in English translate into Mandarin claims
and premises identified by our annotator. These
assessors worked independently of each other.
Only one argument was judged as not being an
identified translation. The assessors agreed on all
identified translation with our annotator and with
each other, leading to the inter-annotator agree-
ment of kappa = 1 based on Cohen’s kappa.

4 Automatic mapping

As our manual effort indicates, there is a substan-
tial reduction in data set, when comparable cor-
pora are used to identify arguments that match
in source and target languages. For this reason,
an automatic approach to argument matching is
mandatory in order to achieve larger data set sizes
for multi-lingual argument mining approaches. In
addition, successfull automatation of matching
would open up the possibiity of creation argumen-
tative corpora from any less-resourced language
for which comparable corpora are available.

To evaluate the viability of an automatic ap-
proach and create a first benchmark we also
performed a simple automatic mapping of En-
glish CDCs and CDEs into Mandarin. Our ap-
proach relies on automatic machine translation
using MOSES (Koehn et al., 2007) and Google
translate4.

We trained MOSES using the publicly avail-
able parallel corpora from the HIT IR-lab5. For
each English article we first translate all CDCs and
CDEs into Mandarin. Next, we compare each of
those translated argumentative pieces of text with
every sentence from the corresponding Mandarin
article. Our comparison is based on cosine simi-
larity without stop-word removal. To perform to-
kenisation we used THULAC6 an efficient Chi-

4https://translate.google.com/
5http://ir.hit.edu.cn/demo/ltp/

Sharing_Plan.htm
6https://github.com/thunlp/THULAC

69



English Mandarin
CDC there was a connection between video games and violence 暴力事件与电子游戏之间有着必然的联系
CDE 1 Academic studies have attempted to find a connection be-

tween violent video games and the rate of violence and
crimes from those that play them; some have stated a con-
nection exists

不少学术研究试图找出一些人的犯罪行为
同他们玩电子游戏行为之间的联系，有些
研究表明这种联系是存在的

CDE 2 Incidents such as the Columbine High School massacre in
1999 have heightened concerns of a potential connection
between video games and violent actions

如在1999年的科伦拜校园事件中，有人认
为凶手的暴力行为与电子游戏之间就存在
潜在的联系

Table 2: Example CDCs and CDEs.

nese lexical analyser.
We evaluate the performance using accuracy of

our automatic mapping solution in retrieving cor-
rect pairs. For each CDC and CDE we check
whether the most similar Mandarin sentence (ac-
cording to cosine similarity) is also the correct
pair. If yes, this is regarded as correct mapping,
otherwise it is marked as wrong. Our evaluation
results give us an accuracy of 24% for MOSES
based translation and 49% for Google based trans-
lation. The Google based results are substantially
better than those obtained through MOSES trans-
lation. This is because the MOSES decoder fails
to translate many cases correctly.

5 Discussion

Our simple approach to tackling the automatic
mapping of CDCs and CDEs achieves very low
accuracy scores. Although the accuracy of the ar-
gument mapper based on the Google translation is
substantially higher than the one achieved through
MOSES translation, 49% of correct matches are
still not satisfactory. This indicates that the task
of argument matching in comparable corpora re-
quires more sophisticated methods. One venue
for improvement could be to extract richer fea-
tures capturing sequential translations. Another
direction for improvement could be towards a two
phases approach. In the first phase one could re-
duce the Mandarin sentences by using an argu-
mentative cue filter. In the second phase rich fea-
tures could be extracted from the remaining candi-
dates to perform the final pairing.

In terms of size the closest corpus to the one pre-
sented in this work is the one reported by Boltužić
and Šnajder (2014) with 300 sentences. However,
despite its small size at present, our corpus has im-
portant potential applications. Apart from train-
ing initial Mandarin argument mining solutions
it can serve as a benchmark data for the task of
mapping argumentative sentences from English to

Mandarin. Systems performing with high preci-
sion on this data can be used to extend the given
corpus by (1) determining annotated documents in
the source language, (2) finding comparable docu-
ments in Mandarin and (3) using the mapping tool
to map the source annotations to Mandarin.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we release the first Mandarin ar-
gumentative corpus containing Context Depen-
dent Claims (CDCs) and Context Dependent Evi-
dence (CDE). We obtained the corpus by manually
mapping existing CDCs and CDEs from English
Wikipedia articles to corresponding Mandarin ar-
ticles. With this corpus we provide the basis for
developing first argumentation mining solutions
for Mandarin. The data can be downloaded from
git-hub.7

By tackling the need for multi-lingual argu-
ments in this paper we also introduced a new task:
mapping argumentative sentences from one lan-
guage to another. With this task we open up pos-
sibilities for obtaining argumentative resources in
less-resourced languages with substantially lower
cost than the manual effort.

Finally, we introduced a simple automatic tool
for performing the argument mapping between
English and Mandarin. The modest accuracy re-
sults achieved by this simple approach indicate
that more sophisticated methods are necessary for
argument mapping. We plan to improve the per-
formance of our tool by investigating richer fea-
tures and also the idea of filtering out sentences in
the Mandarin languages that bare no argumenta-
tion. Our method reported in this work is a base-
line system for argument mapping, and its scores
can serve as a benchmark for further more sophis-
ticated methods.

7https://github.com/ahmetaker/
MandarinArguments

70



Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant No.
GRK 2167, Research Training Group “User-
Centred Social Media”.

References
Ehud Aharoni, Anatoly Polnarov, Tamar Lavee, Daniel

Hershcovich, Ran Levy, Ruty Rinott, Dan Gutfre-
und, and Noam Slonim. 2014. A benchmark dataset
for automatic detection of claims and evidence in the
context of controversial topics. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining. pages
64–68.

Ahmet Aker, Evangelos Kanoulas, and Robert J
Gaizauskas. 2012. A light way to collect compara-
ble corpora from the web. In LREC. Citeseer, pages
15–20.

Ahmet Aker, Monica Lestari Paramita, and Robert J
Gaizauskas. 2013. Extracting bilingual terminolo-
gies from comparable corpora. In ACL (1). pages
402–411.

Khalid Al-Khatib, Henning Wachsmuth, Johannes
Kiesel, Matthias Hagen, and Benno Stein. 2016.
A news editorial corpus for mining argumentation
strategies. In Proceedings of the 26th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Filip Boltužić and Jan Šnajder. 2014. Back up your
stance: Recognizing arguments in online discus-
sions. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Ar-
gumentation Mining. Citeseer, pages 49–58.

Marisa Chow. 2016. Argument identification in chi-
nese editorials. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT .
pages 16–21.

Homa B Hashemi and Azadeh Shakery. 2014. Min-
ing a persian–english comparable corpus for cross-
language information retrieval. Information Pro-
cessing & Management 50(2):384–398.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the ACL on
interactive poster and demonstration sessions. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 177–
180.

Tadashi Kumano, Hideki Tanaka, and Takenobu Toku-
naga. 2007. Extracting phrasal alignments from
comparable corpora by using joint probability smt
model. Proceedings of TMI .

Ran Levy, Yonatan Bilu, Daniel Hershcovich, Ehud
Aharoni, and Noam Slonim. 2014. Context depen-
dent claim detection .

Marco Lippi and Paolo Torroni. 2016. Argument min-
ing from speech: Detecting claims in political de-
bates. In AAAI. pages 2979–2985.

Yuval Marton, Chris Callison-Burch, and Philip
Resnik. 2009. Improved statistical machine trans-
lation using monolingually-derived paraphrases. In
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1-Volume 1. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 381–390.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2002.
Processing comparable corpora with bilingual suffix
trees. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on
Empirical methods in natural language processing-
Volume 10. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 289–295.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguistics
31(4):477–504.

Huy V Nguyen and Diane J Litman. 2015. Extract-
ing argument and domain words for identifying ar-
gument components in texts. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Argumentation Mining. pages 22–
28.

Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede. 2015. An an-
notated corpus of argumentative microtexts. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Argumentation,
Lisbon, Portugal, June. to appear.

Reinhard Rapp. 1999. Automatic identification of
word translations from unrelated english and german
corpora. In Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
Computational Linguistics. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 519–526.

Chris Reed, Raquel Mochales Palau, Glenn Rowe, and
Marie-Francine Moens. 2008. Language resources
for studying argument. In Proceedings of the 6th
conference on language resources and evaluation-
LREC 2008. ELRA, pages 91–100.

Ruty Rinott, Lena Dankin, Carlos Alzate Perez,
Mitesh M Khapra, Ehud Aharoni, and Noam
Slonim. 2015. Show me your evidence-an automatic
method for context dependent evidence detection. In
EMNLP. pages 440–450.

Christos Sardianos, Ioannis Manousos Katakis, Geor-
gios Petasis, and Vangelis Karkaletsis. 2015. Ar-
gument extraction from news. NAACL HLT 2015
page 56.

Serge Sharoff, Bogdan Babych, and Anthony Hartley.
2006. Using comparable corpora to solve problems
difficult for human translators. In Proceedings of the
COLING/ACL on Main conference poster sessions.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
739–746.

71



Inguna Skadiņa, Ahmet Aker, Nikos Mastropavlos,
Fangzhong Su, Dan Tufis, Mateja Verlic, Andrejs
Vasiļjevs, Bogdan Babych, Paul Clough, Robert
Gaizauskas, et al. 2012. Collecting and using com-
parable corpora for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Is-
tanbul, Turkey.

Reid Swanson, Brian Ecker, and Marilyn Walker. 2015.
Argument mining: Extracting arguments from on-
line dialogue. In Proceedings of 16th Annual Meet-
ing of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and
Dialogue (SIGDIAL 2015). pages 217–227.

72


