



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 435–446,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Demystifying Topology of Autopilot Thoughts: A
Computational Analysis of Linguistic Patterns of Psychological

Aspects in Mental Health

Bibekananda Kundu and Sanjay Kumar Choudhury
Language Technology, ICT and Services

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, Kolkata
E-mail: {bibekananda.kundu,sanjay.choudhury}@cdac.in

Abstract

The paper investigates topology of un-
controlled dynamic depressive thoughts
which is popularly known as “autopi-
lot” in the psychology domain. Per-
sistent homology, a mathematical tool
from algebraic topological has been
applied on Vector Space representa-
tion of tweets generated by users hav-
ing neurotic personality for determin-
ing the topological structure of autopi-
lot thoughts. State-of-the-art machine
learning techniques leveraging linguis-
tic resources akin to LIWC, WordNet-
Affect and SentiWordNet have been
applied for identifying neurotic per-
sonality from different Twitter users.
An initiative has been taken for em-
powering Neuro Linguistic Program-
ming (Bandler and Grinder, 1975; Ban-
dler and Grinder, 1979; Bandler and
Andreas, 1985) and other psychother-
apy techniques using Natural Language
Processing in the domain of Mental
Health.

1 Introduction
“Wherever there are sensations, ideas, emo-
tions, there must be words”

— Swami Vivekananda.
We use language for thinking, experienc-

ing, expressing, communicating and problem
solving. So, to analyze one’s thought pro-
cess, language is a symbolic medium. In psy-
chotherapy, language is considered as a pri-
mary tool to understand patients’ experiences
and express therapeutic interventions (Pen-

nebaker et al., 2003). All psychological in-
terventions rely on the power of language.
Psychotherapists rarely intervene directly in
their client’s lives, they create changes in the
thought process through conversation (Vil-
latte et al., 2015). According to Relational
Frame Theory (RFT) (Greenway et al., 2010),
people use linguistic frames to understand the
world around them, and subsequently solve
problems. RFT has been suggested as an
approach to understanding natural language
systems. The theory lends itself well to as-
sessment with Natural Language Processing
(NLP) precisely because it relies on under-
standing interaction between sensation, affect,
language, and behaviour. When someone uses
language, they are labelling their experience.
For example, someone might tweet “I need to
escape this world before I get crushed.” indi-
cating a fear based affective response. We are
planning to use NLP to assess this label (Pen-
nebaker et al., 2015). Simply labelling events
and their attributes as ‘positive’ or ‘negative’
increases associated memories and emotional
salience. This type of relational network can
be evoked with any number of internal or ex-
ternal stimuli, triggering the aforementioned
internal feedback loop, and leading to psy-
chological distress. For example, describing a
‘negative’ event such as a trauma can evoke
intense fear and sadness and subsequent sob-
bing (Miner et al., 2016; Althoff et al., 2016).
The person suffering from distress actually us-
ing a model of world which is very limited
and in this world he/she find no appropri-
ate choice from the options available to their
model of world (Bandler and Grinder, 1975;
Bandler and Grinder, 1979; Bandler and An-435



dreas, 1985). Therefore, there is a requirement
of expanding the model of world i.e. impro-
vise the model to a better model which has
more options. Therefore, the therapeutic tech-
nique would be somehow transforming the ex-
isting model to a better model using a meta-
model and transformational grammar. The
linguistic theory plays a vital role to under-
stand the client model and transform it us-
ing transformational grammar (Bandler and
Grinder, 1975). Therefore, one of the key con-
cerns of psychotherapy is to understand topol-
ogy of the maladaptive autopilot thoughts and
changing the topology of thought process us-
ing Mindfulness (Collins et al., 2009), Collab-
orative Empiricism (Beck and Emery, 1979;
Kazantzis et al., 2013) and other talk ther-
apy techniques (Pawelczyk, 2011; Ebert et al.,
2015; Mayo-Wilson and Montgomery, 2013;
Mohr et al., 2013). In this regards, un-
derstanding of topology of uncontrolled dy-
namic depressive thought (known as “autopi-
lot thought” in psychology) is important for
evaluating mental health of patients. After a
brief discussion on psychological background
and motivation behind the work, we will un-
derstand how we can represent topology of
thought in the next section.

2 How to Represent Topology of
Thought

We are considering written text as a sym-
bolic representation of thoughts. To under-
stand the topology of “autopilot thoughts”,
we have collected tweets of neurotic person-
ality from Twitter applying a hybrid approach
combining Deep Learning based classification,
KL-Divergence (Manning and Schütze, 1999)
based Timeline Similarity Analysis and Rule-
based sentiment analysis technique leveraging
WordNet-Affect1 , SentiWordNet2 and psy-
cholinguistic resource akin to LIWC3. Detailed
data collection procedure has been discussed
in the section 3 and 4 .We are interested to
study the representation of words used by neu-
rotic persons in the Vector Space using Word
Embedding (Mikolov et al., 2013; Mesnil et
al., 2013) and topology (Sizemore et al., 2016)

1http://wndomains.fbk.eu/wnaffect.html
2http://sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it
3http://liwc.wpengine.com/

of these semantically embedded words using
persistent homology (Zhu, 2013; Kaczynski et
al., 2004). We have intuition that timeline of
neurotic person contains different topological
structure than timeline of user having other
personality. Studies say that neurotic per-
son uses more first person pronoun, less so-
cial words, more negative emotion words (Pen-
nebaker, 2011). An introvert person uses sin-
gle topic, discusses more regarding problem,
uses few self-references, many tentative words,
many negation as compare to extrovert per-
son (Mairesse and Walker, 2007). Topological
data analysis using persistent homology has
been discussed in the section 5. In the next
section, we will discuss our data collection pro-
cedure from Twitter.

3 How to Collect Tweets of
Neurotic Persons

The proposed approach utilizes an ensem-
ble of state-of-the-art machine learning tech-
niques based on psycholinguistic features to
detect distress users (having neurotic person-
ality) from their social media text. We have
used Twitter API to search in the Twitter
using some seed words/phrases like “awful”,
“terrible”, “lousy”, “hate”, “lonely”, “hope-
less”, “helpless”, “crap”, “sad”, “miserable”,
“tired”, “sleep”, “hurt”, “pain”, “kill”, “die”,
“dying”, “stressed”, “frustrated”, “irritated”,
“depressed” etc. and name of some antide-
pression drugs like “Sertraline”, “Citalopram”,
“Clonazepam”, “Propanol”, “Prozac”, “Zopi-
clone”, “Fluoxetine”, “Quetiapine”, “Hydrox-
yzine” etc. Next, we have filtered out the
tweets starting with RT to avoid considering
retweets. We have also removed tweets con-
taining url. Thereafter, these tweets are sent
to (in house developed) Psychological Anno-
tation Interface for manual annotation. Fig-
ure 1 shows screenshot of the interface along
with some examples of negative tweets. An
annotator can label a tweet considering three
aspects Viz:
(a) Personal/Impersonal Emotion Labelling

(b) Polarity Labelling

(c) Psychological Annotation
Individual words in a tweet are annotated ac-
cording to Psychological Process as discussed436



Figure 1: Psychological Annotation Interface

in (Pennebaker et al., 2015). Special care
has been taken during annotation to find out
“Linguistic Marker of Depression” (Bucci and
Freedman, 1981; Pyszcynski and Greenberg,
1987) in the tweet. Pronouns tell us where
people focus their attention. If someone uses
the pronoun “I”, it’s a sign of self-focus. De-
pressed people use the word “I” much more
often than emotionally stable people (Pen-
nebaker, 2011; Ramirezesparza et al., 2008;
Nguyen et al., 2014). Researchers have found
that people who frequently use first-person
singular words like “I”, “me” and “myself” are
more likely to be depressed and have more in-
terpersonal problems than people who often
say “we” and “us”. Using LIWC2001, (Stir-
man and Pennebaker, 2001) found that sui-
cidal poets were more likely to use first per-
son pronouns (e.g., “I”, “me”, “mine”) and
less first plural pronouns (e.g., “we”, “ours”)
throughout their writing careers than were
non-suicidal poets. These findings supported
the social engagement/disengagement model
of depression, which states that suicidal in-
dividuals have failed to integrate into society
in some way, and are therefore detached from
social life (Durkheim, 1951). Similarly, (Rude
et al., 2004) found that currently depressed

students used more first person singular pro-
nouns, more negative emotional words, and
slightly fewer positive emotion words in their
essays about coming to college, relative to stu-
dents who had never experienced a depressive
episode. These results are in line with (Pysz-
cynski and Greenberg, 1987) self-awareness
theory. Therefore, in our Psycho-logical An-
notation Interface, we have implemented a fea-
ture to highlight tweets with red back ground
containing First Person Personal Pronoun i.e.
“I”. Focus on temporal orientation of people
that is how often they emphasize the past,
present and future is necessary because it af-
fects their health and happiness (Zimbardo
and Boyd, 2008). We are interested the pro-
portion of a user’s tweets that the analytic
finds evidence in: Insomnia and Sleep Dis-
turbance which is often a symptom of men-
tal health disorders (Weissman et al., 1996;
De Choudhury et al., 2013), so we have cal-
culated the proportion of tweets that a user
makes between midnight and 4 am accord-
ing to their local time-zone. Therefore, dur-
ing annotation, special attention should be
given on the time perspective of the tweets.
Moreover, in the interface we have highlighted
tweets in grey colour that have been gener-

437



ated midnight assuming that the user have
sleeping problem or insomnia. From all la-
belled tweets, unique users name are auto-
matically extracted for analysis of their time-
lines. Thereafter tweets are extracted from
unique users’ timeline and annotated using the
aforementioned procedure. After annotation
of all tweets from a user timeline, the per-
sonality of tweet user is labelled in one of the
nine classes viz.Extravert, Introvert, Emotion-
ally Stable, Neuroticism, Agreeable, Disagree-
able,Conscientious,Unconscientious and Open
to Experience. This personality classes are
basically extended form of “Big Five Per-
sonality” (John and Srivastava, 1999) classes.
We are more interested for the users those
are labelled as “Neuroticism” after analyzing
the tweets from their timeline. Following the
above mentioned procedure, we have created
our training data. Manual analysis of tweets
collected from users’ timeline reveals that in-
formation contains in two neurotic users is
similar. Moreover, people discuss similar prob-
lem among their friend circles, therefore auto-
matic searching “friend” and “followers” of a
neurotic users increases the chance of getting
more data of similar nature automatically.
In this way collected training data has been
used to train our ensemble learner for detect-
ing depression from social media text in order
to collect more tweets from neurotic users. In
the next session, we will discuss the depression
detection technique using an ensemble classi-
fier.

4 Depression Detection from Social
Media Text

4.1 Why Social Media
Currently, depression is primarily assessed
through surveys. The standard approach to
diagnosing psychological health disorders is
through a series of clinically administered di-
agnostic interviews and tests (Weathers and
Davidson, 2001). However, assessment of pa-
tients using these tests is expensive and time-
consuming. Furthermore, the stigma associ-
ated with mental illnesses motivates inaccu-
rate self-reporting by affected individuals and
their family members, thus making the tests
unreliable. Commonly, the evaluation of a pa-
tient is typically performed through the use

of standardized questionnaires like Beck De-
pression Inventory (BDI)4 , Big Five Inven-
tary (BFI) (John and Srivastava, 1999) etc. A
patient’s answers are then compiled and com-
pared with disease classification guidelines,
such as the International Classification of Dis-
eases or the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
(DSM), to guide the patient’s diagnosis. How-
ever, these diagnostic methods are not pre-
cise and have high rates of false positives and
false negatives. In addition, societal and finan-
cial barriers prevent many people from seek-
ing medical attention (Michels et al., 2006).
Many societies around the world stigmatize
and discriminate against people with mental
disorders, contributing to the unwillingness of
individuals to acknowledge the problem and
seek help (Fabrega, 1991). While psycholog-
ical treatments for depression can be effec-
tive (Cuijpers et al., 2008), they are often
plagued by access barriers and high rates of
attrition (Mohr et al., 2010). Internet inter-
ventions have been touted as an antidote to ac-
cess barriers, but they appear to produce more
modest outcomes (Andersson and Cuijpers,
2009), in part also due to high attrition (Chris-
tensen et al., 2009). In recent years, there
has been a tremendous growth in social inter-
actions on the Internet via social networking
sites and online discussion forums. In contrast
to clinical tests, the Internet is an ideal, anony-
mous medium for distressed individuals to re-
late their experiences, seek knowledge, and
reach out for help. Social media is an emerg-
ing tool that may assist research in this area,
as there exists the possibility of passively sur-
veying and then subsequently influencing large
groups of people in real time. (Ruder et al.,
2011) have shown that some Facebook users
do, in fact, post suicide notes on their profiles,
exposing the potential for suicide related re-
search in social media. The amount of publicly
available information spread across the realm
of social media is extensive. We prefer Twit-
ter because of its greater public availability of
data, larger user base, and it being a platform
of personal expression. Users generate over
400 million tweets per day (Bennett, 2012).
This large reservoir of information regarding

4http://www.hr.ucdavis.edu/asap/pdf_files/
Beck_Depression_Inventory.pdf438



people’s daily lives and behaviours, if handled
correctly, can be used to study depression, sui-
cide and possibly intervene. Twitter is also
used for keeping in touch with friends and col-
leagues, sharing interesting information within
one’s network, seeking help and opinions, and
releasing emotional stress (Johnston and Hau-
man, 2013). Therefore, Twitter can be identi-
fied as an important surveillance tool for de-
tecting depression and suicidal patterns.

4.2 Methodology
We have applied an ensemble classifier to clas-
sify distress and non-distress user based on
their social media text collected from Twit-
ter. The ensemble classifier has been built us-
ing linear combination of Document Similarity
and Emotional Intensity Estimator. Weights
in this linear combination are estimated em-
pirically to achieve higher accuracy in this
classification task.

We have followed two approaches for detect-
ing depressive tweets viz.

(a) Document Similarity Measurement:
We have used KL-Divergence (Manning
and Schütze, 1999) to measure similarity
between searched user’s timeline and la-
belled tweets from all users’ timeline and
used the similarity score for final scoring
of negativity of the user. Applying La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et
al., 2003), we have estimated topic distri-
bution on the labelled negative5 and pos-
itive data extracted from users’ timeline.
We have used sklearn.lda.LDA library
to estimate topic distribution. Then we
have estimated the topic similarity of a
query user’s tweets (user whose person-
ality needs to be estimated) from their
timeline with these labelled negative and
positive tweets. Then we have estimated
the overall similarity score using the fol-
lowing equation:

SimilarityScore = 0.6 ∗ β + 0.4 ∗ γ (1)

where β and γ are the similarity scores
estimated using LDA and KL-Divergence

5In this paper we have used the term “negative
tweet” and “distressed tweet” interchangeably to rep-
resent the tweet generate by user having neurotic per-
sonality.

based topic distribution. Study shows
that theme-based retrieval does a better
job of finding relevant and effective docu-
ments (tweets in user timeline in our case)
for this application than conventional ap-
proaches (Dinakar et al., 2012b; Dinakar
et al., 2012a). All the weights used in
the above equations are empirically de-
termined.

(b) Emotional Intensity Measurement:
We have used following resources for mea-
suring emotional intensity of individual
tweet:

(a) SentiWordNet
(b) Manually classified lexicon based on

psychological process akin to LIWC.
(c) WordNet Affect

We have calculated NegetivityScore
combining LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997; Gers et al., 2000;
Graves, 2012), a deep learning model
for detecting polarity from tweets and
rule-based approach using the above
mentioned resources and psycholinguistic
features.Features used in this classifi-
cation task are mainly psycholinguistic
types, other than that “Pattern of Life
Analytics”6 (Greetham et al., 2011;
Berkman et al., 2000; De Choudhury
et al., 2013), “Capitalized Text”, “Spe-
cialHashTag”, “Probability of Personal
Pronoun”, “UserName Conatining Spe-
cial Keywords” etc. have also been used.
Count of some common phrases like
“why me”, “I hate myself” etc. have also
been considered as important feature.
Examples of “SpecialHashTag” feature
are #depressionprobs, #thisiswhatde-
pressionlike, #depression, #suicide etc..
It have been seen that if userid of the
users contains some clue substrings
like “depressing”, “depression”, “hell”,

6Social engagement has been correlated with posi-
tive mental health outcomes. Tweet rate measures how
often a Twitter user posts and pro-portion of tweets
with @mentions measures how often a user posts ‘in
conversation’ with other users. Number of @mentions
is a measure of how often the user in question engages
other users, while Number of self @mentions is a mea-
sure of how often the user responds to mentions of
themselves.439



“depressed”, “sad”, “cry”, “suicidal”,
“anxious”, “anxiety”, “lonely”, “die”,
“broken”, “stress”, “worthless”, “lost”
etc. the timeline of these users contains
depressive tweets. Therefore the users
having such userid have been considered
as an important feature. Tweets written
in Upper Case, are considered as impor-
tant assuming that these are written in
Upper Case for providing more impor-
tance/intensifying the emotion involved
in the tweet.We have used Theano, a
python based deep leaning library for
implementing our LSTM classifier7.
Final score for selecting neurotic persons
has been calculated as follows :

FinalScore = α ∗ SimilarityScore
+ (1 − α) ∗ NegetivityScore (2)

Value of alpha (0 ≤ α ≤ 1) can be set
experimentally to achieve highest accu-
racy. We have seen empirically that bet-
ter result is found when the value of α
is 0.8. It has been observed that when
the FinalScore is greater than 0.14 then
the user can be accepted as neurotic per-
son. Following the procedure discussed
in section 3 and 4 we have collected 2500
negative tweets from the timeline of 12
Twitter users having neurotic personal-
ity. Same numbers of positive tweets have
been collected from the timeline of users
having tweets with hashtag #motivation-
altweet, #positivethinking, #motivation-
alquotes etc.

4.3 Vector Space Representation of
Distressed Tweets

After manual verification, we have converted
the negative and positive tweets into the multi-
dimensional Vector Space. Thereafter, using
“t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embed-
ding” (t-SNE) technique (van der Maaten and
Hinton, 2008), the higher dimensional data
points are projected into a 2d plane. We have
used gensim8 python library to convert neu-
rotic persons’ tweets into Vector Space. We

7http://deeplearning.net/tutorial/lstm.html
8https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/

have considered 2000 dimensions and ±5 con-
text window during Word Embedding. Words
that are appeared at least 10 times in the
corpus have been selected for vector repre-
sentation. We have used t-SNE api available
in the sklearn.manifold library9 for dimen-
sionality reduction of these higher dimensional
points and visualization in the two dimension
space. Figure 2 shows representation of em-
bedding words in 2d space using t-SNE. We
can see semantically closer words are form-
ing clusters in the Vector Space. “Kill me”,
“Suicidal”, “destroy”, “Cutting” are appearing
closer to each other and “rejected”, “unloved”,
“worthless” are forming separate cluster. Sep-
arate cluster represent the different topic of
the thoughts those are having in the mind
of neurotic persons. Conversely, analysing
the tweets of positive minded people, we have
seen that “adorable”, “comfortable”, “eager”,
“hopeful”,“satisfied” etc. words are frequently
used in their timeline. Persistence homology
has been applied to the point clouds of pos-
itive and negative tweets separately. In the
next section we will discuss the topological
data analysis of negative and positive tweets
based on their vector representation.

5 Topological Data Analysis of
Tweets

Persistent homology (Zhu, 2013), a mathemat-
ical tool from topological data analysis has
been applied on the collected tweets for multi-
scale analysis on a set of points and identi-
fies clusters, holes, and voids therein. Persis-
tent homology can identify clusters (0-th order
holes), holes (1st order, as in our loopy curve),
voids (2nd order holes, the inside of a balloon),
and so on in a point cloud. It finds “holes” by
identifying equivalent cycles. Detailed discus-
sion on Persistent homology10 and Algebraic
Topology is out of scope of the paper. Inter-
ested readers can follow work of (Zhu, 2013;
Singh et al., 2008; Giblin, 2010; Freedman
and Chen, 2011; Zomorodian, 2001; Carlsson,
2008; Edelsbrunner and Harer, 2010; Hatcher,
2002). After representing the words in Vec-
tor Space, we have used these data points

9http://scikit-learn.org/
10http://outlace.com/440



Figure 2: Representation of Words in Vector Space using t-SNE

Figure 3: Generated Vietoris-Rips Complexes on Negative Point Cloud with Incremental Values
of ϵ.

Figure 4: Generated Vietoris-Rips Complexes on Positive Point Cloud with Incremental Values
of ϵ.

441



to build Vietoris-Rips11 complexes of diame-
ter ϵ which are simplicial complexes V R(ϵ) =
{σ|diam(σ) < ϵ}. Here diam(σ) represents
the largest distance between two points in σ.
Distance measures varies according to differ-
ent contexts. Here we have used euclidean
distance for our purpose. Figure 3 and fig-
ure 4 show generated Vietoris-Rips complexes
on negative and positive point cloud respec-
tively. Here we can see, if we set ϵ too small,
then generated complexes may just consist of
the original point cloud, or only a few edges
between the points. If we set ϵ too big, then
the point cloud will just become one massive
ultradimensional simplex. Our intention is to
discover meaningful patterns in a simplicial
complex by continuously varying the ϵ param-
eter (and continually re-build complexes) from
0 to a maximum that results in a single mas-
sive simplex. Then we generate a diagram that
shows what topological features are born and
die as ϵ continuously increases. We assume
that features that persist for long intervals
over ϵ are meaningful features whereas features
that are very short-lived are likely noise. This
procedure is called persistent homology com-
putation as it finds the homological features of
a topological space that persist while we vary
ϵ. Persistent homology examines all ϵ’s to see
how the system of hole change (also known as
“Birth and Death process”). An increasing se-
quence of ϵ produces a filtration. Persistent
homology tracks homology classes along the
filtration to know for what value of ϵ does a
hole appear and how long the hole persists.
We have followed the methodology as reported
in (Carlsson, 2008) to study the homology of
the complexes constructed. The steps involve
in this methodology are as follows:

• Construct the R persistence simpli-
cial complex {Cϵ} using Vietoris-Rips
method.

• Select a partial order preserving map f :
N → R

• Construct the associated N-persistence
simplicial complex.

• Construct the associated N-persistence
chain complex {C∗(n)}n with co-efficients

11http://outlace.com/

in F .

• Compute the barcodes associated to
the N-persistence F-vector spaces
{Hi(C∗(n), F )}n

Please refer (Carlsson, 2008) for detail expla-
nation.

The “barcode plot” is a convenient way
to visualize persistent homology (Zhu, 2013;
Ghrist, 2007). Barcode plot shown in figure 5
and figure 6 are drawn based on increasing
sequence of ϵ and zeroth Betti number (β0)
calculated from positive and distressed tweets
respectively.

We have selected 500 data points randomly
from the word to vector representation of pos-
itive and distressed tweets for the filtration
process. The word to vector representation
using Word Embedding ensures that words
that share common contexts (semantics) in
the negative and positive tweets are located
in close proximity to one another in the Vec-
tor Space. Using persistent homology we are
trying to examine the topology of these se-
mantically oriented data points (words). The
number of connected components is an im-
portant topological invariant of a graph. In
topological graph theory, it can be interpreted
as the zeroth Betti number of the graph.
From figure 5, we can see that positive tweets
have less connected components (142 discon-
nected components out of 500 data points)
whereas figure 6 shows that negative tweets
have much more connected component com-
pare to positive tweets (only 7 disconnected
components). Less number of connected com-
ponents in users’ timeline represents wide vari-
ation of topics. Conversely, less number of dis-
connected components indicate that tweets are
much more focused towards some specific top-
ics. Manually investigating the contents of the
positive and negative tweets, we have seen that
users having neurotic personality discuss more
regarding their pain and problems. Hence,
topic discussed in their timeline more focused
to their problem area. On the other hand, pos-
itive minded users discuss on different topics
and also share ideas and thoughts among their
friends and followers. Therefore, tweets gener-
ated by them have wide variation of topics.
Barcode plot shown in figure 7 and figure 8 are442



Figure 5: Barcode Plot of Positive Tweets at
Betti Dimension 0 (β0)

Figure 6: Barcode Plot of Distressed Tweets
at Betti Dimension 0 (β0)

Figure 7: Barcode Plot of Positive Tweets at
Betti Dimension 1 (β1)

Figure 8: Barcode Plot of Distressed Tweets
at Betti Dimension 1 (β1)

drawn based on increasing sequence of ϵ and
1st Betti number (β1) calculated from positive
and distressed tweets respectively. We can see
that figure 7 has very less number of holes and
number of holes in the figure 8 are much more
compare to figure 7. As the number of discon-
nected components are much more in the pos-
itive tweets, the chance of appearance of one
dimensional holes are less. Conversely, num-
ber of one dimensional holes are much more in
negative tweets because of less number of dis-
connected components. We have found that
number of one dimensional holes in positive
tweets is 1 and for negative tweets, it is 34.
This observation corroborates the first obser-
vations that the people with negative mind-
set has more oriented set of thoughts (focused
to their problem domain) than people having
positive mindset. The higher order homology
groups produces Betti numbers having values
zeros, as expected.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed a novel ap-
proach for collecting tweets of neurotic per-
sons. Then these tweets are represented in the
Vector Space using Word Embedding and di-
mensionality has been reduced using t-SNE.
Persistent homology has been applied to anal-
yse the topology of tweets resembling autopi-
lot thoughts. Psychological features in term of
linguistic pattern has been discussed.

As a future work we are planning to ex-
plore, how natural language generation can443



be applied for therapeutic text generation fol-
lowing RFT and based on topology of pa-
tients’ thought. We have hypothesized that
tweets having psychological features, linguistic
markers of depression are indicator of neurotic
user’s time line as per our understanding of lit-
erature. Therefore, as a future work we would
like to get expert guidance from psychothera-
pists for better understanding of the psycho-
logical process involved in Mental Health.

The work discussed in this paper is an ini-
tiative towards applying NLP in the domain of
Mental Health which will motivate researchers
for further exploration of linguistic markers
and topology involved in psychology.

References
Tim Althoff, Kevin Clark, and Jure Leskovec.

2016. Natural language processing for mental
health: Large scale discourse analysis of coun-
seling conversations. Transactions of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

G Andersson and P Cuijpers. 2009. Internet-based
and other computerized psychological treat-
ments for adult depression: a meta-analysis.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, 38(4):196–205.

R. Bandler and S. Andreas. 1985. Using Your
Brain for a Change.

R. Bandler and J. Grinder. 1975. The Structure of
Magic I: A Book About Language and Therapy.
Science and Behavior Books.

R. Bandler and J. Grinder. 1979. Frogs into
Princes: Neuro Linguistic Programming. Real
People Press.

Rush A. J. Shaw B. F. Beck, A. T. and G. Emery.
1979. Cognitive therapy of depression. Guilford
Publications, New york.

Shea Bennett. 2012. Twitter now seeing 400 mil-
lion tweets per day, increased mobile ad revenue,
says ceo@online.

Lisa F. Berkman, Thomas Glass, Ian Brissette,
and Teresa E. Seeman. 2000. From social
integration to health: Durkheim in the new
millennium? Social Science and Medicine,
51(6):843––857.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jor-
dan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 3:993–1022.

W. Bucci and N. Freedman. 1981. The language
of depression. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic,
45(4):334–358.

Gunnar Carlsson. 2008. Topology and data. Tech-
nical report.

H Christensen, KM Griffiths, and Farrer L. 2009.
Review adherence in internet interventions for
anxiety and depression. Journal of Medical In-
ternet Research, 11(2).

SE Collins, N Chawla, SH Hsu, J Grow, JM Otto,
and Marlatt GA. 2009. Language-based mea-
sures of mindfulness: initial validity and clinical
utility. Society of Psychologists in Addictive Be-
haviors, 23(4):743–749.

P Cuijpers, A Van Straten, L Warmerdam, and
N Smits. 2008. Characteristics of effective psy-
chological treatments of depression: a meta re-
gression analysis. Psychother Res, 18(2):225–36.

Munmun De Choudhury, Scott Counts, and Eric
Horvitz. 2013. Predicting postpartum changes
in emotion and behavior via social media. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13,
pages 3267–3276, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Karthik Dinakar, Birago Jones, Catherine Havasi,
Henry Lieberman, and Rosalind Picard. 2012a.
Common sense reasoning for detection, preven-
tion, and mitigation of cyberbullying. ACM
Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., 2(3):18:1–18:30,
September.

Karthik Dinakar, Birago Jones, Henry Lieberman,
Rosalind W. Picard, Carolyn Penstein Rosé,
Matthew Thoman, and Roi Reichart. 2012b.
You too?! mixed-initiative LDA story matching
to help teens in distress. In Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, Dublin, Ireland, June 4-7, 2012.

E. Durkheim. 1951. Suicide. Free Press, New
York.

DD Ebert, AC Zarski, H Christensen, Y Stikkel-
broek, P Cuijpers, M Berking, and H Riper.
2015. Internet and computer-based cognitive
behavioral therapy for anxiety and depression in
youth: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
outcome trials. PLoS One, 10(3).

Herbert Edelsbrunner and John Harer. 2010.
Computational Topology - an Introduction.
American Mathematical Society.

Horacio Fabrega. 1991. Psychiatric stigma in non-
western societies. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
32:534–551.

Daniel Freedman and Chao Chen. 2011. Algebraic
topology for computer vision. Computer Vision,
5:239––268.

Felixv Gers, Jurgen Schmidhuber, and Fred Cum-
mins. 2000. Learning to forget contin-
ual prediction with lstm. Neural Comput,
12(10):2451–2471.444



Robert Ghrist. 2007. Barcodes: The persistent
topology of data. Technical report.

Peter Giblin. 2010. Graphs, Surfaces and Homol-
ogy. Cambridge University Press.

Alex Graves. 2012. Supervised Sequence Labelling
with Recurrent Neural Networks, volume 385 of
Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer.

David E Greenway, Emily K Sandoz, and David R
Perkins. 2010. Potential applications of rela-
tional frame theory to natural language systems.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Con-
ference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Dis-
covery (FSKD), pages 2955–2958. IEEE.

Danica Vukadinovic Greetham, Robert Hurling,
Gab rielle Osborne, and Alex Linley. 2011.
Social networks and positive and negative af-
fect. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences,
22:4––13.

Allen Hatcher. 2002. Algebraic topology. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural Comput.,
9(8):1735–1780, November.

O. P. John and S. Srivastava. 1999. The big-five
trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and the-
oretical perspectives. Handbook of personality:
Theory and research, 2:102–138.

Chan M.M Johnston, K. and M. Hauman. 2013.
Use, perception and attitude of university stu-
dents towards facebook and twitter. The Elec-
tronic Journal Information Systems Evaluation,
16(3):201–211, November.

T. Kaczynski, K. Mischaikow, and M. Mozek.
2004. Computational Homology. Springer.

Nikolaos Kazantzis, John Tee, Frank Dattilio, and
Keith Dobson. 2013. Collaborative empiricism
as the central therapeutic relationship element
in cbt an expert panel discussion. International
Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 6(4).

François Mairesse and Marilyn Walker. 2007. Per-
sonage: Personality generation for dialogue. In
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 496–503.

Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schütze.
1999. Foundations of Statistical Natural Lan-
guage Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

Evan Mayo-Wilson and Paul Montgomery. 2013.
Media-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy
and behavioural therapy (self-help) for anxiety
disorders in adults. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev, 9.

Grégoire Mesnil, Xiaodong He, Li Deng, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2013. Investigation of
recurrent-neural-network architectures and
learning methods for spoken language under-
standing. In Frédéric Bimbot, Christophe
Cerisara, Cécile Fougeron, Guillaume Gravier,
Lori Lamel, François Pellegrino, and Pas-
cal Perrier, editors, INTERSPEECH, pages
3771–3775. ISCA.

Kathleen M. Michels, Karen J. Hofman, Gerald T.
Keusch, and Sharon H. Hrynhow. 2006. Stigma
and global health: Looking forward. Lancet,
367:538–539.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and
Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space. CoRR,
abs/1301.3781.

Adam Miner, Amanda Chow, Sarah Adler, Ilia
Zaitsev, Paul Tero, Alison Darcy, and Andreas
Paepcke. 2016. Conversational agents and men-
tal health: Theory-informed assessment of lan-
guage and affect. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Human Agent In-
teraction, HAI ’16, pages 123–130, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

DC Mohr, J Ho, J Duffecy, KG Baron,
KA Lehman, L Jin, and D Reifler. 2010. Per-
ceived barriers to psychological treatments and
their relationship to depression. Journal of Clin-
ical Psychology, 66(4):394–409.

David C Mohr, Michelle Nicole Burns, Stephen M
Schueller, Gregory Clarke, and Michael
Klinkman. 2013. Behavioral intervention tech-
nologies: evidence review and recommendations
for future research in mental health. General
hospital psychiatry, 35(4):332–338.

Thin Nguyen, Dinh Phung, Bo Dao, Svetha
Venkatesh, and Michael Berk. 2014. Affective
and content analysis of online depression com-
munities. IEEE Transactions on Affective Com-
puting, 5(3).

Joanna Pawelczyk. 2011. Talk as Therapy: Psy-
chotherapy in a Linguistic Perspective. Walter
de Gruyter.

James W. Pennebaker, Matthias R. Mehl, and
Kate G. Niederhoffer. 2003. Psychological
aspects of natural language use: Our words,
our selves. Annual review of psychology,
54(1):547–577.

James W Pennebaker, Ryan L Boyd, Kayla Jor-
dan, and Kate Blackburn. 2015. The develop-
ment and psychometric properties of liwc2015.
UT Faculty/Researcher Works.

James W. Pennebaker. 2011. The secret life of pro-
nouns: What our words say about us. Blooms-
bury Press, New York.445



T. Pyszcynski and J. Greenberg. 1987. Self-
regulatory perseveration and the depressive self-
focusing style: A self-awareness theory of de-
pression. Psychological Bulletin, 102:122–138.

Nairan Ramirezesparza, Cindy K. Chung, Ewa
Kacewicz, and James W. Pennebaker. 2008.
The psychology of word use in depression forums
in english and in spanish: Testing two text ana-
lytic approaches. In Proceedings of the ICWSM.

Stephanie Rude, Eva-Maria Gortner, and James
Pennebaker. 2004. Language use of de-
pressed and depression-vulnerable college stu-
dents. Cognition and Emotion, 18:1121–1133.

Thomas Ruder, Gary M Hatch, Garyfalia Am-
panozi, and Nadja Fischer. 2011. Suicide an-
nouncement on facebook. Crisis, 32(5):280–282.

Gurjeet Singh, Facundo Memoli, Tigran
Ishkhanov, Guillermo Sapiro, Gunnar Carlsson,
and Dario L. Ringach. 2008. Topological
analysis of population activity in visual cortex.
Journal of Vision, 8(8):1–18.

Ann Sizemore, Chad Giusti, Ari Kahn, Richard F.
Betzel, and Danielle S. Bassett. 2016.
Cliques and cavities in the human connectome.
arXiv:1608.03520.

S. W. Stirman and J. W. Pennebaker. 2001. Word
use in the poetry of suicidal and non-suicidal
poets. Psychosomatic Medicine, 63:517–522.

Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton.
2008. Visualizing high-dimensional data using
t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
9:2579–2605, November.

M Villatte, JL Villatte, and SC Hayes. 2015. Mas-
tering the Clinical Conversation: Language as
Intervention. Guilford Publications, Palo Alto,
CA, October.

Keane T. M. Weathers, F. W. and J. Davidson.
2001. Clinician-administered ptsd scale: A re-
view of the first ten years of research. Depres-
sion and Anxiety, 13:132–156.

Myrna M. Weissman, Roger C. Bland, Glorisa J.
Can-ino, Carlo Faravelli, Steven Greenwald,
HaiGwo Hwu, Peter R. Joyce, Eile G. Karam,
Chung-Kyoon Lee, Joseph Lellouch, Jean-Pierre
Lepine, Stephen C. Newman, Maritza Rubio-
Stipec, J. Elisabeth Wells, Priya J. Wickra-
maratne, Hans-Ulrich Wittchen, and Eng-Kung
Yeh. 1996. Cross-national epidemiology of ma-
jor depression and bi-polar disorder. Journal
of the American Medical Association (JAMA),
276(4):293––299.

Xiaojin Zhu. 2013. Persistent homology: An intro-
duction and a new text representation for nat-
ural language processing. In Francesca Rossi,

editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 1953–1959. IJCAI/AAAI.

P.G. Zimbardo and J.N. Boyd. 2008. The Time
Paradox: The new psychology of time that will
change your life. Free Press, New York.

Afra Joze Zomorodian. 2001. Computing and com-
prehending topology: persistence and hierarchi-
cal Morse complexes. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

446


