





































Understanding constraints on non-projectivity using novel measures

Himanshu Yadav
Jawaharlal Nehru University

Center for Linguistics
New Delhi

India
himans53 llh@jnu.ac.in

Ashwini Vaidya
IIT Delhi

Department of
Electrical Engineering

India
ird11278@ee.iitd.ac.in

Samar Husain
IIT Delhi

Department of Humanities
and Social Sciences

India
samar@hss.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
In this work we propose certain novel measures
to understand non-projectivity in various syntac-
tic phenomena in Hindi. This is an attempt
to go beyond the analysis of non-projectivity in
terms of certain graphical measures such as edge
degree, planarity etc. Our measures are moti-
vated by the findings in the processing litera-
ture that have investigated the interaction between
working-memory constraints and syntactic com-
plexity. Our analysis shows that the measures pat-
tern differently for distinct phenomena and there-
fore could prove to be beneficial in understanding
non-projectivity in a language. We also find some
interesting differences in non-projectivity between
conversation and news genre.

1 Introduction

One of the main aims of the modern linguistic the-
ories has been to understand the formal proper-
ties of the grammar and its interaction with hu-
man linguistic competence (Frazier, 1985; Chom-
sky and Miller, 1963). In order to represent the
syntactic structure of a linguistic utterance, most
current theories posit some kind of a hierarchical
structure (Steedman, 2000; Chomsky, 1995; Hud-
son, 2010). This hierarchical structure could either
be represented via the notion of constituents or
through dependency relations (Rambow, 2010). It
is also known that languages allow for configura-
tions that lead to discontiguous constituents. Such
configurations are known to pose a challenge to
grammar formalization and, not surprisingly, they
are more difficult to parse computationally (Nivre,
2009; Joshi, 1990). They are also difficult to pro-
cess by native speakers (Levy et al., 2012; Husain
and Vasishth, 2015).

The discontiguous constituents are termed as
non-projectivity in the dependency grammar liter-
ature. Non-projectivity is characterized by a non-

canonical linear order of words in a sentence.1

Formally, an arc i→j is non-projective if and only
if there is at least one word k between i and j that i
does not dominate (see Figure 1).

j k i l

Figure 1: The dependency arc between i and its
dependent j is non-projective. All other arcs are
projective.

While non-projective dependencies (called dis-
contiguous constituents in phrase structure gram-
mar) are common in many languages that al-
low free word order, it is also known that not
all such configurations are permitted, i.e. not
all non-projective dependencies can be deemed
grammatical (Joshi, 1985; Shieber, 1985). In or-
der to describe the grammar of a language, it is
therefore critical to understand the constraints on
non-projectivity in that language. Understanding
these constraints will throw light on the cognitive
constraints that influence language comprehension
and production. Needless to say, a better under-
standing of non-projectivity will also benefit com-
putational parsers.

Non-projectivity occurs due to discontiguity in
the yield of a node, specifically discontiguity in
the head-dependent projection chain. This dis-
contiguity in the head-dependent linear order is
caused by the intervention of a constituent or
sub-tree that is dependent on a head outside the
current yield. The properties of this interven-
ing element as well as the properties of the non-
projective dependency (comprising a head and its
dependent) can describe the constraining environ-

1This is of course a simplification. As we will discuss
later, there are some constructions that are inherently non-
projective.

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 276-286,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

276



ment for a non-projective dependency. In this
work, we will use such properties to identify con-
straints on non-projectivity in Hindi. In order to do
this we use the Hindi-Urdu Dependency Treebank
(HUTB) (Bhatt et al., 2009).

There has been some work on studying non-
projectivity in Hindi. Mannem et al. (2009) car-
ried out a preliminary study of non-projectivity in
HUTB based on some widely used measures, e.g.,
gap degree, edge degree and planarity (Bodirsky et
al., 2005; Kuhlmann and Nivre, 2006; Kuhlmann,
2007). In a similar and more elaborate work,
Bhat and Sharma (2012) carried out a formal and
linguistic characterization of non-projectivity for
Hindi, Bengali, Telugu and Urdu. They char-
acterized non-projectivity based on the nature of
the linguistic phenomena (e.g., relativization, gen-
itive constructions etc.) and the cause of non-
canonicity (e.g., extraposition, scrambling, etc.).
Similar to Mannem et al. (2009), they also used
edge degree etc. to characterize non-projectivity.

In this paper, we go beyond this type of anal-
ysis to attempt a deeper linguistic understanding
of non-projectivity in Hindi. In particular, we
ask, what are the limiting conditions for a non-
projective dependency? In other words, we at-
tempt to uncover the kinds of non-projective con-
figurations that are disallowed for a phenomenon.
For example, while studying non-projectivity in
genitive constructions, we attempt to identify
which type of non-projectivity is not possible in
such constructions. We examine the limiting con-
ditions for a non-projective dependency with re-
spect to hierarchical and linear distance and the
nature of the intervening constituents and subtrees.
A deeper understanding of non-projectivity in a
language is critical for positing constraints on the
generative power of a dependency grammar and
understanding the interaction of working memory
constraints and linguistic complexity.

Our paper is organized as follows, in Section
2 we motivate new measures for analyzing non-
projectivity based on linear and hierarchical dis-
tance. In Section 3, we discuss these measures us-
ing a Hindi treebank. We conclude the paper in
section 4.

2 A proposal for novel non-projectivity
measures

Previous analyses of non-projectivity in
Hindi (Mannem et al., 2009; Bhat and Sharma,

2012) and in other languages have characterized
sentences that are non-projective using graph-
based measures such as gap degree, edge degree,
planarity and well-nestedness. While these mea-
sures have proven to be very useful, they do not
explicitly capture certain information that could
be used in positing constraints on non-projectivity
for a particular linguistic construction. We pro-
pose three novel measures for non-projectivity in
this section, based on linear word order as well as
hierarchy.

2.1 Linear measures

We look at the examples in figures 3–6 to motivate
the first type of linear measure. These figures show
non-projective dependencies involving a genitive
relation. The noun phrase (NP) raam-kaa ‘Ram-
GEN’ is the dependent of chashmaa ‘spectacles’
in all these examples. Figure 2 shows the projec-
tive dependency for this phenomenon. The edge
degree2 in each of the non-projective structure is 1
(they also have same planarity), however, while 3
and 4 are grammatical, the sentences in figures 5
& 6 are completely ungrammatical. Critically,
the type of intervening material that causes non-
projectivity differs in these examples. In 3, the
intervening element is an adverbial modifying the
main verb; in 4, it is a non-finite clause modifying
the main verb, and in 5, it is a relative clause mod-
ifying a noun outside the span of the genitive de-
pendency arc. The example in figure 6 is ungram-
matical because a negation intervenes. Note that
the dependencies shown here are between chunks
rather than individual words, which is in keeping
with the HUTB representation.

These examples show that in order to under-
stand the nature of non-projectivity for a phe-
nomenon like genitive, it is important to study the
type of intervening material. A metric like edge
degree captures the number of intervening con-
stituents spanned by a single edge (Kuhlmann and
Nivre, 2006), but it is unable to capture certain
linguistic nuances discussed above. Additionally,
the type of intervening constituents also capture
the complexity of these constituents. While both
3 and 4 are grammatical constructions, the inter-
vening material in 3 is less complex than the one
in 4. Capturing the complexity of the intervening

2Let e=(i, j) be a dependency arc with ’j’ as the head and
’i’ as the dependent. Edge degree of an arc e is the number
of connected components c in the span of arc e such that c is
not dominated by ’j’ (Nivre, 2006).

277



do din pahle raam=kaa chashmaa kho gayaa
two days ago Ram=GEN spectacles lose go.Perf

ROOT

r6

Figure 2: ‘Two days ago Ram’s spectacles were lost’. Projective Genitive Construction.

raam=kaa do din pahle chashmaa kho gayaa
Ram=GEN two days ago spectacles lose go.Perf

ROOT

r6

Figure 3: ‘Ram’s spectacles were lost two days ago’. Non-projectivity with edge degree=1, Type of
intervening constituent=NP. NP: Noun chunk.

raam=kaa school jaate hue chashmaa kho gayaa
Ram=GEN school go.NF spectacles lose go.Perf

ROOT

r6

Figure 4: ‘Ram’s spectacles were lost while going to school’. Non-projectivity with edge degree=1,
Type of intervening constituent=VGNF, Length of intervening constituent (in words)=3. VGNF: Non-
finite verb chunk.

raam=kaa jo Delhi=se aa rhi thi chashmaa us train=mein kho gayaa
Ram=GEN which Delhi=LOC come PROG be.past spectacles that train=LOC lose go.Perf

ROOT

r6

Figure 5: ‘Ram’s spectacles were lost in the train which was coming from Delhi’. Non-projectivity with
edge degree=1, Type of intervening constituent=VGF. VGF: Finite verb chunk.

raam=kaa nahin chashmaa khoyaa hai
Ram=GEN not spectacles lose be.present

ROOTr6

Figure 6: ’Ram’s spectacles are not lost’. Non-projectivity with edge degree=1, Type of intervening
constituent=NEG. NEG: Negation.

278



constituents becomes important when we focus
on comprehension or production of non-projective
structures. It is known that non-projective struc-
tures are difficult to process (Levy et al., 2012;
Husain and Vasishth, 2015). In addition we also
know that the type of the intervening material be-
tween a head and its dependent matters during in-
tegration stages (Levy and Keller, 2013; Safavi et
al., 2016).

As mentioned in the previous section, edge
degree captures the number of intervening con-
stituents spanned by a single edge. Intervening
constituents are the independent projection chains
or subtrees which modify neither the dependent
nor the head of a non-projective arc, rather they
modify something outside the scope of the non-
projective arc. The number of these intervening
constituents capture the degree to which a depen-
dent has moved from its canonical linear position.

Again, examples 4, 7, 8 have the same edge
degree (1). Intuitively, we would assume 4 to
be more frequent and thereby more representative
of the non-projective genitive constructions. In-
deed, the average length of the intervening con-
stituents in a genitive construction is 4. We there-
fore expect that the length (in words) of the inter-
vening constituents will be highly constrained by
the type of linguistic construction in which non-
projectivity occurs. Therefore, it might be benefi-
cial to use this as a constraint in our understand-
ing of non-projective constructions. The larger
the size of intervening constituents, the more dif-
ficult it will be to process the non-projective struc-
ture for the native speaker. Indeed, this short-
dependency intuition is backed by research in psy-
cholinguistics where it has been shown that cross-
linguistically dependent-head distance tends to be
short (Futrell et al., 2015). More recently, Liu
et al. (2017) have argued for dependency mini-
mization as a universal cognitive constraint. This
idea has also been extended to explain the oc-
currence of non-projectivity across multiple lan-
guages (Gómez-Rodrı́guez, 2017).

2.2 Hierarchical measure

The two measures discussed in the previous sec-
tion, viz., the type of intervening constituent and
the length (in words) of the intervening con-
stituents do not capture an important feature of a
dependency tree, i.e., the hierarchical distance. In
particular we are interested in measuring the hier-

archical distance between the head of the interven-
ing material (in a non-projective arc) and the head
of the non-projective arc.

We illustrate this using examples 9–12. Exam-
ples 9 and 10 have the same type of intervening
constituents and the same number of intervening
constituents. But they differ with respect to the
difference between the hierarchical position (or
depth) of the head node of the non-projective arc
(yah ‘this’) and the depth of the head of the in-
tervening material (matrix verb). In 9, this depth
difference is 1, while in 10, the difference is 2.
In Figures 11 and 12 the depth difference is even
higher. Interestingly, the sentences in figures 11
and 12 are less acceptable for Hindi native speak-
ers.3

We propose a measure to capture the constraints
on non-projectivity in terms of the hierarchical
depth difference between the head of the non-
projective arc and the head of the intervening con-
stituent. It is evident from the examples in fig-
ures 9–12 that this measure captures the level of
embedding of the non-projective arc. If the non-
projective subtree is deeply embedded in the tree
and the intervening constituent has a head that is
higher up in the tree, we posit that the acceptabil-
ity or grammaticality of the non-projective config-
urations will be determined by the notion of depth
difference. Indeed, it has been previously shown
that more embeddings in a sentence leads to pro-
cessing difficulty (Gibson and Thomas, 1999).

Figure 13 shows a schematic of the environment
of a non-projective dependency; Xd represents the
dependent, Xh represents the head, Xi represents
the intervening constituent whose head Xj is out-
side the span of the subtree headed by Xh. Based
on the discussion in the previous sections, the con-
straining environment of a non-projective depen-
dency will therefore contain the following:

(a) Type of intervening constituent Xi
(b) The length (in words) of the intervening con-

stituents

3We note that the acceptability of 11 in comparison with
12 might be explained via the increased head-dependent dis-
tance in 12. However, a construction with the same head-
dependent distance as 12 but with a lower depth difference (of
1) may be perfectly acceptable. An example of such a sen-
tence would be nalin yah do dinon se [logon ko kahte [chale
jaa rahaa hai]] ki jaggu chor hai ‘Nalin is continuously say-
ing this to people for last two days that Jaggu is a thief’. This
shows that in these cases, depth and not the linear distance is
leading to lower acceptability.

279



raam=kaa apne muhalle=ke bachchon=ko melaa dikhaane le jaate hue chasmaa kho gayaa
Ram=GEN his colony=GEN child.pl=DAT fair show.NF take go.NF spectacles lose go.Perf

ROOT

r6

Figure 7: ‘Ram’s spectacles were lost while taking the children of his colony to see the fair’. Non-
projectivity with edge degree=1, Length of intervening constituents (in words)=10

raam=kaa apne muhalle=ke bachchon=ko aur office=ke doston=ko melaa dikhaane le jaate hue chasmaa kho gayaa
Ram=GEN his colony=GEN child.pl=DAT and office=GEN friend.pl=DAT fair show.NF take go.NF spectacles lose go.Perf

ROOT

r6

Figure 8: ‘Ram’s spectacles were lost while taking the children of his colony and (his) office friends to
see the fair’. Non-projectivity with edge degree=1, Length of intervening constituents (in words)=15

nalin yah kah raha thaa ki jaggu chor hai ROOT
Nalin this say-PROG-be.past that Jaggu thief be.Present

Xh Xi Xd Xj

rs

Figure 9: ‘Nalin was saying that Jaagu is a thief ’. Clausal complement with nominal head. Length of
intervening constituents=3, Hierarchical depth difference=1

nalin=kaa yah kahanaa theek hai ki jaggu chor hai ROOT
Nalin=GEN this say.NF right be.present that Jaggu thief be.Present

Xh Xi Xd Xj

rs

Figure 10: ‘Nalin’s saying that Jaggu is a thief is right’. Clausal complement with nominal head embed-
ded in non-finite clause. Length of intervening constituents=3, Hierarchical depth difference=2

nalin yah kahte hue ped se koodkar gir gaya ki jaggu chor hai ROOT
Nalin this say.NF tree=ABL jump.NF fall go.Perf that Jaggu thief be.Present

Xh Xi Xd Xj

rs

Figure 11: ‘While saying that Jaggu is a thief Nalin jumped and fell from the tree’. Hierarchical depth
difference=3

280



nalin=kaa yah kahte hue ped se koodkar gir jaana bhaari pad gayaa ki Jaggu chor hai ROOT
Nalin=GEN this say.NF tree=ABL jump.NF fall go.NF heavy fall go.Perf that Jaggu thief be.Present

Xh Xi Xd Xj

rs

Figure 12: ‘Nalin’s jump and fall from the tree while saying that Jaggu is thief was a loss for him’.
Hierarchical depth difference=4

(c) The hierarchical depth difference between
Xh and Xj .

Xd Xi Xh Xj

Figure 13: A non-projective configuration.

To summarize, the three measures of non-
projectivity discussed above try to incorporate in-
sights from the processing literature. Specifically,
they try to reflect the notion of structural complex-
ity and its interaction with working memory con-
straints. Assuming that a treebank is representa-
tive of the grammar of a language and its usage
and that the proposed measures indeed reflect cer-
tain cognitive constraints, one hopes to observe
some evidence for these measures while charac-
terizing non-projectivity found in the treebank.

The measure in (a) is operationalized by using
the syntactic constituent label (NP, CCP, VGNN or
RBP etc.) of the intervening constituent. In order
to define the property of these constituents we also
see whether they are arguments or adjuncts (this
information can be derived from the dependency
labels).

The Hindi-Urdu Dependency Treebank (HUTB
ver-0.05) was used to compute these constraints.
We use the inter-chunk dependency information
to extract dependency relations for a sentence.
The treebank consists of 20931 sentences (Aver-
age word count per sentence: 20). The text in the
treebank belongs to two genres: News (18857 sen-
tences) and Conversation (2074 sentences). The
news genre contains articles from a Hindi newspa-
per while the conversation has literary pieces con-
taining dialogues.

3 Non-projectivity measures for the
Hindi Treebank

In this section we try to uncover the constrain-
ing environment in which a phenomenon can oc-
cur in a non-projective configuration. In order to
posit such constraints, we will use the three mea-
sures discussed in section 2: the nature of the in-
tervening constituent, the linear distance between
the head and the dependent, and the hierarchi-
cal depth difference. A constraining environment
should help us in a deeper understanding of non-
projectivity in a phenomenon independent of the
annotation scheme. Out of the total non-projective
sentences in HUTB, there are 15.4% cases that are
non-projective due to annotation choices. We do
not consider these cases in our analysis.

Many constructions become non-projective be-
cause of variation in word order. The word order
variation could have discourse functions (Butt and
King, 1996; Kidwai, 2000; Kothari, 2010). It is
implied that one can projectivize these construc-
tions by rearranging the words in their ‘canoni-
cal’ position. In our analysis we examine such
non-projective constructions using the constraints
shown in Table 1. As mentioned above, our anal-
ysis disregards the cases that are non-projective
because of certain annotation choices in the tree-
bank.

3.1 Type of the intervening constituent

Among GENITIVES, the most common type
of intervening constituent is a nominal adjunct
(67.7%). However, the intervening element in
genitives can occasionally be non-nominal (like a
conjunction, finite verb, non-finite verb etc.). Sim-
ilarly, in NON-FINITE CLAUSE CONSTRUCTIONS,
the intervening elements are nominal adjuncts
(83%). The non-projective COORDINATION CON-
STRUCTIONS and FINITE CLAUSE CONSTRUC-
TIONS are quite constrained with respect to the
nature of intervening element. A coordination

281



Properties of the Intervening Constituents Xi % non-proj

Linguistic Phenomenon Category(Xi) Avg-length(Xi) Arg-Adj(Xi) within across

Genitive

NP Xi NP Xj
(GEN)

r6

NP(67.7%)

4 1.13% 7.2%

CCP(9.3%)
RBP(8.9%) Argument(25.7%)
VGF(7.2%) Adjunct(74.3%)
VGNN(3%)
VGNF(2.4%)

Non-finite Clause

NP Xi VGNN/ Xj
VGNF

NP(83%)

4 1.2% 4.6%
RBP(6.6%) Argument(31.5%)
CCP(2.8%) Adjunct(68.5%)
VGF(2.2%)

Coordination

Xd Xi CCP Xj

ccof

NP(66.7%)
3

Argument(38.5%)
0.2% 0.5%

CCP(33.3%) Adjunct(61.5%)

Finite Clause

NP Xi VGF Xj

CCP(84.5%)
2 0.3% 2.8%VGF(7.7%) Argument(1.9%)

NP(7.7%) Adjunct(98.1%)

Relative Clause

NP Xi VGF ROOT/
VGF

nmod-relc

VGF(94.5%)

3 59.4% 23.7%
NP(4.3%) Argument(2.9%)
CCP(0.5%) Adjunct(97.1%)
VGNF(0.3%)
VGNN(0.1%)

Table 1: Constraining environment for non-projectivity due to non-canonical word order. The data is
taken from the News genre. Here Category(Xi) represents the phrasal category of the intervening con-
stituents, Arg-Adj(Xi) represents whether an intervening element is either an argument or an adjunct
and Avg-length(Xi) is the average length of intervening constituent(s). The % non-proj within construc-
tion means the percentage of non-projective constructions out of total constructions of a specific type
say Genitive. The % non-proj across all constructions means the percentage of non-projective cases
of a specific construction type out of total non-projective cases in the treebank. NP: Noun chunk, CCP:
Conjunction chunk, VGNF: Non-finite verb chunk, VGNN: Verbal noun chunk, VGF: Finite verb chunk.

subtree becomes discontiguous because of a noun
(66.7%) or noun-noun conjunction (33.3%). A
finite clause becomes non-projective due to a
paired connective (84.5%). This happens when
the connective agar ‘if’ moves from its canon-
ical sentence-initial position and intervenes be-
tween the finite verb and its modifiers. RELA-
TIVE CLAUSE CONSTRUCTIONS have finite verbs
as the intervening element due to right extraposi-
tion of the relative clause (94.5%), other types of
intervening elements like noun, conjunctions, non-
finite verb are rarely found. The dominant pattern
that emerges from this is that when something in-
tervenes within a dependency span to make it non-

projective, it is more likely for it to be simple (e.g.
noun phrase) than complex (e.g. clause).

3.2 Length of the intervening constituents

The head-dependent distance i.e. the length of
the intervening constituents (in words) will vary
across linguistic phenomena. The head-dependent
distance is contingent on ‘the size of the projection
chain of an intervener’. The GENITIVE and NON-
FINITE CLAUSE CONSTRUCTIONS have an aver-
age head-dependent distance of 4 words. How-
ever, in cases where a genitive construction al-
lows an embedded non-finite clause and coordi-
nated non-finite clause as intervening elements,

282



the distance between the head and dependent can
get quite large (up to 15 intervening words) as
compared to the average of 4 words. The FINITE
CLAUSE CONSTRUCTION has the average head-
dependent distance of 2 words as they become
non-projective due to a paired connective (which
is just a single word).

3.3 Rightward scrambling & extraposition

Although the leftward scrambling of genitive noun
(i.e. the genitive noun still remains to the left of its
head) is more common among genitive construc-
tions, rightward scrambling of dependent genitive
noun is also observed in the treebank. Example
(a) in Figure 14 shows the genitive marked noun
raam=kaa ‘Ram GEN’ appearing after the copula
hai ‘is’. A similar kind of rightward scrambling
causing non-projectivity is observed in case of
NON-FINITE CLAUSES, where a modifier of non-
finite verb is scrambled to the right of the main
verb (see example (b) of Figure 14). In both cases,
the scrambling could happen because the subtree
headed by this noun is ‘heavy’ due to a relative
clause modification. Such a heavy NP shift should
be seen whenever the noun subtree becomes large.
Non-projectivity due to right extraposition is very
common in relative clause constructions in the
treebank (see example (c) of Figure 14). Re-
cent work in processing suggests that extraposi-
tion of Hindi relative clauses is highly constrained
(Kothari, 2010). Together, these rightward scram-
bling and right-extraposition support the influence
of working memory constraints during processing
(Wasow, 1997; Gibson, 2000; Lewis and Vasishth,
2005).

For the construction types discussed above, we
assumed that their projective counterparts had the
canonical word order; the non-canonical word or-
der in such constructions led to non-projectivity.
There are some clausal complement constructions
that are ‘inherently’ non-projective, i.e., there are
no projective counterparts to these constructions.
The complementizer is headed not by a finite verb,
but a noun or a pronoun; an example – mohan ne
yah bataayaa ki aaj masterji school nahin aayenge
‘Mohan said that the teacher will not come to
school today’, where yah ‘this’ is the head of the
clausal complement headed by ki ‘that’. Out of all
the clausal complements in the treebank 67.3% are
of this type.

A few linguistic phenomena in the treebank are

non-projective due to certain annotation choices.
One such construction is the conditional or paired
connective. Certain types of argument structure al-
ternations with respect to complex predicates also
become non-projective due to annotation choices.
We do not include these cases in our analysis or
in the computation of the non-projectivity mea-
sures. Such cases make up 15.4% of the total non-
projective sentences in the treebank.

So far, we have been discussing non-
projectivity using two of the three constraints
that were introduced in Section 2. We will now
discuss non-projectivity with respect to our third
constraint, hierarchical depth difference.

3.4 Hierarchical depth difference

Linguistic Depth Difference (no. of heads)
Phenomenon n=1 n=2 n=3 n>3
Genitive 88.6% 9.7% 1.7% -
Non-finite clause 53.5% 38.2% 8.3% -
Coordination 61.1% 38.9% - -
Finite Clause 18.4% 75.5% 5.1% 1%
Relative Clause 55.9% 42.2% 0.1% 1.6%
Clausal Complement 64.7% 34.9% - 0.3%

Table 2: The depth difference constraint on
non-projectivity across constructions (in the news
genre)

As shown in table 2, as the depth difference in-
creases, the no. of non-projective constructions
decreases. Recall that this measure captures the
level of embedding of the non-projective arc in
the dependency tree. If the non-projective subtree
is deeply embedded in the tree and the interven-
ing constituent has a head that is higher up in the
tree, we posit that the acceptability or grammati-
cality of the non-projective configurations will be
determined by the notion of depth difference. This
seems to be validated by the data and is consistent
with previous work that has shown the cost of em-
bedding during processing (Gibson and Thomas,
1999), also see Yngve (1960). In fact, since non-
projectivity is costly, we could predict that non-
projectivity at a larger depth difference will be ex-
tremely difficult to process.

It is interesting to note that the difference in per-
centage of non-projectivity across various depths
(cf. table 2) is not the same. While the no. of non-
projective constructions reduce dramatically as
depth difference increases in the case of genitives,
this is not true for relative clauses. Non-finite
clause constructions frequently have depth differ-

283



yah chashmaa hai raam=ka jo iss ilaake kaa netaa hai
these spectacles be.Present Ram=GEN which this area=GEN leader be.present

ROOT

nmod-relc

r6

Example (a): ‘These spectacles are Ram’s, who is the leader of this area’

yah kahana hai raam=ka jo iss ilaake kaa netaa hai
this say.NF be.Present Ram which this area=GEN leader be.present

ROOT
nmod-relc

k1

Example (b): ‘This is Ram’s saying, (the one) who is the leader of this area’

yah kitaab raam=kii hai jo iss ilaake kaa netaa hai
this say.NF be.Present Ram which this area=GEN leader be.present

ROOT

nmod-relc

Example (c): ‘This is Ram’s book, (the one) who is the leader of this area’

Figure 14: Non-projectivity due to extraposition/scrambling of a dependent to the right of the verb in (a)
Genitive, (b) Non-finite clause, (c) Relative clause construction.

ence of 2. Such constructions allow shared argu-
ments to be embedded inside a non-finite clause,
which is in turn within another non-finite clause.
Interestingly, there is a considerable number of
non-projective cases at n=3 for the non-finite and
finite clause constructions. It is very rare to have
non-projectivity for depth >3. Finally, clausal
complements allow a depth difference of up to 5.
They allow a chain of embedded non-finite clauses
inside the main clause, which increases the depth
of embedded head of non-projective subtree.

3.5 Differences across genre
The news data has 18.36% non-projective sen-
tences (3457 sentences) while conversation data
has 11.14% cases of non-projectivity (231 sen-
tences). This is surprising since one would as-
sume conversation data to allow for more word or-
der variation. While this requires further research,
we found a considerable difference between the
two genres (News vs Conversation) with respect
to non-projectivity for some of the linguistic phe-
nomena. In case of NON-FINITE CLAUSE CON-
STRUCTIONS, it is more common for the inter-
vening constituent to be an argument in the con-
versation data (71%) compared to the news data

(31.5%). The rightward scrambling of a genitive
noun is highly productive in the conversation sec-
tion of the treebank, making up 33% of all non-
projective genitive constructions. This implies
that speaker tends to move large phrases right-
ward (heavy NP shift) to minimize the dependency
length in a sentence (Wasow, 1997).

Also, the maximum depth difference for geni-
tives in the conversation data was 1, while in the
news data this was 3 (cf. table 2). This points
to a possibility that non-projectivity of this kind is
simpler in conversation data.

Interestingly, the total number of non-projective
RELATIVE CLAUSE CONSTRUCTIONS is half the
amount in conversation (26.6%) as compared to
news (59.4%). This is due to the frequent occur-
rence of relative-correlative constructions in the
conversation data which are projective. E.g. (i)
ye dost jinse tumhe nafrat hai, vahi ek din tumhare
kaam aayenge ‘These friends whom you hate, they
will help you one day’ (ii) jisko kal tumne ki-
taab di thi, vah ladkaa aaj skool nahin aayaa ‘To
whom you gave the book yesterday, that boy did
not come to school today’. Also, embedded rel-
ative clauses, which are projective, are frequent

284



in the conversation data. Together, these patterns
support a well known claim in the production liter-
ature that syntactic choices are predominantly de-
termined by production ease (MacDonald, 2013,
amongst others), also see Arnold (2011).

4 Summary and Conclusion

This paper was an attempt to use certain novel
measures to understand non-projectivity in Hindi.
These measures were informed by the processing
literature that has tried to formalize the notion of
linguistic complexity using working memory con-
straints. The three measures, namely, the type of
intervening constituent, its length, and the hierar-
chical depth, tried to capture and characterize the
nature and complexity of non-projectivity in var-
ious phenomena. One would assume that over-
all non-projective structures will be less complex.
These measures show that this is indeed true; on
average the nature of intervening phrase is simple,
the length of this phrase is not very large and the
depth difference is small. In addition we also find
support for the role of production ease in the data
of the conversational genre compared to that of the
news genre. It would be interesting to see the effi-
cacy of the proposed measures across multiple lan-
guages. We intend to do this in the near future. We
also hope to investigate if the proposed measures
have any relevance for computational parsing.

References
JE Arnold. 2011. Ordering choices in production: For

the speaker or for the listener. Language from a cog-
nitive perspective: Grammar, usage, and process-
ing, pages 199–222.

Riyaz Ahmad Bhat and Dipti Misra Sharma. 2012.
Non-projective structures in indian language tree-
banks. In Proceedings of TLT11, pages 25–30.

Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Martha Palmer,
Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, and Fei Xia.
2009. A multi-representational and multi-layered
treebank for hindi/urdu. In Proceedings of the Third
LAW, pages 186–189.

Manuel Bodirsky, Marco Kuhlmann, and Mathias
Möhl. 2005. Well-nested drawings as models of
syntactic structure. In In Tenth Conference on For-
mal Grammar and Ninth Meeting on Mathematics of
Language, pages 88–1. University Press.

M. Butt and T. C. King. 1996. Structural topic and
focus without movement. In M. Butt and T. H. King,
eds., The First LFG Conference. CSLI Publications.

N. Chomsky and G. A. Miller. 1963. Introduction
to the formal analysis of natural languages. In R.
D. Luce, R. R. Bush, E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook
of Mathematical Psychology, volume 2, pages 269–
321. Wiley, New York.

N. Chomsky. 1995. The Minimalist Program. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.

L. Frazier. 1985. Syntactic complexity. In D.
Dowty, L. Karttunen, A. Zwicky (Eds.), Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Psychological, Computational
and Theoretical Perspectives, volume 37, pages
129–189. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UKWiley Online Library.

R. Futrell, K. Mahowald, and E. Gibson. 2015.
Large-scale evidence of dependency length mini-
mization in 37 languages. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 112(33):10336–10341.

Edward Gibson and James Thomas. 1999. Memory
limitations and structural forgetting: The perception
of complex ungrammatical sentences as grammati-
cal. Language and Cognitive Processes, 14(3):225–
248.

Edward Gibson. 2000. Dependency locality theory:
A distance-based theory of linguistic complexity.
In Alec Marantz, Yasushi Miyashita, and Wayne
O’Neil, editors, Image, Language, brain: Papers
from the First Mind Articulation Project Symposium.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Carlos Gómez-Rodrı́guez. 2017. On the relation be-
tween dependency distance, crossing dependencies,
and parsing: Comment on dependency distance: a
new perspective on syntactic patterns in natural lan-
guages by haitao liu et al. Physics of Life Reviews.

R. Hudson. 2010. An introduction to Word Grammar.
Cambridge University Press.

S. Husain and S. Vasishth. 2015. Non-projectivity and
processing constraints: Insights from hindi. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Depling, pages 141–150.

Aravind K. Joshi. 1985. Tree adjoining grammars:
how much context-sensitivity is required to provide
reasonable structural descriptions? In David R.
Dowty, Lauri Karttunen, and Arnold Zwicky, ed-
itors, Natural Language Parsing, pages 206–250.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Aravind K. Joshi. 1990. Processing crossed and nested
dependencies: An automaton perspective on the psy-
cholinguistic results. Language and Cognitive Pro-
cesses, 5:1–27.

A. Kidwai. 2000. XP-Adjunction in universal gram-
mar: Scrambling and binding in Hindi- Urdu. Ox-
ford University Press, New York.

A. Kothari. 2010. Processing Constraints And Word
Order Variation In Hindi Relative Clauses. Ph.D.
thesis, Stanford University.

285



Marco Kuhlmann and Joakim Nivre. 2006. Mildly
non-projective dependency structures. In Proceed-
ings of COLING-ACL, pages 507–514.

Marco Kuhlmann. 2007. Dependency Structures and
Lexicalized Grammars. Ph.D. thesis, Saarland Uni-
versity.

Roger Levy and Frank Keller. 2013. Expectation and
Locality Effects in German Verb-final Structures.
Journal of Memory and Language, 68(2):199–222.

R. Levy, E. Fedorenko, M. Breen, and E. Gibson. 2012.
The processing of extraposed structures in English.
Cognition, 122(1):12–36.

R. L. Lewis and S. Vasishth. 2005. An activation-
based model of sentence processing as skilled mem-
ory retrieval. Cognitive Science, 29:1–45.

Haitao Liu, Chunshan Xu, and Junying Liang. 2017.
Dependency distance: a new perspective on syntac-
tic patterns in natural languages. Physics of Life Re-
views.

Maryellen MacDonald. 2013. How language pro-
duction shapes language form and comprehension.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4:226.

P. Mannem, H. Chaudhry, and A. Bharati. 2009. In-
sights into non-projectivity in hindi. In Proceedings
of ACL-IJCNLP 2009 SRW, pages 10–17.

Joakim Nivre. 2006. Constraints on non-projective de-
pendency parsing. In EACL.

Joakim Nivre. 2009. Non-projective dependency pars-
ing in expected linear time. In Proceedings of ACL
and IJCNLP, ACL ’09, pages 351–359.

O. Rambow. 2010. The simple truth about dependency
and phrase structure representations: An opinion
piece. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 337–340.

Molood S. Safavi, Samar Husain, and Shravan Va-
sishth. 2016. Dependency resolution difficulty in-
creases with distance in persian separable complex
predicates: Evidence for expectation and memory-
based accounts. Frontiers in Psychology, 7:403.

S.M. Shieber. 1985. Evidence against the context-
freeness of natural language. Linguistics and Phi-
losophy, 8:333–343.

M. Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.

T. Wasow. 1997. Remarks on grammtical weight.
Language Variation and Change, 9:81–105.

Victor H Yngve. 1960. A model and an hypothesis
for language structure. Proceedings of the American
philosophical society, 104(5):444–466.

286




