



















































Annotating Negation in Spanish Clinical Texts


Proceedings of the Workshop Computational Semantics Beyond Events and Roles (SemBEaR), pages 53–58,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating Negation in Spanish Clinical Texts
Noa P. Cruz Dı́az1, Roser Morante Vallejo2, Manuel J. Maña López3, Jacinto Mata Vázquez3 and

Carlos L. Parra Calderón1

1IBiS/Virgen del Rocı́o University Hospital/CSIC/University of Seville
2CLTL Lab, VU Amsterdam

3Departamento de Tecnologı́as de la Información, University of Huelva
{noapatricia.cruz.exts,carlos.parra.sspa}@juntadeandalucia.es

{r.morantevallejo}@vu.nl
{manuel.mana,jacinto.mata}@dti.uhu.es

Abstract

In this paper we present on-going work
on annotating negation in Spanish clinical
documents. A corpus of anamnesis and
radiology reports has been annotated by
two domain expert annotators with nega-
tion markers and negated events. The Dice
coefficient for inter-annotator agreement is
higher than 0.94 for negation markers and
higher than 0.72 for negated events. The
corpus will be publicly released when the
annotation process is finished, constituting
the first corpus annotated with negation for
Spanish clinical reports available for the
NLP community.

1 Introduction

In this paper we present the UHU-HUVR corpus
of Spanish clinical reports annotated with nega-
tion information. Negation processing (Morante
and Blanco, 2012) is an emergent task in Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP). Initially, nega-
tion processing systems were developed to detect
negation in clinical texts in order to extract ac-
curate information about the patients. The sys-
tems were rule-based (Chapman et al., 2001) be-
cause of the lack of annotated corpora to train ma-
chine learning systems. Currently, annotated cor-
pora are still scarce due to the legal and ethical
requirements that have to be fulfilled. In addition,
most of the corpora only contain documents writ-
ten in English. An example is the BioScope cor-
pus (Szarvas et al., 2008) which contains 1,954 ra-
diology reports from the Computational Medicine
Center in Cincinnati, annotated for negations and
uncertainty along with the scopes of each phe-
nomenon.

For Spanish clinical reports, to the best of our
knowledge, there are only a few attempts to anno-

tate negation, mostly as a secondary task within
broader projects, and none of the annotated re-
sources are publicly available. For example, Cos-
tumero et al. (2014) adapted the NegEx algorithm
(Chapman et al., 2001) to detect negated clini-
cal conditions in Spanish written medical docu-
ments. Although the authors mention that 500
medical texts have been manually annotated, they
do not provide more information about this gold-
standard. Oronoz et al. (2015), annotated negated
adverse drug reactions, but they did not annotate
the words expressing negation. The negation was
annotated as a modifier of the disorder or drug.
Stricker et al. (2015) used a dataset composed of
about 85,600 reports of ultrasonography studies
performed in a Spanish public hospital. Clinical
findings were annotated in a subset of the reports
as being affirmed (if it was possible to infer that
the finding was present in the patient) or negated
(if the finding was absent). The annotations were
recently expanded by Cotik et al. (2016), includ-
ing the values probable (if it was not certain that
the finding was present, but it was probable) and
doubt (if the finding corresponded to the past or
if it was not clear for the annotator if the finding
was present or not). None of the studies provides
information about the availability of the corpora.

Being aware of the limitations of the current ap-
proaches and the necessity of filling this gap, we
present the first version of the UHU-HUVR Cor-
pus, a set of clinical documents annotated with
negation markers and their linguistic scope. The
annotated corpus and its guidelines will be made
publicly available. The paper is structured as fol-
lows: Section 2 describes the annotation process
and provides information about the corpus. Sec-
tion 3 presents the results of the agreement analy-
sis and discusses difficult or interesting cases. Fi-
nally, conclusions and future work are presented
in Section 4.

53



2 Annotating Negation in Spanish
Clinical Reports

The corpus that we present consists of 604 clini-
cal reports from the Virgen del Rocı́o Hospital in
Seville (Spain). Specifically, the set of documents
consists of diagnosis information of 276 radiology
reports and the personal history of 328 anamnesis
reports written in free text, as shown in Table 1.
The reports were randomly collected among re-
ports from the first semester of 2013, and were
fully anonymized in order to satisfy legal and eth-
ical issues. The radiology documents are longer
than the anamnesis documents (339.05 and 157.66
average words per document respectively), but the
average words per sentence is similar (17.50 ver-
sus 16.87).

Anamnesis Radiology
#Docs 328 276
#Sentences 3,065 5,347
#Words 51,712 93,579
Avg. length docs (sentences) 9.34 19.37
Avg. length docs (words) 157.66 339.05
Avg. length sentences (words) 16.87 17.50

Table 1: Statistics about the UHU-HUVR corpus.

The entire corpus was annotated by two domain
experts who followed the guidelines that we de-
veloped. The annotation process started with two
pilot experiments. In the first one, the authors an-
notated 7 reports in order to gain insight to pro-
duce the first version of the guidelines, which was
written by one of the authors, who is a linguistics
expert. In the second one 100 anamnesis docu-
ments were annotated by the two annotators in or-
der to train them, and test and improve the guide-
lines. These documents are not included in the fi-
nal corpus. During all the annotation process, the
annotators were not allowed to communicate with
each other. The problematic cases that they en-
countered were discussed with the expert linguist
and author of the guidelines. As work in progress,
another author who is expert annotator is currently
solving the disagreement cases, acting as adjudi-
cator, in order to generate the gold-standard cor-
pus. The annotation tool used was CAT (Lenzi et
al., 2012). Two markables were defined (negation
marker and negated event) plus a negation relation
between the marker and the event.

The annotation task consisted on annotating the
events that are affected by contextual negation, as
well as the words that express negation. We will

refer to these words as markers. In the exam-
ples that follow, negated events are marked within
brackets and negation markers in bold. In exam-
ple 1, the word no is the negation marker and al-
teraciones en el luminograma aéreo de tráquea
is the event affected by this negation. Examples
of events with negative polarity are the following
ones:1

1. No visualizamos [alteraciones en el lumino-
grama aéreo de tráquea]. (En. We did not
visualize alterations in the aerial luminogram
of trachea.)

2. No [aumentos ganglionares hilio medi-
astı́nicos] ni [hallazgos de interés a lo largo
del esófago]. (En. No mediastinal hilum
nodal enlargement nor findings of interest
along the esophagus.)

3. Sin [lesiones óseas focales que sugieran
metástasis en este barrido]. (En. No focal
bone lesions suggestive of metastasis in this
scan.)

4. Desde hace 20 años abandono radical del
[hábito tabáquico]. (En. During the last 20
years radical stopping of smoking habit.)

The annotation guidelines follow closely the
Thyme corpus guidelines (Styler IV et al., 2014)
with some adaptations. We defined as clinical
event any event that is relevant to elaborate the
clinical chronology of a patient such as a diagno-
sis, tumors, habits, medical tests, or events related
to the functional evaluation of the patient. Events
that do not contribute clinical information are not
annotated. The difficulty of annotating events lies
not just in identifying what is an event, but in
determining which is the chain of words that ex-
press the event. We decided to annotate all the
words that express the event, excluding punctu-
ation marks. In Example (1) the full NP is an-
notated as event: alteraciones en el luminograma
aéreo de tráquea. For negation markers, the mini-
mum number of words is annotated.

We do not always annotate the mentions of neg-
ative results of a test as negation markers because
the fact that a test is negative does not necessar-
ily imply that a clinical event is not happening. In
Example (5) no negation is annotated because, al-
though the results of the Z-N stain are negative,

1We provide between parentheses English translations for
all examples.

54



the test has taken place. However, when the name
of the test is the same as the name of the clini-
cal condition, such as a disease, then the negative
results are annotated as negation because the neg-
ative result indicates that the patient does not have
the disease (see Example (6)).

5. Técnicas de Z-N (normal y largo) negativo.
(En. Negative Z-N stain (normal and long).)

6. Serologı́a materna: [Toxoplasma]: Nega-
tivo. [VHB]: Negativo. [Rubeola]: Nega-
tivo. [Lues]: Negativo. (En. Maternal serol-
ogy: Toxoplasma: Negative. VHB: Negative.
Rubella: Negative. Lues: negative.)

In addition, negative results are sometimes ex-
pressed with the “-” sign, which was annotated
as negation marker in the same cases as indicated
above.

As for affixal negation, we take a pragmatic ap-
proach and annotate the full word where the af-
fix occurs as a negation marker and as a negated
event, when an event is negated. It is the case of
afebril (En. without fever), where a- is the nega-
tion marker. Due to limitations of the tools we
could not split the affixes in order to mark them
independently.

Finally, some coordination structures involve
negation markers. In this cases, each negation
marker in the structure has its own scope, as
shown in Example (7), where the first coordina-
tion marker no scopes over alteraciones a nivel
de los distintos ligamentos y estructuras músculo-
tendinosas and Example (8), where the second
coordination marker ası́ como scopes over al-
teraciones ... de las restantes partes blandas. In
clinical reports, some expressions like ası́ como,
which are usually not negation markers, are used
as such, and thus, we decided to mark them as
negation markers, even if what brings negation to
the event is the coordination structure and not only
the second coordinating element. We have also
marked ”/” as negation marker when it acts as a
coordinating particle, as in Examples (9) and (10).

7. No hemos observado [alteraciones a nivel
de los distintos ligamentos y estructuras
músculo-tendinosas], ası́ como de las
restantes partes blandas. (En. We have
not observed alterations at the level of the
different ligaments and musculo-tendinous
structures, as well as of the other soft parts.)

8. No hemos observado [alteraciones] a nivel
de los distintos ligamentos y estructuras
músculo-tendinosas, ası́ como [de las
restantes partes blandas]. (En. We have not
observed alterations at the level of the differ-
ent ligaments and muscle-tendon structures,
as well as of the other soft parts.)

9. Actualmente no hay evidencia de [nódulos
pulmonares] / adenomegalias mediastı́nicas.
(En. No evidence of pulmonary nodules / me-
diastinal adenomegalies)

10. Actualmente no hay evidencia de nódulos
pulmonares / [adenomegalias mediastı́nicas].

2.1 Negation in Spanish Clinical Texts

The annotations show that negation is a frequent
phenomenon in Spanish clinical texts. As it is
shown in Table 2, more than 22% of the sen-
tences in radiology reports contain negation mark-
ers, whereas in anamnesis reports this percentage
is even higher, 35.20%. This fact is related to the
nature of the two types of documents. Whereas
a radiology report reflects the radiologists obser-
vations, the anamnesis report describes the history
of the patient, including clinical conditions that the
patient has not gone through.

In Spanish clinical domain, (Oronoz et al.,
2015) reported that 27.58% of diseases pre-
sented in a corpus of electronic health records are
negated. Although this percentage is not directly
comparable with the percentage of negated sen-
tences shown in Table 2, the numbers seem sim-
ilar. The frequency of negation in Spanish for
the reviews domain is sensibly higher. Martı́ et
al. (2016) analysed the 75% of SFU Review SP-
NEG corpus and claimed that 46.64% of sentences
contain at least one negation. However, unpub-
lished analysis about the entire SFU Review SP-
NEG corpus shown that the amount of sentences
that contain at least one negation in this corpus is
the 31.90%, which represents a similar value to
negation frequency in anamnesis reports.

#Negation % Negation # Negation
sentences sentences markers

Anamnesis 1,079 35.20 1,572
Radiology 1,219 22.80 1,985

Table 2: Negation statistics in the UHU-HUVR
corpus.

55



Negation markers in the UHU-HUVR corpus
amounted to 69 in the anamnesis subcollection and
52 in the radiology subcollection, with the top 10
most frequent markers shown in Tables 3 and 4. It
is interesting to note that, in Spanish, the first two
markers, no (’no’) and sin (’without’), constitute
more than 70% of the total frequency of all the
markers found in the corpus, while the remaining
markers cover only about 30%. 28 of the mark-
ers are common for radiology and anamnesis re-
ports. It is also interesting to see that signs as “/”
or “-” are considered to be negation markers. A
specific negation marker of the radiology reports
is namc which stands for no alergias medicamen-
tosas conocidas (En. no known drug allergies).

Marker Frequency % Acc. %
no 936 59.54 59.54
sin 197 12.53 72.07
ni 143 9.10 81.17
niega 66 4.20 85.37
namc 31 1.97 87.34
negativo 26 1.65 88.99
nunca 20 1.27 90.26
o 19 1.21 91.47
- 14 0.89 92.36
independiente 11 0.70 93.06

Table 3: The most frequent negation markers in
the anamnesis subcollection of the UHU-HUVR
corpus.

Marker Frequency % Acc. %
sin 877 44.18 44.18
no 662 33.35 77.53
ni 258 13.00 90.53
ası́ como 28 1.41 91.94
ausencia 27 1.36 93.30
o 27 1.36 94.66
tampoco 14 0.71 95.37
desaparecido 7 0.35 95.72
/ 6 0.30 96.02
asimetrı́a 6 0.30 96.32
inespecı́ficas 6 0.30 96.62
inespecı́fico 6 0.30 96.92

Table 4: The most frequent negation markers in
the radiology subcollection of the UHU-HUVR
corpus.

3 Preliminary results

Table 5 illustrates the results obtained for Inter-
Annotator Agreement (IAA) between the two
annotators in terms of Dice’s coefficient mea-
sure (Dice, 1945) as calculated by the CAT anno-
tation tool. We are currently working on the ad-
judication process. The IAA for markers is high

and almost equal in radiology (0.949) and anam-
nesis (0.947) reports, whereas the IAA for events
is lower than for markers. The IAA for events in
radiology reports is lower (0.729) than for anam-
nesis reports (0.840).

Marker Level Token Level
Markers Events Markers Events

Anamnesis 0.947 0.840 0.947 0.896
Radiology 0.949 0.729 0.949 0.860

Table 5: Preliminary Inter-Annotator Agreement
in terms of Dice’s coefficient.

The lower scores for radiology reports can be
explained by the fact that the average length for
events in anamnesis reports is lower (2,10 words)
than in radiology reports (2,81 words), and thus
there are more tokens that can be differently anno-
tated for the same event. Additionally, it is also the
case that interpreting the information in the radiol-
ogy reports requires more specialised knowledge
than interpreting the information in the anamnesis
reports. In the latter, the events are better delimited
and there are certain frequent negated expressions
that are repeated throughout the reports, such as
No or Niega followed by an event, as in the exam-
ples below.

11. No [hábitos tóxicos]. (En. No toxic habits.)

12. Niega [alergias]. (En. Denies allergies.)

13. No [alergias medicamentosas]. (En. No drug
allergies.)

In the radiology reports it is more difficult to
agree on which is the event affected by the marker,
as in Example (14).

14. Sin [hallazgos en la distribución visual-
ización de asas y mesos intestinales y órganos
pélvicos]. (En. No findings in the distribution
visualization of intestinal loops and mesen-
teries and pelvic organs.)

Furthermore, in many radiology reports incor-
rect syntactic constructions are used, as in Exam-
ple (15), where two negation markers are used af-
ter each other forming an agrammatical expression
ni tampoco, which can be confusing for the anno-
tators.

15. No se [realza] ni tampoco [las ramas tribu-
tarias segmentarias de lngula] y [LII]. (En. It
is not enhanced neither the segmental tribu-
tary branches of lingula and LII.)

56



The IAA is similar to the IAA reported for
the clinical collection of the BioScope cor-
pus (Szarvas et al., 2008) in English, where the
IAA between the two annotators was 0.907 for the
markers and 0.762 for the scope. This shows that
the difficulty of the task is independent of the lan-
guage in which the documents are written and in-
herent to the type of texts.

Disagreement cases were analysed by the ad-
judicator who decides on the correct annotations.
Most of the disagreements were the result of a hu-
man error, i.e., the annotators missed a word or
included a word that did not belong either to the
event or to the marker. However, other cases of
disagreement can be explained by the difficulty of
the task and the lack of clear guidance.

A great number of disagreements are related to
the difficulty of detecting what is an event and
which is the chain of words that express the event,
as in Example (16), where the first annotator iden-
tified as event the words Contraste I while the sec-
ond one annotated Contraste I . V ., but none an-
notated the correct span of the event.

16. Sin [Contraste I. V. de Senos Paranasales]
(En. Without Contrast I.V. of paranasal si-
nuses.)

Cases in which negation is expressed by affixes
were a source of disagreement due to the lack of
initial guidelines. An example is the word afebril
which expresses absence of fever. In these cases,
the whole word should be marked both as an event
and as a marker. In contrast, words such as incon-
tinencia urinaria (‘urinary incontinence’), which
contain a negation affix (in- in this case) do not
have to be annotated as negation markers since the
clinical condition that they express is not negated.

More cases of disagreement involve a false dou-
ble negation as shown in Example (17). One of
the annotators identified two markers (no and tam-
poco) instead of one, which is the correct solution
because this is not a case of double negation.

17. Nunca le han dicho que tuviera anemia
porque no [ha acudido tampoco al médico].
(En. (S)he has never been told that (s)he had
anemia because (s)he did not go to the doctor
either.)

Another source of disagreement are cases in
which one marker negates several events, as in
Example (18). One annotator annotated the word

niega as a marker and marked as event the rest of
the sentence, while the other annotator also iden-
tified the word niega as a marker but annotated
each event separately, which is the correct solu-
tion. This case represents an enumeration where
several events are negated by the same marker.
Therefore, each event had to be annotated and re-
lated to the marker independently, generating 4
negation relations.

18. Niega [HTA], [diabetes], [dislipemias] u
[otros FR vascular]. (En. Denies AHT, di-
abetes, dyslipidemia or other FR vascular.)

Jiménez-Zafra et al. (2016) encountered the
same type of disagreements when annotating a
Spanish review corpus (Taboada et al., 2006) with
negation information, i.e., lack of agreement be-
tween annotators about the scope, the event and
the discontinuities. This type of errors amount to
63.26% of the total. They also mentioned seman-
tic problems that arose from the interpretation of
negation patterns in comparative and contrastive
constructions.

4 Conclusions

We have presented the first version of the UHU-
HUVR Corpus, a collection of 604 clinical docu-
ments written in Spanish and annotated with nega-
tion markers, negated events and their relations.
The corpus contains two types of reports, anam-
nesis and radiology. In both of them negation is
a frequent phenomenon that needs to be treated
for natural language processing purposes. The
high IAA obtained suggests that the task is well
defined. As expected, the agreement is higher
for negation markers than for negated events, and
higher in the anamnesis reports than in the radiol-
ogy reports. As future work we plan to perform a
detailed disagreement analysis in order to improve
the guidelines for future annotation projects and to
gain insight into the complexity of the task.

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially funded by the
Andalusian Regional Govenment (Bidamir
Project TIC-07629) and the Spanish Government
(IPHealth Project TIN2013-47153-C3-2-R). RM
is supported by the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO) via the Spinoza-prize
awarded to Piek Vossen (SPI 30-673, 2014-2019).

57



Many thanks to the annotators Carmen Cirilo and
José Manuel Asencio.

References
Wendy W. Chapman, Will Bridewell, Paul Hanbury,

Gregory Cooper, and Bruce G. Buchanan. 2001.
A simple algorithm for identifying negated findings
and diseases in discharge summaries. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 35(5):301–310.

Roberto Costumero, Federico Lopez, Consuelo
Gonzalo-Martı́n, Marta Millan, and Ernestina
Menasalvas, 2014. An Approach to Detect Negation
on Medical Documents in Spanish, pages 366–375.
Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Viviana Cotik, Darı́o Filippo, and José Casta no. 2016.
An approach for automatic classification of radiol-
ogy reports in spanish. Stud Health Technol Inform,
216:634–638.

Lee R. Dice. 1945. Measures of the amount of
ecologic association between species. Ecology,
26(3):297–302.

Salud Marı́a Jiménez-Zafra, Maite Martı́n, L. Alfonso
Ureña Lopez, Toni Martı́, and Mariona Taulé. 2016.
Problematic cases in the annotation of negation in
spanish. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Extra-
Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational
Linguistics (ExProM), pages 42–48, Osaka, Japan,
December. The COLING 2016 Organizing Commit-
tee.

Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, Giovanni Moretti, and
Rachele Sprugnoli. 2012. Cat: the celct annotation
tool. In In Proceedings of the Eigth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2012, pages 333–338.

M. Antònia Martı́, M. Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia, Mar-
iona Taulé, Salud Marı́a Jiménez-Zafra, Montser-
rat Nofre, and Laia Marsó. 2016. La negación
en español: análisis y tipologı́a de patrones de
negación. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural,
57:41–48.

Roser Morante and Eduardo Blanco. 2012. *SEM
2012 Shared Task: Resolving the scope and focus
of negation. In Proceedings of the First Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics,
pages 265–274, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Maite Oronoz, Koldo Gojenola, Alicia Pérez,
Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, and Arantza Casillas.
2015. On the creation of a clinical gold standard
corpus in spanish. J. of Biomedical Informatics,
56(C):318–332, August.

Vanesa Stricker, Ignacio Iacobacci, and Viviana Coti.
2015. Negated findings detection in radiology re-
ports in spanish: an adaptation of negex to spanish.

In Proceedings of the IJCAI - Workshop on Repli-
cability and Reproducibility in Natural Language
Processing: adaptative methods, resources and soft-
ware, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

William Styler IV, Steven Bethard, Sean Finan, Martha
Palmer, Sameer Pradhan, Piet de Groen, Brad Erick-
son, Timothy Miller, Chen Lin, Guergana Savova,
and James Pustejovsky. 2014. Temporal annotation
in the clinical domain. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 2:143–154.

György Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas, and
János Csirik. 2008. The bioscope corpus: anno-
tation for negation, uncertainty and their scope in
biomedical texts. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language
Processing, pages 38–45, Columbus, Ohio, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Maite Taboada, Caroline Anthony, and Kimberly Voll.
2006. Methods for creating semantic orientation
dictionaries. In Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), pages 427–432.

58


