



















































Toward a Comparable Corpus of Latvian, Russian and English Tweets


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 26–30,
Vancouver, Canada, August 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Toward a Comparable Corpus of Latvian, Russian and English Tweets

Dmitrijs Milajevs
NIST

Gaithersburg, MD, USA
dmitrijs.milajevs@nist.gov

Abstract

Twitter has become a rich source for lin-
guistic data. Here, a possibility of building
a trilingual Latvian-Russian-English cor-
pus of tweets from Riga, Latvia is inves-
tigated. Such a corpus, once constructed,
might be of great use for multiple pur-
poses including training machine transla-
tion models, examining cross-lingual phe-
nomena and studying the population of
Riga. This pilot study shows that it is fea-
sible to build such a resource by collect-
ing and analysing a pilot corpus, which is
made publicly available and can be used to
construct a large comparable corpus.

1 Introduction

Comparable corpora are widely used by the natu-
ral language processing community to build ma-
chine translation or information retrieval models.
The goal of this work is to investigate in a pilot
study whether it is possible to build a comparable
linguistic resource of tweets that originates from
one specific location–Riga, Latvia. Riga is a great
location for this because it is a multilingual city in
which Latvian and Russian are both widely used
in everyday life, and English is a lingua franca in
tourism and commerce.

Despite the fact that Latvian and Russian are
widely used, there is little interaction between the
two ethnic communities. The local media con-
sists of two subsystems (Latvian and Russian)
which use different sources and present different
views on current affairs (Muižnieks, 2010). Even
though large media portals tend to have separate
Latvian and Russian web-sites, the same opinions
are found in comments to controversial content on
both versions of web-sites, making the Internet
a public space for a dialogue between the ethnic

communities (Šulmane, 2010). A corpus of user
generated content from Riga is a fruitful resource
for studying the integration of the two communi-
ties, by identifying what is being discussed; how,
and most importantly why it is being discussed.

The pilot corpus1 consists of tweets over the pe-
riod of 5 months (November 2016 to March 2017).
The main goal of the analysis is to investigate
whether a creation of a comparable tweet corpus
is feasible and what the corpus construction strat-
egy should be. To see whether the pilot corpus
is comparable, the peaks of Twitter usage were
analysed. These peaks correspond to real world
events (national celebrations, international politi-
cal affairs and weather). The events are actively
discussed in all languages, but in different propor-
tions (Section 4).

All three languages are represented: 45.5%
tweets are in Latvian, 33.9% in Russian and 20.7%
in English.2 By studying users’ tweeting habits,
we see that the majority of users (83.3%) mostly
tweets in one language (Section 5), making the
tweet collection strategy that considers only mul-
tilingual users incomplete.

The properties of the corpus correspond to the
expectation that it will reflect the real world events
and language use proportion, but its size is too
small to draw solid conclusions. However, the
construction of a reliable comparable corpus is a
matter of the data collection procedure and cor-
pus’ application, because, as this study shows, not
all topics are discussed equally.

2 Related work

Twitter provides an easy way to build a large text
corpus for research. Numerous tweet collections
are built for a variety of purposes. For example,

1https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.582300
2 The ratio of ethnic Latvians to Russians in Riga is 46.2%

to 37.7%.

26



Tjong Kim Sang and van den Bosch (2013) dis-
cuss the process of building a large collection of
Dutch tweets and challenges of accessing the data.
Their retrieval method is based on a list of frequent
Dutch words.

Vicente et al. (2016) build a parallel multilin-
gual corpus of tweets. Their process consists of
two parts: retrieval and alignment. Retrieval is
based on a list of multilingual users. The collected
tweets are aligned using crowdsourcing. Ling
et al. (2013) automatically extract parallel seg-
ments from Sina Weibo (a Chinese counterpart of
Twitter). Gotti et al. (2013) use the parallel web
pages mentioned in tweets of the agencies and or-
ganisations of Canada to train a statistical machine
translation model.

There is a small but growing body of research of
the Latvian Twittersphere, for example, work on
sentiment analysis (Peisenieks and Skadiņš, 2014)
and opinion mining (Špats and Birzniece, 2016).
Both studies focus on Latvian.

3 Dataset construction

The initial set of tweets was retrieved by subscrib-
ing to the POST status/filter endpoint of
the Twitter Streaming API.3 The collected tweets
had to be geo-located and had to originate from
the area of Riga, the capital of Latvia.4

251 083 tweets were collected within the pe-
riod from the 1st of November 2016 to the 31st
of March 2017. On April 14th 2017, the col-
lection was rehydrated5 by querying the Twitter
API with the collected tweet IDs to get rid of the
deleted tweets. In addition, the tweets that origi-
nated from retweets were added to the collection:
the JSON6 representation of a retweet includes the
original tweet, which was extracted and added to
the collection. The rehydrated and expanded col-
lection resulted in a total of 220 883 tweets.

Further analysis of the extended rehydrated col-
lection showed that there are 23 115 (10.5%)
tweets that originated from check-ins on
Foursquare.7 This motivated additional fil-
tering of the rehydrated collection, as “check-in

3https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/
reference/post/statuses/filter

4The locations parameter was set to 23.9325829,
56.8570671, 24.3247299, 57.0859184

5Since distribution of raw tweet data is not allowed,
tweets IDs are shared instead. Hydration is the process of
retrieval of raw tweet data by IDs.

6http://json.org
7https://foursquare.com

tweets” follow a predefined template most of the
time and thus do not reflect real language use.

Client Tweet count Share %

Twitter Web Client 93 705 42.4%
Twitter for iPhone 47 721 21.6%
Twitter for Android 34 277 15.5%
Foursquare∗ 23 115 10.5%
Instagram∗ 13 196 5.0%
Twitter for iPad 2 420 1.1%
Endomondo∗ 1 611 0.7%
Tweetbot of iOS 1 411 0.6%
World Cities∗ 1 361 0.6%
Linkis∗ 660 0.3%

Table 1: The top ten of Twitter clients in the rehy-
drated collection. ∗Clients that are not included in
the final collection as they do not exhibit linguistic
value.

Table 1 shows the top ten most popular clients
in the rehydrated collection. Together with the
tweets originating from Foursquare, tweets from
Instagram, an image sharing service, and En-
domondo, a workout tracking service, were re-
moved. Tweets written using the World Cities
client, which posts weather reports, and the Linkis
client—a promotion website—were also removed.

The final collection resulted in 136 067 tweets
which are in Latvian, Russian or English and cre-
ated after the 1st of November 2016. The language
of a tweet is provided by the corresponding field in
the tweet JSON representation.

4 Tweet analysis

Out of 136 067 tweets that constitute the final col-
lection, 45.5% are in Latvian, 33.9% are in Rus-
sian and 20.7% are in English, see Table 2 for
tweet counts.

Language Tweet count Share % Avg. token count

Latvian 61 869 45.4% 15
Russian 46 070 33.9% 11
English 28 128 20.7% 14

Table 2: Language distribution in the final collec-
tion.

Figure 1 shows the number of tweets per day
over time for all three languages. There are several
peaks in Twitter usage. Some of them affect all
three languages, as in early January, some of them
affect only one language, as in late January.

If the Twitter behaviour is affected by events in
the real world, then these peaks should correspond

27



Nov Dec Jan
2017

Feb Mar

Date

200

400

600
Tw

ee
ts 

pe
r d

ay
language

en
lv
ru

Figure 1: Tweet counts per day per language. The values are averaged over a week window at the right
edge.

to events in the real world. The difference in peaks
could then be explained as there are different real
word events that trigger discussions on Twitter in
Latvian, Russian and English. Table 3 suggests,
that tweets in Latvian and English share similar
behaviour. The Russian tweet timeline is distinct
from both timelines, though its behaviour is more
similar to the Latvian timeline than to the English.

Language Latvian Russian English

Latvian 1.0 0.4 0.6
Russian 0.4 1.0 0.3
English 0.6 0.3 1.0

Table 3: Pairwise Pearson’s-ρ correlation coeffi-
cients between Latvian, Russian and English time-
lines.

What are the distinctive and similar properties
of the timelines? To answer the question, we first
identify the real world events that happened at the
time of the highest peaks.

Mid November 11th of November is Lāčplēsis
Day, a memorial day for soldiers who fought for
the independence of Latvia. 18 November is the
Proclamation Day of the Republic of Latvia. Also,
on the 8th of November, the United States presi-
dential election took place.

The number of tweets significantly increased
for Latvian and English, and not so much for Rus-
sian. Manual inspection of the tweets in that pe-
riod reveals that the US elections are discussed
in all three languages, while the national celebra-
tions of the 11th and the 18th of November are
mostly discussed in Latvian. The discussion in-

cludes such topics as the news related to celebra-
tions, historical notes, reminders of working hours
of businesses, greeting and advertisement.

Manual inspection also shows that events are
language sensitive. For example, the election re-
sults were discussed by Latvians in English. Also,
businesses reported their working hours during the
national celebrations in Latvian and do not dupli-
cate this information in Russian.

Early January In early January a snowstorm hit
Riga. In Latvian and Russian the discussed top-
ics were the same, namely, appreciation of snow,
the transportation difficulties and outdoor photos.
Tweets in English mostly contained photos show-
ing how beautiful Latvia is in Winter.

Late January The inauguration of the 45th
President of the United States was held on 20th of
January 2017. The number of Latvian tweets in-
creases, while for other languages it stays roughly
the same. The reason why there are relatively lit-
tle politics-oriented Russian tweets might be that
60% of citizens and 47% of non-citizens are inter-
ested in politics (Aldermane et al., 2000). Out of
citizens, 60% are ethnic Latvians, 27% are ethnic
Russians. Out of non-citizens, 66% are Russians,
and less than 1% are Latvians.8

5 User analysis

We have seen an evidence that topics are languge
dependant. How many Twitter users switch be-
tween languages?

8https://lv.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Nepilsoņi (Latvija)

28



0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Language uniformity score

0

20

40

60
Us

er
s

Figure 2: Histogram of language use uniformity scores. Low values mean that distinct languages are
used, while high values mean that a single language is preferred.

We consider 507 users for whom at least 50
tweets were collected. 180 or 35.5% of them tweet
exclusively in one language (75 users tweet only in
Latvian, 43 in Russian and 62 in English). Others
tweet in several languages.

To get more insight on how languages are used,
we compute the language uniformity score defined
as:

max(nlv , nru , nen)
nlv + nru + nen

(1)

where nlv corresponds to the number of tweets
in Latvian for a given user, nru to the number of
tweets in Russian, and nen to the number of tweets
in English.

The higher the score, the more dominant a lan-
guage. The lowest possible value of 0.33 means
that all three languages are used equally. The value
of 0.5 means that 50% of tweets are written in a
dominant language. The value of 1 means that the
user tweets exclusively in one language.

The histogram in Figure 2 shows the score dis-
tribution. 420 (82.8%) users tweet mostly in one
language (their scores are greater than 0.9). For
83 (16.4%) users the score is between 0.5 and 0.9.
There are only four (0.8%) users whose dominant
language share is less than 50%.

Among the four Twitter users whose score is
less than 0.5—meaning that they use all three lan-
guages extensively—three are personal accounts
and one is a company account. Other interesting
accounts that tweet equally in Latvian and Rus-
sian, but do not tweet in English are the accounts
of a library and a football club.

To illustrate the language usage pattern between
multilingual users, their first most frequently used
language, their second most frequently used lan-
guage and their third most frequently language
were identified. If a user tweeted equally in two

(three) languages, then the two (three) languages
were given the maximal preference. A user who
tweeted equally in Latvian and Russian, but less
in English, is counted as Latvian and Russian be-
ing their first preference, English as the third.

Latvian is not only the most used language
among the monoligual users, but also is the first
and third most common choice between the mul-
tilingual users. The preference for Russian is sim-
ilar to Latvian, despite the numbers being slightly
lower, suggesting its significant role in everyday
life. English is almost the ultimate second choice,
proving its role as a lingua franca, as Table 4
shows.

Latvian Russian English

Monoligual 75 43 62

Multi, first 150 135 42
Multi, second 56 19 266
Multi, third 29 26 9

Table 4: Language preference between users.

6 Conclusion

We have seen that location-based tweet collection
produces adequate results. Tweets in all three tar-
get languages were collected, and the resulting
collection reflects real world events.

How comparable are the language samples
within the corpus? Topics are language depen-
dent, so it is not the case that all topics are dis-
cussed in every language. There are “monolingual
topics” such as the independence day in Latvia.
Even “multilingual topics” vary in content, as with
the snowstorm tweets, where Latvian and Russian

29



tweets shared common topics, but tweets in En-
glish were distinct.

The final answer is that it depends on the appli-
cation. For machine translation, it is important to
have similar content, so the parallel segments can
be extracted, for example from Latvian and Rus-
sian snowstorm tweets. For a social study, the cor-
pus has to be representative, so that the topics can
lead to the analysis of the communities as in the
case of why the president inauguration was dis-
cussed much less in Russian than in Latvian.

Acknowledgements

The author thanks Dr. Sascha Griffiths for valu-
able discussion and Tatiana Chepurko for litera-
ture suggestions.

Disclaimer

Certain commercial products are identified in this
paper in order to specify the experimental pro-
cedure adequately. Such identification is not in-
tended to imply recommendation or endorsement
by the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, nor is it intended to imply that the identi-
fied products are necessarily the best available for
the purpose.

References
Eiženija Aldermane, Reinis Āboltiņš, Heidi Bottolfs,

Boriss Cilēvičs, Jānis Jaudzems, Anita Jākobsone,
Ābrams Kleckins, Falks Lange, Jānis Mažeiks,
Ilmārs Mežs, Nils Muižnieks, Artis Pabriks, Aija
Priedı̄te, Ilona Stalidzāne, Inese Šūpule, Ramona
Umblija, Elmārs Vēbers, and Brigita Zepa. 2000.
“Towards a Civic Society-2000” Survey of Latvian
Inhabitants. Baltic Institute of Social Sciences.

Fabrizio Gotti, Philippe Langlais, and Atefeh Farzin-
dar. 2013. Translating Government Agencies’
Tweet Feeds: Specificities, Problems and (a few)
Solutions. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Lan-
guage Analysis in Social Media. Association for

Computational Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia, pages
80–89. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-
1109.

Wang Ling, Guang Xiang, Chris Dyer, Alan Black,
and Isabel Trancoso. 2013. Microblogs as Parallel
Corpora. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria, pages 176–186.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P13-1018.

Nils Muižnieks, editor. 2010. How integrated is Lat-
vian society: An Audit of Achievements, Failures and
Challenges. University of Latvia Press.

Jānis Peisenieks and Raivis Skadiņš. 2014. Uses
of Machine Translation in the Sentiment Anal-
ysis of Tweets. Frontiers in Artificial Intelli-
gence and Applications 268(Human Language
Technologies-The Baltic Perspective):126131.
https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-442-8-126.

Gatis Špats and Ilze Birzniece. 2016. Opinion Mining
in Latvian Text Using Semantic Polarity Analysis
and Machine Learning Approach. Complex Systems
Informatics and Modeling Quarterly (7):51–59.

Ilze Šulmane. 2010. The Media and Integration. In
Nils Muižnieks, editor, How integrated is Latvian
society: An Audit of Achievements, Failures and
Challenges, University of Latvia Press.

Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Antal van den Bosch. 2013.
Dealing with big data: The case of Twitter. Com-
putational Linguistics in the Netherlands Journal
3:121–134.

Iñaki San Vicente, Iñaki Alegrı́a, Cristina España-
Bonet, Pablo Gamallo, Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira,
Eva Martı́nez Garcia, Antonio Toral, Arkaitz Zubi-
aga, and Nora Aranberri. 2016. TweetMT: A Paral-
lel Microblog Corpus. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Sara Goggi, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Helene Mazo, Asuncion Moreno,
Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016). Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA),
Paris, France.

30


