







































 Control vs. Raising in English 

A Dependency Grammar Account 

Timothy Osborne 
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
China 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

Matthew Reeve 
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
China 

mjreeve@zju.edu.cn 

Abstract 

This contribution presents a dependency 

grammar (DG) account of control and raising in 

English. Due to the minimalism of DG 

analyses of sentence structure, the difference 

between control and raising cannot be captured 

in the syntactic structure alone. The situation 

forces the DG account to reach to some other 

aspect of dependency syntax other than the 

raw hierarchies of structure to account for the 

differences between control and raising. This 

other aspect is valency. Valency has, of course, 

been a central subtheory of dependency syntax 

since Tesnière (1959/2015: Book D). By 

augmenting the valency frames of predicates to 

distinguish between valents that are and are not 

semantic arguments of the predicate at hand, 

the differences between control and raising can 

be acknowledged and accommodated.  

1 Control vs. raising 

The distinction between control and raising pred-

icates in English and related languages is well es-

tablished. These two types of predicates have a 

combinatory potential that appears to be essen-

tially the same at first blush, e.g. 

(1)  a. Sam preferred to stop. 

b. Sam seemed to stop.

The control predicate preferred and the raising 

predicate seemed both combine with a to-infini-

tive. This similarity obscures the fact that there are 

important differences in how the two behave se-

mantically. 

   Consider in this regard that many DGs would 

produce structural analyses of these two sentences 

that are hierarchically the same, e.g.  

(1) preferred 

Sam to 

  stop  

a'.  Sam  preferred  to  stop. 

seemed 

Sam to 

stop 

b'.  Sam  seemed  to  stop. 

The finite verb in these cases is clearly the clause 

root, and the subject and to-infinitive are then de-

pendents of the root. Given this state of affairs, it 

might seem that DG has nothing to say about the 

differences between these two classes of predi-

cates. 

  The differences between control and raising 

predicates are substantial. For instance, one can 

often form the passive of a control predicate, but 

not of a raising predicate, e.g.  

(2)  a.  To stop was preferred (by Sam). 

b. *To stop was seemed (by Sam). 

The expletive there can often combine with a rais-

ing predicate, but not with a control predicate, e.g. 

(3)  a. *There preferred to be objections. 

b. There seemed to be objections.

Further, raising often allows the alternative for-

mulation with expletive it and a full clause or to-

infinitive, e.g. 

(4)  a. *It preferred that Sam stopped. 

b. It seemed that Sam stopped.

  The aspect of control and raising predicates 

that helps one understand how these differences 

exist lies with the (in)ability of the predicate at 

hand to semantically select (one of) the valent(s) 

that it takes. Control predicates semantically se-

lect their valent(s), whereas raising predicates do 

not semantically select (one of) their valent(s). 

   Semantic selection is indeed the concept neces-

sary for accounting for examples (2–4). The con-

trol predicate prefer semantically selects an expe-

riencer valent (Sam in 1a). The raising predicate 

seem does not, in contrast, place any semantic re-

strictions on its subject valent, but rather its sub-

ject valent must be compatible with the embedded 

Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2017), pages 176-186,
Pisa, Italy, September 18-20 2017

176



predicate. This means that just the embedded 

predicate to stop in (1b) semantically selects the 

subject Sam, whereas both the matrix predicate 

preferred and the embedded predicate to stop in 

(1a) sematically select the subject predicate Sam. 

The primary difference between control and rais-

ing predicates therefore resides with the locus of 

semantic selection, i.e. matrix predicate and/or 

embedded predicate. 

  Acknowledging that there are indeed important 

differences between control and raising predicates, 

DG would seem to be challenged, since the struc-

tural analyses DGs produce of such predicates 

cannot distinguish any significant hierarchical dif-

ference between them, as illustrated with the trees 

(1a'–b'). 

  The greater goal of this manuscript is to inves-

tigate the distinction between control and raising 

predicates from a DG perspective. The message 

delivered is that the differences between the two 

predicate types indeed cannot be captured in the 

hierarchy of structure, but rather it should be lo-

cated in the subtheory of valency. Valency frames 

that are sufficiently augmented to distinguish be-

tween argument and non-argument valents can 

capture the differences between control and rais-

ing. 

 

2  Terminology 

A control predicate such as prefer involves so-

called subject control, because the matrix subject 

is also the understood subject of the embedded 

predicate. A raising predicate such as seem is 

known as a raising-to-subject verb because it ap-

pears as though the subject of the embedded pred-

icate has been raised into the position of the ma-

trix subject. We build on this sort of terminology 

here, although the specific terms we employ to de-

note these predicate types are more exact: prefer 

is called a subject-to-subject (S-to-S) control pred-

icate, and seem a subject-from-subject (S-from-S) 

raising predicate. 

  The motivation for this use of terminology is 

illustrated schematically as follows: 

       S-to-S control 

(4)  a.  Bill prefers __ to nap in the afternoon. 

       S-from-S raising 

    b.  Bill seems __ to nap in the afternoon. 

The arrows now show the distinction between 

control and raising. The appearance of to or from 

in the two terms captures the fundamental distinc-

tion just sketched in the previous section. The sub-

ject valent of the matrix predicate prefers in (4a) 

is conveyed to the embedded predicate, so that it 

can serve as the subject of that predicate. In con-

trast, the raising predicate seems in (4b) raises its 

subject valent from the subject position of the em-

bedded predicate.  

  Note that our use of terminology should be un-

derstood metaphorically. We do not, namely, ad-

vocate a transformational understanding of these 

structures, but rather we are employing the termi-

nology in a manner that we think is accessible to 

the widest possible audience. The type of DG we 

advocate is decidedly monostratal in syntax. 

  The schematic notions just employed can be ex-

tended to denote other types of control and raising 

predicates. Cases of so-called object control and 

raising-to-object can be denoted more exactly as 

object-to-subject (O-to-S) control and object-

from-subject (O-from-S) raising, e.g.  

       O-to-S control 

(5)  a.  Sue asked Jim __ to stay. 

       O-from-S raising 

    b.  Sue expected Jim __ to stay. 

The there-diagnostic verifies that ask is a control 

predicate, and expect a raising predicate: *Sue 

asked there to be a problem vs. Sue expects there 

to be a problem. 

  The dependency hierarchies for these sentences 

are as follows: 

(5)       asked 

     Sue        Jim  to 

                      stay 

  a'.  Sue  asked  Jim  to  stay. 

         expected 

     Sue          Jim  to   

                        stay 

  b'.  Sue  expected  Jim  to  stay.  

These trees demonstrate again that from the DG 

perspective, there is no hierarchical difference in 

the syntactic structure across control and raising 

predicates. The differences lie, rather, in the lexi-

con with the combinatory potential of the distinct 

predicate types. 

  The types of control and raising predicates 

mentioned so far are widely acknowledged and 

have been studied a lot, as is apparent in textbook 

177



accounts (e.g. Haegeman 1991: 237–70, 282–95, 

Radford 2013: 431–50, Carnie 2013: 431–56). 

The terminology adopted here suggests, however, 

that  the typology goes further, that is, that addi-

tional types of control and raising predicates can 

be discerned. This is indeed the case. One can also 

identify S-to-O and O-to-O control predicates as 

well as S-from-O and O-from-O raising predicates. 

The following tables provide an overview of all 

eight predicate types with representative exam-

ples given. 

Control 

predicates 

S-to-S 

ask, attempt, begin, eager, ex-

pect, happy, have, hope, re-

fuse, reluctant, start, stop, try, 

too+adjective, want, willing 

S-to-O 

available, heavy, light, pretty, 

ready, soft, tasty, too+adjec-

tive 

O-to-S 
ask, encourage, force, hear, 

help, listen, persuade, tell  

O-to-O 
bring, build, buy, create, give, 

take  
 

Raising  

predicates 

S-from-S 

appear, apt, certain, happen, 

have, likely, prove, seem, tend, 

threaten, unlikely 

S-from-O 
bad, easy, difficult, fun, good, 

hard, tough, 

O-from-S 

assess, believe, consider, 

deem, expect, judge, make, 

need, see, view, want   

O-from-O have, get, want   

Four of these predicate types have already been 

mentioned and illustrated above. The status of the 

remaining four as control and raising predicates is 

less known and certainly controversial. They are 

illustrated and discussed below in Section 8.  

  Observe that some predicates appear in more 

than one category. Many predicates can license 

control or raising based on context, e.g. expect, 

want. This points to an important aspect of these 

categories. Most control and raising verbs and ad-

jectives (and nouns) have a combinatory potential 

that is to a greater or lesser degree flexible, hence 

                                                           
1 That nouns license control and/or raising is evident with 

NPs such as These hot wings are bitch to enjoy. Due to 

often two or more (often many more) distinct va-

lency frames characterize the combinatory poten-

tial of a given verb or adjective (or noun).1   

3  Structural analysis  

The dependency trees (1a'–b') and (5a'–b') have 

demonstrated that the basic structural analyses 

that DGs produce do not distinguish between con-

trol and raising in the hierarchy of structure. This 

fact seems problematic in view of the differences 

across the two. One might expect, namely, that 

given the differing behaviors with respect to pas-

sivization, there-insertion, and it-extraposition 

that significantly different structures for each 

would obtain.  

  Indeed, one might strive to accommodate the 

differences by pursuing distinct structural anal-

yses. For instance, sentences (5a–b) could be ana-

lyzed as follows: 

(5)       asked  

     Sue        them  to 

                       stay 

  a''. Sue  asked  them  to  stay. 

         expected 

     Sue                to   

                 them     stay 

  b''. Sue  expected  them  to  stay.  

The analysis given as (5a'') is the same as (5a'). 

The analysis given as (5b''), however, is different 

from (5b'); the object Jim has been subordinated 

to the particle to in a manner that suggests a small-

clause-type account. Certainly, other variations on 

the analysis given as (5b'') are also conceivable. 

The point to be established next, though, is that 

there are good reasons to reject analyses along the 

lines of (5b''). The ternary branching analysis 

given as (5b') is in fact well motivated (cf. Kunze 

1975: 111–2, Schubert 1987: 94–6, and 

Heringer 1996: 76–7)). 
  O-to-S control predicates like ask and O-from-

S raising predicates like expect actually behave 

the same with respect to a battery of other diag-

nostics, as illustrated next: 

       Topicalization 

(6)  a. *… but Jim to stay, Sue did ask. 

    b. *…but Jim to stay, Sue did expect. 

    c.  …but Jim Sue did ask to stay. 

space limitations, however, nouns in this role are not exam-

ined in this contribution.   

178



    d.  …but Jim Sue did expect to stay. 

       Clefting 

(7)  a. *It was Jim to stay that Sue asked. 

    b. *It is Jim to stay that Sue expected. 

    c.  It was Jim who Sue asked to stay. 

    d.  It was Jim who Sue expected to stay. 

       Passivization   

(8)  a. *Jim to stay was asked (by Sue). 

    b. *Jim to stay was expected (by Sue).  

    c.  Jim was asked (by Sue) to stay. 

    d.  Jim was expected (by Sue) to stay. 

       Reflexivization 

(9)  a. *Sue1 did ask her1 to stay. 

    b. *Sue1 did expect her1 to stay. 

    c.  Sue1 did ask herself1 to stay. 

    d.  Sue1 did expect herself1 to stay. 

Each of these four data sets illustrates an aspect of 

control and raising predicates that supports the 

relatively flat, ternary-branching analyses given 

as (5a'–b'). 

  The topicalization data illustrate that Jim to stay 

cannot be fronted, whereas Jim alone can be. Sim-

ilarly, the clefting data illustrate that Jim to stay 

cannot be focused as the pivot of cleft sentence, 

whereas Jim alone can be. The passivization data 

demonstrate that Jim to stay cannot become the 

subject of a passive sentence, but Jim alone can; 

and the reflexivization data show that if co-refer-

ence obtains across the subject and object, then the 

object must appear as a reflexive; this fact is, then, 

congruent with the flat analysis, where the object 

is a dependent of the matrix predicate. In sum, the 

four diagnostics are consistent with the flat analy-

sis, where Jim to stay does not form a constituent 

(i.e. a complete subtree) and both Jim and to stay 

are immediate dependents of the matrix predi-

cate.2  

  There is a fifth observation that further 

strengthens the ternary branching analysis given 

as (5a–b). It is possible to insert an adverb that 

modifies the matrix predicate between the object 

nominal and the embedded predicate, e.g.  

                                                           
2 See Hays (1960:261, 1964:520) and Kunze (1975:13) for 

the use of the term complete subtree of dependency syntax 

(10) judged 

  I         him  once  to 

                       have 

                            lied 

                                twice 

  I  judged  him  once  to  have  lied  twice. 

The arrow dependency edge (pointing from once 

to judged) marks once as an adjunct. Using a par-

ticular visual convention like this in the depend-

ency tree to identify adjuncts has precedent, alt-

hough the specific convention used varies (e.g. 

Tarvainen 1981: 61, Engel 1994: 44, Eroms 2000: 

85–6). 

  The position of the adverb once between the 

object him and the to-infinitive phrase is accom-

modated if the structural analysis shown is as-

sumed. There is no semantic contradiction, since 

the adverb once modifies the ‘judging’, and the 

adverb twice, the ‘lying’. The alternative analysis 

that positions him as a dependent of to (or have) 

would incur a projectivity violation, since once 

would still necessarily be a modifier, i.e. a de-

pendent, of judged. 

  In sum, the fact that control and raising struc-

tures receive the same structural analysis here is 

well motivated and should therefore not be con-

strued as a problem for DG more generally. It does, 

though, raise the basic question about how DGs 

can capture the distinction in an insightful way. 

The point established below is that a DG can do 

this in terms of the combinatory potential of the 

relevant predicates. This combinatory potential is 

captured with valency frames. 

4  Phrase structure accounts 

Before proceeding to the discussion of valency 

frames, it is worth considering how the control vs. 

raising distinction is addressed in some phrase 

structure grammars (PSGs). The Government and 

Binding framework explored the distinction be-

tween control and raising extensively (e.g. Chom-

sky 1981: 55–92). It captured the distinction in 

terms thematic marking and null elements. The 

null element PRO was put forth as a means of un-

derstanding control, and in cases of raising, a trace 

t was placed in the base position of the raised con-

stituent.  

as being analogous to the constituent of phrase structure 

syntax.  

179



  Given the null elements PRO and t, control and 

raising predicates were analyzed along the follow-

ing lines: 

      Subject control 

(11) a. Neil1 refused PRO1 to slow down.   

      Object control 

    b. They forced Neil1 PRO1 to slow down. 

      Raising-to-subject 

(12) a. Neil1 appeared t1 to slow down.  

      Raising-to-object 

    b. They need Neil1 t1 to slow down.  

Hence the fundamental insight that control predi-

cates do, but raising predicates do not, semanti-

cally select (one of) their valent(s) is captured via 

the presence of distinct types of null elements and, 

in the case of raising, the assumption that move-

ment occurs.  

  Stepping back for a moment, positing the exist-

ence of null elements such as PRO and t is inde-

pendent of the dependency vs. phrase structure 

distinction. In this regard, nothing prevents a DG 

from also addressing the control vs. raising dis-

tinction in terms of null elements and movement. 

One could, for example, advocate for the follow-

ing structural analyses of the examples just given: 

(11)       refused 

     Neil1              to 

                 PRO1    slow 

                              down 

  a'.  Neil1  refused  PRO1 to  slow  down. 

          forced 

     They        Neil1       to  

                    PRO1    slow 

                                 down 

  b'.  They  forced  Neil1 PRO1  to slow  down. 

(12)       appeared 

     Neil1             to 

                  t1     slow 

                             down 

  a'.  Neil1  appeared  t1  to  slow  down. 

          need 

     They1     Neil1     to 

                   t1     slow 

                              down 

  b'.  They1 need Neil1  t1  to  slow  down. 

A theory of syntax that acknowledges such null 

elements takes the control vs. raising distinction 

to be a phenomenon of syntax. This is particular 

true of traces, since their existence is contingent 

upon the occurrence of movement, a transforma-

tional notion that is located entirely in syntax.  

  While nothing prevents a DG from positing the 

existence of null elements and movement, DGs 

have traditionally been loath to do so. DG by na-

ture is strongly lexical. This is in fact a necessity, 

since the minimalism of dependency structures 

cannot accommodate the richness of category dis-

tinctions associated with some PSGs. For instance, 

DGs are incapable of locating in the rich hierarchy 

functional categories posited by the Minimalist 

Program (MP), e.g. Focus  Phrase (FP), Agree-

ment Phrase (AgrP), Tense Phrase (TP), Topic 

Phrase (TopP), etc. 

  What all this means for the DG analysis of con-

trol and raising predicates is that an approach that 

looks to the lexicon is more consistent with the 

spirt of dependency syntax. The distinction be-

tween control and raising predicates resides with 

the combinatory potential of the relevant predi-

cates, and this combinatory potential is captured 

via valency frames.  

5   Three options 

There are three basic options for addressing con-

trol and raising in dependency syntax: 

1.  Networks,  

2.  An augmented inventory of  

   syntacitc relations, and/or 

3.  Augmented valency frames 

The first option, i.e. networks, stipulates addi-

tional dependencies to show the extent to which 

control and raising predicates designate one of 

their valents to serve as the valent of a lower pred-

icate. The second option adds more syntactic rela-

tions and then addresses the difference between 

control and raising in terms of these additional re-

lations. The third option locates control and rais-

ing entirely in the lexicon and distinguishes be-

tween them in terms of valency frames. The third 

option is the one pursued below. 

180



  Most DGs conceive of syntactic structure in 

terms of trees. Trees are not a necessity, however. 

When a dependency grammar allows a given 

word to have more than a single parent word, it 

assumes networks. Word Grammar (e.g. Hudson 

1990) is perhaps the most prominent DG to as-

sume networks. The Word Grammar analysis of 

control and raising structures is along the follow-

ing lines: 

(13) 

    a. Frank  tried  to  understand. 

 

    b. Frank  appeared  to  understand. 

The fact that Frank is the logical subject of both 

the matrix and the embedded predicate is indi-

cated directly in these cases by the fact that both 

tried/appeared and understand are shown as the 

parent of Frank.  

  While these networks accommodate the fact 

that Frank is the valent of two predicates at the 

same time, the presence of the additional depend-

ency does not alone distinguish between control 

and raising. Something more is needed to this end. 

This necessity brings the discussion to the second 

option, namely an augmented inventory of syntac-

tic relations. 

  Many DGs take the syntactic relations to be 

primitive and grant them an important role in the 

theory of syntax. In this regard, the distinction be-

tween control and raising might be addressed in 

terms of an augmented list of syntactic relations – 

cf. Mel'čuk and Persov (1987). The additional re-

lations would be such that they would discern 

when control or raising is present. One might, for 

instance, posit distinct syntactic relations along 

the following lines (SUBJC = subject control, 

SUBJR = subject raising): 

(14)        is    
       SUBJC 
     Frank     trying 

                   to 

                     understand 

  a.  Frank  is  trying to understand. 

          should 
       SUBJR 
     Frank       appear 

                      to 

                        understand  

   b.  Frank should appear to understand. 

The presence of the labels indicating the pertinent 

syntactic relations in these two cases would dis-

cern and distinguish between control and raising. 

Note, however, the presence of the auxiliary verbs, 

is in (14a) and should in (14b). Their presence 

combined with the fact that the subject is an im-

mediate dependent of the finite verb obscures the 

insight that it is the content verbs tried and ap-

peared that are responsible for the presence of the 

syntactic realtions SUBJC and SUBJR. 

  The points just established reveal difficulties 

associated with the first two options for discerning 

and distinguishing between control and raising in 

dependency syntax. The first option, i.e. networks, 

is rejected here in part because we believe trees 

are a simpler and more principled basis for de-

pendency syntax. The second option, i.e. an aug-

mented inventory of syntactic relations, is also 

deemed insufficient for capturing the distinction 

between control and raising because they alone do 

not make clear that control and raising phenomena 

are closely linked to specific predicates. 

  The third option, namely valency frames, 

avoids networks at the same time that it it ties con-

trol and raising closely to specific predicates. The 

discussion now turns to these valency frames.  

 

6   Valency frames 

There is a long tradition of using valency frames, 

especially in the German language literature. In 

German, a valency frame is often called a 

Satzmuster ‘sentence pattern’. Dictionaries of 

German provide dozens of Satzmuster as a guide 

to correct use of verbs and adjectives (and other 

types of predicates), e.g. dtv Wörterbuch der 

deutschen Sprache (1978: 30–3). To my 

knowledge, however, these dictionaries do not 

distinguish between control and raising predicates 

in a consistent and principled manner. The discus-

sion here henceforth demonstrates how these 

frames can distinguish between control and rais-

ing predicates in English. 

  Table 3 gives the symbols employed in the va-

lency frames below. The table is intended to serve 

as a quick reference guide to the valency frames 

introduced and discussed further below.  

Symbol 
What the symbol 

means 

a 

Marks an argument valent; the 

absence of this subscript indi-

cates that the valent is not an ar-

gument of its governor 

181



f, nf 

valency frame given is valid for 

the finite/nonfinite form of the 

verb 

N 
Nominal (noun, pronoun, or 

noun phrase) 

Pa 
(Passive) perfect participle, e.g. 

eaten, understood, worked 

T to-infinitive phrase, e.g. to stay 

R 

R indicates that that valent is to 

be understood in terms of rais-

ing; the valency carrier does not 

syntactically select that valent 

N, N 

Single underline marks that va-

lent as the subject argument of a 

predicate lower in the structure; 

double underline marks that va-

lent as the object argument of a 

lower predicate 

↑ 

Up-arrow indicates that the va-

lent does not appear as a depend-

ent of the predicate, but rather it 

appears elsewhere in the struc-

ture or situational context 

The valents of a predicate are enclosed in square 

brackets […] and the predicate itself is put in 

small caps and positioned to the immediate left of 

the brackets, e.g. Harry loves Harriet – LOVEf [Na, 

Na]. 

  The machinery given in the table is just enough 

to address control and raising and distinguish be-

tween them. The list of categories and labels nec-

essary for a full account of valency patterns in 

English would be much larger, of course.  

7  To/from-subject predicates 

The following four subsections provide examples 

of the four types of control and raising predicates 

already mentioned above. These predicates have 

the/a matrix valent serving as the subject argu-

ment of the embedded predicate. In order to have 

more space for the discussion for the more contro-

versial types of control and raising discussed in 

Section 8, the discussion in this section is very 

brief.  

7.1  S-to-S control 

S-to-S control predicates are numerous and they 

occur frequently. Both verbs and adjectives can 

establish S-to-S control, e.g. 

(15)         tried 

      Frank       to 

                    rest 

   a.  Frank  tried  to  rest. 

   b.  TRYF [Na, Ta] 

(16)         would 

      Susan        like 

                      to 

                         drink 

                              vodka  

   a.  Susan  would  like  to  drink vodka. 

   b.  LIKEnf [Na↑, Ta] 

(17)        are 

      They      reluctant 

                       to 

                          continue 

   a.  They  are  reluctant  to  continue. 

   b.  RELUCTANT [Na↑, Ta] 

The single underline under N marks that valent as 

controlling the embedded to-infinitive predicate. 

Hence the single underline marks that valent as 

the understood subject valent of the to-infinitive. 

The up-arrow in (16b) indicates that that valent is 

not a dependent of the nonfinite like, but rather it 

appears higher in the structure – in this case, as a 

dependent of the root verb would.  

  The up-arrow is a convention that helps charac-

terize the primary combinatory difference be-

tween finite verbs and other nonfinite forms of 

predicates. For the use of similar means to indicate 

that the subject valents are typically not depend-

ents of nonfinite forms, see Heringer (1996: 44, 

62) and Starosta (2003: 275–6). 

7.2  S-from-S raising 

S-from-S raising also occurs with both verbs and 

adjectives, e.g.  

(18)        is 

      She     certain 

                   to                 

                      fall 

                          asleep  

    a. She  is  certain to  fall  asleep. 

    b. CERTAIN [ R↑, Ta] 

(19) a. The fridge is threatening to explode. 

    b. THREATENnf [ R↑, Ta] 

182



(20) a. They are unlikely to succeed. 

    b. UNLIKELY [ R↑, Ta] 

These valency frames differ from those just given 

in the previous section regarding the presence of 

R and the absence of the a subscript on R. The R 

indicates that that valent is not syntactically se-

lected by its parent, and the absence of the a sub-

script always indicates that that valent is also not 

semantically selected by its parent. At the same 

time, the single underline continues to indicate 

that that valent serves as the subject argument of 

the embedded infinitival predicate. 

7.3  O-to-S control 

O-to-S control predicates are also numerous, and 

they occur frequently as well. Examples follow: 

(21)       asked 

      She        me  to 

                       come 

                             early 

    a. She  asked  me  to  come  early. 

    b. ASKf [Na, Na, Ta] 

(22) a. They have forced him to try it.  

    b. FORCEnf [Na↑, Na, Ta] 

(23) a. Jill told us to start immediately.  

    b. TELLf [Na, Na, Ta] 

The object now controls the embedded to-infini-

tive, functioning as its subject argument. The sin-

gle underline continues to indicate that that valent 

serves as the understood subject valent of the em-

bedded predicate. 

7.4  O-from-S raising 

O-from-S raising predicates have the matrix ob-

ject, as opposed to the matrix subject, being se-

mantically selected by the embedded nonfinite 

predicate. Only verbal predicates can do this, e.g.  

(24)       consider 

     We            you  to 

                          be 

                            reliable   

    a. We  consider  you  to  be  reliable. 

    b. CONSIDERf [Na, R, Ta]   

(25) a. They will need us to help them. 

    b. NEEDnf [Na↑, R, Ta] 

(26) a. He wants them to leave. 

    b. WANTf [Na, R, Ta] 

The R and the absence of the a subscript on the R 

are again the means by which raising is indicated. 

The single underline continues to show that that 

valent serves as the subject valent of the embed-

ded predicate.  

 

8 To/from-object predicates 

The following four subsections consider S-to-O 

and O-to-O control predicates as well as S-from-

O and O-from-O raising predicates. The extent to 

which the predicates discussed are indeed control 

or raising predicates is less acknowledged and/or 

controversial. This, then, is arguably the merit of 

the current account; it discerns generalizations 

about control and raising predicates that have 

been overlooked. 

8.1  S-to-O control 

The typical S-to-O control predicates is an adjec-

tive, e.g. available, fit, heavy, light, pretty, ready, 

soft, tasty, ugly, unavailable:   

(27)          is 

       Susan     pretty 

                      to 

                         look 

                              at 

    a.  Susan  is  pretty  to  look  at.   

    b.  PRETTY [Na↑, Ta] 

    c. *It is pretty to look at Susan. 

(28) a.  These nuts are tasty to snack on. 

    b.  TASTY [Na↑, Ta]     

    c. *It is tasty to snack on these nuts. 

(29) a.  This coat is soft to touch. 

    b.  SOFT [Na↑, Ta] 

    c. *It is soft to touch this coat. 

The unacceptability of the c-sentences here reveal 

that pretty, tasty, and soft are not raising predi-

cates. The b-examples show how the combinatory 

potential of these predicates is captured in valency 

frames. The double underline marks the subject 

valent as controlling an object that appears lower 

in the structure. The fact that the subject N bears 

the a subscript indicates that raising is not involved. 

  An interesting aspect of S-to-O control is that 

many adjectives can be coerced into becoming 

such predicates by the appearance of too, e.g.  

183



(30)              is 

           couch        large 

       The           too      to 

                              move    

    a.  The  couch  is  too large  to move. 

    b.  TOO LARGE [Na↑, Ta] 

(31) a.  Tom is too clever to fool. 

    b.  TOO CLEVER [Na↑, Ta] 

(32) a.  This essay is too long to read. 

    b.  TOO LONG [Na↑, Ta] 

Without too, the adjectives large, clever, and long 

are not control predicates. The ability of the de-

gree adverb too to coerce adjectives that alone are 

not control predicates is also true in cases of S-to-

S control, e.g.  

(33) a.  Frank is too lazy to get up early.  

    b.  TOO LAZY [Na↑, Ta] 

(34) a.  Larry is too slow to catch us. 

    b.  TOO SLOW [Na↑, Ta] 

(35) a.  Harriet is too careful to get caught.   

    b.  TOO CAREFUL [Na↑, Ta] 

The combinatorial difference across (30–32) and 

(33–35) is captured with the underlines, double vs. 

single.3 

8.2  S-from-O raising 

S-from-O raising is more widely known under the 

rubric of tough-movement – a reference to the ad-

jective tough as the typical predicate that licenses 

such movement (e.g. McCawley 1998: 107–10, 

Culicover and Jackendoff 2005: 342–47). The 

double underline again serves to indicate that the 

valent serves as the object of a lower predicate, 

e.g.  

(36)               is 

            couch     tough 

       This                 to 

                              move 

    a.  This  couch  is  tough  to  move. 

    b.  TOUGH [R↑, Ta] 

    c.  It is tough to move this couch. 

                                                           
3 An anonymous reviewer points out that combinations such 

as too large, too lazy, etc. are not stored in the lexicon as sin-

gle lexical items and that an account of such data in terms of 

valency is hence problematic. This matter is open issue.  

(37) a.  The floor is easy to clean. 

    b.  EASY [R↑, Ta] 

    c.  It’s easy to clean this floor. 

(38) a.  A break is good to get. 

    b.  GOOD [R↑, Ta] 

    c.  It’s good to get a break. 

The double underline shows that that valent serves 

as the object of the/a predicate appearing lower in 

the structure. The R and the absence of the a sub-

script on the R valent indicate that that valent is 

neither syntactically nor semantically selected by 

the predicate. 

  The valency frames just introduced to capture 

the combinatory potential of S-from-O raising are 

also capable of characterizing these predicates 

when they are used attributively – although an ad-

ditional assumption is necessary, e.g.  

(39)                    is 

          book             over 

   A  fung      to               there 

                  read            

 a. A  fun  book  to  read  is  over  there. 

 b. FUN [N↑, Ta] 

The attributive adjective fun clearly governs the 

to-infinitive to read. The word order is such, how-

ever, that a non-projective structure should obtain 

due to the intervening noun book. To overcome 

this non-projective structure, rising is assumed, as 

indicated with the dashed dependency edge and 

the g subscript (see Groß and Osborne 2009). Note 

that in such cases of a predicate used attributively, 

the up-arrow in the valency frame continues to 

capture the fact that the subject valent of the pred-

icate is not a dependent of that predicate. Note 

also that the R valent does not occur. In cases of 

attributive use, the subject valent is always a nom-

inal. 

8.3  O-to-O control 

Cadidates for an analysis in terms of O-to-O con-

trol are listed next: bring, build, buy, create, find, 

give, take, e.g. 

184



(40)        found 

      Sam        Sue  to 

                        dance 

                              with 

   a.  Sam  found  Sue  to  dance  with. 

   b.  FINDf [Na, Na, T] 

(41)     gave 

      I       it  to       to 

                   you      read  

   a.  I  gave  it  to  you   to  read. 

   b.  GIVEf [Na, Na, toNa, T]  

(42)       took 

      We       them  to 

                       enjoy 

   a.  We  took  them  to  enjoy. 

   b.  ENJOYf [Na, Na, T] 

The flatness of structure here is motivated by di-

agnostics for constituents – see examples (6–9). 

These diagnostics reveal that, for instance, Sue to 

dance with in (40) is not a constituent, e.g. topi-

calization: *…and Sue to dance with Sam found; 

clefting: *It is Sue to dance with that Sam found. 

In addition, we know that the to-infinitive phrases 

are not dependents of the objects Sue, it, and them 

because definite nouns and pronouns do not typi-

cally take dependents. Furthermore, the fact that 

to read in (41a) is separated from it by to you re-

futes the notion that it and to read could form a 

constituent (i.e. a complete subtree). 

  Another noteworthy aspect of these examples 

is the absence of a subscript on the T valent. This 

indicates that those valents are not arguments of 

the parent predicate; they are, rather, secondary 

predications the presence of which is optional. 

Their actual status is a difficult issue (valent or ad-

junct?) that cannot be addresssed here appropri-

ately due to limited space.   

  Finally, observe that control is doubly present 

in these cases, since the subject of the to-infinitive 

is also a matter of control – although of nonoblig-

atory control, as example (41a) reveals, where the 

understood subject of the to-infinitive is the to-ar-

gument, not the subject. That nonobligatory con-

trol is involved is also evident in the fact that in-

sertion of a for-phrase in these examples can shift 

the controller from the subject to the object of for, 

e.g. For the kids, we took the snacks to enjoy – the 

kids will enjoy the snacks.  

8.4  O-from-O raising 

The final type of raising is O-from-O raising. 

This type of raising occurs infrequently. We 

are aware of just a couple of verbs that qualify 

as such predicates: have, get, and want, e.g.  

(43)      have 

       I       you   to 

                      tease 

    a.  I  have  you   to  tease. 

    b.  HAVEf [Na, R, Ta] 

(44)         got  

       You      her  to  

                        kiss 

    a.  You  got  her  to  kiss. 

    b.  GETf [Na, R, Ta] 

(45)      want 

       I       these  to 

                      eat        

    a.  I  want  these  to  eat.  

    b.  WANTf [Na, R, Ta]  

Observe as well that the object R in these exam-

ples is a definite pronoun. This fact again supports 

the flat analysis shown, since it contradicts the al-

ternative analysis that positions the to-infinitive as 

a dependent of the object – definite pronouns do 

not accept postdependents. Observe that as with 

the examples of O-to-O control in the previous 

section, nonobligatory subject control is also pre-

sent in these examples. We again know that con-

trol is pragmatically determined in such cases be-

cause it is possible to vary the understood subject 

of the to-infinitive, e.g. For my kids, I want these 

to eat.   

  Another interesting aspect of these predicates is 

that they also alternatively license O-from-S rais-

ing, e.g.  

(46)      had 

       I        house  painted 

             a 

    a.  I  had  a  house  painted. 

    b.  havef [Na, R, Paa] 

(47) a.  I got my paper corrected. 

    b.  GETf [Na, R, Paa] 

(48) a.  They wanted it revised. 

    b.  WANTf [Na, R, Paa] 

185



Used in this way, the predicates have, get, and 

want no longer involve control. The appearance of 

the passive participle forces the account to assume 

that the object functions as the subject of the em-

bedded participle, rather than as its object.    

9  Conclusion 

This contribution has presented a DG account of 

obligatory control and raising. Due to the minimal 

nature of dependency structures, the distinction 

cannot be captured in the hierarchy of words; it 

can, rather, be captured in valency frames. The va-

lency frames introduced here distinguish between 

control and raising mainly via the presence/ab-

sence of the a subscript and the R valent. When a 

subscript is absent, the valent is not semantically 

selected by the predicate. A particular merit of the 

approach is its ability to distinguish between var-

ious types of control and raising predicates, eight 

in all.         

References  

Andrew Carnie. 2013. Syntax: A Generative Introduc-

tion, 3rd edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA. 

Noam Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on Government and 

Binding: The Pisa Lectures. Foris Publications, 

Dordrecht. 

Peter Culicover and Ray Jackendoff. 2005. Simpler 

Syntax. Oxford University Press. 

dtv Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache. 1978. 

Herausgegeben von Gerhard Wahrig. Deutscher 

Taschenbuch Verlag GmbH, München.  

Ulrich Engel. 1994. Syntax der deutschen Gegenwarts-

sprache, 3rd fully revised edition. Erich Schmidt, 

Berlin. 

Hans-Werner Eroms. 2000. Syntax der deutschen Spra-

che. de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2009. Toward a 

practical dependency grammar theory of disconti-

nuities. SKY Journal of Linguistics 22, 43–90.  

Liliane Haegeman. 1991. Introduction to Government 

.& Binding Theory. Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

David G. Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A formal-

ism and some observations. Language 40, 511–25. 

Hans Jürgen Heringer. 1996. Deutsche Syntax 

Dependentiell. Staufenberg, Tübingen.  

Richard Hudson. 1990. English Word Grammar. Basil 

Blackwell, Oxford, UK.  

Jürgen Kunze. 1975. Abhängigkeitsgrammatik. Studia 

Grammatica 12. Akademie Verlag, Berlin. 

James McCawley. 1998. The Syntactic Phenomena of 

English, 2nd ed. The University of Chicago Press. 

Igor Mel'čuk and Nikolai Pertsov. 1987. Surface syn-

tax of English: A formal model with the Meaning-

Text Framework. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Klaus Schubert. 1987. Metataxis: Contrastive depend-

ency syntax for machine translation. Foris Publica-

tions, Dordrecht. 

Stanley Starosta. 2003. Dependency grammar and lex-

icalism. In Vilmos Ágel et al. (eds.), Dependency 

and Valency: An International Handbook of Con-

temporary Research, vol. 1, pp. 270–81. Walter de 

Gruyter, Berlin. 

Kalevi Tarvainen. 1981. Einführung in die De-

pendenzgrammatik. Max Niemeyer Verlag, Mün-

chen. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntax structurale. 

Klincksieck, Paris.  

Lucien Tesnière. 2015 (1959). Elements of structural 

syntax, translated by Timothy Osborne and Sylvain 

Kahane. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

186

http://www.degruyter.com/view/product/5087?format=G
http://www.degruyter.com/view/product/5087?format=G



