



















































Click reduction in fluent speech: a semi-automated analysis of Mangetti Dune !Xung


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 107–115,
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, USA, March 6–7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Click reduction in fluent speech: a semi-automated analysis of
Mangetti Dune !Xung

Amanda Miller
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
miller.5592@osu.edu

Micha Elsner
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
melsner0@gmail.com

Abstract

We compare click production in fluent
speech to previously analyzed clear pro-
ductions in the Namibian Kx’a language
Mangetti Dune !Xung. Using a rule-based
software system, we extract clicks from
recorded folktales, with click detection ac-
curacy about 65% f-score for one story-
teller, reducing manual annotation time by
two thirds; we believe similar methods
will be effective for other loud, short con-
sonants like ejectives. We use linear dis-
criminant analysis to show that the four
click types of !Xung are harder to differ-
entiate in the folktales than in clear pro-
ductions, and conduct a feature analysis
which suggests that rapid production ob-
scures some acoustic cues to click identity.
An analysis of a second storyteller sug-
gests that clicks can also be phonetically
reduced due to language attrition. We ar-
gue that analysis of fluent speech, espe-
cially where it can be semi-automated, is
an important addition to analysis of clear
productions in understanding the phonol-
ogy of endangered languages.

1 Introduction

We compare click production in fluent speech
to previously analyzed clear productions in the
Namibian Kx’a language Mangetti Dune !Xung
(hereafter !Xung). This language contains the four
coronal click types recognized by the IPA (Associ-
ation, 2006). Most content words contain an initial
click, making clicks an important marker for lex-
ical identity and useful for marking the beginning
of words for speech processing (Beckman, 2013).
Miller and Shah (2009) show that temporal cues,
burst duration (BD) and rise time to peak inten-
sity in the click burst (RT); and spectral cues, Cen-

ter of Gravity (COG) and Maximum Burst Ampli-
tude (MBA), differentiate the clicks in clear pro-
ductions. We extend this analysis to fluent, natu-
ralistic speech in a corpus of folktales (Augumes
et al., 2011). Using a semi-automated rule-based
method to locate the clicks in the acoustic data,
we are able to inexpensively align a large enough
portion of the corpus for acoustic analysis. We
show that the cues identified by Miller and Shah
(2009) are less effective in differentiating clicks
in running speech, providing quantitative evidence
that this rare class of consonants is subject to pho-
netic reduction. Finally, we provide an analysis
of the acoustic cues which differentiate the clicks,
showing that the best cues for discriminating pro-
ductions vary among speakers, but that in general
spectral cues work better than measures of ampli-
tude. Overall, our results demonstrate that clicks,
which are known for being unique in their loud-
ness, are not always so loud, and that even sounds
that are known for their loudness undergo reduc-
tion just like other speech sounds.

2 Background

2.1 Click Burst Amplitude

It has long been noted that clicks are louder than
pulmonic stop consonants. Ladefoged and Traill
(1994) note that clicks in !Xóõ often have a peak-
to-peak voltage ratio that is more than twice that
of the onset of the following vowel (about a 6 dB
difference in intensity), which Traill (1997) com-
pares to Greenberg (1993) description of pulmonic
stops as typically “. . . 40 dB less intense than the
following vowel.” This property of clicks should
make them easy to recognize automatically, even
with relatively unsophisticated methods. While Li
and Loizou (2008) have shown that low amplitude
pulmonic obstruents are degraded in noisy speech
environments, clicks might be expected to differ
in this regard due to their typically high amplitude

107



click Alveolar, Lateral Palatal Dental
IPA Sym !, { =/ |

Table 1: Intensity of noisebursts for !Xóõ clicks
(loudest to quietest) (Traill, 1997).

bursts.
Previous work on click amplitudes has also

noted a large degree of variability, which could
make both click recognition and differentation of
different click types more difficult. Traill (1997)
provides an intensity scale as in Table 21, but
states that there is a great degree of variability.
Miller-Ockhuizen (2003) shows similar results for
Ju|’hoansi, and also comments on the great degree
of variability. Traill and Vossen (1997) note that
there is a large degree of variability in the ampli-
tude of click bursts. None of these studies has nu-
merically quantified the variability or determined
to what degree it makes clicks confusable with
non-clicks or with each other.

Traill (1997) argues that non-pulmonic stop
consonants are enhanced versions of pulmonic
stops, given the high amplitude bursts that are typi-
cally louder than the following vowel in clicks and
in intermediate intensity bursts found in ejectives,
building on Stevens and Keyser (1989)’s theory of
consonant enhancement. The theory suggests that
clicks should be easier to identify in the acoustic
signal than pulmonic consonants. However, clicks
with lower amplitude should also result in lower
perceptibility in human speech recognition and
lower identification in automatic speech recogni-
tion. What remains unknown from this work is
whether or how often low-amplitude clicks are ac-
tually produced.

2.2 Click Burst Duration
Click amplitudes are useful cues for extracting
clicks from the speech stream, but in order to dif-
ferentiate between click types, listeners must also
attend to other features. Previous work agrees
that these features indicate different manners of
articulation, although they differ in their theoret-
ical account of the underlying phonological con-
trasts. Beach (1938) referred to this difference
as affricate vs. implosive. Trubetzkoy (1969)
recouched the manner contrast among clicks as
fricative vs. occlusive. Both articulatory based

1Traill’s scale also includes the bilabial click [ò], which
is on average less intense than the others. This click does not
occur in !Xung.

and acoustically based phonological features have
been proposed to capture this contrast.

There are several acoustic cues that differenti-
ate stops vs. affricates. Burst duration, rise time to
peak amplitude and frication duration differences
are all part and parcel of the manner contrast. Ka-
gaya (1978) quantified the burst duration differ-
ences among Naro clicks, and showed that bilabial
[ò], dental [|] and lateral [{] click types have long
burst durations, while alveolar [!] and palatal [=/ ]
click types exhibit short burst durations. Sands
(1990), Johnson (1993) and Ladefoged and Traill
(1994) showed that there are similar differences in
Xhosa and !Xóõ clicks. In addition to measuring
click burst durations, Ladefoged and Traill (1994)
measured Rise Time to Peak amplitude in the click
bursts, following Howell and Rosen (1983), who
showed that this measure differentiates pulmonic
plosives from affricates. Ladefoged and Traill
showed that the alveolar and palatal click types in
!Xóõ exhibit short rise times, while the bilabial,
dental and lateral click types exhibit longer rise
times to peak amplitude. Johnson proposed the
feature [+/-noisy], focusing on the acoustic prop-
erties of the releases, and Ladefoged and Traill
proposed the feature as [+/-abrupt] to describe this
phonological contrast in terms of the speed of the
anterior release.

In Mangetti Dune !Xung, these click features
were studied by Miller and Shah (2009), who
show that the palatal click burst duration preced-
ing [u] in Mangetti Dune !Xung exhibits inter-
speaker variation. One of the four speakers’ pro-
ductions that they studied exhibited longer burst
durations for the palatal click type, suggesting
that this speaker released the click less abruptly.
Miller (to appear) explicitly compared the realiza-
tion of clicks preceding [i] and [u], showing that
the palatal click type in Mangetti Dune !Xung has
two allophones. It is non-affricated (and thus pre-
sumably abruptly released) preceding [u] as in the
other languages, but has a period of palatalization
(palatal frication noise) following the click burst
preceding [i]. Miller transcribes the palatalized al-
lophone as [

>
=/C].

2.3 Click Discrimination

We know of one prior study using acoustic fea-
tures for click discrimination. Fulop et al. (2004)
applied discriminant analysis to the four coronal
clicks in the Bantu language Yeyi on the basis

108



of the four spectral moments of the anterior click
bursts, and showed that the classification for the
laterals and palatals were much worse than the
classification results for the alveolars and dentals.
The alveolar clicks only displayed a 2.6% error
rate, and the dental clicks an error rate of 24%,
while the lateral and palatal clicks displayed an
error rate of 93% and 67% respectively. The er-
ror rates given here represent measurements from
isolated productions. In the present study, we give
similar results for isolated productions in !Xung
and compare these to results for productions from
fluent speech. Like Fulop et al. (2004), we find rel-
atively high degrees of confusion among the dif-
ferent clicks.

2.4 Click Reduction

Previous work on click reduction has distin-
guished two situations in which clicks are weak-
ened: as an intermediate stage leading to click
loss throughout a language, and as a prosodic phe-
nomenon in ordinary speech. We find evidence of
both these phenomena in our corpus data. Here,
we review some prior work on them.

Traill and Vossen (1997) quantify a stage of
“click weakening”, which they claim is an inter-
mediate stage before click loss (the change from
a click consonant to a pulmonic consonant). They
describe click weakening as a process of acous-
tic attenuation that effects only the abruptly re-
leased clicks [!] and [=/ ]. They compare the
same click types in !Xóõ, a language that has not
yet been described as undergoing any click loss,
and G{ana, a Khoe language where many of the
alveolar clicks have been lost. They point out
that the weakened G{ana clicks are noisier, and
have more diffuse spectra, than the strong !Xóõ
clicks of the same type. They quantify the am-
plitudes of the clicks in the different languages
by providing difference measures of click inten-
sity based on the peak amplitude of the click mi-
nus the peak amplitude of the following vowel,
which provides a scale of click amplitude rela-
tive to the vowel across the different languages.
Further, they provide palataograms of some of
the strong, and weakened clicks, which show that
“weakened articulations have larger cavities and
this is a result of reduction in the degree of tongue
contact.” They describe this weakening as a pro-
cess of articulatory undershoot. They attribute the
noisiness of the anterior releases in the weakened

clicks to more leisurely anterior releases, that lead
to frication. They suggest that the affrication of
the abruptly released alveolar and palatal clicks
make them less perceptually distinct from the af-
fricated dental and lateral clicks, and that full click
loss would then resolve the perceptual ambiguity
among the two classes of clicks.

Conversational reduction of clicks, meanwhile,
is motivated not by language-wide change but by
general articulatory concerns. Miller et al. (2007)
provide qualitative evidence that nasal clicks have
a stronger and longer duration of nasal voicing in
their closures in weaker prosodic positions. Mar-
quard et al. (2015) compared acoustic properties
of voiceless oral plosives and clicks in three dif-
ferent phrasal positions (Initial, Medial and Final)
in N|uu spontaneous speech. Their quantitative re-
sults showed that while the duration of pulmonic
stop closures got shorter from initial, to medial,
to final position, the clicks were shortest in initial
position, and lengthened in medial and final po-
sitions. The clicks only showed reduction effects
for Center of Gravity (lower COG values in phrase
medial and phrase final positions, compared with
phrase initial position), and in the acoustic energy
level (degree of voicing) before the release burst,
which is highest in phrase-final position, lower in
medial position, and lowest in phrase-final posi-
tion. Neither study investigated the effects of re-
duction on the distinguishability of clicks.

3 Materials

The corpus used in the current study consists of
three folktales told by two different speakers, to-
taling about 45 minutes of speech (Augumes et al.,
2011)2. One story, Lion and Hare, was told by one
of the two oldest living speakers in Mangetti Dune,
Namibia, Muyoto Kazungu (MK). Two additional
stories, Iguana (BG1) and Lion and Frog(BG2)
were told by Benjamin Niwe Gumi, (BG) who was
a bit younger, but still a highly respected elder in
the community. Our click identification tool does
not require a transcript. The acoustic analyses of
extracted clicks do require an orthographic tran-
script, since our tool assigns each detected click
to its correct phonetic category by aligning the de-
tections to the transcript. Two of the stories have
existing ELAN transcripts in the archive, and the
clicks of the third were transcribed by the first au-

2https://elar.soas.ac.uk/Collection/
MPI178567

109



thor.
The laboratory data used was a set of words

recorded in a frame sentence that were previously
analyzed by Miller and Shah (2009) and Miller (to
appear).

4 Click Detection

We present a simple rule-based tool imple-
mented using the acoustic analysis program Praat
(Boersma and Weenink, 2016) to automatically
detect clicks in the audio stream. This method is
intended to locate clicks as a general class; we
discuss the problem of separating the clicks by
type below (Sec. 5). Because clicks are relatively
short in duration and high in amplitude, the tool
searches the acoustic signal in 1 ms frames.

At each frame, a potential click is detected if
the raw signal amplitude exceeds 0.3 Pascal and
the Center of Gravity exceeds 1500 Hz. If the re-
gion of consecutive frames which passes these fil-
ters has a duration less than 20 ms, it is labeled
as a click. For MK, the center of gravity cutoff is
changed to 1000 Hz and the durations allowed to
extend to 25 ms. (These parameters were tuned
impressionistically.)

We explored a few other measurements for
identifying clicks. A relative measurement of am-
plitude (checking that the frame has higher am-
plitude than the one 15 ms back) improves preci-
sion but at the expense of recall. Since we hand-
corrected the output of our tool, we opted to em-
phasize recall (it is easier for a human analyst to
reject click proposals than to find clicks that the
tool has not marked). We also attempted to reject
short vowel sounds by checking for detectable for-
mants within the high-amplitude region, but this
proved unreliable.

Following click detection with the tool, a hu-
man analyst corrected all three transcripts. This
process took less than 12 hour for BG, who con-
sistently produced his clicks at higher amplitudes,
but 2-3 hours for MK, who varied his click ampli-
tudes more widely. The corrected transcripts are
used as a gold standard for evaluating the tool’s
stand-alone performance.

5 Acoustic Analysis

We compute 4 acoustic features known to differ-
entiate coronal clicks: Burst Duration (BD), Rise
Time to Peak Amplitude in the Burst (RT), Cen-
ter of Gravity (COG) and the Ratio of the Maxi-

mum Amplitude in the Burst to the Amplitude at
20 ms into the vowel. These features were used
in a previous study (Miller and Shah, 2009) and
shown to separate !Xung clicks preceding [u]. We
use the same dataset of 248 click tokens studied
by Miller and Shah (2009), extracted from single
content words produced in the focused position
of a frame sentence, and compare the results to
those for 197 clicks extracted from the folktales.
The Miller and Shah (2009) dataset includes COG
values only for clicks produced before [u], so we
restrict our analyses of the folktales to the clicks
produced before non-low back vowels [u] and [o]
to make the two sets as comparable as possible.
The [u] data from Miller and Shah (2009) are all
bimoraic monosyllabic words containing the long
vowel [u:], though they vary in terms of tone and
phonation type. In the texts, both monosyllabic bi-
moraic and bisyllabic words with two short vow-
els occur. The vowels following the clicks in the
monosyllabic words in the stories are either a long
monophthong like [u:] or [o:], or are one of the
diphthongs that commences with a non-low back
vowel: [ui, oe, oa]. In CVCV words, both vowels
are short. All laryngeal release properties (voiced,
aspirated, glottalized) of clicks and vowels with
non-modal voice qualities were included, as these
don’t effect the vowel quality (only the voice qual-
ity of the vowel). Both nasal and oral clicks are
also included. Uvularized clicks were excluded,
as were epiglottalized vowels, as these affect the
vowel quality, and it is unknown, but possible, that
they might affect the C.O.G. of the click bursts.

For the detection of clicks, and for the acoustic
analysis of detected clicks, we measured the Rise
Time to Peak Amplitude (RT) in the burst as the
duration from the onset of the click burst to the
maximum RMS amplitude during the click burst
proper (transient, not including separate frication
noise or aspiration noise that follows the tran-
sient), following Ladefoged and Traill (1994). The
click burst duration was measured as the duration
of the transient itself. The center of gravity was
measured using the standard Praat measure on a
22,050 Hz spectrum that was calculated using a
Hanning window. The relative burst amplitude
was measured as the maximum RMS amplitude
found in the click burst (release of the anterior
constriction) divided by the RMS amplitude of the
following vowel at a point 20 ms from the start
of the vowel. The 20 ms point was chosen as it

110



Transcript Clicks Prec Rec F
MK 1 250 38.1 17.6 24.1
BG 1 180 66.8 61.6 64.2
BG 2 202 65.3 70.8 67.9
All 632 59.6 47.2 52.7

Table 2: Number of clicks and detection results for
three transcripts.

was far enough into the vowel to allow the vowel
to reach a higher amplitude, but contained com-
pletely within the first mora of the vowel. This
assured that the vowel being measured was [u] or
[o] in all cases.

5.1 Results

Our evaluation (Table 2) scores a system-
annotated click as correct if it occurs within 10
ms of a true click. (Small variations in this num-
ber affect the result relatively little, since click
bursts are typically short, distinctive events.) On
the two transcripts of speaker BG, results are rel-
atively good (precision around 65, recall between
60-70), enabling rapid post-correction by a human
analyst. Performance is much poorer for MK (pre-
cision 38, recall 17) and post-correction took over
four times as long.

Precision errors for BNG generally corre-
sponded to other short, loud speech sounds: coro-
nal ejectives: [ts’], [Ù’] and the highest amplitude
part of [i] vowels. Errors for MK were more var-
ied; MK produced many quieter click bursts which
were less distinct from the surrounding speech,
and it was harder to set cutoffs that would distin-
guish the clicks from pulmonic stops and vowel
sounds. See Figure 1 for example spectrograms.
We believe these very low-amplitude clicks are
a consequence of MK’s linguistic background, a
possibility we return to in more detail below (Sec.
7).

6 Acoustic Analysis of Clicks

Once the clicks have been extracted, we conduct
an acoustic analysis of the four click types. The
previous section focused on the task of distin-
guishing clicks from other sounds as an engineer-
ing application. Here, we build a model to dis-
criminate between the four click types, in order to
understand how much information they contribute
for lexical identification in real speech process-
ing. We conduct a linear discriminant analysis

Dataset N Clicks Disc. acc
Lab 248 75
Folktales 197 54
Lab (spkr JF) 75 87
Lab (spkr MA) 75 84
Lab (spkr TK) 74 92
Folktales (spkr BG) 142 73
Folktales (spkr MK) 55 56

Table 3: Linear discriminant analysis accuracies
(leave-one-out) on folktale and laboratory clicks.

using the four acoustic features from Miller and
Shah (2009), which were shown to differentiate
among the four click types in clear productions.
Here, we show that they are much less effective
for fluent speech, suggesting that clicks, like other
speech sounds, are reduced in fluent speech, blur-
ring the primary acoustic cues that distinguish be-
tween them.

6.1 Features
Burst duration and Rise time to peak amplitude are
both acoustic correlates of manner of articulation,
indicating the click’s degree of frication. Longer
burst durations and rise times to peak amplitude
both indicate more frication, while affricates have
an immediate high-amplitude burst right after the
release of the initial constriction. The relative
burst amplitude reflects the size of the cavity and
the abruptness of the release burst. The fourth
acoustic attribute that was measured, Center of
Gravity (COG), correlates with the the size of the
lingual cavity of the click, and therefore is deter-
mined by the place of articulation of both constric-
tions.

6.2 Discriminant Analysis
Using linear discriminant analysis in the R pack-
age MASS (Venables and Ripley, 2013), we find
that these features indeed differentiate clicks in
the single-word lab productions, but are less di-
agnostic in fluent speech. Accuracies (Table 3)
are computed with leave-one-out cross-validation.
The lab speech clicks are classified with 75% ac-
curacy, while performance on the folktale clicks is
reduced to 54%. This gap is exaggerated by the
poor discriminability of clicks produced by MK,
whose atypically quiet clicks were also difficult
to detect. However, a similar result can be ob-
tained by comparing individual speakers. When a
model is learned for each speaker individually, the

111



0

2000

4000

6000

8000

104

i n!Ae te ko

!

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

Time (S)

F
re

q
u

en
cy

 (
H

z)

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

104

n!un te n!ae khe

! !

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7

Time (S)

F
re

q
u

en
cy

 (
H

z)
Figure 1: Spectrograms of the alveolar click in the word n!‚a

¨
é “lion” produced by BG (left) and MK

(right) showing the difference in burst amplitudes.

three lab speakers’ clicks are discriminated with
84-92% accuracy, while the folktale speaker BG’s
clicks are discriminated with only 73% accuracy.
Thus, although intra-speaker variability decreases
the accuracy of the classifier in both settings, it is
still clear that the folktale clicks are harder to dis-
criminate overall.

A visual explanation of the result is shown in
Figure 2, where we plot the RT vs COG (the two
most discriminative features for these speakers)
for clicks from the folktale storyteller BG versus
one laboratory elicitation speaker. The laboratory
clicks show a clear separation among all four click
types. Among the folktale clicks, only the dental
[|] is cleanly separable from the others.

An examination of the learned discriminant
functions shows the relative importance of the four
acoustic cues. Each discriminant function is a lin-
ear combination of the cues; in our data, the first
discriminant function captures most of the vari-
ance between the clicks for all speakers except
MK, whose clicks were poorly classified to begin
with. Table 4 shows the coefficients of the first
discriminant function for several datasets. For the
other speakers, COG is the most discriminative
property of clicks, but the second-most discrim-
inative function varies among speakers. Ampli-
tude is a good cue for two of the laboratory speak-
ers, MA and TK, but not for JF or the folktale
speaker BG; rise time is also a good cue for MA

and TK but neither of the others. Interestingly,
MK’s atypical clicks are classified mainly based
on their duration, a cue which was uninformative
for the rest of the dataset. A small ablation anal-
ysis on BNG and MK’s data tells the same story;
COG is responsible for most of the classification
performance for BNG (70% with COG alone vs
73% with all features). For MK, it is less use-
ful but still captures over half of classifier perfor-
mance (35% vs 56%).

7 Discussion

We can infer from the evidence provided that
!Xung clicks are subject to phonetic reduction in
fluent speech. The primary temporal and spectral
cues for click identification become highly vari-
able and less informative in rapid production. Lis-
teners presumably use top-down information like
lexical context to make up for increased confus-
ability. Thus, !Xung clicks behave much like other
speech sounds in rapid production, despite their
canonical loudness, which makes them stand out
from the speech stream in clear speech.

Although clicks in fluent speech are harder to
discriminate from one another, our results do sup-
port the widespread idea that clicks as a class are
easy to pick out of the speech stream, at least for
speakers who produce them in the canonical way.
Despite relying on a few features and hand-tuned
threshold parameters, our click detection script

112



0

2000

4000

6000

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03

Rise Time (S)

C
e

n
te

r 
o

f 
G

ra
v
it
y
 (

H
z
)

Click

!

/

//

=

Speaker BNG (Story data, [o,u])

0

2000

4000

6000

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03

Rise Time (S)

C
e

n
te

r 
o

f 
G

ra
v
it
y
 (

H
z
)

Click

!

/

//

=

Speaker JF (Lab data, [u])

Figure 2: Folktale and laboratory clicks: RT vs. COG

% var Rise T COG Dur Max amp
Lab 92 0.41 1.63 0.03 -0.33
Lab (JF) 98 0.53 3.72 -0.25 -0.09
Lab (MA) 88 1.12 1.89 -0.17 -1.70
Lab (TK) 98 1.53 5.28 -0.03 -1.11
Folk (BNG) 96 0.26 1.45 0.35 0.40
Folk (MK) 67 0.03 -0.40 1.38 0.52

Spkr Feats Acc
BNG COG only 70
BNG COG/rise 70
BNG all 73
MK COG only 35
MK COG/rise 47
MK all 56

Table 4: Left: Percent of variance captured and coefficients of four features in the first discriminant
function learned in different datasets. Right: Ablation results for two speakers.

was able to automate enough of the acoustic analy-
sis to save a substantial amount of transcriber time
and effort. We expect that other non-pulmonic
consonants like ejectives could also be detected
with similar methods. These results are encourag-
ing for corpus research in endangered languages.

The extremely low accuracy for click detections
in the speech of MK should qualify this conclu-
sion. There are a few possible reasons why MK’s
clicks are much lower in amplitude, harder to de-
tect and harder to discriminate than those of the
other speakers. First, MK is the oldest speaker in
the dataset (in his 70s). Second, MK spent a large
portion of his life in Angola living among speak-
ers of an unknown Bantu language which did not
include clicks. This Bantu language was an impor-
tant mode of communication for much of his life,
and indeed, he occasionally code-switched into it
during the storytelling session. Perhaps because of
this L2 background, MK produced some phone-
mic click consonants as pulmonic stops (primarily
[k,g] for [!,{], and [c,j] for [|, =/ ]), and produced
extremely variable amplitudes for many of the oth-
ers.

Similar variability in click production is re-
ported in langugage as a stage in click loss due to

language endangerment (Traill and Vossen, 1997).
It seems, therefore, that MK’s clicks represent an
initial stage of language loss and replacement with
Bantu, which was reversed for the younger gener-
ation. BG’s speech represents this revitalization of
!Xung and its replacement of Bantu as the prestige
language in the community.

The implication for speech technology and cor-
pus research is that detection methods may vary
in their accuracy from community to community.
Methods developed for robust language commu-
nities may need to be recalibrated when work-
ing with severely endangered languages or fea-
tures undergoing rapid change. Within a single
community, however, the accuracy of a tuned de-
tector might serve as a measure of language loss
by quantifying the degree to which the target seg-
ments have been lost.

Our results reveal new facts about the discrimi-
native features for clicks. For example, although
Traill (1997) provided a scale of click burst in-
tensity, shown in (1) above, the variability of the
amplitude of the alveolar click bursts relative to
the following vowel is so high, that it is clear that
the amplitude alone can not be very useful in dis-
criminating the four click types. As mentioned

113



above, the relative perceptual weighting of the two
temporal measures (click burst duration and rise
time to peak amplitude) is completely unknown
for clicks. Comparing our results to Fulop et al.
(2004) Yeyi results, we can conclude that a com-
bination of manner cues and place of articulation
cues results in much better discriminability. Of
course, we can not rule out the contribution of
click reduction / loss to the poorer discriminability
seen in the Yeyi results.

Machine learning can indicate how much in-
formation about click identity is carried by each
of these cues, but this does not necessarily reveal
which cues are important to human listeners. For
instance, English fricatives and affricates are also
differentiated by duration and rise time to peak
amplitude (Howell and Rosen, 1983). Early stud-
ies assumed that Rise Time was the main acous-
tic feature of importance. However, Castleman
(1997) showed that frication duration differences
among the English contrast are more perceptually
relevant than the rise time differences. While our
results imply that COG is the most informative
criterion for click identity, further perceptual ex-
periments could tell whether this matches listen-
ers’ actual perceptual weightings. Of course, four
manually selected features and a linear classifier
do not tell the whole story of click discriminabil-
ity. A more sophisticated model (King and Tay-
lor, 2000) could discover features directly from the
acoustic signal; however, we believe our features
acceptably represent the major categories of cues.

8 Conclusion

Results suggest that phonetic studies of endan-
gered languages must consider both clean produc-
tions and naturalistic speech corpora. It is impor-
tant to discover not only the phonemic inventory
of the language and the canonical landmarks that
allow listeners to recognize speech sounds in clear
speech, but also the range of phonetic variability
displayed in fluent speech. In this study, investi-
gation of connected speech led to the conclusion
that the scale of click burst intensity is not very
useful in distinguishing clicks, since the amplitude
of alveolar click bursts is so variable. In study-
ing natural data, rule-based extraction of particu-
lar segments may offer a low-cost alternative to
developing a full ASR system for a language with
little available data. The processed data could be
used to supplement non-expert annotations (Liu

et al., 2016; Bird et al., 2014) in training a full-
scale ASR system, or to bootstrap a learning-based
landmark recognition system (Hasegawa-Johnson
et al., 2005).

Acknowledgments

We thank Mehdi Reza Ghola Lalani, Muyoto
Kazungu and Benjamin Niwe Gumi. This work
was funded by ELDP SG0123 to the first author
and NSF 1422987 to the second author.

References
International Phonetic Association. 2006. The inter-

national phonetic alphabet (revised to 2005) [chart].
page 135.

Christine Augumes, Amanda Miller, Levi Namaseb,
and David Prata. 2011. Mangetti Dune !Xung sto-
ries: In !Xung and English. The Ohio State Uni-
versity, the University of Namibia, and the Mangetti
Dune Traditional Authority. Deposited at ELAR.

Douglas Martyn Beach. 1938. The phonetics of the
Hottentot language. W. Heffer & Sons, ltd.

Jill N Beckman. 2013. Positional faithfulness: an Op-
timality Theoretic treatment of phonological asym-
metries. Routledge.

Steven Bird, Lauren Gawne, Katie Gelbart, and Isaac
McAlister. 2014. Collecting bilingual audio in re-
mote indigenous communities. In COLING, pages
1015–1024.

Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2016. Praat: do-
ing phonetics by computer. Version 6.0.20 from
http://praat.org.

Wendy Ann Castleman. 1997. Integrated perceptual
properties of the [+/-continuant] distinction in frica-
tives and affricates.

Sean A Fulop, Peter Ladefoged, Fang Liu, and Rainer
Vossen. 2004. Yeyi clicks: Acoustic description and
analysis. Phonetica, 60(4):231–260.

Steve Greenberg. 1993. Speech processing: Auditory
models. In R.E. Asher and S.M.Y. Simpson, editors,
Pergammon Encyclopedia of Language and Linguis-
tics, Vol. 8, pages 4206–4227.

Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, James Baker, Sarah Borys,
Ken Chen, Emily Coogan, Steven Greenberg, Amit
Juneja, Katrin Kirchhoff, Karen Livescu, Srividya
Mohan, et al. 2005. Landmark-based speech recog-
nition: Report of the 2004 Johns Hopkins summer
workshop. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Pro-
cessing, 2005. Proceedings.(ICASSP’05). IEEE In-
ternational Conference on, volume 1, pages I–213.
IEEE.

114



Peter Howell and Stuart Rosen. 1983. Produc-
tion and perception of rise time in the voiceless
affricate/fricative distinction. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 73(3):976–984.

Keith Johnson. 1993. Acoustic and auditory analyses
of Xhosa clicks and pulmonics. UCLA Working Pa-
pers in Phonetics, 83:33–45.

Ryohei Kagaya. 1978. Soundspectrographic analy-
sis of Naron clicks: A preliminary report. Annual
Bulletin of Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics,
12:113–125.

Simon King and Paul Taylor. 2000. Detection of
phonological features in continuous speech using
neural networks. Computer Speech and Language,
14(4):333–353.

Peter Ladefoged and Anthony Traill. 1994. Clicks
and their accompaniments. Journal of Phonetics,
22(1):33–64.

Ning Li and Philipos C Loizou. 2008. The contribu-
tion of obstruent consonants and acoustic landmarks
to speech recognition in noise. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 124(6):3947–3958.

Chunxi Liu, Preethi Jyothi, Hao Tang, Vimal Manohar,
Rose Sloan, Tyler Kekona, Mark Hasegawa-
Johnson, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2016. Adapt-
ing ASR for under-resourced languages using mis-
matched transcriptions. In Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, pages 5840–5844. IEEE.

Carina Marquard, Oliver Niebuhr, and Alena Witzlack-
Makarevich. 2015. Phonetic reduction of clicks–
evidence from N|uu. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS).

Amanda Miller and Sheena Shah. 2009. The acoustics
of Mangetti Dune !Xung clicks. In Proceedings of
INTERSPEECH, pages 2283–2286.

Amanda L Miller, Johanna Brugman, Bonny Sands,
Levi Namaseb, Mats Exter, and Chris Collins. 2007.
The sounds of N|uu: Place and airstream contrasts.
Working Papers of the Cornell Phonetics Labora-
tory, 16:101–160.

Amanda Miller-Ockhuizen. 2003. The Phonetics
and Phonology of Gutturals: A Case Study from
Ju|’hoansi. Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics
Series. Routledge.

Amanda Miller. to appear. Palatal click allophony
in Mangetti Dune !Xung: Implications for sound
change. Journal of the International Phonetic As-
sociation.

Bonny Sands. 1990. Some of the acoustic characteris-
tics of Xhosa clicks. UCLA Working Papers in Pho-
netics, (74):96.

Kenneth N Stevens and Samuel Jay Keyser. 1989. Pri-
mary features and their enhancement in consonants.
Language, pages 81–106.

Anthony Traill and R Vossen. 1997. Sound change
in the Khoisan languages: new data on click loss
and click replacement. Journal of African languages
and linguistics, 18(1):21–56.

Anthony Traill. 1997. Linguistic phonetic features
for clicks: Articulatory, acoustic and perceptual evi-
dence. African linguistics at the crossroads: Papers
from Kwaluseni, pages 99–117.

Nikolai S. Trubetzkoy. 1969. Principles of Phonology.
University of California Press.

William N Venables and Brian D Ripley. 2013. Mod-
ern applied statistics with S-PLUS. Springer Sci-
ence & Business Media.

115


