






















A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election
Brazilian News

Caio Magno Carvalho, Hitoshi Nagano, Allan Kardec Barros

1Laboratório de Processamento da Informação Biológica
Universidade Federal do Maranhão

São Luı́s – Maranhão – Brasil

magno.caio91@gmail.com, hitoshinagano@me.com, allan@dee.ufma.br

Abstract. Brazilian news media have been accused to be biased over the years,
supporting some political parties and its agendas. To judge this statement as
truth or lie is a hard task due its subjectivity. In election periods, this controversy
become stronger given the influence of the media in the public opinion. Senti-
ment Analysis could be a useful tool for evaluate political news. Here is pro-
posed a comparative study test between three learning algorithms (Naı̈ve Bayes,
SVM and MaxEnt) and three feature selection methods (Chi-Square, CPD and
CPPD) for classifying texts related to president and governor of São Paulo 2014
elections in Brazil.

Resumo. A midia brasileira tem sido acusada ao longo dos anos de favore-
cer algumas entidades politicas e suas campanhas. Avaliar a verdade dessa
afirmação não é uma tarefa simples dado o grau de subjetividade de quem
avalia. Em periodos de eleição, essa controvérsia se torna mais acentuada
visto a influência que a mı́dia exerce na opinião pública. Análise de Senti-
mento pode ser uma ferramenta útil na avaliação de notı́cias polı́ticas. Este
trabalho propõe um estudo comparativo de desempenho de três algoritmos de
aprendizagem (Naı̈ve Bayes, SVM e MaxEnt) e de três métodos de seleção de
atributos (Qui Quadrado, CPD e CPPD) para classificação textos relacionados
às eleições de 2014 para presidente e governador de São Paulo.

1. Introduction

There is always a claim among brazilian people about the bias in the news media concern-
ing some political agendas [Soares 2004], [Porto 2007]. Today, with wide Internet access,
the population is able to freely expose their opinion related to these subjects as well to
obtain more information to understand the current political scenario [Shirky 2011]. Blogs
and social media have been the place of an endless controversy between left and right
political supporters. Each group accuses the mainstream news agencies of favoring his
opposition. This controversy is highlighted especially in elections period 1. Some peo-
ple state that mainstream agencies favor some political parties in this period, while other
media vehicles, self-called independent, are neutral and free of any political bias.

1http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/poder/2014/10/1537985-sede-da-abril-e-pichada-em-protesto-contra-
reportagem-da-veja.shtml, acessado em 15/05/2017

Proceedings of Symposium in Information and Human Language Technology. Uberlândia, MG,
Brazil, October 2–5, 2017. c©2017 Sociedade Brasileira de Computação.

103



In this political context, the computational methods provided by Natural Lan-
guage Processing through Sentiment Analysis have building applications addressed to
this political issues. An example could be [Carvalho et al. 2011] which built a corpus
of political online comments for mining positive opinions. [Park et al. 2011] also targets
the online comments for predict political orientation. However, identify an opinion in a
newspaper or online news is a complex task for a human due to the inherent bias present
in the evaluator personal preferences. Sentiment Analysis could bring a less biased view
for evaluate the opinion/sentiment associated to an article.

Under this argument, this work propose to analyze and predict the senti-
ment of a previously labeled corpus found in [de Arruda et al. 2015] which consists
in collection of online news about 2014 Brazil elections. We intend to compare
the performance of three classification algorithms (Naı̈ve Bayes, SVM and Max-
Ent) and evaluate three methods of feature selection (Chi-Square, Categorical Propor-
tional Difference [Simeon and Hilderman 2008], Categorical Probability Proportional
Difference[Agarwal and Mittal 2012]) and how it affects the classification task.

This work is organized as follows: the section two expose some works related to
sentiment analysis and its applications on online news and politics, section three introduce
the methodology used in this work emphasizing the methods for feature selection. In the
section four we present the obtained results and its discussions followed by conclusions
in section five.

2. Related Work

Sentiment Analysis is the field of NLP that develop algorithms that are capable to classify
documents according to sentiment/opinion expressed about some topic [Pang et al. 2008]
in them. These algorithms are very often used to analyze product and movie reviews, as
showed in [Pang et al. 2002] and [Pang and Lee 2008]. An extensive review about Sen-
timent Analysis could be found in [Schouten and Frasincar 2016] and [Pang et al. 2008].
There are several works for sentiment analysis using twitter and other plataforms of mi-
croblogging as data source in a wide range of applications. In [Moraes et al. 2015] is built
a corpora from twitter posts about 2014 world cup. It describes how data was collected,
cleaned and annotated for posterior applications. The online newspaper comments are
also a target for some works of SA. One can be found in [Park et al. 2011] which take
the news comments of a online newspaper and predict its political orientation (conserva-
tive, liberal or vague) using a TF-IDF feature transformation and Support Vector machine
to classify data. In [Tumitan and Becker 2014] the comments of a well-known brazil-
ian newspaper, Folha de São Paulo 1, were used to build a sentiment time series about
elections for governor, mayor and president in periods from 2010 until 2012. Sentiment
classification for each comment was done by Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO),
an algorithm for Support Vector Machines (SVM), using unigrams as features and apply-
ing TF-IDF transformation to them. The sentiment classification performance achieved
was 81.37% for 2010’s comments and 83.24% for 2012’s election comments. The work
done by [Jose and Chooralil 2015] present a sentiment analysis enhanced tool for also
predicting election results. The method used for classify data was SentiWordNet, a word
graph which assigns to each english word a mesure for it sentiment (positive, negative or

1http://www.folha.uol.com.br/

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

104



neutral) between zero or one.

However these works only targets online comments which are highly subjective
texts, i.e., very opinionated. On the other hand, articles published by news agencies seek
to be more objective than subjective, or less opinionated. Therefore, just a few works
analyze journalistic texts. A plausible explanation can be found in [Padmaja et al. 2013]
stating that this kind of texts are not simple to classify given its intended neutrality and
syntactical similarity with other texts from the same kind.

Though the interest in Sentiment Analysis is growing in the recent years, there
is a lack of research, tools and material and human resources addressing applications
for brazilian portuguese language [Vieira and Lima 2001] [Pardo et al. 2010]. Related
to sentiment analysis in online news processing, there are some works for European
Portuguese as [Morgado 2012] and for Brazilian Portuguese as [Dosciatti et al. 2013],
[Martinazzo et al. 2011] and [Alvim et al. 2010]. In order to build a annotated corpora
for brazilian elections, the work done in [de Arruda et al. 2015] collected 131 articles
from 5 different sources.

There are still a lack of works for analyze political news in Brazil. Regarding this
issue this present work intends to perform a sentiment analysis using the Corpus Viés, a
corpora built and manually annotated by [de Arruda et al. 2015]. This corpus consists in a
set of online news articles splitted by paragraphs where each one is labeled according the
expressed sentiment. We use this dataset in order to evaluate machine learning algorithms
and feature selection methods to deal with this kind of data in Brazilian Portuguese.

3. Methodology
In this section, we describe our approach to compare and evaluate the feature selection
methods and the learning algorithms. We want to classify each labeled paragraph of Cor-
pus Viés correctly in one of used classes postive, negative or neutral. We use three meth-
ods of feature selection: chi-square [Sharma and Dey 2012], categorical proportional dif-
ference [Simeon and Hilderman 2008] and Categorical Probability Proportion Difference
[Agarwal and Mittal 2012]. Three learning algorithms were used to classify preprocessed
data. The chosen classifiers were Naı̈ve Bayes, Support Vector Machines and Maxi-
mum Entropy.These algoritms are very popular in text classification tasks as presented
in [Schouten and Frasincar 2016].

We use Python programming language with the SciKit-Learn2, for the applications
of machine learning, and NLTK3 packages, for the implemented tools of natural language
processing.

The dataset used here, Corpus Viés, was built by [de Arruda et al. 2015] and it
consists in a collection of 131 online news articles about 2014 elections for governor of
São Paulo and for president of Brazil. These articles were obtained from five well-know
sources in Brazil: Veja, Estadão, Folha, G1 and Carta Capital. The articles are splitted by
paragraphs. Each one was manually labeled by four annotators with respect the sentiment
orientation presented in the text. The used labels are positive (”PO”), negative (”NE”)
and neutral (”NE”). This dataset have 1042 labeled paragraphs which 310 are positive,

2scikit-learn.org
3www.nltk.org/

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

105



391 are negative and 341 are neutral. The Corpus Viés is originally stored in XML format
and here was converted and stored in a MySQL database in order to facilitate the access
and queries to the texts and its labels. Before feature extraction and training algorithms,
we remove the stopwords, normalize the text eliminating accents and we also replace all
present numbers by a token “NUMBER”.

In this work, we use the bag-of-ngrams as feature extraction method. The features
extracted can be unigrams, bigrams or both. Trigrams and higher order ngrams are not
used due to exponential increasing in the number of features. This method is described as
follows.

3.1. Feature Extraction with NGrams

All techniques used here to extract features are based in ngrams. A ngram is a sequence of
n words extracted from a given text. When just one word is picked at time, this sequence
is called unigram. We could also pick sequences of two words from text. Each sequence
picked in this way is called bigram.

Here we used the bag of words method, that consist in the frequency that a given
ngram appears in a certain document. For a given unigram (one word) set v, also called
vocabulary, we assign an index number i for each word according to (1), where wi is the
word which has index number i and n is the number of words in vocabulary.

v = {w1, w2, ...wi, ..., wn}, i, n ∈ N (1)

We can represent a given document as vector d with the same dimension n of vocabulary.
Each element ci from vector d stores the counting frequency of wi from vocabulary v in
the document as described in (2).

d = [c1, c2, c3, ..., ci, ..., cn], i, n ∈ N (2)

The document vector representation depends directly on the chosen vocabulary. Very
often, the vocabulary used consists in a set of all unigrams extracted from corpora. Using
feature selection methods we can reduce the original vocubuary for smaller set of ngrams
which are more informative for the class distinction.

The Chi-Square method measures the level of dependency between ngram and
classes. If that ngram is frequent in many classes, the Chi-Square value will be
low, if this ngram occurs just in a few classes, then Chi-Square value will be high
[Haddi et al. 2013]. Categorical Proportional Difference (CPD) measure how much a
term contribute in discriminating the class. It was originally designed for text categoriza-
tion tasks [Simeon and Hilderman 2008]. The CPD of a term for a class is between -1 and
1, which -1 indicates that term never occur in that class, and 1 indicates that term occurs
only in that class. So, we select just the ngrams/terms which CPD is above a established
threshold. Categorical Probability Proportional Difference (CPPD) is a improvement of
the former method. CPPD measures the level of belongingness for a ngram/term inside
a given class [Agarwal and Mittal 2012]. It means while CPD measure just how that
ngram/term is spread among the classes, CPPD rank them also by measuring the proba-
bility of same ngram/term occur in that class. So, we select just the ngrams/terms which

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

106



CPD and the probabiliy is above a established thresholds. In this work we use CPD = 1
as a constraint for CPPD and get n best probability ranked terms, where n is the number
of features that we want to select.

We perform two experiments to evaluate both feature extraction and feature selec-
tion methods. We do not use any feature selection method in the first experiment in order
to evaluate what is the best paragraph representation: unigram, bigram or both. In the
second experiment we intend to evaluate the impact of feature selection on the learning
algorithms. We apply the feature selection methods varying the number of selected fea-
tures. The results for both experiments are obtained by applying cross validation with 10
folds, computing the accuracy for each fold and taking the mean at the end of experiment.
All feature selection methods here are supervised, then we use 90% of corpora for train
each method.

4. Results and Discussion
The obtained results for the first experiment are exposed in Table 1. We note that there is
no improvement when using bigrams instead unigrams. From this experiment we see that
a feature vector composed by both unigrams and bigram is the best representation for the
news paragraphs. This feature combination affects positively all classifiers, but at cost of
high dimensionality.

Table 1. Results for news classification without feature selection

Features Dimensionality AccuracyNaı̈ve Bayes SVM MaxEnt
Unigram 5344 59.1 55.16 56.12
Bigram 18958 55.46 52.77 50.95
Unigram + Bigram 24302 59.3 57.18 56.99

In the second experiment, we use just the combination of unigram and bigrams
as features and apply the feature selection methods. The impact of each feature selection
in the paragraphs classification. Each figure describe the performance for all classifiers
varying the number of selected features from 1000 to 5000. Using Chi-Square, we note in
the Figure 1 that the best performance is achieved by Naı̈ve Bayes classifier with 71.2%
accuracy and 2000 features.

When using CPD (Figure 2), we get worst performances for all classifiers in this
range of number of features. The maximum is achieved by Naı̈ve Bayes again, but with
5000 features, more than twice chi-square features. In other hand, CPPD outperformed
all methods in all range of number of features, as we can see in Figure 3.

The best performance is achieved by MaxEnt model, which has its maximum
using 4000 features. We also note that the accuracy does not vary too much between
2000 and 5000 features. It means that we can use less features without compromising the
accuracy.

The observed results show that MaxEnt using the combination of unigrams and
bigrams selected by the CPPD method is the most efficient method to classify this kind
of texts. However is possible to get some interesting conclusions about the other results
found in table 1.

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

107



Figure 1. The classifiers performance with Chi-Square feature selection varying
the number of selected features.

Figure 2. The classifiers performance with CPD feature selection varying the
number of selected features.

The commom sense states that bigram features bear more information than un-
igram features. This information is called context for the fact that bigrams (and other
ngrams, except unigram) includes the word around the principal feature. It could be a
clue about the real meaning of that word [Pedersen 2001]. The result has shown that clas-
sifiers which use just unigrams as features has a better perfomance than those which use
just bigrams. Hence, if the contextual information is important to distinguish these texts,
use only bigrams as feature does not increase the amount of useful information compar-
ing with unigrams. But when this two kind of features are jointly used, the algorithm
perform better than using only one of them. It means that for this kind of texts, we get
more contextual information using both unigrams and bigrams.

5. Conclusions
In this work we presented a comparative study for learning algorithms and feature sele-
tion methods applied to sentiment analysis on elections online news. We conduct two
evaluations: the first one aims to know the best paragraph representation; the second one,
what is the best classifier and the best feature selection algorithm. We conclude that Max-
Ent is the best classifier when is applied to a paragraphs represented by a combination of
unigrams and bigrams selected by Categorical Probability Proportional Difference using
a CPD threshold equals to 1. As future work, we intend to collect more data not only

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

108



Figure 3. The classifiers performance with CPPD feature selection varying the
number of selected features.

about elections but other subjects related to politics and from more sources. We also aim
to approach the problem of sentiment analysis in a aspect level to make a evalution about
the bias in media vehicles.
Though there are few works related to that subject, the results presented here are com-
parable with the those presented in published works. This reasearch aims colaborate
with brazilian sentiment analysis scenario in online news, providing preliminary results
through comparison of machine learning tools and feature extraction techiniques also
serving as baseline for applications of political opinion mining in online news and bias
assesment.

Acknowledgement

We would like to thank those who gathered and annotate the Corpus Viés used in this
work. We also thank to CAPES and FAPEMA for financial support.

References

Agarwal, B. and Mittal, N. (2012). Categorical probability proportion difference (cppd):
a feature selection method for sentiment classification. In Proceedings of the 2nd
workshop on sentiment analysis where AI meets psychology, COLING, pages 17–26.

Alvim, L., Vilela, P., Motta, E., and Milidiú, R. L. (2010). Sentiment of financial news:
a natural language processing approach. In 1st Workshop on Natural Language Pro-
cessing Tools Applied to Discourse Analysis in Psychology, Buenos Aires.

Carvalho, P., Sarmento, L., Teixeira, J., and Silva, M. J. (2011). Liars and saviors in a sen-
timent annotated corpus of comments to political debates. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies: short papers-Volume 2, pages 564–568. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

de Arruda, G. D., Roman, N. T., and Monteiro, A. M. (2015). An annotated corpus for
sentiment analysis in political news.

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

109



Dosciatti, M. M., Ferreira, L. P. C., and Paraiso, E. C. (2013). Identificando emoçoes
em textos em português do brasil usando máquina de vetores de suporte em soluçao
multiclasse. ENIAC-Encontro Nacional de Inteligência Artificial e Computacional.
Fortaleza, Brasil.

Haddi, E., Liu, X., and Shi, Y. (2013). The role of text pre-processing in sentiment
analysis. Procedia Computer Science, 17:26–32.

Jose, R. and Chooralil, V. S. (2015). Prediction of election result by enhanced sentiment
analysis on twitter data using word sense disambiguation. In Control Communication
& Computing India (ICCC), 2015 International Conference on, pages 638–641. IEEE.

Martinazzo, B., Dosciatti, M. M., and Paraiso, E. C. (2011). Identifying emotions in
short texts for brazilian portuguese. In IV International Workshop on Web and Text
Intelligence (WTI 2012).

Moraes, S. M., Manssour, I. H., and Silveira, M. S. (2015). 7x1pt: um corpus extraı́do do
twitter para análise de sentimentos em lı́ngua portuguesa.

Morgado, I. C. (2012). Classification of sentiment polarity of portuguese on-line news. In
Proceedings of the 7th Doctoral Symposium in Informatics Engineering, pages 139–
150.

Padmaja, S., Fatima, S. S., and Bandu, S. (2013). Analysis of sentiment on newspaper
quotations: A preliminary experiment. In Computing, Communications and Network-
ing Technologies (ICCCNT), 2013 Fourth International Conference on, pages 1–5.
IEEE.

Pang, B. and Lee, L. (2008). Using very simple statistics for review search: An explo-
ration. In COLING (Posters), pages 75–78.

Pang, B., Lee, L., et al. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and
Trends R© in Information Retrieval, 2(1–2):1–135.

Pang, B., Lee, L., and Vaithyanathan, S. (2002). Thumbs up?: sentiment classification
using machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Em-
pirical methods in natural language processing-Volume 10, pages 79–86. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Pardo, T. A., Gasperin, C. V., Caseli, H. M., and Nunes, M. d. G. V. (2010). Computational
linguistics in brazil: an overview. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young
Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 1–7. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Park, S., Ko, M., Kim, J., Liu, Y., and Song, J. (2011). The politics of comments: pre-
dicting political orientation of news stories with commenters’ sentiment patterns. In
Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
pages 113–122. ACM.

Pedersen, T. (2001). A decision tree of bigrams is an accurate predictor of word sense. In
Proceedings of the second meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics on Language technologies, pages 1–8. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

110



Porto, M. (2007). Tv news and political change in brazil: The impact of democratization
on tv globo’s journalism. Journalism, 8(4):363–384.

Schouten, K. and Frasincar, F. (2016). Survey on aspect-level sentiment analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 28(3):813–830.

Sharma, A. and Dey, S. (2012). A comparative study of feature selection and machine
learning techniques for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Research
in Applied Computation Symposium, pages 1–7. ACM.

Shirky, C. (2011). The political power of social media: Technology, the public sphere,
and political change. Foreign affairs, pages 28–41.

Simeon, M. and Hilderman, R. (2008). Categorical proportional difference: A feature
selection method for text categorization. In Proceedings of the 7th Australasian Data
Mining Conference-Volume 87, pages 201–208. Australian Computer Society, Inc.

Soares, G. A. D. (2004). A américa latina na imprensa brasileira. Opinião Pública,
10(1):63–90.

Tumitan, D. and Becker, K. (2014). Sentiment-based features for predicting election
polls: a case study on the brazilian scenario. In Web Intelligence (WI) and Intelligent
Agent Technologies (IAT), 2014 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conferences on,
volume 2, pages 126–133. IEEE.

Vieira, R. and Lima, V. L. (2001). Lingüı́stica computacional: princı́pios e aplicações. In
Anais do XXI Congresso da SBC. I Jornada de Atualização em Inteligência Artificial,
volume 3, pages 47–86. sn.

A Comparative Study for Sentiment Analysis on Election Brazilian News

111


