1

Proceedings of the LT4DHCSEE in conjunction with RANLP 2017, pages 1–9,

Varna, Bulgaria, 8 September 2017.

http://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-046-5_001

A Diachronic Corpus for Romanian (RoDia)

Ludmila Malahov

Institute of Mathematics
and Computer Science of
the Academy of Sciences
of Moldova - Chisinau
Republic of Moldova

lmalahov@gmail.com

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc

Faculty of Computer Science,

“Al. I. Cuza” University

Iasi, Romania

Academic Institute of Linguistics

“Iorgu Iordan Al. Rosetti”,

Bucharest, Romania

Alexandru Colesnicov
Institute of Mathematics
and Computer Science of
the Academy of Sciences
of Moldova - Chisinau
Republic of Moldova

acolesnicov@gmx.com

catalinamaranduc@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper describes a Romanian Depen-
dency Treebank, built at the Al. I. Cuza
University (UAIC), and a special OCR
techniques used to build it. The corpus
has rich morphological and syntactic an-
notation. There are few annotated repre-
sentative corpora in Romanian, and the ex-
istent ones are mainly focused on the con-
temporary Romanian standard. The cor-
pus described below is focused on the non-
standard aspects of the language, the Re-
gional and the Old Romanian. Having
the intention to participate at the PROIEL
project, which aligns oldest New Testa-
ments, we annotate the ﬁrst printed Ro-
manian New Testament (Alba Iulia, 1648).
We began by applying the UAIC tools for
the morphological and syntactic process-
ing of Contemporary Romanian over the
books ﬁrst quarter (second edition). By
carefully manually correcting the result of
the automated annotation (having a mod-
est accuracy) we obtained a sub-corpus for
the training of tools for the Old Roma-
nian processing. But the ﬁrst edition of
the New Testament is written in Cyrillic
letters. The existence of books printed
in the Old Cyrillic alphabet is a common
problem for Romania and The Republic of
Moldova, countries where the Romanian
is spoken; a problem to solve by the joint
efforts of the NLP researchers in the two
countries.
Introduction

1
The UAIC-RoDia-DepTb 1 is a balanced corpus
of the Dependency treebank type, including all the

1UAIC-RoDia = ISLRN 156-635-615-024-0

styles of Romanian, and focusing on non-standard
ones. The corpus contains more styles of Roma-
nian, such as folklore, journals, FrameNet trans-
lated in Romanian, legal texts (Acquis communi-
taire), Romanian and foreign ﬁction, social media
(chat) popularization scientiﬁc style (Wikipedia),
quotations (also poetry). The treebank has now
16,187 sentences, with 322,404 tokens, punctua-
tion included, between which 5,723 sentences in
Oold Romanian are also included (99,749 tokens).
Preserving the cultural heritage means not only
scanning the old books, so as to prevent their loss
by paper damaging. We also need to read and an-
notate the information contained in the old texts;
it needs to be preprocessed, in order to apply to it
the programs for information retrieval, for ques-
tion answering, for machine translations, or for
automatic texts resuming, operations in whose ab-
sence this information is not accessible to contem-
porary readers or researchers.

All these operations are based on the POS-
tagging or on the syntactic parsing; the texts must
be previously annotated on morphological and
syntactic information. A POS-tagger for Old Ro-
manian was built, having an accuracy of 91.66%.
(M˘ar˘anduc et al., 2017).

But the ﬁrst step to enable processing these old
texts is to transform their photos into the editable
text format. This step is the most difﬁcult one, be-
cause old Romanian texts, although the language
has Latin origin, are written in Cyrillic letters of
all forms and in all orthographic conventions en-
countered in the neighboring slave peoples.

Old Romanian is also a non-standard variant of
the language, because the rules have not yet been
established and each writer applied his own princi-
ples to transcribe the spoken language or to change
the form of inﬂected words. The syntactic pecu-
liarities are also very diverse. Building this corpus,
we have also built or trained some tools for Roma-

2

nian language processing; they have a good accu-
racy percentage for contemporary standard Roma-
nian. A clone of the POS tagger for processing
Old Romanian was built, but the syntactic parser
has not yet been sufﬁciently trained on this type of
texts.

A ﬁrst fragment of the New Testament (1648,
ﬁrst edition) was transformed into an editable
Cyrillic text by an OCR program that began op-
erating in August 2016. The printed book will be
entirely transposed to editable Cyrillic letters and
then to the Latin alphabet by the researchers of the
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science of
Chisinau; this is the ﬁrst such operation in prac-
tice.

The editable text in the Cyrillic script obtained
in the ﬁrst step of the process was checked by com-
paring it with the printed old book, and then was
wrapped in the XML format, obtaining the second
form of the ﬁrst 2,500 annotated and manually su-
pervised sentences. The Latin form obtained in the
second step of the processing was compared with
the second edition of the book, manually trans-
posed in Latin letters by priests, without the in-
tention to actualize, or normalize the text.

Our purpose has been to use the entirely anno-
tated and checked book for the extraction of an old
lexicon to be introduced in the tools, and also for
the training of these tools on Old Romanian. Si-
multaneously, the work of the regional sub-corpus
has begun, with the intention to include, in fu-
ture, the south Danube dialects of Romanian. The
transformation of the syntactic classic treebank in
the UD (Universal Dependencies) format and in
another semantic format has also begun. The ﬁrst
part of the New Testament, the four Gospels, has
been entirely annotated and manually corrected in
the classic syntactic format and in the new logical-
semantic one.

The Old Romanian sub-corpus will also be a
balanced treebank, including not only religious
books, but also historical texts (chronicles), legal
texts (codices), anonymous folk tales, documents
ranged by centuries, and even a cookbook.

The academic Institutes of Linguistics in Iasi
and Bucharest have big collections of non-
annotated texts in all the styles and from all the
periods of the Romanian language evolution. The
books are printed and processed by OCR (Opti-
cal Character Recognizer) programs. The (non-
supervised) texts obtained have more errors in the

case of books printed in the 19th century. But
books from the sixteenth to the eighteenth cen-
turies, the Romanian texts written in Old Cyrillic
alphabets, could not be processed with an accessi-
ble OCR program, such as ABBYY Fine Reader
12.

The researchers of Romania and of The Repub-
lic of Moldova have the same problem. The two
countries constituted a single state in the past, the
historical documents (written in Old Cyrillic) are
common, and the regional variants of Romanian
spoken in the two countries, with minor differ-
ences, are mutually understandable.

We have decided to continue together increas-
ing our balanced treebank. Our purpose is to build
a big training gold corpus for Old Romanian, to
collect the data from it and also to build a vari-
ant of our syntactic parser that can automatically
process the old text with good accuracy. A lexi-
con obtained from this corpus has been included
in the POS-tagger for Old Romanian and (with
Cyrillic letters) in the OCR program. We con-
tinue to increase the lexicon in order to augment
the accuracy of these tools. We use the bootstrap-
ping method, and the checked sentences are al-
ways added to the gold corpus for the training of
tools.

2 Directions for Increasing the Corpus

The balanced corpus will be increased by adding a
lot of regional variants. For the moment, the intro-
duction of popular regional texts collected in the
two countries is in progress, adding the folklore
in verse from all the regional variants of Roma-
nian. That is also a non-standard style, because
each regional variant of the language has its own
regularities, and we must train our tools on each of
them.

By introducing in the lexicon of the POS tag-
ger all the lexical or spelling variants of Roma-
nian words, extracted from the Thesaurus Dictio-
nary2, we introduced in fact the archaic and the
regional lexical variants from all over Romania,
but we do not know whether there are any vari-
ants not included in this dictionary in the Republic
of Moldova. Comparisons between the regional
peculiarities and statistical studies of differences
will become possible. For these comparisons, the
sub-treebank of The Republic of Moldova must
include other communication styles, for example

2http://edtlr.info.uaic.ro/

3

journalese or ﬁction.

The annotation of Old Romanian is our prior-
ity. We chose to begin with the New Testament
of Alba Iulia (1648), the ﬁrst printed New Testa-
ment in Romanian, with the intention of afﬁliating
it to the PROIEL project (Pragmatic Resources in
Old Indo-European Languages)3 (Haug and John-
dal, 2008), which aims to align the oldest Latin,
Greek, Slavonic and Armenian New Testaments.
After the training of tools on this gold corpus, the
balanced treebank must be completed with other
styles of the old language.

The annotation conventions speciﬁc to our tree-
bank will be kept in order to create a very big cor-
pus without inconsistencies, that being the con-
dition for increasing the accuracy of tools on all
the language variants. This classic syntactic for-
mat is considered the pivot for the transformation
into other formats; having a big amount of seman-
tic information, we can develop these new formats
and obtain a training corpus for a semantic parser,
which will be trained with priority on old Roma-
nian. The transformation into UD (Universal De-
pendencies)4 conventions is also in progress, be-
cause in this way we can compare our language
with the other 30 languages afﬁliated, but the
transformation is accompanied by the loss of one
part of the semantic information.

3 Related Work

As regards diachronic corpora, we can cite three
recent conferences: the International Conference
on Practical Applications of Language PALC
Lodz5, 23-24 October 2015, the Diachronic Cor-
pora, Genre, and Language Change, Nottingham6
8-9 April 2016, and the conference Digital Access
of Textual Cultural Heritage DATeCH Gttingen, 1-
2 June 20177.

The need for a research infrastructure for the
study of historical textual resources by digitiza-
tion is increasingly recognized by the historical
research community. Historical documents are
being digitized on a vast scale in cultural her-
itage and digital library projects in many countries.
Modern linguistics studies increasingly pay atten-
tion to diachronic and dialectal variations of lan-

3http://www.hf.uio.no/iﬁkk/english/research/projects/proiel/
4http://universaldependencies.org/
5http://palc.uni.lodz.pl
6https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/conference/fac-

arts/clas/dcglc/home.aspx.

7http://ddays.digitisation.eu/datech-2017/

guages, studying them with modern formalisms,
from the point of view of modern theories. Lin-
guistic studies based on corpora get expanded and
grow in importance. Digitized historical corpora
are already created for many languages. The prag-
matic interpretation of ancient texts is a new direc-
tion of research. In the Proceedings of the 12th In-
ternational Pragmatics Conference in Manchester
in 2011 there are chapters based on diachronic
pragmatic interpretation of several corpora (Taav-
itsainen et al., 2014). In Haug and Johndal (2008),
the alignment of the oldest New Testament also
has a pragmatic purpose. The diachronic corpus of
Italian is described in Onelli et al. (2006). There
also exist corpora for the dead languages: DCSL
(The Diachronic Corpus of Sumerian Literature),
a web-based corpus concerning the entire history
of the Mesopotamian civilization8. There are sev-
eral papers that describe the creation of diachronic
corpora, their purpose, their difﬁculties, and their
usability. A historical American English corpus
is presented in Davies (2012); the paper Yanez-
Bouza (2011) describes the history of the creation
of ARCHER (A Representative Corpus of Histor-
ical English Registers), and a multigenre histor-
ical corpus. A similar corpus for Old French is
described in Martineau et al. (2007). The paper
Stein (2008) is a syntactic annotation study for an-
other Old French corpus. Finally, the creation of
a German diachronic corpus is described in Dip-
per et al. (2010). A comparison between the his-
torical Spanish and Portuguese corpora is made in
Davies (2010). In Borin et al. (2010), a computa-
tional morphological description of Old Swedish
is made, and the paper Dipper et al. (2010) is a
guideline for the creation of a richly annotated
corpus. The paper Martineau et al. (2007) is an-
other guideline, intended for linguists who are un-
informed about the perspectives created for their
research by linguistic of corpora. We also con-
sulted an entire book collecting papers interested
in the corpus based linguistic methods and studies
(McEnery et al., 2006).

BLARK (Basic Language Resource Kit) is a
software for the research in the ﬁeld of social-
humanities, i. e. a kit for the automatic annota-
tion of resources in this domain (Borin and Fors-
berg, 2008). East European languages have sev-
eral preprocessing issues. For example, some of
them used Cyrillic and Latin scripts in various

8http://dcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk

4

Figure 1: A fragment of the beginning of the Alba
Iulia New Testament (1648)

periods of time; consequently, some documents
need to be transliterated before further processing
(Gruszczynski and Ogrodniczuk, 2015).

4 The OCR Program for the Old Cyrillic

Books

Romanian linguists published a big number of edi-
tions with comments for each important book writ-
ten with Old Cyrillic letters, including their tran-
scription in the Latin alphabet and ﬁnal indexes or
glossaries. But these philological editions are not
usable for our purpose. They contain controvert-
ible theories of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies pronunciation and use an interpretive tran-
scription. The indexes at the end of these books
would have been very useful, but if we introduced
them in the lexicon of processing tools, they would
not ﬁnd anything in the texts, because the form of
the words was an interpretive spelling, or was re-
placed with the lemma (the form found in contem-
porary dictionaries). The ﬁrst printed Romanian
New Testament, chosen for beginning the old Ro-
manian gold corpus, is relatively well preserved.
(See Figure 1)

Fortunately, the second edition of the Alba Iu-
lia New Testament was published by priests, who
did not practice interpretive transcription. We have
processed its ﬁrst 3,000 sentences with our con-
temporary Romanian tools. The result, whose ac-
curacy is modest, is being carefully manually cor-
rected and will be used to train the tools on Old
Romanian. From a philological point of view,
this does not mean that we annotate the ﬁrst New
Testament printed in Romanian. The books in

Figure 2: The ﬁrst sentence of the Alba Iulia New
Testament (1648) with Old Cyrillic, annotated in
UD conventions Conception and Birth of Jesus
Christ, which is the promised Messiah, our parents
deliverer.

the PROIEL project are written with their original
Greek, Slavonic or Armenian characters. But we
did not ﬁnd another solution to start the project,
breaking the vicious circle - we cannot have pro-
cessing tools because we do not have a training
corpus and we cannot have a corpus because we
do not have automatic annotation tools.

Then, the researchers at the Institute of Math-
ematics and Computer Science in Chisinau have
been able to process the ﬁrst portion of the text,
with ABBYY FineReader OCR program (AFR),
and a specially developed tool pack of add-ons
for AFR. It is the ﬁrst time that a Cyrillic Ro-
manian text of the seventeenth century has been
obtained by an OCR program (Colesnicov et al.,
2016). AFR has initially been trained on Roma-
nian texts printed after 1945 in The Republic of
Moldova with the modern Cyrillic alphabet.
In
Romania, books were printed with Latin charac-
ters starting from the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury (due to a law given by the Prince Al. I. Cuza).
The OCR for the Romanian written with Old
Cyrillic alphabet is based on the AFR features al-
lowing the introduction of new languages, with
their alphabets and lexicons (dictionaries).

AFR has also been trained on texts printed in
Romania at the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury, with sufﬁcient good accuracy, something
which we cannot hope to achieve for texts of the
17th century. The researchers of Chisinau have
processed the print in two steps. In the ﬁrst step,
they obtained an editable form of the book with
Old Cyrillic characters (Cojocaru et al., 2017).
The computational linguists of Iasi have remarked
that three characters are not in the ”times extro”
set. Consequently, they are not recognized by the
computer, because the set of characters are not all

5

Engl. (KJV, Matthew 8): 27. But the men marvelled, saying,
What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea
obey him! 28. And when he was come to the other side into
the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed
with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding ﬁerce, so
that no man might pass by that way. 29. And, behold, they
cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou
Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the
time?

Figure 3: A fragment of the Alba Iulia New Testa-
ment (1648)

in the ASCII set. The computational linguists of
Iasi replaced the letters with other signs (see Fig-
ure 4, ﬁrst row), and they maintained the letter s,c
in the form used by the researchers of Chisinau,
although it replaces the letter s,t, and not s,c. With
this set of letters, they succeeded in replacing the
Latin characters in the checked XML containing
the Gospel, the ﬁrst part of the New Testament. A
resulting sentence, annotated in the UD conven-
tions, is shown in Figure 2.

Simultaneously with the replacement of the
word form in Latin characters by the word form
in Cyrillic characters, the linguists confronted the
transcription with the printed book and they sig-
naled the errors of the Chisinau researchers. They
encountered more problems:

• A ﬁrst problem was the numbers of chap-
ters and paragraphs to be preserved. These

Figure 4: Some difﬁculties of the reading and of
the transliteration of the Alba Iulia New Testament
(1648)

numbers are universal for any version of the
Christian New Testament and essential for
the alignment of our New Testament with the
other similar books in PROIEL. We decided
to introduce them in the general data of each
sentence. In the PROIEL project, they were
repeated for each word, because in the CON-
LLU format there is no information about
sentences. Our NLP group has built a pro-
gram for the XML to CONLLU format trans-
position; there will be added a function to ex-
pand the citation part of each word.

• Therefore, in the printed old books, these
numbers are in a separated column and are
written with old Cyrillic letters. These signs
represent the ﬁrst paragraph, the second, the
third, and so on. (See Figure 4, second row).
The list of letters-digits marked by an upper
score has been introduced in the OCR pro-
gram. The letters-digits appear only in the
oldest books.

• The OCR must include a splitter that can
cross out with spaces the words where they
are not separated in the originally printed
text, using a big lexicon for old Romanian.
For example, in Figure 4, sixth row, there is
a string of signs that can be separated, be-
ing a preposition, deˆın, =de ˆın, En:from and,

6

muierea < Lat. mulier. En: the woman. This
is a speciﬁc peculiarity of the ﬁrst printed
books, probably the white letter did not yet
exist and the letters were placed at various
distances that might chance to disappear at
the moment when they were pressed, or when
orthography respected any rule which we do
not know.

• The book contains a lot of abbreviated words.
The Chisinau researchers made a list of the
individual abbreviations and they wanted the
program to replace the abbreviations by en-
tire words. Perhaps this was not compul-
sory, since abbreviations exist in contempo-
rary languages, too; it is enough to put the
list of abbreviations at the beginning of the
document. See Figure 4, seventh row.

• Frequently, there are no abbreviated words,
but words with some overwritten letters. For
example, the word mears˘ar˘a En: they walk;
the letter “r“ is overwritten; the word Esrom
(proper noun) has an accent and the letter
“m“ placed over the letter o. see Figure 4,
third and fourth row. A solution applied by
the OCR authors is to consider each line of
text as two lines and to read the overwrit-
ten signs, too. But this peculiarity will be a
permanent source for decreasing the accuracy
percentage and these words must be manu-
ally checked.

• Some of the missing letters or words were
due to stains. This difﬁculty could be over-
come by giving up the Scan Taylor program
(which turned the text black and white, as in
Figure 3) and by increasing the resolution.
The word Aminadav (proper noun) wasnt en-
tirely recognized by the OCR program read-
ing the black white text, but was recognized
reading the color print. See Figure 4, ﬁfth
row.

The problem of letters-digit and overwritten is
now solved. The output of a book treated by the
OCR has some sections, like an invisible table, re-
sembling the printed book that has a division for
the notes, the number of chapters, and references
of other chapters. In the Figure 3 we have manu-
ally traced the table (See ﬁgure 3)

5 Some Transcription Difﬁculties

The second step of the OCR processing created at
Chisinau is the transliteration of old Cyrillic letters
as Latin characters. The Chisinau researchers have
built a POS-tagger that can annotate with mor-
phological information both Romanian texts writ-
ten with Latin letters and Romanian ones written
with modern Cyrillic characters; the program was
adopted for old Cyrillic (introducing new charac-
ters) and for the operation of transposition (intro-
ducing new rules). The computational linguists of
Iasi compared the text with Latin letters obtained
by the Chisinau researchers with the second edi-
tion of the New Testament (used in the automatic
morphological and syntactic annotation of the ﬁrst
3,000 sentences) with Latin characters, obtained
by the ABBYY FineReader 12 program.
(This
program is the starting point for building the OCR
for Romanian Old Cyrillic and the specialists from
ABBYY helped them with some indications and
suggestions.) A fragment of the comparison is
shown in Table 1, most of it corresponding to the
image (See ﬁgure 2).

The bold characters of the table are missing
words in the second edition or in the OCR ver-
sion. The high quality of the ﬁrst document re-
ceived from Chis,in˘au is impressive, owing mainly
to the careful manual correction of OCR output.
The previous examples shows that it was a very
difﬁcult task. Some difﬁculties of transposition of
a Cyrillic letter as a group of Latin letters (with
more options) are shown in the Figure 4, last row.
The ﬁrst theoretical observation to be made is
that our purpose is to study the peculiarities of
the old text, but not to remove them by correct-
ing the text, i.e. by applying rules/norms which
did not exist in the studied period of the language
evolution. The bishop Simion Stefan was a cul-
tivated man, he was aware of the European ideas
of his time, demanding that the religious service
and the sacred books be in the language of the
people, therefore he wrote without capital letters
because in this period there was no rule for the
capitalization of proper nouns and of pronouns co-
referential with the noun of the Divinity.

Spelling correction is made for the use of a
wider audience of non-specialists who are not in-
terested in old books and will probably not read
them. On the contrary, the persons interested in the
real appearance of the ancient text will not have
access to it. We believe we must enter in the lex-

7

The New Testament (1648),
Second Edition, with Latin
Letters, Alba Iulia, Roma-
nian Orthodox Diocese Pub-
lisher, 1988
Neamul s,i nas,terea lui Iisus Hristos
carele iaste Mesia f˘ag˘aduit izb˘avitor
p˘arint,ilor.
1. Cartea de neamul lui Iisus Hristos,
ﬁiul lui David, ﬁiul lui Avraam.

The New Testament (1648),
First Printed in Romanian
by Simion S, tefan, Bishop
of Transylvania, obtained by
OCR at IMCS Chis,in˘au
Neamul s,i nas,terea a lui
is hs,
carele iaste mesia f˘ag˘aduit izb˘avitor
p˘arint,ilor.
1. Cartea de neamul lui IS hS, ﬁiul
lui david ﬁiul lui avraam.

2. Avraam n˘ascu pre Isaac, iar˘a Isaac
n˘ascu pre Iacov, iar˘a Iacov n˘ascu pre
Iuda s,i pre frat,ii lui.
3. Iuda n˘ascu pre Fares s,i pre Zara
din Tamar, iar˘a Fares n˘ascu pre Es-
rom s,i Esrom n˘ascu pre Aram.
4. Aram n˘ascu pre Aminadav, iar˘a
Aminadav n˘ascu pre Nasson, Nasson
n˘ascu pre Salmon.
5. Salmon n˘ascu pre Vooz din Rahav,
iar˘a Vooz n˘ascu pre Ovid din Ruta,
Ovid n˘ascu pre Isei.
6. Ieseiu n˘ascu pre David craiu, iar˘a
David craiu n˘ascu pre Solomon, den
muiarea carea au fost a Uriei.
7. Solomon n˘ascu pre Rovoam, iar˘a
Rovoam n˘ascu pre Avia s,i Avia n˘ascu
pre Assa.
iar˘a
8. Assa n˘ascu pre Ioasafat,
Ioasafat n˘ascu pre Ioaram s,i Ioaram
n˘ascu pre Oziia.
9. Oziia n˘ascu pre Ioatam,
Ioatam n˘ascu pre Ahaz,
n˘ascu pre Ezechiia.
10. Ezechiia n˘ascu pre Manasia, iar˘a
Manasiia n˘ascu pre Amon.

iar˘a
iar˘a Ahaz

iar˘a
11. Amon n˘ascu pre Iosian,
Iosian n˘ascu pre Ehonian s,i pre frat,ii
lui, ˆın vavlon.
Iar˘a dup˘a mutarea ˆın Vavilon,
12.
Ehonia n˘ascu pre Salatiil, iar˘a Salatiil
n˘ascu pre Zorovavel.
Zorovavel n˘ascu pre Aviud,
13.
iar˘a Aviud n˘ascu pre Eleachim, iar˘a
Eleachim n˘ascu pre Azor.
14. Azor n˘ascu pre Sadoc, iar˘a Sadoc
n˘ascu pre Ahchim, Ahchim n˘ascu pre
Eliud.
15. Eliud n˘ascu pre Eleazar, Eleazar
n˘ascu pre Mattan, iar˘a Mattan n˘ascu
pre Iacov.
Iacov n˘ascu pre Iosif, b˘arbatul
16.
Mariei, dentru carea n˘ascu Iisus,
carele S˘a chiam˘a Hristos.
toate neamurile
17. Derept acea,
de la Avraam pˆın˘a la David, pa-
truspr˘azeace neamure; s,i de la David
pˆın˘a la mutarea ˆın Vavilon, neamure
patruspr˘azeace, s,i den mutarea den
Vavilon pˆın˘a la Hristos, neamure 14.

2. Avraam n˘ascu pre Isaac. iar˘a Isaac
n˘ascu pre Iacov. iar˘a Iacov,n˘ascu pre
Iuda s,i pre frat,ii lui.
3. Iuda n˘ascu pre fares, s,i pre zara din
Thamar. iar˘a fares n˘ascu pre Esrom,
s,i Esrom n˘ascu pre aram.
4. Aram n˘ascu pre aminadav.
iar˘a
aminadav n˘ascu pre nasson. nasson
n˘ascu pre Salmon.
5. Salmon n˘ascupre vooz diˆı rahav.
iar˘a vooz n˘ascu, pre ovid diˆırutha .
ovid n˘ascupre Iesei.
6. Ieseiu n˘ascu pre david craiu. iar˘a
david craiu n˘ascu pre Solomon deˆın
muiarea carea au fost a uriei.
7. Solomon n˘ascu pre rovoam, iar˘a
rovoam n˘ascu pre avia, s,i avia n˘ascu
pre assa.
8. Assa n˘ascu pre Iosafat, s,i Iosafat
n˘ascu pre Ioaram, s,i Ioaram n˘ascu pre
ozia.
9. Ozia n˘ascu pre Ioatham,
iar˘a
Ioatham n˘ascu pre ahaz, iar˘a ahaz,
n˘ascu pre Ezechia.
10. Ezechia n˘ascu pre manasia, iar˘a
manasia n˘ascu pre amon.

Zorovavel n˘ascu pre aviud.
iar˘a

11. Amon n˘ascu pre Iosian,
iar˘a
Iosiae n˘ascu pre Ehonian s,i pre frat,ii
lui, ˆın vavlon.
12. iar˘a dup˘a mutarea ˆın vavlon, Eho-
nia n˘ascu pre salathiil iarˆı Salathiil
n˘ascu pre zorovavel.
13.
iar˘a aviud n˘ascu pre Eleachim.
Eleachim n˘ascu pre azor
14. Azor n˘ascu pre Sadoc, iar˘a Sadoc
n˘ascu pre achim, achim n˘ascu pre
Eliud.
15. Eliud n˘ascu pre Eleazar. Eleazar
n˘ascu pre matthan.
iar˘a matthan
n˘ascu pre Iacop.
16.
Iacov n˘ascu pre Iosif, b˘arbatul
mariei, dentru carea n˘ascu IS carele
s˘a chiam˘a hs.
17. Derept acea toate neamurile dela
avraam pˆan˘a la dvd patruspr˘azeace
neamure: s,i dela dvd pˆan˘a la mutarea
ˆınvavlon, neamure patruspr˘azeace, s,i
dela mutarea den vavlon pˆan˘a la hS
neamure 14.

translation
The English
(KJV, Matthew
1:1-17)
Note: different text distribu-
tion between verses 10 and
11.
The generation and birth of Jesus
Christ, who is the Messiah, promised
the savior to the fathers.
1 The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham.
2 Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac be-
gat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and
his brethren;
3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara
of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom;
and Esrom begat Aram;
4 And Aram begat Aminadab; and
Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naas-
son begat Salmon;
5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab;
and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and
Obed begat Jesse;
6 And Jesse begat David the king;
and David the king begat Solomon of
her that had been the wife of Urias;
7 And Solomon begat Roboam; and
Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat
Asa;
8 And Asa begat Josaphat; and Jos-
aphat begat Joram; and Joram begat
Ozias;
9 And Ozias begat Joatham; and
Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz be-
gat Ezekias;
10 And Ezekias begat Manasses; and
Manasses begat Amon; and Amon
begat Josias;
11 And Josias begat Jechonias and
his brethren, about the time they were
carried away to Babylon:
12 And after they were brought to
Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel;
and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;
13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and
Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim
begat Azor;
and
14 And Azor begat Sadoc;
Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim be-
gat Eliud;
15 And Eliud begat Eleazar; and
Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan
begat Jacob;
16 And Jacob begat Joseph the hus-
band of Mary, of whom was born Je-
sus, who is called Christ.
17 So all the generations from Abra-
ham to David are fourteen genera-
tions; and from David until the car-
rying away into Babylon are four-
teen generations; and from the car-
rying away into Babylon unto Christ
are fourteen generations.

Table 1: Comparison between the second edition and the OCR of the New Testament ﬁrst edition.

8

icon of processing tools all the forms existing in
the old language, in order for them to be recog-
nized and correctly analyzed when found in other
texts. For example, if we introduce in the lexicon
only capitalized proper nouns, the ones encoun-
tered without capitalization will not be correctly
annotated.

It is also worth noting that, at that time, the or-
thographic convention of words joined by a hy-
phen did not exist. For example, aﬂ˘as˘a means
aﬂ˘a-se, se aﬂ˘a (En:
there was.) Therefore, we
must annotate two words because the string has
the meaning of two words. The inversion of word
marks, not used in the contemporary language, is
frequently used in ancient texts. Being frequent,
the statistical tools will probably be easily trained
on it in this respect.

Another big problem is the variety of ancient
texts. At different times, in the nineteenth century,
there were transition alphabets that mixed Latin
letters with Cyrillic letters (M˘ar˘anduc et al., 2016).
16 types of transition alphabets were found, clas-
siﬁed after the combinations of Latin and Cyril-
lic letters. There were also differences in the
form of letters, and the researchers included in
the program an option in which the user can spec-
ify the year and the locality where the text was
printed. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
there were not many locations where books were
printed. They introduced in the OCR program dif-
ferent sets of letters, for each of these transitions
alphabets and printers.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

After taking the necessary steps for checking the
annotation and the OCR obtained by confronting
it with the printed book, we can say that we have
actually annotated the ﬁrst printed Romanian New
Testament. It is a good idea to compare two tran-
scriptions, (both without the intention to actual-
ize, interpret or correct them), because the text is
ancient and difﬁcult. Each of the versions com-
pared has mistaken that the other does not have,
and problems better solved than the other. The
Chisinau version is as good as the published one.
In the meantime, they have solved the problem of
the letters digits, which are missing in their ver-
sion of the table, as can be seen in Figure 3. Any
problem that linguists are telling them is solved
by the computer scientists in Chisinau. They have
reported to ASCHI the characters that are not yet

recognized and we are expecting their introduction
into international codes. They have also made a
set of old Cyrillic letters for Romanian that can be
entered on the computer keyboard, and in this way
the supervision of results of the OCR will be eas-
ier.

The last 2,200 sentences of the Gospel are ob-
tained by the OCR program, and then processed in
the same way. And for the second part of the New
Testament, i.e. Acts of the Apostles, we intend
to introduce the text obtained by OCR in the pro-
grams for the automatic morphological and syn-
tactic annotation that will be manually checked.
Therefore, the comparison of the second edition
must continue. After each step, the programs will
be ameliorated by the introduction of the correct
information in their lexicon, and by the increase
of the training corpus. The OCR will be trained
on more printed books with a higher resolution.

We will continue to wrap the gold corpus of Old
Romanian with the word form written in Cyrillic
letters. We now have 3,000 sentences, we would
need more for the training with the Cyrillic vari-
ant, to build a POS-tagger which should be able
to annotate Romanian ancient texts written in the
Cyrillic and Latin alphabets. Perhaps some Ro-
manian linguists will want to study the Cyrillic
version of texts, without transposing them into the
modern alphabet, as specialists in old Slavic or in
old Greek do.

The Chisinau researchers began the study of the
problem of the optical character recognition for
old Cyrillic letters from some manuscripts. The
treebank has now three layers (conventions of an-
notation). We ﬁrst annotate each text in the classi-
cal syntactic convention that our tools are trained
in, and that contains a big quantity of information.
It can be automatically transposed in the UD con-
vention, which is the international link between
more than 30 treebanks, but has less information.
Also the classical syntactic annotation can be au-
tomatically transposed in the semantic treebank
in proportion of 65%, but the syntactic relation
that have a big number of semantic correspondents
must be manually annotated. We have transposed
in the semantic format the ﬁrst part (the Gospel)
of Alba Iulia New Testament, with the intention
to train a semantic parser on this format. The se-
mantic annotated corpus could be aligned with the
other old New Testaments in the PROIEL project,
and they can import our semantic annotation.

9

century polish texts (up to 1772) aims, methods,
current state, problems and prospects for develop-
ment. In Slavic Corpus Linguistics: The Historical
Dimension. pages 21–25.

Dag T. T. Haug and Marius L. Johndal. 2008. Creating
a parallel treebank of the old indo-european bible
translations.
In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage
Data. C. Sporleder and K. Ribarov (eds.), pages 27–
34.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, Ludmila Malahov, Cenel-Augusto
Perez, and Alexandru Colesnicov. 2016. Rodia
project of a regional and historical corpus for roma-
nian. In in Proceedings of MFOI.

C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, Radu Simionescu,

and Dan
Cristea. 2017. Hybrid pos-tagger for old romanian.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing (CICLing).

France Martineau, Constana Rodica Diaconescu, , and
Paul Hirschb¨uhler. 2007. Le corpus voies du fran-
cais : de lelaboration `a lannotation pages 121–142.

Tony McEnery, Richard Xiao, and Y. Yukio Tono.
2006. Corpus-based Language Studies: An Ad-
vanced Resource Book. Routledge publisher, Lon-
don, New York.

C. Onelli, D. Proietti, and C. Seidenari. 2006. The dia-
coris project: a diachronic corpus of written italian.
In Proceedings of LREC 2006. pages 1212–1215.
http://corpora.dslo.unibo.it/DiaCORIS.

Achim Stein. 2008. Syntactic annotation of old french

text corpora. Corpus (7):157–172.

Irma Taavitsainen, Andreas H. Jucker, and Jukka
Tuominen. 2014. Diachronic Corpus Pragmatics.
John Benjamins publisher, Amsterdam.

Nuria Yanez-Bouza. 2011. Archer past and present

(1990-2010). ICAME Journal (35):205–236.

The annotation of the second part of the Alba
Iulia New Testament will begin in the coming year.
After the full processing and supervision, the New
Testament will be transformed in the UD conven-
tion and in the CONLLU format and will be afﬁli-
ated to the PROEL project, which will align it with
the other old New Testament versions and the lin-
guists can study the etymology, the translation of
old texts, the pragmatic connections between the
sentences and other peculiarities. The New Testa-
ment will be submitted in four forms: in XML and
in CONLLU, with Latin and with Cyrillic charac-
ters. Meanwhile, another team will continue in-
creasing the treebank with popular regional texts
from all the regions of our two countries. The tools
will be trained on each of these non-standardized
variants of the language.

References
Lars Borin, Marcus Forsberg, and Dimitrios Kokki-
nakis. 2010. Diabase: Towards a diachronic blark
in support of historical studies.
In Proceedings of
LREC. pages 35–42.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2008. Something
old, something new: A computational morpholog-
ical description of old swedish.
In LREC 2008
- Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural
Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2008) Conference Proceed-
ings. pages 9–16.

Svetlana Cojocaru, Alexandru Colesnicov, and Lud-
mila Malahov. 2017. Digitization of old romanian
texts printed in the cyrillic script. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Digital Access to Tex-
tual Cultural Heritage. pages 143–148.

Alexandru Colesnicov, Ludmila Malahov, and Tudor
Bumbu. 2016. Digitization of romanian printed
texts of the 17th century.
In Proceedings of the
12th International Conference Linguistic Resources
and Tools for Processing the Romanian Language.
Alexandru Ioan Cuza University Press, pages 1–11.

Mark Davies. 2010. Creating useful historical corpora:
A comparison of corde, the corpus del espanol, and
the corpus do portuguˆes pages 137–166.

Mark Davies. 2012. Expanding horizons in historical
linguistics with the 400 million word corpus of his-
torical american english. Corpora (7):121–157.

Stephanie Dipper, Lukas Faulstich, Ulf Leser, and
Anke Ludeling. 2010. Challenges in modelling a
richly annotated diachronic corpus of german.
In
Proceedings of the Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, LREC2010.

Wlodzimierz Gruszczynski and Maciej Ogrodniczuk.
2015. The electronic corpus of the 17th and 18th

