



















































Projecting Multiword Expression Resources on a Polish Treebank


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 20–26,
Valencia, Spain, 4 April 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Projecting Multiword Expression Resources on a Polish Treebank

Agata Savary1 and Jakub Waszczuk1,2

1Université François Rabelais Tours, France
2Université d’Orléans, France

{agata.savary,jakub.waszczuk}@univ-tours.fr

Abstract

Multiword expressions (MWEs) are lin-
guistic objects containing two or more
words and showing idiosyncratic behavior
at different levels. Treebanks with anno-
tated MWEs enable studies of such prop-
erties, as well as training and evaluation
of MWE-aware parsers. However, few
treebanks contain full-fledged MWE an-
notations. We show how this gap can be
bridged in Polish by projecting 3 MWE re-
sources on a constituency treebank.

1 Introduction

Multiword expressions (MWEs) are linguistic ob-
jects containing two or more words and showing
idiosyncratic behavior at different linguistic levels
(Savary et al., 2015). For instance, at the morpho-
logical level they can have restricted paradigms,
e.g., in Polish (PL) zjadłbym konia z kopytami (lit.
I would eat a horse with its hooves) ’I am very
hungry’ can only occur in the conditional mood.
At the syntactic level they can: (i) exhibit defec-
tive agreement, e.g., in French (FR) in grands-
mères ’grandmothers’ the adjective does not agree
with the noun in gender unlike all regular adjec-
tival modifiers, (ii) impose agreement constraints
which do not apply to compositional structures,
e.g., to have one’s heart in one’s mouth imposes
agreement in person between both possessive pro-
nouns and the subject, (iii) block some trans-
formations typical for their structures, e.g., *the
bucket was kicked by him, (iv) prohibit or re-
quire modifiers, e.g., (FR) germer dans le cerveau
de quelqu’un (lit. to germinate in someone’s
brain) imposes a pronominal or nominal modifier
of brain, etc. At the semantic level, MWEs show
a varying degree of non-compositionality, e.g., to
pull strings is semantically opaque but can be un-

derstood compositionally if the components them-
selves are interpreted in an idiomatic way (to pull
as ’to use’, and strings as ’one’s influence’).

Treebanks in which MWE have been explicitly
annotated are highly precious resources enabling
us to study such more or less unpredictable prop-
erties. They also constitute basic prerequisites
for training and evaluating parsers, which should
best perform syntactic analysis jointly with MWE
identification (Finkel and Manning, 2009; Green
et al., 2013; Candito and Constant, 2014; Le Roux
et al., 2014; Wehrli, 2014; Nasr et al., 2015; Con-
stant and Nivre, 2016; Waszczuk et al., 2016).

However, few treebanks contain full-fledged
MWE annotations, even for English (Rosén et
al., 2015). Multiword named entities (MWNEs)
constitute by far the most frequently annotated
category (Erjavec et al., 2010; Savary et al.,
2010). Continuous MWEs such as compound
nouns, adverbs and prepositions and conjunctions
are covered in some treebanks as in (Abeillé et
al., 2003; Branco et al., 2010). Verbal MWEs
(VMWEs) have been addressed for a fewer num-
ber of languages (Bejček et al., 2011; Eryigit et al.,
2015; Seraji et al., 2014), and often restricted to
some subtypes only, e.g., light-verb constructions
(Vincze and Csirik, 2010).

Lexical MWE resources develop more rapidly
than MWE-annotated treebanks (Losnegaard et
al., 2016). They already exist for a large number
of languages and are often distributed under open
licenses. It is, thus, interesting to examine how far
MWE lexicons can help in completing the exist-
ing treebanks with annotation layers dedicated to
MWEs. Our case study deals with four Polish re-
sources: (i) the named-entity annotation layer of a
Polish reference corpus, (ii) an e-lexicon of nomi-
nal, adjectival and adverbial MWEs, (iii) a valence
dictionary with a phraseological component, and
(iv) a treebank with no initial MWE annotations.20



We show how the 3 former resources can be au-
tomatically projected on the latter, by identifying
syntactic nodes satisfying (totally or partly) the ap-
propriate lexical and syntactic constraints.

2 Resources

The National Corpus of Polish (NCP) (Prze-
piórkowski et al., 2012) contains a manually
double-annotated and adjudicated subcorpus of
over 1 million words. Its named entity layer
(NCP-NE), which builds on the morphosyntac-
tic layer (relying in its turn on the segmentation
layer), contains over 80,000 annotated NEs, 20%
of which are MWNEs. Only the latter were used in
the experiments described below. The annotation
schema assumes notably the markup of nested,
overlapping and discontinuous NEs, i.e., the anno-
tation structures form trees (Savary et al., 2010).

SEJF (Czerepowicka and Savary, 2015) is a
grammatical lexicon of Polish continuous MWEs
containing over 4,700 compound nouns, adjectives
and adverbs, where inflectional and word-order
variation is described via fine-grained graph-based
rules. It is provided in two forms – intensional
(multiword lemmas and inflection rules) and ex-
tensional (list of morphologically annotated vari-
ants). The latter, generated automatically from the
former, was used in our projecting experiments.
Tab. 1 shows a sample extensional entry contain-
ing a MWE inflected form, its lemma and morpho-
logical tag: noun (subst) in singular (sg) geni-
tive (gen) and feminine gender (f).

Inflected form Lemma Tag
drugiej połowy druga połowa subst:sg:gen:f

Table 1: An inflected form of druga połowa (lit.
second half ) ’one’s husband or wife’ in SEJF.

Walenty is a Polish large-scale valence dictio-
nary of about 50000, 3700, 3000, and 1000 subcat-
egorization frames (in its 2015 version) for Polish
verbs, nouns, adjectives, and adverbs respectively.
Its encoding formalism is rather expressive and
theory-neutral, and includes an elaborate phraseo-
logical component (Przepiórkowski et al., 2014).1

Thus, above 8,000 verbal frames contain lexical-
ized arguments of head verbs, i.e., they describe
VMWEs. For instance the idiom highlighted in

1Walenty and PDT-Vallex for Czech (Urešová et al.,
2014) belong to the most elaborate and extensive endeav-
ors towards the description of the valency of VMWEs
(Przepiórkowski et al., 2016).

example (1) is described in Walenty as shown in
Tab. 2. Each component separated by a ’+’ repre-
sents one required verbal argument with its lexical,
morphological, syntactic, and (sometimes) seman-
tic constraints. Here, the subject is compulsory
and has a structural case (subj{np(str)}),
which notably means that it normally occurs in the
nominative, but turns to the genitive when realized
as a numeral phrase (of a certain type). The sub-
ject being a required argument in a verbal frame
does not contradict the fact that it can regularly be
omitted in Polish, as in (1).2

(1) Nie
Not

umiem
know.SG.PRI

w
in

tych
these

sprawach
affairs

trzymać
hold.INF

języka
tongue.SG.GEN

za
behind

zębami.
teeth.

(lit. I cannot hold my tongue behind my teeth in such

cases) ’I cannot hold my tongue in such cases’

The second required argument is a direct ob-
ject realized as a nominal phrase in structural case,
i.e., normally in the accusative but turning to the
genitive when the sentence is negated, as in (1).
The lexicalized object’s head has the lemma język
’tongue’, should be in singular (sg) and does not
admit modifiers (natr). The second comple-
ment is a prepositional nominal phrase (prepnp)
headed by the preposition za ’behind’ governing
the instrumental case (inst) and a lexicalized
non-modifiable (natr) noun with the lemma ząb
’tooth’ in plural (pl). Walenty’s syntax is com-
pact and meant to be easily handled by lexicogra-
phers but proved sufficiently formalized to be di-
rectly applicable to NLP tasks, such as automatic
generation of grammar rules (Patejuk, 2015).

trzymać: subj{np(str)}+
obj{lex(np(str),sg,’język’,natr)}+
{lex(prepnp(za,inst),pl,’ząb’,natr)}

Table 2: Description of trzymać język za
zębami ’hold one’s tongue’ in Walenty

Składnica is a Polish constituency treebank
comprising about 9,000 sentences with manu-
ally disambiguated syntactic trees (Świdziński and
Woliński, 2010). It was created by automati-
cally generating all possible parses with a large-
coverage DCG grammar, and then manually se-
lecting the correct parse. It does not contain MWE

2This property is to be distinguished from impersonal
verbs, which prohibit a subject, as in dobrze mu z oczu pa-
trzy (lit. looks him from eyes well ) ’he looks like a good
person’.21



Figure 1: Syntax tree of example (1) in Składnica. The categories denote: ff ’finite phrase’, fl
’adjunct’, fno ’nominal phrase’, formaczas ’verbal phrase’, formaprzym ’adjectival phrase’,
formarzecz ’nominal phrase’, fpm ’prepositional phrase’, fpt ’adjectival phrase’, fw ’required
phrase’, fwe ’verbal phrase’, partykuła ’particle’, przyimek ’preposition’, wypowiedzenie ’ut-
terance’, zdanie ’sentence’, znakkońca ’ending punctuation’. The feature structure of the fno node
dominating the terminal język ’tongue’ is highlighted. The feature codes include: przypadek ’case’,
rodzaj ’gender’, liczba ’number’, osoba ’person’, rekcja ’case government’, and neg ’nega-
tion’. The values denote: dop ’genitive’, mnz ’human inanimate’, poj ’singular’, and nie ’negated’.

annotations. Its morphosyntactic tagset is mostly
equivalent to the one used in Walenty, although
it uses Polish terms: mian=mianownik ’nomina-
tive’, dk=dokonany ’perfective aspect’, etc.

Fig. 1 shows the correct syntax tree from Skład-
nica for example (1). Each non-terminal node in-
cludes a feature structure (FS). Here, the FS of
the node fno (nominal phrase), above the termi-
nal język ’tongue’, is highlighted. It includes the
feature neg=nie meaning that this node occurs
within the scope of a negated verb. This makes it
easy to validate constraints from Walenty entries,
such as the structural genitive of direct objects.

A notable feature of Składnica is that depen-
dents of the verbs are explicitly marked as either
arguments (fw) or adjuncts (fl), i.e., valency is
accounted for. Note, however, that the valency of
head verbs in VMWEs can differ from the one of
the same verbs occurring as simple predicates.

3 Projection

Since Składnica contains no explicit MWE anno-
tations, we produced them automatically by pro-
jecting NCP-NE, SEJF and Walenty on the syntax
trees. The projection for NCP-NE was straightfor-
ward and did not require manual validation, since
Składnica is a subcorpus of the NCP, whose NE
annotation and adjudication were performed man-
ually. The projection for SEJF and Walenty, fol-
lowed by a manual validation, consisted in search-
ing for syntactic nodes satisfying all lexical con-
straints and part of syntactic constraints of a MWE
entry. The required lexical nodes were to be con-
tiguous for SEJF but not for Walenty.

Here, we give more details on the Walenty-to-
Składnica projection, which was the most chal-
lenging one. It required defining correspon-
dences at different levels. Explicit morphologi-
cal values and phrase types could be translated
rather straightforwardly due to largely compatible
tagsets (np→fno ’nominal phrase’, mian→nom22



’nominative’, etc.). Context-dependent values like
str (structural case) were encoded in conditional
statements taking combination of features into ac-
count. For instance, the argument specification
obj(np(str)) translated into a feature struc-
ture containing one of the following: [category =
fno, przypadek = bier, neg = tak], [category =

fno, przypadek = dop, neg = nie] (nominal object,
either in the accusative in an affirmative sentence
or in the genitive in a negative one).

Once these correspondences were defined, iden-
tifying a Walenty entry in Składnica consisted in
checking if the current sentence contained a sub-
tree in which: (i) the lexically constrained argu-
ments and adjuncts (and their own, recursively
embedded, lexically constrained dependents) were
present, (ii) selected syntactic constraints (those
concerning np and prepnp phrases) were ful-
filled. For instance in Fig. 1, a head verb, a di-
rect object with a lexicalized head and a lexical-
ized prepositional complement were searched for,
but an ellipsis of the subject was allowed.
Query language The MWE projection task is
handled by: (i) a query language, providing an in-
terface between the MWE resources and the tree-
bank, (ii) procedures for compiling lexicon entries
into the queries, and (iii) an interpreter which runs
a query over treebank subtrees to check whether
the corresponding MWE entry occurs in them.

Formally, we defined our core query language
using the following abstract syntax:

b (Booleans) ::= true | false
n (node queries) ::= b | n1 ∧ n2 | n1 ∨ n2
| mark | satisfy (node → b)

t (tree queries) ::= b | t1 ∧ t2 | t1 ∨ t2
| root n | child t | . . .

Thus, the properties of a given syntactic node or
tree can be verified via an appropriate node query
(NQ) or tree query (TQ), respectively. Both kinds
of queries are recursive and TQs can addition-
ally build on NQs. For instance, from the query
interpretation point of view, the TQ root n is
satisfied for a given tree iff its root satisfies the
NQ n. Also, the TQ child t is satisfied iff at
least one of its root’s children trees satisfies the
TQ t. Finally, particular feature values (category,
przypadek, etc.) can be verified using the NQ
satisfy (node → b), which takes an arbitrary
node-level predicate (node → b) and tells whether
it is satisfied over the current syntactic node.

The particularity of this query language is the
mark construction, which marks a syntactic node
as a part of a MWE. When a TQ t containing
mark has been executed over a tree T , t’s result
contains all nodes matched with mark, provided
that T satisfies all the constraints encoded in t.
Mark does not check any constraints by itself,

but it can be easily combined with other NQs via
query conjunction (i.e., n ∧ mark).

Note that, based on our core language, more
complex queries can be expressed, for instance:

member n
def= root n ∨ child (member n) (2)

The query interpreter is defined over the core lan-
guage only and handles MWE-related marking.
For instance, given a query of type t1 ∨ t2, while
evaluating t1, some subtree nodes may be marked
as potential MWE components. But if t1 finally
evaluates to false, all these markings are wiped
out. This behavior is guaranteed by the implemen-
tation of the core disjunction (∨) operator.
Compiling MWE entries Let us focus on the
Walenty-to-query compilation and on the entry
from Tab. 2 in particular. Its querified version
checks that (i) the base form of the lexical head,
reached via the head-annotated edges (marked in
grayed in Fig. 1), corresponds to the main verb
of the entry (i.e., trzymać), and (ii) each of the
lexically-constrained elements of the frame (i.e.,
noun phrase język and prepositional phrase za
zębami) is realized by one of the child-ren trees
of the queried tree. Part (i) of the query is imple-
mented by the version of the member query (see
Eq. 2) restricted to head-annotated edges. Imple-
mentation of (ii) depends on the particular frame
element. Tree queries corresponding to (i) and (ii)
are then combined using the ∧ operator.

The obj{lex(np(str),sg,’język’,natr)}
frame element is also translated to a ∧-combined
set of tree queries, which individually check that
all the given restrictions are satisfied: the lexical
head is język, the number is singular, etc. The node
query which verifies that język is the lexical head
is combined with mark, so that it is designated as
a part of the resulting MWE annotation, provided
that all the other entry-related constraints are also
satisfied. Modifiers, if specified, are recursively
compiled into tree queries which are then applied
over child-ren trees. Here, natr specifies that
no modifiers are allowed, constraint compiled into
a query which checks that the corresponding tree23



Source TP FP CRead All CRate
NKJP 1,304 n/a n/a 1,304 n/a
SEJF 368 18 23 409 0.94
Walenty 365 78 18 452 0.95
Total 2,037 96 41 2,165 0.95

Table 3: Projection results including true positives
(TP), false positives (FP), compositional readings
(CRead), compositionality rate (CRate).

is non-branching (i.e., has no other children apart
from its head, constraint satisfied in Fig. 1 by
the subtree rooted with fno placed over the leaf
język).3 The other element of the frame, which
describes the prepositional argument za zębami, is
compiled into a query in a similar way.

4 Results

Table 3 shows the projection results. Among the
2165 automatically identified candidate MWEs,
those 1,304 stemming from NCP-NE were sup-
posed correct (since resulting from manual
double-annotation and adjudication). The 861
remaining candidates were manually validated.
They contained 733 true positives, 96 false pos-
itives, and 41 candidates with a compositional
reading, as in examples (3)-(4). Thus, the pre-
cision of the SEJF/Walenty projection was equal
to 0.85. The idiomaticity rate (El Maarouf and
Oakes, 2015), i.e., the ratio of occurrences with
idiomatic reading to all correctly recognized oc-
currences, is about 0.95. We expect that if NEs
were taken into account, this ratio would be even
higher, since NEs seem to exhibit compositional
readings relatively rarely. Note also that false posi-
tives are much more frequent for entries stemming
from Walenty than for those from SEJF, which
shows the higher complexity of verbal MWEs as
compared to other, continuous, MWEs.

(3) . . . w drugiej połowie XIX wieku
’. . . in the second half of the 19th century’
MWE: (lit. second half ) ’one’s husband or wife’

(4) Odetchnęła głęboko i przymknęła oczy.
’(She) breathed profoundly and closed her eyes.’
MWE: przymknać oczy na coś (lit. to close one’s eyes
on sth ) ’to pretend not to see sth’

Notable errors in the projection procedure stem
from allowing for the ellipsis of compulsory but

3The non-branching predicate is a part of the core
language. We did not define it above for the sake of brevity.

non-lexicalized arguments. If all such arguments
marked in Walenty were required in Składnica
during the projection, correct MWEs occurrences
with ellipted arguments would be missed, as in the
case of the subject required in Tab. 2 but omit-
ted in Fig. 1. Conversely, allowing for the ellip-
sis of such arguments results in some false posi-
tives, as in example (4), where the absence of the
prepositional argument (headed by the preposition
na ’on’) excludes the idiomatic reading.

5 Summary and Perspectives

The automatic projection of MWEs resources on a
treebank results in a manually validated resource
containing over 2,000 VMWEs in about 9,000
constituency trees, and available under the GPL v3
license.4 The results are represented in a simpli-
fied custom XML format, meant for an easy use,
e.g., in automatic grammar extraction. This format
refers to identifiers of sentences and tokens in the
Składnica trees, which enables users to automati-
cally project annotations on the original treebank.

We believe to have shown examples of fine-
grained and high-quality MWE resources which
might be promoted as standards for the inter-
national community. Adapting their formalisms
to many languages should be possible with af-
fordable efforts (already undertaken by us for
French). In return, relatively reliable mapping pro-
cedures based on such resources may help bridge
the gap towards large and comprehensive MWE-
annotation in treebanks, which is currently a bot-
tleneck in the MWE-oriented research.

Another interesting finding, worth confirming
in other languages, is the high idiomaticity rate of
MWEs. It is a hint that automated MWE identifi-
cation based on purely syntactic methods and rich
resources may achieve high accuracy, even in the
absence of semantic non-compositionality models.

Future work includes repeating the experiments
with the new version of Walenty released in 2016,
as well as estimating the projection recall. We also
wish to enhance the lexicon projection process,
so as to account for more fine-grained constraints,
and tune the degree of flexibility in constraint val-
idation. Finally, an appropriate MWE annota-
tion schema is needed in which each MWE oc-
currence would be linked to its corresponding en-
try in a MWE lexicon, and its required arguments,
whether lexicalized or not, would be marked.

4
http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Sk\%C5\%82adnicaMWE24



References
Anne Abeillé, Lionel Clément, and François Toussenel,

2003. Building a treebank for French, pages 165–
187. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Eduard Bejček, Pavel Straňák, and Daniel Zeman.
2011. Influence of Treebank Design on Representa-
tion of Multiword Expressions. In Alexander F. Gel-
bukh, editor, Computational Linguistics and Intel-
ligent Text Processing - 12th International Confer-
ence, CICLing 2011, Tokyo, Japan, February 20-26,
2011. Proceedings, Part I, volume 6608 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–14. Springer.

António Branco, Francisco Costa, João Silva, Sara Sil-
veira, Sérgio Castro, Mariana Avelãs, Clara Pinto,
and João Graça. 2010. Developing a deep linguis-
tic databank supporting a collection of treebanks:
the cintil deepgrambank. In Proceedings of the
Seventh conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10). European Lan-
guages Resources Association (ELRA).

Marie Candito and Matthieu Constant. 2014. Strate-
gies for Contiguous Multiword Expression Analy-
sis and Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of the
52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, ACL 2014, June 22-27, 2014,
Baltimore, MD, USA, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages
743–753.

Matthieu Constant and Joakim Nivre. 2016. A
Transition-Based System for Joint Lexical and Syn-
tactic Analysis. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 161–171,
Berlin, Germany, August. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Monika Czerepowicka and Agata Savary. 2015. SEJF
- a Grammatical Lexicon of Polish Multi-Word
Expressions. In Proceedings of Language and
Technology Conference (LTC’15), Poznań, Poland.
Wydawnictwo Poznańskie.

Ismail El Maarouf and Michael Oakes. 2015. Statisti-
cal Measures for Characterising MWEs. In IC1207
COST PARSEME 5th general meeting.

Tomaž Erjavec, Darja Fišer, Simon Krek, and Nina
Ledinek. 2010. The JOS Linguistically Tagged Cor-
pus of Slovene. In Proceedings of the Seventh con-
ference on International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’10). European Languages Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Gulsen Eryigit, Kubra Adali, Dilara Torunoglu-
Selamet, Umut Sulubacak, and Tugba Pamay. 2015.
Annotation and Extraction of Multiword Expres-
sions in Turkish Treebanks. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 70–76. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Joint Parsing and Named Entity Recognition. In

HLT-NAACL, pages 326–334. The Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Spence Green, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2013. Parsing Models for
Identifying Multiword Expressions. Computational
Linguistics, 39(1).

Joseph Le Roux, Antoine Rozenknop, and Matthieu
Constant. 2014. Syntactic Parsing and Compound
Recognition via Dual Decomposition: Application
to French. In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the
25th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 1875–1885.
Dublin City University and Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Federico Sangati,
Carla Parra Escartín, Agata Savary, Sascha
Bargmann, and Johanna Monti. 2016. PARSEME
Survey on MWE Resources. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and
Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris, France,
may. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Alexis Nasr, Carlos Ramisch, José Deulofeu, and An-
dré Valli. 2015. Joint Dependency Parsing and
Multiword Expression Tokenization. In Proceed-
ings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 7th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1116–1126.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Agnieszka Patejuk. 2015. Unlike coordination in Pol-
ish: an LFG account. Ph.D. dissertation, Institute of
Polish Language, Polish Academy of Sciences, Cra-
cow.

Adam Przepiórkowski, Mirosław Bańko, Rafał L.
Górski, and Barbara Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk,
editors. 2012. Narodowy Korpus Języka Polskiego
[Eng.: National Corpus of Polish]. Wydawnictwo
Naukowe PWN, Warsaw.

Adam Przepiórkowski, Elżbieta Hajnicz, Agnieszka
Patejuk, and Marcin Woliński. 2014. Extended
phraseological information in a valence dictionary
for NLP applications. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for
Language Processing (LG-LP 2014), pages 83–91,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and Dublin City University.

Adam Przepiórkowski, Jan Hajič, Elżbieta Hajnicz,
and Zdeňka Urešová. 2016. Phraseology in two
Slavic valency dictionaries: Limitations and per-
spectives. International Journal of Lexicography,
29. Forthcoming.25



Victoria Rosén, Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Koenraad
De Smedt, Eduard Bejček, Agata Savary, Adam
Przepiórkowski, Petya Osenova, and Verginica
Barbu Mitetelu. 2015. A survey of multiword ex-
pressions in treebanks. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Workshop on Treebanks & Linguistic
Theories conference, Warsaw, Poland, December.

Agata Savary, Jakub Waszczuk, and Adam
Przepiórkowski. 2010. Towards the Annota-
tion of Named Entities in the National Corpus of
Polish. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference
on International Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’10). European Languages Resources
Association (ELRA).

Agata Savary, Manfred Sailer, Yannick Parmen-
tier, Michael Rosner, Victoria Rosén, Adam
Przepiórkowski, Cvetana Krstev, Veronika Vincze,
Beata Wójtowicz, Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Carla
Parra Escartín, Jakub Waszczuk, Matthieu Con-
stant, Petya Osenova, and Federico Sangati. 2015.
PARSEME – PARSing and Multiword Expressions
within a European multilingual network. In 7th Lan-
guage & Technology Conference: Human Language
Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Sci-
ence and Linguistics (LTC 2015), Poznań, Poland,
November.

Mojgan Seraji, Carina Jahani, Beáta Megyesi, and
Joakim Nivre. 2014. A Persian Treebank with
Stanford Typed Dependencies. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, may. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Zdeňka Urešová, Jan Štěpánek, Jan Hajič, Jarmila
Panevova, and Marie Mikulová. 2014. PDT-vallex:
Czech valency lexicon linked to treebanks. LIN-
DAT/CLARIN digital library at Institute of For-
mal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University in
Prague.

Veronika Vincze and János Csirik. 2010. Hungarian
Corpus of Light Verb Constructions. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 1110–1118.
Coling 2010 Organizing Committee.

Jakub Waszczuk, Agata Savary, and Yannick Parmen-
tier. 2016. Promoting multiword expressions in
A* TAG parsing. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Yuji Mat-
sumoto, and Rashmi Prasad, editors, COLING 2016,
26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference: Tech-
nical Papers, December 11-16, 2016, Osaka, Japan,
pages 429–439. ACL.

Eric Wehrli. 2014. The Relevance of Collocations
for Parsing. In Proceedings of the 10th Workshop
on Multiword Expressions (MWE), pages 26–32,

Gothenburg, Sweden, April. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Marek Świdziński and Marcin Woliński. 2010. To-
wards a bank of constituent parse trees for Polish.
In Petr Sojka, Aleš Horák, Ivan Kopeček, and Karel
Pala, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue: 13th In-
ternational Conference, TSD 2010, Brno, Czech Re-
public, volume 6231 of Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 197–204, Heidelberg. Springer-
Verlag.

26


