



















































The Circumstantial Event Ontology (CEO)


Proceedings of the Events and Stories in the News Workshop, pages 37–41,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Circumstantial Event Ontology (CEO)

Roxane Segers and Tommaso Caselli and Piek Vossen
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

De Boelelaan 1105 1081 HV Amsterdam (NL)
{r.h.segers,t.caselli;p.t.j.m.vossen}@vu.nl

Abstract

In this paper we describe the ongoing
work on the Circumstantial Event Ontol-
ogy (CEO), a newly developed ontology
for calamity events that models seman-
tic circumstantial relations between event
classes, where we define circumstantial as
explicit and implicit causal relations. The
circumstantial relations are defined manu-
ally in the ontology for classes of events
that involve a change to the same prop-
erty of a participant. We discuss and con-
trast two types of circumstantial relations:
semantic and episodic circumstantial re-
lations. Further, we describe the meta-
model and the current contents of the on-
tology and outline the future evaluation of
the CEO.

1 Introduction

Suppose we read a sentence such as “Helen was
crossing the street; she was hit by a truck”. As it is
clear to most readers, but implicit in this sentence,
there must be some relation between “crossing the
street” (A) and “being hit by a truck” (B). First, the
two events, A and B, share the same participant
(“Helen” - “she”) and they stand in a temporal re-
lation of inclusion.However, the interpretation of
this sentence as a text, i.e. a unitary message, re-
quires some additional coherence relation between
the two events that is not explicitly expressed. In
the context of this occurrence, it is normal for a
human reader to interpret event B, “hit” as a con-
sequence of the event A, “crossing”.

We consider this type of relations between event
pairs as a case of a circumstantial relation. A cir-
cumstantial relation can be best described as a co-
herence relation between events which allows to
interpret and understand their occurrence in the

world in terms of a coherent unitary message. It
explains to human readers “why” something hap-
pened, without necessarily explaining it. Circum-
stantial relations are a set of relations which in-
cludes temporal, causal, entailment, prevention
and contingency relations, among others.

We distinguish two types of circumstantial rela-
tions: episodic and semantic. An episodic circum-
stantial relation is a relation that holds between a
pair of specific actual event instances in a specific
context, where their connection is necessary to un-
derstand what is described in a meaningful and
coherent way. For instance, the relation between
events A and B is a case of an episodic circum-
stantial relation: A and B may happen indepen-
dently without implying the other necessarily, but
when described in the same context, or circum-
stance, a connection is created that explains their
occurrence as a dependent relation.1

On the other hand, we define semantic circum-
stantial relations as a relation that holds between
event classes (abstracting from actual events),
where an event of class C gives rise to another
event of class D or vice versa, based on shared
properties in the formalization of the classes. For
instance: the class ”Shooting” has a semantic cir-
cumstantial relation with the class ”Impacting”,
because they both share the property of transloca-
tion of an object from location Y to Z. Modeling
these relations provides a means to track chains
of logically related events and their shared partici-
pants within and across documents.

Semantic circumstantial relations thus define
possible explanatory sequences of events but not
the actual explanatory sequences. Episodic rela-
tions define actual circumstantial sequences that
fit the semantic model. The Circumstantial Event

1Of course, not all events can have an explanation. For
instance, there is no episodic circumstantial relation that tells
us why Helen is crossing the street.

37



Ontology (CEO), described in this paper, models
the semantic relations, based on shared properties
of the event classes with the intention to support
detecting episodic circumstantial relations in texts.

We specify the methodology used in section 2.1.
Modeling the relations in an ontology will allow
us to 1.) abstract over the different lexical realiza-
tions of the same concept (i.e. at an event men-
tion level); 2.) facilitate reasoning between event
classes and enrich the extraction of information for
event knowledge and event sequences. 2

Existing ontologies and models such
as SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) and
FrameNet(Ruppenhofer et al., 2006) do pro-
vide explicit causal relations between event
classes (SUMO) or preceding and causal relations
(FrameNet). These causal relations are strict,
meaning that if A happens, then B must happen as
well. However, our relations are circumstantial,
meaning that some instance of event class C
and D can happen independently, but given the
circumstance that they coincide, C implies D or D
is implied by C. The implication is however not
necessary.

Previous work on the encoding of semantic rela-
tions between event pairs has focused on specific
subsets of circumstantial relations. For instance,
one example is the encoding of the entailment rela-
tions in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). With respect
to the WordNet approach in this work, we abstract
from various event types (i.e. lexical items) and do
not depend on relations defined at a synset level by
formalizing event knowledge and relations in an
ontology. Another related approach are narrative
chains as described in (Chambers and Jurafsky,
2010) that provide chains of various event men-
tions. However, the relation between these men-
tions is not specified explicitly but based on co-
occurrence of participants and a basic precedence
relation. Manual inspection of these chains re-
vealed that dissimilar relations are implied within
these chains, varying from temporal ordering, to
episodic, up to causal. The Penn Discourse Tree-
Bank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2007) annotates con-
tingency relations, of which causal relations are a
subclass. In PDTB, the focus of the annotation
is between two Abstract Objects (called Arg1 and
Arg2), corresponding to discourse units, rather
than event mentions. The contingency relation is

2CEO will be made publicly available with a CC-BY-SA
license.

annotated either in presence of an explicit connec-
tive, i.e. a lexical item, connecting the two abstract
objects or implicitly by adjacency in discourse. In
our approach, contingency relations are one of the
possible values which express circumstantial re-
lations, and, most importantly, they are indepen-
dent of the presence of connectives or adjacency
in discourse but grounded on (shared) properties
of events.

A resource such as the CEO is envisioned to be
of added value for several NLP tasks such as script
mining, question answering, information extrac-
tion and textual entailment, among others. Fur-
thermore, the explicitly defined relations between
events can be of help in reconstructing storylines
(Vossen et al., 2015), (van den Akker et al., 2010)
and improve the coherence of the narrative chain
models (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2010).

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: in section 2 we describe the meta model and
the development of CEO; in section 3 we report on
plans and current work to evaluate CEO; in section
4 we conclude with final remarks and future work.

2 The Circumstantial Event Ontology

The CEO builds upon an existing event ontology
called the Event and Implied Situation Ontology
(ESO) (Segers et al., 2016). ESO is designed to
run over the output of Semantic Role Labeling sys-
tems by making explicit the ontological type of the
predicative element and the situation that holds be-
fore, during and after the predicate. Each so called
pre-, post- and during situation consists of a set
of properties and roles that define what holds true.
For instance, as can be seen in Figure 2 the pre-
and post-situations of the event class “Damaging”
define:

• that something is in a “relatively plus” state
(pre-situation);

• that this something is in a “relatively less”
state, i.e. it underwent a loss or a negative
change, relatively to the state before the dam-
aging (“+”) (post-situation);

• that some object is in a state ’damaged’ after
the event (post-situation);

• that something has some damage which has
some negative effect on some activity (post-
situation).

38



Figure 1: The ESO assertions for the class Dam-
aging

ESO allows to track chains of states and
changes over time, whether explicitly reported or
inferred. However, ESO does not provide any ex-
plicit definition on what event class logically pre-
cedes or follows some other event class, i.e. the
pre-, post- and during situations provide only de-
scriptions of properties of the participants of the
event in analysis. CEO aims at extending ESO, by
further developing the event hierarchy, the expres-
siveness of the pre-, post-, and during situations,
and, finally, the definition of the circumstantial se-
mantic relations between the classes.

2.1 The CEO Meta Model

CEO is an OWL2 ontology, still under devel-
opment, which currently consists of 250 event
classes, 65 roles, and 58 unique properties that
model the pre-, post- and during situations of the
event classes.

The CEO meta model fully adopts and extends
the ESO model (Segers et al., 2016). The rea-
sons to reuse and extend it are twofold: 1) The
ESO classes and roles are mapped to FrameNet,
therefore we can rely on existing SRL techniques
and models to instantiate CEO (Björkelund et al.,
2009; de Lacalle et al., 2016); 2) ESO provides a
model that defines what situation, or state, is true
before and after an event, thereby already provid-
ing the initial hooks to define the circumstantial
semantic relations. Event classes are connected by
checking if a shared property holds in one of the
following conditions:

• between a post-situation of class X and the
pre-situation of class Y;

• between the post-situation of class X and the
during situation of class Y;

• between the during situation of class X and
the pre-situation of class Y.

Figure 2.1 illustrates this approach and the CEO
meta model. In the Figure, the class ”Damaging”

has a post-situation where is stated that some ob-
ject is damaged (X isDamaged true). For the static
class “BeingDamaged”, the same statement is de-
fined as a during situation, meaning that during the
state “BeingDamaged”, some object is in a dam-
aged state. As such, both classes are tied together,
based on a shared property. Further, the role of
the entity that undergoes the change (here: X) is
mapped to several FrameNet frame elements while
the class, e.g. “Damaging”, is mapped to both a
SUMO class and FrameNet frames.

For relating the classes we investigate two op-
tions. Either we leave the relation between the
classes implicit and track possible paths connect-
ing the classes based on the shared properties. An-
other possibility is that we define explicit relations
between the classes. For the latter case, we pro-
pose to define two properties: 1.) “hasCircum-
stantialPreEvent” (HCPrE), which expresses that
an event class (e.g. “Shooting”) is elicited by an-
other one (e.g. “BeingArmed”); and 2.) “hasCir-
cumstantialPostEvent” (HCPoE) which expresses
that an event class (e.g. “Shooting”) elicits an-
other one (‘Impacting”). Both properties are mod-
eled as a non-inverse property of each other and
as non-propagational. This implies that the re-
lation only holds between two event classes and
does not inherit to any of its subclasses. Also, if
there is a ”hasCircumstantialPostEvent” property
between event class A and B, this does not imply
that there is a relation from B back to A, unless
specified otherwise. However, at this moment the
pre-, post- and during situations, which are used
to connect the classes, do not provide the informa-
tion to determine the directionality of the HCPrE
and HCPoE relations.

Figure 2.1 illustrates a chaining of calamity
events and their relations. On the left, we show
the event classes and on the right the pre–, post–
and during situations. Note that we do not show
the subclass hierarchy here, but only the binding
of a subset of event classes based on shared prop-
erties. For instance, the class “Shooting” has a
HCPoE relation to “Impacting”, while the class
“BeingArmed” has a HCPrE relation to “Havin-
gAPurpose”.

2.2 Building the CEO

CEO is designed to capture chains of events in
newswire, more specifically calamity events. We
define a calamity event as any event where some

39



SUMO: Damaging
fn: Render_nonfunctional, fn: 

Damaging 

ceo:Damaging

X= fn:Object, fn:Artifact, 
fn:Experiencer, fn:Body_part, 

fn:Patient

ceo:BeingDamaged

X isDamaged true

hasContingentPostEvent/
hasContingentPreEvent

hasPostSituation

hasDuringSituation

Figure 2: The meta model of CEO and the map-
pings to the external resources FrameNet (fn) and
SUMO at class and at role levels.

ceo:Shooting

ceo:Impacting

ceo:BeingArmed

ceo:BeingInjured

ceo:HavingSomePurpose
during situation
agent hasPurpose            purpose

pre situation:
agent hasPurpose purpose

during situation:
agent hasInPossession weapon

pre situation:
theme atPlace source
theme notAtPlace goal

post situation:
theme atPlace goal
theme notAtPlace source

during situation:
agent hasInPossession weapon
agent hasPurpose purpose

pre situation:
theme atPlace source
theme notAtPlace goal

post situation:
theme atPlace goal
theme notAtPlace source
theme hasDamage damage
object hasDamage damage

during situation:
damaging-undergoer    isDamaged true
damaging-undergoer    hasDamage damage
damage hasNegativeEffectOn activity

HCPrE

HCPrE

HCPoE

HCPoE

Figure 3: Explicit chaining of event classes (left)
and their shared properties in the pre, post and dur-
ing situation (right).

situation turns from relatively positive to some rel-
atively negative state due to some changes in the
world. Event classes that define processes are also
modeled in CEO, where some agent tries to im-
prove some situation in reaction to some calamity,
i.e. going from a relatively negative situation
back to a relatively positive situation. Examples
of calamity event classes are “CyberAttack” and
“Earthquake”. Examples of event classes where
an attempt to some improvement of a situation is
made are “Repairing” and “Evacuation”.

ESO already provides us with some event
classes for calamities, though the coverage is
rather limited as ESO was designed for the
economic-financial domain. As such, we mas-
sively extended the hierarchy from the initial 63
event classes in ESO to the 250 event classes cur-
rently in CEO. To the best of our knowledge, no
formal ontology specific for calamities and the
inter-event relations exist. Some thesauri such
as the IPTC 3 contain terms for calamities but
these are not formalized and provide few relations.
Therefore, we decided to define a new model,
reusing existing resources as much as possible.

As an input for the calamity classes defined in
CEO, we partially were able to reuse Chamber’s
narrative chains (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2010)
for as far as these pertained to calamities of some
sort. This selection was made manually, based on
at least three calamity events per event chain. Fur-
ther, we manually selected FrameNet frames that
capture calamity events. We used the SUMO on-
tology as a backbone for modeling our initial list
of of verbs and frames. Finally, we defined SKOS
mappings from each CEO event class to FrameNet
and SUMO. 4 thus providing the opportunity to
use CEO on SRL labeled text as well as to find
the vocabulary expressing calamities by means of
the lexical units mapped to frames in FrameNet
and the mappings to Princeton WordNet that are
defined in SUMO.

3 Evaluation

The CEO will be evaluated against a benchmark
corpus to determine precision and recall for both
the classes and the semantic circumstantial rela-
tions. For this, we plug the CEO into an ex-
isting NLP pipeline for text annotation and anal-
ysis (Vossen et al., 2016) For this, we are cur-

3https://iptc.org/
4https://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/

40



rently annotating part of the ECB+ corpus (Cy-
bulska and Vossen, 2014). We selected 24 top-
ics that describe a calamity event. In our anno-
tation, we only use the existing event mention an-
notations and add new mentions if they realize an
event calamity class. In addition to this, the anno-
tators define co-reference sets among event men-
tions and the semantic circumstantial relations. As
such, we can evaluate what events are captured by
our ontology and what relations can be success-
fully reconstructed. For the annotation, we use
the CAT annotation tool (Bartalesi Lenzi et al.,
2012). Additionally, we are designing a Question-
Answering task, where systems will have to pro-
vide answers to questions ”why” a certain event
has taken place rather than factoid questions by
providing the most relevant and direct preceding
event that can be seen as an explanation.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

We have described current ongoing work on an
event ontology that captures calamity events in
newswire and the semantic circumstantial rela-
tions that hold between event classes, based on
shared properties in the pre-, post- or during situa-
tions defined for each class. Future work includes
the further development of the ontology with a fo-
cus on defining the circumstantial semantic rela-
tions between the classes and an extension of the
expressivity of the pre-, post- and during situa-
tions of the event classes. Further, we will evalu-
ate the added value of our model both intrinsically,
against a manually annotated corpus, and extrinsi-
cally, by means of a QA task.

5 Acknowledgements

This research was funded by the NWO Spinoza
Prize project ”Understanding Language by Ma-
chines.

References
V. Bartalesi Lenzi, G. Moretti, and R. Sprugnoli. 2012.

Cat: the celct annotation tool. In LREC. pages 333–
338.

A. Björkelund, L. Hafdell, and P. Nugues. 2009. Mul-
tilingual semantic role labeling. In Proceedings of
CoNLL-2009. Boulder, CO, USA.

N. Chambers and D. Jurafsky. 2010. A database of nar-
rative schemas. In Proceedings of the 9th Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC2010).

A. Cybulska and P. Vossen. 2014. Using a sledge-
hammer to crack a nut? lexical diversity and event
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 9th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC2014). Reykjavik, Iceland. http://www.lrec-
conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/840 Paper.pdf.

M. Lopez de Lacalle, E. Laparra, I. Aldabe, and
G. Rigau. 2016. A multilingual predicate matrix. In
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC 2016).

C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: an electronic lexical
database. MIT Press.

I. Niles and A. Pease. 2001. Towards a standard up-
per ontology. In Proceedings of FOIS-Volume 2001.
ACM.

R. Prasad, E. Miltsakaki, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, A. Joshi,
L. Robaldo, and Bonnie L Webber. 2007. The penn
discourse treebank 2.0 annotation manual .

J. Ruppenhofer, M. Ellsworth, M. Petruck, C.R. John-
son, and J. Scheffczyk. 2006. FrameNet II: Ex-
tended Theory and Practice. International Com-
puter Science Institute, Berkeley, California.

R. Segers, M. Rospocher, P. Vossen, E. Laparra,
G. Rigau, and A.L. Minard. 2016. The event and
implied situation ontology: Application and evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC 2016).

C. van den Akker, L.M. Aroyo, A.K. Cybulska,
M.G.J. van Erp, P. Gorgels, L. Hollink, C. Jager,
S. Ległne, L. van der Meij, J. Oomen, J. van Ossen-
bruggen, G. Schreiber, R. Segers, P.T.J.M. Vossen,
and B. Wielinga. 2010. Historical Event-based Ac-
cess to Museum Collections, CEUR-WS (online),
pages 1–9.

P. Vossen, R. Agerri, I. Aldabe, A. Cybulska, M. van
Erp, A. Fokkens, E. Laparra, A. Minard, A. Palmero
Aprosio, G. Rigau, M. Rospocher, and R. Segers.
2016. Newsreader: Using knowledge resources
in a cross-lingual reading machine to generate
more knowledge from massive streams of news.
Special Issue Knowledge-Based Systems, Elsevier
https://doi.org/dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2016.07.013.

P. Vossen, T. Caselli, and Y. Kontzopoulou. 2015.
Storylines for structuring massive streams of news.
In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Comput-
ing News StoryLines (CNewS 2015) at the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (ACL-
IJCNLP 2015). Bejing, China.

41


