










































%


 
 
 

39 
Proceedings of the Linguistic Resources for Automatic Natural Language Generation Workshop, pages 39–

42, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4, 2017. © 2017 Association for Computational Linguistics 

Generating Text with Correct Verb Conjugation:  

Proposal for a New Automatic Conjugator with NooJ  

Héla Fehri, Sondes Dardour 

MIRACL Laboratory, University of Sfax 

hela.fehri@yahoo.fr, dardour.sondes@yahoo.com 

Abstract 

This paper describes a system that generates 

texts with correct verb conjugation. The pro-

posed system integrates a conjugator devel-

oped using a linguistic approach. This latter is 

based on dictionaries and transducers built 

with the NooJ linguistic platform. The conju-

gator treats three languages: Arabic, French 

and English. It recognizes all verbs and allows 

their conjugation in different tenses. The re-

sults obtained are satisfactory and can easily be 

improved upon by processing other forms, 

such as the negative.  

1 Introduction 

Automatic Language Processing is an area of multi-

disciplinary research that permits the collaboration 

of linguists, computer scientists, logicians, psy-

chologists, documentalists, lexicographers, and 

translators. 

In this domain different conjugators are built and 

used (Rello and Basterrechea, 2010). The term con-

jugation is applied only to the inflection of verbs, 

and not to other parts of speech (inflection of nouns 

and adjectives is known as declension). The devel-

opment of the conjugator is not an easy task and de-

pends on the specificities of the processed language. 

Among existing conjuagators, for Arabic, we can 

cite AlKanz1 and qutrub2. For the French language, 

we find Le Figaro3 and Reverso Conjugaison4. And 

for English, we can cite The conjugator5, conjuga-

tion.com and Reverso Conjugaison6. The difference 

between these conjugators lies in the number of lan-

guages, forms (negative, interrogative) and voices 

                                                                                                            
1 http://www.al-kanz.org/2007/06/26/conju-
gaison-arabe/ 
2 https://qutrub.arabeyes.org/ 
3 http://leconjugueur.lefigaro.fr/ 

processed. They can be in different forms such as a 

website or mobile application. 

The aim of this paper is to generate a text with 

well-conjugated verbs. To reach this objective, we 

propose to develop a system that allows parsing a 

text, extracting different infinitive forms of verbs 

and conjugate them in the appropriate tense. This 

system integrates a conjugator, which makes it pos-

sible to conjugate Arabic, French, and English verbs 

in the desired tense. This conjugator should guaran-

tee the correct conjugation of verbs without errors. 

In this paper, after an introduction to the pro-

posed method, we describe our resource construc-

tion and implementation using the NooJ linguistic 

platform (Silberztein and Tutin, 2005). Then, we 

give an idea of the experimentation and the results 

obtained and conclude with some future perspec-

tives. 

2 Proposed Method 

As shown in Figure 1, the proposed method requires 

four steps or two phases: the identification, con-

struction and compilation of resources phase and the 

conjugation phase in which the conjugator of verbs 

is integrated. In what follows, we will examine each 

phase in detail.  

2.1 Identification, construction and compila-
tion of resources 

The step of constructing and compiling resources 

consists in identifying the lexical resources repre-

sented by dictionaries and building the syntactic 

grammars represented by transducers. 

 

4 http://conjugueur.reverso.net/conjugai-
son-francais.html 
5 http://www.theconjugator.com/ 
6 http://conjugueur.reverso.net/conjugai-
son-anglais.html 

mailto:hela.fehri@yahoo.fr
https://qutrub.arabeyes.org/
http://leconjugueur.lefigaro.fr/
http://www.theconjugator.com/
http://conjugueur.reverso.net/conjugaison-anglais.html
http://conjugueur.reverso.net/conjugaison-anglais.html


 
 
 

40 

 

 
Figure 1: Proposed method 

 

Identification of dictionaries: A NooJ diction-

ary is an electronic dictionary designed for use by 

computer systems. A NooJ dictionary contains dif-

ferent entries. The structure of an entry is specific to 

each dictionary, but contains at least the grammati-

cal category of the entry (Name, Adjective, Verb, 

etc.).  

In our work, we use three dictionaries: the dic-

tionary of Arabic verbs (verbes arabes.nod) which 

contains 9,257 entries (Fehri et al., 2016), the dic-

tionary of French verbs (_dm.nod) which contains 

67,983 entries (Trouilleux, 2011) and the dictionary 

of English verbs (_sdic.nod) which contains 90,000 

entries (Silberztein, 2003). 

Each dictionary contains a derivation module to 

recognize the derived forms and a flexional module 

to recognize the inflected forms of the verb. 

Construction of grammars: A grammar is a set 

of graphs. The number of grammars depends on the 

number of tenses treated to perform the conjugation. 

Note that each language has its proper tenses.  

For Arabic, we have processed four tenses: the 

past tense (َْلا َم  al-māḍī), the present tense يمضا

َْلا) ُم َض -al-muḍāriʻ), the future tense and the imper يمضا

ative (ا مْلا -al-amr). Figure 2  represents the conju يمما

gation of the verbs in the future (F) with different 

Arabic pronouns. 

 
Figure 2: Conjugation of verbs in the future 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperative_mood
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperative_mood


 
 
 

41 

 

For French, we have treated all tenses (present, 

past and future), aspects (perfective and imperfec-

tive), as well as all moods (indicative, impera-

tive, subjunctive, conditional and gerundive). Fig-

ure 3 describes the conjugation of verbs in the pre-

sent tense (PR) (tense: present, mood: indicative). 

 
Figure 3: Conjugation of verbs in the present tense 

For English, we have processed all possible com-

binations of tense, aspect and mood: present tenses 

(simple present and continuous present), past tenses 

(simple past and continuous past), present perfect 

tenses (present perfect (simple) and present perfect 

(continuous)), past perfect tenses (past perfect (sim-

ple) and past perfect (continuous)) and future tenses 

(simple future, continuous future, future perfect 

(simple) and future perfect (continuous)). Figure 4 

describes the conjugation of verbs in the simple past 

(PT) with all pronouns. 

 
Figure 4: Conjugation of verbs in the past 

Compilation of resources: The compilation 

phase consists of generating grammars and diction-

aries in binary format that can be exploited in a later 

step.  

2.2 Conjugation of verbs 

The conjugation of verbs is done in three steps: 

parsing of the text, extraction of the infinitive form, 

its position and the desired tense, and conjugation 

of the extracted verb in the appropriate language. In 

our case, verbs to be conjugated and tenses are de-

limited by special characters such as parentheses.  

To conjugate a verb, we use compiled resources 

described in section 2.1. Theses resources are used 

with command-line program noojapply, which is 

accessed from Java. Once the verb is conjugated, it 

will be inserted in the correct position in the gener-

ated text. The three steps mentioned will be repeated 

until processing of all verbs to be conjugated in the 

original text is complete.  

3 Experimentation and evaluation 

The experimentation of our system is done using 

NooJ and Java. As mentioned above, NooJ uses syn-

tactic and morphological grammars already built. 

To evaluate our work, we have applied our re-

sources to 300 texts in different languages: Arabic, 

French and English. Figure 5 represents an excerpt 

of results obtained when applying our system to an 

English text. 

As shown in Figure 5, our system gives satisfac-

tory results. However, some problems are related to 

the lack of standards for writing verbs (e.g., the 

hamza) in Arabic and the difficulties of dealing with 

some forms, such as the negative and interrogative 

forms and the passive voice. 

Table 1 gives an idea about tenses and verbs pro-

cessed by our system. 

 

 
Languages 

Arabic French English 

Number of tenses 4 17 12 

Number of verbs 9 257 67 983 90 000 

Table 1: Description of the conjugator. 

Note that the number of verbs indicated in Table 

1 represents only the lemmas that exist in our dic-

tionary. The derived forms are also recognized by 

our system thanks to morphological grammars. 



 
 
 

42 

 

 
Figure 5: Excerpt of results obtained 

 

4 Conclusion 

The system we developed helps to learn how to con-

jugate a verb correctly. It can be used as a teaching 

tool for learning conjugation. It gives also sufficient 

results.  

In the future, we aim to improve the conjugator 

by processing other forms (interrogative and nega-

tive) and the passive voice. Furthermore, we want 

to add other concepts and rules in order to know the 

tense of the verb without indicating it. This is possi-

ble by examining the context of the sentence.  

References  

Hela Fehri, Mohamed Zaidi and Kamel Boudhina. 2016. 

Création d’un dictionnaire des verbes NooJ open 

source pour la langue arabe. Report of the end of 

studies project. Higher Institute of Management of 

Gabes  

Luz Rello and Eduardo Basterrechea. 2010. Automatic 

conjugation and identification of regular and irregular 

verb neologisms in Spanish, Proceedings of the 

NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computa-

tional Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pp 1–5, 

Los Angeles, California, June 2010. 

Max Silberztein. 2003. NooJ Manual Available for 

download at: www.nooj4nlp.net.  

Max Silberztein and Agnès Tutin. 2005. NooJ, un outil 

TAL pour l’enseignement des langues. Application 

pour l’étude de la morphologie lexicale en FLE. 

Special Atala, 8(2), pp 123-34. 

François Trouilleux. 2011. Le DM, A French dictionary 

for NooJ. In Automatic Processing of Various Levels 

of Linguistic Phenomena: Selected Papers from the 

NooJ 2011 International Conference (eds. K. 

Vučković, B. Bekavac and M. Silberztein). Cambridge 

Scholars Publishing, pp 16-28.

 

 


