



















































A Method to Generate a Machine-Labeled Data for Biomedical Named Entity Recognition with Various Sub-Domains


Proceedings of the International Workshop on Digital Disease Detection using Social Media 2017 (DDDSM-2017), pages 47–51,
Taipei, Taiwan, November 27, 2017. c©2017 AFNLP

   

A Method to Generate a Machine-Labeled Data for Biomedical 

Named Entity Recognition with Various Sub-Domains 

 

Juae Ki𝐦𝟏, Sunjae Kwon1, Youngjoong Ko2, and Jungyun Seo1 
Computer Science, Sogang University, Sinsu-dong 1, Mapo-gu, Seoul, Korea1 

Computer Engineering, Dong-A University, 840 Hadan 2-dong, Saha-gu, Busan, Korea2 

{juaekim, soon91jae , seojy}@sogang.ac.kr1, 

yungjoong.ko@gmail.com2 

 

 

Abstract 

Biomedical Named Entity (NE) recognition 

is a core technique for various works in the 

biomedical domain. In previous studies, us-

ing machine learning algorithm shows better 

performance than dictionary-based and rule 

based approaches because there are too many 

terminological variations of biomedical NEs 

and new biomedical NEs are constantly gen-

erated. To achieve the high performance with 

a machine-learning algorithm, good-quality 

corpora are required. However, it is difficult 

to obtain the good-quality corpora because 

annotating a biomedical corpus for machine-

learning is extremely time-consuming and 

costly. In addition, most previous corpora are 

insufficient for high-level tasks because they 

cannot cover various domains. Therefore, we 

propose a method for generating a large 

amount of machine-labeled data that covers 

various domains. To generate a large amount 

of machine-labeled data, firstly we generate 

an initial machine-labeled data by using a 

chunker and MetaMap. The chunker is de-

veloped to extract only biomedical NEs with 

manually annotated data. MetaMap is used to 

annotate the category of biomedical NE. 

Then we apply the self-training approach to 

bootstrap the performance of initial machine-

labeled data. In our experiments, the biomed-

ical NE recognition system that is trained 

with our proposed machine-labeled data 

achieves much high performance. As a result, 

our system outperforms biomedical NE 

recognition system that using MetaMap only 

with 26.03%p improvements on F1-score. 

1 Introduction 

As biomedical research has been actively studied, 

the attention of bioinformatics with natural lan-

guage processing is rapidly increasing. According 

to generate an amount of data in the biomedical 

domain, to extract and retrieval the high-quality 

information is increasingly important (Zeng et al., 

2015). Then, extracting the Biomedical Named 

Entity (biomedical NE) is also important to com-

prehend the biomedical text. There are two steps 

to extract biomedical NEs. The first step is an 

identification of biomedical entities from text. 

Second, biomedical entities that identified are 

classified into some several categories such as 

protein, drug, cell-line, and disease. These catego-

ries provide useful information to high-level ap-

plications. To extract the biomedical NEs are con-

sidered challenging task because there are too 

many terminological variations of biomedical NEs 

and new biomedical NEs are constantly generated 

with the course of time. That is why studies using 

machine learning show higher performance that 

dictionary or rule based approaches.  There are 

many efforts that extract a high-quality biomedi-

cal NEs. (Robert et al., 2015) suggests a chemical 

named entity recognizer implemented by combin-

ing two independent machine learning models. (Li 

et al., 2015), (Li et al., 2016) apply the latest tech-

nology which is deep learning. The named entity 

recognizer of (Li et al., 2015), (Li et al., 2016) are 

based on Recurrent Neural Network and LSTM. 

However, annotating a biomedical corpus for ma-

chine-learning is extremely time-consuming and 

costly because of the requirement of medical ex-

perts. In addition, most previous corpora are insuf-

ficient for high-level application likes question 

answering (QA) system that requires various bio-

medical information. Because biomedical NE  cat- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

47



   

 

Table 1: UNLS semantic groups 

 

egories were limited to specific sub-domains of 

biomedicine in each corpus. For example, the bi-

omedical NE recognition system that trained with 

GENIA corpus (Kim et al., 2003), only cover the 

gene and protein subdomain. 

Therefore, we propose a method for creating 

the automatically labeled corpus that covers vari-

ous domains. The biomedical NE recognition sys-

tem that is trained with our proposed machine-

labeled corpus can extract biomedical NEs in var-

ious domains. 

We utilize the open source biomedical NE 

recognition tool, MetaMap (Aronson, 2001) to 

provide various biomedical information as catego-

ries. MetaMap extracts biomedical NEs from raw 

texts and matches them into semantic types of 

UMLS. Unified Medical Language System 

(UMLS) (Lindberg et al., 1993) is a thesaurus that 

provides the biomedical NEs and their semantic 

categories as an annotation. UMLS includes an 

amount of concept categories and a semantic net-

work likes UMLS semantic type. Similar UMLS 

semantic types are grouped into UMLS semantic 

group. In this paper, we regard the annotation of 

biomedical NEs as UMLS semantic group. Table 

1 shows UMLS semantic groups. UMLS semantic 

groups cover not only gene and protein but vari-

ous sub-domains such as anatomy, procedure, and 

medical device. Biomedical NEs and their seman-

tic types from MetaMap are usefully used in bio-

medical QA systems and biomedical topic model-

ing systems that require similarity of biomedical 

terms. MetaMap is a useful tool to analyze the bi-

omedical text, however, there are several limita-

tions (Zhang and Elhadad., 2013) because UMLS 

covers the huge knowledge and there are a lot of 

newly generated biomedical NEs in a real world. 

First, MetaMap extracts not only biomedical NEs 

but also common entities or even verbs that are 

not biomedical NEs clearly. Second, MetaMap 

does not resolve the ambiguity of UMLS semantic 

group types without context. That is, one entity 

can have several annotations. This limitation is 

‘ambiguity problem’ in this paper. Finally, if some 

biomedical NE is not recorded in UMLS thesau-

rus, MetaMap cannot assign UMLS semantic 

group. We named this limitation ‘out–of–

vocabulary problem’. Thus, we present how to 

develop an effective biomedical NE recognition 

system by applying the advantages and overcom-

ing the limitations of MetaMap.  

We had been devised NE recognition system 

find the similarity of biomedical NEs in a query 

and biomedical NEs in candidate answer in bio-

medical QA system based on information retrieval 

(Lee et al., 2016). This QA system is entered for 

2016 BioASQ challenge (Tsatsaronis et al., 2012). 

2 Proposed Method 

To overcome limitations of MetaMap, we propose 

a method to automatically construct a biomedical 

NE recognition data using a small amount of la-

beled data, a large amount of unlabeled data and 

MetaMap. Firstly, we develop a chunker learned 

by a small amount of biomedical training data an-

notated by the people. This chunker is used to 

generate the labeled training data for the self-

training approach. The chunking results of unla-

beled biomedical corpus become the inputs of 

MetaMap. Then the outputs of MetaMap, UMLS 

Category 

 (abbrevia-

tion)  

Category 

 (UMLS semantic groups)  

ACTI Activities & Behaviors 

ANAT Anatomy 

CHEM Chemicals & Drugs 

CONC Concepts & Ideas 

DEVI Devices 

DISO Disorders 

GENE Genes & Molecular Sequences 

GEOG Geographic Areas 

LIVB Living Beings 

OBJC Objects 

OCCU Occupations 

ORGA Organizations 

PHEN Phenomena 

PHYS Physiology 

PROC Procedures 

48



   

 

Figure 1: Overview of proposed method 

 

 

semantic types, become match the UMLS seman-

tic groups are used to make an initial machine-

labeled data. We develop a biomedical NE recog-

nition system with initial machine-labeled data 

and conditional random fields (CRF) classifier. 

The initial machine-labeled data has a form of 

semantic role labelling with an IOB2 format. This 

classifier is an initial model for self-training. Our 

proposed self-training process is described in Sec-

tion 2.2. During self-training, this process is re-

peated, and then overcome the ambiguity problem 

and out–of–vocabulary problem.  

Figure 1 shows the example of overcoming the 

ambiguity problem. In initial machine-labeled da-

ta, ‘disulfide bridges’ denoted by underline has a 

‘O’ tag, but after the self-training process the enti-

ty, disulfide bridges, has a ‘CHEM’ tag. 

2.1 Initial Machine-Labeled Data 

In this section, we present the method for generat-

ing the initial machine-labeled data for self-

training. We propose a semi-supervised approach 

using MetaMap, a small amount of labeled train-

ing data and a large amount of unlabeled data to 

generate a large amount of machine-labeled train-

ing data. The unlabeled data is randomly selected 

titles and abstracts from the PubMed biomedical 

articles. In this paper, we call the unlabeled data as 

a 10MB-PM data.  

In order to generate training data, we first de-

velop a chunker to overcome the problem that 

MetaMap extract several entities even if they are 

not biomedical NEs. The chunker is developed 

with a small amount of labeled data. The NE can-

didates of the 10MB-PM data are chunked by the 

chunker and then only the NE chunks are exploit-

ed as the input of MetaMap to label biomedical 

NEs. 

We now explain how to create a large amount 

of initial machine-labeled data with the analysis 

results of MetaMap. NE chunks from the chunker 

are used as the input of MetaMap and then Met-

aMap analyses their semantic types. We mapped 

133 UMLS semantic types to 15 UMLS semantic 

groups depanding on semilarity. The semantic 

groups are regarded as annotation of biomedical 

NEs. If MetaMap outputs only one semantic 

group type for a biomedical NE chunk, we assume 

that this semantic group type is a correct annota-

tion of the NE chunk. In this case, each word of 

the NE chunk is labeled by B or I tag with UMLS 

group as annotation. For example, there is a NE 

chunk ‘protein hepcidin’ from 10MB-PM data. 

The output of MetaMap as semantic group type of 

‘protein hepcidin’ is ‘CHEM’. To generate auto-

matically labeled data, we tag the ‘B-CHEM’ to 

‘protein’ and ‘I-CHEM’ to ‘hepcidin’. However, 

in some cases, MetaMap outputs several semantic 

groups or no group type for an input NE chunk. In 

these cases, the NE chunks are not considered as a 

biomedical NEs and their words are initially la-

beled by O tags. We try to recover them in order 

to generate a robust machine-labeled data through 

the self-training. 

2.2 Self-training 

The self-training approach is one of the semi-

supervised learning. In Self-training, a classifier is 

trained with the manually annotated data. Then 

the unlabeled data is input the classifier.  All or 

part of a result of the classifier is used as a train-

ing data.   

Through a self-training procedure, we can 

overcome the ambiguity and out-of-vocabulary 

problems in machine-labeled data. The proposed 

self-training procedure performs the following 

steps in an iterative procedure. First, CRFs is 

trained using initial machine-labeled data, and 

then the sequential labelling results of the trained 

CRFs are compared the ones of the initial ma-

chine-labeled data as an answer. If the entity with 

O tag in the initial machine-labeled data are 

changed B or I tag by the trained CRFs model, the 

tags of this entity is replaced with the new B or I 

tag in new training data. This new training data is 

used as the input training data for the next self-

training iteration. This iterative procedure is con-

49



   

ducted until the performance of the classifier is 

converged. In each repeated step, new labeled bi-

omedical NEs are added in the training data.  

In case of biomedical NE chunk that has the 

ambiguity problem or out-of-vocabulary problem, 

we cannot make a decision to the categories of 

that NE chunks. Thus we annotate the O tag to 

that NE chunk. In other words, entities that have 

ambiguity UMLS semantic group or no UMLS 

semantic group cannot exist in automatically la-

beled data. However, their categories are recov-

ered appropriate tag by proposed self-training. It 

is the main reason that the proposed NE recogni-

tion system showed high recall scores in our ex-

periments.  

For example, the word, ‘drisapersen,’ is bio-

medical NE of the drugs but this entity is not rec-

orded in the UMLS thesaurus. After executing our 

self-training procedure, the word ‘drisapersen’ and 

its semantic group type, ‘CHEM,’ are analyzed as 

a correct biomedical NE; ‘CHEM’ is a chemical 

category as a semantic group type that includes 

drugs, protein, steroid, vitamin, and others. 

3 Experiments 

3.1 Experimental Settings 

We constructed a manually annotated dataset that 

consists of 1,249 biomedical question/answer 

pairs from BioASQ 2015 and 2016. A half of the 

annotated data was used as a training data and the 

other data was used as a test data. The test dataset 

is composed of 624 question/answer pairs and 

1,492 biomedical NEs. In test data, there are 1,492 

biomedical NEs. The 10MB-PM data is organized 

by 7,629 PubMed articles that are arbitrary select-

ed. To evaluate the quality of machine-labeled da-

ta, we evaluated biomedical NE recognition sys-

tems that are trained with the machine-labeled da-

ta of each self-training iteration with precision, re-

call, and f1-score. 

3.2 Experimental Result and Evaluation 

‘MetaMap’ in the first row is a model that is used 

MetaMap as biomedical NE recognition system. 

We input the raw text into MetaMap, and then 

evaluated the performance. An ‘Initial model’ is 

the model that is trained with initial machine-

labeled data. The initial machine-labeled data is 

generated by applying chunker and MetaMap. A 

‘Second-iteration model’ in the third row means 

self-training model with initial model. Row 4-6 

are result of models that each iteration of self-

training. 

In Table 2, the initial model shows much-

improved performance. The performance of Met-

aMap is much lower than the initial model. In par-

ticular, the precision score of MetaMap is much 

worse than recall score because it outputs com-

mon nouns and verbs as biomedical NEs. On the 

other hand, the chunker used in initial model is 

trained to extract only biomedical NEs with a 

small amount of manually annotated data. That is 

why the precision score of initial model is more 

improved than MetaMap. 

To recover NE entities with ambiguity and out-

of-vocabulary, the self-training procedure is de-

veloped in our biomedical NE recognition system. 

The performance changes of self-training accord-

ing to the number of iteration times are shown in 

row 2 to row 6 in Table 2. The best performance 

was obtained in the third iteration. The perfor-

mance of third ST model and fourth ST model is a 

lower than second ST model. That is conducting 

the too much self-training makes some decrease 

of performance because noises can be generated 

by recovering the wrong biomedical NEs. With 

the self-training method, we can increase the F1-

score from 68.04% to 69.91%. 

 

Model Precision Recall F1-score 

MetaMap 34.98% 58.8% 43.88% 

Initial model 83.01% 57.64% 68.04% 

Second iteration model 79.93% 60.32% 68.75% 

Third iteration model 79.91% 62.13% 69.91% 

Fourth iteration model 77.85% 59.58% 67.50% 

Fifth iteration model 71.88% 49.87% 58.88% 

 

Table 2: The performance changes according to 

our proposed method 

4 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we proposed the method for generat-

ing machine-labeled biomedical NE recognition 

data with the self-training method. Through vari-

ous experiments, we verified the performances of 

the biomedical NE recognition system that trained 

with our proposed machine-labeled data. The final 

system outperformed MetaMap with 26.03%. In 

addition, the proposed method has more strong 

points. To generate a large amount of data, we on-

ly used a small amount of training data. Therefore 

50



   

the cost to generate a data for the biomedical NE 

recognition systems can be reduced. Since Met-

aMap as an open toolkit is used, developers can 

build up the biomedical NE recognition systems 

without expert’s help in biomedical domains. 

 As a future work, we plan to apply deep neural 

network techniques to construct the biomedical 

NE recognition systems. 

 

Acknowledgement  

This research was supported by the 

MISP(Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Plan-

ning), Korea, under the National Program for Ex-

cellence in SW)(2015-0-00910) supervised by the 

IITP(Institute for Information & communications 

Technology Promotion) 

 

References  

Alan R. Aronson. "Effective mapping of biomedical 

text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap 

program." Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium. 

American Medical Informatics Association, 2001. 

Jin-Dong Kim,  Tomoko Ohta,  Yuka Tateisi, and 

Jun’ichi Tsujii. "GENIA corpus—a semantically 

annotated corpus for bio-textmining." Bioinformat-

ics, 19(1), 2003, i180-i182. 

Hyeon-gu Lee, Minkyoung Kim, Harksoo Kim, Juae 

Kim, Sunjae Kwon, Jungyun Seo, Jungkyu Cho, 

and Yi-reun Kim. "KSAnswer: Question-answering 

System of Kangwon National University and 

Sogang University in the 2016 BioASQ Chal-

lenge." ACL 2016, 2016, pp.45-49. 

Lishuang Li, Liuke Jin, Zhenchao Jiang, Dingxin 

Song, and Degen Huang. "Biomedical named enti-

ty recognition based on extended recurrent neural 

networks." Bioinformatics and Biomedicine 

(BIBM), 2015 IEEE International Conference on. 

IEEE, 2015. 

Lishuang Li, Liuke Jin, Yuxin Jiang, and Degen 

Huang. "Recognizing Biomedical Named Entities 

Based on the Sentence Vector/Twin Word Embed-

dings Conditioned Bidirectional LSTM." China 

National Conference on Chinese Computational 

Linguistics. Springer International Publishing, 

2016. 

Donald A. Lindberg,  Betsy L. Humphreys, and Alexa 

T. McCray. "The Unified Medical Language Sys-

tem." IMIA Yearbook, 1993, pp.281-291. 

Leaman Robert, Chih-Hsuan Wei, and Zhiyong Lu. 

"tmChem: a high performance approach for chemi-

cal named entity recognition and normalization." 

Journal of cheminformatics, 7(1), 2015. 

George Tsatsaronis Michael Schroeder, Georgios 

Paliouras Yannis Almirantis, Ion Androutsopoulos, 
Eric Gaussier, Patrick Gallinari Thierry Artieres, 

Michael R. Alvers Matthias Zschunke, and Axel-

Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. "BioASQ: A Challenge on 

Large-Scale Biomedical Semantic Indexing and 

Question Answering." AAAI fall symposium: In-

formation retrieval and knowledge discovery in bi-

omedical text, 2012. 

Zhiqiang Zeng, Hua Shi, Yun Wu, and Zhiling Hong. 

"Survey of natural language processing techniques 

in bioinformatics." Comp Math Methods Med 

2015, article 674296. 

Shaodian Zhang, and Noémie Elhadad. "Unsuper-

vised biomedical named entity recognition: Exper-

iments with clinical and biological texts." Journal 

of biomedical informatics, 46(6), 2013, pp.1088-

1098. 

 

 

51


