



















































Dimensions of Abusive Language on Twitter


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pages 1–10,
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dimensions of Abusive Language on Twitter

Isobelle Clarke
Aston University
Birmingham, UK

clarkei@aston.ac.uk

Jack Grieve
University of Birmingham

Birmingham, UK
grievejw@gmail.com

Abstract

In this paper, we use a new categorical
form of multidimensional register anal-
ysis to identify the main dimensions of
functional linguistic variation in a cor-
pus of abusive language, consisting of
racist and sexist Tweets. By analysing
the use of a wide variety of parts-of-
speech and grammatical constructions, as
well as various features related to Twit-
ter and computer-mediated communica-
tion, we discover three dimensions of lin-
guistic variation in this corpus, which we
interpret as being related to the degree
of interactive, antagonistic and attitudinal
language exhibited by individual Tweets.
We then demonstrate that there is a signif-
icant functional difference between racist
and sexist Tweets, with sexists Tweets
tending to be more interactive and attitu-
dinal than racist Tweets.

1 Introduction

With the rise of trolling and other forms of abu-
sive language online, many computational meth-
ods for detecting abusive language have been in-
troduced. These classifiers have been trained
on a wide range of linguistic features, including
specific keywords (Xiang et al., 2012), Bag-of-
Words (Warner and Hirschberg, 2012), character
n-grams (Mehdad and Tetreault, 2016), word n-
grams (Chen et al., 2012; Yin et al., 2009), part-
of-speech n-grams (Davidson et al., 2017), and
various syntactic features (Burnap and Williams,
2014). A variety of extra-linguistic features have
also been considered, including gender (Waseem
and Hovy, 2016), location (Waseem and Hovy,
2016), user behaviour and performance (Balci and
Salah, 2015; Dadvar et al., 2013), and surrounding

posts (Yin et al., 2009). Many of these methods
assume that abusive language includes profanity
and negative sentiment, but such features are not
always present in abusive posts. Including offen-
sive terms in the feature set can even hinder the
accuracy of classifiers (Davidson et al., 2017),
because profanity can be used for amplification
and other non-abusive functions, leading to many
false positives (Chen et al., 2012). Trolls have
also developed more covert ways of abusing oth-
ers, such as using creative spelling or avoiding of-
fensive words (Hine et al., 2017). These strategies
have been accounted for in part by examining the
use of offensive words in context, applying spell-
correction algorithms (Chen et al., 2012), consult-
ing WordNet (Chen et al., 2012), and using char-
acter n-grams to deal with the noisiness of online
communication (Mehdad and Tetreault, 2016).

Despite this growing body of research, func-
tional variation in abusive language has yet to
be investigated directly. At the most basic level,
we do not know what is the general repertoire of
styles for abusive language that exists online. One
way to understand how the structure of language
varies depending on its communicative purpose is
multi-dimensional analysis (MDA) (Biber, 1988,
1989). MDA is generally based on the relative
frequencies of many lexical and grammatical fea-
tures measured across a corpus of texts represent-
ing a particular variety of language. The most im-
portant dimensions of linguistic variation are ex-
tracted from this dataset through a factor analy-
sis, and then interpreted functionally based on the
linguistic features and the individual texts that are
most strongly associated with each dimension. In
addition to providing a more complete understand-
ing of the structure of abusive language, incorpo-
rating this type of information into abusive lan-
guage classification systems should lead to more
robust and principled methods.

1



The goal of this study is therefore to use MDA
to identify the main dimensions of functional lin-
guistic variation in a corpus of racist and sex-
ist abusive Tweets (Waseem and Hovy, 2016).
However, because MDA relies on the multivari-
ate analysis of the relative frequencies of linguis-
tic features, it is not suitable for analysing a corpus
of Tweets, which typically include fewer than 30
words, and are therefore too short to allow for the
relative frequencies of most features to be mea-
sured accurately. Rather than concatenate Tweets
to form longer texts (e.g. Passonneau et al., 2014),
for example by author, which would obscure text-
level patterns, we therefore apply a new form of
categorical MDA based on a multiple correspon-
dence analysis of the simple occurrence of a va-
riety of lexical and grammatical forms in individ-
ual Tweets to identify common patterns of func-
tional variation in abusive Tweets. Finally, we in-
vestigate the degree to which the racist and sexist
Tweets in our corpus vary in terms of these dimen-
sions.

2 Method

Our dataset is based on the Twitter corpus used
in Waseem and Hovy (2016), which contained
136,052 English Tweets, identified by searching
for common racial, religious and sexist slurs and
terms, as well as hashtags known to trigger hate
speech over a 2 month period. With the help of
an outside annotator, they coded 16,914 Tweets
as either racist (1,972 Tweets by 9 users), sexist
(3,383 Tweets by 613 users) or neither racist nor
sexist (11,559). Using ‘twitteR’ package (Gen-
try, 2016), we downloaded the Tweets based on
the Twitter IDs; however, at the time of download
only 2,818 Tweets were still available, presumably
because the relevant posts had been deleted. Of
these Tweets, 628 had been coded as sexist and
858 as racist. Our analysis focuses on these 1,486
Tweets.

In general, research using MDA has been based
on a feature set which has grown over time and
which has changed depending on the variety and
the language under analysis. There are, how-
ever, a core set of features related to basic parts-
of-speech and grammatical constructions (Biber,
1988), which we have included in our analysis.
These features include tense and aspect mark-
ers, place and time adverbials, personal pronouns,
questions, nominal forms, passives, subordination,

complementation, adjectives and adverbs, modals,
specialised verb classes, coordination, negation
and other lexical classes, such as amplifiers, down-
toners and conjunctions. In addition, as is gener-
ally the case in MDA studies (e.g. Grieve et al.,
2010), we included additional features to refine
our analysis for this particular variety of language,
including hashtags, URLs, capitalisation, imper-
atives, comparatives, and superlatives. We then
tagged our corpus for each of the 86 linguistic
features. This was achieved by first tagging the
Tweets for basic part-of-speech information using
the Gimpel et al. (2011) Twitter Tagger. Based on
the tagged corpus, we then automatically identi-
fied occurrences of our 86 features in the corpus
by looking for specific tags, words, and sequences
of tags and words, taking into account various ex-
ceptional forms found in this corpus.

Rather than measure the relative frequency of
these forms across the texts in the corpus, we sim-
ply considered whether or not each of these fea-
tures occurred in each of the texts, retaining the
81 features that occurred in at least 1% of the
Tweets in our corpus. We then subjected this 81
feature by 1,486 text binary data matrix to a mul-
tiple correspondence analysis (MCA) in R using
FactoMineR (Husson et al., 2017). MCA is essen-
tially a dimension reduction method, which aims
to represent high dimensional categorical data in
low dimensional space, similar to factor analysis
as used in traditional MDA for continuous data.
MCA is predominantly used to analyse data from
questionnaires and surveys (Husson et al., 2010),
but it has also been used in linguistics, most no-
tably in lexical semantics (e.g. Tummers et al.,
2012; Glynn, 2009, 2014).

The MCA returns a positive or negative coordi-
nate for each linguistic feature on each dimension
as well as a value indicating the variables contri-
bution to that dimension (Le Roux and Rouanet,
2010). If the variables’ coordinates are of simi-
lar value, then this indicates that these variables
often co-occur in Tweets. The MCA also assigns
a positive or negative coordinate to each Tweet on
each dimension, which can then be plotted to visu-
alize the relationship between the Tweets on each
dimension. Tweets with similar coordinates on a
dimension will share linguistic features. Each di-
mension was interpreted by considering the func-
tional properties shared by the linguistic features
with the strongest contributions. Following Le

2



Table 1: The positive and negative features strongly contributing to the Dimensions
Dim Coord Features
2 + Question mark (4), Question do (3.9), Accusative case (3.8), absence of Prepositions (3.5), absence of

Nouns (3.3), 2nd person pronoun (3.1), absence of Proper nouns (2.9), Emoticons (2.4), absence of
Articles (2.4), Nominative case (2.3), Other pronouns (2.2), WH-words (2.1), absence of Attributive
adjectives (2.1), Initial DO (2), absence of Be as main verb (1.8), absence of Coordinating conjunctions
(1.2), 1st person pronouns (1.2), Subject pronouns (1.1), Initial verbs (.9), WH-clause (.9), Exclamation
marks (.8), Quotation marks (.7), absence of Mentioning (.7), Hashtags (.7), Interjections (.6)

- Existentials (5.5), Place adverbials (5.4), BE as main verb (3.3), Coordinating conjunctions (2.3), Proper
nouns (2.3), absence of Nominative case (2), Articles (1.9), Quantifiers (1.9), Attributive adjectives (1.6),
Synthetic negation (1.5), Predicative adjectives (1.2), Contrastive conjunctions (1.2), absence of Other
pronouns (1.1), Nominalisations (1.1), Prepositions (1), Numerals (.9), absence of 2nd person pronouns
(.9), absence of Accusative case (0.9), Perfect aspect (.7), Determiners (.7), absence of Question marks
(.7)

3 + Question DO (9), Question marks (6.8), 2nd person pronouns (6.8), absence of Subject pronouns (4.4),
Initial DO (3.7), Initial verbs (3.2), Determiners (3), Nominalisation (2), Synthetic negation (2), Posses-
sive pronouns (1.9), absence of 1st person pronouns (1.8), Other pronouns (1.7), absence of Nominative
case (1.1), absence of Third person pronoun (1), Pro-verb DO (.9), Emoticons (.8), Existentials (.8), BE
as main verb (.7)

- Subject pronouns (8.7), 1st person pronouns (6.2), Auxiliary BE (3.2), 3rd person pronouns (2.8), Object
pronouns (2.5), absence of 2nd person pronouns (1.9), Progressive aspect (1.8), absence of Determiners
(1.7), Verbs of perception (1.6), Nominative case (1.3), absence of Mentioning (1.2), absence of Question
marks (1.2), absence of Other pronouns (.9), Passives (.8)

4 + Predicative adjectives (4.5), Existentials (4.4), absence of Prepositions (3.7), absence of Proper nouns
(3.5), BE as main verb (3.4), Place adverbials (3), Emoticons (2.5), absence of Nouns (2.3), Synthetic
negation (2.3), absence of Capitalisation (2), Subject pronouns (1.9), 1st person pronouns (1.9), absence
of Past tense (1.4), Interjections (1.3), absence of Auxiliary BE (1.2), Comparatives (1.1), absence of
Articles (1), Requests (.9), absence of URLs (.8), Nominative case (.8)

- Auxiliary BE (7.3), Progressive aspect (4.6), Hashtags (3.9), Capitalisations (3.2), By-passives (3.3),
URLs (3.1), Proper nouns (2.8), Public verbs (2.1), absence of BE as main verb (1.8), Past tense (1.5),
Numerals (1.5), Question DO (1.3), Passives (1), Prepositions (1), Perfect aspect (1), absence of Subject
pronouns (1), Articles (0.8), absence of Nominative case (0.7), absence of Predicative adjectives (0.7),
Infinitives (0.7)

Roux and Rouanet (2010), we interpreted each di-
mension by considering all features with a contri-
bution that exceeds 0.62, the average contribution
of a feature on a dimension (100/162). In addition,
the Tweets with the highest positive and negative
coordinates on each dimension were subjected to
a micro-analysis to confirm and refine these func-
tional interpretations. Finally, the racist and sexist
Tweets were compared on each dimension using
Wilcoxon signed-ranked tests to see if there were
any functional differences in these two forms of
abusive language.

3 Results

We chose to use MCA to extract 4 dimensions
based primarily on the functional interpretability
of these dimensions. However, because longer
Tweets are more likely to contain more features,
it is also important to consider whether text length
may have confounded our analysis. In standard
MDA text length is controlled for by analysing the
relative frequencies of features (i.e. by dividing
the frequency of a feature in a text by the total
number of words in the text), allowing texts of dif-

ferent lengths to be compared. In this case, rel-
ative frequencies are not reliable because Tweets
are so short, which is why we measured the simple
occurrence of forms rather than their relative fre-
quencies and why we used MCA rather than Fac-
tor Analysis. To measure the degree to which our
analysis was affected by variation in text length,
we correlated the dimension coordinates returned
by the MCA for each Tweet against Tweet length.
Overall, we found that Dimension 1 is strongly
positively correlated to Tweet length (r = .72), Di-
mension 2 is moderately negatively correlated (r
= -.33), and Dimensions 3 and 4 are only weakly
correlated (r = .02 and r = -.23). The strong cor-
relation between Dimension 1 and Tweet length is
reflected by the fact that the positive features that
contribute most strongly to this dimension involve
the occurrence of a wide range of forms, whereas
the negative features that contribute most strongly
involve the absence of a wide range of forms. By
excluding Dimension 1 from our primary interpre-
tative analysis, because it primarily reflects Tweet
length, we were thus able to largely control for text
length in our analysis, despite not analysing rela-
tive frequencies. The features that contribute the

3



most to the remaining 3 dimensions, which we in-
terpret below, are presented in Table 1.

3.1 Dimension 2: Interactive
Features with strong contributions and positive co-
ordinates on Dimension 2 have an interactive func-
tion. For example, question marks, question DO,
WH-words and initial DO are indicative of ques-
tions being asked. First and second person pro-
nouns are used to involve the writer and the reader
in the discourse. Verb-initial sentences are com-
mon in computer-mediated communication when
the subject, often the author, is omitted because
such information is retrievable from the context
(Bieswanger, 2016). Hashtags are used to con-
tribute to and interact with a discussion feed. Quo-
tation marks are used to refer to someone elses
speech/words. Interjections are immediate re-
sponses to stimuli and emoticons can be used to
represent responsive facial expressions.

This interpretation is supported by Examples 1-
4, which are Tweets that are strongly associated
with positive Dimension 2. All four examples ex-
hibit an interactive style. For example, each Tweet
contains at least one second person pronoun. Ex-
ample 2, 3 and 4 all contain a hashtag and are thus
interacting with the feed, whereas Example 1 men-
tions another user and is therefore interacting di-
rectly with another account.

1. @username Do you think implying someone
cant get laid is sexist or abusive?

2. #QuestionsForMen Did you know that when
you look at a girl - you rape her? http://...

3. #QuestionsForMen Did you know that scien-
tists agree that women slut shame to make
vaginas more valuable to you? http://t...

4. #DontDateSJWs unless you want them to
date you, bang you, call you, stalk you THEN
cry rape and do performance art. http://t

Alternatively, features with strong contributions
and negative coordinates on Dimension 2 are asso-
ciated with a more informational style, maximis-
ing the amount of information being expressed in
140 characters. For example, existential there in-
troduces things or statements. Be as main verb and
predicative adjectives serve to identify a charac-
teristic, role or attribute of a subject noun phrase.
The use of numbers, attributive adjectives, quan-
tifiers, place adverbials, prepositions and proper

nouns allow for the expression of detailed descrip-
tions and specific information. Nominalisations
are similarly indicative of a high informational
load. Contrastive conjunctions emphasise a con-
trast between two ideas and coordinating conjunc-
tions link two sentences together. Synthetic nega-
tion can be used to increase the emphatic force
of a statement (Tottie, 1983). This interpretation
is also supported by the moderate negative cor-
relation with text length, which reflects the fact
that longer Tweets tend to be more information-
ally dense.

This interpretation is supported by Examples 5-
8, which are Tweets that are strongly associated
with negative Dimension 2. All four examples ex-
hibit an informational as opposed to an interactive
style. For example, each Tweet is made up of 1
or more declarative sentences, headed by the main
verb ‘to be’, which is used to provide identifying
information. Synthetic negation can also be seen
in Examples 5, 7 and 8, where it is used to present
information in an absolutist way.

5. @username @username @username There
is no comparing the vileness of Mohammed
to Jesus or Buddha, or Lao Tse. He was sim-
ply a criminal

6. @username @username Muslims have been
raping white girls with Labors approval for
16 years. Any ukip just got there.

7. @username @username @username There
are no Jews in Saudi or many of the Gulf
estates because the Muslims exterminated
them.

8. @username @username @username There
was no golden age. Jews were regularly
slaughter by Muslims in pogroms.

Overall, Dimension 2 is therefore interpreted as
representing the degree of interactiveness exhib-
ited by a Tweet. Notably, previous MDA stud-
ies (e.g. Biber, 1988, 1989; Grieve et al., 2010)
have found a similar primary dimension, which
opposes two of the most basic functions of lan-
guage, namely interacting and informing.

3.2 Dimension 3: Antagonistic

Features with strong contributions and positive
coordinates on Dimension 3 have an antagonis-
tic function. For example, several of these fea-

4



tures are associated with forming questions, in-
cluding question DO and initial DO, verb ini-
tial, and question marks, which can be used to
make demands of other users. Second person pro-
nouns are also associated with antagonistic lan-
guage especially when accompanied by the ab-
sence of first and third person pronouns as well as
subject pronouns in general, which indicates that
these Tweets are targeted at specific users. The co-
occurrence of nominalisations with these features
is associated with a high degree of specificity,
whilst features such as possessive pronouns func-
tion to indicate possession, implying that someone
is being targeted and challenged on specific infor-
mation or possessions. A high degree of speci-
ficity in questions are common in adversarial dis-
course, for example in cross-examination ques-
tions, which are typically loaded and structured to
confuse the witness and discredit their statement
(Gibbons, 2008). Furthermore, emoticons and ex-
clamation marks can be associated with more ag-
gressive forms of online communication.

This interpretation is supported by Examples
9-12, which are Tweets that are strongly associ-
ated with positive Dimension 3. They all contain
questions antagonistically directed to other users.
Specifically, in all four cases, something has been
noticed by the Tweeter and is now being opposed
through questioning.

9. @username Can you be legally forced into
parental obligations? Can your genitals be
cut at birth? Does your right to vote have an
*?

10. If being pro-due process makes you pro-rape,
does being anti-death penalty make you pro-
murder? http://t...

11. #AskAWhiteFeminist Seriously, what rights
dont you have, and why can none of you an-
swer that question?

12. @username1 Do you approve of your pe-
dophile prophet raping a 9 year old girl, like
it says in 7 hadith?

Alternatively, features with strong contributions
and negative coordinates on Dimension 3 are as-
sociated with a more conciliatory style. Obvi-
ously, abusive language is inherently antagonistic;
however, the absence of second person pronouns
and the presence of subject and object pronouns,
particularly third person pronouns and first person

pronouns, indicates that Tweets scoring negatively
on this Dimension are not targeting particular in-
dividuals. The co-occurrence of the progressive
tense indicates that continuing action is being de-
scribed. Object pronouns suggest that this action
is affecting or influencing particular people. The
co-occurrence of first person pronouns and verbs
of perception suggest that the writer is giving their
account of what they are perceiving, rather than
opposing people directly.

This interpretation is supported by Examples
13-16, which are Tweets that are strongly asso-
ciated with negative Dimension 3, all of which
reflect an ‘us versus them dichotomy’, whereby
descriptions of the actions of ‘them’ are either
perceived by the person speaking or the actions
of ‘them’ are influencing ‘us’. Several of the
Tweets are directed to more than one user sug-
gesting that they are part of a conversation be-
tween friends/acquaintances. While the people be-
ing spoken about may find the messages abusive,
they are not targeted to them, hence the language
appears to be more collaborative than antagonistic,
with people involved in the conversation sharing
the same views, even though those views would
be considered offensive by others.

13. @username1 I saw him, but I rarely engage
male fems zero point to it. They are just fol-
lowing orders

14. @username1 @username2 I actually wish
they would just start using egalitarian so we
can just let feminist mean the misandrist hyp-
ocrites.

15. @username1 @username2 Reminds me of
Simpsons where grandpa was screaming
Death at everything. Now its rape. http://...

16. @username1 @username2 @username3
They are breeding us out of existence in the
westernised world. Islam will rule the world
in time.

Overall, Dimension 3 is therefore interpreted as
representing the degree of antagonism exhibited
by a Tweet. Previous definitions of trolling have
suggested that such posts tend to be hostile and
aggressive (Hardaker, 2010). Moreover, it has
been shown that adversarial behaviour, such as
anger and accusation are common online, espe-
cially when discussing ideological issues because
the purpose is to dominate the discourse and such

5



adversarial behaviour can perform this function
(Herring et al., 1995).

3.3 Dimension 4: Attitudinal
Features with strong contributions and positive co-
ordinates on Dimension 4 have an attitudinal func-
tion. For example, comparatives are used to de-
scribe people or things in relation to others. Pred-
icative adjectives and BE as a main verb func-
tion to describe and identify particular attributes
or characteristics of the subject. First person
pronouns involve the Tweeter in the discourse,
marking the post as a personal opinion. The co-
occurrence of existential there with these features
and the absence of nouns suggests that descrip-
tions are being introduced rather than things, or
that information is being introduced and then an
opinion is given. Synthetic negation indicates that
something is being contested.

This interpretation is supported by Examples
16-20, which are Tweets that are strongly associ-
ated with positive Dimension 4. All of these ex-
amples are expressions of opinions and personal
stance through features such as first person pro-
nouns, be as a main verb and adjectives.

17. @username1 @username2 @username3 and
we still get payed equally. That stupid myth
bothers me to no end because theres really
things -

18. @username1 No. You have proven your ig-
norance here to anyone who isnt as dumb as
you. Its there for all to see but you dont know
it.

19. @username1 I have no religion, but I can ac-
commodate Jews, Hindus, Buddhists, Taoist,
Atheists. But Islam is too cancerous

20. @username1 @username2 Except that there
was no such sexual torture and she is a lying
bitch

Alternatively, features with strong contributions
and negative coordinates on Dimension 4 do not
share this attitudinal function. Instead, several fea-
tures have a reporting function. For example, pub-
lic verbs mark indirect or reported speech, the per-
fect tense is used to report on past events, and
the progressive tense refers to continuing action.
Passive constructions serve to emphasise the ob-
ject acted upon, rather than the agent. Agent-
less passive constructions are common in ideo-

logical discourse as they can be used to reduce
the agents prominence and therefore the blame
or cause, whereas by-Passives take the informa-
tion that would be typically new information and
present it at the beginning of the sentence as given
information and the agent is then moved to the
end of the clause and presented as new informa-
tion (Fairclough, 1992). URLs function to di-
rect the reader to more information, including a
website or an image. Numbers serve to add addi-
tional, specific information. The co-occurrence of
URLs and numbers with ideological features sug-
gests that they are functioning to support a point
or provide proof, either in the form of additional
textual or quantitative information. Capitalisation
suggests that the writer is either emphasising a
point or raising their voice.

This interpretation is supported by Examples
21-24, which are Tweets that are strongly asso-
ciated with negative Dimension 4.The examples
support this interpretation as the speakers point of
view is not explicitly marked, but rather the ac-
tion of others is being reported and supported with
numbers and URLs.

21. @username1 @username2 The Jews are try-
ing to defend themselves against Muslims try-
ing to exterminate them. http://...

22. In Islam women must be locked in their
houses, and Muslims claim this is treating
them well. http://...

23. @username1 @username2 The world is do-
ing nothing. Islam is producing the terrorist
activities and has been for 1400 years

24. Following the example of the pedophile
prophet Mohammed in every detail, one ISIS
militant is marrying a 7 year old child in Mo-
sul. #Islam

Overall, Dimension 4 is therefore interpreted as
representing the degree of attitudinal judgment ex-
hibited by a Tweet. Abusive language is by nature
attitudinal and ideological. However, it has been
shown that such beliefs can be realised in vari-
ous ways, such as through explicit opinions or by
telling stories, which present the other in a nega-
tive light (e.g. van Dijk, 1993). Thus, the degree
of attitudinal judgement reflects the way in which
the attitude is encoded.

6



Figure 1: Boxplots of Racist and Sexist Tweets for Dimension 2, 3, and 4

3.4 Racist versus Sexist Tweets

Following the interpretation of our three primary
functional dimensions, we tested the extent to
which racist and sexist Tweets differ along each
of these dimensions. In particular, we used a
Wilcoxon signed-ranked tests to test if there were
any functional differences between the coordi-
nates of racist and sexist Tweets on each dimen-
sion. In addition, we produced boxplots to help
visualise each comparison (see Figure 1). Over-
all, we found significant differences (p < .01) be-
tween racist and sexist Tweets on Dimensions 2
and 4, with sexist Tweets tending to be more in-
teractive and attitudinal than racist Tweets. We
did not, however, find a significant difference in
the degree of Antagonism between racist and sex-
ist Tweets.

To interpret these findings, we considered pre-
vious studies on sexist and racist language and
strategies. For example, in a study examining
sexist strategies on two email lists, Herring et al.
(1995) found that one silencing strategy employed
in sexist language is to dismiss the points raised
by others by referring to their ‘triviality’. It is pos-
sible to see in Examples 17 and 18 that the signif-
icance of a point is being disputed. In Example
17, “stupid myth” not only represents something

as nonfactual through the word “myth”, but also
represents it as trivial and benign through “stupid”.
In Example 18, the intelligence of the speaker is
being called into question, thereby discrediting the
original posters statement and presenting it as triv-
ial. Thus, it may be that expressions of attitudinal
judgement, specifically by encoding that the pre-
vious post is trivial, are serving the over-arching
aim to silence the individual. Another silencing
strategy employed in sexist discourse is to regain
control over the conversation by introducing new
topics (Herring et al., 1995). This strategy may
provide a reason for why sexist tweets are more in-
teractive as the over-arching aim may be to regain
control and therefore they may ask new questions
and interact by introducing new topics.

In regards to racist language, van Dijk (1993)
describes that racist ideologies have been shown
to be reproduced through story-telling and argu-
mentation. Specifically, stories are told by peo-
ple from majority groups about minority groups
in the form of complaints or negative events (van
Dijk, 1993). Although stories are often associated
with personal expression and opinion, stories are
used to inform people, and can take the form of
news reports. These stories are functionally less
entertaining, but serve more to argue a point or

7



persuade (van Dijk, 1993). It is possible to draw
similarities with what van Dijk (1993) says here
with the informational and reporting function of
the racist Tweets. The argumentative and persua-
sive function of racist discourse is apparent in the
racist Tweets with the use of URLs and numbers in
Examples 21-24, which function here to provide
supporting evidence. Furthermore, story-telling
involves introducing a complication and provid-
ing contextual information, rather than interact-
ing. This can be seen in Examples 5, 7 and 8
through the existential there, which functions to
introduce new information. Thus, it may be sug-
gested that racist Tweets are less interactive and
attitudinal because the aim is to persuade and ar-
gue a point by reporting on events which presents
minority groups in a negative light. In other words,
it presents racist opinions as facts as a way to le-
gitimate racist ideologies.

4 Conclusion

Many classifiers used to detect abusive language
are trained on offensive terms. In this study, we
aimed to avoid using offensive terms, and instead
examined a wide range of functionally-significant
grammatical features to identify the main dimen-
sions of functional linguistic variation that oc-
cur in racist and sexist Tweets. Although we do
not apply our results directly to the task of abu-
sive language detection here, such linguistic co-
occurrence patterns could in all likelihood be use-
fully incorporated into future classification mod-
els. Furthermore, the general patterns we have
identified in this paper should help to explain why
some features work better than others for detect-
ing and distinguishing forms of abusive language
online and suggest new directions for feature se-
lection.

In summary, based on the analysis of Waseem
and Hovys (2016) data, and using a novel cate-
gorical approach to MDA, we have identified 3 di-
mensions of linguistic variation in racist and sex-
ist Tweets: interactive, antagonistic, and attitudi-
nal. Although there is no absolute distinction be-
tween racist and sexist Tweets, by plotting each
Tweets dimension coordinates, we have revealed
that racist and sexist Tweets do differ functionally
in respect to Dimension 2 and Dimension 4, with
sexist Tweets tending to be more interactive and
attitudinal, perhaps reflecting a somewhat differ-
ent intent for racist and sexist Tweets. These re-

sults suggest that certain features used for classi-
fiers may be biased towards particular types and
functions of abusive language. For example, stud-
ies selecting the word tri-gram “you are [adjective:
offensive word]” (e.g. Chen et al., 2012) are likely
to find Tweets that have an interactive and atti-
tudinal function. As a result, other linguistic co-
occurrence patterns that represent other functions
of abusive language may be missed.

The antagonistic and attitudinal dimensions are
perhaps the most obvious because abusive lan-
guage is by nature hostile, opinionated and con-
troversial. Nevertheless, we have demonstrated
that abusive language can be discussed amongst
acquaintances meaning that the function of the in-
teraction changes to be less antagonistic and more
collaborative, at least to its immediate audience.
Additionally, we have shown that abusive lan-
guage does not have to be attitudinal as the speak-
ers point of view can be suppressed and the Tweets
can function to report on action and provide evi-
dence to such reports.

Without relying on profanity, we have high-
lighted the value of such research in identifying
particular linguistic co-occurrence patterns and
functional variation in abusive language. Unfor-
tunately, we have only looked at these particular
racist and sexist Tweets and therefore the dimen-
sions could change with more data. However, in
the future we aim to gather a larger corpus of dif-
ferent types of abusive language and improve the
feature set in order reveal further and more de-
tailed dimensions of linguistic variation of abusive
language. Moreover, we aim to validate these di-
mensions by collecting a corpus of non-abusive
language and making comparisons between the
two.

References
K. Balci and A. A. Salah. 2015. Automatic analysis

and identification of verbal aggression and abusive
behaviors for online social games. Computers in
Human Behavior 53:517–526.

D. Biber. 1988. Variation across speech and writing.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

D. Biber. 1989. A typology of english texts. Linguis-
tics 27:3–43.

M. Bieswanger. 2016. Electronically-mediated en-
glishes: Synchronicity revisited. In L.Squires, edi-
tor, English in Computer-Mediated Communication:

8



Variation, Representation, and Change, De Gruyter,
Berlin Boston.

P. Burnap and M. L. Williams. 2014. Hate speech, ma-
chine classification and statistical modelling of in-
formation flows on twitter: Interpretation and com-
munication for policy decision making. In Proceed-
ings of the Internet, Policy and Politics Conference.
Oxford.

Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Zhu, and H. Xu. 2012.
Detecting offensive language in social media to
protect adolescent online safety. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 ASE/IEEE International Confer-
ence on Social Computing and 2012 ASE/IEEE
International Conference on Privacy, Security,
Risk and Trust. IEEE Computer Society, Wash-
ington, DC, USA, SOCIALCOM-PASSAT ’12,
pages 71–80. https://doi.org/10.1109/SocialCom-
PASSAT.2012.55.

M. Dadvar, D. Trieschnigg, and F. de Jong. 2013. Ex-
pert knowledge for automatic detection of bullies in
social networks. In Proceedings of the 25th Benelux
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, BNAIC 2013,
Delft, the Netherlands. TU Delft, pages 57–64.

T. Davidson, D. Warmsley, M. Macy, and I. We-
ber. 2017. Automated hate speech detection and
the problem of offensive language. In In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th International AAAI Confer-
ence on Web and Social Media ICWSM17. World
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.04009.pdf.

N. Fairclough. 1992. Discourse and Social Change.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd., Cambridge.

J. Gentry. 2016. Package twit-
ter pages 1–30. https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/twitteR/twitteR.pdf.

J. Gibbons. 2008. Questioning in common law
criminal courts. In J. Gibbons and M. Teresa
Turell, editors, Dimensions of Forensic Linguis-
tics, John Benjamins Publishing Company, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia, pages 115–130.

K. Gimpel, N. Schneider, B. OConnor, D. Das,
D. Mills, J. Eisenstein, M Heilman, D Yo-
gatama, J Flanigan, and N. A Smith. 2011. Part-
of-speech tagging for twitter: Annotation, fea-
tures, and experiments. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Short Papers. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 19–24.
www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-2008.

D. Glynn. 2009. Polysemy, syntax, and variation: A
usage-based method for cognitive semantics. In
V. Evans and S. Pourcel, editors, New directions in
Cognitive Linguistics, John Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 77–106.

D. Glynn. 2014. Correspondence analysis: Explor-
ing data and identifying patterns. In D. Glynn and
J. A. Robinson, editors, Corpus Methods for Se-
mantics: Quantitative studies in polysemy and syn-
onymy, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pages 443–
485.

J. Grieve, D. Biber, E. Friginal, and T Nekrasova. 2010.
Variation among blogs: A multi dimensional analy-
sis. In A. Mehler, S. Sharoff, and M. Santini, editors,
Genres on the web: Computational Models and Em-
pirical Studies, Springer-Verlag, New York, pages
45–71.

C. Hardaker. 2010. Trolling in asynchronous
computer-mediated communication: From user dis-
cussions to academic definitions. Journal of Polite-
ness Research 6:215–242.

S. Herring, D. A. Johnson, and T. DiBenedetto. 1995.
This discussion is going too far! male resistance
to female participation on the internet. In K. Hall
and M. Bucholtz, editors, Gender Articulated: Lan-
guage and the Socially Constructed Self , Routledge,
New York and London, chapter 3, pages 67–96.

G. E. Hine, J. Onaolapo, E. De Cristofaro, N. Kourtel-
lis, I. Leontiadis, R. Samaras, G. Stringhini, and
J. Blackburn. 2017. Kek, cucks, and god emperor
trump: A measurement study of 4chan’s politically
incorrect forum and its effects on the web. In
Proceedings of the 11th International AAAI Con-
ference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM-17).
https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.03452.

F. Husson, J. Josse, S. Le, and J. Mazet. 2017. Fac-
tominer: Multivariate exploratory data analysis
and data mining pages 1–96. https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/FactoMineR/FactoMineR
.pdf.

F. Husson, S. Lł, and J. Pags. 2010. Exploratory Mul-
tivariate Analysis by Example Using R. Chapman &
Hall CRC, London.

B. Le Roux and H. Rouanet. 2010. Multiple Corre-
spondence Analysis. SAGE Publications, Inc., Cali-
fornia.

Y. Mehdad and J. Tetreault. 2016. Do characters abuse
more than words? In Proceedings of the 17th
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Los Angeles, pages 299–303.
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-3638.

R. J. Passonneau, N. Ide, S. Su, and J. Stuart. 2014.
Biber redux: Reconsidering dimensions of variation
in american english. In COLING 2014, 25th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, Proceedings of the Conference: Technical Pa-
pers, August 23-29, 2014, Dublin, Ireland. pages
565–576. http://aclweb.org/anthology/C/C14/C14-
1054.pdf.

9



G. Tottie. 1983. Much about not and nothing: a
study of the variation between analytic and synthetic
negation in contemporary American English. CWK
Gleerup, Lund.

J. Tummers, D. Speelman, and D. Geeraerts. 2012.
Multiple correspondence analysis as heuristic tool to
unveil confounding variables in corpus linguistics.
In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Statistical Analysis of Textual Data. JADT, pages
923–936.

T. A. van Dijk. 1993. Stories and racism. In D. K.
Mumby, editor, Narrative and Social Control: crit-
ical perspectives, Sage, Newbury Park, CA, chap-
ter 5.

W. Warner and J. Hirschberg. 2012. Detecting hate
speech on the world wide web. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Language and Social Media. The
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
19–26. https://aclweb.org/anthology/W/W12/W12-
21.pdf.

Z. Waseem and D. Hovy. 2016. Hateful symbols
or hateful people? predictive features for hate
speech detection on twitter. In Proceedings of
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2016. The Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 88–93.
https://aclweb.org/anthology/N/N16/N16-2.pdf.

G. Xiang, B. Fan, L. Wang, J. Hong, and C. Rose.
2012. Detecting offensive tweets via topical feature
discovery over a large scale twitter corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, CIKM ’12, pages 1980–1984.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2396761.2398556.

D. Yin, Z. Xue, L. Hong, B. D. Davison, A. Kon-
tostathis, and L. Edwards. 2009. Detection of ha-
rassment on web 2.0. In Proceedings of the Content
Analysis in the WEB. Dublin City University and As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1–7.
http://www.cse.lehigh.edu/ brian/pubs/2009/CAW2/
harassment.pdf.

10


