




































Comparing Rule-based and SMT-based Spelling Normalisation
for English Historical Texts

Gerold Schneider
Institute of

Computational Linguistics
and Department of English

University of Zurich
gschneid@ifi.uzh.ch

Eva Pettersson
Department of

Linguistics and Philology
Uppsala University
eva.pettersson

@lingfil.uu.se

Michael Percillier
Department of English

University of Mannheim
percillier@uni-mannheim.de

Abstract

To be able to use existing natural lan-
guage processing tools for analysing his-
torical text, an important preprocessing
step is spelling normalisation, convert-
ing the original spelling to present-day
spelling, before applying tools such as tag-
gers and parsers. In this paper, we com-
pare a probablistic, language-independent
approach to spelling normalisation based
on statistical machine translation (SMT)
techniques, to a rule-based system com-
bining dictionary lookup with rules and
non-probabilistic weights. The rule-based
system reaches the best accuracy, up to
94% precision at 74% recall, while the
SMT system improves each tested period.

1 Introduction

Language technology for historical texts poses
several challenges, as earlier stages of languages
are under-resourced. But language technology is
helpful both to researchers in Digital Humanities
and Diachronic Linguistics. Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tools are needed at all levels of
processing, but spelling is a particularly obvious
candidate, for at least two reasons. First, historical
variants not only differ from present-day spellings.
They also often lack normalisation within their
period – the same word often appears with sev-
eral different spellings inside the same document.
Thus, even simple lexicon-based research is ham-
pered by complex corpus queries and low recall.
Second, spelling variants can affect all other sub-
sequent processing levels – tokenisation, part-of-
speech tagging and parsing. For example, frequent
variants like call’d for called lead to a tokeni-
sation error, which in turn results in wrong tag-
ging (call NN d MD), and as a consequence pars-
ing quality is also affected. Rayson et al. (2007),

Scheible et al. (2011) and Schneider et al. (2014)
report that about half of the changes induced by
automatic spelling normalisation lead to improved
tagging and parsing, which makes it a vital con-
tributor to improved tagging and parsing of histor-
ical texts.

Several approaches for mapping historical vari-
ants to present-day standard spelling have been
proposed. For English, on which we are go-
ing to focus in this article, VARiant Detector 2
(VARD) (Baron and Rayson, 2008) is a popu-
lar spelling normalisation tool, but there are other
possible approaches. Pettersson et al. (2014) com-
pared three statistical approaches: 1) a filtering ap-
proach, 2) a Levenshtein-distance approach, and
3) a character-based statistical machine translation
(SMT) approach. These approaches were applied
to five languages, and for four of these (includ-
ing English), the SMT-based approach yielded the
best results.

In this paper, we compare the results of ap-
plying the SMT-based spelling normalisation ap-
proach to the ARCHER corpus of historical En-
glish and American texts, to the results achieved
for VARD2 on the same corpus. The compar-
ison is interesting as the approaches are signifi-
cantly different: SMT is a probablistic, language-
independent approach, whereas VARD2 combines
lexicon-lookup with rules and non-probabilistic
weights.

2 Data and Methods

2.1 The ARCHER Corpus

As corpus of application, we use ARCHER (Biber
et al., 1994), a historical corpus sampled from
British and American texts from 1600-1999 and
across several registers. Its current version (V 3.2)
contains 3.2 million words. Since there are in-
creasingly fewer non-standard spelling variants in
later texts, we have only used texts until 1850.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 40



The increasing scarcity of non-standard spelling
also gives rise to a new research question: from
which point on does spelling normalisation intro-
duce more errors than correcting the few remain-
ing non-standard spelling variants?

For the training phase, we have manually anno-
tated 109 documents (about 200,000 words), strat-
ified by 4 periods (1650-99, 1700-49, 1750-99,
1800-49), with a total of 6,975 manual normal-
isations. For evaluation, we have manually an-
notated a further 30 documents, containing 1,467
normalisations. The ARCHER corpus has been
carefully sampled and aims to be genre-balanced,
which provides us with a realistic real-world sce-
nario.

A first observation that we have made is that
while the amount of non-standard spelling de-
creases (from a mean of 315 per document in the
period 1600-1649 to 24 in the period from 1800-
49), the variance is very large (the standard devia-
tion in the period 1600-1649 is 266, in the period
from 1800-49 it is 52), indicating that individual
styles vary considerably.

2.2 SMT

In the SMT-based approach, spelling normalisa-
tion is treated as a translation task, which could be
solved using statistical machine translation (SMT)
techniques. To address changes in spelling rather
than the full translation of words and phrases, the
translation system is trained on sequences of char-
acters instead of word sequences.

In our experiments, we use the same settings for
SMT-based spelling normalisation as presented
in Pettersson et al. (2013), that is a phrase-
based translation model, using Moses with all its
standard components (Koehn et al., 2007), and
IRSTLM for language modelling (Federico et al.,
2008). For aligning the characters in the histori-
cal part of the corpus to the corresponding charac-
ters in the modern version of the corpus, the word
alignment toolkit GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) is
applied, implementing the IBM models commonly
used in SMT (Brown, 1993). The same default set-
tings as for standard machine translation are used,
with the following exceptions:

1. The system is trained on sequences of char-
acters instead of word sequences.

2. Reordering is switched off during training,
since it is unlikely that the characters are to
be reordered across the whole word.

3. The maximum size of a phrase (sequence of
characters) is set to 10, a setting previously
shown to be successful for character-based
machine translation between closely related
languages (Tiedemann , 2009).

2.3 VARD2
The automatic normalisation tool VARD2 (Baron
and Rayson, 2008) is a rule-based system, which
can be customized to learn more rules from anno-
tated corpora and adapt weights to them. The first
version of VARD was a pure dictionary-based sys-
tem. VARD2 extends this approach as follows.

First, every word that is not found in the tool’s
present-day English (PDE) spelling lexicon is
marked as a candidate. Second, PDE variants for
candidates are found and ranked, according to the
following three methods:

1. the original VARD replacement dictionary

2. a variant of SoundEx, which maps phoneti-
cally similar words onto each other

3. letter replacement rules, which represent
commmon patterns of spelling variation, for
example interchanging v and u or dropping
word-final e.

These rules are given a non-probabilistic confi-
dence score, and each replacement candidate is
also weighted by edit distance. When further an-
notated corpora are added, the replacement dictio-
nary is extended and the weights of the three meth-
ods are optimised.

As VARD2 is a rule-based and non-probabilistic
system, the question arises how it performs
in comparison to state-of-the-art statistical ap-
proaches. It has been shown, for example in
the domain of part-of-speech tagging (Samuelsson
and Voutilainen, 1997; Loftsson, 2008), that care-
fully written rule-based systems can perform at the
same level or better than statistical systems.

3 Results

3.1 Annotation, Inter-Annotator Agreement
For evaluating the SMT method, we used the man-
ual annotation of ARCHER (split into 90% train-
ing and 10% evaluation) as the first evaluation
method. For the evaluation of VARD2, and for
comparing VARD2 to SMT, we used the manually
annotated 30 documents described in Section 2.1.

When annotating the evaluation set, we no-
ticed that while in most cases normalisation is

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 41



clear, there are several reasons why inter-annotator
agreement is considerably lower than 100%. Four
important reasons are: first, there are cases where
it is unclear if a variant is PDE or not. A good
example is thou hast where VARD2 by default
changes hast to have, although this is, in the opin-
ion of one annotator, rather a change of morpho-
logical inflection than of spelling. Second, if dic-
tionaries list alternative readings (e.g. British and
American), should one normalise? Third, it is un-
clear how strict to be with hyphenation: should
sun-shine or bridle-way be corrected? Fourth,
particularly in the recent texts, where only every
100th or 200th word has a non-standard spelling,
it is very easy to overlook variants.

A subset of our evaluation corpus, comprising 7
documents, was annotated by two of the authors.
On the possible 529 normalisations, they agreed
on 439, which corresponds to an inter-annotator
agreement of 83%. We corrected obvious over-
sights and otherwise took the annotations of the
author who had annotated the training set.

3.2 SMT

For the SMT-based experiments, we need to train
a translation model and a language model. For the
translation model, we use pairs of historical word
forms mapped to their corresponding normalised
spelling, to calculate the likelihood that certain se-
quences in the target language (i.e. the modern
spelling) are translations of the sequences in the
source language (i.e. the historical word forms).
Such word pairs were extracted from the training
part of the ARCHER corpus (as described in Sec-
tion 2.1) and split into a pure training part and a
tuning part (as required by the Moses system) by
extracting every 10th word form to the tuning part,
and the rest of the word forms to the training part.
For language modeling, a monolingual target lan-
guage corpus is used for modeling the probabili-
ties that any candidate translation string would oc-
cur in the target language. For this purpose, we
use the British National Corpus (BNC) of approx-
imately 100 million words sampled to represent
a wide cross-section of British English from the
late 20th century (BNC, 2007). We filter hapax
legomena, i.e. take all word forms that appear at
least twice in the BNC. In addition, the manually
normalised part of the training corpus is added to
the language model, to include archaic word forms
that are unlikely to occur in the BNC corpus.

Historical texts are marked by a high degree
of spelling variance and spelling inconsistencies,
leading to data sparseness when applying differ-
ent kinds of NLP tools to the data. It is there-
fore interesting to explore whether adding histor-
ical data in general could improve normalisation
accuracy, or if the data need to be representative
of the specific time period targeted. We therefore
split both the training and the evaluation parts of
the ARCHER corpus into three subcorpora, con-
taining texts from the 17th, 18th, and 19th century
respectively. This way, we can evaluate normali-
sation accuracy for each subcorpus, when trained
on data from all three centuries, and when trained
on data from the specific time period only.

For the SMT-based approach, we then ran ex-
periments by 1) training on the full corpus of man-
ually normalised historical text, 2) training on the
correct century only (17th, 18th or 19th), and 3)
adding dictionaries in two ways:

(a) Historical word forms that are found in the
manually normalised part of the training cor-
pus are left unchanged.

(b) A normalisation candidate suggested by the
SMT system is only accepted if it occurs in
the BNC corpus.

Full Test Corpus
Unnormalised 97.21
Training corpus 98.00
Training corpus + Dict (a) 98.14
Training corpus + Dict (b) 98.01
Training corpus + Dict (a) & (b) 98.14

17th Century Part of the Test Corpus
Unnormalised 93.88
Full training corpus 96.60
17th century part of the training corpus 96.89

18th Century Part of the Test Corpus
Unnormalised 98.65
Full training corpus 98.75
18th century part of the training corpus 98.69

19th Century Part of the Test Corpus
Unnormalised 98.95
Full training corpus 99.10
19th century part of the training corpus 99.15

Table 1: Normalisation accuracy, per word, for
different parts of the corpus. dict = adding dic-
tionaries for lexical filtering.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 42



As shown in Table 1, normalisation accuracy im-
proves for all parts of the corpus, using the SMT-
based approach to spelling normalisation. There
are 421 cases where the SMT-based system has
modified the original spelling to a spelling identi-
cal to the manually defined gold standard spelling,
e.g.:

happinesse→ happiness
onely→ only
relligious→ religious
iustices→ justices
loue→ love

In contrast, there are 44 cases where the SMT-
based system has suggested a modification that
is different from the gold standard spelling, i.e.
precision errors. In most of these cases, the nor-
malisation system has failed, but there are also in-
stances that seem to be due to mistakes in the man-
ually defined gold standard.

In 762 cases, the normalisation system has left
the original word form unchanged, even though
the manually defined gold standard suggest a nor-
malisation, i.e.we have a recall error. A manual
error analysis shows that one of the major cause of
recall errors involves apostrophes, e.g.:

mans 6→ man’s
o’er 6→ over
redeem’d 6→ redeemed
y’are 6→ you’re

Other common causes of recall error are connected
to endings like -ie, -y, e and eth, e.g.:

flie 6→ fly
easie 6→ easy
disdaine 6→ disdain
gipsey 6→ gypsy
captaine 6→ captain
seemeth 6→ seems

Furthermore, using the manually normalised part
of the training data as a filter, leaving word forms
that occur in this data set unnormalised, has a
positive effect on normalisation accuracy. The
main reason is the otherwise incorrect normalisa-
tion of frequently occurring function words, such
as thy and thee. In the manual normalisation pro-
cess, these word forms have been left as they are.
The SMT-based system would however, without
lexical filtering, normalise these word forms into
they and the respectively, due to the strong prefer-
ence for these word forms in the language model.
Even though the manually normalised version of
the ARCHER training data, including word forms

such as thy and thee, have been added to the lan-
guage model, these occurrences are outnumbered
by the occurrences of the much more frequent En-
glish word forms the and they in the BNC part of
the language model.

The second lexical filtering, where normalisa-
tion candidates suggested by the SMT system are
only accepted if occurring in the BNC corpus, also
leads to a small (non-significant) improvement of
the normalisation accuracy. The results presented
for the time-specific subcorpora are thus based on
lexical filtering using both methods.

It is interesting to note that for both 17th cen-
tury data and 19th century data, the best normal-
isation accuracy is achieved if a smaller data set
containing time-specific data only is used, rather
than adding training data from all three centuries.

3.3 VARD2 Performance on Evaluation Set

The results of applying VARD2 are given in
Table 2, in terms of precison, recall, and per-word
rates. The results using the default rules provided
with the VARD2 distribution are in the second col-
umn, and using the training from the manually an-
notated 109 ARCHER documents (in addition to
the default rules provided in the VARD2 distri-
bution) in the third column, and best SMT in the
fourth column.

Table 2 shows five points. First, VARD2 im-
proves spelling (in the sense of mapping it to PDE
variants) in most settings, except when applying
the defaults settings to the latest period, 19th cen-
tury texts.

Second, the training with ARCHER has consid-
erably improved results.

Third, we have tested the effect of training on
the entire ARCHER or only the appropriate cen-
tury and show the results in the second last col-
umn. The effect of training VARD2 on different
periods could be relatively small, as the default
rules are not deleted, the new rules are just added
and the the weights adapted. Using less train-
ing data leads to results with higher precision and
lower recall.

Fourth, the task gets increasingly difficult in
later periods, which is related to the fact that only
very few tokens need normalisation, as we have al-
ready observed in the discussion of inter-annotator
agreement. The performance in the 19th century
is partly so low because there are only very few
words that require correction, thus absurd cor-

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 43



VARD + trained on + trained on best
Default ALL ARCHER ARCHER ct. SMT

Full Evaluation Corpus (N=838,W=29167)
Precision 89.54 94.36 – 80.48
Recall 76.61 73.89 – 64.43
Unnorm. words 97.13 97.13 – 97.13
Correct words 99.07 99.11 – 98.53
17th Century Part of the Evaluation Corpus (N=507,W=9682)
Precision 88.31 94.81 99.43 78.93
Recall 74.56 72.00 69.42 67.26
Unnorm. words 94.76 94.76 94.76 94.76
Correct words 98.15 98.33 98.38 97.34
18th Century Part of the Evaluation Corpus (N=92,W=11478)
Precision 83.75 92.42 100.00 78.31
Recall 72.82 66.30 65.22 70.65
Unnorm. words 99.20 99.20 99.20 99.20
Correct words 99.67 99.69 99.72 99.61
19th Century Part of the Evaluation Corpus (N=61,W=9617)
Precision 90.63 87.23 100.00 60.71
Recall 47.54 67.21 24.59 27.87
Unnorm. words 99.36 99.36 99.36 99.36
Correct words 99.64 99.73 99.52 99.42

Table 2: Normalisation accuracy of VARD, in percent, for the evaluation corpus, and split by century,
comparing the VARD default rules, and the effect of training on 109 manually annotated ARCHER
documents, and a comparison to SMT. N=number of manual changes, W=number of words

rections such as changing idiotism to idiocy af-
fect precision. Recall is strongly affected by rare
words and rare but correct variants, such as sili-
cious which is not corrected to siliceous. It might
be advisable to stop using historical spelling cor-
rection already at 1800 instead of 1850.

Fifth, the SMT system performs slightly below
the highly costumized VARD tool. We elaborate
on this point in the following section.

4 VARD2 and SMT in comparison
Among the items that VARD2 failed to detect, hy-
phenation stood out in particular (e.g. sun-shine
which should be changed to sunshine). On the
other hand, it overgeneralizes from 2nd person sin-
gular verb forms to plural forms (e.g. hast and
darest are changed to have and dare). As these
are frequent forms, they have a substantial numer-
ical impact. VARD2 also overnormalises proper
names (e.g. ALONZO to ALONSO), which often
keep histoical spellings in PDE. The detection of
proper names in historical texts is far from trivial,
however, as also common nouns and verbs are of-
ten capitalised.

When inspecting the errors made by the SMT
system, we have observed the following types of
errors:

• Overgeneralisation, e.g.: whether has incor-
rectly been suggested to be normalised to
wheather.

• Undergeneralisations, e.g.: complements is
not normalised to compliments, because the
word complements also exists, with a differ-
ent meaning.

• Foreign words: for example, the Latin word
mater is incorrectly normalised to matter

• Inter-annotator questions, e.g.: hath is nor-
malised to have, insomuch to inasmuch, em-
phatical to emphatic

• Oversights, spurious errors: Some of the
suggested normalisations are correct, even
though classified as incorrect when compared
to the gold standard.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 44



5 Related Work

Apart from the SMT-based approach to spelling
normalisation originally described in Pettersson
et al. (2013), and applied to the ARCHER cor-
pus in this study, character-based SMT-techniques
have also been implemented by Scherrer and Er-
javec (2013), for the task of normalising historical
Slovene. They tried both a supervised and an un-
supervised learning approach. In the supervised
setting, the translation model was trained on a set
of 45,810 historical-modern Slovene word pairs,
whereas the language model was trained on the
same data set but only including the modern word
forms. In addition, a lexicon filter was used, in
which normalisation candidates proposed by the
translation model were only accepted if they were
also found in the Modern Slovene Sloleks dictio-
nary. In the unsupervised setting, the historical-
to-modern training data was created inbased on
separate lists of historical word forms and modern
word forms, where the historical word forms were
mapped to modern word forms based on string
similarity comparisons between the word forms
occurring in the two lists. Their evaluation showed
an increase in normalisation accuracy from 15.4%
to 48.9% for 18th century test data using the un-
supervised setting. In the supervised setting, accu-
racy improved further to 72.4%.

6 Conclusions and Outlook

We have compared a probablistic, language-
independent approach to spelling normalisation
based on SMT, to a carefully crafted and highly
adapted rule-based system. The latter has slightly
higher performance (up to 94% precision at 74%
recall) while the former is more general and fully
language-independent. We have tested various
settings, and shown that training with smaller
century-specific data sets performs better, and that
statistical SMT can be improved in several ways,
e.g. by constraining the dictionary to forms seen
in present-day spelling.

As future work, we would like to assess the
results of succeeding NLP tasks, such as tag-
ging and parsing, based on normalised data. We
will also try to improve normalisation results fur-
ther by combining the two approaches in various
ways. One way would be to add automatically
normalised word forms using VARD to the train-
ing data for the SMT-based system. This would
be considered a semi-supervised method, in which

both manually revised and automatically anno-
tated data are used for training the SMT-based sys-
tem. Another way of combining the two systems
would be to use the normalisations suggested by
the SMT-based system to guide the VARD system
in the ranking process, in cases where several nor-
malisation candidates are given in VARD.

Many of the remaining errors are hard to correct
with purely word-based approaches. We would
like to investigate if using limited context can im-
prove results.

References
Alistair Baron and Paul Rayson. 2008. VARD 2: A

tool for dealing with spelling variation in historical
corpora. In Proceedings of the Postgraduate Con-
ference in Corpus Linguistics, Birmingham. Aston
University.

Douglas Biber, Edward Finegan, and Dwight Atkinson.
1994. Archer and its challenges: Compiling and ex-
ploring a representative corpus of historical english
registers. In Udo Fries, Peter Schneider, and Gunnel
Tottie, editors, Creating and using English language
corpora, Papers from the 14th International Con-
ference on English Language Research on Comput-
erized Corpora, Zurich 1993, pages 1–13. Rodopi,
Amsterdam.

BNC Consortium. 2007. The British National Corpus,
Version 3. Distributed by Oxford University Com-
puting Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium.
http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/.

Peter Brown, Vincent Della Pietra, Stephen Della
Pietra, and Robert Mercer. 1993. The Mathemat-
ics of Statistical Machine Translation: Parameter Es-
timation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), pages
263–311.

Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cet-
tolo. 2008. IRSTLM: an open source toolkit for
handling large scale language models. in Proceed-
ings of Interspeech 2008, pages 1618–1621.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst, 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
in Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Ses-
sions, pages 177–180.

Hrafn Loftsson. 2008. Tagging icelandic text: A lin-
guistic rule-based approach. Nordic Journal of Lin-
guistics, 31(1).

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A System-
atic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 45



Models. Computational Linguistics, 1(29), pages
19–51.

Eva Pettersson, Beáta Megyesi, and Jörg Tiedemann.
2013. An SMT approach to automatic annotation
of historical text. In Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa
2013 workshop on Computational Historical Lin-
guistics.

Eva Pettersson, Beáta Megyesi, and Joakim Nivre.
2014. A multilingual evaluation of three spelling
normalisation methods for historical text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Tech-
nology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and
Humanities (LaTeCH) @ EACL 2014, pages 32–41,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Paul Rayson, Dawn Archer, Alistair Baron, Jonathan
Culpeper, and Nicholas Smith. 2007. Tagging the
bard: Evaluating the accuracy of a modern POS tag-
ger on Early Modern English corpora. In Proceed-
ings of Corpus Linguistics 2007. University of Birm-
ingham, UK.

Silke Scheible, Richard J. Whitt, Martin Durrell, and
Paul Bennett. 2011. Evaluating an ’off-the-shelf’
POS-tagger on Early Modern German text. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 Workshop on Lan-
guage Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sci-
ences, and Humanities (LaTeCH 2011), Portland,
Oregon.

Christer Samuelsson and Atro Voutilainen. 1997.
Comparing a linguistic and a stochastic tagger. In
Proceedings of of ACL/EACL Joint Conference,
Madrid.

Yves Scherrer and Tomaz̆ Erjavec. 2013. Moderniz-
ing historical Slovene words with character-based
SMT. In Proceedings of the 4th Biennial Work-
shop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing,
pages 58–62.

Gerold Schneider, Hans Martin Lehmann, and Peter
Schneider. 2014. Parsing Early Modern English
corpora. Literary and Linguistic Computing, first
published online February 6, 2014 doi:10.1093/
llc/fqu001.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. Character-based PSMT for
closely related languages. Proceedings of 13th An-
nual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation (EAMT’09), pages 12–19.

Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Processing Historical Language 46


