








































Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT16), pages 119–128,
Prague, Czech Republic, January 23–24, 2018. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 licence. 2017.

Keywords: Telugu, Universal dependencies, adverbial clauses, relative clauses

A Dependency Treebank for Telugu

Taraka Rama
Department of Informatics
University of Oslo, Norway
tarakark@ifi.uio.no

Sowmya Vajjala
Applied Linguistics and Technology Program

Iowa State University, USA
sowmya@iastate.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we describe the annotation and development of Telugu treebank following the Uni-
versal Dependencies framework. We manually annotated 1328 sentences from a Telugu grammar
textbook and the treebank is freely available from Universal Dependencies version 2.1.1 In this
paper, we discuss some language specific annotation issues and decisions; and report preliminary
experiments with POS tagging and dependency parsing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first freely accessible and open dependency treebank for Telugu.

1 Introduction

An annotated treebank is a pre-requisite for developing computational tools that support deeper language
processing for any language. Treebanks are typically created with texts collected from specific genre
such as news, fiction, Wikipedia, blogs, and Bible. There also exist treebanks for non-canonical text
such as learner data (Berzak et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2017). While these treebanks have been used for
the development of natural language parsers and other tools, they may not cover infrequent grammatical
structures that do not occur in the specific domain of the training data. Grammar books provide an
excellent set of examples for annotated sentences that cover a wide range of syntactic structures as these
sentences are chosen to illustrate the interesting and unique features in a language. Additionally, such
grammar book based treebanks can also be used to test the coverage of statistical parsers trained with a
large amount of data from a specific domain or genre. Further, a typical grammar book features short
sentences and allows rapid development of a treebank. Hence, they serve as a good starting point for
developing a broad coverage treebank (Cöltekin, 2015).

Telugu is a Dravidian Language native to India with 74 million native speakers with a long history of
written and oral literature. Despite some published research on development of part-of-speech taggers
(PVS and Karthik, 2007) and a treebank (Vempaty et al., 2010), neither of the resources are publicly
available. In this paper, we describe our efforts in developing a publicly available treebank for Telugu
that covers a range of syntactic constructions and morphological phenomena. We manually annotated
1328 sentences from the Telugu grammar book by Krishnamurti and Gwynn (1985) with (universal)
part-of-speech tags and dependency relations. We followed the Universal Dependencies (Nivre et al.,
2016) framework for annotation, as it supports the development of treebanks for new languages through
extensive documentation. We also report preliminary POS tagging and dependency parsing results using
the treebank data and UDPipe (Straka et al., 2016).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the related work in section 2. We provide
a brief description of linguistic properties of Telugu in section 3. Then, we describe the corpus and
annotation environment in section 4. We describe the annotation decisions during the annotation of POS
tags in section 5. Section 6 briefly introduces Telugu morphology and is followed by section 7 that
discusses dependency relations that are specific to Telugu . We present the results of our POS tagging
and parsing experiments in section 8. Finally, we conclude the paper and discuss some directions for
future work.

1http://universaldependencies.org/treebanks/te/

119



2 Related Work

Treebanks for some South Asian languages were developed following the Paninian framework for depen-
dency annotation (Begum et al., 2008) and some of them are publicly available.2 There were some early
efforts towards Telugu dependency treebank development following the Paninian framework (Vempaty
et al., 2010). A Telugu treebank was also a part of an Indian language dependency tools contest (Husain
et al., 2010). However, none of these resources are publicly available to the best of our knowledge. There
have been efforts to convert some of the Indian language treebanks into Universal Dependencies (UD)
framework (Tandon et al., 2016) and there is a reasonably large UD treebank for Hindi (Palmer et al.,
2009; Bhat et al., 2017). However, except for Tamil (Ramasamy and Žabokrtský, 2012), converted from
Prague dependency style (Hajič et al., 2017) to UD, there is no UD treebank for any other language from
the Dravidian language family. In this scenario, the availability of free and open UD Telugu treebank
would be a good starting point for the future of computational infrastructure support for Telugu and the
Dravidian language family.

UD treebanks were developed from scratch for several low-resource languages such as Kazakh
(Makazhanov et al.) and Buryat (Badmaeva and Tyers, 2017) in the recent years. Several existing tree-
banks are also being converted into UD. While there is no Dravidian language in UD other than Tamil,
there exist treebanks for other agglutinative languages such as Finnish (Pyysalo et al., 2015), Hungar-
ian (Vincze et al., 2017), Turkish (Cöltekin, 2015; Sulubacak et al., 2016), and Estonian (Muischnek
et al., 2016) which provided us with useful insights in dealing with language-specific morphological and
syntactic phenomena for Telugu.

3 Telugu

Telugu is one of the 22 languages with official status in India. Telugu belongs to the South-Central
subgroup of the Dravidian language family3 and is mainly spoken in Southern India. The Dravidian
language family was the subject of both historical and comparative linguistic research in the later half
of twentieth century (Krishnamurti, 2003). Telugu is an agglutinative language like other Dravidian
languages such as Tamil or Malayalam. The dominant word order in Telugu is Subject-Object-Verb
(SOV) with inclination towards pro-drop. Telugu verbs inflect for gender, number and person. The “be”
(vun-, “existential”) verb in Telugu shows agreement with the subject for gender, number, and person.
The existential verb has a negative counterpart “not to be” (le:-) which can participate in both light
and serial verb constructions and also act as the main verb.4 Telugu does not have a dominant overt
coordination as in English or Hindi. Telugu forms subordinate clauses through verbal nouns, verbal
adjective, and converbs. Control constructions marked by xcomp relation are rare (less than ten instances
in our treebank) in Telugu.

4 Corpus and Annotation

The Telugu treebank currently consists of 1328 sentences and 6465 tokens. The sentences were manually
typed in Telugu script (derived from Brahmi script) from the examples in chapters 7–29 in (Krishnamurti
and Gwynn, 1985). Many sentences in this book are collected from contemporary Telugu fiction of
that time (1960s-80s). Both the authors manually annotated all the sentences, and disagreements were
adjudicated after discussion. Annotation was done using the Brat (Stenetorp et al., 2012) tool and the
conversion to CONLL format was done using a Python script. We annotated the sentences with UD POS
tags and dependency relations (annotation guidelines available on the UD website5). The whole pro-
cess of annotation and correction process took 4 months. The following sections outline our annotation
decisions with examples.

2Available at http://kcis.iiit.ac.in/
3The Dravidian language family is one of the four language families spoken in India (the others being Indo-European,

Austro-Asiatic, and Sino-Tibetan).
4The closest parallel of a negative verb is the negative auxiliary verb in Finnish http://wals.info/chapter/112

and in Kurmanji (tune).
5http://universaldependencies.org/guidelines.html

120



5 Part-of-speech annotation

UD specification defines 17 POS tags, of which we used 14 tags in Telugu. We did not use the tags -
X, SYM and AUX. X was not used as there were no instances of unanalyzable foreign words that are
not loan words in the corpus. SYM was not used as there were no symbols in the sentences. Words that
resemble auxiliary verbs in Telugu also function as main verbs in the sentence. Hence, we did not use the
AUX tag in our annotations. While we largely followed UD guidelines for POS tagging, we also made
accommodations for some language specific phenomena. Among the open-class words, while Nouns,
Proper Nouns and Verbs are relatively straightforward to tag, we made specific annotation decisions for
adjectives and adverbs. Verbs functioning as Nouns or Adjectives were tagged Verbs but annotated with
appropriate dependency relation (e.g., acl for verbal adjectives) to the head. We mark the morphological
feature VerbForm with Vnoun and Part respectively.

Adjectives (ADJ): Adjectives in Telugu are indeclinable. Oblique nouns functioning as adjectives are
tagged as NOUN with the relation nmod:poss to the head noun. Adjectives with a pronominal suffix
(e.g., manci=va:ãu good-3-SG-M. suffix, meaning: good one) are tagged as PRON and not adjective, as
they refer to entities. Figure 1a illustrates a sentence with pronominalized adjective in predicate position
with words transcribed in IPA. Adjectives denoting dimensions such as tall (poãugu) or short (poúúi) do
not need a pronominal suffix to function as the root of a sentence non-verbal construction. In such cases,
we treat such as adjectives as abstract nouns and mark the POS tag as NOUN.

Adverbs (ADV): Krishnamurti and Gwynn (1985) and Krishnamurti (2003) note that adverbs of time
and place behave as nouns (can inflect with case markers) in Telugu. We adopt the judgment into our
treebank and mark all adverbs of time and place as nouns. We annotate an inflected time or location
noun as NOUN and annotate it as the dependent of the dependency relations obl or obl:tmod. This
is shown in Figures 1b and 1c.

at”anu manciva:ãu
PRON PRON

He good-3-SG-M

nsubj

root

He is the good one.

(a) Pronominalized adjectives

ne:nu akkaãiki veíía:nu
PRON NOUN VERB

I there-Dat went-PST-1-SG

nsubj

obl

root

I went there.

(b) Oblique spatial noun

va:ãu re:pu po:va:li
PRON NOUN VERB

he tomorrow go-Obl

nsubj

obl:tmod

root

He should go tomorrow.

(c) Uninflected temporal noun

Figure 1: Part-of-speech tag examples

In the case of closed class words – Adpositions, Determiners, Numerals – we made the following
language specific decisions:

Adpositions (ADP): Telugu uses postpositions and suffixes to denote cases. Postpositions are tagged
as ADP and are dependent of nominals through case relation. Some adverbs indicating temporal or
location information that appear as nominal modifiers are also tagged ADP.

Determiners (DET): UD guidelines distinguish 6 kinds of determiners. Of those, Telugu does not
have articles and possessive determiners. We mark distal/proximal demonstratives and interrogative
determiners that precede a nominal as DET. Telugu does not have relative pronouns and forms relative
clauses through nominalization or verbal adjectives.

Numerals (NUM): Following UD guidelines, we tagged all numbers, fractions and multi-word nu-
meric expressions with the NUM tag. However, numbers can also function as adjective, adverb or noun in
Telugu, and can be inflected. Inflected numbers which do not appear in a multi-word numeric expression

121



are marked according to their syntactic function. UD guidelines also describe the tagging of non-cardinal
numbers according to their syntactic function.6

6 Morphology

Telugu verbs show agreement with the agent in number, gender and person. Telugu has two genders:
masculine and non-masculine and we will annotate with the same categories. Telugu has two numbers:
singular and plural. Telugu nominals show highly inflected case system with nominative, dative, instru-
mental, genitive, commitative, ablative, and locative cases. Postpositions also function as adessive (mi:da
“on”), purposive and comparative cases. Complex cases are formed through a combination of base case
markers and postpositions.

Telugu verbs show tense, aspect, and mood. Verbs are typically active voice and passive constructions
are not common. Causative constructions (Voice=Cau) are formed by adding -inc to the transitive verb.
Telugu also has a reflexive suffix -kon that is added to causative and transitive verb stems to denote that
the agent is also the patient. We mark such a reflexive verb with Reflex=Yes. There are two tenses:
past and non-past. Telugu does not have a negative particle and shows negation through -a- marker
that occurs before index markers. Verb can show aspect: habitual (Hab), progressive (Prog), perfect
(Perf), prospective (Prosp) which are available in UD. The mood features are imperative (Imp), con-
ditional (Cnd), potential (Pot), necessitative (Nec), inceptive (Inc), hortative (Hor).7 Morphological
annotation is not a part of the UD 2.1 release for Telugu and is a part of future work.

7 Universal Dependency Relations

Our treebank has 42 dependency relations, of which 11 are language specific. They are listed below in
Table 1. Relations that are not seen in other language UD treebanks are marked with ∗.

Relation Description
acl:relcl Relative clause
advcl:cond Conditional Adverbial clause
compound:lvc Light verb construction
compound:redup Reduplicative construction
compound:svc Serial verb construction
nmod:cmp∗ Nominal comparative modifier
nmod:poss Nominal possessive modifier
nmod:tmod Nominal temporal modifier
nsubj:nc non-canonical subjects (e.g., dative subjects)
obl:tmod Oblique case-temporal
obl:cau∗ Oblique case-causative (Section 6

Table 1: Language Specific Dependency Relations for Telugu

While some relations such as acl:relcl and nmod:poss exist in several other language treebanks,
other relations are not very common. Some of them are discussed below.

Light verb constructions: Light verbs are noun-verb constructions where the semantic content is in
the noun even if the syntactic head is the verb. These constructions are wide spread in Hindi-Urdu (Butt,
2010; Vaidya et al., 2016). However, the Hindi UD treebank (converted from Paninian dependency
treebank) does not seem to tag this construction specifically though it is annotated with pof (part-of)
relation in the original Paninian treebank. We tag this construction explicitly using compound:lvc. In
UD 2.1, this construction is explicitly marked in Farsi, Kazakh, Kurmanji, Marathi, Turkish and Uyghur
along with Telugu. Recent work in Hungarian (Vincze et al., 2017) described these constructions using
the label dobj:lvc. Light verb construction is illustrated in figure 2 where a noun (start) followed by
a verb is used as a light verb compound.

6http://universaldependencies.org/u/pos/NUM.html
7Inceptive and Hortative moods are not available in UD.

122



Kamala pa:úa pa:ãaúam mod”alu peúúind”i
PROPN NOUN VERB NOUN VERB
Kamala song sing-Vnoun start put-3-SG-F

nsubj

obj

ccomp

compound:lvc

root

Kamala started singing a song.

Figure 2: Light verb construction with a nominalized clausal complement.

Reduplication: Reduplication is the morphological process in which whole or parts of the word are
repeated to denote a syntactic function. Reduplication (both partial and complete) is a common phe-
nomenon in several languages although it is explicitly marked in only five other UD 2.1 languages –
Hindi, Kurmanji, Marathi, Turkish and Uyghur – with the relation compound:redup. We mark all
reduplicated words with this relation and treat the final word as the head. In Telugu, reduplication can oc-
cur across POS categories such as determiner, verbs, adjectives, nouns, and adverbs. We show examples
of verb and adjective reduplication in figure 3.

t”ini t”ini visugu puúúind”i
VERB VERB NOUN VERB
eat-NF eat-NF disgust generated

advcl

nsubjcompound:redup

root

Eating and Eating is disgusting.

(a) Verb reduplication

va:ííaku mugguru mugguru pillalu
PRON ADJ ADJ NOUN

they-DAT three three children

nsubj:nc

amodcompound:redup

root

They each have three children.

(b) Adjective reduplication

Figure 3: Reduplication in verbs and adjectives.

Serial Verbs: The Dravidian comparative literature defines serial verbs as a series of finite verbs which
are present in Old Telugu but absent in Modern Telugu. There is no limit to the number of participating
verbs in such a construction. We employ the definition of serial verbs from Velupillai (2012, 332) that
a series of verbs referring to a single event is labeled as serial verb. These are different from other
compound verbs such as V-V complex predicates in that they describe a sequence of actions. We mark
such constructions with compound:svc (cf. Figure 4). The Dravidian comparative literature treats
these constructions as adverbial clauses.

Non-verbal predication: In this paragraph, we present non-overt copula (cf. Figure 5a) and negative
verb (cf. Figure 5b) which is specific to Telugu. Equative, attributive, possession, and benefaction
constructions consist of NP+NP and lack an overt copula. Location construction (negation variant) shown
in Figure 5b shows agreement and does not fall under the definition of non-verbal predication in UD.

Genitives: Genitive constructions can be formed through a preceding nominal dependent in nominative
case, postposition (yokka), and oblique noun. We mark all these relations as nmod:poss (cf. figure 6).

Comparatives: Comparative constructions are formed through a special postposition kanúe which is
marked as a dependent of the second nominal through case relation (cf. figure 7). 8

8At the time of submission of the paper, we marked the relation between the two nominals using nmod:cmp relation. We
mark the relation between the second nominal and the root noun with obl relation. We thank one of the reviewers for pointing

123



ne:nu ninnane: libraryki veííi vacca:nu
PRON ADVERB NOUN VERB VERB

I yesterday library-Dat gone came

nsubj

obl:tmod

obl

compound:svc

root

I went to the library yesterday.

Figure 4: Serial verb construction

a:me na: t”alli
PRON PRON NOUN

She my mother

nsubj

nmod:poss

root

She is my mother.

(a) Non-overt copula

a:me gad”ilo: le:d”u
PRON NOUN VERB

She room-Loc NEG-PST-3-SG-F

nsubj

obl

root

She was(is) not in the room.

(b) Negative existential verb

Figure 5: Non-verbal predication in Telugu.

a:yana fi:ju
PRON NOUN

His fees

nmod:poss

atani fi:ju
PRON NOUN

His fees

nmod:poss

a:yana yokka fi:ju
PRON ADP NOUN

he Case=Gen fees

nmod:poss

case

Figure 6: Genitive formation strategies

ra:mu kamala kanúe poãugu
PROPN PROPN ADP NOUN
Raamu Kamala Case=Cmp tall

nsubj

obl

case

root

Ramu is taller than Kamala.

Figure 7: Comparative construction without an overt copula

Dative subjects: Typically, NPs that occur at the sentence-initial position are in nominative case (un-
marked). However, stative verbs such as “to know” and intransitive verbs such as “to want” do not show
any agreement with any of the NPs in the sentence. In such cases, the NP in initial position is marked
with dative case (Sridhar, 1979; Nizar, 2010). We mark the syntactic relation between the verb and the
dative NP with nsubj:nc. Although dative NP occurs in sentence initial position, the free word order
allows the dative NP to be moved to a non-final position in the sentence. A dative NP (annotated as

this mistake.

124



nsubj:nc) can also occur as the experiencer NP in non-verbal sentences (cf. figure 3b).9

Adverbial clauses: Telugu forms adverbial clauses through converbs. The final verb in the sentence
is a finite verb which is treated as the root of the sentence. The subject of the embedded clause can
be co-referential (cf. Figure 8) when the non-finite verb is marked for perfective or progressive aspect.
In such a case, we annotate the subject to be the dependent of the main verb. Subjects of the main
and subordinate clauses cannot be co-referential when the non-finite verb is marked for conditional or
concessive moods.

ne:nu annam t”ini inúiki veíía:nu
PRON NOUN VERB NOUN VERB

I rice eat-Perf house-Dat go-Pst-1-SG

nsubj

obj obl

advcl

root

I ate rice and went home.

Figure 8: Adverbial clause

Relative clauses: There is no relative pronoun in Telugu and relative clauses are formed through ver-
bal adjectives. There are no expletive nominals in Telugu and cleft constructions are formed through
pronominalized verbal adjectives. We analyze cleft sentences as relative clauses (cf. figure 9).

inúiki mand”u teccind”i ra:mayya
NOUN NOUN VERB PROPN

house-Dat medicine brought-3-SG-F Ramayya

acl:relcl

obl

obj

root

(a) Topicalized agent

ra:mayya inúiki teccind”i mand”u
PROPN NOUN VERB NOUN

Ramayya house-Dat brought-3-SG-F medicine

acl:relcl

nsubj

obl

root

(b) Topicalized object

Figure 9: Cleft constructions derived from a simple sentence: ra:mayya inúiki mand”u tecca:ãu. (Ram-
mayya brought medicine home.)

Nominalized clauses: Non-finite verbs are nominalized by adding -atam. A nominalized verb can then
be the head of a subordinate clause which can be the subject or object of the main verb (cf. figure 2). We
annotate a nominalized verb clause as csubj (functions as subject) and ccomp (functions as object),
respectively.

8 Tagging and Parsing Experiments

As a demonstration of the usefulness of our treebank in real world settings, we evaluated POS tagging
and parsing models trained using UDPipe (Straka et al., 2016). UDPipe is a free, open-source, and
language agnostic pipeline for training and evaluating NLP models for lemmatization, POS tagging and
dependency parsing.

We split our treebank into 80-10-10 for training, development, and testing; and trained POS tagging
and parsing models. Both training and evaluation was performed with UDPipe-1.2 on a Linux machine.

9We follow the Persian UD annotation guidelines (Seraji et al., 2016) in this case and name the dependency relation as
nsubj:nc.

125



We report POS tagging accuracy, Labeled Attachment Score (LAS), and Unlabeled Attachment Score
(UAS) on test set (after parameter tuning on development set) in Table 2. We also trained and evaluated
a second parsing model on gold POS tags and found that the LAS and UAS scores are better than the
joint model for predicting POS tags and dependency relations. We expect the POS tagging results to be
high since nouns and verbs make the bulk of the part-of-speech tags in Telugu.

Input features POS Acc. LAS UAS
Tagging + Parsing 90.43% 74.76% 87.79%
Parsing (Gold POS tags) – 78.50% 89.74%

Table 2: Preliminary tagging and parsing results with UDPipe.

Previous work on Telugu dependency parsing – trained and evaluated with Paninian dependency labels
– report the highest LAS of 70.15% (Husain et al., 2010) and best UAS of 90.5% (Kanneganti et al.,
2016). While our LAS results are higher than both the previous results, the UAS results are slightly
lower; however, a direct comparison is not possible due to the unavailability of the training data for these
results and also due to different annotation schemes.

9 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented the first publicly available treebank for Telugu annotated in Universal Depen-
dencies framework. We annotated POS tags and dependency relations from scratch for 1328 sentences.
We trained and evaluated two parser models using UDPipe on the training split of the treebank and found
that the parser performs within the range reported in the previous experiments.

As a part of future work, we intend to add morphological annotations to the treebank. It would also
be interesting to compare different parsers on this treebank data. We are currently working towards
expanding the treebank to include at least 100,000 tokens from Telugu Wikipedia. We plan to achieve
this in a semi-automated fashion by running a trained parser model on Wikipedia sentences and then,
manually checking and correcting for errors. We are also in the process of augmenting the treebank
with fine-grained POS tags designed for Indian languages (Choudhary and Jha, 2011). The average
sentence length in our treebank corpus is rather small (∼ 5 tokens per sentence) whereas Wikipedia
sentences are typically much longer. We intend to analyze how accurate can an automatic parser trained
on grammar book examples would be when faced with longer sentences, with possibly complicated
syntactic structures.

Acknowledgments

The first author was supported by ERC Advanced Grant 324246 EVOLAEMP and a NRC LightHouse
grant which is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Çağrı Çöltekin, Lilja Øvrelid, and Viswanath Naidu
for all the discussions and input which proved useful in the development of the treebank. Finally, we
thank the anonymous reviewers for the comments that helped improve the paper.

References
Elena Badmaeva and Francis M Tyers. 2017. A Dependency Treebank for Buryat. In 15th Internationtal Workshop

on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT15). pages 1–12.

Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti Misra Sharma, Lakshmi Bai, and Rajeev Sangal. 2008. Depen-
dency Annotation Scheme for Indian Languages. In Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing: Volume-I. pages 721–726.

Yevgeni Berzak, Jessica Kenney, Carolyn Spadine, Jing Xian Wang, Lucia Lam, Keiko Sophie Mori, Sebastian
Garza, and Boris Katz. 2016. Universal Dependencies for Learner English. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, pages 737–746. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1070.

126



Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, Rajesh Bhatt, Annahita Farudi, Prescott Klassen, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Martha Palmer,
Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, Ashwini Vaidya, Sri Ramagurumurthy Vishnu, and Fei Xia. 2017. The
Hindi/Urdu Treebank Project. In Handbook of Linguistic Annotation, Springer, pages 659–697.

Miriam Butt. 2010. The Light Verb Jungle: Still Hacking Away. Complex predicates in cross-linguistic perspec-
tive pages 48–78.

Narayan Choudhary and Girish Nath Jha. 2011. Creating Multilingual Parallel Corpora in Indian languages. In
Language and Technology Conference. Springer, pages 527–537.

Cagrı Cöltekin. 2015. A Grammar-book Treebank of Turkish. In Proceedings of the 14th workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories (TLT 14). pages 35–49.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Marie Mikulová, and Jiřı́ Mı́rovskỳ. 2017. Prague Dependency Treebank. In Handbook
of Linguistic Annotation, Springer, pages 555–594.

Samar Husain, Prashanth Mannem, Bharat Ambati, and Phani Gadde. 2010. The ICON-2010 tools contest on In-
dian language dependency parsing. Proceedings of ICON-2010 Tools Contest on Indian Language Dependency
Parsing, ICON 10:1–8.

Silpa Kanneganti, Himani Chaudhry, and Dipti Misra Sharma. 2016. Comparative Error Analysis of Parser Outputs
on Telugu Dependency Treebank. Proceedings of CICLING 2016 .

Bhadriraju Krishnamurti. 2003. The Dravidian Languages. Cambridge University Press.

Bhadriraju Krishnamurti and John Peter Lucius Gwynn. 1985. A Grammar of Modern Telugu. Oxford University
Press, USA.

John Lee, Herman Leung, and Keying Li. 2017. Towards Universal Dependencies for Learner Chinese. In Pro-
ceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Gothenburg, Sweden, pages 67–71. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-0408.

Aibek Makazhanov, Aitolkyn Sultangazina, Olzhas Makhambetov, and Zhandos Yessenbayev. ???? Syntactic
Annotation of Kazakh: Following the Universal Dependencies Guidelines- A Report.

Kadri Muischnek, Kaili Müürisep, and Tiina Puolakainen. 2016. Estonian Dependency Treebank: From Constraint
Grammar tagset to Universal Dependencies. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC). pages 1558–1565.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D Manning,
Ryan T McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman. 2016.
Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual Treebank Collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016). pages 1659–1666.

Milla Nizar. 2010. Dative Subject Constructions in South-Dravidian Languages. Unpublished master’s thesis,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA. .

Martha Palmer, Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Owen Rambow, Dipti Misra Sharma, and Fei Xia. 2009.
Hindi Syntax: Annotating Dependency, Lexical Predicate-Argument Structure, and Phrase Structure. In The
7th International Conference on Natural Language Processing.

Avinesh PVS and Gali Karthik. 2007. Part-of-speech Tagging and Chunking Using Conditional Random Fields and
Transformation Based Learning. Proceedings of the Workshop on Shallow Parsing for South Asian Languages .

Sampo Pyysalo, Jenna Kanerva, Anna Missilä, Veronika Laippala, and Filip Ginter. 2015. Universal dependencies
for Finnish. In Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015).
Linköping University Electronic Press, 109, pages 163–172.

Loganathan Ramasamy and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012. Prague Dependency Style Treebank for Tamil. In Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of Eighth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012). İstanbul, Turkey, pages 1888–1894.
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/summaries/456.html.

Mojgan Seraji, Filip Ginter, and Joakim Nivre. 2016. Universal dependencies for persian. In LREC.

Shikaripur N Sridhar. 1979. Dative Subjects and the Notion of Subject. Lingua 49(2-3):99–125.

127



Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić, Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2012.
BRAT: A Web-based Tool for NLP-assisted Text Annotation. In Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the
13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 102–107.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajic, and Jana Straková. 2016. UDPipe: Trainable Pipeline for Processing CoNLL-U Files
Performing Tokenization, Morphological Analysis, POS Tagging and Parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016). pages 4290–4297.

Umut Sulubacak, Memduh Gokirmak, Francis Tyers, Çağrı Çöltekin, Joakim Nivre, and Gülşen Eryiğit. 2016.
Universal Dependencies for Turkish. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers. pages 3444–3454.

Juhi Tandon, Himani Chaudhry, Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, and Dipti Sharma. 2016. Conversion from Paninian Karakas
to Universal Dependencies for Hindi Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of the 10th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop held in conjunction with ACL 2016 (LAW-X 2016). Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin,
Germany, pages 141–150. http://anthology.aclweb.org/W16-1716.

Ashwini Vaidya, Sumeet Agarwal, and Martha Palmer. 2016. Linguistic Features for Hindi Light Verb Construc-
tion Identification. In COLING. pages 1320–1329.

Viveka Velupillai. 2012. An introduction to linguistic typology. John Benjamins Publishing.

Chaitanya Vempaty, Viswanatha Naidu, Samar Husain, Ravi Kiran, Lakshmi Bai, Dipti Sharma, and Rajeev San-
gal. 2010. Issues in Analyzing Telugu Sentences towards Building a Telugu Treebank. International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLING) pages 50–59.

Veronika Vincze, Katalin Simkó, Zsolt Szántó, and Richárd Farkas. 2017. Universal Dependencies and Morphol-
ogy for Hungarian-and on the Price of Universality. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers. volume 1, pages 356–365.

128


