



















































Ultra-Concise Multi-genre Summarisation of Web2.0: towards Intelligent Content Generation


Proceedings of the MultiLing 2017 Workshop on Summarization and Summary Evaluation Across Source Types and Genres, pages 37–46,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Ultra-Concise Multi-genre Summarisation of Web2.0: towards Intelligent
Content Generation

Elena Lloret, Ester Boldrini, Patricio Martı́nez-Barco, Manuel Palomar
Department of Software and Computing Systems

University of Alicante
Apdo. de correos, 99

E-03080 Alicante, Spain
{elloret,eboldrini,patricio,mpalomar}@dlsi.ua.es

Abstract

The electronic Word of Mouth has become
the most powerful communication channel
thanks to the wide usage of the Social Me-
dia. Our research proposes an approach
towards the production of automatic ultra-
concise summaries from multiple Web 2.0
sources. We exploit user-generated con-
tent from reviews and microblogs in dif-
ferent domains, and compile and analyse
four types of ultra-concise summaries: a)
positive information, b) negative informa-
tion; c) both or d) objective information.
The appropriateness and usefulness of our
model is demonstrated by its successful re-
sults and great potential in real-life appli-
cations, thus meaning a relevant advance-
ment of the state-of-the-art approaches.

1 Introduction and Motivation

The Web 2.0 has created a framework where users
from all over the world express their opinion on
a wide range of topics via different communica-
tion Social Media channels, such as blogs, fora,
micro-blogs, reviews, etc. Undoubtedly, all this
information is of great value in today’s competi-
tive business environment, increasing the need for
businesses to collect, monitor, and analyse user-
generated data on their own and on their com-
petitors’ Social Media, such as Twitter (He et al.,
2015). Moreover, this context is also fostering the
electronic Word of Mouth (eWOM) (Jansen et al.,
2009), an unpaid form of promotion (Duan et al.,
2008) in which customers share with other users
their experience with the product they bought,
for example. WOM is an ancient phenomenon
originated in the streets orally, but now, with the
flourishing of the Web 2.0 it has been evolved in
eWOM, whose essence is the same; the only dif-
ference is that it is not implemented orally, but

using the Social Media instead (Boldrini et al.,
2010): fora, blogs, online reviews and microblogs.
However, the huge amount and the heterogeneity
of online data poses great challenges to the devel-
opment of applications able to effectively retrieve,
extract and synthesise the main content spread
within Social Media. Due to the richness of So-
cial Media data, its exploitation is being crucial
for business-oriented applications, such as market
analysis, competence monitoring or simply under-
standing the reasons behind customers’ opinion on
a product. Having at their disposal effective appli-
cations for information analysis and exploitation
would mean for them having competitive advan-
tage.

Recently, three Natural Language Processing
(NLP) applications are gaining predominance, es-
pecially in the field of Social Media content analy-
sis: i) information retrieval (Croft et al., 2009), ii)
opinion mining (Pang and Lee, 2008) and iii) au-
tomatic text summarisation (Nenkova and McKe-
own, 2011). Information retrieval aims to search
and determine relevant documents on the Web ac-
cording to a specific user need or topic. The goal
of opinion mining is to identify subjective lan-
guage and classify it according to its sentiment or
polarity (i.e., positive, negative or neutral informa-
tion). Finally, text summarisation detects the most
relevant pieces of information from one or multi-
ple texts and presents the main ideas in a coherent
fragment of text.

The main objective of this article is to apply
the aforementioned NLP techniques to exploit the
Social Media data generated through online re-
views and microblogs. In particular, our aim is to
produce innovative automatic ultra-concise sum-
maries in the form of tweets (140 characters) re-
liable in terms of content (they reflect the opin-
ions expressed on a topic positive/negative -) and
form. Even if there are some previous studies on
this topic (Ganesan et al., 2012), the novelty of our

37



approach comes from the usage of multiple textual
genres simultaneously and the production of a ul-
tra concise summary (multi-genre summarisation).
This means that our final summary is presented to
the user in the form of a Tweet. The summary
is representative of what has been said on a pre-
defined topic. It is reliable since we perform a ro-
bust treatment of our source data. We treat each of
the sources separately (because each textual genre
has specific needs) and then merge the distinctive
and relevant information for automatically build-
ing up the tweet as final outcome.

Microblogs, and more especially tweets, have
a direct impact on eWOM communication. They
empower people to share these brand-affecting
points of view anywhere to almost anyone. More-
over, Princeton Survey Research Associates Inter-
national1 found that the microblogging site Twit-
ter experienced massive amounts of growth over
the past years with millions of new users join-
ing and engaging with the site on a daily basis
(Smith and Brennen, 2012). While the concise-
ness of microblogs keeps people from writing ex-
tensive reflections, it is exactly the micro part that
makes microblogs peculiar if compared with other
eWOM channels, such as blogs, webs, etc. More-
over, the advantage of having a tweet as a final
outcome is that: a) we provide immediate infor-
mation, b) users can take it and exploit it in the
way they prefer (i.e. post it) and c) have a com-
plete overview, comprehensive of different genres
content in a friendly format, and d) save a lot of
their time since the system carries out the job for
them: retrieving, analysing, selecting, and provid-
ing them with the information they are looking for.
Due to the limited length of a tweet, it is neces-
sary to analyse to what extent and how current ap-
proaches could be adapted.

The motivation of our article lies on the fact
that microblog is one the most used Social Media
channel and thus considered as a point of refer-
ence for many users. This implies that the genera-
tion we do of brief summaries would be useful for
users that can use it directly in their Social Net-
works. Microblogs have the potential of reaching
a huge number of users. But not only normal users
can take advantage of it; for instance a company
can exploit such ultra-concise summaries dissem-
inating them through different channels for adver-
tising purposes, to attract more customers or to

1http://www.psrai.com/ (last access 30 January 2017)

make its potential customers aware of the high rep-
utation of their products; thus, making this tech-
nology a real-life application that will allow users
to save a lot of time and effort since the system
will do the job automatically analysing the texts
selected and summarising their content in a reli-
able way.

The paper is organised as follows: Section 2
presents the most relevant related work, while Sec-
tion 3 the corpus creation and Section 4 its annota-
tion. Section 5 describes the methodology for gen-
erating ultra-concise summaries and Section 6 the
evaluation of the results obtained. Section 7 anal-
yses our approach in-depth, and finally, Section 8
outlines the main conclusions and future work.

2 Related Work

In the last years, there has been much interest
in summarisation from Social Media, within the
wider context of opinion summarisation. Twitter
is now the most popular microblogging service. It
is a huge repository of data and it is gaining pop-
ularity in different NLP tasks, especially in auto-
matic text summarisation focusing on generating
brief summaries starting from a collection of texts
like microblog entries, like Tweets (O’Connor et
al., 2010; Sharifi et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2014)
or enriched with other sources of information, like
Webpage links or newswire (Liu et al., 2011). In
(Sharifi et al., 2010) a trending topic is consid-
ered as a starting point from which all related
posts are collected and summarised. They gen-
erally use machine learning algorithms to detect
the sentences mostly related to the topic phrase.
In (Inouye and Kalita, 2011) a comparative anal-
ysis of different summarisation techniques is car-
ried out to determine which is the most adequate
for this type of summaries, and it is concluded that
simple word frequency and redundancy reduction
are the best techniques for the Twitter topics sum-
marisation. In (Weng et al., 2011), the approach
to summarise Twitter posts consists of two stages:
i) classification of the posts and responses in dif-
ferent groups, according to their intention (interro-
gation, sharing, discussion and chat) and ii) analy-
sis of different strategies for building the summary
through sentiment analysis techniques or simply
analysing the responses for each post. Their final
summaries are generated depending on the cate-
gory they belong (e.g., if the summarised posts are
within the sharing groups, the summary is a pie

38



Domain Technology Motor
Topic Mobile phones Cars
Number of topics 10 10
Number of tweets per topic 13 10
Number of online reviews per topic 9 10
Microblogs (Avg. Number of words per tweet) 28.05 14.76
Microblogs (Number of words in total) 3647 1476
Reviews (Avg. Number of words per review) 146.30 156.13
Reviews (Number of words in total) 13167 15613

Table 1: Corpus statistics.

chart showing the percentage of positive and neg-
ative opinions). Other relevant studies aim at gen-
erating other types of summaries, like event sum-
maries (Chakrabarti and Punera, 2011) or ultra-
concise opinion summaries (Ganesan et al., 2012).
In the former, the goal is to produce a real-time
summary of events, focusing on the American
Football games, and analysing the performance of
different summarisers. In the latter, the objective
is to generate a tweet from a set of reviews, where
each tweet is a summary of a key opinion in text,
and it relies on techniques based on Web N-grams.

Our research idea is based on (Ganesan et al.,
2012), but the main novelty and added value of our
research with respect to it is precisely the multi-
genre perspective addressed: starting simultane-
ously from multiple sources of information, tweets
and online reviews we treat them and produce an
ultra concise summary that is reliable and repre-
sentative in terms of content. This output can be
directly used by the user in his own Social Net-
works and not to waste their time in analysing
what they found and prepare a summary of the
huge amount of information available.

3 Corpus Creation

We automatically gathered a corpus of online re-
views and tweets in English for 10 different mo-
bile phones and 10 cars using the crawler de-
veloped in (Fernández et al., 2010). A crawler
is an automatic process in charge of retrieving
and extracting the HTML content of a Website.
In this process, relevant information sources are
identified (e.g. Websites of reviews), and then
the content of useful web pages within the se-
lected sources of information are retrieved, down-
loaded, and extracted in an automatic, quick and
easy manner using the well-known vector space

model. This manner, a corpus with a large number
of documents can be created automatically. Using
this crawler, 10 mobile phone brands and 10 car
brand models were selected to conduct the exper-
iments. For each brand, we obtained on average
10 microblogs extracted from Twitter and 10 on-
line reviews from Amazon2 and WhatCar3, hav-
ing in total 400 texts. We selected cars and mo-
bile phones, since they are frequently discussed by
people with different profiles and at the same time
they are from two different domains (important
for demonstrating the efficiency of our approach
in multi-domain contexts). Furthermore, mobile
phones and car topics can be seen as in between
the high-level terminology complexity of a spe-
cific and technical domain such as medicine for
example and an easier one like food or music. In
our case, for this step of our research we focused
on a medium level complexity topic to check if
our techniques were pertinent for a real-life appli-
cation.

Table 1 summarises the main features of our
corpus. Analysing the specific properties and fea-
tures for each of the Social Media textual genres,
the most outstanding difference is the length of the
texts. While the tweets are very short, having no
more than 28 words on average, the reviews are
quite longer, with more than 145 words on aver-
age. Both textual genres will be therefore comple-
mentary, tweets providing conciseness, whereas
reviews providing opinions in a specific context.

4 Annotation Process

Once the documents were retrieved, we pre-
processed them by extracting only the main text;
a very important step since we eliminate all pos-

2http://www.amazon.com (last access 30 January 2017)
3http://www.whatcar.com (last access 30 January 2017)

39



sible characters that are not part of the infor-
mation, links, and emoticons. Then, we started
the annotation process, where one expert anno-
tator manually labelled the documents using the
coarse-grained version of the EmotiBlog annota-
tion schema (Boldrini et al., 2010). To have the
documents annotated by just one expert was con-
sidered enough for this preliminary study, since
the EmotiBlog model had been previously evalu-
ated (Boldrini, 2012) and proved to be easy to use.
The annotation schema developed in EmotiBlog
was created for automatic systems to detect the
subjective expressions in the new textual genres of
the Web 2.0 and has been employed to improve the
performance of different NLP applications dealing
with complex tasks, including opinion summari-
sation, where it obtained satisfactory results (Bal-
ahur et al., 2009).

Although EmotiBlog was originally a very fine-
grained annotation scheme, we decided to use the
less grained part of the resource, since our research
purposes at this level only required to detect sub-
jectivity and classify the polarity of a statement.
Therefore, the expert annotator labelled the corpus
at sentence level during 4 weeks in part time ded-
ication using the following EmotiBlog elements:
POLARITY (positive/negative/neutral) + INTEN-
SITY (high/medium/low). The fragment below
shows an example of labelled sentence for the
topic “Nokia 2700”, a subjective sentence whose
polarity is positive, with a high intensity.

<phenomenon degree1="high"
category="phrase"
polarity="positive"
source="w" target="Nokia
2700" confidence="high">It’s
inexpensive, it’s primarily a
phone but it has some useful
features, it’s neat and it works
well.</phenomenon>

We selected the abovementioned elements of
the EmotiBlog model since our purpose is to dis-
criminate sentences between objective/subjective
and from the subjective ones discriminate them
into positive/negative and finally the summarisa-
tion system will treat those two groups to pro-
duce a reliable ultra-concise summary that reflects
the reality of users feelings. This process implies
the added challenge for the summarisation sys-
tem to be able to treat the two typologies (objec-
tive/subjective), quite challenging task if we take

into consideration the high language variability
present in the Web 2.0 (Pacea, 2011). The rea-
son why we performed manual annotation was be-
cause we wanted to ensure a precise labelling and
minimise cascade errors derived from the use of
NLP tools. This manner we can focus more on
the evaluation of the automatic summarisation ap-
proach.

5 Ultra-concise Summary Generation

To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the
first attempts aiming at generating this new type of
summaries starting from text sources of different
nature (i.e., multi-genre), and about different opin-
ion polarities (positive/negative/objective). This
requires that the summarisation system has high
coverage to produce such a small text with full
meaning, relevant to the topic, and with grammat-
ical adequacy. These types of summaries have
enormous benefits as presented in Section 1. As
it was previously said, the ultra-concise summari-
sation generation approach employed in this re-
search is novel considering the following main
aspects. First of all, it is able to deal with dif-
ferent types of Web 2.0 textual genres (tweets
and reviews) thus employing NLP techniques able
to treat the linguistic phenomena encountered
(thanks to the annotation performed beforehand).
The proposed approach takes as a starting point the
corpus previously created, and then it performs a
series of steps to determine the relevant informa-
tion, and analysing the most appropriate manner
to present it in the form of a tweet. In addition
its modular architecture allows the inclusion of
tools for deeper language/linguistic/content analy-
sis. Figure 1 depicts an overview of our proposed
approach. Next, the stages involved in the process
are explained in more detail:

1. Polarity detection and classification: our
main goal in this stage is to group the sen-
tences into three sets: one for the positive,
one for the negatives, and one for the ob-
jectives. In this manner, taking as a start-
ing point a set of topic-related reviews and
tweets, the first stage is to detect and clas-
sify the opinions contained. In our research
work, we take advantage of the manual anno-
tation process previously explained, because
this manner, precise information concerning
the positive, negative and objective sentences
is obtained.

40



Figure 1: Overview of our proposed approach.

2. Sentence ranking: the aim of this stage is to
assign a relevance score to each positive, neg-
ative or objective sentence. This relevance
score is determined automatically, relying on
automatic summarisation techniques. Specif-
ically, two heuristics were used to compute
the relevance for a sentence: term frequency
and noun-phrase length. On the one hand,
term frequency is a statistical technique that
assumes that the more important sentences
are determined by the most frequent words,
without taking into account the words that
do not carry any semantic information (i.e.,
stopwords such as “the”, “a”, etc.). On the
other hand, the use of noun-phrase length
has a linguistic motivation (Givón, 1990),
where it is stated that longer noun-phrases
carry more important information. Then, for
calculating the score of each sentence, these
two heuristics were combined, thus consider-
ing more important those sentences contain-
ing longer noun-phrases composed of high
frequent words. The combination of both
techniques has been proven to work fine for
producing automatic summaries by means
of COMPENDIUM summariser (Lloret and
Palomar, 2013).

3. Determining candidate text fragments for
tweets: although a relevance score was as-
signed to each sentence, one of the key is-
sues of the task we are facing is how to pro-
duce tweet informative enough, ensuring at
the same time, the 140 characters length re-
striction. At this stage, regardless of the rel-
evance for each sentence, we identify from
each group of sentences those ones not ex-
ceeding the 140 characters length to be com-
bined with the relevance score in the next
stage. Although this may seem a trivial ap-
proach, the current semantic analysis and nat-
ural language generation tools are not capa-
ble of dealing with the textual genres of the
Web 2.0, making a lot of errors that could be
detrimental for the final summaries.

4. Selecting the most appropriate tweet: hav-
ing on the one hand, the score for each sen-
tences, and on the other hand, the group of
sentences that would fit the tweet length, an
added value of our proposed approach is to
take into account in a joint manner the rel-
evance sentence score, distinguishing them
with respect to their polarity, and the poten-
tial tweet candidates that fit with the right
length. The strategy followed in this stage
is to select as tweets the ones that are most

41



similar to the top-most relevant sentence in
each group, but at the same time, not sur-
passing 140 characters. For achieving this we
used the cosine similarity measure, where the
tweet candidate whose cosine score is most
similar to the sentences that have been iden-
tified are more relevant is extracted as final
tweet. This works fine for the generation of
positive, negative or objective tweets. How-
ever, when a mixed tweet needs to be pro-
duced, the result of combining subjective and
objective information may be ending with
a sentence longer than 140 characters. If
this happens, we use the same method as
in (Lloret et al., 2013) for compressing sen-
tences. In the end, we obtain four tweets
(positive, negative, objective, and one con-
taining a mix of subjective/objective informa-
tion). We therefore propose these four tweets
as reliable ultra-concise summaries.

All these stages together with the corpus cre-
ation are then included in a semi-automatic se-
quential process, where basic and intermediate
NLP components are used in order to analyse and
pre-process the input documents to the summari-
sation engine.

6 Evaluation and Results

The evaluation of our ultra-concise summarisa-
tion approach was carried out by two expert users
who evaluated in an independent manner the au-
tomatic ultra-concise summaries (i.e. the gener-
ated tweets). For performing this evaluation, we
relied on the qualitative criteria employed in the
TAC conferences4. These criteria were: a) the
content of the summary, b) its readability and c)
its overall responsiveness. The first criterion de-
termines whether the tweet reflects important in-
formation of the source inputs; the second assesses
whether the tweet is well-written and easy to un-
derstand; and the third evaluates if it is reliable
and suitable for a real-life application. Evaluating
our results with these criteria allows us determin-
ing if the product we reach is useful because it is
of a high quality, so that no additional treatment
is needed. They were evaluated from a concep-
tual point of view and the general idea expressed,
rather than from the individual words building up
the summaries.

4http://www.nist.gov/tac/ (last access 30 January 2017)

For each topic (mobile phone and cars) we pro-
duce different alternatives as tweets: i) positive in-
formation; ii) negative information; iii) objective
information; and iv) mixing subjective and objec-
tive information. Each of these tweets (40 in to-
tal) was rated according to a 3-level Likert scale,
with values ranging from 1 to 3 (1=poor or very
poor; 2=barely acceptable; and 3=good or very
good). The reason for choosing such scale and
not a 5-level one was to avoid assessment disper-
sion. In our case, the agreement between the two
assessors was quite high: 60% for content, 75%
for readability, and 65% for overall responsive-
ness criteria, meaning that they both agree in the
score assigned to the summary. It is important to
stress that the assessors had access to the origi-
nal reviews and tweets, from which the automatic
tweets were generated, and they read them in ad-
vance for being able to determine whether the au-
tomatic tweets were reliable and a good represen-
tative of the source documents. Table 2 shows the
average results obtained for each type of automat-
ically generated tweet. Last two columns provide
the global average obtained taking into account all
the results.

The results are very encouraging, meaning
that our proposed approach can be considered
as appropriate for synthesising in one tweet or
ultra-concise summary relevant information.
Next, we show an example of a potential mixed
Tweet with 126 characters that contains subjective
and objective information that belong to the group
that has obtained the best results:

“Most annoyingly, the alarm is MUCH too
quiet. Aside from the alarm though, this is a fab
little phone which I highly recommend.”

Generally, the results for each criterion are high,
since they are over 2.50, and in most of the cases,
very close to 3, the maximum value. Thus, tweets
are readable, easy to understand, and reflect rele-
vant information or the key aspects of the phones.
If we have a look at the results obtained, we can
also notice a better performance in the case of
negative sentences. This could be due to the fact
that generally negative concepts are expressed in
a much more strong and direct way than positive
ones, thus are easier to detect and treat from a
linguistic point of view. Moreover, we can also
appreciate that the objective sentences have lower

42



Content Readability Over. Resp. Global
Phones Cars Phones Cars Phones Cars Phones Cars

Positive 2.55 2.70 2.65 2.65 2.55 2.70 2.58 2.68
Negative 2.72 2.50 2.83 2.60 2.76 2.65 2.76 2.58
Objective 2.01 2.35 2.61 2.40 2.22 2.35 2.22 2.37
Mixed 2.75 2.70 2.85 2.80 2.77 2.75 2.77 2.75

Table 2: Average results for the ultra-concise summaries generated with our approach

Content Readab.ility Over. Resp. Global
Phones Cars Phones Cars Phones Cars Phones Cars

Our approach 2.75 2.70 2.85 2.80 2.77 2.75 2.77 2.75
Swotti 2.22 2.35 2.45 2.50 2.30 2.40 2.32 2.42
Ganesan 1.20 1.30 1.45 1.85 1.25 1.45 1.30 1.48
COMPENDIUMsem 1.75 2.65 1.65 2.75 1.70 2.60 1.70 2.67

Table 3: Comparison results for mixed tweet generation across systems

performance and after having analysed our test set,
we reach the conclusion that this is because of
the huge amount of advertisement that companies
launch in such communication channels, adding
noise and influencing in a negative way the re-
trieval of the sentences and thus the performance
of the system. Analysing more in detail the gener-
ated tweets, we find some beneficial aspects of our
approach and some other aspects with room for
improvement. Concerning the positive ones, the
modularity of our approach makes it easy to adapt
it to other textual genres and languages. More-
over, a strong advantage of our approach is that
it is able to produce different types of tweets to be
used for different purposes. Each type of tweet can
be more or less suitable depending on the users’
needs and interests, thus allowing taking into ac-
count the user/company’s profile. For instance, if
a company wants to emphasise a good feature of a
product, a positive tweet entry would be the best.
In contrast, if they want to improve the weaknesses
of their products, a negative tweet could be more
appropriate (always seeing this automatic gener-
ated tweet as an additional tool to be properly
managed by market experts). On the other hand,
we also observed some cases in which the auto-
matic tweets generated did not meet our expecta-
tions. We found that some original tweets were
in other languages than English, such as Spanish
or French, and therefore they were counted as in-
correct, since we are focusing only in the English
language. This was probably due to the fact that
the crawler used did not filter the language of the

tweets, because this did not occur for the reviews.
However, this stresses the necessity and impor-
tance of multilingual approaches that could deal
with these challenges and exploit a larger amount
of data. Another issue that is worth discussing is
the informality, frequently employed in Web 2.0
content. In our case, this was higher in tweets
than in on-line reviews, and although, the auto-
matic tweets were not much affected for this, this
could be a problematic issue when dealing with
highly informal texts.

For both domains tested, the mixed summaries
were the ones with best results. To compare our
summaries in the form of a tweet with respect to
other existing approaches, we took into account
the following systems, and we evaluated the re-
sults following the same criteria as for the previous
evaluation of our approach:

• COMPENDIUMsem (Vodolazova et al.,
2012) for determining relevant sentences.
This summariser takes into account seman-
tic features, such as concept identification
and disambiguation, textual entailment and
anaphora resolution.

• The approach proposed in (Ganesan et al.,
2012), which is able to produce ultra-concise
opinion summaries as well.

• Swotti5, which is a commercial system that
provides summarised opinion information for

5http://swotti.starmedia.com/ (last access 30 January
2017)

43



a wide range of products.

Table 3 shows the comparison results of our ap-
proach (mixed tweet configuration) with respect to
the other systems, where the last two columns pro-
vide the global average per row. As it can be seen,
our approach obtains the best performance, show-
ing again its appropriateness to be used in real-
life applications. From the comparison results, we
would like to note that even if we also tested sum-
marisation approaches relying on semantic knowl-
edge the results of these summaries were lower
than when using simple word frequency tech-
niques, as in our approach. This confirms the
findings in (Inouye and Kalita, 2011), and veri-
fies the power of lexical-based techniques for sum-
marisation. This could be also seen as a com-
petitive method for the generation of ultra-concise
summaries. In addition, the results achieved with
Swotti, a real on-line platform that provides opin-
ion summarisation, could not surpass the ones ob-
tained with our approach either.

7 Potentials and Limitations of Our
Approach

After having described our approach and the re-
sults obtained it is worth underlying that, since
this the first step of an experimental approach, we
decided to take into account only the text. As
explained above, all non-conventional characters
were deleted. In addition, emoticons have also
been removed, however our idea is to take them
into account for next steps, since they are usually
charged with polarity that could also be an added
value for the correct text interpretation.

The retrieval and pre processing stages con-
firmed the fact that the text available in the Social
Media is extremely informal and it does not al-
ways follow the conventional rules. Many are the
cases of informal languages that contain sayings or
collocations hard to interpret automatically. They
will be taken into account in future work, since
the EmotiBlog annotation model is able to capture
and interpret them in terms of polarity. In addi-
tion to semantic challenges, the issue of informal-
ity is a main concern. Last but not least, the fact
of working with different textual genres poses the
problem of having to deal with different linguistic
phenomena, typical in one or other genre. The re-
sult of this is that, despite the satisfactory perfor-
mance we also obtained cases with room for im-
provement. Example of this are:

• Help please?!
• 2.5mm Standard Headset Adapter for LG

GW520 [Wireless Phone Accessory]: A
top quality standard headset adapter (...
http://amzn.to/wnzLVP

• Easy AdSense Pro by Unreal Here
is download link LG KS360/ KS365
PC suite/Sync/USB Driver for
http://goo.gl/fb/uxV5o

From the examples above, we can deduce that
in the cases in which the system performance was
not satisfactory, we obtain sentences with no rele-
vant content in most of the cases. In all the cases
in which the system performance was satisfactory,
examples of sentences are the following ones:

• The only annoying thing I do find is all the
Blackberry apps are geared up for the USA,
not UK, which limits their desirability.

• The battery life is good and will last me 2-3
days if I am careful.

• All the Blackberry apps are geared up for
the USA. The internet drains is pretty quickly.
The battery is good and will last me 2-3 days.

As it can be seen, the content is relevant to the
topic search. In addition to this, in the third case
we obtain a mixed tweet, which includes different
ideas taken from the positive, negative and objec-
tive sentences. This is very important to maintain
the relevance of the content and thus the quality
and reliability of the system output.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

In this article, we presented an innovative method
for creating an effective system that produces
ultra-concise summaries with no more that 140
characters (i.e., in the form of a tweet). The ap-
proach represents an advancement of the state-of-
the-art approach since we work with multiple tex-
tual genres simultaneously and produce a reliable
ultra concise summary. We start from the informa-
tion contained in a selected corpus composed of
on-line reviews and microblogs written in English
about “mobile phones and cars” and more con-
cretely we selected a set of 10 cell phones and 10
cars of different brands. We presented our corpus
and the annotation process carried out. For the cor-
pus annotation, we applied the coarse grained ver-
sion of the EmotiBlog annotation schema that is

44



a fine-grained annotation schema for the detection
of the subjectivity in the new textual genres of the
Web 2.0. We took advantage of such annotation
to propose a novel summarisation approach that
employed statistical and linguistic techniques for
detecting relevant sentences. We generated four
types of ultra-concise summaries (or tweets) that
were then evaluated following a standard qual-
itative framework, and compared to similar ap-
proaches. From the results obtained we conclude
that our approach is reliable and appropriate for
generating this types of summaries. The success-
ful performance of the tweets (in terms of content
reliability and syntactic adequacy) clearly indi-
cates that they can be used within a real-life appli-
cation. The selection of which tweet to show is out
of the scope of this paper, and this would depend
on the target users and purpose of the tweet. How-
ever, one strategy that could be adopted would
be to rely on existing automatic rating models,
such as EmotiReview (Boldrini et al., 2011). This
manner depending on the rating given to a spe-
cific product, we could decide which type of tweet
should be generated.

Despite the good results achieved, there are sev-
eral issues that have to be tackled for improving
the generation of ultra-concise summaries and that
we plan to tackle as future work. On the one hand,
in the short-term, we will mainly focus on two
aspects: the multilinguality and the inclusion of
more Web 2.0 textual genres and domains. This
manner, we will be able to extend our approach to
languages, such as Italian or Spanish, as well as
to deal with other type of texts, such as fora, or
blogs and increase the domains such as tourism,
politics, etc. Moreover, we want to analyse in
more detail the impact of each proposed stage in
the summarisation process, as well as the influ-
ence of each textual genre. In this manner, we
will substitute the manual annotation for sentiment
analysis for an automatic one as well as we will
analyse more features for sentiment analysis (e.g.
target, intensity, etc.), and we will test other sum-
marisation techniques. On the other hand, for the
medium and long-term research, we will increase
the size of the annotated corpus, and we will use it
to train a machine learning system that automati-
cally detects and classifies the objective/subjective
information. In addition, a topic detection stage
able to identify concepts and their relationships
would be necessary in order to personalise the re-

sulting summaries. Other important issues to take
into account will be the informality of the text and
some sentiment-analysis-related phenomena, such
as irony, that were out of the scope of the paper,
due to its great difficulty. The informality of a text
could be detected and used to normalize the texts
using for instance the TENOR tool (Mosquera and
Moreda, 2012), or vice versa, to produce an infor-
mal summary in the form of a tweet. For detecting
ironic expressions, we could also rely on already
existing approaches, such as the one described in
(Reyes et al., 2012).

Acknowledgments

This research work has been partially funded
by the Generalitat Valenciana and the Span-
ish Government through the projects DIIM2.0
(PROMETEOII/2014/001), TIN2015-65100-R
and TIN2015-65136-C2-2-R.

References
Alexandra Balahur, Elena Lloret, Ester Boldrini,

Andrés Montoyo, Manuel Palomar, and Patricio
Martı́nez-Barco. 2009. Summarizing threads in
blogs using opinion polarity. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Events in Emerging Text Types, pages
23–31, Borovets, Bulgaria, September. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Ester Boldrini, Alexandra Balahur, Patricio Martı́nez-
Barco, and Andrés Montoyo. 2010. Emotiblog: A
finer-grained and more precise learning of subjectiv-
ity expression models. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 1–10, Upp-
sala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Ester Boldrini, Javier Fernández, José Manuel Gómez,
and Patricio Martı́nez-Barco. 2011. Emotiblog: To-
wards a finer-grained sentiment analysis and its ap-
plication to opinion mining. In Proceedings of IV
Jornadas TIMM, pages 49–54.

Ester Boldrini. 2012. EmotiBlog: A Model to Learn
Subjective Information Detection in the New Textual
Genres of the Web 2.0 -a Multilingual and Multi-
Genre Approach. Ph.D. thesis, University of Ali-
cante.

Deepayan Chakrabarti and Kunal Punera. 2011. Event
summarization using tweets. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Weblogs and So-
cial Media, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, July 17-
21, 2011.

Bruce Croft, Donald Metzler, and Trevor Strohman.
2009. Search Engines: Information Retrieval in
Practice. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
USA, 1st edition.

45



Wenjing Duan, Bin Gu, and Andrew B. Whinston.
2008. Do Online Reviews Matter? - An Empiri-
cal Investigation of Panel Data. Decision Support
Systems, 45(4):1007–1016, November.

Javi Fernández, José Manuel Gómez, and Patri-
cio Martı́nez Barco. 2010. Evaluation of web in-
formation retrieval systems on restricted domains.
Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 45:273–276.

Kavita Ganesan, ChengXiang Zhai, and Evelyne Vie-
gas. 2012. Micropinion generation: An unsu-
pervised approach to generating ultra-concise sum-
maries of opinions. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on World Wide Web, pages
869–878, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Talmy Givón. 1990. Syntax: A functional-typological
introduction. Volume II. Amsterdam: John Ben-
jamins. XXV, 553 pages. (Volume 1: 1984 (XX, 464
pages).

Wu He, Harris Wu, Gongjun Yan, Vasudeva Akula, and
Jiancheng Shen. 2015. A novel social media com-
petitive analytics framework with sentiment bench-
marks. Information & Management, 52(7):801–
812.

David Inouye and Jugal K. Kalita. 2011. Comparing
twitter summarization algorithms for multiple post
summaries. In PASSAT/SocialCom 2011, Privacy,
Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT), 2011 IEEE Third
International Conference on and 2011 IEEE Third
International Conference on Social Computing (So-
cialCom), Boston, MA, USA, 9-11 Oct., 2011, pages
298–306.

B.J. Jansen, M. Zhang, K. Sobel, and A. Chowdury.
2009. Twitter power: Tweets as electronic word of
mouth. Journal of American Society of Information
Science, 60(11):2169–2188, November.

Tae-Yeon Kim, Jaekwang Kim, Jaedong Lee, and Jee-
Hyong Lee. 2014. A tweet summarization method
based on a keyword graph. In Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Infor-
mation Management and Communication, ICUIMC
’14, pages 96:1–96:8, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Fei Liu, Yang Liu, and Fuliang Weng. 2011. Why is
”sxsw” trending?: Exploring multiple text sources
for twitter topic summarization. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Languages in Social Media, LSM
’11, pages 66–75, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Elena Lloret and Manuel Palomar. 2013. COM-
PENDIUM: a text summarisation tool for generating
summaries of multiple purposes, domains, and gen-
res. Natural Language Engineering, 19:147–186, 4.

Elena Lloret, Marı́a Teresa Romá-Ferri, and Manuel
Palomar. 2013. COMPENDIUM: A text summa-
rization system for generating abstracts of research
papers. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 88:164–
175.

Alejandro Mosquera and Paloma Moreda. 2012.
Tenor: A lexical normalisation tool for spanish web
2.0 texts. In Petr Sojka, Ales Hork, Ivan Kopecek,
and Karel Pala, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue
- 15th International Conference, TSD 2012, Brno,
Czech Republic, September 3-7, 2012. Proceedings,
volume 7499 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 535–542. Springer.

Ani Nenkova and Kathleen McKeown. 2011. Auto-
matic summarization. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval, 5(2-3):103–233.

Brendan O’Connor, Michel Krieger, and David Ahn.
2010. Tweetmotif: Exploratory search and topic
summarization for twitter. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, ICWSM 2010, Washington, DC, USA,
May 23-26, 2010.

O. Pacea. 2011. CorpTweet: Brands, Language
and Identity in Web 2.0. SERIA FILOLOGIE,
22(2):157–168.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in In-
formation Retrieval:, 2(1-2):1–135, January.

Antonio Reyes, Paolo Rosso, and Davide Buscaldi.
2012. From Humor Recognition to Irony Detection:
The Figurative Language of Social Media. Data &
Knowledge Engineering, 74:1–12.

Beaux Sharifi, Mark-Anthony Hutton, and Jugal Kalita.
2010. Summarizing microblogs automatically. In
Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
685–688, Los Angeles, California, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

A. Smith and J. Brennen. 2012. Twitter use 2012. tech-
nical report. Technical report.

Tatiana Vodolazova, Elena Lloret, Rafael Muñoz, and
Manuel Palomar. 2012. A comparative study of
the impact of statistical and semantic features in the
framework of extractive text summarization. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Text, Speech, and Dialogue Conference, TSD ’12,
pages 306–313.

Jui-Yu Weng, Cheng-Lun Yang, Bo-Nian Chen, Yen-
Kai Wang, and Shou-De Lin. 2011. IMASS: An in-
telligent microblog analysis and summarization sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System
Demonstrations, pages 133–138, Portland, Oregon,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

46


