



















































Improving Polish Mention Detection with Valency Dictionary


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2017), co-located with EACL 2017, pages 17–23,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Improving Polish Mention Detection with Valency Dictionary

Maciej Ogrodniczuk
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences

Jana Kazimierza 5
01-248 Warsaw, Poland

maciej.ogrodniczuk@ipipan.waw.pl

Bartłomiej Nitoń
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences

Jana Kazimierza 5
01-248 Warsaw, Poland

bartek.niton@gmail.com

Abstract

This paper presents results of an experi-
ment integrating information from valency
dictionary of Polish into a mention detec-
tion system. Two types of information is
acquired: positions of syntactic schemata
for nominal and verbal constructs and sec-
ondary prepositions present in schemata.
The syntactic schemata are used to prevent
(for verbal realizations) or encourage (for
nominal groups) constructing mentions
from phrases filling multiple schema posi-
tions, the secondary prepositions – to filter
out artificial mentions created from their
nominal components. Mention detection
is evaluated against the manual annotation
of the Polish Coreference Corpus in two
settings: taking into account only mention
heads or exact borders.

1 Introduction

Coreference resolution systems are believed to
suffer from lack of integration of ”deeper” knowl-
edge, with respect to both semantics and world
knowledge, while it has been recognized from the
very beginning (Hobbs, 1978) that they make very
important and at the same time difficult factors in
the process1 and that present attempts of integra-
tion of such features are bringing only small im-
provements to the overall accuracy (see next sec-
tion for examples). The slow progress in solving
complex semantics- or knowledge-related issues

1Cf. a concluding sentence from (Sapena et al., 2013):
”Although it is clearly necessary to incorporate world knowl-
edge to move forward in the field of coreference resolution,
the process required to introduce such information in a con-
structive way has not yet been found.” See also e.g. Michael
Strube’s presentation at CORBON 2016: ”The (Non)Utility
of Semantics for Coreference Resolution”.

we are experiencing today is promoting the switch
into the search of new algorithms and models and
probably also adds to the general loss of global in-
terest in coreference resolution.

Nevertheless we argue that such situation
should not be considered as failure of semantic
approaches but rather as a consequence of enor-
mous dimensions and complication of the knowl-
edge system which needs to be applied to linguis-
tic processing, including reference decoding. On
the contrary, we believe that the method of small
steps towards the big goal is constantly bringing
useful models and resources to the field, year by
year growing in size and complexity. It is par-
ticularly important for languages other than En-
glish where more subtle properties of semantic
constructs can influence the results.

In the current paper we show how integration of
a relatively simple rule taking into consideration
verbal and nominal valency in Polish slightly but
consequently improves mention detection scores.

2 Related Work

(Kehler et al., 2004) integrated preferences in-
ferred from statistics of subject–verb, verb–object
and possessive–noun predicate–argument frequen-
cies into a pronoun-based resolution system which
resulted in 1% accuracy improvement. Sev-
eral works integrating semantic processing into
coreference resolution were also proposed, e.g.
(Ponzetto and Strube, 2006b) integrated predicate-
argument pairs into (Soon et al., 2001)’s resolution
system which yielded 1.5 MUC F1 score improve-
ment on ACE 2003 data.

(Ponzetto and Strube, 2006a; Ponzetto and
Strube, 2007) used Wikipedia, WordNet and se-
mantic role tagging to compute semantic related-
ness between anaphor and antecedent to achieve
2.7 points MUC F1 score improvement on ACE

17



2003 data.
(Rahman and Ng, 2011) labelled nominal

phrases with FrameNet semantic roles achieving
0.5 points B3 and CEAF F1 score improvement
and used YAGO type and means relations achiev-
ing 0.7 to 2.8 points improvement on OntoNotes-2
and ACE 2004/2005 data.

(Durrett and Klein, 2013) incorporated in their
system shallow semantics by using WordNet hy-
pernymy and synonymy, number and gender data
for nominals and propers, named entity types and
latent clusters computer from English Gigaword
corpus, reaching 1.6 points improvement on gold
data and 0.36 points on system data.

For Polish, WordNet and Wikipedia-related fea-
tures were used to improve verification of seman-
tic compatibility for common nouns and named
entities in BARTEK-3 coreference resolution sys-
tem (Ogrodniczuk et al., 2015, Section 12.3) re-
sulting in improvement of approx. 0.5 points
MUC F1 score. Experiments with integration of
external vocabulary resources coming from web-
sites registering the newest linguistic trends in Pol-
ish, fresh loan words and neologisms not yet cov-
ered by traditional dictionaries have been also per-
formed showing low coverage of new constructs
in evaluation data (Ogrodniczuk, 2013).

All these results showed challenges regard-
ing knowledge-based resources, mainly concern-
ing the memory and time complexity of the task
as well as low coverage of complex features in
the test data, but at the same time brought some
(sometimes tiny) improvements to coreference
resolution scores.

3 Problem Definition

In our approach mentions are defined as text frag-
ments (nominal groups including attached prepo-
sitional phrases and relative clauses) which could
potentially create references to discourse world
objects. Such definition has both syntactic and
semantic grounds: inclusion of extensive syntac-
tically dependent phrases into mention borders is
important due to semantic understanding of men-
tions: pierwszy człowiek na Księżycu ’the first
man on the Moon’ or samochód, który potrącił
moją żonę ’the car which hit my wife’ have dif-
ferent meanings than just człowiek ’the man’ or
samochód ’the car’. One of the consequences of
this distinction is treating as mentions all embed-
ded phrases with heads distinct from the head of

the main phrase (meaning that they corresponded
to different entities). Therefore, in the example:

(1) szef działu firmy

‘the head of the branch of the company’

three noun phrases should be considered as men-
tions referring to, accordingly, ‘the head of the
branch of the company’, ‘the branch of the com-
pany’ and ‘the company’ itself.

The need of exact mention border detection
stands in contradiction with unavailability of a
constituency parser for Polish with sufficient cov-
erage2 which could solve most of the attachment
problems. Current state-of-the-art mention detec-
tor for Polish (see Section 4.3) identifies nom-
inal groups with a relatively old Spejd shallow
parser. Our work attempts to use valency schemata
from a recently created valency dictionary for Pol-
ish (see Section 4.1) for two purposes: to pre-
vent mention borders to cross positions of a syn-
tactic schema and to filter out mentions created
from nominal components of secondary preposi-
tions, also present in the valency dictionary.

4 Resources and Tools

4.1 Walenty, a Polish Valence Dictionary
Walenty (Przepiórkowski et al., 2014)3 is a com-
prehensive human- and machine-readable dictio-
nary of Polish valency information for verbs,
nouns, adjectives and adverbs. It consists of
two interconnected layers, syntactic and seman-
tic, and features precise linguistic description, in-
cluding the structural case, clausal subjects, com-
plex prepositions, comparative constructions, con-
trol and raising and semantically defined phrase
types. Lexicon entries have strictly defined for-
mal structure and the represented syntactic and
semantic phenomena are always attested in lin-
guistic reality, with the National Corpus of Pol-
ish (Przepiórkowski et al., 2012, later referred to
as NKJP) as a primary source of data and Internet
and linguistic literature as secondary sources.

Each lexical entry is identified by its lemma and
consists of a number of syntactic valence schemata
with each schema being a set of syntactic po-
sitions. Apart from the two labeled argument

2Currently available constituency parsers for Polish such
as Świgra (http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Świgra) or
POLFIE (http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/LFG) do not
yet guarantee sufficient coverage of natural language con-
structs.

3See also http://walenty.ipipan.waw.pl/.

18



Figure 1: A sample schema in Walenty.

positions, subject and object, usual phrase types
are considered, such as nominal phrases (NP),
prepositional phrases (PREPNP), adjectival phrases
(ADJP), clausal phrases (CP), etc. Phrase types can
be further parameterised by corresponding gram-
matical categories, e.g., NP and ADJP are param-
eterised by information concerning case. The un-
derscore symbol ’_’ denotes any value of a gram-
matical category, e.g., INFP(_) denotes infinitival
phrase of any aspect.

Figure 1 presents a sample schema for the verb
łączyć (’to link’) with subject, object, nominal
phrase in the instrumental case and prepositional
phrase using preposition z (’with’) and nominal
component in the instrumental case again, as in
the following example:

(2) Potężne [komputery] SUBJ [łączą] VERB
[firmę] OBJ [światłowodami] NP(INST)
[z cyfrowym światem] PREPNP(Z,INST).

’Powerful [computers] SUBJ [link] VERB
[the company] OBJ [with the digital
world] PREPNP(Z,INST) [using optical
fiber] NP(INST).’

As of January 2017, Walenty contains over 65K
schemata for 12K Polish verbs and 16K schemata
for about 2500 nouns and is still expanding.

In our experiments we use Walenty in textual
format (Hajnicz et al., 2015) which can be down-
loaded directly from Slowal Web application4 (Ni-
toń et al., 2016). The version used in our experi-
ment dates January 17, 2017.

4.2 Polish Coreference Corpus

The Polish Coreference Corpus5 (Ogrodniczuk et
al., 2015) is a large corpus of Polish general nom-
inal coreference built upon NKJP. Each text of the
corpus is a 250–350-word sample consisting of
full subsequent paragraphs extracted from a larger
text. With its 1900 documents from 14 text genres,

4http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Slowal
5http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/PCC

containing about 540K tokens, 180K mentions and
128K coreference clusters, the PCC is among the
largest manually annotated coreference corpora in
the international community.

Mentions in PCC are understood as broadly as
possible, with the following components included
in the nominal phrase:

1. adjectives adjusting their form (case, num-
ber, gender) to the superordinate noun, e.g.
kolorowe kwiaty, duży czerwony tramwaj,
lebiodka pospolita ‘colourful flowers’, ‘big
red tram’, ‘oregano’

2. adjectives in genitive, singular, neuter, e.g.
coś fantastycznego, nic dziwnego ‘something
fantastic’, ‘nothing strange’

3. nouns adjusting its case and number to
the superordinate noun (apposition), e.g.
malarz pejzażysta, miasto Łódź ‘a landscape
painter’, ‘the city of Łódź’

4. nouns in genitive, e.g. kolega brata, protokół
przesłuchania ‘a friend of my brother’, ‘the
protocol of the hearing’

5. numeral phrases as subordinate elements of
the nominal element, e.g. zabójca pięciu ko-
biet ‘the killer of five women’

6. adjective participles adjusting its form to the
superordinate noun, together with its subor-
dinate element, e.g. nadchodzące zmiany,
rozbudowany hotel, zapaleńcy prowadzący
swoje wojenki ‘oncoming changes’, ‘ex-
panded hotel’, ‘hotheads waging their little
wars’

7. relative clauses, e.g. dziewczyna, o której roz-
mawiamy ‘the girl we talked about’

8. prepositional-nominal phrases, e.g. ustawa
o podatku dochodowym, droga na skróty ‘the
law on income tax’, ‘a way across the coun-
try’

9. particles, e.g. prawie cała rodzina, tylko ty
‘almost the whole family’, ‘only you’

10. adverbs as adjectives and participle modi-
fiers, e.g. szalenie ciekawy film ‘incredibly
interesting film’.

19



Similarly some phrases with syntactic head
other than nominal were also considered mentions,
such as numeral phrases or coordinated nominal
phrases.

The current version of PCC data is 0.92 dated
December 29, 2014.

4.3 Mention Detector for Polish

The state-of-the-art mention detection tool for
Polish is MentionDetector6 which uses informa-
tion from morphosyntactic, shallow syntactic and
named entity annotations created with state-of-
the-art tools for Polish. MentionDetector is mostly
a rule based tool with a statistical mechanism for
detecting zero subjects. The following constructs
are recognized:

1. single-segment nouns and nominal groups,
detected with Spejd shallow parser7

(Przepiórkowski and Buczyński, 2007)
fitted with an adaptation of the NKJP
grammar of Polish (Ogrodniczuk et al.,
2014)

2. pronouns, identified with a disambiguating
morphosyntactic tagger Pantera8 (Acedański,
2010) with a morphological analyser and
lemmatizer Morfeusz9 (Woliński, 2014)

3. zero subjects, detected with a custom solu-
tion (Kopeć, 2014)

4. nominal named entities, detected with Nerf10

(Waszczuk et al., 2013).

The current version of MentionDetector is 1.3
dated October 13, 2016.

5 The Experiment

The idea for the experiment is based on the ob-
servation that delimitation of mentions based on
their semantic understanding is different for nom-
inal and verbal constructs: for nominal phrases
engaged in valency schemata (making the men-
tion ’core’) all syntactic positions should be in-
cluded into the mention boundaries since they add
vital supporting information to the core while for

6http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/
MentionDetector

7http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Spejd
8http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Pantera
9http://sgjp.pl/morfeusz/index.html.en

10http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/Nerf

verbal phrases their nominal or prepositional po-
sitions correspond to different semantic roles and
cannot be linked into a single mention. This as-
sumption is verified with schemata acquired from
Walenty against the PCC gold annotation.

The entry point for both nominal and verbal
parts of the experiment is the same: finite verb
forms as well as nominal and prepositional phrases
are detected in the text11 and matched against va-
lency schemata. This is achieved by comparing
base forms of syntactic heads of words to entries
from the valency dictionary (directly for the main
Walenty entry and by creating textual representa-
tions of phrase types for syntactic positions).

5.1 Nominal realizations
If a nominal schema with two positions corre-
sponding to phrase types detected in the document
is found, both the core nominal phrase and the de-
pendent phrases are merged into a single mention,
as in:

(3) Od tamtego czasu miał miejsce
[konflikt] NOUN [polskiego am-
basadora] NP(GEN) [z polskim
księdzem] PREPNP(Z,INST).

’Since then there was [a conflict] NOUN
[of the Polish ambassador] NP(GEN)
[with the Polish priest] PREPNP(Z,INST).’

PREPNP constructions are created from the
preposition word (tagged as PREP by Spejd) and
the case of the head word from prepositional-
nominal groups. NP constructions are created us-
ing the case of the nominal group head word.

The results of mention detection after adding
this rule to base MentionDetector are presented in
Table 1 under Mention merging.

5.2 Verbal realizations
If a verbal schema with nominal or prepositional
positions is detected in the document, we prevent
creation of a single mention out of phrases from
different syntactic positions, cf.

(4) [Gratuluję] VERB [Włochom] NP(DAT)
[awansu] NP(GEN).

’I [congratulate] VERB [the Ital-
ians] NP(DAT) [on their promo-
tion] NP(GEN).’

11In order to process prepositional phrases Spejd shallow
grammar was adapted to detect prepositional-nominal groups
(PREPNG).

20



The results of mention detection after adding
this rule are presented in Table 1 under Mention
cleaning, note that nominal realizations rule is
also active.

5.3 Secondary Prepositions and
Phraseological Compounds

Another valuable information present in Walenty
is a list of approx. 200 secondary prepositions
used in syntactic schemata12. Since secondary
prepositions are lexicalized combinations of pri-
mary (monomorphemic) prepositions and nomi-
nal or prepositional phrases, their nominal com-
ponents can be often automatically (and always in-
correctly) marked as mentions. Table 1 under Wa-
lenty list presents the results of removal of such
mentions from the system set.

The next step was expansion of the list of com-
plex prepositions using other available sources,
the first of them being The PWN Universal Dic-
tionary of the Polish Language13 (Dubisz, 2006).
Secondly, rules responsible for building secondary
prepositions out of individual prepositions and
nouns in Spejd grammar were examined and their
components were also excluded from the list of
mention candidates. Last but not least, Spejd
grammar rules for idiomatic expressions (marked
as frazeo) were investigated to collect indeclin-
able phraseologic phrases with nominal compo-
nent (underlined below) such as:

• particle-adverbs (Qub), e.g. bez wątpienia
’without a doubt’

• adverbs (Adv), e.g. w lot ’immediately’
• interjections (Interj), e.g. broń Boże

’heaven forbid’

• adjectives (Adj), e.g. na poziomie ’ambi-
tious’

• conjunctions (Conj), e.g. przy czym ’at the
same time’

• compounds (Comp), e.g. w miarę jak
(słuchali) ’as (they listened)’

That means that sometimes complex preposi-
tions text strings are not always used as a prepo-
sition and we must know the wider text context to

12See http://walenty.ipipan.waw.pl/
rozwiniecia_typow_fraz/.

13Electronic version: http://usjp.pwn.pl/

distinguish whether they are truly complex prepo-
sitions or constructions bringing up mention into
the discourse. Spade helps us in this distinction.

The results of mention detection after adding
this rule are presented in Table 1 under Secondary
prepositions, note that nominal realizations and
verbal realizations rules are also active.

6 Results

Results of mention detection follow the procedure
described in (Ogrodniczuk et al., 2015). Preci-
sion, recall and F-measure are calculated using
Scoreference application from the Polish Coref-
erence Toolset14. As compared to SemEval ap-
proach (Recasens et al., 2010) where systems were
rewarded with 1 point for correct mentions bound-
aries, 0.5 points for boundaries within the gold NP
including its head, 0 otherwise, in our evaluation
we decided not to reward partial matches but to
provide two alternative mention detection scores:
EXACT boundary match and HEAD match.

Table 1 compares the results of exact mention
detection to the best available mention detection
results for Polish. The baseline for our verification
is the newest result of evaluation of current version
of MentionDetector on PCC test data15.

Nominal realizations rule increases mention de-
tection by over 1%. We believe that it could be
increased even higher with larger dictionary. Our
rule is using noun constraints only and by far there
are only about 2500 nouns in Walenty. Fortunately
Walenty is still expanding and further score im-
provement is a matter of time.

Verbal realizations rule is bringing very small
mention detection score improvement, on the
other hand it is highly precise.

Head only detection results are presented for
comparison, as we can see they have slightly in-
creased after using secondary prepositions and
phraseological compounds rule. This is be-
cause during this step we have removed a lot
of wrong single-segment mentions (consisting of
heads only) which has noticeable and positive im-
pact on HEAD mention detection precision.

14See all tools at http://zil.ipipan.waw.pl/
PolishCoreferenceTools.

15The results reported in (Ogrodniczuk et al., 2015,
pp. 239–240) are even lower (66.79% precision, 67.21% re-
call and 61.00% F1 score for EXACT borders) probably due
to recent changes in MentionDetector related to progress in
null subject detection.

21



Configuration EXACT HEADPrecision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1
Baseline 67.07% 67.19% 67.13% 88.68% 89.37% 89.02%

Mention merging 68.34% 67.95% 68.15% 88.63% 88.74% 88.69%
Mention cleaning 68.35% 67.96% 68.16% 88.63% 88.74% 88.69%
Secondary prepositions 69.59% 67.85% 68.71% 90.02% 88.30% 89.15%

Table 1: Mention detection evaluation results

7 Conclusions

The presented experiment showed usefulness of
valency schemata in the process of mention detec-
tion although the scale of improvement was rela-
tively small. It should be attributed to several fac-
tors such as the limited size of the valency dictio-
nary or sparsity of cases where valency rules can
intervene (as opposed to ’general’ cases).

The setting used only two most frequent types
of phrases present in valency schemata, nominal
and prepositional phrases, so one of the next steps
could be analysis how other types of phrases inter-
vene in the process of mention construction.

Even though the gains are far from being huge
as compared to the progress introduced to the
field in the recent years by adoption of new al-
gorithms and architectures, experiments with inte-
gration of knowledge and semantics into the pro-
cess seem worth pursuing, particularly for lan-
guages other than English for which they may of-
fer fine-tuning of the language-independent solu-
tions bringing slow but stable progress to results
of linguistic analysis.

Acknowledgements

The work reported here was carried out within
the research project financed by the Polish
National Science Centre (contract number
2014/15/B/HS2/03435).

References
Szymon Acedański. 2010. A morphosyntactic brill

tagger for inflectional languages. In Hrafn Lofts-
son, Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson, and Sigrún Helgadóttir,
editors, Advances in Natural Language Processing:
7th International Conference on NLP, IceTAL 2010,
Reykjavik, Iceland, August 16-18, 2010, pages 3–14,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Stanisław Dubisz, editor. 2006. Uniwersalny słownik
języka polskiego PWN. Wydawnictwo Naukowe
PWN. vol. 1–4.

Greg Durrett and Dan Klein. 2013. Easy victories and
uphill battles in coreference resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1971–1982,
Seattle, Washington, USA, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Elżbieta Hajnicz, Bartłomiej Nitoń, Agnieszka Patejuk,
Adam Przepiórkowski, and Marcin Woliński. 2015.
Internetowy słownik walencyjny języka polskiego
oparty na danych korpusowych. Prace Filologiczne,
LXV:95–110.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1978. Resolving Pronoun References.
Lingua, 44:311–338.

Andrew Kehler, Douglas Appelt, Lara Taylor, and
Aleksandr Simma. 2004. The (Non)Utility of
Predicate-Argument Frequencies for Pronoun Inter-
pretation. In Proceedings of 2004 North American
chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics annual meeting, pages 289–296.

Mateusz Kopeć. 2014. Zero subject detection for
Polish. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, volume 2: Short Papers,
pages 221–225, Gothenburg, Sweden. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Bartłomiej Nitoń, Tomasz Bartosiak, and Elżbieta Ha-
jnicz. 2016. Accessing and Elaborating Wa-
lenty — a Valence Dictionary of Polish — via
Internet Browser. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Marko Grobelnik, Bente
Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan
Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 1352–
1359, Portorož, Slovenia. ELRA, European Lan-
guage Resources Association.

Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Alicja Wójcicka, Katarzyna
Głowińska, and Mateusz Kopeć. 2014. Detec-
tion of Nested Mentions for Coreference Resolu-
tion in Polish. In Maciej Ogrodniczuk and Adam
Przepiórkowski, editors, Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on NLP, PolTAL 2014, volume
8686 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
270–277, Warsaw, Poland. Springer International
Publishing.

22



Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Katarzyna Głowińska, Mateusz
Kopeć, Agata Savary, and Magdalena Zawisławska.
2015. Coreference in Polish: Annotation, Resolu-
tion and Evaluation. Walter De Gruyter.

Maciej Ogrodniczuk. 2013. Discovery of common
nominal facts for coreference resolution: Proof of
concept. In R. Prasath and T. Kathirvalavakumar,
editors, Mining Intelligence and Knowledge Explo-
ration (MIKE 2013), volume 8284 of Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, pages 709–716. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Simone Paolo Ponzetto and Michael Strube. 2006a.
Exploiting Semantic Role Labeling, WordNet and
Wikipedia for Coreference Resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology Confer-
ence of the NAACL, Main Conference, pages 192–
199, New York City, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Simone Paolo Ponzetto and Michael Strube. 2006b.
Semantic Role Labeling for Coreference Resolution.
In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Posters & Demonstrations, EACL ’06,
pages 143–146, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Simone Paolo Ponzetto and Michael Strube. 2007.
Knowledge Derived from Wikipedia for Computing
Semantic Relatedness. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence Research, 30(1):181–212.

Adam Przepiórkowski and Aleksander Buczyński.
2007. Spejd: Shallow Parsing and Disambiguation
Engine. In Zygmunt Vetulani, editor, Proceedings of
the 3rd Language & Technology Conference, pages
340–344, Poznań, Poland.

Adam Przepiórkowski, Mirosław Bańko, Rafał L.
Górski, and Barbara Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk,
editors. 2012. Narodowy Korpus Języka Polskiego.
Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN, Warsaw.

Adam Przepiórkowski, Elżbieta Hajnicz, Agnieszka
Patejuk, Marcin Woliński, Filip Skwarski, and
Marek Świdziński. 2014. Walenty: Towards a
comprehensive valence dictionary of Polish. In
Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry De-
clerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2014), pages 2785–2792, Reykjavík,
Iceland. ELRA.

Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng. 2011. Coreference
Resolution with World Knowledge. In Proceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 814–824.

Marta Recasens, Lluís Màrquez, Emili Sapena, M. An-
tònia Martí, Mariona Taulé, Véronique Hoste, Mas-
simo Poesio, and Yannick Versley. 2010. SemEval-
2010 Task 1: Coreference Resolution in Multi-
ple Languages. In Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 1–
8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Emili Sapena, Lluís Padró, and Jordi Turmo. 2013. A
Constraint-based Hypergraph Partitioning Approach
to Coreference Resolution. Computational Linguis-
tics, 39(4):847–884.

Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel
Chung Yong Lim. 2001. A Machine Learning Ap-
proach to Coreference Resolution of Noun Phrases.
Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521–544.

Jakub Waszczuk, Katarzyna Głowińska, Agata Savary,
Adam Przepiórkowski, and Michał Lenart. 2013.
Annotation tools for syntax and named entities in
the National Corpus of Polish. International Jour-
nal of Data Mining, Modelling and Management,
5(2):103–122.

Marcin Woliński. 2014. Morfeusz Reloaded. In
Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry De-
clerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2014), pages 1106–1111, Reykjavík,
Iceland. European Language Resources Association.

23


