



















































Learning to Recognize Animals by Watching Documentaries: Using Subtitles as Weak Supervision


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 21–30,
Valencia, Spain, April 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Learning to Recognize Animals by Watching Documentaries:
Using Subtitles as Weak Supervision

Aparna Nurani Venkitasubramanian1, Tinne Tuytelaars2, and Marie-Francine Moens1

1KU Leuven, Computer Science Department, Belgium
2KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, IMEC, Belgium

{firstname.lastname}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
We investigate animal recognition models
learned from wildlife video documentaries
by using the weak supervision of the tex-
tual subtitles. This is a challenging setting,
since i) the animals occur in their natural
habitat and are often largely occluded and
ii) subtitles are to a great degree comple-
mentary to the visual content, providing a
very weak supervisory signal. This is in
contrast to most work on integrated vision
and language in the literature, where tex-
tual descriptions are tightly linked to the
image content, and often generated in a
curated fashion for the task at hand. We
investigate different image representations
and models, in particular a support vec-
tor machine on top of activations of a pre-
trained convolutional neural network, as
well as a Naive Bayes framework on a
‘bag-of-activations’ image representation,
where each element of the bag is consid-
ered separately. This representation al-
lows key components in the image to be
isolated, in spite of vastly varying back-
grounds and image clutter, without an ob-
ject detection or image segmentation step.
The methods are evaluated based on how
well they transfer to unseen camera-trap
images captured across diverse topograph-
ical regions under different environmen-
tal conditions and illumination settings, in-
volving a large domain shift.

1 Introduction

It is estimated1 that video traffic will be 82 per-
cent of all global Internet traffic by 2020. The

1http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-
provider/visual-networking-index-vni/complete-white-
paper-c11-481360.html

ubiquitousness of video on the web demands in-
dexing tools that facilitate fast and easy access to
relevant content. Traditionally, video search has
been based on user-tags. However, in the recent
past, research activities have been directed at au-
tomatic indexing of videos based on the content.
Contributing to this goal of automatic video index-
ing, we focus on the problem of wildlife recogni-
tion in nature documentaries with subtitles.

This setup is challenging from at least two per-
spectives: first, from the point of view of the con-
tent, and second, due to the nature of video docu-
mentaries. As far as the content is concerned, we
are dealing with animals shot in their natural habi-
tat. The problem of identifying animals in videos,
especially those shot in the natural habitat presents
several challenges. Firstly, animals are among the
most difficult objects to recognize in images and
videos, mainly due to their deformable bodies that
often self occlude and the large variation they pose
in appearance and depiction (Afkham et al., 2008;
Berg and Forsyth, 2006). Further, in the natural
habitat, there are challenges due to camouflage
and occlusion by flora. Moreover, unlike faces
or cuboidal objects such as furniture, we do not
have accurate detectors that can localize the an-
imal in a frame. State-of-the-art object proposal
methods such as (Girshick et al., 2014; Ren et al.,
2015) yield an unacceptably low level of either re-
call or precision. The absence of detectors neces-
sitates other mechanisms that allow segregation of
the components of the image.

The nature of video documentaries presents yet
another challenge. Typically, in video documen-
taries such as ours, the subtitles are not parallel,
but complementary to the visuals (See Fig. 1).
This is in contrast to most work on integrated vi-
sion and language in the literature, where textual
descriptions are tightly linked to the image con-
tent. This means we do not have examples that

21



In the rivers and lakes of Africa, lives an animal which has a reputation for being the most
unpredictable and dangerous of all.
Even crocodiles are wary.
The hippopotamus.

Figure 1: A set of frames together with the corresponding subtitles: The frames show hippos, while the
subtitles mention both hippo and crocodile.

can reliably tie together textual and visual entities.
In this work, we study image representations

and models that cope with the above challenges.
These include a support vector machine on top
of activations of a pretrained convolutional neu-
ral network, and a Naive Bayes framework on a
‘bag-of-activations’ image representation, where
each element of the bag is considered separately.
While the former utilizes a global representation
denoted by the feature vector comprising CNN ac-
tivations, the latter works on per dimension ba-
sis, allowing key components in the image to be
isolated, in spite of largely varying backgrounds
and image clutter, without an object detection or
image segmentation step. We experiment with
both continuous and discretized variants of the
‘bag-of-activations’ representation. In particular,
we investigate image representations and weakly
supervised animal recognition models that can
be learned without the need for bounding boxes,
or curated data comprising manually annotated
training examples.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 presents the background and related
work. Section 3 provides the problem definition.
Section 4 describes the image representations and
animal recognition models based on CNN activa-
tions. Section 5 discusses the experiments and re-
sults. Finally, Section 6 provides the conclusions.

2 Related Work

Identifying animals is a well-studied topic
(Afkham et al., 2008; Berg and Forsyth, 2006;
Schmid, 2001; Ramanan et al., 2006). Recent

works such as (Hariharan and Girshick, 2016) and
(Gomez and Salazar, 2016) advance us further and
provide better insight into the problem. However,
these methods are not applicable in our setting
since they require extensive training data. It is
important to note that in this setup, we lack suffi-
cient reliable training data making neural network-
based training impractical.

Apart from these works that focus specifically
on animals, there is a large literature on generic
object detection. These methods are often evalu-
ated on the Pascal VOC challenge dataset (Ever-
ingham et al., 2012) which includes classes of an-
imals such as cats, dogs, cows and horses, among
other things. There are also datasets that focus
on animals such as Caltech UCSD Birds (Wah
et al., 2011) and Stanford Dogs (Khosla et al.,
2011). Additionally, the FishClef and BirdClef
challenges which are part of LifeClef (Joly et al.,
2015) provide an arena for identification of species
of fish and birds respectively. Most of these
datasets are, however, object-centered and in that
sense easier than the ‘in-the-wild’ setting we are
dealing with.

The problem of aligning animals from videos
with their mentions in subtitles has been studied
in (Dusart et al., 2013) and (Venkitasubramanian
et al., 2016). The former relies on hand-annotated
bounding boxes to localize the animals in a frame,
which are difficult to acquire. The latter relies on
training animal classifiers on labeled external data
such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), and has the
issue that not all classes of objects can be learned
from an external dataset, for instance, rare species

22



of animals may not be found on ImageNet.
Recently, there has been considerable interest

in sentence/caption generation from images as
well as natural language based object detection,
e.g. (Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2014; Fang et al.,
2014; Guadarrama et al., 2013; Kazemzadeh et al.,
2014). These approaches typically rely on text
snippets that accurately describe the content of the
images or videos. However, in our context, the
subtitles and the visuals are not parallel, but com-
plementary. For example, often a few animals are
mentioned in the text, while the connected frame
only shows one of them. The connection between
the vision and the text is therefore much weaker.
Additionally, in our setup, we have too few data to
train similar models. As a result, these approaches
are not directly applicable to our setting. In this
paper, we explore weakly-supervised models that
can deal with the complementarity or the ‘non-
parallelism’ of the visual and textual modalities.

There has also been some work on alignment
across modalities for recognizing people (Pham
et al., 2010, 2011; Guillaumin et al., 2008). These
approaches rely on the use of a face-detector.
While there are face detectors available with rea-
sonable accuracy, there are no such detectors that
allow localizing animals. The absence of the
bounding boxes complicates the problem in many
ways. A notable endeavor in this domain is that
of (Everingham et al., 2006) where dialogue tran-
scripts and other supervisory information (such as
lip movements or clothing) are used in addition to
subtitles and face detectors. In our context, since
the subjects of our videos involve animals, cues
such as lip movements or clothing are not relevant.

In this paper, we investigate image representa-
tions and multi-modal animal recognition models
that can cope with a) complementarity of vision
and language, b) lack of bounding boxes and c)
lack of labeled external data, and can transfer to a
different unseen domain, shot under very different
conditions.

3 Task definition

We have a wildlife documentary with subti-
tles. On the visual side, we derive key frames
F = {f1, f2 . . . fq} from which we extract vi-
sual features with a suitable representation A =
{a1,a2 . . .aq}. Assume each feature vector has
D dimensions. On the textual side, from the sub-
titles, we identify the unique animal mentions or

animal names N = {n1, n2 . . . np}, using a list
of animal names derived from WordNet (Miller,
1995) as in (Dusart et al., 2013).

Using the setup of (Venkitasubramanian et al.,
2016), we associate every frame fi, 1 ≤ i ≤ q,
with a set Ni ⊂ N of possible animal names de-
rived from 5 subtitles to the left and right of the
frame. The set Ni refers to the set of unique ani-
mal names derived from their mentions and coref-
erences in the subtitles2. It is possible that the
frame has some or all or none of the animals in
Ni. Corresponding to every name nl ∈ Ni, we
have a binary label yl indicating the presence or
absence of nl. Our objective is to find the most
likely value of yl corresponding to name nl ∈ Ni
for every frame fi.

4 Image Representations Based on CNN
Activations

A popular choice of visual features for object
recognition is the activations of the penultimate
layer of a pretrained Convolutional Neural Net-
work. In this work, we use the VGG CNN-M-128
architecture3 of (Chatfield et al., 2014), which is
trained on 1,000 object categories from ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) with roughly 1.2M training im-
ages. Within this realm, we explore two perspec-
tives on the real-valued feature vector: (i) a global
representation where each feature vector is treated
as one entity, and (ii) a bag-of-activations repre-
sentation, where each element of the bag is con-
sidered separately.

The global representation is by far the most
commonly used (Sharif Razavian et al., 2014) and
fits well with a linear Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classifier. For the task of object recogni-
tion, the linear SVM is typically used with the L2
norm, and has the following objective function

minimize
wl

1
2
||wl||2 + C

∑
i

max(1− ylwlTai, 0)

where wl denotes the set of weights to be learned
for the label yl corresponding to name nl, and
C denotes the cost4. In a weakly supervised
setting, these weights are learned based on the

2There remains a small percentage (2.35%) of animals not
mentioned in the nearby subtitles. These will be left unde-
tected.

3This model yielded 128 features.
4We used the Liblinear (Fan et al., 2008) toolkit, with the

default setting of 1 for the cost C.

23



weakly associated (hence noisy) frame-name pairs
< ai, nl > for all nl ∈ Ni.

An alternative to this global representation is
a bag-of-activations representation, where each
feature dimension is treated in isolation. Li et
al. (2014) have shown that the CNN activations
have two interesting properties: firstly, they can
be treated independently along the dimensions and
second, they preserve their essence even after bi-
narization. We exploit the first property and use
it in a naive Bayes framework. The idea of treat-
ing each element of the CNN representation indi-
vidually rather than using the full feature vector
in a high-dimensional space is crucial: It brings
robustness to image clutter and changing back-
grounds, and helps in learning from few examples.

p(yl|ai) = p(yl)
∏D

v=1 p(aiv|yl)
Zl

(1)

Zl is a normalization constant for the name nl,
given by

Zl = p(yl)
D∏

v=1

p(aiv|yl)+p(yl)
D∏

v=1

p(aiv|yl) (2)

where yl = 0 if yl = 1 and vice versa. p(yl) is
the prior which we assume to be uninformative for
simplicity. So, p(yl = 0) = p(yl = 1).

Then, using Eq. 2, Eq. 1 can be written as fol-
lows:

p(yl|ai) =
∏D

v=1 p(aiv|yl)∏D
v=1 p(aiv|yl) +

∏D
v=1 p(aiv|yl)

(3)
The second interesting property of the CNN ac-

tivations is that they preserve their essence even
after binarization. We investigate this further
and show that not only binarization but also dis-
cretization of the feature vector into a larger num-
ber of bins is useful. In particular, we propose to
discretize the feature vector into B bins along each
dimension5. In this paper, we experiment with
two approaches for binning the feature vector - (i)
equal width and (ii) equal frequency. The equal
width approach ensures that all the bins are of the
same size. For example, if we are interested in 2
equal width bins, we could look at the feature vec-
tor along a dimension and set the threshold mid-
way between the minimum and maximum values

5Discretization can also be applied to the global repre-
sentation used by the SVM, but as shown in (Venkitasubra-
manian et al., 2016), it is particularly useful in conjunction
with a naive Bayes classifier.

of that dimension. The values that are less than the
threshold could be set to 0, while the rest are set
to 1. In equal frequency binning, the threshold is
set such that the number of elements in each bin is
roughly the same.

This discretization is similar to the vector quan-
tization of SIFT descriptors to obtain Bag of Vi-
sual Words (BoVW). But, while BoVW has the
issue that the discretization errors can have a sig-
nificant negative impact, with CNN features, there
are no strong discretization artifacts. In fact, Li et
al. (2014) have shown that retaining just the values
of the largest k dimensions (or even setting the val-
ues of the largest k dimensions to 1 and the rest to
0) is sufficient to capture the essence of the image.

Discretizing the feature space allows us to re-
place the feature aiv by the corresponding bin βv.

p(aiv|yl) = p(βv|yl) (4)
where βv ∈ {0, 1 . . . B} is the bin to which aiv
belongs.

Eq. 3 can then be rewritten as

p(yl|ai) =
∏D

v=1 p(βv|yl)∏D
v=1 p(βv|yl) +

∏D
v=1 p(βv|yl)

(5)

To compute the conditional probabilities
p(βv|yl) of the bin βv given yl, we rely on the
noisy labels that can be obtained from the text.
Basically we count the co-occurrence of label
yl corresponding to name nl ∈ Ni with bin βv
relative to the total number of instances where yl
occurs in our dataset.

p(βv|yl) = freq(βv, yl)
freq(yl)

(6)

5 Experiments and Results

The dataset used in our experiments is that of
(Dusart et al., 2013). This is a wildlife documen-
tary named ‘Great Wildlife Moments’6 with sub-
titles from the BBC. This is an interlaced video
with a duration of 108 minutes at a frame rate of
25 frames per second, and the frame resolution is
720x576 pixels. The video consists of 28 chap-
ters and all the chapters except the ones contain-
ing just one animal are evaluated. This leaves us
with chapters 14 to 28. Applying shot cut detec-
tion (Hellier et al., 2012) on these chapters, we ob-
tained 602 key frames. Of these, 302 frames had

6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Wildlife_Moments

24



Method Precision Recall F1
SVM 80.43 12.71 21.96
Naive Bayes 20.23 71.48 31.54

Table 1: Results of using the continuous features
and applying the weak labels of our dataset

Figure 2: The precision-recall curves for the SVM
and naive Bayes classifier shown in Table 1. Area
under the curve is 0.1599 for the SVM and 0.3642
for naive Bayes.

no animal. The remaining 300 contained 365 ani-
mals in total. We run our algorithm on all the 602
key frames. There were 19 species of animals.

The animal labeling is evaluated in terms of
precision, recall and F1 computed over the entire
dataset as follows:

precision =
number of labels correctly assigned

total number of labels assigned

recall =
number of labels correctly assigned

actual number of animal present

The evaluation covers two aspects:

1. How well do the representation and model
learned using the weak labels of our dataset
perform on the same dataset? (Section 5.1)

2. How well do the representation and model
learned using the weak labels of our dataset
transfer to an external dataset shot over di-
verse topographical regions under different
environmental conditions and illumination
settings? (Section 5.2)

5.1 Animal labeling on wildlife videos
Table 1 shows the performance of an SVM on the
global representation and a naive Bayes classifier
on the bag of activations using continuous fea-
tures. In either case, name nl is assigned to frame

Figure 3: The distribution of the feature val-
ues along the first dimension: x-axis shows the
range of feature values, y-axis shows the num-
ber of frames. The grey histogram shows the
distribution of the feature values. The red curve
is the normal distribution plotted using the mean
and standard deviation along the first dimension,
N (0.0454, 0.0622).

ai if p(yl|ai) > p(yl|ai), that is, the probability
threshold for prediction was set at 0.5. For the
naive Bayes classifier, a Gaussian distribution was
used to model the continuous features along each
dimension. While both models do not yield ade-
quate performance, the naive Bayes certainly does
far better compared to the SVM. In this setup in-
volving limited reliable example pairs, it is benefi-
cial to treat each element of the CNN representa-
tion individually rather than using the full feature
vector in a high-dimensional space. Fig. 2 shows
the precision-recall curves of the SVM and the
naive Bayes classifier. The naive Bayes is clearly
better in this setup, except in the low recall / high
precision region.

Closer inspection reveals that the Gaussian dis-
tribution used in the Naive Bayes framework is not
a good fit to the data (see Fig. 3 for one example
feature dimension). Fig. 3 shows the normal dis-
tribution plotted using the mean and the standard
deviation along the first dimension for the entire
dataset (red curve: N (0.0454, 0.0622)). This is
superimposed on the histogram of the real-valued
(undiscretized) feature vector (in grey). While
there are certainly other distributions (such as
Poisson or Binomial) that could be used to model
the data, we show that the most commonly used
Gaussian clearly does not fit the data. Rather than
forcing the data to fit into some distribution, we
turn to a discretized setting as it allows use of a
simple non-parametric model.

25



Method Precision Recall F1
B = 2 46.43 91.55 61.61
B = 3 46.85 94.37 62.62
B = 4 47.03 92.96 62.46
B = 5 47.18 94.37 62.91
B = 6 47.88 95.31 63.74
B = 7 47.69 96.71 63.88
B = 8 47.45 96.24 63.57
B = 9 47.00 95.77 63.06
B = 20 46.47 95.77 62.58
log2l-bins 47.47 96.71 63.68

Method Precision Recall F1
B = 2 48.04 92.02 63.12
B = 3 47.95 93.43 63.38
B = 4 46.99 95.31 62.95
B = 5 46.24 95.31 62.27
B = 6 45.56 96.24 61.84
B = 7 45.23 95.77 61.45
B = 8 44.93 95.77 61.17
B = 9 44.81 97.18 61.33
B = 20 43.51 97.65 60.20

Table 2: Results of using the discretized features (left: equal width discretization, right: equal frequency
discretization) and applying the weak labels of our dataset

Next, we present the results of using the dis-
cretized features. Table 2 (left) shows the results
of the animal labeling using equal width binning
for different number of bins B. First, we use a
fixed number of bins over every dimension. That
is, along every dimension in the feature vector,
the number of bins is set to a constant B. Note
that irrespective of the number of bins, the per-
formance has improved significantly. The preci-
sion has more than doubled, and the recall has
improved by more than 20% absolute. Contrary
to expectations, the discretization has actually im-
proved the classification. These findings are con-
sistent with those of Dougherty et al. (Dougherty
et al., 1995). Overall, we see that these results are
significantly better than all the baselines in Table
1. In addition to the discretization, the key as-
pects of this method are the use of naive Bayes
classifier and the idea of treating each element of
the CNN representation separately rather than us-
ing the full feature vector in a high-dimensional
space. These bring robustness to image clutter and
changing backgrounds, and help in learning from
few examples.

Next, looking at the F1 measures for different
values of B, we see that the best results are ob-
tained when B = 7. In addition to fixing the
number of bins along every dimension, we used
a heuristic to set a variable number of bins for
each dimension. Using the heuristic in S-Plus his-
togram algorithm of Spector (Spector, 1994), we
set the number of bins along each dimension to
log2l, where l is the number of unique values in
that dimension. Using this heuristic, different di-
mensions had different number of bins. We ob-
served that of the 128 dimensions, 12 had 7 bins,

while the rest had 8 bins. This explains why we
have the best results in the range B = 7 and
B = 8.

Table 2 (right) shows the results of the animal
labeling using equal frequency binning for differ-
ent number of bins B. Here, since we are deal-
ing with sparse matrices, we have to ensure that
all zero-valued entries along a dimension should
belong to the same bin. The results in table 2 in-
corporate this correction. As with the equal-width
case, we obtain significant improvements over the
naive Bayes classifier with continuous features.

Fig. 4 shows some of the sample outputs of our
system. Note that our method is capable of iden-
tifying multiple species in the same frame, as well
as detecting frames that do not contain any animal.

5.2 Transfer to camera-trap images
The second aspect of the evaluation is to measure
how well the representations and models transfer
to external data from an entirely different setup.
To evaluate this, we use the Snapshot Serengeti
(Swanson et al., 2015) dataset, which consists of
camera-trap (remote, automatic cameras) images
covering wildlife in Savanna. We learn animal
recognition models using the weak labels of our
dataset and apply them to the Snapshot Serengeti
(Swanson et al., 2015) dataset. It is important to
note that the pictures of this Serengeti dataset are
captured automatically, in very different scenes,
under various illumination conditions. This causes
a huge domain shift. The Serengeti dataset covers
40 mammalian species, of which three (Lion, Ze-
bra and Hippopotamus) also appear in our dataset.
We choose 500 random images7 each of Lion and

7shot between 6:00 am and 6:00 pm

26



Figure 4: Some sample outputs from our system. ‘GT’ indicates ground truth, ‘Predicted’ indicates the
predictions of the system.

Zebra, and all 37 images available for the Hip-
popotamus class. This set forms the target data
on which the animal recognition models will be
tested. Fig. 5 shows some of the sample images
from this dataset.

Table 3 shows the performance of the animal
recognition models learned using our data, applied
on the target dataset. The first baseline is simply
based on the probabilities output by the CNN pre-
trained on ImageNet. We used the same architec-
ture (CNN-M-128) that was used for feature ex-
traction. When the output probability for a certain
class was >0.5, we concluded that the system pre-
dicted that class. Of course, multiple classes could
be predicted for each key frame. Although some
of the classes predicted covered ‘lake side’, ‘hay’
etc. which were not explicitly labeled in our setup,
there were a lot of animals incorrectly predicted
(which did not belong to our dataset of 19 ani-
mals). These included elephant, panther, camel,
dugong. We filtered the outputs to just retain the
19 classes that were seen in our dataset. This in-
creased the precision by a large margin (second
row in the table). Next, we retained only the
three classes that were common to our dataset and
Serengeti dataset. While this gave a perfect preci-
sion, the recall stands low at approx. 20% in all
the three cases above.

Next, we train an SVM (on the continuous fea-
tures) on all the 19 classes of our dataset, using
the weak association of the subtitles and applied
them to Serengeti (Swanson et al., 2015) dataset

(Second block on table 3). Note that the perfor-
mance is low compared to ImageNet cases in the
first block. The model learned by the SVM on our
dataset does not compare well with that of Im-
ageNet, which was trained on several thousands
of zebra, hippos and lions. As with the previ-
ous block, filtering to the 3 relevant classes in-
creases the precision by a large margin, while the
recall stays the same. When we used the ground
truth labels instead of the weak labels (which ba-
sically indicate if a frame could have some ani-
mal), we have a perfect precision, but the recall
is even lower. By capturing elements in the back-
ground/environment which might be related to the
animal, (e.g., a water body for the hippopotamus,
or grasslands for the zebra), the training based on
weak labels yields higher recall, albeit at the cost
of precision.

The last block shows the performance using a
naive Bayes, trained using both weak labels, and
the ground truth. Again, we note that the preci-
sion is better with groundtruth labels, while the
recall is lower. But in either case, there are re-
markable improvements compared to the first and
second blocks. The idea of treating each element
of the CNN representation individually rather than
using the full feature vector in a high-dimensional
space is crucial both for isolating the object(s) of
interest from the clutter, and for learning with few
examples. The discretized naive Bayes does not
perform better than the continuous naive Bayes in
this case - the discretized features probably do not

27



Figure 5: Some sample images from the Snapshot Serengeti (Swanson et al., 2015) dataset, together
with the descriptions that show the difficulty of the task. Green box indicates the animal was recognized
correctly, while red indicates the animal was missed.

Method Precision Recall F1
CNN-M-128 (1000 classes) 21.98 20.38 21.15
CNN-M-128 (filtered to 19 classes of our dataset) 91.75 20.38 33.35
CNN-M-128 (filtered to 3 overlapping classes) 100 20.38 33.86
SVM continuous (on our 19 classes) - using weak labels 58.16 14.96 23.80
SVM continuous (on 3 overlapping classes) - using weak labels 86.34 14.96 25.50
SVM continuous (on 3 overlapping classes) - using GT 100 9.31 17.04
NBC continuous (on 3 overlapping classes) - using weak labels 49.03 90.53 63.61
NBC continuous (on 3 overlapping classes) - using GT 62.07 67.71 64.77
NBC discretized into log2l bins (on 3 classes) - using weak labels 53.45 65.73 58.95

Table 3: Performance of the animal recognition models learned using our data, applied on images from
Snapshot Serengeti (Swanson et al., 2015) dataset

transfer as well to the target domain. Neverthe-
less, it certainly outperforms the classifiers in the
first two blocks, by a large margin.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we investigate different image rep-
resentations and models, including a support vec-
tor machine on top of activations of a pretrained
convolutional neural network, as well as a Naive
Bayes framework on a bag-of-activations image
representation, where each element of the bag is
considered separately. We show that the bag-of-
activations representation allows key components
in the image to be isolated, in spite of largely vary-
ing backgrounds and image clutter, and eliminates
the need for an object detection or image segmen-
tation step. In contrast to most work on integrated
vision and language that use curated data, the pro-

posed approach deals with vision and language
that are complementary.

When the source and target are of the same do-
main, we also found that the discretization used
with a multinomial Naive Bayes classifier yields
much better performance compared to continuous
features with a traditional Naive Bayes classifier -
the precision is more than doubled and the recall
is boosted by more than 20% absolute for the task
of identifying animals on a challenging dataset of
wildlife documentaries. Here, we have used unsu-
pervised equal-width and equal-frequency binning
of the features. In future, we wish to explore other
(weakly) supervised techniques for discretization,
and their transfer to other domains. The methods
proposed here take us a step closer to automatic
video recognition and indexing.

28



References
Heydar Maboudi Afkham, Alireza Tavakoli Targhi,

Jan-Olof Eklundh, and Andrzej Pronobis. 2008.
Joint visual vocabulary for animal classification. In
19th International Conference on Pattern Recogni-
tion. IEEE, pages 1–4.

Tamara L. Berg and David A. Forsyth. 2006. Animals
on the web. In IEEE Computer Society Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE,
volume 2, pages 1463–1470.

Ken Chatfield, Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and
Andrew Zisserman. 2014. Return of the devil in the
details: Delving deep into convolutional nets. In
Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Confer-
ence .

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai
Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE,
pages 248–255.

James Dougherty, Kohavi Ron, and Sahami Mehran.
1995. Supervised and unsupervised discretization
of continuous features. In Proceedings of the twelfth
international conference on Machine Learning. San
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, volume 12, page
194–202.

Thibaut Dusart, Aparna Nurani Venkitasubramanian,
and Marie-Francine Moens. 2013. Cross-modal
alignment for wildlife recognition. In Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM International Workshop on Multi-
media Analysis for Ecological Data. ACM, pages
9–14.

Mark Everingham, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zisserman.
2006. Hello! my name is... buffy”–automatic nam-
ing of characters in tv video. In Proceedings of
the British Machine Vision Conference. volume 2,
page 6.

Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Cristopher K. I.
Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. 2012.
The PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2012
(VOC2012) Results.

Rong-En Fan, Kai-Wei Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Xiang-
Rui Wang, and Chih-Jen Lin. 2008. Liblinear: A
library for large linear classification. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 9:1871–1874.

Hao Fang, Saurabh Gupta, Forrest Iandola, Rupesh Sri-
vastava, Li Deng, Piotr Dollár, Jianfeng Gao, Xi-
aodong He, Margaret Mitchell, John Platt, et al.
2014. From captions to visual concepts and back.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4952 .

Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jiten-
dra Malik. 2014. Rich feature hierarchies for accu-
rate object detection and semantic segmentation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. pages 580–587.

Alexander Gomez and Augusto Salazar. 2016. To-
wards automatic wild animal monitoring: Identifi-
cation of animal species in camera-trap images us-
ing very deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.06169 .

Sergio Guadarrama, Niveda Krishnamoorthy, Girish
Malkarnenkar, Subhashini Venugopalan, Raymond
Mooney, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2013.
Youtube2text: Recognizing and describing arbitrary
activities using semantic hierarchies and zero-shot
recognition. In IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision. IEEE, pages 2712–2719.

Matthieu Guillaumin, Thomas Mensink, Jakob Ver-
beek, and Cordelia Schmid. 2008. Automatic face
naming with caption-based supervision. In IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition. IEEE, pages 1–8.

Bharath Hariharan and Ross Girshick. 2016. Low-
shot visual object recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.02819 .

Pierre Hellier, Vincent Demoulin, Lionel Oisel, and
Patrick Pérez. 2012. A contrario shot detection. In
19th IEEE International Conference on Image Pro-
cessing. IEEE, pages 3085–3088.

Alexis Joly, Hervé Goëau, Hervé Glotin, Concetto
Spampinato, Pierre Bonnet, Willem-Pier Vellinga,
Robert Planqué, Andreas Rauber, Simone Palazzo,
Bob Fisher, et al. 2015. Lifeclef 2015: multime-
dia life species identification challenges. In Inter-
national Conference of the Cross-Language Eval-
uation Forum for European Languages. Springer,
pages 462–483.

Andrej Karpathy and Li Fei-Fei. 2014. Deep visual-
semantic alignments for generating image descrip-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.2306 .

Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten,
and Tamara L. Berg. 2014. Referit game: Referring
to objects in photographs of natural scenes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Aditya Khosla, Nityananda Jayadevaprakash, Bang-
peng Yao, and Fei-fei Li. 2011. Novel dataset for
fine-grained image categorization. In First Work-
shop on Fine-Grained Visual Categorization, IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. Citeseer.

Yao Li, Lingqiao Liu, Chunhua Shen, and Anton
van den Hengel. 2014. Mid-level deep pattern min-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.6382 .

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical database
for English. Communications of the ACM 38:39–41.

Phi The Pham, Marie-Francine Moens, and Tinne
Tuytelaars. 2010. Cross-media alignment of names
and faces. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia
12(1):13–27.

29



Phi The Pham, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Marie-Francine
Moens. 2011. Naming people in news videos with
label propagation. IEEE Multimedia 18(3):44–55.

Deva Ramanan, David A Forsyth, and Kobus Barnard.
2006. Building models of animals from video.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 28(8):1319–1334.

Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian
Sun. 2015. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time ob-
ject detection with region proposal networks. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing systems.
pages 91–99.

Cordelia Schmid. 2001. Constructing models for
content-based image retrieval. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition,. IEEE, volume 2,
pages II–39.

Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sul-
livan, and Stefan Carlsson. 2014. CNN features off-
the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. pages
806–813.

Phil Spector. 1994. An introduction to S and S-PLUS.
Duxbury press: Wadsworth, Inc .

Alexandra Swanson, Margaret Kosmala, Chris Lintott,
Robert Simpson, Arfon Smith, and Craig Packer.
2015. Snapshot Serengeti, high-frequency anno-
tated camera trap images of 40 mammalian species
in an African savanna. Scientific Data 2:150026.

Aparna Nurani Venkitasubramanian, Tinne Tuytelaars,
and Marie-Francine Moens. 2016. Wildlife recogni-
tion in nature documentaries with weak supervision
from subtitles and external data. Pattern Recogni-
tion Letters, Elsevier 81:63–70.

Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro
Perona, and Serge Belongie. 2011. The Caltech-
UCSD birds-200-2011 dataset, Technical Report
CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technol-
ogy .

30


