



















































Phonological Soundscapes in Medieval Poetry


Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature.

,

Proceedings, pages 46–56, Vancouver, BC, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Phonological Soundscapes in Medieval Poetry

Christopher Hench
University of California, Berkeley

Department of German
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
chench@berkeley.edu

Abstract

The oral component of medieval poetry
was integral to its performance and recep-
tion. Yet many believe that the medieval
voice has been forever lost, and any at-
tempts at rediscovering it are doomed to
failure due to scribal practices, manuscript
mouvance, and linguistic normalization in
editing practices. This paper offers a
method to abstract from this noise and
better understand relative differences in
phonological soundscapes by considering
syllable qualities. The presented syllabifi-
cation method and soundscape analysis of-
fer themselves as cross-disciplinary tools
for low-resource languages. As a case
study, we examine medieval German lyric
and argue that the heavily debated lyri-
cal ‘I’ follows a unique trajectory through
soundscapes, shedding light on the perfor-
mance and practice of these poets.

1 Introduction

Research attempting to generalize medieval liter-
ary form has been severely hindered by the gap
between performativity and manuscript evidence,
manuscript mouvance, and linguistic normaliza-
tion in editing practices.1 How can formal fea-
tures be identified and agreed upon if manuscripts
differ significantly, and most transcriptions used
by scholars today have been heavily edited? Re-
cent scholarship has called for medievalists to
move beyond such obstacles and recognize the
importance of form in composition, performance,
and reception (Stock, 2004; Kragl, 2011; Braun,
2013). Markus Stock focuses on sound, reasoning
that if we believe these poems were primarily read

1See Paul Zumthor (1984) on the medieval voice.

or sung aloud (with or without musical accompa-
niment), any insight into how they sounded to the
audience would reveal a crucial aspect of the per-
formance. Stock’s reading emphasizes the sounds
of words and how the repetition of words is not
only a repetition of a concept, but a repetition of
a sound, reinforcing an idea’s connection to that
sound (Stock, 2004, 195). Yet it is not necessar-
ily about hearing and recognizing these patterns,
rather that “in the sound dimension the individual
rhetorical figure is blurred and a total acoustic im-
pression emerges” (Stock, 2004, 200).

This paper proposes taking advantage of the in-
formation in syllables to gauge the aesthetic affect
of a poem’s soundscape by calculating the per-
centage of open syllables in stanzas of medieval
poetry. It then attempts to correlate these “total
acoustic impression[s]” with the medieval voice.

2 Soundscapes

For orientation purposes, we may first read aloud
the following stanzas from the German poet Rein-
mar der Alte. As our focus is on the phonological
sound and rhythm, we may for now set aside un-
derstanding the poem, opening up this experience
to those who are not experts in medieval German.2

[1] Dêst ein nôt, daz mich ein man
vor al der werlte twinget, swes er wil.
sol ich, des ich niht enkan,
beginnen, daz ist mir ein swaerez spil.
Ich hât ie vil staeten muot
nu muoz ich leben als ein wı̂p,
diu minnet und daz angestlı̂chen tuot.3

2Each stanza is excerpted from a different poem.
3Des Minnesangs Frühling (MF) 192, 25-214C. “It is dis-

tressful that a man may force me before all the world to do
as he wishes. Am I to begin things that I cannot, that is for
me a difficult game. I’ve always had steadfast courage. Now
I must live as a woman who loves, and does so in fear.” All
translations are the author’s own unless otherwise noted.

46



[2] Swenne ich sı̂ mit mı̂ner valschen
rede betrüge,

sô het ich sı̂ unreht erkant.
Und gevâhe sı̂ mich iemer an deheiner

lüge,
sâ sô schupfe mich zehant
Und geloube niemer mı̂ner klage,
dar zuo niht, des ich sage
dâ vor müeze mich got behüeten alle

tage.4

It is difficult to not be immediately drawn to the
unique phonological soundscapes. Dêst ein nôt is
marked by many closed syllables, creating a short
abbreviated affect, while Swenne ich sı̂, with a ma-
jority of open syllables, generates a more iambic
rhythm. Although the musical settings and perfor-
mance for these medieval poems and many oth-
ers have not survived, we can gather from the
phonology of the stanzas that they must have been
very different. The great French philosopher Jean-
Jacques Rousseau wrote extensively about lan-
guage and music, arguing that some languages
were more phonologically suitable to music than
others. Rousseau believed that an unsuitable lan-
guage would be “indistinct” and “piercing” when
set to music (Rousseau et al., 1998, 144).5 To
avoid this, one would have to be selective with
words, generating very “insipid and monotonous”
music: “its progress would also be slow and tire-
some for the same reason, and if one wanted to
press the movement a little, its haste would resem-
ble that of a heavy and angular body rolling along
on cobblestones” (Rousseau et al., 1998, 144).6

Although Rousseau’s description is surely ex-
aggerated, many writers after him have shared his
sentiment that vowels and open syllables are cru-
cial to the composition of sung music and may
even correlate with melismatic syllables.7 Ger-

4MF 173, 13-96C, 53b. “If I were to ever deceive her with
my false words, then I would have valued her improperly.
And if she were to ever catch me in any lie, then she would
immediately shake me up and never believe my lamentation,
moreover anything I say. May God protect me from that every
day.”

5Rousseau understands Italian as having one of the great-
est phonemic inventories due to its open syllables and bright
vowels (Rousseau et al., 1998, 148).

6Charles Kensington argues that languages with fewer
open syllables, English in particular, can remedy this if lex-
ical breadth is sufficient to substitute words (Salaman, 1876,
123-124).

7See forthcoming work by Murray Schellenberg, ‘Influ-
ence of Syllable Structure on Musical Text Setting.’ Ross et
al. (2007) suggest that preferred musical intervals are related
to formants in vowel phones.

manic languages, including medieval Middle High
German (MHG), Middle English (ME), and Old
Norse (ON), would certainly be considered by
Rousseau as languages phonologically less suit-
able when compared to medieval romance lan-
guages such as the Old Occitan of the troubadour
tradition, with its many open syllables. This dis-
tinction is acknowledged in the various manifes-
tations of the MHG word ‘tandaradei’, a popular
interjection used to voice a bird’s singing pres-
ence. Variations on ‘tandaradei’ all allow for sig-
nificantly more sequences of open syllables than
normal for MHG phonology, emphasizing the vo-
cal quality of the singing. Heinrich von Stretelin-
gen reimagines himself in the position of the bird,
with the world needing his song, and augments
the poem’s soundscape by adding more open syl-
lables to his own singing to match the bird’s
tune (Schweikle, 1978):

[3] Frowe, bluomen unde klê
unde heide, diu so wunneklı̂che grüene

lı̂t,
Die wen muoten unde mê,
daz diu vogellı̂n wol singen suozze

widerstrı̂t.
Des fröit sich sêre
mı̂n gemüete, dâz si sint fröiderı̂ch.
al dur ir êre
singe ich mêre,
sı̂t si ist minneklich.
Deilidurei faledirannurei
lı̂dundei faladaritturei!8

Rousseau’s characterization of a less-suited lan-
guage can also shed light on the formal play in
MHG poetry emerging in the early 13th century
observed by Hugo Kuhn, Thomas Cramer, Markus
Stock, and Manuel Braun (Kuhn, 1967; Cramer,
1998; Stock, 2004; Braun, 2013). Rousseau’s
claim that a less-suited language would be
“force[d]” to exclude many words and would thus
become “monotonous” is exactly what the schol-
arship has identified (Cramer, 1998, 45). Mo-
tifs are constantly rehashed and Kuhn claims that
nothing new was contributed after the formal
shift. It appears that a musical vocabulary re-

8MHG text from Bartsch (1964). “Lady, flowers, and
clovers, and heather, which lay so wonderfully green, and
who want very much that the little bird sings well and sweet
in response. They are pleased by this very much, my senses,
that they are joyful. All by her honor, I sing more, since she
is dear. Deilidurei faledirannurei lı̂dundei faladaritturei!”

47



stricted by the phonology of a language, in addi-
tion to the natural development of the genre, led to
formal play aimed at breaking these boundaries.
With Konrad von Würzburg’s mid-13th century
infamous rhyme poem (Schlagreimlied 26, I), in
which every word is rhymed, we understand well
Rousseau’s sense of “a heavy and angular body
rolling along on cobblestones.”9

3 Syllabification

To analyze phonological soundscapes on a large
scale we must first be able to accurately syl-
labify words. The sonority sequencing princi-
ple (SSP) (Jesperson (1904)) and onset maximiza-
tion and legal initials (Vennemann (1972) and
Kahn (1976)) capture the fundamentals of syl-
labification in many languages. The SSP pro-
poses a scale in which every phoneme in a lan-
guage may be ordered. A phoneme’s sonority
value is based on the degree to which the lips are
opened and sound is allowed to pass through the
mouth (Jespersen, 1904, 186-187). Accordingly,
the most sonorous phoneme is an open [A]. Jes-
person groups phonemes first by whether they are
voiced or voiceless, then stops, fricatives, nasals,
laterals, rhotic consonants, and three levels of
vowels (high, medium, and low). A syllable break
appears before a trough in sonority (Jespersen,
1904, 187-188). While what follows details the
syllabification of MHG, this method is easily gen-
eralized to many other languages.

For the purposes of syllabifying MHG, it was
determined that a three tiered sonority hierar-
chy was most accurate.10 Computationally, each
phoneme in a word is assigned a value from 1 to
3. Vowels, both long and short, receive a 3. Sono-
rants (‘l’, ‘m’, ‘n’, ‘r’, and ‘w’) receive a 2. All re-
maining consonants receive a 1. The MHG word
‘werltlı̂chen’, viz. ‘worldy’, is syllabified by the
SSP accordingly:

werl — tlı̂ — (ch)en11

2322 123 1 32

9Rousseau’s thoughts on linguistic musicality has shifted
focus to phonological rhythm in the field of ‘rhythm metrics’.
See Arvaniti (2009); Bolinger (1965); Ramus et al. (1999,
268); Grabe and Low (2002); Dasher and Bolinger (1982);
Patel (2008); Palmer and Kelly (1992)

10When adapting to other languages, the number of tiers as
well as their composition must also be adapted.

11For MHG, ‘ch’ is considered a single phoneme [x].
Other cases include ‘sch’ ([S]) and ‘ph’ ([f]).

While the SSP alone can be very accurate, errors
may still occur in the onset. The legality princi-
ple argues that “[m]edial syllable initial clusters
should be possible word initial clusters” (Venne-
mann, 1972, 11). Daniel Kahn notes that this prin-
ciple still leaves several possibilities if a consonant
cluster could be broken up into more than one per-
missable word-initial grouping. To remedy this,
Kahn argues that there “is a strong tendency to syl-
labify in such a way that initial clusters are of max-
imal length” (Kahn, 1976, 41). Because ‘tlı̂’ is not
a legal onset in MHG, i.e., ‘tlı̂’ does not start any
MHG word, the ‘t’ is then drawn to the first sylla-
ble, and ‘werl-tlı̂-chen’ becomes ‘werlt-lı̂-chen’.12

While some may consider this the correct syl-
labification, we argue that an intervocalic ‘ch’
should be considered ambisyllabic and thus also
be split up. This and other individual fixes were in-
formed partly by a metrical analysis.13 MHG epic
poetry generally alternates between stressed and
unstressed syllables, following trochaic tetrame-
ter (Tervooren, 1997). A typical MHG epic verse
foot is two syllables in length, a stressed sylla-
ble followed by an unstressed syllable. How-
ever, feet may also consist of one or three sylla-
bles (Domanowski et al., 2009). Only phonolog-
ically heavy syllables (ending in a long vowel or
a consonant) may fill an entire foot. If a foot is
filled by three syllables, either the first two or the
last two syllables are often phonologically light.14

Thus the line belows necessitates the syllabifica-
tion ‘zec-he’ so that the single syllable may be
heavy and fill the entire foot:

daz |ist ein |fremdiu |zec|he15
× | ×́ × | ×́ ×| −́ |×̀ ˆ

The syllabification ‘ze-che’ would leave a light
syllable to fill an entire foot, which is not permit-
ted. Other syllabifications would break with the
natural stress of the language. The final syllabifi-
cation thus yields ‘werlt-lı̂c-hen’.16

A similar decision had to be made for inter-
12For this implementation, onsets were deemed illegal if

they appeared in less than .02% of all onsets in the corpus.
This threshold helps reduce the acceptance of onsets in for-
eign words.

13See Estes and Hench (2016) for a computational ap-
proach to MHG phonology and meter.

14Excepted are several end syllables in divided falls such
as ‘-er’, ‘-el’, and ‘ez’ (Domanowski et al., 2009).

15Wolfram von Eschenbach (1994, 17, l. 5-21) “This is a
peculiar arrangement.”

16This last change is important for our analyses in that it
changes an open syllable (‘lı̂’) to a closed syllable (‘lı̂c’).

48



MHG wordtokenizerstanza

list of
onsets

initial
syllable set SSP

second
syllable setLP

final
syllable set

individual
fixes

Figure 1: Flow chart for MHG syllabification.

vocalic affricates, which may be viewed as ei-
ther ambisyllabic or biphonemic. For example,
MHG ‘sitzen’ (‘sit’) could be syllabified as ‘si-
tzen’ ([zI.ts@n]), ‘sit-zen’ ([zIt.s@n]), or ‘sitz-en’
([zIts.@n]). The first syllabification would yield
NHG [zits.@n], which is incorrect. It similarly
does not correspond to manifestations in MHG
meter, which deems ‘sit-zen’ preferable, e.g.:

sie | sêre | solde | let|zen17
× | ×́ × | ×́ ×| −́ |×̀ ˆ

The workflow for this process as implemented
on MHG is charted in Figure 1.18 A text is first
tokenized into words, from which a list of permiss-
able onsets is extracted. Each word is then syllabi-
fied according to the SSP and controlled for legal-
ity of onset. A final small set of language specific
morphological fixes are made to yield the final syl-
lable set.

While algorithmic computational syllabifica-
tion is nothing new, previous methods have not
combined syllabification principles in the manner
presented here by controlling SSP syllabification
with the legality principle (LP).19 Moreover, this

17 (Hartmann and Mertens, 2005, 250, l. 361) “[that his
death] would cause them great harm.”

18The individual fixes include: intervocalic ‘ch’, intervo-
calic ‘sch’, a sequence of one long vowel followed by one
short vowel, and the suffixes ‘lı̂ch’ and ‘heit’. These mor-
pheme boundaries interfere with the otherwise normal pro-
cesses of syllabification. For example, with the fix the com-
mon MHG suffix -lich in wı̂plich results in the syllabification
‘wı̂p-lich’, not ‘wı̂-plich’, despite onset maximization prefer-
ring the latter (‘pl’ is a legal MHG onset).

19Early work from Bartlett et al. (2008) devised a new
method for phonemic translation of English, an important
step toward accurate syllabification. Bartlett et al. (2009)
produced gold standard results of the SSP, LP, and OM, also
creating an SVM-HMM model. Adsett and Marchand (2009)
test several algorithms across multiple languages concluding
that Syllabification by Analogy is most accurate. Rogova et
al. (2013) develop an SCRF model for phonetic transcrip-

method is particularly suited to languages lacking
a standardized orthography. Testing the algorithm
across dialects on the new Referenzkorpus Mit-
telhochdeutsch (REM) corpus (Klein et al., 2016)
yielded an accuracy of 99.4% on a randomly sam-
pled 1,000 words from the entire corpus of diplo-
matically transcribed texts.20 This algorithm thus
offers itself as a useful tool for the syllabification
of low-resource languages, particularly those with
varied orthography, a significant obstacle for com-
putational text analysis of medieval texts.

4 Method

Returning to Reinmar’s stanzas above, with such
clear voice distinctions one may wonder if these
soundscapes are correlated with specific content.
To this end, we propose treating each stanza of po-
etry as a single observation. The soundscape for a
stanza is quantified simply by calculating the per-
centage of open syllables, i.e., syllabes ending in
a vowel. Reinmar’s stanza [1] above has 9 open
syllables and 50 closed syllables, and is thus as-
signed the value of 15.25%. Stanza [2] has 42
open syllables and 31 closed syllables and is as-
signed 57.53%. Each stanza in the corpus is then
lemmatized and the lemmata are assigned to one
of seven buckets at 5% intervals based solely on
this percentage.21 Finally, normalized lemmata
frequencies are calculated for each bucket and are

tions. Kondrak et al. (2016) seek to improve the gold stan-
dard syllabification by including morphological segmentation
information.

20Syllabifying diplomatically transcribed texts introduces
several orthographic obstacles for computers. Most symbols
have a 1-1 signification to a standard grapheme, which for
computational purposes, were resolved. The greatest obsta-
cle was resolving ‘v’ and ‘u’ notations, as the consonant ‘v’
is at the other end of the sonority hierarchy than the vowel
‘u’. This project assumes a conservative approach by using a
corpus of standardized texts from the Mittelhochdeutsche Be-
griffsdatenbank (MHDBDB) (1992-2017) to determine per-
missable environments of the ‘v’ grapheme. If a given en-
vironment with a ‘v’ grapheme in the diplomatic translation
does not exist in the standardized environments, the ‘v’ is
converted to a ‘u’. All other cases remain, and no other
changes are made to the diplomatic transcriptions. Other
spelling variations do not undermine the algorithm, as they
commonly remain at the same level of the sonority hierar-
chy. This project therefore errs on the side of undercorrec-
tion. Note, however, that one should not compare results to
Bartlett et al. (2009) as MHG is significantly easier to syllab-
ify than English due to orthography and vocabulary. These
results also include repeated words to demonstrate relevance
to its application in the method.

21Lemmata in the MHDBDB corpus are annotated by hand
for each text included in this analysis.

49



stanzas

count 7856
median syllables per stanza 81
median lines per stanza 9
median syllables per line 8
median percent open syllables 32.88%

Table 1: Summary statistics for soundscape stanza
analysis

Figure 2: Distribution of soundscapes in the
MHDBDB lyric corpus

examined across buckets.22

We take all lyric poetry from the Mit-
telhochdeutsche Begriffsdatenbank (MHDBDB)
(1992-2017) corpus of medieval German texts.23

Relevant summary statistics for this subset of the
corpus are reproduced in Table 1. The distribu-
tion of soundscapes is shown in Figure 2 and the
selected buckets and counts are given in Table 2.

Because the MHDBDB corpus is a collection of
primarily edited texts with a range of dialects it is
important to determine the degree to which edito-
rial linguistic normalization practices might influ-
ence our measure of soundscapes. This problem
is not unique to medieval German, and stands as
a further significant obstacle to text analysis. A
diplomatic transcription of Reinmar’s stanza [1]
from the Codex Manesse (Handschrift C) serves
to illustrate:

D est ein not das mich ein man
22Lemmata frequencies are normalized by the length of the

bucket. Each bucket is bootstrap resampled 1,000 times with
replacement to generate 95% confidence intervals.

23The texts are all those designated as ‘Lyrik’ in the
MHDBDB, with duplicate editions removed. For the pur-
poses of this analysis, this paper considers only those stanzas
> 2 lines and < 50 lines. While some poems have extended
stanzas, especially in the longer political or social commen-
tary poems, considering a stanza > 50 lines distracts from the
focus of studying a smaller unified group generating a clear
soundscape.

percent open stanzas

< 20% 272
< 25% 803
< 30% 1582
< 35% 2055
< 40% 1592
< 45% 974
≥ 45% 516
total 7794

Table 2: Counts of stanzas per soundscape bucket

vor al d˜ w˜lte twinget swes er wil.
sol ich des ich niht enkan
beginnen dc ist mir ein sweres spil.
ich hat ie vil stetē mv

o
t.

nv mv
o
s ich lebē als ein wib

dv̇ mīnet vn̄ das angestlichen tv
o
t.24

Aside from shorthand, the primary differences are
in vowel orthography and length. Unfortunately,
diplomatic transcriptions of MHG lyric, as well
as other traditions, are far too few to cover the
breadth of the MHDBDB or to serve as the data
for a large analysis of MHG lyric. Nevertheless,
an impressive effort has been made by the Lyrik
des deutschen Mittelalters (LDM) (1992-2017)
project to provide a complete online edition of
MHG lyric with side-by-side diplomatic transcrip-
tions and edited editions of all extant manuscripts
in which a poem survives. The LDM project has
completed all of the stanzas attributed to Dietmar
von Aist (42), Rubin (68), and Der wilde Alexan-
der (35) in the largest manuscript of MHG lyric,
the Codex Manesse. Across these texts we com-
pare the soundscapes for each stanza in the diplo-
matic transcription and the normalized MHG. Ta-
ble 3 gives the mean discrepancy in our measure
(the percentage of open syllables) weighted by syl-
lable count, demonstrating that it is unlikely that
with buckets of 5% a soundscape would be placed
in a bucket more than one bucket away from the
correct placement. This test is an important step
in building confidence to implement text analysis
techniques on noisy medieval manuscripts. By ab-
stracting from the grapheme and varied orthogra-
phy, this method is still able to garner an accurate
representation of a soundscape regardless of edit-
ing practices, perhaps even proxying for the other

24Transcription from Pfaff (1898, 197).

50



stanzas sound diff.

Dietmar von Aist 42 .79% ± 1.00 %
Rubin 68 .82% ± .89%
Der wilde Alexander 35 1.09% ± .99%
lyric total 145 .86% ± .95%

Table 3: Comparison of soundscape measure in
diplomatic transcriptions and normalized editions
in manuscript C, weighted by syllable count in
stanza.

layers of mediation inherent in medieval literature.

5 Soundscapes and Voice

Returning to Reinmar’s stanzas, it is noteworthy
that Dêst ein nôt is a male voice and Swenne ich sı̂
is a female voice. Reinmar was not the only one to
distinguish speaker roles through soundscapes:25

[4] Owê,
si kuste âne zal
in dem slâfe mich.
dô vielen hin zetal
ir trehene nider sich.
iedoch getrôste ich sie,
daz si ir weinen lie
und mich alumbe vie.
dô tagte ez.26

[5] Owê,
daz er sô dicke sich
bı̂ mir ersehen hât!
als er endahte mich,
sô wolt er sunder wât
mı̂n arme schouwen blôz.
ez was ein wunder grôz,
daz in des nie verdrôz.
dô tagte ez.27

It is no coincidence that Heinrich von Morun-
gen uses this soundscape difference to highlight

25Heinrich von Morungen, MF 143,22-93C ff.
2659.18% open syllables. “Woe, she kissed me innumer-

able times in my sleep. Then her tears fell downward. Yet I
comforted her, that she let her crying be, and embraced me.
Then the day dawned.”

2727.08% open syllables. “Woe, that he falls for me over
and over! As he discovered me, he wanted to see my arms un-
covered and bare. It was a great wonder that he never stopped.
Then the day dawned.”

the ‘Wechsellied’, viz. ‘alternating song’, qual-
ity of his dawn song. This change in soundscape
is a feature that largely goes unnoticed by mod-
ern readers, as these songs are no longer per-
formed or read aloud. Manuel Braun, describ-
ing Ulrich von Liechtenstein’s Wizzet frouwe wol
getan, similarly shows a clear formal distinction
between male and female voices: “The man speak-
ing in the first stanza demonstrates his abilities by
using only a single rhyme. The woman in the
second stanza does the opposite, not rhyming at
all. Thus her speech appears artless and inferior
[...]” (Braun, 2013, 223). Thomas Cramer illumi-
nates the same poem, emphasizing that such for-
mal mastery would not have been understood by
the average audience member, especially not in a
purely oral tradition (Cramer, 1998, 16). Yet this
paper argues that these formal distinctions would
have been experienced as such by an audience
accustomed to such performances, and that these
soundscapes have thematic and voice associations.

Among the many possibilities of correlating
thematics and voice with soundscapes, we choose
here to investigate voice through one of the most
common groups of words in the entire corpus: pro-
nouns. Figure 3 shows the relative frequency of
the lemmatized pronouns for ‘I’ (‘ich’), ‘he’ (’er’),
and ‘she’ (‘sie’) for each soundscape grouping.
Shaded regions depict 95% confidence intervals
determined by bootstrap resampling 1,000 stanzas
from each bucket. Among the pronouns there is
a clear trend in ‘ich’ and ‘er’. To reiterate, ‘ich’
in this analysis includes all inflected forms—‘ich’,
‘mich’ (me, acc.), ‘mir’ (me, dat.), etc. Figure 3
implies that with a greater share of open syllables
in any given stanza, the share of all words referring
to a first person subject ‘I’ increases. The opposite
holds true for ‘he’, while ‘she’ remains relatively
constant across buckets.28

For further confirmation of this method, we
also chart the trends of each grammatical gen-
der’s definite article with the hypothesis that due
to the definite article inflections and nominal ad-
jective endings attributed to each gender, the fem-
inine article lemma would increase as the mascu-

28Several tests were conducted to further ensure and ex-
plore the accuracy of these results. The most obvious po-
tential complication from the above analysis is that the size,
content, and style of these texts vary significantly, and larger
texts will inevitably have a larger influence on the analysis.
The analysis was rerun holding out a different text each iter-
ation, producing similar results. The five largest texts were
also removed, yielding similar results.

51



Figure 3: Lemmatized pronouns by soundscape
bucket

Figure 4: Lemmatized definite articles by sound-
scape bucket

line article lemma decreases, and the neuter arti-
cle lemma would remain relatively stable across
soundscape buckets.29 Figure 4 confirms this hy-
pothesis and demonstrates the inevitability that un-
derlying grammatical genders have a significant
impact on the soundscape of a MHG stanza.

The duration of this study will focus on the
soundscapes of the first person pronoun and the
lyrical ‘I’.30 ‘ich’ and all of its inflected forms are

29Following Mittelhochdeutsche Grammatik (Paul et al.,
1982), all masculine definite article inflections are closed syl-
lables, only a nominative nominal adjective ending is open.
Feminine neuter and accusative article inflections are open
syllables, as is the pronominal nominative adjective ending.
All neuter definite article inflections are closed syllables, both
the nominative and dative nominal adjective endings are open
syllables.

30Admittedly, ‘er’ and ‘sie’ are complicated cases, as
MHG can refer to non-human objects using the masculine
and feminine pronouns for the gender, though in this genre
of lyric that is rather uncommon. While stanzas with a fe-
male voice have not been separately annotated, Katharina
Boll’s thorough study Also redete ein vrowe schoene iden-
tifies two characteristics marking a stanza in a female voice:
“For one, the extreme distinction through a male first-person
singer with the ‘Inquit’ formula. The gender specific status of
the speaker can also be shown internally, for example through

unambiguous in MHG in their reference to a first
person speaker. Moreover, save the feminine ac-
cusative possessive pronouns, each form of ‘ich’ is
a closed syllable. To be growing in presence inside
of a soundscape with a greater share of open syl-
lables implies that it must be counteracting itself
with more open syllables to offset its own closed
quality.

6 The Medieval German Lyrical ‘I’

In MHG lyric there are two opposing interpreta-
tions of the lyrical ‘I’, with a wide spectrum in be-
tween.31 One interpretation claims that the lyrical
‘I’ and all other roles are entirely fictional, cre-
ated for entertainment or pedagogical purposes.
It follows that we know nearly nothing about the
real authors and performers. Günther Schweikle,
while not assuming this extreme stance, argues
that Minnesang (medieval German love lyric) is a
constructed realm of stage play (Schweikle, 1995,
92).32

Schweikle’s position has been softened signifi-
cantly by Jan-Dirk Müller, who, while acknowl-
edging and emphasizing the fictional aspect of
Minnesang, seeks to reconcile this aspect with the
many attempts by the Minnesänger (the poets of
Minnesang) to integrate a very real aspect of their
life, society, and work into their poems. Elements
of reality, Müller argues, are necessary to convince
and captivate the audience. One great difference
in Minnesang from other forms of poetry is that
the poets commonly represent not a single fictional
or non-fictional person, but an entire community
(ladies, knights, singers, etc.), as these roles of-
ten collapse into one through an abundance of ref-
erences, not hinting at reality, but at what reality
could or should be (Müller, 2001, 110, 113, 127).
Müller argues for an inclusive interpretation of this

the apostrophization of the male partner” (Boll, 2007, 117).
This ‘Inquit’ formula, “sprach diu vrouwe” (“the lady said”),
is not measured in the preceding analysis. However, the com-
mon internal pronoun reference (‘er’ and its inflections) is
captured clearly and is consistent in soundscapes with a lower
share of open syllables, exemplified by Reinmar and Heinrich
above. While we hesitate to make any stronger claims due to
referential ambiguity, this line should be further investigated
and the groundwork for constructing a supervised classifier
has been laid.

31This debate began with Warning (1979). See also
Strohschneider (1996) and Müller (2001), (2004).

32Horst Brunner adopts a similar stance for MHG lyric
outside the Minnesang genre (Brunner and Tervooren, 2000,
7). Sabine Obermaier argues that even when speaking self-
reflexively, these poets recreate themselves many times over
in different professions (Obermaier, 2000).

52



‘I’ as an individual, an author, a singer, and com-
munity, also emphasizing the agenda behind the
‘ich’.

Intensifying some of Müller’s claims, Har-
ald Haferland maintains that the fiction of Min-
nesang is actually much closer to reality and that
the Minnesänger, through situational references,
often speak directly to the audience as them-
selves (Haferland, 2004, 77). Haferland argues
that Minnesang’s success was contingent upon be-
lievability. The effect of the poems would be much
stronger if the poet could relate situations directly
to the audience without a fictive role.

What consequences do these soundscapes have
for the configuration of the first person in MHG
poetry? Considering Stock’s recent research on
sound, we recognize that repeating the first per-
son pronoun is not only repeating a semantic con-
cept, but the actual sounds of ‘ich’, ‘mich’, ‘mir’,
etc. Stock’s example is Gottfried von Neifen,
one of the lead poets in shifting the genre to-
ward more formalist ambitions. He is interested
in Gottfried’s use of sound through word repeti-
tion, specifically through the repetition of ‘fröide’
(’joy’) and ‘liebe’ (’love’), in the sense of Vickie
Ziegler’s ‘Leitwort’, viz. ‘leading-’ or ‘guiding
word’ (Ziegler, 1975). While the ‘Leitwort’ is
generally understood to have semantic importance
due to its high frequency relative to the rest of
the corpus or song, what if the ubiquitous lyri-
cal ‘I’, this heavily controversial figure, is ele-
vated to ‘Leitwort’, or perhaps ‘Leitklang’ (‘lead-
ing sound’), via its unique soundscape presence?

[6] Ich solt aber dur die süezen
grüezen meien walt heid ouwe
und der kleinen vogel süezez singen,
lieze eht mir an ir gelingen
trût mı̂n trôst, mı̂s herzen frouwe,
daz si mı̂nen kumber wolde büezen:
seht, sô wurde ich noch an fröiden rı̂che.
truter lip, nu tuot genædecliche:
rôter munt, du maht mı̂n leit verdrin-

gen.33

[7] Süeziu minne, sı̂t dı̂n minne
33Text from Kraus (1951-1958). 35.71% open syllabes. “I

should but sing sweetly through the sweet, welcoming May
forest, heather, water, and to the small birds. May it only
reach her as comfort, my dear, lady of my heart, that she
would wish to relieve my suffering: see, so will I be rich
in joy. My dear, now do so graciously: red mouth, you drive
away my suffering.”

sinne krenket zallen stunden,
wie sold ich dan iemer frô belı̂ben?
lieber lı̂p vor allen lı̂ben,
heilet mir mı̂ns herzen wunden,
daz mı̂n fröide lige an dem gewinne.
tuot ir daz, sô wirde ich froidebære.
sælic wı̂p, nu scheidet mich von swære.
Minne, dû maht mir mı̂n leit

vertrı̂ben.34

[8] Ich hân fröide von ir eine:
seine troestet mich ir güete.
dâ von muoz mir spilndiu fröide

swinden.
lieze sie mich gnâde vinden,
seht, so fröite mı̂n gemüete,
daz mir wurde ir rôter kus, ein kleine;
so wær ich vil manger sorgen âne.
triutelehter lı̂p, ich lebe in wâne
daz ich fröide von iu müge enpfinden.35

Formal play is clearly on display in Gottfried’s
song through rhyme, alliteration, and soundscape.
The percentage of open syllables gradually in-
creases in each stanza, taking on an entirely new
soundscape in the last stanza, while retaining
nearly the same number of syllables per line and
presumably the same metrical scansion. While we
clearly see the increased presence of the ‘Leitwort’
‘fröide’, it is easy to overlook the simultaneous in-
creased presence of the first person (following the
trend in Figure 3). Not only does this subject in-
crease in count, but also in space and time inter-
vals, both crucial aspects of the performance. In
the first two stanzas the subject appears in more
concentrated sections, while Gottfried leaves him-
self (or his fictive role) out of consecutive verses to
describe nature, a bird, and love. Not so in the final
stanza, in which Gottfried’s subject asserts himself
in every verse, refocusing the audience’s attention
on the subject before them, not only through these
self-references, but also by intensifying the sound-

3439.29% open syllables. “Sweet love, since your love
weakens the senses at all hours, how should I then ever be
left happy? My dear above all others, heal me of my heart’s
wounds, that my happiness is won. If this is done, so will I
be joyful. Fortunate lady, part me now from grief. Love, you
drive away my suffering.”

3549.41% open syllables. “I had joy from her alone: her
goodness comforted me, from which the playful joy must
vanish. If she allowed me to find grace, you see, so would
my disposition be joyed, that I would receive her red kiss, a
small one; so would I be without many worries. My dear, I
live in hope that I may feel joy from you.”

53



scape. Each self-reference throughout the entire
poem is itself a closed syllable for which Got-
tfried must compensate further as the song pro-
gresses. The clear increased presence of ‘fröide’
is certainly one solution. Stock hesitantly borrows
from Kuhn’s terminology, that the ‘fröide’ ‘Leit-
wort’ in Gottfried’s complementary KLD song 3
through its repeated employment in formal moves
becomes “objective”.36 The objective ‘fröide’ be-
comes the central theme of the poem, superseding
the singer himself. Yet in his poem above, Got-
tfried appears to struggle with the objectivisation
of ‘fröide’ in order to maintain the singer as the
central reference, in fact it is the subject, to which
this increased presence of the sound (and ‘reality’)
of ‘fröide’ is constantly subjected. Although as we
have now come to learn, it is not only the sound
of ‘fröide’, rather the sonorous sound of open syl-
lables, with which the subject is temporally and
sequentially surrounded, and which may simply
serve as a counter-weight to the increased pres-
ence of the ego-centric subject.

7 Conclusion

This paper has demonstrated that abstracting from
orthographic variation and individual graphemes
to the building blocks of language can help unite a
diverse corpus for analysis. Testing this method on
various levels of mediation demonstrates its poten-
tial for text analysis on the heavily mediated me-
dieval corpus. Implementing this method reveals
unique soundscape experiences of a medieval au-
dience. This paper thus answers calls for new for-
mal approaches to sound across disciplines, and
provides a generalizable workflow for the syllab-
ification of low-resource languages. The results
from a case study of medieval German lyric sup-
port a counter-intuitive trend in the positioning of
the lyrical ‘I’, and paves the way for feature ex-
traction and classification of gendered voice.37

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the Mittelhochdeutsche
Begriffsdatenbank and Klaus Schmidt, Digital Hu-
manities at Berkeley, and David Bamman for their
continued support of this project.

36See Stock (2004, 188) and Kuhn (1967).
37The source code for this project is avail-

able at https://github.com/henchc/
ACL-LaTeCH-CLfL-2017.

References
Connie R Adsett and Yannick Marchand. 2009. A

comparison of data-driven automatic syllabification
methods. In International Symposium on String
Processing and Information Retrieval. Springer,
pages 174–181.

Amalia Arvaniti. 2009. Rhythm, Timing
and the Timing of Rhythm 66(1):46–63.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000208930.

Susan Bartlett, Grzegorz Kondrak, and Colin Cherry.
2008. Automatic syllabification with structured
svms for letter-to-phoneme conversion. In ACL
2008. pages 568–576.

Susan Bartlett, Grzegorz Kondrak, and Colin Cherry.
2009. On the syllabification of phonemes. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technolo-
gies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 308–316.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1620799.

Karl Bartsch. 1964. Die Schweizer Minnesänger. Hu-
ber.

D. L. Bolinger. 1965. Pitch accent and sentence
rhythm. In Abe, Kanekiyo, Forms of English: ac-
cent, morpheme, order, Harvard University Press,
pages 139–180.

Katharina Boll. 2007. Also redete ein vrowe schoene:
Untersuchungen zu Konstitution und Funktion der
Frauenrede im Minnesang des 12. Jahrhunderts.
Number 31 in Würzburger Beiträge zur deutschen
Philologie. Königshausen & Neumann.

Manuel Braun. 2013. Aufmerksamkeitsverschiebung.
Zum Minnesang des 13. Jahrhunderts als Form- und
Klangkunst 21:203–230.

Horst Brunner and Helmut Tervooren. 2000. Ein-
leitung: Zur situation der sangspruch- und meis-
tergesangsforschung 119(2000):1–9.

Thomas Cramer. 1998. Waz hilfet âne sinne kunst?:
Lyrik im 13. Jahrhundert Studien zu ihrer Ästhetik.
Number Heft 148 in Philologische Studien und
Quellen. E. Schmidt.

Richard Dasher and Dwight Bolinger. 1982.
On pre-accentual lengthening 12(2):58–71.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025100300002462.

Anna Domanowski, Yochanan Rauert, Hanno
Rüther, and Tomas Tomasek. 2009. Mittel-
hochdeutsche Metrik Online. https://www.uni-
muenster.de/MhdMetrikOnline/.

Alex Estes and Christopher Hench. 2016. Su-
pervised machine learning for hybrid meter
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W16/W16-
0201.pdf.

54



E. Grabe and E. Low. 2002. Durational variability in
speech and the rhythm class hypothesis Vol. 7:515–
546.

Harald Haferland. 2004. Minnesang als posenrhetorik.
In Albrecht Hausmann, Cornelia Logemann, and
Christian Rode, editors, Text und Handeln: zum
kommunikativen Ort von Minnesang und antiker
Lyrik, Winter, number Heft 46 in Beihefte zum Eu-
phorion, pages 65–105.

Hartmann and Volker Mertens. 2005. Der arme
Heinrich. Bibliothek des Mittelalters. Chadwyck-
Healey, Cambridge, England.

Otto Jespersen. 1904. Lehrbuch
der Phonetik;. Leipzig, Teubner.
http://archive.org/details/lehrbuchderphone00jespuoft.

Daniel Kahn. 1976. Syllable-based generalizations in
english phonology.

Thomas Klein, Klaus-Peter Wegera, Stefanie
Dipper, and Claudia Wich-Reif. 2016. Ref-
erenzkorpus mittelhochdeutsch (1050-1350).
https://www.linguistics.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/rem/.

Garrett Nicolai Lei Yao Grzegorz Kondrak. 2016. Mor-
phological segmentation can improve syllabifica-
tion. ACL 2016 page 99.

Florian Kragl. 2011. wort unde wı̂se. Formen des sang-
baren Verses in der deutschen Literatur des Mittelal-
ters 52:31–80.

Carl von Kraus. 1951-1958. Gottfried von Neifen, vol-
ume Deutsche Liederdichter. M. Niemeyer.

Hugo Kuhn. 1967. Minnesangs Wende. Hermaea n.F.,
Bd. 1. Niemeyer.

Hugo Moser, Helmut Tervooren, and Carl von Kraus,
editors. 1977. Des Minnesangs Frühling. Hirzel,
36., neugestaltete u. erw. aufl edition.

Jan-Dirk Müller. 2001. ”ir sult sprechen willekomen”:
Sänger, sprecherrolle und die anfänge volkssprach-
licher lyrik. In Ute von Bloh and Armin Schulz,
editors, Minnesang und Literaturtheorie, Niemeyer,
pages 107–128.

Jan-Dirk Müller. 2004. Die fiktion höfischer liebe und
die fiktionalität des minnesangs. In Text und Han-
deln. Zum kommunikativen Ort von Minnesang und
antiker Lyrik, pages 47–64.

Sabine Obermaier. 2000. Der dichter als handw-
erker - der handwerker als dichter. autorkonzepte
zwischen sangspruchdichtung und meistersang.
119(2000):59–72.

Carloline Palmer and Michael Kelly. 1992. Linguistic
prosody and musical meter in song 31(4):525–542.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(92)90027-U.

Aniruddh D. Patel. 2008. Music, language, and the
brain. Oxford University Press.

Hermann Paul, Hugo Moser, Ingeborg Schröbler, and
Siegfried Grosse. 1982. Mittelhochdeutsche Gram-
matik. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen.

Fridrich Pfaff. 1898. Die grosse Heidelberger Lieder-
handschrift, in getreuem textabdruck. C. Winter.
https//catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/100607933.

F. Ramus, M. Nespor, and J. Mehler. 1999. Correlates
of linguistic rhythm in the speech signal 73(3):265–
292.

Kseniya Rogova, Kris Demuynck, and Dirk Van Com-
pernolle. 2013. Automatic syllabification using seg-
mental conditional random fields. Comput. Linguist.
Neth. J 3:34–48.

Deborah Ross, Jonathan Choi, and Dale Purves. 2007.
Musical intervals in speech 104(23):9852–9857.
http://www.pnas.org/content/104/23/9852.short.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, John T. Scott, and Jean-
Jacques Rousseau. 1998. Essay on the origin of lan-
guages and writings related to music. Number vol.
7 in The collected writings of Rousseau. University
Press of New England.

Charles Kensington Salaman. 1876. On the English
Language as a Language for Music 3(1):120–139.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jrma/3.1.120.

Günther Schweikle. 1978. Heinrich von stretelingen.
In Die deutsche Literatur des Mittelalters, Verfasser-
lexikon, W. de Gruyter, volume 3. Zweite, völlig neu
bearbeitete auflage edition.

Günther Schweikle. 1995. Minnesang, volume 244.
Metzler.

Margerete Springeth, Nikolaus Morocutti, and Daniel
Schlager. 1992-2017. Mittelhochdeutsche be-
griffsdatenbank (mhdbdb). universität salzburg.
http://www.mhdbdb.sbg.ac.at/. Ac-
cessed: 2016-10-01.

Markus Stock. 2004. Das volle wort - sprachklang im
späteren minnesang. In Albrecht Hausmann, Cor-
nelia Logemann, and Christian Rode, editors, Text
und Handeln: zum kommunikativen Ort von Min-
nesang und antiker Lyrik, Winter, number Heft 46
in Beihefte zum Euphorion, pages 65–105.

Peter Strohschneider. 1996. ”nu sehent, wie der
singet!”: vom hervortreten des sängers im min-
nesang. In ”Aufführung” und ”Schrift” in Mittelal-
ter und früher Neuzeit, pages 7–30.

Helmut Tervooren. 1997. Minimalmetrik zur Arbeit
mit mittelhochdeutschen Texten. Kümmerle Verlag,
Göppingen.

Theo Vennemann. 1972. On the Theory of Syllabic
Phonology. Linguistische Berichte 18:1–18.

Rainer Warning. 1979. Lyrisches ich und öffentlichkeit
bei den trobadors. In FS Hugo Kuhn (1979), pages
120–159.

55



Wolfram, Karl Lachmann, Eberhard Nellmann, and Di-
eter Kuhn. 1994. Parzival. Bibliothek deutscher
Klassiker. Deutscher Klassiker Verlag, Frankfurt am
Main, 1 edition.

Vickie L. Ziegler. 1975. The leitword in Minnesang:
stylistic analysis and textual criticism. The Penn
State series in German literature. Pennsylvania State
University Press.

Paul Zumthor. 1984. La poésie et la voix dans la civil-
isation médiévale, volume 9. Julliard.

56


