



















































Exploring Treebanks with INESS Search


Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics, pages 326–329,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 23-24 May 2017. c©2017 Linköping University Electronic Press

Exploring Treebanks with INESS Search

Victoria Rosén
University of Bergen
victoria@uib.no

Helge Dyvik
University of Bergen
helge.dyvik@uib.no

Paul Meurer
Uni Research

paul.meurer@uni.no

Koenraad De Smedt
University of Bergen
desmedt@uib.no

Abstract
We demonstrate the current state of
INESS, the Infrastructure for the Explo-
ration of Syntax and Semantics. INESS
is making treebanks more accessible
to the R&D community. Recent work
includes the hosting of more treebanks,
now covering more than fifty languages.
Special attention is paid to NorGramBank,
a large treebank for Norwegian, and to the
inclusion of the Universal Dependency
treebanks, all of which are interactively
searchable with INESS Search.

1 Introduction

The richly structured information in treebanks re-
quires powerful, user friendly tools for their ex-
ploration. We demonstrate the current state of
INESS, the Infrastructure for the Exploration of
Syntax and Semantics (Rosén et al., 2012a; Meurer
et al., 2013). The project implementing and oper-
ating this infrastructure is carried out by the Uni-
versity of Bergen (Norway) and Uni Computing (a
division of Uni Research, also in Bergen), and is
funded by the Research Council of Norway and the
University of Bergen (2010–2017).
INESS is aimed at providing access to treebanks

to the R&D community in language technology
and the language sciences. It is is developed and
operated in Norway, and has been integrated in
CLARINO, the Norwegian part of CLARIN. One
of the project’s main activities is the implementa-
tion and operation of a comprehensive open tree-
banking environment for building, hosting and ex-
ploring treebanks. The other main activity is the
development of a large parsebank for Norwegian.
INESS offers comprehensive services for the

construction, management and exploration of tree-
banks. A modern web browser is sufficient as a
client platform for accessing, searching and down-
loading treebanks, and also for the annotation of

LFG-based parsebanks, including computer-aided
manual disambiguation, text cleanup and handling
of unknown words (Rosén et al., 2009; Rosén et
al., 2012b; Rosén et al., 2016). These functions are
supported by cataloguing, resource management
and visualization (Meurer et al., 2016).
INESS has become a valuable service for re-

search groups who have developed or want to de-
velop treebanks, but who cannot or do not want to
invest in their own suite of web services for tree-
banking. Among the larger treebanks developed
by others and made available through INESS are
the Icelandic Parsed Historical Corpus (IcePaHC,
73,014 sentences) (Wallenberg et al., 2011), the
German Tiger treebank (50,472 sentences with
dependency annotation, 9,221 with LFG annota-
tion) (Brants et al., 2002) and the dependency part
of the Bulgarian BulTreeBank (11,900 sentences)
(Simov and Osenova, 2004).
The remainder of this paper provides search ex-

amples in recently added treebanks. In Section 2
we present NorGramBank and illustrate search in
LFG treebanks. Search in the UD treebanks is il-
lustrated in Section 3.

2 NorGramBank

NorGramBank (Dyvik et al., 2016) is a large
treebank constructed by parsing Norwegian text
with a wide coverage grammar and lexicon (Nor-
Gram) based on the Lexical-Functional Grammar
(LFG) formalism (Bresnan, 2001). Approximately
350,000 words of parsed text have been manu-
ally disambiguated and checked using computer-
generated discriminants. Through stochastic dis-
ambiguation the corpus has been extended to about
50 M word tokens. A grammar coverage test was
performed on 500 random sentences, of which
78.4% received gold analyses and 6.8% received
analyses with only a single local error (Dyvik et
al., 2016).
INESS Search is is a querying system for tree-

326



banks in a variety of formats (Meurer, 2012).
It handles search in constituency, dependency
and HPSG treebanks as well as in LFG tree-
banks. The core of INESS Search is a reim-
plementation of TIGERSearch in Common Lisp
and contains numerous extensions and improve-
ments. INESS Search supports almost full first-
order predicate logic (existential and universal
quantification; negation; quantifier scope can be
specified), with the exception of universal quan-
tification over disjunctions (Meurer, 2012, for fur-
ther details on the query language and the imple-
mentation). Partial structures that match variables
in queries are highlighted in the interface.
The query language contains some operators

that are specific for searching in LFG structures.
Among them are the projection operator (to query
for c- to f-structure projections), the path opera-
tor (to search for f-structure paths satisfying a reg-
ular expression over f-structure attributes), the c-
command and the extended head operator.
The rich information in NorGramBank allows

highly detailed queries. As an example, consider
the task — of interest to lexicographers, for exam-
ple— to study the set of nouns modified by a given
adjective, with frequencies. The syntactic expres-
sion of such modification may take several forms:
attributive position (a successful result), simple
predicative (the result wasn’t very successful), ob-
ject predicative (they considered the result highly
successful), predicative in a relative clause (it is
difficult to get a result which is completely success-
ful), etc. Across all these varieties the noun and
the adjective always share the value of the feature
GEND (gender) by reentrancy in the f-structure
representations. This can be exploited in a query
like (1), searching for nouns modified in various
syntactic ways by vellykket ‘successful’.

(1) #x_ >PRED ’vellykket’ & #x_ >ATYPE &
#x_ >GEND #g_ & #y_ >GEND #g_ & #y_
>(NTYPE NSEM) & #y_ >PRED #p

The query says that there exists an f-structure
#x_ which has ‘vellykket’ as the value of the at-
tribute PRED (predicate), has a value for ATYPE (i.e.,
it is an adjective), and has the value #g_ for GEND.
Furthermore there exists an f-structure #y_ which
also has #g_ as the value of GEND, has a value for
the path (NTYPE NSEM) (i.e., it is a noun), and has
the value #p for PRED. The absence of an under-
score in the variable name #p signals that its val-
ues should be listed in the output, which makes it

possible to sort the hits by the predicate values of
the modified nouns. This gives the output shown
in Table 1, showing the top of the list of 355 nouns
found, with frequencies. Clicking on one of the
lines in the table brings up a display of the sen-
tences found for that word combination.

Table 1: Top of the list of nouns modified by vel-
lykket ‘successful’

Figure 1 shows the analysis of a sentence from
the search output with the values of the search vari-
ables from the query expression highlighted in red:
Ekspedisjonen ble ansett som vellykket ‘The expe-
dition was considered (as) successful’. The exam-
ple illustrates how the query expression, based on
a shared GEND value, finds examples where the
modification relation between adjective and noun
is mediated by complex syntactic constructions in-
volving object predicatives, passive, control, etc.

3 The UD treebanks

The Universal Dependencies (UD) project is de-
veloping cross-linguistically consistent treebank
annotation for many languages.1 The number of
UD treebanks has been increasing dramatically.
We have imported and indexed all publicly avail-
able UD treebanks (up to v2.0), in order to make
them searchable with INESS.
Since all treebanks in this large collection follow

the same general annotation principles, they are
good targets for showing the capability of INESS
Search to search acrossmany treebanks at the same
time. For instance, an earlier pilot study (De Smedt
et al., 2015) illustrated the use of INESS Search to
get a quick indication of the correctness and con-
sistency of annotation across all the UDversion 1.1
treebanks.

1http://universaldependencies.org

327



Figure 1: The analysis of a retrieved sentence with the values of the search variables highlighted in red

According to the UD guidelines version 2 on the
UD website, the fixed dependency relation is one
of the three relations for multiword expressions
(MWEs). The fixed label is to be used for certain
fixed grammaticized expressions without any in-
ternal structure, but the guidelines do not make it
entirely clear whether such expressions must con-
sist of only adjacent words. If one is interested in
finding out whether this relation is actually used
for annotating non-adjacent words, query (2) can
be used to search for binary fixed relations that are
non-adjacent.

(2) #x >fixed #y & !(#y . #x) & !(#x .
#y) & !(#x >fixed #z & #z != #y) ::
lang

Query (2) says that there is a node #x which
dominates a node #y through a fixed relation. Fur-
thermore, it is not the case (the exclamation point
is the negation operator) that #y immediately pre-
cedes #x, and it is not the case that #x immediately
precedes #y. It is also not the case that #x has a
fixed relation to a node #z which is not equal to
#y.
The result in Table 2 shows the top search re-

sults obtained by (2) from the UD v1.3 treebanks
for German, Italian, Spanish and Swedish, and also
illustrates that the global variable lang (for lan-
guage) can add useful information from the meta-
data. Figure 2 shows an example of a non-adjacent
fixed relation in Swedish. The search variables are

added in red, making it easy to spot them when in-
specting a large dependency structure.

Table 2: Top search results for nonadjacent fixed
relations obtained by query (2)

Figure 2: The analysis of a retrieved fixed relation
with the search variables in red

328



References
Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolf-

gang Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER
treebank. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, pages 24–41.

Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwell, Malden, MA.

Koenraad De Smedt, Victoria Rosén, and Paul Meurer.
2015. Studying consistency in UD treebanks
with INESS-Search. In Markus Dickinson, Er-
hard Hinrichs, Agnieszka Patejuk, and Adam
Przepiórkowski, editors, Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic The-
ories (TLT14), pages 258–267, Warsaw, Poland. In-
stitute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sci-
ences.

Helge Dyvik, Paul Meurer, Victoria Rosén, Koenraad
De Smedt, Petter Haugereid, Gyri Smørdal Losne-
gaard, Gunn Inger Lyse, and Martha Thunes. 2016.
NorGramBank: A ‘Deep’ Treebank for Norwegian.
In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry De-
clerck, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asunción Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Tenth Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’16), pages 3555–3562, Portorož,
Slovenia. ELRA.

Paul Meurer, Helge Dyvik, Victoria Rosén, Koenraad
De Smedt, Gunn Inger Lyse, Gyri Smørdal Losne-
gaard, and Martha Thunes. 2013. The INESS tree-
banking infrastructure. In Stephan Oepen, Kristin
Hagen, and Janne Bondi Johannessen, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013), May 22–24,
2013, Oslo University, Norway. NEALT Proceed-
ings Series 16, number 85 in Linköping Electronic
Conference Proceedings, pages 453–458. Linköping
University Electronic Press.

Paul Meurer, Victoria Rosén, and Koenraad De Smedt.
2016. Interactive visualizations in the INESS tree-
banking infrastructure. In Annette Hautli-Janisz and
Verena Lyding, editors, Proceedings of the LREC’16
workshop VisLR II: Visualization as Added Value in
the Development, Use and Evaluation of Language
Resources, pages 1–7. ELRA.

Paul Meurer. 2012. INESS-Search: A search sys-
tem for LFG (and other) treebanks. In Miriam Butt
and Tracy Holloway King, editors, Proceedings of
the LFG ’12 Conference, LFG Online Proceedings,
pages 404–421, Stanford, CA. CSLI Publications.

Victoria Rosén, Paul Meurer, and Koenraad De Smedt.
2009. LFG Parsebanker: A toolkit for building and
searching a treebank as a parsed corpus. In Frank
Van Eynde, Anette Frank, Gertjan van Noord, and
Koenraad De Smedt, editors, Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-
guistic Theories (TLT7), pages 127–133, Utrecht.
LOT.

Victoria Rosén, Koenraad De Smedt, Paul Meurer,
and Helge Dyvik. 2012a. An open infrastructure
for advanced treebanking. In Jan Hajič, Koen-
raad De Smedt, Marko Tadić, and António Branco,
editors, META-RESEARCH Workshop on Advanced
Treebanking at LREC2012, pages 22–29, Istanbul,
Turkey.

Victoria Rosén, Paul Meurer, Gyri Smørdal Los-
negaard, Gunn Inger Lyse, Koenraad De Smedt,
Martha Thunes, and Helge Dyvik. 2012b. An inte-
gratedweb-based treebank annotation system. In Iris
Hendrickx, Sandra Kübler, and Kiril Simov, editors,
Proceedings of the Eleventh International Work-
shop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT11),
pages 157–167, Lisbon, Portugal. Edições Colibri.

Victoria Rosén, Martha Thunes, Petter Haugereid,
Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Helge Dyvik, Paul
Meurer, Gunn Inger Lyse, and Koenraad De Smedt.
2016. The enrichment of lexical resources through
incremental parsebanking. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 50(2):291–319.

Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2004. BulTree-
Bank Stylebook. BulTreeBank Project Technical
Report 5, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.

Joel Wallenberg, Anton Karl Ingason, Einar Freyr Sig-
urðsson, and Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson. 2011. Icelandic
Parsed Historical Corpus (IcePaHC) version 0.9.

329


