



















































Beyond On-hold Messages: Conversational Time-buying in Task-oriented Dialogue


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2017 Conference, pages 241–246,
Saarbrücken, Germany, 15-17 August 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Beyond On-Hold Messages:
Conversational Time-Buying in Task-Oriented Dialogue

M Soledad López Gambino
CITEC, Bielefeld University
Universitätsstraße 25, 33615

Bielefeld, Germany

Sina Zarrieß
CITEC, Bielefeld University
Universitätsstraße 25, 33615

Bielefeld, Germany
m.lopez gambino, sina.zarriess, david.schlangen@uni-bielefeld.de

David Schlangen
CITEC, Bielefeld University
Universitätsstraße 25, 33615

Bielefeld, Germany

Abstract

A common convention in graphical user
interfaces is to indicate a “wait state”, for
example while a program is preparing a
response, through a changed cursor state
or a progress bar. What should the ana-
logue be in a spoken conversational sys-
tem? To address this question, we set up
an experiment in which a human infor-
mation provider (IP) was given their in-
formation only in a delayed and incre-
mental manner, which systematically cre-
ated situations where the IP had the turn
but could not provide task-related infor-
mation. Our data analysis shows that 1)
IPs bridge the gap until they can provide
information by “re-purposing” a whole va-
riety of task- and grounding-related com-
municative actions (e.g. echoing the user’s
request, signaling understanding, assert-
ing partially relevant information), rather
than being silent or explicitly asking for
time (e.g. “please wait”), and that 2) IPs
combined these actions productively to en-
sure an ongoing conversation. These re-
sults, we argue, indicate that natural con-
versational interfaces should also be able
to manage their time flexibly using a vari-
ety of conversational resources.

1 Introduction

How to best present information in a dialogue sys-
tem is a central, and hence well-studied problem
(Stent et al., 2004; Demberg and Moore, 2006;
Rieser et al., 2010; Dethlefs et al., 2012b; Wen
et al., 2015). What has received less attention is
the question of what a system should do until it
can present information, in the case that retrieval
of this information takes time.

A simple option would be to remain silent.
However, as observed in human conversation anal-
ysis, longer periods of silence appear to be marked
in normal conversation and are typically avoided
(Clark, 2002). As part of an effort to study on-
line, incremental information presentation, we set
up an experiment where an information provider
(IP) was given their information in a delayed and
piecemeal fashion, and hence was faced with the
problem of having the turn before having the infor-
mation to relay (Section 2). We devised a coding
scheme for different types of dialogue moves used
in this “time-buying phase” before task-related in-
formation is available (Section 3). Analyzing the
distribution and sequencing of these moves (Sec-
tion 4), we find that a variety of strategies is used,
with direct requests for more time (“please wait”,
“one moment please”) being relatively rare.

2 Data Collection

As task domain, we chose flight travel informa-
tion.1 Interactions were set up between a CALLER
(C; a confederate), who had the information need,
and a TRAVEL AGENT (A), who was to provide the
information. The participants were assigned the
role of travel agent, and assumed that they were
talking to another participant. C and A were con-
nected via audio only, through high-quality head-
sets. Each agent handled 10 calls (from the same
caller, but treating each as separate), after two
training calls. We had 10 participants (balanced
for gender), all native German speakers.

To provide some control over the interaction,
the task was set up so that after a greeting provided
by a recording, C formulated their request in one
turn (ostensibly, addressing a dialogue system that
processed it) which A could hear, but not intervene

1A domain in which it is, to this date, realistic that a re-
quest needs significant time to be processed, as anyone who
has recently used flight search engines can attest.

241



Figure 1: Phases of the call.

Figure 2: Example interaction (gray: caller, white: travel agent)

in. C was given, as part of the experimental proto-
col, a schematic representation of their goal (e.g.,
“flight from Hannover to New York, early August,
weekday, Lufthansa”), but no exact formulation.
After the request was completed, the system (or so
A was told) processed it and showed it in writing
on a computer display placed in front of A. An au-
dible signal was played, after which the line was
assumed to be open and it was A’s task to respond
to the request, using information also displayed on
their computer screen. This information, however,
could be presented either immediately or after a
certain delay (consisting of five seconds plus a ran-
dom interval between 500 and 2500 ms). The in-
formation presentation itself was also varied. In
8 of the 10 calls handled by the same agent, 16
flights were presented; in the other 2, only 4. The
16 flight responses were presented either all in one
go, with the 16 flights appearing individually with
delays between them, or in two blocks. In some
cases, flights were taken off the result list (greyed
out) again after a delay. The intended effect of
this presentation mode was to keep A uncertain
of whether they already had the full flight list or
not. Figure 1 shows a schematic illustration of the
general call structure, and Figure 2 shows an ex-
ample call (abbreviated, and translated from the
German) with category labels explained next. Due
to technical problems, some recorded calls were
not useable, which left us with a total of 92 calls
(1h:41min audio).

3 Annotation

Time-Buying Stretch In this paper, we focus on
what we call the “time-buying stretch”, that is, the
time from after the beep (when A gets the turn)
until the moment at which A offers information
about a specific flight, or declares definitely that
no flight matches the request. One of the authors
identified these stretches in the calls. There is one
such stretch in each call, the length of which de-
pends on the information delay mode (see previ-

ous section) and the individual selection speed of
A. These stretches vary in duration from 4 seconds
to 50 seconds, with the majority being shorter than
20 seconds.

Time Buyer Categories To enable a fine-
grained analysis of the strategies for bridging the
time until information presentation, we annotated
dialogue moves that do not directly move the task
at hand forward (as per the definition of time-
buying stretch). We started out from the gen-
eral DAMSL scheme (Core and Allen, 1997) but,
somewhat contrary to our expectations, found that
the dialogue moves in our data correspond to var-
ious backward and forward-looking actions coded
in different parts of the DAMSL hierarchy. Thus,
we opted for a flat scheme, allowing us to la-
bel conversational actions specific to our domain.
The categories are shown together with exam-
ples in Table 1. It is important to note here that
we allow for multi-functionality of the dialogue
moves. Moves in the “echo” category, for exam-
ple, clearly also have a conversational grounding
function (Clark, 1996; Bunt, 2011); however, our
focus is on their function to avoid giving task in-
formation or being silent2.

The TB stretches were segmented and annotated
by one of the authors. An independent second an-
notator also labelled a randomly selected set of
20% of the time buyers, using the information
from Table 1 as a guideline. For these segments,
we calculated Cohen’s κ = 0.93, indicating that
the categories are well-recognisable.

4 Analysis

The first observation to make is that there is a sim-
ilar amount of speech (629 seconds) and of si-
lence (771 seconds) in the time-buying stretches.
It seems clear, hence, that our agents do something
else than just wait until they have task-related in-

2Interestingly, given our task setup, confirmation of the
search parameters was not really necessary for A, as these
were displayed on A’s screen.)

242



Category Description DAMSL Examples
acknowledgment signaling understanding of

the request/ acceptance of
task

Signal Understanding → Ac-
knowledge

C: I want to fly to Bristol.
A: Okay

echoing repeating the request or part
of it

Signal Understanding → Re-
peat / Statement→ Reassert

C: I’m looking for a flight to Izmir at
the beginning of August.
A: A flight to Izmir . beginning of Au-
gust

conf./exp./rep.
request

A asks C to clarify, repeat
or expand on request

Influencing addressee future ac-
tion → Directive → Info-
Request

Did you say Lufthansa?

filler conventional hesitation
sound

? Uh, uhm, mm, etc.

wait request A asks C to wait Influencing addressee future ac-
tion → Directive → Action-
Directive / Information Level
→ Task Management

One moment, please

agent/system
state

providing information
about factors which pre-
vent A from offering
information

Information Level → Task
Management

The search for flights is still in progress.
I’m not sure if Emirates flies this route.

commitment expressing that A is (still)
engaged in performing the
task

Committing Speaker Future
Action→ Commit

Let’s have a look...

availability announcing information
without presenting it

Statement→ Assert / Commit-
ting Speaker Future Action →
Commit

I could offer you a number of flights...
Hmm, you said Quito, is that correct?

partial match presenting information
which only matches the
request partially

Statement → Assert / Signal-
Understanding→ Repeat

There’s a flight to Sidney on 2.8 at
07:15, but you would prefer to fly after
lunchtime, so let’s keep looking...

temporary
non-
availability

announcing lack of infor-
mation at the current mo-
ment

Statement→ Assert Until now I haven’t found any flights for
your request, let’s keep looking...

incomplete partial utterance Communicative Status →
Abandoned

Maybe I can find...

Table 1: Time buyer categories (C: Customer, A: Agent)
Category %
echoing 21
filler 19
agent/system state 10.4
acknowledgment 9.4
commitment 8.8
incomplete 6.7
wait request 6.3
conf./exp./rep. request 5.9
availability 5.1
other 3.5
partial match 2.2
temporary non-availability 1.6

Table 2: Distribution of time buyer categories

formation to provide. Table 2 shows the overall
distribution of time buyer categories. As can be
seen, echoing occurs frequently, as does produc-
tion of fillers. Direct requests to wait are com-
paratively rare. As Figure 3 shows, there is con-
siderable variation between speakers in their dis-
tribution of time buyer categories, in particular
for echoing and filler, which can occur very fre-
quently or rarely depending on the speaker. Fi-
nally, Figure 4 illustrates the temporal sequencing

of the TB categories. The plot shows percentages
of TB type for the first seven time-buyers uttered
in each episode (where available). As this indi-
cates, there seems to be a certain structure to the
sequencing of these acts: First, taking over the
floor (and accepting the task) is acknowledged,
then some time is filled with echoing parts of the
request; when information becomes available, the
parameters are made present again through clar-
ification / expansion requests, or announcements
of partial or full availability. Task- and grounding-
independent acts such as fillers, announcements of
system state, or direct wait requests, are available
at any time, but are most relevant after the initial
grounding has been done and before partial infor-
mation is available for presentation.

5 Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, delayed informa-
tion presentation has so far not been systemat-
ically studied. Various systems, however, ad-
dressed the problem in an ad-hoc manner. The

243



acknowl filler ag/sys
state

commit echo c/e/r
request

avail incompl wait
0

10

20

30

40

50

%
 b

y
 e

a
ch

 p
a
rt

ic
ip

a
n
t

Figure 3: Distribution of TB categories per
speaker (only categories with an overall frequency
higher than 5%)

Figure 4: Distribution of time buyer categories for
the first seven time-buyers in each episode (where
available)

TRIPS system (Stent, 1999), for example, deals
with pauses during language generation by in-
serting “turn-keeping” utterances, such as um and
wait a minute. Funakoshi et al. (2008) conducted
a Wizard-of-Oz experiment with a robot which
blinked a light on its chest during long pauses, and
participants successfully understood this signal as
meaning that the robot was processing the incom-
ing utterance. Wigdor et al. (2016) carried out an
experiment in which a robot using “pensive fillers”
(utterances such as good question and let me think)
was viewed as more alive by participants than one
which only postponed information by producing
pauses. Although the motivation behind this ex-
periment is not related to a real need to buy time,
its results suggest that explicitly addressing collat-
eral aspects of the task before conveying primary

task information is not only not detrimental to the
interaction, but might in fact be beneficial.

From a broader perspective, we see this study
on time buying as contributing to research on in-
cremental generation and information presentation
for dialogue systems, cf. (Skantze and Hjalmars-
son, 2010), and incremental processing in gen-
eral (Schlangen and Skantze, 2009). In this line
of research, it is typically acknowledged that di-
alogue systems should be set up in a way such
that they are able to start speaking before a com-
plete plan of what to say has been built. Skantze
and Hjalmarsson (2010) present a model for in-
cremental generation that includes the ability to
insert small speech segments for hesitations and
fillers, in case the system has not fully planned the
current utterance. It is unclear how such a system
would be able to deal with scenarios similar to the
ones we have investigated in this work. Similarly,
other work has looked at appropriate timings of
feedback and barge-in in spoken dialogue systems
(Dethlefs et al., 2012a; Meena et al., 2013), deal-
ing with situations where the system does not need
to buy time pro-actively.

6 Conclusions and Further Work

It is often difficult to systematically elicit con-
versational phenomena in human-human dialogue
(Gustafson and Merkes, 2009), at least to an ex-
tent that would support robust data-driven systems
for conversational dialogue. We have presented an
experiment designed to investigate conversational
strategies used to bridge time until a task can be
fulfilled, or to say something before fully know-
ing what to say. We found that such phenomena
can be successfully and systematically triggered
by manipulating and delaying the information that
an agent has to communicate in a typical travel
information setup. Our analysis focused on the
time-buying stretch, i.e. the phase of the inter-
action where the information provider cannot of-
fer factual information. Even in this stretch, task-
or interaction-management related acts are clearly
preferable over explicit requests for more time.

In future work, we plan to analyze the re-
maining phases of the recorded interactions where
agents actually provided information. This will al-
low us to compare conversational strategies in this
initial time-buying stretch to grounding-related
strategies used in the information presentation
phase. It would also be interesting to analyze in-

244



formation postponing in actual telephone interac-
tions from customer/passenger service lines, and
see whether time-buying in the real world exhibits
similar characteristics to those in our recordings.
Clearly, this is subject to the possibility of obtain-
ing access to such data.

On the other hand, it is necessary to devote
more efforts to understanding the variation be-
tween the use of time-buyers by different indi-
viduals (Figure 3), as well as along time (Figure
4). In addition, while we think that the setup we
devised is representative for the travel informa-
tion domain specifically, it remains to be seen how
information-postponing occurs in other conversa-
tional contexts. A similar remark could be made
in connection to other languages: Since tolerance
to silence has been shown to differ significantly
across cultures (Lundholm Fors, 2015), observa-
tion of the phenomenon in non-German interac-
tions might also prove revealing.

Finally, we still need to establish how to incor-
porate these insights in a human-agent interaction
scenario. While our taxonomy was useful for an-
notation and analysis, it could be necessary to ad-
just it in order to implement time-buying in an ac-
tual system.

Acknowledgments

This research/work was supported by the Clus-
ter of Excellence Cognitive Interaction Technol-
ogy ‘CITEC’ (EXC 277) at Bielefeld University,
which is funded by the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG). Special thanks to our student assis-
tants for their help with transcription and annota-
tion, and to Julian Hough and Ting Han for en-
lightening discussions on the topic of time-buying.

References
Harry Bunt. 2011. The semantics of dialogue acts.

In Proceedings of the Ninth International Confer-
ence on Computational Semantics. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
IWCS ’11, pages 1–13.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Herbert H. Clark. 2002. Speaking in time. In Speech
Communication, Elsevier Science, volume 36, pages
5–13.

Mark G Core and James Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs
with the damsl annotation scheme. In AAAI fall sym-

posium on communicative action in humans and ma-
chines. Boston, MA, volume 56.

Vera Demberg and Johanna Moore. 2006. Information
presentation in spoken dialogue systems. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL.

Nina Dethlefs, Helen Hastie, Verena Rieser, and Oliver
Lemon. 2012a. Optimising incremental dialogue
decisions using information density for interactive
systems. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 82–93.

Nina Dethlefs, Helen Hastie, Verena Rieser, and Oliver
Lemon. 2012b. Optimising incremental generation
for spoken dialogue systems: Reducing the need for
fillers. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Natural Language Generation Conference. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 49–58.

Kotaro Funakoshi, Kazuki Kobayashi, Mikio Nakano,
Seiji Yamada, Yasuhiko Kitamura, and Hiroshi Tsu-
jino. 2008. Smoothing human-robot speech in-
teractions by using a blinking-light as subtle ex-
pression. In Proceedings of the 10th Interna-
tional Conference on Multimodal Interfaces. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, ICMI ’08, pages 293–296.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1452392.1452452.

Joakim Gustafson and Miray Merkes. 2009. Elicit-
ing interactional phenomena in human-human dia-
logues. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Con-
ference: The 10th Annual Meeting of the Special In-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 298–301.

Kristina Lundholm Fors. 2015. Production and Per-
ception of Pauses in Speech. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Gothenburg.

Raveesh Meena, Gabriel Skantze, and Joakim
Gustafson. 2013. A data-driven model for timing
feedback in a map task dialogue system. In 14th
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue-SIGdial. pages 375–383.

Verena Rieser, Oliver Lemon, and Xingkun Liu. 2010.
Optimising information presentation for spoken di-
alogue systems. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1009–1018.

David Schlangen and Gabriel Skantze. 2009. A gen-
eral, abstract model of incremental dialogue pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (EACL 2009). Athens, Greece,
pages 710–718.

Gabriel Skantze and Anna Hjalmarsson. 2010. To-
wards incremental speech generation in dialogue
systems. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Meeting

245



of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Di-
alogue. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, SIGDIAL ’10, pages 1–8.

Amanda Stent, Rashmi Prasad, and Marilyn Walker.
2004. Trainable sentence planning for complex in-
formation presentation in spoken dialog systems. In
Proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting on associ-
ation for computational linguistics. Association for
Computational Linguistics, page 79.

Amanda J. Stent. 1999. Content planning and genera-
tion in continuous-speech spoken dialog systems. In
Proceedings of the KI’99 workshop “May I Speak
Freely?”.

Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gašić, Dongho Kim, Nikola
Mrkšić, Pei-Hao Su, David Vandyke, and Steve
Young. 2015. Stochastic Language Generation in
Dialogue using Recurrent Neural Networks with
Convolutional Sentence Reranking. In Proceedings
of the 16th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Noel Wigdor, Joachim de Greeff, Rosemarijn Looije,
and Mark A. Neerincx. 2016. How to improve
human-robot interaction with conversational fillers.
In Proceedings of the 25th IEEE International Sym-
posium on Robot and Human Interactive Communi-
cation (RO-MAN). IEEE, pages 219–224.

246


