



















































'Fighting' or 'Conflict'? An Approach to Revealing Concepts of Terms in Political Discourse


Proceedings of the 2017 EMNLP Workshop on Natural Language Processing meets Journalism, pages 90–94
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

‘Fighting’ or ‘Conflict’? An Approach to Revealing Concepts of Terms in
Political Discourse

Linyuan Tang and Kyo Kageura
Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies / Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
linyuan-tang@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, kyo@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Previous work on the epistemology of
fact-checking indicated the dilemma be-
tween the needs of binary answers for the
public and ambiguity of political discus-
sion. Determining concepts represented
by terms in political discourse can be con-
sidered as a Word-Sense Disambiguation
(WSD) task. The analysis of political
discourse, however, requires identifying
precise concepts of terms from relatively
small data. This work attempts to provide
a basic framework for revealing concepts
of terms in political discourse with ex-
plicit contextual information. The frame-
work consists of three parts: 1) extract-
ing important terms, 2) generating concor-
dance for each term with stipulative defi-
nitions and explanations, and 3) agglom-
erating similar information of the term by
hierarchical clustering. Utterances made
by Prime Minister Abe Shinzo in the Diet
of Japan are used to examine our frame-
work. Importantly, we revealed the con-
ceptual inconsistency of the term Sonritsu-
kiki-jitai. The framework was proved to
work, but only for a small number of terms
due to lack of explicit contextual informa-
tion.

1 Introduction

In October 2016, in the process of diet deliber-
ations on assigning Japan’s Self-Defense Forces
members to U.N. operations in South Sudan,
Japanese Prime Minister Abe Shinzo stated that
the ‘fighting’ between the government and rebel
forces were not to be considered as a ‘military con-
flict’1, according to the definition of ‘conflict’ un-

der Japanese peacekeeping law.
When domain-specific jargons are used, the

ambiguity between common usage and domain-
specific usage becomes inevitable. In addition, the
case above illustrates that the task of political dis-
course analysis is different from other scientific
discourse analysis. In contrast to other scientific
domains, terms used by political figures tend to be
vague and ambiguous due to their unwillingness
to explain their opinions or statements sufficiently
clearly to the public. Although social scientists
may derive certain implications from the ambigu-
ities, an intentional misuse of terms by a political
figure, which is difficult to recognize, could lead
the public to misinterpretation.

As a prerequisite for fact-checking, therefore, it
is essential to reveal concepts represented by terms
in political discourse. As we cannot expect politi-
cians to do this, it is necessary for the public and/or
journalists to disambiguate concepts of terms. Au-
tomatic processing of political texts, namely word
sense disambiguation (WSD), has a potential to
assist this process.

The procedure of WSD can be summarized as:
‘given a set of words, a techique is applied which
makes use of one or more sources of knowledge to
associate the most appropriate senses with words
in context’ (Navigli, 2009). WSD in general relies
on knowledge; without knowledge, not only com-
puters but also human beings cannot understand
word sense. The unwillingness of political figures
to clarify the meaning of their utterances causes at
least two difficulties in WSD specific to political
discourse.

First, there exist few political domain-specific
dictionaries or corpora that could serve as a knowl-

1 As in English, there are also various verbal expressions
(Sentō, Shōtotsu, etc.) of the act of fighting in Japanese. Sentō
is the term that generally thought to be parallel to ‘military
conflict’ as well as ‘military fighting’.

90



edge base, which is desirable for WSD. Generally,
in order to facilitate communication, a dictionary
defines standard usage and a corpus exhibits prac-
tical usage of terms. On the other hand, politi-
cal figures almost always create specific usage of
terms to escape from common understanding.

Second, every term in political discourse could
have a peculiar concept. It is well known in Japan
that most utterances made in the Diet are drafted
by bureaucrats, and there are always subtle nu-
ances present in bureaucratese. If necessary, po-
litical figures would make every single term be in-
dependent of its synonyms, hyponyms and hyper-
nyms, even when the terms share a similar surface
word form2. Therefore, unlike the tasks of doc-
ument summarization or simplification, when re-
vealing the concept of a term made by political
figures, information loss is relatively less accept-
able.

The first difficulty could be overcome by creat-
ing a domain-specific knowledge base or applying
unsupervised disambiguation or word sense induc-
tion (WSI) methods. However, knowledge pro-
vided by political knowledge bases, which is nec-
essary for further research, could sometimes ob-
struct the analysis, because concepts of terms can
vary across political figures and scenarios. WSI,
on the other hand, while it is also necessary for fur-
ther research, suffers from a more practical prob-
lem, i.e., it identifies sense clusters rather than as-
signing a sense to a word, and ‘a significant gap
still exists between the results of these techniques
and the gold standard of manually compiled word
sense dictionaries’ (Denkowski, 2009).

In view of the urgent need for an accessible and
straightforward approach to practical WSD for po-
litical discourse, this ongoing research provides a
springboard by introducing a framework to reveal
concepts of terms using only explicit contextual
information. The method we propose copes with
the balance of the needs of knowledge and the at-
tention to the specific usages of terms by creating a
concordance that serves as a temporary knowledge
base. On the other hand, it deals with precision of
concept generation by keeping as much informa-
tion as possible.

We collected utterances made by Prime Minis-
ters of Japan in the Diet deliberations as target dis-

2In the example above, according to the government,
Sentō (fighting) is not defined while Sentō-kōi (act of fight-
ing) is defined by the law, so that these two terms have differ-
ent meanings and only the latter can be used.

courses. The concept-revealing framework con-
sists of three parts. First, we applied widely-used
tf-idf method to weigh terms and acquired nouns
with ranks by their importance. Second, we gener-
ated a concordance for each of the important terms
in order to collect their stipulative definitions and
explanations offered in the document. Thirdly, fo-
cusing on the similarity of concepts rather than the
quantity of clusters, we agglomerated similar in-
formation by hierarchical clustering.

Theoretically, as our approach extracts informa-
tion from given documents without summarization
or simplification, concepts of terms will surely be
revealed. Given this, we will show, instead of em-
phasizing the overall results, an important obser-
vation obtained from the concept of Sonritsu-kiki-
jitai3which was identified as one of the most im-
portant terms used by Prime Minister Abe Shinzo.
Specifically, conceptual inconsistency exists not
only between the speaker and the audience, but
also in the same speaker’s utterances.

2 Related work

The controversy among Uscinski and Butler
(2013), Amazeen (2015), and Uscinski (2015)
over the epistemology of fact-checking illustrated
issues on the methodology of fact-checking.

Uscinski and Butler (2013) made five method-
ological criticisms against fact-checking methods:
selection effects, confounding multiple facts or
picking apart a whole, causal claims, predicting
the future, and inexplicit selection criteria. These
challenges were related to ‘the naı̈ve political epis-
temology at work in the fact-checking branch of
journalism’ (Uscinski and Butler, 2013).

Amazeen (2015) critized Uscinski and Butler
(2013) for their overgeneralization of the selection
effects and failure to offer supportive empirical
quantification. She also demonstrated that there
was a high level of consistency among multiple
fact-checkers, and argued that fact-checking is im-
portant as long as ‘unambiguous practices of de-
ception’ continue (Amazeen, 2015).

The rejoinder then from Uscinski (2015) argued
that Amazeen’s attempt to infer the accuracy of
fact-checks failed because of fact-checkers’ pos-
sible political biases, and she also ignored the dis-
tinction between facts and claims. Fact-checking
was therefore still a ‘continuation of politics by

3An armed attack against foreign country resulting in
threatening Japan’s survival.

91



means of journalism’ rather than being an ‘coun-
terweight to political untruths’ (Uscinski, 2015).

Although the discussion was mainly about
the epistemological disagreement over so-called
“truth” between journalists and social scientists,
it did indicate the dilemma between ‘the needs
of citizens, politicians, and therefore journalists
for clear-cut binary answers’ (Uscinski, 2015) and
ambiguity of most politcal discussion, which sug-
gests the necessity of a novel perspective on fact-
checking, focusing on how political figures per-
formed their language rather then what really oc-
curred.

3 Approach

3.1 Dataset

We assembled a corpus of utterances made by
prime ministers of Japan at the Plenary Session
of the Diet from 1996 to 2016, from the Diet
Record4. The corpus of 2605 fulltext discourses
includes utterances from 11 prime ministers, 47
sessions. We selected utterances of Abe Shinzo,
the incumbent Japanese Prime Minister, as our tar-
gets. The target utterances include 427 fulltext dis-
courses from 6 sessions (16469 sentences, 9715
types, 492505 tokens). We used the rest of the
corpus as supplementary materials to weigh the
terms.

3.2 Procedure

3.2.1 Term extraction
We firstly seperated 2605 discourses into 47 docu-
ments in accordance with sessions of the Diet (6
target documents for Prime Minister Abe). Af-
ter data cleansing, we used ChaSen5(A Japanese
morphological analyzer) to convert each document
into a bag of its nouns. Nominal verbs were also
included.

We then ranked nouns to obtain the most im-
portant terms in each document. We applied the
tf-idf model because it is one of the most popular
term-weighting schemes and is empirically useful.

3.2.2 Concordance generation
For each important term in the document, a list
of all the instances of the term was generated if
the term co-occurred with a stipulation expression
such as to-ha, to-tēgi (both of the phrases repre-
sent ‘be defined as’)6. An instance of a term was

4http://kokkai.ndl.go.jp
5http://chasen-legacy.osdn.jp

a sentence which consists of the term and its con-
text. All the instances of a term formed its concor-
dance. The term’s concept was constructed with
only these instances.

3.2.3 Concept clustering
We converted every entry in the concordance into
a vector for calculating the similarity of the term’s
contextual information. We applied tf-idf model
instead of word embedding. Word embeddings
contain biases in their geometry that reflect stereo-
types present in broader society, and word em-
beddings not only reflect such stereotypes but can
also amplify them (Bolukbasi et al., 2016). On
the other hand, tf-idf has no semantic represen-
tation of words. In order to cope with poten-
tial subtle nuances in the utterances of political
figures, a non-semantic representation is prefer-
able to a semantic one. We then generated a
hierarchy of clusters of the entries with Ward’s
method. Even though clustering approaches in
WSI are usually non-hierarchical (Navigli, 2009;
Denkowski, 2009), the reason for applying a hi-
erarchical clustering instead of a non-hierarchical
one is that we focused on the similarity of entries
rather than the quantity of concepts.

Finally, by eliminating duplicated entries7and
combining the remainder manually, we were able
to acquire concepts of terms which are constructed
with explicit stipulative definitions and explana-
tions offered in documents. The revealed concept
was therefore entirely contextual and independent
of that which we have already known about.

4 Results

We treated the top 100 out of 8298 (3568 proper
nouns) nouns as important terms. Three of them
are explicitly defined in Prime Minister Abe’s
utterances: Sekkyokuteki-hēwa-syugi (Proactive
pacifism), Sonritsu-kiki-jitai, and Rikken-syugi
(Constitutionalism). Sekkyokuteki-hēwa-syugi
was ranked as the 17th most important term among
all the nouns. The cluster dendrogram of 68 sen-
tences which were in the term’s concordance is
shown in figure 1. Sonritsu-kiki-jitai was ranked
as the 24th most important term among all the

6Besides these two phrases, various expressions are used
to define terms. Since there haven’t been a comprehensive
summary of definition/stipulation expressions yet, we may
not be able to extract all the potential defined terms.

7Most utterances were repeated twice at the House of
Representatives and the House of Councilors.

92



41
51

4
6 2

17 67
19

25
16 22

28 48
57

5 32
36

14 52
23

64
21

69 66 59 62
18

24
1 26

33
34

15 60
27

50
10 40

31
45 47

42 30 29
13 9

55
68 65 63 61 58 54 49 46 44 20 39

3
35 37

7 43
38

11 56
53 8 12

0
10

20
30

40
50

Sentence number

He
ig
ht

Figure 1: Cluster dendrogram of Sekkyokuteki-hēwa-syugi

38

12 33

2 39

36 21

18 19

5 17

26 34

7

3

10

13 23

32 9

15

6 11 2
2 27

4

25

20 37

14

24

31 8

16

1 29

30

28 35

0
5

10
15

20
25

30
35

Sentence number

He
ig
ht

Figure 2: Cluster dendrogram of Sonritsu-kiki-jitai

nouns. The clustering result of 39 sentences is
shown in figure 2. Rikken-syugi was ranked as the
72nd most important term among all the nouns.
The clustering result of 22 sentences is shown in
figure 3. Few terms were defined in utterances of
Prime Ministers (15 terms in total).

Mutually contradictory explanations were
found in the concordance of Sonritsu-kiki-jitai.
Specifically, this term is currently translated
to ‘an armed attack against foreign country
resulting in threatening Japan’s survival’, and
is defined as a situation that ‘an armed attack
against Japan or a foreign country that is in a
close relationship with Japan occurs, and as a
result, threatens Japan’s survival and poses a
clear danger to fundamentally overturn people’s
right to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness’ by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. The

4

5

9

21

16

12 14

22 7

17 18

1 6

15 20

3 2

8 19

13

10 110
5

10
15

20
25

Sentence number

He
ig
ht

Figure 3: Cluster dendrogram of Rikken-syugi

situation is also one of three new conditions by
which “use of force” as measures for self-defense
is strictly limited8. This definition was mentioned
two times in Prime Minister Abe’s utterances
(the 189th session on 26th May and 27th July,
2015). However, it was also mentioned several
times that to determine whether a situation is
a Sonritsu-kiki-jitai requires a comprehensive
analysis by the government (18th May, 26th
May, 29th May, 27th July, 2015; 27th Jan, 2016).
Concisely, the concept of Sonritsu-kiki-jitai is
a ‘clear danger’ that requires a ‘comprehensive
analysis’ to determine whether it is a clear danger
or not. This conceptual inconsistency turns one of
the limitations on “use of force” into a mere scrap
of paper.

5 Discussion

Political discourse is always vague and ambigu-
ous. Nonetheless, we can still recognize in what
manner it is vague and ambiguous. Even though
the mission of fact-checking is ‘not to measure
which candidate “lies most” but rather to provide
the public with information about the accuracy of
statements’ (Amazeen, 2015), in respect of accu-
racy, the information about how political figures
performed their language is as important as the in-
formation about what really occurred.

This ongoing work opens a novel perspective
on WSD for political discourse as well as fact-
checking, by pointing out that a confirmation of
concepts of terms which formed discourse is a pre-
requisite for analyzing formal utterances by polit-
ical figures.

Our framework makes it possible for the pub-
lic and/or journalists to recognize the most impor-
tant terms as well as their stipulative concepts in
an objective way. Moreover, we revealed the pos-
sibility that conceptual incosistency can also exist
in a single term as exemplified by revealed concept
of Sonritsu-kiki-jitai. This indicated that there is a
possibility that a term could be meaningless due to
an inherent self-contradiction in its concept.

Due to inadequate explicit information in Prime
Minister Abe’s utterances, few concepts were re-
vealed. This identified a weakness of our ap-
proach, i.e., it relies on how explicitly a speaker
stipulated a term. Nonetheless, from another per-
spective, by focusing on the lack of explicit def-
initions and explanations of important terms in

8http://www.mofa.go.jp

93



discourse, The vagueness and ambiguity of utter-
ances could be evaluated.

Our work is an ongoing research aims at es-
tablishing a practical standard for terminological
analysis of political discourse. To start with, we
provided this framework for revealing concepts of
terms in political discourse. It could be techni-
cally improved in the following ways: 1) by an-
alyzing the structure of documents’ terminology
sets and applying suitable term weighting models,
we may generate a more applicable term ranking;
2) by discovering patterns of stipulative definition
and explanation, we may assemble a more ade-
quate concordance of a term from discourse; and
3) by applying suitable clustering and summariza-
tion methods, we may create a better balance be-
tween precision and concision.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank National Diet Library of
Japan for allowing free use of retrieval system of
the Diet Record of Japan.

References
Michelle A. Amazeen. 2015. Revisiting the epistemol-

ogy of fact-checking. Critical Review 27(1):1–22.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In D. D.
Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and
R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc.,
pages 4349–4357.

Michael Denkowski. 2009. A survey of techniques for
unsupervised word sense induction. Language &
Statistics II Literature Review pages 1–18.

Roberto Navigli. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: A
survey. ACM Computing Surveys 4(2):10.

Joseph E. Uscinski. 2015. The epistemology of fact
checking (is still naive): Rejoinder to amazeen.
Critical Review 27(2):243–252.

Joseph E. Uscinski and Ryden W. Butler. 2013. The
epistemology of fact checking. Critical Review
25(2):162–180.

94


