



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 236–244,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Malayalam VerbFrames

Jisha P Jayan
Centre for Development of

Imaging Technology
Thiruvanathapuram

jishapjayan@gmail.com

Asha S Nair
Centre for Development of

Imaging Technology
Thiruvanathapuram
ashanaircdit@
gmail.com

Govindaru V
Centre for Development of

Imaging Technology
Thiruvanathapuram

neithalloor@gmail.com

Abstract

Verbs acts as a major role in describing a
sentence meaning. Capturing of the syn-
tactic distributions of occurrence of a verb
in a sentence is the VerbFrame. This pa-
per tests the applicability of verbframe ap-
proach that has been developed for Hindi
language in Malayalam. Around 255
verbs were selected for this study, show-
ing the basic argument structure of words
with these verbs.
Keywords- verbframe; karaka relations;
semantic; syntactic;

1 Introduction

Verbs are the most important grammatical cate-
gory in any language. With the help of an action,
activity and state are denoted. The arguments of
the verb indicate various participants required by
the verb. Verbs play a noteworthy part in inter-
preting meaning of a sentence, therefore, the study
of the argument structure of a verb and their syn-
tactic behavior will provide the needed knowledge
base for intelligent NLP applications. Verbframe
is the gathering of the syntactic distribution of the
verb occurrence in any sentence. Paninian Gram-
matical Framework (PGF) is followed in creating
a Verbframe as verb plays the important role in the
sentence analysis.

The relation of verb with the alternate units of
a sentence, in a language may be encoded in vari-
ous ways. Among them, the word order and the
presence of case markers on the arguments are
very often used by computational linguists. There
are, however, languages in which the marking can
be present of the verb itself rather than its argu-
ments (Butt, 2010). Such types of relations fre-
quently reflect semantics of a verb, that-means the
syntactic behavior of the verb provides a good sup-
port to understand its semantics. Researchers also

encode other information such as tense, aspect,
modality, gender, number, person etc., with verb,
that allow language specific variations.

This paper is intended to develop verbframe for
Malayalam language which has got grammatical
roots from Dravidian and Aryan languages. This
paper presents the work in different stages, begin-
ning in Section 2 with the major works related.
Section 3 introduces the Verb Frame and its de-
scription . Section 4 describes the Verb frame for
Malayalam. Finally, Section 5 concludes the pa-
per.

2 State of Art

Some of the famous linguistic sources related to
verb argument structure, are discussed briefly in
this section. Levin’s work on verb classes (Beth,
1993) indicates the relationship between seman-
tic and syntactic behavior of the English verbs.
The verb behavior can be used to get an insight
into linguistically applicable aspects of the verb
meaning (Beth, 1995). VerbNet (VN) (Kipper,
2000) (Kipper, 2005) is a domain-independent; hi-
erarchical, wide-coverage of online verb dictio-
nary which extends Levin’s verb classes (Beth,
1993) and providing syntactic and semantic infor-
mation for English verbs. It is mapped to various
language resources such as Wordnett (Fellbaum,
1998), FrameNet, and PropBank. Each class of
verbs in VN is described by thematic roles, selec-
tional restrictions on the arguments, and syntactic
frames (Beth, 1993).

PropBank (PB) (Palmer, 2003) (Palmer, 2005)
is a corpus, annotated with verbal propositions
and their arguments. This has been extensively
used for semantic role labeling task in recent
times (CoNLL shared task 2004-05 and 2008-
2009). PB gives a layer of semantic annotation
upon the syntactic structures. PB represents the
verb argument depending on the valency of the
verb relations by Arg0, Arg1, Arg2, etc., (Palmer,236



2002). Each set of argument labels and their def-
initions is called a frameset. As an example, con-
sider the frameset for the verb dance. This verb
takes the dancer:Arg0, dance:Arg1 , partner:Arg2
and audience:Arg3 as essential roles. It also has
non-essential roles such as location:Argm-loc and
time:Argm-tmp. This is for capturing spatio-
temporal aspects of verbs.

FrameNet (FN) (Baker et al., 1998) is an on-
line lexical resource for English, based totally on
frame semantics and supported by means of cor-
pus evidence. FN groups words in accordance to
the conceptual structures, i.e., frames that under-
lie them (Arun, 2008) . The paper describes three
major components such as: (1) Lexicon; (2) Frame
Database; (3) Annotated Example Sentences. The
Frame database deals with the descriptions of each
frame’s basic conceptual structure, and provides
the names and descriptions of the elements par-
ticipating in such structure (Begum, 2017). Anno-
tated Sentences are marked to illustrate the seman-
tic and morpho-syntactic properties of the lexical
items. Each frame contains numerous elements,
i.e., core (core arguments) and non-core (adjuncts
or peripheral roles) elements which are considered
as semantic roles. For example, core elements of
the frame Getting-up are person/animal getting up
from sleep and place of sleeping; non-core ele-
ments are time, purpose, etc.

All these resources looks into the argument
structure of English verbs. They gives the syn-
tactic and semantic information, and correlation
between them. These resources are also mapped
to each other making individual resources much
richer. In the work of creating verb frames for
Hindi, the argument structure of verb is captured
using Karaka relations which capture both syntac-
tic and semantic information about the verbs. Be-
tween Karaka relations, thematic roles and Prop-
bank annotation, a mapping is done . Begum et al.
(Begum, 2008) mentioned their experience with
the creation of Hindi verb frames. These frames
are further classified based on a Paninian gram-
mar framework using 6 Karaka relations. This
method considered the morphology, syntactic vari-
ations and semantics of the verb to divide it into
various classes.

Based on similar approach, Ghosh (Ghosh,
2014) created a resource for verb frames for com-
pound verbs in Bengali language. The main aim
of the paper is to investigate if the vector verb

from the compound verb is able to retain its case
marking properties and argument structure or not.
Additionally the knowledge and syntax associated
with verb frames can be utilized for categorizing
and analyzing the verb words for various NLP ap-
plications.

Soni et al. (Ghosh, 2013) explores the applica-
tion of verb frames and the conjuncts in sentence
simplification for Hindi language. The method
proposed by the authors includes usage of con-
juncts as a first level of sentence simplification.
This is followed by using verb frames enhanced
with tense, aspect and modality features. It is a
rule based system and its output is evaluated man-
ually and automatically using the BLEU score for
the ease of readability and simplification.

A semi-automatic annotator tool for verb
frames was developed by Hanumant et al (Redkar,
2016). The tool is used for extracting and generat-
ing the verb frames automatically from the exam-
ple sentences of Marathi wordnet. The paper ex-
plains the concept and working of the verb - frame
tool with its advantages and disadvantages. Other
related work by Schulte (Walde, 2009) has also
explored verb frames for the English language.

3 Verb Frames

In all languages, verb plays the major part-of-
speech category. Verbs are used to define actions,
activities and states. Ability of the verbs to choose
their arguments and/or adjuncts is termed as ‘verb
sub-categorization’or ‘verb valency’. Combina-
tion of functional units that are elicited by a verb
is refered to as verb frames. In linguistics, verb-
framing and satellite-framing are typological de-
scriptions of how verb phrases in different lan-
guages describe the path of motion or the manner
of motion, respectively (Redkar, 2016).

Verb frame generally constitutes verbal proposi-
tions and arguments of words surrounding a verb
in a given sentence. Each of the prepositional
words in a verb frame has arguments such as an
arc-label, otherwise called a semantic role label,
its necessity in a frame, case markers or the suf-
fixes, lexical type, relation of the word with head
verb, position with respect to head verb, etc. These
verb frames are developed to generate dependency
tree structures in a given language. Verb frames
on the basis of their argument demands categoriza-
tion of any verb. The verb frames show mandatory237



Karaka1 relation for a verb. They are:

1. Karaka : dependency arc labels.

2. The necessity of the argument whether it is
mandatory (m) or desirable (d).

3. Case Markers / Vibhakti: post-position or the
case associated with the nominal.

4. Lexical category of the arguments.

5. The Position of the demanded nominal with
respect to verb whether it is left(l) or right(r).

Verb frames are built for the base form of a verb.
The demands undergo a subsequent change based
on the tense, aspect and modality (TAM) of the
verb used in the sentence. Knowledge about the
transformations induced on the base form of a verb
by TAM is stored in the form of transformation
charts for each distinct TAM.

In the present work we develop verbframe for
Malayalam based on Karaka theory developed by
IIIT-Hyderabad for Hindi.

4 Malayalam Verb Frame

Amid the semantic analysis, verb is taken as the
central, element of the sentence. According to
Paninian viewpoint, there are four levels in un-
derstanding any sentence (Bharati, 1995) namely
the surface level (uttered sentence), the vibhakthi
level, the Karaka level and the semantic level. The
Karaka level has related to semantics on one side
and on the other side with the syntax. Karaka re-
lation can be identified from markers/suffixes or
case endings after the noun. The Karaka relations
in Malayalam are analyzed from the point of vib-
hakthi and the postpositions that associate with it.
The types of verb and the vibhakthi markers in
Malayalam are illustrated in Figure 1 and Table 1
respectively.

The roles and the dependency relation based on
IIIT H approach, are shown in Table 2.

The genitive noun does not have any direct
grammatical or semantic relation with the verb but
only the noun modified by the genitive is related
to the verb. The Genetive case “hw_áoIneoõ-
2o” saMbhndhikaavibhakti otherwise Possessive
takes the markers “tÂ” nRe, “DtS” uTe.
Eg (a): cnatÂ A\ob° eÁq.

1karakas are the typed dependency labels in Computa-
tional Paninian Framework (Bharati, 1993)

No Case Case markers
1 nirddeeSika \o±u¥foI φ

Nominative
2 prathigraahika }]Xo}KnioI F

Accusative -e
3 samyojika hwubnPoI ¨Sm

Sociative -ooTu
4 uddeeshika mal ·m , \m

Dative kku ,nu
5 sambandhika hw_áoIn tÂ , DtS

Gentive -nRe,-uTe
6 aadhaarika Bcn[oI C², I²

Locative -il, -kal
7 prayoojika }]ubnPoI B²

Instrumental aal
8 sambhoodana hwu_n[oI p , n, u

Vocative long forms
9 ao}feoõ2o C² \oÁm

Ablative il ninn

Table 1: Case and Case Markers

ramanRe aniyan vannu.
Raman’s brother came.
Eg (b): AejqtS AÅ ]l¼q .
avaLuTe amma paranjnju.
Her mother said.
Because of this, the genitive noun can be removed
from the sentence without affecting the grammati-
cality of the sentence

Dependency annotated data are used for devel-
oping Malayalam verb frames. The dependency
annotation is a collective process of Tokeniser,
Morphological Analyser, POS tagger, Chunker
and Dependency annotation. A raw text will be
given as the input and the text is converted into
tokens, identifies grammatical features of the
individual words, assigns parts of speech (POS)
tags to each word , groups them to phrases and the
dependency tree diagrams are drawn. Malayalam
has tendency to join a wide variety of suffixes with
a single word forming compound words, which
makes the process more complicated. Therefore
complicated words are spllited and then analysed
in the present analysis. As an example, consider
the following sentence.
aÊm õ¸W hn[\ºtj Au]¸o»m ]k¹-

¼obo² _o6 , _o12 tteÊao\qI³ [ncnjw

ASºobo½q¾m .

maRRu bhakshaNa saadhanangngaLe apeek-
shiccu pazhangkanjnjiyil b6 , b12 vaiRRaminukaL238



Figure 1: Verb types in Malayalam

dhaaraaLaM aTangngiyiTTuNTu.
In comparison to other food items, rice gruel is
rich in vitamins B-6 and B-12.
The sentenence is annotated as follows:
<Sentence id=”1”>
1 (( NP <fs af=’hn[-
\,n,ne,pl,3,d,F,NGaLe’ head=’hn[\ºtj’
name=’NP’ drel=’k2:VGF’>
1.1 aÊm QT QTF <fs af=’aÊm,qtf,,,,,,’ name=’a-
Êm’>
1.2 õ¸W JJ <fs af=’õ¸W,adj,,,,,,’ name=’õ-
¸W’>
1.3 hn[\ºtj N NN
<fs af=’hn[\,n,ne,pl,3,d,F,NGaLe’
name=’hn[\ºtj’>
1.4 Au]¸o»m PSP <fs af=’Au]n¸o-
»m,psp,,,,,,’ name=’Au]¸o»m’>

))
2 (( NP <fs af=’]k¹¼o,n,ne,pl,3,d,C²,il’
head=’]k¹¼obo²’ name=’NP2’
drel=’k7:VGF’>
2.1 ]k¹¼obo² N NN <fs af=’]k¹-
¼o,n,ne,pl,3,d,C²,il’ name=’]k¹¼obo²’>

))
3 (( NP <fs af=’_o6,n,ne,sg,3,d,0,0’
name=’NP3’ drel=’ccof:NULL CCP’>
3.1 _o6 N NN <fs af=’_o6,n,ne,sg,3,d,0,0’

name=’_o6’>
3.2 , RD PUNC <fs af=’&comma,punc,,,,,,’
name=’,’>

))
4 (( NULL CCP <fs af=’,,,,,,,’ dmrel=’k1:VGF’
name=’NULL CCP’>
4.1 NULL CC <fs af=’,,,,,,,’ name=’NULL’>

))
5 (( NP <fs af=’tteÊao-
\m,n,ne,pl,3,d,I³,kaLu’ head=’tteÊao\qI³’
name=’NP4’ drel=’ccof:NULL CCP’>
5.1 _o12 N NN <fs af=’_o12,n,ne,sg,3,d,0,0’
name=’_o12’>
5.2 tteÊao\qI³ N NN <fs af=’tteÊao-
\m,n,ne,pl,3,d,I³,kaLu’ name=’tteÊao\qI³’>

))
6 (( JJP <fs af=’,qtf,,,,,,’ head=’4’ name=’JJP’
drel=’pof:VGF’>
6.1 [ncnjw QT QTF <fs af=’[ncnjw,qtf,,,,,,’
name=’[ncnjw’>

))
7 (( VGF <fs af=’AS-
ºm,v,,,,,CD¾m,iTTuNTu’ head=’ASºobo-
½q¾m’ name=’VGF’ Participles m=’C½m’
Participles=’yes’>
7.1 ASºobo½q¾m V VM VF <fs af=’AS-
ºm,v,,,,,CD¾m,iTTuNTu’ name=’ASºobo½q¾m’239



Karakas Case Case Marker Role
Karthru Karakam Nominative φ k1 Agent/Subject/Doer
Karma Karakam Accusative e k2 Object /Patient/Causer

F

Karna Karakam Instrumental aal k3 Instrument
B²

Sampradana Karakam Dative kku ,nu (·m , \m) k4 Recepient/Experiencer
Sociative ooTu(¨Sm)

Apadana Karakam Ablative il ninn k5 Source
C² \oÁm

Vishayadhikarana Locative C² k7 Locative ( in general)
il

Deesaadhikarana k7p Location in space
Kaladhikarana k7t Location in time

Table 2: Karakas and Role (IIIT-H)

Participles m=’C½m’ Participles=’yes’>
))

8 (( BLK <fs af=’.,punc,,,,,,’ head=’.36’
name=’BLK’ drel=’rsym:VGF’>
8.1 . RD PUNC <fs af=’.,punc,,,,,,’ name=’.’>

))
</Sentence>

The dependency annotation is tree is given in Fig-
ure 2.

4.1 Diagnosis

Diagnosis of Malayalam verbfame is illustrated
with an example of a verb entry with the descrip-
tion and verb frame. Gloss explains meaning of
the particular verbal root. Arc label is to show the
dependency relation between any words and the
verb that exist in a sentence. Necessity is valency.
Valency is the the number of grammatical aspects
of verbs which combines other words in that sen-
tence. On the other hand, it is the capacity of verbs
that how many arguments, it can combine with it-
self at time. The distinction among the modifiers
and complements is mostly defined using valency,
which is a central notion in the theoretical tradi-
tion of dependency analysis (Theoritical tradition
of dependency analysis has limitation in Computa-
tional Linguistics that has discussed widely in re-
cent years. So it is not detailed here). Although
the exact characterization of this notion differs
from one theoretical framework to the other, va-
lency is usually related to the semantic predicate-
argument structure associated with certain classes
of lexemes, in particular verbs but sometimes also

nouns and adjectives (Nivre, 2005). The idea is
that the verb imposes requirements on its syntac-
tic dependents that reflect its interpretation as a se-
mantic predicate. Dependents that correspond to
the arguments of the predicate can be mandatory
or optional (Nivre, 2005). The valency frame of
the verb is generally taken to incorporate argument
dependents, however some theories also allow de-
sirable non-arguments to be included. Position ba-
sically refers to on which side of the verb, the par-
ticular word takes place in the sentence. That is,
the word can occur either on the left side of the
verb or right side of the verb. So, ’l’ stands for the
word left and ’r’ stands for the word right.

Verb::ASºm aTangngu
SID:: ASºm %VT%S1
Verb Sense::
Eng Gloss::to contain
Verb Class::
Verb in Same Class::
TAM for the verb root::CC½mD¾m i iTT uNTu

Frames::
Example::aÊm õ¸W hn[\ºtj Au]¸o»m
]k¹¼obo² _o6 , _o12 tteÊao\qI³

[ncnjw ASºobo½q¾m .

maRRu bhakshaNa saadhanangngaLe apeek-
shiccu pazhangkanjnjiyil b6 , b-12 vaiR-
RaminukaL dhaaraaLaM aTangngiyiTTuNTu.
In comparison to other food items, rice gruel is
rich in vitamins B-6 and B12.
FRAME ID::1240



Figure 2: Dependency tree for given example

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
k2 m I³F n l c

(kaLe)
k7 m C² n l c

(il)
k1 m I³ n l c

(kal)
pof m 0 n l c

In the verbframe file above as example, the
first feild gives the name of the verb. SID is
the unique sense identification number. It is rep-
resented as verb root%verb type%sense number.
The verb types in Malayalam are distinguished
into transtitive, intransitive and causative. Here
in the example the type of the verb is transtitive
and is represent by VT. Verbs in Same Class field
gives the list of all the verbs that have same mean-
ing as the given verb. Since Malayalam is a verb
final language, by default, all the words are kept
normally on the left side of the verb. Rarely, it
happens that particular word occurs on the right
side of the verb. As an example consider the fol-
lowing sentence:
F¹odqw õcX\nSy¿o\m XtÁ }fª tNdq¿n°

BWm \pdoa CuÃn³ }fao·qÁXm .

enkiluM bharatanaaTyattinu tanne shRaddha ce-
luttaan aaNu niilima ippoL shRamikkunnatu.
Nilima is now trying to focus on Bharatanatyam
itself.
In the above example, “BWm” aaN is the finite
verb and it occurs in between the given sentence.
These type of constructions are found mostly. In
such cases, the the words that follow the final

verbs are positioned on the right side. The verb
frame for above example is as follows :

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
ccof m 0 avy l c

k4 m Dm n l c
(u)

vmod m B° v l c
(aan)

vmod- m DÁXm v l c
emph (unnatu)

Verbframe of a similar verb in different sen-
tences varies according to argument relations
(Karaka relations) change. For example, for the
verb “InWnw” kaaNaaM, different frames are
shown below.
Verb::InWm kaaN
SID::InWm%VT%S1
Verb Sense::
Eng Gloss::to see
Verb Class::
Verb in Same Class::
TAM for the verb root::Bw aaM
Frames::

Example::1
eÉqe\nS° }Knaºjqw t\²ebdqIjqw KX-

Ind }]vUoubntS \o²·qÁ a\Ijqw Fºqw

InWnw .

vaLLuvanaaTan graamangngaLuM nelvay-
alukaLuM gatakaala prauDiyooTe nilkkunna
manakaLuM engnguM kaaNaaM.241



Valluvanadan villages, paddy fields and the abode
houses of Malayali Brahmins with its historical
pride can be seen.
FRAME ID::1

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
k1 m Dw n l c

(uM)
adv d 0 adv l c

Example::2
CeotS DÉ eyru]nboÂo² \oÁm gouÈnºm \-

Kc¿otÂ , }]uXyIo»m cn}Xobo² Zp]ndwIsXw

BIqÁ DÃ|danb InkmN InWnw .

iviTe uLLa vyuupooyinRil ninnu Silloongng na-
garattinRE , pratyeekiccu raatriyil diipaalaMkRI-
taM aakuna ujjvalamaaya kaazhcha kaaNaM.
From the view point here, the city of Shillong, es-
pecially the magnificent view of the city decorated
with lights at night can be seen.
FRAME ID::2

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
k5 m C²\oÁm n l c

(ilninn)
k1 d 0 n l c

Example::3
eouZf¿m tNÁn² }fpd¹bodqw _ndobodqw

Ht· cnab° h±Iyr½qI³ InWnw .

videeshattu cennaal sRIIlangkayiluM baaliyiluM
okke raamayan sarkyuuTTukaL kaaNaaM.
If you go abroad, the Ramayan circuits can be seen
especially in Sri Lanka and Bali.
FRAME ID::3

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
vmod m 0 v l c
k7p m C² n l c

(il)
k1 d I³ n l c

(kal)

Example::4
_Imhlo² \oÁm AÕmIoudnapÊ± eS·qIok·q

anlo AidynuZeobqtS AÄdw InWnw .

baksaRil ninnu anjcu kiloomiiRRar vaTakkuk-
izhakku maaRi ahalyaadeeviyuTe ampalaM
kaaNaaM.

The temple of Ahalya Devi is located five kilome-
ters north-east from Buxar.
FRAME ID::4

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
k5 m C²\oÁm n l c

(ilninn)
vmod m C v l c

(i)
k1 d I³ n l c

(kal)

Example::5
õncX¿o² arÁq }][n\ eoõnKºjo² t]½etc

InWnw : CuÐn - Bcy° ewfP± , }ZneoU ewf-
P± , awuKn³ - Bcy° ewfP± .
bhaaratattil muunu pradhaana vibhaagangngaLil
peTTavare kaaNaaM : intoo-aaryan , draaviDa
vaMshajar , maMgooL - aaryan vaMshajar.
There are three main groups in India: Indo-Aryan
tribes, Dravidian and Mangol-Aryan tribes.
FRAME ID::5

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
k1 m A±F v l c

(are)
k1 d 0 n r c

Example::6
BwKoIw , enNoIw , hnX|oIw , Bincyw

FÁp Aõo\bcpXoI³ GÊ·ql»odqIujntS

aqSoubÊo² InWnw

aaMgikaM, vaacikaM, saatvikaM, aahaaryaM
enni abhinjayariitikal eeRRakkuRaccilikaLoTe
kaaNaaM.
Different styles of actings like Agikam, Vachikam,
Satvikam, Aharyam are found in a ritualistic art
form Mudiyettu.
FRAME ID::6

arc nec- Vibhakti Lex posn reln
label essity Type
k1 d I³ n l c

(kal)
k4 d I³¨SmF n l c

(kaLooTe)
k7 m C² n l c

(il)

It is clear from the above example that
verbframe of similar verb is different from the242



other verb frames as the argument relations
namely the Karaka relations are changing. In the
present study, we have taken 3000 dependency an-
notated sentences for generating the verb frames.
Verb frames for 255 verbs 2 were generated from
these sentences.

There are some sentences which have 2 finite
verbs. Such sentences are not considered in the
present study. Examples for such a sentence:
AXo°tl A±Yw a\ôodn·n° B±·qw \oba

hinbw uXuS¾o ecqw FÁqw uXnÁqÁoÈ .

atinRe arthaM manassilaakkaan aarkkum niyama
sahaayaM teeTeeNTi varuM ennuM toonnunnilla.
It does not appear to have any legal assistance to
understand the meaning.
In the above sentence, the “FÁqw”(ennuM) is the
connector. To this connector, the two finite verbs
“ecqw”” varuM and “uXnÁqÁoÈ ”toonnunnilla
is joined in the dependency tree. The sentenence
is annotated as follows and the dependency tree
diagram is depiced in Figure 3.

5 Conclusion and Future Directions

5.1 Conclusion
Application of approach for generating verbframe
developed by IIIT-H seems to be adopted for
Malayalam languages. However we have to ex-
plore how does this can be made applicable for the
sentences which have two or more finite verbs.

5.2 Future Directions
This work can be further extended to classify the
verb frames according to the semantic nature of
the verb. Also attempts can be made to extract the
verb frames from dependency annotated corpora
though some machine learning approaches.

Acknowledgement

We acknowledge Consortium for Developing De-
pendency TreeBanks for Indian Languages and
its leader IIIT-Hyderabad, especially Prof. Dipti
Misra Sharma and Department of Electronics &
Information Technology (DeitY) , Government of
India .

References
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb lasses and Alterna-

tions. A Preliminary Investigation, University of
Chicago press.

2Only finite verbs are considered.

Figure 3: Dependency tree for given example

Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 1995. Un-
accusativity: At the syntax-lexical semantics inter-
face., MIT press. 26.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. VerbNet: A Broad-
coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon, PhD dis-
sertation, Computer and Information Science De-
partment, University of Pennsylvania.243



Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang and Martha Palmer .
2000. VerbNet: Class based construction of a verb
lexicon, In AAAI/IAAI, 691 696.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet An Electronic
Lexical Database, MIT press.

Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2003. PropBank:
the next level of treebank, In Proceedings of Tree-
banks and lexical Theories, Vol. 3.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles., In Computational linguistics, Vol.
31(1) , 71-106.

Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2002. PropBank:
the next level of treebank, In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, pp. 1989-1993.

Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Lakshmi Bai, and
Dipti Misra Sharma. 2008. Developing Verb
Frames for Hindi., In LREC.

Collin F Baker, Charles J Fillmore, and John B Lowe
. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project, In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics and 17th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
Association for Computational Linguistics. 6:86-90.

Rafiya Begum and Dipti Misra Sharma. 2017. De-
velopment and Analysis of Verb Frame Lexicon for
Hindi., In Linguistics and Literature Studies. 5(1):1-
22.

Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Lak-
shmi Bai, cc and Rajeev Sangal. 2008. Dependency
Annotation Scheme for Indian Languages., In IJC-
NLP. 721-726.

Sanjukta Ghosh. 2014. Making Verb Frames for
Bangla Vector Verbs., In Proceedings of 11th
Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing.
305314.

Ankush Soni, Sambhav Jain, and Dipti Misra Sharma.
2013. Exploring Verb Frames for Sentence Simplifi-
cation in Hindi., In IJCNLP. 1082-1086.

Hanumant Redkar, Sandhya Singh, Nandini Ghag,
Jai Paranjape, and Nilesh Joshi. 2016. Verbfram-
ator: Semi-Automatic Verb Frame Annotator Tool
with Special Reference to Marathi., In Proceeding
s of 13th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing. pp-299.

Schulte im Walde and Sabine. 2009. The induction of
verb frames and verb classes from corpora., Corpus
Linguistics. An International Handbook. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin.

Akshar Bharati, Vineet Chaitanya, Rajeev Sangal,
and K V Ramakrishnamacharyulu. 1995. Natu-
ral language processing: a Paninian perspective.,
Prentice-Hall of India New Delhi.

Joakim Nivre. 2005. Dependency grammar and de-
pendency parsing., In MSI report. 5133(1959):1-32.

Akshar Bharati and Rajeev Sangal. 1993. Parsing free
word order languages in the Paninian framework, In
Proceedings of the 31st annual meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics Association for
Computational Linguistics. 105-111.

Miriam Butt. 2010. The light verb jungle: still hack-
ing away., In Complex predicates in cross-linguistic
perspective Cambridge University Press. 48-78.

244


