



















































The Rich Event Ontology


Proceedings of the Events and Stories in the News Workshop, pages 87–97,
Vancouver, Canada, August 4, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

The Rich Event Ontology

 

Susan Windisch Brown,1 Claire Bonial,2 Leo Obrst,3 and Martha Palmer1 
1 University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado  

2 U.S. Army Research Lab, Adelphi, Maryland 
3 MITRE, McLean, Virginia 

 
Susan.Brown@colorado.edu, Claire.N.Bonial.civ@mail.mil, 

lobrst@mitre.org, Martha.Palmer@colorado.edu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

In this paper we describe a new lexical 

semantic resource, The Rich Event Ontol-

ogy, which provides an independent con-

ceptual backbone to unify existing seman-

tic role labeling (SRL) schemas and aug-

ment them with event-to-event causal and 

temporal relations.  By unifying the 

FrameNet, VerbNet, Automatic Content 

Extraction, and Rich Entities, Relations 

and Events resources, the ontology serves 

as a shared hub for the disparate annota-

tion schemas and therefore enables the 

combination of SRL training data into a 

larger, more diverse corpus.  By adding 

temporal and causal relational information 

not found in any of the independent re-

sources, the ontology facilitates reasoning 

on and across documents, revealing rela-

tionships between events that come to-

gether in temporal and causal chains to 

build more complex scenarios.  We envi-

sion the open resource serving as a valua-

ble tool for both moving from the ontology 

to text to query for event types and scenar-

ios of interest, and for moving from text to 

the ontology to access interpretations of 

events using the combined semantic in-

formation housed there.    

1 Introduction 

As NLP moves into tasks requiring deeper lan-

guage understanding, inferencing, and reasoning, 

knowledge-based resources are being increasingly 

called on to support and supplement probabilistic 

and other data-driven methods (Hogenboom et al., 

2011). Ontologies have been recognized as useful 

for tasks such as information extraction (IE) 

(Maedche et al., 2003; Wimalasuriyu et al., 2010), 

metaphor analysis (Brown, 2014) and automatic 

question answering (Lopez et al., 2011). By 

providing a formal specification of the shared 

concepts in a domain, an ontology allows users to 

identify entities and relations between them de-

spite the myriad ways these can be expressed in 

language.  

Existing general-purpose ontologies, such as 

the Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cog-

nitive Engineering, DOLCE (Masolo et al., 2003), 

the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology, SUMO 

(Pease, 2002), Cyc (Lenat, 1995), and the Basic 

Formal Ontology, BFO (Smith & Grenon, 2002) 

have either focused on providing only a very un-

der-specified upper level ontology to which do-

main-specific ontologies can attach or have creat-

ed much more fully developed object hierarchies 

than event hierarchies. SUMO has links to the 

well-known WordNet lexicon (Fellbaum, 1998), 

which is also the foundation for the BabelNet on-

tology (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012).  WordNet 

has well-developed subsumption relations in its 

noun lexicon. It’s verb lexicon, however, has hy-

pernym/meronym relations only four to five nodes 

deep. This situation translates to an ontology rich 

with object concepts and relations but a rather im-

poverished event network. In addition, none of 

87



 

  

 

these ontologies have incorporated information 

from lexical resources that focus on events. 

Most applications using ontologies have made 

heaviest use of these ontologies’ object hierar-

chies, drawing on their often extensive representa-

tions of physical objects, people, and locations. 

Events, being more difficult to delineate and de-

fine, often have a sparser and more shallow class 

hierarchy in an ontology. Classes representing 

events, however, can provide the nexus for relat-

ing objects and properties and prove useful for 

many language understanding tasks. By explicitly 

representing events, we can deal directly not only 

with relations between events and objects, but be-

tween multiple events as well. One of the more 

difficult language understanding tasks is identify-

ing temporal and causal relations between events. 

The ontology we describe here is intended to pro-

vide a rich structure of event concepts that con-

nects varying levels of event specificity, relates 

events to their key objects and participants, and 

encodes the temporal and causal relationships be-

tween events. 

We found that existing ontologies were not 

suitable for bridging the gap between spatio-

temporal ontological approaches to representing 

events and the representations stemming from 

SRL resources.  Our ontology provides this bridge 

by drawing heavily from the upper-level distinc-

tions of DOLCE, but also linking to the widely 

used lexical resources FrameNet (FN) (Fillmore et 

al., 2002) and VerbNet (VN) (Kipper et al., 2008). 

Not only do these provide wide-coverage lexicons 

having to do with events, they also contribute an-

notated corpora and additional semantic and syn-

tactic information that can be crucial to identify-

ing events and their participants (see section 2.5). 

In addition, the ontology provides links to the an-

notations, event typing, and role specifications of 

both the Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) 

(Doddington et al., 2004) and the Rich Entities, 

Relations, and Events (ERE) (Song et al., 2015) 

Projects.  Both are DARPA-funded resources that 

have figured prominently in the TAC-KBP (Text 

Analysis Conference – Knowledge Base Popula-

tion) evaluations. The ontology thus allows one to 

draw on multiple linguistic resources and combine 

their annotations.  This firstly ensures a larger, 

more diverse training corpus with the potential to 

detect a wide variety of events.  Secondly, this al-

lows the resources to be integrated in terms of 

common temporal and causal relationships be-

tween annotated event types, making explicit 

higher-order relationships between events – in-

formation not found in any of the independent re-

sources.    

We have completed the early stages of ontology 

development and are now working toward a for-

mal evaluation.  To that end, we are integrating 

the ontology into an end-to-end IE pipeline in or-

der to evaluate the ontology’s ability to 1) in-

crease the number and types of events recognized 

and classified in text, and 2) allow users to refine, 

expand or alter queries about events by making 

use of ontological relations. We report results on 

two sample use cases related to these goals.   

In the remainder of the paper, we provide a de-

scription of the upper level of the ontology, some 

of the major mid-level classes, and the linked lex-

ical resources. We then explain the modular struc-

ture of the ontology and its advantages. In section 

3, we describe our progress towards evaluation by 

discussing our two use cases. Finally, we conclude 

with a description of our future work. 

2 Ontology Description  

Intended as a resource for a wide range of tasks, 

the Rich Event Ontology (REO) has been de-

signed to encompass both meta-level concepts in 

its upper level and many general domains in its 

mid level.  REO has been implemented in OWL, 

which allows for easy extension with more de-

tailed, domain-specific ontologies. The main ref-

erence ontology now encompasses 161 classes 

and 553 axioms. Including the lexical resource on-

tologies and the linking models (described in de-

tail in sections 2.5 and 2.6) in these counts brings 

the totals to 3,065 classes and 60,531 axioms, as 

well as 16,005 individuals representing the vo-

cabulary (unique lemmas) of event denotations.1 

This project’s goal has been the development of 

a unified representation of events. To do this, 

however, we must be able to reference the partici-

pants of the events, necessitating a connection to a 

well-developed physical and abstract object on-

tology. Although this paper will include mentions 

of object classes, especially as they link to event 

classes as participants in those events, it will focus 

on the event portion of the ontology. In addition, 

we will focus on a description of the ontology’s 

structure and content, rather than a description of 

                                                      
1 For comparison: VN includes about 8,600 verb lemmas 

and FN includes about 13,000 lexical units.   

88



 

 g 

 

our development methodology, which can be 

found in earlier work (Bonial et al., 2016). 

2.1 Theoretical Framework & Approach 

We attempt to describe those categories that un-

derlie human language. DOLCE’s basic assump-

tions reflect our own: “We do not commit to a 

strictly referentialist metaphysics related to the in-

trinsic nature of the world: rather, the categories 

we introduce here are thought of as cognitive arti-

facts ultimately depending on human perception, 

cultural imprints and social conventions” (Masolo 

et al., 2003, p. 8).  Our upper level ontological dis-

tinctions align with DOLCE’s largely spatio-

temporal distinctions.  However, given our practi-

cal NLP goals, our mid-level distinctions shift to-

wards Davidsonian (Davidson, 1980) distinctions 

more aligned with SRL resources.  

2.2 The Upper Ontology 

The fundamental distinction at the top level of our 

ontology is between Endurant and Perdurant enti-

ties.  Borrowing heavily from DOLCE, we define 

“Endurants” as those entities that can be ob-

served/perceived as a complete concept, no matter 

which given snapshot of time and “Perdurants” as 

those entities for which only a part exists if we 

look at them at any given snapshot in time.  Vari-

ously called events, processes phenomena, or ac-

tivities and states, perdurants have temporal parts 

or spatial parts and participants. We continue to 

follow DOLCE’s lead in dividing the PERDURANT 

class into the subclasses EVENTIVE PERDURANT 

and STATIVE PERDURANT. This dichotomy is 

based on the notions of homeomericity and cumu-

lativity (Masolo et al., 2003). So, in this case, a 

stative would be distinguished from an eventive 

by way of possessing the property of cumulativity, 

i.e., a sitting occurrence type is a stative because 

the mereological sum of two sittings is still a sit-

ting. This is somewhat similar to the “waterfall” 

analysis of Galton & Mizoguchi (2009), that more 

radically proposes a property of dissectivity for 

processes and matter, so that processes are similar 

to mass nouns in semantics. In the waterfall mod-

el, processes are dependent continuants, similar to 

objects, which are independent continuants. Un-

like DOLCE and the waterfall model (see also 

Mizoguchi et al (2011), Galton (2012), Borgo & 

Mizoguchi (2014), Rovetto & Mizoguchi (2015), 

which more directly address notions of causality), 

however, we do not currently subdivide these cat-

egories into the aspectual classes of states, pro-

cesses, achievements and accomplishments. Alt-

hough these categories have a long history in lin-

guistic and philosophical literature (Vendler, 1957; 

Moens and Steedman, 1988) and more recently in 

semantics, distinguishing kinds of states (Maien-

born, 2011; Maienborn et al., 2011), these divi-

sions are difficult to apply in a commonsense way 

to domains we consider coherent.  For example, 

Vendlerian divisions would place a chatting even-

tuality in a fundamentally different section of the 

ontology from a telling eventuality. Instead, as we 

move into the middle level of the ontology, we 

shift to a neo-Davidsonian perspective, in which 

event participants become a greater focus. We ex-

pect that we will refine the underlying event for-

malization over time, as it becomes clearer how to 

reconcile our commonsense semantic application 

focus with more recent semantic and ontological 

analyses. 

2.3 Mid-level Classes 

The EVENTIVE PERDURANT class splits into many 

daughter classes, of which some of the most exten-

sive are COGNITIVE EVENT, LIFE EVENT, INTEN-

TIONALLY ACT, and MOTION. These are still very 

general concepts, and have no direct connections 

to the lexical resources and specific lexical items. 

For some of these classes, such as LIFE EVENT, the 

next level down introduces concepts with direct 

links to the lexical resources, such as the LIFE 

EVENT daughter class BIRTH linking to FN’s BE-

ING_BORN frame and VN’s BIRTH class (among 

others). 

For other classes, another sublevel with few di-

rect lexical realizations seemed necessary. For ex-

ample, INTENTIONALLY ACT includes the sub-

classes SOCIAL INTERACTION, INTENTIONALLY AF-

FECT, TRANSFER POSSESSION, and ORGANIZA-

TIONAL EVENT. Each of these has multiple sub-

classes.  To illustrate the level of class granularity, 

we present ORGANIZATIONAL EVENT in more detail 

(Figure 1).  

Its daughter classes include START ORGANIZA-

TION, END ORGANIZATION, MERGE ORGANIZATION, 

DECLARE BANKRUPTCY, START POSITION WITH AN 

ORGANIZATION, and END POSITION WITH AN OR-

GANIZATION. Most of these have no further sub-

classes, although START POSITION subdivides further 

into START LEADERSHIP POSITION, HIRING, and 

HIRING ON. END POSITION has similar subclasses. 

The decision to include the very specific classes 

89



 

  

 

concerning leadership positions resulted from the 

many lexical items, across languages, for events like 

‘crown’, ‘ordain’, ‘oust’ and ‘depose’, and the fre-

quency with which starting and ending leadership 

positions are discussed in print and oral corpora. 

The decision to create the closely related classes 

HIRING and HIRING ON stems from a similar desire 

to take common human distinctions into account 

and to allow for the shift in role relations that usual-

ly accompany such shifts in perspective. The agent 

of a hiring event is the employer and the employee 

is a theme. However, the agent of a hiring-on event 

is the employee. Although Company hiring Person 

is arguably the same event as Person hiring on with 

Company, the shift in perspective is commonly lex-

icalized and therefore represented in the ontology. 

Such perspective-shifting classes are rare in the on-

tology and always share a common parent class, 

which ignores the perspective shift.  They are im-

portant, however, in the TRANSFER POSSESSION 

domain, with such divisions as GIVE and GET. We 

highlight the perspective shift by having two rela-

tions between a class like TRANSFER and a class like 

GIVE: both TRANSFER hasSubclass GIVE and 

TRANSFER hasPerspective GIVE. For applications 

that need a more perspective-neutral classification, 

one can generalize to the parent class. 

2.4 Relations between Classes 

The main relation between classes (i.e., concepts) 

in the ontology is the subclass relation, which 

specifies that every subclass is a more specific 

type of the superclass. This entails that a subclass 

inherits all the domain and range restrictions of 

the parent class as well as other types of relations 

the parent class holds, such as hasResult. 

The subclass relation, however, barely taps into 

the rich, complex relations between events or be-

tween events and objects. To capture some of that, 

we have included temporal and causal relations ex-

tended from the Richer Event Description (RED) 

project (Ikuta et al., 2014; O’Gorman et al., 2016). 

The RED project aims to annotate text with men-

tions of eventualities and entities, with the goal of 

representing the temporal and causal relationships 

between those eventualities in such a way that an 

accurate timeline of events could be automatically 

constructed. We have adapted and expanded their 

relations to our hasPrecondition, hasCause, 

hasResult, and hasSubevent relations.2 Examples 

of these relations include: 

1.  END ORG hasPrecondition BEGIN ORG 
2.  KILLING hasResult  DYING 
3.  TRIAL hasSubevent VERDICT 

The hasSubevent relation is intended to capture 

events that are temporally contained within anoth-

er event and considered a proper part of that 

event. For example, Verdict is not a type of Trial, 

so the Subclass relation is inappropriate. The has-
                                                      
2 In some cases the relations encode opposite perspectives 

on the same relation between classes (e.g., DEAD hasCause  

DYING and DYING hasResult  DEAD), but those relations 

do not always coincide (e.g., (2) does not entail that DYING 

hasCause  KILLING). 

 

Figure 1: ORGANIZATIONAL EVENT section of the ontology. 

90



 

  

 
Subevent relation, however, indicates that a ver-

dict happens within the greater context of a trial. 

We have currently defined ten such cross-event 

relations. As part of the process of selecting and 

defining these relations, we created 49 instances 

of event-to-event relations in a small portion of 

the existing ontology. Future work will involve 

applying these relations to the rest of the reference 

ontology. 

Other relations connect events with object clas-

ses (physical or abstract), such as the hasLocation, 

hasAgent, and hasPatient relations. As mentioned 

earlier, these relations are inherited by descendent 

classes. For example, DECLARE BANKRUPTCY is a 

subclass of both ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESS and 

JUDICIAL ACTION. ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESS 

hasParticipant some ORGANIZATION, and JUDI-

CIAL ACTION hasParticipant some GOVERNMEN-

TAL AUTHORITY. DECLARE BANKRUPTCY would 

thus inherit both ORGANIZATION and GOVERN-

MENTAL AUTHORITY as participants in the event. 

The relations described in this section are being 

applied to the main, “reference” REO ontology. 

For an explanation of how the main ontology links 

to the lexical resources, see section 2.6. 

2.5 Lexical Resource Ontologies and Their 
Linking Models 

One of the primary goals of the ontology is to 

provide a means of combining the information in 

multiple lexical resources, despite differences in 

their categorization of lexical items. With our fo-

cus on event modeling, we have chosen to link to 

resources with rich event representations and 

broad coverage of English verbs and eventive 

nouns. We have represented the categorizations, 

lexical items, and participant roles included in 

each of these resources as separate OWL ontolo-

gies. 

FrameNet: This resource, based on Fillmore’s 

frame semantics (Fillmore, 1976; Fillmore & 

Baker, 2001), groups verbs, nouns and adjectives 

into “frames” based on words or “frame elements” 

that evoke the same semantic frame: a description 

of a type of event, relation, or entity and the par-

ticipants in it. For example, the Apply_heat frame 

includes the frame elements Cook, Food, Heat-

ing_instrument, Temperature_setting, etc.  The 

“net” of frames makes up a rather complex net-

work, including simple isA inheritance relations as 

well as more complex relations such as Precedes 

and PerspectiveOn.  

These relations highlight important aspects of 

many frames, for example, the Apply_heat frame 

is UsedBy the Cooking_creation frame, but often 

the frames involved are not anchored to the main 

isA hierarchy. In addition, the automatic reasoning 

capabilities of ontologies implemented in OWL 

are restricted to strictly logical relationships be-

tween classes. The complexity of FN precludes 

complete representation in OWL, as others have 

found (e.g., Scheffczyk et al., 2006).  Therefore, 

we flattened the FN hierarchy, connecting every 

frame to a single parent node, FrameNetFrame, 

and relying on our main ontology to provide isA 

and event-event relations. This decision reduces 

the relational information from FN that is directly 

represented in our ontology, but users can of 

course trace the frames back to FN proper and ac-

cess FN’s full relational structure there. 

VerbNet: This resource, based on Levin 

(1993), groups verbs into “classes” using their 

compatibility with certain syntactic alternations 

(e.g., She rolled the ball down the hill vs. The 

ball rolled down the hill).  Although the group-

ings are primarily syntactic, the classes do share 

semantic features as well, since, as Levin posit-

ed, the syntactic behavior of a verb is largely de-

termined by its meaning. Each class specifies its 

member verbs and their typical participants (i.e., 

semantic roles), lists the syntactic patterns they 

are all compatible with, and connects those pat-

terns to semantic representations (Kipper et al., 

2008).  

By linking to VN, the ontology gains valuable 

syntactic information about how events are ex-

pressed in English. Generally, a VN class is 

linked in a one-to-one relation to one of the main 

ontology classes.  A class’s syntactic alterna-

tions, however, sometimes cut across semantic 

distinctions made by the main ontology.  For ex-

ample, events expressible with causative-

inchoative alternations are grouped in the same 

VN class, but are divided in the main ontology 

(since the main ontology makes distinctions 

based on the number and types of event partici-

pants). For these VN classes, we link an ontology 

class to specific frames in a class, using VN the-

matic roles to distinguish the appropriate frames.  

These cases coincide with places where VN’s 

semantic representation also differs for a particu-

lar frame, indicating that the reference ontology 

is consistent with VN semantic distinctions.   

ERE/ACE: ERE is based on the ACE project’s 

semantic role annotation schema.  The goal of the 

91



 

ERE/ACE projects is to mark up the events and 

the entities involved in them, and to mark corefer-

ence between these.  This provides a somewhat 

shallow representation of the meaning of the text. 

The ERE/ACE schema can also serve as a lexicon 

imported into the ontology, with its event type 

designations serving as links to the lexical items 

marked up with that designation. ERE annotated 

eventualities are limited to certain types of special 

interest within the defense community, with top-

level types referred to as Life, Movement, Trans-

action, Business, Conflict, Manufacture, Contact, 

Personnel and Justice events.   

Both the FN and VN resource ontologies model 

lexical units and class members, respectively, as 

individuals that represent lemmas, which may be 

used as references for particular event concepts in 

REO.  Because ERE and ACE are resources de-

veloped specifically for annotating data to be used 

as training data, they do not include pre-specified 

individuals or “triggers,” of certain event types.  

Instead, these are always marked up in context.  

Thus, these resources provide a data-driven, 

ground-up perspective on event semantics that is 

very distinct from the other resources.  The ACE 

and ERE models include as individuals English 

lemmas that have been annotated either in the 

freely available ACE 2005 Multilingual Training 

Corpus (Walker et al., 2005), or the as-of-yet un-

released ERE corpus, respectively.   

2.6 Modular Architecture 

The structure of the ontology is modeled after the 

architecture of the Ontologies of Linguistic Anno-

tation (OLiA) (Chiarcos et al., 2016). OLiA serves 

as a reference hub for annotation terminology for 

largely (morpho-)syntactic information across a 

variety of languages. Similarly, REO can act as a 

bridge between semantic annotation resources.  In 

this modular architecture (Figure 2), one reference 

ontology houses the schema-independent, primary 

event concepts and relations of REO. Each of the 

lexical resources currently included, FrameNet, 

VerbNet, ERE and ACE, are modeled as inde-

pendent OWL ontologies, as described above. For 

each annotation resource model, a linking model 

defines the relationships between the concepts and 

properties in the resource model and those of the 

reference model. Specifically, each linking model 

imports both the respective resource model and 

the reference ontology, and concepts in the refer-

ence ontology are linked to those of the resource 

model via the hasReferenceGroup relation.  For 

example, the LEGAL ACTION event subclass 

DISCHARGE has the reference group Release-

Parole from ERE and Releasing from FN (see 

Figure 3).  Thus, all of the lexical units that are 

members of the Releasing Frame and all of the 

triggers annotated as Release-Parole form the 

group of references for a DISCHARGE event: 

free, parole, release, let go, set free, etc. Each of 

the linking models can be imported into a single 

ontology to query across all resources simultane-

ously.  However, as Chiarcos et al. (2016) point 

out, maintaining independent ontologies in this 

modular structure allows one to integrate, or re-

move, terminology from different resources in a 

lossless and reversible way.  Additionally, given 

the ongoing development of resources like FN, 

this structure also allows for independent lexical 

resource models to be updated without impacting 

the ontology as a whole.  Finally, the modularity 

offers a certain level of customization for users.  

For example, if a user is looking for somewhat 

synonymous references to events, then it may be 

desirable to leave FN out of the final model, since 

FN frames include Frame Elements that may not 

be references to the event (e.g., cop in the Arrest 

frame).

Figure 2: Modular architecture of the ontology 

 

92



 

  

 

  

 

      

 

 

3 Use Cases of REO  

We are working to integrate REO into an IE pipe-

line designed for intelligence analyst use.  Within 

the pipeline we will evaluate the ontology’s im-

pact on two main areas. 1) Increasing the number 

and types of events recognized and classified in 

text.  We will be incrementally examining the pre-

cision, recall and F-score of trigger identification 

and classification in systems that are trained on 

just ACE data, then ACE+ERE, ACE+ERE+FN, 

and finally all data sources: ACE+ERE+FN+VN.  

2) Allowing users to refine, expand or alter que-

ries about events by making use of ontological re-

lations. We will be completing user studies for this 

evaluation and comparing efficiency in decision-

making using the IE pipeline with and without the 

event ontology component.  In the interm, we re-

port results below on two sample use cases related 

to these goals.    

  

3.1 Expanding Lexical Triggers for IE 

The ontology can be leveraged to support event 

detection in IE systems by expanding the number 

and variety of lexemes recognized as potentially 

referring to a given event type. The aforemen-

tioned ACE program, and its inclusion in TAC, 

has established the ACE annotated data as a 

benchmark dataset for IE systems.  As a result, 

many existing IE systems are tailored to, and can 

be limited to, the detection of events recognized 

and marked up in the ACE annotated data.  To 

avoid the need for additional manually annotated 

data, the ontology and associated lexical resources 

can be used in backoff techniques to augment the 

trigger words associated with certain types of 

events, thus expanding the domain of application.   

To explore the potential efficacy of the ontolo-

gy in this application, we examined the reference 

groups associated with the LEGAL ACTION portion 

of the ontology. LEGAL ACTION is a type of SO-

CIAL INTERACTION, and is the parent class of sev-

eral subclasses, including ARREST, SUE, and DE-

CLARE BANKRUPTCY (which also inherits from 

ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESS).  We first established 

a baseline of what a typical system, trained on 

Figure 3: DISCHARGE, a daughter of LEGAL ACTION, hasReferenceGroup Releasing in FN and Release-

Parole in ERE.  The lexical items in these classes can be matched to sense-annotated lemmas found in 

the annotated corpora, and/or users can query the ontology for events to obtain a schema-neutral repre-

sentation, including event-event relations, and access the combined semantic information from resources. 

93



 

  

 
ACE, might recognize as triggers associated with 

the event concepts in this portion of the ontology.  

To do this, we examined what ACE types and sub-

types are linked to the subclasses of LEGAL AC-

TION via the hasReferenceGroup relation.  We 

then extracted all of the individuals that have been 

tagged as triggers for the hasReferenceGroup 

linked event types and subtypes.  In total, we 

found 102 lexemes associated with the LEGAL 

ACTION subtypes in ACE. Presumably, systems 

trained on ACE data have the potential to recog-

nize these lexemes as triggers of the LEGAL AC-

TION events. 

To determine how the ontology may help to 

move beyond this baseline, we examined what 

other triggers might be found by using the ontolo-

gy to access lexemes in the reference groups asso-

ciated with LEGAL ACTION in ERE, FN and VN.  

This allowed us to extract groups of 204, 69 and 

14 lexemes from ERE, FN and VN, respectively.  

Thus, we were able to expand the vocabulary of 

what lexemes may denote subtypes of LEGAL AC-

TION from 102 words to 389 words.  This is sum-

marized in Table 1.  

 

The variety of triggers found across the re-

sources is quite remarkable: only 17 of the 389 

lexemes are duplicated from one resource to an-

other.  We see the data-driven resources, ACE and 

ERE, capturing much more informal expressions, 

such as share a needle, referring to an execution 

event.  In contrast, FN and VN capture more for-

mal expressions like mulct and amerce, referring 

to fining events.  Furthermore, few nodes in the 

ontology have reference groups in all four re-

sources.  For example, only FN distinguishes 

events at a level of specificity fine-grained enough 

to have a specific frame for Notifica-

tion_of_charges, which is a reference group for 

the CHARGE events node of the ontology.  We feel 

that this highlights the potential for the ontology 

to overcome data sparsity by combining re-

sources.   

3.2 Querying: From Events to Scenarios 

Although a mapping (similar to SemLink (Palmer, 

2009)) of the resources included in the ontology 

may be able to achieve the vocabulary expansion 

described in the previous section, a unique contri-

bution of the ontology is the causal and temporal 

event relations included. With the exception of 

limited relations in FN, the linked lexical re-

sources do not provide information on such rela-

tions.  The ontology has adapted the RED rela-

tions, as described in section 2.5, and therefore al-

lows insights into how events are typically related, 

both causally and temporally.  This can enable an 

understanding of how individual events fit into 

more complex real-world scenarios.  What’s 

more, users can take advantage of the temporal 

and causal relations in addition to subclass ‘is-a’ 

relations to expand, refine, or alter their queries.     

One area of the ontology where these relations 

are particularly rich and informative is the domain 

of conflict.  PROTEST, ATTACK, and RECIPROCAL 

CONFLICT are three daughters of the SOCIAL IN-

TERACTION class CONFLICT.  As in other areas of 

the ontology, we drew upon domain expertise in 

the development of this area.  We reviewed social 

science literature to establish the basic sub-events 

and preconditions of PROTEST.  Combining re-

search on both the psychology of protest (Van 

Stekelenburg and Klandermans, 2013) and the 

theory of planned behavior generally (Ajzen, 

1991), we established subevents and stages of pro-

test scenarios: PROTEST has as a precondition 

MOBILIZATION, which in turn has TAKE SIDE as a 

precondition; TAKE SIDE has GROUP IDENTITY as 

a precondition, as well as the typical precondition 

GRIEVANCE; a communication event is a sub-

event of PROTEST.  This excerpt of some of the re-

lations to PROTEST captures social science theo-

ries suggesting that a protest is generally mobi-

lized where there is a sense of a group identity and 

a grievance or trigger for intergroup conflict, and 

that protest by nature involves the communication 

of some claims calling for change.  The event 

structure found in the ontology for PROTEST paral-

lels the “stages” of protest outlined in Korolov et 

al. (2016), who find that trigger words associated 

with these stages can be used to predict social pro-

test based on social media messaging.  

Source ACE 

 

ACE + 

ERE 

ACE +  

ERE + 

FN 

ACE + 

ERE + 

FN +  

VN  

Trigger 

Total 

102 306 375 389 

Ex’s Arrest, 

fine, 

prosecute 

Behind 

bars, 

get_life 

Bust, 

put_away, 

guillotine 

Book, 

collar, 

impeach 

Table 1: Expansion of event trigger vocabulary  

using the REO class LEGAL ACTION. 

94



 

REO users can take advantage of ontological 

relations in their queries.  For example, a user in-

terested in protest may start by querying for doc-

uments with PROTEST event trigger words (e.g., 

boycott, burn, loot, march, occupation, take to the 

streets, etc.), with accompanying SRL-annotated 

training data sentences,  such as “The events 

which unfolded over last week are still very un-

clear but peaceful protesters took to the streets in 

Tottenham Saturday to demand answers.”  If users 

decided they were interested in a broader range of 

events, including both physical attacks and argu-

ments, they could broaden the search space using 

the CONFLICT node of the ontology.  If users were 

interested in querying for events that may be indi-

cators of protest to come, they could query for the 

preconditions of protest, including TAKE SIDE 

with associated triggers endorse, oppose, pro, 

side, etc. Thus, the ontology links the annotated 

resources in a way that uniquely allows for users 

to search for events that are related to others in 

higher-order scenarios.     

4 Future Work 

The modular architecture of the ontology was 

designed to allow efficient linking to other lexi-

cal resources, including those from other lan-

guages. We intend to pursue such expansion, as 

well as expansion of the main ontology through 

alignment with or importation of other ontolo-

gies, such as the Emotion Ontology (Hastings et 

al., 2011).  

Although we have emphasized the ontology’s 

NLP applications, we have also begun testing the 

ontology’s usefulness for activity recognition in 

video. We are currently exploring the use of REO 

for understanding how complex activities can be 

decomposed into simpler events, and how those 

events are broken down into semantic components 

in the linked resource VN. We hypothesize that 

activities that share similar event semantics will 

likely have some similar visual components.  The 

potential to detect similar visual components may 

allow for generalizing from the recognition of one 

activity type (e.g., baseball pitch) to another that is 

semantically similar (e.g., throw discus).  Thus, 

we hope to leverage information from the ontolo-

gy instead of seeking out greater amounts of train-

ing data specific to fine-grained activity types.  

We are also exploring new types of event-to-

event relations that could enhance the inferencing 

power of the ontology. The logic requirements of 

OWL have prevented us from capturing relations 

that are not necessary but still highly probable. 

For example, a TRIAL event typically follows a 

CHARGE/INDICT event, but not always. We would 

like to explore ways to marry probabilistic meth-

ods with the ontology to allow for such common-

sense (but not strictly logical) inferences.  

5 Conclusion 

The Rich Event Ontology is a freely available tool 

for semantic analysis of events, a key area in NLP 

tasks like question answering, information extrac-

tion, and knowledge representation. It provides an 

independent conceptual backbone that unifies val-

uable lexical resources and adds critical relational 

information in the form of event-to-event causal 

and temporal relations. Although this work is in 

the relatively early stages, we have shown how 

the ontology could be used to expand the number 

and variety of lexemes recognized as event deno-

tations and to refine, expand or shift user queries 

using both subclass and temporal relations. We be-

lieve REO is unique among existing ontologies in 

combining in-depth representation of events with 

the ability to link valuable but disparate lexical re-

sources and annotation schemes.  REO is tempo-

rarily available by request, but we plan to migrate 

the ontology to an in-house server in the near fu-

ture, where it will be freely available.  

Acknowledgments 

This project has deeply benefited from the ex-

pertise of the REO Advisory Board: Ann Bies, Di-

ana McCarthy, Teruko Mitamura, James 

Pustejovsky, German Rigau, Roxane Segers, 

Clare Voss, Piek Vossen, Annie Zaenen, and addi-

tional members of the board. We sincerely thank 

them for their wise advice and the generous dona-

tion of their time. 

In addition, we gratefully acknowledge the 

support of DARPA DEFT - FA-8750-13-2-0045 

and DTRA HDTRA1 -16-1-0002/Project # 

1553695, eTASC - Empirical Evidence for a The-

oretical Approach to Semantic Components.  Any 

opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-

dations expressed in this material are those of the 

authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of 

DARPA or the US government. 

Finally, we thank our anonymous reviewers for 

their constructive feedback. 

95



 

  

 
References  

Ajzen, I., 1991. The theory of planned behav-

ior. Organizational behavior and human decision 

processes, 50(2): 179-211. 

Bonial, Claire, Susan Windisch Brown and Martha 

Palmer. 2016. A lexically-Informed upper level 

event ontology.  In Proceedings of the LREC 2016 

Workshop ISA-12 – 12th Joint ACL - ISO Work-

shop on Interoperable Semantic Annotation, 28 

May, Portorož, Slovenia. 

Brown, Susan Windisch. 2014. From visual proto-

types of action to metaphors: extending the 

imagact ontology of action to secondary mean-

ings. In Proceedings of the Tenth Joint ISO – ACL 

SIGSEM Workshop on Interoperable Semantic An-

notation, Reykjavik, May. 

Chiarcos, C., C. Fäth, and M. Sukhareva. 2016. De-

veloping and using the ontologies of linguistic an-

notation (2006-2016).  In Proceedings of the LREC 

2016 Workshop “LDL 2016 – 5th Workshop on 

Linked Data in Linguistics: Managing, Building 

and Using Linked Language Resources”. 

Davidson, D. 1980. Essays on Actions and Events. 

Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Doddington, G. R., A. Mitchell, M. A. Przybocki, L. 

A. Ramshaw, S. Strassel and R. M. Weischedel. 

2004. The Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) 

program-tasks, data, and evaluation. In LREC  2: 1. 

Fellbaum, Christiane, ed. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-

tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.  

Fillmore, Charles J. 1976. Frame semantics and the 

nature of language*. Annals of the New York Acad-

emy of Sciences, 280(1): 20-32. 

Fillmore, Charles J., and Collin F. Baker. 2001. Frame 

semantics for text understanding. In Proceedings of 

WordNet and Other Lexical Resources Workshop, 

NAACL. 

Fillmore, Charles J., Christopher R. Johnson, and 

Miriam R. L. Petruck. 2002. Background to 

FrameNet. International Journal of Lexicography,  

16(3): 235-250. 

Galton, Antony, and Riichiro Mizoguchi. 2009. The 

water falls but the waterfall does not fall: New per-

spectives on objects, processes and events. Applied 

Ontology 4: 71–107. 

Galton, A. 2012. The ontology of states, processes, 

and events. InterOntology 2012, 5: 35 - 45. 

 

Hastings, J., W. Ceusters, B. Smith, and K. Mulligan. 

2011. The emotion ontology: Enabling interdisci-

plinary research in the affective sciences. In Mod-

eling and Using Context, pp. 119-123. Springer. 

Hogenboom, F., F. Frasincar, U. Kaymak, and F. De 

Jong. 2011. An overview of event extraction from 

text. Workshop on Detection, Representation, and 

Exploitation of Events in the Semantic Web (De-

RiVE 2011) at Tenth International Semantic Web 

Conference (ISWC 2011). 

Ikuta, R., W. F. Styler IV, M. Hamang, T. O’Gorman, 

and M. Palmer. 2014. Challenges of adding causa-

tion to richer event descriptions. In Proceeding of 

ACL 2014. 

Kipper, Karin, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and 

Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification 

of English verbs. Language Resources and Evalua-

tion Journal, 42: 21– 40. 

Korolov, R., D. Lu, J. Wang, G. Zhou, C. Bonial, C. 

Voss, L. Kaplan, W. Wallace, J. Han, and H. Ji. 

2016. On predicting social unrest using social me-

dia. In Advances in Social Networks Analysis and 

Mining (ASONAM), 2016 IEEE/ACM International 

Conference on (pp. 89-95), August. 

Lenat, D. B. 1995. Cyc: A large-scale investment in 

knowledge infrastructure, CACM 38(11): 33-38. 

Levin, B. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-

tions: A Preliminary Investigation. University of 

Chicago Press. 

Lopez, Vanessa, Victoria Uren, Marta Sabou, and 

Enrico Motta. 2011. Is question answering fit for 

the semantic web?: A survey. Semantic Web, 2(2): 

125-55. 

Maedche, Alexander, Günter Neumann, and Steffen 

Staab. 2003. Bootstrapping an ontology-based 

information extraction system. In Intelligent 

Exploration of the Web, pp. 345-359. Physica-

Verlag HD. 

Maienborn, Claudia, Klaus von Heusinger, and Paul 

Portner, eds. 2011. Semantics: An International 

Handbook of Natural Language Meaning. Vol. 33. 

Walter de Gruyter. 

Maienborn, Claudia. 2011. Event semantics. In 

Semantics: An international handbook of natural 

language meaning. Vol. 33. Maienborn, Claudia, 

Klaus von Heusinger, and Paul Portner, eds., pp. 

802-829. Walter de Gruyter,   

Masolo, C., S. Borgo, A. Gangemi, N. Guarino, A. 

Oltramari, and L. Schneider. 2003. DOLCE: a 

descriptive ontology for linguistic and cognitive 

engineering. WonderWeb Project, Deliverable 

D, 17. 

Mizoguchi, R., K. Kozakil, H. Kou, Y. Yamagata, T. 

Imai, K. Waki and K. Ohe. 2011. River flow model 

of diseases. In Proceedings of International Con-

ference on Biomedical Ontology, pp. 63–70. 

 

96



 

 
Moens, Marc, and Marc Steedman. 1988. Temporal 

ontology and temporal reference. Computational 

Linguistics, 14: 15-28. 

R. Navigli and S. Ponzetto. 2012. BabelNet: The au-

tomatic construction, evaluation and application of 

a wide-coverage multilingual semantic network. 

Artificial Intelligence, 193: 217-50. 

Niles, I., and A. Pease. 2001. Towards a standard up-

per ontology. In Proceedings of the 2nd Interna-

tional Conference on Formal Ontology in Infor-

mation Systems (FOIS-2001), Chris Welty and Bar-

ry Smith, eds. Ogunquit, Maine, October. 

 O’Gorman, Tim, Kristen Wright-Bettner, and Martha 

Palmer. 2016. Richer Event Description: Integrat-

ing Event Co-reference with temporal, causal and 

bridging annotation. In Proceedings of 2nd Work-

shop on Computing News Storylines, pp. 47-56.  

Palmer, Martha. 2009. Semlink: Linking propbank, 

verbnet and framenet. In Proceedings of the Gen-

erative Lexicon Conference (GenLex-09), pp. 9-15.  

Pisa, Italy, September. 

Pease, A., I. Niles, and J. Li. 2002. The suggested up-

per merged ontology: A large ontology for the se-

mantic web and its applications. In Working Notes 

of the AAAI-2002 Workshop on Ontologies and the 

Semantic Web (Vol. 28), July. 

Rovetto, R. J. and R. Mizoguchi. 2015. Causality and 

the ontology of disease. Applied Ontology 10: 79–

105. 

Scheffczyk, J., C. F. Baker, and S. Narayanan. 2006. 

Ontology-based reasoning about lexical resources. 

In Proc. of OntoLex, pp. 1-8. 

Smith, B., and P. Grenon. 2002. Basic formal ontolo-

gy. Draft. Downloadable at http://ontology. buffa-

lo. edu/bfo. 

Song, Z., A. Bies, S. Strassel, T. Riese, J. Mott, J. El-

lis, ... and X. Ma. 2015. From light to rich ERE: 

Annotation of entities, relations, and events. 

In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at 

the NAACL-HLT, pp. 89-98, June. 

Van Stekelenburg, J., and B. Klandermans. 2013. The 

social psychology of protest. Current Sociology, 

p.0011392113479314. 

Vendler, Z. 1957. Verbs and times. The Philosophical 

Review 66(2): 143-60. 

Walker, Christopher, et al. 2005. ACE Multilingual 

Training Corpus LDC2006T06. DVD. Philadelph-

ia: Linguistic Data Consortium. 

Wimalasuriya, Daya C., and Dejing Dou. 2010. On-

tology-based information extraction: An introduc-

tion and survey of current approaches. Journal of 

Information Science, 36 (3): 306–323. 

.  

97


