



















































Hypothesis Testing based Intrinsic Evaluation of Word Embeddings


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Evaluating Vector-Space Representations for NLP, pages 16–20,
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 7–11, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Hypothesis Testing based Intrinsic Evaluation of Word Embeddings

Nishant Gurnani
Department of Mathematics

University of California San Diego
ndgurnan@ucsd.edu

Abstract

We introduce the cross-match test - an
exact, distribution free, high-dimensional
hypothesis test as an intrinsic evaluation
metric for word embeddings. We show
that cross-match is an effective means
of measuring distributional similarity be-
tween different vector representations and
of evaluating the statistical significance of
different vector embedding models. Ad-
ditionally, we find that cross-match can
be used to provide a quantitative measure
of linguistic similarity for selecting bridge
languages for machine translation. We
demonstrate that the results of the hypoth-
esis test align with our expectations and
note that the framework of two sample hy-
pothesis testing is not limited to word em-
beddings and can be extended to all vector
representations.

1 Introduction

Word embeddings obtained via specialized mod-
els (Brown et al., 1992; Pennington et al., 2014;
Mikolov et al., 2013a) or neural networks (Ben-
gio et al., 2003) have been successfully used to
address various natural language processing tasks
(Vaswani et al., 2013; Soricut and Och, 2015).
These embeddings provide a nuanced represen-
tation of words that can capture various syntac-
tic and semantic properties of natural language
(Mikolov et al., 2013b). Despite their effec-
tiveness in downstream applications, embeddings
have limited practical value as standalone items.
Consequently, an intrinsic evaluation metric must
provide insight on the downstream task the em-
beddings are designed for. In this work, we use
Cross-match (Rosenbaum, 2005) - an exact, dis-
tribution free, high-dimensional hypothesis test to

propose a novel approach for intrinsic evaluation
of word embeddings, one that provides insight on
tasks that depend on linguistic similarity.

Evaluating general purpose vector representa-
tions is difficult. They are trained using sim-
ple objectives and applied to a variety of down-
stream tasks, thus making no single extrinsic eval-
uation definitive. Often, due to computational con-
straints, direct downstream evaluations are also
impractical. In the case of word embeddings, these
constraints have led to the development of ded-
icated evaluation tasks like similarity and anal-
ogy (Rohde et al., 2006; Levy et al., 2015) which
are not directly related to training objectives or
to downstream tasks. Despite their ease of inter-
pretability, Faruqui et al. (2016) have shown that
these tasks do not correlate well with downstream
performance. In related work, Tsvetkov et al.
(2016) propose an evaluation measure QVEC-
CCA that is shown to correlate well with down-
stream semantic tasks where the objective is to
quantify the linguistic content of word embed-
dings by maximizing the correlation with a manu-
ally annotated linguistic resource.

In this work, we use the Cross-match hypoth-
esis test (Rosenbaum, 2005) to measure distri-
butional similarity between different word vec-
tor representations. Cross-match is an adjacency
based test traditionally used in clinical settings
where the goal is to assess no treatment effect
on a high-dimensional outcome in a randomized
experiment. In our setting, we assume there ex-
ists some unknown distribution W from which
our constructed word embeddings {w1, . . . ,wn}
are “sampled” from. Given two sets of word em-
beddings, cross-match tests whether the underly-
ing distribution from which the embeddings were
“sampled” are identical or not. The test uses op-
timal non-bipartite matching to pair vectors from
both sets of embeddings based on distance (e.g.

16



a vector will be paired with it’s nearest neighbor
based on some distance metric). The cross-match
test statistic C is the number of times that a vec-
tor from one set is paired with a vector from an-
other. The null hypothesis assumes that the vec-
tors were sampled from the same distribution and
rejects for small values ofC. Thus, a large number
of cross-matches between two sets of word em-
beddings suggests that they are from the same em-
bedding distribution.

Using cross-match, we propose two illustrative
examples of intrinsic evaluation. First, we use pre-
trained word vectors (trained on Wikipedia using
the skip-gram model in Bojanowski et al. (2016))
from Facebook’s fastText library for several lan-
guages to calculate the cross-match statistic for
several language pairs. We hypothesize that for
linguistically similar languages, a larger statistic
will be observed. Secondly, we use cross-match
to assess the statistical significant of word em-
bedding models. We consider several well known
models trained on the same corpus and use cross-
match to assess whether the respective word vector
representations are statistically significantly dif-
ferent. We hypothesize that the number of cross-
matches between two different embedding models
is small, thus suggesting that they capture funda-
mentally different linguistic aspects of the corpus.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2
introduces the cross-match test in detail. Experi-
ments on embedding similarity and evaluation are
described in Section 3. We discuss extensions and
conclude in Section 4.

2 Cross-Match Test

The cross-match test (Rosenbaum, 2005) is a
nonparametric goodness-of-fit test in arbitrary di-
mensions. It is an exact, distribution-free, two-
sample hypothesis test that measures whether two
distributions are equal or not. Formally, given
two independent samples w1, . . . , wn ∼ W and
v1, . . . , vm ∼ V , cross-match tests the null hy-
pothesis H0 : W = V versus the alternative hy-
pothesisH1 : W 6= V . The test has been tradition-
ally used in clinical settings, where the goal is to
assess no treatment effect on a high-dimensional
outcome between control and treated subjects in
a randomized experiment (Heller et al., 2010). In
the case of word embeddings, the goal is to test
whether two sets of word embedding vectors have
been “sampled” from the same distribution.

2.1 Definition of the Cross-Match Statistic

Let W,V denote two word embedding distri-
butions (distributions of word embedding vec-
tors over a corpus), suppose we obtain two
sets of word vectors {w1, . . . ,wn} ∼ W and
{v1, . . . ,vm} ∼ V . Assign the group la-
bels 0 and 1 to indicate which sample the
vectors are from such that the data are orga-
nized as follows: {(0,w1), . . . , (0,wn)} and
{(1,v1), . . . (1,vm)}.

The cross-match statistic C, is a function of the
word vectorsD = {w1, . . . ,wn,v1, . . . ,vn} and
the group labels G = {0, . . . , 0, 1, . . . , 1}. If
H0 : W = V is true, then all the word vectors
are i.i.d. “sampled” from W and the group labels
are meaningless. It’s as if the 0’s and 1’s were ran-
domly assigned.

The cross-match test is performed as follows.
For notational convenience ignore the group labels
and treat the data as one sample {z1, . . . , zn+m}
of size n+m = N (assume for simplicity thatN is
even). We define aN×N symmetric distance ma-
trix, with row k and column l giving the distance
(any distance metric can be used) between zk and
zl. Compute the optimal non-bipartite matching
of the z′s (match the vectors into non-overlapping
pairs) that minimizes the total distances between
the points in each pair.

Formally, we find a permutation σ̂ of
{1, . . . , N} that minimizes

Match(σ) =
N∑
i=1

d(Zi, Zσ(i))

where i 6= σ(i) and d is our chosen distance mea-
sure. The cross-match statistic C, is defined as
the number of pairs that have group labels (0,1) or
(1,0), the test rejects for small values of C.

If there is an odd number of word embedding
vectors, then a psuedo-vector is added to the dis-
tance matrix at zero distance from everyone else.
N
2 pairs are formed as before, and the pair contain-

ing the psuedo-vector is discarded (thus the least
matchable word vector is discarded).

2.2 Null Distribution of the Cross-Match
Statistic

One advantage of the cross-match test is that we
can compute the exact distribution of the statistic
C under the null hypothesis H0. Given N2 paired
vectors, let c0 denote the observed number of the

17



pairs with group labels (0,0), let c1 denote the ob-
served number of pairs with group labels (0,1) or
(1,0) (this is our observed cross-match statistic)
and finally let c2 denote the observed number of
pairs with group labels (1,1). The null distribution
of C in closed form is:

f(c1) = P (C = c1) =
2c1n!(N

n

)
c0!c1!c2!

where N2 = c0 + c1 + c2. Having the null distri-
bution in closed form also allows us to compute
the exact p-value for our observed cross-match
statistic. The resulting p-value is equal to F (c1)
where

F (c1) = P (C ≤ c1) =
c1∑
c′1=0

f(c′1)

A low p-value would suggests that we have evi-
dence to reject the null hypothesis (at a given level
of significance) that the word embedding vectors
were “sampled” from the same distribution.

3 Experiments

In the following experiments, we demonstrate two
different illustrative examples of the cross-match
test. Our objective is to show the effectiveness of
cross-match as a general tool for intrinsic evalua-
tion of word embedding vectors.

3.1 Embedding Similarity
A bridge language (also referred to as a pivot lan-
guage), is an artificial or natural language used
as an intermediary for translation between two
different languages. In machine translation, a
bridge language is useful in low-resource situa-
tions where a good parallel corpora is not avail-
able for the target language. In such cases, a
resource rich, linguistically similar language is
used as a proxy in order to perform the required
NLP task. For example in Tsvetkov and Dyer
(2015) the authors use Arabic, Italian and French
as bridge languages to perform Swahili-English,
Maltese-English and Romanian-English transla-
tions respectively.

Assessing whether languages are linguistically
similar is a reasonably difficult task and depends
on the notion of similarity one uses (lexical, mor-
phological etc.) In this experiment, we use cross-
match to provide a quantitative measure to assess
linguistic similarity between languages.

We use pre-trained word vectors (trained on
Wikipedia using the skip-gram model in Bo-
janowski et al. (2016)) from Facebook’s fastText
library for several languages and calculate the
cross-match statistic for several language pairs.
Specifically, we randomly select 100,000 word
vectors for each language (with the exception of
Maltese and Swahili which have only 26,000 and
52,000 vectors respectively). Then for each lan-
guage pair, we randomly sample 200 vectors and
calculate the number of cross-matches between
them using R’s crossmatch package (https://
github.com/cran/crossmatch). We re-
peat this 500 times for each language pair and re-
port the average cross-match statistic.

Language Pair Cross-Match
English-French 23.76
English-Italian 25.04
English-Spanish 23.36
English-Portuguese 18.44
English-Arabic 19.34
English-Maltese 7.84
English-Romanian 16.56
English-Swahili 17

Table 1: fastText vectors cross-match statistics
for English-pair languages

Language Pair Cross-Match
Maltese-English 7.84
Maltese-French 7.28
Maltese-Italian 9.20
Maltese-Spanish 6.76
Maltese-Portuguese 4.84
Maltese-Arabic 6.68
Maltese-Romanian 6.96
Maltese-Swahili 4.44

Table 2: fastText vectors cross-match statistics
for Maltese-pair languages

Tables 1 and 2 present the results of calcu-
lating the average number of cross-matches be-
tween several English-pair and Maltese-pair lan-
guages. We note that with a sample of 400 vec-
tors (200 from each language) the maximum pos-
sible number of cross-matches is 200. Given that
are our reported statistics are considerably lower
than 200 we can safely conclude that the dis-
tributions from which the word embedding vec-

18



tors were generated are different for different lan-
guages. In table 1 we note that the number of
cross-matches between English and other romance
languages (French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese,
Romanian) is noticeably higher than that between
English and non-romance languages (Arabic, Mal-
tese, Swahili). This corresponds with our notions
of linguistic similarity between the languages, we
certainly expect English to be more “similar” to
French than to Maltese. We also note that in table
2, the Maltese-Italian pair has the highest cross-
match statistic, thus supporting the choice of Ital-
ian as a bridge language for Maltese.

3.2 Embedding Evaluation

In this experiment, we use cross-match to as-
sess the statistical significance of word embedding
models. Despite the popularity of various different
embedding models (Mikolov et al., 2013a,b; Pen-
nington et al., 2014) it is not always clear whether
one model represents a statistically significant im-
provement to other existing models (it maybe that
all of them capture largely similar features of the
text).

We consider four popular word embedding
models: word2vec Skip-gram, word2vec CBOW,
Glove and fastText all trained on the same English
wikipedia corpus. Once again we take samples of
size 200 from each method, caluclate the p-value
between two pairs of methods using cross-match
and then report the average p-value across 500 re-
peated iterations.

Skip CBOW Glove FastText
Skip - 4.93e-26 2.39e-27 1.66e-23
CBOW 4.93e-26 - 9.42e-25 2.71e-22
Glove 2.39e-27 9.42e-25 - 1.13e-23
fastText 1.66e-23 2.71e-22 1.13e-23 -

Table 3: p-values calculated using Cross-match

The results in 3 show low p-values across all
pairs of word embedding methods thus suggesting
that they all seem to capture different aspects of
the corpus they are modeling. In other words, us-
ing cross-match we have evidence to reject the null
hypothesis that the vectors derived from any pair
of models come from the same word embedding
distribution.

Lastly, we note that there are at present some
computational constraints in performing the cross-
match test. There exists a bottleneck in the calcu-
lation of the optimal non-bipartite matching and

this makes performing the test for larger sample
sizes currently intractable. However, we feel con-
fident that this software issue can be easily over-
come by writing custom routines (as opposed to
using existing open-source code) and parallelizing
the problem. As a result of our limited sample
size, we not that it is possible that the power of our
hypothesis test is low and thus we may be making
type I errors (falsely rejecting the null). Nonethe-
less our initial results seem promising and are in
line with our expectations.

4 Conclusion

In this work we introduced the cross-match test,
an exact, distribution free, high-dimensional hy-
pothesis test as an intrinsic evaluation metric for
word embeddings. We were able to demonstrate
on two illustrative examples that the test performs
reasonably in line with our expectations and can
potentially be a useful tool in assessing bridge
languages for machine translation. Despite the
initially promising results, much further work re-
mains to be done in order to confirm the efficacy
of cross-match in the context of word embeddings.

We posit that our main contribution is the in-
troduction of the hypothesis testing framework as
a method for intrinsic evaluation of vector repre-
sentations. We observe that there is nothing no-
table about word embeddings or the cross-match
test and our experiments could be extended for
other vector representations (sentence, phrase etc.)
using other modern two-sample hypothesis tests
such as the popular maximum mean discrepancy
(Gretton et al., 2012). Given the rich literature on
hypothesis testing in statistics, there is certainly
much to be explored here.

For future work we aim to focus solely on the
problem of bridge languages in machine transla-
tion. Our objective is to conduct a larger scale
study that is able to definitively show a strong cor-
relation between the results of a hypothesis test
on word embedding vectors, and their subsequent
performance on the downstream machine transla-
tion task.

Acknowledgments

We thank Ndapa Nakashole for several useful dis-
cussions helping formulate the problem and the
anonymous reviewers for their feedback.

19



References
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and

Christian Janvin. 2003. A neural probabilistic lan-
guage model. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3:1137–1155.

Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin,
and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Enriching word vec-
tors with subword information. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.04606 .

Peter F. Brown, Peter V. deSouza, Robert L. Mer-
cer, Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Jenifer C. Lai.
1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural lan-
guage. Comput. Linguist. 18(4):467–479.

Manaal Faruqui, Yulia Tsvetkov, Pushpendre Rastogi,
and Chris Dyer. 2016. Problems with evaluation
of word embeddings using word similarity tasks.
CoRR abs/1605.02276.

Arthur Gretton, Karsten M. Borgwardt, Malte J. Rasch,
Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. 2012.
A kernel two-sample test. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
13:723–773.

Ruth Heller, Shane T. Jensen, Paul R. Rosenbaum,
and Dylan S. Small. 2010. Sensitivity analysis
for the cross-match test, with applications in ge-
nomics. Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation 105(491):1005–1013.

Omer Levy, Yoav Goldberg, and Ido Dagan. 2015. Im-
proving distributional similarity with lessons learned
from word embeddings. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics 3:211–225.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. CoRR abs/1301.3781.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013b. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,
Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26, pages 3111–3119.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In EMNLP. volume 14, pages 1532–
1543.

Douglas L. T. Rohde, Laura M. Gonnerman, and
David C. Plaut. 2006. An improved model of
semantic similarity based on lexical co-occurence.
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 8:627–633.

Paul R. Rosenbaum. 2005. An exact distribution-free
test comparing two multivariate distributions based
on adjacency. Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
ety: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 67(4):515–
530.

Radu Soricut and Franz Och. 2015. Unsupervised mor-
phology induction using word embeddings. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, Denver, Col-
orado, pages 1627–1637.

Yulia Tsvetkov and Chris Dyer. 2015. Cross-lingual
bridges with models of lexical borrowing. J. Artif.
Intell. Res. (JAIR) 55:63–93.

Yulia Tsvetkov, Manaal Faruqui, and Chris Dyer. 2016.
Correlation-based intrinsic evaluation of word vec-
tor representations. CoRR abs/1606.06710.

Ashish Vaswani, Yinggong Zhao, Victoria Fossum, and
David Chiang. 2013. Decoding with large-scale
neural language models improves translation. In
EMNLP. ACL, pages 1387–1392.

20


