



















































Author Profiling at PAN: from Age and Gender Identification to Language Variety Identification (invited talk)


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects, page 46,
Valencia, Spain, April 3, 2017. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

Author Profiling at PAN:
from Age and Gender Identification to Language Variety Identification

(invited talk)

Paolo Rosso
Natural Language Engineering Lab

PRHLT Research Center
Universitat Politècnica de València

Valencia, Spain
prosso@dsic.upv.es

1 Abstract

Author profiling is the study of how language is
shared by people, a problem of growing impor-
tance in applications dealing with security, in or-
der to understand who could be behind an anony-
mous threat message, and marketing, where com-
panies may be interested in knowing the demo-
graphics of people that in online reviews liked or
disliked their products. In this talk we will give an
overview of the PAN1 shared tasks that since 2013
have been organised at CLEF and FIRE evaluation
forums, mainly on age and gender identification
in social media, although also personality recog-
nition in Twitter as well as in code sources was
also addressed.

In 2017 the PAN author profiling shared task ad-
dresses jointly gender and language variety iden-
tification in Twitter where tweets have been anno-
tated with authors’ gender and their specific varia-
tion of their native language: English (Australia,
Canada, Great Britain, Ireland, New Zealand,
United States), Spanish (Argentina, Chile, Colom-
bia, Mexico, Peru, Spain, Venezuela), Portuguese
(Brazil, Portugal), and Arabic (Egypt, Gulf, Lev-
antine, Maghrebi).

1http://pan.webis.de/

2 Biography

Paolo Rosso2 is an associate professor of computer
science at the Technical University of Valencia,
Spain where he leads the NLE lab of the PRHLT
research center. His research interests include au-
thor profiling and irony detection in social media,
opinion spam detection, as well as text reuse and
plagiarism detection. Since 2009 he has been in-
volved in the organisation of PAN benchmark ac-
tivities, since 2010 and 2011 in the framework of
CLEF and FIRE evaluation forums, on plagiarism
/ text reuse detection and author profiling. He has
been also co-organiser of the shared task on Sen-
timent analysis of figurative language in Twitter at
SemEval-2015. Paolo Rosso has been PI in several
national and international research projects. He is
the co-author of 50+ articles in international jour-
nals and 400+ articles in conferences and work-
shops. He has been advisor of 17 PhD students.
He has been chair of *SEM-2015, and organisa-
tion chair of CLEF-2013 and also of EACL-2017
both here in Valencia...

2http://www.dsic.upv.es/˜prosso/

46


