



















































Proceedings of the...


S Bandyopadhyay, D S Sharma and R Sangal. Proc. of the 14th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 383–391,
Kolkata, India. December 2017. c©2016 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Scalable Bio-Molecular Event Extraction System towards Knowledge 

Acquisition 

 

 

Pattabhi RK Rao 

AU-KBC Research Centre 

MIT Campus of Anna 

University, Chennai, India 

pattabhi@au-kbc.org 

Sindhuja Gopalan 

AU-KBC Research Centre 

MIT Campus of Anna 

University, Chennai, India 

sindhujagopalan@au-

kbc.org 

Sobha Lalitha Devi 

AU-KBC Research Centre 

MIT Campus of Anna 

University, Chennai, India 

sobha@au-kbc.org 

 

  

Abstract 

This paper presents a robust system for the 

automatic extraction of bio-molecular events 

from scientific texts. Event extraction pro-

vides information in the understanding of 

physiological and pathogenesis mechanisms. 

Event extraction from biomedical literature 

has a broad range of applications, such as 

knowledge base creation, knowledge discov-

ery. Automatic event extraction is a challeng-

ing task due to ambiguity and diversity of 

natural language and linguistic phenomena, 

such as negations, anaphora and co-

referencing leading to incorrect interpreta-

tion. In this work a machine learning based 

approach has been used for the event extrac-

tion. The methodology framework proposed 

in this work is derived from the perspective 

of natural language processing. The system 

includes a robust anaphora and coreference 

resolution module, developed as part of this 

work. An overall F-score of 54.25% is ob-

tained, which is an improvement of 4% in 

comparison with the state of the art systems. 

1 Introduction 

Tremendous growth in the field of biomedical 

science has resulted in large amount of clinical 

and biomedical medical data. Primarily, the bio-

medical research largely focused on genome data 

analysis. Over the years, the application of new 

technologies to health care has resulted in volu-

minous data that includes structured and unstruc-

tured clinical notes, patient data, imaging data, 

etc. This growth also resulted in accumulation of 

large number of biomedical texts, i.e. medical 

literatures. It is important to extract useful infor-

mation from these data to benefit the researchers 

for further findings. This requires the application 

of data driven approaches. Data mining involves 

the analysis and extraction of interesting patterns 

from large amount of data. In recent times the 

researchers are spending much effort on data 

mining for bioinformatics. The previous applica-

tions of data mining and machine learning (ML) 

to bioinformatics were on genetic data sets and 

phenotype data. Now it has been extended to text 

documents like clinical and biomedical data. 

In the early days, the goal of natural language 

processing in biomedical domain was to populate 

the databases with biological information. This 

can be done manually, but requires lots of effort 

and is time consuming. Hence recognizing the 

named entities (NEs) using computational tech-

niques could help in automatically populating the 

database with biological information. The extrac-

tion of the information like event or relation be-

tween biomedical entities will help the research 

community to compare the applicability of their 

works with others. Finding related literatures 

studying same biomedical entities is a crucial and 

challenging task. For example, there are lots of 

research publications related to “BRCA” gene. 

Unifying all studies about this gene helps the 

researchers to work on cancer therapy. The first 

step for accomplishing this task is extracting the 

biomedical named entities from literature and 

finding the events and relations between them. 

Therefore, mining the literature and extracting 

the event between biomedical entities have lots 

of applications in bioinformatics. Event extrac-

tion from scientific texts in biomedical domain 

such as PubMed abstracts has attracted a lot of 

interest in the last decade, especially for those 

events involving proteins and other bio-

molecules. In the biomedical domain, an event 

refers to the change of state of one or more bio-

medical entities, such as proteins, cells, and 

chemicals. In the task of event extraction we 
383



need to identify the types of the events and their 

arguments. Event arguments include event par-

ticipants, which may be entities (e.g., proteins) or 

other events. This structured definition of events 

is associated with an ontology that defines the 

types of events and entities, semantic roles, and 

also any other attributes that may be assigned to 

an event. Examples of ontologies for describing 

bio-molecular events include the Genia Event 

Ontology. Consider the below Figure 1 

 
Figure 1: An Example for Event Occurrence in 

Biomedical text 

The above Figure 1 shows two events, binding 

and phosphorylation. The first event belongs to 

event type binding, where the event has two ar-

guments protein “p50 NF-kappaB”, which is the 

theme and the second argument is the site “con-

sensus sequence”. The second event belongs to 

the event type phosphorylation and the argu-

ments of this event is pronoun “its” which refers 

to the protein “p50 NF-kappaB”, the theme of 

first event and protein DNA-PK, cause of second 

event. This example demonstrates the need for 

anaphora resolution in event identification. 

By identifying the events we can extract in-

formation like gene-protein interactions, gene-

chemical interactions and gene functions, etc. 

The BioNLP 2013 shared task on Genia Event 

extraction, has brought in more research groups 

to work in this area and has increased the re-

search activity. Most of the systems which have 

participated in the BioNLP-ST 2013 Genia event 

(GE) extraction (Nédellec et al., 2013) have used 

the support vector machine (SVM) based pipe-

line. Two of the systems had used rule based ap-

proach. And another two had used hybrid ap-

proach where both rules and SVM have been 

used (Nédellec et al., 2013). In terms of use of 

pre-processing tools all the systems have used 

one of the deep parser tools such as McClosky-

Charniak-Johnson Parser, Stanford Parser for 

syntactic processing.  And some of the participat-

ing systems have also used external independent 

resource such as UniProt (Bairoch et al., 2005), 

IntAct (Kerrien et al., 2012), and CRAFT 

(Verspoor et al., 2012). Below we explain top 

two successful systems which have participated 

in the BioNLP-ST GE task. Both these systems 

have obtained an overall F-score of 50.97% and 

50.74%. 

Hakala et al., (2013) uses EVEX tool to ex-

tract the events. EVEX is a text mining resource 

built on top of events extracted from all PubMed 

abstracts and PubMed Central Open-Access full-

text documents (Landeghem et al., 2011). Evex 

is built on top of “Banner” NER tool and 

“TEES” extraction tool. It uses SVM to re-rank 

the output of the EVEX resource output, sets a 

threshold score, below which the events are re-

moved. The threshold score is obtained using a 

linear SVM regressor on each sentence. The re-

sults for event types “binding” and “regulation” 

are found to be lower and especially in “Meth-

ods” and “Captions” section of the documents. 

Our work contributes to the application of data 

mining approach to biomedical data. This paper 

describes an event extraction system developed 

using ML approach and rich feature set including 

linguistic and biological domain motivated fea-

tures. It has been observed from the participating 

systems in the BioNLP-ST 2013 that most of the 

systems have not used coreference resolution. 

Though the data had anaphora and coreference 

annotation, the systems had not exploited the 

annotations. In the present work we make use of 

the coreference annotations provided in the data. 

The use of coreference resolution has mainly 

improved the extraction of event type “binding”.  

 The main contributions of this work are as 

follows: 

1. We have developed a robust, scalable 
event identification system, which can be 

used for any of the biomedical domain 

documents. The developed system archi-

tecture is robust and portable for any bi-

omedical text. The results obtained on 

the test data of the BioNLP ST 2013 GE 

task shows significant results compara-

ble to the state-of the art. 

2. We have developed a biomedical domain 
anaphora coreference resolution module 

for resolving the protein coreference re-

lations. A general domain, robust anaph-

ora coreference resolution module has 

been used and adapted (or customized) 

with the use of biomedical coreference 

annotations. 

3. We have used open source tools such as 
“Genia tagger”, CRF++ (Taku, 2005) for 

the development of the syntactic and se-

mantic pre-processing. Thus this work is 384



easily implementable by other research-

ers. 

 In the following section we describe the 

corpora, features and the method used to develop 

the system. The results are discussed in Section 

3. The paper ends with the conclusion and future 

works. 

2 Method 

The various approaches to event extraction task 

are rule based, dictionary based, ML and Hybrid 

approaches. This paper proposes a robust, scala-

ble BioEventTag system developed by using 

graph-based ML technique Conditional Random 

Fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001). This system 

is developed for the extraction of biological 

events. We have used CRF++ tool, an open 

source implementation of the CRFs algorithm. In 

this section, we present the experiments per-

formed to extract the events from biomedical 

texts. First, the input text is syntactically prepro-

cessed using Genia tagger. The pre-processing 

includes sentence splitting, tokenization, PoS 

tagging and chunking. Then in the next step se-

mantic pre-processing is performed where the 

biomedical named entities (BNEs) are identified 

and anaphors in the document are resolved. For 

identifying the NEs we have used the biomedical 

named entity recognition (BioNER) system de-

veloped by (Gopalan et al., 2016). We developed 

an anaphora resolution system to resolve the 

anaphors. Finally we developed an event extrac-

tion system which contains two modules. First 

module identifies the event trigger and the sec-

ond module extracts the event from the text. The 

system architecture is shown in Figure 2. 

 

 
Figure 2: System Architecture 

2.1 Corpora Collection and Analysis 

We developed our system using a widely accept-

ed dataset BioNLP-ST 2013 (Genia Event Task 

data). BioNLP-ST 2013 GE data was developed 

to evaluate the applicability of event extraction 

systems. The collection consists of 1210 titles 

and abstracts and 34 full papers from the Open 

Access subset of PubMed Central (Nédellec et 

al., 2013). Table 1 shows the corpus statistics. It 

is evident from the corpus statistics displayed in 

Table 1 that the majority of the events (65.86%) 

are “Regulation and Binding” event types. Thus 

handling of these two event types properly is 

very important to improve the system efficiency 

and performance. In these two types of events 

anaphora coreference resolution plays a signifi-

cant role. 

S.No Description Statistics 

1 Number of Abstracts  + full 

Papers 

1210 + 

34 

2 Number of Words 2,63,133 

3 Number of Proteins 16,427 

4 Total Number of Events 9,364 

5 Number of Anaphora and 

Coreference relations to 

Proteins 

535 

6 Number of Regulation and 

Binding Event types 

6,168 

Table 1: BioNLP Genia Event (GE) Shared Task 

Corpus Statistics 

2.2 Feature Extraction 

CRF++ is a general purpose tool and hence the 

feature template needs to be specified in ad-

vance. This file describes the feature used for 

training and testing. When the feature template is 

given, CRF++ automatically generates a set of 

feature function. The challenge in developing an 

event extraction system using ML techniques lies 

in designating the striking features and designing 

of feature template. We have used window size 

of 5 for this work. We describe in detail the fea-

tures used in developing our system. 

Lexical features and Syntactic features such 

as word, Parts of Speech (PoS) and chunk are 

used. PoS help in disambiguating the sense of the 

word in a sentence. PoS is an important feature 

for extracting the events as most of the argu-

ments of an event are proper noun and event 

trigger belongs to noun and verb category. Hence 

PoS is a key feature for event extraction task. 

Most of the event trigger and arguments are de-

scriptive i.e., they occur as a phrase. Hence 385



chunk tag will help in argument and event trigger 

extraction. 

Morphological Patterns: Prefix/suffix is used 

as one of the features in our work. For example, 

an event trigger like “phosphorylation”, has suf-

fix ‘-ation’, which means action or process. Pre-

fix/suffix of a token helps to boost the perfor-

mance of the system. 

Biomedical Named Entities: BNEs are used 

as features in our work. BioNER is the task of 

extraction of BNEs like gene, protein, chemical 

etc. from biomedical text. From Figure 1, we can 

observe that the arguments of the events are 

BNEs and hence BNEs are useful features for 

argument identification task. 

The combination of these features is used to 

develop the template feature. The template file 

sets up which features to use while running 

CRFs. Each line in the template file represents 

one template. The template is represented as 

%x[row,col], where “row” specifies the relative 

position from the current token and “col” repre-

sents the absolute position of the column. 

2.3 Experiments 

In this work we have followed two step ap-

proach, first the event trigger is identified and 

then the event arguments. One important seman-

tic pre-processing module has been introduced in 

this work. We have developed Anaphora and 

Coreference resolution module as part of seman-

tic pre-processing. This is important to resolve 

the anaphoric entities such as “these proteins”, 

“it” which refer to proteins, chemicals etc. After, 

incorporating the features, the system was trained 

with the training corpus. We extracted the dis-

tinctive features to build the language models 

based on conditioned features. Finally, by using 

these language models, NEs in the testing corpus 

are automatically labeled. The experiments per-

formed are detailed in this section. 

Syntactic Pre-Processing: The syntactic pre-

processing of the data is performed using Genia 

Tagger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005), where the data is 

split into sentences and tokenized and then PoS 

and chunk tags are added. The performance of 

this tool for PoS tagging is 98.26% accuracy and 

for chunking, the F-score obtained is 88.9% for 

Noun Phrases and 95.2% for Verb phrases (Kang 

et al., 2011). 

Semantic pre-processing: The semantic pre-

processing of the data includes named entity tag-

ging and anaphora resolution. As the event in 

biomedical text is established between the BNEs, 

the identification of BNEs is important. Similarly 

as described in Section 1, resolution of anaphora 

is an essential step for event extraction that helps 

in improving the system’s performance. 

Biomedical Named Entity Recognition: The 

BNEs are identified using the system developed 

by (Gopalan et al., 2016). This portable system is 

developed on three data sets, BioNLP/NLPBA 

2004 dataset; BioNLP-ST 2013 (pathway cura-

tion task data) and BioCreative 2013 CTD track 

data using ML approach. A rich feature set in-

cluding linguistic features and domain-specific 

features were used to develop the system. For 

BioNLP-ST corpus they obtained F-score of 

83.73%. The BNEs belonging to calss simple 

chemical, gene or gene product, complex and 

cellular component are identified. We used this 

system to identify the named entities from our 

corpus. Named entities is one of the features used 

for event argument identification. After identify-

ing the entities, the resolution of anaphora is per-

formed. 

Biomedical Anaphora and Co-reference reso-

lution module: Anaphora is a compound word 

consisting of the words “Ana” and “phora”. 

“Ana” refers to back, upstream or back in an up-

ward direction.  “phora” means the act of carry-

ing and denoted the act of carrying back stream. 

Anaphora is a type of expression whose refer-

ence depends upon another referential element. 

Reference is made based on the preceding part of 

the utterance. It is the cohesion which points 

back to some previous items. “The pointing 

back” is called an anaphor and the entity to 

which it refers is antecedent. The process of de-

termining the antecedent of anaphor is called as 

anaphora resolution. Anaphora resolution in dis-

course is the task or process of identifying the 

referents of expressions which we use to denote 

discourse entities, i.e., objects, individuals, prop-

erties and relations that have been introduced and 

talked about in the prior discourse. Biomedical 

texts differ significantly from other text genres 

such as newspapers and fiction writing. In bio-

medical texts, much background knowledge is 

required for the reader to understand the relation 

between the entities mentioned in the text. This is 

a common aspect of scientific papers.  

One of the common problems in biomedical 

texts is a gene and the protein it encodes share 

the same name, causing some ambiguity in the 

text when the context does not provide enough 

information to determine whether the writer is 

talking about the gene or the protein. Though 

there are writing conventions to avoid this ambi-

guity, it is common, however, that authors do not 386



follow these conventions properly. Other com-

mon issue is protein or gene names may coincide 

with common English words, e.g. for (symbol for 

foraging). These sources of ambiguity create 

challenges to a system for automatic detection of 

entities and events. 

The distribution of different types of noun 

phrases in biomedical articles differs from the 

distribution in other general text. Pronouns are 

very rare, accounting for about 3% of noun 

phrases; whereas proper names, acronyms are 

very frequent, giving mentions of genes, proteins 

and names of other BNEs. In the WSJ Newswire 

corpus the pronouns are 4.5% and in fiction part 

of the brown corpus the pronouns are 22%.  An-

other aspect in the pronouns distribution in the 

biomedical texts is it has more plural pronouns 

such as “these proteins”, “them”, “those pro-

teins”. This makes the task of anaphora and co-

reference resolution more challenging. It is ob-

served that in biomedical texts entities are com-

monly referred to using non-pronominal noun 

phrases, like proper nouns, acronyms or definite 

descriptions. Hence there is a need to focus on 

these noun phrases (NPs) for a good event ex-

traction engine. The occurrence of acronyms and 

NPs which have part-of relationships, linking 

those in the co-reference chain is a challenging 

aspect in biomedical coreference resolution. 

Though there are many Anaphora and corefer-

ence resolutions systems developed for general 

domain, there are very few works on anaphora 

and coreference resolution in the biomedical do-

main. Castano et al., (2002) developed a sali-

ence-based system for anaphora resolution which 

uses UMLS Semantic Network to obtain seman-

tic information. Gaizauskas et al., (2003) devel-

oped PASTA system, which implements an in-

ference-based coreference resolution module. 

Yang et al., (2004) developed a supervised ML 

approach for anaphora resolution and evaluated it 

on a portion of the GENIA corpus. Gasperin et 

al., (2009) developed a statistical anaphora reso-

lution system for biomedical domain. They have 

tested their system on various corpora. 

Here in this work, a general Newswire text 

anaphora engine is customized to adapt to the 

biomedical domain. So here anaphora and coref-

erence module is developed using a hybrid ap-

proach. An implementation of a general anaphora 

and coreference resolution engine as described in 

Lalitha Devi et al., (2011) is done here.  The 

main difference in the implementation is the cor-

pus used for training. Lalitha Devi et al., (2011) 

use Newswire text documents, whereas in this 

implementation, the anaphora and coreference 

annotations provided in BioNLP-ST 2013 GE 

task have been used. The results obtained from 

this engine are post processed with rules specific 

to biological domain. In the post processing stage 

Genia ontology is used to provide the required 

world knowledge to resolve the linking of acro-

nyms, for improving the resolution of acronyms 

and definite descriptions. In Figure 3 the archi-

tecture of Anaphora and coreference module is 

shown in detail. 

 
Figure 3: System architecture for Anaphora Res-

olution 

The features used are same as described in the 

Lalitha Devi et al., (2011). Along with those fea-

tures, two more features specific to biological 

domain are added. The new features are 

1. Biological Entity type matching: ‘yes’ if 
anaphor’s and candidate’s biological en-

tity type match, ‘no’ otherwise. 

2. Is Entity type a gene or Protein? ‘Yes’ if 
the anaphor entity type or candidate enti-

ty type is gene or protein, ‘no’ otherwise. 

This feature is mainly to distinguish 

which pairs can hold BNE relations, be-

cause most of the event types have ar-

guments as proteins or genes. 

This module has been evaluated separately to 

ascertain its efficiency as a standalone engine. 

This has been tested on the gold anaphora anno-

tations provided in the test partition of the GE 

task of the BioNLP 2013 shared task. We have 

obtained a precision of 55.35%, recall of 58.36% 

and F-score of 56.86%.  

Event extraction: The whole task of event ex-

traction is divided into two sub-tasks. First the 

event trigger is identified and then the event ar-

guments are extracted. The event extraction sub 

task includes two phases, event start identifica-387



tion and event end identification. We have used 

the training and development partitions of the GE 

task data for training and the test partition has 

been used for testing the system. The experi-

ments performed for event trigger identification 

and event extraction are described below. 

Event Trigger Identification: Event trigger is 

an important feature for extraction of event from 

a document. The features used for event trigger 

identification includes lexico-syntactic features 

like words, PoS, chunk and morphological pat-

terns. The event trigger for event relation in-

cludes noun phrases containing action terms like 

“regulation”, “interaction”, “phosphorylation”, 

“expression” etc. In some cases, the event trigger 

is verb phrases like “activates” that belongs to 

event type “positive regulation”. Hence syntactic 

features like PoS and chunk acts as prime fea-

tures for identification of event triggers. In addi-

tion to lexical and syntactic features, we have 

also used another biomedical domain specific 

feature, “trigger indicator”. Trigger indicator fea-

ture includes biomedical domain specific verbs 

such as “binds”, “inhibit” etc. and biomedical 

key terms like “translocation”, “methylation” etc. 

This feature has a Boolean value “true” if do-

main specific verbs or key terms are identified in 

the current word, else “false”. For event trigger 

identification the data is first preprocessed and 

features are extracted. After extracting the fea-

tures, the language model is built. The identifica-

tion of event trigger is followed by the identifica-

tion of event arguments.  

Event Argument Identification: The event 

extraction task includes extraction of event and 

its arguments. For extraction of event arguments, 

the event start and event end is identified. The 

event trigger is identified in the first task and the 

sentences with event trigger are given as input to 

the event argument extraction module. The fea-

tures for event boundary identification are word, 

PoS, chunk, event trigger and BNEs. The argu-

ments for the events are BNEs. Hence, giving 

weightage to BNEs that occur before or after the 

event trigger helps in the identification of argu-

ment boundaries. Using these features the lan-

guage models are built for event start boundary 

and event end boundary. These models are used 

for identifying and extracting the event of a text.  

The event may have one argument or multiple 

arguments. In case of events like “gene expres-

sion”, there will be one argument “theme”. 

Whereas in case of events like “binding” and 

“regulation”, there will be more than one argu-

ments such as “theme”, “cause” and “site”. Con-

sider the Example 1 given below. 

Example 1: 

Methyl-CpG-binding proteins (MBPs) are 

thought to inhibit the binding of transcriptional 

factors to the promoter.  

In this Example 1 there are two events “nega-

tive regulation” and “binding”. The event trig-

gers are “inhibit” for negative regulation and 

“binding” for binding event. The arguments for 

“negative regulation” event is the theme “binding 

of transcriptional factors”, which again is an 

event, the cause “Methyl-CpG-binding proteins” 

and the site “promoter”. This event has three ar-

guments. The second event is “binding” and the 

arguments of this event are the theme “transcrip-

tional factors” and the site “promoter”. For this 

event there are two arguments. The simpler 

events mostly have one argument.  

From this example we also observe that the 

arguments of first event and second events are 

overlapping and importantly the second event as 

a whole is one of the argument of first event. 

Both the events share same arguments and hence 

the argument boundaries overlap. In these cases 

we have processed the events separately i.e. 

when there is more than one event in a sentence; 

each event is processed one by one, while devel-

oping the models.   

The event arguments are actually relations be-

tween the entities. Thus the event argument iden-

tification is modeled as the identification of ar-

gument spans for each argument of the event 

trigger. The basic assumption is that each event 

will either have an explicit or an implicit event 

trigger. Event argument span identification is 

split into four sub-phases for identification of 

each boundary of each argument, i.e., the identi-

fication of Arg1’s two boundaries and Arg2’s 

two boundaries. Four language models were built 

for this purpose and Arg2-START, Arg1-END, 

Arg1-START and Arg2-END were identified in 

series, in that order. The output at each sub-phase 

was fed as input to the next sub-phase. In other 

words, in each sub-phase, the previously identi-

fied boundary is also used as a feature along with 

the features explained in Section 2.2. The choice 

of the order of identification of bounds was made 

with the idea that it is easier to first find the 

boundaries that are in close proximity to the 

cause-effect marker – Arg1-END and Arg2-

START. Between these two, Arg2-START was 

chosen first, arbitrarily. The same holds for the 

choice of Arg1-START to be the third boundary. 

The arguments need not be always adjacent to 388



the marker. Sometimes, the arguments can be in 

the same sentence as the event trigger as shown 

in Example 1. Sometimes, one of the arguments 

is in the sentence immediately preceding that of 

the event trigger. 

3 Results and Discussion 

This section describes the performance of our 

system in terms of Precision, Recall and F score. 

Precision is the number of NEs correctly per-

ceived by the system from the total number of 

NEs identified, Recall is the number of NEs cor-

rectly detected by the system by the total number 

of NEs contained in the input text and F-score is 

merely the harmonic mean of precision and re-

call. 

Precision = TP / (TP + FP) 

Recall = TP / (TP + FN)  

F score = (2 × Recall × Precision / (Recall + 

Precision)) 

Where, TP means true positives, FN means 

false negatives and FP means false positives. 

 We evaluated our system on test parti-

tion of GE task data. The overall result and re-

sults achieved by the system for each event type 

are demonstrated in Table 2 and Table 3. First, 

we developed the system for event extraction, 

without resolving the anaphors. Then we im-

proved the performance of the system by resolv-

ing the anaphors. We obtained F-score of 75.12% 

for simple events, 62.11% for Binding Events & 

Protein Modification Events, 35.31% for regula-

tion events and 49.27% for all event types with-

out resolving the anaphors. After resolving the 

anaphors we observed that there is a significant 

increase in the performance of the system for 

identification of binding and modification events 

and regulation events. 
Event Types Precision Recall F-

score 
Simple Events 78.65 71.89 75.12 

Binding & Protein 
Modification 

Events 

66.36 58.54 62.11 

Regulation Events 41.43 30.77 35.31 
Overall 60.15 41.73 49.27 

Table 2: Results for event extraction- Without 

Anaphora & Coreference resolution 
Event type Precision Recall F-

score 
Simple Events 78.75 71.94 75.76 
Binding & Protein 
Modification 
Events 

69.87 61.67 65.51 

Regulation Events 46.15 35.42 40.08 
Overall 67.15 47.73 54.25 

Table 3: Results for event extraction-After 

Anaphora & Coreference resolution 

Although simpler events achieve good results 

in event extraction task, the extraction of events 

such as binding and modification events and reg-

ulation events is still difficult. We have made an 

approach to improve the results of these complex 

events by resolving anaphora and co-reference. 

There are 445 anaphora relations in binding and 

regulation event types. With the help of our 

anaphora resolution engine we were able to iden-

tify the referents of 254 anaphor relations cor-

rectly. The anaphor relation consisted of pronom-

inal anaphors such as them, its, they etc. and 

noun-noun anaphors such as “aforementioned 

cytokines”, these proteins” etc. Consider the be-

low Example 2 

Example 2 
After 5 days, supernatants were collected and the 

secretion of IFNgamma, IL4 and IL2 were 

measured by ELISA. Samples from both nega-

tive controls had no detectable production of the 

aforementioned cytokines. 

In Example 2, the event trigger is “production” 

and the event is “gene expression”. The argu-

ment for the event is “aforementioned cyto-

kines”, but this refers to IFNgamma, IL4 and 

IL2. This is an example for noun-noun anaphora 

relation. The main objective of this task is to 

identify the protein involved in the event. If we 

do not resolve the noun-noun anaphor “afore-

mentioned cytokines”, we will not be able to 

identify the protein names. Hence resolving the 

anaphors helped in the improvement of regula-

tion and binding events. To know the signifi-

cance of each features we conducted experiments 

to check the performance of individual features. 

The results for performance of individual fea-

tures are shown in Table 4. 

Table 4: Results for Individual features 

Features Precision Recall F-score 

Lexical feature 37.87 23.13 28.53 

Lexical feature 

+Syntactic features 
49.46 28.79 36.80 

Lexical feature 

+Syntactic features 

+Event trigger 

60.56 37.01 45.94 

Lexical feature 

+Syntactic features 

+Event trigger + 

BNEs 

60.45 41.65 49.31 

All above features + 

Anaphora 
67.15 47.73 54.25 

For event extraction we have used lexical fea-

ture, syntactic features such as PoS and chunk, 

event trigger and biomedical entities.  When lex-

icon is used as feature we obtained precision of 389



37.87%, recall of 23.13% and 28.53% F-score.  

A window size of 5 is used. Then we used syn-

tactic features along with the lexical feature.  

Since PoS and chunk plays a key role in extrac-

tion of event trigger and arguments, we observed 

that there were significant improvement in preci-

sion and recall of the system. There was a signif-

icant increase in F-score of about 8.27%. Then 

we used event trigger as feature along with lexi-

cal and syntactic feature. Event trigger is very 

important feature in event extraction task as it 

signals the presence of event in a text. We ob-

tained good increase in performance with preci-

sion of 60.56%., recall of 37.01% and F-score of 

45.94%. Then we used BNE features along with 

the other features. BNEs are main features for 

argument identification of an event. This feature 

helped in heightening the system’s performance 

with increase in F-score of about 3.37%. We ob-

tained an increase of 4.94% after resolving the 

anaphors. The evaluation results show that the 

system is comparable to state of art system. 

4 Conclusion 

This paper described an event extraction system 

designed using the ML approach CRFs, with rich 

feature set. We have evaluated our system on test 

partition of GE task data and showed that the 

system is comparable to state of art system. The 

performance of the system based on individual 

feature is outlined and have also exhibited that 

the system render good performance by resolving 

the anaphors. 

Reference 

John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum and Fernando C. N. 

Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: probabil-

istic models for segmenting and labeling sequence 

data, Proceedings of the Eighteenth International 

Conference on Machine Learning, San Francisco, 

USA, 282–289. 

Kudo Taku. 2005. CRF++, An Open Source Toolkit 

for CRF [online] http://crfpp.sourceforge.net (ac-

cessed 3 January 2013). 

Claire Nédellec, Robert Bossy, Jin-Dong Kim, Jung-

Jae Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo and Pierre 

Zweigenbaum. 2013. Overview of BioNLP Shared 

Task 2013, Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared 

Task 2013 Workshop, Sofia, Bulgaria, 1–7.  

Sindhuja Gopalan and Sobha L. Devi. 2016. BNE-

Miner: mining biomedical literature for extraction 

of biological target, disease and chemical entities, 

Int. J. Business Intelligence and Data Mining, 

11(2):190–204. 

Bairoch, A., Apweiler, R., Wu, C.H., Barker, W.C., 

Boeckmann, B., Ferro, S., Gasteiger, E., Huang, 

H., Lopez, R., Magrane, M., Martin, M.J.,  Natale, 

D.A., O’Donovan, C., Redaschi, N., and Yeh. 

L.S.L. (2005) ‘The universal protein resource (uni-

prot)’, Nucleic Acids Research, 33(1):154–159.  

Samuel Kerrien, Bruno Aranda, Lionel Breuza,  Alan 

Bridge, Fiona Broackes-Carter, Carol Chen, Mar-

garet Duesbury, Marine Dumousseau, Marc Feu-

ermann, Ursula Hinz, Christine Jandrasits, Rafael  

C. Jimenez, Jyoti Khadake, Usha Mahadevan, Pat-

rick Masson, Ivo Pedruzzi, Eric Pfeiffenberger, 

Pablo Porras, Arathi Raghunath, Bernd Roechert, 

Sandra Orchard and Henning Hermjakob. 2012. 

The intact molecular interaction database in 2012, 

Nucleic Acids Research, 40(1):841–846.  

Karin Verspoor, Kevin B. Cohen, Arrick Lanfranchi, 

Colin Warner, Helen L. Johnson, Christophe Roed-

er, Jinho D. Choi, Christopher Funk, Yuriy Malen-

kiy, Miriam Eckert, Nianwen Xue, William A. 

Baumgartner, Michael Bada, Martha Palmer and 

Lawrence Hunter. 2012. A corpus of full-text jour-

nal articles is a robust evaluation tool for revealing 

differences in performance of biomedical natural 

language processing tools, BMC Bioinformatics, 

13(1): 207.  

Jose Castano, Jason Zhang and James Pustejovsky. 

2002. Anaphora resolution in biomedical literature, 

Proceedings of International Symposium on Refer-

ence Resolution for NLP 2002, Alicante, Spain.  

Robert Gaizauskas, Demetriou, G., Artymiuk, P.J., 

and Willett, P. (2003) Protein structures and infor-

mation extraction from biological texts: the PAS-

TA system, Bioinformatics, 9(1):135-143. 

Xiaofeng Yang, Jian Su, Guodong Zhou and Chew L. 

Tan. 2004. An NP-cluster based approach to coref-

erence resolution, Proceedings of COLING 2004, 

Geneva, Switzerland, 226–232. 

Jari Bjorne and Tapio Salakoski. 2013. TEES 2.1: 

Automated Annotation Scheme Learning in the Bi-

oNLP 2013 Shared Task, Proceedings of the Bi-

oNLP Shared Task 2013 Workshop, Sofia, Bulgar-

ia, 16–25. 

Kai Hakala, Sofie V. Landeghem, Tapio Salakoski, 

Yves Van de Peer and Filip Ginter. 2013. EVEX in 

ST’13: Application of a large-scale text mining re-

source to event extraction and network construc-

tion, Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2013 

Workshop, Sofia, Bulgaria, 26-34.  

Sobha L. Devi, Pattabhi R. K. Rao, Vijay S. Ram, 

Malarkodi C. S, and Akilandeswari A. 2011. Hy-

brid Approach for Coreference Resolution, Pro-

ceedings of 15th Conference on Computational 

Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, Port-

land, Oregon, 93-96.  
390



Sofie V. Landeghem, Filip Ginter, Yves Van de Peer 

and Tapio Salakoski. 2011. Evex: A pubmed-scale 

resource for homology-based generalization of text 

mining predictions, Proceedings of BioNLP 2011 

Workshop, Portland, Oregon, USA, 28–37.  

Caroline V. Gasperin. 2009. Statistical anaphora reso-

lution in biomedical texts. A Technical report 

based on a dissertation titled Statistical anaphora 

resolution in biomedical texts, University of Cam-

bridge.  

Ning Kang, Erik M. van Mulligen and Jan A. Kors. 

2011. Comparing and combining chunkers of bio-

medical text, Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 

44(2):354–360. 

Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Yuka Tateishi, Jin-Dong Kim,  

Tomoko Ohta, John McNaught, Sophia Ananiadou 

and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2005. Developing a Robust 

Part-of-Speech Tagger for Biomedical Text, Lec-

391


