



















































ParaDi: Dictionary of Paraphrases of Czech Complex Predicates with Light Verbs


Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2017), pages 1–10,
Valencia, Spain, April 4. c©2017 Association for Computational Linguistics

ParaDi: Dictionary of Paraphrases of Czech Complex Predicates
with Light Verbs

Petra Barančı́ková and Václava Kettnerová
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics,

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University,
Malostranské náměstı́ 25, 118 00, Praha, Czech Republic,

barancikova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, kettnerova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We present a new freely available dic-
tionary of paraphrases of Czech complex
predicates with light verbs, ParaDi. Can-
didates for single predicative paraphrases
of selected complex predicates have been
extracted automatically from large mono-
lingual data using word2vec. They have
been manually verified and further refined.
We demonstrate one of many possible ap-
plications of ParaDi in an experiment with
improving machine translation quality.

1 Introduction

Multiword expressions (MWEs) pose a serious
challenge for both foreign speakers and many NLP
tasks (Sag et al., 2002). From various multiword
expressions, those that involve verbs are of great
significance as verbs represent the syntactic center
of a sentence.

In this paper, we focus on one particular type
of Czech multiword expressions – on complex
predicates with light verbs (CPs). CPs consist
of a light verb and another predicative element
– a predicative noun, an adjective, an adverb or
a verb; the pairs function as single predicative
units. As such, most CPs have their single pred-
icative counterparts by which they can be para-
phrased, e.g. the CPs dát polibek and dát pusu
‘give a kiss’ can be both paraphrased by polı́bit
‘to kiss’.

In contrast to their single predicative para-
phrases, CPs manifest much greater flexibility
in their modification, c.f. adjectival modifiers
of the CP dát polibek ‘give a kiss’ and the cor-
responding adverbial modifiers of its single verb
paraphrase polı́bit ‘to kiss’ in dát vášnivý/něž-
ný/letmý/manželský/májový/smrtı́cı́ polibek ‘give
a passionate/tender/fleeting/marriage/May/fatal

kiss’ vs. vášnivě/něžně/letmo/*manželsky/*má-
jově/*smrtelně polı́bit ‘kiss passionately/tender-
ly/fleetingly/*marriagely/*Mayly/?fatally’. Easier
modification of CPs is usually considered as the
main motivation for their widespread use (Brinton
and Akimoto, 1999).

In this paper, we present ParaDi, a dictionary
of single predicative verb paraphrases of Czech
CPs. We restricted the dictionary only to CPs
that consist of light verbs and predicative nouns,
which represent the most frequent and central type
of CPs in the Czech language.

ParaDi was built on a semi-automatic basis.
First, candidates for single verb paraphrases of
selected CPs have been automatically identified
in large monolingual data using word2vec, a shal-
low neural network. The list of these candidates
has been then manually checked and further re-
fined. In many cases, if CPs are to be correctly
paraphrased by the identified single predicative
verbs, these verbs require certain semantic and/or
syntactic modifications.

It has been widely acknowledged that many
NLP applications – let us mention, e.g. informa-
tion retrieval (Wallis, 1993), question answering,
machine translation (Madnani and Dorr (2013);
Callison-Burch et al. (2006); Marton et al. (2009))
or machine translation evaluation (Kauchak and
Barzilay (2006); Zhou et al. (2006); Barančı́ková
et al. (2014)) – can benefit from paraphrases.

Here we show how the dictionary providing
high quality data can be integrated into an ex-
periment with improving statistical machine trans-
lation quality. If translated separately, CPs of-
ten cause errors in machine translation. In our
experiment, we use the dictionary to simplify
Czech source sentences before translation by re-
placing CPs with their respective single predica-
tive verb paraphrases. Human annotators have
evaluated quality of the translated simplified sen-

1



tences higher than of the original sentences con-
tain CPs.

This paper is structured as follows. First, related
work on CPs generally and on their paraphrases is
introduced (Section 2). Second, the paraphrasing
model for CPs is thoroughly described, especially
the selection of CPs, an automatic extraction of
candidates for their paraphrases and their manual
evaluation (Section 3). Third, the resulting data
and the structure of the lexical space of the dictio-
nary are discussed (Section 4). Finally, in order to
present one of many practical applications of this
dictionary, a random sample of paraphrases from
the ParaDi dictionary is used in a machine trans-
lation experiment (Section 5).

2 Related Work

A theoretical research on CPs with light verbs has
a long history, which can be traced back to Jes-
persen (1965). An ample literature devoted to this
language phenomenon so far is characterized by
an enormous diversity in used terms and analyses,
see esp. (Amberber et al., 2010) and (Alsina et al.,
1997). Here we use the term CP with the light verb
for a collocation within which the verb – not re-
taining its full semantic content – provides rather
grammatical functions (incl. syntactic structure)
and to which individual semantic properties are
primarily contributed by the noun (Algeo, 1995).

The information on CPs is a part of several
lexical resources containing manually annotated
data. For instance, CPs are represented in syn-
tactically rich annotated corpora from the family
of the Prague Dependency Treebanks: the Prague
Dependency Treebank 3.0 (PDT)1 and the Prague
Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.02, see
(Bejček et al., 2013) and (Hajič et al., 2012). Fur-
ther, the PropBank3 project has been recently en-
hanced with the information on CPs; the anno-
tation scheme of CPs in PropBank is thoroughly
described in (Hwang et al., 2010). Finally, the
Hungarian corpus of CPs based on the data from
the Szeged Treebank has been built (Vincze and
Csirik, 2010).

At present, one of trending topics in NLP
community is an automatic identification of CPs.
In this task, various statistical measures often

1http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0
2http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pcedt2.0/en/

index.html
3https://verbs.colorado.edu/˜mpalmer/

projects/ace.html

combined with information on syntactic and/or
semantic properties of CPs are employed (e.g.
Bannard (2007), Fazly et al. (2005)). The auto-
matic detection benefits especially from parallel
corpora representing valuable sources of data in
which CPs can be automatically recognized via
word alignment, see e.g. (Chen et al., 2015),
(de Medeiros Caseli et al., 2010), (Sinha, 2009),
(Zarrießand Kuhn, 2009).

Work on paraphrasing CPs is still not exten-
sive. A paraphrasing model has been proposed
within the Meaning↔Text Theory(Žolkovskij and
Mel’čuk, 1965). Its representation of CPs by
means of lexical functions and rules applied in
the paraphrasing model are thoroughly described
in (Alonso Ramos, 2007). Further, Fujita et al.
(2004) present a paraphrasing model which takes
advantage of semantic representation of CPs by
lexical conceptual structures. Similarly as our pro-
posed dictionary of paraphrases, this model also
takes into account changes in the grammatical cat-
egory of voice and changes in morphological cases
of arguments, which have appeared to be highly
relevant for the paraphrasing task.

3 Paraphrase Model

In this section, the process of paraphrase extrac-
tion is described in detail. First, we present the se-
lection of CPs (Section 3.1). For their paraphras-
ing, we had initially intended to use some of exist-
ing sources of paraphrases, however, they turned
out to be completely unsatisfactory for our task.4

Word2vec is a group of shallow neural networks
generating representations of words in a continu-
ous vector space depending on contexts they ap-
pear in (Mikolov et al., 2013). In line with dis-
tributional hypothesis (Harris, 1954), semantically

4We used the ParaPhrase DataBase (PPDB), (Ganitke-
vitch and Callison-Burch, 2014; Ganitkevitch et al., 2013)
the largest paraphrase database available for the Czech lan-
guage. PPDB has been created automatically from large par-
allel data and it comes in several sizes ranging from S to
XXL. However, the bigger its size, the bigger the amount of
noise. We chose the size L as a reasonable trade-off between
quality and quantity. We combined the phrasal paraphrases,
many-to-one and one-to-many. We lemmatized and tagged
the collection of PPDB using the state-of-the-art POS tagger
Morphodita (Straková et al., 2014). Even though this collec-
tion contains almost 400k lemmatized paraphrases in total, it
contained only 54 candidates for single predicative verb para-
phrases of CP. Only 2 of these 45 candidates these candidates
have been detected correctly, the rest was noise in PPDB. As
a result, we chose not to use parallel data in our task but we
have adopted another approach applying word2vec, a neural
network based model to large monolingual data.

2



similar words are mapped close to each other
(measured by the cosine similarity) so we can ex-
pect CPs and their single verb paraphrases to have
similar vector space distribution.

Word2vec computes vectors for single tokens.
As CPs represent MWEs, their preprocessing was
necessary: CPs have to be first identified and con-
nected into a single token (Section 3.2).

Particular settings of our model for an auto-
matic extraction of candidates for single predica-
tive verb paraphrases are presented in Section 3.3.
Finally, a manual evaluation of the extracted can-
didates, including their further annotation with
semantic and syntactic information, is described
(Section 3.4).

3.1 CPs Selection

Two different datasets of CPs, containing together
2,257 unique CPs, have been used. As both these
datasets have been manually created, they allow us
to achieve the desired quality of the resulting data.

The first dataset resulted from the experiment
examining the native speakers’ agreement on the
interpretation of light verbs (Kettnerová et al.,
2013). CPs in this dataset consist of collocations
of light verbs and predicative nouns expressed by
a prepositionless case (e.g., položit otázku ‘put
a question’), by a simple prepositional case (e.g.,
dát do pořádku ‘put in order’), and by a complex
prepositional group (e.g., přejı́t ze smı́chu do pláče
‘go from laughing to crying’).

The second dataset resulted from a project aim-
ing to enhance the high coverage valency lexicon
of Czech verbs, VALLEX,5 with the information
on CPs (Kettnerová et al., 2016). In this case, only
the nominal collocates expressed in the preposi-
tionless accusative were selected as they represent
the central type of Czech CPs. As the frequency
and saliency have been taken as the main crite-
ria for their selection, the resulting set represents
a valuable source of CPs for Czech.

The overall number of CPs in the datasets is pre-
sented in Table 1. The union of CPs from these
datasets – 2,257 CPs in total – has been used in the
paraphrase candidates extraction task.

3.2 Data Preprocessing

For word2vec training, only monolingual data –
generally easily obtainable in a large amount – is
necessary. We have used large lemmatized corpora

5http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/vallex/3.0/

CPs Verbs Nouns
First dataset 726 49 612
Second dataset 1640 126 699
Union 2257 154 1061

Table 1: The number of unique CPs, light verbs
and predicative nouns from two datasets. Their
union has been used in the paraphrase extraction
task.

Corpus Sentences Tokens
CNK2000 2.78 121.81
CNK2005 7.95 122.99
CNK2010 8.18 122.48
Czeng 1.0 14.83 206.05
Czech Press 258.40 4018.89
Total 292.14 4592.22

Table 2: Basic statistics of datasets (numbers
in millions of units).

of Czech texts: SYN2000 (Čermák et al., 2000),
SYN2005 (Čermák et al., 2005), SYN2010 (Křen
et al., 2010) and CzEng 1.0 (Bojar et al., 2011).
As these four large corpora with almost 600 mil-
lion tokens in total have turned out to be insuffi-
cient, they have been extended with the data from
the Czech Press – a large collection of contempo-
rary news texts containing more than 4,000 mil-
lion tokens. The overall statistics on all datasets is
presented in Table 2.

To generate CPs paraphrases, all the selected
CPs (Section 3.1) had to be automatically iden-
tified in the given corpora. For the identification
of the CPs, we proceeded from light verbs. First,
all verbs in the corpora were detected. From these
verbs, only those verbs that represent light verbs as
parts of the selected CPs were further processed.

For each identified light verb, each noun phrase
in the context ± 4 words from the given light verb
was extracted in case the verb and the given noun
phrase can combine in some of the selected CPs.

Further, as word2vec generates representations
of single word units, every detected noun phrase
was connected with its respective light verb into
a single word unit. In case that some light verb
could combine with more than one noun phrase
into CPs, or in case that one noun phrase could
be connected with more than one light verb, we
have followed the principle that every verb should
be connected to at least one candidate in order
to maximize a number of identified CPs.

3



rank CP frequency

1.
mı́t problém

319,791
’have a problem’

2.
mı́t možnost

300,330
’have a possibility’

3.
mı́t šanci

292,340
’have a chance’

... ... ...

998.
vznést žalobu

535
’bring charges’

... ... ...

1775.
vést k sebevyvrácenı́

1
’lead to self-refutation’

1776.
dojı́t k flagelantstvı́

1
’flagellation takes place’

Table 3: The ranking of the CPs identified in the
corpora, based on their frequency.

For example, if there were two light verbs v1
and v2 in a sentence and v1 had a candidate c1,
while v2 had two candidates c1 and c2, v1 was con-
nected with c1 and v2 with c2. In case this princi-
ple was not sufficient, the light verb was assigned
the closest noun phrase on the basis of word order.

When each noun phrase was connected maxi-
mally with one light verb and each light verb was
connected maximally with one noun phrase, we
have joined the noun phrases to their respective
light verbs into single word units with the under-
score character and erase the noun phrases from
their original position in sentences.

For example, after identifying the light verb mı́t
‘have’ in a sentence and the prepositionless noun
phrase problém ‘problem’ in its context on the
above principles, the given light verb and the given
noun phrase have been connected into the result-
ing single word unit mı́t problém; this whole unit
then replaced the verb mı́t ‘have’ in the sentence,
while the noun phrase problém ‘problem’ was
deleted from the sentence.

On this basis, almost 8.5 million instances
of CPs were identified in the corpora, 99,9%
of them has frequency more than 100 occurrences
in the corpora. However, only 1,776 unique CPs
were detected – almost 500 CPs from the selected
datasets (Section 3.1) did not occur even once.
The rank and frequency of selected CPs identified
in the corpora is presented in Table 3.

3.3 Word2vec Model

To the resulting data, we have applied gen-
sim, a freely available word2vec implementation
(Řehůřek and Sojka, 2010). In particular, we have
used a model of vector size 500 with continuous
bag of word (CBOW) training algorithm and neg-
ative sampling.

As it is impossible for the model to learn any-
thing about a rarely seen word, we have set a min-
imum number of word occurrences to 100 in or-
der to limit the size of the vocabulary to reason-
able words. This requirement filtered also uncom-
monly used CPs from the identified CPs in the cor-
pora: from 1,776 CPs only 1,486 CPs fulfilled the
given limit.

After training the model, for each of 1,486 CPs
we have extracted 30 words with the most similar
vectors. From these 30 words, we have selected up
to ten single verbs closest to the given CP. These
verbs were taken as candidates for single predica-
tive verb paraphrases of the given CP.

As a result, 8,921 verbs in total corresponding
to 3,735 unique verb lemmas have been selected as
candidates for single predicative verb paraphrases
of the given 1,486 CPs.

3.4 Annotation Process

In this section, the annotation process of the ex-
tracted 8,921 candidates for single predicative
verb paraphrases of CPs is thoroughly described.
Manual processing of the extracted single verbs
allowed us to evaluate the results of the adopted
method.

Let us repeat that word2vec generates seman-
tically similar words depending on their contexts
they appear in. However, not only words having
the same meaning can have similar space repre-
sentation. Words with the opposite meaning (e.g.
‘finish’ vs ‘start’), more specific meaning (‘finish’
vs. ‘graduate’) or even different meaning can be
extracted as they can appear in similar contexts as
well. Manual evaluation of the extracted candi-
dates for single verb paraphrases is thus necessary.

In the manual evaluation, two annotators have
been asked to indicate for each instance of the
extracted candidates for single verb paraphrases
of a CP whether it represents the paraphrase of the
given CP, or not. For example, the single verbs
upřednostňovat and preferovat ‘to prefer’ are the
paraphrase of the CP dávat přednost ‘to give
a preference’ while the verb srazit ‘to run down’

4



not.
Moreover, single verbs antonymous with the re-

spective CPs have been indicated as well as in par-
ticular context they can also function as a para-
phrase. For example, depending on contexts
both extracted single verbs stoupnout ‘to rise’
and poklesnout ‘to drop’ can function as para-
phrases of the CP zaznamenat propad ‘to experi-
ence a drop’, while the first one has the meaning
synonymous with the given CP, the meaning of the
latter is antonymous.

Further, when the annotators have determined
a certain candidate as the single verb paraphrase
of a CP, they have taken the following three mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic aspects into ac-
count.

First, they had to pay special attention to the
morphological expression of arguments. Changes
in their morphological expression reflect different
syntactic perspectives from which the action de-
noted by the given CP and its single verb para-
phrase is viewed. For example, the single verb
potrestat ‘to punish’ can serve as the paraphrase of
the CP dostat trest ‘to get a punishment’ in a sen-
tence, however, the semantic roles of the subject
and the object are switched.

Second, in some cases the reflexive morpheme
se/si, reflecting the inchoative meaning, had to be
added to single predicative verb paraphrases so
that their meaning corresponds to the meaning
of their respective CPs. For example, the CP
mı́t problém ‘have a problem’ can be paraphrased
by the verb trápit only on the condition that the
reflexive morpheme is attached to the verb lemma
trápit se ‘to worry’.

Third, some single predicative verbs function
as paraphrases of particular CPs only if nouns
in these CPs have certain adjectival modifications.
These paraphrases have been assigned the given
adjectives during the annotation.

As the above given three features are not mu-
tually exclusive, they can combine. For example,
the verb zaměstnat ‘to hire’ is a paraphrase of the
CP nalézt uplatněnı́ ‘to find an use’ but both the
reflexive morpheme se and a modification by the
adverb pracovnı́ ‘working’ is required.

To summarize, for each identified single pred-
icative verb paraphrase v of a CP l, the annotators
have chosen from the following options:

• v is a synonymous paraphrase of l (without
any modification of the context)

synonyms antonyms
no constrains 1607 51
+ reflexive morpheme 353 2
+ voice change 173 5
+ an adjective 53 –
total 2177 58

Table 4: The basic statistics on the annotation. The
synonyms column does not add up as the condi-
tions are not mutually exclusive as mentioned ear-
lier.

e.g., mı́t zájem ‘to be interested’ and chtı́t
‘to want’

• v is an antonym of l (the modification of the
context is necessary)
e.g., zaznamenat propad ‘to experience
a drop’ and stoupnout ‘to rise’

• v is a paraphrase of l but changes in the mor-
phological expression of arguments are nec-
essary
e.g., dostat nabı́dku ‘to get an offer’ and
nabı́dnout ‘to offer’

• v is a paraphrase of l but the reflexive mor-
pheme se/si has to be added (the modification
of verb lemma is necessary)
e.g., nést název ‘to be called’ and nazývat se
‘to be called’

• v is a paraphrase of l with a particular adjecti-
val modification (the adjective modifier of the
noun should be present)
e.g., podat oznámenı́ ‘to make an announce-
ment’ can be paraphrased as žalovat ‘to sue’
only if the noun oznámenı́ is modified with
the adjective trestnı́ ‘criminal’

• v is a not a paraphrase of l

As a result of the annotation process, the total
number of the indicated single verb paraphrases
of CPs was 2,177. For 999 CPs at least one single
verb paraphrase has been found. The highest num-
ber of single verb paraphrases indicated for one
CP has been eight; it has been the CP vznést dotaz
‘to ask a question’. Figure 1 shows the number
of paraphrases per CPs.

Table 4 presents more detailed results of the an-
notation. It shows frequency of additional mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic features.

5



Figure 1: The number of single predicative verb
paraphrases and antonymous verbs per CPs in the
ParaDi dictionary.

4 Dictionary of Paraphrases

2,235 single predicative verbs indicated by the
annotators as synonymous or antonymous verbs
of 999 CPs (Section 3.4) form the lexical stock
of ParaDi, a dictionary of single verb paraphrases
of Czech CPs. The format of the ParaDi dictio-
nary has been designed with respect to both hu-
man and machine readability. The dictionary is
represented in JSON, as it is flexible and language-
independent data format.

The lexical entries in the dictionary describe
individual light verbs. Under light verb keys,
all predicative nouns constituting CPs with the
given light verb are listed. The predicative nouns
are lemmatized; the information on their mor-
phology is included under their morph keys the
value of which are prepositionless and preposi-
tional cases.

Each CP in the lexical entry might be assigned
one or two lists of single predicative verbs: one for
synonymous paraphrases and the other for antony-
mous verbs. Paraphrases in the lists are sorted
based on the distance from their respective LVC
in the vector space. Moreover, each verb may be
assigned one or more following features:

• voice change – indicating changes in the
morphosyntactic expression of arguments,

• adjective – indicating necessary adjectival
modification,

• reflexive – indicating that reflexive morpheme
is necessary,

’lverb’: ’zaznamenat’,
[{’noun’: ’propad’,
’morph’: ’4’,
’synonyms’: [
{’lemma’: ’poklesnout’},
{’lemma’: ’klesnout’},
{’lemma’: ’propadnout’,
’reflexive’: ’se’}
],
’antonyms’: [
{’lemma’: ’stoupnout’}
],
...
]
}

Figure 2: The lexical representation of the CP za-
znamenat propad ‘to record a slump’.

An illustrative example of the lexical represen-
tation of paraphrases in ParaDi is presented in Fig-
ure 2. It displays the lexical entry of the CP zaz-
namenat propad ‘to record a slump’. Under the
light verb zaznamenat ‘to record’, there is a list
of nouns that combine with this light verb into
CPs. In case of the noun propad ‘slump’, the noun
is expressed by the prepositionless accusative.
This CP has three single verb paraphrases (pok-
lesnout ‘to decrease’, klesnout ‘to drop’, propad-
nout se ‘to slump’) and one antonymous verb
(stoupnout ‘to increase’). The paraphrase propad-
nout ‘to slump’ needs to have the reflexive mor-
pheme se.

ParaDi is freely available at the following
URL: http://hdl.handle.net/11234/
1-1969

5 Machine Translation Experiment

We have taken advantage of the ParaDi dictio-
nary in a machine translation experiment in order
to verify its benefit for one of key NLP tasks. We
have selected 50 random CPs from the dictionary.
For each of them, we have randomly extracted one
sentence from our data containing the given CP.
This set of sentences is referred to as BEFORE.
By substituting a CP for its first (i.e. closest in the
vector space) paraphrase on the basis of the dictio-
nary, we have created a new dataset AFTER.

We have translated both these datasets – BE-
FORE and AFTER – using two freely avail-

6



Source Moses GT
BEFORE 30% 33%
AFTER 45% 44%
TIE 25% 23%

Table 5: Results of the experiment. First column
shows a source of better ranked sentence from the
pairwise comparison or whether they tied.

able MT systems – Google Translate6 (GT) and
Moses7 in the Czech to English setting.

We have used crowdsourcing for evaluation
of the resulting translations. Both options were
presented in a randomized order and the annota-
tors were instructed to choose whether one trans-
lation is better or they have the same quality.

We have collected almost 300 comparisons. We
measured inter-annotator agreement using Krip-
pendorff’s alpha (Krippendorff, 2007), a reliabil-
ity coefficient developed to measure the agreement
between judges. The inter-annotator agreement
has achieved 0.58, i.e. moderate agreement.

The results (see Table 5) are very promising:
in most cases the annotators clearly preferred
translations of AFTER (i.e. with single predicative
verbs) to BEFORE (i.e. with CPs). The results are
consistent for both translation systems.

However, it is clear from the example in Table 6
that even though the change in the source sentence
was minimal, the translations changed substan-
tially as both the translation models are phrase-
based. Based on this fact, we can expect that
not only difference in quality between translations
of CPs and their respective synonymous verbs was
evaluated. This low quality translation inevitably
reflected in lower inter-annotator agreement, typi-
cal for machine translation evaluation (Bojar et al.,
2013).

6 Conclusion

We have presented ParaDi, a semiautomatically
created dictionary of single verb paraphrases of
Czech complex predicates with light verbs. We
have shown that such paraphrases are automati-
cally obtainable from large monolingual data with
a manual verification. ParaDi represents a core
of such dictionary, which can be further enriched.
We have demonstrated one of its possible applica-

6http://translate.google.com
7http://quest.ms.mff.cuni.cz/moses/

demo.php

tions, namely an experiment with improving ma-
chine translation quality. However, the dictionary
can be used in many other NLP tasks (text sim-
plification, information retrieval, etc.) and can be
similarly created for other languages.

Acknowledgments

The research reported in this paper has been sup-
ported by the Czech Science Foundation GA ČR,
grant No. GA15-09979S. This work has been us-
ing language resources developed and/or stored
and/or distributed by the LINDAT-Clarin project
of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of
the Czech Republic, project No. LM2015071.

References
John Algeo. 1995. Having a look at the expanded

predicate. In B. Aarts and Ch. F. Meyer, editors,
The Verb in Contemporary English: Theory and
Description, pages 203–217. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Margarita Alonso Ramos. 2007. Towards the syn-
thesis of support verb constructions: Distribution of
syntactic actants between the verb and the noun. In
L. Wanner and I. A. Mel’čuk, editors, Selected Lex-
ical and Grammatical Issues in the Meaning-Text
Theory, pages 97–137. John Benjamins Publishing
Company, Amsterdam, Philadelphia.

Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells, editors.
1997. Complex Predicates. CSLI Publications,
Stanford.

Mengistu Amberber, Brett Baker, and Mark Harvey,
editors. 2010. Complex Predicates in Cross-
Linguistic Perspective. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Colin Bannard. 2007. A measure of syntactic flexibil-
ity for automatically identifying multiword expres-
sions in corpora. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on a Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions,
MWE ’07, pages 1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Petra Barančı́ková, Rudolf Rosa, and Aleš Tamchyna.
2014. Improving Evaluation of English-Czech
MT through Paraphrasing. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson,
Bente Maegaard, and Joseph Mariani, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2014),
pages 596–601, Reykjavı́k, Iceland. European Lan-
guage Resources Association.

Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlı́na
Jı́nová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová,
Marie Mikulová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko,

7



Source

BEFORE
Fotbalisté Budějovic opět nedali branku

Football players Budějovice again did not give gate
Football players of Budějovice didn’t make a goal again

AFTER
Fotbalisté Budějovic opět neskórovali

Football players Budějovice again did not score
Football players of Budějovice didn’t score again

GT
BEFORE Footballers Budejovice again not given goal
AFTER Footballers did not score again Budejovice

Moses
BEFORE Footballers Budějovice again gave the gate
AFTER Footballers Budějovice score again

Table 6: An example of the translated sentences. The judges unanimously agreed that AFTER trans-
lations are better than BEFORE. Moses translated the CP dát branku literally word by word and the
meaning of this translation is far from the meaning of the source sentence.

Jarmila Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda
Ševčı́ková, Jan Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová.
2013. Prague dependency treebank 3.0.

Ondřej Bojar, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Ondřej Dušek, Pe-
tra Galuščáková, Martin Majliš, David Mareček, Jiřı́
Maršı́k, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2011. Czech-english parallel corpus 1.0
(CzEng 1.0). LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles
University in Prague.

Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Chris Callison-Burch,
Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and
Lucia Specia. 2013. Findings of the 2013 Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 1–44, Sofia, Bulgaria, Au-
gust. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Laurel Brinton and Minoji Akimoto, editors. 1999.
Collocational and Idiomatic Aspects of Composite
Predicates in the History of English. John Ben-
jamins Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Philadel-
phia.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, and Miles Os-
borne. 2006. Improved Statistical Machine Transla-
tion Using Paraphrases. In Proceedings of the Main
Conference on Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics, HLT-NAACL
’06, pages 17–24, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

František Čermák, Renata Blatná, Jaroslava
Hlaváčová, Jan Kocek, Marie Kopřivová, Michal
Křen, Vladimı́r Petkevič, and Michal Schmiedtová,
Věra Šulc. 2000. SYN2000: balanced corpus of
written Czech. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles
University in Prague.

František Čermák, Jaroslava Hlaváčová, Milena
Hnátková, Tomáš Jelı́nek, Jan Kocek, Marie

Kopřivová, Michal Křen, Renata Novotná, Vladimı́r
Petkevič, Věra Schmiedtová, Hana Skoumalová, Jo-
hanka Spoustová, Michal Šulc, and Zdeněk Velı́šek.
2005. SYN2005: balanced corpus of written Czech.
LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at Institute of For-
mal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University in
Prague.

Wei-Te Chen, Claire Bonial, and Martha Palmer. 2015.
English light verb construction identification using
lexical knowledge. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
AAAI’15, pages 2375–2381. AAAI Press.

Helena de Medeiros Caseli, Carlos Ramisch, Maria das
Graças Volpe Nunes, and Aline Villavicencio. 2010.
Alignment-based extraction of multiword expres-
sions. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-
2):59–77.

Afsaneh Fazly, Ryan North, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2005. Automatically distinguishing literal and figu-
rative usages of highly polysemous verbs. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Deep
Lexical Acquisition, DeepLA ’05, pages 38–47,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Atsushi Fujita, Kentaro Furihata, Kentaro Inui, Yuji
Matsumoto, and Koichi Takeuchi. 2004. Para-
phrasing of japanese light-verb constructions based
on lexical conceptual structure. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrat-
ing Processing, MWE ’04, pages 9–16, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Juri Ganitkevitch and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014.
The Multilingual Paraphrase Database. In The 9th
edition of the Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Conference, Reykjavik, Iceland, May. European
Language Resources Association.

Juri Ganitkevitch, Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris
Callison-Burch. 2013. PPDB: The Paraphrase
Database. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of

8



the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 758–764, Atlanta, Georgia, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr
Sgall, Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková,
Marie Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Se-
mecký, Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman,
Zdeňka Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012.
Announcing prague czech-english dependency tree-
bank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2012), pages 3153–3160, İstanbul, Turkey.
ELRA, European Language Resources Association.

Zellig Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(23):146–162.

Jena D. Hwang, Archna Bhatia, Claire Bonial, Aous
Mansouri, Ashwini Vaidya, Nianwen Xue, and
Martha Palmer. 2010. PropBank Annotation of
Multilingual Light Verb Constructions. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop,
pages 82–90, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Otto Jespersen. 1965. A Modern English Grammar on
Historical Principles VI., Morphology. A Modern
English Grammar on Historical Principles. George
Allen & Unwin Ltd., London.

David Kauchak and Regina Barzilay. 2006. Para-
phrasing for Automatic Evaluation. In Proceedings
of the Main Conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association of Computational Linguistics,
HLT-NAACL ’06, pages 455–462, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Václava Kettnerová, Markéta Lopatková, Eduard
Bejček, Anna Vernerová, and Marie Podobová.
2013. Corpus Based Identification of Czech
Light Verbs. In Katarı́na Gajdošová and Adriána
Žáková, editors, Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Conference Slovko 2013; Natural Language
Processing, Corpus Linguistics, E-learning, pages
118–128, Lüdenscheid, Germany. Slovak National
Corpus, L’. Štúr Institute of Linguistics, Slovak
Academy of Sciences, RAM-Verlag.

Václava Kettnerová, Petra Barančı́ková, and Markéta
Lopatková. 2016. Lexicographic Description of
Czech Complex Predicates: Between Lexicon and
Grammar. In Proceedings of the XVII EURALEX
International Congress.

Michal Křen, Tomáš Bartoň, Václav Cvrček, Milena
Hnátková, Tomáš Jelı́nek, Jan Kocek, Renata
Novotná, Vladimı́r Petkevič, Pavel Procházka, Věra
Schmiedtová, and Hana Skoumalová. 2010.
SYN2010: balanced corpus of written Czech. LIN-
DAT/CLARIN digital library at Institute of For-
mal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University in
Prague.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2007. Computing Krippendorff’s
Alpha Reliability. Technical report, University of
Pennsylvania, Annenberg School for Communica-
tion.

Nitin Madnani and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2013. Generat-
ing Targeted Paraphrases for Improved Translation.
ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., 4(3):40:1–40:25,
July.

Yuval Marton, Chris Callison-Burch, and Philip
Resnik. 2009. Improved Statistical Machine Trans-
lation Using Monolingually-derived Paraphrases. In
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ’09, pages 381–390, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781.

Radim Řehůřek and Petr Sojka. 2010. Software
Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Cor-
pora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop
on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–
50, Valletta, Malta, May. ELRA.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In In
Proc. of the 3rd International Conference on Intelli-
gent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics
(CICLing-2002, pages 1–15.

R. Mahesh K. Sinha. 2009. Mining Complex Predi-
cates in Hindi Using a Parallel Hindi-English Cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Identification, Interpretation, Disam-
biguation and Applications, MWE ’09, pages 40–
46, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Jana Straková, Milan Straka, and Jan Hajič. 2014.
Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatiza-
tion, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition.
In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations, pages 13–18, Baltimore, Mary-
land, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Veronika Vincze and János Csirik. 2010. Hungarian
Corpus of Light Verb Constructions. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, COLING ’10, pages 1110–
1118, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Alexander K. Žolkovskij and Igor A. Mel’čuk.
1965. O vozmožnom metode i instrumentax se-
mantičeskogo sinteza. Naučno-texničeskaja infor-
macija, (6).

9



Peter Wallis. 1993. Information Retrieval based on
Paraphrase.

Sina Zarrießand Jonas Kuhn. 2009. Exploiting Trans-
lational Correspondences for Pattern-independent
MWE Identification. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions: Identification,
Interpretation, Disambiguation and Applications,
MWE ’09, pages 23–30, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Liang Zhou, Chin-Yew Lin, and Eduard Hovy. 2006.
Re-evaluating Machine Translation Results with
Paraphrase Support. In Proceedings of the 2006
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, EMNLP ’06, pages 77–84,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

10


