Proceedings of Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval Workshop, pages 19–27,

Varna, Bulgaria, Sep 7 2017.

https://doi.org/10.26615/978-954-452-038-0_003

19

Automatic Summarization of Online Debates

Nattapong Sanchan, Ahmet Aker and Kalina Bontcheva

Natural Language Processing Group, Department of Computer Science,
The University of Shefﬁeld, 211 Portobello, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom

{nsanchan1, ahmet.aker, k.bontcheva}@shefﬁeld.ac.uk

https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/dcs

Abstract

Debate summarization is one of the novel
and challenging research areas in auto-
matic text summarization which has been
largely unexplored. In this paper, we de-
velop a debate summarization pipeline to
summarize key topics which are discussed
or argued in the two opposing sides of on-
line debates. We view that the generation
of debate summaries can be achieved by
clustering, cluster labeling, and visualiza-
tion. In our work, we investigate two dif-
ferent clustering approaches for the gen-
eration of the summaries. In the ﬁrst ap-
proach, we generate the summaries by ap-
plying purely term-based clustering and
cluster labeling. The second approach
makes use of X-means for clustering and
Mutual Information for labeling the clus-
ters. Both approaches are driven by on-
tologies. We visualize the results using
bar charts. We think that our results are
a smooth entry for users aiming to re-
ceive the ﬁrst impression about what is
discussed within a debate topic containing
waste number of argumentations.

1

Introduction

As the number of Internet users has been growing
signiﬁcantly, information is published and stored
digitally in textual forms. Online debate is one
example of the information which has been mas-
sively published. As more and more debate con-
tent increases, it becomes a difﬁcult task to easily
and quickly discover key arguments that are ex-
pressed in the vast amount of debate data. Auto-
matic Text Summarization can help users to ex-
tract or summarize those key arguments more efﬁ-
ciently and reduce the reading time.

Online debate forums normally contain two
sides of debates: proponent and opponent. This
structure gives opportunities for users to choose
a stance (side) for a debate topic, expresses their
opinions to support their propositions, and op-
poses other propositions. In this paper, we explore
online debates which are related to the existence
of global warming. A side of proponents believes
in the existence of global warming and the other
side, the opponents, says that global warming is
not true. When the proponents and the opponents
express their sentiments, opinions, and pieces of
evidence to support their propositions, arguments
between them arise.

In this paper we aim to summarize online de-
bates about global warming. In our approach we
ﬁrst extract salient sentences from the two oppos-
ing sides of debates (i.e. arguments published by
users). Next, we cluster them by some sort of sim-
ilarity. For clustering we investigate two differ-
ent approaches. Our ﬁrst approach is a term-based
clustering approach.
The second approach is
based on ﬂat clustering, namely X-means, which
can automatically determine the number of clus-
ters. Ontologies are used as the backbone for both
approaches. Ontologies have been used broadly
in automatic text summarization studies. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge, this approach
has not yet been applied for summarizing online
debates, especially when our purpose is to cap-
ture arguments conversed in both opposing sides.
Once clusters are generated, labels representing
the clusters are extracted. Again we follow two
approaches. The ﬁrst approach is a simple one and
selects as a label an ontological term that is shared
by all salient sentences within the cluster. The sec-
ond labeling approach extracts such a term, based
on Mutual Information (MI). The resulting clus-
ters along with their labels are visualized using
bar charts. Our results show that clustering with

20

X-means and label generation using MI is a better
choice for the purpose of online debates summa-
rization.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 discusses about related work in online
debate summarization. The online debate data re-
lated to the existence of global warming are elabo-
rated in Section 3. Section 4 illustrates the system
structure for developing our debate summarization
system. Within the same section we also present
our evaluation results. We conclude in 5.

2 Related Work

Debate summarization is one of the novel research
areas in automatic text summarization which has
been largely unexplored (Ranade et al., 2013). Ex-
amples of related work in debate summarization
includes Contrastive Summarization, Compara-
tive Summarization, and Debate Stance Recogni-
tion. Contrastive Summarization is the study of
generating summary for two entities and ﬁnding
the difference in sentiments among them (Ler-
man and McDonald, 2009). This kind of sum-
marization requires the classiﬁcation of polarity in
order to contrast opinions expressed in different
sentiments (Campr and Jezek, 2012; Paul et al.,
2010). Kim and Zhai (2009) summarized con-
trastive pairs of sentences by aligning positive and
negative opinions on the same aspect. In this work,
contrastive sentence pairs were constructed based
on two criteria: 1) choose sentences that represent
a major sentiment orientation; and 2) the two sen-
tences should have opposite opinions on the same
aspect. Similarity functions were used for deter-
mining contrastive sentence pairs. Then sentence
pairs were used as input for generating the ﬁnal
summary. The summary was aimed to help read-
ers compare the pros and cons of mixed opinions.
Comparative Summarization aims to ﬁnd the
difference between two comparable entities so
that sentiment classiﬁcation may not be required
(Campr and Jezek, 2012). Zhai et al. (2004)
worked on comparative text mining problem
which aimed to discover common topics in news
articles and laptop reviews and to summarize com-
monalities and differences in a given set of com-
parable text collections. A probabilistic mixture
model was proposed. It generates clusters of top-
ics across all collections and in each collection of
document. The model generates k collections of
speciﬁc topics for each collection and k common

topics across all collections. Each topic is char-
acterized by multinomial word distribution (also
called a unigram language model). High proba-
bility words were used as representatives of each
cluster and are also included in the summary.

Debate Stance Recognition aims to detect
stance of an opinion’s holder in text. Somasun-
daran and Wiebe (2009) noticed that in online de-
bate posts, people debate issues, express their fa-
vorites, oppose other stances, and argue why their
thoughts are correct. To determine positive sen-
timent about one target, expressing negative sen-
timent about the other side is a key target. For
instance, in a debate “Which mobile phone is bet-
ter: iPhone VS Blackberry?”, people supporting
iPhone may give reasons to afﬁrm why iPhone is
better. In addition, they also express why Black-
berry is not. On the Blackberry side, people may
also ﬁnd reasons to support their opinions and ar-
gue why the phone is unfavorable. Therefore, to
identify stance, it is important to not only consider
positive and negative sentiment, but also consider
which target an opinion refers to.

Unlike these, the study of Ranade et al. (2013)
directly tackled debate summarization problem
and it is the one which is closest to our work.
In that work, system summaries are extracted by
ranking the smallest units of debates, called Di-
alogue Acts (DAs). The ranking of sentences is
based on features including, words in DAs that
is co-occurring in debate topic, topics with opin-
ions expressed on it, sentence position, and sen-
tence length features. However, this work does not
explicitly highlight what is the key content to be
summarized and how the debate summary is pre-
sented. This is different to our work. On the other
hand, in our work, we highlight the summarization
of key content in debates and visualize them to be
easily accessed by users.

3 Online Debate Data

In our earlier work we created freely available
debate dataset on climate change domain1, also
referred as Salient Sentence Selection Dataset
(SSSD). Each debate consists of two opposing
sides, Agree and Disagree. Whereas the opinion
on the Agree side believes that global warming ex-
ists, the Disagree side opposes this opinion. In this
dataset, each debate comment was manually anno-

1This dataset can be downloaded at https://goo.

gl/3aicDN.

21

tated by 5 judgments. The aim of the annotation
was to select from each comment 20% sentences
that were salient and worth for inclusion in a sum-
mary. For instance, for a comment containing 10
sentences 2 sentences were extracted by each an-
notator. The dataset contains 11 debate topics with
341 comments in total. Average number of com-
ments for a topic is 31 comments, with the min-
imum and maximum of 5 and 103 comments re-
spectively.

4 Framework

To generate a bar chart representing a summary of
an online debate topic we proposed a pipeline with
two branches where each branch presents either
a term-based clustering and the term-based label-
ing method or X-means based clustering and the
MI labeling strategy. The ﬂow of the pipeline is
shown in Figure 1. The system assumes an input
of n comments from the agree and disagree sides.
Each comment consists of several sentences. We
aim to select the most salient sentences from each
comment, cluster the salient sentences according
to their content similarity, generate clusters repre-
senting labels, and ﬁnally visualize the results us-
ing a bar chart summary. In the following sections
we introduce each of the components and provide
evaluation results.

4.1 Automatic Salient Sentence Selection
For the shown pipeline in Figure 1 we used an ex-
tractive automatic summarization system reported
in our earlier work.2 There are 8 main features
deﬁned in this system. Those features include
sentence position (SP), sentence length (SL), title
words (TT), the presence of conjunctive adverbs
(CJ), cosine similarity of topic signatures3 and
sentences (COS TPS), cosine similarity of climate
change terms4 and sentences (COS CCTS), cosine
similarity of sentence and title words (COS TTS),
and the semantic similarity of sentence and title
words (COS STT) using Doc2Vec. Additionally,
we also investigated the Combination of features
(CB) in the salient sentence selection. For a given
comment the system extracts 20% sentences from
it that are deemed as salient.

2https://goo.gl/xqVeJf.
3We used an approach described by (Lin and Hovy, 2000)
to obtain a list of topic signatures. We extract the topic signa-
tures from our dataset which is related to climate change.

4The terms are obtained by aggregating document key-
words from online news media coverage on climate change.

4.1.1 Evaluation
We used ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-
SU4 evaluation metrics to evaluate the quality of
the system summaries, i.e. the selection of salient
sentences. As reference summaries we used the
manually generated summaries from the freely
available dataset, SSSD. Our results revealed that
sentence position outperforms other features indi-
cating that the most salient sentences are always.
In addition, other useful key features are debate ti-
tle words feature, and cosine similarity of debate
title words and sentences feature. The complete
set of results are shown in Table 1.

4.2 Term-Based Clustering
To perform clustering we used terms extracted
through ontologies. We employed the En-
glish ClimaPinion service5 from the DecarboNet
project6 as the background knowledge to cap-
ture climate change topics and extract from each
salient sentence topical terms. To obtain clusters
we grouped sentences containing the same label
within the same cluster. If a sentence contained
more than one term then it was assigned to several
groups allowing the sentence to be soft-clustered.7
Also note, terms with the same semantic meaning
can be expressed differently. To address this, for
each label, we obtained a list of its synonyms from
WordNet (Miller, 1995). If the labels shared com-
mon synonyms, we considered they are the same
labels. Consequentially, the sentences automati-
cally annotated with such labels were merged to
the same clusters.

4.2.1 Evaluation
The evaluation of the ontology based term extrac-
tion has been evaluated somewhere else. By con-
sisting of two environmental ontologies, GEMET
(GEneral Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus)
and Reegle, the ClimaPinion yields great results
in recognizing environmental terms in text, with
the precision, recall, and F1 measure of 85.87%,
53.05%, and 65.58% respectively (Maynard and
Bontcheva, 2015).

The results derived from the term-based clus-
tering approach are evaluated with the Silhouette
index (Rousseeuw, 1987). Silhouette evaluates

5http://services.gate.ac.uk/decarbonet/sentiment/
6https://www.decarbonet.eu
7Within a cluster all sentences must share one particular
term but each sentence may contain other terms that are not
shared by other sentences within the same cluster.

22

Figure 1: The framework for generating the Chart Summary for online debate summarization

ROUGE-N

R-1
R-2
R-SU4

CB

0.4773
0.3981
0.3783

CJ

0.4988
0.4346
0.4147

COS CCT COS TTS COS TPS

0.3389
0.2558
0.2340

0.5630
0.5076
0.4780

0.3907
0.2986
0.2699

SL

0.4307
0.3550
0.3335

SP

0.6124
0.5375
0.4871

COS STT

0.4304
0.3561
0.3340

TT

0.5407
0.4693
0.4303

Table 1: ROUGE scores derived from each feature in the Salient Sentence Selection task

Table 2: Average silhouette scores derived from
the term-based clustering approach

Number of Clusters Average Silhouette Score

39

0.0000

the clustering performance by determining the ap-
propriateness of documents assigned to a cluster
rather than the other clusters. These documents
are represented as coordinates. Silhouette calcu-
lates the pairwise difference in both inter-cluster
and intra-cluster distance. We calculated an aver-
age silhouette score and reported it in Table 2. As
shown in the table, the system generated 39 clus-
ters based on the climate change terms annotated
by the ClimaPinion service.
It achieved the sil-
houette score around zero, similar to the work pre-
sented by Wang and Koopman (2017). The inter-
pretation based on the score is the data points are

assigned nearly to the decision boundaries of the
clusters. Especially, when salient sentences con-
tain multiple climate change topics, clear cluster-
ing boundaries are difﬁcult to achieve. This cir-
cumstance indicates that such a simple clustering
approach is less applicable for grouping semanti-
cally similar sentences together and that the task
asks for more sophisticated ways for achieving a
better performance. We will discuss an alternative
solution in Section 4.4.

4.3 Term-Based Label Extraction
After grouping salient sentences together,
the
groups or clusters should be given labels which
clearly reﬂect the content in the clusters (Aker
et al., 2016). Similar to the clustering approach,
where we grouped salient sentences by the onto-
logical term they share, we used the sharing term
as the label to represent the cluster. This is based
on the assumption that the climate change terms

23

which are annotated in the sentences do already
elaborate the central meaning of the clusters.
4.3.1 Evaluation
In the labeling evaluation, we compared the sys-
tem labels against the baseline labels. We gener-
ated the baseline labels by applying tf*idf.
It is
a common approach in most information retrieval
systems (Ponte and Croft, 1998) which consists of
two main components, tf and idf.
In our exper-
iment, tf indicates the frequency of terms occurs
in a cluster8. idf presents the number clusters in
which the term occurs. These components allow
us to reduce common terms in the clusters and dis-
cover more discriminative terms having fairly low
term frequency in the clusters. To determine the
candidate labels, we calculated the score for each
term by the multiplication of tf and idf. The term
with the top score was chosen as the cluster label.
In the evaluation of cluster labels, we followed
the manual evaluation method presented by Aker
et al. (2016). We invited three participants, two
PhD candidates and one researcher having back-
ground in Computer Science, to evaluate the la-
bels. The evaluation was presented as an online
form. The participants were asked to read the
sentences in the given clusters and score the la-
bels. The baseline and system labels were shown
in random order.
the partici-
pants were asked to answer ﬁve-point Likert scale
questions, ranking from strongly disagree (1) to
strongly agree (5). The questions include i) Ques-
tion 1: By reading the label, I can understand it, ii)
Question 2: This label is a complete phrase, and
iii) Question 3: This label precisely reﬂects the
content of the sentences in cluster. Along with the
three questions, we presented 13 clusters with a
maximum of 10 salient sentences (so that the par-
ticipants are able to read the content prior to the
labeling evaluation) and a minimum of 2 salient
sentences. Figure 2 illustrates the results of the
labeling evaluation.

For each label,

As we can see from the ﬁgure, in overall, the
quality of system labels outperforms the baseline
labels. In Q1, the system labels compared to the
baseline labels are more understandable with the
average score of 4.59 and 3.33 respectively. Like-
wise, in Q2, the system labels are more completed
phrases than the baseline with the mean differ-
ence of 1.51. Lastly, with the average preference

8Since sentences can carry more than a term it is likely

that a cluster has several climate change terms.

Figure 2: The labeling evaluation performed on
the term-based clustering approach. The average
preference scores generated by 3 participants on a
scale 1: strongly disagree to 5: strongly agree

scores of 4.23 in Q3, the system labels are more re-
ﬂecting the quality of content in the clusters than
those generated by the baseline having the score
of 2.79. Additionally, the quality of the system
labels is further conﬁrmed by a statistical signif-
icance analysis with Mann-Whitney U Test. The
test reveals that signiﬁcance difference is found in
the system labels (M dQ1−Q3 = 5, nQ1−Q3 = 39)
and the baseline labels (M dQ1 = 4, M dQ2 =
3, M dQ3 = 2), UQ1 = 363, UQ2 =
343, UQ3 = 386, zQ1 = −4.25, zQ2 =
−4.36, zQ3 = −3.92, p < 0.01,
rQ1 =
0.48,
rQ2 = 0.49, rQ3 = 0.44. We also mea-
sured the inter-annotator agreement using Krip-
pendorffs alpha coefﬁcient9. The agreement in
Q1, Q2, and Q3 are 0.31, 0.27, and 0.35 respec-
tively.

4.4 X-means Clustering
In Section 4.2 we have shown that the idea of per-
forming clustering based on shared terms results in
poor clustering performance. The approach leads
to too many clusters which are very close to each
other.
In this section we aim to overcome the
problem of poor performance of the term-based
clustering approach and use X-means (Pelleg and
Moore, 2000), an extended version of K-means,
to cluster the salient sentences selected by the
summarization system. One of the beneﬁts of X-
means is that it is able to automatically detect the
number of clusters. By computing the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) scores, X-means de-
cides if cluster centroids should be split. We ap-
plied ontology-based vector space model approach

9The measurement

is performed using nltk metrics,

http://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.metrics.html.

24

have strong clustering structure and is more appro-
priate for the task of summarizing debate data.

Table 3: Average silhouette scores derived from
X-means clustering results

Number of Clusters Average Silhouette Score

19

0.9878

4.5 Label Generation with Mutual

Information

To generate labels from the X-means clusters we
could have followed the same approach as de-
scribed in Section 4.3, namely picking up a term
that is shared by all or majority of the salient sen-
tences within a cluster. We tried this however, to
our surprise the performance was very low com-
pared to what we achieved in Section 4.3. Nev-
ertheless this helped us to draw two conclusions.
First, the performance in Section 4.3 is high be-
cause the labels were so selected that all salient
sentences within a group shared that label. Second
the size of the clusters was not big so that the label
had high chance to be representative of the clus-
ter. This pictures changed once the cluster size
increased and also the salient sentences covered
several different climate change terms. Because
of this selecting a label was not about just simply
selecting the term that appears in all or majority of
the salient sentences. We used Mutual Information
(MI) to make this decision for us.

MI is a prevalent feature selection approach
that involves in the calculation of a utility mea-
sure A(t,c). MI quantiﬁes how much information
that term t contributing to the correct classiﬁca-
tion judgment on class c (Manning et al., 2008).
The MI formula is shown in Equation 1, where U
is a random variable that holds the value et. If a
sentence contains term t, the value of et is 1. Oth-
erwise, the et is 0. C is a random variable that
holds the value ec. The value of ec is 1 indicating
that a sentence is in class c and it is 0 if it is not.

to create vectors as the similarity inputs for X-
means.
4.4.1 Similarity Measurement
To enable X-means to process the clustering, a
similarity needs to be deﬁned to determine which
sentences are close to each other.
In the deﬁ-
nition of our similarity measurement, the auto-
matic selected salient sentences are transformed
into vectors using the Vector Space Model (VSM).
In the document indexing stage, we employed the
ontologies to automatically annotate key climate
change terms in the SSSD. The employment of
ontology-based approach beneﬁts the transforma-
tion of words to vectors by help capturing rele-
vance of speciﬁc topics. We derived 64 signiﬁ-
cant climate change topics. Term frequency was
counted for each term to generate vectors for each
sentence. To generate a similarity matrix, cosine
similarity measure was used to calculate cosine
similarity scores among the vectors. After the sim-
ilarity matrix was constructed, we applied a Prin-
cipal Component Analysis (PCA)10 for the dimen-
sionality reduction.
4.4.2 Evaluation
Similar to the ontology term-based clustering we
evaluated the results of the X-means clustering us-
ing Silhouette index. Results are reported in Table
3.

As shown in the table, the average silhouette
score is derived from the calculation based on
the similarity deﬁnition obtained by the ontology-
based vector space model. We achieved a high sil-
houette score of 0.9878, with the total number of
19 generated clusters. A silhouette close to 1.0 in-
dicates good cohesion and separation of the clus-
tering results, meaning that the average distance
from a coordinate in a cluster to the other coordi-
nates within its own cluster is less than the average
distance to all coordinate in the nearest cluster. In
addition, when the score is close to 0, the coordi-
nates in the clusters are nearly close or on the de-
cision boundary between two neighbouring clus-
ters. A negative silhouette score is obtained when
coordinates might be assigned to wrong clusters.
In other words, the coordinates are very close to
the neighbouring cluster rather than the coordi-
nates in their own clusters (Rousseeuw, 1987). In
our experiment, we concluded that the clustering
results obtained by X-means clustering algorithm

10sklearn.decomposition.PCA: https://goo.gl/QqiWec

25

X

X

et∈{1,0}

ec∈{1,0}
+ N01
N

I(U; C) =

P (U = et, C = ec) log2

P (U = et, C = ec)
P (U = et)P (C = ec)0

I(U; C) = N11
N

log2

N N11
N1.N.1

log2

N N01
N0.N.1

+ N10
N

log2

N N10
N1.N.0

+ N00
N

log2

N N00
N0.N.0

(1)

(2)

To calculate the mutual information scores for
candidate terms, we applied the maximum likeli-
hood estimation of probability as shown in Equa-
tion 2 (Manning et al., 2008). From the equation,
N refers to the counts of sentences in which its
subscripts take the values of et and ec. For in-
stance, N01 refers to the number of sentences that
do not containing term t (et = 1) but in class c
(ec = 1). N1. is derived from the addition of N10
and N11. N refers to the total number of sentences.
In each cluster, we calculated the score of each
candidate term. The term with the higher MI score
was selected as the cluster label for that cluster.

4.5.1 Labeling Evaluation
In order to evaluate the system labels generated
by the results derived from X-means clustering ap-
proach, we applied the same evaluation procedure
as well the baseline discussed in Section 4.3.1.
The results are illustrated in Figure 2. As can be
seen from the ﬁgure, the average preference scores
of the system outperform the baseline. In Q1, the
system labels are more understandable than the
baseline, with the mean difference of 0.10. In Q2,
the system labels more completed phrases than
the baseline labels, with a higher mean score of
0.13. Lastly, in Q3, the system labels are still bet-
ter than the baseline labels with the mean differ-
ence of 0.05. The system labels are more mean-
ingful for presenting the central meaning of the
content in the clusters. However, as there is a
slight difference between the results of the system
labels and baseline labels, Mann-Whitney U test
reveals that no signiﬁcant difference, with the z
values of -0.705,-0.427, and -0.389, with the sig-
niﬁcance levels of p= 0.481, 0.670, and 0.697 re-
spectively. The values of Krippendorff’s alpha, by
another three participants, for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are
0.33, 0.44, and 0.56 respectively.

4.6 Visualization
Sanchan et al. (2016) have manually investigated
various representation models for displaying or vi-

Figure 3: The labeling evaluation performed on
the X-means clustering approach. The average
preference scores generated by 3 participants on
a scale 1: strongly disagree to 5: strongly agree

sualizing summaries of online debates. Unlike tra-
ditional summaries, the debates extracts have to
capture main concepts discussed in both sides and
enable the reader to look at those concepts from
both proponent and opponent sites. The authors
proposed the Chart Summary which presents the
clusters by bars. Each bar is marked with the
cluster label.
In this work we adopt the Chart
Summary for visualization purposes. An example
Chart Summary is shown in Figure 4.

In the generation of the bars in Chart Summary,
the bars are the clusters that express related con-
tent in both opposing sides. Therefore, it is im-
portant to match clusters from the two opposing
sides which express the related content. We call
this approach as alignment. From the two oppos-
ing sides, we align the clusters based on the clus-
ter labels. The clusters sharing mutual labels are
aligned. For alignment, we used cosine similar-
ity over vector spaces representing the labels. The
vector also contains semantically related words
enriched from WordNet. Clusters which have no
pair will not be aligned and thus will not be pre-
sented in the Chart Summary. Once the pairs of
aligned clusters are derived, we count the number
of salient sentences in those clusters, separately in
each opposing side. Those numbers represent the

26

frequencies of the bars.

After all components of a Chart Summary are
completely generated, they are exported to NVD3
JAVA script11 for the purpose of visualizing the
Chart Summary. Figure 4 illustrates a Chart Sum-
mary for the online debates data which runs on a
web browser12.

Figure 4: Chart Summary for Debate Data

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we investigated one of the novel and
challenging problems in automatic text summa-
rization of online debates and proposed a frame-
work to tackle this problem. We aimed to gen-
erate Chart Summaries which represent the high-
level topics of online debates. The Chart Summary
is composed of three main components, including
the bars, labels, and frequencies of the bars. We
proposed an ontological term-based driven clus-
tering and cluster labeling pipeline to guide the
debate summary generation. In our approach we
used an online service to automatically annotate
climate change terms in salient sentences and to
group related salient sentences into the same clus-
ter. For clustering we investigated two variants
both making use of ontological terms. The ﬁrst,
a simply approach, groups salient sentences by
shared terms. The second approach applies X-
means clustering. The evaluation has shown that
the X-means approach is a better choice for clus-
tering. We create labels to represent each clus-
ter. Again here we investigated two different ap-
proaches both making use of ontological terms.
The ﬁrst approach, again a simply one, labels each

11http://nvd3.org
12A full version of Chart Summary can be accessed via

https://goo.gl/wjBh7V.

cluster with the term shared by all members within
the cluster. The second approach picks up the best
term according to Mutual Information. The man-
ual evaluation showed that the simple approach
achieves higher results than the MI one. How-
ever, as discussed the simply approach achieved
high results because of the size of the clusters and
led to poor results when the size of the cluster
grew which is the case with the X-means cluster-
ing. Once the clusters and labels are generated
with align the pro and contra parts and visualize
the results using NVD3.

In future work we plan to enrich the Chart Sum-
mary with additional details such as enabling the
users to see example debates for each pair of clus-
ters.

References
Ahmet Aker, Monica Lestari Paramita, Emina Kur-
tic, Adam Funk, Emma Barker, Mark Hepple,
and Robert J. Gaizauskas. 2016. Automatic la-
bel generation for news comment clusters.
In
INLG 2016 - Proceedings of
the Ninth Inter-
national Natural Language Generation Confer-
ence, September 5-8, 2016, Edinburgh, UK. pages
61–69.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W/W16/W16-
6610.pdf.

Michal Campr and Karel Jezek. 2012.

Compar-
ative summarization via latent semantic analy-
sis.
In Lastest Trends in Information Technol-
ogy;Proceedings of the 1st WSEAS International
Conference on Information Technology and Com-
puter Networks (ITCN ’12), Proceedings of
the
1st WSEAS International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CLC ’12), Proceedings of
the 1st
WSEAS International Conference on Programming
Languages and Compilers (PRLC ’12). WSEAS
Press, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, Recent Advances
in Computer Engineering Series 7, pages 279–
284.
http://textmining.zcu.cz/publications/wseas-
mcampr.pdf.

summaries

comparative

Hyun Duk Kim and ChengXiang Zhai. 2009.
con-
In David Wai-
Il-Yeol Song, Wesley W. Chu,
editors,
and
http://dblp.uni-

Generating
tradictory opinions in text.
Lok Cheung,
Xiaohua Hu,
CIKM. ACM, pages 385–394.
trier.de/db/conf/cikm/cikm2009.html.

J. Lin,

Jimmy

of

Kevin Lerman and Ryan McDonald. 2009. Con-
An experiment with
trastive summarization:
In Proceedings of Human
consumer reviews.
2009 Annual
Language Technologies:
Conference of
the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Short Papers. Association
Companion Volume:
for Computational
Linguistics,
Stroudsburg,

The

27

Nattapong Sanchan, Kalina Bontcheva, and Ahmet
Aker. 2016. Understanding human preferences for
summary designs in online debates domain. Polibits
54:79–85. https://doi.org/10.17562/PB-54-10.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2009.
In Pro-
Recognizing stances in one debates.
the 47th
ceedings of
the Joint Conference of
Annual Meeting of
the ACL and the 4th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing of
the AFNLP: Volume 1 - Volume
1. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL ’09, pages 226–234.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1687878.1687912.

Shenghui Wang

and Rob Koopman.

articles

Clustering
ilarity.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2298-x.

based
Scientometrics

on

2017.
sim-
111(2):1017–1031.

semantic

ChengXiang Zhai, Atulya Velivelli, and Bei Yu.
2004. A cross-collection mixture model for com-
parative text mining.
the
Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, KDD ’04, pages 743–748.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1014052.1014150.

In Proceedings of

PA, USA, NAACL-Short
’09, pages 113–116.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1620853.1620886.

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2000. The auto-
mated acquisition of topic signatures for text sum-
marization.
In Proceedings of the 18th Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA, COLING ’00, pages 495–501.
https://doi.org/10.3115/990820.990892.

C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan,

and H. Schtze.
Introduction to Information Retrieval.
http://www-
hinrich/information-retrieval-

2008.
Cambridge University Press.
csli.stanford.edu/
book.html.

Diana Maynard and Kalina Bontcheva. 2015. Un-
derstanding climate change tweets: an open source
toolkit for social media analysis. In Volker Wohlge-
muth Chris Preist Elina Eriksson Vivian Kvist Jo-
hannsen, Stefan Jensen, editor, Atlantis Press. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., Atlantis Press, pages
242–250.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM 38(11):39–
41.

Michael J Paul, ChengXiang Zhai, and Roxana Girju.
2010. Summarizing contrastive viewpoints in opin-
ionated text. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 66–76.

Dan Pelleg and Andrew W. Moore. 2000. X-means:
Extending k-means with efﬁcient estimation of
the number of clusters.
In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth International Conference on Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San
Francisco, CA, USA, ICML ’00, pages 727–734.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645529.657808.

Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1998.

A
language modeling approach to information re-
trieval.
In Proceedings of the 21st Annual In-
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, SIGIR ’98, pages 275–281.
https://doi.org/10.1145/290941.291008.

Sarvesh Ranade, Jayant Gupta, Vasudeva Varma, and
Radhika Mamidi. 2013. Online debate summariza-
tion using topic directed sentiment analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second International Workshop on
Issues of Sentiment Discovery and Opinion Mining.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, WISDOM ’13, pages
7:1–7:6. https://doi.org/10.1145/2502069.2502076.

Peter Rousseeuw. 1987.

Silhouettes: A graphical
aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster
analysis.
J. Comput. Appl. Math. 20(1):53–65.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7.

