




















































main.pdf


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for Educational Applications, pages 143–151
Melbourne, Australia, July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

143

Measuring Beginner Friendliness of Japanese Web Pages
explaining Academic Concepts

by Integrating Neural Image Feature and Text Features
Hayato Shiokawa, Kota Kawaguchi, Bingcai Han, Takehito Utsuro

Graduate School of Systems and Information Engineering,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 305-8573, JAPAN

Yasuhide Kawada
Logworks Co., Ltd.

Tokyo, 151-0051, JAPAN

Masaharu Yoshioka
Hokkaido University

Sapporo, 060-0808, JAPAN

Noriko Kando
National Institute of Informatics

Tokyo, 101-8430, JAPAN

Abstract

Search engine is an important tool of mod-
ern academic study, but the results are lack
of measurement of beginner friendliness.
In order to improve the efficiency of us-
ing search engine for academic study, it
is necessary to invent a technique of mea-
suring the beginner friendliness of a Web
page explaining academic concepts and to
build an automatic measurement system.
This paper studies how to integrate het-
erogeneous features such as a neural im-
age feature generated from the image of
the Web page by a variant of CNN (con-
volutional neural network) as well as text
features extracted from the body text of
the HTML file of the Web page. Integra-
tion is performed through the framework
of the SVM classifier learning. Evalua-
tion results show that heterogeneous fea-
tures perform better than each individual
type of features.

1 Introduction

Search engine is a quite important tool for ob-
taining fundamental as well as practical knowl-
edge when it comes to the study of academic con-
cepts. However, when we intend to find begin-
ner friendly Web pages through search engine, it
is necessary to compare many pages by manual
work. The reason of ineffective manual compari-
son is that there is no systematic criterion on mea-
suring beginner friendliness of Web pages in the
results of search engine. Therefore, it comes up
with us to invent a technique of measuring begin-
ner friendliness of Web pages explaining academic
concepts automatically, and finally build a whole
assisting system for promoting academic study us-
ing search engine, which would improve the effi-

ciency of Web learning.
More specifically, this paper proposes how to

automatically measure beginner friendliness of
Web pages explaining academic concepts. Before
we formalize the framework of automatic mea-
surement of beginner friendliness of Web pages
explaining academic concepts, we examine how
we manually measure beginner friendliness of
those Web pages. The upper half of Figure 1 lists
each individual factor that are supposed to be con-
sulted when we judge the overall beginner friend-
liness of those Web pages. This paper, namely,
considers that those individual factors include a)
whether or not to contain definition of academic
concepts, b) whether or not to contain formulas,
c) whether or not to contain figures, d) whether or
not to contain examples, e) beginner friendliness
of the text of the Web page, and f) visual intelligi-
bility of the Web page layout.

Figure 2(a) shows an example of beginner
friendly Web page explaining an academic con-
cept (“probability density function”) of the field
of statistics. The Web page of Figure 2(a) can be
judged as beginner friendly since it has a visually
intelligible layout of the title of the page, the for-
mula, the text of its explanation, and its figure. The
text of its explanation is simple but easy to under-
stand, while it has a reference for further studies in
the bottom of the page. Figure 2(b), on the other
hand, illustrates typical cases of Web pages ex-
plaining academic concepts that are not beginner
friendly. The case 1 contains a sufficient defini-
tion of the academic concept, a figure, a formula,
and an example, while its layout is not visually
intelligible and its explanation text is not easy to
understand. The case 2 is an opposite case, which
has a visually intelligible layout as well as the ex-
planation text which is easy to understand, while
it lacks a figure nor an example, and having an in-
sufficient definition of the academic concept.



144

Figure 1: Beginner Friendliness of Web Pages explaining Academic Concepts: Manual Judgment vs.
Automatic Judgment by SVM

(a) An Example of Beginner Friendly Web Page (excerpt from
https://mathtrain.jp/pmitsudo)

Case 1
• having its definition, figure, formula, and example, 
• insufficient in visual intelligibility nor in beginner 

friendliness of text.

Case 2
• having visually intelligible layout and beginner 

friendly text.
• no figure / no example, insufficient definition

(b) Typical Cases of Beginner Unfriendly Web Pages

Figure 2: Beginner Friendly/Unfriendly Web Pages explaining Academic Concepts



145

(a) linear algebra, physics, IT, and statistics (b) biology, programming, and chemistry

Figure 3: Rate of Beginner Friendly Web Pages explaining Academic Concepts ranked at 10th or Higher
in the Results of Search Engine

More importantly, when we intend to find be-
ginner friendly Web pages explaining academic
concepts through search engine, it is necessary to
compare many pages by manual work. The reason
of ineffective manual comparison is that there is no
systematic criterion on measuring beginner friend-
liness of Web pages in the results of search engine.
Figure 3 shows an evidence of non-existence of
such systematic criterion on measuring beginner
friendliness of Web pages ranked at 10th or higher
by Google search engine in the case of the over-
all 96 queries of academic terms from the seven
academic fields of linear algebra, physics, biol-
ogy, programming, IT, statistics, and chemistry.
The figure plots the rates of the beginner friendly
Web pages among those ranked at N -th or higher
(N = 1, . . . , 10), among which are mostly those
explaining academic concepts of the query aca-
demic terms. This evidence supports the claim that
there is no systematic criterion on measuring be-
ginner friendliness of Web pages explaining aca-
demic concepts in the results of Google search en-
gine.

Based on such observation as well as the mo-
tivation of finding beginner friendly Web pages
explaining academic concepts, this paper studies
how to automatically measure beginner friendli-
ness of Web pages explaining academic concepts.
As we formalize in the lower half of Figure 1,
we integrate heterogeneous features such as a neu-
ral image feature generated from the image of the
Web page by a variant of CNN (convolutional neu-
ral network) as well as text features extracted from
the body text of the HTML file of the Web page.
Among those individual factors above, the neural

image feature is mostly intended to cover f) vi-
sual intelligibility of the Web page layout, while
it also partially covers a) definition of academic
concepts, b) formulas, c) figures, and d) examples.
The text features, on the other hand, are intended
to cover d) examples, and e) beginner friendliness
of the text of the Web page.

This paper formalizes to integrate those hetero-
geneous features through the framework of the
SVM classifier learning. Evaluation results show
that heterogeneous features perform better than
each individual type of features.

2 Factors of Beginner Friendliness of
Web Pages explaining Academic
Concepts

This section describes details of individual factors
of beginner friendliness of Web pages explaining
academic concepts, as well as their correlations to
the overall judgment of beginner friendliness of
Web pages.

2.1 Individual Factors

As we describe in the previous section as well as in
the upper half of Figure 1, we abstract six individ-
ual factors including definition, formula, figure,
example, beginner friendliness of text and Web
page layout. For each factor, the followings il-
lustrate rough rules on how we manually measure
each factor.

(a) Definition: with this factor, it is examined
whether the Web page contains correct and
precise definition of the explained academic
concept.



146

Table 1: Query Academic Terms
academic

fields
# of

queries academic terms

linear algebra 14 階数 (rank), 共役勾配 (conjugate gradient), 行列式 (determinant), クラメルの公式
(Cramer’s rule),クロネッカーのデルタ (Kronecker delta),三角行列 (triangular matrix),
正規直交基底 (orthonormal basis), 対角化 (diagonalization), 直交行列 (orthogonal
matrix), 特性多項式 (characteristic polynomial), 二次形式 (quadratic form), ノルム
(norm),メネラウスの定理 (Menelaus’ theorem),ヤコビ行列 (Jacobian matrix)

physics 15 電気力線 (line of electric force),張力 (tension),慣性の法則 (Newton’s first law),遠心
力 (centrifugal force), 電波 (radio wave), 電流 (electric current), 万有引力 (universal
gravitation),交流 (alternating current),音波 (acoustic wave),ホイートストンブリッジ
(Wheatstone bridge),反発係数 (coefficient of restitution),相互誘導 (mutual induction),
正電荷 (positive electric charge),速度 (velocity),変圧器 (transformer)

biology 7 DNA,ショウジョウバエ (Drosophilidae),原核生物 (Prokaryote),減数分裂 (meiosis),
光合成 (photosynthesis),細胞 (cell),葉緑体 (Chloroplast)

programming 15 C 言語 (C), Java, エスケープシーケンス (escape sequence), コマンドライン引数
(command line arguments), スコープ (scope), フィールド値 (field value), ポインタ
(pointer),メソッド (method),繰り返し処理 (repetitive processing),構造体 (structure),
算術演算子 (arithmetic operator),条件分岐 (branch),配列変数 (array variable),文字
列 (string),論理演算 (logical operation)

IT 15 API, DBMS, HTML, IP アドレス (IP address), JDBC, RDB, SDK, SQL, Unicode,
URL,スコープマネジメント (scope management),ステークホルダーマネジメント
(stakeholder management),タイムマネジメント (time management),ナレッジマネジ
メント (knowledge management),リスクマネジメント (risk management)

statistics 15 事後分布 (posterior distribution),確率 (probability),相関係数 (correlation coefficient),
信頼区間 (confidence interval), k平均法 (k-means clustering),回帰分析 (regression),十
分統計量 (sufficient statistic),確率密度関数 (probability density function),ガンマ分布
(gamma distribution),事前分布 (prior distribution),主成分分析 (principal component
analysis), コーシー分布 (Cauchy distribution), f 分布 (F distribution), 自己回帰モデ
ル (autoregressive model),自己回帰 (autoregressive)

chemistry 15 イオン結合 (ionic bond),エステル (ester),カルボン酸 (carboxylic acid),ケトン (ke-
tone), 化学反応式 (chemical equation), 化学平衡 (chemical equilibrium), 共有結合
(covalent bond), 合成高分子 (synthetic polymer), 酸化還元 (redox), 遷移元素 (tran-
sition elements), 典型元素 (main-group element), 天然高分子 (natural polymer), 燃
料電池 (fuel cell), 物質の三態 (three states of matter), 芳香族有機化合物 (aromatic
compounds)

total 96 —

(b) Formula: with this factor, it is examined
whether the Web page contains formula
within its text or figures. The formulas
should be relevant to the academic concept
explained in the Web page.

(c) Figure: with this factor, it is examined
whether the Web page contains figures or pic-
tures relevant to the academic concept ex-
plained in the Web page, except when the fig-
ure shows formula(s) only.

(d) Example: with this factor, it is examined
whether the Web page contains examples rel-
evant to the academic concept explained in
the Web page, including examples of applica-
tion, proof, explanation and so on. When the
examples are shown in figures, it is consid-
ered as positive for both of the factors figure
and example.

(e) Beginner friendliness of text: with this factor,
it is examined whether the text of the Web

page is beginner friendly. More specifically,
the amount of information of the text content
needs to be within a certain range. The begin-
ner friendliness of the text is violated when
too many occurrences of technical terms are
observed in the text. It is also required that if
too little or too much academic information
is included in the text, then that is regarded
as violating beginner friendliness of the text.
Another criterion is to avoid that the text is to
be too stiff.

(f) Visual intelligibility of Web page layout:
with this factor, it is examined whether the
layout of the Web page is visually intelligi-
ble. More specifically, the topmost part of
the Web page should not be only in text, but
should also include figures. Also, the rate of
of the area of advertisements should be less
than a certain upper bound. Furthermore, the
background of the Web page should not be
in dark color. It is recommended that the top



147

page has a menu bar as well as a table of con-
tents.

2.2 Overall Measurement considering
Individual Factors

When we manually judge the overall beginner
friendliness of Web pages explaining academic
concepts, there exist certain rules and each indi-
vidual factor has a certain correlation to the overall
judgment. Out of the a) to f) individual factors, the
three factors a) definition, e) beginner friendliness
of text, as well as f) visual intelligibility of Web
page layout, are primary factors compared to the
remaining other three factors. All the three two
factors should be satisfied in order for the over-
all beginner friendliness to be satisfied. When all
the three factors are satisfied, the overall beginner
friendliness tends to be satisfied if at least one of
the remaining three factors is satisfied. Out of the
remaining other three factors, the more of them
are satisfied, the more the overall beginner friend-
liness is satisfied.

3 Reference Data Set of Web Pages
Explaining Academic Concepts

This section describes the details of how we col-
lect the reference data set of Web pages explaining
academic concepts as well as the procedure before
we judge the overall beginner friendliness of each
collected Web page explaining academic concepts
according to the criterion discussed in the previous
section.

3.1 Academic Fields and Concepts for Study

As for the academic fields for which we collect
academic terms to be used as queries, we focus
on those within science and technology academic
fields, mainly because science and technology aca-
demic fields tend to have similar criterion on judg-
ing the beginner friendliness of text, the visual in-
telligibility of the Web page layout, and the overall
beginner friendliness of the Web page itself. Out
of those science and technology academic fields,
we select the following seven for study: linear al-
gebra, physics, biology, programming, IT, statis-
tics, and chemistry. For each filed, we select 15 or
less academic terms as queries for academic con-
cepts that are around the level of high school or
university education, as listed in Table 1. Those
query academic terms are selected under the cri-
terion that certain number of Web pages ranked at

10th or higher by Google search engine are those
explaining academic concepts.

3.2 Reference Data Set

For each academic term collected in the previ-
ous section, we collect the highest 10 Web pages
ranked by the Google search engine when each
academic term used as the query. In this procedure
of collecting Web pages, we ignore Web pages
whose HTML files can not be accessed. Then, the
first author of this paper1 judged the overall begin-
ner friendliness as well as the visual intelligibility
of the Web page layout of each collected Web page
explaining academic concepts according to the cri-
terion discussed in Section 2. Finally, in the pro-
cedure of fine-tuning the VGG16 model for judg-
ing visual intelligibility of the layout of the Web
pages explaining academic concepts, we consider
those Web pages which satisfy the visual intelligi-
bility as positive samples while those which do not
satisfy the visual intelligibility as negative sam-
ples, where their numbers are as shown in Table 2.
Similarly, in the procedure of training the SVM
classifier for judging the overall beginner friendli-
ness of the Web pages explaining academic con-
cepts, we consider those Web pages which satisfy
the overall beginner friendliness as positive sam-
ples while those which do not satisfy the overall
beginner friendliness as negative samples, where
their numbers are also as shown in Table 2. Out
of the total seven academic fields, we use the Web
pages from five academic fields as training sam-
ples, while those from the remaining two as test
samples.

4 Neural Image Feature

This section describes the procedure of transform-
ing each Web page explaining academic concepts
into its Web page layout image, and then of gen-
erating the neural image feature expression from
each Web page layout image.

1 In the preliminary study where two authors of this paper
worked on developing reference data set and analyzed their
agreement rate, it is discovered that the results of the task
of judging the overall beginner friendliness of Web pages ex-
plaining academic concepts as well as the visual intelligibility
of their Web page layout may vary according to the annota-
tors’ knowledge level as well as preferences. Thus, in this
paper, in the procedure of developing reference data set, we
prefer the consistency of the reference data and we decided
to develop reference data set with only one annotator.



148

Table 2: Numbers of Positive/Negative Samples of Manual Judgment of Visual Intelligibility of Page
Layout and Overall Beginner Friendliness of the Web Page

visual intelligibility overall beginnerfriendliness
academic fields positive negative positive negative total
linear algebra 31 58 36 53 89
physics 34 93 26 101 127

training biology 12 52 17 47 64
programming 58 84 70 72 142
IT 37 52 39 50 89
total 172 339 188 323 511
statistics 58 53 49 62 111

test chemistry 50 83 49 84 133
total 108 136 98 146 244
total 280 475 286 469 755

4.1 VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015)

It has been well known that deep learning tech-
niques have been applied to a number of tasks in a
broad range of research fields and have achieved
remarkable improvement over the state of the
art baselines. In the domain of pattern recogni-
tion such as image recognition, especially, it is
noted that convolutional neural networks (CNN)
as well as a large scale image data set such as
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2014) greatly con-
tribute to achieving high performance in various
image recognition tasks. Furthermore, parame-
ters of CNN pre-trained using a large scale gen-
eral purpose data set of images (e.g. natural im-
ages) have been proved to be quite useful for ex-
tracting universal features that can be easily fine-
tuned to image recognition tasks of certain specific
domains such as the medical domain (Shin et al.,
2016; Tajbakhsh et al., 2016).

Following those successes of the approach
of fine-tuning of pre-trained general purpose
CNN parameters for image recognition, this pa-
per applies the approach to the task of auto-
matic judgment of visual intelligibility of the lay-
out of the Web pages explaining academic con-
cepts. More specifically, we employ VGG16
model (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015) as the
general purpose CNN for extracting universal fea-
tures. VGG16 model won second prize in the im-
age classification task and first prize in the single-
object localization task in the ImageNet Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC)
2014 (Russakovsky et al., 2014). Its neural net ar-
chitecture consists of a stack of 13 convolutional
layers with 5 intermediate max-pooling layers,
followed by three fully-connected layers, among
which the third layer performs 1000-way ILSVRC

classification with 1000 channels (one for each
class). The final layer is the soft-max layer.
The VGG16 model is pre-trained for the task of
1000-way ILSVRC classification with the Ima-
geNet 2014 data set and is publicly available. It
is also known that the pre-trained VGG16 model
is widely transferable to other image recognition
tasks through fine-tuning. In this paper, as one of
the available versions of VGG16 model, we em-
ploy the one2 available as a model within Keras3,
an open source neural network library written in
Python.

4.2 Feature of Visual Intelligibility of Web
Pages explaining Academic Concepts

This section describes how to generate the neu-
ral image feature expression from the layout each
Web page explaining academic concepts.

First, each Web page is transformed into its
Web page layout image, to which the fine-tuned
VGG16 model is applied so as to automatically
judge the visual intelligibility of the Web page lay-
out image.

Next, in the fine-tuning of the VGG16 model,
its three fully-connected layers of 1000-way
ILSVRC classification as well as the soft-max
layer are replaced with another three fully-
connected layers of binary classification (of judg-
ing visual intelligibility of the Web page layout
image) as well as the soft-max layer. Through-
out the fine-tuning, out of the overall 13 convo-
lutional layers with 5 intermediate max-pooling
layers, pre-trained parameters of 10 convolutional
layers with 4 intermediate max-pooling layers are

2 https://github.com/keras-team/keras/
blob/master/keras/applications/vgg16.py

3 https://keras.io/ja/



149

kept unchanged, while the remaining three con-
volutional layers, one max-pooling layer, and the
subsequent three fully-connected layers are fine-
tuned with the reference training data set (i.e.,
from the five academic fields of linear algebra,
physics, biology, programming, and IT) developed
in Section 3.2. Those Web pages from the two
remaining academic fields of statistics and chem-
istry are the reference test samples.

The actual feature values utilized in the sub-
sequent classifier learning of judging the overall
beginner friendliness of the Web page explain-
ing academic concepts are the score of the soft-
max function, ranging within the interval of [0,1],
which can be regarded as the confidence of judg-
ing the visual intelligibility of the Web page lay-
out.

More specifically, for the five training academic
fields, each Web page is annotated with the neu-
ral image feature according to the following pro-
cedure: i.e., we fine-tune the VGG16 model with
four training academic fields out of the total five,
then, each Web page of the remaining one training
academic field is annotated with the visual intel-
ligibility judged by the VGG16 model fine-tuned
with the other four training academic fields.

For the two test academic fields, on the other
hand, first we fine-tune five VGG16 models each
of which is fine-tuned with four out of five training
academic fields. Then, for each test Web page ex-
plaining academic concepts, out of those five fine-
tuned VGG16 models, one model is randomly se-
lected and applied to the test Web page, where the
test Web page is annotated with the visual intelli-
gibility judged by the selected fine-tuned VGG16
model.

5 Text Features

Within the scope of this paper, as the text fea-
tures for judging the beginner friendliness of the
text of explaining academic concepts, almost low
level features such as frequencies of character
types, words/strings, and HTML tags for pagina-
tion functions are employed. The number of spe-
cific features among those three types of text fea-
tures employed in this paper is ten in total. With
a preliminary evaluation procedure, we examined
much larger candidates list of text features includ-
ing those ten features4, and then, we decided to

4 Actually, we examined in total 26 features, i.e., eight
character type features, 16 word/string features, HTML tag

Figure 4: Evaluation Results

employ only those ten features.

5.1 Character Type Features

Japanese sentences are composed mostly of three
types of characters, kanji, hiragana, and katakana.
Kanji is Chinese characters. Hiragana and
katakana are original Japanese characters, where
hiragana character is used for Japanese words not
covered by kanji and for grammatical inflections,
while katakana character is used for transcrip-
tion of foreign language words into Japanese and
the writing of loan words, for emphasis, for ono-
matopoeia, for technical and scientific terms, and
for names of plants, animals, minerals, and often
Japanese companies. Following those situations of
character types of Japanese sentences, as character
type features, we use frequencies of those three
character types, kanji, hiragana, and katakana.

5.2 Word/String Features

In this paper, we examined various words/strings
as candidates of word/string features, where
we finally decided to employ the following six
Japanese words/strings and use the frequencies of
those words/strings as word/string features.

• “利用規約”(terms of use)
• “相談”(consultation)
• “ノウハウ”(know-how)
• “法”(a constituent character of words such as

“方法”(expedient) and “手法”(method))
features for pagination, and HTML tag features for images,
out of which ten is selected as an optimal feature combina-
tion.



150

• “困”(a constituent character of a verb “困る”
(get into a situation where one needs assis-
tance), where it is intended to count the fre-
quency of a phrase such as “こんな困ったこ
とありませんか?” (Do you have any experi-
ence of having a trouble like this?))

• Total frequencies of a word “例”(example)
and symbols “Q0”, . . ., “Q9”, which are in-
tended to count the frequencies of examples
and questions.

5.3 Pagination Feature
This feature is introduced to detect paginated Web
pages, where a Web page content is divided into
a sequence of paginated numbered Web pages.
More specifically, any digit sequence immediately
after the HTML tag “>” and immediately before
the HTML tag “<” is detected and their frequency
is counted and used as the pagination feature.

6 Evaluation

6.1 Evaluation Procedure
In this paper, we apply the sklearn.SVM.SVC tool
of scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) package to
the task of judging the overall beginner friendli-
ness of the Web page explaining academic con-
cepts. Here, for each Web page, the overall begin-
ner friendliness of the Web page explaining aca-
demic concepts is used as the class value. We ex-
amined the following two approaches to binarizing
features which take more than two discrete values
or continuous values;

(a) Dividing the range of discrete values or the
continuous values into a certain number of
disjoint sub-ranges each of which is exclusive
of other sub-ranges.

(b) Dividing the range of discrete values or
the continuous values into a certain number
of overlapping sub-ranges which share their
lower bounds, i.e., those sub-ranges have ex-
actly the same lower bound.

Through the preliminary evaluation, we employed
the approach (b), where the ranges of discrete fea-
ture values or the continuous feature values are di-
vided into 20 to 40 overlapping sub-ranges. As
the kernel function of the SVM, we used the Ra-
dial Basis Function (RBF) kernel. A cost parame-
ter (1 or 10) and a gamma parameter (0.01, 0.001,
and 0.0001) of RBF kernel were set by grid search
where the area of the ROC curve is optimized.

6.2 Evaluation Results
In the evaluation, we plot recall-precision curves
by changing the lower bound of the confidence
score of the SVM judgment. Figure 4 compares
the performance the following three combinations
of features:

(i) Both the neural image feature and the text
features are used.

(ii) Only the neural image feature is used.
(iii) Only the text features are used.

The evaluation results clearly show that integrat-
ing the two types of features as in (i) outperform
each individual feature(s) (ii) and (iii).

7 Related Work

No existing work studied the task of judging be-
ginner friendliness of Web pages explaining aca-
demic concepts. As one of the related tasks,
that of estimating presentation skills based on
slides and audio features has been studied. For
example, Luzard et al. (2014) applied machine
learning methods, where the most relevant slide-
based features are number of words, images,
and tables as well as the maximum font size,
while the most significant audio-based features
are pitch and filled pauses related ones. An-
other related task is to evaluate community QA
answers (e.g., Wang et al. (2009) and Sakai et
al. (2011)). For example, Wang et al. (2009) stud-
ied how to rank community answers and evalu-
ated the method using user-labeled “best answers”
of Yahoo!Answers Web site as the gold stan-
dard positive examples. Compared to the task of
ranking community answers, the current task of
judging beginner friendliness of Web pages ex-
plaining academic concepts is different in that
we examine neural image feature, while, in the
community answer ranking task, they usually do
not consider any image feature when ranking
community answers. Also, approaches to text
readability judgment (e.g., (Pitler and Nenkova,
2004; González-Garduño and Søgaard, 2017)) are
closely related to the task of beginner friendliness
of the text of the Web page and the features stud-
ied in those previous work need to be studied also
in this paper.

8 Conclusion

This paper studied how to integrate heterogeneous
features such as a neural image feature generated



151

from the image of the Web page by a variant of
CNN as well as text features extracted from the
body text of the HTML file of the Web page. In-
tegration was performed through the framework
of the SVM classifier learning. Evaluation results
showed that heterogeneous features perform bet-
ter than each individual type of features. We are
now working on developing a reference data set
where several annotators participate in the task of
developing a reference data set, and then the inter-
annotator agreement rate is examined.

Future work include introducing more sophis-
ticated techniques of measuring beginner friendli-
ness of text contents, where it is expected that fea-
tures that are more semantics-based than frequen-
cies of character types as well as words/strings fre-
quencies contribute to measuring beginner friend-
liness. Another future work is to incorporate much
more detailed list of HTML tags as features of
SVM. Preliminary evaluation results indicate that
those HTML tag features also contribute to judg-
ing beginner friendliness of Web pages explaining
academic concepts. This is mainly because one
who is capable of developing beginner friendly
Web pages explaining academic concepts tends to
use certain types of HTML tags frequently and
this tendency helps judging beginner friendliness
of those Web pages. We plan to report those re-
sults in other conferences.

References
A. V. González-Garduño and A. Søgaard. 2017. Using

gaze to predict text readability. In Proc. 12th BEA,
pages 438–443.

G. Luzard, B. Guamán, K. Chiluiza, G. Castells, and
X. Ochoa. 2014. Estimation of presentations skills
based on slides and audio features. In Proc. MLA,
pages 37–44.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2825–2830.

E. Pitler and A. Nenkova. 2004. Revisiting readability:
A unified framework for predicting text quality. In
Proc. EMNLP, pages 186–195.

O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. S.
Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and F.-F. Li. 2014. ImageNet

large scale visual recognition challenge. CoRR,
abs/1409.0575.

T. Sakai, D. Ishikawa, N. Kando, Y. Seki, K. Kuriyama,
and C.-Y. Lin. 2011. Using graded-relevance met-
rics for evaluating community QA answer selection.
In Proc. 4th WSDM, pages 187–196.

H.-C. Shin, H. R. Roth, M. Gao, L.. Lu, Z. Xu,
I. Nogues, J. Yao, D. Mollura, and R. M. Sum-
mers. 2016. Deep convolutional neural networks
for computer-aided detection: CNN architectures,
dataset characteristics and transfer learning. IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, 35(5):1285–
1298.

K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. 2015. Very deep con-
volutional networks for large-scale image recogni-
tion. In Proc. 3rd ICLR.

N. Tajbakhsh, J. Y. Shin, S. R. Gurudu, R. T. Hurst,
C. B. Kendall, M. B. Gotway, and J. Liang. 2016.
Convolutional neural networks for medical image
analysis: Full training or fine tuning? IEEE Trans-
actions on Medical Imaging, 35(5):1299–1312.

X.-J. Wang, X. Tu, D. Feng, and L. Zhang. 2009.
Ranking community answers by modeling question-
answer relationships via analogical reasoning. In
Proc. 32nd SIGIR, pages 179–186.


