



















































Saying no but meaning yes: negation and sentiment analysis in Basque


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 85–90
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17

85

Saying no but meaning yes: negation and sentiment analysis in Basque

Jon Alkorta
Computer Languages

and Systems
IXA group (UPV/EHU)

Koldo Gojenola
Computer Languages

and Systems
IXA group (UPV/EHU)

{jon.alkorta,koldo.gojenola,mikel.iruskieta}@ehu.eus

Mikel Iruskieta
Didactics of Language

and Literature Department
IXA group (UPV/EHU)

Abstract
In this work, we have analyzed the effects
of negation on the semantic orientation in
Basque. The analysis shows that negation
markers can strengthen, weaken or have no ef-
fect on sentiment orientation of a word or a
group of words. Using the Constraint Gram-
mar formalism, we have designed and eval-
uated a set of linguistic rules to formalize
these three phenomena. The results show that
two phenomena, strengthening and no change,
have been identified accurately and the third
one, weakening, with acceptable results.

1 Introduction
Negation is a morphosyntactic operation in which
a lexical item denies or inverts the meaning of an-
other lexical item or language construction (Loos
et al., 2004). The effect of the negation can be
the change of semantic orientation (SO) and, ac-
cording to Liu (2012), negation is called sentiment
shifters because they change the semantic orienta-
tion of a word or a sentence.

With the aim of calculating the semantic orien-
tation, the first step is to build a lexicon, but this is
not enough, to grasp the correct SO-value of Ex-
ample 1.

(1) [Irabazi+2 ezinik jarraitzen du Eibarrek]+2.
(KIR17)
[(The soccer team) Eibar continues without
winning+2]+2.

Following the semantic lexicon Sentitegi (Alko-
rta et al., 2018)1, the semantic orientation of the
word irabazi (“to win”) is +2, and consequently,
of the sentence also is +2. But we can notice that
the semantic orientation of the sentence is clearly
negative. The negator ezin (“can not”) turns the
positive oriented word irabazi+2 (“to win”) into a
negative oriented one. Therefore, we think that ad-
dressing this phenomenon is crucial to obtain bet-
ter results in the calculation of the SO of texts.

1The semantic lexicon is available on the web at: http:
//ixa.si.ehu.es/node/11438

The main aim of this work is to study how
negation expressions and syntactic structures can
change the semantic orientation of words, and to
design a set of linguistic rules by means of Con-
straint Grammar (Karlsson et al., 2011) in order to
identify these phenomena. According to our cor-
pus study, different negation language forms can
strengthen, weaken or have no effect on semantic
orientation. These results go in the same direc-
tion as (Jiménez-Zafra et al., 2018b) where effects
of negation within its scope are studied. We have
centered our study on negation markers that unlike
negation in verbs and nouns and negative polarity
items, they only share information about negativ-
ity while others can share more information like
aspect of action (e.g. they denied going to the city).

This paper has been organized as follows: af-
ter presenting related work in Section 2, Section 3
describes methodological steps. Then, Section 4
presents theoretical framework, while Section 5
gives a linguistic analysis. Section 6 shows results
and error analysis, concluding with Section 7 and
proposing directions for future work.

2 Related Work
There is a variety of works about negation and
sentiment analysis in different languages and from
different approaches.

For English, Liu and Seneff (2009) have pre-
sented a work where a parse-and-paraphrase
paradigm is used to assign sentiment polarity for
product reviews. If negation is detected, its polar-
ity will be reversed (switch negation). If it has a
value of +5, it will be reversed to −5, and vice
versa. Following this, they have improved results
(recall was improved in 45 %). The treatment
of negation has been different in Taboada et al.
(2011). In their work, when a negator is identi-
fied, the polarity value is not reversed; instead it
is shifted toward the opposite polarity by a fixed
amount. This approach is called shift negation. In

http://ixa.si.ehu.es/node/11438
http://ixa.si.ehu.es/node/11438


86

Text Text span Dictionary words SO value
MUS20 Pogostkinak [ezin hobeki]+ atera zituen hobeki +2

Pogostkina took them out [in an unbeatable way]+ best, better
KIR17 [Irabazi ezinik]− jarraitzen du Eibarrek, Irabazi +2

Eibar continues [without winning]− to win
Table 1: Polarity extraction of words (step 2) and linguistic analysis (step 3).

the creation of the semantic orientation calculator
(SO-CAL tool), Taboada et al. (2011) have also
treated negation in combination with other linguis-
tic phenomena (like irrealis or intensifiers).

In Spanish, there are several works related to
negation and sentiment analysis. In the case of
Jiménez Zafra et al. (2015), firstly, they have ana-
lyzed what the effects of different negators in dif-
ferent sentences are. After that, they have created
linguistic rules defined by the previous analysis.
Finally, they developed a module that has been in-
cluded in their polarity classifier system, improv-
ing results between 2.25 % and 3.02 % depend-
ing on the resource. Vilares et al. (2015) have
used a syntactic approach for opinion mining on
Spanish reviews. This system treats negation tak-
ing into account the scope and polarity flip caused
by negation. According to their results, there is an
improvement, due to the implementation of nega-
tion, among other reasons.

Our work is related to (Taboada et al., 2011) and
(Jiménez Zafra et al., 2015) since it is based on a
linguistic analysis and also because a set of rules
that detect the negation language forms are cre-
ated. As far as we know, there is not any work
which analyzes negation in connection with senti-
ment analysis in Basque.2

3 Methodological steps
1- Negation corpus. We have extracted 359

negation instances of seven3 negation mark-
ers. They were extracted from a total of 96 re-
views of six different topics: movies, music,
literature, politics, sports and forecast. We
have selected those negation markers because
they are the most frequent in the corpus.

2- Polarity extraction of every instance. We
have created a polarity tagger, based on a
POS tagger (Ezeiza et al., 1998) to enrich
the corpus with POS information on a se-

2Altuna et al. (2017) also analyze negation but their point
of view is different, since they analyze events in Basque texts.

3The extracted negation markers from the Basque Opin-
ion Corpus (Alkorta et al., 2016) are the following: ez (“not”),
gabe (“without”), ezin (“can not”), salbu (“except (for)”),
izan ezik (“except (for)”), ezta (“not even, not either”) and
ezean (“in the absence of” or “unless”).

mantic oriented lexicon for Basque (Alkorta
et al., 2018), to assign the semantic orienta-
tion value (SO value, between −5 and +5)
to words, as shown in Table 1. There, the
adverb hobeki (“best”, “better”) and the verb
irabazi (“to win”), have a SO value of +2 in
the lexicon.

3- Linguistic analysis. We have analyzed
whether the negation markers can change the
semantic orientation and the SO value of sen-
tences. We have also tried to identify whether
there are other phenomena related to nega-
tion with or without effects on semantic ori-
entation. In Table 1, in MUS20, the nega-
tion marker appears near hobeki (“best”), an
adverb. The result of this combination is
strengthening. In contrast, in KIR17, the verb
irabazi (“to win”) is before the negator and
the result is weakening. These two examples
show the different performances of ezin(ik)
(“can not”). Consequently, in Table 1, for ex-
ample, this negation marker appears in two
different groups. The same methodology has
been used with other negation markers.

4- Constraint Grammar (CG3) rules for nega-
tion. Several rules have been proposed to de-
tect each group, in order to identify the ef-
fects of negation based on the linguistic anal-
ysis presented in Section 5.

5- Evaluation. We use F1 to evaluate the results
using a different set of 46 reviews from the
same corpus (Alkorta et al., 2016)4.
4 Theoretical framework
In this section, we explain the three most
important concepts, regarding our analysis:
i) scope (negation analysis) and ii) switch
and iii) shift negation (sentiment analysis ap-
proach to negation).

(2) Berez pianorako konposatutako poliptiko txiki
honek ez du bere naf kutsua galtzen−2
bertsio orkestratuan. (MUS01)
This small polyptych composed for the piano
does not lose−2 its naive sense
in the orchestral version.

4A part of the corpus is available on the web
at: http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/diskurtsoa/
fitxategiak.php

http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/diskurtsoa/fitxategiak.php
http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/diskurtsoa/fitxategiak.php


87

(3) −maitasun istorio konbentzional bat,
grazia+3 handirik+1 gabea−. (LIB07)
−a conventional love story,
without great+1 grace+3.5

According to Huddleston and Pullum (2002),
the scope of negation is the part of the mean-
ing that is affected by the negation marker,
changing or not their SO value. In the ex-
amples above, the scope is underlined. As
our study shows, there can be two kinds of
semantic orientation in scope and these can
be changed by negation markers. In Exam-
ple 2, the SO value of the verb galdu (“to
lose”) and of its scope is −2. The negation
weakens the SO value of the verb, reversing
its SO. But, in Example 3, the SO values of
the noun grazia (“grace”) +3 and the adjec-
tive handi (“great”) +1 assign a SO value of
+4 to the scope which is positive. The nega-
tor gabe (“without”) weakens the SO value.

According to Taboada et al. (2011), there
are two approaches in sentiment analysis to
weaken the negative SO value: i) switch
negation and ii) shift negation.

(4) This pub is [not good+3]−3(switch)−1(shift) but the
music from there is good+3.

In the switch negation approach, the SO value
of Example 4 is reversed. The SO value of the
adjective good is +3 while the reversed SO
value is−3. However, this criteria has a prob-
lem: if excellent is +5; not excellent would
be more positive (+1) than not good (−2),
but the SO value points to the contrary (not
excellent is more negative than not good).

Otherwise, in the shift negation, the differ-
ent negators have their own SO value and
the results depend on the interaction of both
SO values (the value of negation marker and
negated word). Taking into account Exam-
ple 4, the SO value of the negation no is−4 in
the dictionary; so, when it modifies the word
good, which has a SO value of +3, the sum
value of scope is −1. This is the way how
the shift approach solves the problem we de-
scribe in Example 4. We have decided to use
the shift negation approach assigning a ±4
SO value to the negators.
5 Linguistic analysis
In the theoretical framework of the shift nega-
tion, it has been considered that negation

5Bold is used to mark the negator, underline means the
scope of negation.

markers only weakens the SO value. Nev-
ertheless, we have identified two other func-
tions of these negation markers with low fre-
quency, but relevant anyway from our point
of view as the works of (Jiménez-Zafra et al.,
2018a) and (Jiménez-Zafra et al., 2018b)
show. As we observed in this study, the nega-
tion markers can strengthen, weaken or have
no effect in the SO value of its scope as Fig-
ure 1 shows.

Figure 1: The effects of negation on semantic ori-
entation according to negation markers.

The majority of negation markers usually
weaken the semantic orientation of scope.
But as we can see in Figure 1, the nega-
tion marker ezin (“can not”), for example,
can strengthen or weaken the semantic ori-
entation of scope. The weakening can be
understood in two ways: i) if the word or
scope of the semantic orientation is +5, +4,
−5 or −4, their semantic orientation will not
become negative because according to our
methodology (shift negation), due to our SO
value of the negators is ±4. In contrast, ii) if
the semantic orientation of scope or sentence
is between −3 and +3, their semantic orien-
tation will be reversed. iii) Finally, nega-
tion with conjunction, contrastive negation
and lexicalized structures do not change the
SO value of the scope.
5.1 Negation strengthening the SO
Among all the negation instances, we have
observed some cases where the semantic ori-
entation has been strengthened (1.96 %: 7
of 359). This happens when the negation
marker ezin (“can not”) modifies adjectives
or adverbs.

(5) Dena nahasten da maisulan
ezin ederragoa(+4) osatzeko. (MUS21)
Everything is mixed to create a masterpiece
that can not be more beautiful(+4).

In Example 5, the negator modifies the ad-
jective and, in this case, the negation with an
adjective in a comparative structure is used
to reinforce the positive SO value. The result



88

Example Negation marker Categorization Instances
6

ez

[(NP +)] ez [+ aux. (+ NP) + verb (+ NP)]
[(NP +) verb +] ez
[NP +] ez

214
18
13

ez [+ NP +] ez [+ NP] (...) (repetitive) 2
gabe [NP/VP/clause +] gabe 41

7 ezin [(NP) + verb +] ezinezin [(+ NP) +] verb [(+ NP)]
19
5

salbu [NP] + salbu 2
izan ezik [NP/clause] + izan ezik 1

ezta ezta + [NP/clause] 1
ez, ezin with any clear pattern 7
Total 323

Table 2: Negation weakening the semantic orientation.

of negating a positive chunk can not be more
beautiful is to be even more positive. In this
case, the masterpiece is very beautiful.
5.2 Negation weakening the SO
In the majority of cases, the SO value is
weakened due to negation. Several negation
markers can weaken the semantic orientation.
In our corpus, 89.98 % of cases (323 of 359)
show a weakening of scope.

(6) Horrek ez die eragotzi(−2) ordea, 57 milioi
euro ematea San Mames klub pribatuari!.
(POL30)
It does not prevent(−2) them, however, to
give 57 milion euros to San Mames private
club!

(7) Irabazi(+2) ezinik jarraitzen du Eibarrek,
baina oso puntu ona eskuratu du Getaferen
zelaian. (KIR17)
Eibar continues without winning(+2), but it
has achieved a very good point in Getafe’s
(football) field.

In Example 6, the default word order of
Basque (main verb + auxiliary verb) was
reversed in a typical negation structure (ez
“not” + auxiliary verb + main verb). In
this example, the negation marker ez (“not”)
has an effect on all the words of the sen-
tence, including the verb eragotzi (“prevent”)
which has a negative SO value (−2), weak-
ening its SO value. In Example 7, the nega-
tion marker ezin “can not” negates the verb
irabazi (“win”). Therefore, the negation
marker ezin (“can not”) works like an inten-
sifier does with adjectives and adverbs (Ex-
ample 5) while it has the opposite function
with verbs and nouns (Example 7). There-
fore, weakening negators can have a positive
or negative (±4) SO value, if the modified
chunk (scope) has a positive or negative SO
value. The same happens if the SO value is
positive +5, because the result of the weak-
ening (−4) will not change the polarity and

the SO value will still be positive +1. In con-
trast, if the SO value of the modified chunk
+3 or −3 or lower, the SO value will be re-
versed to a ±1. This happens in Example 6
and Example 7. In the first example, the SO
value of the scope is +2 (eragotzi (“prevent”)
−2 + ez (“not”) +4 = +2). In the second
one, the SO value of the scope is −2 (irabazi
(“win”) +2 + ez (“not”) −4 = −2).
5.3 Negation with no effect
Negation with no effect on semantic orien-
tation has happened in 8.08 % of our sam-
ple (27 of 359). In these cases, the negation
does not modify any word with a SO value
assigned. This can happen due to three rea-
sons: i) the negator appears with a conjunc-
tion, ii) the negator is a part of contrastive
negation and iii) the negator is part of a lex-
icalized structure (structures with their own
meaning and sometimes also corresponding
to dictionary entries). The scope concept
is applicable only in the case of contrastive
negation and the particle ez (“no”) with a con-
junction.

(8) Ikuspuntu politikotik(−1) ez ezik, ekonomiko-
tik(+3) ere Greziak esperantza ekarri du Eu-
ropako hegoaldeko beste herrietara, tartean
Euskal Herrira. (POL08)
Not only from the political point of view, but
also from the economic point of view, Greece
has also hoped for other parts of southern Eu-
rope, including the Basque Country.

(9) Sei puntu baino ez dituela, hamaseigarren
postuan da Reala sailkapenean. (KIR27)
With only six points, Real is in the sixteenth
position in the classification.

Example 8 shows a contrastive negation with
additive function (Silvennoinen, 2017). In
other words, the negation mark does not
negate the noun phrase, as in ikuspuntu poli-
tikotik(−1) (“from the political(−1) point of
view”), actually it functions as conjunction



89

Example Negation marker / lexicalized structure Instances
[verb/bai “yes”] + edo/edota/ala ez (ez with conjuction) 3

8 [NP] + ez ezik (contrastive negation) 2
9 baino/besterik ez 11

Others lexicalized structures 13
Total 29

Table 3: Negation without effects on semantic orientation.

and adds new information: ekonomikotik ere
(“also from the economic point of view”).
Structures of Table 3 have their own SO
value, they can be considered as dictionary
entries and they can appear in different posi-
tions in the sentence. In Example 9, the struc-
ture baino/besterik ez (“only”) is an adverb.
6 Evaluation
6.1 Evaluation methodology
To tag the negation changes of the SO value,
we have created negation rules based on pre-
vious studies.Rules have been implemented
using Constraint Grammar (CG3) (Karlsson
et al., 2011) to assign the correct value to the
negated structures. The corpus of 96 texts has
been tagged using the Basque morphosyntac-
tic disambiguator based on the CG formal-
ism (Aduriz et al., 1997). Then, a different
set of 48 texts of the Basque Opinion Corpus
has been used as test dataset to evaluate the
rules. After that, the results have been ana-
lyzed manually, observing if the words have
been annotated or not and, when annotated,
whether they have the correct annotation.
Negation effects Prec. Rec. F1

Strengthen 1.00 1.00 1.00
Weaken 0.93 0.80 0.86

No effect 0.97 1.00 0.98
Total 0.93 0.80 0.86

Negated elements Prec. Rec. F1
Negation markers 1.00 0.96 0.98

Lexicalized structures 0.96 1.00 0.98
Scope 0.91 0.75 0.82
Total 0.93 0.80 0.86

Table 4: General results of negation effects and
negated elements.

Most of the corpus was evaluated by one lin-
guist, but with the aim to know the reliability
of this evaluation a piece of the corpus (10
%) has been annotated by two linguists. Both
annotators have followed a guideline to eval-
uate the output of CG3 rules. According to
the results, the Cohen’s kappa score is 0.93
for the annotation of the words that belong
to negation and the kappa score is 0.69 for

the annotation of words that have been anno-
tated correctly, badly or is missed (which can
be considered as substantial in (Landis and
Koch, 1977)).
6.2 Results and error analysis
According to general results, the F1 of the
negation rules identifying elements related to
negation is 0.86 (Precision is 0.93 while re-
call is 0.80).

In accordance with weakening and scope er-
ror analysis, these elements show lower F1
score because they behave more irregularly.
The components as well as the length in
scope are more unpredictable. Moreover,
some negators apply to lists of words with
comma and, as some constraints in CG3 rules
correspond to punctuation marks, they have
not been detected. This suggests that the
rules need more precision. So, the punctu-
ation mark constraint is not enough. There-
fore, some syntactic information is needed to
detect these kind of structures.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
This work presents a negation analysis for
Basque sentiment analysis based on Con-
straint Grammar rules. According to this
study, the negation can affect the seman-
tic orientation (SO value) in different ways:
i) strengthening, ii) weakening or iii) hav-
ing no effect. According to our evaluation to
measure the identified words, the overall pre-
cision is 0.93, the recall 0.80 and the F1 score
0.86. In line with error analysis, the punc-
tuation mark constraint is not enough and
more precise rules are needed in the nega-
tion weakening. In the near future, i) we
want to implement these negation rules in a
tool for automatic Basque sentiment analysis
and ii) we want to continue with the analysis
of negation: analyzing the scope in a bigger
corpus and especially based on the Rhetorical
Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and Thomp-
son, 1987), studying if the position of negator
in rhetorical structure has any effect on senti-
ment analysis.



90

References
Itziar Aduriz, José Marı́a Arriola, Xabier Artola,

Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza, Koldo Gojenola, and
Montse Maritxalar. 1997. Morphosyntactic disam-
biguation for basque based on the constraint gram-
mar formalism. Proceedings of Recent Advances
in NLP (RANLP97), pages 282–288, Tzigov Chark
(Bulgary).

Jon Alkorta, Koldo Gojenola, and Mikel Iruskieta.
2016. Creating and evaluating a polarity - balanced
corpus for Basque sentiment analysis. In IWoDA16
Fourth International Workshop on Discourse Analy-
sis, pages 58–62. Santiago de Compostela (Spain).

Jon Alkorta, Koldo Gojenola, and Mikel Iruskieta.
2018. SentiTegi: building a semantic oriented
Basque lexicon. In Proceedings of the CICLing
2018. Hanoi (Vietnam).

Marı́a Jesus Aranzabe Begoña Altuna and
Arantza Dı́az de Ilarraza. 2017. Euskarazko
ezeztapenaren tratamendu automatikorako azter-
keta. In Iñaki Alegria, Ainhoa Latatu, Miren Josu
Ormaetxebarria and Patxi Salaberri (pub.), II.
IkerGazte, Nazioarteko Ikerketa Euskaraz: Giza
Zientziak eta Artea, pages 127–134. Udako Euskal
Unibertsitatea (UEU), Bilbo (Spain).

Nerea Ezeiza, Iñaki Alegria, José Marı́a Arriola, Rubén
Urizar, and Itziar Aduriz. 1998. Combining stochas-
tic and rule-based methods for disambiguation in
agglutinative languages. In Proceedings of the
17th international conference on Computational
linguistics-Volume 1, pages 380–384. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Rodney Huddleston and Geoffrey Keith Pullum. 2002.
The Cambridge grammar of English. Language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Salud Marı́a Jiménez-Zafra, M. Teresa Martı́n-
Valdivia, M. Dolores Molina-González, and L. Al-
fonso Ureña-López. 2018a. Relevance of the SFU
Review SP-NEG corpus annotated with the scope
of negation for supervised polarity classification in
Spanish. Information Processing & Management,
54(2):240–251.

Salud Marı́a Jiménez Zafra, Eugenio Martı́nez Cámara,
Marı́a Teresa Martı́n Valdivia, and Marı́a Dolores
Molina González. 2015. Tratamiento de la Ne-
gación en el Análisis de Opiniones en Espanol.
Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, (54).

Salud Marı́a Jiménez-Zafra, Mariona Taulé, M. Teresa
Martı́n-Valdivia, L. Alfonso Ureña-López, and M.
Antónia Martı́. 2018b. SFU Review SP-NEG: a
Spanish corpus annotated with negation for sen-
timent analysis. A typology of negation patterns.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 52(2):533–
569.

Fred Karlsson, Atro Voutilainen, Juha Heikkilae,
and Arto Anttila. 2011. Constraint Grammar:

a language-independent system for parsing unre-
stricted text, volume 4. Walter de Gruyter.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, pages 159–174.

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing. Synthesis lectures on human language tech-
nologies, 5(1):1–167.

Jingjing Liu and Stephanie Seneff. 2009. Review sen-
timent scoring via a parse-and-paraphrase paradigm.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1-Volume 1, pages 161–169. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Eugene Emil Loos, Susan Anderson, Dwight H. Day,
Paul C. Jordan, and J. Douglas Wingate. 2004. Glos-
sary of linguistic terms, volume 29. SIL Interna-
tional Camp Wisdom Road Dallas.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1987.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: A theory of text orga-
nization. University of Southern California, Infor-
mation Sciences Institute.

Olli O. Silvennoinen. 2017. Not only apples but also
oranges: Contrastive negation and register. In Turo
Hiltunen, Joe McVeigh and Tanja Sily (edit.), Big
and Rich Data in English Corpus Linguistics: Meth-
ods and Explorations, VARIENG, Helsinki (Fin-
land).

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kim-
berly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based
methods for sentiment analysis. Computational lin-
guistics, 37(2):267–307.

David Vilares, Miguel A. Alonso, and Carlos Gómez-
Rodrı́guez. 2015. A syntactic approach for opinion
mining on Spanish reviews. Natural Language En-
gineering, 21(1):139–163.


