




































Using authentic texts for grammar exercises for a minority
language

Lene Antonsen
UiT The Arctic

University of Norway
lene.antonsen@uit.no

Chiara Argese
UiT The Arctic

University of Norway
chiara.argese@uit.no

Abstract

This paper presents an ATICALL (Au-
thentic Text ICALL) system with auto-
matic visual input enhancement activities
for training complex inflection systems in
a minority language. We have adapted the
freely available VIEW system which was
designed to automatically generate activi-
ties from any web content.
Our system is based on finite state trans-
ducers (FST) and Constraint Grammar,
originally built for other purposes. The
paper describes ways of handling ambi-
guity in the target form in the exercises,
and ways of handling the challenges for
VIEW posed by authentic text, typical
for a minority language: variations in or-
thography, and large proportion of non-
normative forms.

1 Introduction
This paper presents an implementation of

an ATICALL (Authentic Text ICALL) system
with automatic visual input enhancement ac-
tivities for students acquiring complex inflec-
tion systems. The system, called VIEW, was
originally designed to automatically generate
activities from any web content for English,
Spanish and German (Meurers et al., 2011),
and an adaption of the browser-extension ver-
sion of the program for Russian was presented
by Reynolds et al. (2014). We have adapted
and implemented the web-version of the pro-
gram for North Saami.

Adapting the ATICALL-program to a
morphology-rich minority language with a
short tradition of literacy, like North Saami,
gave us challenges like finding suitable texts
on the internet, and finding ways of handling

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Licence details:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

both variation in orthography and large pro-
portions of non-normative forms in the texts,
in addition to making solutions for using also
ambiguous grammatical forms as target words
for the exercises.

The paper is structured as follows: Section
2 presents the background and motivation for
our approach and puts it in a wider context.
Section 3 presents the system and how it was
adapted to North Saami. Section 4 discusses
how we adapted the system to handle chal-
lenges related to the situation for this minor-
ity language. Section 5 contains a user eval-
uation, and in section 6 we present the con-
clusion. Finally, in section 7, we present some
future perspectives.

2 Background
2.1 North Saami
North Saami is a morphology-rich language,
with nominal inflection for two numbers, six
cases, and possession. Nouns have paradigms
both with possessive declension and without
possession indicated (absolute declension), see
table 1. Verbs have 45 finite forms including
three persons for singular, dual and plural, in
four modi (indicative, imperative, conditional,
potential), and two tenses for indicative. The
verbs are also inflected for ten different non-
finite forms. Nouns, adjectives and verbs may
be divided into groups according to stem type,
each type having different paradigms. Suffix-
ation is accompanied by phonological alterna-
tions, one of these alternations is a stem con-
sonant alternating process, consonant grada-
tion, where each stem may appear in two or
even three versions, e.g. gieht-, gieđ-, giht-
(“hand-”), as in table 1. Usually, the case
suffix is sufficient to identify the case form,
but for some common forms, consonant gra-
dation is the only distinguishing feature be-

Lene Antonsen and Chiara Argese 2018. Using authentic texts for grammar exercises for a minority lan-

guage. Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018

(NLP4CALL 2018). Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings 152: 1–9.

1



tween the forms, like for giehta, gieđa in table
1. See Sammallahti (1998) for more informa-
tion about the language.

Number Even stem Odd stem Contracted
and case stem
Singular:
Nominative giehta beana suolu
Accusative gieđa beatnaga sullo
Illative gihtii beatnagii sullui
Locative gieđas beatnagis sullos
Comitative gieđain beatnagiin sulluin
Plural:
Nominative gieđat beatnagat sullot
Accusative gieđaid beatnagiid sulluid
Illative gieđaide beatnagiidda sulluide
Locative gieđain beatnagiin sulluin
Comitative gieđaiguin beatnagiiguin sulluiguin
Essive giehtan beanan suolun
In English “hand” “dog” “island”

Table 1: Absolute declension of nouns in North
Saami, for the three different stem types. The ac-
cusative and genitive cases are syncretic.

North Saami has approx. 20 000 speakers
living in three countries, Norway, Sweden and
Finland, and got a common orthography in
1978. The language is taught as native and
foreign language in school and universities.

2.2 ICALL for North Saami

There are other ICALL systems for North
Saami, which generate question-answer pairs
with fill-in-the-blank (Antonsen et al., 2013)
and question-answer drills with to some ex-
tent free input (Antonsen, 2013b). They use
finite-state transducers, which make it possible
to generate a virtually unlimited set of exer-
cises, and they cover all types of combinations
of stem types and inflection forms, also those
which are infrequent in the texts electronically
available.

Despite the availability of the question-
answering systems, we still think that also
an ICALL program based on authentic texts
would be useful for the learners. The advan-
tages of this new system are interesting top-
ics for learners, more context for the exercises,
and more variation in sentences with focus on
frequent forms and idioms.

2.3 Based on VIEW

The system architecture is based on the VIEW
(Visual Input Enhancement of the Web)1 sys-
tem described in (Meurers et al., 2011). VIEW
is an ATICALL system designed to help learn-
ers in their language learning process, and it
automatically produces exercises based on a
text chosen by the user on the web.

Figure 1: The topic is nouns: all the target words
are highlighted.

VIEW includes four different types of ac-
tivities. Two activities are based on the as-
sumption that noticing is necessary in lan-
guage learning for adults (Schmidt, 1990).
The learner is fist exposed for the grammati-
cal forms: the highlight-activity adds colour
to target wordforms, as in figure 1. The next
step is when the learner looks for the forms:
the click-activity allows the learner to find
the target wordforms in the text and colorize
them by clicking them.

Figure 2: The topic is nouns. The activity is to
select the correct form of the target words.

The multiple-choice-activity allows the
learner to select the correct form from a
multiple-choice list, as in figure 2, and in
the practice-activity the learner types in the
wordforms. The latter will be referred to as
the cloze-activity in this paper. The learner
gets instant feedback on whether the answer is
correct or not. The activities can be accessed
as a web application.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

2



Figure 3: Application home page, where the user can select a grammar topic from the list under Fáttát
(“Topics”) and an activity from the list under Hárjehusat (“Excercises”). Both of these are explained
in section 2.3. From the list under Materiálat (“Materials”) the learner can also choose to work with
recommended web-texts, a function explained in section 4.2. Below the list there is an expand/collapse
menu for adding a URL or uploading a text.

3 Implementation for North Saami
In Konteaksta2, our implementation for North
Saami (home page in figure 3), the user can
choose to train her skills on four different
grammatical topics:

1. Nouns
2. Finite verbforms
3. Non-finite verbforms
4. Negation form of verbs

These topics are made for the four standard
VIEW activities, see 2.3. The user is then pre-
sented with three different options:

1. Choose from a set of recommended texts
2. Insert a URL of her own choice, or find

one by using the “Google search” field.
3. Upload a file (explained in section 4.2).

3.1 Linguistic framework
The NLP resources being used are developed
at UiT The Arctic University of Norway. They

1The open-source research prototype is available at
http://purl.org/icall/view

2http://oahpa.no/konteaksta/

include morphological analysers implemented
as finite-state transducers (FST) and compiled
with the Xerox compilers TWOLC and LEXC
(Beesley and Karttunen, 2003).

The syntactic parser for disambiguation and
adding function tags is built within the Con-
straint Grammar-framework (CG) (Karlsson
et al., 1995). The CG-framework is based
upon manually written rule sets and a syn-
tactic analyser which also selects the correct
analysis in case of homonymy. Vislcg3 (VISL-
group, 2008), a new improved version of the
initial CG compiler (Karlsson, 1990; Karlsson
et al., 1995), is used for compilation of the rule
sets.

The North Saami analyser recognises 98%
of the words in Saami texts (Antonsen and
Trosterud, 2017), and has an F-score of 0.99
for part-of-speech (PoS) disambiguation, 0.94
for disambiguation of inflection and deriva-
tion, and 0.93 for assignment of grammatical
functions (Antonsen et al., 2010).

3.2 Technical implementation
Our application front page is written in HTML
and Javascript. Once all options have been

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

3



chosen (topic, activity and webpage) the Java
servlet will execute the following three steps:

1. Preprocessing. During this step the tex-
tual content from the webpage is ex-
tracted and tokenised. Then sentence
boundaries are detected.

2. The text is annotated with the grammat-
ical analyser.

3. Postprocessing. Here the target words are
selected, and the HTML code is enhanced
with additional attributes.

4. Loading. The enhanced page is loaded to
the browser. The four different exercise
types are implemented in Javascript.

One main technical issue we are facing in de-
veloping the application lies in the tokeniza-
tion for sentences ending with abbreviations,
as for measures, cf. “cm.” in example (1).
These sentences get an extra dot not present in
the original text as sentence delimiter for the
syntactic analysis, and this sometimes creates
problems when putting each token back in its
original position after it has been analysed:

(1) Darfi
The turf

berrešii
should

leat
be

assái,
thick,

15-25
15-25

cm.
cm.

Darfi
The turf

deaddá
pushes

…
…

As a consequence, in the text after these ab-
breviations, the wrong tokens are highlighted.
This happens for all activities. In figure 4
nouns should be highlighted, but after the to-
ken “cm”, the tokens “.” and verb “deaddá”
are highlighted instead of the noun “Darfi”.

Figure 4: The output from the application when
highlight-activity for nouns is chosen with text con-
taining an abbreviation in the end of the sentence.
Translation is in example (1).

This is something we are currently working
with.

To take into account variation in orthogra-
phy, we allowed the application to accept more
forms in the cloze-activity, see 4.4 for a more
detailed explanation.

To help the user focus on the text itself, we
have removed the enhancement of targets in

menus in the webpages (by searching and re-
moving the enhancement from specific HTML-
tags).

After initial testing, we realised that one
limit of the application is its performance
in terms of response time (especially for the
multiple-choice and cloze activities). This was
improved by the following: before the prepro-
cess is executed the application checks whether
a file with annotated text exists; if it does,
only the postprocessing and loading steps are
executed; if not, the output from the prepro-
cessing is saved to a file for future use. In this
way, the process is now twice as fast as before.

4 Challenges for a morphology-rich
minority language

In the VIEW-versions for English and German
the key-answer is the form used in the original
text, which the activity is based on (Meurers
et al., 2011, 13), and this is also the situa-
tion for Russian, except from the generating
of words with stress marking, which is not a
part of Russian orthography (Reynolds et al.,
2014, 102).

For a morphology-rich language with much
variation like North Saami, we chose to gen-
erate the key-answer, based on the morpho-
logical analysis of the target word, and in
many cases the system will accept several an-
swers. This is important both for target selec-
tion (section 4.1), and for variation and mis-
spellings (section 4.4).

For a minority language there are also chal-
lenges in finding suitable web-texts (section
4.2), and there is often a mix of both the mi-
nority and the majority language in the web
page (section 4.3).

4.1 Target selection
Each noun declension paradigm has 11 cells,
see table 1. In the multiple-choice and cloze-
activities it is not always obvious for the
learner which form to choose. If there is
no agreement with another member of the
sentence, e.g. subject-verbal agreement, the
learner will not know whether the target
should be in singular or plural if there is no pic-
ture as reference. The Russian VIEW does not
select tokens for which number is grammati-
cally ambiguous (Reynolds et al., 2014, 102).

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

4



In our first version of the program we solved
the problem by dividing singular and plural
nouns into two target types, so the learner
would choose to work with either nouns in sin-
gular or nouns in plural. But two of the cells in
the case paradigm always have homonymous
forms across numbers: singular comitative and
plural locative, e.g. gieđain (Sg.Com: “with
the hand” or Pl.Loc: “in the hands”). The
analyser does not always succeed in choos-
ing correctly between these two analyses, so
there is a risk of using a plural target when
the learner has chosen a singular activity, or
the other way round. The learner is never
exposed to the morphological analysis of the
wordforms, so by including both singular and
plural nouns in the same target set, a wrong
analysis will not make any difference for the
user, because the wordform is the same. The
essive case has no number marker, and with
this solution we were able to include the es-
sive case in the activity.

For our new solution for the number am-
biguity, we are generating the distractors for
multiple-choice with an algorithm according to
the analysis of the target word: the distractors
will have the same number, but different case,
as the target word. Essive can be distractor
for both singular and plural. Only for target
words in nominative case, which agree with the
verb, the system might offer both the singu-
lar and the plural form. For the cloze-activity
the system will accept both singular and plural
forms if the target word has no agreement with
the verbal, e.g. in example (4), as the object
is accepted both gándda (“boy.Sg.Acc”) and
gánddaid (“boy.Pl.Acc”).

4.2 Finding suitable texts
According to Meurers et al. (2011), the idea
behind the VIEW approach is to allow the
learner to choose up-to-date webpages on any
topic they are interested in, because this
clearly has a positive effect on learner moti-
vation. Learners can use an ordinary search-
engine interface to search for texts, or enter
the URL of the page they want to enhance.

This is a good idea, but problematic for a
minority language like North Saami. There
are texts on the web, but the high rate of mis-
spellings, 4% (Antonsen, 2013a), is problem-
atic for getting reliable morphological analy-

sis and disambiguation. Misspellings in AT-
ICALL texts are also pedagogically problem-
atic, since learners will be exposed to them.

Traditionally Saami speakers write in the
majority language, and a native speaker’s res-
idence is decisive for the amount of schooling
she has had in Saami, even if the situation
has improved to some extent over the past 25
years. Still, native speakers are not exposed
enough to the written language to be able to
automate writing. According to research most
L1 pupils both read and write better in major-
ity language than Saami language (Helander,
2016, 15–16). Therefore Saami web-texts tend
to be short, and with many misspellings.

There is a North Saami daily newspaper,
but its web articles are behind a paywall.
The Norwegian Saami broadcasting company
(NRK-Sápmi) publishes a couple of new texts
every day in North Saami, on topics which
could be interesting for learners, but our anal-
ysis of 1.6 mill. words of these texts gives
the rate of 5.7% misspellings, which is even
higher than the average rate. That means that
almost every sentence contains a misspelling.
Also the texts published by the Finnish broad-
casting company, YLE Sápmi, contain many
misspellings.

Our solution is using texts from textbooks
published on the web, and giving links to these
texts as “recommended texts”, see figure 3.
In addition to news articles, NRK-Sápmi has
published a collection of fairy tales, and they
are willing to correct the texts on their site,
if we proofread them. At this point it is not
possible for the learners to choose up-to-date
webpages on any topic they are interested in,
because we have to ensure the quality of the
spelling. There is a spell checker for North
Saami, but it detects only non-word errors,
and the correction suggestions are not cho-
sen according to the context. An automatic
spelling correction would not give the required
quality.

Another way of getting around this prob-
lem has been to implement the possibility for
teachers to upload proofread material or their
own texts. They may then send the URL for
each activity to their students.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

5



4.3 Majority language in the texts
Even if there are good texts in North Saami
on the web, they often contain fragments of
the majority language (Norwegian, Finnish,
Swedish), like a menu, or a dateline, as in ex-
ample (2), with a dateline in Norwegian.

(2) Publisert
Published

19.
19.

jan.
Jan.

2018
2018

kl.
o’clock

09:32
09:32

We can remove the enhancement of elements
which are specified in the HTML-code, like
menus, but elements like datelines are not
always specified. If none of the tokens are
recognised as North Saami words, they do not
constitute a problem for the ICALL-program.
But this is something we have to keep an eye
on, and it may require implementation of a
language recogniser in the pipeline.

4.4 Handling variation
The orthography often allows variation in the
spelling and the morphology. For example,
the North Saami copula singular 3rd person
indicative past tense has two normative or-
thographic forms, lei ~ leai. Also in other
parts of the morphology there is much varia-
tion, e.g. the suffix for first person plural form
of odd-stemmed verbs can, due to dialectal dif-
ferences, be both -it and -at, like in muitalit ~
muitalat (“(we) tell”). The cloze-activity must
accept all normative forms, and our solution
is to generate the correct form(s) based on the
analysis of the target word.

Also, we have solved the problem of non-
normative forms in the same way. The de-
scriptive analyser can to some extent recog-
nise a word with non-normative spelling, but
to get the key-answer to follow the norma-
tive spelling, the target form must be gener-
ated. In example (3), the verb áiggon (“(I)
will”) is spelled like it is pronounced in some
dialects, and the analysis from the analyser
is áigut+V+TV+Ind+Prs+Sg1. With these
tags the normative form, áiggun, will be gen-
erated as the key answer for the cloze-activity,
and the wordform áiggon will not be accepted
as a correct answer.

(3) …ja
…and

mon
I

áiggon
will.Prs.Sg1

[áiggun]
[will]

jearrat
ask

dus
you

čiežanuppelohkái
seventeen

gažaldaga
questions

The morphological and syntactic analysers for
the ICALL-program are also used for the ma-
chine translation system described in Anton-
sen et al. (2017). This system is facing the
same problem with non-normative forms in
texts, and thus the work aimed at giving the
descriptive analyser a better coverage for ma-
chine translation of North Saami web-texts, is
also giving a better coverage to the analysis of
web-texts for the ICALL-application.

4.5 Better feedback to the user
The VIEW system provides limited feedback
to the user. In all the three activities where the
user is asked to “do” something (click, choose,
cloze), the answer turns red if it is wrong or
green if it is correct. We have looked into how
to give more sophisticated feedback to the user
in the multiple-choice and cloze-activities. As
suggested by Reynolds et al. (2014), one may
give meaningful feedback based on the same
NLP techniques as employed in the analysis,
see figure 5.

Figure 5: The FST and CG analysis of the
sentence in example (4). The function tag for
subject (SUBJ) is marked with an arrow to-
wards the agreement verb, and both the object
(OBJ) and adverbial (ADVL) are marked with
an arrow towards the main verb (MAINV). The
verb váldit has the analysis váldit+V+TV+Inf
(“Verb+Transitive+Infinitive”).

(4) De
Then

boahtá
comes

stállu
the troll

ja
and

áigu
will

váldit
take

.......

.......
(gánda)
(the boy)

For many of the targets, it would be possible
as a first feedback to an incorrect answer, to
highlight in blue a word as a hint for choos-

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

6



Figure 6: An example of highlighting a hint to
the learner. The hint is the transitive verb váldit,
which triggers the accusative case for the object,
and the correct form is gándda (“boy.Sg.Acc”).
The sentence is translated in example (4).

ing the correct form, like in figure 6, the verb
váldit triggers the accusative case for the tar-
get word.

Usually the verb is the trigger for the case
in the adverbial, moving towards a place (illa-
tive), or from a place (locative). For some of
the oblique cases, the trigger will be a gov-
erning verb, like ballat (“to be afraid of”) for
locative or liikot (“to like”) for illative. These
verbs can be marked with an additional tag in
the analysis, because the CG-grammar already
contains sets of such verbs. For the nominative
the hint is the verb agreeing with the noun.

For some of the non-finite verbforms, the
trigger is an auxiliary verb, such as the cop-
ula for the perfect participle, e.g. in lea borran
(“have eaten”). For infinitive the trigger may
be an auxiliary (like áiggun) or a verb govern-
ing the infinitive (like vikkan): áiggun borrat
( “(I) will eat”) or vikkan borrat (“(I) try to
eat”). The negation form of the main verb
is preceded by the negation verb, inflected for
person and number: in bora (“(I) don’t eat”).
Even though the negation form is a non-finite
verb form, we considered it to be both impor-
tant and difficult to learn to inflect correctly,
especially for learners with a Germanic lan-
guage as their first language, so we have in-
cluded it as a target type of its own.

For the finite verb-form there is often a sub-
ject agreeing with the finite verb, but not al-
ways, since the subject may be omitted. But it
seems that often it will be possible to identify
and highlight a hint, and based on this, one
might also generate a comment, like “Look at
the highlighted subject, the verb must agree”.
These are plans, and are not implemented yet.

5 User evaluation

We have identified two main user groups:
teachers and learners. A group of teachers at
an upper secondary school has started using
the application and has given us some initial

feedback, which we have taken into account.
They suggested that it would be good to

have additional information about the texts
recommended by us. We added genre, length
and difficulty level on each link to the texts.

Upon their request, we have removed the
possibility to display key-answers from the ex-
ercises, since they were concerned that this
feature might be used too much by the stu-
dents, instead of trying to give the correct an-
swer themselves. We also added information
on how to convert PDF files into HTML (the
format accepted by the application for file up-
load).

In addition to this, we asked both the
students and the teacher at an introductory
course in North Saami at a university to eval-
uate our application by replying to a targeted
set of questions. They are still at the begin-
ning of their course, but the teacher is confi-
dent that towards the end of the first semester
the application will be useful and will provide
exercises suitable to their level. In addition,
the teacher says that is good for the students
to train grammar in context, and read a vari-
ety of texts.

To the question about what should be im-
proved, the teacher asks for more recom-
mended texts. However, finding suitable texts
for a minority language like North Saami is
problematic (see 4.2).

We received feedback from three students
using our application. All of the students are
L2 speakers. Two of the three students have
used at least two texts and at least three out
of four of the activities proposed.

Two of the students declared that they had
to struggle a bit before understanding how to
use the application. In fact, one of the stu-
dents noticed that it would be helpful to be
able to use the same text for all topics. This
confirms that, at least some of the users don’t
understand that it is possible to produce the
desired exercise for each text. This means that
we might rethink the layout of the application,
but in order to do that it would be helpful to
have more detailed feedback. One possibility
to get a more explicit feedback might be to
plan a short “usage session” with some users
and get their instant opinions about the appli-
cation, as was done by Bontogon et al. (2018).

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

7



Although the students like using the appli-
cation to add variety to their study, two of
them found the texts too difficult for their level
of knowledge of the language.

In addition, a bug was reported, which
caused the application not to show any cor-
rect/incorrect feedback when using the appli-
cation together with a translation plugin. This
has been fixed.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we show that it is possible to
adapt an ATICALL program like VIEW for
North Saami. The analyser tools available are
quite robust and with an acceptable F-score,
but adapting and implementing the applica-
tion for a minority language present some ex-
tra challenges.

The amount of variation in orthography
made it necessary to generate the key-answer
instead of using the original text. The same
applied for misspellings. But the high rate of
misspellings makes the analysis less reliable,
and the ATICALL approach less pedagogi-
cal for learners, because they are exposed for
the misspellings. Generating the key-answer
makes it possible also to accept more morpho-
logical forms, and allows us to include also am-
biguous target words.

It is also clear that although we provide the
user with the feature of choosing any web-
page, there are not enough suitable web-texts
available of acceptable quality. The solution
is thus to use proofread material, either as
recommended web-texts or as teachers’ up-
loaded texts. Still this ATICALL program was
welcomed by students and teachers in both
schools and universities, because of the sparse-
ness of learning materials.

7 Future work

From the initial feedback received from stu-
dents, we identified some problems with re-
gards to the layout. In order to improve it and
make it more user-friendly, we plan to organise
a “usage session” with students to get instant
opinions and comments about their experience
with the application.

As described in 4.5, we plan to implement
additional feedback, by highlighting hints in
the sentence, if the learner writes or chooses

an incorrect wordform. Based on the hint it
would also be possible to generate comments
for the learner.

We want to add adjectives as a target type.
The inflection and derivation of adjectives is
an important part of the grammar, and we are
searching for suitable texts for this.

We have implemented three additional top-
ics: identification of subject, object and adver-
bial. These are currently under testing, but
we plan to have them in the stable version of
our application soon, for both the highlight-
activity and the click-activity. These addi-
tional topics will be relevant not only for lan-
guage learners, but also for students following
linguistic courses for North Saami as a native
language.

We will concider implementation of a lan-
guage recogniser in the pipeline, because there
are often fragments of the majority language
in the Saami webpages.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Heli Uibo, who created the first
implementation of VIEW for North Saami,
which our work builds on. We also thank
Ciprian Gerstenberger for technical support,
and Trond Trosterud for useful discussions.

References
Lene Antonsen. 2013a. Čállinmeattáhusaid guor-

ran. [English summary: Tracking misspellings].
Sámi dieđalaš áigecála, 2/2013:7–32.

Lene Antonsen. 2013b. Constraints in free-input
question-answering drills. In Proceedings of
the second workshop on NLP for computer-
assisted language learning (NoDaLiDa 2013),
volume 17 of Proceedings Series, pages 11–26,
Oslo. NEALT.

Lene Antonsen, Ciprian Gerstenberger, Maja
Kappfjell, Sandra Nystø Rahka, Marja-Liisa
Olthuis, Trond Trosterud, and Francis M. Tyers.
2017. Machine translation with North Saami
as a pivot language. In Proceedings of the 21st
Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics
(NoDaLiDa 2017), volume 29 of NEALT Pro-
ceedings Series, pages 123–131, Linköping, Swe-
den. Linköping University Electronic Press.

Lene Antonsen, Ryan Johnson, Trond Trosterud,
and Heli Uibo. 2013. Generating modular gram-
mar exercises with finite-state transducers. In
Proceedings of the second workshop on NLP for
computer-assisted language learning (NoDaLiDa

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

8



2013), volume 17 of NEALT Proceedings Series,
pages 27–38.

Lene Antonsen and Trond Trosterud. 2017. Ord
sett innafra og utafra – en datalingvistisk anal-
yse av nordsamisk. Norsk lingvistisk tidsskrift,
35(1):153–185.

Lene Antonsen, Trond Trosterud, and Linda
Wiechetek. 2010. Reusing grammatical re-
sources for new languages. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010), pages
2782–2789, Stroudsburg. The Association for
Computational Linguistics, ELRA.

Kenneth R. Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003.
Finite State Morphology. CSLI Studies in Com-
putational Linguistics. CSLI publications, Stan-
ford, USA.

Megan Bontogon, Antti Arppe, Lene Antonsen,
Dorothy Thunder, and Jordan Lachler. 2018.
Intelligent Computer Assisted Language Learn-
ing (ICALL) for nêhiyawêwin: An In-Depth
User Experience Evaluation. The Canadian
Modern Languages Review, 74(3).

Nils Øivind Helander. 2016. Ohppojuvvon ja sohp-
pojuvvon giella. Gielladiđolašvuohta, čálamáhttu
ja guovttegielatvuohta. Dieđut 1/2016. Sámi Al-
laskuvla, Guovdageaidnu.

Fred Karlsson. 1990. Constraint grammar as a
framework for parsing running text. In Papers
Presented to the 13th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING-90) on
the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of COL-
ING and the 350th Anniversary of Helsinki Uni-
versity, volume 3, Helsinki. Yliopistopaino.

Fred Karlsson, Atro Voutilainen, Juha Heikkilä,
and Arto Anttila. 1995. Constraint Grammar. A
Language-Independent System for Parsing Unre-
stricted Text. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin – New
York.

Detmar Meurers, Ramon Ziai, Luiz Amaral, Adri-
ane Boyd, Aleksandar Dimitros, Vanessa Met-
calf, and Niels Ott. 2011. Enhancing authentic
web pages for language learners. In Proceedings
for the 5th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP
for Building Educational Applications (BEA-5)
at NAACL-HLT 2010, pages 10–18, Los Ange-
les.

Robert Reynolds, Eduard Schaf, and Detmar
Meurers. 2014. A VIEW of Russian: Vi-
sual input enhancement and adaptive feed-
back. In Proceedings of the third workshop on
NLP for computer-assisted language learning at
SLTC 2014, Uppsala University, pages 98–112.
Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings.

Pekka Sammallahti. 1998. Saamic. In Daniel
Abondolo, editor, The Uralic Languages, pages
43–96. Routledge, London.

Richard W. Schmidt. 1990. The role of conscious-
ness in second language learning. Applied Lin-
guistics, 11(2):129–158.

VISL-group. 2008. Constraint grammar.
Documentation on internet. http://
beta.visl.sdu.dk/constraint_grammar.html.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

9


