



















































Consequences and Factors of Stylistic Differences in Human-Robot Dialogue


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2018 Conference, pages 110–118,
Melbourne, Australia, 12-14 July 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

110

Consequences and Factors of Stylistic Differences
in Human-Robot Dialogue

Stephanie M. Lukin1, Kimberly A. Pollard1, Claire Bonial1, Matthew Marge1,
Cassidy Henry1, Ron Artstein2, David Traum2 and Clare R. Voss1

1U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD 20783
2USC Institute for Creative Technologies, Playa Vista, CA 90094

stephanie.m.lukin.civ@mail.mil

Abstract

This paper identifies stylistic differences
in instruction-giving observed in a corpus
of human-robot dialogue. Differences in
verbosity and structure (i.e., single-intent
vs. multi-intent instructions) arose natu-
rally without restrictions or prior guid-
ance on how users should speak with the
robot. Different styles were found to
produce different rates of miscommunica-
tion, and correlations were found between
style differences and individual user varia-
tion, trust, and interaction experience with
the robot. Understanding potential con-
sequences and factors that influence style
can inform design of dialogue systems that
are robust to natural variation from human
users.

1 Introduction

When human users engage in spontaneous lan-
guage use with a dialogue system, a variety of
naturally occurring language is observed. A per-
sistent challenge in the development of dialogue
systems is determining how to handle this diver-
sity. One strategy is to limit diversity and maxi-
mize the system’s natural language understanding
by training users a priori on what language and
syntax is valid. However, these constraints could
potentially yield inefficient interactions, e.g., the
user may incur greater task and cognitive load try-
ing to remember the proper phrasing needed by the
system, worrying whether or not their speech will
be understood if they do not get it exactly right.
A broader approach to dealing with diversity is to
develop more robust systems that can respond ap-
propriately to different styles of language. A set
of dialogue system policies that takes into account
natural stylistic variations in users’ speech would

Dialogue 1: Lower Verbosity
U: take pictures in all four directions

Robot: executing...
Robot: done

Dialogue 2: Higher Verbosity
U: robot face north, take a picture, face south, take

a picture, face east, take a picture
Robot: executing...
Robot: done

Dialogue 3: Minimal Structure Style
U: go through the other door

Robot: executing...
Robot: done

U: take a picture
Robot: image sent

Dialogue 4: Extended Structure Style
U: face your starting position and send a picture

Robot: executing...
Robot: image sent

Figure 1: Dialogues between Users (U) and a
Robot, exemplifying stylistic differences

provide for a more nuanced, adaptable, and user-
focused approach to interaction.

Rather than constrain users or develop a gener-
alized dialogue system that attempts to cover all
variations in the same way, we focus on analytic
understanding of differences in observed language
behavior, as well as possible causes of these differ-
ences and implications of misunderstanding. This
work is a first step towards a more nuanced and
flexible dialogue policy that can be sensitive to in-
dividual and situational differences, and adapt ap-
propriately. This paper introduces a taxonomy of
stylistic differences in instructions that humans is-
sue to robots in a dialogue. The taxonomy consists
of two classes: verbosity and structure. Verbosity
is measured by number of words in an instruction.
Dialogues 1 and 2 in Figure 1 show contrasting
verbosity levels. Structure concerns the number of
intents issued in an instruction: Minimal if it con-
tains a single intent (Dialogue 3 in Figure 1 has



111

two Minimal) or Extended if it contains more than
one intent (Dialogue 4). Understanding stylistic
differences can support the development of dia-
logue systems with strategies that tailor system re-
sponses to the user’s style, rather than constrain
the user’s style to the expected input. The taxon-
omy is described in more detail in Section 3.

We observe and analyze these stylistic differ-
ences in a corpus of human-robot direction-giving
dialogue from Marge et al. (2017). These styles
are not unique to this corpus; they emerge in other
human-robot and human-human dialogue, such
as TeamTalk (Marge and Rudnicky, 2011) and
SCARE (Stoia et al., 2008). The corpus contains
60 dialogues from 20 participants (Section 4). The
robot dialogue management in the corpus is con-
trolled by a Wizard-of-Oz experimenter, allowing
for the study of users’ style with a fluent and nat-
uralistic partner (i.e., with an approximation of an
idealized automated system).

In Section 5, we investigate possible conse-
quences and implications of these categorized
styles in this corpus. We examine the relationship
of style and miscommunication frequency, ap-
plying an existing taxonomy for miscommunica-
tion in human-agent conversational dialogue (Hi-
gashinaka et al., 2015a) to this human-robot cor-
pus. We explore the relationship between stylis-
tic differences and other dialogue phenomena de-
scribed in Section 6, specifically whether:

• The rate of miscommunication is related to
verbosity (H1) and structure (H2);

• Latent user differences are related to ver-
bosity (H3) and structure (H4);

• Trust in the robot is related to verbosity (H5)
and structure (H6);

• Time/experience with the robot is related to
verbosity (H7) and structure (H8).

Finally, we speculate about how knowledge of
style, miscommunication, individual differences,
trust, and experience might be leveraged to imple-
ment targeted and personalized dialogue manage-
ment strategies and offer concluding remarks on
future work (Sections 7 and 8).

2 Related Work

A number of human-human direction-giving cor-
pora exist, among them, ArtWalk (Liu et al.,
2016), CReST (Eberhard et al., 2010), SCARE
(Stoia et al., 2008), and SaGA (Lücking et al.,
2010). The majority of existing analyses on these

corpora focus on the vocabulary of referring ex-
pressions and entrainment. While variations in
instruction-giving verbosity and structure are ev-
ident in these human-human interactions, the goal
of this work is to improve human-robot communi-
cation. Humans have different assumptions about
how robots communicate and behave, and may
speak differently to robots than they do to other
humans. We therefore chose a human-robot cor-
pus for our style analysis that uses a Wizard-of-Oz
for dialogue management. This allowed us specif-
ically to isolate the style usage and miscommu-
nication errors of the human partner (because the
Wizard makes very few errors on the robot’s end).

Studies of human-robot automated systems tend
to focus on the miscommunication errors of the
dialogue system (i.e., the robot itself), rather than
the miscommunication or style of the human part-
ner. In conversational agents, the research fo-
cus is also primarily to categorize errors made
by the agent, not the human, including errors in
ASR, surface realization, or appropriateness of
the response (e.g., Higashinaka et al. (2015b);
Paek and Horvitz (2000)). The more generic
task-oriented and agent-based response-level er-
rors from Higashinaka et al. (2015a) map well to
the user miscommunication in the corpus we ex-
amine, including excess/lack of information, non-
understanding, unclear intention, and misunder-
standing. Works that focus specifically on mis-
communication from the user when interacting
with a robot include those categorizing referential
ambiguity and impossible-to-execute commands
(Marge and Rudnicky, 2015). These categories are
common in the data we examine as well.

In this analysis, we predict that trust will have
an effect on stylistic variations. Factors of trust
in co-present and remote human-robot collabora-
tion has been studied with respect to engagement
with the robot, and memory of information from
the robot (Powers et al., 2007).

3 Stylistic Differences

We describe two classes of stylistic differences for
instruction-giving: differences in the verbosity of
an instruction, and in the structure of the instruc-
tion. These styles emerge when decomposing a
high-level plan or intent (e.g., exploring a physical
space) into (potentially, but not necessarily) low-
level instructions (e.g., how to explore the space,
where to move, how to turn).



112

3.1 Verbosity

Verbosity is a continuous measure of the number
of words per instruction. Compare the instruction
in Dialogue 1 in Figure 1 “take pictures in all four
directions” (6 words) with the instruction in Di-
alogue 2 “robot face north, take a picture, face
south, take a picture, face east, take a picture” (16
words). Both issue the same plan (with the excep-
tion of a picture towards the west in Dialogue 2),
yet Dialogue 1 condenses the instruction and as-
sumes that the robot can unpack the higher-level
plan. Dialogue 2 is more verbose and low-level,
making reference to individual cardinal directions.
Verbosity alone does not capture all style differ-
ences; additional categorization is needed.

3.2 Structure of Instructions

We define a Minimal instruction as one contain-
ing a single intent (e.g., “turn”, “move”, or “re-
quest image”). A sequence of Minimal instruc-
tions often reveals the higher-level plan of the user.
In Dialogue 3, the user issues a single instruc-
tion “go through the other door” and waits until
the instruction has been completed. Upon receiv-
ing completion feedback from the robot (“execut-
ing” and “done” responses), the next instruction,
“take a picture”, is issued. Compare this with Di-
alogue 4, where the intents “face your starting po-
sition” and “send a picture” are compounded to-
gether and issued at the same time. This is clas-
sified as an Extended intent structure: instructions
that have more than one expressed intent. These
structural definitions were first described in Traum
et al. (2018) to classify the composition of an in-
struction. In this work, we use these definitions to
classify the style of the user.

4 Human-Robot Dialogue Corpus

We examine these styles in a corpus of human-
robot dialogue collected from a collaborative
human-robot task (Marge et al., 2017). The user
and the robot were not co-present. The user in-
structed the robot in three remote, search-and-
navigation tasks: a Training trial and two Main tri-
als (M1 and M2). During Training, users got used
to speaking to the robot. Main trials lasted for 20
minutes each, and users were given concrete goals
for each exploration, including counting particular
objects (e.g., shoes) and making deductions (e.g.,
if the space could be a headquarters environment).

Users spoke instructions into a microphone

while looking at a live 2D-map built from the
robot’s LIDAR scanner. A low bandwidth envi-
ronment was simulated by disabling video stream-
ing; instead, photos could be captured on-demand
from the robot’s front-facing camera. To allow full
natural language use, users were not provided ex-
ample commands to the robot, though they were
provided with a list of the robot’s capabilities
which they could reference throughout the trials.
Well-formed instructions (unambiguous, with a
clear action, end-point, and state) could be exe-
cuted without any additional clarification (e.g., all
dialogues in Figure 1). The robot responded with
status updates to the user to make it known when
an instruction was heard and completed. When
necessary, the robot requested instruction clarifi-
cation. A human Wizard experimenter stood in for
the robot’s speech recognition, natural language
understanding, and language production capabil-
ities, which were guided by a response protocol.

4.1 Corpus Statistics

The corpus contains 3,573 utterances from 20
users, totaling 18,336 words. 1,981 instructions
were issued. The least verbose instruction ob-
served is 1 word (“stop”), and the most verbose is
59 words (mean 7.3, SD 5.8). Of the total instruc-
tions, 1,383 are of the Minimal style, and 598, Ex-
tended. A moderate, positive correlation exists be-
tween higher verbosity and the Extended style in
this corpus (rs(1969) = .613, p < .001)), support-
ing an intuition that more words would be found in
Extended instructions. That this correlation is not
stronger, however, may suggest that the verbosity
metric is insufficient to capture critical elements of
stylistic variation of structure. Number of words
does not completely map onto the complexity or
the “packed” nature of instructions. For example,
the Minimal but highly verbose instruction from
in corpus “continue down the hallway to the first
entrance on the left first doorway on the left” is 16
words, but the Extended instruction “stop. take a
picture” is only 4.

5 Stylistic Differences and
Miscommunication

A user’s utterance is classified as a miscommuni-
cation if the following robot utterance is a request
for clarification or indicates inability to comply;
this occurred at least once in 216 (16%) of the in-
structions in the corpus. We hypothesize that dif-



113

ferent instruction styles will differ in their over-
all rates of miscommunication, i.e., that miscom-
munication rates are related to verbosity (H1) and
structure (H2).

If a scarcity of words leads to ambiguity or
missing information, we would predict that ver-
bosity and miscommunication rate would be neg-
atively correlated. However, if more words simply
yield more opportunities for erroneous or contra-
dictory information, then we would predict a pos-
itive correlation between verbosity and miscom-
munication. We assessed this using binary logistic
regression of verbosity on overall miscommunica-
tion presence (H1). Results revealed that miscom-
munication significantly increases with verbosity
(verbosity as a continuous independent variable,
with model χ2 = 55.94, p < .001, with Wald =
56.67, p < .001, Nagelkerke R2 = .06)

If having more intents in a single instruction
leaves more opportunities for mistakes, then we
would predict that greater use of Extended struc-
ture would be positively related to miscommunica-
tion rates. To examine this relationship, we com-
pared overall miscommunication rates and use of
different instruction structures (H2). The over-
all miscommunication rate for Minimal instruc-
tions is 8%, while Extended is 18%; we confirmed
that Extended instructions were significantly more
likely to have miscommunication (structure as a
categorical independent variable, with Chi-square
test, χ2(1, N = 1969) = 40.91, p < .001).

5.1 Miscommunication Types

While overall miscommunication rate differed sig-
nificantly among styles, it would be useful to
understand whether different styles are associ-
ated with different types of miscommunication,
as this may inform what error-handing algo-
rithms the system should favor. Following Hi-
gashinaka et al. (2015a), we categorize miscom-
munication in the corpus according to Response-
level and Environmental-level ontologies. Though
this ontology was designed to categorize errors
made by a virtual agent dialogue system, a num-
ber of categories are applicable to communica-
tive errors committed by human users in situ-
ated dialogues. Figure 2 shows examples of user-
miscommunication errors from the human-robot
corpus and the robot response. Further explana-
tion and expected relationships are below.

Dialogue 5: Response, Missing Information
U: leave the room and go to your left

Robot: How far left should I go?

Dialogue 6: Response, Unclear Instruction
U: go into the center of the first room on your left

and then take a picture at the west north east and south
position
Robot: Can you repeat the positions you’d like photos
from?

Dialogue 7: Environment, Ambiguous Reference
U: can you move forward to take a picture of the

object
Robot: I’m not sure which object you are referring to.
Can you describe it another way?

Dialogue 8: Environment, Impossible Instruction
U: move around the cone into the next room turn

right ninety degrees
Robot: There is not enough space for me to move around
the cone and enter the room ahead. Would you like me
to get as close as possible to the room?

Dialogue 9: Environment, Misunderstand Capabili-
ties

U: okay turn to your right forty five degrees and turn
on video camera
Robot: Our bandwidth will currently not support the
video feed. Would you like me to send a photo?

Figure 2: Dialogues between Users (U) and Robot
with different miscommunications types

Response-level, Missing Information instruc-
tions lack information required for execution (Di-
alogue 5). We expected that lower verbosity in-
structions would be more likely to lead to this type
of miscommunication due to a lack of specificity,
as measured by fewer words, e.g., “turn right” is
missing how many degrees to turn. On the other
hand, we might expect that Extended instructions
would be more likely to lead to this type because
with multiple intent comes a compounding poten-
tial for lack of specificity.

Response-level, Unclear Instructions are un-
clear due to phrasing or order of information pre-
sented (Dialogue 6). More verbose instructions
were expected to be more prone to this type of mis-
communication because more information, mea-
sured as words, has a higher potential to be mis-
construed (e.g., it is unclear if “north east” is
“north” and “east” or “north-east”). However, in-
creased information may provide additional con-
text required for specification, the opposite rela-
tionship. Due to compounding potential, we ex-
pected Extended style would lead to more Unclear
type errors.

Environment-level, Ambiguous Reference in-
structions include an ambiguous referent in the en-



114

vironment, potentially due to a lack of common
ground (Dialogue 7). We expected that lower ver-
bosity instructions, with less information (words)
would have more Ambiguous miscommunication
(e.g., “go to the doorway” versus “go to the door-
way furthest from you”). For Extended style, we
hypothesize more Ambiguous type errors due to
compounding potential.

Environment-level, Impossible instructions are
impossible to execute in the physical space in
terms of distance and dimension (Dialogue 8). We
expected that overspecified instructions (higher
verbosity or Extended) might be more likely to be
Impossible (e.g., in the more verbose, Extended
instruction “move up two feet, turn right ninety
degrees, move forward seven feet”, it is not pos-
sible for the robot to move 7 feet after completing
the first two actions).

Environment-level, Misunderstood Capabilities
instructions are those in which the user misunder-
stands the robot’s capabilities (Dialogue 9). We
expect verbosity and structure to affect Misunder-
stood rates much as they affect Impossible mis-
communication rates.

Logistic regression revealed that verbosity does
not significantly correlate with any type of mis-
communication that occurred (χ2 = 4.89, p =
.298). To examine this result in more detail, we
conducted binomial logistic regression on each
miscommunication type separately, asking, e.g.,
does verbosity predict whether the miscommuni-
cation is of the Ambiguous type or not? None of
these results were significant.

With regard to structure, a Chi-square test
showed a non-significant trend, suggesting there
may be a possible influence of structure on mis-
communication type (χ2(4, N = 216) = 8.71, p =
.065). We explored this result in more detail, look-
ing at each miscommunication type separately,
asking, e.g., does structure predict whether the
miscommunication is of the Ambiguous type or
not? Results were significant for Ambiguous mis-
communication type (χ2(1, N = 216) = 4.01, p =
.045) and a trend toward significance for Unclear
miscommunication type (χ2(1, N = 216) = 3.34,
p = .067) With Minimal styles, miscommunica-
tions that arise are more likely to be Ambiguous
type. With Extended styles, miscommunication
that arise may tend to be Unclear type. Counts of
miscommunication types for each structure style
are shown in Figure 3.

M
iss

ing

Un
cle

ar

Am
big

uo
us

Im
po

ssi
ble

Ca
pa

bil
itie

s

0

20

40

60 *49

16

35

4 2

39

8

51

8 4

#
m

is
co

m
m

un
ic

at
io

n

Extended Minimal

Figure 3: Miscommunication types observed in
structures style (* p < 0.05)

6 Factors related to Style Differences

Knowing that stylistic differences are observed
in unconstrained dialogue and the relationship of
these differences to miscommunication rates, it is
important to assess factors of these differences in
the first place. We examine latent individual dif-
ferences, as well as trust and interaction time with
the robot, which may influence style.

6.1 Individual Differences

A broad-use dialogue system can expect to receive
instructions from different individuals. The dia-
logue system must therefore be robust to a range
of individuals who will bring different speaking
styles to the interaction. We hypothesized that in-
dividual users differ in their verbosity (H3) and
structure (H4).

We first examined whether individual user iden-
tity predicted verbosity (H3). The ANOVA as-
sumption of homogeneity of variances was vio-
lated, so a Kruskal-Wallis H test was used, sup-
porting H3 with significant difference in verbosity
across individual participants (χ2(19, N = 1969) =
422.53, p < .001). The most verbose user used an
average of 15 words per instruction, and the least
verbose used an average of 4 words.

Chi-square tests revealed that individual users
also vary in structure (H4; χ2(19, N = 1969) =
511.70, p < .001). Figure 4 graphs the percent-
age of structural style employed by users (sorted
from smallest to largest percent of Extended us-
age). Some users seem to simply prefer the Min-
imal style (Users 1, 2, 3) while other users em-
ployed a majority of Extended (Users 19, 20).
Others are almost evenly split (Users 13, 14, 15).



115

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
0

20

40

60

80

100
98 97 96 89 87 85 83 74 73 72 70 60 53 47 41 37 37 35 32 29

2 3 4
11 13 15

17
26 27 28 30

40
47

53
59 63 63

65 68
71

Individual users

%
of

st
ru

ct
ur

e
st

yl
e

Extended Minimal

Figure 4: Percent distribution of instruction structure between users (sorted smallest to largest Extended)

6.2 Trust in the Robot

User trust in the robot may be a factor in how the
user realizes their instructions, e.g., because the
user may have different levels of confidence in the
robot’s abilities. Users completed the Trust Per-
ception Scale-HRI (Schaefer, 2016) after M1, and
again after M2. The Trust Perception Scale-HRI
is a 40-item scale designed to measure an individ-
ual’s subjective perception of trust in a robot.

We hypothesized that trust in the robot would
be related to verbosity (H5) and structure (H6). If
reported trust is indicative of a user’s comfort with
speaking more with the robot, and/or if trust is in-
dicative of having higher confidence in the robot’s
ability to process many words, then we would pre-
dict a positive relationship between trust and ver-
bosity. On the other hand, if trust scores reflect
confidence that the robot will understand instruc-
tions without need for additional words or expla-
nations, then we would predict a negative relation-
ship between trust and verbosity.

To assess whether and how trust levels are re-
lated to verbosity (H5), we compared trust lev-
els for a trial to the verbosity in that trial (there
were not enough data points to control for individ-
ual user ID in a regression). Spearman correlation
was significant, with higher trust correlating with
greater verbosity (rs(38) = .33, p = .035).

If higher trust scores indicate user confidence
that the robot can understand, parse, and execute
complex instructions, then we predict that more
Extended instructions would be observed. To as-
sess this relationship (H6), trust levels measured
for each trial were compared to the proportion of

Extended instructions used in that trial. Spear-
man correlation revealed a nonsignificant trend for
higher trust to correlate with more use of the Ex-
tended structure (rs(38) = .29, p = .07).

6.3 Time and Experience

As time passes and experience grows, people are
known to interact differently with technology and
with communication partners. We thus hypothe-
size that time/experience with the robot would be
related to verbosity (H7) and structure (H8), i.e., as
the user progresses from Training to M1 and M2,
instruction-giving style may change.

If it is the case that users become more com-
fortable or confident as they gain more experience,
we predict that verbosity should increase over
time/experience (H7). Indeed, verbosity increased
across trials from an average of 6.1 words in Train-
ing, to 7.3 average words in M1, to 8.1 average
words in MP2. A one-way repeated measures
ANOVA was conducted to determine whether ver-
bosity differed by trial (repeated measures analy-
sis effectively controls for user ID). Trial was sig-
nificantly related to verbosity, (F(2,38) = 13.45,
p < .001), and post-hoc LSD t-tests indicated that
each trial had significantly more verbose instruc-
tions than previous trials (Training vs. M1 p =
.003; Training vs. M2 p = .001; M1 vs. M2 p =
.020).

Figure 5 shows the percentage of structural style
in each trial. There is a general upward trend
in use of the Extended style as users engage in
successive trials. A one-way repeated measures
ANOVA was used to determine whether structure



116

Tr
ain

ing M
1

M
2

0

50

100

**
*

78 70 64

22
30 36

%
of

st
ru

ct
ur

e
st

yl
e

Extended Minimal

Figure 5: Percent distribution of instruction struc-
ture between trials (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01)

usage differed by trial (H8). Results showed sig-
nificant differences among trials (F(2,38) = 8.26,
p = .001), with post-hoc LSD t-tests revealing
greater Extended structure use in M1 and M2 as
compared to Training (Training vs. M1 p = .014;
Training vs. M2 p = .002). Structural usage be-
tween M1 and M2 was not significantly different
(M1 vs. M2 p = .190).

7 Discussion

7.1 Miscommunication
Styles differ in the overall frequency of miscom-
munication they engender, but these differences
are not consistent across all miscommunication
types. Among miscommunication-producing in-
structions, we found no correlation between ver-
bosity and what type of miscommunication was
produced (H1). Future analyses that look at ad-
ditional linguistic features may help reveal what is
happening at a level of specificity beyond a sim-
ple word count. We can speculate that this may
be because user misunderstandings of the robot or
environment exist regardless of how many words
it takes the user to express these misunderstand-
ings (Impossible, Misunderstood Capabilities), or
because Ambiguous, Unclear, or Missing Infor-
mation miscommunication can result either from
too few words, or from cases where the participant
adds more words and commits more miscommuni-
cation with those words. This raises the question
of what it is that is being added with more ver-
bose instructions, if not clarification information.
Future research can aim to address this.

Our analyses revealed an effect of structure on
miscommunication types (H2). Minimal structure

had a greater tendency to yield Ambiguous mis-
communications. This may be because additional
intents in an instruction offer opportunities to cor-
rect ambiguity in the first intent. For example,
if the robot is told to go through the door and
take a photo of the chair, the robot can use the
presence or absence of a chair to settle any am-
biguity about which door to go through. With-
out the additional intent packed into the instruc-
tion, this would remain ambiguous. Extended
style additionally showed a nonsignificant trend
toward yielding more response-level Unclear mis-
communication types, which may result because
Extended instructions are packed, sequentially-
ordered instructions and thus have the ability to
introduce miscommunication in the order of infor-
mation presented. Missing Information, Impossi-
ble Instructions, and Misunderstood Capabilities
were not significantly related to structure. These
miscommunication types might not arise from the
structural style, but instead stem from a funda-
mental misunderstanding on the user-end. Further
analysis of the content of the instructions, rather
than only the structure, may uncover if content is
a factor.

7.2 Individual Differences

Our analysis revealed that latent differences
among individuals appear to yield differences in
verbosity and structure style (H3 and H4). Fu-
ture analysis may aim to identify these latent dif-
ferences. Possibilities include variations in po-
tential for introspection, personality, perspective-
taking ability, and other differences. Regardless
of the underlying factors that cause individual dif-
ferences, dialogue systems must be robust to a
range of individuals who bring with them differ-
ent stylistic tendencies.

7.3 Varying Degrees of Trust

We found that higher trust was related to higher
verbosity. We speculate that this may be because
when a user trusts in the robot’s competence and
capabilities, they are more likely to feel comfort-
able enough to speak more and be confident that
the robot can parse longer instructions. Users’
propensity for trust was not measured during the
experimental collection, which may be an unob-
served factor in this analysis. Future analysis
will incorporate this additional information about
users’ latent traits.



117

If trust is measured in questionnaires, or gauged
by other means, this information could be incorpo-
rated as feedback for the dialogue system to appro-
priately adjust dialogue management strategies; as
the users’ trust in the robot is gauged during an
interaction, the system will know to expect ad-
justments to verbosity and structure, so it can of-
fer more appropriate and tailored responses to the
user’s style. Furthermore, providing feedback that
encourages trust (or discourages it) may be a gen-
tle, minimally obtrusive way of guiding a user to
employ a different style to avoid particular mis-
communication types, if working with a less ro-
bust dialogue system.

7.4 Effect of Interaction Time

Users increased their verbosity (H7) and use of the
Extended style (H8) when progressing from Train-
ing to M1 (and verbosity again when progress-
ing from M1 to M2). We speculate that starting
with lower verbosity and Minimal style during the
Training trial might suggest users initially are hes-
itant or do not have a strong sense for the robot’s
language processing capabilities. Users may be
learning from the training and growing in comfort
level over interaction time and experience with the
robot, and are willing to use more verbose or Ex-
tended instructions in successive trials. Another
possible explanation might be that users face a
more difficult task in the main trials as compared
to training; when pressed for time in a more chal-
lenging task, users may use more words and be
more prone to combine intents together. Future
studies can aim to disentangle these effects.

We observed an increase in Extended style use
between M1 and M2, but it did not reach statistical
significance. This might suggest that any learning
or strategy convergence in terms of structure that
occurred from training to M1 may have mostly set-
tled by M1. It is possible that future work with a
greater sample size will reveal that Extended style
use continues to grow across trials. An under-
standing of interaction time or experience effects
can be incorporated in the dialogue system to bet-
ter support the change of user styles that emerge
with repeated interactions.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper defines two classes of stylistic differ-
ences: verbosity and structure, and examines these
styles in a corpus of human-robot dialogue with

no constraints on how robot-directed instructions
were formulated. We show that stylistic differ-
ences are linked to different rates and types of mis-
communication (H2), that latent individual differ-
ences exist (H3 and H4), and that there is a rela-
tionship between style and trust (H5 and H6), and
style and interaction time (H7 and H8).

By understanding the effects of stylistic differ-
ences used in instruction-giving, we are posed to
implement adjusting dialogue systems to the ex-
pectations of styles to increase user interaction
and system performance. Tapus et al. (2008) has
shown that users prefer a robot that tailors en-
couragement strategies according to users’ person-
ality (introverted or extroverted). Torrey et al.
(2006) found that users prefer robots that tailor
their speech to the human’s level of expertise.
We posit that dialogue systems could similarly be
crafted to support and interact with different ver-
bosity and structural styles. Future dialogue sys-
tems might adjust to the verbosity style by, for ex-
ample, providing system feedback in more or less
verbose styles, which may make the interaction
feel more like a natural conversation. A system
can adjust to the structural style by providing in-
cremental feedback to users issuing Extended in-
structions to capture miscommunications early, as
well as provide feedback that the system under-
stood the compound instruction. The monitoring
of trust and interaction time can be incorporated
as feedback for the dialogue system to offer more
appropriate responses or attentive repair strategies
in advance of miscommunication being made.

This investigation of style warrants further turn-
by-turn analysis to better understand where style
shift occurs during an interaction, and why particu-
lar styles are subject to increased rates of miscom-
munication. A future robot may be able to propose
alternate courses of action for certain miscommu-
nication types (e.g., the suggestion to offer the
user a picture of the room in Dialogue 9). These
propositions may be difficult for other miscommu-
nication styles, which require contextual, environ-
ment information and specification directly from
the user. Future work will investigate these alter-
native suggestions to study if a users’ style would
shift around the alternate action (e.g., reducing
Minimal structure usage for Ambiguous instruc-
tions), or if the user would adapt the alternate ac-
tion into their own style (e.g., continuing to use
Minimal, but not repeating the same mistake).



118

References
Kathleen M Eberhard, Hannele Nicholson, Sandra

Kübler, Susan Gundersen, and Matthias Scheutz.
2010. The Indiana “Cooperative Remote Search
Task” (CReST) Corpus. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation.

Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Kotaro Funakoshi, Masahiro
Araki, Hiroshi Tsukahara, Yuka Kobayashi, and
Masahiro Mizukami. 2015a. Towards Taxonomy of
Errors in Chat-oriented Dialogue Systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the Special Interest Group on Discourse
and Dialogue. pages 87–95.

Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Masahiro Mizukami, Kotaro
Funakoshi, Masahiro Araki, Hiroshi Tsukahara, and
Yuka Kobayashi. 2015b. Fatal or Not? Finding
Errors that Lead to Dialogue Breakdowns in Chat-
Oriented Dialogue Systems. In Proceedings of Em-
pirical Methods for Natural Language Processing.
pages 2243–2248.

Kris Liu, Jean E Fox Tree, and Marilyn A Walker.
2016. Coordinating Communication in the Wild:
The Artwalk Dialogue Corpus of Pedestrian Navi-
gation and Mobile Referential Communication. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Andy Lücking, Kirsten Bergmann, Florian Hahn, Ste-
fan Kopp, and Hannes Rieser. 2010. The Biele-
feld Speech and Gesture Alignment Corpus (SaGA).
In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation workshop:
Multimodal corpora–advances in capturing, coding
and analyzing multimodality.

Matthew Marge, Claire Bonial, Ashley Foots, Cory
Hayes, Cassidy Henry, Kimberly Pollard, Ron Art-
stein, Clare Voss, and David Traum. 2017. Ex-
ploring Variation of Natural Human Commands to
a Robot in a Collaborative Navigation Task. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Language
Grounding for Robotics. pages 58–66.

Matthew Marge and Alexander Rudnicky. 2011. The
TeamTalk Corpus: Route Instructions in Open
Spaces. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Ground-
ing Human-Robot Dialog for Spatial Tasks..

Matthew Marge and Alexander Rudnicky. 2015. Mis-
communication Recovery in Physically Situated Di-
alogue. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue. pages 22–31.

Tim Paek and Eric Horvitz. 2000. Conversation as Ac-
tion under Uncertainty. In Proceedings of the Six-
teenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial intel-
ligence. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., pages
455–464.

Aaron Powers, Sara Kiesler, Susan Fussell, and Cristen
Torrey. 2007. Comparing a Computer Agent with

a Humanoid Robot. In Proceedings of Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI), 2007 2nd ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Conference on. IEEE, pages 145–152.

Kristin E Schaefer. 2016. Measuring Trust in Human
Robot Interactions: Development of the “Trust Per-
ception Scale-HRI”. In Proceedings of Robust Intel-
ligence and Trust in Autonomous Systems, Springer,
pages 191–218.

Laura Stoia, Darla Magdalena Shockley, Donna K By-
ron, and Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2008. SCARE: a Situ-
ated Corpus with Annotated Referring Expressions.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Adriana Tapus, Cristian Ţăpuş, and Maja J Matarić.
2008. User-Robot Personality Matching and Assis-
tive Robot Behavior Adaptation for Post-Stroke Re-
habilitation Therapy. In Intelligent Service Robotics
1(2):169.

Cristen Torrey, Aaron Powers, Matthew Marge, Su-
san R Fussell, and Sara Kiesler. 2006. Ef-
fects of adaptive robot dialogue on information ex-
change and social relations. In Proceedings of the
First ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, pages 126–133.

David Traum, Cassidy Henry, Stephanie Lukin, Ron
Artstein, Felix Gervits, Kimberly Pollard, Claire
Bonial, Su Lei, Clare Voss, Matthew Marge, Cory
Hayes, and Susan Hill. 2018. Dialogue Structure
Annotation for Multi-Floor Interaction. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation.


