



















































Meteorologists and Students: A resource for language grounding of geographical descriptors


Proceedings of The 11th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 421–425,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5-8, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

421

Meteorologists and Students:
A resource for language grounding of geographical descriptors

Alejandro Ramos-Soto1,2, Ehud Reiter2, Kees van Deemter2,3, Jose M. Alonso1, and Albert Gatt4

1Centro Singular de Investigación en Tecnoloxı́as da Información (CiTIUS), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela:

{alejandro.ramos,josemaria.alonso.moral}@usc.es
2Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen:

{alejandro.soto,e.reiter,k.vdeemter}@abdn.ac.uk
3Utrecht University: k.vandeemter@uu.nl

4Institute of Linguistics and Language Technology, University of Malta: albert.gatt@um.edu.mt

Abstract

We present a data resource which can be
useful for research purposes on language
grounding tasks in the context of geo-
graphical referring expression generation.
The resource is composed of two data sets
that encompass 25 different geographical
descriptors and a set of associated graph-
ical representations, drawn as polygons
on a map by two groups of human sub-
jects: teenage students and expert meteo-
rologists.

1 Introduction

Language grounding, i.e., understanding how
words and expressions are anchored in data, is one
of the initial tasks that are essential for the con-
ception of a data-to-text (D2T) system (Roy and
Reiter, 2005; Reiter, 2007). This can be achieved
through different means, such as using heuristics
or machine learning algorithms on an available
parallel corpora of text and data (Novikova et al.,
2017) to obtain a mapping between the expres-
sions of interest and the underlying data (Reiter
et al., 2005), getting experts to provide these map-
pings, or running surveys on writers or readers that
provide enough data for the application of map-
ping algorithms (Ramos-Soto et al., 2017).

Performing language grounding ensures that
generated texts include words whose meaning is
aligned with what writers understand or what read-
ers would expect (Roy and Reiter, 2005), given
the variation that is known to exist among writers
and readers (Reiter and Sripada, 2002). Moreover,
when contradictory data appears in corpora or any
other resource that is used to create the data-to-
words mapping, creating models that remove in-
consistencies can also be a challenging part of lan-

guage grounding which can influence the develop-
ment of a successful system (Reiter et al., 2005).

This paper presents a resource for language
grounding of geographical descriptors. The origi-
nal purpose of this data collection is the creation of
models of geographical descriptors whose mean-
ing is modeled as graded or fuzzy (Fisher, 2000;
Fisher et al., 2006), to be used for research on gen-
eration of geographical referring expressions, e.g.,
(Turner et al., 2010, 2008; de Oliveira et al., 2015;
Ramos-Soto et al., 2016, 2017). However, we be-
lieve it can be useful for other related research pur-
poses as well.

2 The resource and its interest

The resource is composed of data from two differ-
ent surveys. In both surveys subjects were asked
to draw on a map (displayed under a Mercator pro-
jection) a polygon representing a given geograph-
ical descriptor, in the context of the geography of
Galicia in Northwestern Spain (see Fig. 1). How-
ever, the surveys were run with different purposes,
and the subject groups that participated in each
survey and the list of descriptors provided were
accordingly different.

The first survey was run in order to obtain a high
number of responses to be used as an evaluation
testbed for modeling algorithms. It was answered
by 15/16 year old students in a high school in Pon-
tevedra (located in Western Galicia). 99 students
provided answers for a list of 7 descriptors (in-
cluding cardinal points, coast, inland, and a proper
name). Figure 2 shows a representation of the an-
swers given by the students for “Northern Galicia”
and a contour map that illustrates the percentages
of overlapping answers.

The second survey was addressed to meteorolo-
gists in the Galician Weather Agency (MeteoGali-
cia, 2018). Its purpose was to gather data to create



422

Figure 1: Snapshot of the version of the survey
answered by the meteorologists (translated from
Spanish).

fuzzy models that will be used in a future NLG
system in the weather domain. Eight meteorolo-
gists completed the survey, which included a list
of 24 descriptors. For instance, Figure 3 shows a
representation of the answers given by the meteo-
rologists for “Eastern Galicia” and a contour map
that illustrates the percentage of overlapping an-
swers.

Table 1 includes the complete list of descrip-
tors for both groups of subjects. 20 out of the
24 descriptors are commonly used in the writing
of weather forecasts by experts and include car-
dinal directions, proper names, and other kinds
of references such as mountainous areas, parts of
provinces, etc. The remaining four were added to
study intersecting combinations of cardinal direc-
tions (e.g. exploring ways of combining “north”
and “west” for obtaining a model that is similar to
“northwest”).

The data for the descriptors from the surveys
is focused on a very specific geographical con-
text. However, the conjunction of both data sets

15 %
30 %

45 %

60 %

75 %90 
%

El Norte de Galicia

Figure 2: Representation of polygon drawings by
students and associated contour plot showing the
percentage of overlapping answers for “Northern
Galicia”.

15 %

30 %
45 %

60 %

75 %

90
 %

Figure 3: Representation of polygon drawings by
experts and associated contour plot showing the
percentage of overlapping answers for “Eastern
Galicia”.

provides a very interesting resource for perform-
ing a variety of more general language grounding-
oriented and natural language generation research
tasks, such as:

• Testing algorithms that create geographical
models. These models would aggregate the
answers from different subjects for each de-
scriptor. The differences among the sub-
jects can be interpreted from a probabilistic
or fuzzy perspective that allows a richer char-
acterization of the resulting models. For in-
stance, in Fig. 2 the contour plots could be
taken as the basis or support for the semantics
of the expression “Northern Galicia”, with a
core region that is accepted by the majority,
and a gradual decay as one moves to the outer
periphery of the regions outlined.

• Analyzing differences between the expert
and non-expert groups for the descriptors
they have in common (as Table 1 shows, both
groups share 6 descriptors).

• Studying how to combine models represent-

Subject 
Group

Spanish English translation

Common
Norte de Galicia, Sur de Galicia, Oeste de 
Galicia, Este de Galicia, Interior de Galicia, 

Rías Baixas

Northern Galicia, Southern Galicia, Western 
Galicia, Eastern Galicia, Inland Galicia, Rías 

Baixas

Students Costa de Galicia Galician Coast

Experts

Tercio Norte, Extremo Norte
Áreas de montaña de Lugo,

Áreas de montaña de Ourense,
Oeste de A Coruña, Comarcas Atlánticas,

Litoral Atlántico, Litoral Cantábrico,
Litoral Norte, Interior de Coruña,

Interior de Pontevedra, Oeste de Ourense,
Sur de Ourense, Sur de Lugo,

Noroeste de Galicia, Noreste de Galicia, 
Suroeste de Galicia, Sureste de Galicia  

Northern Third, Extreme North,
Mountainous areas in Lugo,

Montainous areas in Ourense,
Western A Coruña, Atlantic Regions,

Atlantic Coast, Cantabrian Coast,
Northern Coast, Inland Coruña,

Inland Pontevedra, Western Ourense,
Southern Ourense, Southern Lugo,

Northwestern Galicia, Northeastern Galicia, 
Southwestern Galicia, Southeastern Galicia

Table 1: List of geographical descriptors in the re-
source.



423

ing the semantics of different cardinal direc-
tions, such as “south” and “east” to obtain a
representation of “southeast”.

• Developing geographical referring expres-
sion generation algorithms based on the em-
pirically created models.

3 Qualitative analysis of the data sets

The two data sets were gathered for different
purposes and only coincide in a few descriptors,
so providing a direct comparison is not feasible.
However, we can discuss general qualitative in-
sights and a more detailed analysis of the descrip-
tors that both surveys share in common.

At a general level, we had hypothesized that
experts would be much more consistent than stu-
dents, given their professional training and the re-
duced number of meteorologists participating in
the survey. Comparing the visualizations of both
data sets we have observed that this is clearly the
case; the polygons drawn by the experts are more
concentrated and therefore there is a higher agree-
ment among them. On top of these differences,
some students provided unexpected drawings in
terms of shape, size, or location of the polygon
for several descriptors.

If we focus on single descriptors, one inter-
esting outcome is that some of the answers for
“Northern Galicia” and “Southern Galicia” over-
lap for both subject groups. Thus, although ‘north’
and ‘south’ are natural antonyms, if we take into
account the opinion of each group as a whole,
there exists a small area where points can be con-
sidered as belonging to both descriptors at the
same time (see Fig. 4). In the case of “west”
and “east”, the drawings made by the experts were
almost divergent and showed no overlapping be-
tween those two descriptors.

Figure 4: Areas overlapping “north” and “south”
for both subject groups (in blue).

Regarding “Inland Galicia”, the unions of the
answers for each group occupy approximately the
same area with a similar shape, but there is a very
high overlapping among the answers of the me-
teorologists. A similar situation is found for the
remaining descriptor “Rı́as Baixas”, where both
groups encompass a similar area. In this case, the
students’ answers cover a more extensive region
and the experts coincide within a more restricted
area.

3.1 A further analysis: apparent issues

As in any survey that involves a task-based collec-
tion of data, some of the answers provided by the
subjects for the described data sets can be consid-
ered erroneous or misleading due to several rea-
sons. Here we describe for each subject group
some of the most relevant issues that any user of
this resource should take into account.

In the case of the students, we have identified
minor drawing errors appearing in most of the de-
scriptors, which in general shouldn’t have a neg-
ative impact in the long term thanks to the high
number of participants in the original survey. For
some descriptors, however, there exist polygons
drawn by subjects that clearly deviate from what
could be considered a proper answer. The clearest
example of this problem involves the ‘west’ and
‘east’ descriptors, which were confused by some
of the students who drew them inversely (see Fig.
5, around 10-15% of the answers).

In our case, given their background, some of the
students may have actually confused the meaning
of + “west” and “east”. However, the most plausi-
ble explanation is that, unlike in English and other
languages, in Spanish both descriptors are phonet-
ically similar (“este” and “oeste”) and can be eas-
ily mistaken for one another if read without atten-

10 %

20
 %

30 %

40 %

50 %

60 %

70
 %

15
 %

30 %

45 %

60 %

75 %

Western Galicia Eastern Galicia

Figure 5: Contour maps of student answers for
“Western Galicia” and “Eastern Galicia”.



424

8 %

8 %

16 %

24
 %

32 %

56
 %

Figure 6: Representation of polygon drawings by
experts and associated contour plots showing the
percentage of overlapping answers for “Northeast-
ern Galicia”.

tion.
As for the expert group, a similar case is found

for “Northeastern Galicia” (see Fig. 6), where
some of the given answers (3/8) clearly correspond
to “Northwestern Galicia”. However, unlike the
issue related to “west” and “east” found for the
student group, this problem is not found recipro-
cally for the “northwestern” answers.

4 Resource materials

The resource is available at (Ramos-Soto et al.,
2018) under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International Li-
cense. Both data sets are provided as SQLite
databases which share the same table structure,
and also in a compact JSON format. Polygon
data is encoded in GeoJSON format (Butler et al.,
2016). The data sets are well-documented in the
repository’s README, and several Python scripts
are provided for data loading, using Shapely
(Gillies et al., 2007–2018); and for visualization
purposes, using Cartopy (Met Office, 2010–2015).

5 Concluding remarks

The data sets presented provide a means to per-
form different research tasks that can be use-
ful from a natural language generation point of
view. Among them, we can highlight the creation
of models of geographical descriptors, compar-
ing models between both subject groups, study-
ing combinations of models of cardinal directions,
and researching on geographical referring expres-
sion generation. Furthermore, insights about the
semantics of geographical concepts could be in-
ferred under a more thorough analysis.

One of the inconveniences that our data sets
present is the appearance of the issues described in

Sec. 3.1. It could be necessary to filter some of the
answers according to different criteria (e.g., devi-
ation of the centroid location, deviation of size,
etc.). For more applied cases, manually filtering
can also be an option, but this would require a cer-
tain knowledge of the geography of Galicia. In
any case, the squared-like shape of this region may
allow researchers to become rapidly familiar with
many of the descriptors listed in Table 1.

As future work, we believe it would be invalu-
able to perform similar data gathering tasks for
other regions from different parts of the world.
These should provide a variety of different shapes
(both regular and irregular), so that it can be fea-
sible to generalize (e.g., through data-driven ap-
proaches) the semantics of some of the more com-
mon descriptors, such as cardinal points, coastal
areas, etc. The proposal of a shared task could
help achieve this objective.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Spanish Min-
istry of Economy and Competitiveness (grants
TIN2014-56633-C3-1-R and TIN2017-84796-C2-
1-R) and the Galician Ministry of Education
(grants GRC2014/030 and ”accreditation 2016-
2019, ED431G/08”). All grants were co-funded
by the European Regional Development Fund
(ERDF/FEDER program). A. Ramos-Soto is
funded by the “Consellerı́a de Cultura, Edu-
cación e Ordenación Universitaria” (under the
Postdoctoral Fellowship accreditation ED481B
2017/030). J.M. Alonso is supported by RYC-
2016-19802 (Ramón y Cajal contract).

The authors would also like to thank Juan
Taboada for providing the list of most frequently
used geographical expressions by MeteoGalicia,
and José Manuel Ramos for organizing the survey
at the high school IES Xunqueira I in Pontevedra,
Spain.

References
H. Butler, M. Daly, A. Doyle, S. Gillies, S. Hagen, and

T. Schaub. 2016. ”The GeoJSON Format”, RFC
7946.

Peter Fisher. 2000. Sorites paradox and vague geogra-
phies. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 113(1):7–18.

Peter Fisher, Alexis Comber, and Richard Wadsworth.
2006. Approaches to uncertainty in spatial data.
Fundamentals of Spatial Data Quality, pages 43–59.

https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC7946
https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC7946


425

Sean Gillies et al. 2007–2018. Shapely: manipula-
tion and analysis of geometric objects. https:
//github.com/Toblerity/Shapely.

Met Office. 2010–2015. Cartopy: a cartographic
python library with a matplotlib interface. http:
//scitools.org.uk/cartopy.

MeteoGalicia. 2018. Meteogalicia’s web site. http:
//www.meteogalicia.es.

Jekaterina Novikova, Ondrej Dušek, and Verena Rieser.
2017. The E2E dataset: New challenges for end-
to-end generation. In Proceedings of the 18th
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue, Saarbrücken, Germany.
ArXiv:1706.09254.

Rodrigo de Oliveira, Yaji Sripada, and Ehud Reiter.
2015. Designing an algorithm for generating named
spatial references. In Proceedings of the 15th Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG), pages 127–135. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Alejandro Ramos-Soto, Jose M Alonso, Ehud Reiter,
Kees van Deemter, and Albert Gatt. 2017. An
empirical approach for modeling fuzzy geograph-
ical descriptors. In Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE),
2017 IEEE International Conference on, pages 1–6.
IEEE.

Alejandro Ramos-Soto, Ehud Reiter, Kees
van Deemter, Jose M. Alonso, and Al-
bert Gatt. 2018. geodescriptors. https:
//gitlab.citius.usc.es/alejandro.
ramos/geodescriptors. Accessed: 2018-07-
09.

Alejandro Ramos-Soto, Nava Tintarev, Rodrigo
de Oliveira, Ehud Reiter, and Kees van Deemter.
2016. Natural language generation and fuzzy sets:
An exploratory study on geographical referring ex-
pression generation. In 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), pages
587–594.

Ehud Reiter. 2007. An architecture for data-to-text sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 11th European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, pages 97–
104.

Ehud Reiter and Somayajulu Sripada. 2002. Should
corpora texts be gold standards for NLG? In
Proceedings of the International Natural Language
Generation Conference, pages 97–104.

Ehud Reiter, Somayajulu Sripada, Jim Hunter, and Ian
Davy. 2005. Choosing words in computer-generated
weather forecasts. Artificial Intelligence, 167:137–
169.

Deb Roy and Ehud Reiter. 2005. Connecting language
to the world. Artificial Intelligence, 167(1-2):1–12.

Ross Turner, Somayajulu Sripada, and Ehud Reiter.
2010. Generating approximate geographic descrip-
tions. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Generation, volume 5790 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 121–140. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg.

Ross Turner, Somayajulu Sripada, Ehud Reiter, and Ian
P. Davy Davy. 2008. Using spatial reference frames
to generate grounded textual summaries of georef-
erenced data. In Proceedings of the 2008 Interna-
tional Conference on Natural Language Generation
(INLG08), pages 16–24.

https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely
https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely
http://scitools.org.uk/cartopy
http://scitools.org.uk/cartopy
http://www.meteogalicia.es
http://www.meteogalicia.es
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09254
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09254
https://gitlab.citius.usc.es/alejandro.ramos/geodescriptors
https://gitlab.citius.usc.es/alejandro.ramos/geodescriptors
https://gitlab.citius.usc.es/alejandro.ramos/geodescriptors
https://doi.org/10.1109/FUZZ-IEEE.2016.7737740
https://doi.org/10.1109/FUZZ-IEEE.2016.7737740
https://doi.org/10.1109/FUZZ-IEEE.2016.7737740
http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/papers/enlg07.pdf
http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/papers/enlg07.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15573-4_7
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15573-4_7

