









































AMTA_2018_Research_Track_v1.pdf


Balancing Translation Quality and Sentiment
Preservation

Pintu Lohar1 pintu.lohar@adaptcentre.ie
Haithem Afli1-2 haithem.afli@cit.ie
Andy Way1 andy.way@adaptcentre.ie
1ADAPT Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City University
2Cork Institute of Technology

Abstract
Social media platforms such as Twitter and Facebook are hugely popular websites through
which Internet users can communicate and spread information worldwide. On Twitter, mes-
sages (tweets) are generated by users from all over the world in many different languages.
Tweets about different events almost always encode some degree of sentiment. As is often the
case in the field of language processing, sentiment analysis tools exist primarily in English, so
if we want to understand the sentiment of the original tweets, we are forced to translate them
from the source language into English and pushing the English translations through a sentiment
analysis tool.

However, Lohar et al. (2017) demonstrated that using freely available translation tools often
caused the sentiment encoded in the original tweet to be altered. As a consequence, they built
a series of sentiment-specific translation engines and pushed tweets containing either positive,
neutral or negative sentiment through the appropriate engine to improve sentiment preservation
in the target language. For certain tasks, maintaining sentiment polarity in the target language
during the translation process is arguably more important than the absolute translation quality
obtained. In the work of Lohar et al. (2017), a small drop off in translation quality per se was
deemed tolerable. In this work, we focus on maintaining the level of sentiment preservation
while trying to improve translation quality still further. We propose a nearest sentiment class-
combination method to extend the existing sentiment-specific translation systems by adding
training data from the nearest-sentiment class. Our experimental results on German-to-English
reveal that our approach is capable of achieving a proper balance between translation quality
and sentiment preservation.

1 Introduction

The rapid development of internet technologies has given rise to a significant growth in gener-
ating and sharing of user-generated content (UGC). Internet users from all over the world stay
connected via widely used social networking websites such as Twitter and Facebook by shar-
ing information in different languages. On Twitter, tweets on different events related to sports,
festivals, conferences and political events almost always encode some degree of sentiment. Ac-
cordingly, the task of sentiment analysis is important on datasets such as these. However, given
the lack of such tools for most languages, this can only be achieved via an MT-based sentiment
analysis approach, where the tweets are first translated from the original language to English
and then sentiment analysis is performed on th English translations (Araujo et al. (2016)).

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 81



However, the 140-character limitation – recently expanded to 280 – in Twitter encourages
users to use short forms at word and phrase levels. Moreover, tweets often contain (deliber-
ate) spelling errors, hashtags, user names and URLs which pose challenges in the translation
process. In order to build corpus-based MT systems, a parallel corpus is a prerequisite, but par-
allel UGC data is in very short supply. In recent work based on sentiment translation system,
Lohar et al. (2017) collected a parallel data comprising 4, 000 English–German tweet pairs1 in
the football domain (extracted from the FIFA World Cup 2014 Twitter feed) and built senti-
ment translation engines using a sentiment classification approach. In that work, the sentiment
translation models were built using the (i) negative, (ii) neutral, and (iii) positive tweet pairs,
respectively. Their experimental results showed that the sentiment classification approach is
very useful for preserving the sentiment in the target language during translation. However, the
MT quality deteriorated a little due to dividing the small corpus of 4, 000 parallel tweets into
even smaller ones with different sentiment classes for training sentiment-specific MT engines.

In this work, we try to retain the degree of sentiment while at the same time minimizing
any loss in translation quality. We propose to extend the sentiment-specific translation models
by incorporating neighbouring sentiment data. We perform the following steps to build our
extended sentiment translation system: (i) building a single baseline translation model by using
the whole Twitter data regardless of the sentiment classes, (ii) building separate negative, neutral
and positive sentiment translation models using the negative, neutral and positive tweet pairs,
respectively, (iii) combining the negative and neutral tweet pairs to build a translation system
conveying both of these sentiments, and (iv) combining the positive and neutral tweet pairs to
build a translation system conveying both of these sentiments. Steps (iii) and (iv) are the main
contributions in this work that extend the previously mentioned sentiment translation system of
Lohar et al. (2017). The reason behind such combinations of sentiment classes is that the neutral
class is relatively closer to both the negative and positive classes, compared to the distance
between the negative and positive classes in terms of sentiment score. This is motivated by the
fact that in their work, Lohar et al. (2017) demonstrated that while MT can alter the original
sentiment, it typically transfers to the immediately neighbouring class (i.e. from negative to
neutral (or vice-versa) or from positive to neutral (or vice-versa)), but rarely from positive to
negative (or vice-versa).

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. We briefly describe some relevant
related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we provide an architectural overview of our sentiment
classification MT system. The experimental set ups are discussed in Section 4, followed by a
detailed discussion of the results in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes together with some
avenues for future work.

2 Related work

Translating UGC creates new challenges in the area of MT. Jiang et al. (2012) describe how to
handle shortforms, acronyms, typos, punctuation errors, non-dictionary slang, wordplay, censor
avoidance and emoticons, phenomena which are characteristic of UGC but not of ‘normal’
written forms in language. The combination of statistical machine translation (SMT) and a
preprocessor was also applied to remove a significant amount of noise from tweets in order to
convert them into a more readable format (Kaufmann and Kalita (2010)). Gotti et al. (2013)
use an SMT system to translate Twitter feeds published by agencies and organisations. They
create tuning and training sets by mining parallel web pages linked from the URLs contained in
English–French pairs of tweets.

There exists quite a lot of research in the area of sentiment analysis of UGC. For example,
1Recently released in Lohar et al. (2018) and available at: https://github.com/HAfli/FooTweets_

Corpus

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 82



Fang and Zhan (2015) analyse the sentiment polarity of online product reviews extracted from
Amazon.com using both sentence-level and review-level categorization techniques. Gräbner
et al. (2012) classify customer reviews of hotels by extracting a domain-specific lexicon of
semantically relevant words based on a given corpus (Scharl et al. (2003); Pak and Paroubek
(2010)). Broß (2013) focus on the following two main subtasks of aspect-oriented review min-
ing: (i) identification of the relevant product aspects, and (ii) determining and classifying the
expressions of the sentiment.

Some existing work applies MT for the task of sentiment analysis. For example, Mo-
hammad et al. (2016) show that the sentiment analysis of English translations of Arabic text
produces competitive results compared to Arabic sentiment analysis per se. In a similar vein,
Araujo et al. (2016) reveal that simply translating the non-English input text into English and
using the English sentiment analysis tool can be better than the existing language-specific ef-
forts evaluated. In contrast, Afli et al. (2017) demonstrate that building a sentiment analysis
tool for a low-resource language, namely Irish, can outperform strategies including translation
as an integral sub-task. Their approach includes the following strategies: (i) using the existing
English sentiment analysis resources to both manually and automatically translated tweets, and
(ii) manually creating an Irish-language sentiment lexicon – Senti-Foclóir – to build the first
Irish sentiment analysis system – SentiFocalTweet – which produces superior results to the first
method.

Importantly, although MT can be useful for the sentiment analysis task, it can alter the
sentiment of the source-language text in the target language during the translation process (Mo-
hammad et al. (2016)). For example, a text in the source language (say Arabic) with positive
sentiment may not retain its positivity when translated into the target language (say English).
To address such problems, Lohar et al. (2017) propose a sentiment classification approach to
build sentiment-specific translation models that aim at maintaining the sentiment polarity of the
source-language text during the translation process. The results revealed that it is possible to
increase the sentiment preservation score by using the sentiment translation systems. In the
present paper, we extend that work by incorporating the nearest neighbour sentiment classes
in order to build extended sentiment translation engines that incorporate the sentiment of the
neighbouring sentiment class. To the best of our knowledge, no existing work has attempted
such an approach to addressing the problems of maintaining translation quality and sentiment
preservation in parallel.

3 Architecture of the sentiment translation system

Figure 1 shows the architecture of our proposed sentiment translation system using the nearest
neighbour sentiment classes. The complete workflow of the whole system can be described in
following steps:

(i) sentiment classification is performed on the whole corpus,

(ii) the negative and the neutral tweet pairs are grouped together as the nearest neighbour
sentiment classes,

(iii) apart from being used for combination, the neutral tweet pairs are also kept for separate
usage,

(iv) the positive and the neutral tweet pairs are grouped together as the nearest neighbour
sentiment classes,

(v) from the above three corpus sets, three different translation systems are built: nega-
tive neutral, neutral and positive neutral models, respectively,

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 83



Figure 1: Sentiment translation using nearest neighbour sentiment classes

(vi) the test data is divided into negative, neutral and positive sentiment classes,

(vii) the negative, neutral and the positive test data are translated by the negative neutral, neu-
tral and the positive neutral translation models, respectively,

(viii) the outputs produced by these three translation models are combined, and

(ix) the combined output is used to measure the MT and sentiment-preservation quality.

4 Experiments

4.1 Data statistics
Lohar et al. (2017) held out a small subset of only 50 tweet pairs per sentiment class (negative,
neutral and positive, so 150 sentence pairs in total) for testing purposes in order to maintain
as large an amount as possible for training the sentiment translation systems. However, it has
to be acknowledged that it is difficult to judge the system’s performance with only 150 test
pairs. We therefore maintain two different distributions of the whole data set and use each of
them separately in the two different experimental set-ups (Exp1 and Exp2). We hope that by
slightly increasing the size of the development and test sets, our analysis of the performance of
the proposed system with these two different set-ups will be somewhat more informative.

Exp. Train Development Test
setup #neg. #neu. #pos. #neg. #neu. #pos.
Exp1 3, 700 50 50 50 50 50 50
Exp2 3, 400 100 100 100 100 100 100

Table 1: Data statistics

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 84



4.2 Resources and tools
All the translation models are built by using the widely used open source Moses SMT toolkit
(Koehn et al. (2007)). The word and phrase alignments are obtained by using the Giza++
tool (Och and Ney (2003)). Once the translation models are built, we tune all the sentiment
translation systems for both experimental set-ups (Exp1 and Exp2) via minimum error rate
training (Och (2003)).

4.3 Evaluation process
We use the automatic MT evaluation metrics BLEU (Papineni et al. (2002)), METEOR
(Denkowski and Lavie (2014)) and TER (Snover et al. (2006)) to evaluate the absolute trans-
lation quality obtained. We measure the sentiment preservation score by calculating what per-
centage of the tweets belongs to the same sentiment class before and after translation.

5 Results

Table 2 shows the results obtained from the first experimental setup (Exp1) which is comparable
with the previous results obtained in the work of Lohar et al. (2017) because the data distribution
is the same (i.e. 150 tweet pairs for each of the development and test data sets).

System (Exp1) BLEU METEOR TER Sent Pres.
Twitter Baseline 50.3 60.9 31.9 66.66%

Twitter SentClass 48.2 59.4 34.2 72.66%
Twitter NearSent 49.0 60.1 34.0 66.66%

Table 2: Experiment 1: performance comparison on small test sets

The 2nd and the 3rd rows in Table 2 show the comparison between the two different sys-
tems (i.e., Twitter Baseline and Twitter SentClass) that were reported in Lohar et al. (2017).
Twitter Baseline is the translation system where sentiment classification is not used, whereas
Twitter SentClass is the system where it is switched on.

In contrast, “Twitter NearSent” is our proposed system (including nearest sentiment class-
combination) with the same amount of training, development and test data. As can be seen
in this table, Twitter SentClass obtains the highest sentiment preservation score of 72.66% but
the BLEU, METEOR and TER scores are worse than the Baseline. Lohar et al. (2017) state
that as expected, as the sentiment-classification approach divides the whole corpus into smaller
parts with specific sentiment classes, the translation models built from each data set are much
smaller than the baseline model and so the performance decreases accordingly. However, the
sentiment preservation score is significantly increased (from 66.66% to 72.66%) which was the
main objective of that work. In this work, our objective is to reduce this gap. More precisely,
we are interested in obtaining better MT scores than the Twitter SentClass system but at the
same achieving the better sentiment preservation than the Baseline, which we hope to achieve
using the Twitter NearSent system. Although the sentiment preservation score is not increased
at all, we do indeed manage to increase the MT scores: BLEU and METEOR increase by 0.8
(1.7% relative) and 0.7 (1.2% relative) points, respectively, while TER decreases by 0.2 points
(1.5% relative improvement).

These results demonstrate that using such a small amount of test data set (i.e. only 150
tweet pairs) is insufficient to confirm the utility of our approach. We therefore decided to rerun
the whole set of experiments on the new distribution (Exp2, see the 3rd row of Table 1) of the
training, development and test data (i.e. 100 sentence-pairs per sentiment for both the devel-
opment and test data sets, respectively). Table 3 shows the results produced during our second

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 85



stage of experiments using the “Exp2” setup. As this data distribution is different from “Exp1”,
the results obtained are different and so are not directly comparable with the results shown in
Table 2.

System (Exp2) BLEU METEOR TER Sent Pres.
Twitter Baseline 51.3 62.5 31.0 52.33%

Twitter SentClass 47.3 59.1 35.2 60.33%
Twitter NearSent 48.3 59.6 34.4 60.0%

Table 3: Experiment 2: performance comparison on larger test sets

It can be observed from this table that the “Twitter SentClass” system produces the highest
sentiment-preservation score of 60.33% – 8% (or 15.3% relative) better than the Baseline – but
the MT scores are much lower than the Baseline. For example, the BLEU score is reduced by
exactly 4 points (from 51.3 down to 47.3, an almost 8% relative reduction in translation quality),
with the other automatic metrics corroborating this deterioration in performance. In contrast,
our proposed system (Twitter NearSent) raises the BLEU score by exactly 1 point (from 47.3
to 48.3, a 2.1% relative improvement) while at the same time the sentiment-preservation score
is reduced by only 0.33%. In parallel, METEOR score is also increased from 59.1 to 59.6 (a
0.85% relative improvement) and the TER score is also improved (drops from 35.2 to 34.4, a
2.3% relative improvement). These results suggest that using a comparatively larger test set
gives us a clearer picture of the performance of the various engines than the smaller one with
“Exp1” set-up (see Table 2).

The above observations are important in terms of the balance between translation quality
and sentiment preservation. Our new system is still able to significantly improve the sentiment-
preservation score (from 52.33% to 60.0%) over the Baseline which is very close to the maxi-
mum value obtained (60.33%), yet at the same time manages to increase the MT score compared
to the original engines built in Lohar et al. (2017).

6 Conclusion and Future Work

The current paper presented a novel extension to building sentiment-translation engines based
on the combination of the nearest sentiment-class parallel data. Our new translation models
are built by: (i) combining the negative and the neutral tweet pairs in order to build our first
nearest neighbour sentiment translation model (Negative neutral model), and (ii) combining the
positive and the neutral tweet pairs to build the second nearest neighbour sentiment translation
model (Positive neutral model). We performed experiments in two stages with two different
data distributions as the initial experiment was conducted on the smallest data set which we
assumed to be insufficient to confirm the results to any great extent. The results obtained in
the second stage of our experiments revealed that we can significantly increase the sentiment-
preservation score (very close to the maximum value obtained) while at the same time obtaining
improved MT scores than the sentiment-translation engines in Lohar et al. (2017).

Accordingly, our approach maintains a better balance between translation quality per se
and sentiment preservation. In future, we will apply our approach to other forms of UGC such
as user feedback, blogs, and reviews and with larger data sets. We will also conduct experiments
on language pairs other than German-to-English. We also noticed that some of the tweets in our
data sets are less related to the main topic (football) than originally anticipated, so it will be
interesting to see how we can combine such out-of-domain data with true in-domain tweet pairs
when building the next batch of sentiment-translation engines.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 86



Acknowledgments

The ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology at Dublin City University is funded under
the Science Foundation Ireland Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and is co-
funded under the European Regional Development Fund.

References

Afli, H., McGuire, S., and Way, A. (2017). Sentiment translation for low resourced languages:
Experiments on irish general election tweets. In 18th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, Budapest, Hungary. 10 pages.

Araujo, M., Reis, J., Pereira, A., and Benevenuto, F. (2016). An evaluation of machine trans-
lation for multilingual sentence-level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pages 1140–1145, New York, USA.

Broß, J. (2013). Aspect-Oriented Sentiment Analysis of Customer Reviews Using Distant Su-
pervision Techniques. PhD thesis, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Denkowski, M. and Lavie, A. (2014). Meteor universal: Language specific translation evalua-
tion for any target language. In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 376–380, Baltimore, USA.

Fang, X. and Zhan, J. (2015). Sentiment analysis using product review data. Journal of Big
Data, 2(5). 14 pages.

Gotti, F., Langlais, P., and Farzindar, A. (2013). Translating government agencies’ tweet feeds:
Specificities, problems and (a few) solutions. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language
Analysis in Social Media, pages 80–89.

Gräbner, D., Zanker, M., Fliedl, G., and Fuchs, M. (2012). Classification of customer reviews
based on sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information
and Communication Technologies, pages 460–470, Helsingborg, Sweden. Springer Vienna.

Jiang, J., Way, A., and Haque, R. (2012). Translating user-generated content in the social
networking space. In Proceedings of the Tenth Biennial Conference of the Association for
Machine Translation in the Americas, San Diego, USA. 9 pages.

Kaufmann, M. and Kalita, J. (2010). Syntactic normalization of Twitter messages. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th International Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 149–158,
Kharagpur, India.

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B.,
Shen, W., Moran, C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., and Herbst, E. (2007).
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Lohar, P., Afli, H., and Way, A. (2017). Maintaining sentiment polarity in translation of user-
generated content. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 108:73–84.

Lohar, P., Afli, H., and Way, A. (2018). Footweets: A bilingual parallel corpus of world cup
tweets. In LREC-2018, Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Miyazaki, Japan. (to appear).

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 87



Mohammad, S. M., Salameh, M., and Kiritchenko, S. (2016). How translation alters sentiment.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 55(1):95–130.

Och, F. J. (2003). Minimum error rate training in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 160–167,
Sapporo, Japan.

Och, F. J. and Ney, H. (2003). A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational Linguistics, 29:19–51.

Pak, A. and Paroubek, P. (2010). Twitter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference on International Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 1320–1326, Valletta, Malta.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002). Bleu: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Scharl, A., Pollach, I., and Bauer, C. (2003). Determining the semantic orientation of web-based
corpora. In 4th International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated
Learning, pages 840–849, Hong Kong, China.

Snover, M., Dorr, B., Schwartz, R., Micciulla, L., and Makhoul, J. (2006). A study of translation
edit rate with targeted human annotation. In AMTA 2006: Proceedings of the 7th Conference
of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas, “Visions for the Future of Ma-
chine Translation, pages 223–231, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 88




