



















































Automatic Input Enrichment for Selecting Reading Material: An Online Study with English Teachers


Proceedings of the Thirteenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 35–44
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 5, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Input Enrichment for Selecting Reading Material:
An Online Study with English Teachers

Maria Chinkina Ankita Oswal Detmar Meurers

Universität Tübingen
Department of Linguistics, ICALL research group∗

LEAD Graduate School & Research Network
{mchnkina,aoswal,dm}@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

Input material at the appropriate level is cru-
cial for language acquisition. Automating the
search for such material can systematically
and efficiently support teachers in their ped-
agogical practice. This is the goal of the
computational linguistic task of automatic in-
put enrichment (Chinkina and Meurers, 2016):
It analyzes and re-ranks a collection of texts
in order to prioritize those containing tar-
get linguistic forms. In the online study de-
scribed in the paper, we collected 240 re-
sponses from English teachers in order to in-
vestigate whether they preferred automatic in-
put enrichment over web search when select-
ing reading material for class. Participants
demonstrated a general preference for the ma-
terial provided by an automatic input enrich-
ment system. It was also rated significantly
higher than the texts retrieved by a standard
web search engine with regard to the represen-
tation of linguistic forms and equivalent with
regard to the relevance of the content to the
topic. We discuss the implications of the re-
sults for language teaching and consider the
potential strands of future research.

1 Introduction

Input material at the appropriate level is impor-
tant for language learners − whether it is a re-
vision of the already acquired linguistic forms
or an introduction of the structures to be ac-
quired next, in line with the input hypothesis by
Krashen (1977). Automating the search for such
material can systematically and efficiently sup-
port teachers and is the goal of the computa-
tional linguistic task of automatic input enrich-
ment (Chinkina and Meurers, 2016): It provides
reading material containing target grammatical
and lexical forms by analyzing and re-ranking a
collection of texts. Automatic input enrichment
systems rely on rigorous NLP analysis of texts

provided either by a search engine or by the user.
As a result, the most linguistically appropriate
texts are prioritized and presented to the user.

Automatic input enrichment is in essence
closely related to the notion of input flood sub-
stantially motivated and discussed in second lan-
guage acquisition research (Trahey and White,
1993) and is a necessary step in providing any
type of text-based activities for language learn-
ing. It has been shown that a richer representa-
tion of target linguistic forms in the input leads to
a better acquisition of these forms by the learner
(Pigada and Schmitt, 2006). However, the bene-
fits of input flood for language teachers have not
been empirically tested so far.

In order to fill this gap, we developed an online
study investigating whether English teachers pre-
ferred automatic input enrichment, or input flood,
over web search when selecting reading material
for class. The study implemented a repeated mea-
sures design: Participants read and rated 20 news
articles on ten different topics. The articles were
presented in pairs, with one of them being the top
search result retrieved by a standard search engine
and the other one provided by an automatic input
enrichment system. A topic and a pair of target
linguistic forms were kept constant for each pair of
articles. The repeated measures design allowed us
to collect a sufficient number of responses (n=240)
discriminating different types of linguistic forms.

We start by reviewing the relevant research from
the field of second language acquisition in Sec. 2
and dwell on the importance of automatic input
enrichment for language teaching and its practical
implementation in Sec. 3. We then describe the
design of the current study and the obtained re-
sults in Sec. 4 and discuss the findings in Sec. 5.
Finally, we conclude with the implications of the
results and ideas for further research in Sec. 6.

35



2 Motivation and Related Work

Research on second language acquisition has pro-
vided insights on effective language teaching and
learning techniques. The role of comprehensible
input (Krashen, 1977) has been emphasized by
many researchers, and extensive exposure to writ-
ten input has shown positive effects on vocabulary
(Krashen, 1989; Waring and Nation, 2004) and
grammar acquisition (Pigada and Schmitt, 2006).

While stressing the importance of input, re-
searchers agree that in order for the learner to ac-
quire a linguistic form, it has to be frequent and
salient enough in the input (Slobin, 1985). At the
same time, the learners should be provided with
pedagogical support to notice (Schmidt, 1990) and
process the forms (VanPatten, 1990).

The effectiveness of activities targeting certain
linguistic forms has been thoroughly investigated
by second language acquisition researchers: Ac-
cording to Long (1991), focus on form instruc-
tion encourages learners to attend to form within a
communicative classroom environment, which has
proved to be superior to purely communicative in-
struction (Leeman et al., 1995). Pointing out the
importance of systematic focus on target linguis-
tic forms, VanPatten and Oikkenon (1996) found
that contextualized practice activities were more
effective than explicit explanations of rules for in-
termediate learners of Spanish. In a meta-review
of research on reading and second language acqui-
sition, Chio (2009) also emphasized the potential
of supplementing reading with discussion or inter-
active activities targeting certain linguistic forms.

Either incidentally drawing learners’ attention
to certain vocabulary and grammar or providing
exercises targeting those, all of the aforemen-
tioned approaches rely on the existence of appro-
priate reading material with a rich representation
of linguistic forms for effective language acquisi-
tion. The following section provides information
on how language teachers can efficiently search
for such material.

3 Automatic Input Enrichment for
Language Teaching

Automatic provision of reading material for lan-
guage learners has been guided by text complex-
ity (Vajjala and Meurers, 2012), lexical and gram-
matical properties (Brown and Eskenazi, 2004;
Bennöhr, 2007), and the learner’s language pro-
ficiency (Collins-Thompson et al., 2011).

We refer to automatic selection of lexically and
grammatically appropriate texts as automatic input
enrichment and approach it as a web search task
(Chinkina and Meurers, 2016). We developed a
linguistically aware web search system FLAIR1

that provides automatic input enrichment of cer-
tain lexical and grammatical forms by detecting
them in a collection of texts and reordering the
texts accordingly. This process can be seen as vo-
cabulary and grammar retrieval.

Vocabulary retrieval is indeed the core of any
web search engine: One obtains an appropriate
text containing target lexical items by including
them in a search query. Grammar retrieval, on the
other hand, requires an extension to web search
as the user is unlikely to find appropriate texts by
simply searching for, e.g., texts containing present
perfect. Such an extension is implemented in
FLAIR as an algorithm detecting linguistic forms
relevant for English learners, such as regular and
irregular verb forms. The heatmap at the top of
Fig. 1 demonstrates that although these two lin-
guistic forms are highly frequent, they are not
equally represented across the top 60 search re-
sults retrieved by Microsoft Bing.2 The heatmap
at the bottom of the same figure shows the result
of automatic input enrichment by FLAIR: a re-
ordered list of the same search results with those
containing the best representation of both regular
and irregular verbs closer to the top (i.e., to the left
in the figure).

FLAIR is built on top of a web search engine
Microsoft Bing, relies on third-party tools for text
extraction and parsing, detects 87 linguistic forms
from the grammar section of the official curricu-
lum of English, and uses a ranking algorithm for
prioritizing texts containing the target linguistic
forms specified by the user. Once the user has
typed in a search query, specified the target lin-
guistic forms and a number of search results to re-
trieve, they receive a list of web pages, with those
that contain the best representation of the target
forms at the top of the list. The user can then ex-
plore the retrieved texts with the highlighted target
linguistic forms and select the texts of appropriate
complexity and length (see Fig. 2).

We used FLAIR to find out whether teach-
ers benefit from automatic input enrichment, as
compared to a standard web search engine, when

1www.purl.org/icall/flair
2www.bing.com

36



Figure 1: Comparison of the top results retrieved by a standard web search engine before and after automatic input
enrichment. The 60 search results are plotted along the X axis, and the two target linguistic forms, regular and
irregular verbs, are plotted on the Y axis.

searching for reading material for their students.
The following section presents our research ques-
tions and hypotheses, the design of the online
study, and the results.

4 Automatic Input Enrichment vs. Web
Search for Selecting Reading Material

The current study focuses on teachers as media
between students and reading material. It as-
sesses teachers’ experience and satisfaction with
the every-day task of searching for supplementary
texts online and provides insights on this process.

The research questions of the study address
the importance of content and linguistic form and
teachers’ attitude towards their optimal balance:
Does automatic input enrichment succeed in giv-
ing teachers the material that:

• is enriched with target linguistic forms rele-
vant in the context of language learning,

• is in line with the information need expressed
via a search query, and

• is suitable as a reading assignment for their
students?

The online study was designed to operationalize
these research questions. In the study, news arti-
cles retrieved by the standard web search engine

Microsoft Bing were compared to those provided
by the automatic input enrichment system FLAIR.
As FLAIR relies on Bing for retrieving web pages,
the study in fact evaluates the impact of the NLP-
driven re-ranking provided by FLAIR. The follow-
ing hypotheses guided the design and the contents
of our study:

H1: Teachers prefer texts provided by FLAIR
over those provided by Bing when choosing a
reading assignment for their students.

H2: Texts provided by FLAIR are perceived
to have a richer representation of target linguistic
forms than those provided by Bing.

H3: Texts provided by FLAIR are perceived to
be less relevant to the topic than those provided by
Bing.

H4: The more infrequent the target linguistic
forms are, the more teachers prefer texts provided
by FLAIR over those provided by Bing.

4.1 Design of Online Study

In order to address the aforementioned hypothe-
ses, we designed an online study where the par-
ticipants were asked to rate and compare pairs of
news articles: One was the top search result from
a standard search engine and the other one was a
search result prioritized by FLAIR after specify-
ing the target linguistic forms. Each article had to
be rated on two scales: (i) its relevance to a given

37



Figure 2: FLAIR interface.

topic and (ii) the representation of given linguis-
tic forms in it. These two criteria are an integral
part of language teachers’ pedagogical practice:
Teachers want to expose their students to language
richly containing the structure to be taught or re-
vised using a text that is on a topic that is relevant
and motivating to the students.

We opted for a repeated-measures within-
subjects design and ensured a random order of
news articles retrieved from Bing and FLAIR as
well as a random combination of topics and pairs
of linguistic forms in the main task. The study
proceeded as follows.

Procedure Participants received a message with
the link to the online study and were asked to care-
fully read the information for the participants and
the consent form before registering. Upon regis-
tration, they filled out a short questionnaire ask-
ing for their age, gender, native language(s), En-
glish language proficiency, the highest degree in
teaching, and the proficiency level(s) of their stu-
dents. They were also asked whether they used
web search to look for reading material for their
classes. Once they submitted the answers to the
questionnaire, they could read the detailed instruc-
tions, which were displayed on every login.

The flow of the main task is demonstrated in
Fig. 3: Participants were presented with a topic
and a pair of target linguistic forms. They read and
rated each of the two provided news articles by an-

swering two questions and were asked to pick one
article as a reading assignment for their students
with a preference scale from Definitely Text 1 to
Definitely Text 2.

Once they have completed the ten topics, partic-
ipants filled out a debriefing questionnaire, where
they explained general strategies for answering
each of the questions in the main task (e.g., How
did you decide on the relevance of an article to a
given topic?). Finally, they submitted their email
address and received a 20 Euro voucher as reim-
bursement.

4.2 Implementation of Online Study

We implemented the online study as a Java J2EE
web application. To ensure anonymity, the user
personal information obtained from the question-
naire was stored separately from their responses.
Upon registration, each user was assigned a list
of ten topics in a random order. Each topic was
randomly matched with one of the three types of
linguistic forms (see Sec. 4.3 below), one news
article provided by FLAIR and one news article
retrieved by Bing. For each topic, the two articles
were displayed in a random order, and participants
could not change their rating of the first news arti-
cle once the second one was displayed.

4.3 Data and Participants

The total of 60 news articles were used in the
study. The texts were presented in pairs that shared

38



Figure 3: The main task in the online study included
reading and rating two news articles and selecting one
of them as a reading assignment for class.

the same topic (e.g., Brexit) and the same pair of
target lingusitic forms (e.g., the present simple and
the present continuous tenses). One article in each
pair was obtained by submitting a search query to
the web search engine Microsoft Bing and select-
ing the top search result. The other article in each
pair was obtained by submitting the same query to
FLAIR, configuring the settings to prioritize texts
with the two target linguistic forms and selecting
the top search result from the re-ranked list. As
FLAIR relies on Microsoft Bing for retrieving the
original search results, the only variable that dif-
fered between the two conditions was the auto-
matic input enrichment component implemented
in FLAIR.

Linguistic forms For the current study, we se-
lected three pairs of linguistic forms (frequent,
mixed, and infrequent) based on their document
co-occurrence frequency in a corpus of 2400 news
articles. Table 1 provides the distribution of their
mean relative term frequencies across the texts
provided by Bing and FLAIR.

The frequent pair was represented by regular
(e.g., typed) and irregular (e.g., wrote − written)
verb forms. It had a high document co-occurrence
frequency of 95%. This means that these two lin-
guistic forms occur together in 95 out of 100 doc-
uments, on average. Both constructions are also
highly frequent: in the texts chosen for our study,
regular and irregular verbs both had an average rel-
ative term frequency of 0.016. We did not count
those forms when they occurred in modifier posi-
tions (e.g., is interested, coloured balloons).

The mixed pair of linguistic forms was repre-
sented by two grammatical tenses, present sim-
ple (e.g., Kate plays guitar.) and present contin-
uous (e.g., Kate is playing guitar now.). Their
respective relative term frequencies in the study
were 0.012 and 0.003, with their document co-
occurrence frequency being 50%. Predicates con-
taining modal verbs were not counted as the
present simple tense (e.g., He can swim.), with the
exception of the verbs have to, need, and want.
When a form constituted a part of a conditional
sentence, it was not counted either (e.g., I will not
go out if it is still raining.).

The infrequent pair was represented by the com-
parative degree of short adjectives and adverbs
(e.g., nicer) and that of long adjectives and ad-
verbs (e.g., more beautiful). In addition to only
co-occurring in 4% of documents, these linguis-
tic forms had low term frequencies of 0.002 and
0.001. When the comparative form more occurred
as part of a longer form (e.g., more intelligent), the
whole expression was counted as a long form, and
more was not additionally counted as a short one.

Texts Using Microsoft Bing, we did a web
search for Reuters3 news articles by expanding the
search query with site:reuters.com. The follow-
ing ten topics popular on Bing at the time served
as search queries: Game of Thrones, healthcare,
street artists, Roger’s Cup 2017, SpaceX, electric
cars, Bitcoin, Venezuela coup, Brexit, opioid epi-
demic. The top result for each topic was stored in
our database as a Bing result, and the top 20 results

3www.reuters.com

39



Bing FLAIR
fr

eq
ue

nt regular verbs 0.012 0.020

irregular verbs 0.012 0.019

m
ix

ed present simple 0.011 0.014

present continuous 0.001 0.005

in
fr

eq
ue

nt comparative d. of
short adj. and adv. 0.001 0.003

comparative d. of
long adj. and adv. 0 0.001

Table 1: Mean relative term frequencies of the linguis-
tic forms used in the study across the top search results
provided by Bing and FLAIR.

were used for further reordering.4 For each topic,
we repeatedly configured the FLAIR settings to
prioritize texts containing each of the three pairs
of linguistic forms presented above and stored the
three top hits as FLAIR results. In the end, we
had three pairs of news articles per topic: One
was the top web search result from Bing and the
other one was the top one from FLAIR. The two
texts for a given topic and a given pair of linguis-
tic forms were of comparable length (the differ-
ence was at most 50% of the shortest article) and
at the same or adjacent readability levels calcu-
lated using a simple Automated Readability Index
(Senter and Smith, 1967).

Participants Twelve English teachers working
with upper-intermediate and advanced learners of
English in Germany were recruited through uni-
versity and social media channels. Each partici-
pant was reimbursed with a 20 Euro voucher, and
all 240 responses were anonymized.

The ages of the participants ranged from 25 to
59 years old, 91% of them being women. The first
language of the majority of the participants was
German (75%) followed by English (8%), French

4The number of texts to be retrieved can be configured in
the interface. Fig. 1 presented the top 60 results for demon-
stration purposes. In practice, 20 results are quite heteroge-
neous and provide a good balance of sufficient variability and
speed of analysis.

(8%), and Spanish (8%). All participants had an
advanced level of English proficiency and a degree
in teaching English. They worked at a secondary
school (50%), a high school (42%), or a university
(8%). The majority (75%) specified that they were
using web search to look for reading material for
their students, and 25% said they sometimes used
web search for this purpose.

4.4 Results
All the analyses were conducted using R version
3.2.1 (R Core Team, 2009). Packages for individ-
ual tests and models are specified in the footnotes.

First, we compared the general preference for
FLAIR to that for Bing. The option Doesn’t matter
was selected 25% of the time, and the correspond-
ing responses were not included in the analysis. A
chi-square test5 revealed a significant preference
for FLAIR: Participants chose it over Bing 71% of
the time; χ2(1) = 16.04, p < .001. They were
also more confident in choosing FLAIR: The an-
swer Definitely was selected three times more for
FLAIR than for Bing; χ2(1) = 12.60, p < .001.
Thus, our first hypothesis could be confirmed:
Teachers indeed preferred the linguistically en-
riched texts provided by FLAIR over those pro-
vided by Bing when choosing a reading assign-
ment for their students.

We conducted two logistic regression analyses6

to investigate how texts provided by FLAIR and
Bing compared in terms of (i) representation of
linguistic forms and (ii) relevance of the content
to the topic. In line with the descriptive statis-
tics in Tab. 1, logistic regression models showed
that FLAIR (M = 3.22, SD = 1.07) was sig-
nificantly more likely to be rated higher in terms
of representation of linguistic forms than Bing
(M = 2.51, SD = 1.15); b = 1.89, SE = 0.51,
p < .001. Moreover, texts provided by FLAIR
(M = 3.67, SD = 1.08) were perceived to be
slightly more relevant to the topic than those pro-
vided by Bing (M = 3.58, SD = 1.00) although
the difference failed to reach statistical signifi-
cance; b = 0.53, SE = 0.74, p = .470.

In order to test whether the absence of statistical
significance was due to chance or texts provided
by FLAIR and Bing were indeed comparable with
regard to content, we conducted two one-sided
tests of equivalence (Schuirmann, 1987).7 The

5R native stats package, method chisq.test()
6R native stats package, method glm()
7R package TOSTER, method TOSTtwo()

40



results were statistically significant (t1 = 4.55,
t2 = −3.19, p1 < .001, p2 < .001, 90% CI
[−0.13; 0.31]), so we could confirm that the sam-
ples were equivalent with a medium effect size of
0.5 and an alpha level of .05.

Finally, we used a two-way repeated-measures
analysis of variance8 to test whether the prefer-
ence for FLAIR depended on the type of linguis-
tic forms. We hypothesized that the more infre-
quent the target linguistic forms were, the more
teachers would prefer texts provided by FLAIR.
The first factor was the preference for FLAIR (a
five-point scale), and the second factor was the
type of linguistic forms (frequent, mixed, or in-
frequent). ANOVA did not show the tendency that
we expected; F (2, 90) = 0.87, p = .419; so we
inspected the means of all three groups and per-
formed paired samples t-tests.

The biggest mean preference for FLAIR
was found for the mixed pair of linguistic
forms (present simple and present continuous;
M = 3.92, SD = 1.99), followed by the infre-
quent group (comparative degree of short adjec-
tives and adverbs; M = 3.69, SD = 1.30) and
the frequent one (regular and irregular verbs;
M = 3.46, SD = 1.39). When we turned the
five-point scale into a binary outcome variable
(i.e., either selected FLAIR as a reading assign-
ment or not) and calculated the percentage of
responses, we found 76% of responses favoring
FLAIR in the infrequent group, 75% in the mixed
group, and 65% in the frequent one.

As the data in the three groups were not
normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk’s normality
test9 yielded significant differences from a nor-
mal distribution), we opted for paired two-
samples Wilcoxon tests.10 The paired tests
revealed that there was no significant differ-
ence between the groups with regard to prefer-
ence for FLAIR: infrequent and mixed groups,
Z = 128, p = .352; mixed and frequent groups,
Z = 157, p = .643; infrequent and frequent
groups, Z = 217, p = .727.

5 Discussion

English teachers demonstrated an overall prefer-
ence for FLAIR over a standard web search en-
gine when choosing a reading assignment for their

8R native stats package, method aov()
9R package dplyr, method shapiro.test()

10R native stats package, method wilcox.test()

students. This is in line with our first hypothesis
and a strong argument in support of the automatic
input enrichment approach.

Feedback from teachers suggested that the rel-
evance of the article to the topic and the content
of the article were the decisive factors in choos-
ing one article over the other as a reading assign-
ment. We were, therefore, particularly interested
whether there was a trade-off between the content
and the representation of linguistic forms in the ar-
ticles because a large number of the news articles
retrieved by FLAIR (40%) were not among the top
ten original search results. Thus, we hypothesized
that the texts retrieved by FLAIR would have a
richer representation of linguistic forms while be-
ing less relevant to the topic.

As the number of occurrences of the given lin-
guistic forms in the texts retrieved by FLAIR was
higher (see Tab. 1), this indeed resulted in sig-
nificantly higher teachers’ ratings for the repre-
sentation of linguistic forms. However, counter
to our expectations, the texts provided by FLAIR
were neither inferior nor superior to those origi-
nally retrieved by Bing in terms of content: They
were rated slightly, but not significantly, more rel-
evant to the given topic. This suggests that the
most appropriate texts for language learners may
not appear within the top web search results, and
those texts that are not ranked high by standard
web search engines can have a higher linguistic
and pedagogical potential than the top hits.

As the study showed, automatic input enrich-
ment is particularly beneficial for retrieving texts
containing target linguistic forms of lower fre-
quency levels, although the differences were non-
significant. This can be explained by document
and term frequencies: The high term and doc-
ument frequencies of frequent linguistic forms
make it likely for every retrieved text to contain at
least several instances of each form. In this case,
the texts prioritized by an automatic input enrich-
ment system may not differ from the original top
hits with regard to their linguistic characteristics.
Other frequently co-occurring pairs of linguistic
forms relevant for language teaching are, for ex-
ample: adjectives and adverbs (co-occur in 97%
of documents), the definite and the indefinite arti-
cles (96%), present simple and past simple (93%),
to infinitives and ing verb forms (90%). We pro-
pose a way to improve the functionality of auto-
matic input enrichment systems targeting frequent

41



linguistic forms in the next section.
Infrequent linguistic forms, on the contrary, ap-

pear in few texts together, with a small number
of occurrences within each text. The advantage
of automatic input enrichment in this case is that
it can detect those few texts containing the target
infrequent linguistic forms. Other pairs of linguis-
tic forms with a low document co-occurrence fre-
quencies as well as low term frequencies are, for
example: the modal verbs can and may (14%),
past perfect and past progressive (12%), future
simple and going to (9%), wh- questions and
yes/no questions (7%), real and unreal condition-
als (4%).

In case of mixed pairs of linguistic forms (i.e.,
the ones consisting of one frequent and one infre-
quent form), the reordering algorithm pushes the
few texts containing the infrequent form to the top.
Those texts are at the same time likely to also con-
tain several occurrences of the frequent form be-
cause of its high term and document frequencies.
Other mixed pairs of linguistic forms relevant for
teaching English are: past simple and present per-
fect (63%), positive and comparative degrees of
short adjectives (58%) and adverbs (45%), present
simple and future simple (40%), past simple and
past continuous (30%). The full list of pairs of lin-
guistic forms with their co-occurrence document
frequency was compiled by Chinkina (2015).

The aforementioned results show that, while re-
lying on a standard web search engine for retriev-
ing the results, automatic input enrichment suc-
ceeds in providing the texts that are a) enriched
with respect to the linguistic forms, b) in line with
the information need, and c) suitable as a reading
assignment.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper, we described an online study inves-
tigating the effects of automatic input enrichment
on English teachers selecting reading material for
class. The results of the study show that partici-
pants preferred the texts provided by automatic in-
put enrichment over those originally retrieved by
a standard web search engine both in terms of rep-
resentation of linguistic forms and content. The
study also provides insights about which linguis-
tic forms benefit the most from automatic input
enrichment.

It is important to note that our goal was not
to compare automatic input enrichment to web

search but to show that the linguistically motivated
re-ranking of texts leverages the content and form
aspects of the retrieved material. With the abun-
dance of authentic texts available on the web, such
reordering does not prioritize texts of low qual-
ity but selects the most linguistically appropriate
ones in the pool of relevant texts. This means that
such systems as FLAIR can rely on standard web
search engines for retrieving texts of sound con-
tent. Whether automatic input enrichment systems
also provide an effective learning environment for
language learners should be tested in further end-
to-end empirical studies.

Another interesting empirical question would
be: For which kind of queries will an input enrich-
ment system find enough texts? Our assumption is
that the topics covered in a language classroom are
current, prominent, and widely discussed: This is
why we selected the texts on popular topics for
our online study. However, when searching for
texts on more specific topics − or in other less
represented languages − fewer relevant texts may
be retrieved and the balance of content and form
may be skewed. This could be the case for courses
targeting English for specific purposes, though for
such courses it is likely that special repositories of
sample texts from that specific domain would be
used. Thus, the automatic analysis and re-ranking
can be done on the provided corpus, which is also
a capability of the FLAIR system.

Therefore, FLAIR provides an ecologically
valid, real-life setting for an empirical evaluation
of a number of phenomena discussed in second
language acquisition research, such as input flood,
input enhancement, structured input activities, and
extensive reading. For instance, one could con-
duct a randomized controlled field study and com-
pare the learning outcomes of two groups of stu-
dents: one reading and working with the results re-
ranked by FLAIR and the other one working with
the standard Bing results. In fact, such an exper-
imental yet real-world evaluation in essence only
becomes possible thanks to a technology-enabled
input enrichment approach such as FLAIR.

Finally, based on the feedback from the English
teachers who took part in our study, we identi-
fied two strands for potential improvement of au-
tomatic input enrichment systems:

1. Providing a variety of contexts in which lin-
guistic forms are used. This challenge can
be addressed by the tasks of word and tense

42



sense disambiguation (Stevenson and Wilks,
2003; Reichart and Rappoport, 2010) that
could be expanded to the disambiguation of
other linguistic forms. The insights from
the task of finding good dictionary exam-
ples (Kilgarriff et al., 2008) can help make
sure that the contexts in which target linguis-
tic form occur are informative, typical, and
intelligible for the learner (Atkins and Run-
dell, 2008). This could be particularly ad-
vantageous for frequent linguistic forms that
currently benefit the least from automatic in-
put enrichment as they are richly represented
across texts.

2. Integration of a component that automati-
cally generates exercises targeting the se-
lected linguistic forms. The task of automatic
question generation has explored generating
factual wh- questions (Heilman, 2011), gap
sentences (Becker et al., 2012), a combina-
tion of those, and grammar-concept questions
asking for the meaning of linguistic forms
(Chinkina and Meurers, 2017). In line with
the idea of providing a variety of contexts,
one could generate different types of ques-
tions targeting not only different linguistic
forms but also different contexts in which
those forms occur.

Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the LEAD Graduate
School & Research Network [GSC1028], a project
of the Excellence Initiative of the German federal
and state governments. Maria Chinkina is a doc-
toral student at the LEAD Graduate School & Re-
search Network.

References
BT Sue Atkins and Michael Rundell. 2008. The Oxford

guide to practical lexicography. Oxford University
Press.

Lee Becker, Sumit Basu, and Lucy Vanderwende.
2012. Mind the gap: Learning to choose gaps for
question generation. In Proceedings of the 2012
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, NAACL HLT ’12, pages
742–751, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jasmine Bennöhr. 2007. A web-based personalised
textfinder for language learners. In Data Struc-

tures for Linguistic Resources and Applications,
Tübingen. Gunter Narr Verlag.

Jonathan Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Retrieval
of authentic documents for reader-specific lexical
practice. In InSTIL/ICALL 2004 Symposium on
Computer Assisted Learning, NLP and speech tech-
nologies in advanced language learning systems,
Venice, Italy. International Speech Communication
Association (ISCA).

Maria Chinkina. 2015. Form-focused language-aware
information retrieval. M.a. thesis in computational
linguistics, Seminar fr Sprachwissenschaft, Univer-
sity of Tbingen.

Maria Chinkina and Detmar Meurers. 2016.
Linguistically-aware information retrieval: Provid-
ing input enrichment for second language learners.
In Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications,
pages 188–198, San Diego, CA.

Maria Chinkina and Detmar Meurers. 2017. Ques-
tion generation for language learning: From ensur-
ing texts are read to supporting learning. In In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Workshop on Innovative Use
of NLP for Building Educational Applications, page
334.

Kit U Chio. 2009. Reading and second language acqui-
sition. HKBU Papers in Applied Language Studies,
13:153–174.

K. Collins-Thompson, P. N. Bennett, R. W. White,
S. de la Chica, and D. Sontag. 2011. Personaliz-
ing web search results by reading level. In Proceed-
ings of the Twentieth ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM
2011).

Michael Heilman. 2011. Automatic factual question
generation from text. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon
University.

Adam Kilgarriff, Miloš Husák, Katy McAdam,
Michael Rundell, and Pavel Rychlý. 2008. Gdex:
Automatically finding good dictionary examples in
a corpus. In Proceedings of EURALEX-08.

Stephen Krashen. 1977. Some issues relating to the
monitor model. On Tesol, 77(144-158).

Stephen Krashen. 1989. We acquire vocabulary and
spelling by reading: Additional evidence for the
input hypothesis. The modern language journal,
73(4):440–464.

Jennifer Leeman, Igone Arteagoitia, Boris Fridman,
and Catherine Doughty. 1995. Integrating attention
to form with meaning: Focus on form in content-
based spanish instruction. Attention and awareness
in foreign language learning, pages 217–258.

43



Michael H. Long. 1991. Focus on form: A de-
sign feature in language teaching methodology. In
K. De Bot, C. Kramsch, and R. Ginsberg, editors,
Foreign language research in cross-cultural per-
spective, pages 39–52. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Maria Pigada and Norbert Schmitt. 2006. Vocabulary
acquisition from extensive reading: A case study.
Reading in a foreign language, 18(1):1.

Development R Core Team. 2009. R: A Language and
Environment for Statistical Computing. R Founda-
tion for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.

Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2010. Tense sense
disambiguation: a new syntactic polysemy task. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
325–334. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

R. Schmidt. 1990. The role of consciousness in sec-
ond language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11:206–
226.

Donald J Schuirmann. 1987. A comparison of the two
one-sided tests procedure and the power approach
for assessing the equivalence of average bioavail-
ability. Journal of pharmacokinetics and biophar-
maceutics, 15(6):657–680.

RJ Senter and Edgar A Smith. 1967. Automated read-
ability index. Technical report, Cincinatti University
Ohio.

D. I. Slobin, editor. 1985. The crosslinguistic study of
language acquisition. L. Erlbaum Associates, Hills-
dale, NJ.

Mark Stevenson and Yorick Wilks. 2003. Word-sense
disambiguation. In Ruslan Mitkov, editor, The Ox-
ford Handbook of Computational Linguistics, chap-
ter 13, pages 249–265. Oxford University Press.

Martha Trahey and Lydia White. 1993. Positive evi-
dence and preemption in the second language class-
room. Studies in second language acquisition,
15(02):181–204.

Sowmya Vajjala and Detmar Meurers. 2012. On im-
proving the accuracy of readability classification us-
ing insights from second language acquisition. In
In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications,
pages 163–173, Montral, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Bill VanPatten. 1990. Attending to form and content in
the input: An experiment in consciousness. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 12(3):287–301.

Bill VanPatten and Soile Oikkenon. 1996. Explana-
tion versus structured input in processing instruc-
tion. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
18(04):495–510.

Rob Waring and I.S.P. Nation. 2004. Second language
reading and incidental vocabulary learning. Angles

on the English speaking world, 4:97–110.

44


