



















































Discourse-Related Language Contrasts in English-Croatian Human and Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 1: Research Papers, pages 36–48
Belgium, Brussels, October 31 - Novermber 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64005

Discourse-Related Language Contrasts in
English-Croatian Human and Machine Translation

Margita Šoštarić†∗
†University of Zagreb

Dept. of English
margita.sostaric1@ffzg.hr

Christian Hardmeier∗ Sara Stymne∗
∗Uppsala University

Dept. of Linguistics and Philology
first.last@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract
We present an analysis of a number of coref-
erence phenomena in English-Croatian human
and machine translations. The aim is to shed
light on the differences in the way these struc-
turally different languages make use of dis-
course information and provide insights for
discourse-aware machine translation system
development. The phenomena are automati-
cally identified in parallel data using annota-
tion produced by parsers and word alignment
tools, enabling us to pinpoint patterns of inter-
est in both languages. We make the analysis
more fine-grained by including three corpora
pertaining to three different registers. In a sec-
ond step, we create a test set with the challeng-
ing linguistic constructions and use it to evalu-
ate the performance of three MT systems. We
show that both SMT and NMT systems strug-
gle with handling these discourse phenomena,
even though NMT tends to perform somewhat
better than SMT. By providing an overview
of patterns frequently occurring in actual lan-
guage use, as well as by pointing out the weak-
nesses of current MT systems that commonly
mistranslate them, we hope to contribute to the
effort of resolving the issue of discourse phe-
nomena in MT applications.

1 Introduction

Every natural language has means of marking ele-
ments belonging to the same coreference chain in
order to achieve cohesion and coherence in run-
ning text. These discourse phenomena are crucial
for understanding texts and their misrepresenta-
tion harms text intelligibility. Despite their sig-
nificance, machine translation (MT) systems have
been known to struggle with adequately transfer-
ring coreference relations from the source to the
target language, which is partly due to the great
differences in the way languages express these re-
lations. In our approach, we extend the framework
introduced by Lapshinova-Koltunski and Hard-
meier (2017), who identify discourse discrepan-

cies in parallel data for English and German by
predefining and automatically extracting discourse
patterns of interest, and then utilize word align-
ment information to determine which of the ex-
tracted phenomena lack the equivalent counterpart
in the other language. We use the same procedure
to automatically extract phenomena, but extend
the methodology to include cases where the phe-
nomenon does have an equivalent construction in
the other language, despite the alignment data sug-
gesting that it is more frequently left unaligned.

In this research, we perform an in-depth study
of the way in which diverse discourse phenomena
are handled in translation from English to Croa-
tian. We investigate both human translation and
the output of different types of MT systems. In
the first step, we use the extended methodology
of Lapshinova-Koltunski and Hardmeier (2017)
to extract interesting diverging discourse patterns
that commonly occur in the parallel data. While
reflections on the relevant linguistic intuitions are
given as a reference, the selection of the phenom-
ena chosen for further examination is primarily
based on the data obtained from corpora. This
makes our approach strongly usage-based and pro-
vides ample space for making observations uncon-
strained by a particular theoretical framework.

In the second step, we construct a dataset with
sentences containing challenging discourse phe-
nomena identified in the analysis of human trans-
lations. The constructed dataset can be used for
further research in the field of corpus linguistics
and translation studies, but it is also useful for
gaining insight about language contrasts that is of
relevance to MT researchers. We therefore use
it to test and evaluate the performance of sev-
eral types of MT systems and to that end devise
a weighted error classification, tailored to accom-
modate the complexity of the problem at hand.

The paper is structured as follows: in Section
2 we explain the motivation for the research and

36

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64005


in Section 3 we give an overview of related work.
In Section 4 we describe the used parallel corpora
and present the approach to and findings of their
analysis. In Section 5 we describe the MT experi-
ment and our approach to error classification. Sec-
tion 6 contains a discussion of the obtained results
and the paper ends with concluding remarks and
ideas for future research in Section 7.

2 Motivation

As a South Slavic language, Croatian is a morpho-
logically rich language with relatively free word
order. Its pronouns and determiners are grammat-
ically marked for seven cases, three genders and
two numbers. Additionally, the forms of deter-
miners and some pronouns show the distinction
between animate and inanimate, whereas personal
pronouns have long and short variants that reflect
emphasis, the choice between them affecting the
word order and information flow in the sentence.
Croatian is a pro-drop language, meaning that pro-
nouns in the subject position tend to be omitted
if the agent can be inferred from other features,
such as verbal inflection. In comparison, English
is a morphologically less diverse and syntactically
stricter language, which suggests that the two lan-
guages potentially employ quite different mecha-
nisms to express coreference links.

Apart from the inevitable structural differences,
there are several general points of divergence that
quickly come to light when handling parallel data
for the two languages. First of all, although Croa-
tian has means of expressing the notion of def-
initeness, it does not have articles, which have
a prominent role in the English language. In-
stead, demonstratives and possessives are some-
times used, as well as definite forms of adjectives
and, to a certain extent, restrictive relative clauses.
There is also a general tendency to avoid pas-
sive constructions and inanimate subjects in Croat-
ian, with these structures commonly rephrased us-
ing impersonal verb forms with the reflexive pro-
noun se. Moreover, there is no need for cleft
constructions, as information flow can be manipu-
lated through word order, which makes pleonastic
pronouns largely redundant in Croatian. Finally,
it does not easily create participial constructions,
preferring to elaborate the concise English par-
ticipial expressions into full, finite relative clauses
using the relative pronoun koji.

3 Related Work

The study by Lapshinova-Koltunski and Hard-
meier (2017) examines discrepancies in discourse
structures for the language pair English-German.
The structures are defined as linguistic patterns
using part-of-speech and dependency annotation
and the discrepancies are identified using align-
ment information by finding elements with no cor-
responding structure in the parallel sentence. This
approach allows for a corpus-based contrastive
analysis, since the discrepancies might be an in-
dication of systematic linguistic differences or ex-
amples of explicitation and implicitation phenom-
ena in the translation process. The mentioned
study is mostly focused around the former and the
authors manually investigate definite articles and
pronouns in subject position as the most frequent
unaligned patterns in both languages. Through
the analysis, they were able to obtain quantitative
proof of tendencies regarding, for example, article
use in generics and differences in the use of rela-
tive clauses.

Although our approach largely follows the
above described methodology, Lapshinova-
Koltunski and Hardmeier (2017) were hardly the
first to recognize the need to address discourse
phenomena in translation. Given the immense
variety of linguistic phenomena that fall within
the scope of the term, research on discourse
phenomena in translation has often focused on a
limited group of phenomena (e.g. Furkó, 2014;
Zinsmeister et al., 2012; Bührig and House, 2004),
which frequently have to be studied in reference
to particular registers (Kunz and Lapshinova-
Koltunski, 2015). Moreover, the pronouncedly
language-specific character of their form has led
to examinations of explicitation and implicitation
of these phenomena in translation (Blum-Kulka,
1986). On a similar note, Meyer and Webber
(2013) compare implicitation tendencies in human
and machine translation and find that the latter
displays more cases where the phenomena are
kept in translation. Scarton and Specia (2015)
assess the impact of discourse structures on
MT quality through quantitative analysis, while
Lapshinova-Koltunski (2017) compares human
and machine translations to identify and describe
variation in the distribution of different cohesive
devices.

On the other hand, a variety of approaches have
also been proposed to incorporate discursive infor-

37



mation in the workflow of MT systems. The ap-
proaches of Le Nagard and Koehn (2010), Hard-
meier and Federico (2010) and Guillou (2012)
are based on the projection of the source side
annotation of coreferring pronouns. A number
of discourse-oriented pronoun prediction systems,
statistical and rule-based, have also been devel-
oped for the submission for the DiscoMT shared
task (Hardmeier et al., 2015). The systems experi-
mented with different coreference resolution tech-
niques to improve the translation of pronouns. In
recent approaches, Voita et al. (2018), Jean et al.
(2017), Wang et al. (2017), Tiedemann and Scher-
rer (2017) and Bawden et al. (2018) all attempt
to improve the translation of discourse phenomena
using context-aware NMT systems. Although the
degree of their success varies, all papers notably
report improvement over the baseline systems.

However, the evaluation of these systems re-
mains problematic, as MT evaluation research
has typically been focused on providing an over-
all score for documents, either through automatic
metrics like BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), or
through human evaluation, such as the ranking
of systems in the WMT evaluations (Bojar et al.,
2017). There have been attempts at error analy-
sis where specific errors are identified and classi-
fied into typologies (Vilar et al., 2006; Stymne and
Ahrenberg, 2012; Comelles et al., 2016), but these
classifications usually do not target discourse-
related phenomena. Taking a more specific ap-
proach to MT evaluation, Burlot and Yvon (2017)
describe how test suites can be created and used
automatically for the evaluation of MT systems
on morphological phenomena, while the test suite
PROTEST, developed by Guillou and Hardmeier
(2016), enables relative comparisons between MT
systems in terms of pronoun translation. Bawden
et al. (2018) construct a contrastive test set to eval-
uate anaphoric pronouns, cohesion and coherence
by having NMT systems rank a correct and an in-
correct translation of an input sentence, whereas
Sennrich (2017) describes a ranking approach for
evaluating NMT systems on grammaticality.

Some of the above work has specifically tar-
geted the differences in performance between
NMT and SMT (Burlot and Yvon, 2017; Sennrich,
2017). There are also other types of error analysis
targeting this difference, e.g. based on post-edits
(Bentivogli et al., 2016). For Croatian in particu-
lar, Klubička et al. (2017) conducted an error anal-

ysis of SMT and NMT systems, finding that the
translation of function words in general is consid-
erably improved in NMT. However, they do not
present separate results for pronouns or other ele-
ments with coreference functions.

4 Human Translation Analysis

In this section we give an overview of the used
datasets and their preprocessing. We also describe
the extraction process and the selected phenom-
ena, along with the observations based on the man-
ual data analysis.

4.1 Parallel Corpora
As the use of coreference phenomena varies across
different registers and text types, we decided to
perform the analysis on corpora from three differ-
ent domains:

• DGT-TM (Steinberger et al., 2012): EU legal
texts, 950K sentences

• SETIMES2 (Tiedemann, 2009): newspaper
articles, 200K sentences

• TedTalks (Tiedemann, 2012): prepared
speeches, 86K sentences

The three datasets cover an interesting range from
very formal, strictly standardized and highly repet-
itive texts (DGT) to fairly loose and informal
translation of speeches (TedTalks). For the pur-
poses of the analyses, English is taken as the
source and Croatian as the target language. The
corpora were tokenized, tagged for parts of speech
and parsed using the pre-trained models for the re-
spective languages developed for the annotation
pipeline UDPipe (2017). The parallel data were
then aligned at word-level with efmaral (Östling
and Tiedemann, 2016), using the grow-diag-final-
and heuristic (Koehn et al., 2003).

Relying on the approach of Lapshinova-
Koltunski and Hardmeier (2017), we used POS-
tags and dependency information to extract a high-
recall list of pronouns and determiners in both
languages, in order to identify potentially inter-
esting coreference patterns. The main criterion
for their extraction was the pron or det tag, as
the original research has found this approach to
permit reliable identification of phenomena, even
with multi-word units. Similarly to Lapshinova-
Koltunski and Hardmeier (2017), we couple the

38



POS-tags with syntactic information to create lin-
guistic patterns in the format lemma, POS-tag, de-
pendency label (e.g. it, pron, nsubj:pass) and use
word-alignment information to identify the equiv-
alent structure in the other language, if it exists.
This gave us a dataset of sentence pairs with indi-
cated coreference phenomena, grouped according
to the described linguistic patterns.

Although our approach was largely open and
we looked into a variety of phenomena, an ini-
tial overview analysis of the data revealed noise
both in the output of the tools and in the corpora
themselves. As a result, the phenomena chosen
for closer examination were selected based on the
combination of several factors: the interesting ten-
dencies in their translation identified in the brief
overall examination of the data, the tentative in-
terpretation of the frequency of their occurrence
across the corpora and the purely practical crite-
rion of having a pattern that enables reliable ex-
traction, meaning that we opted for phenomena
which were in most cases correctly handled by the
parsing and alignment tools.

4.2 Analysis of Discourse Phenomena
This subsection contains the description of the
studied phenomena1 and the observations made in
relation to the specific datasets. The number of
phenomena occurrences per corpus is shown in Ta-
ble 1.

KOJI, det, unaligned. The high frequency of
cases where the relative pronoun koji is present
in Croatian with no corresponding phenomenon
on the English side (who, whom, whose, which,
that) led us to further examine its use. We sepa-
rate the phenomenon into two groups, depending
on whether the relative pronoun has the function
of the subject (nominative case) or object (oblique
cases) in the relative clause. A major source of
unaligned instances with object function seems to
be the omission of that in English. In both syntac-
tic functions, koji is often introduced as a result of
elaboration of participial clauses into finite relative
clauses. Interestingly enough, introducing relative
clauses seems to be a way of dealing with lexical
gaps, as illustrated by the example:

1The patterns used to refer to phenomena have the fol-
lowing format: phenomenon, pos-tag, alignment information.
The last feature specifies whether or not the equivalent struc-
ture exists in the other language. At a more specific level,
phenomena are defined in reference to the Universal Depen-
dency Treebank labels (Nivre et al., 2015).

EN: a resealable bag
vrećica
bag

koja
that

se
REFL

može
can

ponovno
again

zatvoriti
to seal

‘a bag that can be sealed again’

Moreover, it is a way of making the concise En-
glish phrases more natural and understandable in
Croatian:
EN: women-run entreprises
poduzeća
enterprises

koja
that

vode
run

žene
women

‘enterprises that are run by women’

Essentially, clauses with koji seem to constitute
a fairly neutral means of paraphrasing, but their
overuse might yield unnecessarily elaborate and
clumsy constructions. In SETIMES2 we notice a
tendency to resort to such paraphrases in order to
maintain a more neutral style:
EN: the beheaded mother
majka
mother

koja
who

je
is

ostala
left

bez
without

glave
head

‘the mother who has lost her head’

Here the entire relative clause could be substituted
with the Croatian adjective obezglavljen, whose
meaning is equivalent to that of ‘beheaded’, but
whose use is slightly stylistically marked.

ARTICLES, det, aligned. We have already
mentioned that Croatian has alternative ways of
representing definiteness, the most straightfor-
ward example of this being through the use of
demonstratives and possessives2. We were inter-
ested to see whether specific contextual features
could be distinguished that make the explicitation
of these coreference links necessary. In that re-
spect, the function of articles seems to vary among
the corpora: while the DGT deploys a strict coref-
erencing system to ensure precision, cohesion and
consistency, in TedTalks articles are more pro-
nouncedly used for emphasis and achieving imme-
diacy and closeness in delivering a speech in front
of an audience. SETIMES2 generally retains defi-
niteness for the purposes of cohesion and boosting
the effect of reader engagement by making news
appear as more relevant:
EN: to address the problem, he says...
kako
in order to

bi
would

se
REFL

uspješno
successfully

nosilo
deal

s
with

ovim
this

problemom,
problem

kaže
says

Simitis
Simitis

‘to successfully deal with this problem, says Simitis’
2The automatic annotation of adjective definiteness was

not reliable enough to be used for automatic extraction.

39



KOJIsub KOJIobj ARTICLES ITnsubj ITexpl ITpass ITobj ITobl/nmod POSSESSIVES
DGT 19747 6606 10558 8019 1576 3981 3113 2395 9645
SETIMES2 2844 1532 8304 3801 400 448 1648 401 6842
TedTalks 618 300 1758 4411 185 134 4919 1758 3043

Table 1: Overall number of occurrences of each phenomenon in the respective language per corpus.

IT, pron, both. The semantically vague English
pronoun it can be used in a variety of functions
and roles. Given that our approach is based on
the patterns produced by the dependency parser,
we generally split the phenomenon according to
its syntactic function (subject or object), and then
break down the two groups into more fine-grained
categories. It as the subject is hence analysed ac-
cording to three different patterns: it as the sub-
ject of an active clause (nsubj), as the subject of
a passive clause (nsubj:pass) and as an expletive
(expl). In the first case, the behaviour of it gen-
erally follows that of other Croatian pronouns, i.e.
it is frequently omitted. The two latter cases, by
contrast, frequently require paraphrasing of vary-
ing extent and level of conventionality in Croatian.
These typically entail changing the word order and
using impersonal constructions:

EN: It is necessary to make them from scratch.
Potrebno
Necessary

ih
them

je
is

stvoriti
to create

od
from

početka.
beginning

‘It is necessary to make them from scratch.’

In the example, the expletive it is dropped and the
adjective in singular neuter form is shifted to the
initial position in the sentence.

Unfortunately, the diversity of forms of it in
Croatian makes it a tricky task for word align-
ment tools, which especially comes to light when
it is in object position and varies both lexically and
grammatically depending on the antecedent. Due
to the inability to reliably separate aligned from
unaligned instances, we abstracted away from this
information in analysing how this phenomenon is
handled in translation. For it as an object we
looked at two phenomena, depending on whether
the object is preceded by a preposition (obl/nmod)
or not (obj). It in object position is more fre-
quently retained in Croatian, which is understand-
able as it is often required by verb valency.

POSSESSIVES, det, unaligned. Finally, we
noticed that possessives, especially reflexive pos-
sessives, are frequently left out on the Croatian
side when their introduction is clumsy or redun-
dant. Notably, possessives are sometimes omitted
when there are other clear markers of possession

in the sentence, encoded for example by verb in-
flection or indirect objects:

EN: it did not deny my right to vote
nije
did not

mi
to me

uskratila
deny

pravo
right

da
to

glasujem
vote

‘it did not deny me the right to vote’

The specification of possession in the example
above is made redundant by the use of the personal
pronoun in dative case mi. Similar situations fre-
quently occur in the more informal TedTalks cor-
pus, where personal pronouns in dative case are
often introduced to denote a degree of familiarity
with the audience. Given the nature of the cor-
pus, there is also a relatively large proportion of
cases where the possessives are dropped in phrases
that are closely tied to the agent (referring to e.g.
one’s body parts or family members). On the other
hand, SETIMES2 and DGT are somewhat stricter
in style and often omit possessives, an interesting
tendency being the omission of reflexive posses-
sives in cataphoric reference:

EN: Shortly after their arrival, the royal couple...
Nedugo
Shortly

nakon
after

dolaska,
arrival

kraljevski
royal

par
couple

‘Shortly upon arrival, the royal couple’

In the example, the reflexive possessive svoj refer-
ring to the subject is omitted from the adverbial
phrase that precedes it. In the DGT data we also
notice the tendency to substitute possessives with
explicit noun phrases:

EN: the value of the procurement over its entire
duration

vrijednost
value

nabave
procurement

tijekom
during

cijelog
entire

razdoblja
period

trajanja
duration

nabave
procurement

‘the value of the procurement during the entire
duration of the procurement’

As can be seen, the noun nabava is repeated in the
translation instead of using the possessive njezin.

5 MT Experiment

After analysing the parallel data and identifying
interesting tendencies regarding the coreference

40



TRAIN DEV PREPROCESSING CONFIGURATION BLEU
SMT 1.23M 4500 Standard preprocessing: data

tokenized and truecased, max.
sentence length 80.

Training and tuning using the
Moses default settings, order of the
n-gram model: 3.

33.54

NMT1 1.18M 4500 Tokenization, max. sentence
length 60, min. word
frequency 5.

Encoder: 3-layer bidirectional
LSTM, hidden size 500. Decoder:
3-layer LSTM, hidden size 500.

38.14

NMT2 1.18M 4500 Tokenization, max. sentence
length 60, individual BPE,
min. frequency 5.

Encoder: 3-layer bidirectional
LSTM, hidden size 500. Decoder:
3-layer LSTM, hidden size 500.

36.56

Table 2: MT systems – training configurations.

phenomena, we wanted to see how they were han-
dled by different types of MT systems. Using our
linguistic patterns, we extracted a subset of sen-
tences, targeting the constructions that are han-
dled differently by the two languages. The num-
ber of sentences per phenomenon corresponds to
the overall frequency of their occurrence, while
the proportion of sentences taken from each cor-
pus roughly reflects the differences in corpus sizes.
We added a couple of manually selected examples
(cases of lexical gaps and unaligned reflexive pro-
noun se in Croatian) to construct a test set com-
prising a total of 1899 sentence pairs with indi-
cated phenomena of interest3. We have made the
dataset publicly available4.

5.1 MT Systems
For the experiment we trained a baseline SMT sys-
tem and several baseline NMT systems. We used
open-source toolkits, the phrase-based SMT pack-
age Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) and the OpenNMT
toolkit (Klein et al., 2017) respectively, and fol-
lowed the standard training procedures. The NMT
systems were based on a sequence-to-sequence
architecture with general attention (Luong et al.,
2015) and were trained for 13 epochs. We also ex-
perimented with sub-word segmentation with byte
pair encoding (Sennrich et al., 2016), trained both
individually and jointly, for which 10,000 oper-
ations were performed. However, only the two
models with the highest BLEU scores were re-
tained for the manual analysis. An overview of

3Due to the nature of the extraction process, the study is
largely focused on intra-sentential phenomena. Although the
segmented nature of the artificially constructed test set might
be considered a constraint, it is difficult to find an alternative
way of testing such a variety of phenomena, while retaining
as much data as possible for training.

4http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2855

the chosen MT systems is given in Table 25.
The BLEU scores seem to be in line with what

could generally be expected from standard MT
systems used on relatively repetitive data, except
that the performance of NMT systems slightly
drops with the application of byte-pair encoding.
This calls for further investigation in the future,
with some adaptations possibly needed to be made
in the training process. However, the BLEU scores
are given only as a reference, as it remains ques-
tionable whether this evaluation metric can cap-
ture the quality of performance on such specific
instances as those that are examined in this study.
We hence turn to the manual error analysis.

5.2 Error Analysis
For the purposes of the manual analysis, the orig-
inal human translations are taken as a reference
and the order of the machine translations is ran-
domized to reduce bias. The MT output is eval-
uated only with regard to the relevant antecedent
and the syntactic structure containing the specific
phenomenon, with the rest of the sentence not be-
ing taken into account. Based on our initial data
analysis, we devised a classification of errors in
terms of translation variation acceptability. The
categories used in classification are listed in Ta-
ble 3. The evaluation was performed by one of the
authors, who is a native speaker of Croatian.

To reflect the scalar nature of error severity,
we assign a penalty to each error category. This
also enables us to produce a provisional score
for relative comparison and evaluation of the sys-
tems. Some clarification might be needed for cat-
egories 4 to 6. Agreement error means that the
phenomenon does not agree with the grammati-

5The test and development sets are kept constant, but the
training data used for the two NMT systems had to be further
filtered due to technical issues.

41



error description category penalty
mistranslation 1 1
phen. misrepresented, unacceptable translation 2 1
different formulation, unacceptable translation 3 1
phen. represented, agreement error 4 0.75
phen. represented, lexical error 5 0.5
phen. represented, grammatical error 6 0.5
phen. misrepresented, unacceptable due to style/register 7 0.25
phen. misrepresented, acceptable in the style/register 8 0
different formulation, acceptable translation 9 0
identical translation 10 0

Table 3: MT error classification.

cal categories of its antecedent, whereas the lexi-
cal and grammatical errors refer to cases such as
antecedent mistranslation or errors in the gram-
matical form of the surrounding elements con-
tained within the same phrase as the phenomenon.
As we are primarily interested in the coreference
element, we assign a higher penalty for cases
where the coreference link gets lost due to agree-
ment mismatch between the antecedent and the
observed phenomenon. On a different note, the
choice between errors 2, 7 and 8 sometimes seems
particularly subjective, but as we conducted the
analysis for three different corpora, it was inter-
esting to retain this fine-grained distinction. As an
illustration of the complexity of the categorization
task, as well as of our approach to it, we provide
an example from the created dataset:
SOURCE: ... modifications for the feed currently
legally placed on the market...

REFERENCE:
... izmjene
f.pl.nom
modifications

hrane za životinje
f.sg.gen prep f.pl.acc
feed

koja
f.sg.nom
which

se
refl.pron.
REFL

trenutačno
adv
currently

zakonito
adv
legally

stavlja
3.sg
place

na
prep
on

tržište...
n.sg.acc
market
‘modifications for the feed which is currently legally
placed on the market’

SMT:
... izmjene
f.pl.nom
modifications

hrane za životinje
f.sg.gen prep f.pl.acc
feed

trenutačno
adv
currently

zakonito
adv
legally

stavljeni
m.pl.nom
placed

na
prep
on

tržište...
n.sg.acc
market

‘modifications for the feed currently legally placed on
the market’

NMT1:
... izmjene
f.pl.nom
modifications

hrane za životinje
f.sg.gen prep f.pl.acc
feed

već
adv
already

pravno
adv
juridically

stavljene
f.sg.gen
placed

na
prep
on

tržište...
n.sg.acc
market

‘modifications for the feed already juridically placed
on the market’

NMT2:
... izmjene
f.pl.nom
modifications

za
prep
for

hranu za životinje
f.sg.acc prep f.pl.acc
feed

koje
f.pl.nom
which

su
3.pl
are

trenutačno
adv
currently

zakonito
adv
legally

stavljene
f.pl.nom
placed

na
prep
on

tržište...
n.sg.acc
market

‘modifications relating to the feed which are currently
legally placed on market’

The observed phenomenon here is the unaligned
relative pronoun koji in subject position, which
means we evaluate the translation of the noun
phrase whose head noun is feed, or hrana. The
reference translation uses the relative pronoun and
an impersonal verb form (se stavlja) instead of the
participial post-modification. SMT keeps the par-
ticipial form, which would arguably be an accept-
able translation in the DGT corpus (error category
8). However, there is an agreement mismatch be-
tween the head noun hrane (feminine, singular,
genitive case) and the participle stavljeni (mascu-
line, plural, nominative case). As the phenomenon
present in the reference translation is not repre-
sented and there are additional errors which make
the translation unacceptable, this is an example of
error category 2.

The translation produced by NMT1 uses the
correct participial form stavljene, but makes inad-
equate lexical choices in the translation of other
elements contained in the phrase, translating cur-
rently and legally by već and pravno instead of
trenutačno and zakonito, respectively. Regardless
of the correct participial form, using the relative
clause is generally more acceptable in the trans-
lation of this particular sentence, so we treat it as
a case of misrepresented phenomenon and opt for
a more severe punishment by marking it as error
category 2, and not 5. Finally, NMT2 uses the rel-
ative pronoun koji, but the post-modification does
not agree with the head noun in number. It is there-
fore categorized as error 4. As a side note, all three
machine translations also lack the durative aspect,
which is one of the morphological properties of

42



total SMT NMT1 NMT2
DGT 931 41.78 43.29 38.78
SETIMES2 628 17.36 37.9 38.85
TedTalks 340 11.76 30 27.65

Table 4: Percentage of acceptable translations out of the total
number of sentences for each corpus.

verbs in Croatian (e.g. stavljane instead of stavl-
jene), which means that they all belong to error
category 6 as well. However, if multiple categories
are applicable, we give precedence to the one with
the severest penalty so that the overall error scores
do not get distorted by single examples.

5.3 Results
As already mentioned, the different properties of
individual corpora were taken into account in the
analysis, but for brevity’s sake we focus more on
the overall results in the discussion. However, we
should point out that all systems generally perform
better on the DGT dataset, which is hardly surpris-
ing given that it is the largest and most repetitive
corpus. As can be seen in Table 4, the variance in
performance across corpora is most pronounced in
SMT, which produces 42% of acceptable transla-
tions for the DGT and only 12% for the TedTalks
data.

While for individual phenomena SMT invari-
ably performs best on DGT, there is some varia-
tion in the NMT systems, with NMT2 notably per-
forming best on SETIMES2 for all three cases of it
in subject position and for koji as object. Interest-
ingly enough, when it comes to the retention of ar-
ticles and the omission of possessives, both NMT
systems perform best on TedTalks. However, a
closer look at the data reveals that the good perfor-
mance on articles is largely due to NMT produc-
ing differently phrased translations (category 9),
whereas their performance on possessives is ex-
plained by the fact that the informal style and over-
all proliferation of determiners and pronouns fre-
quently make the retention of possessives seem ac-
ceptable (category 8). Finally, we take note of the
poor performance of all systems on it in obl/nmod
function in the TedTalks corpus, with the majority
of errors belonging to one of the first three cate-
gories and the NMT systems producing the lowest
percentage of acceptable translations.

Looking at the overall results, it should be

acceptable unacceptable score
SMT 538 1361 1219.5
NMT1 743 1156 980
NMT2 699 1200 1036

Table 5: Overall number of acceptable and unacceptable
translations and the score based on summed-up penalties.

Figure 1: Percentages of error categories for each system.

pointed out that the systems generally perform rel-
atively badly on the examined phenomena. As can
be seen in Table 5, the systems in total produce
more unacceptable than acceptable translations,
although the penalty score does seem to loosely
reflect the difference in overall translation qual-
ity measured by BLEU. For individual phenom-
ena, shown in Table 6, NMT1 consistently per-
forms best, except on possessives and the miscel-
laneous examples where NMT2 achieves a better
score. All systems are most successful in trans-
lating it as an expletive and passive subject. On
the other end of the scale, SMT performs worst on
possessives, NMT1 on articles and NMT2 on it as
object.

In terms of total error counts, SMT produces
significantly more complete mistranslations, while
NMT2 makes more agreement errors than the
other two systems. Both NMT systems also pro-
duce more translations that are generally accept-
able, but do not fit the given register/style. Over-
all percentages of individual error categories in the
output of each system are shown in Figure 1. We
also notice that most cases fall into the extreme
ends of the spectrum, i.e. identical translations and
mistranslations.

6 Discussion

It is often pointed out that NMT systems gener-
ally produce more fluent, albeit sometimes inac-
curate output compared to SMT. We can therefore
hypothesize that the two NMT systems will per-

43



SMT NMT1 NMT2
phenomenon instances acceptable score acceptable score acceptable score
KOJI, det, subject, unaligned 237 30.8 148.5 40.51 120.5 40.93 126.25
KOJI, det, object, unaligned 247 33.2 143.25 46.56 102.75 43.72 110.25
ARTICLES, det, aligned 327 23.85 231.25 27.83 211 26.61 212.5
IT, pron, nsubj, both 109 33.03 64.75 44.04 50.25 39.45 57.5
IT, pron, expl, both 138 40.58 67.25 57.97 44.75 54.35 49
IT, pron, nsubj:pass, both 137 37.23 78.5 53.28 56.25 51.82 60.5
IT, pron, obj, both 263 22.81 180.75 32.7 148.75 25.48 165.5
IT, pron, obl/nmod, both 132 27.27 86.5 36.36 74 28.03 86.25
POSSESSIVES, pron, unaligned 297 21.89 209 33.33 166.75 35.69 164.25
MISCELLANEOUS 12 8.33 9.75 58.33 5 66.67 4

Table 6: Total scores and percentages of acceptable translations for each system per phenomenon.

form better on unaligned phenomena, especially
when the omission or insertion of elements on the
target side is more a matter of degree of expression
idiomaticity than a strict rule. This is confirmed by
our analysis, as NMT systems outperform SMT on
all three unaligned phenomena. Moreover, SMT
performs worst on possessives, which are gener-
ally indeed frequently retained in Croatian, and
NMT seems to do a better job at identifying con-
texts in which they should be left out. As for
the relative pronoun koji in object position, NMT2
does the best job at recognizing when it is neces-
sary to introduce it on the target side, producing
31.98% of translations identical to the original.

The fluency of NMT could also result in better
translations of it as an expletive or passive sub-
ject, as these instances typically require rephras-
ing in Croatian. This is confirmed in our analy-
sis to some extent as well, with both NMT sys-
tems producing the highest percentage of accept-
able translations for these phenomena. However,
this is also the case for the SMT system, even if its
percentages are much lower, which suggests that
the patterns used to paraphrase these two phenom-
ena are fairly standardized in Croatian, and hence
frequently occur in the corpora. On the other hand,
all systems tend to make mistakes when the re-
phrasing entails moving a noun into the subject
position:

it is not possible for the controls
kontrole
controls

ne
not

mogu
can

‘the controls cannot’

When it comes to restructuring participial
clauses into finite relative clauses using koji, the
situation is similar. The systems rarely produce
the less natural literal translations of participial
structures, despite the existence of grammatically
equivalent forms in the Croatian language. How-

ever, when the translation requires more imagina-
tive paraphrasing, the MT systems in most cases
fail to deliver, which highlights their incapabil-
ity to deal with creative language use and satis-
factorily handle lexical gaps. Most cases of such
mistranslations, manifested as either omission or
retention of the source side element, are noticed
for the phenomena of unaligned koji and in the
small group of miscellaneous examples, which
comprises a number of cases chosen specifically
to see what the systems will do in situations where
the translation and use of coreference phenomena
are less straightforward.

For instance, let us consider the innovative
phrase non-carbon-based life, which in the refer-
ence is translated as

život
life

koji
which

se
REFL

ne
not

bazira
base

na
on

ugljiku
carbon

‘life which is not based on carbon’

and is entirely mistranslated by all three systems.
The SMT system leaves the unknown word in
source language, misinterprets the dependency re-
lations and substitutes the relative clause with an
impersonal verb construction with se:

non-carbon
non-carbon

se
REFL

temelje
based

na
on

životu
life

‘non-carbon are based on life’

Both NMT systems leave out the entire unknown
part and translate the phrase only as život (‘life’).

The systems also fail to cope with idiomatic ex-
pressions, frequently omitting or producing word-
for-word translations for idiomatic uses of it in ob-
ject position (e.g. make it, get it). The translation
of multi-word units is another well-known stum-
bling block of MT systems, but this particular dis-
course phenomenon seems to be problematic for
another reason, and that is the already mentioned
diversity of grammatical forms this pronoun can

44



take in the object position in Croatian. Inciden-
tally, it in object position is the phenomenon for
which all three systems produce the largest per-
centage of agreement errors: well above 20% of
errors made by the systems on this phenomenon
belong to category 4, compared to the usual av-
erage of around 3% of agreement errors produced
in the translation of other phenomena. Finally, the
relative performance of all three systems lies clos-
est in the case of aligned articles, but that is be-
cause all systems perform poorly, probably due to
the very strong tendency not to translate these ele-
ments that permeate the English side of the corpus.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we apply the usage-based approach
of Lapshinova-Koltunski and Hardmeier (2017)
for automatic identification of unaligned patterns
linked to discourse-related language discrepan-
cies, and extend it to also include cases of inter-
esting aligned phenomena. We focus on pronouns
and determiners in two structurally different lan-
guages, English and Croatian, and study them in
parallel corpora pertaining to three different regis-
ters. We were able to distinguish tendencies both
at the general level (e.g. the omission of reflex-
ive possessives in cataphoric position in Croatian)
and at corpus-specific levels (e.g. the stricter regu-
lation of representation of definiteness in the DGT
corpus). We find that the data-driven nature of the
approach makes it a useful framework for linguis-
tic and translation studies, as it hardly makes any
initial assumptions about the behaviour of phe-
nomena.

The observations obtained from the parallel data
analysis were used to pinpoint interesting linguis-
tic patterns in the two languages, and we further
study the way they are handled in MT. To that end,
we trained several statistical and neural MT sys-
tems and constructed a test set targeting the chal-
lenging linguistic expressions. The test set has
been made publicly available for further research.
We devised a relatively fine-grained classification
of errors to evaluate system performance and as-
signed a penalty to the different error categories in
order to facilitate the comparison and ranking of
systems in terms of translation acceptability. We
provide insights for these diverse extracted phe-
nomena both with regard to the different registers
and to the general performance of several MT sys-
tems.

Overall, all systems seem to perform unsatisfac-
torily, especially so on the TedTalks corpus, which
is smallest in size as well as linguistically infor-
mal and diverse. On the other hand, insofar as bet-
ter handling of unaligned phenomena can be inter-
preted as a reflection of translation fluency, NMT
systems seem to outperform SMT by producing
a higher percentage of acceptable translations in
cases which involve standard patterns of para-
phrasing and the introduction/omission of coref-
erence elements on the target side. However, all
MT systems fall short when it comes to more cre-
ative language use, such as handling lexical gaps
or idiomatic expressions. Our analysis highlights
the complexity of the issue and offers an approach
through which further insights can be obtained
with a view to improve the translation of coref-
erence phenomena. Lastly, we would like to point
out that the research included Croatian, a language
that is both under-resourced and under-researched
in the field of MT. We also believe that many of
the insights for English–Croatian could carry over
to other closely related Slavic languages.

As part of future work it would be interesting
to investigate other coreference phenomena, and
experiment with basing the extraction patterns on
some other linguistic features, such as pronoun
function (cf. Guillou et al., 2014). As for MT
system applications, our manual analysis suggests
that the MT systems for this language pair are
generally in need of some improvement to bet-
ter support the study of such specific phenomena,
despite obtaining reasonably high BLEU scores.
Further inquiry into why the system performance
dropped with the application of byte-pair encod-
ing would certainly be advisable and experiment-
ing with different architectures, notably the Trans-
former (Vaswani et al., 2017), would be desirable.
Future work might also include attempts at inte-
grating the output of coreference annotation sys-
tems in the workflow of MT systems, in order to
make them more attuned to the translation of dis-
course phenomena.

Acknowledgements

Christian Hardmeier received funding from the
Swedish Research Council under grant 2017-930.
We acknowledge the computational resources pro-
vided by CSC in Helsinki through NeIC-NLPL
(www.nlpl.eu).

45



References
Rachel Bawden, Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, and

Barry Haddow. 2018. Evaluating discourse phe-
nomena in neural machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long Papers), pages 1304–1313. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Luisa Bentivogli, Arianna Bisazza, Mauro Cettolo, and
Marcello Federico. 2016. Neural versus phrase-
based machine translation quality: a case study.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
257–267.

Shoshana Blum-Kulka. 1986. Shifts of cohesion and
coherence in translation. In Juliane House and
Shoshana Blum-Kulka, editors, Interlingual and in-
tercultural communication: Discourse and cogni-
tion in translation and second language acquisition
studies, pages 17–35. Tübingen: Günter Narr Ver-
lag.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian Huang,
Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara
Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Matt
Post, Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco
Turchi. 2017. Findings of the 2017 Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT17). In Proceedings
of the Second Conference on Machine Translation,
pages 169–214, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Franck Burlot and François Yvon. 2017. Evaluating
the morphological competence of machine transla-
tion systems. In Proceedings of the Second Confer-
ence on Machine Translation, pages 43–55. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Kristin Bührig and Juliane House. 2004. Connectiv-
ity in translation transitions from orality to literacy.
Multilingual communication, 3:87–114.

Elisabet Comelles, Victoria Arranz, and Irene Castel-
lón. 2016. Guiding automatic MT evaluation by
means of linguistic features. Digital Scholarship in
the Humanities, 32(4):761–778.

Bálint Péter Furkó. 2014. Perspectives on the transla-
tion of discourse markers: A case study of the trans-
lation of reformulation markers from English into
Hungarian. Acta Universitatis Sapientiae, Philolog-
ica, 6(2):181–196.

Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving pronoun translation
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Student Research Workshop at the 13th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1–10. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Liane Guillou and Christian Hardmeier. 2016. Protest:
A test suite for evaluating pronouns in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2016), Portorož, Slovenia. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Aaron Smith, Jörg
Tiedemann, and Bonnie Webber. 2014. ParCor 1.0:
A parallel pronoun-coreference corpus to support
statistical MT. In Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC-2014), Reykjavik, Iceland. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling pronominal anaphora in statistical ma-
chine translation. In IWSLT (International Work-
shop on Spoken Language Translation), pages 283–
289, Paris, France.

Christian Hardmeier, Preslav Nakov, Sara Stymne, Jörg
Tiedemann, Yannick Versley, and Mauro Cettolo.
2015. Pronoun-focused MT and cross-lingual pro-
noun prediction: Findings of the 2015 DiscoMT
shared task on pronoun translation. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Discourse in Machine
Translation, pages 1–16.

Sebastien Jean, Stanislas Lauly, Orhan Firat, and
Kyunghyun Cho. 2017. Does neural machine trans-
lation benefit from larger context? arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05135.

Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean
Senellart, and Alexander Rush. 2017. OpenNMT:
Open-source toolkit for neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstra-
tions, pages 67–72. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Filip Klubička, Antonio Toral, and Víctor M. Sánchez-
Cartagena. 2017. Fine-Grained Human Evaluation
of Neural Versus Phrase-Based Machine Transla-
tion. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, 108:121–132.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the ACL on
interactive poster and demonstration sessions, pages
177–180. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology-
Volume 1, pages 48–54. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

46



Kerstin Kunz and Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski.
2015. Cross-linguistic analysis of discourse vari-
ation across registers. Nordic Journal of English
Studies, 14(1):258–288.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski. 2017. Cohesion
and translation variation: Corpus-based analysis of
translation varieties. In Katrin Menzel andEkate-
rina Lapshinova-Koltunski and Kerstin Kunz, edi-
tors, New perspectives on cohesion and coherence,
pages 105–130. Berlin: Language Science Press.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski and Christian Hard-
meier. 2017. Discovery of discourse-related lan-
guage contrasts through alignment discrepancies in
English-German translation. In Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Discourse in Machine Transla-
tion, pages 73–81.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding
pronoun translation with co-reference resolution. In
Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages
252–261. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2015. Effective approaches to attention-based
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1412–1421, Lis-
bon, Portugal. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Thomas Meyer and Bonnie Webber. 2013. Implicita-
tion of discourse connectives in (machine) transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse
in Machine Translation, pages 19–26.

Joakim Nivre, Cristina Bosco, Jinho Choi, Marie-
Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Richárd
Farkas, Jennifer Foster, Filip Ginter, Yoav Gold-
berg, Jan Hajič, Jenna Kanerva, Veronika Laippala,
Alessandro Lenci, Teresa Lynn, Christopher Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Anna Missilä, Simonetta
Montemagni, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia
Silveira, Maria Simi, Aaron Smith, Reut Tsarfaty,
Veronika Vincze, and Daniel Zeman. 2015. Univer-
sal dependencies 1.0. LINDAT/CLARIN digital li-
brary at the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguis-
tics (ÚFAL), Faculty of Mathematics and Physics,
Charles University.

Robert Östling and Jörg Tiedemann. 2016. Effi-
cient word alignment with Markov Chain Monte
Carlo. Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics,
106:125–146.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Carolina Scarton and Lucia Specia. 2015. A quanti-
tative analysis of discourse phenomena in machine
translation. Discours. Revue de linguistique, psy-
cholinguistique et informatique. A journal of linguis-
tics, psycholinguistics and computational linguis-
tics, 16.

Rico Sennrich. 2017. How grammatical is character-
level neural machine translation? Assessing MT
quality with contrastive translation pairs. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Volume 2, Short Papers, pages 376–382.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words
with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1715–
1725. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ralf Steinberger, Andreas Eisele, Szymon Klocek,
Spyridon Pilos, and Patrick Schlüter. 2012. DGT-
TM: A freely available translation memory in 22
languages. In Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012), Istanbul, Turkey.

Milan Straka and Jana Straková. 2017. Tokenizing,
POS tagging, lemmatizing and parsing UD 2.0 with
UDPipe. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Univer-
sal Dependencies, pages 88–99, Vancouver, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sara Stymne and Lars Ahrenberg. 2012. On the prac-
tice of error analysis for machine translation eval-
uation. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012), Istanbul, Turkey.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS - A col-
lection of multilingual parallel corpora with tools
and interfaces. In N. Nicolov, K. Bontcheva,
G. Angelova, and R. Mitkov, editors, Recent
Advances in Natural Language Processing, vol-
ume V, pages 237–248. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia, Borovets, Bulgaria.

Jörg Tiedemann and Yves Scherrer. 2017. Machine
translation with extended context. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Discourse in Machine Transla-
tion, pages 82–92, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and inter-
faces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eight In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-2012), Istanbul, Turkey. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 5998–6008.

47



David Vilar, Jia Xu, Luis Fernando D’Haro, and Her-
mann Ney. 2006. Error analysis of machine transla-
tion output. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2006), pages 697–702, Genoa, Italy.

Elena Voita, Pavel Serdyukov, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan
Titov. 2018. Context-aware neural machine trans-
lation learns anaphora resolution. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 1264–1274. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Andy Way, and Qun
Liu. 2017. Exploiting cross-sentence context for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2826–2831. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Heike Zinsmeister, Stefanie Dipper, and Melanie Seiss.
2012. Abstract pronominal anaphors and label
nouns in German and English: Selected case studies
and quantitative investigations. Translation: Com-
putation, Corpora, Cognition, 2(1).

48


