



















































A Morphological Analyzer for Shipibo-Konibo


Proceedings of the 15th SIGMORPHON Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology, pages 131–139
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 The Special Interest Group on Computational Morphology and Phonology

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17

131

A Morphological Analyzer for Shipibo-Konibo

Ronald Cardenas
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Inst. of Formal and Applied Linguistics
ronald.cardenas@matfyz.cz

Daniel Zeman
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Inst. of Formal and Applied Linguistics

zeman@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We present a fairly complete morphological
analyzer for Shipibo-Konibo, a low-resourced
native language spoken in the Amazonian re-
gion of Peru. We resort to the robustness of
finite-state systems in order to model the com-
plex morphosyntax of the language. Evalua-
tion over raw corpora shows promising cover-
age of grammatical phenomena, limited only
by the scarce lexicon. We make this tool freely
available so as to aid the production of anno-
tated corpora and impulse further research in
native languages of Peru.

1 Introduction

Linguistic and language technology research on
Peruvian native languages have experienced a re-
vival in the last few years. The academic effort
was accompanied by an ambitious long term ini-
tiative driven by the Peruvian government. This
initiative has the objective of systematically doc-
umenting as many native languages as possible
for preservation purposes (Acosta et al., 2013).
So far, writing systems and standardization have
been proposed for 19 language families and 47
languages.

In this paper, we focus on Shipibo-Konibo
(henceforth, SK), also known in the literature as
Shipibo or Shipibo-Conibo. SK is a member of
the Panoan language family. This family is a well-
established linguistic group of the South Ameri-
can Lowlands, alonside Arawak, Tupian, Cariban,
and others. Currently, circa 28 Panoan languages
are spoken in Western Amazonia in the regions be-
tween Peru, Bolivia, and Brazil. Nowadays, Ship-
ibo is spoken by nearly 30,000 people mainly lo-
cated in Peruvian lands.

The morphosyntax of SK in extensively ana-
lyzed by Valenzuela (2003). However, several
phenomena such as discourse coherence marking

and ditransitive constructions still require deeper
understanding, as pointed out by Biondi (2012).

We present the first finite-state morphological
analyzer for SK, capable of performing POS tag-
ging as well as morpheme segmentation and cate-
gorization. In order to impulse the development of
downstream applications and corpora annotation,
the tool is freely available1 under the GPL license.

2 Related Work

The development of freely available basic lan-
guage tools has proven to be of utmost impor-
tance for the development of downstream appli-
cations for native languages with low resources.
Finite-state morphology systems constitute one
type of such basic tools. Besides downstream
applications, they are essential for the construc-
tion of annotated corpora, and consequently, for
development of other tools. Such is the case
of Quechua, a native language spoken in South
America, for which the robust system developed
by (Rios, 2010) paved the way to the proposal of a
standard written system for the language (Acosta
et al., 2013) and impulsed work in parsing, ma-
chine translation (Rios, 2016), and speech recog-
nition (Zevallos and Camacho, 2018).

Initial research regarding SK has centered
in the development of manual annotation tools
(Mercado-Gonzales et al., 2018), lexical database
creation (Valencia et al., 2018), Spanish-SK par-
allel corpora creation and initial machine trans-
lation experiments (Galarreta et al., 2017). Re-
lated to our line of research, work by Pereira-
Noriega et al. (2017) addresses lemmatization
but not morphological categorization. Alva and
Oncevay-Marcos (2017) presents initial experi-
ments on spell-checking using proximity of mor-
phemes and syllable patterns extracted from anno-

1http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2857

http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2857


132

tated corpora.
In this work, we take into account the morpho-

tactics of all word categories and possible mor-
pheme variations attested by Valenzuela (2003).
We explored and included as many exceptions as
found in the limited annotated corpora to which
we got access. Hence, the tool presented is robust
enough to leverage current efforts in the creation
of basic language technologies for SK.

3 Shipibo-Konibo Morphosyntax

In terms of a syntactic profile, SK is a (mainly)
post-positional and agglutinating language with
highly synthetic verbal morphology, and a basic
but quite flexible agent-object-verb (AOV) word
order in transitive constructions and subject-verb
(SV) order in intransitive ones, as summarized by
(Fleck, 2013).

SK usually exhibits a biunique relationship be-
tween form and function, and in most cases mor-
pheme boundaries are easily identifiable. It is
common to have unmarked nominal and adjectival
roots, and few instances of stem changes and sup-
pletion are documented by (Valenzuela, 2003). In
addition, the verb may carry one or more deictic-
directive, adverb type suffixes, in what can be de-
scribed as a polysynthetic tendency.

In addition, SK presents a rare instance of syn-
tactic ergativity in an otherwise morphologically
ergative but syntactically accusative language.

We proceed to comment about the most salient
morpho-syntactic features relevant to the morpho-
tactics argumentation in section 4.2. The examples
presented in this section were taken from Valen-
zuela (2003).

3.1 Expression of Argument

Verb arguments are expressed through free lexi-
cal case-marked nominals, with no co-referential
pronominal marking on the verb or auxiliary. That
is, verbs and auxiliaries are not marked to agree
with 1st, 2nd, or 3rd person of the subject or agent.
Instead, verbs are marked to indicate that the ac-
tion was carried out by the same participant of the
previous clause or by another one. We explain this
phenomena in section 3.4.

Omission of required subject and object is nor-
mally understood as zero third person singular
form. There are no systematic morpho-syntactic
means of distinguishing direct from indirect ob-
jects, or primary versus secondary objects.

3.2 Case Marking
Grammatical cases are always marked as suffixes,
except for a couple of exceptions. SK exhibits
a fairly rigid ergative-absolutive case-marking
system. The ergative case is always marked,
whereas the absolutive case is only marked on
non-emphatic pronouns. All other grammatical
cases are marked, except the vocative case. The
vocative case is constructed by shifting the stress
of a noun to the last syllable.

3.3 Participant Agreement
Certain adverbs, phrases, and clauses are seman-
tically oriented towards one core participant or
controller and receive a marking in accordance
with the syntactic function this participant plays,
namely subject (S) of a intransitive verb, agent (A)
of a transitive verb, or object (O) of a transitive
construction. This feature can be analyzed as a
type of split-ergativity which might be exclusive
to Panoan languages. The following example il-
lustrates this phenomena for the adjunct bochiki:
high up in S, O, and A orientation (ONOM refers
to onomatopeic words).

(1) S orientation
Bochiki-ra e-a oxa-i
up:S-Ev 1-Abs sleep-Inc
“I sleep high up (e.g., in a higher area inside
the house).”

(2) O orientation
E-n-ra yami kentı́ bochiki a-ke
1-Erg-Ev metal pot:Abs up:O do.T-Cmpl
“I placed the metal pot high up.” (only the pot
is high up)

(3) A orientation
E-n-ra yami kentı́ bochiki-xon
1-Erg-Ev metal pot:Abs up-A
tan tan a-ke.
ONOM ONOM do.T-Cmpl
“I hit the metal pot (being) high up.” (I am
high up with the pot)

3.4 Clause-Chaining and Switch-Reference
System

Chained clauses present only one clause with fully
finite verb inflection while the rest of them carry
same- or switch-reference marking. Reference-
marked clauses are strictly verb-final, carry no ob-
vious nominalizing morphology and may precede,
follow, or be embedded in their matrix clause.



133

Same-reference markers encode transitivity sta-
tus of the matrix verb, co-referentiality or non co-
referentiality of participant, and relative temporal
or logical order of the two events. This is be-
cause most same-subject markers are identical to
the participant agreement morphemes and hence
correlate with the subject (S) or agent (A) function
played by their controller in the matrix clause. The
following example shows three chained clauses.
Notice that the matrix verb is chew, and the subor-
dinated clause’s verbs carry the marker xon to in-
dicate that the action was performed by the same
agent prior to the action described in the main
clause (PSSA: previous event, same subject, A ori-
entation).
[ [ Jawen tapon bi-xon ] kobin-a-xon ]

Pos3 root:Abs get-PSSA boil-do.T-PSSA
naka-kati-kan-ai.
chew-Pst4-Pl-Inc
“After getting its (i.e., a plant’s) root and boiling

it, they chewed it.”
Same- or switch- reference marking may also

be used to encode different types of discourse
(dis)continuity.

3.5 Pronouns and Split-Ergativity

The personal pronoun system in SK is composed
of 6 basic forms corresponding to the combina-
tions of three person (1,2,3) and two number (sin-
gular and plural) distinctions. SK does not differ-
entiate gender or inclusive vs exclusive first person
plural. There are no honorific pronouns either.

The ergative-absolutive alignment is used in
all types of constructions, except for reflexive
pronoun constructions. Reflexive pronouns are
marked with the suffix -n when referring to both
A and S arguments, but remain unmarked when
referring to an O argument. Hence, reflexive pro-
nouns constructions clearly present a nominative-
accusative alignment.

3.5.1 Clitics
All clitics in SK are enclitics, i.e. they always
function as suffixes, but most of them encode
clause level features in which case they are at-
tached to the last element of the phrase or clause
they are modifying. SK clitics are categorized into
case markers, less-fixed clitics and second position
clitics, as proposed by Valenzuela (2003).

Case markers are attached to noun phrases pre-
ceding mood and evidentiality markers in its last
constituent word.

Second position clitics are attached to the main
clause in the sentence, and they encode evidential-
ity (+Ev:ra; +Hsy:ronki, ki; e.g. it is said that ...),
reported speech (e.g. he says/said that ...), inter-
rogative focus (+Int:ki,rin; +Em:bi), and dubita-
tive voice.

Less-fixed clitics mark the specific element they
are attached to, instead of the whole clause. These
are endo-clitics, i.e. they can take any position
other than the last morpheme slot in a construc-
tion. In this category we can find adverbial, adjec-
tival, and dubitative suffixes.

4 Morphological Analyzer

The analyzer was implemented using the Foma
(Hulden, 2009) toolkit, following the extensive
morphological description provided by Valenzuela
(2003). Besides segmenting and tagging all mor-
phemes in a word form, the analyzer also catego-
rizes the root and the final token in order to ac-
count for any sequence of derivational processes.
The analysis is of the form

[POS] root[POS.root] morpheme[+Tag] ...
and it is illustrated with an example in Table 1.

The complete list of abbreviations and symbols
used for morphological tagging can be found in
the Appendix A of (Valenzuela, 2003). Language
specific POS tagset was mapped to the Universal
Dependencies (Nivre et al., 2016) v2 POS tagset.2

In the remaining of this section we provide a
thorough explanation of the production rules for
the main POS categories and the comment on the
limitations of the analyzer.

4.1 The Lexicon

The lexicon was obtained from manually anno-
tated corpus and a digitalized thesaurus kindly
provided by the Artificial Intelligence Research
Lab of the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru
(GIPIAA-PUCP). The annotated corpus was built
from folk tales documents and it consists of 12,250
tokens and 2,915 types. The thesaurus provides
dictionary entries for 6,750 types.

The extensive work of (Valenzuela, 2003) pro-
vides a systematic encoding of morpho-syntactic
information for SK. Similar guidelines were fol-
lowed to design the encoding for Quechua (Rios,
2016), another agglutinative, ergative-absolutive

2http://universaldependencies.org/u/
pos/

http://universaldependencies.org/u/pos/
http://universaldependencies.org/u/pos/


134

Token Translation Analysis
Isábora the birds [NOUN] isá[NRoot] bo[+Pl] ra[+Ev]
noyai are flying [VERB] noy[VRoot.I] ai[+Inc]

Table 1: Example of analysis produced.

UPOS Thesaurus Annotated corpus
NOUN 2557 719
VERB 2284 578
ADJ 601 107
ADV 223 112
PROPN - 112
PRON 24 36
NUM - 6
SCONJ - 2
CCONJ - 3
AUX - 2
DET - 28
ADP 46 19
INTJ - 15
PART - 9

Table 2: Number of roots per POS, for each lexicon
source.

native language widely spoken in Peru and South
America.

The annotated corpus, however, was not anno-
tated following this encoding, and further man-
ual annotation was required. With the help of
a digitalized dictionary and an affix thesaurus
we manually resolved the mappings and corre-
spondences using the—now widely accepted—
morphosyntactic encoding.

The following example illustrates the annota-
tion. The first row shows the raw segmentation
of the tokens; the second row, the original anno-
tation (Clit stands for clitic, VS stands for verbal
suffix); the third row, the new annotation follow-
ing the morphosyntactic tagset proposed by Valen-
zuela (2003).

Shoko-res oxa-[a]i / pi-ai.
a.little.bit-Clit sleep-VS eat-VS
a.little.bit-just sleep-Inc eat-Inc
‘I’m gonna sleep / eat just a little bit.’

Table 2 presents the number of roots per UD
POS category for each lexicon source, for a total
of 8,658 roots.

4.2 Morphotactics

Although SK presents a predominantly suffixed
morphology, there exists a closed list of prefixes,
almost all being body part derivatives shortened
from the original noun (e.g. ’head’ mapo→ ma).
These prefixes can be added to nouns, verbs, and
adjectives to provide a locative signal.

4.2.1 Nouns
Nominal roots can occur in a bare form without
any additional morphology or carry the following
morphemes.

• Body part prefix (+Pref), to indicate location
in the body.

• Plural marker (+Pl:bo), meaning more than
one. Dual number distinction is not made in
nouns, but in verbs.

• N-marker and other case markers. The suf-
fix -n can mark the ergative (+Erg), geni-
tive (+Gen), and interessive (+Intrss, to de-
note interest), and instrumental (+Inst) cases.
Other marked cases in SK include abso-
lutive (+Abs:a), dative (+Dat:ki), locative
(+Loc:me,ke), allative (+All:n,nko), ablative
(+Abl:a), and chezative (+Chez:iba). The
allative case always follows a locative case
marker, both of them presenting several allo-
morphs.

• Participant agreement marker (+S:x), to indi-
cate the subject of a transitive verb.

• Distributive marker (+Distr:tibi), produces
quantifier phrases, e.g. day+Distr > every
day.

• Adjectival markers , such as diminutive
(+Dim:shoko), deprecatory (+Deprec:isi),
legitimate (+Good:kon, +Bad:koma),
proprietive (+Prop:ya) and privative
(+Priv:oma,nto).

• Adverbial markers.

• Postpositional markers.



135

• Second position clitics, exclusively the focus
emphasizer (+Foc:kan).

It is worth mentioning that only the first plural
morpheme has precedence over the others suffixes,
and clitics are required to be last. Plural, cases,
and adverbial markers can occur multiple times.
There is no gender marking in SK. Instead, the
words for woman (ainbo) and man (benbo) are
used as noun modifiers. Consider the example

Tı́ta-shoko-bicho-ra oxa-ai
mom:Abs-Dim-Adv-Ev sleep-Inc
‘Mommy sleeps alone.’
The diminutive shoko is denoting affection in-

stead of size. Notice that the adverbial suffix bicho
would have to be constructed as a separate adjunct
in English and it is attached to the noun, not the
verb.

Derived Nominals Verbal roots can be nominal-
ized by adding the suffix -ti or past participle suf-
fixes a, ai. Zero nominalization is only possible
over a closed set of verbs, e.g. shinan- ‘to think, to
remember / mind, thinking’.

On the other hand, adverbial expressions and
adjectives may function as nominals and take the
corresponding morphology directly without re-
quiring any overt derivation.

4.2.2 Adjectives and Quantifiers
Adjectival roots can optionally bear the following
morphemes.

• Negative (+Neg:ma), to encode the opposite
feature of an adjective.

• Diminutive (+Dim:shoko), deprecatory
(+Deprec:isi), intensifier (+Intens:yora).

• Adverbial markers.

• Interrogative clitics (+Int:ki,rin; +Em:bi).

Derived Adjectives Nominal roots can be ad-
jectivized when adding proprietive (+Prop:ya) or
privative (+Priv:oma,nto) markers, e.g. bene-ya
[husband+Prop]→ married (woman).

In regards to verbs, participial tense-marked
verbs can function as adjectives. Transitive verbs
and a closed set of intransitive verbs can take an
agentive suffix (+Agtz:mis,yosma,kas) to express
one who always does that action.

As with nominalization, adverbs take zero mor-
phology to function as adjectives.

4.2.3 Verbs
Verbal morphology presents by far the most com-
plex morphotactics in SK, allowing up to 3 pre-
fixes and 18 suffixes following a relatively strict
order of precedence, as follows.

• Prefixes related to body parts, providing loca-
tive information about the action.

• Plural marker (+Pl:kan).

• Up to 2 valency-changing suffixes, depend-
ing whether we are increasing or decreasing
transitivity, whether the root is transitive or
intransitive, or whether the root is bisyllabic
or not.

• Interrogative intensifier (+Intens:shaman), to
bring focus on the action in a question.

• Desiderative marker (+Des:kas), to indicate
that the clause is desiderative (e.g. I want to
V).

• Negative marker (+Neg:yama).

• Deictive-directive markers are identical or
similar to motion verbs and encode a
movement-action sequence, e.g. V-ina→ ’go
up the river and V’.

• Adverbial suffixes, depending whether the
verb is marked as plural or not. Here in this
slot we find the suffix bekon that indicates
dual action.

• Habitual marker (+Hab:pao), to encode that
the action is done as a habit.

• Tense markers.

• Adjectival (+Dim:shoko; +Deprec:isi; +In-
tens:yora) and adverbial suffixes.

• Preventive marker (+Prev:na), to express
warning, a situation to be prevented.

• Final markers, including participial and ref-
erence markers depending whether the verb
is finite or non-finite in the clause. Reference
markers encode agreement with the agent or
subject of the clause (S vs A agreement),
whether it is even the same agent and the
point in time the action was carried out.

• All second position clitics.



136

Verbal roots must always bear either a tense
marker or at least one final marker. All other suf-
fixes are optional. The following example illus-
trates how the deictive-directive marker can en-
code a whole subordinated clause.

Sani betan Tume bewa-kan-inat-pacho-ai
Sani and Tume sing-Pl-go.up.the.river-Adv-Inc
‘Sani and Tume always sing while going up the

river.’

Derived Verbs Nominal roots are turned into
transitive verbs by adding the causativizer
+Caus:n. The auxiliary marker +Aux:ak can be
added to nominal, adjectival, and adverbial roots
to form transitive verbs.

4.2.4 Pronouns
Personal pronouns can bear the following suffixes.

• Ergative (+Erg:n) and absolutive (+Abs:a)
case marker. This last one is only used on
singular forms and first person plural.

• Chezative (+Chez:iba), dative (+Dat:ki), and
comitative (+Com:be) case markers.

• Post-positional suffixes.

• Interrogative and evidential clitics.

The ergative case construction also renders pos-
sessive modifiers, with the exception of the first
and third singular form, which have a different
form with no marking. Possessive pronouns are
formed by adding the nominalizer +Nmlz:a to pos-
sessive modifiers.

Emphatic pronouns present the marker +S:x
when agreeing with the S argument and no marker
when agreeing with the A argument. Special atten-
tion was taken for the third person singular pro-
noun ja-, which presents a tripartite distribution:
ja-n-bi-x for S, ja-n-bi for A, ja-bi for O.

Interrogative pronouns who, what, where can be
marked for ergative, absolutive, genitive, cheza-
tive, and comitative cases. The participant agree-
ment suffix for these pronouns presents a tripar-
tite distribution: +S:x, +O:o, +A:xon for S, O,
A agreement, respectively. The following exam-
ple illustrates the behavior of pronoun jawerano:
where.

(4) S orientation
Jawerano-a-x-ki mi-a jo-a
where:Abl-S-Int 2-Abs come-Pp2
‘From where did you come?’

(5) O orientation
Jawerano-a-ki mi-n paranta be-a
where:Abl-O-Int 2-Erg banana:Abs bring-
Pp2
‘From where did you bring banana?’

(6) A orientation
Jawerano-xon-ki epa-n pi-ai
where-A-Int uncle-Erg eat-Pp1
‘Where is uncle eating?’

Interrogative pronouns how, how much, how
many are marked only for participant agreement
using an ergative-absolutive distribution (+S:x,
+A:xon). In addition, all interrogative pronouns
can take interrogative, focus, and emphasis clitics.

Demonstrative roots can function both as pro-
nouns and determiners. In the first case, they bear
all proper pronoun morphology. In the second
case, they can only bear the Plural nominal marker
+Pl:bo.

4.2.5 Adverbs
Adverbs can be suffixed with evidential clitics.
However, whenever an adverb is modifying an ad-
jective, it takes participant agreement morphology
(+S:x,ax,i; +A:xon) in order to agree with the syn-
tactic function of the noun the adjective is modify-
ing.

Adverbial roots can also function as suffixes and
be attached to nouns, verbs, adjectives, and even
other adverbial roots.

Derived Adverbs Adverbs can be derived from
demonstrative roots by adding locative case mark-
ers depending of the proximity of the entity be-
ing referred to. Adjectival roots function as ad-
verbs by receiving the +Advz:n morpheme. Nouns
and quantifier roots take the locative case marker
+Loc:ki in order to form adverbs.

4.3 Postpositions

There are only 20 postpositional roots in SK, all of
them can take second position clitics. In the same
fashion as adverbial roots, postpositional roots can
also function as suffixes. Adverbial roots can
function as postpositions by taking the locative
marker sequence +Loc: ain-ko.

4.3.1 Conjunctions
All conjunction roots take participant agreement
markers (+S:x, +A:xon), except coordinating con-
junctions betan (and) and itan (and, or). These



137

markers encode inter or intra-clausal participant
agreement, often used as discourse discontinuity
flags.

Subordinating conjunctions can take the follow-
ing morphemes.

• Locative, ablative, and similitive (+Siml:ska)
case markers.

• Completive aspect markers, also found as
participials in verbs at the final slot.

• Reference agreement mark +P:ke, to encode
discourse continuity.

• Second position clitics.

In the following example, we analyze the be-
havior of the conjunction root ja.

(7) Ja-tian jawen bene ka-a ik-á
that-Temp Pos3 husband:Abs go-Pp2 be-Pp2

iki jato onan-ma-i ...
AUX 3p:Abs know-Caus-SSSI ...

‘By that moment her husband had gone to
teach them (i.e. the Shipibo men) ...’

(8) Jo-xon jis-á-ronki ik-á iki
come-PSSA notice-Pp2-Hsy be-Pp2 AUX

Inka Ainbo wini wini-i.
Inka woman:Abs cry cry-SSSI

‘When (he) returned, he saw the Inka Woman
crying and crying.’

(9) Ja-tian jawen bene-n raté-xon
3-Temp Pos3 husband-Erg scare:Mid-PSSA

yokat-a iki: “Jawe-kopı́-ki mi-a wini-ai?”
ask-Pp2 AUX why-Int 2-Abs cry-Inc

“Then her husband got scared and asked
(her): ‘Why are you crying?’”

While the first instance of jatian in (9) coin-
cides with the introduction in subject function of
the male Inka and hence with a change of subject,
the second instance in (11) does not. In fact, the
subjects in (10) and (11) have the same referent,
but jatian is used to indicate a switch from narra-
tive to direct quote in the chain. Note that in (11)
the subject ‘her husband’ is overtly stated so that
the hearer does not misinterpret jatian as indicat-
ing a change in subject.

4.4 Limitations

The analyzer processes token by token without
considering context, restricting it from discard-
ing hypothesis based on fairly rigid constructions,
e.g. future tense with auxiliary verbs, modal verbs,
nominal compounds, among others.

There exist a group of morphemes that present
multiple possible functions in the same position
of the construction template. Hence, they can be
mapped to more than one morphological tag. Con-
sider the case suffix -n in the following example.
The square brackets indicate that even though -n
is attached to nonti, it acts as a phrase suffix that
modifies the whole phrase (you canoe).

E-n [ mi-n nonti]-n yomera-i ka-ai
1-Erg 2-Gen canoe-Ins get.fish-SSSS go-Inc
“I am going to fish with your canoe.”
In this case, the analyzer outputs all possi-

ble tag combinations, such as +Erg:ergativo,
+Inst:intrumental, +Gen:genitive, +In-
trss:interessive, and +All:allative. Other suffixes
with this kind of behavior are completive aspect
suffixes and past tense suffixes in verbs. Disam-
biguation of these morphemes requires knowledge
of the syntactic function of the word in the clause.
Such sentence level disambiguation is out of the
scope of the analyzer.

5 Evaluation

We evaluate the robustness of our analyzer by test-
ing the coverage of word forms. A coverage per
type of 94.99% was achieved for the training data
(annotated corpus + thesaurus). A closer look into
the remaining non-recognized types revealed that
in all cases they contain an already covered root
or affix but with different diacritization. This is to
be expected since the only diacritization rules ex-
istent for SHK were proposed recently by Valen-
zuela (2003) and the text the annotated data was
based in was written way before the proposal of
the diacritization rules.

Table 3 shows type and token coverage over raw
text not used during development. These corpora
span several domains such as the bible, educa-
tional material, legal domain, and folk tales. This
last domain—same as the domain of the annotated
corpus—has the highest coverage.

As expected, the lowest coverage is obtained
over the legal domain, a specialized domain with
complex grammatical constructions and special-
ized vocabulary. For example, legal documents



138

Number of Words Coverage (%)
Subset Tokens Types Tokens Types
Bible - New Testament 210,828 20,504 79.11 49.49
Elementary School Books 31,127 4,395 76.59 45.12
Kindergarten Text Material 15,912 2,581 76.90 55.29
Constitution of Peru 12,319 2,645 70.83 40.57
Folk tales 10,934 2,737 94.38 85.42
Total 281,120 28,133 78.93 47.12

Table 3: Coverage on corpora from different domains of raw corpora.

Error type Count
Alternative spelling 43
Proper nouns 20
Common nouns 4
Other OOV 25
Foreign word 8

Table 4: Error analysis of the 100 most frequent unan-
alyzed word types in raw corpora.

must be precise about semantic roles of the partici-
pants, information partially encoded through mor-
phology in SK.

In contrast, educational material for kinder-
garten level presents the second highest cover-
age, quite possibly because only basic grammat-
ical constructions are used at this level of educa-
tion.

Error Analysis: We further analyze the unrec-
ognized words in the raw corpora. We manu-
ally categorize the 100 most frequent unrecog-
nized word types, as shown in Table 4. It can be
noted that the most common error is due to alter-
native spelling of the final word form, mostly due
to the absence—or presence—of diacritics or due
to the presence of an unknown allomorph. Most of
the errors of this kind can be traced back to tokens
in the Bible domain. The Bible was translated to
SK in the 17th century and it has remained almost
intact since then. Hence, some constructions are
considered nowadays ungrammatical (e.g. a verb
must always carry either a participant agreement
suffix or a tense suffix) or some suffixes are obso-
lete (e.g. the n-form +Erg:sen; the infinitive form
+Inf:ati).

Furthermore, the high presence of OOV words
other than nouns or proper nouns is an indicative
that the root lexicon upon the analyzer is based is
still limited and far more entries are needed.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented a robust and fairly complete (in mor-
photactics, not in lexicon) finite-state morpholog-
ical analyzer for Shipibo-Konibo, a low-resourced
native language from Peru. The analyzer is ca-
pable of performing morphological segmentation
and categorization, as well as part-of-speech tag-
ging of the root and the whole final token.

Experiments over corpora from different do-
mains show promising coverage given the lim-
ited root lexicon available. We performed a thor-
ough analysis of errors over unrecognized words,
finding that our analyzer cannot recognize cer-
tain obsolete constructions and spellings found in
Biblical text, which was written centuries ago.
However, for modern day Shipibo-Konibo in non-
specialized domains (e.g. legal domain) the tool
is quite robust and covers production rules for all
word categories.

The work presented in this paper is part of a
greater effort to provide the research community
with basic language tools that would aid in the
construction of treebanks. Future paths considered
include the mapping of morphological tags into
morphological features defined in Universal De-
pendencies 3, sentence-level tag disambiguation
and parsing, among others.

Acknowledgments

The work was partially supported by the grant
15-10472S of the Czech Science Foundation
(GAČR). The authors would like to thank GR-
PIAA Research Lab at the Pontifical Catholic Uni-
versity of Peru for kindly providing the annotated
corpus, dictionaries, and raw corpora used in the
experiments of this paper.

3http://universaldependencies.org/u/
feat/index.html

http://universaldependencies.org/u/feat/index.html
http://universaldependencies.org/u/feat/index.html


139

References
Sullón Acosta, Karina Natalia, Edinson Huaman-

cayo Curi, Mabel Mori Clement, and Vidal Carba-
jal Solis. 2013. Documento nacional de lenguas
originarias del Perú.

Carlo Alva and Arturo Oncevay-Marcos. 2017. Spell-
checking based on syllabification and character-
level graphs for a peruvian agglutinative language.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Subword
and Character Level Models in NLP, pages 109–
116.

Roberto Zariquiey Biondi. 2012. Ditransitive con-
structions in Kashibo-Kakataibo and the non-
distinguishable objects analysis. Studies in Lan-
guage. International Journal sponsored by the Foun-
dation “Foundations of Language”, 36(4):882–905.

David William Fleck. 2013. Panoan languages and
linguistics. (Anthropological papers of the American
Museum of Natural History, no. 99). American Mu-
seum of Natural History.

Ana-Paula Galarreta, Andrés Melgar, and Arturo
Oncevay-Marcos. 2017. Corpus creation and ini-
tial SMT experiments between Spanish and Shipibo-
Konibo. In Proceedings of RANLP.

Mans Hulden. 2009. Foma: a finite-state compiler and
library. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Demonstrations Session, pages
29–32. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rodolfo Mercado-Gonzales, José Pereira-Noriega,
Marco Antonio Sobrevilla Cabezudo, and Arturo
Oncevay-Marcos. 2018. Chanot: An intelligent an-
notation tool for indigenous and highly agglutinative
languages in Peru. In LREC.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 1659–1666, Por-
torož, Slovenia. European Language Resources As-
sociation.

José Pereira-Noriega, Rodolfo Mercado-Gonzales,
Andrés Melgar, Marco Sobrevilla-Cabezudo, and
Arturo Oncevay-Marcos. 2017. Ship-lemmatagger:
Building an NLP toolkit for a peruvian native lan-
guage. In International Conference on Text, Speech,
and Dialogue, pages 473–481. Springer.

Annette Rios. 2010. Applying finite-state techniques
to a native American language: Quechua. Institut
für Computerlinguistik, Universität Zürich.

Annette Rios. 2016. A basic language technology
toolkit for Quechua.

Diego Maguiño Valencia, Arturo Oncevay-Marcos,
and Marco Antonio Sobrevilla Cabezudo. 2018.
Wordnet-shp: Towards the building of a lexical
database for a peruvian minority language. In
LREC.

Pilar Valenzuela. 2003. Transitivity in shipibo-konibo
grammar. Ph.D. thesis, University of Oregon.

Rodolfo Zevallos and Luis Camacho. 2018. Sim-
inchik: A speech corpus for preservation of south-
ern Quechua. In Proceedings of the Eleventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2018), Paris, France. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).


