









































Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Automatic Text Adaptation (ATA)


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Automatic Text Adaptation (ATA), pages 10–20,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 8 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Study of readability of health documents with eye-tracking approaches

Natalia Grabar
CNRS, UMR 8163, F-59000 Lille, France;

Univ. Lille, UMR 8163 - STL,
F-59000 Lille, France

natalia.grabar@univ-lille.fr

Emmanuel Farce, Laurent Sparrow
Univ. Lille, CNRS,

UMR 9193 - SCALab,
F-59000 Lille, France

emmanuel.farce@univ-lille.fr

laurent.sparrow@univ-lille.fr

Abstract

Medical area is an integral part of our lives
due to health concerns, but the availability
of medical information does not guaran-
tee its correct understanding by patients.
Several studies addressed this issue and
pointed out real difficulties in the under-
standing of health contents by patients.
We propose to use eye-tracking methods
for studying this issue. For this, orig-
inal technical and simplified versions of
a deidentified clinical document are ex-
ploited. Eye-tracking methods permit to
follow and to record the gaze of partici-
pants and to detect reading indicators such
as duration of fixations, regressions and
saccades. These indicators are correlated
with answers to questionnaires submitted
to participants after the reading. Our re-
sults indicate that there is statistically sig-
nificant difference in reading and under-
standing of original and simplified ver-
sions of health documents. These results,
in combination with another experiment,
permit to propose a typology of medical
words which need to be explained or sim-
plified to non-expert readers.

1 Introduction

Medical area is an integral part of our lives due
to health concerns and to presence of health in-
formation in media and literature. With the evo-
lution of Internet, medical and health information
is becoming widely available and accessible on-
line. It has been noticed that, across the world, In-
ternet is positioned at the second place where pa-
tients are searching for health information, while
the first source of information is still occupied by
consultations with medical doctors (Pletneva et al.,

2011; Fox, 2011). According to these surveys, up
to 24% of the population uses Internet at least once
a day to find information on health issues and up to
80% of population is looking for health informa-
tion on Internet in general. Yet, the availability of
medical information does not guarantee its correct
understanding by patients. Medical area conveys
indeed very specific terminology, like abdomino-
plasty, hepatic or metatarsophalangeal. This fact
has been stressed by several studies dedicated to
poor understanding of health information (Mc-
Cray, 2005; Patel et al., 2002; Williams et al.,
1995; Berland et al., 2001) and to complicated
communication between patients and medical staff
(Jucks and Bromme, 2007; Tran et al., 2009).

Text complexity is studied in several dis-
ciplines, such as linguistics (Iacobini, 2003;
Lüdeling et al., 2002), psychology (Bertram et al.,
2011; Lüttmann et al., 2011; Bozic et al., 2007;
Dohmes et al., 2004; Cain et al., 2009), and NLP
(Natural Language Processing) with traditional
(Flesch, 1948; Dale and Chall, 1948) and compu-
tational (Zeng et al., 2005; Chmielik and Grabar,
2011) approaches. The purpose of our work is
to study further the understanding of health docu-
ments by non-expert people. We work with data in
French. More particularly, we propose to address
the reading and understanding of health informa-
tion through methods and tools provided by eye-
tracking. Indeed, study of eye movements during
the reading is indicative about the cognitive pro-
cesses involved. More particularly, text difficulty
and readability can be measured with several indi-
cators (Duchowski, 2007; Rayner, 1998; Sparrow
et al., 2003; Miellet et al., 2008). Among the eye-
tracking indicators, we can mention the following,
which are the most exploited in the existing work:

• Saccades are rapid movements of eyes dur-
ing the reading to go from one spot in the

10



Increase

knowledge

of people

and literacy

Increase

the readability

of texts

NLP methodsTPE methods

Figure 1: Two aspects related to the understanding of health documents: health literacy of people and
readability of documents.

text to another. When the text is easy to read
and understand, saccades are longer, and they
become shorter when the text is complicated
because readers need more time for reading;

• Fixations are periods during which the eyes
are stable. Fixations correspond to moments
when visual information is analyzed. Dura-
tion of fixations is increased when the texts
are difficult because such texts require longer
time for the assimilation of information. Cor-
respondingly, the duration of fixations de-
creases when the text is easy to read and un-
derstand;

• Regressions occur when the reader goes back
to the text spans already read. When the text
is difficult it usually requires more regres-
sions.

Hence, the comparison of eye-tracking parameters
(duration of fixations, length of saccades, regres-
sions, etc.) recorded during the reading of texts
permits to evaluate with more precision difficul-
ties and blocking points of readers.

According to our hypotheses, reading of com-
plex texts and unknown terms condition our atten-
tion and the movements of our eyes present then
typical and observable patterns. Such indicators
can be directly correlated with difficulties occur-
ring during the text reading and understanding: for
instance, when a text contains technical terms, the
reading speed and fixations are longer, and require
more time for the assimilation. We propose to
exploit the findings from the eye-tracking experi-
ments for the detection of blocking reading points
in medical texts and for providing a typology of
medical words for which reading and understand-
ing may present some difficulties. This typology is
also supported by another set of experiments per-

formed with medical terms in French. One issue is
that these medical words and terms should be sim-
plified or explained to laypeople and patients for
making better their understanding of the medical
contents.

Eye-tracking and its indicators are exploited in
several contexts for the detection of text spans
that attract or block the eye movements and the
reading, such as: relation between speech and
eye movements, when participants are looking at
picture segments which correspond to the sen-
tences they are hearing (Cooper, 1974; Tanen-
haus et al., 1995; Wendt et al., 2014); reading of
texts in first and second languages (Altarriba et al.,
1996; Bisson et al., 2014); reading of texts by
dyslexic people (Rubino and Minden, 1973; Elter-
man et al., 1980; Nilsson Benfatto et al., 2016) and
autists (Yaneva et al., 2015); processing of syn-
tactic structures (Frenck-Mestre and Pynte, 1997;
Clifton and Staub, 2011; Trueswell et al., 1994;
Singh et al., 2016); detection and processing of er-
rors (Keating, 2009); evaluation of text complexity
during the translation (Sharmin et al., 2008) and
language acquisition (Balakrishna, 2015).

Usually, in relation with understanding of texts,
two closely related aspects are distinguished (Fig-
ure 1):

1. On one side, patients have a given level of lit-
eracy and of health literacy, when situated in
the health area. This aspect is researched by
Therapeutic Patient Education (TPE), which
purpose is to diagnose and to improve the
health literacy of patients (Golay et al., 2007;
Pélicand et al., 2009; Glasgow et al., 2012).
Such actions are usually done by experts in
patient education (specialized medical doc-
tors, speech therapists, sociologists, psychol-
ogists, nurses...);

11



EXAM: SONOGRAPHY OF HANDS
AND FEET
REASON: Arthralgia
Hands: Tenosynovitis and arthrosynovi-
tis cannot be observed.
Forefoot: Interesting reorganization
of the first metatarsophalangeal can
be seen, in relation with the history of
surgery of hallux valgus.
Absence of arthrosynovitis at the level
of metatarsophalangeal articulations.

EXAM: SONOGRAPHY OF HANDS
AND FEET
REASON: Pain in articulations
Hands: Inflammation of tendons or of
articulation membrane cannot be ob-
served.
Forefoot: Interesting reorganization of
the first foot articulations can be seen,
in relation with the history of surgery of
foot deformation.
Absence of inflammation of the mem-
brane at the level of foot articulations.

Figure 2: Translated examples with original (up-
per) and simplified (lower) texts.

2. On the other side, health documents show a
given readability level and can be more or
less difficult to read and to understand. Here,
the purpose is to diagnose the difficulty of in-
formation and to make this information more
easily accessible for laypeople. Typically,
this process is addressed by researchers in
NLP for the readability diagnosis and for the
text simplification (Biran et al., 2011; Brouw-
ers et al., 2012; Glavas and Stajner, 2015).

Our work is related to the second aspect: diagnosis
of text readability.

In what follows, we first present the material
used (Section 2) and the protocol of the approach
(Section 3) to reach the objectives. Section 4 is
dedicated to the description and discussion of the
results obtained, and Section 5 draws the conclu-
sion and proposes some issues for the future work.
All experiments are performed with the French-
language data.

2 Material

Two short excerpts of deidentified clinical docu-
ments are used: summary discharge in cardiol-
ogy and radiology report of feet and hands. These
texts are used in two versions: original (techni-
cal) and manually simplified (see Figure 2). Due
to the experimental setting of eye-tracking exper-
iments, the texts used are short: 48 words in
text1 and 112 words text2. For the simplifica-
tion, we use automatically built resources (Grabar
and Hamon, 2014; Antoine and Grabar, 2016),
which provide pairs of equivalent terms such as
{myocard; heart muscle}, {desmorrhexy; rup-
ture of ligaments}, and pairs of hyperonyms such
as {metatarsophalangeal→foot}. Synonyms and
paraphrases are used in priority, and hyperonyms
are used when synonyms and paraphrases are not
available. The simplification is typically done for
words and terms which have been judged as non-
understandable in previous research, for which
almost 30,000 medical words from the UMLS
(Lindberg et al., 1993) and Snomed International
(Côté, 1996) terms have been manually cate-
gorized as understandable or non-understandable
(Grabar and Hamon, 2016). Overall, the text1 has
undergone seven modifications, and the text2 ten
modifications. After the simplification, text1 con-
tains 65 words and text2 82 words. As a matter
of fact, text1 has become longer because its origi-
nal version contains several compoundings which
simplification requires paraphrasing with several
words.

These texts are used to build two testsets, in
which the order of technical and simplified texts
varies:

• testset1: original text1 and simplified text2,

• testset2: simplified text1 and original text2.

Figure 2 presents the English translation of the
text1 in the original and simplified versions.

3 Approach

We first describe the inclusion criteria of this
study, and then the protocol of the eye-tracking
experiments, and the analysis of the obtained data
(Sections 3.1 to 3.3).

3.1 Inclusion Criteria
50 participants are recruited and each testset is
read by 25 of them, so that statistical significance

12



between original and simplified versions can be
computed. Can be included in the study:

1. undergraduate students from different disci-
plines (psychology, linguistics, history, com-
munication studies...). Medical and paramed-
ical students are excluded. Usually, 5 levels
of literacy are distinguished (Bernèche and
Perron, 2006):

• levels 1 and 2 correspond to persons
who have serious difficulties in reading,
understanding and assimilation of infor-
mation;
• level 3 gathers people who usually have

standard readability and literacy level.
They are fluent in reading and can un-
derstand general language purposes;
• levels 4 and 5 correspond to persons

who show the capacity to read, under-
stand and make complex deductions,
which is often specific to persons with
high school education.

Undergraduate students are usually associ-
ated with the third level of literacy, and
are representative of the average citizens
(Bernèche and Perron, 2006);

2. people without chronic disorders because in
that case they may be familiar with medical
terminology;

3. people without dyslexia because they have
difficulties with reading, which are not
specifically due to the reading of specialized
texts, such as aimed in our study;

4. people with French as first language, which
provide the common basis for all participants
and guarantees that difficulties in reading and
understanding are not due to other causes
than specificity of the medical field.

3.2 Eye-tracking Protocol
The proposed approach is based on exploitation of
eye-tracking, which purpose is to measure the flu-
idity of reading with objective measures like the
number of saccades, the duration of saccades, the
number of fixations, the duration of the first fix-
ation, or the regressions (Sparrow et al., 2003;
Miellet et al., 2008). These indicators typically
permit to detect text zones which obstruct the read-
ing and the understanding, as the two of them are

The heart is supplied in blood by coro-
nary arteries which are fed by another
artery: the aorta. When the diameter
of coronary arteries is reduced because
of progressive formation of fat patches,
cardiac muscle is no more supplied in
oxygen and nutrients: it is suffering. If
the artery is blocked completely, infarc-
tus may be close... Bypass and stent
have the same purpose: restore normal
blood flow.

Figure 3: Translation of the control text (step 4).

related. The texts are presented on a display, and
specific camera (EyeLink 1000) permits to capture
eye movements and to relate them with the text.

After the presentation of the objectives of the
study, each participant goes though:

1. parameterizing of the eye-tracking camera,

2. reading of a general text for training,

3. reading of the testset1 or of the testset2, with
medical texts in original and simplified ver-
sions,

4. reading of the control text with lay medical
contents (Figure 3).

5. After the reading of each text, the participant
has to answer multiple choice questionnaires
(two questions per text) to control the under-
standing of these texts. On the text1, these
two questions are asked:

• The sonography is done for: (1) shoul-
der, (2) hands and feet, (3) I do not know
• Which inflammations are looked for: (1)

articulations only, (2) articulations and
tendons, (3) I do not know

On the text2, these two questions are asked:

• The patient has problems: (1) cardiac,
(2) cerebral, (3) I do not know
• The patient is treated with: (1) surgery,

(2) genetically, (3) I do not know

On the control text, these two questions are
asked:

• The arteries can be damaged with: (1)
fat patches, (2) calcium patches, (3) I do
not know

13



Text1 Text2
O S std. p dof t-test O S std. p dof t-test

TRN 60,55 63,63 -3,08 0,23 45,00 1,22 62,73 59,67 3,06 0,22 45,00 1,24
CRL 58,88 62,06 -3,19 0,22 45,00 1,25 61,04 57,84 3,20 0,21 45,00 1,29
DFF 227,41 215,75 11,66 0,11 45,00 1,65 214,73 214,69 0,04 0,50 45,00 0,68
TNF 587,61 370,48 217,14 0,00 45,00 7,38 395,71 372,22 23,49 0,16 45,00 1,43
AMP 3,50 3,80 -0,30 0,02 45,00 2,44 3,33 3,82 -0,49 0,00 45,00 5,38
REG 27,26 21,21 6,06 0,05 45,00 2,05 21,47 19,30 2,18 0,24 45,00 1,18
MCQ 1304,35 869,57 434,78 0,02 21,00 2,08 602,77 538,95 63,82 0,00 21,00 2,08

Table 1: Results for the two versions of the texts (original O and simplified S) and their statistical
analysis. The indicators are the following: training text TRN and control text CRL; duration of the first
fixation DFF, total number of fixations TNF, amplitude of saccades AMP, number of regressions REG;
answers to questions MCQ. Statistically significant p is marked with bold characters.

• When the artery is blocked, there is risk
of: (1) headaches, (2) infarctus, (3) I do
not know

6. At the end, if desired, the results recorded
further to his reading are presented and ex-
plained to the participant.

Overall the experiment lasts for 15 to 20 minutes.

3.3 Analysis of Eye-tracking Data

The data collected during the eye-tracking exper-
iments are analyzed with several statistical mea-
sures, such as t test, statistical significance, degree
of freedom (Walker, 1940) and standard deviation.
The objective is to assess the difference of indica-
tors when reading original and simplified versions
of texts. We expect that the simplified version of
texts is read more easily, e.g. with short fixations,
long saccades and no regressions.

4 Results and Discussion

We first present the results obtained from the pre-
sented eye-tracking experience (Section 4.1) and
discuss them, we then indicate some advantages
of using the eye-tracking methodology (Section
4.2) and some known limitations (Section 4.3),
and propose a typology of words that may present
reading difficulties in medical texts (Section 4.4).

4.1 Results from the Eye-tracking Protocol

In Figure 4, we present an example of reading of
the text1: the original (upper graphics) and sim-
plified (lower graphics) versions. In Figure 5, we
present another example obtained while reading
the text2 in original and simplified versions. On

these Figures, we can easily observe differences
in reading of original and simplified versions.

In Table 1, we present the average reading in-
dicators for the two tested versions (original O
and simplified S) and their statistical analysis: the
reading time for the original O and the simplified
S versions, the standard deviation sdt., the p-value
p, the degree of freedom dof , and the t − test
value. These results are provided for the text1 and
the text2, and for each indicator studied. The re-
sults indicate that:

• Reading time of the training (TRN) and con-
trol (CRL) texts. No statistical difference is
observed with the reading time of the train-
ing and control texts. This indicates that the
participants have the same reading capacity
and that their reading results on medical texts
are comparable. This is a good observation
which points out that further results are com-
parable;

• Duration of the first fixation (DFF). No dif-
ference is observed for the duration of the
first fixation. This indicates that reading of
the two versions of texts starts in a similar
way, that the participants do not anticipate on
the nature of the texts (original or simplified),
and again that further results are comparable;

• Total number of fixations (TNF). Statistically
significant difference is observed for the to-
tal duration of fixations for the text1: on the
original version the fixations are more fre-
quent. This can be observed on Figure 4:
on the original (upper) text, the blue dots are
more frequent than on the simplified (lower)

14



Figure 4: Examples of reading of original (upper) and simplified (lower) versions of texts1.

Figure 5: Examples of reading of original (upper) and simplified (lower) versions of texts2.

15



text. For instance, in the original text, com-
pound words like arthralgia, arthrosynovitis
or metatarsophalangeal can require several
fixations, which may correspond to the syl-
lables of these words. Besides, this kind of
terms also show longer fixations by the par-
ticipants (the dots are larger). The techni-
cal version of the text2 does not require that
many fixations, may be due to the fact that it
does not contain compounds;

• Amplitude of saccades (AMP). The simplifi-
cation of the texts causes the increasing of
the amplitude of saccades. As indicated in
Table 1, this indicator is statistically signifi-
cant for the text1 and the text2. This means
that simplification decreases the reading dif-
ficulty. Hence, on Figures 4 and 5, the hor-
izontal blue lines are shorter on the original
texts than on the simplified texts;

• Regressions (REG). The number of regres-
sions is statistically important for the text1
but not for the text2. This suggests that the
reading of the simplified version of the text1
is more fluent. This can also be observed on
Figure 4: on the original text, we can see ver-
tical blue lines;

• Answers to the questionnaires (MCQ). The
analysis of the answers to questions indicates
that the understanding of the simplified ver-
sion is always better for the simplified ver-
sions than for the technical versions. The dif-
ference is statistically significant for the two
texts. Hence, we obtain 54% of correct an-
swers for the original versions and up to 81%
of correct answers for the simplified versions.

On the whole, we can observe that the simplifi-
cation of text improves all the reading indicators:
(1) the total duration of fixations is lesser, (2) the
amplitude of saccades is bigger, and (3) the re-
gressions are less frequent. These results provide
coherent and stable reading indicators and reading
patterns specific to the technical original and the
simplified versions of the medical texts. These re-
sults also indicate that the simplification of health
documents is an efficient way to improve their
reading and understanding by non-expert readers.
As indicated all indicators show statistically sig-
nificant differences on the text1 and some of them
are also statistically significant on the text2. On

both texts, correct answers to questions are corre-
lated with the text difficulty.

4.2 Advantages of Eye-tracking

The eye-tracking technology offers several advan-
tages which can be exploited in different tasks,
such as those presented in Section 1. We present
here some of these advantages, which have been
very useful in our experiments:

• Several indicators on the reading process can
be computed and exploited. Typically, these
indicators are: the number and duration of
fixations, the amplitude of saccades, the num-
ber of regressions;

• The eye-tracking indicators are objective:
they are non-conscious and non-controlled by
people. They are directly impacted by the
individual reading habits acquired during the
scholar and family learning;

• The eye-tracking indicators can be correlated
with other types of information such as un-
derstanding of texts, social and professional
status of participants, etc.;

• During the reading, the words and terms
are considered within their contexts and the
global perception of texts is usually expected
from participants.

4.3 Limitations of Eye-tracking

Yet, the eye-tracking technology presents some
known limitations, which are usually taken into
account in experiments (Duchowski, 2007):

• Eye-tracking camera permits to detect and to
record the gaze of the participants. The com-
mon hypothesis is that the gaze is correlated
with the attention of participants, while in re-
ality attention can also be oriented on objects
which are located on peripheral areas of the
gaze. Human vision system is indeed very
sophisticated and currently it is not fully de-
coded yet. This is one of the known limi-
tations of the eye-tracking methodology and
it requires that the two possibilities are ac-
cepted: the gaze matches with the explicit at-
tention of participants or does not match. In
our case, with the reading of short medical
texts, the requirement to answer questions af-
ter the reading, and the absence of distractors

16



(the tests have been performed in experimen-
tal lab conditions), we assume that the atten-
tion of readers matches with their gaze;

• With some participants, due to their physi-
ological specificities (long eyelashes, make-
up, heavy eyelids...), it can be complicated
to parameter the eye-tracking camera, and to
track and record the eye movements. This
can lead to loss of data or to wrong super-
position of gaze recording on the texts. Nev-
ertheless, when the data are exploitable, there
is no impact on the reading indicators;

• Similarly, eyeglasses and contact lenses can
be problematic for the tracking of the pupil
and of its movements;

• For a given text or picture, the attention and
the gaze of participants vary according to the
task and the questions they are being asked.
In our experiment, all the participants had to
do the same task which consisted in text read-
ing and answering to questions. The instruc-
tions have been presented clearly at the be-
ginning of the test and before each reading;

• Eye-tracking cameras also have some limita-
tions: (1) they work with a given frequency
(60 Hz) and some eye movements can be
missed and not recorded; (2) the recorded
signal is cleaned up, such as with blinking or
some peripheral eye movements, which can
also remove some important eye movements;

• Due to the test requirements, the tests can be
performed only with short texts which can be
easily displayed and read by all participants
from a computer screen. This means that sev-
eral tests and experiments are necessary to
cover more texts and to increase their diver-
sity.

4.4 Typology of difficulties

The results obtained from the presented experi-
ments permit to propose a typology of some med-
ical words and terms that may present reading
and understanding difficulties to laypeople. Notice
that this typology is confirmed and completed by
larger experiments done with medical terminolo-
gies in French: almost 30,000 medical words from
the UMLS (Lindberg et al., 1993) and Snomed In-
ternational (Côté, 1996) in French. These terms

have been manually categorized as understandable
or non-understandable (Grabar and Hamon, 2016).

The complete proposed typology contains the
following types of linguistic units:

• abbreviations (IVA, NIHSS, OAP, NaCl, VNI,
OG, VG, PAPS, j, bat, cp);

• borrowings from Latin or English (stent, Hal-
lux valgus);

• proper names (Gougerot, Sjögren, Bentall,
Glasgow, Babinski, Barthel, Cockcroft);

• drug names (CALCIPARINE);

• neoclassical compounds meaning disorders,
procedures or treatments (endoprothesis,
pseudohémophilie, sclérodermie, hydrolase,
tympanectomie, arthrodèse, synesthésie);

• human anatomy (metatarsophalangeal,
microcytic, cloacal, pubovaginal, na-
sopharyngé, mitral, antre, inguinal, stron-
tium, érythème, maxillo-facial, mésentère);

• lab test results with numeral values and their
interpretation.

Such units are very frequent in different types of
medical texts and potentially present an impor-
tant understanding difficulty. We assume that such
words and terms must be explained or simplified to
laypeople to guarantee a more correct understand-
ing of medical texts by them. This task can be
typically addressed during the automatic text sim-
plification or adaptation.

Due to the experimental set-up, only two short
excerpts from medical texts have been used (160
words in technical versions and 147 words in sim-
plified versions, in total). Currently, it is difficult
to link the typology classes to the eye-tracking in-
dicators. Nevertheless, we can present here some
first observations:

• Abbreviations. The text2 contains one abbre-
viation (IVA), which required longer fixations
of the participants;

• Borrowings. The text1 contains one borrow-
ing from Latin (Hallux valgus), which was
read normally by participants. One possi-
ble explanation collected from participants is
that uppercased H in Hallux valgus associ-
ated this term with a proper name;

17



• Proper names. No real proper names occur
in the two texts;

• Drug names. No drug names occur in the two
texts;

• Neoclassical compounds. The tested texts,
and especially the text1, contain several com-
pounds. As already indicated above, com-
pounds require several fixations and these fix-
ations are longer. Compounds may also re-
quire regressions;

• Human anatomy. Several terms related to hu-
man anatomy occur in the two texts. Except-
ing very frequent terms (like foot or hand),
human anatomy terms usually require several
fixations and these fixations are longer;

• Numeral values. The text2 contains sev-
eral numerical values. These values require
longer fixations and also regressions.

These are just first raw observations obtained from
two small medical texts in French.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We proposed an experiment on studying the ef-
fect of simplification of medical texts addressed
through the use of eye-tracking methods. In this
way, we can obtain several objective reading indi-
cators, such as duration of fixations, amplitude of
saccades and regressions. The collected indicators
are then compared between the original and sim-
plified versions of a given text with statistical mea-
sures to analyze if there is statistically significant
differences when reading technical and simplified
medical contents. Then, two understanding ques-
tions (multiple choice questionnaires) are asked to
the participants after the reading of each text.

The results obtained indicate that reading of the
two versions of the texts, original and simplified,
provide coherent and stable reading patterns. For
instance, when reading the simplified version, the
fixations are shorter, the saccades are longer and
the regressions absent or infrequent. Additionally,
the analysis of the answers to questions indicates
that the understanding of the simplified version is
better: the number of correct answers varies be-
tween 54% for the original text and up to 81% for
the simplified text. This also indicates that medical
texts can be efficiently simplified in order to obtain
their better understanding by non-expert persons.

These tests, together with data obtained from
previous experiments, also permitted to propose
a typology of medical words and terms that may
present blocking points and difficulties with un-
derstanding. This typology include abbreviations,
borrowed words, proper names, drug names, com-
pounds, terms related to human anatomy and num-
bers. We assume that these kinds of terms should
be simplified for a better understanding of medi-
cal texts by patients. Our first results permitted to
associate some of these classes with eye-tracking
indicators. For instance, compounds require more
fixations and these fixations are longer. They may
also require regressions.

We have several directions for future research.
For instance, it would be interesting to study the
relation between the text length and its readability
and understanding. The hypothesis is that longer
texts, even if they are simpler, may yet present
reading and understanding difficulties. The impact
of other factors (such as definitions, favorable con-
texts, pictures) can also be studied. Due to the ex-
perimental constraints, only short excepts of texts
are used. For this reasons, it may be interesting to
perform additional tests with a greater variety of
text types and of simplification versions. Terms re-
lated to the proposed typology will be addressed in
other works in order to perform their automatic ex-
planation or simplification. In order to address dif-
ferent levels of literacy, different principles may be
used when performing the simplification. These
principes and the corresponding rules will be de-
fined and tested in future work. Besides, like with
manual simplification, the efficiency of automatic
simplification methods can also be tested and eval-
uated using eye-tracking protocols.

6 Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the French National
Agency for Research (ANR) as part of the CLEAR
project (Communication, Literacy, Education, Ac-
cessibility, Readability), ANR-17-CE19-0016-01.
The excerpts of the texts used have been obtained
during the RAVEL project funded by the French
National Agency for Research (ANR) and the
DGA, under grant Tecsan ANR-11-TECS-012.

We would like to thank again the participants
in the eye-tracking study. Also, we would like to
thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments.

18



References
J Altarriba, J Kroll, A Sholl, and K Rayner. 1996. The

influence of lexical and conceptual constraints on
reading mixed-language sentences: Evidence from
eye fixations and naming times. Memory and Cog-
nition, 24:477–92.

E Antoine and N Grabar. 2016. Exploitation de re-
formulations pour l’acquisition d’un vocabulaire ex-
pert/non expert. In Traitement Automatique des
Langues Naturelles (TALN).

SV Balakrishna. 2015. Analyzing Text Complexity
and Text Simplification: Connecting Linguistics,
Processing and Educational Applications. Thèse
de doctorat, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

GK Berland, MN Elliott, LS Morales, JI Algazy,
RL Kravitz, MS Broder, DE Kanouse, JA Munoz,
JA Puyol, and M Lara et al. 2001. Health informa-
tion on the Internet. Accessibility, quality, and read-
ability in english ans spanish. JAMA, 285(20):2612–
2621.

Francine Bernèche and Bertrand Perron. 2006.
Développer nos compétences en littératie: un
défi porteur d’avenir. Enquête internationale sur
l’alphabétisation et les compétences des adultes.
Technical report, Institut de la statistique du Québec,
Canada.

Raymond Bertram, Victor Kuperman, Harald R
Baayen, and Jukka Hyönä. 2011. The hyphen as
a segmentation cue in triconstituent compound pro-
cessing: Its getting better all the time. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 52(6):530–544.

Or Biran, Samuel Brody, and Noémie Elhadad. 2011.
Putting it simply: a context-aware approach to lexi-
cal simplification. In Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

MJ Bisson, W Van Heuven, K Conklin, and R Tunney.
2014. Processing of native and foreign language
subtitles in films: An eye-tracking study. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 35:399–418.

Mirjana Bozic, William D. Marslen-Wilson, Em-
manuel A. Stamatakis, Matthew H. Davis, and Lor-
raine K. Tyler. 2007. Differentiating morphology,
form, and meaning: Neural correlates of morpholog-
ical complexity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
19(9):1464–1475.

Laetitia Brouwers, Delphine Bernhard, Anne-Laure
Ligozat, and Thomas François. 2012. Simplification
syntaxique de phrases pour le français. In Traite-
ment Automatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN),
pages 211–224.

Kate Cain, Andrea S. Towse, and Rachael S. Knight.
2009. The development of idiom comprehension:
An investigation of semantic and contextual process-
ing skills. Journal of Experimental Child Psychol-
ogy, 102(3):280–298.

J Chmielik and N Grabar. 2011. Détection de la
spécialisation scientifique et technique des docu-
ments biomédicaux grâce aux informations mor-
phologiques. TAL, 51(2):151–179.

C Clifton and A Staub. 2011. Syntactic influences
on eye movements in reading. In S Liversedge,
I Gilchrist, and S Everling, editors, The Oxford
handbook of eye movements, pages 895–909. Oxford
University Press.

RM Cooper. 1974. The control of eye fixation by the
meaning of spoken language: A new methodology
for the real-time investigation of speech perception,
memory, and language processing. Cognitive Psy-
chol, 6:84–107.

RA Côté. 1996. Répertoire d’anatomopathologie de la
SNOMED internationale, v3.4. Université de Sher-
brooke, Sherbrooke, Québec.

E Dale and JS Chall. 1948. A formula for predicting
readability. Educational research bulletin, 27:11–
20.

Petra Dohmes, Pienie Zwitserlood, and Jens Bölte.
2004. The impact of semantic transparency of
morphologically complex words on picture naming.
Brain and Language, 90(1-3):203–212.

Andrew Duchowski. 2007. Eye Tracking Methodology.
Theory and practice. Springer, London, UK.

RD Elterman, LA Abel, RB Daroff, LF DellOsso,
and JL Bornstein. 1980. Eye movement patterns in
dyslexic children. J Learn Disabil, 13:16–21.

R Flesch. 1948. A new readability yardstick. Journ
Appl Psychol, 23:221–233.

Susannah Fox. 2011. Health topics. 80% of Internet
users look for health information online. Technical
report, Pew Internet & American Life Project, Wash-
ington DC.

C Frenck-Mestre and J Pynte. 1997. Syntactic ambigu-
ity resolution while reading in a second and native
languages. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50(1):119–48.

Russell E. Glasgow, Deanna Kurz, Diane King, Jen-
nifer M. Dickman, Andrew J. Faber, Eve Halter-
man, Tim Woolley, Deborah J. Toobert, and Lisa
A. Strycker et al. 2012. Twelve-month outcomes
of an Internet-based diabetes self-management sup-
port program. Patient Education and Communica-
tion, 87(1):81–92.

Goran Glavas and Sanja Stajner. 2015. Simplifying
lexical simplification: Do we need simplified cor-
pora? In ACL-COLING, pages 63–68.

A. Golay, G. Lagger, and A. Giordan. 2007. Motivat-
ing patient with chronic diseases. Journ of Med and
the Person, 5(2):57–63.

19



Natalia Grabar and Thierry Hamon. 2014. Automatic
extraction of layman names for technical medical
terms. In ICHI 2014, Pavia, Italy.

Natalia Grabar and Thierry Hamon. 2016. A large
rated lexicon with French medical words. In LREC
(Language Resources and Evaluation Conference),
pages 1–12.

C Iacobini. 2003. Composizione con elementi neoclas-
sici. In Maria Grossmann and Franz Rainer, editors,
La formazione delle parole in italiano, pages 69–96.
Walter de Gruyter.

R Jucks and R Bromme. 2007. Choice of words
in doctor-patient communication: an analysis of
health-related internet sites. Health Commun,
21(3):267–77.

G Keating. 2009. Sensitivity to violations of gender
agreement in native and non-native Spanish: An
eye-movement investigation. Language Learning,
59:503–35.

DA Lindberg, BL Humphreys, and AT McCray. 1993.
The Unified Medical Language System. Methods
Inf Med, 32(4):281–291.

A Lüdeling, T Schmidt, and S Kiokpasoglou. 2002.
Neoclassical word formation in German. Yearbook
of Morphology, pages 253–283.

Heidi Lüttmann, Pienie Zwitserlood, and Jens Bölte.
2011. Sharing morphemes without sharing mean-
ing: Production and comprehension of Ger-
man verbs in the context of morphological rela-
tives. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy/Revue canadienne de psychologie exprimentale,
65(3):173–191.

A McCray. 2005. Promoting health literacy. J of Am
Med Infor Ass, 12:152–163.

S Miellet, L Sparrow, and S Sereno. 2008. The ef-
fects of frequency and predictability in French: An
evaluation of the E-Z Reader model. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14:762–769.

M Nilsson Benfatto, G qvist Seimyr, J Ygge, T Pansell,
A Rydberg, and C Jacobson. 2016. Screening for
dyslexia using eye tracking during reading. PLoS
ONE, 11(12):e0165508.

V Patel, T Branch, and J Arocha. 2002. Errors in
interpreting quantities as procedures : The case
of pharmaceutical labels. Int Journ Med Inform,
65(3):193–211.

J Pélicand, C Fournier, and I Aujoulat. 2009. Obser-
vance, auto-soin(s), empowerment, autonomie: qua-
tre termes pour questionner les enjeux de l’éducation
du patient dans la relation de soins. ADSP, 66:21–
23.

N Pletneva, A Vargas, and C Boyer. 2011. How do gen-
eral public search online health information? Tech-
nical report, Health On the Net Foundation.

K Rayner. 1998. Eye movements in reading and infor-
mation processing: 20 years of research. Psycholog-
ical bulletin, 124(3):372–373.

CA Rubino and HA Minden. 1973. Analysis of eye-
movements in children with reading disability. Cor-
tex, 9:217–220.

S Sharmin, O Spakov, KJ Rih, and AL Jakobsen.
2008. Effects of time pressure and text complexity
on translators fixations. In ETNA, pages 123–126.

AD Singh, P Mehta, S Husain, and R Rajkumar.
2016. Quantifying sentence complexity based on
eye-tracking measures. In Workshop on Computa-
tional Linguistics for Linguistic Complexity, pages
202–212.

Laurent Sparrow, S Miellet, and Yann Coello. 2003.
The effects of frequency and predictability on eye
fixations in reading: An evaluation of the E-Z reader
model. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26:503–505.

MK Tanenhaus, MJ Spivey-Knowiton, KM Eberharda,
and JC Sedivy. 1995. Integration of visual and lin-
guistic information in spoken language comprehen-
sion. Science, 268:1632–1634.

TM Tran, H Chekroud, P Thiery, and A Julienne. 2009.
Internet et soins : un tiers invisible dans la relation
médecine/patient ? Ethica Clinica, 53:34–43.

J Trueswell, M Tanenhaus, and S Garnsey. 1994. Se-
mantic influences on parsing: Use of thematic role
information in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Jour-
nal of Memory and Language, 33:285–318.

HM Walker. 1940. Degrees of freedom. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 31(4):253–269.

D Wendt, T Brand, and B Kollmeier. 2014. An eye-
tracking paradigm for analyzing the processing time
of sentences with different linguistic complexities.
PLoS ONE, 9(6):e100186.

MV Williams, RM Parker, DW Baker, NS Parikh,
K Pitkin, WC Coates, and JR Nurss. 1995. Inad-
equate functional health literacy among patients at
two public hospitals. JAMA, 274(21):1677–1682.

V Yaneva, I Temnikova, and R Mitkov. 2015. Acces-
sible texts for autism: An eye-tracking study. In Int
ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Ac-
cessibility, pages 49–57.

Qing T Zeng, Tony Tse, Jon Crowell, Guy Divita,
Laura Roth, and Allen C Browne. 2005. Identi-
fying consumer-friendly display (CFD) names for
health concepts. In Ann Symp Am Med Inform Assoc
(AMIA), pages 859–63.

20


