



















































Attaining the Unattainable? Reassessing Claims of Human Parity in Neural Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 1: Research Papers, pages 113–123
Belgium, Brussels, October 31 - Novermber 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64012

Attaining the Unattainable? Reassessing Claims
of Human Parity in Neural Machine Translation

Antonio Toral
Center for Language and Cognition

University of Groningen
The Netherlands

a.toral.ruiz@rug.nl

Sheila Castilho Ke Hu Andy Way
ADAPT Centre

Dublin City University
Ireland

firstname.secondname@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract

We reassess a recent study (Hassan et al.,
2018) that claimed that machine translation
(MT) has reached human parity for the transla-
tion of news from Chinese into English, using
pairwise ranking and considering three vari-
ables that were not taken into account in that
previous study: the language in which the
source side of the test set was originally writ-
ten, the translation proficiency of the evalua-
tors, and the provision of inter-sentential con-
text. If we consider only original source text
(i.e. not translated from another language, or
translationese), then we find evidence showing
that human parity has not been achieved. We
compare the judgments of professional trans-
lators against those of non-experts and dis-
cover that those of the experts result in higher
inter-annotator agreement and better discrim-
ination between human and machine transla-
tions. In addition, we analyse the human trans-
lations of the test set and identify important
translation issues. Finally, based on these find-
ings, we provide a set of recommendations for
future human evaluations of MT.

1 Introduction

Neural machine translation (NMT) has revolu-
tionised the field of MT by overcoming many
of the weaknesses of the previous state-of-the-art
phrase-based machine translation (PBSMT) (Ben-
tivogli et al., 2016; Toral and Sánchez-Cartagena,
2017). In only a few years since the first work-
ing models, this approach has led to a substan-
tial improvement in translation quality, reported
in terms of automatic metrics (Bojar et al., 2016,
2017; Sennrich et al., 2016). This has ignited
higher levels of expectation, fuelled in part by hy-
perbolic claims from large MT developers. First
we saw in Wu et al. (2016) that Google NMT
was “bridging the gap between human and ma-
chine translation [quality]”. This was amplified

recently by the claim by Hassan et al. (2018) that
Microsoft had ”achieved human parity” in terms
of translation quality on news translation from
Chinese to English, and more recently still by
SDL who claimed to have “cracked” Russian-to-
English NMT with “near perfect” translation qual-
ity.1 However, when human evaluation is used to
compare NMT and SMT, the results do not always
favour NMT (Castilho et al., 2017a,b).

Accompanying the claims regarding the capa-
bility of the Microsoft Chinese-to-English NMT
system, Hassan et al. (2018) released their exper-
imental data2 which permits replicability of their
experiments. In this paper, we provide a detailed
examination of Microsoft’s claim to have reached
human parity for the task of translating news from
Chinese (ZH) to English (EN). They provide two
definitions in this regard, namely:

Definition 1. If a bilingual human judges the
quality of a candidate translation produced by a
human to be equivalent to one produced by a ma-
chine, then the machine has achieved human par-
ity.

Definition 2. If there is no statistically signifi-
cant difference between human quality scores for
a test set of candidate translations from a machine
translation system and the scores for the corre-
sponding human translations then the machine has
achieved human parity.

The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows. First, we identify and discuss three poten-
tial issues in Microsoft’s human evaluation, con-
cerning (i) the language in which the source text
was originally written, (ii) the competence of the
human evaluators with respect to translation, and
(iii) the linguistic context available to these evalu-
ators (Section 2). We then conduct a new modified

1https://www.sdl.com/about/news-media/press/2018/sdl-
cracks-russian-to-english-neural-machine-translation.html

2http://aka.ms/Translator-HumanParityData

113

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64012


evaluation of their MT system on the same dataset
taking these issues onboard (Section 3). In so do-
ing, we reassess whether human parity has indeed
been achieved following what we consider to be
a fairer evaluation setting. We then take a closer
look at the quality of Microsoft’s dataset with the
help of an English native speaker and a Chinese
native speaker, and discover a number of problems
in this regard (Section 4). Finally, we conclude the
paper (Section 5) with a set of recommendations
for future human evaluations, together with some
remarks on the risks for the whole field of over-
hyping the capability of the systems we build.

2 Potential Issues

2.1 Original Language of the Source Text
The test set used by Hassan et al. (2018)
(newstest2017) was the ZH reference from the
news translation shared task at WMT 2017 (Bo-
jar et al., 2017),3 which contains 2,001 sentence
pairs, of which half were originally written in
ZH and the remaining half were originally writ-
ten in EN. Figure 1 represents the WMT test set
and the respective translation. The organisers of
WMT 2017 manually translated each of these two
subsets (files A1 and B1 in Figure 1) into the
other language (B2 and A2, respectively) to pro-
duce the resulting parallel test set of 2,001 sen-
tence pairs. Thus, Hassan et al. (2018) machine-
translated 2,001 sentences from ZH into EN, but
only half of them were originally written in ZH
(file D1); the other half were originally written in
EN, then they were translated by a human trans-
lator into ZH (as part of WMT’s organisation),
and this human translation was finally machine-
translated by Microsoft into EN (file D2). Mi-
crosoft also human-translated the ZH reference
file into EN to use as reference translations (file C
- EN REF). Therefore, 50% of their EN reference
comprises EN translations direct from the original
Chinese (file C1), while 50% are EN translations
from the human-translated file from EN into ZH
(file C2), i.e. backtranslation of the original EN
(A1). While their human evaluation is conducted
on three different subsets (referred to as Subset-
2, Subset-3, and Subset-4 in Tables 5d to 5f of
their paper), since all three are randomly sampled
from the whole test set, these subsets still contain
around 50% of sentences originally written in ZH
and around 50% originally written in EN.

3http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task.html

Figure 1: WMT test set and Microsoft Translation ZH-
to-EN reference and MT output

We hypothesize that the sentences originally
written in EN are easier to translate than those
originally written in ZH, due to the simplification
principle of translationese, namely that translated
sentences tend to be simpler than their original
counterparts (Laviosa-Braithwaite, 1998). Two
additional universal principles of translation, ex-
plicitation and normalisation, would also indicate
that a ZH text originally written in EN would be
easier to translate. Therefore, we explore whether
the inclusion of source ZH sentences originally
written in EN distorts the results, and unfairly
favours MT.

2.2 Human Evaluators

The human evaluation described in Hassan et al.
(2018) was conducted by “bilingual crowd work-
ers”. While the authors implemented a set of qual-
ity controls to “guarantee high quality results”,
no further details are provided on the selection of
evaluators and their linguistic expertise. In addi-
tion, no inter-annotator agreement (IAA) figures
were provided. We acknowledge, however, that
agreement cannot be measured using the conven-

114



tional Kappa coefficient, since their human evalu-
ation uses a continuous scale (range [0− 100]).

It has been argued that non-expert translators
lack knowledge of translation and so might not
notice subtle differences that make one transla-
tion better than another. This was observed in
the human evaluation of the TraMOOC project4 in
which authors compared the evaluation of MT out-
put of professional translators against crowd work-
ers (Castilho et al., 2017c). Results showed that
for all language pairs (involving 11 languages), the
crowd workers tend to be more accepting of the
MT output by giving higher fluency and adequacy
scores and performing very little post-editing.

With that in mind, we attempt to replicate the
results achieved in Hassan et al. (2018) by redo-
ing the manual evaluation with participants with
different levels of translation proficiency, namely
professional translators (henceforth referred to as
experts) and bilingual speakers with no formal
translation qualifications (henceforth referred to as
non-experts).

2.3 Context

Hassan et al. (2018) evaluated the sentences in
the testset in randomised order, meaning that sen-
tences were evaluated in isolation. However, doc-
uments such as the news stories that make up
the test set contain relations that go beyond the
sentence level. To translate them correctly one
needs to take this inter-sentential context into ac-
count (Voigt and Jurafsky, 2012; Wang et al.,
2017a). The MT system by Hassan et al. (2018)
translates sentences in isolation while humans nat-
urally consider the wider context when conducting
translation.

Our hypothesis is that referential relations that
go beyond the sentence-level were ignored in the
evaluation as its setup considered sentences in iso-
lation (randomised). This probably resulted in
the evaluation missing some errors by the MT
system that might have been caused by its lack
of inter-sentential contextual knowledge. In con-
trast, our revised human evaluation takes inter-
sentential context into account. Sentences are not
randomised but evaluated in the order they appear
in the documents that make up the test set. In
addition, when a sentence is evaluated, the eval-
uator can see both the previous and the next sen-
tence, akin to how a professional translator works

4http://tramooc.eu/

in practice. In the same spirit, concurrent work by
Läubli et al. (2018) contrasts the evaluation of sin-
gle sentences and entire documents in the dataset
by Hassan et al. (2018), and shows a stronger
preference for human translation over MT when
evaluating documents as compared to isolated sen-
tences.

3 Evaluation

3.1 Experimental Setup

We conduct a human evaluation in which at the
same time evaluators are shown a source ZH sen-
tence and three EN translations thereof: (i) the hu-
man translation produced by Microsoft (file C in
Figure 1: henceforth referred to as HT), (ii) the
output of Microsoft’s MT system (file D: hence-
forth MS), and the output of a production system,
Google Translate (henceforth GG).5 We take these
three translations from the data provided by Has-
san et al. (2018).

Instead of giving evaluators randomly selected
sentences, they see them in order. We randomised
the documents in the test set (169) and prepared
one evaluation task per document, for the first 49
documents (503 sentences). Of these 49 docu-
ments, 41 were originally written in ZH (amount-
ing to 299 sentences, with each document contain-
ing 7.3 sentences on average) and the remaining 8
were originally written in EN (204 sentences, av-
erage of 25.5 sentences per document). Evaluators
were asked to annotate all the sentences of each
document in one go, so that they can take inter-
sentential context into account.

Rather than direct assessment (DA) (Graham
et al., 2015), as in Hassan et al. (2018), we conduct
a relative ranking evaluation. While DA has some
advantages over ranking and has replaced the latter
at the WMT shared task since 2017 (Bojar et al.,
2017), ranking is more appropriate for our eval-
uation due to the fact that we evaluate sentences
in consecutive order (rather than randomly). This
can be accommodated in ranking as we can show
all three translations for each source sentence to-
gether with the previous and next source sentences

5We note that in the study by Hassan et al. (2018), 9 differ-
ent translations were compared: 3 reference translations, and
the output from six MT systems, 4 of which were Microsoft
systems (including one online), plus Google Translate and the
Sogou system (Wang et al., 2017b), the best-performing sys-
tem at WMT-2017. This, together with the fact that we use
different methods, may affect the comparability of the results
obtained to some degree.

115



Figure 2: Snapshot from the human evaluation showing the first sentence from the first document, which contains
30 sentences.

at the same time. In contrast, in DA only one trans-
lation is shown at a time, which is of course eval-
uated in isolation. An important advantage of DA
is that the number of annotations required grows
linearly (rather than exponentially with ranking)
with the number of translations to be evaluated;
this is relevant for WMT’s shared task as there
may be many MT systems to be evaluated, but not
for our research as we have only three translations
(HT, MS and GG). In any case, both approaches
have been found to lead to very similar outcomes
as their results correlate very strongly (R ≥ 0.92
in Bojar et al. (2016)).

Our human evaluation is performed with the
Appraise tool (Federmann, 2012).6 Figure 2
shows a snapshot of the evaluation. Subsequently,
we derive an overall score for each translation (HT,
MS and GG) based on the rankings. To this end
we use the TrueSkill method adapted to MT eval-
uation (Sakaguchi et al., 2014) following its us-
age at WMT15,7 i.e. we run 1,000 iterations of
the rankings recorded with Appraise followed by
clustering (significance level α = 0.05).

Five evaluators took part in our evaluation: two
professional Chinese-to-English translators and
three non-experts. Of the two professional transla-
tors, one is a native English speaker with a fluent
level of Chinese, and the other is a Chinese na-
tive speaker with a fluent level of English. The

6https://github.com/cfedermann/Appraise
7https://github.com/mjpost/wmt15

three non-expert bilingual participants are Chi-
nese native speakers with an advanced level of En-
glish. These bilingual participants are researchers
in NLP, and so their profile is similar to some of
the human evaluators of WMT, namely MT re-
searchers.8

All evaluators completed all 49 documents, ex-
cept the third non-expert, who completed the first
18. Similarly, all evaluators ranked all the sen-
tences in the documents they evaluated, except the
second professional translator, who skipped 3 sen-
tences. In total we collected 6,675 pairwise judge-
ments.

3.2 Results

3.2.1 Original Language
To find out whether the language in which the
source sentence was originally written has any
effect on the evaluation, we show the resulting
Trueskill scores for each translation taking into ac-
count all the sentences in our test set versus con-
sidering the sentences in two groups according to
the original language (ZH and EN). The results are
shown in Table 1.

Regardless of the original language, GG is the
lowest-ranked translation, thus providing an indi-

8It is an open question as to whether using bilingual NLP
researchers may affect the results obtained. While we fol-
low the practice of WMT here – which differs from the ap-
proach taken by Hassan et al. (2018), who used bilingual
crowd workers – we intend in future work to investigate this
further.

116



Rank Original language
Both ZH EN

n = 6675 n = 3873 n = 2802

1 HT 1.587* HT 1.939* MS 1.059
2 MS 1.231* MS 1.199* HT 0.772*
3 GG -2.819 GG -3.144 GG -1.832

Table 1: Ranks of the translations given the original
language of the source side of the test set shown with
their Trueskill score (the higher the better). An aster-
isk next to a translation indicates that this translation is
significantly better than the one in the next rank.

cation that the quality obtainable from the MS sys-
tem is a notable improvement over state-of-the-art
NMT systems used in production. We observe that
HT outperforms significantly MS when the origi-
nal language is ZH, but the difference between the
two is not significant when the original language
is EN. Hence, we confirm our hypothesis that the
use of translationese as the source language dis-
torts the results in favour of MS.

Next, we check whether this effect of transla-
tionese is also present in the evaluation by Has-
san et al. (2018). To this end, we concatenate
all their judgments and model them with mixed-
effects regression. Our dependent variable is the
score, scaled down from the original range [0, 100]
to [0, 1], which we aim to predict with one contin-
uous predictor – sentence length – and two fac-
torial independent variables: translation (levels
HT, MS and GG) and original language (levels
ZH and EN). The identifiers of the sentence and
the annotator are included as random effects. We
plot the interaction between the translation and the
original language of the resulting model in Fig-
ure 3. HT outperforms MS by around 0.05 abso-
lute points for sentences whose original language
is ZH. However this gap disappears for source sen-
tences originally written in EN, where we see that
the score for MS is actually slightly higher than
that of HT, though the difference is not signifi-
cant. We observe a clear effect of translationese
(EN): compared to ZH, the scores of both MT sys-
tems increase substantially (GG over 10% abso-
lute and MS over 6% absolute), while the HT score
increases only very slightly.

Our hypothesis was theoretically supported by
the simplification principle of translationese. Ap-
plied to the test data, this would mean that the por-
tion originally written in ZH is more complex than

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

zh en

Original language of the source sentence

S
co

re
 (

ra
ng

e 
[0

,1
])

SystemID

●

●

●

HT

MS

GG

Figure 3: Interaction between the MT system (lev-
els HT, MS and GG) and the original language of the
source sentence (levels ZH and EN).

the part originally written in EN. To check whether
this is the case, we compare the two subsets of the
test set using a measure of text complexity, type-
token ratio (TTR). While both subsets contain a
similar number of sentences (1,001 and 1,000),
the ZH subset contains more tokens (26,468) than
its EN counterpart (22,279). We thus take a sub-
set of the ZH (840 sentences) containing a similar
amount of words to the EN data (22,271 words).
We then calculate the TTR for these two sub-
sets using bootstrap resampling. The TTR for ZH
(M = 0.1927, SD = 0.0026, 95% confidence in-
terval [0.1925, 0.1928]) is 13% higher than that for
EN (M = 0.1710, SD = 0.0025, 95% confidence
interval [0.1708, 0.1711]).

Given the findings of this experiment, in the re-
mainder of the paper we use only the subset of the
test set whose original language is ZH.

3.2.2 Evaluators
To find out whether the translation expertise of
the evaluator has any effect on the evaluation, we
show the resulting Trueskill scores for each trans-
lation resulting from the evaluations by non-expert
versus expert translators. The results are shown in
Table 2. The gap between HT and MS is consid-
erably wider for experts (2.2 vs 1.2) than for non-
experts (1.3 vs 0.9). We link this to our expec-
tation, based on the previous finding by Castilho
et al. (2017c), that non-experts are more lenient
regarding MT errors. In other words, non-experts
disregard translation subtleties in their evaluation,
which leads to the gap between different transla-
tions – in this case HT and MS – being smaller.
In Section 4 we explore this further by means of a
qualitative analysis.

117



Rank Translators
All Experts Non-experts

n = 3873 n = 1785 n = 2088

1 HT 1.939* HT 2.247* HT 1.324
2 MS 1.199* MS 1.197* MS 0.94*
3 GG -3.144 GG -3.461 GG -2.268

Table 2: Ranks and Trueskill scores (the higher the
better) of the three translations for evaluations carried
out by expert versus non-expert translators. An aster-
isk next to a translation indicates that this translation is
significantly better than the one in the next rank.

Trueskill provides not only an overall score for
each translation but also its confidence interval.
We expect these to be wider for the annotations
by non-experts than those annotations given by ex-
perts, which would indicate that there is more un-
certainty in the rankings by non-experts. Figure 4
shows the scores for each translation by experts
and non-experts, i.e. the same values that were
shown in Table 2, now enriched with their 95%
confidence intervals.

The sum of the confidence scores for the three
translations is just 0.33% higher for non-experts
(3.076) than for experts (3.066). However, it is
worth mentioning that, compared to the width of
the intervals for experts, those for non-experts are
considerably wider for HT (16% relative differ-
ence) while they are similar or smaller for MT (1%
and -11% relative differences for GG and MS, re-
spectively).

HT MS GG HT MS GG
Experts Non-experts

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Tr
ue

sk
ill

 s
co

re

Figure 4: Trueskill scores of the three translations by
experts and non-experts together with their confidence
intervals.

We now look at inter-annotator agreement
(IAA) between experts and non-experts. We com-
pute the Kappa (κ) coefficient (Cohen, 1960), as
done at WMT 2016 (Bojar et al., 2016, Sec-

tion 3.3):9

k =
P (A)− P (E)
1− P (E)

where P (A) represents the proportion of times
that the annotators agree, and P (E) the proportion
of times that the annotators are expected to agree
by chance.

As expected, the IAA between professional
translators (κ = 0.254) is notably higher, 95%
relative, than that between non-experts (κ =
0.130).10 As we have three non-experts, we can
calculate the IAA not only among the three of
them but also between all three pairs of non-expert
annotators; all of the resulting coefficients (0.057,
0.135 and 0.195) are lower than that between ex-
perts (0.254).

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
time that IAA of professional translators and non-
experts has been compared for the human eval-
uation of MT. In related work, Callison-Burch
(2009) compared the agreement level of two types
of non-expert translators: MT developers (referred
to in that paper as ‘experts’) and crowd work-
ers. He showed that crowd workers can reach the
agreement level of MT researchers using multiple
workers and weighting their judments. That said,
both types of non-experts conducted human eval-
uations for WMT13 (Bojar et al., 2013) and the
IAA rates of the crowd were well below those of
the researchers.

4 Analyses

As mentioned previously, we have examined the
quality of the test sets, both originally written in
ZH and originally written in EN and their respec-
tive translations. An English native speaker anal-
ysed both the original EN version from the WMT
set (file A1 in Figure 1) and the human transla-
tion of the set originally written in ZH performed
by Microsoft (file C2). A Chinese native speaker,
who is fluent in English and has experience with
translation from EN into ZH, analysed the original

9https://github.com/cfedermann/wmt16/
blob/master/scripts/compute_agreement_
scores.py

10Due to the fact that one non-expert evaluated only 18 out
of the 49 documents, the IAA calculations consider only the
first 18 documents. If we consider all 49 documents, the trend
remains the same; the IAA for the two experts is higher than
that for the two non-experts who evaluated all the documents:
0.265 vs 0.196.

118



ZH versions (file B1) as well as the human transla-
tion of the set originally written in EN performed
by the WMT organisers (file B2).

4.1 Original English
Regarding the English original (file A1 in Figure
1), the analysis showed that apart from a few
grammar errors, the test set appeared to be fluent
and grammatical. Examples of grammatical errors
in the original EN files are:

i) “The idiot didn’t realize they were still on the
air”
ii) “Soon after, Scott Russel who was hosting
CBC’s broadcast apologized on-air for Mac-
Donald’s comment, saying: ‘We apologize the
comment on a swim performance made it to air.’ ”

In example i) “on air” should be used instead
of “on the air”, while in the example ii) a missing
“that” should be used after “apologize”. Nonethe-
less, these errors did not affect the ZH translation
(file B2) or the following backtranslation (C2) into
EN. Our hypothesis is that because the test set is
news content, it also contains tweets (such as ex-
ample i)) and quotes from speech interviews (such
as example ii)), which are more likely to contain
grammatical errors.

4.2 Chinese Translation
Regarding the human translation into ZH per-
formed by WMT (file B2 in Figure 1), most of
the sentences contained grammatical errors and/or
mistranslations of proper nouns. Furthermore,
although some translations were grammatically
correct and accurate, they were not fluent. When
the ZH-translated sentences were compared
against the source (A1), the translations were
mostly accurate. However, when analyzed on
their own without the source, they sound disfluent:

iii)
EN original (A1): A front-row seat to the stunning
architecture of the Los Angeles Central Library
ZH (B2):洛杉矶中央图书馆的惊艳结构先睹为
快

iv)
EN original (A1): An open, industrial loft in
DTLA gets a cozy makeover
ZH (B2): DTLA的开放式工厂阁楼进行了一次
舒适的改造。

In example iii), although the ZH translation has
fully transferred the meaning of the source text, it
contains word-order errors which makes the trans-
lation disfluent since the verb phrase “先睹为快”
(take a look) is placed after the object (library).
One possible translation for that is “抢先目睹洛
杉矶中央图书馆的惊艳结构” because the ZH
language syntax requires the verb to be placed be-
fore the object.

In example iv), the ZH translation contains a
grammatical error in the word “进行”, which
would imply that the loft is carrying out a
makeover. In addition, the adjective “舒适
的” (cosy) cannot be used to describe “改造”
(makeover). One possible translation for the En-
glish sentence is “DTLA的开放式工业阁楼被
改造的很舒适”.

Given this analysis, we speculate that the trans-
lation of the EN original files into ZH might not
have been performed by an experienced translator,
but rather exemplify either human translation per-
formed by an inexperienced translator, or poorly
post-edited MT.

4.3 English Translation

Regarding the EN reference files translated by
Microsoft (file C2 in Figure 1), many of the
sentences contained grammatical errors (such as
word order, verb tense and missing prepositions)
as well as mistranslations.

v)
EN original (A1): A front-row seat to the stunning
architecture of the Los Angeles Central Library
ZH (B2):洛杉矶中央图书馆的惊艳结构先睹为
快

EN (C2): Take a look of the astounding architec-
ture of the Los Angeles Central Library.

GG: The stunning structure of the Los Angeles
Central Library
MS: A sneak peek at the stunning architecture of
the Los Angeles Central Library

vi)
EN original (A1): An open, industrial loft in
DTLA gets a cozy makeover
ZH (B2):DTLA的开放式工厂阁楼进行了一次
舒适的改造。

EN (C2): A comfortable makeover was provided

119



to the open factory building design of DTLA.

GG: DTLA’s Open factory loft has a comfortable
makeover.
MS: DTLA’s open-plan factory loft has undergone
a comfortable makeover.

In example v), the EN translation of the ZH
source11 analyzed previously is translated with
the wrong preposition, i.e. ‘look of’ instead of
‘look at’. None of the professional translators
considered the reference worse than the MS
output; while one translator and one non-expert
considered it ‘as good’ as the MS output, the
other considered it better than MS but worse than
GG. Regarding the non-expert assessment, two of
them considered the HT to be as good as MS and
better than GG, and one considered the HT to be
worse than MS but better than GG.

In example vi), the EN translation (C2) of the
ZH source (B2) does not have all the information
expressed in ZH as the word ‘loft’ (阁楼) is not
translated. Moreover, the EN translation refers to
an architectural design makeover of the building
rather than an interior makeover of an attic. Both
professional translators considered the EN refer-
ence to be worse than the MS output. As far as
the non-experts are concerned, two of them con-
sidered the HT to be worse than MS, while one
considered it to be ‘as good’. This provides quali-
tative evidence that non-experts may be more tol-
erant of translation errors than professional trans-
lators.

Another example of such behaviour is the
following:

vii)
EN original (A1): Learn more about the history of
downtown’s Central Library as the Society of Ar-
chitectural Historians/Southern California Chap-
ter hosts a salon with Arnold Schwartzman and
Stephen Gee, authors of the new book ”Los An-
geles Central Library: A History of its Art and Ar-
chitecture
ZH (B2): 美国建筑史学家学会南加利福尼亚洲
分会与新书《洛杉矶中央博物馆：其艺术与建
筑历史》的作者阿诺·斯瓦茨曼和史蒂芬·吉举

11It is important to note that the translators did not have
access to the original EN (A1) and so the ZH file (B2) was
used as the source.

办了一场沙龙。观众们可通过此次活动进一步
了解市中心中央图书馆的历史

EN (C2):A salon will be hosted by Southern
California Branch of Society of Architectural
Historians and the co-authors of Los Angles
Central Museum: Art and Architectural History,
Arnold Schwarzman and Stephen Gee. It will
deliver more knowledge of the Central Library to
the participants

GG: The Southern California branch of the
American Institute of Architectural Historians has
held a salon with阿诺·斯瓦茨曼 and史蒂芬·吉,
author of the Los Angeles Central Museum:
its art and architectural history. Through this
event, viewers can learn more about the history of
Central Library in the city centre
MS: The Southern California chapter of the
American Society of Architectural Historians and
the authors of a new book, ”Los Angeles Central
Museum: Its Art and Architectural History,”
Arnold Schwartzman and Steven Gee, hosted a
salon at which viewers learned more about the
history of the Central Library in the city center

In example vii), regarding the ZH source (B2),
in addition to having the first sentence translated
into past tense – whereas the EN original (A1)
shows the salon event is happening in the near fu-
ture – it also contains a typo ‘洲’ which means
‘continent’ instead of ‘state’ ‘州’. Even though
the typo does not affect the EN translation (C2),
it shows that the quality of the ZH translation is
not as high as would be expected of professional
human translators. Regarding the EN translation
(C2), while the first sentence is mostly fluent –
although it contains a typo in ‘Angles’ (Ange-
les) and lacks the article ‘the’ before the proper
noun in the first sentence – the second sentence
lacks fluency and contains errors of omissions and
mistranslations. For example, the words “down-
town” and “history” (市中心 and 历史, respec-
tively) were not transferred over to the EN refer-
ence (C2). Furthermore, the word ‘viewers’ in the
ZH translation (观众们) was mistranslated as ‘par-
ticipants’. Nonetheless, the EN translation (C2) is
able to capture the correct tense of the sentence
since the second sentence in the ZH translation
(B2) is ambiguous regarding verbal tense. The
MS translation does a better job in keeping the flu-
ency throughout the sentence even though it mis-

120



translates the tense of the source in the past tense.
Both professional translators assessed the HT as
worse than MS, whereas two of the non-experts
considered it to be as good as MS and better than
GG. The third non-expert considered the HT to be
worse than both MT systems. This example shows
that the level of expertise of the evaluators may
have an effect on the evaluation given that non-
experts are wrongly more tolerant of MT errors.

Similarly to the ZH translation (B2) of the En-
glish original, we speculate that the EN translation
(C2) of the ZH files is more likely a human trans-
lation performed by an inexperienced translator,
or even a poorly post-edited machine translation;
even if the translation was performed by an expe-
rienced translator, such that the ZH source (B2)
contained errors or was disfluent, a professional
translator would surely be more meticulous and
fix such errors before rubber-stamping the trans-
lations.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper has reassessed a recent study that
claimed that MT has reached human parity for
the translation of news from Chinese into English,
considering three variables that were not taken
into account in that previous study: (i) the lan-
guage in which the source side of the test set was
originally written, (ii) the translation proficiency
of the evaluators, and (iii) the provision of inter-
sentential context.

The main findings of this paper are the follow-
ing:

• If we consider the subset of the test set whose
source side was originally written in ZH,
there is evidence that human parity has not
been achieved, i.e. the difference between the
human and the machine translations is signif-
icant. This is the case both in our human eval-
uation and in Microsoft’s.

• Having translationese (ZH translated from
EN in our study) as input, compared to hav-
ing original text, results in higher scores for
MT systems in Microsoft’s human evalua-
tion.

• Compared to judgments by non-experts,
those by professional translators have a
higher IAA and a wider gap between human
and machine translations.

• We have identified issues in the human trans-
lations by both WMT and Microsoft. These
indicate that these translations were con-
ducted by non-experts and that were possibly
post-edited MT output.

There is little doubt that human evaluation has
played a very important role in MT research and
development to date. As MT systems improve –
as exemplified by the progress made by Hassan
et al. (2018) over state-of-the-art production sys-
tems – and thus the gap between them and human
translators narrows, we believe that human evalu-
ation, in order to remain useful, needs to be more
discriminative. We suggest that a set of principles
should be adhered to, partly based on our findings,
which we outline here as recommendations:

• The original language in which the source
side of the test sets is written should be the
same as their source language. This will
avoid having spurious effects because of hav-
ing translationese as MT input.

• Human evaluations should be conducted by
professional translators. This allows fine-
grained nuances of translations to be taken
into account in the evaluation and should re-
sult in higher inter-annotator agreement.

• Human evaluations should proceed taking
the whole document into account rather than
evaluating sentences in isolation. This allows
for intersentential phenomena to be consid-
ered as part of the evaluation.

• Test sets should be translated by experienced
professional translators from scratch.

We are confident that adhering to these princi-
ples is sensible under any translation conditions.
Of course, if the test set is faulty, then in claim-
ing that one’s MT system outperforms one’s com-
petitors, there is a risk that what one is actually
demonstrating is the contrary, as if automatic eval-
uation metrics demonstrate a higher score, what
that could be denoting is that one’s output is actu-
ally closer to the faulty test set than producing bet-
ter output in terms of improved translation quality
per se. Of course, this has consequences not just
for the study in this paper, but for all shared tasks:
past, present, and future.12

12Ideally, it would be great if multiple references were also

121



Should material be made available by Google,
SDL or any other MT developers who claim ‘hu-
man parity’ or the like, we would be very happy
to apply these principles in subsequent rigorous
evaluations of actual demonstrable improvements
in translation quality. One thing is certain; as Way
(2018) observes, “those of us who have seen many
paradigms come and go know that overgilding the
lily does none of us any good, especially those of
us who have been trying to build bridges between
MT developers and the translation community for
many years.” We trust that our findings in this pa-
per demonstrate that while MT quality does seem
to be improving quite dramatically, human trans-
lators will continue to find gainful employment for
many years to come, despite somewhat grandiose
claims to the contrary.

On a final note, we acknowledge that our con-
clusions and recommendations are somewhat lim-
ited in that they are derived from experiments
on just one language direction and five evalua-
tors. Therefore we plan as future work to conduct
similar experiments on additional language pairs
with a higher number of evaluators. In the spirit
of Hassan et al. (2018), without which this pa-
per would not have been possible, we too make
publicly available our evaluation materials, the
anonymised human judgments and the statistical
analyses thereof.13

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the five expert and non-
expert translators that took part in this study.
We are also grateful for valuable comments on
this paper from Hany Hassan, the lead author
on the Microsoft paper. This research was par-
tially supported by the iADAATPA project funded
by CEF research action (2016-EU-IA-0132) under
grant agreement No.1331703. The ADAPT Cen-
tre for Digital Content Technology at Dublin City
University is funded under the Science Founda-
tion Ireland Research Centres Programme (Grant
13/RC/ 2106) and is co-funded under the Euro-
pean Regional Development Fund.

available, but the point remains that if these are poor qual-
ity human translations, then this is likely to skew results still
further.

13https://github.com/antot/human_
parity_mt

References
Luisa Bentivogli, Arianna Bisazza, Mauro Cettolo, and

Marcello Federico. 2016. Neural versus phrase-
based machine translation quality: a case study.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
257–267, Austin, Texas.

Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Chris Callison-Burch,
Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and
Lucia Specia. 2013. Findings of the 2013 Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 1–44, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian Huang,
Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara
Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Matt
Post, Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco
Turchi. 2017. Findings of the 2017 conference on
machine translation (wmt17). In Proceedings of
the Second Conference on Machine Translation, Vol-
ume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 169–214, Copen-
hagen, Denmark.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck,
Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara
Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Aure-
lie Neveol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt
Post, Raphael Rubino, Carolina Scarton, Lucia Spe-
cia, Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos
Zampieri. 2016. Findings of the 2016 conference
on machine translation. In Proceedings of the First
Conference on Machine Translation, pages 131–
198, Berlin, Germany.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and creative:
Evaluating translation quality using Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk. In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ’09,
pages 286–295, Singapore.

Sheila Castilho, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari,
Iacer Calixto, John Tinsley, and Andy Way. 2017a.
Is neural machine translation the new state of the
art? The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, 108(1):109–120.

Sheila Castilho, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari,
Rico Sennrich, Vilelmini Sosoni, Panayota Geor-
gakopoulou, Pintu Lohar, Andy Way, Antonio Va-
lerio Miceli Barone, and Maria Gialama. 2017b.
A Comparative Quality Evaluation of PBSMT and
NMT using Professional Translators. In MT Summit
2017, pages 116–131, Nagoya, Japan.

Sheila Castilho, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari,
Andy Way, Panayota Georgakopoulou, Maria Gi-
alama, Vilelmini Sosoni, and Rico Sennrich. 2017c.
Crowdsourcing for NMT evaluation: Professional

122



translators versus the crowd. In Translating and the
Computer 39, London. https://www.asling.
org/tc39/?page_id=3223.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for
Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Christian Federmann. 2012. Appraise: An open-source
toolkit for manual evaluation of machine translation
output. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Lin-
guistics, 98:25–35.

Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, and Nitika Mathur.
2015. Accurate evaluation of segment-level ma-
chine translation metrics. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 1183–1191,
Denver, Colorado.

Hany Hassan, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal
Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark, Christian Federmann,
Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Will
Lewis, Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-Yan Liu, Renqian
Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin, Frank Seide, Xu Tan,
Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, Shuangzhi Wu, Yingce Xia,
Dongdong Zhang, Zhirui Zhang, and Ming Zhou.
2018. Achieving Human Parity on Automatic Chi-
nese to English News Translation. https://
arxiv.org/abs/1803.05567.

Samuel Läubli, Rico Sennrich, and Martin Volk. 2018.
Has Machine Translation Achieved Human Parity?
A Case for Document-level Evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium.

Sara Laviosa-Braithwaite. 1998. Universals of trans-
lation. In Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation
Studies, pages 288–291. Routledge, London.

Keisuke Sakaguchi, Matt Post, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2014. Efficient Elicitation of Annota-
tions for Human Evaluation of Machine Translation.
In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, pages 1–11, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Edinburgh Neural Machine Translation Sys-
tems for WMT 16. In Proceedings of the First Con-
ference on Machine Translation (WMT16), pages
371–376, Berlin, Germany.

Antonio Toral and Vı́ctor M. Sánchez-Cartagena. 2017.
A multifaceted evaluation of neural versus phrase-
based machine translation for 9 language directions.
In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages 1063–
1073, Valencia, Spain.

Rob Voigt and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. Towards a liter-
ary machine translation: The role of referential co-
hesion. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012

Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Litera-
ture, pages 18–25, Montrèal, Canada.

Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Andy Way, and Liu
Qun. 2017a. Exploiting cross-sentence context for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2826–2831, Copen-
hagen, Denmark.

Yuguang Wang, Shanbo Cheng, Liyang Jiang, Jiajun
Yang, Wei Chen, Muze Li, Lin Shi, Yanfeng Wang,
and Hongtao Yang. 2017b. Sogou neural machine
translation systems for WMT17. In Proceedings
of the Second Conference on Machine Translation,
WMT 2017, page 410–415, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Andy Way. 2018. Machine translation: Where
are we at today? In Angelone E, Massey G,
and Ehrensberger-Dow M, editors, The Bloomsbury
Companion to Language Industry Studies. Blooms-
bury, London. In press.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V.
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin
Johnson, Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz Kaiser, Stephan
Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto
Kazawa, Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant
Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason
Riesa, Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado,
Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. 2016. Google’s
Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the
Gap between Human and Machine Translation.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144.

Appendix: Evaluator Instructions
Given three translations (T1, T2 and T3), the task is to rank
them from best to worst given a source segment:

• Rank a translation T1 higher (rank1) than T2 (rank2),
if the first is better than the second.

• Rank both translations equally, for example translation
T1 rank1 and T2 rank1, if they are of the same quality.

• Use the highest rank possible, e.g. if you’ve three
translations T1, T2 and T3, and the quality of T1 and
T2 is equivalent and both are better than T3, then do:
T1=rank1, T2=rank1, T3=rank2. Do NOT use lower
rankings, e.g.: T1=rank2, T2=rank2, T3=rank3.

Each task corresponds to one document. Documents contain
up to 50 sentences. If possible please annotate all the sen-
tences of a document in one go.

123


