



















































PAWS: A Multi-lingual Parallel Treebank with Anaphoric Relations


Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Models of Reference, Anaphora and Coreference, pages 68–76
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

PAWS: A Multi-lingual Parallel Treebank with Anaphoric Relations

Anna Nedoluzhko and Michal Novák
Charles University

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Prague, Czech Republic

{nedoluzko,mnovak}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Maciej Ogrodniczuk
Polish Academy of Sciences

Institute of Computer Science
Warsaw, Poland

maciej.ogrodniczuk@ipipan.waw.pl

Abstract

We present PAWS, a multi-lingual parallel
treebank with coreference annotation. It con-
sists of English texts from the Wall Street Jour-
nal translated into Czech, Russian and Polish.
In addition, the texts are syntactically parsed
and word-aligned. PAWS is based on PCEDT
2.0 and continues the tradition of multilingual
treebanks with coreference annotation. The
paper focuses on the coreference annotation
in PAWS and its language-specific differences.
PAWS offers linguistic material that can be
further leveraged in cross-lingual studies, es-
pecially on coreference.

1 Introduction

In recent years, we have witnessed a rise in multi-
lingual approaches to both theoretical and compu-
tational linguistics. Coreferential and anaphoric
relations are no exception. For instance, the
CoNLL 2012 Shared Task (Pradhan et al., 2012)
has focused on modeling coreference in three dif-
ferent languages, making use of the data from
the OntoNotes corpus (Weischedel et al., 2013).
Since then, several other multilingual parallel cor-
pora annotated with referential relations were pro-
duced (see Section 2). In this work, we go
even further. We present the PAWS treebank,
a multi-lingual parallel treebank annotated with
full-fledged coreference relations. Its current re-
lease consists of texts in four languages: English,
Czech, Russian and Polish.

A decision to build such treebank has multiple
motivations, mostly related to cross-lingual stud-
ies of coreference relations.

First, construction of such corpus tests applica-
bility of a particular annotation schema for other
languages. The project of Universal Dependen-
cies1 has shown that efforts devoted to seeking

1http://universaldependencies.org

a language-universal syntactic and morphological
representation may open up a space for novel re-
search within the field. Concerning coreference, a
single annotation schema has been applied to En-
glish, Chinese and Arabic already in OntoNotes
5.0 (Weischedel et al., 2013) and on parallel
English-German-Russian texts by Grishina and
Stede (2015).

Second, from a perspective of theoretical lin-
guistics, a cross-lingual view on particular linguis-
tic phenomena may give us more information than
a monolingual view. The present work focuses
on three Slavic languages, which despite their ap-
parent closeness exhibit considerable differences
in phenomena related to coreference, e.g. a de-
gree of using pro-drops, or diverse usage of re-
flexive pronouns. With our corpus such phenom-
ena can be directly compared across languages.
This work thus follows on the comparative anal-
ysis that has been previously conducted on coref-
erential expressions in English and Czech (Novák
and Nedoluzhko, 2015) and reflexive possessives
in English, Czech and Russian (Nedoluzhko et al.,
2016a).

Last but not least, a new coreference-annotated
parallel corpus may drive a research on cross-
lingual automatic approaches related to corefer-
ence. It includes coreference projection (Pos-
tolache et al., 2006; Grishina and Stede, 2017)
and bilingually-informed coreference resolution
(Mitkov and Barbu, 2003; Novák and Žabokrtský,
2014). Unlike ParCor 1.0 (Guillou et al., 2014),
PAWS is not tailored to machine translation exper-
iments. Nevertheless, its parallel nature suggests
that it can also be leveraged for these purposes.

The main feature of PAWS is its manual anno-
tation of coreferential relations in all included lan-
guages. As two of the languages extensively use
zero subjects, we could miss a lot of valuable in-
formation if we annotated coreference only on sur-

68



face. Therefore, we adopted the style based on
the theory of Functional Generative Description
(Sgall et al., 1986), first used for Czech in Prague
Dependency Treebank 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2006) and
for Czech and English in Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2012).
In this style, coreference and other anaphoric re-
lations are annotated on the layer of deep syn-
tax called tectogrammatical layer. It consists of
dependency trees containing both overt as well
as important elided content words. Presence of
elided words makes it possible to represent coref-
erential relations even for dropped pronouns.

To facilitate cross-lingual studies, we equip the
treebank with word alignment links between all
the language pairs. Since these links are annotated
on the tectogrammatical layer, they also cover the
reconstructed zeros. Most of the alignment links
were collected automatically. However, for se-
lected types of coreferential expressions, we la-
beled the alignment links also manually.

Figure 1 illustrates the annotation of a sam-
ple sentence in all languages, as visualized by the
TrEd tool (Pajas and Štěpánek, 2008). Every sen-
tence is represented as a dependency tree, with
squared nodes representing the expressions elided
on surface. Whereas the solid arrows correspond
to coreferential links, word alignment is marked
by dashed lines between the nodes in the trees (for
clarity, the figure shows only alignment of coref-
erential expressions).

2 Related Corpora

Our work relates to all multilingual parallel cor-
pora with linguistic annotation, especially those
for Slavic languages. ParaSol: A Parallel Corpus
of Slavic and other languages (Waldenfels, 2006)
is an aligned corpus of translated and original bel-
letristic texts featuring automatic morphosyntac-
tic annotations. The latest version comprises more
than 30 languages. InterCorp (Čermák and Rosen,
2012) is another large multi-lingual parallel syn-
chronic corpus with Czech as a pivot language,
i.e. every text has its Czech version. It features
part-of-speech tagging and lemmatization. The
Polish-Russian Parallel Corpus (Laziński and Ku-
ratczyk, 2016) features morphosyntactic descrip-
tion yet both sides differ as far as disambiguation
is concerned (present in Polish, absent in Russian
part). Paralela (Pȩzik, 2016) is a translation-based
Polish-English corpus based on publicly available

multilingual text collections and open-source par-
allel corpora featuring morphosyntactic annota-
tion.

PAWS is also one of a few corpora annotated
with coreference relations. Its English and Czech
part directly corresponds to a subset of the Prague
Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0 (Hajič
et al., 2012, PCEDT) and its coreferential ex-
tension (Nedoluzhko et al., 2016b, PCEDT 2.0
Coref). ParCor 1.0 (Guillou et al., 2014) also be-
longs to this category. It is a German-English par-
allel corpus consisting of more than 8,000 sen-
tences. Unlike PAWS, which has annotation of full
coreference chains, only pronominal coreference
is annotated in ParCor. On the other hand, texts
in the corpus come from different genres, which is
not the case in PAWS.

3 PAWS Data and Its Rich Annotation

This paper presents the PAWS treebank, which
stands for Parallel Anaphoric Wall Street Journal.
In its current version it comprises parallel texts in
English, Czech, Russian, and Polish.

English texts with their Czech translations were
extracted from Prague Czech-English Dependency
Treebank 2.0 (Hajič et al., 2012). Namely,
the data consist of 50 documents from sections
wsj1900-49. The English texts originally come
from the Wall Street Journal section of Penn Tree-
bank (Marcus et al., 1999).

Russian and Polish texts were translated from
English by one native speaker for each of the target
languages. The translations were revised and cor-
rected by the translators again, if necessary. Basic
statistics of the collected texts is shown in the up-
per part of Table 1.

All the texts were annotated with rich linguis-
tic information stratified into two layers of depen-
dency trees – the surface and deep syntax (tec-
togrammatical) layer. Whereas the English and
Czech annotation was copied from the PCEDT
without any change, we produced the Russian and
Polish annotation entirely within this project.

In PCEDT, English surface syntax trees had
been built by transforming manually annotated
constituency trees in Penn Treebank. On the
other hand, Czech surface syntax trees had been
created automatically by tools available in the
multi-purpose NLP framework Treex (Popel and
Žabokrtský, 2010). Both the English and Czech
tectogrammatical layer had been annotated manu-

69



Fi
gu

re
1:

Te
ct

og
ra

m
m

at
ic

al
re

pr
es

en
ta

tio
n

of
a

sa
m

pl
e

se
nt

en
ce

in
al

lf
ou

r
av

ai
la

bl
e

la
ng

ua
ge

s,
vi

su
al

iz
ed

by
th

e
Tr

E
d

to
ol

.
Fo

r
cl

ar
ity

,w
e

sh
ow

al
ig

nm
en

ts
fo

r
co

re
fe

re
nt

ia
l

no
de

s
on

ly
.

70



ally from scratch.
The amount of automatic processing was even

larger in the Russian and Polish annotations. Treex
was employed to obtain both types of trees. Joint
part-of-speech tagging, morphological analysis
and dependency parsing provided by the UDPipe
tool (Straka et al., 2016) were the key elements to
build surface syntax trees. These trees were then
transformed to tectogrammatical ones by a mostly
generic sequence of rule-based modifications.

In other words, the final tectogrammatical trees
are simplified and not always guaranteed to be cor-
rect, especially in the following aspects:

• Lemmata. Lemmata were set automatically
for Russian and Polish and they have been
corrected consistently only for expressions
that take (or may take) part in coreference
relations. The remaining nodes have been
mostly corrected during the annotation of tec-
togrammatical structure and coreference, if
annotators discovered a mistake, but no spe-
cial check has been carried out.

• Obligatory valency positions of predicates.
Unlike English and Czech, for which valency
lexicons2 had been used for consistent anno-
tation of valency modifications, we used no
such lexicons for Russian and Polish.

• Semantic roles. For Russian, we manually
annotated semantic roles for arguments of
a predicate, temporal, locative, and causal
adjuncts etc. The annotation of semantic
roles followed the guidelines for annotation
on the tectogrammatical level in the Prague
Dependency Treebank for Czech and English
(Mikulová et al., 2007), but it was simplified
in some respects. For example, instead of
nine temporal roles, we used only three ba-
sic ones for Russian. As for Polish, semantic
roles have not been annotated yet; we plan to
add them in future development of the cor-
pus.

• Ellipses. Whereas the English and Czech
ellipses had been added by the rules used
for the Prague Dependency Treebank3, the
inventory of reconstructed ellipsis types in
Russian and Polish was narrowed. It includes

2Lexicons PDT-Vallex (Hajič et al., 2003) and Engvallex
(Urešová, 2012) for Czech and English, respectively.

3Described in more details in (Mikulová, 2014).

only the cases necessary for coreference an-
notation.

• Identification structures. For example, in the
sample sentence in Figure 1, the name of the
magazine (Ms.) is marked as an identifica-
tion structure (with a special governing node
#Idph) in English and Czech. However, this
is not the case of Russian and Polish, where
the tectogrammatical structure is more sim-
ple.

4 Annotation of Coreference in PAWS

The coreference annotation of PAWS has been
conducted manually according to Prague corefer-
ence annotation style (Nedoluzhko et al., 2016b).4

It takes place on the tectogrammatical layer to al-
low for marking zero anaphora. The annotation
covers the cases of grammatical (syntactic) and
textual coreference.

The grammatical coreference typically occurs
within a single sentence, the antecedent is ex-
pected to be derived on the basis of grammar
rules of a given language. These are the cases
of relative and reflexive pronouns, verbs of con-
trol, coreference of arguments hidden in reciprocal
constructions (Peteri and Mary j kissed Øi+ j). and
coreference with verbal modifications that have
dual dependency (John saw Mary [Ø run around
the lake]). All the cases of grammatical corefer-
ence have been systematically annotated for En-
glish and Czech (Nedoluzhko et al., 2016b). For
Russian and Polish, grammatical coreference an-
notation has been consistently provided for the
cases of relative and reflexive pronouns. Corefer-
ence of arguments of verbs of control and corefer-
ence in reciprocal constructions have been manu-
ally annotated for Russian but only partly for Pol-
ish. However, this task is not especially urgent for
our planned comparative analysis of coreferential
expressions. In all four analyzed languages, the
controllees of the arguments of control verbs, sec-
ond arguments in reciprocal constructions and ar-
guments in constructions with dual dependencies
are unexpressed, thus the results of the compari-
son will be mostly trivial. For example in Figure
1, the unexpressed controllee is reconstructed as
the first argument of the verb publish and its coun-
terparts in Czech and Russian (see the dependent

4This paper also describes comparative analysis of our ap-
proach with coreference annotation in the OntoNotes.

71



node with the lemma #Cor under the node pub-
lish).5 It is controlled by the first argument of the
verb begin (Czech: začı́t, Russian: начинать) and
it cannot be explicitly expressed in either of the
languages.

By textual coreference, arguments are not re-
alized by grammatical means alone, but also via
context. Within this type, we annotate the follow-
ing relations:

• Pronominal coreference of personal, posses-
sive and demonstrative pronouns (e.g., Mary
– she – her).

• Coreference with textual ellipsis, for example
coreference of zero subjects in pro-drop lan-
guages. This is the case of the unexpressed
subject he in the Czech and Polish transla-
tions of the main clause he told the staff of
Ms. in the running example (see Figure 1).
In such cases, the special node #PersPron is
added to the tectogrammatical tree and the
coreference relation to the antecedent in the
previous context is annotated (as shown in the
figure). Interestingly, in the dependent clause
of this sentence, the subject is dropped only
in Czech and it is not cross-lingually coref-
erential with the expressions at the same po-
sition in the other languages (In Czech, it
is coreferential with the subject of the main
clause he; in English and Russian, this is the
magazine; in Polish, this is the publication
(publikacja)).

• Nominal textual coreference in case when the
anaphoric expression is a full nominal group
(noun with or without modifications) core-
ferring with an antecedent in the preceding
context. In the running example, such rela-
tion is held between magazine (Polish: cza-
sopismo, Czech: časopis, Russian: жур-
нал), the name of this magazine Ms. in the
same sentence and an antecedent in one of
the previous sentences.

• Anaphoric reference of local and temporal
adverbs (there, then, etc.).

• Textual reference to multiple antecedents (so-
called split antecedent). In this case, there
are (technically) two coreference links of a

5 In Polish, the sentence has a different syntactic structure,
so the argument cannot be reconstructed.

special type, pointing to the split parts of the
antecedent.

In the same way as for the other coreference-
annotated corpora with Prague-style annotation,
the textual coreference is marked in case of
anaphoric references to events (so-called abstract
anaphora), i.e. anaphoric references to verbal
groups, clauses, sentences and larger textual seg-
ments (Nedoluzhko and Lapshinova-Koltunski,
2016). If the antecedent does not exceed one sen-
tence, it is annotated in the same way as other
coreference types, the root of the verbal phrase be-
ing the antecedent of a pronominal element.

If an anaphoric expression refers endophori-
cally to a discourse segment of more than one sen-
tence, including the cases where the antecedent is
understood by inference from a broader context,
a special relation with no explicitly marked an-
tecedent is annotated.

We also specifically mark presence of exophora,
which denotes that the referent is “out” of the co-
text, i.e. it is only known from the actual situa-
tion. Exophoric reference is annotated in cases of
temporal and local deixis (this year, this country),
deixis with pronominal adverbs (here), as well as
exophoric reference to the whole text.

In accordance with the Prague coreference an-
notation tradition, textual coreference is marked
up to the length of 20 sentences.

For more detailed description and examples of
the applied coreference annotation scheme, see
(Nedoluzhko et al., 2016b).

5 Statistics and Observations

The bottom part of Table 1 shows the statistics of
coreference-related annotation in PAWS. Here are
the main observations:

1. The number of tectogrammatical nodes in
Czech is larger than in the three remaining
languages. This could be caused either by
the translator’s style or by some language-
specific features of Czech. The answer to this
question requires further comparison (first
of all to other translated and non-translated
texts) but manual analysis of the texts shows
a strong tendency in Czech to use finite sub-
ordinated clauses instead of non-finite infini-
tive or gerundial clauses in English, Polish
and Russian. Finite constructions are natu-
rally longer than infinite ones.

72



English Czech Russian Polish

Sentences 1,078
Tokens 26,149 25,697 25,704 25,763

Tectogrammatical nodes 18,611 20,696 18,874 18,541
Coreferring nodes 4,210 4,403 4,254 3,371

grammatical coreference 729 528 749 294
textual pron. coref. overt 544 213 493 206
textual pron. coref. elided 76 643 32 243
textual nominal coreference 1,361 1,496 1,610 1,568
first mentions 1,277 1,330 1,243 979
reference to split antecedents 149 149 91 65
reference to a segment 28 23 16 12
exophora 46 21 20 4

Table 1: Statistics of the data and its coreference-related annotation.

2. The number of coreferring nodes in Pol-
ish is smaller than in the three remaining
languages. The explanation for this substan-
tial difference is in the simplification of the
tectogrammatical annotation for Polish. To
keep the annotation consistency for different
kind of complicated syntactic structures, the
tectogrammatical annotation rules for Czech,
English and Russian are very sophisticated.
For example, for verbs of speech (e.g., say,
claim, contend), the valency position of the
verbal content has been reconstructed in the
tectogrammatical tree (according to verbal
valency lexicons for these languages), even
if it is not explicitly expressed in the corre-
sponding clause. See Figure 2, where two
obligatory valencies are reconstructed for En-
glish, but not for Polish.

3. On the other hand, the biggest number of
coreferring nodes is in Czech. This corre-
lates with the greater amount of tectogram-
matical nodes as well as to the fact that Czech
uses personal constructions with overt and
unexpressed pronouns more frequently. Be-
sides, this high number reflects especially de-
tailed manual annotation of tectogrammatical
level, by which the omitted valency positions
have been reconstructed also by a large part
of deverbatives, which was not the case for
other languages.

4. The number of grammatical coreference
relations is the largest in Russian. In Pol-
ish, on the contrary, it is very small. The

reason for the small number in Polish is the
missing annotation of the control verbs coref-
erence (see Section 4). As for the large num-
ber for Russian, it can be partially explained
by a large number of infinitive constructions,
where unexpressed subjects are controlled by
the actants of their governing control verbs
by means of grammatical coreference.

5. Overt textual pronominal coreference.
This point is especially interesting, as it
shows the different degree of pro-drop qual-
ities of English, Czech, Polish and Russian.
As observed from the table, overt textual
pronominal coreference is most frequent in
English. Indeed, in English, there is no
possibility for subject omission, whereas for
Slavic languages this often happens. How-
ever, the subject can be omitted in the
analyzed languages to a different degree.
Czech is a highly pro-drop language, where
anaphoric use of personal pronouns in the
subject position is untypical. On the other
hand, Polish and Russian show substantially
lower degree of pro-drop qualities, Polish
being slightly more pro-drop than Russian
(Kibrik, 2011).

6. Another observation supported by the brief
inspection of Table 1 is that coreference
is more frequently realized by nominal
groups in Russian than in the other lan-
guages. This observation requires further
analysis. This could be a translation effect
that should be however proved by compar-

73



Figure 2: Different tectogrammatical representation of the English sentence and its Polish translation. The English
sentence contains additional unexpressed coreferential node.

ison with other translations. On the other
hand, the annotation effect is also possible.
In some cases, especially in cases of nomi-
nal coreference, a coreference relation may
be ambiguous (so-called near-identity (Re-
casens et al., 2011)) and it is up to the an-
notator, whether to annotate it or not. In such
cases, the use of anaphoric markers can in-
fluence the annotator’s decision: In case of
explicit anaphoric reference, the relation is
more likely to be annotated.

6 Word Alignment

The annotated texts are equipped with word
alignment between each pair of the languages,
both on the surface and deep syntax representa-
tions. Alignment links were collected by run-
ning GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2000) on a union of
the texts in question and a large number of addi-
tional parallel texts. The additional parallel texts
were collected using the OPUS project (Tiede-
mann, 2012) and their size was roughly 15 million
sentence pairs for each language pair. The word
alignment was then projected to the tectogrammat-
ical layer and complemented with alignment for
reconstructed nodes using syntax-based heuristics.

For selected types of coreferential expressions,
we annotated their cross-lingual counterparts also
manually. Particularly, we marked alignment of
English, Czech and Russian pronouns and zeros
to their counterparts in each of these three lan-

guages.6 Polish is not covered by manual align-
ment, yet.

7 Availability

PAWS is freely available for non-commercial re-
search and educational purposes. It can be down-
loaded from the Lindat/Clarin repository.7 The
treebank is released in the following file formats:

Plain text format. The texts with inline anno-
tation of coreferential mentions. This format also
contains reconstructed ellipses, which can be eas-
ily removed by running a script that we provide in
the release.

Treex XML format. The internal format of
PAWS contains the entire annotation. Documents
in this format can be viewed using the TrEd tool.

CoNLL 2012 format. This format was used for
the CoNLL 2012 Shared Task in coreference reso-
lution. As this format allows for representing sur-
face words only, it does not include all annotated
mentions and anaphoric links, especially for pro-
drop languages.

8 Conclusion

In this work, we introduced the PAWS treebank: a
multi-lingual parallel treebank with manual anno-
tation of coreferential relations and cross-lingual

6It extends the annotation of English-Czech alignment al-
ready provided in PCEDT 2.0 Coref.

7 http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2683

74



alignment between selected types of coreferential
expressions. The treebank currently comprises
English texts and its Czech, Russian and Polish
translations.

We have primarily built PAWS for future analy-
sis on difference between the languages in terms
of how they express coreference. Nevertheless,
due to its extensive annotation of syntax, semantic
roles, coreference relations and alignment it may
serve as a basis for many different linguistic stud-
ies. Cross-lingual analysis of any phenomena can
bring a deeper insight and allow for its better un-
derstanding than if each of the languages was an-
alyzed in isolation.

9 Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge support from
the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (project
GA16-05394S) and the Polish National Science
Centre (contract number 2014/15/B/HS2/03435).
The research reported in the present contri-
bution has been using language resources de-
veloped, stored and distributed by the LIN-
DAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Edu-
cation, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic
(project LM2015071). We also thank three anony-
mous reviewers for their instructive comments.

References
Yulia Grishina and Manfred Stede. 2015. Knowledge-

Lean Projection of Coreference Chains across Lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop
on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages
14–22, Beijing, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Yulia Grishina and Manfred Stede. 2017. Multi-Source
Annotation Projection of Coreference Chains: As-
sessing Strategies and Testing Opportunities. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Coreference
Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (CORBON 2017),
pages 41–50, Valencia, Spain. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Aaron Smith, Jörg
Tiedemann, and Bonnie Webber. 2014. ParCor 1.0:
A Parallel Pronoun-Coreference Corpus to Support
Statistical MT. In Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2014), pages 3191–3198, Reykjavik,
Iceland. European Language Resources Association.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr
Sgall, Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková,
Marie Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́
Semecký, Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef

Toman, Zdeňka Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský.
2012. Announcing Prague Czech-English Depen-
dency Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 8th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), pages 3153–3160, Istan-
bul, Turkey. European Language Resources Associ-
ation.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajičová, Petr
Sgall, Petr Pajas, Jan Štěpánek, Jiřı́ Havelka, Marie
Mikulová, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Magda Ševčı́ková-
Razı́mová, and Zdeňka Urešová. 2006. Prague De-
pendency Treebank 2.0. Philadelphia, USA. Lin-
guistic Data Consortium.

Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Zdeňka Urešová,
Alevtina Bémová, Veronika Kolářová, and Petr
Pajas. 2003. PDT-VALLEX: Creating a Large-
coverage Valency Lexicon for Treebank Annotation.
In Proceedings of The Second Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories, volume 9 of Mathe-
matical Modeling in Physics, Engineering and Cog-
nitive Sciences, pages 57–68, Vaxjo, Sweden. Vaxjo
University Press.

Andrej A. Kibrik. 2011. Reference in Discourse. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Marek Laziński and Magdalena Kuratczyk. 2016. The
University of Warsaw Polish-Russian Parallel Cor-
pus. In Polish-Language Parallel Corpora, pages
83–95. Instytut Lingwistyki Stosowanej UW, War-
saw, Poland.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and Ann Taylor. 1999. Penn Tree-
bank 3. Philadelphia, USA. Linguistic Data Consor-
tium.

Marie Mikulová. 2014. Semantic Representation of El-
lipsis in the Prague Dependency Treebanks. In Pro-
ceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics and Speech Processing RO-
CLING XXVI (2014), pages 125–138, Taipei, Tai-
wan. Association for Computational Linguistics and
Chinese Language Processing (ACLCLP).

Marie Mikulová, Alevtina Bémová, Jan Hajič, Eva
Hajičová, Jiřı́ Havelka, Veronika Kolářová, Lucie
Kučová, Markéta Lopatková, Petr Pajas, Jarmila
Panevová, Magda Ševčı́ková, Petr Sgall, Jan
Štěpánek, Zdeňka Urešová, Kateřina Veselá, and
Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2007. Annotation on the Tec-
togrammatical Level in the Prague Dependency
Treebank. Technical Report 3.1. ÚFAL, Charles
University. Prague, Czech Republic.

Ruslan Mitkov and Catalina Barbu. 2003. Using Bilin-
gual Corpora to Improve Pronoun Resolution. Lan-
guages in contrast, 4(2).

Anna Nedoluzhko, Anna Schwarz (Khoroshkina), and
Michal Novák. 2016a. Possessives in Parallel
English-Czech-Russian Texts. Computational Lin-
guistics and Intellectual Technologies, (15):483–
497.

75



Anna Nedoluzhko and Ekaterina Lapshinova-
Koltunski. 2016. Abstract Coreference in a
Multilingual Perspective: A View on Czech and
German. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes (COR-
BON 2016), pages 47–52, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Anna Nedoluzhko, Michal Novák, Silvie Cinková,
Marie Mikulová, and Jiřı́ Mı́rovský. 2016b. Coref-
erence in Prague Czech-English Dependency Tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2016), pages 169–176, Paris, France. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association.

Michal Novák and Anna Nedoluzhko. 2015. Corre-
spondences between Czech and English Coreferen-
tial Expressions. Discours: Revue de linguistique,
psycholinguistique et informatique., 16:1–41.

Michal Novák and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2014. Cross-
lingual Coreference Resolution of Pronouns. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Techni-
cal Papers, Dublin, Ireland. Dublin City University
and Association for Computational Linguistics.

Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved Sta-
tistical Alignment Models. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 440–447, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Petr Pajas and Jan Štěpánek. 2008. Recent Advances in
a Feature-rich Framework for Treebank Annotation.
In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Piotr Pȩzik. 2016. Exploring Phraseological Equiv-
alence with Paralela. In Polish-Language Par-
allel Corpora, pages 67–81. Instytut Lingwistyki
Stosowanej UW, Warsaw.

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT:
Modular NLP Framework. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Advances in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 293–304, Berlin,
Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Oana Postolache, Dan Cristea, and Constantin Orasan.
2006. Transferring Coreference Chains through
Word Alignment. In Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, Genoa, Italy. European Language Re-
sources Association.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. CoNLL-
2012 Shared Task: Modeling Multilingual Unre-
stricted Coreference in OntoNotes. In Joint Confer-
ence on EMNLP and CoNLL - Shared Task, pages
1–40, Jeju Island, Korea. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Marta Recasens, Eduard Hovy, and M. Antònia Martı́.
2011. Identity, Non-identity, and Near-identity: Ad-
dressing the Complexity of Coreference. Lingua,
121:1138–1152.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. D. Reidel Publishing Company,
Dordrecht, Netherlands.

Milan Straka, Jan Hajič, and Jana Straková. 2016. UD-
Pipe: Trainable Pipeline for Processing CoNLL-
U Files Performing Tokenization, Morphological
Analysis, POS Tagging and Parsing. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages
4290–4297, Paris, France. European Language Re-
sources Association.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel Data, Tools and In-
terfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eight In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), pages 2214–2218, Paris,
France. European Language Resources Association.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2012. Building the PDT-VALLEX
Valency Lexicon. In Proceedings of the fifth Corpus
Linguistics Conference, pages 1–18, Liverpool, UK.
University of Liverpool.

František Čermák and Alexandr Rosen. 2012. The
Case of InterCorp, a Multilingual Parallel Cor-
pus. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics,
17(3):411–427.

Ruprecht von Waldenfels. 2006. Compiling a Parallel
Corpus of Slavic Languages. Text Strategies, Tools
and the Question of Lemmatization in Alignment.
Beiträge der Europäischen Slavistischen Linguistik
(POLYSLAV), 9:123–138.

Ralph Weischedel, Martha Palmer, Mitchell Marcus,
Eduard Hovy, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
Nianwen Xue, Ann Taylor, Jeff Kaufman, Michelle
Franchini, Mohammed El-Bachouti, Robert Belvin,
and Ann Houston. 2013. OntoNotes Release 5.0.
Philadelphia, USA. Linguistic Data Consortium.

76


