




































Joint Modeling for Query Expansion and Information Extraction with Reinforcement Learning


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Fact Extraction and VERification (FEVER), pages 34–39
Brussels, Belgium, November 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

34

Joint Modeling for Query Expansion and Information Extraction with
Reinforcement Learning

Motoki Taniguchi, Yasuhide Miura and Tomoko Ohkuma
Fuji Xerox Co., Ltd.

{motoki.taniguchi, yasuhide.miura, ohkuma.tomoko}@fujixerox.co.jp

Abstract

Information extraction about an event can be
improved by incorporating external evidence.
In this study, we propose a joint model for
pseudo-relevance feedback based query ex-
pansion and information extraction with re-
inforcement learning. Our model generates
an event-specific query to effectively retrieve
documents relevant to the event. We demon-
strate that our model is comparable or has bet-
ter performance than the previous model in
two publicly available datasets. Furthermore,
we analyzed the influences of the retrieval ef-
fectiveness in our model on the extraction per-
formance.

1 Introduction

Information extraction about an event is gaining
growing interest because of the increases in text
data. The task of information extraction about an
event from a text is defined to identify a set of val-
ues including entities, temporal expressions and
numerical expressions that serve as a participant
or attribute of the event. The extracted informa-
tion is useful for various applications such as risk
monitoring (Borsje et al., 2010) and decision mak-
ing support (Wei and Lee, 2004).

Conventional information extraction systems
provide higher performance if the amount of la-
beled data is larger. Labeled training data is
expensive to produce and thus the data amount
is limited. In this case, extraction accuracy
can be improved using an alternative approach
that incorporates evidence from external sources
such as the Web (Kanani and McCallum, 2012;
Narasimhan et al., 2016; Sharma et al., 2017).
However, this approach faces the following chal-
lenges: issuing an effective query to the external
source, identifying documents relevant to a target
event from retrieval results and reconciling the val-
ues extracted from the relevant documents.

To overcome these problems, several attempts
have been made to model the decisions as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) with deep rein-
forcement learning (RL) (Narasimhan et al., 2016;
Sharma et al., 2017). The agent of these models is
trained to maximize expected rewards (extraction
accuracy) by performing actions to select an ex-
panded query for external source and to reconcile
values extracted from documents retrieved from
the external source. The models use the title of
source document as an original query and tem-
plates to expand this query. Expansion terms of
the template are same in any event even though an
optimal query depends on the event. Therefore, it
is still a challenge to issue an effective query to an
external source.

In this study, we extended the previous mod-
els by introducing a query expansion based on
pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF) (Xu and Croft,
1996). The PRF based query expansion assumes
that the top-ranked documents retrieved by an
original query are relevant to the original query.
An agent of our model selects a term from those
documents and generates an expanded query by
adding the term into the original query. The PRF
based query expansion enables us to add an event-
specific term into the query without additional re-
sources. For instance, let us consider an infor-
mation extraction about a shooting incident. The
query “Shooting on Warren Ave. leaves one dead”
retrieves the documents which may contain the
term “New York”. The addition of the event-
specific term “New York” to the query leads to the
filtering out of irrelevant documents, and thus to
improves retrieval performance because “Warren
Ave.” is located in “New York”. Therefore, we ex-
pect to improve extraction accuracy by introduc-
ing PRF based query expansion.

In contrast to the previous models, candidate
terms for query expansion in our model vary de-



35

Figure 1: Illustration of states, actions and state transition in our framework. For simplicity, only the sets of current
and newly extracted values are shown for the states.

pending on an event. Therefore, we exploit an
original query and its candidate terms information
as inputs of policy networks in addition to state
information.

The contributions of this paper are follows:

• We propose a joint model for PRF based
query expansion and information extraction
with RL.

• We investigated the oracle extraction accu-
racy as an indicator of the model’s retrieval
performance to reveal that the PRF based
query expansion outperforms the template
query in two publicly available datasets.

• We demonstrate that our model is comparable
or better extraction performance compared to
the previous model in the datasets.

2 Related Work

Information extraction incorporating external
sources: Information extraction incorporating ex-
ternal sources has been increasingly investigated
in knowledge base population (Ji and Grishman,
2011; West et al., 2014) and multiple document
extraction (Mann and Yarowsky, 2005). In con-
trast to the tasks of these studies, a challenge ex-
ists in our task to identify documents relevant to
a target event, and this complicates extraction of
information.

Narasimhan et al. (2016) and Sharma et al.
(2017) modeled the information extraction tasks
as an MDP with RL. They demonstrated that their
models outperformed conventional extractors and
meta-classifier models. There are two crucial dif-
ferences between our model and aforementioned
models. First, the proposed model is trained to se-
lect an optimal term of query expansion for each

original query instead of a query template. Sec-
ond, the proposed model also leverages an original
query and its candidate terms as the input of pol-
icy networks, whereas the above-mentioned mod-
els use only state information.

Query expansion: Query expansion can
be categorized into global and local methods
(Manning et al., 2008). The global methods in-
clude query expansion using a manual thesaurus
(Voorhees, 1994), and an automatically generated
thesaurus based on word co-occurrence statistics
over corpus (Qiu and Frei, 1993). The template
query that is used in the previous RL based model
belongs to the global methods.

There are several approaches of local methods
that use query log (Cui et al., 2002), and are based
on PRF (Xu and Croft, 1996). We employed a
PRF based method because it does not require ad-
ditional resources. Moreover, local methods have
been evidenced to outperform global methods in
information retrieval (Xu and Croft, 1996).

Nogueira and Cho (2017) proposed an RL
based approach to model query reformulation in
information retrieval. They also reformulated a
query through PRF. In contrast, our proposed ap-
proach targets information extraction rather than
document retrieval. The goal of our task is to
extract multiple values of event attributes as well
as to retrieve relevant documents. Moreover, the
document collection in the RL-based approach
(Nogueira and Cho, 2017) is limited to Wikipedia
pages or academic papers, while we use the Web
as an open document-collection platform.

3 Proposed Model

3.1 Framework

We model the information extraction task
as an MDP in a similar manner to that by



36

Narasimhan et al. (2016) and Sharma et al.
(2017); however, the query-selection strategy
differs. An agent in our framework selects a term
to add to an original query instead of selecting
a query template. In this section, we mainly
describe the difference between our framework
and the previous framework.

At the beginning of each episode, an agent is
given a source document to extract information
about an event. Figure 1 illustrates an example
of state transition. The state comprises the con-
fidence score of current and newly extracted val-
ues, the match between current and new values,
term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-
IDF) of context words, and TF-IDF similarity be-
tween source and current documents, similar to the
method by Narasimhan et al. (2016). At each step,
the agent performs two actions: a reconciliation
decision ad, which involves the accepting of ex-
tracted values for one or all attributes or rejecting
all newly extracted values (or ending an episode),
and a term selection for query expansion aw. In
the example, the agent takes a reconciliation deci-
sion ad to update the value of City attribute from
Baltimore to Philadelphia based on the state st in
time step t. Simultaneously, the agent performs
term selection aw that is used to form the ex-
panded query to retrieve the next document. The
candidate terms W = {w1, w2, · · · , wN} are col-
lected from the documents retrieved by an original
query q0. Here, we use the title of the source doc-
ument as q0. The agent selects a term wi from
W and generates expanded query qi by adding wi
into q0. qi is used to retrieve the next document
and the new values are extracted from the docu-
ment by base extractor. State st+1 of the next step
is determined according to the updated values of
the event attributes and the newly extracted val-
ues. The agent receives a reward, which is de-
fined as the difference between the accuracy in
the current time step and the previous time step.
We add a negative constant to the reward to avoid
long episodes. In the subsequent time steps, the
agent sequentially chooses the two actions ad and
aw until ad is a stop decision. For more de-
tails of state, reward and base extractor, refer to
(Narasimhan et al., 2016).

The agent is trained to optimize the expected re-
wards by choosing actions to select an expansion
term for query expansion and to reconcile values
extracted from documents.

Figure 2: Overview of our model. FC: fully connected
layer; ⊕: concatenation of vectors.

3.2 Network Architecture

We use neural networks to model decision pol-
icy πd(ad|st) and term selection policy πq(aw|st)
as probability distributions over candidate actions
ad and aw. Figure 2 represents an overview of
our policy networks. Decision policy πd(ad|st)
and value function V (st) is calculated using a
state representation rst that is obtained with two
fully connected layers in the same manner as in
Sharma et al. (2017).

In contrast to the previous framework, candi-
date terms in our framework depend on an event.
Hence, we utilize a pairwise interaction function
whose input is the state representation rst and ex-
panded query representation rqi to calculate term
selection policy πq(aw|st). The words of q0 are
embedded using a word embedding layer and pro-
cess using a convolutional neural network (CNN)
and a max pooling layer, similar to the method by
Kim (2014). rqi for each term wi is obtained by
feeding the concatenation of the output of the max
pooling layer and the word embedding of a candi-
date term wi to a fully connected layer FCQ1. We
feed the concatenation of rst and rqi for each term
wi to a fully connected layer FCQ2. The parame-
ters of the FCQ1 and FCQ2 are shared among the
candidate terms. πq(aw|st) is obtained by normal-
izing the outputs of the FCQ2 over the candidate
terms.

We train the policy and value networks by
using the Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic
(A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) as used in Sharma et al.
(2017). A3C can speed up the learning process
of the policy networks by training multiple agents
asynchronously. Further details on the A3C can be
found in Sharma et al. (2017).



37

Table 1: The number of source documents and down-
loaded documents in each set.

4 Experiments

4.1 Experimental Setting

We evaluated our model on Shooting and Adul-
teration datasets that used in Narasimhan et al.
(2016). For each an original query, we collected
the candidate terms obtained from the first M
words of the top-K documents retrieved through
Bing Search API1. The vocabulary size of the can-
didate terms N is defined as MK + 1 because the
null token, namely no query expansion, is also in-
cluded in the candidate terms. We downloaded the
top 20 documents from the Bing Search API as
the external sources through an expanded query.
Statistics of the original datasets and downloaded
documents is described in Table 1.

Word embeddings are set to fixed vectors of 300
dimensions and is initialized with word2vec em-
bedding trained on Google News Dataset2. We
set the unit size of FCS1 and FCS2 to 20, FCQ1
to 300, FCV and FCQ2 to 1. Further, we set the
number of feature maps of CNN to 200 and the
window size of CNN to 3. Discount factor and
the constant of entropy regularization were set to
0.8 and 0.01, respectively. We utilize RMSprop
(Hinton et al., 2012) as the optimizer and set the
number of threads in A3C to 16.

We employed RLIE-A3C (Sharma et al., 2017)
as a baseline model to compare with our model.
We used their public implementation3.

4.2 Results

We evaluated the average extraction accuracy for
attributes as done in Sharma et al. (2017). Table
2 shows the results of Shooting and Adulteration.

1https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitive-
services/bing-web-search-api/

2https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
3https://github.com/adi-sharma/RLIE A3C

Our model achieved 1.9 pt increase of average ac-
curacy in Shooting and 0.2 pt decrease in Adul-
teration against the RLIE-A3C model when the
number of expanded queries N was 5 for Shoot-
ing and 4 for Adulteration; these correspond to
(M,K) = (4, 1) or (3, 1) respectively. We varied
(M,K) to (10, 1), (10, 2) and (10, 3), which indi-
cate N = 11, 21 and 31, to evaluate the effect of
the number of expanded queries. The accuracy in
our models rarely changes even though the num-
ber of expanded queries increases.

Table 2: Extraction accuracy of RLIE-A3C and our
models on Shooting and Adulteration datasets. Under-
lined values represent the best values on each datasets.

4.3 Discussion

We evaluated oracle extraction accuracy to deter-
mine the effectiveness of PRF-based query expan-
sion and to discover why our model does not per-
form well in Adulteration. The oracle extraction
accuracy is calculated if an agent perfectly takes
actions to select a term for query and reconcile the
values from the documents. In other words, the
oracle extraction accuracy can be regarded as an
indicator of retrieval performance.

Table 3 presents the oracle extraction accuracies
from only source documents, the documents re-
trieved by the original queries and the documents
retrieved by the expanded queries by using tem-
plates and PRF. Compared with template queries,
PRF based query expansion with the same number
of queries performed better in Shooting and Adul-
teration. Oracle extraction accuracy further im-

Table 3: Oracle extraction accuracy. “Documents”
refers to documents to extract information.



38

Shooting
1 Dead, 3 Wounded In Shooting On Roxbury Street
Police: 3 Dead, 1 In Surgery After Dallas Shooting CBS Dallas
San Francisco police confirm 4 dead following shooting in Hayes Valley

Adulteration
Subway investigates china media reports of doctored expiry dates
High level of seafood fraud found Denmark
Fake honey worthing leads to trading standards prosecution

Table 4: Examples of titles of source documents in Shooting and Adulteration datasets

proved with the increases in the number of queries
N . However, no difference was found in its ex-
traction performance (see Table 2). This indicates
that increasing the number of queries N compli-
cates the selection of an optimal term for query
expansion.

Compared to Shooting, the oracle accuracy of
the original queries in Adulteration is relatively
low. Therefore, the assumption that the top-ranked
documents retrieved by the original query are rel-
evant to the original query is not satisfied in Adul-
teration. We consider that this is why our model
does not achieve an improvement in the extraction
performance on Adulteration. Table 4 shows ex-
amples of the titles of source document used as
original queries. We can observe that named entity
and numerical expression appeared in more titles
of the source documents in Shooting than those
in Adulteration. Therefore, the original queries in
Adulteration lack specifics and weaken the extrac-
tion performance.

5 Conclusions

We integrated the PRF based query expansion to
the task of information extraction using RL. Our
model can expand a query into an event-specific
query without additional resources. To integrate
the PRF based query expansion, we introduced
a pairwise interaction function to calculate term
selection policy πq(aw|s). Experimental results
showed that our model is comparable or better
than the previous model in terms of extraction per-
formance in two datasets. Furthermore, we ana-
lyzed the relationship between retrieval effective-
ness and extraction performance.

In the future work, we plan to develop a model
that can generate a complete term sequence of the
expanded query rather than adding a term to a
query.

References

Jethro Borsje, Frederik Hogenboom, and Flavius Fras-
incar. 2010. Semi-automatic financial events discov-

ery based on lexico-semantic patterns. Int. J. Web
Eng. Technol., 6(2):115–140.

Hang Cui, Ji-Rong Wen, Jian-Yun Nie, and Wei-Ying
Ma. 2002. Probabilistic query expansion using
query logs. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’02, pages
325–332, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swer-
sky. 2012. Neural networks for machine learning
lecture 6a overview of mini-batch gradient descent.

Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2011. Knowledge base
population: Successful approaches and challenges.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 1148–1158. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Pallika H. Kanani and Andrew K. McCallum. 2012.
Selecting actions for resource-bounded information
extraction using reinforcement learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’12, pages
253–262, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classification. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 1746–1751. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Gideon Mann and David Yarowsky. 2005. Multi-
field information extraction and cross-document fu-
sion. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL’05), pages 483–490. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and
Hinrich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, New York,
NY, USA.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi
Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley,
David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2016. Asyn-
chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 1928–1937.

Karthik Narasimhan, Adam Yala, and Regina Barzilay.
2016. Improving information extraction by acquir-
ing external evidence with reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages



39

2355–2365. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017. Task-
oriented query reformulation with reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 574–583. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yonggang Qiu and Hans-Peter Frei. 1993. Concept
based query expansion. In Proceedings of the
16th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, SIGIR ’93, pages 160–169, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Aditya Sharma, Zarana Parekh, and Partha Talukdar.
2017. Speeding up reinforcement learning-based
information extraction training using asynchronous
methods. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 2658–2663. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Ellen M. Voorhees. 1994. Query expansion using
lexical-semantic relations. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, SIGIR ’94, pages 61–69, New York, NY,
USA. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.

Chih-Ping Wei and Yen-Hsien Lee. 2004. Event de-
tection from online news documents for support-
ing environmental scanning. Decis. Support Syst.,
36(4):385–401.

Robert West, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Kevin Murphy,
Shaohua Sun, Rahul Gupta, and Dekang Lin. 2014.
Knowledge base completion via search-based ques-
tion answering. In WWW.

Jinxi Xu and W. Bruce Croft. 1996. Query expansion
using local and global document analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th Annual International ACM SI-
GIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’96, pages 4–11, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.


