



















































Do Speakers Produce Discourse Connectives Rationally?


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning and Processing, pages 6–16
Melbourne, Australia, July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

6

Do speakers produce discourse connectives rationally?

Frances Yung1 and Vera Demberg1,2
1Dept. of Language Science and Technology

2Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saarland University
Saarland Informatic Campus, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
{frances,vera}@coli.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

A number of different discourse connec-
tives can be used to mark the same dis-
course relation, but it is unclear what fac-
tors affect connective choice. One recent
account is the Rational Speech Acts the-
ory, which predicts that speakers try to
maximize the informativeness of an utter-
ance such that the listener can interpret the
intended meaning correctly. Existing prior
work uses referential language games to
test the rational account of speakers’ pro-
duction of concrete meanings, such as
identification of objects within a picture.
Building on the same paradigm, we design
a novel Discourse Continuation Game to
investigate speakers’ production of ab-
stract discourse relations. Experimental
results reveal that speakers significantly
prefer a more informative connective, in
line with predictions of the RSA model.

1 Introduction

Discourse relations connect units of texts to a co-
herent and meaningful structure. Discourse con-
nectives (DC), e.g., but and so, are used to signal
discourse relations. In Example (1), the connec-
tive as is used to mark the causal relation between
the two clauses.

(1) That tennis player has been losing his
matches, as we know he is still recovering
from the injury.

However, discourse relations can often be ex-
pressed by more than one DC, or not be marked
by an explicit connective at all (these are referred
to as implicit relations). For example, the connec-
tives since or because can alternatively be used
in Example (1). Note however that there can be

small differences in meaning between alternative
connectives: because stresses more strongly that
the reason is the new information in the discourse.

There is a large body of literature on the com-
prehension of DCs and unmarked discourse re-
lations (see for example Sanders and Noordman
(2000)), but the production of discourse relations
is under-studied. Patterson and Kehler (2013) and
Asr and Demberg (2015) investigate the choice
of using a DC vs. omitting it, and find that ex-
plicit connectives are more often used when the
discourse relation cannot be easily predicted from
prior context. More recently, Yung et al. (2017,
2016) proposed a broad-coverage RSA model to
account for relation signaling, and showed that the
RSA-based modeling improves the prediction of
whether a relation is marked explicitly or not.

Nonetheless, it is still unclear, what factors af-
fect the speaker’s choice of a specific explicit con-
nective. Given the previous success of the RSA
account in predicting connective presence in a
corpus, we here set out to investigate whether
the choice of DCs follows the game-theoretic
Bayesian model of pragmatic reasoning (Frank
and Goodman, 2012). As broad-coverage corpus
analyses can be very noisy and can include a lot of
confounding effects, in particular with respect to
small meaning differences between connectives,
which we cannot control in a corpus study, we here
test for an RSA effect in a tightly controlled exper-
imental setting.

2 Background: The rational account of
linguistic variation

Natural language allows us to formulate the same
message in many different ways. The rational
speech act (RSA) model (Frank and Goodman,
2012; Frank et al., 2016) explains linguistic vari-
ation in terms of speakers’ pragmatic reasoning



7

about the listeners’ interpretation in context. Us-
ing Bayesian inference, the model formalizes the
utility of an utterance to convey the intended
meaning in context c. In our case, the utterance
is a DC and the meaning is a discourse relation r.
Utility is defined in Equation 1:

Utility(DC; r, c)

= − logP (r|DC, c)− cost(DC)
(1)

− logP (r|DC, c) quantifies the informative-
ness of DC, i.e. how likely the intended mean-
ing r can be interpreted by the listener in context
c. cost(DC) quantifies the production cost of the
utterance. The probability that a rational speaker
chooses DC is proportional to its utility.

P (DC|r, c) ∝ expαUtility(DC;r,c) (2)

According to the RSA theory, the rational ut-
terance should provide the most unambiguous in-
formation for the listener, and, at the same time,
be as brief as possible. These goals correspond
to Grice’s Maxims of effective communication
(Grice, 1975).

The RSA model has been shown to account
for speakers’ choice during production for various
phenomena, such as referential expressions (De-
gen et al., 2013; Frank et al., 2016), scalar impli-
catures (Goodman and Stuhlmüller, 2013), yes-no
questions (Hawkins et al., 2015), shape descrip-
tions (Hawkins et al., 2017) and uncertainty ex-
pressions (Herbstritt and Franke, 2017). In these
existing works, speakers’ utterances are collected
by experiments in the form of referential language
games. Although various types of speaker utter-
ances have been investigated, the intended mean-
ings to be conveyed in the experiments are com-
monly the identification of concrete, visible ob-
jects or attributes, such as figures, colors and quan-
tities presented in pictures.

3 Methodology

In this work, we conduct language game experi-
ments to test the rational account of speakers’ pro-
duction of discourse relations. In contrast to pre-
vious approaches that use RSA to predict the pres-
ence or absence of DCs in corpus data (Yung et al.,
2016, 2017), we compare the theoretical choice
of RSA with the choice of human subjects. To
our knowledge, this is the first attempt to manip-
ulate the production of abstract meanings in the
language game paradigm.

According to RSA, among alternative DCs that
are literally correct for a given intended dis-
course relation, speakers prefer the DC with larger
P (DC|r, c) and thus larger utility (Equation 2).
Since DCs are generally frequent expressions con-
sisting of no more than a few words, we assume
that the production cost for all DCs is constant.
Therefore, the DC that is more informative in con-
text (larger P (r|DC, c)) is the one preferred by the
speaker (Equation 1).

We use crowdsourcing to collect discourse pro-
cessing responses from naive subjects, following
previous success (Rhode et al., 2016; Scholman
and Demberg, 2017). It is, nonetheless, challeng-
ing to manipulate the intended meaning in a pro-
duction scenario, because discourse relation can-
not be presented visually, as in other referential
language games. We design a novel Discourse
Continuation Game that induces the subjects to
choose a DC, among multiple options with differ-
ent levels of informativeness, to convey a particu-
lar discourse relation.

3.1 Task and stimulus design

In each Discourse Continuation Game, the sub-
ject is asked to choose a DC as a hint for another
player, Player 2, who is supposed to guess how
the discourse will continue1. There are three pos-
sible continuations and three DC options in each
question. The subject (Player 1) is told that both
players see the possible continuations but only
Player 1 knows which continuation is the target.
Figure 1 shows the screen shot of one of the ques-
tions.

Figure 1: Sample question of the Discourse Con-
tinuation Game, under the with competitor condi-
tion. Continuation B is replaced by “he was close
in every match.” under the no competitor condi-
tion.

1We focus on speaker’s production in this work, so the lis-
tener, Player 2, does not exist. Fake responses are generated
by the system during the experiment. See Section 3.2.



8

Each continuation option represents a discourse
relation and the target continuation is the discourse
relation we want the subjects to produce. For the
example in Figure 1, continuations A, B and C rep-
resent causal, temporal and concession relations
respectively.

The three DC options differ in the level of in-
formativeness in context, i.e. P (r|DC, c). For the
example in Figure 1, since is the ambiguous DC
because it can be used to mark the target contin-
uation A (causal relation), as well as continuation
B (temporal relation). As is the unambiguous DC
because, among the available continuations, it can
be used to mark the target continuation only. But
is the unrelated DC because it is used to mark con-
tinuation C, which is not the target.

When the speaker utters since, continuation B
can be seen as the competitor of the target contin-
uation A. We modify the informativeness of since
by replacing the competitor continuation with an-
other unrelated continuation. Under this no com-
petitor condition, both since and as are unambigu-
ous DCs for the target continuation A. The no com-
petitor condition serves as the control condition
because DC choice of a particular utterance can be
subject to other factors on top of informativeness.
By keeping the target identical and only manipu-
lating the set of alternative continuations, we can
control for fine nuances in connective meaning: if
a connective is more suitable for marking the tar-
get continuation than another one, this will be the
same for both conditions.

DC context c P (r|DC, c)
ambiguous since with comp. lower
unambiguous as with comp. high
unrelated but with comp. lowest
ambiguous since no comp. high
unambiguous as no comp. high
unrelated but no comp. lowest

Table 1: Level of informativeness of the DC op-
tions in the Discourse Continuation Game exam-
ple in Figure 1.

The level of informativeness of various DC op-
tions for target continuation A is summarized in
Table 1. When the speaker intends to convey the
discourse relation represented by continuation A,
both since and as are literally correct DCs, so both
DCs are similarly likely to be selected under the
no competitor condition. But, according to RSA

theory, the unambiguous DC as is pragmatically
preferred when there is a competitor in context.
We crowdsource responses of the Discourse Con-
tinuation Game to evaluate this RSA prediction.

3.2 Experiment

We constructed 36 stimuli similar to the exam-
ple in Figure 1, covering eight ambiguous DCs,
as shown in Table 2.

ambiguous unambiguous stimulus
connective alternative count total
and also 2

and then 4
therefore 1
so 3 10

while at the same time 4
but 1
when 1
however 1 7

as since 2
while 1
whilst 1 4

or otherwise 3
alternatively 1 4

meanwhile however 1 1
since as 5 5
then after that 1 1
when if 4 4

36

Table 2: List of DCs covered in the stimuli

Since many readings are possible if a discourse
relation is unmarked, to make sure that the stimuli
are valid, we conduct pretests by recruiting a sepa-
rated group of participants to fill in any words that
connect the first sentence with the continuation op-
tions. A stimulus is excluded or revised if, for any
of the 3 continuation options, any pretest partici-
pant fills in a DC that is among the 3 DC options
but is not the matching DC (or one of the match-
ing DCs for continuation A). The pretest makes
sure that: 1) all options are compatible with the
intended literal DC; 2) the target continuation is
compatible with both of the DCs that match it; and
3) continuation B and C are not compatible with
the DCs which are not their literal connectives in
the experiment.

The 36 stimuli (each in two conditions) were
divided up into 12 separate lists, each containing
6 items. Each participant saw 3 items in each of
the two conditions. An additional 6 filler items
were added to each of the lists, resulting in a total
of 12 different questions in a list. The order of
items in a list was randomized. For each of the 12
lists, we collected 20 responses, resulting in a total



9

of 240 native-English-speaking participants who
took part in the experiment. 127 participants are
females and 73 are males. Their average age is 34.
148 participants come from the United Kingdom,
34 from the United States and 18 from other coun-
tries, including Canada, Ireland etc. The partici-
pants were recruited through the Prolific platform.
They took on average 8 minutes to complete the
task, and were reimbursed for their efforts with
0.8 GBP each. The filler questions had the same
form as the stimuli, except that continuations B or
C were set as the target instead of the experimen-
tally interesting continuation A. Responses from
participants who chose more than 6 non-matching
DCs in their list were excluded and recollected.
The experimental interface was constructed using
Lingoturk (Pusse et al., 2016).

The experimental interface was designed to re-
semble a communication scenario where two play-
ers interact at real time, although the responses
of “Player 2” were actually automatically gener-
ated by the system, and were shown to the subject
with a time lag of 4 seconds. “Player 2” was pro-
grammed to be an rational Gricean pragmatic lis-
tener, who in the unambiguous condition always
chose the continuation that best fits the connec-
tive, and who supposed that the speaker would
choose an unambiguous DC when there was a
competitor in context. For example, if the par-
ticipant chose the ambiguous since, “Player 2”
would guess continuation B, assuming that the par-
ticipant would have chosen the unambiguous as if
he meant continuation A.

To motivate the participants, they were re-
warded with a bonus of 0.06 GBP for each ques-
tion where the “Player 2” successfully guessed
the target continuation.

4 Results

We calculate the agreement among the participants
for each stimulus by

Count(majority response)

Count(all response)

and average it over the items. The average agree-
ment of the filler items is 87% while that of the
stimulus items is 68% and 71% respectively for
the no- and with competitor conditions. The agree-
ment of the filler items is higher than that of the
stimulus items. It is expected because only one
of the three connective options literally matches

the target continuation in the filler items while two
of the options are literally correct in the stimu-
lus items. The agreement under the no competitor
condition is slightly lower than the with competi-
tor condition. This follows our prediction that, un-
der the no competitor condition, participants more
freely choose between the two literally correct op-
tions, because they are equally informative.

Figure 2: Distribution of participant responses.

The distribution of the participant responses is
shown in Figure 2. In both conditions, most of
participants choose one of the connectives that fits
the target relation (i.e., the ambiguous or unam-
biguous DC). This shows that our stimuli are valid,
because both options are literally correct for the
target continuation.
Also, the results show that the distribution of con-
nective choice differs between the two conditions:
In the no competitor condition, where both the am-
biguous and unambiguous DCs are similarly infor-
mative, speakers’ choice between the two options
is evenly distributed. In the condition with the
competitor, the ambiguous connective is chosen
significantly less often than in the no-competitor
condition. This is the expected effect according
to the RSA model, as the ambiguous connective is
less informative in the condition with the competi-
tor.

Moreover, we are also interested to see if there
is a learning effect as the trials progress. When the
subjects chose an unambiguous connective, a pos-
itive feedback was displayed to the subjects say-
ing that Player 2 correctly guessed the continua-
tion. Figure 3 shows the distribution of subject
responses grouped by the number of correct an-



10

Figure 3: Distribution of participant responses by
the number of previous positive feedbacks exclud-
ing the fillers

swers they previously got, excluding the fillers. In-
creased preference for unambiguous connectives
is not observable; the subjects prefer an unambigu-
ous connective since the first question and the ten-
dency persists until the end of the trial.

We test for significance of the effects of the
with/no competitor conditions as well as previous
positive feedbacks on connective choice using a
logistic mixed effects model. Responses choos-
ing the unrelated DCs are not taken into account.
We included by-subject and by-stimulus random
intercepts, as well as random slopes for the effect
of the condition under both subject and item. The
regression values of the effects are reported in Ta-
ble 3. Statistical analyses were performed using
the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015), version 1.1-
15. The with competitor condition was confirmed
to have statistically significant positive effect on
the choice of unambiguous DC, but no significant
effect from the number of previous positive feed-
backs is detected. Further investigation is neces-
sary to evaluate the effect of pragmatic feedbacks,
possibly in longer trials of experiment.

To summarize, speakers do not have a prefer-
ence choosing either of the DC options that are lit-
erally appropriate for the target discourse relation
when both DCs are similarly informative. How-
ever, when one of the literal DCs is ambiguous in
context, the speaker chooses the unambiguous one
to facilitate listener’s comprehension. These re-
sults support the prediction of the RSA theory.

5 Conclusion

This work investigates the preference of speakers’
production of DCs for an intended discourse rela-

Fixed effects:
β SE t p

intercept −.0891 .272 −.328 .743
with comp. .649 .177 3.676 .000237∗∗∗

feedback .0679 .0634 1.072 .284
Random effects:
Groups Name Variance SD Corr.
subject intercept .186 .431

wth comp. .117 .342 −1.00
stimuli intercept 2.047 1.431

wth comp. .458 .677 −.65

Table 3: The regression values of the logistic
mixed effect model.

tion. According to the responses of subjects par-
ticipating in a specially designed Discourse Con-
tinuation Game, we found that speakers prefer a
more informative, less ambiguous DC when it is
necessary for effective communication. The re-
sults are consistent with predictions of the RSA
model, showing that speakers choose their utter-
ance by pragmatic reasoning when planning the
production of abstract meanings, such as discourse
relations. The results are also consistent with
the earlier broad-coverage model by Yung et al.
(2017), that speakers prefer to explicitly mark dis-
course relations when they predict that the relation
is hard to interpret if it is unmarked.

The Discourse Continuation Game successfully
extends the referential language game paradigm to
test the production of abstract, non-visible mean-
ings. A limitation of the current first study is that
the alternative completions of the sentence are pro-
vided explicitly to the speaker and the compre-
hender, which is not the case in natural commu-
nication. Therefore, the current study only pro-
vides information on what humans can do, but not
yet necessarily on what they usually do in natural
communication. We plan to extend our work to
more realistic settings in subsequent work.

Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) as part of SFB 1102 Infor-
mation Density and Linguistic Encoding and the
Cluster of Excellence (MMCI).

References
Fatemeh Torabi Asr and Vera Demberg. 2015. Uni-

form information density at the level of discourse
relations: Negation markers and discourse connec-



11

tive omission. Proc. of the International Conference
on Computational Semantics.

Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve
Walker. 2015. Fitting linear mixed-effects mod-
els using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software,
67(1):1–48.

Judith Degen, Michael Franke, and Gerhard Jager.
2013. Cost-based pragmatic inference about ref-
erential expressions. In Proceedings of the annual
meeting of the cognitive science society, volume 35.

Michael C Frank, Andrés Gómez Emilsson, Benjamin
Peloquin, Noah D Goodman, and Christopher Potts.
2016. Rational speech act models of pragmatic rea-
soning in reference games.

Michael C Frank and Noah D Goodman. 2012. Pre-
dicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Sci-
ence, 336(6084):998–998.

Noah D Goodman and Andreas Stuhlmüller. 2013.
Knowledge and implicature: Modeling language un-
derstanding as social cognition. Topics in cognitive
science, 5(1):173–184.

H Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. Syntax
and Semantics, 3:41–58.

Robert XD Hawkins, Michael C Frank, and Noah D
Goodman. 2017. Convention-formation in iterated
reference games. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Cogni-
tive Science Society.

Robert XD Hawkins, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Judith De-
gen, and Noah D Goodman. 2015. Why do you
ask? good questions provoke informative answers.
In CogSci. Citeseer.

Michele Herbstritt and Michael Franke. 2017. Mod-
eling transfer of high-order uncertain information.
CogSci.

Gary Patterson and Andrew Kehler. 2013. Predicting
the presence of discourse connectives. Proc. of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 914–923.

Florian Pusse, Asad Sayeed, and Vera Demberg. 2016.
Lingoturk: Managing crowdsourced tasks for psy-
cholinguistics. Proc. of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

H Rhode, A. Dickinson, N. Schneider, C. N. L. Clark,
A. Louis, and B. Webber. 2016. Filling in the blanks
in understanding discourse adverbials: Consistency,
conflict, and context-dependence in a crowdsourced
elicitation task. Proc. of the Linguistic Annotation
Workshop.

Ted JM Sanders and Leo GM Noordman. 2000. The
role of coherence relations and their linguistic
markers in text processing. Discourse processes,
29(1):37–60.

Merel Cleo Johanna Scholman and Vera Demberg.
2017. Examples and specifications that prove
a point: Identifying elaborative and argumenta-
tive discourse relations. Dialogue & Discourse,
8(2):56–83.

Frances Yung, Kevin Duh, Taku Komura, and Yuji
Matsumoto. 2016. Modeling the usage of dis-
course connectives as rational speech acts. Proc. of
the SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, page 302.

Frances Yung, Kevin Duh, Taku Komura, and Yuji
Matsumoto. 2017. A psycholinguistic model for the
marking of discourse relations. Dialogue & Dis-
course, 8(1):106–131.

https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01


12

A Stimuli and fillers of the experiment

Continuations A, Bwth and C are displayed to the subjects under the with competitor condition, as
well as in the fillers. Continuations A, Bno and C are displayed under the no competitor condition.
Continuation A is set as the target in the stimulus questions, while continuations Bwth or C are the
targets in the fillers. The connective options are in the order: ambiguous / unambiguous / unrelated.

1 Hard work is the key to success...
[ and / also / unless ]
A. patience is important.
Bwth. honesty is the key to friendship.
Bno. you are always lucky.
C. you are a genius.

2 Harry was born in Scotland...
[ and / and then / but ]
A. he lived in Glasgow for 20 years.
Bwth. his ancestors had origined from Scotland.
Bno. both his parents are not Scottish.
C. he would not have said so.

3 I listened to music on my mobile phone...
[ while / when / because ]
A. I was walking back home from work.
Bwth. I knew there are more important things I should do instead.
Bno. it helped me to concentrate.
C. I was bored waiting for you for half an hour.

4 I will buy a bag for my son as promised...
[ or / otherwise / because ]
A. he will be very disappointed.
Bwth. I will buy him a watch instead.
Bno. he did well in his exams.
C. it is his birthday tomorrow.

5 You must have been studying this afternoon...
[ since / as / but ]
A. I did not hear music from your room.
Bwth. you came back from school.
Bno. it doesn’t mean you will certainly get good marks in the exam.
C. John has been playing video games all the time.

6 I had been longing for a cup of coffee...
[ since / as / so ]
A. you woke me up at five this morning.
Bwth. the teacher of the first class came in.
Bno. I rushed to the cafeteria as soon as the bell rang.
C. please do me a favour and buy me an espresso.

7 I will finish this homework now...
[ then / after that / although ]
A. I will go to chill with my friends.
Bwth. I can have something to hand in tomorrow.
Bno. I don’t know the answers for half of the questions.
C. it is not interesting at all.



13

8 Big cities are fun to visit ...
[ and / therefore / but ]
A. I visit at least one of those every year.
Bwth. they are usually easier to access as well.
Bno. surprisingly my sister prefers small towns.
C. unfortunately those places are often packed with tourists.

9 Your joints will feel better...
[ when / if / but ]
A. you do these stretches regularly.
Bwth. the summer comes.
Bno. still you should not start running yet.
C. the symptom will never go away unfortunately.

10 The older children stopped talking at once...
[ as / since / but ]
A. they understood that it was not a joke.
Bwth. the train approached the station.
Bno. that lasted for a minute only.
C. the younger ones were still noisy.

11 Jane finished the obstacle course the fastest...
[ and / so / but ]
A. she ended up winning the first prize overall.
Bwth. Mary finished it very quickly, too.
Bno. she was disqualified.
C. still she could not win.

12 I started to watch over my calorie intake...
[ since / as / so ]
A. you said I ate too much.
Bwth. I moved back to my parents’.
Bno. I might finally be able to lose some weight.
C. you’d better not offer me chocolates and chips.

13 Let’s just follow Peter’s idea...
[ or / otherwise / because ]
A. we will never finish the project on time.
Bwth. we can adopt Tom’s alternative instead.
Bno. no one is suggesting anything better.
C. I think his idea is simple but great.

14 Maggie grabbed her coat and sweater...
[ as / while / but ]
A. she followed the crowd into the playground.
Bwth. it was snowing outside.
Bno. Tom went out with short sleeves.
C. she did not take her hat.

15 Mark was almost an hour late to the station last evening...
[ while / but / and ]
A. Harry was even two hours late.
Bwth. he was on his way to London.
Bno. he even said he was going to quit.
C. he was late again this morning.



14

16 Dave ordered a tall glass of fine scotch...
[ as / since / but ]
A. we could order what ever we want.
Bwth. the host was giving a speech.
Bno. he could not finish half of it.
C. Mary just ordered a soft drink.

17 Mary always wore a fancy dress to a ball...
[ when / if / whereas ]
A. her boyfriend was going as well.
Bwth. she was at her 20s.
Bno. she did not care much about her hair.
C. she dressed casually to work.

18 That pizzaria has always been my favourite...
[ since / as / but ]
A. I like Italian food a lot.
Bwth. I had dinner with Jill there two years ago.
Bno. my boyfriend doesn’t really like it.
C. I think this restaurant is not bad, too.

19 My parents will visit Canada again in December...
[ and / and then / although ]
A. they will visit South America in spring.
Bwth. it will be their thrid visit in two years.
Bno. the air tickets are expensive in that season.
C. they hate cold weather.

20 I am sure David will burst into tears...
[ when / if / but ]
A. his children come to visit one day.
Bwth. he comes home tonight.
Bno. Kathy probably will not react much.
C. that will be tears of happiness.

21 Leo is taking orders from the guests...
[ while / at the same time / so ]
A. George is serving the food.
Bwth. there are too many tables for him to serve alone.
Bno. he is not able to pick up the call right now.
C. have patience, he will come to our table sooner or later.

22 Peter was watching the baseball match on TV this morning...
[ while / at the same time / because ]
A. his wife was making breakfast for him in the kitchen.
Bwth. he didn’t understand the rules at all.
Bno. there were not any other good shows on TV.
C. he recently became a fan of the team that was playing.

23 Please buy some fruits for me...
[ and / and then / if ]
A. come home immediately afterwards.
Bwth. don’t forget the milk.
Bno. you still have money left.
C. you pass by a supermarket.



15

24 Sam is going on a business trip to Seoul....
[ while / at the same time / and ]
A. his children are going to a summer camp.
Bwth. he is not very optimistic about the Korean market.
Bno. he will come back with signed contracts.
C. later he will travel to Japan for an exhibition.

25 That task took me a lot of time...
[ and / so / but ]
A. I expected a higher reward.
Bwth. it was so boring.
Bno. it was not the worst.
C. I enjoyed doing it.

26 The carnival was held on the main street for a week...
[ while / at the meantime / because ]
A. a film festival was being held in the same period.
Bwth. it was held in the park for only one day.
Bno. the central park was not big enough.
C. people complained that three days were too short.

27 The cat always behaves weird at night ...
[ when / if / but ]
A. we have a visitor at home.
Bwth. dad comes back from work early.
Bno. she was normal last night.
C. she will be fine the next morning.

28 The cleaning lady will come to clean our house in the morning...
[ and / also / otherwise ]
A. she will wash the cars.
Bwth. we can just leave the dishes in the kitchen.
Bno. we will have to do it ourselves.
C. I think the house will just be in a mess forever.

29 The current situation is likely to change...
[ while / however / before ]
A. our standard of living is unlikely to improve.
Bwth. the management is planning the next move.
Bno. the summer holiday starts.
C. you even notice it.

30 The talk will be delayed for an hour...
[ meanwhile / however / because ]
A. the conference room is already full of people.
Bwth. people are having a coffee break.
Bno. there is a technical problem.
C. the speaker is coming late.

31 The teddy bear dropped from the baby’s hand...
[ and / and then / as ]
A. he cried aloud.
Bwth. he has dropped it twice in a minute.
Bno. he fell asleep.
C. the stroller entered the elevator.



16

32 That tennis player has been losing his matches...
[ since / as / but ]
A. we know he is still recovering from the injury.
Bwth. the season started.
Bno. he was close in every match.
C. his coach believes that he still has chance.

33 The next concert will be held this summer here in this city...
[ and / so / but ]
A. we are definitely going.
Bwth. I heard that it will be an outdoor concert.
Bno. unfortunately I cannot go this time.
C. the dates are not yet confirmed.

34 We fell asleep immediately...
[ as / whilst / but ]
A. the moon rose higher in the sky.
Bwth. we had been working the whole day.
Bno. we woke up shortly in the middle of the night.
C. the kids stayed up until early in the morning..

35 We should not walk but take the bus...
[ or / alternatively / although ]
A. we can take a taxi instead.
Bwth. we will not arrive on time.
Bno. it would have been nice to walk through the forest.
C. it is still not the fastest way to get there.

36 You should bring something to eat...
[ or / otherwise / although ]
A. you will starve yourself.
Bwth. alternatively, you can bring some drinks.
Bno. it is not compulsory.
C. some snacks will be served there.


