










































Using Morphemes from Agglutinative Languages
like Quechua and Finnish to Aid in Low-Resource

Translation

John E. Ortega jeo10@alu.ua.es
Dept. de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informatics, Universitat d’Alacant, E-03071, Alacant, Spain

Krishnan Pillaipakkamnatt csckzp@hofstra.edu
Department of Computer Science, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY 11549, USA

Abstract

Quechua is a low-resource language spoken by nearly 9 million persons in South America
(Hintz and Hintz, 2017). Yet, in recent times there are few published accounts of successful
adaptations of machine translation systems for low-resource languages like Quechua. In some
cases, machine translations from Quechua to Spanish are inadequate due to error in alignment.
We attempt to improve previous alignment techniques by aligning two languages that are simi-
lar due to agglutination: Quechua and Finnish. Our novel technique allows us to add rules that
improve alignment for the prediction algorithm used in common machine translation systems.

1 Introduction

The NP-complete problem of translating natural languages as they are spoken by humans to
machine readable text is a complex problem; yet, is partially solvable due to the accuracy of
machine language translations when compared to human translations (Kleinberg and Tardos,
2005). Statistical machine translation (SMT) systems such as Moses 1, require that an algo-
rithm be combined with enough parallel corpora, text from distinct languages that can be com-
pared sentence by sentence, to build phrase translation tables from language models. For many
European languages, the translation task of bringing words together in a sequential sentence-
by-sentence format for modeling, known as word alignment, is not hard due to the abundance of
parallel corpora in large data sets such as Europarl 2. In contrast, Quechua is a language that is
spoken by more than nine million people in South America (Adelaar, 2012); yet, parallel texts
with Quechua in them are very scarce (Monson et al., 2006).

This paper presents an approach to address the scarcity problem of parallel corpora in
Quechua. In particular, we compare our approach with a previous approach that attempted to
align Quechua to German (DE) using DE as the pivot language with the final translation being
Spanish (Rios et al., 2012). Generally, the consensus on solving language translation with
little resources is to find more resources or use rule-based, instead of statistical-based, machine
translation through employing a more controlled corpus, or set of texts like the ones presented
in the Avenue project 3.

1http://www.statmt.org/moses/
2http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
3https://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜avenue/

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 1



Additionally, scarce-resource languages like Quechua seldom have translated technical
corpora like Europarl available. We attempt to employ Natural Language Processing (NLP)
techniques to better align Quechua words to other, more widely studied, words in Finnish.
Specifically, techniques such as pronoun identification (Lee et al., 2013), are considered by this
paper to be the key strategies in attempting to find a solution to the scarcity problem.

Moses 4 builds translation tables from models and texts that are aligned from word align-
ment tools like Giza++ 5, the alignment module that Moses uses to pre-align text before ap-
plying heuristics to find the most likely translations from a bank of possibilities (Och and Ney,
2003). Giza++ is used to align words from sentences in parallel text. For example, the following
sentence in English: “I1 love2 you3” would directly align with its parallel German counterpart:
“Ich1 liebe2 dich3” by applying a one-to-one alignment where a position x in the English
sentence is directly aligned to a position y in the German sentence.

The overall probability scheme used in Giza++ for the first major iteration is called the
Expectation-Maximization (EM) probability (Do and Batzoglou, 2008). The focus in this paper
is to review and adapt the tools that are most widely used for SMT (namely Moses and Giza++)
to prove that linguistic rules that label pronouns and their counterparts can be added to obtain
more accurate results for specific languages such as Quechua, a highly agglutinative language
(Rios, 2011).

In the case of Quechua, most parallel texts use Spanish as the target language. Consti-
tutional documents, plays, and poetry can be found in parallel format from various sources
(Llitjós, 2007). Unfortunately, Spanish is not easily aligned to Quechua due to the complex
Quechua morphology that uses suffix-based grammatical determination in order to modify
words that are morphological and syntactically different from those of Spanish.

Our hypothesis is that it may be easier to take two “naturally” similar languages and com-
pare their grammatical similarities in order to better align the languages. Most previous re-
search attempts to translate Quechua to some other common target language, such as Span-
ish, have been unsuccessful due to the complexity of alignment. We leverage the abundance
of Quechua–Spanish (QU–ES) corpora with the abundance of (ES–FI) text to create a final
Quechua–Finnish (QU–FI) system to compare against previous work. Our aim is to modify EM
algorithmic heuristics in Giza++ to achieve better Alignment Error Rates (AER) than previously
published by empowering the alignment that Quechua and Finnish possess.

Moses generally uses BLEU scores to measure the preciseness of a translation. Previous
work does not seem to have published Quechua translation BLEU scores because BLEU scores
are normally used when there is an abundance of corpora available for the languages at hand.
Our system is a hybrid rule-based and phrase-based (statistical) machine translation (MT) sys-
tem for translating from Quechua to Finnish where Spanish is used as a pivot (helper) language
and Giza++ is used for aligning Quechua words to Finnish words.

2 Related Work

Various researchers have attempted tasks like detecting entities such as nouns, verbs, and pro-
nouns in Quechua. Several of the more important projects are based on research efforts com-
pleted in a project called the Avenue project (Llitjós, 2007). The Avenue project was created
to serve as a parallel corpus project that implemented NLP tools such as a spell checker. Spell
checkers, unfortunately, are not translation tools and do not attempt to map one language to
another through translations. Nonetheless, spelling correctors and other editing tools can be
useful for reviewing Quechua corpora’s correctness of word spelling in order to ensure more
precise input to a more sophisticated word alignment or machine translation tool.

4http://www.statmt.org/moses/
5http://www.statmt.org/moses/giza/GIZA++.html

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 2



Research has been completed by Rios et al. (2012) at the University of Zurich that uses
the Avenue Elicitation Corpus (Llitjós, 2007). Particularly, they have performed a substantial
amount of research on aligning Quechua to Spanish and vice-versa. The University of Zurich
tree-banks are an attempt to annotate Quechua with the correct Part-of-Speech (POS) tags. They
have taken an inflective approach by identifying suffix inflections and assigning each inflection
as part of a numerical inflection group. Their work has established a good baseline research
point for Quechua experimentation and is helpful with the task of translating Quechua to Span-
ish. However, most research completed to this date, including the Rios et al. (2012)’s research,
seems to deal with the Quechua language as a whole and its translation to Spanish rather than
focusing on the specific language construction and morphology. Here, we use linguistic rules
to show that morphemes from Quechua to Finnish align better due to the linguistic similarity of
the two languages.

Another series of morphology experiments, similar to those done at the University of
Zurich, were performed by Nießen and Ney (2004). Their methodology reduced the origi-
nal corpus size about ten percent resulting in only a 1.6 percent loss of translation quality while
using inflectional grouping. The idea implemented by Nießen and Ney (2004) is similar to the
idea researched by Rios et al. (2012) that we use for comparison in this paper. By classify-
ing morphemes into specific inflections, or lack of inflections, groups can be formed to better
statistically decide where a source word may align to a target word. The inflection idea was
originally proposed by researchers at IBM (Ecker et al., 1999). Quechua is in its majority is
based on inflectionally-grouped suffix morphemes. We use that phenomenon to develop a hy-
brid machine translation system based on Moses and Giza++. The main focus of our work is
to show that rules can be applied to Quechua that will improve the error rates from Giza++
alignment results in the work performed by the University of Zurich - Parallel tree-banking
Spanish-Quechua(Rios et al., 2012).

3 Language Specifics

Quechua is morphologically rich. Its morphology is comparable to many other European lan-
guages such as Finnish, Turkish, and even French. Quechua is a language that heavily depends
on word parts, knows as morphemes, being added on as suffixes; hence, we say that Quechua is
agglutinative (Rios, 2011). One example of its agglutinativity is seen with the infinitive verb in
Quechua for the English verb “to grow”, “wiña”. The suffix “nku” is added to the word “wiña”
to form the Quechua third-person plural verb, “wiña-nku”, which translates to the English words
“they grow”. The English translation does not change the infinitive form of the word. Rather, in
English, it is grammatically correct in many cases to simply add the word “they” in front of the
infinitive verb to create the third-person plural form of the infinitive. It is noted that Quechua
contains as many as 130 these types of suffixes (Göhring, 2014) - we deal with two of them in
our work.

4 Methodology

We attempt to improve the Alignment Error Rates (AER) achieved by University of Zurich
(Rios et al., 2012) by duplicating the results (QU–DE and QU-ES) using the same corpora and
resources from their project. Then, we modify the final growth-and-reordering algorithm that
Moses provides from the Giza++ alignment. It is important to note that our focus will be on the
alignment ideas performed by Rios et al. (2012); therefore, we use IBM Model 1 and its lexical
matching as a first step rather than focus on other, more complicated, models. All of the corpora
used in this project coincide with the corpora used in the tree-banking project at the University
of Zurich (Llitjós, 2007).

After duplicating the AER published by Rios et al. (2012), we create reference sentences

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 3



in Finnish. This is done by translating the previous (Spanish) reference sentences to Finnish
using a Moses system trained on Europarl. Then, we manually align Quechua words to Finnish
words. Slight adaptations were made to the original target reference sentences. However, the
difference can be considered negligible (less than 2 words on average per sentence).

With the reference corpora created, we modify Giza++’s algorithm for alignment, the EM
algorithm presented in the book by Koehn (2009), by adding practical pronoun possessive rules.
After rule insertion, we rerun a new Moses (QU–FI) execution and record alignment rates by
comparing the new output to our reference corpora.

4.1 Alignment Technique
The alignment technique we use attempts to naturally align Quechua with another language
that has more readily available corpora - Finnish. Finnish has been chosen because it is quite
agglutinative and, in many cases, suffix-based grammatical rules are used to modify words in the
Finnish language similar to Quechua. In order to better exemplify agglutination, the example
below is presented:

• Infinitive Finnish verb “to correct”: korja

• Conjugate Finnish verb “to correct”: korjaame (stem is korjaa)

• Infinitive Quechua verb “to correct”: allinchay

• Conjugate Quechua verb “to correct”: allinchaychik (stem is allinchay)

There are two main figures from the word evaluation summary table published in the par-
allel tree-banking paper (Rios et al., 2012) that are of most concern: 1) Spanish to Quechua
words and 2) Spanish to Quechua inflectional groups. Respectively, the Alignment Error Rate
(AER) achieved by the Zurich group are: 1) 85.74 and 2) 74.05. The approach taken in the
parallel tree-banking paper is to use inflectional groups that will group word parts, known as
lexicons (Becker, 1975), in order to translate unknown source (Spanish) words. Since Giza++
attempts reverse translations, it could be determined that a reverse translation from Quechua to
Spanish would also produce around eighty percent AER. That is because the parameters used in
Rios et al. (2012)’s work do not align null words and use the default methods for alignment in
Giza++. The rules are not necessarily supervised because they use inflection groups(IG). An IG
is a way of applying a tag to a word by annotating it according to a classification with a specific
group as was done by Rios et al. (2012).

Quechua is based on a morphological structure that depends on suffixes to determine the
meaning of root words that would otherwise be infinitive verbs. We modify the EM algorithm
from Koehn (2009) to increase the likelihood of a word containing a desired morpheme match
that has not been classified. That way matches are always done on words found in the past rather
than a group of phrases. We modify the EM algorithm because other models, outside of IBM
Model 1 and IBM Model2, are commonly based on fertility (Schwenk, 2007) and, thus, are
not helpful when attempting to translate scarce-resource languages like Quechua. Furthermore,
applying probabilities to words that cannot be aligned by a phrasal approach, where the “null”
qualifier is allowed, could actually harm the output. For our purpose, which is to produce better
alignment error rates than those presented in the University of Zurich parallel tree-banking
project (Rios et al., 2012), all models with exception of IBM Model 1, are excluded leaving a
single sentence iteration for probability purposes. While a single iteration may not be the most
optimum execution operation for likelihood expectation, it serves well as a determinant for the
rule-based probability. One can imagine aspects of the higher order IBM models that don’t
involve fertility could be useful. e.g., aspects involving distance or relative distance between
matching words.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 4



We also show that using Spanish as the pivot language for translations to Finnish makes
suffixes, or morphemes, easier to align and makes inflectional grouping less necessary. Rules
can be added that simply start at the end of the source word and compare them to the end of
the target word. Each suffix has its own meaning and use that can be aligned using rule-based
heuristics to determine the best word match. Our experiments described below show that the
result of changing the target language increases the probability of lower alignment error rates.

Finnish has been chosen here for detecting pronouns through suffix identification. Pro-
nouns in Finnish are in many cases added to the end of the stem word, or lemma, in order to
signify possession or direction much like is done in Quechua. While we were unable to identify
all of the suffixes with their pronouns in Quechua, we show that by adding two pronoun and
possession rules we achieve higher AER.

Finnish is also ideal because rendering of Finnish sentences from Spanish sentences using
a version of Moses trained on Europarl is easier than Quechua to Spanish. That makes choosing
a pivot language, such as Spanish, the ideal candidate for translating the QU–ES texts to QU–FI
texts and vice-versa. And, while the use of Finnish alone may be considered one of the most
important factors in the alignment experiment, the focus of this paper is the adding of rules to
the suffixes of both languages in order to better the AER found in previous QU–ES experiments.

Here we are working with lexical alignment between two like languages, one with low
resources available. That makes a pivot language necessary. The advantage of translating by
using a pivot language without a bilingual corpus available has been shown in the past by Wu
and Wang (2007). By using the pivot language, we are able to translate Quechua to Finnish
without having any Finnish translations directly available for Quechua. We use Finnish as the
target language and Spanish as the pivot language for the alignment strategy of logical word
pairing between Finnish and Quechua through their similar suffix incorporation.

5 Experiments

5.1 Tools, Corpora, and Algorithm

In order to have a clear image of how the results are achieved, we define the tools, corpora, and
other necessaries of the research performed. The main tool used for attaining research results,
Moses, is a combination of various tools and corpora. Apart from Moses, other auxiliary tools
such as Aulex 6, an on-line translator, have been used to modify the corpora and their corre-
sponding configuration files. Altogether, an extended amount of time was spent on preparing
the input and reference sentences used for improving the alignment error rates. We use Moses
for translation experiments.

There are three major phases that take place when translating a document in Moses: 1) To-
kenization and Parsing, 2) Word Alignment, and 3) Phrasal and Word Tuning. For this project,
the translation from Quechua to Finnish relies heavily on the first two phases above: Tokeniza-
tion and Word Alignment.

Our final language model has a vocabulary from the words found in the corpora, both native
and foreign, Quechua and Finnish, respectively. After preparing a model with probabilities for
each word, word alignment is performed with the Giza++. We add suffix pronoun rules in order
to gain higher percentages on words that are easily aligned from Quechua to Finnish.

Lastly, after word alignment is completed and saved, Moses performs final tuning and
smoothing that uses statistics to determine phrase probability in the phrasal step. In our case,
we only perform one alignment step of a lexicon type that compares suffixes word by word and
applied commonality, or expectation, through learned words from the corpora.

As seen in Table 1, the three steps required to successfully modify rules to process

6http://aulex.org

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 5



Quechua to Finnish translations using Giza++ and Moses can be complex.

Step 1: Tokenize and Parse Step 2: Word Alignment Step 3: Phrasal Tuning

1. create the initial corpora

2. prepare corpora for word
alignment

3. translate from Spanish to
Finnish

1. apply suffix rules

2. parallel word
alignment from
Quechua to Finnish

1. extract word phrases

2. build translation table

3. word reordering

4. tuning

Table 1: Steps for translating Quechua to Finnish in Moses using our proposed hybrid MT
system

Altogether, our corpus contains 450 sentences. The SQUOIA corpora 7 from the Univer-
sity of Zurich tree-banking project, in its original textual format, are quite diverse and require
various manual efforts in order to get quality parallel sentence translations. In order to get both
the Finnish and Quechua texts in a readable format, manual reading and some command line
tools are used. On-line dictionaries and publications from the following list are used create and
align the parallel corpora:

• http://tatoeba.org

• http://www.runasimi.de

• http://aulex.org

• http://www.folkloredelnorte.com.ar

Apart from dictionaries, consultations from native speakers on a non-organizational basis
were requested in order to review the reference sentences. But, reference sentences are not
necessarily as important due to the fact that statistics, apart from the repeated occurrences of
a particular word or lexicon, are not heavily used. The native speakers simply confirm that
reference sentences are grammatically and logically correct.

Tools like Tixz 8 and Picaro 9 are used for alignment visualization in order to clearly
view the aligned words and predict the AER (Alignment Error Rate) for the translated sentence
results. In order to get results, the alignment configuration and results files have to be extracted
from Moses because they are part of the overall system processing.

In order to nearly duplicate results from the University of Zurich, we execute Moses on
the corpora from SQUOIA project 10 with the same parameters defined: 1) Null values are not
allowed as a word 2) Fertility is not used and 3) Lexical matching is used. As an overall param-
eterized machine, the idea is to do word-forward matching based on the training corpora model
that Giza++ creates during a single iteration. This is done by modifying the configuration file
in Moses for IBM Model 1 only and adding rules directly into the IBM Model 1 EM algorithm.
The basic idea of IBM Model 1 is that by applying the Chain Rule (Ambrosio and Dal Maso,
1990) of probability with two steps:

7https://code.google.com/archive/p/hltdi-l3/wikis/PossiblyUsefulCorpora.wiki
8http://texample.net/
9http://www.isi.edu/˜riesa/software/picaro/

10http://a-rios.github.io/squoia/

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 6



1. Expectation application of the model and

2. Maximization estimation of the model

from the data, conversion should occur that will align native (e) words with foreign (f)
words.

Since we use 446 sentences for training, probability from word references in sentence
pairs alone is not enough to predict the final phrasal probability. Generally speaking, the main
problem with scarce resources and statistical probability on lexical matching is the global count,
or maximization of probability. The Maximization step from the EM algorithm for SMT in
Moses written by Koehn (2009) takes the counts of probability and applies them at the end of
execution. But, if there are few sentences in the corpus, probability cannot be skewed highly for
a particular word because the amount of text that coexists in a phrasal situation is relatively low.
Word alignment cannot be high (greater than fifty percent) if the sentences available are scarce.
In order to maximize probability on our desired suffix rules, we modify the Em Algorithm for
IBM Model 1 right before collecting counts 11.

5.2 Rule Addition
Modifying the Giza++ alignment algorithm for Finnish and Quechua requires a detailed un-
derstanding of Quechua and Finnish morphology. We use a few of the grammatical suffix rules
from both languages that have the same meaning and convert them into rules that can be applied
to the EM algorithm. Two pronoun-based rules are presented to show that the possibility for
alignment error exists:

1. “chik” in Quechua to “me” in Finnish

2. “yki” in Quechua to “si” in Finnish

In order to better understand the two rules presented here that are added to the Giza++ EM
algorithm, a review of both grammars and the effect of their corresponding suffixes presented
above is necessary.

Rule 1 presented above is the “chik” suffix in Quechua. CHIK is a word that is a pronoun
type by nature because it describes a particular part of speech: third person inclusive “we”. This
behavior can be seen in word like “riku-wa-n-chik”. The Quechua verb “rikuy” means “to see”
in English. By adding the “wa”, “n”, and “chik”, the verb is converted into a third person group
that collectively means “we see”. There are exceptions to the rule. CHIK appears as “nchik”
following a vowel, “ninchik” following a consonant, and “chik” elsewhere (as when it follows
the “n” morpheme) (Lewis et al., 2009). Clearly, a pronoun suffix rule can be added to the EM
rule in order to achieve the “we” functionality desired by adding a coefficient to the probability
of the word match p(e, f |a) and p(f, e|a). The additional thirty-three percent of probability
is added to words that fully comply with Rule 1. The inclusive third person pronoun “we” in
Quechua is equivalent to the suffix in Finnish “me”. The possessive suffix “mme” is compul-
sory in standard Finnish 12. Finnish words that end with “me” are, thus, words that can be
aligned directly with Quechua words that end with “chik”. It is important to note that there are
exceptions. But, considering the high error rate that currently exists (more than fifty percent),
it makes sense to add this type of rule. Apart from that, the idea of explicit pronoun resolution
between Quechua and Finnish has not been performed previously to our knowledge. The Uni-
versity of Zurich project and other projects have centralized attention on specific parts of speech
and inflectional groups without specifying the specific pronoun alignment. We attempt to show

11line 17 of the EM algorithm on page 91 (Koehn, 2009)
12using standard Finnish dictionary from http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/-mme

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 7



that the location of words within sentences in Quechua makes pronoun resolution somewhat
possible between Quechua and Finnish. And, based on the amount of text that is available in
Finnish and Spanish, pronoun resolution and specific positioning within larger corpora could
possibly be attained.

Rule 2 is similar to Rule 1 in that it is based on pronoun resolution. This rule is more
interesting because it directs attention to the singular second person pronoun “you”. On top of
that, the suffix “yki” signified that the first person is directing the root word toward the second
person like the word for “I love you” in Quechua “munakuyki”. The “yki” suffix is used when
subject “I” does something to the direct pronoun “you”, also known as the “I you” suffix (Ruiz,
2006). A direct word for word alignment from Quechua to Spanish in the example above would
be almost impossible due to the amount of words in a Spanish phrase for “I love you”, “Te
quiero”, and a Quechua word like “Munakuyki”, a two-to-one comparison. Since null values
are not permitted in this experiment, “munakuyki” could only be aligned to one word. Finnish
does not always directly align to Quechua. For example, the Finnish equivalent for “I love
you”, like Spanish, is also two words, “Rakastan sinua”. Nonetheless, there are more suffix-
based words in Finnish that align to Quechua pronoun suffixes than in English or Spanish. That
makes translating Quechua to Finnish much easier. The Finnish equivalent for the Quechua
word “yki” is “si”. Therefore, as is done in Rule 1, the application of probability will applied in
foreign and native sentence to reflect the rule by giving a higher percentage to those words that
comply with the rule. We add a 33% coefficient to rules that meet the desired requirement by
modifying counts in the EM algorithm in Koehn (2009):

count(e|f) = t(e|f)
totals(e)

+ .33

The change will ensure that the global probability calculated for all sentences produces a
higher percentage for words that are an exact lexical match for the rules proposed in here.

6 Results

In general, previous AERs show that when translating Quechua to Spanish, Moses and Giza++
produce high error rates as Table 2 confirms:

Univ. of Zurich Results Fs Fp AER
ES–QU words 11.64 15.20 85.74
Lowercase ES–QU words 12.62 15.57 85.02
ES–QU Inflectional Groups 25.40 25.84 74.05
Lowercase ES–QU Inflectional Groups 26.53 26.89 72.95

Table 2: Original ES–QU results from the University of Zurich (Rios et al., 2012) where Fs rep-
resents sure alignments, Fp represents possible alignments, and AER represents the alignment
error rate.

A QU–FI execution is done with the our new, hybrid Moses system that contains two new
suffix pronoun rules. As mentioned before, each counts probability has a possibility of changing
by a coefficient of .33 when a rule has been met. For this experiment, there are about 12 words
per sentence and one sentence per line. That means that around 6000 words have to be compared
for alignment between Quechua and Finnish. Table 3 shows the hybrid rule addition results.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 8



Our Hybrid Suffix-Based Results Fs Fp AER
FI–QU words 12.21 15.08 85.62
Lowercase FI–QU words 14.07 14.61 85.02
FI–QU Inflectional Groups 34.13 34.17 64.71
Lowercase FI–QU Inflectional Groups 34.00 34.13 61.08

Table 3: Hybrid suffix-based FI–QU results where Fs represents sure alignments, Fp represents
possible alignments, and AER represents the alignment error rate.

The results confirm that there are grammatical rules that can be applied directly to the
suffix of a word from either language to improve alignment in the new system. That is not
possible when comparing Spanish to Quechua. There are complexities when comparing the
agglutinative language, Quechua, to the separated language, Spanish. There is clearly a dif-
ference between translating suffix-based translation groups in parallel word-for-word text from
sentences and translating phrases that may occur in phrase-based translation with languages that
are less agglutinative.

There are a large amount of suffixes that could fall under the two rules and it is clear that
the AER presented may be decreased even further by classifying all of the possibilities as suffix
type rules. It should be noted that, while the rules do somehow indicate supervised learning, the
learning applied here is non-deterministic by nature due to the fact that grammatical construct is
used as the basis for comparison for parallel words and sentences instead of a dictionary-based
or single lexicon match. We leave other MT systems and forms of learning such as Zoph et al.
(2016) out for this paper; but, it’s would be worthwhile to try for future iterations of the system.

7 Conclusions

By adopting a “first-things-first” approach we overcome a number of challenges found in de-
veloping NLP Systems for resource scarce languages (Monson et al., 2006). After comparing
the same reference sentences introduced in the initial experiment to our results, our work has
shown successful results using suffix rules for pronouns.

The research performed has given a clear example of the possibilities of hybrid machine
translation techniques with languages that have few resources available. Quechua is as an ex-
ample of a low-resource spoken in various South American countries. The two rules here that
are added into Giza++ are just two possibilities of the various combinations of suffixes that
occur between Finnish and Quechua. Rules could be extended in Giza++ that would include all
of the possibility suffixes in order to gain the best possible translation. Giza++ itself, as a word
alignment tool, could be modified to accept hybrid-based rules in order to accept specific prob-
abilities through a configuration file much like it currently does with dictionaries. The amount
of possibilities that this project opens is endless. Giza++ modification is only one manner of
extending this project to be applied to others.

References

Adelaar, W. F. (2012). Modeling convergence: Towards a reconstruction of the history of
quechuan–aymaran interaction. Lingua, 122(5):461 – 469. Language Contact and Universal
Grammar in the Andes.

Ambrosio, L. and Dal Maso, G. (1990). A general chain rule for distributional derivatives.
Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 108(3):691–702.

Becker, J. D. (1975). The phrasal lexicon. In Proceedings of the 1975 Workshop on Theoretical

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 9



Issues in Natural Language Processing, TINLAP ’75, pages 60–63, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Do, C. B. and Batzoglou, S. (2008). What is the expectation maximization algorithm? Nature
biotechnology, 26(8):897.

Ecker, D. M., Duan, L., Franz, A. M., and Horiguchi, K. (1999). Analyzing inflectional mor-
phology in a spoken language translation system. US Patent US6442524B1.

Göhring, A. (2014). Building a spanish-german dictionary for hybrid mt. In Proceedings of the
3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Machine Translation (HyTra), pages 30–35.

Hintz, D. J. and Hintz, D. M. (2017). The evidential category of mutual knowledge in quechua.
Lingua, 186:88–109.

Kleinberg, J. and Tardos, E. (2005). Algorithm Design. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing
Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA.

Koehn, P. (2009). Statistical machine translation. Cambridge University Press.

Lee, H., Chang, A., Peirsman, Y., Chambers, N., Surdeanu, M., and Jurafsky, D. (2013). De-
terministic coreference resolution based on entity-centric, precision-ranked rules. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 39(4):885–916.

Lewis, M. P., Simons, G. F., Fennig, C. D., et al. (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the world,
volume 16. SIL international Dallas, TX.

Llitjós, A. F. (2007). Automatic improvement of machine translation systems. Carnegie Mellon
University.

Monson, C., Llitjós, A. F., Aranovich, R., Levin, L., Brown, R., Peterson, E., Carbonell, J.,
and Lavie, A. (2006). Building nlp systems for two resource-scarce indigenous languages:
mapudungun and quechua. Strategies for developing machine translation for minority lan-
guages, page 15.

Nießen, S. and Ney, H. (2004). Statistical machine translation with scarce resources using
morpho-syntactic information. Computational linguistics, 30(2):181–204.

Och, F. J. and Ney, H. (2003). A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Rios, A. (2011). Spell checking an agglutinative language: Quechua. In 5th Language and
Technology Conference: Human Language Technologies as a Challenge for Computer Sci-
ence and Linguistics, pages 51–55.

Rios, A., Volk, M., et al. (2012). Parallel treebanking spanish-quechua: how and how well do
they align? Linguistic Issues in Language Technology, 7(1).

Ruiz, C. S. (2006). Quechua, manual de enseñanza, volume 4. Instituto de estudios peruanos.

Schwenk, H. (2007). Building a statistical machine translation system for french using the
europarl corpus. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 189–192. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Wu, H. and Wang, H. (2007). Pivot language approach for phrase-based statistical machine
translation. Machine Translation, 21(3):165–181.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 10



Zoph, B., Yuret, D., May, J., and Knight, K. (2016). Transfer learning for low-resource neural
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02201.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 11




