



















































A Pipeline for Creative Visual Storytelling


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Storytelling, pages 20–32
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 5, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Pipeline for Creative Visual Storytelling

Stephanie M. Lukin, Reginald Hobbs, Clare R. Voss
U.S. Army Research Laboratory

Adelphi, MD, USA
stephanie.m.lukin.civ@mail.mil

Abstract

Computational visual storytelling produces a
textual description of events and interpreta-
tions depicted in a sequence of images. These
texts are made possible by advances and cross-
disciplinary approaches in natural language
processing, generation, and computer vision.
We define a computational creative visual sto-
rytelling as one with the ability to alter the
telling of a story along three aspects: to speak
about different environments, to produce vari-
ations based on narrative goals, and to adapt
the narrative to the audience. These aspects of
creative storytelling and their effect on the nar-
rative have yet to be explored in visual story-
telling. This paper presents a pipeline of task-
modules, Object Identification, Single-Image
Inferencing, and Multi-Image Narration, that
serve as a preliminary design for building a
creative visual storyteller. We have piloted this
design for a sequence of images in an annota-
tion task. We present and analyze the collected
corpus and describe plans towards automation.

1 Introduction

Telling stories from multiple images is a creative
challenge that involves visually analyzing the im-
ages, drawing connections between them, and pro-
ducing language to convey the message of the
narrative. To computationally model this cre-
ative phenomena, a visual storyteller must take
into consideration several aspects that will influ-
ence the narrative: the environment and presen-
tation of imagery (Madden, 2006), the narrative
goals which affect the desired response of the
reader or listener (Bohanek et al., 2006; Thorne
and McLean, 2003), and the audience, who may
prefer to read or hear different narrative styles
(Thorne, 1987).

The environment is the content of the imagery,
but also its interpretability (e.g., image quality).
Canonical images are available from a number

of high-quality datasets (Everingham et al., 2010;
Plummer et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2014; Ordonez
et al., 2011), however, there is little coverage of
low-resourced domains with low-quality images
or atypical camera perspectives that might appear
in a sequence of pictures taken from blind persons,
a child learning to use a camera, or a robot survey-
ing a site. For this work, we studied an environ-
ment with odd surroundings taken from a camera
mounted on a ground robot.

Narrative goals guide the selection of what ob-
jects or inferences in the image are relevant or un-
characteristic. The result is a narrative tailored
to different goals such as a general “describe the
scene”, or a more focused “look for suspicious ac-
tivity”. The most salient narrative may shift as
new information, in the form of images, is pre-
sented, offering different possible interpretations
of the scene. This work posed a forensic task with
the narrative goal to describe what may have oc-
curred within a scene, assuming some temporal
consistency across images. This open-endedness
evoked creativity in the resulting narratives.

The telling of the narrative will also differ based
upon the target audience. A concise narrative is
more appropriate if the audience is expecting to
hear news or information, while a verbose and hu-
morous narrative is suited for entertainment. Au-
diences may differ in how they would best experi-
ence the narrative: immersed in the first person or
through an omniscient narrator. The audience in
this work was unspecified, thus the audience was
the same as the storyteller defining the narrative.

To build a computational creative visual story-
teller that customizes a narrative along these three
aspects, we propose a creative visual storytelling
pipeline requiring separate task-modules for Ob-
ject Identification, Single-Image Inferencing, and
Multi-Image Narration. We have conducted an ex-
ploratory pilot experiment following this pipeline

20



Figure 1: Creative Visual Storytelling Pipeline: T1 (Object Identification), T2 (Single Image Inferencing),
T3 (Multi-Image Narration)

to collect data from each task-module to train the
computational storyteller. The collected data pro-
vides instances of creative storytelling from which
we have analyzed what people see and pay atten-
tion to, what they interpret, and how they weave
together a story across a series of images.

Creative visual storytelling requires an under-
standing of the creative processes. We argue
that existing systems cannot achieve these cre-
ative aspects of visual storytelling. Current object
identification algorithms may perform poorly on
low-resourced environments with minimal train-
ing data. Computer vision algorithms may over-
identify objects, that is, describe more objects than
are ultimately needed for the goal of a coherent
narrative. Algorithms that generate captions of an
image often produce generic language, rather than
language tailored to a specific audience. Our pilot
experiment is an attempt to reveal the creative pro-
cesses involved when humans perform this task,
and then to computationally model the phenomena
from the observed data.

Our pipeline is introduced in Section 2, where
we also discuss computational considerations and
the application of this pipeline to our pilot experi-
ment. In Section 3 we describe the exploratory pi-
lot experiment, in which we presented images of a
low-quality and atypical environment and have an-
notators answer “what may have happened here?”
This open-ended narrative goal has the potential to
elicit diverse and creative narratives. We did not

specify the audience, leaving the annotator free to
write in a style that appeals to them. The data and
analysis of the pilot are presented in Section 4,
as well as observations for extending to crowd-
sourcing a larger corpus and how to use these cre-
ative insights to build computational models that
follow this pipeline. In Section 5 we compare
our approach to recent works in other storytelling
methodologies, then conclude and describe future
directions of this work in Section 6.

2 Creative Visual Storytelling Pipeline

The pipeline and interaction of task-modules we
have designed to perform creative visual story-
telling over multiple images are depicted in Fig-
ure 1. Each task-module answers a question criti-
cal to creative visual storytelling: “what is here?”
(T1: Object Identification), “what happens here?”
(T2: Single-Image Inferencing), and “what has
happened so far?” (T3: Multi-Image Narration).
We discuss the purpose, expected inputs and out-
puts of each module, and explore computational
implementations of the pipeline.

2.1 Pipeline
This section describes the task-modules we de-
signed that provide answers to our questions for
creative visual storytelling.

Task-Module 1: Object Identification (T1).
Objects in an image are the building blocks for sto-
rytelling that answer the question, literally, “what

21



is here?” This question is asked of every im-
age in a sequence for the purposes of object cura-
tion. From a single image, the expected outputs
are objects and their descriptors. We anticipate
that two categories of object descriptors will be in-
formative for interfacing with the subsequent task-
modules: spatial descriptors, consisting of object
co-locations and orientation, and observational at-
tribute descriptors, including color, shape, or tex-
ture of the object. Confidence level will provide
information about the expectedness of the object
and its descriptors, or if the object is difficult or
uncertain to decipher given the environment.

Task-Module 2: Single-Image Inferencing
(T2). Dependent upon T1, the Single-Image In-
ferencing task-module is a literal interpretation de-
rived from the objects previously identified in the
context of the current image. After the curation of
objects in T1, a second round of content selection
commences in the form of inference determina-
tion and selection. Using the selected objects, de-
scriptors, and expectations about the objects, this
task-module answers the question “what happens
here?” For example, the function of “kitchen”
might be extrapolated from the co-location of a ce-
real box, pan, and crockpot.

Separating T2 from T1 creates a modular sys-
tem where each task-module can make the best de-
cision given the information available. However,
these task-modules are also interdependent: as the
inferences in T2 depend upon T1 for object selec-
tion, so too does the object selection depend upon
the inferences drawn so far.

Task-Module 3: Multi-Image Narration
(T3). A narrative can indeed be constructed from
a single image, however, we designed our pipeline
to consider when additional context, in the form
of additional images, is provided. The Multi-
Image Narration task-module draws from T1 and
T2 to construct the larger narrative. All images,
objects, and inferences are taken into consider-
ation when determining “what has happened so
far?” and “what has happened from one image to
the next?” This task-module performs narrative
planning by referencing the inferences and objects
from the previous images. It then produces a natu-
ral language output in the form of a narrative text.
Plausible narrative interpretations are formed from
global knowledge about how the addition of new
images confirm or disprove prior hypotheses and
expectations.

2.2 From Pipeline Design to Pilot

Our first step towards building this automated
pipeline is to pilot it. We will use the dataset col-
lected and the results from the exploratory study
to to build an informed computational, creative vi-
sual storyteller. When piloting, we refer to this
pipeline a sequence of annotation tasks.

T1 is based on computer vision technology. Of
particular interest are our collected annotations on
the low-quality and atypical environments that tra-
ditionally do not have readily available object an-
notations. Commonsense reasoning and knowl-
edge bases drive the technology behind deriv-
ing T2 inferences. T3 narratives consist of two
sub-task-modules: narrative planning and natu-
ral language generation. Each technology can be
matched to our pipeline, and be built up separately,
leveraging existing works, but tuned to this task.

Our annotators are required to write in natural
language (though we do not specify full sentences)
the answers to the questions posed in each task-
module. While this natural language intermedi-
ate representation of T1 and T2 is appropriate for
a pilot study, a semantic representation of these
task-modules might be more feasible for compu-
tation until the final rendering of the narrative text.
For example, drawing inferences in T2 with the
objects identified in T1 might be better achieved
with an ontological representation of objects and
attributes, such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), and
inferences mined from a knowledge base.

In our annotation, the sub-task-modules of nar-
rative planning and natural language generation
are implicitly intertwined. The annotator does not
note in the exercise intermediary narrative plan-
ning before writing the final text. In computa-
tion, T3 may generate the final narrative text word-
by-word (combining narrative planning and natu-
ral language generation). Another approach might
first perform narrative planning, followed by gen-
eration from a semantic or syntactic representa-
tion that is compatible with intermediate represen-
tations from T1 and T2.

3 Pilot Experiment

A paper-based pilot experiment implementing this
pipeline was conducted. Ten annotators (A1 -
A10)1 participated in the annotation of the three

1A5, an author of this paper, designed the experiment and
examples. All annotators had varying degrees of familiarity
with the environment in the images.

22



Figure 2: image1, image2, and image3 in Pilot Experiment Scene

images in Figure 2 (image1 - image3). These
images were taken from a camera mounted on a
ground robot while it navigated an unfamiliar en-
vironment. The environment was static, thus, pre-
senting these images in temporal order was not as
critical as it would have been if the images were
still-frames taken from a video or if the images
contained a progression of actions or events.

Annotators first addressed the questions posed
in the Object Identification (T1) and Single-Image
Inference (T2) task-modules for image1. They re-
peated the process for image2 and image3, and au-
thored a Multi-Image Narrative (T3). The anno-
tator work flow mimicked the pipeline presented
in Figure 1. For each subsequent image, the time
allotted increased from five, to eight, to eleven
minutes to allow more time for the narrative to
be constructed after annotators processed the ad-
ditional images. An example image sequence with
answers was provided prior to the experiment. A5
gave a brief, oral, open-ended explanation of the
experiment as not to bias annotators to what they
should focus on in the scene or what kind of lan-
guage they should use. The goal of this data col-
lection is to gather data that models the creative
storytelling processes, not to track these processes
in real-time. A future web-based interface will
allow us to track the timing of annotation, what
information is added when, and how each task-
module influences the other task-modules for each
image.

Object Identification did not require annotators
to define a bounding box for labeled objects, nor
were annotators required to provide objective de-
scriptors2. Annotators authored natural language
labels, phrases, or sentences to describe objects,
attributes, and spatial relations while indicating

2As we design a web-based version of this experiment, we
will enforce interfaces explicitly linked to object annotations,
and the desire to view previously annotated images.

confidence levels if appropriate.
During Single Image Inferencing, annotators

were shown their response from T1 as they au-
thored a natural language description of activity
or functions of the image, as well as a natural lan-
guage explanation of inferences for that determi-
nation, citing supporting evidence from T1 out-
put. For a single image, annotators may answer
the questions posed by T1 and T2 in any order to
build the most informed narrative.

Annotators authored a Multi-Image Narrative to
explain what has happened in the sequence of im-
ages presented so far. For each image seen in the
sequence, annotators were shown their own natu-
ral language responses from T1 and T2 for those
images. Annotators were encouraged to look back
to their responses in previous images (as the bot-
tom row of Figure 1 indicates), but not to make
changes to their responses about the previous im-
ages. They were, however, encouraged to incor-
porate previous feedback into the context of the
current image. From this task-module, annotators
wrote a natural language narrative connecting ac-
tivity or functions in the images which will be used
to learn how to weave together a story across the
images.

The open-ended “what has happened here?”
narrative goal has no single answer. These anno-
tations may be treated as ground truth, but we run
the risk of potentially missing out on creative alter-
natives. Bootstraping all possible objects and in-
ferences would achieve greater coverage, yet this
quickly becomes infeasible. We lean toward the
middle, where the answers collected will help de-
termine what annotators deem as important.

4 Results and Analysis

In this section, we discuss and analyze the col-
lected data and provide insights for incorporating
each task-module into a computational system.

23



# Annotators Objects

10 calendar, water bottle
9 computer, table/desk
8 chair
4 walls, window
2 blue triangles
1 floor, praying rug

Table 1: Objects identified by annotators in image1

# Annotators Objects

10 suitcase, shirt
8 sign
6 green object
5 fire extinguisher
4 walls
3 bag
2 floor, window
1 coat hanger, shoes, rug

Table 2: Objects identified by annotators in image2

# Annotators Objects

7 crockpot, cereal box, table
6 pan
5 container
2 walls, label
1 thread and needle, coffee pot,

jam, door frame

Table 3: Objects identified by annotators in image3 (to-
tal of 7 annotators)

4.1 Object Identification (T1)

Thirty three objects were identified across the im-
ages.3 A5 identified the most of these objects (20),
and A1, the least (10). Tables 1 - 3 show the
objects identified and how many annotators ref-
erenced each object. A set of objects emerged
in each image that captured the annotators’ atten-
tion. Object descriptor categories are tabulated in
Table 44. Not surprisingly, the most common de-
scriptors were attributes, e.g., color and shape, fol-
lowed by co-locations. Orientation was not ob-
served in this dataset, however this category may
be useful for other disrupted environments. We
observed instances of uncertainty, e.g., “a suitcase,
not entirely sure, because of zipper and size”, and
unexpected objects, “unfinished floor”, whereas
“floors” may have not been labeled otherwise.

Lack of coverage and overlap in this task with
respect to objects and descriptors is not discour-
aging. In fact, we argue that exhaustive object

3Due to time constrains, A2 - A4 did not complete image3.
4Tabulation of descriptors in Tables 7 - 9 in Appendix.

Total Average Min Max

Spatial
Co-Location 51 6.3 0 14

Observational
Attribute 99 12.2 3 22

Confidence
Unexpected 7 0.7 0 4
Uncertainty 28 3.3 0 8

Total 185 22.6 7 39

Table 4: Object descriptor summary with counts per
annotator (A2 - A4 excluded from average, min, and
max; see footnote 4)

identification is counter-intuitive and detrimental
to creative visual storytelling. Annotators may
have identified only the objects of interest to the
narrative they were forming, and viewed other ob-
jects as distractors. The most frequent of the iden-
tified objects are likely to be the most influential
in T2 where the calendar, computer, and chair pro-
vide more information than the “blue triangles”.

Not only can selective object identification pro-
vide the most salient objects for deriving interpre-
tations, but the Object Identification exercise with
respect to storytelling can differentiate between
objects and descriptors that are commonplace or
otherwise irrelevant. For instance, if a fire extin-
guisher was not annotated as red, we are inclined
to deduce it is because this fact is well known or
unimportant, rather than the result of a distracted
annotator.5

When automating this task-module, new object
identification algorithms should account for the
following: a sampling of relevant objects specific
to the storytelling challenge, and attention to po-
tential outlier descriptors which may be more in-
dicative than a standard descriptor, depending on
the environment.

4.2 Single-Images Inferencing (T2)

We highlight A1 and A8 for the remainder of the
discussion6. Table 5 shows A1’s annotation of
Single-Image Inferencing and Multi-Image Nar-
ration. In the Single-Image Inferencing (T2) for
image1, A1 noted the “office” theme by referenc-
ing the desk and computer, and expressed uncer-
tainty with respect to the window looking “weird”
and unlike a typical office building. A1 kept clear

5We expect this to be revealed in the web-based version
of the task with a stricter annotation interface.

6Other annotation results in Tables 10 - 17 in Appendix.

24



Image Single-Image Inference Multi-Image Narrative
Image1 Looks like a dingy, sparse office. The computer

desk, calendar indicate an office, but the space is un-
finished (no dry wall, carpet) and area outside win-
dow looks weird, not like an office building.

Image2 Looks like someone was staying here temporarily,
using this now to store clothes, or maybe as a bed-
room. Again, it’s atypical because its an unfinished
space that looks uncomfortable.

I think this person was hiding out here to get ready
for some event. The space isn’t finished enough to
be intended for habitation, but someone had to stay
here, perhaps because they didn’t want to be found,
and you wouldn’t expect someone to be living in a
construction zone.

Image3 This area was used as a sort of kitchen or food stor-
age prep area.

Someone was definitely living here even though it
wasn’t finished or intended to be a house. They were
probably using a crock pot because you can make
food in this without having larger appliances like a
stove, oven. There’s no milk, so this person may be
lactose intolerant. The robot should vanquish them
with milk.

Table 5: A1’s annotation (previously identified objects in Single-Image Inference text in italics)

Image Single-Image Inference Multi-Image Narrative
Image1 This is likely a workplace of some sort. It is unclear

if it is an unfinished part of a current/suspended con-
struction project or it is just a utilitarian space inside
of an industrial facility. The presence of a computer
monitor suggest it is in use or a low crime area.

Image2 This is a jobsite of some sort. It has unfinished walls
and what may be a paper shredder.

This is an unfinished building. There is some ev-
idence of office-type work (i.e. work involving pa-
per and computers). The existence of “windows” be-
tween rooms suggests that this is not a dwelling (or
intended to become one), that is, a building designed
to be a dwelling, but what it is remains unclear.

Image3 A room in a building is being used as a cooking and
eating station, based upon presence of food, table,
and cooking instruments.

This building is being used by a likely small number
of individuals for unclear purposes including cook-
ing, eating, and basic office work.

Table 6: A8’s annotation (previously identified objects in Single-Image Inference text in italics)

the distinction between images in their annota-
tion of image2, as there were no references to the
office observed only in image1. Instead, refer-
ences in image2 were to the storage of clothes. In
the single-image interpretation of image3, A1 sug-
gested that this was a food preparation area from
the presence of the crockpot, cereal, and the other
food items that appeared together. A8, whose an-
notation is in Table 6, also noted the “workplace”
theme from the desk and computer, though A8
leaned more towards a construction site, citing the
utilitarian space. Due to uncertainty of the envi-
ronment, A8 misidentified the suitcase in image2
as a shredder, and incorporated it prominently into
their interpretation. Similar to A1, A8 also indi-
cated in image3 that this was a food preparation
area.

A8’s misinterpretation of the suitcase raises an
implementation question: are the inferences and
algorithms we develop only as good as our en-

vironment data allows them to be? How might
a misunderstanding of the environment affect the
inferences? This environment showcased the
uniqueness of the physical space and low-quality
of images, yet all annotators indicated, without
prompting or instruction, varying degrees of con-
fidence in their interpretations based upon the ev-
idence. A8 indicated their uncertainty about the
suitcase object by hedging that it was “what may
be a paper shredder”. This expression of uncer-
tainty should be preserved in an automated system
for instances such as this when an answer is un-
known or has a low confidence level.

T2 is intended to inform a commonsense rea-
soner and knowledge base based on T1 to deduce
the setting. This task-module describes functions
of rooms or spaces, e.g., food preparation areas
and office space. Additional interpretations about
the space were made by annotators from the over-
all appearance of objects in the image, such as the

25



atmospheric observation “lighting of rooms is not
very good” (A7, Table 15 in Appendix). These
inferences might not be easily deducible from T1
alone, but the combination of these task-modules
allows for these to occur.

Evaluating this annotation in a computational
system will require some ground truth, though we
have previously stated that it is impossible to claim
such a gold standard in a creative storytelling task.
Evaluation must therefore be subject to both quali-
tative and quantitative analyses, including, but not
limited to, commonsense reasoning on validation
sets and determining plausible alternatives to com-
monsense interpretations.

4.3 Multi-Image Narration (T3)

The narrative begins to form across the first two
images in the Multi-Image Narration task-module
(T3). A1 hypothesized that someone was “hiding
out”, going a step beyond their T2 inference of
an “office space” in image1, to extrapolate “what
has happened here” rather than “what happens
here”. In image2, A1 had hedged their narrative
with “I think”, but the language became stronger
and more confident in image3, in which A1 “def-
initely” thought that the space was inhabited. A1
pointed out that a lack of milk was unexpected in
a canonical kitchen, and supplemented their nar-
rative with a joke, suggesting to “vanquish them
with milk”. In image2, A8 interpreted that the
space was not intended for long-term dwelling.
Their narrative shifted in image3 when another
scene was revealed. A8 concluded that this space
was inhabited by a group, despite the annotator’s
previous assumption in image2 that it was not
suited for this purpose.

There is no a guaranteed “correct” narrative that
unfolds, especially if we are seeking creativity.
Some narrative pieces may fall into place as ad-
ditional images provided context, but in the case
of these environments, annotators were challenged
to make sense of the sequence and pull together a
plausible, if not uncertain, narrative.

The narrative goal and audience aspects of cre-
ative visual storytelling will directly inform T3.
A variety of creative narratives and interpretations
emerged from this pilot, despite the particularly
sparse and odd environment and openness of the
narrative goal. Based on the responses from each
successive task-modules, all annotators’ interpre-
tations and narratives are correct. Even with anno-

tator misunderstandings, the narratives presented
were their own interpretation of the environment.
As the audience in this task was not specified, an-
notators could use any style to tell their story. The
data collected expressed creativity through jokes
(A1), lists and structured information (A5), con-
cise deductions (A6, A8), uncertain deductions
(A4), first person (A1, A3, A5), omniscient nar-
rators (A2), and the use of “we” inclusive of the
robot navigating the space (A7, A9, A10).

Future annotations may assign an audience or
a style prompt in order to observe the varied lan-
guage use. This will inform computational models
by curating stylistic features and learning from ap-
propriate data sources.

5 Related work

Visual storytelling is still a relatively new subfield
of research that has not yet begun to capture the
highly creative stories generated by text-based sto-
rytelling systems to date. The latter supports the
definition of specific goals or presents alternate
narrative interpretations by generating stories ac-
cording to character goals (e.g., Meehan (1977))
and author goals (e.g., Lebowitz (1985)). Other in-
teractive, co-constructed, text-based narrative sys-
tems make use of information retrieval methods by
implicitly linking the text generation to the inter-
pretation. As a result, systems incorporating these
methods cannot be adjusted for different narrative
goals or audiences (Cychosz et al., 2017; Swanson
and Gordon, 2008; Munishkina et al., 2013).

Other research in text-based storytelling focuses
on answering the question “what happens next?”
to infer the selection of the most appropriate next
sentence. This method indirectly relies on the se-
lection of sentences to evaluation the results of a
forced choice between the “best” or “correct” next
sentence of the choices when given a narrative
context (as in the Story Close Test (Mostafazadeh
et al., 2016) and the Children’s Book Test (Hill
et al., 2015)). Our pipeline, by contrast, builds
on a series of open-ended questions, for which
there is no single gold-standard or reference an-
swer. Instead, we expect in time to follow prior
work by Roemmele et al. (2011) where evaluation
will entail generating and ranking plausible inter-
pretations.

Recent work on caption generation combines
computer vision with a simplified narration, or sin-
gle sentence text description of an image (Vinyals

26



et al., 2015). Image processing typically takes
place in one phase, while text generation fol-
lows in a second phase. Superficially, this sep-
aration of phases resembles the division of labor
in our approach, where T1 and T2 involve image-
specific analysis, and T3 involves text generation.
However this form of caption generation depends
solely on training data where individual images
are paired with individual sentences. It assumes
the T3 sub-task-modules can be learned from the
same data source, and generates the same sen-
tences on a per-image basis, regardless of the or-
der of images. One can readily imagine the inade-
quacy of stringing together captions to construct a
narrative, where the same captions describe both
images of a waterfall flowing down, and those
same images in reverse order where instead the
water seems to be flowing up.

The work most similar in approach to our vi-
sual storyteller annotation pipeline is Huang et al.
(2016) who separate their tasks into three tiers: the
first over single images, generating literal descrip-
tions of images in isolation (DII), the second over
multiple images, generating literal descriptions of
images in sequence (DIS), and the third over mul-
tiple images, generating stories for images in se-
quence (SIS). While these tiers may seem analo-
gous to ours, there are different assumptions un-
derlying the tasks in data collection. For each task,
their images are annotated independently by dif-
ferent annotators, while in our approach, all im-
ages are annotated by annotators performing all
of our tasks. The DII task is an exhaustive object
identification task on single images, yet we leave
T1 up to our annotators to determine how many
objects and attributes to describe in an image to
avoid the potential for object over-identification.
The SIS task involves a set of images over which
annotators select and possibly reorder, then write
one sentence per image to create a narrative, with
the opportunity to skip images. In our pipeline,
we have intentionally designed our task-modules
to allow for the possibility of one task-module to
build off of and influence one another. It is possi-
ble in our approach for an annotator’s inference in
T2 of one image to feed forward and affect their
T1 annotations in the subsequent image, which
might in turn affect the resulting T3 narrative. In
short, Huang et al. (2016) capture the thread of
storytelling in one tier only, their SIS condition,
while our annotators build their narratives across

task-modules as they progress from image to im-
age.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper introduces a creative visual storytelling
pipeline for a sequence of images that delegates
separate task-modules for Object Identification,
Single-Image Inferencing, and Multi-Image Nar-
ration. These task-modules can be implemented
to computationally describe diverse environments
and customize the telling based on narrative goals
and different audiences. The pilot annotation has
collected data for this visual storyteller in a low-
resourced environment, and analyzed how creative
visual storytelling is performed in this pipeline for
the purposes of training a computational, creative
visual storyteller. The pipeline is grounded in nar-
rative decision-making processes, and we expect
it to perform well on both low- and high-quality
datasets. Using only curated datasets, however,
runs the risk of training algorithms that are not
general use.

We are now positioned to conduct a crowd-
sourcing annotation effort, followed by an imple-
mentation of this storyteller following the outlined
task-modules for automation. Our pipeline and
implementation detail are algorithmically agnos-
tic. We anticipate off-the-shelf and state-of-the-art
computer vision and language generation method-
ologies will provide a number of baselines for
creative visual storytelling: to test environments,
compare an object identification algorithm trained
on high-quality data against one trained on low-
quality data; to test narrative goals, compare a
computer vision algorithm that may over-identify
objects against one focused on a specific set to
form a story; to test audience, compare a caption
generation algorithm that may generate generic
language against one tailored to the audience de-
sires.

The streamlined approach of our experimen-
tal annotation pipeline allows us to easily prompt
for different narrative goals and audiences in fu-
ture crowdsourcing to obtain and compare differ-
ent narratives. Evaluation of the final narrative
must take into consideration the narrative goal and
audience. In addition, evaluation must balance the
correctness of the interpretation with expressing
creativity, as well as the grammaticality of the gen-
erated story, suggesting new quantitative and qual-
itative metrics must be developed.

27



References
Jennifer G Bohanek, Kelly A Marin, Robyn Fivush,

and Marshall P Duke. 2006. Family narrative inter-
action and children’s sense of self. Family process,
45(1):39–54.

Margaret Cychosz, Andrew S Gordon, Obiageli
Odimegwu, Olivia Connolly, Jenna Bellassai, and
Melissa Roemmele. 2017. Effective scenario de-
signs for free-text interactive fiction. In Inter-
national Conference on Interactive Digital Story-
telling, pages 12–23. Springer.

Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI
Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. 2010.
The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. In-
ternational journal of computer vision, 88(2):303–
338.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet. Wiley Online
Library.

Felix Hill, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and Jason
Weston. 2015. The goldilocks principle: Reading
children’s books with explicit memory representa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02301.

Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang, Francis Ferraro, Nasrin
Mostafazadeh, Ishan Misra, Aishwarya Agrawal, Ja-
cob Devlin, Ross Girshick, Xiaodong He, Pushmeet
Kohli, Dhruv Batra, et al. 2016. Visual storytelling.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 1233–1239.

Michael Lebowitz. 1985. Story-telling as planning and
learning. Poetics, 14(6):483–502.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context. In European confer-
ence on computer vision, pages 740–755. Springer.

Matt Madden. 2006. 99 ways to tell a story: exercises
in style. Random House.

James R Meehan. 1977. Tale-spin, an interactive pro-
gram that writes stories. In Ijcai, volume 77, pages
91–98.

Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong
He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vanderwende,
Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. 2016. A cor-
pus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding
of commonsense stories. In Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT, pages 839–849.

Larissa Munishkina, Jennifer Parrish, and Marilyn A
Walker. 2013. Fully-automatic interactive story de-
sign from film scripts. In International Conference
on Interactive Digital Storytelling, pages 229–232.
Springer.

Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara L. Berg.
2011. Im2text: Describing images using 1 million
captioned photographs. In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NIPS).

Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes,
Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svet-
lana Lazebnik. 2015. Flickr30k entities: Col-
lecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer
image-to-sentence models. In Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2015 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 2641–2649. IEEE.

Melissa Roemmele, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and An-
drew S Gordon. 2011. Choice of plausible alterna-
tives: An evaluation of commonsense causal reason-
ing. In AAAI Spring Symposium: Logical Formal-
izations of Commonsense Reasoning, pages 90–95.

Reid Swanson and Andrew S Gordon. 2008. Say any-
thing: A massively collaborative open domain story
writing companion. In Joint International Confer-
ence on Interactive Digital Storytelling, pages 32–
40. Springer.

Avril Thorne. 1987. The press of personality: A
study of conversations between introverts and ex-
traverts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 53(4):718.

Avril Thorne and Kate C McLean. 2003. Telling trau-
matic events in adolescence: A study of master nar-
rative positioning. Connecting culture and memory:
The development of an autobiographical self, pages
169–185.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show and tell: A neural im-
age caption generator. In Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), 2015 IEEE Conference
on, pages 3156–3164. IEEE.

28



Appendix: Additional Annotations
Object # Descriptor Text # Descriptor
Calendar 10 hanging off the table, taped to table top 4 co-location

marked up, ink, red circle on calendar, marked with pen 4 attribute
foreign language 1 attribute
paper 1 attribute
picture on top 1 attribute

Water bottle 10 on the floor, on ground, on floor 3 co-location
to the right of table 1 co-location
mostly empty, unclear if it has been opened 2 attribute
plastic 2 attribute
closed with lid 1 attribute

Computer 9 screen, black turned off; monitor, black 3 attribute
Table / Desk 9 has computer on it, [computer] on table 2 co-location

gray, black 2 attribute
wood 2 attribute
metal 1 attribute
(presumed) rectangular 1 uncertainty

Chair 8 folding 6 attribute
metal 5 attribute
grey 3 attribute

Walls 4 wood 1 attribute
unfinished and showing beams, unfinished construction 3 unexpected

Window 4 in wall behind chair 1 co-location
window to another room; perhaps chairs in other room 1 uncertainty
no glass 1 unexpected

Blue triangles 2 blue objects in windowsill 1 unexpected
Floor 1 unfinished 1 unexpected
Praying rug 1

Table 7: Object Identification for image1

Object # Descriptor Text # Descriptor
Suitcase 10 black, orange stripes; black and red; black with red trim; blue and copper 5 attribute

(not entirely sure) because of zipper item and size 1 uncertainty
resembles a paper shredder 1 uncertainty
a suitcase or a heater 1 uncertainty

Shirt 10 on hanger; on fire extinguisher; on wall; hanging 6 co-location
black 5 attribute
long sleeves 2 attribute
black thing hanging on wall (unclear what it is); black object 2 uncertainty

Sign 8 on the wall 4 co-location
maybe indicating ’3’?; roman numerals; 3 dashes; Arabic numbers; foreign
language; room number 111

6 attribute

poster 1 attribute
map or blueprints 1 uncertainty

Green object 6 spherical 1 attribute
hanging in window; in windowsill 2 co-location
green thing outside room; green object; unidentifiable object; lime green
object

4 uncertainty

light post? fan? 1 uncertainty
Fire extinguisher 5 hanging off of black thing (also unclear as to what this is or does); on wall 3 co-location

obscured 1 co-location
cylindrical 1 attribute
white and red thing; red object, white and red piece of object 3 uncertainty

Wall 4 wooden 1 attribute
unfinished; visible plywood studs 2 unexpected

Bag 3 backpack or bag; something round; pile of clothes 2 uncertainty
on the ground 2 co-location
next to suitcase 1 co-location

Floor 2 marking of industry grade particle board, unfinished 2 attribute
Window 2
Coat hanger 1 hanging on wall 1 co-location

wire 1 attribute
white 1 attribute

Shoes 1 shoes or hat 1 uncertainty
Rug 1

Table 8: Object Identification for image2
29



Object # Descriptor Text # Descriptor
Crockpot 7 on table 1 co-location

green 2 attribute
old fashioned 1 attribute
kitchen appliance 1 attribute
white or silver 1 uncertainty

Cereal box 7 on table 1 co-location
to the right of crockpot 1 co-location
shredded wheat 4 attribute
cardboard 1 attribute
printed black letters 1 attribute

Table 7 wood 3 attribute
coffee table style 2 attribute
pale 1 attribute

Pan 6 on ground; on floor 3 co-location
blue handle 1 attribute
medium-size 1 attribute

Container 5 clear 2 attribute
plastic 3 attribute
empty 2 attribute
rectangular 1 attribute
hinged top 1 attribute

Walls 2 lined with paper 1 attribute
Label 2 on pressure cooker 2 co-location

white 1 attribute
Thread and nee-
dle

1 to the right of cereal box 1 co-location

Coffee pot 1 what looks like a coffee pot 1 uncertainty
empty 1 attribute
behind cereal box 1 attribute

Jam 1 plaid red and white lid 1 attribute
Door frame 1

Table 9: Object Identification for image3

Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 Someone sits at table and puts water bottle on floor

while perhaps taking notes for others in some room.
Folding chair suggests temporary or new use of
space while building under construction.

Image2 Hallway view, suggesting exit path where someone
might leave luggage while being in building

Same building as in the first scene because same type
of wood for walls, floor, and opening/window con-
struction. Arabic numbers on paper sign loosely at-
tached (because wavy surface of paper e.g. not rigid,
not laminated) to the wall suggests temporary des-
ignation of space for specific use, as an organized
arrangement by some people for others.

Image3 N/A N/A

Table 10: A2’s annotation

Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 I believe this is an office, because there is a computer

monitor on a table, the table is serving as a desk,
and there is a metal chair next to the monitor and
the desk. A calendar is typically found in an office,
however the calendar here is not in a location that is
convenient for a person

Image2 I believe that this is a standard room that serves as a
storage area. The absence of other objects does not
hint at this room serving any other purpose.

I believe that this storage room is located in a home
since personal items such as a luggage bag and spare
shirt are not typically found in a public building.
From the marked calendar in the previous picture,
it appears that the occupants are preparing to travel
very soon.

Image3 N/A N/A

Table 11: A3’s annotation

30



Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 An office or computer setting/workstation. Actual

computer maybe under desk (not visible) or miss-
ing. Water bottle suggests someone used this space
recently. Chair not facing desk suggests person left
in a hurry (not pushed under desk). Red circled date
suggests some significance.

Image2 Shirt and suitcase suggests someone stored their per-
sonal items in this space. Room being labeled sug-
gests recent occupants used more than 1 part of this
space. Space does not look comfortable, but per-
sonal effects are here anyway. Holiday?

Someone camped out here and planned activities.
They left in a hurry and didn’t spend time putting
things in their suitcases, or they had a visitor and the
visitor left abruptly. The occupant may have left on
the date marked in the calendar. The date may have
had personal significance for an operation.

Image3 N/A N/A

Table 12: A4’s annotation

Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 Office (chair, desk, computer, calendar). Unfinished

building (walls, floor, window)
Image2 In an unfinished building closet, common space.

Things thrown to the side. Doesn’t care much about
office safety because fire extinguisher is covered,
therefore not easily accessible.

Not sure about either workzone because randomly
placed clothes and unsafe work environment. Could
be a factory with unsafe conditions. Someone living
or storing clothes in a “break room”?

Image3 “Camp” site but not outdoors. Items on floor indicate
some disarray or disregard for cleanliness. Why is
the crock pot on the coffee table with cereal? Break-
fast? But why are the walls strange?

Food like this shouldn’t appear in a safe work envi-
ronment, so I no longer think that. Someone seems
to be living here in an unsafe and probably unregu-
lated (re: fire extinguisher) way. Someone is hiding
out in an uninhabited warehouse or work site (walls,
floors, windows)

Table 13: A5’s annotation

Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 This is an office space because there is a desk, chair,

computer and calendar. These items are typical
items that would be in an office space.

Image2 This looks like a storage space, a closet, or the en-
trance/exit to a building. People typically pile things
such as a suitcase, hanging clothes, backpack, etc.
at one of those locations. A storage space or closet
would allow for the items to be stored for a long time
but would also be due to people being ready to leave
on travel.

Due to the lack of decorations I would say these pic-
tures were taken in a location where people were
staying or working temporarily (like a headquarters
safe house, etc.)

Image3 These are items that would typically be found in a
kitchen or break area. You would see a table or
counter in a kitchen or break room. The pan and
crock pot are not items that would be seen in other
rooms, like a living room, office, bathroom, bed-
room.

I would say this is a house or temporary space be-
cause the items are not organized and the surround-
ing area is not decorative. The scenes look messy
and it doesn’t look like it gets cleaned or has been
cleaned recently. Plus the space contains a suitcase
which gives the impressions that the person has not
unpacked.

Table 14: A6’s annotation

31



Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 Looks like a place to work, with chair, table, mon-

itor. Calendar is out of place because people don’t
have calendars from the edge of a table, so it can
only be seen from the floor. Walls are unfurnished,
only wood and plywood. A window in the wall, like
an interior window. Not sure what it is a window
for-why is the window in that location?

Image2 We are looking through a doorway or hallway. Shirt
and suitcase belong together. Not sure what other
objects are (green, red, black on ground).

Might be same location as Image 1, because the
wooden/plywood walls and floor are similar. Not
sure what the images have to do with each other, but
might be 2 different rooms in same location. We’re
viewing this image from another room, because this
room has a poster in it. Lighting of rooms is not very
good, almost looks like spot lights, so not like an or-
dinary, prototypical house.

Image3 A bunch of objects on a table, with a few objects
underneath. The objects on/under the table all have
to do with food or preparing food. Walls are light
colored. In the foreground appears to be a wooden
door jam. Although there are some kitchen items,
this does not look like a typical kitchen

It is difficult to tell if this is in the same location as
the previous 2 images. The wood door jam might
be the same, but hard to know if wall is plywood
and we don’t see any other wooden framing. Rooms
from all 3 images don’t appear connected physically.
No understandable context or connections.

Table 15: A7’s annotation

Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 This looks like a make-shift room or space. Has a

military of intel feel to it. Could be a briefing or an
interrogation room. Given the prayer rug, definitely
interaction between parties of different backgrounds,
etc.

Image2 This view or room reflects living quarters. Given the
nature of the condition of the wall, it is a make-shift.
The existence of a number identifying this room in-
dicates that it is one of many.

Combining the 2 pictures, this is beginning to look
like part of a structure used for military/intel pur-
poses. The location is most likely somewhere in the
Middle East given how the numbers are written in
Hindi indicating Arabic language. This also means
we have multi-party/individual interactions.

Image3 This picture has all the ingredients to presenting
a kitchen: food and cookware leads to a kitchen.
Given the “rough” look of the setting, this has the
hallmarks of a make-shift kitchen.

This confirms, more than anything else, the scenario
described in picture 2. As a whole, looks like some
sort of post or output or a make-shift temporary type.
Only necessities are present and the place couldn’t
quickly be abandoned.

Table 16: A9’s annotation

Image Single-Image Inferencing Multi-Image Narration
Image1 This was probably used as a workspace, given the

chair and table with the monitor and the calendar.
Someone was recently there because the bottle is up-
right.

Image2 This was a space that someone lived in given the
clothes, fan(?), heater/suitcase(?). Given the mess,
they left abruptly. The fire extinguisher indicates a
presence because it is a safety aid.

This suggests we’re in a space occupied by some-
one because of the office type and “living room” type
room setup. It was purposefully made and left very
abruptly (messy clothes, chair not pushed in).

Image3 This seems to be a kitchen area because all objects
are food related. It is messy. The rice cooker has a
blue light and may be on. There is a window letting
in light, visible on the back wall.

This supports the assumption that the environment
was recently occupied. Food is opened, rice cooker
is on, mess suggests it was abruptly abandoned,
much like image 2’s mess. The robot appears to be I
the doorway at an angle.

Table 17: A10’s annotation

32


