



















































Dealing with Medication Non-Adherence Expressions in Twitter


Proceedings of the 3rd Social Media Mining for Health Applications (SMM4H) Workshop & Shared Task, pages 32–33
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

32

Dealing with medication non-adherence expressions in Twitter

Takeshi Onishi†, Davy Weissenbacher‡, Ari Klein‡, Karen O’Connor‡, Graciela Gonzalez‡
†Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 6045 South Kenwood, Chicago, IL

‡University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
†tonishi@ttic.edu

‡{dweissen, ariklein, karoc, gragon}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract

Through a semi-automatic analysis of tweets,
we show that Twitter users not only express
Medication Non-Adherence (MNA) in social
media but also their reasons for not comply-
ing; further research is necessary to fully ex-
tract automatically and analyze this informa-
tion, in order to facilitate the use of this data in
epidemiological studies.

1 Introduction

Past studies (Claxton et al., 2001) have shown that
50% of medications are not taken as prescribed by
patients. This Medication Non-Adherence (MNA)
increases morbidity and mortality with an esti-
mated cost of 100−239 billion per annum to the
US healthcare system. The patients’ reasons to not
comply with treatments are of diverse nature, such
as high price for a drug or its negative adverse ef-
fect, not trusting the medication, or because they
feel better or forget. Healthcare providers have to
understand such reasons in order to influence pa-
tients’ behavior. A major challenge, however, is
the difficulty in identifying such reasons. Tradi-
tional methods, such as mining clinical records or
using pharmacy claims data, or interacting directly
with patients through surveys and intervention tri-
als have been found limited to identify MNA rea-
sons (Xie et al., 2017).

With the large adoption during the last decades
of Social Media (SM) and the proneness of the SM
users to discuss medical habits and share health is-
sues, SM is increasingly regarded as an important
source that can provide unique insights into Medi-
cation Non-Adherence reasons. For our study, we
have chosen Twitter due to the large volume of
easily-accessible data.

In this work, through a semi-automatic analysis
of 4 million tweets, we show that not only Twit-
ter users clearly express MNA in the social media

but also their reasons for not complying with their
treatments, which calls for further research to fully
automatize our process.

2 Methods

Tweets mention medications in various contexts
such as advertising/selling drugs or personal drug
experiences. Typically, accounts owned by a com-
pany or organization advertise and sell drugs, and
individual persons post personal drug experiences
such as their prescriptions, their reaction to the
drugs, and sometimes their non-adherence.

To determine if Twitter users are mentioning
their non adherence to their treatment and their
reasons, we manually analyzed an existing cor-
pus of four millions tweets, the Pregnancy corpus.
This corpus is composed of ∼112,500 timelines1
of women posting during their pregnancy and col-
lected for the needs of a previous epidemiologic
study (Golder et al., 2018).

Two independent methods detected tweets men-
tioning a MNA. The methods rely on different fea-
tures related to MNA and were applied in parallel.

Drug names matching: We compiled a list of
103 distinct names of drugs related to HIV and
diabetes from Drug.com2 and eMEDTV3. These
lists include generic and brand names. We fil-
tered out all tweets which did not contain any
drug name from the drug list. We, then, removed
all tweets containing a hyperlink, retweets, reply
tweets and tweets not written in English. These
heuristic rules were inspired by Adrover et al.
(2015) and were based on the observation that a
majority of tweets containing drug names and a
hyperlink were posted by companies commenting
web articles, whereas tweets posted by individuals

1We call a timeline the exhaustive set of tweets posted by
a user during a given period.

2https://www.drugs.com
3http://cholesterol.emedtv.com



33

Drug Pattern
Tweets matched 377 27
Tweets mentioning MNA 9 9
Reason in the tweet 6 8
Reason in the tweet vicinity 0 1

Table 1: Tweets mentioning a MNA and its reason
manually discovered in tweets retrieved by Drug
names and Patterns matching methods.

describing their experiences about drugs did not
contain hyperlinks.

Patterns matching: We encoded our patterns
in REs and searched for all tweets in the corpus.
For this preliminary study, we searched for two
patterns: all tweets which contain both phrases
“stopped taking” and “made me”, regardless of the
order. The previous heuristic rules, used to remove
tweets posted by bots or companies, were not ap-
plied on the tweets retrieved by the patterns since,
due to the semantic of the patterns, the tweets they
retrieved were personal tweets.

Two annotators independently investigated the
tweets obtained by both methods. Each annotator
judged if the tweets were mentioning a MNA or
not for precision. The recall was not estimated be-
cause MNA tweets are rare and estimating such
frequency even from random samples is practi-
cally impossible. For the tweet mentioning an
MNA, they looked for the reasons in the users’
timelines up to ten days before and after the MNA
tweet. A third annotator resolved the disagree-
ments.

3 Results

Table (1) details our results. Despite the limited
number of drug names and the small size of our
corpus, the drug names matching method retrieved
377 tweets including nine tweets mentioning an
MNA. Six of the nine tweets were also describ-
ing the reason of the MNA in the tweet. The pat-
terns matching method retrieved 27 tweets includ-
ing nine MNA tweets. The 27 tweets are exclusive
to the 377 tweets retrieved by the first method. The
precision of the pattern matching is 9/27 which
appears to be more precise compared to that of
the drug name matching (9/377). Of these nine
tweets retrieved by the pattern matching, one spec-
ifies a medication, two specifies a type of med-
ication (e.g, pain medication), and the other six
use a generalization (e.g, pills) or a pronoun to

refer to a medication mentioned elsewhere in the
users’ timelines. Due to the patterns searched, all
of the tweets also mention the reasons, except for
one tweet that is truncated and mentions the rea-
son in the subsequent post. The other 18 tweets
retrieved by the patterns either did not refer to a
type of medication (e.g, birth control, prenatal vi-
tamins) or used generalizations or pronouns to re-
fer to medications for which we did not discover
the referent.

4 Conclusion

Two semi-automatic processes successfully iso-
lated 18 tweets in total from four millions of
tweets where Twitter users explicitly report their
MNA. Additionally, we found that users are also
more likely to explain their failure to comply in
the same MNA tweets or in the following tweets.
These results showed the potential of Twitter for
understanding patients’ behavior at a large scale
and justify further research to extract and analyze
automatically the MNA reasons. To increase the
number of tweets retrieved, we will listen in real-
time tweets from the stream of Twitter, searching
for all drugs names using a Drug Name Recog-
nizer and a manually expended set of patterns.

References
Cosme Adrover, Todd Bodnar, Zhuojie Huang, Amalio

Telenti, and Marcel Salathé. 2015. Identifying Ad-
verse Effects of HIV Drug Treatment and Associated
Sentiments Using Twitter. JMIR Public Health and
Surveillance, 1(2).

Ami J. Claxton, Joyce Cramer, and Courtney Pierce.
2001. A Systematic Review of the Associations Be-
tween Dose Regimens and Medication Compliance.
CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS, 23(8):1296–1310.

Su Golder, Stephanie Chiuve, Davy Weissenbacher,
Ari Klein, Karen O’Connor, Martin Bland, Murray
Malin, Mondira Bhattacharya, Linda Scarazzini, and
Graciela Gonzalez-Hernandez. 2018. Pharmacoepi-
demiologic evaluation of birth defects from health-
related postings in social media during pregnancy.
Drug Safety [Submitted].

Jiaheng Xie, Xiao Liu, Daniel Dajun Zeng, and Xiao
Fang. 2017. Understanding medication nonadher-
ence from social media: A sentiment-enriched deep
learning approach. SSRN Electronic Journal.


