



















































UFRGS Participation on the WMT Biomedical Translation Shared Task


Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 662–666
Belgium, Brussels, October 31 - Novermber 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64075

UFRGS Participation on the WMT Biomedical Translation Shared Task

Felipe Soares
Instituto de Informtica - UFRGS

Porto Alegre - RS - Brazil
felipe.soares@inf.ufrgs.br

Karin Becker
Instituto de Informtica - UFRGS

Porto Alegre - RS - Brazil
karin.becker@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract

This paper describes the machine translation
systems developed by the Universidade Fed-
eral do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) team for
the biomedical translation shared task. Our
systems are based on statistical machine trans-
lation and neural machine translation, using
the Moses and OpenNMT toolkits, respec-
tively. We participated in four translation
directions for the English/Spanish and En-
glish/Portuguese language pairs. To create our
training data, we concatenated several paral-
lel corpora, both from in-domain and out-of-
domain sources, as well as terminological re-
sources from UMLS. Our systems achieved
the best BLEU scores according to the official
shared task evaluation.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we present the system developed
at the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do
Sul (UFRGS) for the Biomedical Translation
shared task in the Third Conference on Machine
Translation (WMT18), which consists in trans-
lating scientific texts from the biological and
health domain. In this edition of the shared
task, six language pairs are considered: En-
glish/Chinese, English/French, English/German,
English/Portuguese, English/Romanian, and En-
glish/Spanish.

Our participation in this task considered the
English/Portuguese and English/Spanish language
pairs, with translations in both directions. For
that matter, we developed two machine translation
(MT) systems: one based on statistical machine
translation (SMT), using Moses (Koehn et al.,
2007), and one using neural machine translation
(NMT), using OpenNMT (Klein et al., 2017).

This paper is structured as follows: Section 3
details the language resources used to train our

translation models. Section 4 contains the de-
scription of the experimental settings of our SMT
and NMT models, including the pre-processing
step performed to comply with the shared task
guidelines. In Section 5 we present the results
and briefly discuss the main findings. Section 6
contains the conclusions and directions of future
works to improve our models.

2 Related Works

Most of related works in biomedical machine
translation used SMT models to perform auto-
matic translation. Aires et al. (2016) developed a
phrase-based SMT that differs significantly from
the usual Moses toolkit, especially by not analyz-
ing phrases at word level and adopting a trans-
lation score that is a tuned weighted average be-
tween the translation model and the language
model, instead of the traditional log-linear ap-
proach.

Costa-Jussà et al. (2016) employed Moses SMT
to perform automatic translation integrated with
a neural character-based recurrent neural network
for model re-ranking and bilingual word embed-
dings for out of vocabulary (OOV) resolution.
Given the 1000-best list of SMT translations, the
RNN performs a rescoring and selects the trans-
lation with the highest score. The OOV resolu-
tion module infers the word in the target language
based on the bilingual word embedding trained on
large monolingual corpora. Their reported results
show that both approaches can improve BLEU
scores, with the best results given by the combina-
tion of OOV resolution and RNN re-ranking. Sim-
ilarly, Ive et al. (2016) also used the n-best output
from Moses as input to a re-ranking model, which
is based on a neural network that can handle vo-
cabularies of arbitrary size.

In the last WMT biomedical translation chal-

662

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64075


lenge (2017) (Yepes et al., 2017), the submission
that achieved the best BLEU scores for the FR/EN
language pair on the EDP dataset, in both direc-
tions, was based on NMT models developed in the
University of Kyoto (Cromieres, 2016). For the
other datasets, the submission from the University
of Edinburgh (Sennrich et al., 2017) achieved the
best BLEU scores with their NMT models based
on the Nematus implementation with BPE tok-
enization and the use of parallel and backtrans-
lated data.

3 Resources

In this section, we describe the language resources
used to train both models, which are from two
main types: corpora and terminological resources.

3.1 Corpora
We used both in-domain and general domain cor-
pora to train our systems. For general domain data,
we used the books corpus (Tiedemann, 2012),
which is available for several languages, included
the ones we explored in our systems, and the JRC-
Acquis (Tiedemann, 2012). As for in-domain data,
we included several different corpora:

• The corpus of full-text scientific articles from
Scielo (Soares et al., 2018a), which includes
articles from several scientific domains in
the desired language pairs, but predominantly
from biomedical and health areas.

• A subset of the UFAL medical corpus1, con-
taining the Medical Web Crawl data for the
English/Spanish language pair.

• The EMEA corpus (Tiedemann, 2012), con-
sisting of documents from the European
Medicines Agency.

• A corpus of theses and dissertations abstracts
(BDTD) (Soares et al., 2018b) from CAPES,
a Brazilian governmental agency respon-
sible for overseeing post-graduate courses.
This corpus contains data only for the En-
glish/Portuguese language pair.

• A corpus from Virtual Health Library2
(BVS), containing also parallel sentences for
the language pairs explored in our systems.

1https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/ufal_
medical_corpus

2http://bvsalud.org/

Table 1 depicts the original number of paral-
lel segments according to each corpora source. In
Section 3.1, we detail the pre-processing steps per-
formed on the data to comply with the task evalu-
ation.

Corpus SentencesEN/ES EN/PT
Books 93,471 -
UFAL 286,779 -
Full-text Scielo 425,631 2.86M
JRC-Acquis 805,757 1.64M
EMEA - 1.08M
CAPES-BDTD - 950,252
BVS 737,818 631,946
Total 2.37M 7.19M

Table 1: Original size of individual corpora used in
our experiments

3.2 Terminological Resources

Regarding terminological resources, we extracted
parallel terminologies from the Unified Medical
Language System3 (UMLS). For that matter, we
used the MetamorphoSys application provided by
U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) to sub-
set the language resources for our desired lan-
guage pairs. Our approach is similar to what
was proposed by Perez-de Viñaspre and Labaka
(2016).

Once the resource was available, we imported
the MRCONSO RRF file to an SQL database to
split the data in a parallel format in the two lan-
guage pairs. Table 2 shows the number of parallel
concepts for each pair.

Language Pair Concepts
EN/ES 14,399
EN/PT 26,194

Table 2: Number of concepts from UMLS for each
language pair

4 Experimental Settings

In this section, we detail the pre-processing steps
employed as well as the architecture of the SMT
and NMT systems.

3https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/
umls/

663



4.1 Pre-processing

As detailed in the description of the biomedical
translation task, the evaluation is based on texts
extracted from Medline. Since one of our corpora,
the one comprised of full-text articles from Scielo,
may contain a considerable overlap with Medline
data, we decided to employ a filtering step in order
to avoid including such data.

The first step in our filter was to down-
load metadata from Pubmed articles in Spanish
and Portuguese. For that matter, we used the
Ebot utility4 provided by NLM using the queries
POR[la] and ESP[la], retrieving all results avail-
able. Once downloaded, we imported them to an
SQL database which already contained the cor-
pora metadata. To perform the filtering, we used
the pii field from Pubmed to match the Scielo
unique identifiers or the title of the papers, which
would match documents not from Scielo.

Once the documents were matched, we re-
moved them from our database and partitioned the
data in training and validation sets. Table 3 con-
tains the final number of sentences for each lan-
guage pair and partition.

Language Train Dev
EN/ES 2.35M 22,670
EN/PT 7.17M 24,206

Table 3: Final corpora size for each language pair

4.2 SMT System

We used the popular Moses toolkit (Koehn et al.,
2007) to train our SMT system for the two lan-
guage pairs. As training parameters, we followed
the Moses baseline steps5 to train four MT systems
(i.e. one for each translation direction).

Regarding training, we used the Amazon AWS
spot virtual machines with 24 cores and 60GB of
RAM, and used parallelization as much as possi-
ble to reduce training time and the associated cost.

4.3 NMT System

As for the NMT system, we employed the Open-
NMT toolkit (Klein et al., 2017) to train four MT
systems, one for each translation direction. To-
kenization was performed by the supplied Open-

4https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Class/
PowerTools/eutils/ebot/ebot.cgi

5http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=moses.
baseline

NMT algorithm. Regarding network parametriza-
tion, the following settings were used, while all
other parameters were set as default:

• Encoder type: bidirectional recurrent neural
network
• Decoder type: Seq2Seq with attention (de-

fault)
• Word vector size: 600
• Layers (encoder and decoder): 4
• RNN size: 800
• Batch size: 64
• Vocabulary size: 50000

To train our system, we used the Azure virtual
machines with a single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU.
The models with the best perplexity value were
chosen as final models. During translation, OOV
words were replace by their original word in the
source language, all other OpenNMT options for
translation were kept as default.

5 Experimental Results

We now detail the results achieved by our SMT
and NMT systems on the official test data used in
the shared task. Table 4 shows the BLEU scores
(Papineni et al., 2002) for both systems and for the
submissions made by other teams.

Our submissions achieved the best results for
all translation directions we participated, with re-
markable BLEU scores for the ES/EN and PT/EN
pairs. When compared to the other teams, our
results presented similar behavior, with higher
scores when English was the target language,
which may be explained by the poor English mor-
phosyntactic system. For the English/Spanish pair,
the SMT system presented slightly better results
than the NMT one, probably due to the dictionary
size used in the NMT.

Regarding the superior results achieved, we ex-
pect that the large parallel corpora used in our ex-
periments played an essential role. Although we
did not use the provided Scielo abstracts corpus
(Neves et al., 2016), we used a newer parallel cor-
pus also from Scielo, but comprised of full-text ar-
ticles (Soares et al., 2018a), which overlaps with
the abstracts, but contains more data.

In addition to the biomedical and health cor-
pora, we employed two out-of-domain corpora
that we assumed to have a similar structure to
scientific texts: the books and the JRC-Acquis
(Tiedemann, 2012). We decided not to use the

664



Team, Runs EN/ES EN/PT ES/EN PT/EN
UFRGS run1 (NMT) 39.62 39.43 43.31 42.58
UFRGS run2 (SMT) 39.77 39.43 43.41 42.58
TGF TALP UPC run1 - - 40.49 39.49
TGF TALP UPC run2 - - 39.06 38.54
UHH-DS run1 31.32 34.92 36.16 41.84
UHH-DS run2 31.05 34.19 35.17 41.80
UHH-DS run3 31.33 34.49 36.05 41.79

Table 4: Official BLEU scores for the English/Spanish and English/Portuguese language pairs in both translation
directions. Bold numbers indicate the best result for each direction.

large Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005), since it is
comprised of speeches transcripts, which do not
follow the usual structure of scientific texts.

6 Conclusions

We presented the UFRGS machine translation sys-
tems for the biomedical translation shared task
in WMT18. For our submissions, we trained
SMT and NMT systems for all four transla-
tion directions for the English/Spanish and En-
glish/Portuguese language pairs.

For model building, we included several cor-
pora from biomedical and health domain, and
from out-of-domain data that we considered to
have similar textual structure, such as JRC-Acquis
and books. Prior training, we also pre-processed
our corpora to ensure, or at least minimize the
risk, of including Medline data in our training
set, which could produce biased models, since the
evaluation was carried out on texts extracted from
Medline.

Our systems achieved the best results in this
shared task for the translation directions we par-
ticipated, which we attribute to the high quality
corpora used and their size.

Regarding future work, we are planning on op-
timizing our systems by studying the following
methods:

• BPE tokenization: as stated by Sennrich et al.
(2016b), the use of byte pair encoding tok-
enization can help to tackle the issue of OOV
words by using subword units. We expect
that this approach can provide better results
for our NMT system on biomedical data,
since this domain contains terminologies that
are usually based on the use of affixes.

• Backtranslation: the use of synthetic data
from back-translation of monolingual proved

to be able to increase NMT performance
(Sennrich et al., 2016a) by providing addi-
tional training data.

• Multilingual training: a study from Google
(Johnson et al., 2017) showed that using mul-
tilingual data when training NMT systems
can improve translation performance, espe-
cially when using a many-to-one scheme (i.e.
several source languages and one target lan-
guage). We expect that systems trained us-
ing (ES+PT)→EN, for instance, may pro-
duce better results due to the similarity be-
tween Portuguese and Spanish.

References

José Aires, Gabriel Lopes, and Luı́s Gomes. 2016.
English-portuguese biomedical translation task us-
ing a genuine phrase-based statistical machine trans-
lation approach. In Proceedings of the First Con-
ference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared
Task Papers, volume 2, pages 456–462.

Marta R Costa-Jussà, Cristina España-Bonet, Pranava
Madhyastha, Carlos Escolano, and José AR Fonol-
losa. 2016. The talp–upc spanish–english wmt
biomedical task: Bilingual embeddings and char-
based neural language model rescoring in a phrase-
based system. In Proceedings of the First Confer-
ence on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared
Task Papers, volume 2, pages 463–468.

Fabien Cromieres. 2016. Kyoto-nmt: a neural ma-
chine translation implementation in chainer. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations, pages 307–311.

Julia Ive, Aurélien Max, and François Yvon. 2016.
Limsi’s contribution to the wmt’16 biomedical
translation task. In First Conference on Machine
Translation, volume 2, pages 469–476.

665



Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le, Maxim
Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat,
Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado,
et al. 2017. Google’s multilingual neural machine
translation system: Enabling zero-shot translation.
Transactions of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, 5(1):339–351.

G. Klein, Y. Kim, Y. Deng, J. Senellart, and A. M.
Rush. 2017. OpenNMT: Open-Source Toolkit for
Neural Machine Translation. ArXiv e-prints.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In MT summit, vol-
ume 5, pages 79–86.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the ACL on
interactive poster and demonstration sessions, pages
177–180. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Mariana Neves, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, and Aurlie
Nvol. 2016. The scielo corpus: a parallel corpus
of scientific publications for biomedicine. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
Paris, France. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, pages 311–318. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, Anna Currey, Ulrich
Germann, Barry Haddow, Kenneth Heafield, An-
tonio Valerio Miceli Barone, and Philip Williams.
2017. The university of edinburgh’s neural mt sys-
tems for wmt17. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00726.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016a. Improving neural machine translation mod-
els with monolingual data. In Proceedings of the

54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol-
ume 1, pages 86–96.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016b. Neural machine translation of rare words
with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1,
pages 1715–1725.

Felipe Soares, Viviane Moreira, and Karin Becker.
2018a. A Large Parallel Corpus of Full-Text Sci-
entific Articles. In Proceedings of the Eleventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Felipe Soares, Gabrielli Yamashita, and Michel An-
zanello. 2018b. A parallel corpus of theses and dis-
sertations abstracts. In The 13th International Con-
ference on the Computational Processing of Por-
tuguese (PROPOR 2018), Canela, Brazil. Springer
International Publishing.

Jrg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and inter-
faces in opus. In Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Olatz Perez-de Viñaspre and Gorka Labaka. 2016. Ixa
biomedical translation system at wmt16 biomedi-
cal translation task. In Proceedings of the First
Conference on Machine Translation, pages 477–
482, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Aurélie Névéol, Mariana
Neves, Karin Verspoor, Ondrej Bojar, Arthur Boyer,
Cristian Grozea, Barry Haddow, Madeleine Kittner,
Yvonne Lichtblau, et al. 2017. Findings of the
wmt 2017 biomedical translation shared task. In
Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine
Translation, pages 234–247.

666


