









































Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Content Determination for Chess as a Source for Suspenseful Narratives

Richard Doust
Independent Researcher

Open University, UK
richard.doust@gmail.com

Pablo Gervás
Facultad de Informática

Instituto de Tecnologı̂a del Conocimiento
Universidad Complutense de Madrid

pgervas@ucm.es

Abstract

In this paper, we explore a way of view-
ing a chess game as a narrative. Using
the model of suspense described in Doust
(2015), Doust and Piwek (2017) and Doust
(2017), we derive a fluctuating step-by-step
prediction of the suspense level evoked
by a series of steps in a particular chess
endgame scenario. Based on these predic-
tions, particular variations from a given
set-up of the game may be chosen to in-
duce a story for the game that optimises
the value of the suspense perceived by an
observer following the narrative that results
from the game. This provides a content de-
termination strategy for a system that con-
structs chess games specifically to support
suspenseful stories.

1 Introduction

When an author sits down to write a story, one pos-
sible goal in his mind may be to evoke feelings
of suspense in the prospective reader. To achieve
this, the writer plays both with the content that he
includes in his story and the order in which it is
presented to the reader. Some recent efforts in the
computational study of narrative have focused in
the way this inducement of feelings of suspense
may be achieved (Delatorre and Arfè, 2015; De-
latorre et al., 2016). In this paper, we explore a
possible way of selecting between possible contin-
uations of a chess game such that the story of its
telling be such that it evokes a desirable amount of
suspense.

The game of chess – being a simplified model
of a world that includes conflict between opposing
factions (black and white) constituted by individu-
als (pieces) that carry out actions (moves) driven by
an illusion of purpose (the strategy of each player)
– has already been used as a case study for com-
putational studies on the construction of narrative

(Gervás, 2014; Delatorre and Gervás, 2014; Gervás,
2018a,b).

In this paper, we explore a way of viewing a
chess game as a narrative. Using the model of
suspense described in Doust (2015), Doust and
Piwek (2017) and Doust (2017), we derive a fluctu-
ating step-by-step prediction of the suspense level
evoked by a series of steps in a particular chess
endgame scenario. Based on these predictions, par-
ticular variations from a given set-up of the game
may be chosen to induce a story for the game that
optimises the value of the suspense perceived by an
observer following the narrative that results from
the game. This provides a content determination
strategy for a system that constructs chess games
specifically to support suspenseful stories.

1.1 Design choices

In searching for suitable domains to explore the
potential and the validity of our model, the chess
world has the advantages of simplicity, clarity and
closure. This is especially true in the endgame
phase where there are fewer pieces on the board
and the available options are easy to see and pre-
dict. In the endgame, the King and Pawns have
the advantage of only moving one square at a time.
Their movement has a certain linearity. The goal of
queening a pawn is also a very clear endpoint for a
pawn. For these reasons we have limited ourselves
to a particular chess endgame with only Kings and
Pawns on the board. If the model is successful,
other more complex setups with additional pieces
could be considered.

In extrapolating a narrative from a board game
or indeed any sport, there are several options. One
of these would be to consider the individual sto-
ries of the different pieces. For the chess exam-
ple we could create a narrative of the pawn’s self-
realisation in becoming a queen. We could use
terms such as far, near, close, within firing range to
simulate the approximate non-omniscient knowl-

26



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

edge or field of view that a piece has of the other
pieces on the board. In this way, we could tell the
suspenseful and surprising story of the events that
happen to a given piece. In such an approach, the
unpredictability that is essential to narrative would
be achievable because the piece in question might
not be aware beforehand of a different piece’s sud-
den appearance in its field of view.

In this paper however, we follow the perhaps
more usual idea of the suspenseful and surprising
story derived from the movement of the pieces
that is understood by a viewer of the game who
observes both sides, white and black, and maybe
supports one of the sides. In such an approach,
however, it would appear to be harder to model the
unpredictability needed to create a model of narra-
tive, as all moves are visible and, theoretically at
least, calculable by the observer. However, we will
be simulating a non-expert observer with certain
limits to its analytical powers, and this will enable
us to simulate a narrative-like process with a degree
of unpredictability from a series of chess moves.

2 Related Work

This section reviews existing studies on computa-
tional narrative based on chess and existing models
of suspense.

2.1 Computational Narrative Studies based
on Chess

The use of a chess game as a reference world on
which to developed basic mechanics of narrative
composition had been explored in Gervás (2014),
where a basic concept of a narrative thread is intro-
duced similar to the ones used in this paper. The
evaluation of the perception of suspense over a
chess game was addressed in Delatorre and Gervás
(2014), using simple models of the level of threat
perceived by each faction. Elementary models for
proposing possible plot structures to account for
a selected sequence of moves out of the record of
a complete chess game are described in Gervás
(2018a) and Gervás (2018b).

2.2 Computational Models of Suspense

Based on systematic reviews of existing cognitive
models of suspense, the work described in Dela-
torre and Arfè (2015) and Delatorre et al. (2016)
outlines a computational approach for measuring
the suspense evoked by a given narrative, in terms
of particular characteristics such as the relative

strengths of the characters in opposition, the em-
pathy inspired by different characters in the reader,
and the props and settings for particular scenes.

2.3 Our narrative thread model of suspense

We now give a brief review of our narrative model
of suspense as shown in Doust (2015), Doust and
Piwek (2017) and Doust (2017).

Much research on computational models of nar-
rative has often centred on use of detailed represen-
tations for character goals and plans – see for exam-
ple Cavazza and Charles (2005). Also, approaches
to suspense modelling often interlock with the con-
cept of a story protagonist under some kind of
threat – see for example, the suspense modelling in
the SUSPENSER system Cheong and Young (2015)
which attempts to maximise suspense by varying
the number of potential actions of a central pro-
tagonist which could allow him or her to escape a
threat.

In Doust (2015), we proposed a domain-
independent model of suspense together with a
method for measuring the suspensefulness of sim-
ple chronological narratives. By separating out
emotional salience and character empathy consider-
ations from informational and attentional processes
at the heart of the suspense reaction, we constructed
a modular definition of suspense.

In our model, which was inspired by the infor-
mal model presented in Brewer and Lichtenstein
(1982), the concept of a narrative thread plays a
pivotal role. Narrative threads model the reader’s
expectations about what might happen next in a
given story. As a story is told, narrative threads are
activated and de-activated. Different threads may
point to conflicting events that are situated in the fu-
ture. As more of the story is revealed, the moment
of resolution of the conflict may appear more or
less proximal in time. We capture this by formally
defining the concept of Imminence. Imminence
is based on the potential for upcoming storyworld
events to conflict with one another and on the nar-
rative proximity with these conflicts. It is the key
factor in what we call conflict-based suspense1.

For a given storyworld, our model requires a
set of narrative threads. Each thread consists in a
chronological list of potential events taken from
the storyworld. In addition, we used a set of dis-

1Additionally, as the story is told, conflicting interpreta-
tions about certain events in the story may prevail. This led
us to define a distinct second type of suspense which we call
revelatory suspense which we will not examine in this paper.

27



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

allowing ordered pairs of events to represents in-
compatible storyworld events. If one of a pair of
disallowing events is told in the story, then the other
event can no longer be told.

A story is then an ordered list of events taken
from the storyworld that usually includes events
from different narrative threads. Telling a story
is equivalent to going through this ordered list of
events one by one. Each new told event may have
an effect on one or more narrative threads. Each
narrative thread also has a Told and Untold event
list. If the new story event matches a member of the
Untold list of any narrative thread, then we move it
(and all the events before it) into the thread’s Told
list. Additionally, the thread also becomes active
(if previously, it was not). Finally, threads can get
deactivated by certain events in the story according
to a defined set of disallowing pairs of events.

3 Content Determination for
Suspense-Inducing Stories based on
Chess Games

We will use an endgame study by Réti as a working
example (taken from Dvoretsky (2011, p. 29).

80Z0Z0Z0J
7Z0Z0Z0Z0
6kZPZ0Z0Z
5Z0Z0Z0Zp
40Z0Z0Z0Z
3Z0Z0Z0Z0
20Z0Z0Z0Z
1Z0Z0Z0Z0

a b c d e f g h

3.1 Deriving the narrative threads

It should ultimately be possible to derive the narra-
tive threads inherent in a given chess position from
automatic computational analysis of the position.
However, we have chosen in this first approach
to derive them by hand. This choice is linked
to our strategy of focussing on a relatively sim-
ple endgame situation where, because we use only
Kings and Pawns, the move choices more visibly
resemble a thread-like structure.

Criteria for the identification of a narrative thread
are that it has a clear start and end point. As we
shall see, in the chess storyworld, a thread can of-

ten be usefully labelled with a goal-like description
such as ‘wants to take a piece’, ‘wants to stop a
piece getting taken’, ‘wants to make a queen’, etc.
We inferred a set of narrative threads that we con-
sider relevant for this chess position. We now show
these on the chessboard.

8 0Z0Z0Z0J
7 Z0Z0Z0Z0
6 kZPZ0Z0Z
5 Z0Z0Z0Zp
4 0Z0Z0Z0Z
3 Z0Z0Z0Z0
2 0Z0Z0Z0Z
1 Z0Z0Z0Z0

a b c d e f g h

Q

Q

The black king has a thread of two steps cul-
minating in the capture of the white pawn (grey
arrows). The white pawn has a thread of two steps
culminating in becoming a queen (blue arrows) and
the black pawn has a thread of 4 steps to become
a queen (purple arrows). The white king has two
sets of threads: one set (red arrows) contains the
more or less equivalent paths to try to catch the
black pawn (currently 3 steps away), the other set
(brown arrows) contains roughly equivalent paths
to get close to the white pawn to stop it being taken
by the black king (currently 4 steps away).

In Table 1, we show a sample of the threads in a
table form.

Table 1: Narrative threads sample
Thread Name Thread steps
Black pawn h5 h4 h3 h2 h1
White pawn c6 c7 c8

White king chases pawn h8 h7 h6 h5

Computationally, we use the following format
for each thread: a Name, an Importance value, a
sequence of Told events (or moves) and a sequence
of as yet Untold events.

• arc(Name,Importance,[Told],[Untold])

To help to understand the overall structure and in-
terlinking of these narrative threads, we now show
some visual interpretations of the narrative threads

28



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

BPawn_to_h5

BPawn_to_h4

BPawn_to_h3

WKing_to_h5xBPawn

BPawn_to_h2

WKing_to_h4xBPawn

BPawn_to_h1q

WKing_to_h3xBPawn

WKing_to_h2xBPawn

WKing_to_h8

WKing_to_h7

WKing_to_h6

WKing_to_h5

WKing_to_h1xBPawn

WKing_to_h4

WKing_to_h3

WKing_to_h2

Figure 1: Narrative threads for the White King and
Black Pawn

for this chess position. First, we show the inter-
action between just the White King and the Black
Pawn in Figure 1.

In this figure, each thread has its own colour. We
can see that different threads can ‘pass through’ the
same chess move. The red dotted lines identify the
moves that disallow each other, that is, if one of
these occurs, then the other can no longer occur in
the game. These disallowing links are necessary
to eliminate certain threads as soon as for example
the pawn is captured.

Next, in order to give an idea of the global struc-
ture of our narrative thread systems, we show the
complete system of narrative threads for this chess
position (with abbreviated labels due to space) in
Figure 2.

This global view also helps to see how the dif-
ferent threads are linked and where interesting nar-
ratives may lie. In this Figure, several threads for
the White King link up to the square e52 and then
split into two directions: one to protect the white
pawn, the other to try to capture the black pawn.
Indeed, this move turns out to be the key to solving
the original study.

2In the Figure, this shown by the event wke5 third down
from the top in the centre

bph5

bph4

bph3

wkh5xbp

bph2

wkh4xbp

bph1q

wkh3xbp

wkh2xbp

wpc6

wpc7

wpc8q

wkh8

wkh7wkg7

wkh6

wkh5

wkh1xbp

wkh4

wkh3

wkh2

wkf6

wkg5

wke5

wkf4wkd6

wkg3bkc6xwp

Figure 2: Narrative threads for the whole Réti posi-
tion

3.2 Modelling the reader’s predicted
reactions: the suspense algorithm

3.3 Modelling our observer

We will make some assumptions that the observer
of our game is a rather naive beginner who does
not calculate the interaction of the narrative threads
in absolute terms, but rather has a feel for each
narrative thread’s end-point and how soon this end-
point could be reached.

We will assume that our observer absolutely
wants the white pieces to win and each thread is
evaluated with respect to this desire. We therefore
evaluate moves that are good for white as positive,
and those good for black as negative.

With this setup, we can now simulate the sus-
pense in a chess position with our narrative thread-
based model of conflict-based suspense.

3.3.1 Applying our algorithm to the Réti
study

According to the suspense algorithm in Doust
(2015), after the telling of the nth story
event, we calculate the suspense as a function
of the Imminencen(Z), Foregroundednessn(Z),
Confidencen(Z) and Importancen(Z) of each ac-

29



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

tive narrative thread Z after story event n:

Suspensen(Z) = Imminencen(Z)

× Importancen(Z)
× Foregroundednessn(Z)
× Confidencen(Z)

(1)

Of course, some threads are more important than
others and will have a bigger effect on suspense.
The Importance of each narrative thread is equiva-
lent to the predicted degree of positive or negative
appraisal of the storyworld situation that the ob-
server would have, were Z to succeed. The Impor-
tance values given here are based on standard chess
practice that uses relative values of the pieces to
evaluate board positions. Thus, if the white pawn
queens at the endpoint of a thread, then this will
give a value of +8 to that thread, because the value
of a queen is 8 and the observer supports white.

In a standard chess game, the Confidence vari-
able will always be equal to 1, as there are no
hidden or untold moves.

As for the Foregroundedness variable, in previ-
ous work, we used a decay factor of 0.88 to deter-
mine the rate at which threads decay in importance
when they are not explicitly evoked in a story step.
However, in this first approach, we will ignore this
variable, that is, we will ignore any memory effects
and consider its value as always equal to 1.

Thus, the suspense contribution of a thread will
depend only on its Importance and its Imminence.

3.3.2 Imminence
At a given point in the telling of the story, each
active narrative thread Z generates two values for
Imminence.

Completion Imminence is related to the number
of moves in Z still to be played for it to be com-
pleted or to ‘succeed’. For the starting position of
the chess board above, the thread corresponding to
the black pawn advancing to queen has a comple-
tion imminence of 4. In other words, it will take
this thread 4 steps to complete.

Interruption Imminence is related to the smallest
number of steps still to be played in some other
thread before a step can be occur which interrupts
Z by disallowing one of its steps3. The question to
ask is: ”How soon can this thread be interrupted?”.

3In the case where no thread can interrupt Z, the Interrup-
tion Imminence of Z is taken as zero.

In the case of our black pawn thread, the interrup-
tion imminence is 3, as the pawn’s moves can only
be interrupted by the white king taking it and this
requires 3 steps.

We use the definition in Doust (2015) of the
Total Imminencen(Z) of a narrative thread Z after
the nth event in the story:

Total Imminence = ρ
1

H
+ (1− ρ) 1

R
(2)

where H is the number of events to the completion
of Z and R is the minimum number of events be-
fore an event in some other narrative thread could
be told which would disallow some untold event
in Z. The factor ρ is used to vary the relative
weighting of these two imminence effects. Exper-
imentation with the implementation of our model
(see Doust (2015)) led us to choose ρ = 0.7, in
effect boosting the relative effect of Completion
imminence over Interruption Imminence.

3.3.3 Overall step-by-step suspense value
Finally we use a heuristic to combine all these
individual narrative thread suspense values and pro-
duce the global suspense level at each moment in
the story. Our method is to assume that it is the
thread with the highest suspense value that is the
one responsible for the story’s evoked suspense at
that point and we take this thread’s contribution
as equivalent to the overall suspense level of the
narrative at that point in the story. Different threads
will have the most important effect on suspense at
different points in the story.

We can now apply our algorithm to calculate
values for the suspense inherent at any point in this
chess endgame.

3.3.4 Starting position
We first represent the starting positions of the
pieces on the board: [White King h8, Black pawn
h5, White Pawn c6, Black King a6]. Of course, in
this starting position, it seems likely that there will
already be some suspense. We therefore consider
that the following threads may already be active in
the starting position:

• Black Pawn tries to queen

• White Pawn tries to queen

• Black King chases the White Pawn

The only piece to which we ascribe no active
thread at the beginning is the White King. This

30



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

first list of threads can be used to calculate the
initial suspense levels.

3.3.5 Choosing a story
In the starting position of the study in question,
it is White’s move. Two options seem to present
themselves:

• The White King tries (hopelessly) to move
down the column to catch the Black Pawn and
stop it from queening (h8-h7-h6-...)

• The White King tries to move along the row
to get close to the White Pawn and protect it
so that it can queen. (h8-g8-f8-...)

The interesting choice in chess terms, however,
is for the White King to move to g7 which actually
satisfies both of the above goals. (This choice also
allows White to draw the game as shown in the
standard analysis of the study.)

We will therefore first examine a sequence of
moves that starts with this move. The particular
‘chess story’ of (necessarily) alternating white and
black ‘events’ we will consider is the following:

• W.King moves diagonally to g7, B.Pawn
moves down

• W.King moves diagonally to f6, B.King
moves next to white pawn

• W.King moves diagonally to e5, B.King takes
white pawn

• W.King moves to f4 towards the B.Pawn,
B.Pawn moves down

• W.King moves to g3 next to the pawn, B.Pawn
moves down

• W.King takes the B.Pawn

Now after each move, we can update the comple-
tion and interruption distances for each thread ands
obtain a prediction of the overall suspense level at
that point in the ’story’.

3.4 Suspense predictions
We show the suspense predictions given by our
algorithm in Figure 3. The figure also shows the
contributions from some individual threads to the
overall value.

To show some of the potential of our approach,
we show the suspense profiles of two different
‘chess stories’ that could be told in this position.

0 2 4 6 8 10 12

0

2

4

6

8

wkg7 bph4 wkf6 bkb6 wke5bkc6xwpwkf4 bph3 wkg3 bph2wkh2xbp

story step

su
sp

en
se

le
ve

l

Réti chess study suspense levels

Total suspense
Black pawn thread
White pawn thread

White king protects pawn

Figure 3: Suspense levels for Réti chess study

In Figure 4, we show the suspense lev-
els for the story where the White King
moves towards the White Pawn and
protects it as it advances and queens:
wkg7,bph4,wkf6,bph3,wke6,bph2,wkd6,bph1q,wpc7.

0 2 4 6 8

4

6

8

10

wkg7 bph4 wkf6 bph3 wke6 bph2 wkd6 bph1q wpc7

story step

su
sp

en
se

le
ve

l
Réti chess study suspense levels

Total suspense

Figure 4: Suspense levels for ”white king helps
white pawn to queen”

In Figure 5, we show the suspense levels
for the story where the White King merely
tries to catch the Black Pawn as the Black
Pawn moves down the board and queens:
wkh7,bph4,wkh6,bph3,wkh5,bph2,wkh4,bph1q.

0 2 4 6 8

4

6

8

10

wkh7 bph4 wkh6 bph3 wkh5 bph2 wkh4 bph1q

story step

su
sp

en
se

le
ve

l

Réti chess study suspense levels

Total suspense

Figure 5: Suspense levels for ”white king chases
black pawn”

31



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

4 Discussion

Chess studies are interesting for our purposes in
that they are specifically designed to be surpris-
ing to the observer of the moves. This paper ex-
plores the possibility that at least one aspect of
what makes a series of chess moves interesting is
their ability to evoke story-like scenarios and more
specifically generate suspense, surprise and curios-
ity.

The graph of suspense levels (Figure 3) clearly
shows the switch in the pieces generating the sus-
pense levels as the sequence of moves unfolds. We
may consider therefore that a suspenseful chess
match therefore will need different pieces to carry
out the ‘suspense creation’ as the match progresses.

The design choices made for the present paper
(see Section 1.1) align better with the approach
to telling the story of a chess game followed in
Delatorre and Gervás (2014), in the sense that the
story considered is based on a perception of the
complete chess board and the moves that take place
over it. The alternative described – but not followed
in this paper – where the story of the game is told
in terms of partial views by certain pieces aligns
better with the approach followed in Gervás (2014).

The model of suspense applied in this paper dif-
fers from others in the literature in that it is based on
the interaction between a set of possible narrative
threads as inferred by the reader from the partially
told story. Other approaches do not consider this
narrative level of suspense and focus more on the
construction of possible plans for a given character
(usually aimed at its survival in the face of danger).

5 Conclusions and Future Work

A further point is that it should be possible to calcu-
late the suspensefulness of different move options
and potentially to choose those options that pro-
duce the most suspense. Such an approach could
be used as part of a system generating potential nar-
rative sequences and then evaluating them for their
suspensefulness in order to choose among them the
most entertaining options.

Lastly, challenging though it may be, the pre-
dictions that this model makes need to be tested
empirically for a range of participants. A factor
that may be difficult to account for is the varying
chess ability of the participants. Typically, in the
study above, for example, as soon as it becomes
clear to a reasonable chess player that the Black
Pawn will be captured, then arguably there is no

more suspense left in the game. This in itself points
to further work on defining suspense for a specific
player profile. One way to approach this would be
to place different sized event horizons for the dif-
ferent players: experienced players would be able
to see several moves ahead, beginners much fewer.
These different levels of awareness may then gen-
erate predictably different suspense experiences.

References
W.F. Brewer and E.H. Lichtenstein. 1982. Stories are

to entertain: A structural-affect theory of stories.
Journal of Pragmatics, 6(5-6):473–486.

Marc Cavazza and Fred Charles. 2005. Dialogue Gen-
eration in Character-based Interactive Storytelling.
AAAI, AIIDE2005,, pages 21–26.

Yun-Gyung Cheong and R Michael Young. 2015. Sus-
penser: A story generation system for suspense.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence
and AI in Games, 7(1):39–52.

Pablo Delatorre and Barbara Arfè. 2015. Modu-
lare la suspense del lettore attraverso un mod-
elo computazionale. In XXVIII Congresso
Nazionale Sezione di Psicologia dello sviluppo e
dell’educazione.

Pablo Delatorre, Barbara Arfè, Pablo Gervás, and
Manuel Palomo-Duarte. 2016. A component-based
architecture for suspense modelling. In Proceedings
of AISB 2016’s Third International Symposium on
Computational Creativity (CC2016).

Pablo Delatorre and Pablo Gervás. 2014. Un modelo
para la evaluación de la narrativa basada en partidas
de ajedrez. In Proceedings of the 1st Congreso de
la Sociedad Española para las Ciencias del Video-
juego (CoSECiVi 2014). CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings, CEUR Workshop Proceedings.

Richard Doust. 2015. A domain-independent model of
suspense in narrative. Ph.D. thesis, The Open Uni-
versity.

Richard Doust. 2017. A fundamental element for narra-
tive parsing. 6th International Workshop on Compu-
tational Creativity, Concept Invention, and General
Intelligence. Madrid, December 15th 2017.

Richard Doust and Paul Piwek. 2017. A model of sus-
pense for narrative generation. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Natural Language
Generation, pages 178–187.

Mark Dvoretsky. 2011. Dvoretsky’s endgame manual.
SCB Distributors.

P. Gervás. 2018a. Storifying observed events: Could i
dress this up as a story? In 5th AISB Symposium on
Computational Creativity, University of Liverpool,
UK. AISB, AISB.

32



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 26–33,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Pablo Gervás. 2014. Composing narrative discourse
for stories of many characters: a case study over
a chess game. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
29(4).

Pablo Gervás. 2018b. Targeted storyfying: Creat-
ing stories about particular events. In Ninth Inter-
national Conference on Computational Creativity,
ICCC 2018, Salamanca, Spain. Association of Com-
putational Creativity, Association of Computational
Creativity.

33


