



















































From Fidelity to Fluency: Natural Language Processing for Translator Training


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for Educational Applications, pages 130–134
Melbourne, Australia, July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

130

From Fidelity to Fluency:
Natural Language Processing for Translator Training

Oi Yee Kwong
Department of Translation

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
oykwong@arts.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

This study explores the use of natural lan-
guage processing techniques to enhance
bilingual lexical access beyond simple
equivalents, to enable translators to nav-
igate along a wider cross-lingual lexical
space and more examples showing differ-
ent translation strategies, which is essen-
tial for them to learn to produce not only
faithful but also fluent translations.

1 Introduction

Online dictionaries are important computer-aided
tools for translators today (Bowker, 2015), while
parallel corpora, despite their relative scarcity,
have become useful resources for translation
teaching (Olohan, 2004). The two kinds of ref-
erence provide what lexicographers like Atkins
and Rundell (2008) would distinguish as context-
free and context-sensitive translations respec-
tively. The current work, as a prelude to a larger
project, discusses the limitations of existing bilin-
gual lexical resources and proposes natural lan-
guage processing approaches for enhancing their
navigational means for better usability in transla-
tor training and computer-aided translation.

Consider the translation of the English sen-
tence “I still have vivid memories of that evening”
into Chinese. The Online Cambridge English-
Chinese Dictionary1 shows two senses of “vivid”,
and quite straightforwardly the word can be dis-
ambiguated between the first sense (Vivid descrip-
tions, memories, etc. produce very clear, powerful,
and detailed images in the mind) and the second
sense (very brightly coloured). Hence, notwith-
standing the normal associative strengths between
words, when “vivid” has been properly disam-
biguated, its associations with “colour”, “bright”,

1http://dictionary.cambridge.org

etc. are down-weighted compared with its associa-
tions with “recollection”, “memory”, “clear”, etc.

Once the decoding purpose is fulfilled, with
the appropriate senses identified (“vivid” as above
and “memory” as “something that you remember
from the past”), one can then refer to the Chinese
“equivalents” provided by the dictionary: 栩栩如
生的, 鮮活的, and 生動的 for “vivid”, and 記
憶 and 回憶 for “memory”. But the encoding
purpose is not achieved yet, because none of the
combinations between these lexical items could be
considered satisfactory. They are only conceptu-
ally close to what we need, but not exactly appro-
priate for the context. It will only be helpful if we
can depart from them and navigate further along
their associations. The ability to do so is essen-
tially what translator training would need to fore-
ground, especially for novice translators to pro-
duce not only faithful but also fluent translations.

In the rest of this paper, we will first illustrate, in
Section 2, the limitations of existing bilingual re-
sources from the cognitive perspective, especially
with reference to word associations. We will dis-
cuss in Section 3 the implications on the need for
enhanced access of those resources to facilitate
translator training. Section 4 outlines the natural
language processing techniques employed in our
ongoing work in this regard.

2 Word Association for Lexical Access

Word association has been deemed an important
element in the mental lexicon (e.g. Collins and
Loftus, 1975; Aitchison, 2003) as well as many
lexical resources employed in a variety of natural
language processing tasks (e.g. Fellbaum, 1998;
Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012), and is believed to be
able to provide useful navigational means to ad-
dress the search problem in lexical access in dic-
tionaries (Zock et al., 2010).



131

While there are various ways to model dif-
ferent associative relations from large corpora
(e.g. Church and Hanks, 1990; Wettler and Rapp,
1993; Biemann et al., 2004; Kilgarriff et al., 2004;
Hill et al., 2015), certain knots remain to be untied
for them to be better utilised in language applica-
tions. First, corpus-based modelling of associa-
tions often focuses on specific relations (e.g. sim-
ilarity, hierarchical relations, collocations, etc.),
but in real-life lexical access, a combination of
relations is often retrieved, as shown in human
word association norms (e.g. Moss and Older,
1996). Moreover, some associations are bound to
be more relevant than others in a given context,
and they are readily activated regardless of their
normal associative strengths. Second, for tasks re-
quiring bilingual lexical access, care must be taken
especially when onsidering the non-identical con-
ceptual and linguistic structures across languages.
Given the scarcity of complete equivalence and
different linguistic properties, bilingual (or multi-
lingual) word associations based entirely on bi- or
multi-lingual concept lexicalisations (equivalents)
may not be adequate for representing the cross-
lingual word association patterns.

Existing bilingual dictionaries nevertheless gen-
erally presume the existence of lexical transla-
tion equivalents. Analysis of human association
responses, as in Kwong (2013; 2016), suggests
an alternative view. On the one hand, very dif-
ferent association types are found for different
word classes (e.g. more taxonomic associations
for nouns and more collocational associations for
verbs), and across English and Chinese (e.g. more
paradigmatic responses for English but clear pref-
erence for syntagmatic associations for Chinese).
On the other hand, free associations may be mod-
elled from large corpora, but the results vary con-
siderably for individual words, some even counter-
intuitive. Less frequent associations are normally
disadvantaged, but humans readily retrieve them
when prompted by a certain context. Hence, mod-
elling of associations should be task-driven.

In addition, the equivalents given in bilingual
lexicons are basically decontextualized, and they
often do not appear in the example bilingual sen-
tences in the dictionaries. Thus, an association
found in the source language may not hold for
the equivalents found in a target language. When
using word associations in a bilingual context,
other than associative strengths, cross-lingual cor-

respondence of the associations is also worth in-
vestigation.

One conventional issue in psycholinguistics re-
garding models of bilingual lexicon is whether the
conceptual stores for two languages are shared or
separated (Keatley, 1992), and many studies sug-
gest that the store is mostly shared (e.g. Kroll
and Sunderman, 2003). Another issue is what is
shared and what is separated in particular lexical
concepts (Jarvis and Pavlenko, 2008). Pavlenko
(2009) suggested, in contrast to the conclusions
by many, that weaker connections failing to show
a semantic priming effect may not necessarily in-
dicate the lack of shared meaning, as concep-
tual equivalence can range from complete equiva-
lence to partial and even non-equivalence, and the
bilingual mental lexicon undergoes conceptual re-
structuring during language learning when cross-
linguistic differences are encountered. Such cog-
nitive aspects may not have been sufficiently mod-
elled in static bilingual linguistic lexicons, espe-
cially between two very different languages like
English and Chinese.

In the following we will compare the word asso-
ciations obtained from various resources, and eval-
uate them against the information need in our ear-
lier example situated in the translation context.

2.1 Word Association Norms
Table 1 shows the non-single responses in de-
scending order of frequency in the University of
South Florida (USF) Association Norms (Nelson
et al., 1998), for the stimuli “vivid” and “memo-
ries”. Apparently, should “vivid” and “memories”
be associated, they are linked by “dream”. In fact,
“memory” was among the 33 single responses for
“vivid”, while “vivid” was not among any of the
responses for “memories” or “memory”.

vivid memories
clear past album
color thoughts cats
bright happy good
imagination pictures love
real dreams photos
alive mind tears
dream bad boyfriends
read childhood fond
unclear friends high school
natural remember recollections
strong songs sad

Table 1: Responses from USF Association Norms

The equivalents in the Online Cambridge Dic-
tionary for “vivid” (栩栩如生(的),鮮活(的), and



132

清清清晰晰晰 (clear) 印印印象象象 (impression)
可見 (visible) 深刻 (deep)
目標 (objective) 印象派 (impressionism)
指引 (guideline) 良良良好好好 (good)
模模模糊糊糊 (unclear) 差差差 (bad)
清清清楚楚楚 (clear) 人 (person)
影像 (image) 第一印象 (first impression)
明白 (understand) 派 (-ism)

Table 2: Responses from HKC Association Norms

生動(的)) and for “memory” (記憶 and 回憶)
are not found in the Hong Kong Chinese (HKC)
association norms (Kwong, 2013), so instead we
look at the responses for two similar items, 清晰
(clear/vivid) and 印象 (impression/memory), re-
spectively2. The non-single responses for these
stimuli are shown in Table 2. For 清晰, the re-
sponses 清楚 (clear) and 模糊 (unclear) can be
said to match the English responses for “vivid”,
but other than that the response patterns differ con-
siderably across languages. The only response re-
lated to “memory” is 印象 which appeared only
once. Similarly, the stimulus 印象 has its own
cluster of associations and the most typical adjec-
tive associated with it (深刻) is not one expected
in English for “memories”, although more general
ones like “good” and “bad” are found in common.

2.2 Dictionary Text

Based on the content words gathered from the def-
initions in the Online Cambridge English-Chinese
Dictionary (Table 3), it seems that “vivid” and
“memories” are closely associated, with the lat-
ter appearing in the definition of the former. But
as mentioned above, one cannot really take the
given Chinese equivalents and combine them for
the translation. None of the combinations would
sound idiomatic to a native Chinese speaker.

vivid memory
descriptions something
memories remember
produce past
clear
powerful
detailed
images
mind

Table 3: Associations from Dictionary Definitions

2The former is among the equivalents for “vivid”
in iCIBA (http://www.iciba.com/) and the latter is
a near-synonym for 記 憶 in a Chinese dictionary
(http://dict.revised.moe.edu.tw).

2.3 Large Corpora

Making use of the Word Sketch function for se-
lected gramrel collocations and the Thesaurus
function in the Sketch Engine (Kilgarriff et al.,
2004; Rychlý and Kilgarriff, 2007) on the ukWaC
corpus and twWaC corpus, Tables 4 and 5 show
the top 10 results for our target words.

vivid memory
modifies thesaurus modifier thesaurus
recollection compelling fond image
imagination vibrant loving thought
evocation evocative childhood knowledge
imagery poignant short-term picture
depiction colourful distant feeling
memory imaginative vivid sense
portrayal striking collective vision
dream fascinating episodic experience
color dramatic flash character
portrait memorable happy idea

Table 4: Associations from ukWaC

清清清晰晰晰 回回回憶憶憶

noun right thesaurus adj left thesaurus
影像 清楚 美好 美好
照片 模糊 共同 記憶
概念 完整 老 童年
畫面 生動 許多 回想
聲音 深刻 深刻 時光
條理 流暢 難忘 快樂
輪廓 鮮明 浪漫 故事
認識 明確 永久 感動
文字 簡單 不愉快 往事
方向 呈現 永生 難忘

Table 5: Associations from twWaC

The following are noted from the results. First,
in English, “vivid” and “memory” are strongly
collocated, as the same collocation pops up from
both directions (what does “vivid” modify / what
modifies “memory”). But to a certain extent,
whether an expected association can be extracted
depends on individual corpora. For instance, with
thesaurus function on ukWaC, “recollection” (syn-
onym of “memory”) is not even found, and the
near-synonym “impression” ranked after the 450th
place. Second, very little overlap is found be-
tween the English and Chinese associations ex-
tracted (even if based on partial equivalents). Ar-
guably we started with partial equivalents anyway
(but that is inevitable), and it shows that the word
association patterns may not be the same across
translation equivalents.



133

3 Implications

Realising that Adj-N constructions in English are
not necessarily rendered as Adj-(的de)-N in Chi-
nese, one must go beyond the context-free equiv-
alents given in bilingual dictionaries to look for
potential target expressions which may sometimes
be found from the context-sensitive translations
shown in the example sentences. While one might
faithfully combine the bilingual lexicalisations of
“vivid” and “memory” to give生動/鮮活/逼真/清
晰的記憶, other more idiomatic and fluent ways
of expressing the same meaning in Chinese should
be accessible for reference, including word-class
shifts like 清楚記得/記得清清楚楚 (remember
vividly), use of four-character expressions like記
憶猶新, as well as other appropriate expressions
depending on context, such as 印象深刻 and 歷
歷在目, to name a few examples.

The process of determining the appropriate
target expression from the partial equivalents
can sometimes be tricky especially considering
the word formation, polysemy, and collocation
patterns across the two languages (e.g. even
for the same sense, “clear” appropriately cor-
responds to 清晰/清楚 when collocated with
image/explanation respectively, and 清澈/透明
with river/glass respectively). The challenge is
even more pronounced when no correspondence
can be spotted from the examples, or for gen-
erally weakly associated words (e.g. strong-
endorsement). Thus, natural language processing
techniques are adopted to enhance bilingual access
beyond lexical equivalents for translators.

4 Work in Progress

It is not simply lexical transfer but a transfer of
the whole relevant semantic space that is needed
in translation. With this in mind, we are pursu-
ing two routes using natural language processing
approaches to enhance bilingual lexical access be-
yond simple translation equivalents, for reference
in the translation process.

The first involves chaining up collocation infor-
mation in a cross-lingual manner. Many have re-
alised that there are often conceptual gaps across
languages, but in addition to the bilingual cor-
respondences of individual lexicalised concepts,
it is necessary to consider the cross-lingual dif-
ference in terms of not only conceptual structure
but also collocation patterns. As McKeown and
Radev (2000) pointed out, a concept expressed by

way of a collocation in one language may not have
a corresponding collocation in another language.

Hence, ideally one should be able to start from
a certain collocation or cluster of collocation in
one language (e.g. vivid-memory) and, through
some translation equivalents as seed words (e.g.
memory-回憶), extend into the relevant semantic
space in the other language (e.g. 往事/歷歷/印
象/深刻) which is otherwise unretrievable from
bilingual lexicons alone, as Figure 1 shows. For
experiments, the Bilingual Word Sketch function
in the Sketch Engine (Baisa et al., 2014) is taken
as a starting point, upon which strategic applica-
tion of word sense disambiguation, clustering, and
word embedding techniques is tested for their ef-
fects on re-prioritising word associations with re-
spect to specific collocations for a given context.

Figure 1: A Glimpse of a Cross-lingual Colloca-
tion Chain

The second makes use of neural machine trans-
lation (NMT) to obtain paraphrase sentence pairs.
While most machine translation research focuses
primarily on the fidelity of the target text, other
possible and perhaps more fluent renditions are ei-
ther ranked very low or completely ignored. They
may exist in parallel corpora but with so low a
frequency that often leaves NMT models to con-
sider them noise. Thus we propose to identify
paraphrase (that is, non-literal translation) cases
from NMT with the attention mechanism (Bah-
danau et al., 2014). While most work would pay
attention to the more strongly correlated parts in
the resulting word alignments which often indicate
very faithful and literal translation, we assume that
the less correlated parts would correspond to free
yet more fluent translation, provided that the bilin-
gual parallel corpus is of good quality. Preliminary
experiments are underway, and there are certainly
technical issues to overcome, including threshold
setting, noise filtering, and properly making use of
the less strongly aligned parts. Evaluation would
also need to be considered.



134

Acknowledgements

The work described in this paper was fully sup-
ported by a grant from the Research Grants Coun-
cil of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Re-
gion, China (Project No. CUHK 14616317).

References
J. Aitchison. 2003. Words in the Mind: An Introduction

to the Mental Lexicon. Blackwell Publishers.

B.T.S. Atkins and M. Rundell. 2008. The Oxford Guide
to Practical Lexicography. Oxford University Press.

D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. 2014. Neural
machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. In arXiv e-prints, abs/1409.0473.

V. Baisa, M. Jakubı́ček, A. Kilgarriff, V. Kovář, and
P. Rychlý. 2014. Bilingual Word Sketches: the
translate button. In Proceedings of the 16th EU-
RALEX International Congress, pages 505–513,
Bolzano, Italy.

C. Biemann, S. Bordag, and U. Quasthoff. 2004. Au-
tomatic acquisition of paradigmatic relations using
iterated co-occurrences. In Proceedings of 4th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2004), pages 967–970, Lisbon,
Portugal.

L. Bowker. 2015. Computer-aided translation: Trans-
lator training. In S-W. Chan, editor, The Routledge
Encyclopedia of Translation Technology. Routledge.

K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word association
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Com-
putational Linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

A.M. Collins and E.F. Loftus. 1975. A spreading-
activation theory of semantic processing. Psycho-
logical Review, 82(6):407–428.

C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database. MIT Press.

F. Hill, R. Reichart, and A. Korhonen. 2015. Simlex-
999: Evaluating semantic models with (genuine)
similarity estimation. Computational Linguistics,
41(4):665–695.

S. Jarvis and A. Pavlenko. 2008. Crosslinguistic Influ-
ence in Language and Cognition. Routledge, New
York.

C. Keatley. 1992. History of bilingualism research in
cognitive psychology. In R. Harris, editor, Cogni-
tive Processing in Bilinguals, pages 15–49. North-
Holland, Amsterdam.

A. Kilgarriff, P. Rychlý, P. Smrz, and D.Tugwell. 2004.
The Sketch Engine. In Proceedings of EURALEX
2004, Lorient, France.

J. Kroll and G. Sunderman. 2003. Cognitive processes
in second language learners and bilinguals: The de-
velopment of lexical and conceptual representations.
In C. Doughty and M. Long, editors, The Hand-
book of Second Language Acquisition, pages 104–
129. Blackwell, Malden, MA.

O.Y. Kwong. 2013. Exploring the Chinese mental lex-
icon with word association norms. In Proceedings
of the 27th Pacific Asia Conference on Language,
Information and Computation (PACLIC 27), pages
153–162, Taipei.

O.Y. Kwong. 2016. Strong associations can be weak:
Some thoughts on cross-lingual word webs for trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 30th Pacific Asia Con-
ference on Language, Information and Computation
(PACLIC 30), pages 249–257, Seoul, Korea.

K.R. McKeown and D.R. Radev. 2000. Collocations.
In R. Dale, H. Moisl, and H. Somers, editors, A
Handbook of Natural Language Processing. Marcel
Dekker.

H. Moss and L. Older. 1996. Birkbeck Word Associa-
tion Norms. Psychology Press, Hove, UK.

R. Navigli and S. Ponzetto. 2012. Babelnet: The au-
tomatic construction, evaluation and application of a
wide-coverage multilingual semantic network. Arti-
ficial Intelligence, 193:217–250.

D.L. Nelson, C.L. McEvoy, and T.A. Schreiber.
1998. The University of South Florida word
association, rhyme, and word fragment norms.
http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/.

M. Olohan. 2004. Introducing Corpora in Translation
Studies. Routledge.

A. Pavlenko. 2009. Conceptual representation in the
bilingual lexicon and second language vocabulary
learning. In A. Pavlenko, editor, The Bilingual Men-
tal Lexicon: Interdisciplinary Approaches, pages
125–160. Multilingual Matters, Bristol, UK.

P. Rychlý and A. Kilgarriff. 2007. An efficient al-
gorithm for building a distributional thesaurus (and
other Sketch Engine developments). In Proceedings
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interac-
tive Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pages 41–
44, Czech Republic.

M. Wettler and R. Rapp. 1993. Computation of word
associations based on the co-occurrences of words in
large corpora. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on Very Large Corpora: Academic and Industrial
Perspectives, pages 84–93, Columbus, Ohio.

M. Zock, O. Ferret, and D. Schwab. 2010. Deliberate
word access: an intuition, a roadmap and some pre-
liminary empirical results. International Journal of
Speech Technology, 13(4):201–218.


