



















































Challenges in Converting the Index Thomisticus Treebank into Universal Dependencies


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2018), pages 27–36
Brussels, Belgium, November 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

27

Challenges in Converting the Index Thomisticus Treebank
into Universal Dependencies

Flavio Massimiliano Cecchini and Marco Passarotti
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, CIRCSE Research Centre

Largo Gemelli 1, 20123 - Milan, Italy
{flavio.cecchini}{marco.passarotti}@unicatt.it

Paola Marongiu
Università degli Studi di Pavia

Corso Strada Nuova 65, 27100 - Pavia, Italy
paola.marongiu01@universitadipavia.it

Daniel Zeman
Charles University in Prague, Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Malostranské náměstı́ 25, 118 00 - Prague, Czech Republic
zeman@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

This paper describes the changes applied to
the original process used to convert the In-
dex Thomisticus Treebank, a corpus including
texts in Medieval Latin by Thomas Aquinas,
into the annotation style of Universal Depen-
dencies. The changes are made both to har-
monise the Universal Dependencies version
of the Index Thomisticus Treebank with the
two other available Latin treebanks and to fix
errors and inconsistencies resulting from the
original process. The paper details the treat-
ment of different issues in PoS tagging, lem-
matisation and assignment of dependency re-
lations. Finally, it assesses the quality of the
new conversion process by providing an eval-
uation against a gold standard.

1 Introduction

Since release 1.2, Universal Dependencies (UD)
(Nivre et al., 2016)1 has been including treebanks
for ancient languages or historical phases of mod-
ern ones. In the current release of UD (2.2), there
are treebanks for Ancient Greek, Gothic, Latin,
Old Church Slavonic, Old French and Sanskrit.

Among these languages, Latin is not only the
one provided with most data in UD 2.2 (520K to-
kens), but also the one with the most treebanks (3).
These are PROIEL (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008),
which includes the entire New Testament in Latin
(the so called Vulgata by Jerome) and texts from
the Classical era (199K tokens), the Latin Depen-

1http://universaldependencies.org/

dency Treebank (LDT) by the Perseus Digital Li-
brary (Bamman and Crane, 2006), which collects
a small selection of texts by Classical authors (29K
tokens), and the Index Thomisticus Treebank (IT-
TB) (Passarotti, 2011), based on works written in
the XIIIth century by Thomas Aquinas (291K to-
kens).

The greater number of treebanks available for
Latin than for other ancient languages reflects the
large diachronic (as well as diatopic) span of Latin
texts, which are spread across a time frame of
more than two millennia and in most areas of what
is called Europe today. This aspect is peculiar to
Latin, which has represented for a long time a kind
of lingua franca in Europe. The variety of textual
typologies in Latin is thus wide: to name just a
few, scientific treaties, literary works, philosophi-
cal texts and official documents were mostly writ-
ten in Latin for centuries all around Europe. To-
day, this makes it impossible to build a textual
corpus that can be sufficiently representative of
“Latin”, just because there are too many varieties
of Latin, which can be even very different from
each other.2

The three Latin treebanks were all developed
before UD came into use and thus have been fol-
lowing a different annotation style. Although
they are all dependency-based, only the IT-TB and
the LDT have been sharing the same annotation

2For instance, Ponti and Passarotti (2016) show the dra-
matic decrease of accuracy rates provided by a dependency
parsing pipeline trained on the IT-TB when applied on texts
of the Classical era taken from the LDT.

http://universaldependencies.org/


28

guidelines since the beginning of their respective
projects (Bamman et al., 2007), while PROIEL has
adopted a slightly different style.3 The treebanks
had been originally converted into the UD style
by means of different and independent processes,
which led to a number of inconsistencies in treat-
ing syntactic constructions as well as in part-of-
speech (PoS) tagging and lemmatisation. In or-
der to overcome such situation, a consensus has
been achieved between the three projects with the
aim of bringing the Latin treebanks closer to each
other, establishing fundamental common criteria
for both syntactic and morphological annotation.

In particular, so far the IT-TB has been always
converted into UD through the same process used
for the Prague Dependency Treebank for Czech
(PDT) (Hajič et al., 2017), since both treebanks
follow the same annotation style; just few mod-
ifications were made to cope with issues in PoS
tagging.

This paper describes the changes applied to the
original process of conversion from the IT-TB into
the UD style, both to harmonise the IT-TB with the
other Latin treebanks and to fix errors and incon-
sistencies during conversion. The result of the new
conversion process is the UD version of the IT-TB
that will be made available in the release 2.3 of
UD, scheduled to be published in November 2018.

The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes the conversion process, by detailing its two
phases, i. e. the so called harmonisation, which
mostly deals with issues in PoS tagging and lem-
matisation (Section 2.1), and the UD conversion
proper, which is responsible for assigning depen-
dency relations and rearranging the nodes in the
syntactic trees to fit the UD annotation style (Sec-
tion 2.2). Section 3 provides an evaluation of the
conversion process. Finally, Section 4 concludes
the paper and sketches some future work.

2 Conversion Process

The conversion process is performed via two sets
of scripts, both written in Perl language4 and
embedded as modules in TREEX’s5 architecture.
They consist of a preparatory harmonisation phase

3http://folk.uio.no/daghaug/
syntactic_guidelines.pdf

4https://www.perl.org/
5TREEX is a modular software system in Perl for Nat-

ural Language Processing. It is described in (Popel and
Žabokrtský, 2010) and available online at http://ufal.
mff.cuni.cz/treex.

(Section 2.1), followed by the UD conversion
proper (Section 2.2).

2.1 Harmonisation

Here, with harmonisation we mean adjusting a
treebank to the PDT annotation style, with regard
to the notation of lemmas, PoS and dependency
relations. This is the starting point for the current
UD conversion proper script (developed as part of
the HamleDT project (Rosa et al., 2014)), which in
a second phase infers morphological features and
intervenes on the structure of the syntactic trees.
In our case, harmonisation also includes making
the IT-TB adhere to the agreed-upon annotation
criteria for the three Latin treebanks, by means of
a number of interdependent harmonisation scripts.

In what follows, we describe the most relevant
issues that are dealt with during harmonisation of
the IT-TB and their treatment in the script.

2.1.1 PoS Tagging of Inflectable Words
The syntactic annotation style of the IT-TB already
substantially coincides with the PDT one (with the
exception of one afun;6 see Section 2.1.6). Hence,
no substantial changes have to be carried out dur-
ing harmonisation in this respect. However, the
IT-TB does not distinguish PoS: instead, it applies
a tripartite classification on a morphological basis
between (a) nominal inflection, including nouns,
adjectives, pronouns and numerals, (b) verbal in-
flection, including verbs, and (c) no inflection, in-
cluding conjunctions, prepositions, adverbs and
interjections.7

This means that, while words belonging to the
class of verbal inflection (including also their
nominal forms; see Section 2.1.2) can be readily
assigned PoS VERB,8 assigning a PoS to words of
the other classes is not straightforward. To this
end, we take advantage of the finer morphologi-
cal classification provided by LEMLAT (Passarotti,
2004), where each inflectable nominal, adjecti-
val and pronominal paradigm is treated differently.
This gives us a PoS tagging for inflectable word
classes, but not for uninflectable ones. From LEM-

6afun means “analytical function”, which is the term
used for syntactic labels in the surface syntax (“analytical”)
layer of annotation in the PDT. The corresponding term in UD
is deprel, standing for “dependency relation”.

7Actually, the IT-TB also considers a fourth inflec-
tional class to acknowledge the nominal inflections in verbal
paradigms, like for instance for participles and gerunds.

8UD makes use of the Universal PoS tagset by (Petrov
et al.).

http://folk.uio.no/daghaug/syntactic_guidelines.pdf
http://folk.uio.no/daghaug/syntactic_guidelines.pdf
https://www.perl.org/
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/treex
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/treex


29

LAT we thus obtain three lists of lemmas, respec-
tively for nouns, adjectives and pronouns, which
are hard-coded into the Perl script as look-up ta-
bles for PoS assignment (lemmas are already pro-
vided by the IT-TB annotation).

These lists are manually checked and partly
corrected; indeed, some terms that are new to
Thomistic Latin, or that have changed PoS or
gained a new one in the passage from the Classical
to the Medieval era9 need to be added to their re-
spective list or moved to a different one. This pro-
cedure does not resolve lexical ambiguity: for ex-
ample, philosophus ‘philosopher; philosophical’
can function both as a noun and as an adjective.
This ambivalence between noun and adjective can
not be solved by look-up tables alone, but requires
taking into account the syntactic behaviour of the
word in the dependency tree. More precisely, if
in the IT-TB the node in question is found to be
dependent on another node and has afun Atr (at-
tribute)10 and they agree by case, number and gen-
der, we will label it as an adjective; otherwise, as
a noun. The genitive case needs to be excluded
from this procedure, as one of its functions is to
make a noun the attribute of another noun; e. g.,
a phrase like amici philosophi, where both words
are in the genitive case, might be interpreted as
‘of the philosophical friend’ (noun amicus and ad-
jective philosophus), ‘of the philosopher’s friend’
(two nouns), or ‘of the philosopher friend’ (noun
and nominal apposition). This ambiguity can not
be solved a priori, as in the IT-TB all these three
constructions yield the same annotation:

. . . amici philosophi . . .

Atr

In general, the boundaries between adjectives and
nouns are blurred. Thus, in those occurrences
where an adjective is not assigned afun Atr in the
IT-TB, we give it PoS NOUN in UD.

2.1.2 PoS of Verbal Nouns

Words belonging to the verbal inflectional
class are always assigned PoS tag VERB, also
when nominal forms are concerned (participles,

9E. g. sanctus ‘saint’ was originally only a participial
form of the verb sancio ‘to ratify’, but subsequently it was
perceived and used also as an independent noun or adjective.

10For further details about afuns, see the an-
notation guidelines for PDT’s analytical layer at
https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/
manuals/en/a-layer/html/.

gerunds, gerundives, supines).11 Since a ver-
bal noun is still able to take complements, the
strongest argument in favour of this decision is that
in the current version of UD nominals can not gov-
ern the same syntactic relations as verbs (e. g. no
core/oblique distinction between complements is
made). For example, in the sentence from Summa
contra gentiles, Lib. III, Cap. CXXIX12

Transgredi autem terminum hunc a iudice
positum, non est secundum se malum. . .
‘But to pass over a boundary line set up by a
judge is not essentially evil. . . ’

we have positum ‘set up’ (perfect participle of
pono) acting as a modifier of terminum ‘boundary
line’, whose Agent is represented by the preposi-
tional phrase a iudice ‘by a judge’. Our UD con-
version yields:13

. . . terminum . . . a iudice positum . . .

acl

obl:argcase

Here, if we were to use amod (adjectival modifier)
instead of acl, we would not be able to identify a
iudice as an agent, and for the corresponding node
we should then choose between nmod (noun mod-
ifier) and amod, both however unsuitable to this
context.14

In the IT-TB, the only possible identification of
a verbal noun as an adjective or another nominal
is made at the level of lemmatisation: some oc-
currences of e. g. abstractus ‘abstract’ (adjective),
perfect participle of abstraho ‘to drag away’, are
assigned their own adjectival lemma (reported in
the look-up table) instead of the verbal one, on the
basis of their lexicalisation.

2.1.3 PoS Tagging of Uninflectable Words
Words belonging to uninflectable classes (preposi-
tions, conjunctions, adverbs, interjections) are all

11A practical reference for Latin grammar is (Greenough
and Allen, 2006).

12Here and thereafter, English translations of excerpts
from Summa contra gentiles are taken from (Aquinas, 1955–
1957). Those from Scriptum super sententiis are based on the
Italian translation provided by (d’Aquino, 2001).

13acl: adjectival clause; obl:arg: oblique argument;
case: case-marking element.

14The IT-TB is not the only treebank following
this approach, another one being the Sanskrit tree-
bank: http://universaldependencies.org/
treebanks/sa_ufal/index.html.

https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/a-layer/html/
https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/a-layer/html/
http://universaldependencies.org/treebanks/sa_ufal/index.html
http://universaldependencies.org/treebanks/sa_ufal/index.html


30

labeled with a common PoS tag I (for “invariable”)
in LEMLAT.

To assign a Universal PoS tag to such words, we
use a number of ad hoc rules relying on the origi-
nal IT-TB syntactic annotation, where such words
are assigned specific afuns: AuxC for subordinat-
ing conjunctions, AuxZ and AuxY for a closed
subset of non-derived adverbs, and Coord for co-
ordinating conjunctions.15 All those uninflectable
words that are not assigned a PoS by these ad hoc
rules are considered to be non-derived adverbs.

2.1.4 PoS and Lemmas of Derived Adverbs
In the IT-TB, the lemma of a derived adverb is
the adjective or the verb from which it is reg-
ularly formed. For example, continue ‘continu-
ously’, continuius ‘more continuously’ (compara-
tive) and continuissime ‘most continuously’ (abso-
lute superlative) are all lemmatised under the ad-
jective continuus, while the lemma for abundan-
ter ‘abundantly’, abundantius ‘more abundantly’
and abundantissime ‘most abundantly’ is the verb
abundo, on whose present participle (abundans)
the adverb is formed. However, in UD Latin tree-
banks, the lemma of an adverb is defined to be its
positive degree. In the examples above, we will
thus have lemmas continue and abundanter.

To assign a PoS to derived adverbs, we exploit
the original tagging of the IT-TB, which features
a specific morphological tag for the “adverbial
case”, as this is considered to be part of the nomi-
nal inflection (so that e. g. continue is the adverbial
case of continuus).

2.1.5 The Article
Latin does not feature the lexical category of the
article, but all modern Romance languages de-
scended from it, like Italian, have developed one.
Remarkably, in the IT-TB we find 8 occurrences
of the otherwise unattested word ly, as in ly homo
‘the human being’. This is clearly an ancestor of
the Italian definite article making its way in the
XIIIth-century Latin of Thomas, whose mother
tongue was a southern Italian variety. In the IT-
TB, ly is then the only word receiving PoS DET
(determiner); it does not show any inflection.

2.1.6 Verbal Complements
For what concerns the afun tagset, the only inno-
vation of the IT-TB with respect to the PDT stan-

15AuxY is also assigned to coordinating conjunc-
tions occurring in multiple coordinations (like . . . et. . . et. . .
‘. . . and. . . and. . . ’).

dard is the afun OComp for predicative comple-
ments (or secondary predicates), precisely for ob-
ject complements (the afun Pnom being used for
subject complements). For example, see Summa
contra gentiles, Lib. II, Cap. XXXVIII (OComp
highlighted):

. . . posuerunt mundum aeternum.
‘. . . (they) asserted the world’s eternity.’
lit. ‘. . . (they) supposed the world eternal.’

In UD this syntactic relation is represented by as-
signing the deprel xcomp (open clausal comple-
ment) to object complements. However, in the
original version of the conversion script, OComp
was equated to afun Obj (direct or indirect ob-
ject) and as such erroneously translated into UD as
deprel obj.16 Since the harmonisation to the PDT
style does not accept the OComp afun, we have
to mark the affected nodes by using a “miscella-
neous” field in the XML TREEX file, so that we will
be able to treat OComp as a subcase of Obj later
during conversion proper. A similar approach is
also pursued for appositions (cf. Section 2.2.3).

2.2 UD Conversion Proper
The UD conversion script manages the relabeling
of afuns into deprels and, most importantly, rear-
ranges the dependencies in the tree according to
the UD style.

After describing the main differences between
the IT-TB and UD annotation styles (2.2.1), in this
Section we will focus on two syntactic construc-
tions that we deem to be particularly challenging
to tackle while adapting the conversion script to
the IT-TB: namely, ellipsis (2.2.2) and apposition
(2.2.3).

2.2.1 Differences between IT-TB and UD
The main difference between the IT-TB and UD
styles is that in the IT-TB conjunctions, prepo-
sitions and copulas govern their phrases, while
UD favours dependencies between content words,
with function words tending to end up as leaves
of the tree.17 To illustrate this with an example,
we consider the following excerpt from Scriptum
super sententiis (Lib. I, Dist. III, Qu. II, Art. II):

16In the IT-TB, the afun Obj is also used for annotat-
ing oblique nominals expressing Result, Origin and Target
(mostly) with motion verbs. As these are considered to be
(non-core) arguments, they are assigned deprel obl (oblique
nominals) with a specific subtype arg (argument).

17The basic principles of UD are explained at
http://universaldependencies.org/u/
overview/syntax.html.

http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/syntax.html
http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/syntax.html


31

. . . quae imperfecta sunt, ut patet in materia
et forma . . .
‘. . . which are imperfect, as it clearly appears
in matter and form. . . ’

Here, sunt ‘(they) are’ is a copula and ut ‘as’ is
a conjunction introducing a subordinate clause.
They both govern the predicate of their respective
clause in the IT-TB style:18

. . . quae imperfecta sunt , ut patet . . .

Pnom

Sb AuxC

Adv

The same goes for in ‘in’ (preposition) and et ‘and’
(coordinating conjunction):19

. . . patet in materia et forma . . .

AuxP

Coord

Adv Co Adv Co

Here, in and et govern the two conjuncts of the
coordinated phrase in materia et forma. On the
contrary, the UD tree looks as follows:20

. . . quae imperfecta sunt , ut patet . . .

copnsubj

advcl

mark

and

. . . patet in materia et forma . . .

obl

case

conj

cc

Once a treebank is harmonised into a standard
PDT-style form, the UD conversion script acts in
two ways: (a) it translates all afuns into UD dep-
rels. This translation is not always biunivocal
and is handled through a set of rules exploit-
ing both morphological and syntactic annotation:
e. g., afun Adv can correspond to different deprels,
like advcl or advmod (adverbial modifier); (b)

18Sb: subject; Pnom: nominal predicate; AuxC: subordi-
nating conjunction; Adv: adverbial.

19AuxP: adposition; Coord: coordinating element; Co
adscript: member of a coordination.

20nsubj: nominal subject; cop: copula; advcl: ad-
verbial clause; mark: marker introducing a finite subor-
dinate clause; obl: oblique nominal (see footnote 17);
conj: conjunct; cc: coordinating conjunction. The com-
plete list of deprels and their explanations can be found
at http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/
index.html.

it rearranges the nodes in the tree. TREEX features
a number of specific modules to manage different
kinds of constructions, such as coordinations and
subordinate clauses. These Perl subroutines are
language-independent and make use of the PoS,
the morphological features and the afuns found
in the source data. Thus, even after harmonisa-
tion, the basic conversion script is still inadequate
to properly handle a language-specific treebank.
Therefore, we have to tune the script to better ad-
dress the specific needs of the IT-TB.

We will illustrate this point with the aid of two
constructions: ellipsis and apposition.21

2.2.2 Ellipsis
The IT-TB and UD styles treat ellipsis quite differ-
ently, in a way that is not directly related to the UD
primacy of content words. To clarify this point,
we will use the following excerpt from the IT-TB
(Scriptum super sententiis, Lib. IV, Dist. VII, Qu.
I, Art. III):

In illis autem sacramentis quae perficiuntur
in usu materiae, sicut baptismus [perficitur]
in ipsa tinctione. . .
‘In those sacraments, however, which are ac-
complished through the use of matter, like
baptism [is accomplished] through the sub-
mersion itself. . . ’

The text in square brackets (a verb) is the elided
part of the sentence. In the IT-TB, the only
recorded ellipses, i. e. constructions for which the
afun ExD (external dependency) is used, are those
of verbal elements. On the contrary, nominal el-
lipses are not explicitly marked in the annotation.
Therefore, in the following we will consider ver-
bal ellipses only.

In the IT-TB style, if ellipsis resolution were
applied, the comparative clause introduced by
sicut would look as follows:

. . . sicut baptismus perficitur in ipsa tinctione

AuxC

Adv

Sb AuxP

Adv

Atr

Since the node for perficitur is missing, the nodes
for baptismus and in (head of tinctione), lacking
their governor, become children of their closest

21Ellipsis and apposition are challenging constructions
where different UD teams have faced similar problems and
sometimes found different, yet compatible, solutions. Dis-
cussion about the treatment of such constructions in different
languages can be found in (Aranzabe et al., 2014), (Dobro-
voljc and Nivre, 2016), (Pyysalo et al., 2015), (Tandon et al.,
2016) and (Zeman, 2015).

http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/index.html
http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/index.html


32

ancestor (in this case sicut for both) and are
assigned afun ExD. Since nodes labeled with
AuxP, AuxC or Coord can never take the afun
ExD, this percolates down the tree to the first
content word. Here, this happens from in to
tinctione:

. . . sicut baptismus in ipsa tinctione . . .

AuxC ExD

AuxP ExD

Atr

In UD a member of the elliptical clause is pro-
moted to clause’s head on the basis of its coreness
value22 and receives the deprel that would have
been otherwise assigned to the elided predicate.
The remaining nodes of the clause become its
children and are assigned the special deprel
orphan to avoid misleading dependencies.23

For elliptical constructions, the task of our con-
version script is then to identify one of the ExD
siblings in the IT-TB source data as the node to
promote to head of the elliptical clause in UD. Fol-
lowing the UD guidelines, we consider a coreness
hierarchy that gives precedence to a subject over
an object, to an object over an indirect object, to an
indirect object over an oblique one, and generally
to core complements over peripheral ones. Now,
the afun ExD obscures such relations. However,
we can retrieve this information heuristically, by
exploiting the rich Latin morphology (word order
being much less meaningful) and cross-checking
it with the PoS assigned during harmonisation.

In the example above, the conversion script
has to choose the head of the elliptical clause
between baptismus and tinctione (tinctione being
the content word, and thus the UD head, in its
prepositional phrase). Both are nominals (with
PoS NOUN assigned by harmonisation), but the
fact that baptismus is in the nominative case,
while tinctione is in the ablative (lemma tinctio)
tells us that the former is most probably the
subject of the elliptical clause, while the latter
is an oblique complement. Hence, the script
promotes baptismus and restructures the subtree
as follows:

22See the UD guidelines at http://
universaldependencies.org/u/overview/
specific-syntax.html#ellipsis.

23Again, this does not apply to function words like con-
junctions and prepositions, which keep their deprel.

. . . sicut baptismus in ipsa tinctione . . .

advcl

mark

orphan

case

det

Such approach shows some limitations, especially
when dealing with coordinating constructions,
which are quite tricky when paired with elliptical
constructions. Indeed, a priori it is not possible
to set a hierarchy of the ExD siblings occurring in
a coordination, since they all equally depend on
one common coordinating element. For example
(Summa contra gentiles, Lib. III, Cap. LXXIV):

. . . sicut homo albus , et musicum album . . .

AuxC

Coord

ExD Co

ExD Co

ExD Co

ExD Co

This clause means “just like a man [is] white and
a musical being [is] white”. First, we know that
the ExD siblings need to be distributed among the
(at least) two members of the coordination, but, in
principle, we do not know this distribution: e. g.,
both homo albus/musicum album and homo/albus
musicum album might be valid splits.24 To address
this issue, we implement a heuristic approach that
takes into account both frequently used separators
(like commas and conjunctions) and word order
to identify the most probable boundaries between
coordination members; in the example above, the
two members homo albus and musicum album
are separated by the coordinating conjunction et.
Second, head promotion for elliptical construc-
tions takes place according to the PoS hierarchy
described above: in our example, the nouns homo
and musicum become governors of the adjectives
albus and album respectively, via deprel orphan.
The resulting UD subtree is the following:25

. . . sicut homo albus , et musicum album . . .

advcl

mark orphan cc

conj

orphan

As it clearly stands out from the UD subtree above,
in such a case our conversion fails. Here, the
adjectives are nominal predicates and only their

24The latter is probably not grammatical, but we are work-
ing at a very shallow level here.

25cc: coordinating conjunction; conj: conjunct.

http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html#ellipsis
http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html#ellipsis
http://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/specific-syntax.html#ellipsis


33

copulas (est) are missing, so that the correct
dependencies should be assigned in the opposite
way, with no deprel orphan involved:

. . . sicut homo albus , et musicum album . . .

advcl

mark

nsubj

cc

conj

nsubj

Being aware of such limitations, when treating
specific elliptical constructions we print different
kinds of warnings at the end of the conversion
process to support a subsequent manual revision.

In the previous version of the IT-TB conversion
script, ellipsis was not dealt with at all, provid-
ing the TREEX modules with no clues about how
to interpret such constructions correctly. The way
we treat elliptical constructions exemplifies how
to take advantage of properties of a language like
Latin to address linguistic issues that impact the
UD conversion.

A particular case of ellipsis is the omission of
the auxiliary verb sum ‘to be’ in the gerundive
construction when occurring at the beginning of
a sentence, e. g. in a frequent formula of the type
Ad secundum dicendum [est], quod. . . ‘Secondly,
[it has] to be said that. . . ’. According to the IT-TB
style, the subtree for this clause looks as follows:

Ad secundum dicendum , quod . . .

AuxP

ExD

ExD AuxC

The nodes for ad, dicendum and quod directly de-
pend on the root as a consequence of the missing
root node for est. The conversion script promotes
dicendum to the head, as verbs have priority over
nominals. The children of dicendum are then as-
signed the correct deprel (instead of orphan), by
using heuristics similar to those to establish core-
ness hierarchy. In the end, the UD subtree will
be:26

Ad secundum dicendum , quod . . .

oblcase

root

mark

csubj

In the UD subtree, the elided node for est would
be a child of the node for dicendum with deprel

26csubj: clausal subject.

aux:pass. This is a case where an elliptical
construction represented in the IT-TB style is not
apparent anymore in UD, because the primacy of
content words obscures the ellipsis of est in the
UD subtree.

2.2.3 Apposition
Just like in the PDT style, in the IT-TB an appo-
sition is defined as a binary relation where one
phrase or clause is reworded or specified in some
way by another following phrase or clause, which
is separated from the first one by punctuation or a
grammatical element.27 In the IT-TB, this element
is in most cases scilicet ‘that is, namely’, less fre-
quently sicut ‘as’, like in Summa contra gentiles,
Lib. III, Cap. CXVI:

. . . amor summi boni, scilicet Dei. . .
’. . . the love of the highest good, namely,
God. . . ’

In the IT-TB style, we have:28

. . . amor summi boni , scilicet Dei . . .

Apos

Atr Ap

Atr Atr Ap

Apposition in this sense can take place for any
noun, verb or adverb phrase. However, the defini-
tion of the UD deprel appos is stricter29 and lim-
ited to a noun immediately following another one
and specifying it, like in Moyses, propheta iudaeo-
rum ‘Moses, prophet of the Jews’, where propheta
is assigned deprel appos and is made dependent
on the node for Moyses.

This means that we can not translate the IT-TB
afun Apos directly into the UD deprel appos, but
have to resort to other deprels expressing modi-
fiers, according to their appropriateness. These
include acl, nmod, amod, advmod (adverbial
modifier) and advcl. Anyway, according to the
definitions of such deprels in the current UD guide-
lines, none of them is suitable to express (and thus
convert) the joint, coordination-like relationship
holding between the two members of an apposi-
tion as meant in the IT-TB. In particular, the sta-
tus of scilicet remains unclear, as it can neither

27https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/
manuals/en/a-layer/html/ch03s04x12.html

28Apos: Apposition (assigned to the connecting ele-
ment); Ap adscript: member of an apposition.

29http://universaldependencies.org/u/
dep/appos.html

https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/a-layer/html/ch03s04x12.html
https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/a-layer/html/ch03s04x12.html
http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/appos.html
http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/appos.html


34

be considered an adverbial modifier (it introduces,
but does not modify the apposition), nor a coordi-
nating conjunction (deprel cc).

We address this issue by assigning a specific
subtype appos (a) to appositive adverbial mod-
ifiers like scilicet, (b) to non-nominal appositions
and (c) to appositions whose second member does
not immediately follow the first one.

Our UD subtree for the example above will look
like this:

. . . amor summi boni , scilicet Dei . . .

nmod

amod

appos

advmod:appos

Here we can use the deprel appos since the ap-
position is made of two nominals (boni, lemma
bonum, and Dei, lemma Deus).

A case of two non-nominals involved in an ap-
position is the following (Summa contra gentiles,
Lib. III, Cap. XXV), where the second member of
the apposition (scilicet intelligere deum ‘namely,
to understand God’) is an attributive clause modi-
fying the pronoun hoc ‘this’ and it is thus assigned
deprel acl and subtype appos:

. . . hoc . . . , scilicet intelligere deum .

acl:appos

advmod:appos obj

Treating appositions also requires a quite substan-
tial rearrangement of the nodes in an IT-TB sub-
tree prior to the UD conversion proper, including
a complex system of cross-references in the Perl
script to reconstruct all considered syntactic de-
pendencies, that was completely absent from the
original conversion script.

3 Evaluation

We perform an evaluation to assess to what degree
our modifications to the IT-TB–UD conversion pro-
cess impact the quality of the conversion. To this
aim, we first build a gold standard that we use as a
benchmark for our data.

The 2.2 UD version of the IT-TB includes 21 011
sentences (291K tokens), 17 721 of which pertain
to the first three books of Summa contra gentiles,
the remaining 3 290 being the concordances of the
lemma forma ‘form’ from a selection of works of
Thomas Aquinas. We randomly extract 994 sen-

LAS LA UAS PoS Lemma
Orig. 84.8 87.9 94.2 95.5 95.2
New 97.0 98.0 98.3 98.5 99.8

Table 1: Evaluation of original and new conversion.

tences out of the IT-TB and check that they are
balanced and representative of the whole treebank
according to a number of topological and annota-
tion parameters.30 Then, the gold standard is built
by manually checking the output of the automatic
conversion of these 994 sentences into the UD style
and fixing the mistakes.

Finally, we compare the gold standard with (a)
the output of our new conversion process and (b)
the output of the original conversion process. We
compute the rates for the usual evaluation metrics
of dependency parsers: LAS (Labeled Attachment
Score), LA (Label Accuracy) and UAS (Unlabeled
Attachment Score) (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006).
Table 1 shows the results together with the accu-
racy rates for PoS tagging and lemmatisation, as a
way to evaluate the harmonisation phase too.

Results reveal a general improvement of the
quality of conversion. In particular, there is a
substantial increase in LAS, while this is smaller
for what concerns UAS. This shows that, while
the basic TREEX conversion modules are already
capable of addressing well the rearrangement of
some subtrees required by the conversion to UD,
they nonetheless need and greatly benefit from a
language-specific fine-tuning, mainly but not only
for what concerns the assignment of deprels.

4 Conclusion

We presented the new conversion process of the
Index Thomisticus Treebank of Medieval Latin
into the Universal Dependencies annotation style.
We detailed the changes applied not only to make
the IT-TB consistent with the other UD treebanks,
but also to harmonise it with the other Latin tree-
banks available in the UD dataset. This aspect is
particularly relevant, because the wide diachronic
and diatopic span of Latin language requires to
collect (and annotate) several sets of textual data
to represent its different varieties. These corpora
need to follow a common set of guidelines for an-
notation so as to enable users to run queries pro-

30Length of the sentence; depth of trees; cases of ellipti-
cal constructions (ExD) and of coordination chains (a Coord
governing another Coord); distribution of PoS and afuns.



35

viding results that support research in comparative
linguistics, as well as to train stochastic NLP tools.

Beside harmonisation, refining the original con-
version process has opened questions concerning
the annotation of specific constructions. This is
e. g. the case of appositions, where our decision
is to use the subtype appos to address structures
that are not yet considered in the current UD guide-
lines. We hope that our solution will be helpful
also for other treebanks getting through similar
problems.

Given the good quality of the conversion, as
shown by our evaluation, after publishing the new
version of the IT-TB in the release 2.3 of UD, we
plan to start working on enriching the treebank
with enhanced dependencies.

The current harmonisation and conversion
scripts can be downloaded from the Github pages
of the TREEX and HamleDT projects.31

Acknowledgments

Marco Passarotti gratefully acknowledges the sup-
port of the project LiLa (Linking Latin. Build-
ing a Knowledge Base of Linguistic Resources for
Latin). This project has received funding from
the European Research Council (ERC) European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under grant agreement No 769994.

References
Thomas Aquinas. 1955–1957. Summa contra gen-

tiles. Hanover House, New York, NY, USA. Acces-
sible at https://dhspriory.org/thomas/
ContraGentiles.htm.

S. Tommaso d’Aquino. 2001. Commento alle sentenze
di Pietro Lombardo. Edizioni Studio Domenicano,
Bologna, Italy.

Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Aitziber Atutxa, Kepa Ben-
goetxea, Arantza Diaz, Iakes Goenaga de Ilarraza,
Koldo Gojenola, and Larraitz Uria. 2014. Auto-
matic conversion of the basque dependency tree-
bank to universal dependencies. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Workshop on Treebanks an Linguis-
tic Theories (TLT 14), pages 233–241, Warszawa,
Poland. Polish Academy of Sciences.

David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2006. The design
and use of a Latin dependency treebank. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-
guistic Theories (TLT 2006), pages 67–78, Prague,
Czech Republic. Univerzita Karlova.

31https://github.com/ufal/treex; https:
//github.com/ufal/hamledt.

David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Gregory Crane, and
Savina Raynaud. 2007. Guidelines for the syntac-
tic annotation of Latin treebanks. Tufts University
Digital Library.

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-
X shared task on multilingual dependency parsing.
In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-X),
pages 149–164, New York, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Kaja Dobrovoljc and Joakim Nivre. 2016. The uni-
versal dependencies treebank of spoken slovenian.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016), pages 1566–1573, Paris, France. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

James B Greenough and JH Allen. 2006. Allen and
Greenough’s new Latin grammar. Dover publica-
tions, Mineola, NY, USA.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Marie Mikulová, and Jiřı́
Mı́rovský. 2017. Prague Dependency Treebank. In
Nancy Ide and James Pustejovsky, editors, Hand-
book of Linguistic Annotation, pages 555–594.
Springer, Dordrecht, Netherlands.

Dag TT Haug and Marius Jøhndal. 2008. Creating
a parallel treebank of the old Indo-European Bible
translations. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage
Data (LaTeCH 2008), pages 27–34, Marrakesh, Mo-
rocco. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, Christopher Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 1659–1666, Por-
torož, Slovenia. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Marco Passarotti. 2004. Development and perspectives
of the Latin morphological analyser LEMLAT. Lin-
guistica computazionale, XX-XXI:397–414.

Marco Passarotti. 2011. Language resources. The
state of the art of Latin and the Index Thomisti-
cus treebank project. In Corpus anciens et Bases
de données, number 2 in ALIENTO. Échanges sapi-
entiels en Méditerranée, pages 301–320, Nancy,
France. Presses universitaires de Nancy.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. ArXiv e-
prints. arXiv:1104.2086 at https://arxiv.
org/abs/1104.2086.

https://dhspriory.org/thomas/ContraGentiles.htm
https://dhspriory.org/thomas/ContraGentiles.htm
https://github.com/ufal/treex
https://github.com/ufal/hamledt
https://github.com/ufal/hamledt
https://arxiv.org/abs/1104.2086
https://arxiv.org/abs/1104.2086


36

Edoardo Maria Ponti and Marco Passarotti. 2016. Dif-
ferentia compositionem facit. A slower-paced and
reliable parser for Latin. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2016), pages 683–688, Por-
torož, Slovenia. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT:
modular NLP framework. In Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing, volume 6233 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 293–304, Berlin -
Heidelberg, Germany. Springer.

Sampo Pyysalo, Jenna Kanerva, Anna Missilä,
Veronika Laippala, and Filip Ginter. 2015. Univer-
sal dependencies for finnish. In Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics (Nodalida 2015), pages 163–172, Linköping,
Sweden. Linköping University Press.

Rudolf Rosa, Jan Mašek, David Mareček, Martin
Popel, Daniel Zeman, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský.
2014. HamleDT 2.0: Thirty dependency treebanks
Stanfordized. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2014), pages 2334–2341, Reykjavı́k,
Iceland. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Juhi Tandon, Himani Chaudhry, Riyaz Ahmad Bhat,
and Dipti Sharma. 2016. Conversion from paninian
karakas to universal dependencies for hindi depen-
dency treebank. In Proceedings of the 10th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop held in conjunction with
ACL 2016 (LAW-X 2016), pages 141–150, Berlin,
Germany. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Daniel Zeman. 2015. Slavic languages in univer-
sal dependencies. In Natural Language Process-
ing, Corpus Linguistics, E-learning (proceedings of
SLOVKO 2015), pages 151–163, Bratislava, Slo-
vakia. RAM-Verlag.


