



















































Automatic Extraction of Entities and Relation from Legal Documents


Proceedings of the Seventh Named Entities Workshop, pages 1–8
Melbourne, Australia, July 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

1

Automatic Extraction of Entities and Relation from Legal Documents

Judith Jeyafreeda Andrew1
GREYC , Campus 2 UniCaen,

Bâtiment F
6 Boulevard Maréchal Juin , 14000 Caen
judithjeyafreeda@gmail.com

Xavier Tannier1
Sorbonne Université,

Inserm, LIMICS, Paris, France
xavier.tannier@

sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract

In recent years, the journalists and com-
puter sciences speak to each other to
identify useful technologies which would
help them in extracting useful information.
This is called ”computational Journalism”.
In this paper, we present a method that
will enable the journalists to automatically
identifies and annotates entities such as
names of people, organizations, role and
functions of people in legal documents;
the relationship between these entities are
also explored. The system uses a combina-
tion of both statistical and rule based tech-
nique. The statistical method used is Con-
ditional Random Fields and for the rule
based technique, document and language
specific regular expressions are used.

1 Introduction

Everyday there are a number of legal documents
that are being recorded and made available as text
documents. In this paper, we present a system
that automatically identifies named entities and
the relationships between various entities within a
dataset of certain type of legal documents which
contains information about people investing in
property. This helps journalists to identify some
useful information - information like the name of
the person investing and company invested in. We
propose a hybrid method to automatically detect
different types of relationship after identifying the
entities within the corpus. We follow a combi-
nation of statistical and rule based techniques to
achieve the goal.

The objective of this project therefore are:

1The work was done while the authors were affiliated with
LIMSI, CNRS and Univ. Paris-Sud.

• To identify and classify the entities within
each of the text documents

• To identify the relationships between the en-
tities

To achieve the objectives, we present a hybrid
system which explores a combination of two tech-
niques for Named Entity recognition (a statistical
approach using Conditional Random Fields (CRF)
and rule based techniques) and produces a graph
with all entities and their relationships, in the per-
spective of a investigative journalism use.

2 Data

The data used in this project is a corpus taken from
the so-called “Luxembourg” corpus. This publicly
available legal register contains information about
people and companies who are investing money
or property in the state of Luxembourg. Most of
the documents are written in French, and we only
worked on this language.

Some of the data set has been annotated manu-
ally with the help of the brat tool (Stenetorp et al.,
2012) for the different classes and the relationship
between the classes by our journalist partners. The
annotations have been done manually for 35 doc-
uments which can be used as a training set to de-
velop a model.

2.1 Entities

The classes used for classification of the entities
are as follows:

• PERSONNE represents the name of the person

• NOM represents the first name of the person

• ADDRESS represents the address of the orga-
nization



2

• SOCIETE PRINCIPALE represents the name
of the main company participating in the
transaction

• SOCIETE SECONDAIRE represents the name
of the secondary companies participating in
the transaction

• ROLE represents the role of the identified per-
son or company in the transaction

• FONCTION is the function or position held by
the identified person in the transaction

• TYPE SOCIÉTÉ is the type of the companies
identified

2.2 Relations

The relationships between the entities are classi-
fied as follows:

• ‘PERSONNE FONCTION” is the relationship
between the class “PERSONNE” and the class
“FONCTION”

• “PERSONNE ROLE” is the relationship be-
tween the class “PERSONNE” and the class
“ROLE”

• “SOCIÉTÉ ROLE” is the relationship between
the class “SOCIÉTÉ” and the class “ROLE”

• “SOCIÉTÉ TYPE” is the relationship be-
tween the class “SOCIÉTÉ” and the class
“TYPE SOCIÉTÉ”

2.3 Structure of the corpus

The structure and language of legal documents are
more rigid than free text. When the persons and
companies are identified, then the other classes ap-
pear in the same sentence and can be identified by
only a few specific expressions. Below are few ex-
amples, the translation in English are given in the
”[]”.

• “Ensuite les souscripteurs prédésignés,
représentés par Me Catherine Dessoy,
prénommée, en vertu des procurations
susvantées” [”Then the underwriters, rep-
resented by Catherine Dessoy, prenamed,
under the aforementioned powers of at-
torney”], where “représentés par” is the
ROLE and “Me Catherine Dessoy” is the
PERSONNE.

• “Par-devant Maı̂tre Blanche Moutrier, notaire
de résidence à Esch-sur-Alzette.”[”Before
Maı̂tre Blanche Moutrier, notary of resi-
dence in Esch-sur-Alzette.”], where “Maı̂tre
Blanche Moutrier” is the PERSONNE and
“notaire” is the FONCTION.

• “CUBE INVEST S.A.-SPF, une société de
gestion de patrimoine familial, en abrégé
SPF, sous forme d’une société anonyme”
[”CUBE INVEST S.A.-SPF, a family wealth
management company, in abbreviated SPF,
in the form of anonymous company”], where
“CUBE INVEST S.A.-SPF” is the SOCIÉTÉ
and “société de gestion de patrimoine famil-
ial” is the TYPE SOCIÉTÉ.

Because of this rigid structure of the legal docu-
ments, rule-based techniques will be able to iden-
tify some of the entities. However, the basic
classes PERSONNE and SOCIÉTÉ have to be iden-
tified first in order to take advantage of this rigid
structure. Figure 1 shows an example of an anno-
tated document as seen by the BRAT visualization
tool emphasizing on the structure of the legal doc-
uments.

2.4 Training and Test data sets
The data is divided into training and test set. The
training set is a set of corpus consisting of 35 text
files and test set is a collection of 21 text docu-
ments. The method has been trained and tested on
this small corpus, however it is developed with the
scope of being able to build a graph with all the
documents available in the Luxembourg register.
This mounts up to data between the years 2002 to
2016, containing about 2,041,111 text documents.
For this reason, the training documents have been
taken randomly from the entire collection.

3 Related Work

3.1 Conditional Random Fields
Conditional Random Field (CRF (Lafferty, 2001))
is a sequence modeling technique belonging to the
class of statistical modeling methods. It is often
used in labeling and parsing sequential data. A
CRF has a single exponential model for the joint
probability of the entire sequence of labels given
the observation sequence. (Sutton and McCal-
lum, 2012) gives a detailed tutorial on Condition
Random fields. Since the CRF model is condi-
tional, dependencies among the input variables x



3

Figure 1: Annotated document presented with the BRAT visualization tool



4

do not need to be explicitly represented. This al-
lows CRF to be used widely in Natural Language
Processing. (Sutton and McCallum, 2012) also
suggests that some of the useful features that could
be used in Natural Language Processing are cap-
italization, word bigrams, neighboring words etc.
In this work, word bigrams and capitalization have
been used extensively.

3.1.1 Conditional Random Fields for Entity
Recognition

There have been quite a lot of work done with re-
spect to entity recognition and classification using
CRF.

(N.V et al., 2010) describes the use conditional
Random Fields for Entity Recognition in geolog-
ical text. (McCallum and Li, 2003) presents a
named entity recognition technique with condi-
tional random fields, where web enhanced lexi-
cons are used for feature induction. (Ghamrawi
and McCallum, 2005) present the multi-label clas-
sification of corpora using classification. Multi-
label classification is a task of assigning an object
simultaneously to one or multiple classes. (Gham-
rawi and McCallum, 2005) present two graphical
models for multi-label classification, namely the
Collective Multi-Label classifier and the Collec-
tive Multi-Label with Features classifier. CRFs
have better performances than many other tech-
niques. (Li et al., 2008) compares SVM with CRF
for named entity recognition with clinical data and
concludes that CRF outperforms SVM.

4 Approach

The approach used is a combination of statistical
approach (CRF) and the rule based technique.

4.1 Process

In order to annotate the corpus with the en-
tities and the relationship, the work uses two
techniques which are conditional random fields
and rules based on regular expressions. Condi-
tional Random Fields (CRF) is used to annotate
the document only for the classes ”PERSONNE”,
”SOCIÉTÉ”, ”NOM”,”ADDRESS”. These classes
are the basic classes and therefore they have to
be identified first. Moreover, we only expect the
other classes to appear in the same sentence as a
”PERSONNE” or a SOCIÉTÉ or a ”NOM” or a ”AD-
DRESS”. Therefore, identifying these classes will
be the first and basic step. For the other classes, a

rule based technique are used. 2 shows the pro-
cess flow used for the annotation of text. The
rules are written in such a way that they identify
the other classes and their relation with the main
classes (”PERSONNE” and ”SOCIÉTÉ”).

5 Implementation

5.1 Conditional Random Fields (CRF)

In order to annotate the document for the base
classes (“PERSONNE”, “SOCIÉTÉ”, ”ADDRESS”,
”NOM”), Conditional Random Fields are used.
The system uses the wapiti toolkit (Lavergne et al.,
2010) to train the CRF.

In order to use wapiti, the training set and the
test set are converted into the BIO format. Figure 3
shows how the wapiti tool works in order to train
and test using CRF.

In order to use conditional random fields, one
has to create a pattern file with which CRF can be
trained. A pattern file defines some features that
are going to be used by the wapiti.

5.2 Regular Expressions for entity
recognition and relationship

In order to identify the other classes (ROLE,
FONCTION, TYPE SOCIÉTÉ), regular expressions
are used. The rules are written such that once the
entities are identified the relationship can be estab-
lished with the same rule. This is done by writing
the rules using the relationship itself. For exam-
ple, if there is a “PERSONNE” in a sentence, then
the sentence should have a “ROLE” and a “FONC-
TION” for the identified person. This suggests that
there exist a relationship between the person and
his/her “ROLE” and “FONCTION”. Therefore, the
entities “ROLE” and “FONCTION” should occur
somewhere close to the entity “PERSONNE”. This
rule-based system is established with the help of
the GATE tool (Cunningham et al., 2011) and the
rules are written as JAPE grammar(Thakker et al.,
2009)

5.2.1 Formation of JAPE rules for the
various classes

Class “FONCTION” The class “FONCTION”
is the job of the person in question. The GATE
gazetteer is used to annotate the function of a per-
son. GATE gazetteer does not have a dictionary
for the function of a person. Therefore, a dictio-
nary is created with all the words that could be the
function of a person. This dictionary has been cre-



5

Figure 2: Process Flow for identifying entities and relationships

Figure 3: The process flow as followed by wapiti



6

ated with about 500 words and added to the GATE
gazetteer. The rule for the class “FONCTION” was
developed as per the structure of all the docu-
ments in the training set, where it was identified
that the class “FONCTION” appears with the same
sentence as the class “PERSONNE”. Thus using
the gazetteer and the class “PERSONNE”, the class
“FONCTION” can be annotated and the relation
‘PERSONNE FONCTION” is drawn. For example,
“Par-devant Maı̂tre Blanche Moutrier, notaire de
résidence à Esch-sur-Alzette.” [”Before Maı̂tre
Blanche Moutrier, notary of residence in Esch-
sur-Alzette.”]. In this sentence, “Maı̂tre Blanche
Moutrier” is the class “PERSONNE” and this is fol-
lowed by the “notaire” which is the “FONCTION”
of “Maı̂tre Blanche Moutrier”.

class “ROLE” The “ROLE” of a “PER-
SONNE” almost always occur in the same sentence
as the class “PERSONNE”. It could occur after or
before “PERSONNE” “ROLE” could also be asso-
ciated with the class “SOCIÉTÉ” as well. In this
case, the class “ROLE” occurs in the same sen-
tence as the “SOCIÉTÉ”. This leads to the “PER-
SONNE ROLE” and “SOCIÉTÉ ROLE” relation.

For example: “Pardevant Maı̂tre Henri
Hellinckx, notaire de résidence à Luxembourg.”
[”Late Maı̂tre Henri Hellinckx, notary residing
in Luxembourg.”] In the above sentence, “Parde-
vant” is the “ROLE” played by “Maı̂tre Henri
Hellinckx” and the “FONCTION” is “notaire”.
Therefore the rule is to identify the sequence
“PERSONNE” “FONCTION” and identify the word
before the sequence as “ROLE”.

Another example: “Ont comparu: 1.- La sociètè
de droit du Panama DAEDALUS OVERSEAS
INC., ayant son siège à Panama-City” [”Ap-
peared: 1.- The company of law of Panama
DAEDALUS OVERSEAS INC., Having its head-
quarters in Panama-City”], where “Ont comparu”
is the “ROLE” and “DAEDALUS OVERSEAS
INC.” is the “SOCIÉTÉ” . Here the “ROLE” is
followed by tokens like punctuations and numbers
before the “SOCIÉTÉ” which also have to be in-
corporated with the rules.

Another example: “Les parts sociales ont ètè
souscrites par LUXEMBOURG CORPORATION
COMPANY S.A., prèqualifièe, qui est l’associèe
unique de la socié té ” [”The shares have been
subscribed by LUXEMBOURG CORPORATION
COMPANY S.A., prequalified, which is the sole
partner of the company.”], where “ parts sociales

ont été souscrites” and “l’associèe unique de la
société .” are both “ROLE” of the “SOCIÉTÉ”
“LUXEMBOURG CORPORATION COMPANY
S.A.” This state of having two roles is handled
with a different rule as well.

Therefore, in order to help handle all these dif-
ferent situations, multiple different rules are used.
A total of 20 different JAPE rules has been written
to annotate all the roles in all the different situa-
tions. This count includes identifying the roles of
the société as well.

class “TYPE SOCIÉTÉ” The class
“TYPE SOCIÉTÉ” tells about the type of the
“SOCIÉTÉ”. Therefore the type has to be occur-
ring in the same sentence as the “SOCIÉTÉ”. It is
also identified that all the texts in the training set
had the type of the société in the same sentence
as the SOCIÉTÉ. Also, the type of the société
always starts with the word “société” followed
by a type. This then leads to the relationship
of “SOCIÉTÉ TYPE”. Example: “S’est réunie
l’Assemblée Générale Extraordinaire des associé
s de la société à responsabilité limité e thermo
haus, S.à r.l., ayant son siè ge social à L-6940
Niederanven, 141, route de Trèves, inscrite
au Registre du Commerce et des Socié tés à
Luxembourg, section B sous le numéro 74.172,
constituée suivant acte reçu par Maı̂tre Alex
Weber, notaire de résidence à Bascharage, en
date du 2 février 2000, publié au Mémorial C de
2000, page 16652.” [”The Extraordinary General
Assembly of the associates of the limited liability
company, S.à rl, having its if it is located at
L-6940 Niederanven, 141, route de Trvesves,
entered in the Register of Commerce and Com-
panies in Luxembourg, section B under number
74.172, incorporated according to the deed of the
Court, given to Alex Weber, notary residing at
Bascharage, on February 2, 2000, published in the
Mémorial C of 2000, page 16652.”]. In the above
sentence, “thermo haus, S.à r.l.” is the SOCIÉTÉ
and “la société à responsabilité limitée” is the
TYPE SOCIÉTÉ.

5.2.2 The GATE pipeline
The JAPE rules are incorporated with the other
inbuilt modules of the GATE tool to create a
pipeline. A GATE pipeline with modules for to-
kenization , POS tagging along with the JAPE
rules is used to annotate the document for the other
classes.



7

Mode True Positive False Positive False Negative Precision Recall
Exact 318 61 0 83.91% 100%
Partial 348 30 0 92.08% 100%

Table 1: Results of brat evaluation tool on the training set.

Mode True Positive False Positive False Negative Precision Recall
Exact 81 4 88 95.29% 47.93%
Partial 191 9 12 95.50% 94.09%

Table 2: Results of brat evaluation tool on the test set.

6 Evaluation

For the evaluation of annotations, the brat evalu-
ation tool is used (Stenetorp et al., 2012). The
comparisons can be done in two ways: either by
comparing the file for exact matches or by partial
matches. By exact matches we mean that the off-
set have to be exactly matched between the two
files. By partial matches, we mean that even if the
offsets do not match perfectly, partial annotations
are also considered to be correct.

7 Results

The results are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1
corresponds to the results from the training set and
the table 2 corresponds to the results from the test
test. The results depend on both the processes -
the CRF and the rule based technique. The perfor-
mance of the CRF is with an error rate of 3.12%.

The low recall value for the exact matches of
the test set as compared with the training set is due
the tailoring of the rules. While training, the data
set has been referred to at many times to come up
with expressions that will help in retrieving all the
possible instances of every annotations. However,
while the same rules have been run on test data
which has not been seen before hand, it is noted
that there requires many more rules that need to
added to the already existing rules to improve the
recall value.

However it has to be noted that the recall value
is quite high with the partial matches. For ex-
ample: instead of annotating “ici représenté par”,
it annotates “représenté par”. This is not totally
wrong. Considering the knowledge base, this an-
notation is still useful. Though it is not the exact
same annotation as in the manual annotation, it is
still considered valid.

Thus considering the results of partial annota-
tions only, this method proves to be quite efficient

in annotating the files from the “Luxembourg” reg-
ister.

As indicated above, the process has been de-
veloped over a small set of data, but the process
can be run over huge volumes of data. The total
amount of documents tested are 2,041,111. The
number of relations found in these documents are
3,026,560. However, since these data have no
manual annotations, no evaluation was performed
on this set of data.

References
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina

Bontcheva, Valentin Tablan, Niraj Aswani, Ian
Roberts, Genevieve Gorrell, Adam Funk, Angus
Roberts, Danica Damljanovic, Thomas Heitz,
Mark A. Greenwood, Horacio Saggion, Johann
Petrak, Yaoyong Li, and Wim Peters. 2011. Text
Processing with GATE (Version 6).

Nadia Ghamrawi and Andrew McCallum. 2005. Col-
lective multi-label classification. In Proceedings of
the 14th ACM International Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’05, pages
195–200, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

John Lafferty. 2001. Conditional random fields: Prob-
abilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. pages 282–289. Morgan Kaufmann.

Thomas Lavergne, Olivier Cappé, and François Yvon.
2010. Practical Very Large Scale CRFs. In Pro-
ceedings the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 504–
513, Uppsala, Sweden. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dingcheng Li, Karin Kipper-Schuler, and Guergana
Savova. 2008. Conditional random fields and sup-
port vector machines for disorder named entity
recognition in clinical texts. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical Natu-
ral Language Processing, BioNLP ’08, pages 94–
95, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

http://tinyurl.com/gatebook
http://tinyurl.com/gatebook
https://doi.org/10.1145/1099554.1099591
https://doi.org/10.1145/1099554.1099591
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-1052
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1572306.1572326
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1572306.1572326
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1572306.1572326


8

Andrew McCallum and Wei Li. 2003. Early results for
named entity recognition with conditional random
fields, feature induction and web-enhanced lexicons.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natu-
ral Language Learning, CoNLL 2003, Held in coop-
eration with HLT-NAACL 2003, Edmonton, Canada,
May 31 - June 1, 2003, pages 188–191.

Sobhana N.V, Pabitra Mitra, and S.K. Ghosh. 2010.
Article: Conditional random field based named en-
tity recognition in geological text. International
Journal of Computer Applications, 1(3):119–125.
Published By Foundation of Computer Science.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. BRAT: A Web-based Tool for NLP-
assisted Text Annotation. In Proceedings of the
Demonstrations at the 13th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL’12), pages 102–107, Avignon,
France. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Charles Sutton and Andrew McCallum. 2012. An
introduction to conditional random fields. Found.
Trends Mach. Learn., 4(4):267–373.

Dhaval Thakker, Taha Osman, and Phil Lakin. 2009.
GATE JAPE grammar tutorial.

http://aclweb.org/anthology/W/W03/W03-0430.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W/W03/W03-0430.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W/W03/W03-0430.pdf
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2380921.2380942
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2380921.2380942
https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000013
https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000013

