



















































A Master-Apprentice Approach to Automatic Creation of Culturally Satirical Movie Titles


Proceedings of The 11th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 274–283,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5-8, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

274

A Master-Apprentice Approach to Automatic Creation of Culturally
Satirical Movie Titles

Khalid Alnajjar
Department of Computer Science

and Helsinki Institute for IT
Faculty of Science

University of Helsinki, Finland
alnajjar@cs.helsinki.fi

Mika Hämäläinen
Department of Digital Humanities

Faculty of Arts
University of Helsinki, Finland

mika.hamalainen@helsinki.fi

Abstract

Satire has played a role in indirectly ex-
pressing critique towards an authority or
a person from time immemorial. We
present an autonomously creative master-
apprentice approach consisting of a ge-
netic algorithm and an NMT model to pro-
duce humorous and culturally apt satire
out of movie titles automatically. Further-
more, we evaluate the approach in terms of
its creativity and its output. We provide a
solid definition for creativity to maximize
the objectiveness of the evaluation.

1 Introduction

Movie theaters used to be prohibited in Saudi Ara-
bia by law, however in mid-December 2017, Saudi
Arabia officially declared they would abolish the
law by 20181. This gave birth to a movement on
Twitter by the hashtag #SaudiMovieTitles where
people would post alternative movie titles meant
to be satirical towards the Saudi Arabian legisla-
tive system. An example of such a title is I Know
What You Ate Last Ramadan for I Know What You
Did Last Summer.

In this paper, we present a novel master-
apprentice approach to computational creativity
for the generation of such humoristic movie titles
automatically. Our system consists of two creative
agents: a computationally creative master that is
implemented with a genetic algorithm approach
and a neural network based apprentice that will
learn from the master along with its peers, namely
real people writing satirical movie titles on Twit-
ter. We are introducing the apprentice to achieve

1The press release of The Saudi Ministry of Culture
and Information (MOCI) https://www.media.gov.
sa/news/1101

creative autonomy, because of its nature of adjust-
ing its standards by learning, a capability which is
absent in the master.

Furthermore, we base our approach in terms of
the design of its implementation and its evalua-
tion on a solid definition of creativity that we build
based on literature. This will make a reasoned
evaluation of our system possible and set standards
for future research in this topic.

For the purposes of our research, we understand
cultural satire as a way of presenting critique to-
wards a society in a humoristic fashion. The hu-
moristic expression has to relate to Saudi Arabia in
its expression - mostly by lexical choice. The re-
latedness has to be apparent when presented with
the hashtag #SaudiMovieTitles.

Computational linguistic creativity of this na-
ture poses a number of challenges, not only be-
cause it is a difficult NLG problem, but also be-
cause the generated output has to be humorous.
Thus the goal of the system is very different from
a more traditional NLG task where the system is to
convey factual information such as timetables of a
train or the current weather conditions in the form
of natural language.

The message our system is to produce serves
rather to convey emotion and provoke joy in the
reader. Furthermore, the humor is to be deliv-
ered in a culture-specific way which combines cul-
tural artifacts of the Western World, the Holly-
wood movie titles, with a Saudi Arabian cultural
twist. The system will derive its satire from this
juxtaposition of the two cultures following utterly
conflicting norms.

2 Related Work

Automatic creation of humor has received some
attention in the past. Valitutti et al. (2009) present
a tool for interactive creation of puns. The sys-

https://www.media.gov.sa/news/1101
https://www.media.gov.sa/news/1101


275

tem suggests funny replacement words for familiar
expressions such as proverbs. The replacements
are found by applying a phonetic similarity met-
ric together with a Latent semantic analysis (LSA)
based semantic similarity metric, which not only
gives semantically related words but also semanti-
cally opposed ones.

A fully automated pun generator, presented in
Valitutti et al. (2013), takes an English sentence as
its input and changes one word in it based on three
criteria: sound or spelling similarity, the replace-
ment word has to be a taboo and that the word has
to go well together with its immediate predecessor
in the sentence. The system operates with a prede-
fined set of taboo words and an n-gram model to
assess how well the new words fit in the sentence.

A more recent take on the pun generation is that
of Shah et al. (2016), which presents a template
based approach on humor generation. The tem-
plates are filled by using WordNet relations for the
input compound word. The system looks up a list
of related words for the two words of the com-
pound and forms a pun out of them.

Research has also been conducted in the vein
of humoristic sarcasm generation, which is then
served to the user as satire (Veale, 2018). The
system generates sarcastic tweets that satirize a
person with a knowledge-based approach and re-
generative approach which regenerates sarcastic
tweets giving the sarcasm a new contextual mean-
ing. The system is online on Twitter and it ac-
tively engages into replying Tweets it has been
mentioned in.

The related work, not unlike a great many pub-
lications in the field of computational creativity,
overlooks an important aspect, which is a clear and
motivated definition for creativity. This issue has
been brought up in the past research as well (Jor-
danous, 2012), but yet a great many publications
devote little to no comment on what creativity, the
very thing that is computationally modeled, really
means in the context of a creative system. This
makes comparison to and building from previous
research a difficult task. To provide an alleviation
to this problem, we will provide a definition for
creativity based on existing literature that we will
follow in this paper.

3 Definition of Creativity

In order to say anything about the creativity of
a computational system, it is important to define

what creativity means in the context of the sys-
tem. We do this by following the SPECS (Stan-
dardized Procedure for Evaluating Creative Sys-
tems) approach (Jordanous, 2012). In short, the
approach requires us first to define what is needed
for creativity in general and then what is needed
for creativity in our case of producing cultural hu-
morous movie titles in particular.

For the general definition, instead of under-
taking defining something as abstract as creativ-
ity by ourselves, we opt for a well established
definition in the field, namely the creative tripod
(Colton, 2008). According to that definition, there
are three indispensable components to creativity:
skill, imagination and appreciation. All of them
can come from the three different parties of the
creative experience, the system, the programmer
or the perceiver of the creative artifact. However,
the system has to be perceived to exhibit all of
them on its own to be considered creative.

To put the creative tripod in the context of our
highly narrowed down task, we start by defining
skill as an ability to produce a new title out of an
existing one. To master this skill it is imperative
that the original movie title still remain recogniz-
able and that the new title deliver a humoristic joke
that satirizes Saudi Arabia.

Imaginativeness requires that our system should
at least achieve P-creativity. That is, according to
Boden (2004), coming up with a surprising and
valuable idea that is novel to the one who came up
with it, as opposed to H-creativity which is novel
in a more global context, i.e. no one else had
thought of it before. What this means is that our
system should come up with similar humorous ti-
tles as real people have in our dataset to achieve P-
creativity, and preferably come up with humoristic
titles nobody has ever tweeted about before to be
H-creative.

Lastly, we define appreciation in this context
as a computational capability of assessing various
factors that affect on the quality of the created title.
One of them is the ability of identifying puns by
recognizing sound similarities on a phonetic level
such as in Sheikhs and the City for Sex and the
City. But a far more important requirement for ap-
preciation is an automated assessment of the hu-
morousness of the output. Two key components
have been identified for humorousness in jokes:
surprise and coherence (Brownell et al., 1983).

When the brain makes sense of the stimuli it



276

receives, it relies on prior experiences to predict
what it is perceiving. When these predictions turn
out to be wrong, surprise arises. This is even
more clearly crystallized in the case of movie ti-
tles. When a title everyone has heard a plethora of
times gets changed, it clearly breaks learned ex-
pectations of the brain of how the title should be,
as it is the case for example with How to Train
Your Imam from How to Train Your Dragon.

In the previous example, surprise arises from
the fact that the brain was expecting to hear
dragon, but got a wildly different word imam. This
surprise, however, does not yet lead to humor if
the surprising word is not interpreted in its con-
text. This requires coherence; the word has to
make sense in the context of the sentence, and also
in the wider context of the movie the original title
refers to. Part of the humoristic value comes from
the thought of young Hiccup undertaking an ad-
venturous task on training his imam, as he did in
the original movie to train his dragon.

In addition to the requirements identified with
the creative tripod framework, we also introduce
the requirement of creative autonomy for our sys-
tem. Creative autonomy (Jennings, 2010) requires
autonomous evaluation, autonomous change and
non-randomness. In other words, the system
should be able to evaluate its output independently
(this relates to the appreciation defined earlier)
and change its standards on its own without in-
structions on how to do so. Neither of these two
requirements can be based solely on a random
choice.

We have defined the core requirements for our
system to be considered to exhibit creative behav-
ior. These requirements will be revisited in the
Evaluation section of this paper to assess the ex-
tent to which they are met by the implementation.
This is also required by the SPECS approach we
have decided to follow in this paper.

4 Datasets

This section is devoted to the description of the
datasets we have in use for the implementation of
the system.

4.1 Movie Data

For our case, we are only interested in the popular
movies people might have heard of, as one of our
requirements is the original title to be recognizable
after it has been turned into a humoristic form. No

matter how good the satire, the joke will not land,
if the audience is unfamiliar with the original title.

To get indispensable information of the movies,
we used the data dumps provided by the IMDB2

to extract movie titles and their metadata. As the
IMDB is a bit too extensive, sporting over a 5
million movies and TV shows in its database, we
had to narrow it down to those that had got more
than 100,000 votes from the IMDB. The number
of votes does not tell anything about how well the
movie was received by the audience, but it gives
us a clue on its popularity. The more popular the
movie, the more votes it will get. In total, we had
a total of 1,661 movies.

As movies can be referred to without their
episode name, we expand the list of movies by
considering their titles without episode or sequel
name. This is performed by stripping out words
after the first dash or colon. For instance, the
movie title The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship
of the Ring is converted into The Lord of the Rings.

4.2 Tweets

Another peculiar source of information are the
tweets with the the hashtag #SaudiMovieTitles.
We retrieved them by using the Twitter API, which
resulted in a list of 2,445 tweets. However, the
tweets are noisy because, more often than not,
they contain other unrelated content (e.g. URLs,
mentions and so on) in addition to the humoris-
tic movie title. Moreover, the titles in the tweets
might not be in the same format as the original
movie title.

In order to serve us any use, the tweets needed
to be processed so that what was left was just the
humoristic title. This is done by converting the
tweets into lowercase. Thereafter, the tokeniza-
tion is applied, and any word starting with # or
is filtered out to clean any hashtags and mentions,
respectively. Any special characters and URLs are
also deleted from the string. Finally, we remove
all instances of the token “rt” from the string as it
indicates a re-tweet.

Furthermore, we map the processed tweets to
their original movie titles. The mapping phase
is employed to backtrack any modifications per-
formed on the original title for a humoristic effect.
We achieve this by iterating over all tweets and
calculating the edit distance on character and word
level against all movie titles in the dataset. Movie

2https://datasets.imdbws.com/



277

titles with the least word edit distance, followed
by character edit distance, are considered as the
original title to tweets.

To reduce noise in the data (e.g. tweeted titles
where all words have been changed), we keep the
humoristic titles with at most 3 changed words,
making still sure that not all the words have been
changed in the tweeted title. Examples of mapped
titles are The Lord of the Thowbs to The Lord of
the Rings and Gulf Fiction to Pulp Fiction.

4.3 Saudi Arabia Related Vocabulary
We extract words, along with their part-of-speech
tags that are related to Saudi Arabia from the
tweets dataset. This is accomplished by pars-
ing the tweeted titles and their mapped original
counterparts with Spacy (Honnibal and Montani,
2017), followed by an analysis of their differences.
We build the vocabulary by adding words that ex-
ist exclusively in the tweeted titles and not in the
original ones. We also save the part-of-speech tags
of the words.

Analyzing the vocabulary, it appears that all the
added words, 1053 in total, are either nouns or ad-
jectives. Examples of nouns are thawab, imam and
stone, and adjectives are saudi, shaytan and sunni.

4.4 English Vocabulary of Arabic Origin
In order to produce titles relevant to the Saudi Ara-
bian context, the system needs to have a list of En-
glish words related to the Arabian culture. The pri-
mary source of such words are the ones registered
in the Oxford English Dictionary (OED, n.d.) as
having Arabic as one of the languages in their ety-
mology (514 in words in total). We have an access
to the JSON files3 of the OED, which made this
task easier. The vocabulary also included the lexi-
cal categories of words.

5 Creating Movie Titles

In this section, we explain the method for creating
movie titles. The method is divided into two sub-
methods, (1) the master, which generates movie
titles using genetic algorithms, and (2) the appren-
tice, which learns from the master and develops its
own appreciation for generating movie titles.

5.1 The Master
The implementation of the master follows the one
presented by Alnajjar et al. (2018) for slogan gen-

3We used the JSON files updated on the 14 of February in
2018

eration. The generator is a genetic algorithm that
accepts an original movie title as an input and pro-
duces an entire population of satire movie titles
based on the input.

The master operates on a semantic space of
words related to Saudi Arabia to make the substi-
tution of content words in the input with cultural
words about Saudi Arabia possible. The seman-
tic space is a combination of the vocabularies de-
scribed in Section 4.3 and 4.4.

5.1.1 Evolutionary algorithm
Our algorithm starts by producing an initial pop-
ulation which undergoes an evolutionary process
throughout a certain number of generations. The
evolutionary algorithm in place is a standard (µ +
λ)4 which applies mutation and crossover on the
current population to generate λ number of off-
spring. Subsequently, the algorithm evaluates the
fitness of the individuals in the current population
and their offspring, and selects µ number of the
fittest individuals to survive to the next genera-
tion. Once the specified number of generations is
reached, the evolutionary process terminates and
returns the final population.

5.1.2 Initial Population
The method produces µ copies of the input movie
title. For each copy, the method substitutes a ran-
domly selected content word, i.e. not a stop word,
with a random word from the semantic space. The
substitution is done in such a fashion that the parts-
of-speech of the original word and its substitute
have to match. Furthermore, the word is inflected
if necessary. The resulting titles form the initial
population.

5.1.3 Mutation and Crossover
We define one type of mutation and crossover. The
mutation procedure follows the same substitution
approach performed during the construction of the
initial population. The crossover employed in our
function is a single-point crossover where words
before and after a randomly selected point in two
individuals are swapped.

5.1.4 Evaluation as Appreciation
The appreciation is implemented in the master
by four internal evaluation dimensions, which are
(1) prosody, (2) semantic relatedness to Saudi Ara-
bia, (3) semantic similarity, and (4) number of al-

4We use the value 100 for both µ and λ



278

tered words. The first two dimensions are maxi-
mized, whereas the last two are minimized. Ad-
ditionally, a dimension can be represented by the
weighted sum of multiple sub-functions.

The prosody dimension assesses the sound sim-
ilarity of the original word and its replacement.
The dimension is composed of four prosody fea-
tures, namely consonance, assonance, rhyme and
alliteration. We utilize espeak-ng tool5 to produce
IPA transcriptions for words to better evaluate how
they sound when pronounced. The tool is capa-
ble of producing IPA even for non-English words,
such as jahannam.

To measure the semantic relatedness of words
to Saudi Arabia, we build a semantic relatedness
model following the model described in Xiao et al.
(2016). Using the model, we measure the dimen-
sion as the maximum semantic relatedness of any
content words in the generated title to the words
“Saudi” and “saudi”.

We employ a word2vec model trained on News
dataset by Google (Mikolov et al., 2013) to mea-
sure the semantic similarity between two words.
The dimension is represented as the mean of the
semantic similarity of each introduced word to its
original word. This dimension is minimized to in-
crease surprise, with the idea that a lower semantic
relatedness between the original word and its sub-
stitute would result in a bigger surprise.

The last dimension monitors the number of
words altered in the input title. Minimizing this di-
mension motivates that less substitutions are made
to the title, which makes it more recognizable.

These are the criteria based on which the fitness
of individuals is evaluated at the end of each gen-
eration to let only the best ones survive to the next
generation. Also, the master uses this exact same
functionality when it is to show appreciation to ti-
tles outside of its own creations such as those cre-
ated by the apprentice.

5.1.5 Selection and Filtering
To reduce having a dominating dimension and
motivate generating titles with diverse and bal-
anced scores on all four dimensions, we opt for a
non-dominant sorting algorithm –NSGA-II– (Deb
et al., 2002) as the selection algorithm.

During each iteration of the evolution, the cur-
rent population and its offspring go through a fil-
tering phase which filters out any duplicate titles.

5https://github.com/espeak-ng/
espeak-ng

5.2 The Apprentice

The apprentice is a sequence-to-sequence neural
network model, which will be trained by the par-
allel data of the original titles and their humoris-
tic counter-parts produced by the master. Fur-
thermore, the apprentice is trained with the par-
allel titles extracted from the tweets. We use a
general purpose NMT library called OpenNMT
(Klein et al., 2017) for this task.

Similar sequence-to-sequence based ap-
proaches have been used in the past for text
paraphrasing task (Brad and Rebedea, 2017;
Sleimi and Gardent, 2016), which shares its simi-
larities with the task we are set to solve. This gives
us a reason to believe that sequence-to-sequence
approach is a viable way of implementing the
apprentice.

The apprentice was trained for 50 epochs with
the titles the master had produced for a random set
of the most popular IMDB movie titles. This set
consisted of 6568 humoristic titles. After this, the
model was trained for 50 additional epochs with
the data from the 1,483 tweeted titles. This made
it possible for the apprentice to learn to a set of
standards for humoristic titles from its master and
adjust those standards with the peer data. In both
cases, we use a 25% of the data in validation. The
high number of epochs together with a larger vali-
dation set seemed6 to make the model learn more
given the limitation imposed by the scarce training
data.

5.3 The Symbiotic Nature

Currently, we cannot argument for the apprentice
developing appreciation that matches the require-
ments we have set for it in the definition of creativ-
ity, albeit it will learn some kind of an appreciation
because it is capable of giving a confidence score
to its creations. However, as the nature of such
appreciation is not assessed in this paper, we opt
for a symbiotic approach in the appreciation of the
full system.

The apprentice will only be allowed to learn
from its peers if the master shows high enough ap-
preciation towards the creations of its peers. Fur-
thermore, when producing its creative output, the
apprentice consults the master for its opinion on
which output should be picked and presented to

6We tried training with fewer epochs and fewer titles in
the validation, but the model failed to learn anything mean-
ingful.

https://github.com/espeak-ng/espeak-ng
https://github.com/espeak-ng/espeak-ng


279

the audience.
The apprentice might be dependent on the mas-

ter in terms of appreciation, but just as much the
master is dependent on its apprentice. The master
possesses no capability of adjusting its standards,
because it exhibits no learning from others. This
is where the apprentice can learn its own standards
from its peers, and is thus the only one responsible
of the creative autonomy of the entire system.

6 Evaluation

In this part, we are presenting an evaluation of
the system from two points of view. Firstly, we
will assess critically how the definition of creativ-
ity with its requirements is met in the implementa-
tion of the system. Secondly, we validate this as-
sessment by having ordinary people evaluate the
output of the system by answering to questions on
a 5-point Likert scale. These questions are derived
from the definition of creativity in our context by
following the SPECS approach.

6.1 Evaluation of the Creative Process

The skill of converting a movie title into a humor-
ous one can be shown on the implementation level
of the master. It takes an existing title, uses it as
a skeleton and outputs a new title. The apprentice
model also clearly demonstrates this lowest level
requirement for skill. By nature, the NMT model
produces an output based on its input. However,
we can say little about the fulfillment of the fur-
ther criteria for skill just by looking at the creative
process. Recognizability of the original title, hu-
morousness and satire towards Saudi Arabia are
highly subjective notions and thus they will be as-
sessed by evaluators in the next section.

The system can be shown to achieve P-
creativity with a rather easy test by looking at the
output in relation to the data the systems were
given initially. For example the master produced
a title The Hobbit: An Unexpected Desert from
The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey even though
the master was not given knowledge of such a
possibility for a humoristic title. The apprentice
was able to produce the title The Amazing Spider
Mosque for The Amazing Spiderman even thought
its training data did not provide it with this map-
ping.

In order to analyze the imagination any further,
we have to assess also the H-creativity of the pro-
duced titles. We could perform a Google search

with some of the generated titles and claim H-
creativity if it did not return any hits. However,
we feel that this is not quite enough as the same
kind of a joke might have come up elsewhere with
a slightly different context. This is the reason why
we have to verify the H-creativity with evaluators.

Appreciation can be more easily assessed from
the point of view of the master. The master
has been programmed to look at sound similarity
which covers the optional requirement for a pun.
Surprise is modeled in the master by it minimiz-
ing the semantic similarity of the original word
and the new replacement. If we define surprise as
a failed prediction done by the brain, we can back
the master’s way of producing it in neuroscience.
Research (Lau et al., 2008) has shown that words
the brain expects to hear in a sentence cause a
lower N400 response than unexpected words. This
is because when the brain fails at its expectations,
it has to activate the new surprising concepts to-
gether with those close to it semantically. This
might not, however, be the only explanation for
surprise nor a sufficient one. Therefore, the re-
quirement for surprise, though met, has room for
improvement.

The last requirement for appreciation was co-
herence. This has been implemented on the level
of semantic coherence to Saudi Arabia. However,
as some of the titles written by people, such as
Sheikhs and the City, show, the contextual coher-
ence is next to impossible to assess without the
wider context of the movie itself. We feel that this
kind of pragmatic coherence is such a wide task
to tackle that it is deserving of a dedicated paper
on its own right and thus is beyond the scope of
this research. However, it is an important ques-
tion for the future as it has been shown that humor
of the kind we are focusing on in this paper de-
rives its meaning greatly from its pragmatic con-
text (Hämäläinen, 2016).

The appreciation will only be discussed here
from the point of view of the master, as the de-
sign choice of the system was to give the master
the responsibility of appreciation. However, an in-
teresting question for the future is the appreciation
learned by the apprentice. Since an NMT model
can score its predictions, it has to have learned a
kind of an appreciation, but the nature of it is not
discussed here. Although this gives an interesting
direction for the future research on the topic.

We can demonstrate that the system is capable



280

of achieving creative autonomy because it can ap-
preciate autonomously its own creations and those
of its peers. Furthermore, the changes it makes to
its standards are guided by observations made on
the artifacts of its peers that have received enough
appreciation from the master. Even though the
master will follow a limited way of generating hu-
morous titles, its apprentice is liberated from such
limits thanks to its neural network architecture.

6.2 Evaluation of the Output

The creative tripod, through which we have de-
fined creativity, requires there to be perceivably
skill, appreciation and imagination in the system.
The existence of these in the output of the mas-
ter and the apprentice is evaluated by formulating
questions based on the requirements we set for this
particular creative task.

6.2.1 Skill
Skill is probably the leg of the tripod that most
vocally calls for evaluation from people. In the
previous evaluation section, we could only clearly
demonstrate that the system fills the most basic re-
quirement, that is to produce a new title out of the
existing one.

The further requirements, recognizability of the
original title, whether the new title is humoristic
and whether it satirizes Saudi Arabia, are beyond
any justified assessment without resorting to peo-
ple’s opinion. Thus we need to asses them with
the following questions.

1. The title is humorous

2. The original title is recognizable

3. The humor in the title relates to Saudi Arabia

4. The title is critical towards Saudi Arabia

The first question can be asked directly, there
is no need to find a better way to ask whether the
original title is still recognizable or not. It is im-
portant to note that when we are evaluating the
skill, we only want to know whether the skill of
producing humor exists. The quality of the humor
is left for the evaluation of the appreciation.

As for the other questions we want to know
whether humor is perceived and whether a relation
to Saudi Arabia is perceived. Furthermore, we are
curious to see whether criticism is perceived. We
will not ask directly whether the title is satirical

for two reasons, firstly in order to understand any-
thing as satire, further context is needed and sec-
ondly terms such as satire, sarcasm and irony are
difficult for an ordinary person to grasp and get of-
ten mixed up with one another in people’s minds.

6.2.2 Imagination
We took Boden’s P- and H-creativity as the basis
of the imagination quality of the system. We de-
fined the system to be imaginative enough if it can
come up with something new to itself and to ex-
ceed the expectations of its imagination if it can
come up with something novel in a greater con-
text.

The previous evaluation of the creativity in the
system, we have showed that the system is capable
of P-creativity and we have shown examples of its
H-creativity. While P-creativity, as it is limited to
the system itself, has been inarguably proven, the
H-creativity calls for further validation. Therefore,
we formulate the following evaluation questions to
assess the imaginativeness of the system.

5. The joke in the title sounds familiar

6. The joke in the title is obvious

These questions get to the core of what is re-
quired from H-creativity, it has to be novel in a
global context, i.e. it cannot sound familiar to an-
other slightly different joke the evaluator might
have heard before. Also, the joke cannot be too
obvious, because if its perceived as an obvious
one, people would likely come up with it easily
and thus it can hardly be seen H-creative.

6.2.3 Appreciation
Appreciation is something we have discussed to
a great extent in the previous evaluation section.
As for appreciation, we are not interested to see
whether the system gets a high grade from the peo-
ple for each evaluation question. Instead, we are
more interested in seeing the extent to which they
are in line. Does the appreciation of the system
predict human appreciation in the same variables?

The constituents of the appreciation we identi-
fied earlier were pun detection, and humorousness.
The latter was then further divided into two appre-
ciable features: surprise and coherence. To put
these into the form of evaluation questions, we re-
sulted in the following ones.

7. The title delivers a pun



281

8. The joke in the title is surprising

9. The joke of the title makes sense in the con-
text of the original movie

The three evaluation questions are meant to
evaluate the three requirements respectively. For
coherence, we are interested in how coherent the
humor is in the context of the movie. A title might
be perfectly humoristic if it was in the context of
one movie, where as it might make little to no
sense in the case of another movie.

6.2.4 Results
The master was made to produce populations7 for
the most popular movie titles. Out of these, we
picked at random 50 titles that exhibited apprecia-
tion based on the master’s own standards. Further-
more, we picked another 50 titles at random that
were produced by the apprentice and appreciated
by the master.

The questions defined earlier were presented
for each title produced by the master and the ap-
prentice to evaluators on a platform called Figure-
Eight. Due to the way the platform operates, ev-
ery title was not presented to every evaluator, but
they appeared at random in such a way that each
individual title was evaluated by 20 different eval-
uators. All in all 48 evaluators participated. As
knowledge of English is entailed by the system,
we defined a further requirement for the evalua-
tors’ language to be Arabic. This way they should
be familiar with the specialized cultural vocabu-
lary exhibited by the humoristic titles and know
enough English to understand the title.

Figure 1: Results of the evaluation for the ques-
tions for both the master and the apprentice

For each evaluated title, we calculated the av-
erage of the judgments received on each question.
Furthermore, judgments are considered agreeing if
their average evaluation score is greater than 3, i.e.

7The evaluated titles are the ones the apprentice was
trained with. See Section 5.2

above neutral. Figure 1 shows the percentage of
agreements to neutral or disagreement judgments.
Examples of the generated titles can be seen in Ta-
ble 1,

From the results, it is evident that both methods,
the master and the apprentice, were capable of pro-
ducing humorous titles. Furthermore, it appears
that the original movie titles were usually recog-
nized, with 76%, form generated titles. Neverthe-
less, a low percentage, ≤ 45%, of the generated ti-
tles were perceived as related to or critical towards
Saudi Arabia. In terms of the imagination ques-
tions, Q5 and Q6, statistics illustrate that the meth-
ods generated familiar and obvious jokes, most of
the time; which suggests low H-creativity. Despite
that, the methods have received high agreement on
the appreciation questions. These results demon-
strate that both methods have produced creative al-
ternatives of original movies; however, further de-
velopment and evaluation is needed to explore the
methods and enhance their current state of creativ-
ity.

Comparing the results of the master and the ap-
prentice, we notice that generated titles by the ap-
prentice have received different judgments than
the master, on most of the questions. Such dis-
tinction shows that the apprentice has developed
its own internal appreciation. As a result, the ap-
prentice exhibits characteristics of creative auton-
omy, and, with continuous data from the master
and peers, the apprentice will adaptively adjust its
appreciation.

7 Conclusions and Final Remarks

We have presented a novel approach for generat-
ing satirical humor. Evaluating it critically against
the definition of the creativity we established, we
identified two clear shortcomings of the approach:
firstly a better definition for surprise is needed to
better model it in the future, and secondly coher-
ence calls for a better contextual model relating
the coherence in the context of the original movie
where the title has occurred. Both of these short-
comings require additional research and are wor-
thy of own publications dedicated to the topics.

Our definition of creativity that has been built
on top of existing theories gives us a good start-
ing point to conduct any future research on the
topic. Also the evaluation questions deriving from
the definition provides us with a way of comparing
the results of any future improvements to the ones



282

Question High Scoring Ones Low Scoring Ones

Q1
The Lord of the Lambs: The Return of
the King
My Big Saudi Wedding

Iraqi of Arabia
Empire of the State

Q2 Muslim League
Captain Tanker

The Sunni: Part III
Iraqi-man: Houthi

Q3 My Big Saudi Wedding
The Good the Haram and the Saudi

Iraqi Buyers Club
The Wedding Attack

Q4 Serabs of Saudi York
Transformers Saudi of Extinction

La La Kill
The Wedding Attack

Q5 Night at The Arabian
My Big Saudi Wedding

La La Invasion
Attack Powers: The Oil
dependence Who Shagged Me

Q6 Night at the Arabian
The Saudi Runner

The Sunni Life of Izars
La La Invasion

Q7 Sunnah Squad
The Twilight Bomb Eclipse

Muslim Story 3
Harry Potter and
the Revenge’s Sulham

Q8 The Twilight Bomb Eclipse
The Saudi Runner

The Imam Ultimatum
Muslim Fu Panda

Q9 The Amazing Surah-man
The Sound of Jihad

The Amazing Spider Mosque
Harry Potter and
the Revenge’s Sulham

Table 1: Examples of high and low scoring titles based on the evaluators’ judgment

presented in this paper.
The master-apprentice approach makes it pos-

sible for us to study the creativity and its devel-
opment in the apprentice from a multi-agent per-
spective. This evokes interesting questions such
as: What if there were multiple master-apprentice
pairs and they would function as each other’s
peers? What if an apprentice took classes of mul-
tiple masters simultaneously? What if the masters
were experts on different fields such as humor and
poetry? Would the apprentice then learn to gener-
ate based on both fields? We are also interested in
diving into the black box of the NMT architecture
of the apprentice to see what kind of an apprecia-
tion it can develop.

8 Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the Academy of
Finland under grants 276897 (CLiC) and 293009
(STRATAS).

References
Khalid Alnajjar, Hadaytullah Hadaytullah, and Hannu

Toivonen. 2018. “Talent, Skill and Support.” A

method for automatic creation of slogans. In Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Computational Creativity (ICCC 2018), pages 88–
95, Salamanca, Spain. Association for Computa-
tional Creativity (ACC).

Margaret A Boden. 2004. The creative mind: Myths
and mechanisms. Routledge.

Florin Brad and Traian Rebedea. 2017. Neural para-
phrase generation using transfer learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Natural Language Generation, pages 257–261, San-
tiago de Compostela, Spain. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Hiram H Brownell, Dee Michel, John Powelson, and
Howard Gardner. 1983. Surprise but not coherence:
Sensitivity to verbal humor in right-hemisphere pa-
tients. Brain and Language, 18(1):20 – 27.

Simon Colton. 2008. Creativity Versus the Perception
of Creativity in Computational Systems. In AAAI
Spring Symposium: Creative Intelligent Systems,
Technical Report SS-08-03, pages 14–20, Stanford,
California, USA.

K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. 2002.
A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm:
Nsga-ii. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-
putation, 6(2):182–197.

http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc2018/sites/default/files/papers/ICCC_2018_paper_24.pdf
http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc2018/sites/default/files/papers/ICCC_2018_paper_24.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W17-3542
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W17-3542
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(83)90002-0
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(83)90002-0
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(83)90002-0
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Spring/2008/SS-08-03/SS08-03-003.pdf
https://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Spring/2008/SS-08-03/SS08-03-003.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.996017
https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.996017


283

Mika Hämäläinen. 2016. Reconocimiento au-
tomático del sarcasmo - ¡Esto va a funcionar bien!
Master’s thesis, University of Helsinki, Finland.
URN:NBN:fi:hulib-201606011945.

Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spaCy 2:
Natural Language Understanding with Bloom Em-
beddings, Convolutional Neural Networks and In-
cremental Parsing. To appear.

Kyle E. Jennings. 2010. Developing Creativity: Arti-
ficial Barriers in Artificial Intelligence. Minds and
Machines, 20(4):489–501.

Anna Jordanous. 2012. A standardised procedure for
evaluating creative systems: Computational creativ-
ity evaluation based on what it is to be creative. Cog-
nitive Computation, 4(3):246–279.

Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean
Senellart, and Alexander M. Rush. 2017. Open-
NMT: Open-Source Toolkit for Neural Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics-System Demonstrations, pages 67–72,
Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Ellen F Lau, Colin Phillips, and David Poeppel. 2008.
A Cortical Network for Semantics: (De)constructing
the N400. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9:920–
933.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. CoRR, abs/1310.4546.

OED. n.d. OED Online. Oxford University Press.
Http://www.oed.com/.

Priyanshi R Shah, Chintan D Thakkar, and Swati Mali.
2016. Computational creativity: Automated pun
generation. International Journal of Computer Ap-
plications, 140(10).

Amin Sleimi and Claire Gardent. 2016. Generating
Paraphrases from DBPedia using Deep Learning.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Natural Language Generation and the Semantic
Web (WebNLG 2016), pages 54–57.

Alessandro Valitutti, Oliviero Stock, and Carlo Strap-
parava. 2009. Graphlaugh: A tool for the interactive
generation of humorous puns. pages 1 – 2.

Alessandro Valitutti, Hannu Toivonen, Antoine
Doucet, and Jukka M Toivanen. 2013. ”Let Every-
thing Turn Well in Your Wife”: Generation of Adult
Humor Using Lexical Constraints. In Proceedings
of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers), volume 2, pages 243–248, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Tony Veale. 2018. A Massive Sarcastic Robot: What a
Great Idea! - Two Approaches to the Computational
Generation of Irony. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Computational Creativ-
ity (ICCC 2018), pages 120–127, Salamanca, Spain.
Association for Computational Creativity (ACC).

Ping Xiao, Khalid Alnajjar, Mark Granroth-Wilding,
Kathleen Agres, and Hannu Toivonen. 2016.
Meta4meaning: Automatic metaphor interpretation
using corpus-derived word associations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Computational Creativity (ICCC 2016), Paris,
France. Sony CSL, Sony CSL.

http://hdl.handle.net/10138/163231
http://hdl.handle.net/10138/163231
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-010-9206-y
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-010-9206-y
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-012-9156-1
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-012-9156-1
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-012-9156-1
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4012
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4012
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-4012
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2532
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2532
http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.4546
http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.4546
http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.4546
http://www.oed.com/
https://doi.org/10.5120/ijca2016909467
https://doi.org/10.5120/ijca2016909467
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-3511
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-3511
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACII.2009.5349529
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACII.2009.5349529
http://aclweb.org/anthology/P/P13/P13-2044.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/P/P13/P13-2044.pdf
http://aclweb.org/anthology/P/P13/P13-2044.pdf
http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc2018/sites/default/files/papers/ICCC_2018_paper_34.pdf
http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc2018/sites/default/files/papers/ICCC_2018_paper_34.pdf
http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc2018/sites/default/files/papers/ICCC_2018_paper_34.pdf
http://www.computationalcreativity.net/iccc2016/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Meta4meaning.pdf
http://www.computationalcreativity.net/iccc2016/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Meta4meaning.pdf

