



















































Forms of Anaphoric Reference to Organisational Named Entities: Hoping to widen appeal, they diversified


Proceedings of the Seventh Named Entities Workshop, pages 36–40
Melbourne, Australia, July 20, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

36

Forms of Anaphoric Reference to Organisational Named Entities:
Hoping to widen appeal, they diversified

Christian Hardmeier1 Luca Bevacqua2 Sharid Loáiciga3 Hannah Rohde2
1Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University

2Department of Linguistics and English Language, University of Edinburgh
3CLASP, University of Gothenburg

christian.hardmeier@lingfil.uu.se lbevacqu@ed.ac.uk

sharid.loaiciga@gu.se hannah.rohde@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Proper names of organisations are a spe-
cial case of collective nouns. Their mean-
ing can be conceptualised as a collective
unit or as a plurality of persons, permit-
ting different morphological marking of
anaphoric pronouns. This paper explores
the variability of references to organisation
names with 1) a corpus analysis and 2) two
crowd-sourced story continuation experi-
ments. The first shows the bias for singular
vs. plural conceptualisation depends on the
level of formality of a text. In the second,
we observe a strong preference for plural
they typical of informal speech. This pref-
erence is reduced for edited corpus data
compared with constructed sentences.

1 Introduction

The names of organisations such as political bod-
ies or companies are often made-up words (e. g.,
“Intel”, “Novartis”) or acronyms (e. g., “EU”, “Un-
esco”). They differ from other noun phrases in that
they offer very little information about their gram-
matical properties such as number or, in languages
where this is relevant, gender. Such names are a
special case of the broader category of collective
nouns, which also includes common nouns such as
“team” or “committee”, and they can be conceptual-
ised in different ways by focusing on the collective
as a singular unit or on the plurality of people which
the organisation is comprised of. When they oc-
cur as antecedents of referring expressions, names
of organisations are a challenge for natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) because they can trigger
different types of morphological marking on the
anaphoric elements. Moreover, the preference for
certain types of agreement varies across different
genres and, we expect, different languages. The

experiments presented here address English only
and serve as a pilot study for an investigation of ref-
erence to organisations across multiple languages.

Via a corpus analysis of the OntoNotes corpus
(Pradhan et al., 2013) and two crowd-sourced story
continuation experiments, we study how organisa-
tional named entities are referenced after their in-
troduction in a discourse. Specifically, we consider
anaphoric expressions coreferent with the proper
name of an organisation that are separated from
their antecedent by a sentence boundary, but no
intervening mentions belonging to the same core-
ference chain. The expressions are categorised
into four classes: repetition of the proper name
(name), paraphrastic noun phrases with a common
noun such as “the company” (noun), and forms of
the pronouns it and they. The pronominal case is
informative to speakers’ choice between a concep-
tualisation as singular (it) or plural (they).

2 Related literature

Morphological agreement with collective nouns
has received some attention in English linguist-
ics, but most research focuses on the agreement of
verbs rather than pronouns, and – to an even lar-
ger extent – on collective common nouns such as
“team”, which are formally singular but can trigger
plural agreement, rather than proper names.

There is broad agreement that American Eng-
lish prefers singular verb agreement with collective
nouns, whereas notional concord with plural forms
is not uncommon in British English (Fries, 1988;
Bock et al., 2006; Hundt, 2009). Other varieties
of English range in between (Hundt, 2006). Shift
towards singular agreement is considered to be an
ongoing diachronic process (Hundt, 2009), but the
extent to which plural verb agreement with collect-
ives is disappearing among younger speakers of
British English is disputed (Fries, 1988).



37

it they name noun other total

bc 8 15 59 10 13 105
bn 11 12 146 44 12 225
mz 17 11 91 24 4 147
nw 76 11 926 193 36 1242
tc 2 3 7 0 0 12

wb 6 4 52 8 4 74

120 56 1281 279 69 1805

Table 1: Reference types per genre in OntoNotes

The situation for pronouns is different. Pro-
nouns following collective nouns are more likely
to receive plural marking than verbs (Hundt, 2006,
2009), particularly in speech (Levin, 2001), and
there is psycholinguistic evidence of processing
differences favouring syntactic (singular) agree-
ment for verbs and notional (plural) concord for
pronouns (Bock et al., 2006). Singular and plural
agreement can also co-occur with the same mention
(“mixed concord”), typically involving a singular
verb and a plural pronoun (Hundt, 2009).

3 Corpus analysis

3.1 Corpus and extraction

The OntoNotes corpus (Pradhan et al., 2013) con-
tains about 1.7 million words of annotated Eng-
lish text predominantly of American origin from
different genres, or data sources: newswire (nw),
broadcast news (bn), broadcast conversation (bc),
magazine (mz), telephone conversation (tc), web
data (wb) and pivot text (pt).1 We extract examples
using the gold-standard annotations of coreference
and named entity type. Each example is a pair of
mentions belonging to the same coreference chain.
To ensure that the corpus analysis is comparable
with the continuation studies described in Section 5,
we only extract pairs of mentions in adjacent sen-
tences, excluding both pairs of mentions in the
same sentence and pairs with intervening sentences.
A pair of mentions is extracted if the two mentions
are neighbouring members of the same coreference
chain (i. e., no mentions of the same chain occur
in between) and the first mention is annotated as a
named entity of type ORG.

3.2 Overview

Table 1 and the first six bars of Figure 1 show
the distribution of reference types for the different

1The pt subcorpus contains excerpts of the Bible and is not
used in this paper.

Bars 1–6: OntoNotes (Section 3)
Bars 7–8: Continuation studies (Section 5)

Figure 1: Proportions of reference types

OntoNotes genres. The size of the individual sub-
corpora varies substantially and so does the number
of examples that can be extracted from each. The
smallest non-empty sample (N = 12) is from the
telephone conversations (tc) subcorpus, the largest
(N = 1242) is from Newswire.

The most common type of reference, making
up 58–75% of the examples in all subcorpora, is a
repetition of the name. Paraphrasing noun phrases
are more common in broadcast news (19.6%),
magazine (16.3%) and newswire (15.5%) than
in web data (10.8%) and broadcast conversation
(9.5%). Many examples in the other category are
instances of the first-person pronoun we that occur
when a representative of the organisation is quoted
or speaking. The relative frequency of pronominal
references (it and they) varies considerably between
genres. It is greatest in telephone conversations,
where 5 out of 12 references are of this type. In
newswire (7%) and broadcast news (10.2%), pro-
nominal references are much less common. Web
data (13.5%), magazine (19.0%) and broadcast
conversation (21.9%) are in between. Among the
pronominal references, we observe large differ-
ences in the preference for it vs. they across sub-
corpora, with numbers ranging from 34.8% it in
broadcast conversation to 87.4% in newswire.

4 The effect of formality

In this section, we examine the hypothesis that the
cross-corpus variation in the conceptualisation of
organisations as singular or plural can be explained
by the different levels of formality of the texts.



38

Figure 2: Formality score and prevalence of it in
OntoNotes subcorpora

4.1 Measuring formality

To measure the formality of discourse, we use
an automatic metric proposed by Heylighen and
Dewaele (2002). The metric is called F-score by
the original authors, but we use Formality score to
avoid confusion with the entirely unrelated F-score
derived from precision and recall. The fundamental
assumption of Heylighen and Dewaele (2002) is
an opposition between formality and contextuality,
with the claim that more formal texts prefer more
absolute and less context-dependent forms of ex-
pression, which is reflected in lexical choice. The
authors identify two (non-exhaustive) subsets of
the lexicon that they call formal or non-deictic and
deictic, respectively. This distinction is then opera-
tionalised via part-of-speech (POS) categories with
nouns, adjectives, prepositions and articles taken to
be non-deictic, and pronouns, verbs, adverbs and
interjections as deictic. The score is calculated as:

F = 100 · Nformal −Ndeictic
2N

+50 (1)

where Nformal and Ndeictic are the counts of formal
and deictic tokens and N is the total corpus size.

4.2 Choice of referring expression

Since the number of pronouns in a corpus enters
the computation of the Formality score through the
Ndeictic term, we must exercise care when we meas-
ure referential preferences so that we do not use a
metric that is correlated by construction with the
Formality score. The preference among pronom-
inal references between the conceptualisation of or-
ganisation as singular versus collective entities can
be measured as the proportion of references with
it among third-person pronominal references, i. e.,
Nit/(Nit +Nthey). As both it and they are counted as

pronouns in the Formality score, their proportion
can be measured independently from the score.

Figure 2 plots the proportion of it among pro-
nominal references (x-axis) against the Formal-
ity score (y-axis). The ranking predicted by the
Formality score seems intuitively reasonable: The
newswire, magazine (two edited written genres)
and broadcast news (prepared speech in a very
formal setting) genres are identified as most formal,
whereas telephone conversations are predicted to
be least formal. The Pearson correlation coefficient
between the Formality score and the proportion
of it vs. they is 0.67, which fails to reach signific-
ance (p = 0.146). However, the Spearman rank
correlation reaches a value of ρ = 0.886, which is
significantly different from 0 (p < 0.05). This con-
firms that formality is a relevant factor to explain
the language-internal variation in the number mark-
ing of pronouns with organisational antecedents, as
was suggested for collective nouns more generally
by Hundt (2009).

5 Continuation experiments

Two story-continuation studies presented parti-
cipants with prompts to elicit entity coreference.

5.1 Study 1: Constructed stimuli

Materials The 16 experimental items consisted
of a context sentence and a prompt. The first sen-
tence introduced a named entity in the subject po-
sition of the matrix clause with some additional
contextual information, followed by a prompt with
a discourse adverbial or other connective (e.g., In
the following years, Because of this). The named
entities belonged to four categories: names of com-
panies, publishers, sport teams and music bands.

The experimental items were interleaved with
48 filler items. They included 20 fillers composed
of a sentence introducing two animate or inanimate
entities, followed by an adverbial prompt, 24 items
for an unrelated production experiment involving
the coreference of the pronouns it and this, and 4
catch trials with a straightforward correct response,
which were mentioned in the instructions.

Participants Twenty-seven monolingual Amer-
ican English speakers aged 19–63 (mean age 36,
σ = 11.2; 15 male) were recruited from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk (Munro et al., 2010; Gibson et al.,
2011). All had US IP addresses and received $4
for an estimated 30-minute task.



39

it they name noun total

Study 1 32 307 19 12 370
Study 2 24 113 11 16 164

56 420 30 28 534

Table 2: Reference types in the continuations

Procedure The continuations were collected via
a web-based interface that participants accessed
directly from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. The
website displayed a background questionnaire, a
consent form and an instructions page, and then
proceeded to display one item at a time with a text
box for participants to write their continuations.

Analysis The continuations were annotated for
referent type, using the same labels as in the corpus
analysis, plus other for continuations in which the
named entity was not mentioned in any way. One
of the authors of the paper annotated the whole set
of continuations, and two others labelled half of
it. The annotations did not present any real case of
disagreement among the authors.

Results 50 out of 420 continuations were ex-
cluded because they were labelled as other. This
left 370 labelled annotation for the analysis. The
results are shown in Table 2 and Figure 1. It is
striking that the participants produced an extremely
high number of pronominal continuations, most of
them with they (accounting for 83% of the refer-
ential types vs. only 3.1% in the OntoNotes data).
By contrast, the name category occurred only infre-
quently (5.1% of types vs. 71% in OntoNotes).

5.2 Study 2: Corpus stimuli
Materials The 24 target passages were extracted
from the data described in Section 3.1. They were
interleaved with 76 filler items. 24 of these were
extracted from the ParCorFull corpus (Lapshinova-
Koltunski et al., 2018). These fillers mentioned
a range of referents; the sentence continuation
prompt was an adverbial expression (e.g., Even-
tually). 48 additional fillers were items of the afore-
mentioned unrelated production experiment, and a
final 4 fillers repeated the catch trials from Study 1.

Participants Nineteen monolingual English-
speaking participants aged 23–44 (mean age 30,
σ = 6.5; 13 male) were recruited as in Study 1, and
received $7 for an estimated 50-minute task.

Procedure and Analysis Identical to Study 1.

Results 43 out of 207 continuations were la-
belled other and excluded from the data set. This
left 164 continuations labelled for referential type.
The results are shown in Table 2 and Figure 1.
While the continuations produced in this study still
contain a much larger number of pronominal ref-
erences than the OntoNotes examples, the propor-
tion of pronouns (83.5%) is considerably lower
than in Study 1 (91.6%), and the proportion of it
among pronominal references is higher (17.5% vs.
9.4%). The difference between the distributions ob-
served in Studies 1 and 2 is statistically significant
(χ2 = 145.71; p < 0.001) in a χ2 test with Monte
Carlo simulation (Hope, 1968).

6 Conclusions

Focusing on pronouns referring to proper names,
our study confirms a number of results suggested
by earlier research concentrating primarily on col-
lective common nouns and verb agreement (Hundt,
2009). There is significant language-internal vari-
ation in English in how speakers and writers refer
to organisational named entities. In the OntoNotes
corpus data, the most frequent way of referring to
an organisation is by repeating its name. The num-
ber of pronominal references and their distribution
among it and they varies greatly across genres. As
suggested by Hundt (2009), we find a correlation
between the level of formality of a text and the
prevalence of singular pronominal references.

In the story continuation studies, we observe a
distribution of reference types that is more extreme
in its preference for they than even the most in-
formal OntoNotes genres. This suggests that the
patterns we obtain in this type of study are more
representative of informal and spoken language
than of more formal written genres, despite the
written modality of the task. As a result, we cannot
automatically generalise the findings from these
studies across different genres. However, the com-
bination of crowd-sourced continuation study and
corpus analysis provides us with a useful baseline
in terms of both methods and results for a planned
cross-lingual study of reference to named entities.

Acknowledgements

Christian Hardmeier was supported by the Swedish
Research Council under grant 2017-930, Neural
Pronoun Models for Machine Translation. Hannah
Rohde was supported via a Leverhulme Trust Prize
in Languages & Literatures.



40

References
Kathryn Bock, Sally Butterfield, Anne Cutler,

J. Cooper Cutting, Kathleen M. Eberhard, and
Karin R. Humphreys. 2006. Number agreement in
British and American English: Disagreeing to agree
collectively. Language, 82(1):64–113.

Udo Fries. 1988. The crew have abandoned the
ship: Concord with collective nouns revisited. AAA:
Arbeiten aus Anglistik und Amerikanistik, 13(2):99–
104.

Edward Gibson, Steve Piantadosi, and Kristina Fe-
dorenko. 2011. Using Mechanical Turk to obtain
and analyze English acceptability judgments. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass, 5(8):509–524.

Francis Heylighen and Jean-Marc Dewaele. 2002. Vari-
ation in the contextuality of language: An empirical
measure. Foundations of Science, 7:293–340.

Adery C. A. Hope. 1968. A simplified Monte
Carlo significance test procedure. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological),
30(3):582–598.

Marianne Hundt. 2006. The committee has/have
decided. . . On concord patterns with collective
nouns in inner- and outer-circle varieties of English.
Journal of English Linguistics, 34(3):206–232.

Marianne Hundt. 2009. Concord with collective nouns
in Australian and New Zealand English. In Pam
Peters et al., editors, Comparative studies in Aus-
tralian and New Zealand English: Grammar and
beyond, pages 207–224. John Benjamins.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski, Christian Hardmeier,
and Pauline Krielke. 2018. ParCorFull: a paral-
lel corpus annotated with full coreference. In Pro-
ceedings of 11th Language Resources and Evalu-
ation Conference, pages 00–00, Miyazaki, Japan.
European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
To appear.

Magnus Levin. 2001. Agreement with collective nouns
in English. Ph.D. thesis, Lund University.

R. Munro, S. Bethard, V. Kuperman, V.T. Lai, R. Mel-
nick, C. Potts, T. Schnoebelen, and H. Tily. 2010.
Crowdsourcing and language studies: the new gen-
eration of linguistic data. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk, pages 122–130. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Hwee Tou Ng, Anders Björkelund, Olga Uryupina,
Yuchen Zhang, and Zhi Zhong. 2013. Towards ro-
bust linguistic analysis using ontonotes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 143–152,
Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-3516
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-3516

