










































 

Embedding register-aware MT into the CAT 
workflow 

Corey Miller 
The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA 22102 camiller@mitre.org 
Danielle Silverman  danielle.c.silverman@nvtc.gov 
National Virtual Translation Center, Washington, DC 20535 
Vanesa Jurica vjurica@mitre.org 
The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA 22102 
Elizabeth Richerson liz@mitre.org 
The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA 22102 
Rodney Morris rodney.d.morris@nvtc.gov 
National Virtual Translation Center, Washington, DC 20535 
Elisabeth Mallard Elisabeth.d.mallard@nvtc.gov 
National Virtual Translation Center, Washington, DC 20535 
 
 

Abstract 

As machine translation (MT) improves, the possibility for it to translate different registers ap-
propriately becomes more possible. This capability is particularly relevant when confronting 
non-standard varieties such as are common in social media and chats. Register-sensitive MT, 
coupled with advances in register detection, opens up new possibilities for the enhancement of 
computer-assisted translation (CAT) tools.  

1. Introduction 

Many translation style guides say something like the following: “A translation is not just a 
transcription from one language into another. It needs to render not only the meaning of words 
and sentences but also the context and, more subtly, what is sometimes described in stylistic 
manuals as the register of the source text—its level and style of language.” (World Bank 2004). 
It should be noted that such advice is also proffered to interpreters: “From the standpoint of the 
user, a successful interpretation is one that faithfully and accurately conveys the meaning of the 
source language orally, reflecting the style, register, and cultural context of the source message, 
without omissions, additions or embellishments on the part of the interpreter” (Federal Coordi-
nation and Compliance Section, 2011).  

If such advice is to be adhered to, it will of course be most challenging to those transla-
tion departments whose work spans a wide range of registers, from slangy/chatty to scien-
tific/formal. After discussing the nature of register and the motivation for advising its convey-
ance from source to target, we seek to establish ways in which computer-assisted translation 
(CAT) software can aid translators in this process. In particular, we explore the role of both 
termbases and translation memories (TMs) in recording register information. Within that con-
text, we consider the possible role of automatic register detection. Finally, we discuss work on 
register in machine translation (MT) and how this may ultimately facilitate a register-enabled 
CAT workflow. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 275



2. Register 

Ability to effectively translate register variation is relevant to all spheres of translation, wheth-
er governmental, corporate or literary/creative. Government organizations must translate from 
a variety of sources, possibly ranging from social media to diplomatic communications and 
businesses produce communications variously targeted for customers and partners. Perhaps reg-
ister variation is most obvious in the creative domains, including subtitling and fiction. In all of 
these domains, even literary ones (Francisco 2015), CAT usage is becoming more prevalent. 

Failure to convey register in translation can have real-life consequences, even in “trans-
lations” within a given language. Jackman (2017) describes the case of Warren Demesme, who 
said “just give me a lawyer dog” in the course of his police interrogation in Louisiana. The 
Louisiana Supreme Court decided that this utterance did not constitute an invocation of the right 
to counsel. As pointed out by Green (2002), dog or dawg is a term of address used by African 
American males, “without negative import”, a detail neither the interrogators nor the court 
seems to have taken into account. 

Steiner’s (1998) register-based analysis of original English and subsequent German 
Rolex advertisements indicates that adherence to register across languages may have business 
consequences. From this analysis, it appears that the effectiveness of the advertisements may 
be compromised by a failure to convey source language register to the target language in certain 
cases. 

2.1. Definition 
While at first glance, register might seem to simply include stylistic variation, we feel it may 
be useful to explore whether what is intended in recommendations to convey register from 
source to target might really include the full range of sociolinguistic variation. In addition to 
style, sociolinguistic variation can include language differences associated with geography 
(from nation to neighborhood), age (from youth to old), as well as social, ethnic or religious 
affiliation. 

The notion of markedness proves useful in this discussion. While the notion of “stand-
ard” language is somewhat fraught, it seems fairly straightforward to say that a given expression 
is marked for a particular sociolinguistic category. For example, while a word like “money” 
might be considered neutral in most, if not all, varieties of English, a word like “dough” in the 
sense of “money” seems marked for informality. In the same way, “elevator” is markedly Amer-
ican (and perhaps beyond) and “lift” is markedly British (and perhaps beyond). 

First, it will be helpful to assess whether register covers all the sociolinguistically-rele-
vant information we might want to convey. Halliday (2002) focuses on functional (diatypic) 
registers, i.e. the language differences encountered across domains.  Yu (2017) has a wider 
conception, including the range of language from vulgar to elevated, and the possibility both of 
several registers in a given domain, and the preponderance of certain registers within certain 
social groups. 

Dialect or locale introduces another axis of sociolinguistic variation that is hard to dis-
sociate from register, and its conveyance from source to target is not straightforward. For ex-
ample, while “pop” and “soda” are two locale-specific ways of referring to carbonated bever-
ages in American English, how or should one convey this in a French translation? Hanes (2012) 
discusses the rendering of Southern American English into Brazilian Portuguese subtitles and 
finds a variety of available strategies, many of which could benefit from a more structured 
approach to this problem. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 276



Finally, we consider the sociolinguistic approach to style variation. Labov (2006) offers 
the notion that style is correlated with attention paid to speech, and work in this tradition ex-
plores a range of styles from casual to formal based on the task at hand, e.g. conversation vs. 
reading word lists. Bell (1984) offers a slightly different perspective, viewing style as “audience 
design”, thus shifting the focus from attention to accommodation to interlocutors. We find that 
both perspectives on style variation are useful here. 

For our purposes, the attentional view of style provides insight into the kinds of devia-
tions from neutrality that often perplex translators: typographical errors, disfluencies, mal-
aprops, and in the case of non-native speakers/authors, false friends (Chamizo-Domínguez 
2008). At the same time, the audience-focused view of style is relevant when we consider for 
whom the translation is intended. 

While we will not go into further detail on this topic here, we feel a proper analysis of 
how such displays of lack of attention (or education/experience/training) should be conveyed 
in translation is a proper part of register analysis and conveyance. While treatment of such “er-
rors” are often handled by a diverse set of tools from use of the term sic to subtle correction in 
target language translations, it is clear that each of these devices carries baggage, whether by 
impugning the source author/speaker or masking/“upgrading” the source author’s intent and 
characteristics.  

3. Terminology Management  

Termbases are a natural repository for register information. ISO/TC37/SC3, “Systems to man-
age terminology, knowledge and content” includes ISO/CD 12620, “Terminology and other 
language and content resources -- Data category specifications” whose current data categories 
are described at http://www.datcatinfo.net. The register, dating and frequency data categories 
shown in Table 1 provide a starting point for considering the extent to which dialect and regis-
ter issues can be dealt with through terminology management. 

 
Dating Modern 

Old 
Frequency Commonly used 

Infrequently used 
Rarely used 

Register Bench-level 
Dialect  
Facetious 
Formal 
In house 
Ironic 
Neutral 
Slang 
Taboo 
Technical 
Vulgar 

  
Table 1. Register data categories in ISO/CD 12620 

 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 277



While fairly extensive, this list is not exhaustive. For example, age grading, i.e. the use 
of terms by certain age groups and not others, sociolects and dialect/locale need to be (more 
finely) addressed. So, in contrast to simple data categories, these could allow more complex 
data types. 

4. Translation Memory 

TM metadata is another potential repository for register information, but a survey of the rele-
vant standards (e.g. TMX, XLIFF) and literature indicates that it is not common to character-
ize translation units (TUs) beyond their date, translator, status and domain. Moorkens (2013) 
indicates the usefulness of date metadata, since more recent TUs may benefit from having been 
corrected and feature the latest vocabulary. However, even if register information were made 
specifiable in TMs, analogous to that proposed in the standards for terminology, it remains to 
be established how and whether this could be made useful for translators in conveying register 
into the target language. 

In our imagined scenario, source and target variants of translation units in a translation 
memory would have the same metadata elements available to them, but they would not neces-
sarily match between source and target. For example, while elements such as “frequency” or 
“slang” might well match, if further sociolinguistic detail is provided, such as “Southern Unit-
ed States” for the American English variant of a TU, this cannot be expected to have the same 
value as the equivalent in another language. 

At this stage, we are agnostic as to whether separate TMs should be maintained for reg-
ister. Given the potentially large dimensionality of register information, it seems that such an 
approach would prove cumbersome. At any rate, it seems that a register-sensitive TM search 
should not be greatly affected by the choice to use single or multiple TMs. 

4.1 Automatic Register Detection 

Assuming that register information can be captured in a TM, the question arises as to what ex-
tent this can be done automatically as new TUs are added. Lapshinova-Koltunski & Vela (2015) 
and Biber (2014) discuss automatic identification of registers. Salloum et al. (2014) discuss 
sentence-level dialect identification in service of MT; this seems like a promising approach to 
apply in the case of identifying register in source materials, since it can shift multiple times 
over the course of the document. Once enhanced with register information, TUs could be com-
pared for register across languages, resulting in a way for translators and reviewers to identify 
register mismatches warranting further attention. Register detection could also enhance content 
optimization tools’ capabilities with respect to style checking. 

5. Machine Translation 

Since MT can help fill in the gaps in TM, it is worth exploring whether it too can be made sen-
sitive to register. Niu et al. (2017) describe initial attempts at imbuing MT with the ability to 
control register. In cases without a suitable TM match, MT register control could be exercised 
on source language TU variants in order to produce target variants with the appropriate regis-
ter. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 278



6. Discussion 

How might all of this work in practice? Let us imagine a workflow including a CAT tool of the 
future which we call Register CAT. Register CAT provides both terminology management and 
translation memory both enhanced with register metadata, and the translation memory is en-
hanced with register detection capabilities. The translation memory backs off to machine trans-
lation that can output various registers on demand. 

At this stage, we imagine that an input source text for Register CAT is segmented into 
sentence-sized segments as is common in today’s CAT tools. While it is clear that register can 
vary within documents, it is not clear whether a different kind of segmentation would serve 
register conveyance better, and indeed, as will be seen below, individual segments can exhibit 
register variation as well. 

The source language part of the translation unit can then be submitted to a language-
specific register detector which can fill in register metadata information. This can then be used 
to search the translation memory, which has also been annotated (either by hand or by a register 
detector) for register. We leave the theory and mechanics of the factoring in of register infor-
mation to TM match scoring to further research, but for now, we assume that better register 
matches will score higher than otherwise equally matching target language variants. 

As the translator sets about modifying the translation memory match, the termbase will 
provide guidance by presenting register-matched target terms highest in the list. Once the trans-
lator is ready to commit the translation unit, the opportunity will be made available for her to 
modify the translation unit metadata in case the automatically generated register information 
requires it. In those cases where there is no suitable translation memory match for the source 
language segment, register-enabled MT will provide a target language segment best matching 
the source language register specifications.  

Let us work through an example based on an American English news report from Okla-
homa (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ydmPh4MXT3g). For the sake of this example, we 
will assume that the audio has been transcribed into the source language orthography and that 
the transcript is what constitutes the source side presented in Register CAT that needs to be 
translated into a target language, e.g. French. 
 

(Announcer) One resident describes her horrifying experience when she first realized 
the complex was on fire. 
 
(Sweet Brown) Well, I woke up to go get me a cold pop… 

 
The announcer’s utterance displays no marked properties and could well be described 

as register-neutral. In contrast, Sweet Brown’s utterance displays two features that can be con-
sidered marked with respect to American English: “go get me” and “pop”. The use of “me” in 
the phrase “go get me” is an example of a personal dative which Horn (2008) ascribes to “dia-
lectal (Southern and Appalachian) U.S. English”. The use of “pop” vs. “soda” (among other 
variants) has been a longstanding discussion among American English dialectologists (von 
Schneidemesser 1996). According to popvssoda.com, an internet survey project by Alan 
McConchie, “pop” is the lead variant in Oklahoma County, where the broadcast emanates. In 
fact, the state of Oklahoma appears to be one of the southernmost regions for “pop”, whose 
main bastions appear to be the Northwestern and North-central regions of the United States. 

Whereas the personal dative in “go get me” has a vernacular flavor, “pop” seems to be 
more of a geographical rather than a stylistic variant. In termbase metadata, we could indicate 
the stylistic and geographic features of each expression: 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 279



 
“go get me”: informal, dialect:Southern/Applachian (US) 
“pop”: neutral, dialect:Northwestern/North-central (US), including Oklahoma 

 
However, when considering how to indicate the metadata in the TM for the entire seg-

ment “Well, I woke up to go get me a cold pop…”, we propose to take the union of the register 
features exhibited by the expressions it contains. Indeed, one segment could certainly contain 
both informal and formal words, or words with different geographical affiliations. Therefore, it 
is important to allow the metadata to accommodate this, perhaps by quantifying the number of 
expressions in a segment containing each relevant feature. This creates a situation where some 
utterances will have stronger sociolinguistic marking than others. For the expression in ques-
tion, this could look something like this: 
 

“Well, I woke up to go get me a cold pop”: informal (1), Southern/Appalachian US (1), 
Northwestern/North-central/Oklahoma (1) 

 
Now when considering a translation memory search for a target language, say French, 

equivalent for this phrase, we confront all of the sociolinguistic variation of that language. In 
this case, the personal dative, as in “Je me prends un petit café”, literally “I take me a little 
coffee” (Horn 2008) does not seem to be markedly informal as in American English. In the case 
of “pop”, French has a number of terms of its own, as shown in Table 2. 
 

boisson gazeuse Formal 
liqueur1 Canadian, Informal? 
soda Informal? 

 
Table 2. French equivalents for “pop/soda” 

 
While mapping register properties like “formal” and “informal” between languages may 

seem at first straightforward, we are confronted by the lack of register parallelism (at least with 
respect to vocabulary) between languages. So, if “go get me” is informal in English, and the 
equivalent with a personal dative is not marked in French, must we try to find an informal way 
of expressing that? If “pop” is regionally marked in English, is our translation best served by 
seeking a regionally-marked term like “liqueur” in French? We do not offer solutions to these 
problems here, but they are discussed elsewhere (e.g. Berezowski 1997). 

It is hoped that this outline specifying ways in which the CAT workflow can be fortified 
to accommodate register information will provide researchers and developers a path forward 
for a forthcoming generation of CAT tools which will make it easier for translators and review-
ers to maintain and assess register fidelity. 

 

References 
Bell, Allan. 1984. Language style as audience design. Language in Society 13, 145-204. 

Berezowski, Leszek. 1996. Dialect in Translation. Wydawnictwo Uniwerytetu Wroclawskiego. 

                                                      
1 Thanks to Miguel Jetté for Canadian French consultation. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 280



Biber, Douglas. 2014. Using multi-dimensional analysis to explore cross-linguistic universals of register 
variation. Languages in Contrast 14:1, 7-34. 

Chamizo-Domínguez, Pedro J. 2008. Semantics and pragmatics of false friends. Routledge. 

Federal Coordination and Compliance Section. 2011. Commonly Asked Questions and Answers Re-
garding Lim-ited English Proficient (LEP) Individuals. 
https://www.lep.gov/faqs/042511_Q&A_LEP_General.pdf [last accessed 25 September, 2017]. 

Francisco, Reginaldo. 2015. CAT tools em tradução literária: para quê? VI Congresso Internacional de 
Tradção e Interpretação da ABRATES.  

Green, Lisa J. 2002. African American English: A Linguistic Introduction. Cambridge University Press. 

Halliday, M.A.K. 2002. The construction of knowledge and value in the grammar of scientific dis-
course: With reference to Charles Darwin’s The Origin of Species. In Jonathan J. Webster, editor, 
Linguistic Studies of Text and Discourse, Volume 2, Bloomsbury, pages 169-192. 

Hanes, Vanessa Lopes Lourenço. 2012. Norms in the Translation of Southern American English in Sub-
titles in Brazil: How is southern American speech presented to Brazilians? Translation Journal 
16(3). http://translationjournal.net/journal/61southern.htm [last accessed 25 September, 2017]. 

Horn, Laurence R. 2008. “I love me some him”: The landscape of non-argument datives. In O. Bonami 
and P. Cabredo Hofherr, editors, Empirical Issues in Syntax and Semantics 7, pages 169-192. 

Jackman, Tom. 2017. “The suspect told police ‘give me a lawyer dog.’ The court says he wasn't asking 
for a lawyer.” Washington Post, November 2. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/true-
crime/wp/2017/11/02/the-suspect-told-police-give-me-a-lawyer-dog-the-court-says-he-wasnt-ask-
ing-for-a-lawyer. 

Labov, William. 2006. The social stratification of English in New York City, Second Edition. Cam-
bridge. 

Lapshinova-Koltunski, Ekaterina and Mihaela Vela. 2015. Measuring ‘registerness’in human and ma-
chine translation: A text classification approach. Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Dis-
course in Machine Translation, pages 122-131. 

Moorkens, Joss. 2013. The role of metadata in translation memories. In Valerie Pellatt, editor, Text, Ex-
tratext, Metatext and Paratext in Translation, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pages 79-90. 

Niu, Xing, Marianna Martindale and Marine Carpuat. 2017. A study of style in machine translation: 
Controlling the formality of machine translation output. Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2804-2809. 

Salloum, Wael, Heba Elfardy, Linda Alamir-Sallou, Nizar Habash and Mona Diab. 2014. Proceedings 
of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), 
pages 772-778. 

Steiner, Erich. 1998. A register-baed translation evaluation: An advertisement as a case in point. Target 
10:2, 291-318. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 281



von Schneidemesser, Luanne. 1996. Soda or Pop? Journal of English Linguistics, 24(4): 270-287. 

World Bank. 2004. World Bank Translation Style Guide, Version 1.0. http://sitere-
sources.worldbank.org/TRANSLATIONSERVICESEXT/Resources/Transla-
tion_Style_Guide_English.pdf [last accessed 25 September, 2017]. 

Yu, Jing. Translating ‘others’ as ‘us’ in Huckleberry Finn: dialect, register and the heterogeneity of 
standard language. Language and Literature, 26(1): 54-65. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 282




