Football and Beer - a Social Media Analysis on Twitter in Context of the

FIFA Football World Cup 2018

Roland Roller, Philippe Thomas, Sven Schmeier

Language Technology Lab, DFKI,

Berlin, Germany

{firstname.surname}@dfki.de

Abstract

In many societies alcohol
is a legal and
common recreational substance and socially
accepted. Alcohol consumption often comes
along with social events as it helps people to
increase their sociability and to overcome their
inhibitions. On the other hand we know that in-
creased alcohol consumption can lead to seri-
ous health issues, such as cancer, cardiovascu-
lar diseases and diseases of the digestive sys-
tem, to mention a few. This work examines al-
cohol consumption during the FIFA Football
World Cup 2018, particularly the usage of al-
cohol related information on Twitter. For this
we analyse the tweeting behaviour and show
that the tournament strongly increases the in-
terest in beer. Furthermore we show that coun-
tries who had to leave the tournament at early
stage might have done something good to their
fans as the interest in beer decreased again.

Introduction

1
Alcohol can lead to serious health issues. For in-
stance, even though there is no apparent threshold,
even one drink of alcohol per day on average can
signiﬁcantly increase the risk of cancer (Roerecke
and Rehm, 2012).

Studies have shown, that the exposure to media
and commercial communications on alcohol is as-
sociated with the likelihood that adolescents will
start to drink alcohol, and with increased drinking
amongst baseline drinkers (Anderson et al., 2009).
In addition to that social events can have a inﬂu-
ence on drinking behaviour. In course of this Cur-
tis et al. (2018) apply a Twitter analysis and show
that topics such as sporting events, art and food-
related festivals are positively correlated to alco-
hol consumption on US county level.

Various other

studies have also explored
alcohol-related content on social media, particu-
larly Twitter. Abbar et al. (2015) carry out a food

analysis on Twitter and identify weekly periodic-
ities in context of daily volume of tweets men-
tioning food. Moreover, authors show a correla-
tion between state obesity and caloric value of
food (also alcoholic beverages). Instead Culotta
(2013) analyse alcohol sales volume in context of
Twitter messages. Kershaw et al. (2014) investi-
gate regional alcohol consumption patterns in the
UK, while Hossain et al. (2016) explore alcohol
consumption patterns in various areas in the US.
Curtis et al. (2018) target the prediction of exces-
sive drinking rates and Huang et al. (2017) exam-
ine alcohol- and tobacco-related behaviourial pat-
terns. And ﬁnally, Moreno et al. (2010) carry out a
content analysis of adolescents on social media.

This work examines alcohol consumption on
Twitter in context of the FIFA Football World Cup
2018. We make use of the results of the above
mentioned works, especially the observed correla-
tion between people’s behaviour on Twitter and in
their real life in context of consumption. The study
is carried out across all participating countries of
the tournament and explores the inﬂuence of the
event on the drinking behaviour of people.

2 Experimental Setup

The FIFA World Cup 2018 was taking place from
14th of June until 15th of July. Within the group
stage 32 participating teams were playing in 8
groups and completed 3 matches each. After that
the two best teams of each group went to the
knockout stage. A match usually lasts 90 minutes
plus 15 minutes of break (⇡2 hours). This work
analyses the tweeting behaviours during a match.
In the following a match is deﬁned as a time pe-
riod of one hour before kick-off and three hours
after the kick-off. The hour before and after the
game are included as supporters might express ex-
citement for the game.

2.1 Data Collection
Tweets over a period between 05/31/2018 and
07/23/2018 were collected, which covers the pe-
riod of the tournament, but also two weeks before
and one week after. As this work analyses mes-
sages from all participating countries of the tour-
nament, messages were crawled containing vari-
ous emojis due to their language independence.
The considered emojis are listed in Table 1. In the
rest of the work we refer to them as BEER, WINE,
SAKE and BALL.

Table 1: Emojis used for Twitter crawling

2.2 Country Assignment
In this work, Tweets are examined according to the
different participating countries. As only a small
number of Tweets contain country related infor-
mation (8.63%), Tweets lacking this information
had to be assigned automatically to the corre-
sponding country of each user. A classiﬁer was
trained based on the approach of Thomas and Hen-
nig (2018), which is able to detect the origin of a
Tweet based on text and meta information.

As sanity check, Tweets which actually con-
tain information about its origin were compared
to the automatically assigned country. On those
messages the model achieves an accuracy of above
91%.
2.3 Preprocessing
Collected Tweets were then mapped to small time
intervals of one hour, according to the target la-
bel (e.g. beer emoji). For instance a message sent
on 06/27/2018 at 5:25 pm (UTC) and containing a
beer emoji is assigned to its country, then assigned
to the set of beer emoji Tweets, and ﬁnally mapped
to the time interval 06/27/2018, 5:00 pm. All mes-
sages of a particular label and a particular time in-
terval are summed up. In this way a list for each
target label is generated containing time intervals,
country origin and number of relevant Tweets for
this interval. For the following analysis these lists
are used as input. One line is considered as TCF
(time-country-frequency) triple.
3 Analysis
In the following the different Tweets containing
the target emojis are analysed in detail. All ex-

aminations which include signiﬁcance testing use
one-sided paired t-test.

3.1 Outside the Tournament
Figure 1 shows the average number of Tweets per
day containing BEER emojis before/after the tour-
nament from the participating countries. Partici-
pants with less than 50 BEER Tweets per day are
excluded, to show more meaningful results. We re-
fer to this group as avg50. In average, more than
half of the BEER Tweets per day come from Brazil
and England together. Results show no direct cor-
relation to the statistics Harmful use of alcohol1 of
the WHO. The reasons for this can only be pos-
sibly found out by a longterm analysis going fur-
ther than pure statistics. In that list Brazil with 7.8
litres of pure alcohol per capita is actually ranked
further to the end. Instead countries such as Ger-
many (13.4), France (12.6), England (11.4) and
Australia (10.6) would be ranked to the top.

Figure 1: Average number of alcohol related (BEER)
Tweets per day outside the tournament

In order to draw a fair comparison to pure alco-
hol per capita the number of active Twitter users
must be taken into account. It turns out that di-
viding the avg. BEER Tweets by the number of
active Twitter users does not change much. Ar-
gentina switches place with England, Saudi Ara-
bia moves to the very end and Japan drops just in
front of it. Columbia moves slightly up.

Next mean is calculated for all BEER Tweets
from avg50 for each day of the week. The re-
sulting graph is presented in Figure 2 and visu-
alises, similarly to Abbar et al. (2015), particular
periodicities. Firstly single days can be recognised
as small peaks. Moreover, towards the end of the
week, peaks are slightly increased compared to the
beginning of the week. Using this data it is for in-

1http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.

sdg.3-5-viz, accessed 19.07.2018

Japan.

Figure 2: Mean of all alcohol related (BEER) Tweets
before/after the tournament from avg50
stance possible to deduct, that people tweet sig-
niﬁcantly more about alcohol on the evening
(from 4pm until 1am) (p<0.001). Moreover, the
data also shows, that people tweet signiﬁcantly
more about alcohol at the weekend (Friday 4pm
- Monday 6am) (p<0.001). in comparison to the
rest of the week.

3.2 The Tournament
In this subsection alcohol related Tweets during
the tournament are examined. The ﬁrst question
to address is whether supporters of their national
team tweet more during the match in comparison
to other periods. Reference periods are the days
after each match during the same time slots.

The analysis shows that people from 19 coun-
tries use BEER signiﬁcantly more when their
team is playing (p<0.05, 10 of
them with
p<0.001). Among the 13 other countries, only
Japan and Saudi Arabia are from avg50. Interest-
ingly Croatia, which reached the ﬁnal, does not
show any signiﬁcant increase, but the general us-
age of BEER is generally very low here. Consid-
ering WINE Tweets, only Brazil, Poland and Bel-
gium and for SAKE only Mexico show a signiﬁ-
cant increase in Tweets during the matches of their
team (p<0.05). However the number of Tweets are
low in comparison to BEER.

Figure 3 presents an overview on how the tour-
nament inﬂuences the average usage of BEER per
day of avg50, while the team is in the tournament.
France shows the largest increase of BEER Tweets
per day in average of more than 107%, followed
by Japan with 35%. The increase from Japan is
surprising as Japanese people do not tweet sig-
niﬁcantly more during the matches of their team.
Possible explanations might be that matches are
broadcasted often late in the evening due to the
time difference to Russia. For this reason people
might meet up earlier, thus start drinking earlier.
Another explanation can be just the fact that there
is a high interest for the tournament in general in

Figure 3: Increase of beer related Tweets per day during
World Cup, until leaving the tournament

Brazil instead shows ‘only’ an increase of 18%.
Even with this small increase (in comparison to
others) Brazil remains the country with the largest
number of avg. BEER Tweets per day. Consid-
ering all countries Morocco has the strongest in-
crease (407.5%) and also the strongest decrease
after leaving the tournament (-68.97%). On the
other hand, outside the tournament Morocco has a
very low number of BEER Tweets per day (0.48),
so the increase might be not too serious. Interest-
ingly only Peru shows a decrease during the tour-
nament (-16.4%). Considering the avg50, Colom-
bia and Brazil showed the strongest decrease when
their team left the tournament with -18.81% and -
10.59% respectively.

Generally the results show, that from almost
all countries more alcohol related Tweets can be
found during the tournament. Moreover, in most
cases the avg. number of BEER Tweets decreases
when the team leaves the tournament. However,
in some cases an increase in Tweets can be de-
tected. Senegal for instance increases the number
of BEER Tweets up to 54%, followed by Uruguay
(28%) and Australia (10%).

3.3 Top-5 Matches
This subsection analyses the different matches of
the tournament for popularity in terms of BEER
and BALL. In order to have a fair comparison data
is normalized ﬁrst. The average number of Tweets
of each country outside the tournament is sub-
tracted from the number of Tweets during the tour-
nament at a given time and day.

Table 2 presents the Top-5 matches involving
BEER and BALL. The table shows that more peo-
ple use the football emoji than the beer emoji. In
terms of BALL, the Top-5 list contains the ﬁnal

(France-Croatia), the opening (Russia-Saudi Ara-
bia) and some other games involving recent Euro-
pean and World Champions.

Mexico-Sweden
German-S. Korea
Brazil-Belgium
Serbia-Brazil
Switzerland-C. Rica
Nigeria-Iceland
Brazil-Costa Rica

#

1313

Portugal-Spain

1305
1250

France-Croatia
Russia-S. Arabia

1104 Germany-Mexico
1092
France-Argentina

#

5100

4637
4253

3798
3616

Table 2: Top-5 matches of the tournament in terms of
beer and football emoji (normalized)

From BEER perspective we ﬁnd on the ﬁrst
and third palce matches which took place in par-
allel. Considering that, the most popular single
match was Brazil-Belgium in the Quarter Final.
Ranked 4th is Nigeria-Iceland, which is surpris-
ing, as both countries are not tweeting much about
beer. Analysing the results in more detail reveals,
that all 7 matches took place on a day Brazil
played. Even though Tweets were normalized, the
inﬂuence of Brazilian BEER Tweets before and af-
ter a match of their team is enormous, so that even
the Nigeria-Iceland match achieved a high rank.

4 Results
This work presented a short analysis of alcohol
related emojis in context of the FIFA football
World Cup 2018. With the start of the tourna-
ment we showed, that most countries strongly in-
crease the number of Tweets containing beer emo-
jis. As many people tweet less after their national
team left the tournament, we draw the conclusion
that leaving the tournament early, as Germany did,
is the healthiest solution - unless you are Peru.
We also showed that people of many participating
teams of the tournament tweet signiﬁcantly more
about alcohol during a match of their team. Fur-
thermore we presented the increase of alcohol re-
lated Tweets during the tournament and the most
popular games in terms of beer and football emo-
jis. Finally we showed, that Brazil tweets by far
the most about beer. Cheers!

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Economics and Energy (BMWi)

through the project MACSS (01MD16011F).
References
Soﬁane Abbar, Yelena Mejova, and Ingmar Weber.
2015. You tweet what you eat: Studying food con-
sumption through twitter.
In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’15, pages 3197–3206,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Peter Anderson, Avalon de Bruijn, Kathryn Angus,
Ross Gordon, and Gerard Hastings. 2009.
Impact
of alcohol advertising and media exposure on ado-
lescent alcohol use: A systematic review of longitu-
dinal studies. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 44(3):229–
243.

Aron Culotta. 2013. Lightweight methods to estimate
inﬂuenza rates and alcohol sales volume from twit-
ter messages. Language resources and evaluation,
47(1):217–238.

Brenda Curtis, Salvatore Giorgi, Anneke E. K. Buf-
fone, Lyle H. Ungar, Robert D. Ashford, Jessie
Hemmons, Dan Summers, Casey Hamilton, and
H. Andrew Schwartz. 2018. Can twitter be used to
predict county excessive alcohol consumption rates?
PLOS ONE, 13(4):1–16.

Nabil Hossain, Tianran Hu, Roghayeh Feizi,
Ann Marie White, Jiebo Luo, and Henry A.
Kautz. 2016. Precise localization of homes and
activities: Detecting drinking-while-tweeting pat-
terns in communities. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Web and Social Me-
dia, Cologne, Germany, May 17-20, 2016., pages
587–590.

Tom Huang, Anas Elghafari, Kunal Relia, and Rumi
Chunara. 2017. High-resolution temporal represen-
tations of alcohol and tobacco behaviors from so-
cial media data. Proceedings of the ACM on human-
computer interaction, 1(CSCW).

Daniel Kershaw, Matthew Rowe, and Patrick Stacey.
2014. Towards tracking and analysing regional alco-
hol consumption patterns in the uk through the use
of social media. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM
conference on Web science, pages 220–228. ACM.

Megan A. Moreno, Leslie R. Briner, Amanda Williams,
Libby Brockman, Leslie Walker, and Dimitri A.
Christakis. 2010. A content analysis of displayed
alcohol references on a social networking web site.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 47(2):168 – 175.

Michael Roerecke and J¨urgen Rehm. 2012. Alco-
hol intake revisited: Risks and beneﬁts. Current
Atherosclerosis Reports, 14(6):556–562.

Philippe Thomas and Leonhard Hennig. 2018. Twit-
ter Geolocation Prediction Using Neural Networks.
In Language Technologies for the Challenges of the
Digital Age, pages 248–255, Cham. Springer Inter-
national Publishing.

View publication stats
View publication stats

