


















































%


Proceedings of The 11th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 197–198,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5-8, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

197

 
 
 

  1 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Japanese Advertising Slogan Generator using Case Frame and Word 

Vector  

Kango Iwama 

Department of Informatics, Graduate 

School of Integrated Science and Technol-

ogy, Shizuoka University 

Japan 
kiwama@kanolab.net 

Yoshinobu Kano 

Faculty of Informatics, Shizuoka Univer-

sity 

Japan 
kano@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp 

Abstract 

There has been many works published for 

automatic sentence generation of a variety 

of domains. However, there would be still 

no single method available at present that 

can generate sentences for all of domains. 

Each domain will require a suitable gener-

ation method. We focus on automatic gen-

eration of Japanese advertisement slogans 

in this paper. We use our advertisement slo-

gan database, case frame information, and 

word vector information. We employed our 

system to apply for a copy competition for 

human copywriters, where our advertise-

ment slogan was left as a finalist. Our sys-

tem could be regarded as the world first sys-

tem that generates slogans in a practical 

level, as an advertising agency already em-

ploys our system in their business. 

1 Introduction 

There has been many works published on Japanese 

automatic sentence generation for a variety of do-

mains. In literary works, generation of a short-

short (short story) (Matsubara et al., 2013) (Sato et 

al., 2015), has become a hot topic. A wide variety 

of works have been published including business 

documents such as newspaper articles and finan-

cial summary1, sports bulletins such as baseball in-

ning breaking (Tagawa and Shimada, 2017), over-

view text of the weather forecast (Murakami et al., 

2017), haiku (Wu et al., 2017), chat dialogue such 

as "high school girl AI RINNA." (Wu et al., 2016). 

However, these generation methods tend to be dif-

ferent for each case. For example, the short-short 

generation was performed with templates written 

manually; the inning bulletins generation was rule-

based; the chat dialogue of the "high school girl AI 

RINNA" used RNN-GRU; the generation system 

                                                      
1 http://pr.nikkei.com/qreports-ai/ 

of overview text of weather forecast incorporates 

neural networks, such as an encoder-decoder 

model. These variety of methods mean that there 

are still no single method available at present that 

is effective and unified for all of domains.  

2 Advertisement Slogan Generator   

Advertisement (ad) slogan itself is not a strict con-

cept. There are many kinds of related types of 

phrases: copies of the ads, book titles and bands, 

headings of table of contents, headlines of newspa-

pers and magazines, copies of the movie, titles of 

sales letters and blogs, e-mail magazines, the say-

ing known in the world, impressive phrases that 

have heard or seen in the city (Kawakami 2016). 

Our target is automatic generation of practical ad 

slogans where professional copywriters would 

work for, rather than automatic creation support for 

amateur individuals. However, our system could be 

used e.g. for web ads in future to provide slogans 

in lower costs.  

There are a couple of previous works as follows. 

Yamane and Hagiwara proposed a method for au-

tomatic generation of Japanese ad slogans with re-

placement of nouns (Yamane and Hagiwara, 2015). 

They used n-gram and search result information 

from the web. Baba et al. used Word2Vec to extend 

the number of candidates which are automatically 

generated from ad texts (Baba et al., 2015). How-

ever, no work reported in practical business level 

works yet. 

Our automatic ad slogan generator uses case 

frames and word vectors, with ad slogans written 

by professional copy writers. Our system targets on 

Japanese language, but we will show input and out-

put in English using a machine translation in our 

demonstration.  

http://pr.nikkei.com/qreports-ai/


198

 
 
 

  2 

We applied our system to the 8th Shizuoka Copy 

Award2, which is a competition of ad slogans for 

human copywriters. We submitted our generated 

slogans as humans, so the reviews did not know our 

slogans are by machine. Our submissions were 

manually selected from generated samples around 

ten times larger. Table 1 shows statistics of submis-

sions and selections. Examples of generated slo-

gans with selection results are shown in Table 2, 

also show slogans written by humans, a grand prize 

one and a part of finalists. 

                                                      
2 http://shizuokacc.com/award/ 

This system has already been used as a base of 

the AICO (AI COpywriter) system in Dentsu Inc., 

one of the five world largest advertising agency 

groups. Together with the competition results, our 

system could be regarded as the world first system 

that can generate ad slogans in the practical level.  

Acknowledgments 

We are grateful to the copywriters of Dentsu Inc. 

References  

Jun Baba, Yuki Iwazaki, Itsuki Sugio, Kosuke Kitade, 

Takeshi Fukushima. 2015. Automatic Generation of 

Title and Description Texts for Sponsored Search 

Ads. The 29th Annual Conference of the Japanese 

Society for Artificial Intelligence. 

Tetsuya Kawakami. 2016. The basic of catch phrase 

power. Nippon Jitsugyo Publishing.  

Hitoshi Matsubara, Satoshi Sato, Mina Akaishi, Kaoru 

Sumi, Kazushi Mukaiyama, Hideyuki Nakashima, 

Hideaki Sena, Hajime Murai, Yuko Otsuka. 2013. 

An attempt at automatic composition of Shin’ichi 

Hoshi-like short short stories. The 27th Annual Con-

ference of the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelli-

gence. 

Soichiro Murakami, Ryohei Sasano, Hiroya Takamura, 

Manabu Okumura. 2017. Automatic generation of 

weather forecast comments from numerical forecast 

map. 2017 The Association for Natural Language 

Processing. 

Satoshi Sato. 2015. What is Automatic Story Genera-

tor? The 29th Annual Conference of the Japanese 

Society for Artificial Intelligence. 

Yuki Tagawa, Kazutaka Shimada. 2017. Automatic 

generation of inning summary sentence by auto-

matic generation of template. 2017 The Association 

for Natural Language Processing. 

Xianchao Wu, Kazushige Ito, Katsuya Iida, Kazuna 

Tsuboi, Momo Klyen. 2016. RINNA: high school 

girl Artificial Intelligence. 2016 The Association for 

Natural Language Processing. 

Xianchao Wu, Momo Klyen, Kazushige Ito, Zhan 

Chen. 2017. Haiku Generation Using Deep Neural 

Networks. 2017 The Association forNatural Lan-

guage Processing. 

Hiroaki Yamane, Masafumi Hagiwara. 2015.  Tag Line 

Generating System Using Information on the Web. 

28th Fuzzy System Symposium. 

 

 Human System 

# of submissions 4060 228 

Passed 1st review 584 (14.3%) 16 (7.0%) 

Finalist 59 (1.4%) 1 (0.4%) 

Table 1: Submission and selection statistics in 

the 8th Shizuoka Copy Award. 

 

 

Finalist 

written 

by our 

system 

親の意見と寄付は後で効く。 

(Parents' opinions and donation will work 

later.) 

Passed 

1st re-

view by 

our sys-

tem 

その朝、いちばんご機嫌なのは経済

でした。 

(This morning, it was the economy that 

seemed the best mood.) 

仲良しがはみ出てる。(The chum is 

protruding.) 

可愛い子には U ターンをさせよ (Let 

your cute child to U-turn.) 

Failed 

by our 

system 

ふるさとを走ろう。(Let’s run in your 

hometown.) 

広告が、世界をつなぐ。(The adver-

tisement connects the world.) 

まだ見ぬお家に会いに行こう。 

(Let’s see a house you don’t know.) 

Grand 

Prize 

by hu-

man 

変わらない味は、忘れない言葉で守

られている。(The unchanged taste is 

protected by unforgettable words.). 

Finalist 

written 

by hu-

mans  

好きな人にキスを。好きな街にキフ

を。(Kiss the person you like, donate to 

the city you like.) 

「今」は、過去のだれかのやさしさ

でできている。(“Now” is made of 

someone’s kindness in the past.)  

分ければ分けるほど増えるもの。そ

れは、幸せ。(The more you divide, the 

more it increases. It is happiness.) 

Table 2:  Examples of ad slogans with selection 

results, by our system and human writers. 

 

 


