









































Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 5–10,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Seeking the Ideal Narrative Model for Computer-Generated Narratives

Mariana Chinellato Ferreira
Center for Portuguese Literature

Materialities of Literature
University of Coimbra, Portugal

mariana.ferreira@student.fl.uc.pt

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira
Center of Informatics & Systems

Department of Informatics Engineering
University of Coimbra, Portugal

hroliv@dei.uc.pt

Abstract

The aim of this paper is to discuss and
sketch an ideal narrative model based
on post-classical narratology approaches,
namely Cognitive Narratology to help to
improve the interestingness of the output
in computer-generated narratives. This
model will be further tested in a prototype
of a generative system in the Portuguese
language that will be based on Brazilian
urban novels.

1 Introduction

Generative Literature is not novel in Literary nor
Computer Science experiments, but there has been
an increase of studies focused on this matter lately,
both by artists and scientists. For the last few
decades, Literary Studies and Computer Science
have been crossing paths, which led to the devel-
opment of the Digital Humanities.

Among other applications, Computational Cre-
ativity has been focusing on the issues of creativ-
ity and the possibility of programming a computer
to produce art or learn how to produce it. In the
scope of language, there are various works in col-
laboration with Linguistics, Stylistics and Literary
Studies, especially when analyzing several textual
aspects of large text corpora. More complex ap-
proaches are used in CC for the development of
automatic text generation systems (Kybartas and
Bidarra, 2017; Goncalo Oliveira, 2017)

This paper is part of a Ph.D. research that aims
to foster the crossover between Literary Studies
and Computer Science to contribute to the solu-
tion of linguistic, literary and aesthetic issues in
computer-generated literary artifacts. To this end,
it is necessary to find a more general narrative
model to be applied in a prototype of a system that
generates literary narratives in Portuguese.

Even though the research intends to use post-

classical narratological theories1, it is hard to work
with narratives in Computational Creativity with-
out using any formal model of literary narrative.
Ergo this paper focuses on understanding how the
systems develop and apply the narrative model,
most commonly Propp’s Morphology of the Folk-
tale (or any other Formalist or Structuralist ap-
proach) and propose a new model that will be fur-
ther tested on the prototype.

At the current stage of the research, most of the
work is still theoretical and must be tested. Never-
theless, the aim of this paper is to present a few
systems and show how their narrative is devel-
oped, dividing them into systems that use Propp’s
Morphology as a narrative model and systems that
present their own narrative models. The following
part of the paper intends to present the proposition
of a new narrative model based on Brazilian Ur-
ban Novel with the background of the Cognitive
Narratology (Herman, 2000).

2 Propp’s Morphology of the Russian
Folktale

In the introduction of the second edition of the
Morphology of the Folktales, Alan Dundes shows
the reader the importance of Propp’s work and
presents several different usages of this theory in
multiple study fields. He first states that Propp in-
spired many formalists and structuralists into de-

1Built upon the French Structuralism, Semiotics and
Russian Formalism, classical narratology is composed by
theories developed by renowned theorists such as Tzvetan
Todorov, Gérard Genette, Roland Barthes, Vladimir Propp,
Seymour Chatman, Gerald Prince, A.J. Greimas, among oth-
ers, who tried to find the characteristics of the narrative text
to generate a logical structural model of narratives. Post-
classical narratology does not criticize the formal models di-
rectly, but they suggest the expansion of these models, mainly
through the merge of narratology with different study fields to
understand narrative beyond its own form. Among the post-
classical theorists David Herman (cognitive science), Man-
fred Jan, Monika Fludernik (conversational narrative), Marie-
Laure Ryan (digital), Susan Lanser (genre), among others
stand out.

5



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 5–10,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

veloping their own theories (Propp, 1968).
Because Propp’s morphology was the only work

in literature to dissect a literary genre into its
smallest parts, a great number of projects on nar-
rative generation – especially the ones that use
story grammars (Lakoff, 1972) as its basis – use
Propp’s model in some way. In fact, his work
has always been very useful for the development
of several systems that generate narratives auto-
matically. However, its main criticism is in the
fact that Propp has never related his model to the
Russian social and cultural context2. Even though
many literary texts and genres seem to be time-
less their peculiarities in form and content come
mainly from their social and cultural contexts.

Thus, one of the hypotheses this paper takes into
consideration is the need to focus on the context of
the narrative for the improvement of the narrative
model. It does not mean to discard the formal-
ist and structuralist models, but to approach them
with the help of post-classical narratological ap-
proaches. In this paper, we try to observe the nar-
rative model through the lens of the Cognitive Nar-
ratology (Herman, 2013).

3 Narrative Generators

This part of the papers is dedicated to the presen-
tation of different linear narrative generators and
their features in terms of literary inspiration. The
systems were studied through the written materi-
als found (Ph.D. thesis, papers, reports) once most
of the systems are not available to the public.

It is interesting to notice that a considerable
number of systems even when they do not present
a direct link to Propp’s morphology they are some-
how related to the fantastic (Todorov, 1975) or in
the realm of the folktales. This is an interesting
fact that raises some questions about the choice of
literary genre to be emulated.

The first obvious reason for the fantastic to be
an option for the narrative generation is the fact
that there are formal models of these narratives.
Another possible reason might be that the fantas-
tic does not need verisimilitude and strange, cu-
rious and atypical things are able to occur in the
story. And finally, maybe because the creators of
the systems simply liked this literary genre.

Regardless of the reason why the fantastic was

2Different from Propp, Lèvi-Strauss (1955) developed a
study on the structure of the myth where he took into consid-
eration their social and cultural context. (Propp, 1968).

chosen, it is the most common choice among the
most well-known narrative generators as it will be
discussed next.

3.1 Systems based on Propp’s Morphology

As its name suggests, ProtoPropp uses the Mor-
phology of Folktales as its narratological back-
ground as “it provides a simple (and well-known
in the field) formal system, something which is un-
usual to find in other post-structuralist or semiotic
narrative theories” (Peinado and Gervás, 2005).

Imababuchi and Ogata (2014) developed a
Propp-based story generator that can work inde-
pendently, generating stories with the structure of
Russian folktales, or work as part of an Integrated
Narrative System. They pointed out that most
Propp-based systems focus on the function while
they intend to include “many productive and the-
oretical ideas to contribute to story generation in
various sides” (Imabuchi and Ogata, 2014).

In the introduction of his Ph.D., Turner (1993)
tells the reader that he stumbled upon Propp’s
morphology and thought it was fascinating that
he could reduce the folktale into grammar. Al-
though it was his first inspiration, his final com-
puter program barely resembled Propp’s grammar.
Minstrel (Turner, 1993) is a case-based problem
solver system that generates short stories about
King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table,
also in the realm of the fantastic and fairy tales.

Brandon Tearse, Noah Wardrip-Fruin and
Michael Mateas (2010) studied Turner’s Minstrel
in order to identify the crucial elements of the sys-
tem (once it is not available in any format), ex-
plore possible new usages of the system, and de-
velop and make available a new version of the sys-
tem. As there are few theoretical materials about
the classical systems as well as few or no access to
the systems (or their code) for a deeper analysis,
Minstrel Remixed is an important tool for prac-
tical analysis of story generation even though it
presents a few challenges in terms of usage, es-
pecially for those not familiarized with program-
ming. As a development of Minstrel, Minstrel
Remixed (renamed Skald) (Tearse et al., 2010) has
the same theoretical background.

Even though BRUTUS (Bringsjord and Fer-
rucci, 1999) generates short narratives with the
theme of betrayal, Propp’s grammar has some in-
fluence in its development once this system pro-
duces its stories using story grammars ”moving

6



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 5–10,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

from general descriptions of narrative and simple
folktales to generating fully realized narratives”
(Kybartas and Bidarra, 2017).

3.2 Other narrative models

There are however systems that developed their
own narrative model based on different types of
literary texts as it follows.

GESTER (Pemberton, 1984) is a plot generator
whose grammar is based on Old French epic nar-
ratives. Even though it is not based on Propp, epic
narratives also present fantastic events and might
be somehow similar to folktales (once their origin
is from oral tradition). Her work is interesting be-
cause she states that “[a] full story generating sys-
tem would need access to many different kinds of
separate but interacting knowledge” (Pemberton,
1989), such as the story structure, the audience,
the author, the cultural context and the rules of the
sub-genre.

Although MEXICA (Pérez y Pérez, 1999) does
not use Propp’s morphology or any kind of story
grammars, and it tells the story of the Mexicas —
old inhabitants of Mexico City. Its output may be
classified as fantasy once it presents the love of the
princess and the knight, kings and queens, gods
and magical ceremonies. Different from other sys-
tems, MEXICA worries about characteristics out-
side the textual form. Among the postconditions
(the effects of the primitive actions) there are the
emotional links between characters, their tensions
and their positions.

Mark Owen Riedl (2004) developed an archi-
tecture for the creation of automatic stories that
divides the generation process of a narrative into
three layers: (1) fabula generation, (2) discourse
generation and (3) media representation. The sto-
ries are based in fables and fairy tales, as its name
suggests and it is indirectly inspired by Propp’s
morphology and directly by Genette’s narrative
discourse and Gerald Prince’s (1987) dictionary
of narrative. It is interesting to notice that his
work starts to merge a more contemporary nar-
ratological approach by the use of David Her-
man’s and Marie-Laure Ryan’s works (both post-
classical theorists) with classical narratology.

These are just a few examples out a vast field
where it is possible to find many different systems
that generate linear or interactive narratives that
might use Propp’s morphology or not. The sys-
tems presented previously meet the purpose of il-

lustrating that there is the predominance use of the
proppian model both in story grammars or literary
genre (even though there are other systems that do
not use folktales as their main literary genre, such
as Brutus, Author, Universe, nn, among others).

4 Ideal Narratological Approach

The presentation of the systems shows us that the
formalization of the folktales seems to be the first
step in the development of new narrative models
to be applied in computer-generated narrative sys-
tems. From the literary point of view, there seems
not to be any other way for us to analyze a literary
text of any kind this thoroughly. But it is known,
both in computer science and in literature, that
the formalist approach has its weaknesses and the
main criticism is the reduction of the importance
of the historical, biographical, social and cultural
context of the text.

In fact, at first, any kind of pure formalization
sounds like the best option in terms of developing
narratives using a computer. But the need for more
humanistic approaches in order to improve the cre-
ativity in artistic artifacts automatically generated
is also noticed in the field of Computational Cre-
ativity (Pérez y Pérez, 2018).

So, this section of the paper intends to present
an alternative to the approaches available.

5 Cognitive Narratology

To some degree, formalist and structuralist models
were very useful tools in the early stages of Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Computational Creativity.
As suggested by Pérez y Pérez (2018), the field
of Computational Creativity presents a continuum
(CC-Continuum) that has two opposite sides: on
one side there is the Engineering-Mathematical
Approach were scientists work on technical tasks
of optimization while on the other side there is the
Cognitive-Social Approach where scientist study
the human behavior as basis for the development
of creative computer artifacts. Their major work
is “to find ways of representing in computer terms
relevant cognitive, cultural and social behaviours”
(Pérez y Pérez, 2018).

As Literary Theories are too subjective to be im-
plemented in a computer system, it is important to
maintain a certain level of formality learnt from
Propp’s morphology. So, we propose to merge
the propian approach to the Cognitive Narratology,
once it supports the structure of a story world and

7



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 5–10,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

the characteristics of a text for it to be considered a
narrative. It also helps the study of specific story-
telling strategies to foster emotional responses of
the reader which helps to measure the degree of
interestingness of the text.

Herman’s work on the basic elements of narra-
tive presents us four main elements divided into:
(1) situatednes, (2) event sequencing, (3) world
making/ world disruption and (4) what it’s like.
What makes his approach to stand out is the focus
given on the fourth element: for him, narratives
are stories about things that happened to particular
people and what it was like for the to experience
that. Thus, he uses Monika Fludernik’s concept
of experientiality in which narrativity is based on
the evocation of a human-like consciousness (Her-
man, 2013).

So, the main focus of this approach is to per-
ceive the strategies used in narratives to affect the
reader somehow, through triggering unconscious
feelings. Another aspect of this approach is the ex-
ploration of characters and characterization tech-
niques, especially the ones that deal with the rela-
tionships among the characters.

As the approach does not discard formalization,
it helps to understand or even develop a model of
narrative worldmaking using: who, what, when,
where, how, why (Herman, 2013). It is worth
highlighting that all these analyses take into con-
sideration all the social and cultural aspects of the
texts.

The search for a new approach in Narratology
is to propose the experimentation of the language
using a more contemporary and natural model of
narrative (Fludernik, 1996).

6 Literary Corpora

Because most narrative generation systems are in
the realm of the fantastic or fairy tales, this work
proposes the experimentation with a different kind
of narrative text. To try a more natural approach
with a more social appeal, the urban novel was the
choice for an ontology because they tend to ob-
serve people and understand/ describe social rela-
tions in the urban environment. This kind of novel
has a direct correspondence between text and re-
ality. It is realist not because it represents real
life, but because of the way reality is represented
through a great variety of human experiences.

Although Brazilian Romantic Urban Novel is
not such a breakthrough in terms of literary genre,

WHO WHAT
The mistress Stays with married man
The single strong woman Reads, discusses politics,

empowers other women
The wife Stays home, suffers, con-

spires against mistress
The rich single man Tries to get strong woman
The romantic single man Tries to get strong woman
The husband Works, goes to bar, goes to

brothel
The priest/ Family mem-
bers

Interfere in the other char-
acters choices

Table 1: Characters (Who) & Action (What)

WHERE WHEN
Street/Bar/Brothel The married man is at the

brothel/ street
Street/Café/Home Whenever she is provoked
Home/Church Most of the time
Street/ Work/ Bar/ Brothel Whenever he feels like
Street/ Home/ Bar/ Café Whenever he meets woman
Street/ Home/ work When he needs to feel pow-

erful
Church/ Home Most of the time

Table 2: Place (Where) & Time (When)

it serves our purposes to try to develop a differ-
ent narrative model for a prototype of a narrative
generator once it presents a fixed structure and a
certain number of characters. The plot is also well
organized in terms of time and space. There is a
large number of texts available in public domain.

Mainly focused on the female audience from the
beginning of Brazilian modernization, by the end
of the 19th century, these novels presented fixed
structures and simple language. Most of the plots
were steady – even when they presented different
sub-plots that merged. The characters used to de-
pict social groups and could be less complex than
the characters of the following literary schools.
Love is the main motif and it is always related to
the social values of the time. They are usually (im-
possible) love stories told with some humor in a
linear time and space.

The following tables show a first attempt to
obtain a general model of the Brazilian Urban
Novel through the personal analysis of the follow-
ing books: A Moreninha (Macedo, 1844), Senhora
(Alencar, 1875), Diva (Alencar, 1864), Lucı́ola
(Alencar, 1862). The model was based on Her-
man’s Basic Elements of Narative (2009).

7 Final Remarks

The main objective of this paper was not to find
answers but mainly raise questions to be further

8



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 5–10,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

HOW WHY
Destroying the man’s mar-
riage

Wants money/ wants better
life

Arguing with men/ helping
other women

Wants to be free from soci-
ety

With the help of strong
woman or rich man

Wants revenge

Flirting with strong woman Wants to get strong woman
Flirting with strong woman Wants to marry strong

woman
Staying with mistress/
fighting rich man

Wants revenge from rich
man

Giving their opinion/ con-
founding the characters

No main objective

Table 3: Plot (How) & Objective (Why)

answered throughout the development of the re-
search.

At this point, the study of Cognitive Narratol-
ogy applied to the generation of narrative seems
to be a good path for the development of systems
more cognitive-social oriented. Compared to the
previous approaches, it helps us to understand nar-
ratives as human experiences and try to replicate it
in order to improve the interestingness of the out-
put focusing on affecting the reader.

Even if this approach cannot be used to develop
a system from scratch, it would be helpful to be
applied in existing systems to test its applicability,
even though it is still a first draft of the model.

Since urban novels are very distinct from folk-
tales it is necessary to observe its own characteris-
tics and find the paradigms to formalize this kind
of text. At this point, some particularities were al-
ready found as showed in the tables.The next step
would be the formalization of the narrative genre
– work in progress – to be further tested in the pro-
totype.

References
José Alencar. 1862. Lucı́ola. Public Domain.

José Alencar. 1864. Diva. Public Domain.

José Alencar. 1875. Senhora. Public Domain.

Selmer Bringsjord and David Ferrucci. 1999. Artificial
Intelligence and Literary Creativity: Inside the Mind
of BRUTUS, a Storytelling Machine. Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.

Monika Fludernik. 1996. Towards a ’natural’ narra-
tology, volume 25. Routledge, NY.

Hugo Goncalo Oliveira. 2017. A Survey on Intelli-
gent Poetry Generation: Languages, Features, Tech-
niques, Reutilisation and Evaluation. Proceedings

of The 10th International Natural Language Gener-
ation conference (INLG’17), pages 11–20.

David Herman. 2000. Narratology as a cognitive sci-
ence. Image & Narrative, 1(1):1–26.

David Herman. 2009. Basic Elements of Narrative.
Blackwell Publishing, Malden, MA.

David Herman. 2013. Cognitive Narratology.

Shohei Imabuchi and Takashi Ogata. 2014. Integrat-
ing the Event Generation Mechanism in the Propp-
based Story Generation Mechanism into the Inte-
grated Narrative Generation System. Journal of
Robotics, Networking and Aritficial Life, 1(2):164–
168.

Ben Kybartas and Rafael Bidarra. 2017. A Survey on
Story Generation Techniques for Authoring Com-
putational Narratives. IEEE Transactions on Com-
putational Intelligence and AI in Games, 9(3):239–
253.

George Lakoff. 1972. Structural complexity in fairy
tales. The Study of man ; v. 1., 1:. 128–150.

Claude Lévi-Strauss. 1955. The Structural Study
fo Myth. The Journal of American Folklore,
68(270):428–444.

Joaquim Manuel de Macedo. 1844. A Moreninha. 91.
Public Domain.

Federico Peinado and Pablo Gervás. 2005. Creativ-
ity issues in plot generation. In Workshop on Com-
putational Creativity, Working Notes. 19th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence 2005, Edinburgh, Scotland. School of Infor-
matics, University of Edinburgh, School of Infor-
matics, University of Edinburgh.

Lyn Pemberton. 1984. Story Structure: A Narrative
Grammar of Nine Chansons de Geste of the Guil-
laume d’Orange Cycle. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Toronto.

Lyn Pemberton. 1989. A modular approach to story
generation. Proceedings of the fourth conference on
European {. . .}, pages 217–224.

Rafael Pérez y Pérez. 1999. MEXICA : A Computer
Model of Creativity in Writing. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Sussex.

Rafael Pérez y Pérez. 2018. The Computational Cre-
ativity Continuum. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Computational Creativity
ICCC 2018, pages 177–184.

Vladı́mir Propp. 1968. Morphology of the Folktale
(Translated by The American Folklore Society and
Indiana University). Bloomington, Indiana Univer-
sity.

9



Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Creativity and Natural Language Generation, pages 5–10,
Tilburg, November 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mark O Riedl. 2004. Narrative Planning: Balancing
Plot and Character. Ph.D. thesis, North Carolina
University.

Brandon Tearse, Noah Wardrip-fruin, and Michael
Mateas. 2010. Minstrel Remixed : Procedurally
Generating Stories. Artificial Intelligence, pages
192–197.

Tzvetan Todorov. 1975. The Fantastic: A Structural
Approach to a Literary Genre, 1st edition. Cornell
University Press.

Scott R Turner. 1993. MINSTREL: A computer model
of creativity and storytelling. Ph.d., University of
California.

10


