



















































Modeling Brain Activity Associated with Pronoun Resolution in English and Chinese


Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Models of Reference, Anaphora and Coreference, pages 87–96
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling Brain Activity Associated with Pronoun Resolution in English
and Chinese

Jixing Li
Department of Linguistics

Cornell University

jl2939@cornell.edu

Murielle Fabre
Department of Linguistics

Cornell University

mf684@cornell.edu

Wen-Ming Luh
Cornell MRI Facility

Cornell University

wl358@cornell.edu

John Hale
Department of Linguistics

Cornell University

jthale@cornell.edu

Abstract

Typological differences between English and
Chinese suggest stronger reliance on salience
of the antecedent during pronoun resolution in
Chinese. We examined this hypothesis by cor-
relating a difficulty measure of pronoun reso-
lution derived by the activation-based ACT-R
model with the brain activity of English and
Chinese participants listening to a same au-
diobook during fMRI recording. The ACT-
R model predicts higher overall difficulty for
English speakers, which is supported at the
brain level in left Broca’s area. More gener-
ally, it confirms that computational modeling
approach is able to dissociate different dimen-
sions that are involved in the complex process
of pronoun resolution in the brain.

1 Introduction

Pronoun resolution has been suggested to be in-
fluenced by morpho-syntactic constraints such as
gender/number/person agreement, and discourse
factors such as salience of the antecedents (e.g.,
Grosz et al., 1995, for empircical evidence using
eye tracking see Arnold, 2000). Yet, unlike En-
glish, Chinese pronouns in their spoken form lack
morphosyntactic marking and can even be omit-
ted. This leads to a general hypothesis that Chi-
nese speakers may rely more on salience of the
antecedent during pronoun resolution compared to
English speakers, who have additional morpho-
syntactic cues to help resolve the referents.

The Adaptive Control of Thought-Rational
(ACT-R) model of pronoun resolution (van Rij
et al., 2013) offers a way to test this hypothesis.
Built within the cognitive architecture of ACT-R
(Anderson, 2007), this model represents pronoun
resolution as the selection of a most-activated
mention from a ranked list of candidates stored
in declarative memory. As such, this model cal-
culates the activation level for each mention and

selects the most activated one as the antecedent.
Given our hypothesis that Chinese has stronger re-
liance on salience of the antecedent during pro-
noun resolution in abscence of morphosyntactic
cues for agreement, we predict that antecedents in
Chinese have higher overall activation level than
antecedents in English.

We compared the mean ACT-R activation level
for each pronoun’s antecedent in a same audio-
book in English and Chinese translation, and con-
firmed higher activation level for antecedents in
Chinese. We then took the negative of the an-
tecedents’ activation levels to represent “effort”
during pronoun resolution, and correlated this dif-
ficulty measure with brain activity while both En-
glish and Chinese participants listened to the pro-
nouns present in an audiobook during fMRI recod-
ing. The results revealed different left-lateralized
ACT-R difficulty effects for English and Chinese.
Chinese specifically activates the Angular Gyrus
where non-grammatical gender information pro-
cessing was observed (Hammer et al., 2007), while
English ACT-R effect encompasses left Broca’s
area.

This study builds upon the salience-based ac-
count of pronoun resolution, which has long
been recognized both in computational linguis-
tics (Kantor, 1977; Alshawi, 1987; Brennan et al.,
1987; Lappin and Leass, 1994) and in psychology
(Grosz et al., 1995; Gordon et al., 1993; Greene
et al., 1992; Arnold, 2010; McElree, 2001). Our
key contribution is in demonstrating different
brain activation maps associated with measures of
the ACT-R model in English and Chinese, sug-
gesting that different factors are operative in the
system of pronoun resolution in different lan-
guages.

In the following sections, we briefly review the
typological differences linked to pronominal ref-
erence in English and Chinese, and describe the

87



algorithm of the ACT-R model. We, then com-
pare the model performance on our English and
Chinese audiobook texts, and present the methods,
results and discussion of the English and Chinese
fMRI experiments.

2 English and Chinese Typological
Differences in Pronominal Reference

In English, pronouns cannot be omitted in the sub-
ject or object position of a tensed clause, even
though the referent of the omitted pronoun re-
mains clear.On the contrary, Chinese can have
null pronouns in subject or object position in
tensed clauses under appropriate contextual li-
cencing (see (1) and (2), data from Huang (1989)).
This phenomenon is called pro-drop in genera-
tive syntax and has been considered a typologi-
cal parameter that distinguishes topic-prominent
languages like Chinese and subject-prominent lan-
guages like English (Li and Thompson, 1976; Xu,
2006).

(1) Speaker A: Did John see Bill yesterday?
Speaker B: a. Yes, he saw him.

b. *Yes, e saw him.
c. *Yes, he saw e.
d. *Yes, e saw e.
e. *Yes, I guess e saw e.
f. *Yes, John said e saw e.

(2) Speaker A: Zhangsan kanjian Lisi le ma?
Zhangsan see Lisi LE Q?
“Did Zhangsan see Lisi?”

Speaker B: a. Ta kanjian ta le.
He see he LE.
“He saw him.”

b. e kanjian ta le.
“[He] saw him.”

c. Ta kanjian e le.
“He saw [him].”

d. e kanjian e le.
“[He] saw [him].”

e. Wo cai e kanjian e le.
I guess see LE.
“I guess [he] saw [him].”

f. Zhangsan shuo e kanjian e le.
Zhangsan say see LE.
“Zhangsan said that [he] saw [him].”

Moreover, the spoken form of Chinese pro-
nouns do not mark gender information. There-
fore, Chinese pronouns in general provide fewer
morpho-syntactic cues than English pronouns.
This may additionally lead Chinese speakers to
rely more on discourse information than English

speakers when resolving the referencial linking of
pronouns.

3 ACT-R Model for Pronoun Resolution

3.1 Salience-Based Account of Pronoun
Resolution

According to the salience-based account on pro-
noun resolution, the antecedent of the pronoun is
a highly prominent entity in the discourse con-
text. The Centering Theory (Grosz et al., 1995),
for example, refers to entities that link an utterance
to another utterance as “centers”. Each utterance
(U) has a set of forward-looking centers (Cf (U);
i.e., potential antecedents) and a single backward-
looking center (Cb(U); i.e., the anaphoric expres-
sion). The backward-looking center of utterance
Un+1 connects with one of the forward-looking
center of utterance Un. The elements of Cf are
ordered to reflect their relative prominence in Un,
and the most highly ranked Cf is the Cb of Un+1.
The ranking of Cf is mainly determined by its
grammatical role in Un: SUBJECT > OBJECT >
OTHERS. Thus the subject of the previous sen-
tence is more likely to be the antecedent of the
pronoun in the next sentence.

The Centering Theory has been tested by Gor-
don et al. (1993) in a number of self-paced reading
experiments. They introduced a prominent entity
(Cb) and a less prominent entity in a short passage
and found that reading time significantly increased
when the prominent entity is not pronominalized
but repeated. They also showed the repeated-name
penalty for Cb only in the grammatical subject po-
sition, confirmed the basic notion in the Center-
ing Theory that there is only one Cb in an utter-
ance, and that grammatical subject ranks the high-
est among the Cf s.

Arnold (2010) prosed a similar salience-based
account for pronominalization. She referred to
salience of the entity as “accessibility” and sug-
gested that the more accessible entities tend to
be pronominalized (see evidence from oral corpus
analysis by Arnold et al. 2009). The accessibil-
ity of an entity is influenced by whether the entity
has been mentioned before, how recent the entity
occurs, and whether the entity is syntactically or
thematically prominent. McElree (2001), from a
memory decay point of view, also suggested that
recency, together with frequency, i.e, how many
times the entity occurs, contribute to the salience
of the entity in the discourse context.

88



Based on the notion of salience, Greene et al.
(1992) proposed a framework for pronouns resolu-
tion in which a pronoun is matched automatically
against all the entities in the discourse model. The
degree of match is determined by the accessibil-
ity of the entity, as well as the gender/number fea-
tures. The entity is automatically identified as the
antecedent of the pronoun if its degree of match
to the pronoun is better than the match for other
entities. If no match or more than one match is
identified, the selection process is postponed for
more discourse information, or strategic problem-
solving can be attempted.

3.2 Salience-Based Computational Models
for Pronoun Resolution

One early influential pronoun resolution model
based on the Centering Theory is proposed by
Brennan et al. (1987; henceforth BFP). The
BFP algorithm computes the preferred antecedents
from relations that hold between the forward and
backward looking centers in adjacent sentences.
The algorithm first generates all possible Cb – Cf
pairs for the pronoun in Utterance Un. It then fil-
ters all pairs by constraints such as the Binding
Theory (Chomsky, 1982) and Centering rules, For
example, if Cb must be pronominalized if any Cf
is pronominalized; Cb is the highest ranked ele-
ments in the list of Cf s, etc. Finally, the algorithm
ranks the remaining pairs by transition orderings,
where maintaining the same Cb (Continue) is pre-
ferred over maintaining the same Cb in Un+1 but
not in Un+2 (Retain), which is preferred to chang-
ing Cb in Un+1 (Shift). The selected Cb – Cf pair
is the most preferred relation according to the tran-
sition order.

Another influential salience-based model for
pronoun resolution is the RAP algorithm proposed
by Lappin and Leass (1994). Unlike the BFP algo-
rithm that compares a discrete number of centers,
the RAP algorithm assumes a graded activation
level for each entities. It also follows a generate-
filter-rank procedure and takes as input the out-
put of a full parser and filters entities according
to binding constraints and gender/number agree-
ment. It then assigns a salience weight to each en-
tity depending on its recency, syntactic position,
grammatical role, etc. The weights are halved for
each sentence boundary in between the entity and
the pronoun, and weights for all occurrence of the
same entity are summed. The entity that receives

the highest salience weight is the antecedent of the
pronoun.

Both the BFP and the RAP algorithms incor-
porate claims from the Centering Theory, as well
as binding constraints and gender/number agree-
ments. The RAP algorithm is similar to the ACT-
R model in that they both assume salience on a
graded scale and compute the activation level for
each entity. However, the ACT-R model for pro-
noun resolution is adapted from the cognitive ar-
chitecture of ACT-R (Anderson, 2007), which is
both a computational model and a theory of how
different components of the mind worked to pro-
duce coherent cognition. ACT-R consists a set
of modules, and the ACT-R model for pronoun
resolution is adapted from its declarative module
for retrieving information from memory. The ele-
ments in the ACT-R model for pronoun resolution
include only the recency, frequency and grammat-
ical role of the entity, with no syntactic and gen-
der/number information. The following sections
describes the formula of the ACT-R model in de-
tail.

3.3 The ACT-R Model for Pronoun
Resolution

Built within the cognitive architecture of ACT-
R (Anderson, 2007), van Rij et al. (2013) pro-
posed an ACT-R model of pronoun resolution
which integrates the major factors that influences
the salience of the antecedents – frequency, re-
cency, and the grammatical role of the antecedent.
The formula of for the activation level for the an-
tecedent i of a pronoun is

Ai = ln(
∑n

k=1 t
−0.5
k ) +

∑m
j Wj × 2

where the base-level activation ln(
∑n

k=1 t
−0.5
k )

represents frequency and recency of each mention
k of the antecedent i, and the associative activation∑m

j Wj × 2 represents the influence of grammat-
ical role of each mention k. If mention j is a sub-
ject, it has a weight (W ) of 1; which is divided by
the total number of mentions of this antecedent n
(Wj = W/n), as the total value of associative ac-
tivation cannot be infinite. Wj is then multiplied
by 2, the default value of associative strength in
ACT-R (see Anderson, 2007, p.110 for the ACT-R
equations).

The effects of frequency and recency is folded
into the calculation of the base activation for an-
tecedent i, such that the more mentions it has, and

89



the more recent the mentions occur, the higher the
base activation. Conversely, if antecedent i has
been mentioned only once, or if its last mention
was a long time ago, its activation level will be
low, and it will rank lower on the activation list for
all the candidates antecedents. The subjecthood of
the mentions of antecedent i gains a spreading ac-
tivation in addition to the base activation. Overall,
the amount of activation value of an antecedent is
computed in an attempt to “abstract the impact of
neural Hebbian-like learning and spread of activa-
tion among neurons” (Anderson, 2007, p.35).

To give a concrete example of how the acti-
vation level for each antecedent is calculated, in
the English sentences in Figure 1, the immediate
antecedent of the pronoun “they16” is “they15”.
The previous mentions of “they15” are “their13”,
“boa constrictors12” and “boa constrictors8”. The
time elapsed from these three previous mentions to
“they15” in the audio are 11.13 s, 3.68 s and 3.02
s respectively. Since “boa constrictor12” is a sub-
ject of a subordinate clause, it gets an associative
weighting W of 1. Therefore, the activation level
for the antecedent of “they15” is calculated as:

Athey15 = ln(11.13
−0.5 + 3.68−0.5 + 3.02−0.5) + 0/3× 2 + 1/3× 2 + 0/3× 2

≈ ln(0.3 + 0.52 + 0.58) + 0.67
≈ 1.01

Similarly, for the Chinese sentence in Figure 1, the
antecedent of the last pronoun “它们13 (tamen)”
is “它们11”, and the the previous mentions of “它
们13” are “蟒蛇7(mangshe)” and “蟒蛇10”. The
time elapsed from them to “它们13” in the audio
are 7.94s and 0.44 s, respectively. Therefore, its
activation level is calculated as:

A它们11 = ln(7.94
−0.5 + 0.44−0.5) + 1/2× 2 + 1/2× 2

≈ ln(1.51 + 0.35) + 2
≈ 2.62

4 Current Study

Given the typological difference of pronouns in
English and Chinese, it is hypothesized that Chi-
nese speakers rely more on salience of the an-
tecedent to resolve pronouns as they do not have
additional morpho-syntactic cues. The current
study first tests this hypothesis by comparing the
activation level of the antecedent for each pronoun
in a same audiobook The Little Prince in English
and Chinese translation. Our prediction is that an-
tecedents in Chinese have higher overall activation
levels than antecedents in English.

To explain how the theoretical predictions and
the model performance are specifically brought to
bear on brain activity, we further correlated the
negative of the activation levels of the antecedents
with fMRI time-courses when both English and
Chinese participants listened to the pronouns in
the audiobook in the scanner. We took the neg-
ative of the activation level to indicate difficulty
during pronoun resolution: that lower the activa-
tion level of the antecedent, the more difficulty to
successfully retrieve the antecedents, hence higher
hemodynamic response.

Based on the elements in the ACT-R formula,
we expected the difficulty of pronoun resolution
modeled by activation spread to tease apart the
brain areas whose activity is influenced by the fre-
quency, recency and the grammatical role of the
antecedent, and to highlight regions where the ef-
fort of pronoun resolution is stronger in English
and Chinese respectively.

Previous neuroimgaing results on pronoun reso-
lution have implicated the bilateral Inferior Frontal
Gyrus (IFG), the left Medial Frontal Gyrus (MFG)
and the bilateral Supramarginal/Angular Gyrus in
gender mismatch between pronoun and antecedent
(Hammer et al., 2007). We therefore expect as-
sociated activity in these regions for the ACT-
R model of pronoun resolution. We also ex-
pect to see activity in the bilateral Superior Tem-
poral Gyrus (STG) as they have been associ-
ated with long distance pronoun-antecedent link-
ing (Matchin et al., 2014). The Precuneus cortex
activity may also be activated as it has been sug-
gested to track different sorts of story characters
(Wehbe et al., 2014).

5 Model Performance on Text Data

Based on van Rij et al.’s (2013) formula, we calcu-
lated the activation level for each previously men-
tioned entities for each pronoun in the English and
Chinese audiobook of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s
The Little Prince. Within the English audiobook
text, 1755 pronouns (excluding possessives, re-
flexives and dummy pronoun “it”) and 3127 non-
pronominal entities (4882 mentions in total) are
identified. Pronouns with sentential antecedents
are removed. For example, in the conversation
“That is funny where you live a day only last a
minute.” “It is not funny at all.” “it” in the sec-
ond sentence is removed from our pronoun set as it
refers to the whole sentence “where you live a day

90



Figure 1: Sample annotations of pronouns and non-pronoun mentions in English and Chinese, visualized
using the annotation tool brat (Stenetorp et al., 2012).

only last a minute”. The resulting English data-set
contains 645 1st person pronouns, 302 2nd person
pronouns and 675 3rd person pronouns (see Table
1).

The Chinese audiobook text contains 1785 pro-
nouns (excluding possessives and reflexives) and
2947 non-pronominal mentions (4732 mentions in
total). We further pruned the pronoun set to ex-
clude possessives, reflexives, and pronouns with
sentential antecedents. Comparably to the English
pronoun set, the resulting Chinese pronoun set
contains 639 1st person pronouns, 298 2nd person
pronouns and 529 3rd person pronouns (see Table
1). All pronouns and non-pronominal mentions in
the English and Chinese texts were annotated us-
ing the annotation tool brat (Stenetorp et al., 2012;
see Figure 1).

To evaluate the performance of the ACT-R
model of pronoun resolution for the English and
Chinese text, we ranked all the candidate an-
tecedents for each pronoun according to their ac-
tivation levels, such that the most activated an-
tecedent has a rank of 1. We allow a certain level
of ambiguity for cases where more than one an-
tecedents can be linked to the pronoun, and de-
cide that if the rank of the correct antecedent is

English Chinese
1st i me 我(wo)

505 121 621
we us 我们(women)
16 3 18

2nd you 你(ni)
302 261

你们(nimen)
37

3rd she her 她(ta)
41 14 62
he him 他(ta)
268 64 303
it 它(ta)
136 73
they them 她们(tamen) 他们(tamen) 它们(tamen)
94 58 2 74 15

Table 1: Attestations of each pronoun type in the
English and Chinese texts. Note that Chinese 3rd
person pronouns are homophones.

less or equal to 3 (top 3 on the ranking list), then
the model is correct in predicting the antecedent
for the pronoun.

Table 2 shows the accuracy of the model for
each pronoun type in English and Chinese. As
predicted, the model has higher overall accuracy
for pronoun resolution in Chinese than in English.
A further division of 1st, 2nd and 3rd person pro-

91



nouns reveals a 78% accuracy for 1st person pro-
nouns in both English and Chinese, yet 2nd and
3rd person pronouns in Chinese has ∼ 8% higher
accuracy than 2nd and 3rd person pronouns in En-
glish.

Pronoun Type Accuracy (%)
1st person 0.78

English 2nd person 0.62
3rd person 0.54
all pronoun 0.66
1st person 0.78

Chinese 2nd person 0.71
3rd person 0.62
all pronoun 0.71

Table 2: Accuracy of ACT-R model on pronoun res-
olution in English and Chinese.

Direct comparison of the activation levels of the
antecedents in the two groups by a two-sample
t-test confirmed that the activation level for Chi-
nese antecedents (M=3.07, SD=1.52) is signifi-
cantly higher than that for English antecedents
(M=2.86, SD=1.64; t(3097) = 3.4, p < 0.001).
Taken together, the model performance suggests
that salience-based pronoun resolution predicts
antecedents better in Chinese than in English, con-
firming our hypothesis about the strong reliance
of Chinese on discourse salience compared to En-
glish speakers.

6 Correlating ACT-R Measures with
Brain Activity

6.1 Participants
English participants were 49 healthy, right-
handed, young adults (30 female, mean age =
21.3, range = 18-37). They self-identified as na-
tive English speakers, and had no history of psy-
chiatric, neurological or other medical illness that
could compromise cognitive functions. All partic-
ipants were paid for, and gave written informed
consent prior to participation, in accordance with
the guidelines of the Human Research Participant
Protection Program at Cornell University.

Chinese participants were 35 healthy, right-
handed, young adults (15 female, mean age=19.3,
range = 18-25). They self-identified as native
Chinese speakers, and had no history of psychi-
atric, neurological or other medical illness that
could compromise cognitive functions. All par-
ticipants were paid for, and gave written informed
consent prior to participation, in accordance with

the guidelines of the Ethics Committee at Jiangsu
Normal University.

6.2 Stimuli

The English audio stimulus was an audiobook
version of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s The Little
Prince, translated by David Wilkinson and read
by Nadine Eckert-Boulet. This text contains 3127
non-pronominal mentions and 645 1st person pro-
nouns, 302 2nd person pronouns and 675 3rd per-
son pronouns (see Table 1).

The Chinese audio stimulus was a Chinese web
version of The Little Prince 1, read by a profes-
sional female Chinese broadcaster. Within this
text, 2947 non-pronominal mentions and 639 1st
person pronouns, 298 2nd person pronouns and
529 3rd person pronouns are identified (see Table
1). The offset time of the pronouns and the non-
pronominal mentions in the English and Chinese
audiobook are marked as 1 and are entered as bi-
nary regressors into our GLM analysis.

6.3 Procedure

After giving their informed consent, partici-
pants were familiarized with the MRI facility
and assumed a supine position on the scanner.
The presentation script was written in PsychoPy
(Peirce, 2007). Auditory stimuli were delivered
through MRI-safe, high-fidelity headphones (En-
glish: Confon HP-VS01, MR Confon, Magde-
burg, Germany; Chinese: Ear Bud Headset, Res-
onance Technology, Inc, California, USA) inside
the head coil. The headphones were secured
against the plastic frame of the coil using foam
blocks. An experimenter increased the sound
volume stepwise until the participants could hear
clearly.

The English and Chinese audiobooks last for
about 94 and 99 minutes, respectively. They were
both divided into nine sections, each lasts for
about ten minutes. Participants then listened pas-
sively to the nine sections and completed four quiz
questions after each section (36 questions in total).
These questions were used to confirm their com-
prehension and were viewed by the participants
via a mirror attached to the head coil and they an-
swered through a button box. The entire session
lasted around 2.5 hours.

1http://www.xiaowangzi.org

92



6.4 MRI Data Collection and Preprocessing

Both English and Chinese brain imaging data were
acquired with a 3T MRI GE Discovery MR750
scanner with a 32-channel head coil. Anatomi-
cal scans were acquired using a T1-weighted vol-
umetric Magnetization Prepared RApid Gradient-
Echo (MP-RAGE) pulse sequence. Blood-
oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) functional scans
were acquired using a multi-echo planar imag-
ing (ME-EPI) sequence with online reconstruction
(TR=2000 ms; TE’s=12.8, 27.5, 43 ms; FA=77◦;
matrix size=72 x 72; FOV=240.0 mm x 240.0
mm; 2 x image acceleration; 33 axial slices, voxel
size=3.75 x 3.75 x 3.8 mm). Cushions and clamps
were used to minimize head movement during
scanning.

All fMRI data is preprocessed using AFNI ver-
sion 16 (Cox, 1996). The first 4 volumes in
each run were excluded from analyses to allow
for T1-equilibration effects. Multi-echo inde-
pendent components analysis (ME-ICA; Kundu
et al.,2012) were used to denoise data for motion,
physiology and scanner artifacts. Images were
then spatially normalized to the standard space of
the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) atlas,
yielding a volumetric time series resampled at 2
mm cubic voxels.

6.5 Statistical Analysis

At the single subject level, the observed BOLD
time course in each voxel were modeled by the dif-
ficulty of pronoun resolution derived by the ACT-
R model for each 1st, 2nd and 3rd person pronoun
time-locked at the offset of each pronoun in the
audiobook. We also include a binary regressor
for non-pronominal mentions time-locked at the
its offset.

To further examine the status of ACT-R activa-
tion as a cognitive model for pronoun resolution,
We did a second GLM analysis where we corre-
lated only the binary regressors time-locked at the
offset of each 1st, 2nd, 3rd person pronoun and
each non-pronominal mention in the audiobook.

These two analyses both included three control
variables of non-theoretical interest: RMS inten-
sity at every 10 ms of the audio; word rate at the
offset of each spoken word in time; frequency of
the individual words in Google Book unigrams 2.
These regressors were added to ensure that any
conclusions about pronoun resolution would be

2 http://books.google.com/ngrams

specific to those processes, as opposed to more
general aspects of speech perception.

At the group level, for each group, the activa-
tion maps for the ACT-R activation regressors and
the binary regressors for 3rd person pronouns were
computed using one sample t-test. The voxelwise
threshold was set at p ≤ 0.05 FWE, with an ex-
tent threshold of 50 contiguous voxels (k ≥ 50).
Contrasts of the activation maps between the two
groups were examined by a factorial design ma-
trix, and statistical threshold was also set at p ≤
0.05 FWE. The GLM analysis was performed
using SPM12 (Penny et al., 2011).

We only focused on the results of 3rd person
pronouns because they provide gender informa-
tion in English but not Chinese, which points to
potentially different brain activation maps. In ad-
dition, 3rd person pronouns have been suggested
to differ from 1st and 2nd person pronouns in that
1st and 2nd person pronouns mark proximity in
space and 3rd person pronouns are further away
(Ariel, 1990).

7 fMRI Results

For English speakers, the largest clusters for 3rd
person pronouns, which represents brain activity
associated with the presence 3rd person pronouns
were observed in the right Temporal Pole, and the
left Middle Temporal Gyrus (MTG). For Chinese
speakers, the presence of 3rd person pronouns is
associated with increased activity in the left Mid-
dle Temporal Gyrus (MTG; p < 0.001 FWE; see
Figure 2a and Figure 2b). Direct comparison of
the contrast maps between the English and Chi-
nese group suggests stronger activity in the right
Angular Gyrus, the right MTG and the right Pre-
cuneus for English speakers and stronger activ-
ity in the left Angular Fyrus for Chinese speakers
(p < 0.05 FWE).

Brain regions showing an increased activation
for pronouns with higher processing difficulty pre-
dicted by our ACT-R measure (i.e., the negative of
ACT-R activation level) include the left MTG and
the left IFG and the left Superior Frontal Gyrus
(SFG) for English speakers (p < 0.001 FWE;
see Figure 2c), whereas Chinese speakers has peak
clusters in the left Angular Gyrus, the left SFG and
the left MTG (p < 0.05 FWE; see Figure 2d)).

The difference between the ACT-R difficulty
measure for 3rd person pronoun resolution in Chi-
nese and English is confirmed by the direct com-

93



parison reported in Table 3c (p < 0.05 FWE).
Although the cluster size is relatively small at the
corrected threshold, Chinese ACT-R effect signif-
icantly differs form English in the Angular Gyrus,
and English ACT-R effect shows a more right lat-
eralized activation of the language network involv-
ing the Precuneus cortex. Table 3b lists of all the
significant clusters using region names from the
Harvard-Oxford Cortical Structure Atlas.

8 Discussion

ACT-R activation levels for 3rd person pronouns
in Chinese are significantly higher than that in En-
glish (see Section 5), demonstrating as predicted a
stronger reliance of Chinese on salience compared
to English. It also relates to the rich linguistic liter-
ature on Chinese as a discourse-oriented language
(Xu, 2006). When used as a regressor against
hemodynamic responses to naturalistic text, ACT-
R activation level reveals different left-lateralized
activation patterns in English and Chinese, sup-
porting different model performance on pronoun
resolution in the two languages (cf. Table 2)

Only English shows a significant increased ac-
tivation in the left Broca’s area pars Triangularis,
which has been recurrently reported as correlating
with syntactic processing cost linked to antecedent
pronoun (Santi and Grodzinsky, 2012), and par-
ticularly to the distance between the antecedent
and the pronoun (Matchin et al., 2014; Santi and
Grodzinsky, 2007).

Chinese, on the other hand, shows greater acti-
vation in the Angular Gyrus for the ACT-R diffi-
culty measure compared to English. Notably, pre-
vious literature on German gender agreement in
anaphoric reference reported increased activation
in the Angular Gyrus (BA 39) for incongruent bi-
ological gender matching (Hammer et al., 2007).
One interpretation of the result, therefore, is that
the ACT-R model predicts processing effort when
the antecedent is not salient or when there are
equally salient competitors. In these cases, only
English speakers could use morpho-syntactic cues
such as gender to identify the correct antecedent,
whereas Chinese speakers might have to work ex-
tra hard to accomplish gender matching using the
discourse information.

The difference between the brain areas high-
lighted by the Chinese and English ACT-R re-
sults, is confirmed by the simpler GLM analysis
that correlated brain activity with only the pres-

ence of pronouns in the text (cf. GLM Analy-
sis 2 in Section 6.5). Whole-brain pronouns ef-
fects were observed with a temporally distributed
response patterns (for backward anaphora see
Matchin et al.; for intra-sentential co-referential
link see Fabre), with the additional involvement
of the right Broca’s area for English.

In sum, this study highlighted brain areas in-
volved in the discourse and syntactic dimension
of pronoun-antecedent linking as modeled in the
ACT-R activation level of pronoun resolution.

9 Conclusion

ACT-R activation levels of antecedents suggest in-
teresting differences between the two languages,
English appears to have significantly lower ACT-
R activation levels, hence higher difficulty for
salience-based pronoun resolution. This difficulty,
as suggested in the fMRI results of the present
study, is associated with activity in the left Broca’s
area.

Although the ACT-R model accuracy was
higher for Chinese, the difficulty measure of pro-
noun resolution yields a greater activation in an
area where non-grammatical gender information
is processed. This suggests that the salience-based
pronoun resolution model is more effortful when
no gender information is encoded in the language.

The current study only compares pronoun res-
olution in speech, thus the conclusion may not
hold for reading comprehension where pronouns
with different gender have different forms in Chi-
nese as well. Future directions may include com-
paring brain activity during pronoun resolution in
both reading and listening comprehension. Over-
all, these results show that crossing computational
approach and naturalistic ecologically valid lin-
guistic stimuli to tease apart strongly interwo-
ven cognitive processes is a promising perspec-
tive in neuroimaging. As such, they pave the way
for increasing cross-fertilization between compu-
tational linguistics and the cognitive neuroscience
of language.

10 Acknowledgments

This material is supported by Jeffrey Sean Lehman
Fund for Scholarly Exchange with China, and is
based upon work supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under Grant No.1607441.

94



(a) T-score map for the binary 3rd person pronoun effect in
English

(b) T-score map for the binary 3rd person pronoun effect in
Chinese

(c) T-score map for the ACT-R difficulty measure for 3rd per-
son pronouns in English

(d) T-score map for the ACT-R difficulty measure for 3rd per-
son pronouns in Chinese

Figure 2: Whole-brain effect with significant clusters for (a) binary 3rd person pronouns effect in English,
(b) binary 3rd person pronouns effect in Chinese, (c) ACT-R difficulty measure for 3rd person pronoun
resolution in English and (d) ACT-R difficulty measure for 3rd person pronoun resolution in Chinese.
All images underwent FWE voxel correction for multiple comparisons with p < 0.05.

3rd person pronoun effect MNI coordinates Region p-value k-size t-score
x y z FWE-corr cluster peak

English 50 12 -26 right Temporal Pole 0.001 101 6.4
3rd pronoun -46 -60 -8 left Inferior/Middle Temporal Gyrus 0.001 194 6.34
Chinese -60 -10 0 left Superior//Middle Temporal Gyrus 0.003 57 6.36
3rd pronoun

(a) Significantly activated clusters by the binary 3rd person pronoun effect in English and Chinese (p < 0.05 FWE)

ACT-R difficulty measure MNI coordinates Region p-value k-size t-score
x y z FWE-corr cluster peak

English -52 -58 -10 left Middle Temporal Gyrus < 0.001 1074 7.96
ACT-R 3rd pronoun -48 34 14 left Inferior Frontal Gyrus < 0.001 494 7.20

-12 40 40 left Superior Frontal Gyrus 0.001 724 6.36
18 -68 -26 right Cerebellum 0.009 61 5.53

Chinese -54 -62 28 left Angular Gyrus 0.002 217 6.51
ACT-R 3rd pronoun -8 52 30 left Superior Frontal Gyrus 0.002 150 6.50

-58 -4 -18 left anterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 0.006 167 4.95
-50 -42 -4 left posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus 0.007 117 4.90

(b) Significantly activated clusters by the ACT-R difficulty measure for 3rd person pronouns in English and Chinese (p < 0.05
FWE)

Comparison of ACT-R difficulty measure MNI coordinates Region p-value k-size t-score
x y z FWE-corr cluster peak

English > Chinese 4 -40 44 right Precuneus Cortex 0.008 55 5.23
ACT-R 3rd 68 -46 10 right Middle Temproal Gyrus 0.01 27 5.19

64 -48 24 right Angular Gyrus 0.015 70 5.07
Chinese > English -52 -62 28 left Angular Gyrus 0.033 6 4.82
ACT-R 3rd pronoun

(c) Contrast between the ACT-R difficulty measure for 3rd person pronouns in English versus Chinese (p < 0.05 FWE)

Table 3: Significant clusters of BOLD activation for (a) 3rd person pronouns, (b) ACT-R difficulty mea-
sure on 3rd person pronoun in English and Chinese and (c) their contrast after FWE voxel correction for
multiple comparisons with p < 0.05. Peak activations are given in MNI Coordinates.

95



References
Hiyan Alshawi. 1987. Memory and context for lan-

guage interpretation. Cambridge University Press.

John R Anderson. 2007. How can the human mind oc-
cur in the physical universe? Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

M. Ariel. 1990. Accessing noun-phrase antecedents.
Routledge, London, UK.

Jennifer E. Arnold. 2010. How speakers refer: The role
of accessibility. Language and Linguistics Com-
pass, 4(4):187–203.

Susan E. Brennan, Marilyn W. Friedman, and Carl J.
Pollard. 1987. A centering approach to pronouns. In
Proceedings of the 25th annual meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 155–162.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Noam Chomsky. 1982. Some concepts and conse-
quences of the theory of government and binding.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

R. W. Cox. 1996. AFNI: software for analysis and
visualization of functional magnetic resonance neu-
roimages. Computers and Biomedical Research, an
International Journal, 29(3):162–173.

Murielle Fabre. 2017. The sentence as cognitive object
- The neural underpinnings of syntactic complex-
ity in Chinese and French. Ph.D. thesis, INALCO
Paris.

P. C. Gordon, B. J. Grosz, and L. A. Gilliom. 1993.
Pronouns, names, and the centering of attention in
discourse. Cognitive Science, 17:311–47.

S. B. Greene, G. McKoon, and R. Ratcliff. 1992. Pro-
noun resolution and discourse models. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 18:266–83.

Barbara J. Grosz, Scott Weinstein, and Aravind K.
Joshi. 1995. Centering: A framework for model-
ing the local coherence of discourse. Computational
linguistics, 21(2):203–225.

Anke Hammer, Rainer Goebel, Jens Schwarzbach,
Thomas F. Münte, and Bernadette M. Jansma. 2007.
When sex meets syntactic gender on a neural ba-
sis during pronoun processing. Brain Research,
1146:185–198.

C.-T. James Huang. 1989. Pro-drop in Chinese: A gen-
eralized control theory. In Osvaldo Jaeggli and Ken-
neth Safir, editors, The null subject parameter, pages
185–214. Springer.

Robert Kantor. 1977. The management and compre-
hension of discourse connection by pronouns in En-
glish. Ph.D. thesis, Ohio State University.

Prantik Kundu, Souheil J. Inati, Jennifer W. Evans,
Wen-Ming Luh, and Peter A. Bandettini. 2012. Dif-
ferentiating BOLD and non-BOLD signals in fMRI
time series using multi-echo EPI. NeuroImage,
60(3):1759–1770.

Shalom Lappin and Herbert J. Leass. 1994. An algo-
rithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. Compu-
tational linguistics, 20(4):535–561.

Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson. 1976. Subject
and topic: A new typology. In Charles N. Li, editor,
Subject and topic, pages 457–89. Academic Press,
New York.

William Matchin, Jon Sprouse, and Gregory Hickok.
2014. A structural distance effect for backward
anaphora in Broca’s area: An fMRI study. Brain
and Language, 138:1–11.

Brian McElree. 2001. Working memory and focal at-
tention. Journal of experimental psychology. Learn-
ing, memory, and cognition, 27(3):817–835.

Jonathan W. Peirce. 2007. PsychoPy—Psychophysics
software in Python. Journal of Neuroscience Meth-
ods, 162(1-2):8–13.

William Penny, Karl Friston, John Ashburner, Stefan
Kiebel, and Thomas Nichols. 2011. Statistical para-
metric mapping: The analysis of functional brain
images. Academic Press.

Jacolien van Rij, Hedderik van Rijn, and Petra Hen-
driks. 2013. How WM load influences linguistic
processing in adults: A computational model of pro-
noun interpretation in discourse. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 5(3):564–580.

Andrea Santi and Yosef Grodzinsky. 2007. Taxing
working memory with syntax: Bihemispheric modu-
lations. Human Brain Mapping, 28(11):1089–1097.

Andrea Santi and Yosef Grodzinsky. 2012. Broca’s
area and sentence comprehension: A relation-
ship parasitic on dependency, displacement or pre-
dictability? Neuropsychologia, 50(5):821–832.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. BRAT: a web-based tool for NLP-assisted
text annotation. In Proceedings of the Demonstra-
tions at the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 102–107. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Leila Wehbe, Ashish Vaswani, Kevin Knight, and
Tom M. Mitchell. 2014. Aligning context-based sta-
tistical models of language with brain activity during
reading. In EMNLP, pages 233–243.

Liejion Xu. 2006. Topicalization in asian languages.
In Marting Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk, edi-
tors, The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Syntax, 2nd
Edition, pages 137–174. Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell
Publishing, Hoboken, NJ.

96


