

















































Co-Attention Based Neural Network for Source-Dependent Essay Scoring

Haoran Zhang
Department of Computer Science

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

colinzhang@cs.pitt.edu

Diane Litman
Department of Computer Science & LRDC

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

litman@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

This paper presents an investigation of us-
ing a co-attention based neural network for
source-dependent essay scoring. We use a co-
attention mechanism to help the model learn
the importance of each part of the essay more
accurately. Also, this paper shows that the co-
attention based neural network model provides
reliable score prediction of source-dependent
responses. We evaluate our model on two
source-dependent response corpora. Results
show that our model outperforms the baseline
on both corpora. We also show that the atten-
tion of the model is similar to the expert opin-
ions with examples.

1 Introduction

Manually grading students’ essays is labor inten-
sive. Therefore, many automated essay scoring
(AES) methods have been developed to support
grading essays at scale. However, in different
grading tasks, the information required by an AES
system is different. For example, if a system needs
to assign a holistic score to the essay, the sys-
tem needs to take all information into account. In
contrast, if a system needs to assign a score for
one specific aspect of the essay (e.g. use of evi-
dence), the system needs to ignore some informa-
tion. Also, if an essay is a source-dependent es-
say, the system needs to exploit knowledge of the
source article.

This paper focuses on source-dependent essay
assessment. In this task, students read a source
article before writing the essay, and assessment
involves recognizing and analyzing references to
the article in the essay. We propose a new type
of co-attention based neural network model tai-
lored to source-dependent grading, then use two
source-dependent essay corpora to evaluate our
model. Our first corpus contains the four source-
dependent essay sets in the Automated Student

Assessment Prize (ASAP) corpus1. The ASAP
grading task is to assign a holistic score to each
essay. The second corpus uses the Response to
Text Assessment (RTA) (Correnti et al., 2013) to
assess students’ analytic writing skills. Instead of
evaluating holistic writing skills, the RTA was de-
signed to evaluate students’ writing skills along
five dimensions: Analysis, Evidence, Organiza-
tion, Style, and MUGS (Mechanics, Usage, Gram-
mar, and Spelling). Our grading task for this cor-
pus is to assign an Evidence score to each essay,
by evaluating students’ ability to find and use evi-
dence from a source article to support their claims.

The main contributions of this paper are as fol-
lows. First, we introduce a co-attention based neu-
ral network model that is fully automated and does
not need any expert effort to encode knowledge of
a source article. Second, our co-attention based
neural network model extends prior work by de-
signing the model to take a source article into ac-
count during grading. Third, we apply our model
to the subset of source-dependent responses tasks
in the ASAP corpus and show that the model out-
performs a previous neural network model devel-
oped for the full corpus. Fourth, we show that
our model also performs well on the RTA task and
again significantly outperforms our baseline neu-
ral net model. Last, we use examples to show that
our model can assign reasonable attention scores
to different sentences in the essay.

In the following sections, we first present re-
lated research. Then we describe our tasks by in-
troducing the ASAP corpus and the RTA corpus.
Next, we explain the structure of our co-attention
based neural network model. Finally, we discuss
the results of our experiments and future plans.

1https://www.kaggle.com/c/asap-aes



2 Related Work

Previous research in AES needed feature engineer-
ing. In very early work, Page (1968) developed an
AES tool named Project Essay Grade (PEG) by
only using linguistic surface features. A more re-
cent well-known AES system is E-Rater (Burstein
et al., 1998), which employs many more natural
language processing (NLP) technologies. Later,
Attali and Burstein (2004) released E-Rater V2,
where they created a new set of features to rep-
resent linguistic characteristic related to organiza-
tion and development, lexical complexity, prompt-
specific vocabulary usage, etc. Similarly to Page
(1968), this system used regression equations for
assessment of student essays. One limitation of all
of the above models is that all need handcrafted
features for training the model. In contrast, our
model uses a neural network for the AES task and
thus does not require feature engineering.

Recently, neural network models have been in-
troduced into AES, making the development of
handcrafted features unnecessary or at least op-
tional. Alikaniotis et al. (2016) and Taghipour
and Ng (2016) presented AES models that used
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks. Dif-
ferently, Dong and Zhang (2016) used a Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) model for es-
say scoring by applying two CNN layers on both
the word level and then sentence level. Later,
Dong et al. (2017) presented another work that
uses attention pooling to replace the mean over
time pooling after the convolutional layer in both
word level and sentence levels. However, none of
these neural network grading models consider the
source article if it exists. In this paper, we intro-
duce a neural network model that takes the source
article into account by using a co-attention mech-
anism instead of the self-attention mechanism of
prior work.

Our work not only focuses on essay assess-
ment using a holistic score, but also evaluates a
particular dimension of argument-oriented writing
skills, namely use of Evidence. Louis and Higgins
(2010) analyze only the content of essays by de-
tecting off-topic essays. Ong et al. (2014) used ar-
gumentation mining techniques to evaluate if stu-
dents use enough evidence to support their posi-
tions. However, these two prior studies are not
suitable for our task because they did not measure
the use of content or evidence from a source ar-
ticle. With respect to source-based dimensional

essay analysis, Rahimi et al. (2014, 2017) devel-
oped a set of rubric-based features that compared
a student’s essay and a source article in terms of
number of related words or paraphrases. Zhang
and Litman (2017) improved their model by intro-
ducing word embedding into the feature extraction
process to extract relationships previously missed
due to lexical errors or use of different vocabulary.
However, in both of these studies, human effort
was still necessary for pre-processing the source
article, for example, by having experts manually
create a list of important words and phrases in the
article which the system would compare with fea-
tures extracted from the student’s essay. In con-
trast, our work does not need any human effort
to analyze the source article before essay grading.
Although Rahimi and Litman (2016) investigated
extracting example lists by using LDA (Blei et al.,
2003) model, the data-driven model missed an ex-
ample when there was no essay mentioning the ex-
ample. Klebanov et al. (2014) predicted which
parts of the source material were important and
that students needed to use in their essays. The
essay score is required to obtain the content impor-
tance for their work, but our work does not need to
know the essay score while identifying the content
importance.

3 Data

We use two different essay corpora in our exper-
iments: source-based essays from the ASAP cor-
pus, and source-based RTA essays. While the full
ASAP corpus contains essays in response to 8 dif-
ferent prompts, we use only essays in response to
the 4 source-dependent prompts. The gold stan-
dard ASAP assessment is a holistic score. In con-
trast, the gold standard assessment in the RTA cor-
pus is an Evidence score. In particular, the assess-
ment only considers how students use evidence
from a source article to support their claims; the
assessement thus ignores the lexical and syntactic
mistakes made by students and the organization of
the essay when assessing the evidence dimension.

3.1 ASAP

The Automated Student Assessment Prize (ASAP)
corpus consists of written responses to 8 prompts.
Among them, prompts 3, 4, 5, and 6 are source-
dependent which means students read an article
before writing their essays. Since the scores as-
signed to essays are holistic, assessment considers



Source Excerpt: My mother and fa-
ther had come to this country with such
courage, without any knowledge of the
language or the culture. They came self-
lessly, as many immigrants do, to give
their children a better life, even though
it meant leaving behind their families,
friends, and careers in the country they
loved.

Essay Prompt: Describe the mood cre-
ated by the author in the memoir. Sup-
port your answer with relevant and spe-
cific information from the memoir.

Figure 1: A source excerpt for ASAP Prompt 5.

the overall quality of the essay, not just a specific
dimension. Figure 1 contains an excerpt from an
ASAP source article and the associated Prompt 5.

Prompt 3 4 5 6
Score 0 39 311 24 44

(2%) (18%) (1%) (3%)
Score 1 607 636 302 167

(35%) (36%) (17%) (9%)
Score 2 657 570 649 405

(38%) (32%) (36%) (23%)
Score 3 423 253 572 817

(25%) (14%) (32%) (45%)
Score 4 NA NA 258 367

(14%) (20%)
Total 1726 1770 1805 1800

Table 1: The holistic score distribution of ASAP.

In this paper, we only focus on prompts 3, 4, 5,
and 6 (denoted by ASAP3, ASAP4, ASAP5, and
ASAP6 respectively), because they are source-
dependent responses. In ASAP, different prompts
have different score ranges. The score range of
ASAP3 and ASAP4 is 0 to 3, while the range of
ASAP5 and ASAP6 is 0 to 4. Figure 2 shows an
excerpt of an essay with score of 4 for ASAP5.
The score distribution is shown in Table 1.

3.2 RTA

The RTA corpora were collected from upper ele-
mentary level students, as described by Correnti
et al. (2013). There are two forms of RTA based
on different articles that students read before writ-
ing essays. The first article is from Time for Kids

Essay Excerpt: The author of the mem-
oir, Narciso Rodriguez creates a caring,
happy, and thoughtful mood. By men-
tioning the Cuban traditions shared in
the neighborhood between close friends,
and cooking in the kitchen to share a
great meal with one another the mood
is happy. When Narciso talks about the
great friends he made from different her-
itages and knowing the entire commu-
nity like family the mood is thoughtful
and caring because it shows that the peo-
ple really appreciated each other’s com-
pany...

Figure 2: Excerpt of an essay with score of 4 for ASAP
Prompt 5.

about the Millennium Villages Project, an effort by
the United Nations to end poverty in a rural village
in Sauri, Kenya; we refer to it as RTAMV P . The
other article talks about the importance of space
exploration; we refer to refer it asRTASpace. Fig-
ure 3 shows an excerpt from the RTAMV P article
and the associated essay writing prompt. Bolded
text spans in the article excerpt are pieces of evi-
dence that our experts (School of Education RTA
team members) manually labeled as being impor-
tant for students to include in their essays.

Source Excerpt: Today, Yala Sub-
District Hospital has medicine, free of
charge, for all of the most common
diseases. Water is connected to the
hospital, which also has a generator
for electricity. Bed nets are used in ev-
ery sleeping site in Sauri...

Essay Prompt: The author provided
one specific example of how the quality
of life can be improved by the Millen-
nium Villages Project in Sauri, Kenya.
Based on the article, did the author pro-
vide a convincing argument that win-
ning the fight against poverty is achiev-
able in our lifetime? Explain why or
why not with 3-4 examples from the text
to support your answer.

Figure 3: A source excerpt for the RTAMV P prompt.

Evidence usage in each RTA essay was scored



on a scale of 1 to 4 (low to high). The distribution
of Evidence scores is shown in Table 2. Figure 4
shows a student essay with a score of 3. Our ex-
perts manually bolded all pieces of evidence found
in this essay.

Essay: In my opinion I think that they
will achieve it in lifetime. During the
years threw 2004 and 2008 they made
progress. People didnt have the money
to buy the stuff in 2004. The hospi-
tal was packed with patients and they
didnt have alot of treatment in 2004.
In 2008 it changed the hospital had
medicine, free of charge, and for all
the common dieases. Water was con-
nected to the hospital and has a gen-
erator for electricity. Everybody has
net in their site. The hunger crisis
has been addressed with fertilizer and
seeds, as well as the tools needed to
maintain the food. The school has no
fees and they serve lunch. To me thats
sounds like it is going achieve it in the
lifetime.

Figure 4: A RTAMV P essay with score of 3.

Prompt RTAMV P RTASpace
Score 1 852 538

(29%) (26%)
Score 2 1197 789

(40%) (38%)
Score 3 616 512

(21%) (25%)
Score 4 305 237

(10%) (11%)
Total 2970 2076

Table 2: The Evidence score distribution of RTA.

4 Model

Our network is inspired by the hierarchical neural
network model presented by Dong et al. (2017).
In their model, they considered each essay as a
sequence of sentences rather than a sequence of
words. Their model has three parts. First, they
used a convolutional layer and attention pooling
layer to get sentence representation. Second, they
used an LSTM layer and another attention pooling

layer for document representation. Finally, they
used a sigmoid layer for score prediction.

Differently from their model, our model re-
places the attention pooling layer for document
representation with a bi-directional attention flow
layer and an additional modeling layer (Seo et al.,
2017). By doing so, our model considers students’
essays associated with a source article and this at-
tention mechanism captures the relationship be-
tween the essay and the source article. In partic-
ular, a higher attention score will be assigned to
sentences that are mentioned in the article but less
mentioned in other essays. Our model is a hierar-
chical neural network and consists of seven layers.
Figure 5 shows the structure of our network. The
layers in the dashed box were presented by Dong
et al. (2017). The sentence level co-attention layer
was presented by Seo et al. (2017).

4.1 Word Embedding Layer
This layer maps each word in sentences to a high
dimension vector. We use the GloVe pre-trained
word embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014) to ob-
tain the word embedding vector for each word.
It was trained on 6 billion words from Wikipedia
2014 and Gigaword 5. It has 400,000 uncased vo-
cabulary items. The dimensionality of GloVe in
our model is 50 dimensions. The outputs of this
layer are two matrices, LE ∈ RSe×We×dL for the
essay and LA ∈ RSa×Wa×dL for the article, where
Se, Sa, We, Wa, and dL are number of sentences
of the essay and the article, length of sentences of
the essay and the article, and the embedding size,
respectively. Same to Dong et al. (2017), a dropout
is applied after the word embedding layer.

4.2 Word Level Convolutional Layer
In this layer, we perform 1D convolution over the
word representations of both LE and LA, so that
we can get local representation of each sentence.
For each wordwi in each sentence, we perform 1D
convolution:

pi = g([wi : wi+k−1] · Up + bp) (1)

where g is a nonlinear activation, k is the kernel
size, Up is the filter weight matrix, and bp is the
bias vector. The outputs of this layer are Ce ∈
RSe×Pe×dC for the essay and Ca ∈ RSa×Pa×dC
for the article, where Pe and Pa are filtered lengths
of sentences of the essay and the article, respec-
tively. dC is the number of filters of the 1D convo-
lution layer.



Figure 5: The Co-Attention Based Neural Network Structure.

4.3 Word Level Attention Pooling Layer
After the convolutional layer, a pooling layer is de-
manded to obtain the sentence representations. In
this layer, we follow the same design presented by
Dong et al. (2017). The attention pooling is de-
fined as equations below:

mi = tanh(Um · pi + bm) (2)

vi =
euv ·mi∑
euv ·mj

(3)

s =
∑

vipi (4)

where Um, uv and bm are weight matrix, vector,
and bias vector, respectively. mi and vi are atten-
tion vector and attention weight for pi. The out-
puts of this layer are Ae ∈ RSe×dC for the essay
and Aa ∈ RSa×dC for the article.

4.4 Sentence Level LSTM Layer
In this layer, we use a Long Short-Term Memory
Network (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997) over the sentence representations of the es-
say and the article to capture contextual evidence
from previous sentences to refine the sentence rep-
resentation.

The LSTM unit is a special kind of RNN unit
which has long-term dependency learning abil-
ity. LSTMs use three gates to control information
flow to avoid the long-term dependency problem
by forgetting or remembering information in each
LSTM unit. They are an input gate, a forget gate,

and an output gate. The following equations define
the LSTM unit:

ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, st] + bf ) (5)

it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, st] + bi) (6)

c̃t = tanh(Wc · [ht−1, st] + bc) (7)

ct = ft ∗ ct−1 + it ∗ c̃t (8)

ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1, st] + bo) (9)

ht = ot ∗ tanh(ct) (10)

where st and ht are the input sentence and the out-
put state of time t, respectively. Wf , Wi, Wc,
and Wo are weight matrices. bf , bi, bc, and bo
are bias vectors. σ is the sigmoid function, and
∗ is element-wise multiplication. The output of
this layer are He ∈ RSe×dH for the essay and
Ha ∈ RSa×dH for the article, where dH is the di-
mensionality of the output.

4.5 Sentence Level Co-Attention Layer
The concept of this layer is presented by Seo et al.
(2017) in the part of attention flow layer. This
layer links information from He and Ha, and gen-
erates a collection of article aware features vec-
tor of essay sentences. The attention is computed
in two directions, from essay to article, and vice
versa. Both attention scores are figured from a
similarity matrix by the following equation:

Sim =W Tsim · [het;haj ;hat ∗haTj ] + bsim (11)



where Wsim is weight matrix, het and haj are tth
row vector ofHe and jth row vector ofHa, bsim is
bias vector. ∗ is element-wise multiplication. [; ]
is vector concatenation. After obtaining the simi-
larity matrix Sim ∈ RSe×Sa , we compute the at-
tention in two directions.

Essay to Article Attention measures which
sentences in the article are similar to each sentence
in students’ essays. The following equations de-
fine the essay to article attention:

aea = softmax(Sim) (12)

H̃a = aeaHa (13)

where aea ∈ RSe×Sa represents the attention
score of each sentence in the article associate with
each sentence in the essay, softmax is performed
across each row. The output of this H̃a ∈ RSe×dH .

Article to Essay Attention measures which
sentences in the essay have the closest meaning to
one of the sentences in the article. The following
equations define the article to essay attention:

aae = softmax(maxcol(Sim)) (14)

h̃e = a
T
aeHe (15)

where aae ∈ RSe , maxcol is a maximum function
performed across the column, and h̃e ∈ RdH . Be-
cause maxcol will find out which sentence in the
article has the closest meaning to each sentence
in the essay, so h̃e represents the attention score
of the most important sentence in the essay asso-
ciated with the article. After tiling Se times, the
final output of this layer is H̃e ∈ RSe×dH .

The final output G is a concatenated matrix of
He, H̃e, and H̃a defined by:

G = [He; H̃a;He ∗ H̃a;He ∗ H̃e] (16)

where ∗ is element-wise multiplication, and [; ] is
concatenation, He is the original representation of
essay, H̃a is the essay to article attention, He ∗ H̃a
is the self-aware representation, and He ∗ H̃e is
article-aware representation. Therefore, the output
of this layer is G ∈ RSe×4dH , the article-aware
representation of each sentence in the essay.

4.6 Modeling Layer
G is the representation of each sentence, and we
need the representation of the essay. Therefore, we
introduce another LSTM layer for modeling the
essay and only use the output of the final LSTM
unit as the output of this layer M ∈ RdM , where
dM is the dimensionality of the output of LSTM
units.

4.7 Output Layer
After obtaining the essay representation M , a lin-
ear layer with sigmoid activation will predict the
final output. The following equation defines the
output layer:

y = sigmoid(WoM + bo) (17)

where Wo is weight vector, and bo is bias vector. y
is the final predicted score of the essay.

5 Training

Loss. Dong et al. (2017) used mean squared er-
ror (MSE) loss, thus we use the same loss func-
tion. MSE evaluates the average of squared error
between the predicted score and the gold standard.
Thus it is widely used in regression tasks. The fol-
lowing equation defines MSE:

mse(y, y′) =
1

N

N∑
i=1

(yi − y′i)2 (18)

where yi is the predicted score, y′i is the gold stan-
dard, N it the total number of samples.

Optimization. The optimizer we use is RMS-
prop (Dauphin et al., 2015). The initial learning
rate is 0.001, momentum is 0.9, and Dropout rate
is 0.5 for preventing overfitting. These setting are
the same as used by Dong et al. (2017).

6 Experimental Setup

We configure experiments to test three hypotheses:

H1: the model we proposed (denoted by CO-
ATTN) will outperform or at least per-
form equally well as the baseline (denoted
by SELF-ATTN) presented by Dong et al.
(2017) on four ASAP essay corpora in the
holistic score prediction task.

H2: the model we proposed will outperform or at
least perform equally well as the baseline on
two RTA corpora in the Evidence score pre-
diction task.

H3: the model we proposed will outperform or at
least perform equally well as the non-neural
network baselines on both corpora.

We use NLTK (Bird et al., 2009) for text prepro-
cessing. The vocabulary size of the data is limited
to 4000, and all scores are scaled to the range [0,
1], following Taghipour and Ng (2016) and Dong



et al. (2017). In particular, the 4000 most fre-
quent words are preserved, with all other words
treated as unknowns. The assessment scores will
be converted back to their original range during
evaluation. We use Quadratic Weighted Kappa
(QWK) to evaluate our model. QWK is not
only the official criteria of ASAP corpus, but
also adopted as evaluation metric in Rahimi et al.
(2014); Taghipour and Ng (2016); Dong et al.
(2017); Rahimi et al. (2017); Zhang and Litman
(2017) for both ASAP and RTA corpora.

We use 5-fold cross-validation because both
RTA and ASAP corpora have no released labeled
test data. We split all corpora into 5 folds. For the
ASAP corpus, the partition is the same as the set-
ting presented by Taghipour and Ng (2016). For
the RTA corpus, since there is no prior work to
split the corpus, we separate it into 5 folds ran-
domly. In each fold, 60% of the data are used for
training, 20% of the data are the development set,
and 20% of the data are used for testing.

To select the best model, we trained each model
on 100 epochs and evaluated on the development
set after each epoch. The best model is the model
with the best QWK on the development set. This
is done five times, once for each partition in the
cross-validation. Then the average QWK score
from these five evaluations on the test set is re-
ported. Paired t-tests are used for significance
tests with p < 0.05. Table 3 shows all hyper-
parameters for training.

The code of SELF-ATTN are provided by Dong
et al. (2017), they used Keras (Chollet et al., 2015)
1.1.1 and Theano (Theano Development Team,
2016) 0.8.2 as the backend. Because we are using
Keras 2.1.3 and TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015)
1.4.0 as the backend, we ran all experiments with
our frameworks. Therefore, the numbers of SELF-
ATTN have small differences to the numbers re-
ported by the baseline model.

For non-neural network baselines, we introduce
the SVR and BLRR baselines presented by Phandi
et al. (2015) for the ASAP corpus, and SG base-
line presented by Zhang and Litman (2017) for the
RTA corpus.

SVR and BLRR models use Enhanced AI Scor-
ing Engine (EASE)2 to extract four types of fea-
tures, such as length, part of speech, prompt, and
the bag of words. Then they use SVR and BLRR
as the classifiers, respectively. We do not perform

2https://github.com/edx/ease

any significance test on both SVR and BLRR be-
cause we do not have detailed experiment data.
Therefore, we only report the result presented in
Phandi et al. (2015).

SG model extracts evidence features based on
hand-crafted topic and example lists, and uses ran-
dom forest tree as the classifier. We follow the
same data partition. However, we only use the
training set for training and the testing set for test-
ing while ignoring the development set so that we
can perform the same paired t-tests in the experi-
ments.

Layer Parameter Name Value
Embedding Embedding dimension 50
Word-CNN Kernel size 5

Number of filters 100
Sent-LSTM Hidden units 100
Modeling Hidden units 100
Dropout Dropout rate 0.5
Others Epochs 100

Batch size 100
Initial learning rate 0.001

Momentum 0.9

Table 3: Hyper-parameters of training.

7 Results

We first examine H1. The results shown in Table 4
support this hypothesis. The CO-ATTN model
yields higher performance than the SELF-ATTN
model on all ASAP prompts. However, the CO-
ATTN model only significantly outperforms the
SELF-ATTN model on Prompt 3.

Second, we examine H2. Again, the results
shown in Table 4 support this hypothesis. The CO-
ATTN model yields higher performance than the
SELF-ATTN model, significantly on both of the
RTA corpora.

Last, we examine H3. The results shown in
Table 4 still support this hypothesis. The CO-
ATTN model yields higher performance than all
non-neural network baselines.

The results show that in our tasks, the neu-
ral network approaches are better than non-neural
network baselines. One possible reason is the final
representation of the essay from neural network
contains more information. However, some of the
information might be ignored by hand-crafted fea-
tures. For example, the importance of different
evidence in RTA task is not considered in the SG



Prompts SVR BLRR SG SELF-ATTN CO-ATTN
RTAMV P NA NA 0.653 0.681† 0.697∗†
RTASpace NA NA 0.632 0.669† 0.684∗†
ASAP3 0.630 0.621 NA 0.677 0.697∗
ASAP4 0.749 0.784 NA 0.807 0.809
ASAP5 0.782 0.784 NA 0.806 0.815
ASAP6 0.771 0.775 NA 0.809 0.812

Table 4: The performance (QWK) of the baselines and our model. ∗ indicates that the model QWK is significantly
better than the SELF-ATTN (p < 0.05). † indicates that the model QWK is significantly better than the SG
(p < 0.05). The best results in each row are in bold.

model. It treats all evidence equally. However,
the neural network models capture this informa-
tion automatically.

Apparently, the CO-ATTN model performs bet-
ter in the RTA tasks, because it always signifi-
cantly outperforms the SELF-ATTN model. One
possible reason is that the RTA task only considers
the Evidence score. The CO-ATTN model is more
suitable for the Evidence score prediction task be-
cause it can find pieces of evidence that appear in
both students’ essays and the source article better.
In contrast, the SELF-ATTN model only consid-
ers students’ essays associated with the scores. In
this case, if a piece of evidence is not mentioned
by students, this data-driven model cannot distin-
guish it. Consequently, some important pieces of
evidence will be assigned to a lower weight. How-
ever, the CO-ATTN model considers not only the
students’ essays but also the source article. In
other words, if an important piece of evidence is
not mentioned by too many students, but it is in
the source article, the CO-ATTN model will as-
sign this sentence higher attention.

In the ASAP holistic score prediction task, al-
though we still see a benefit in using the CO-
ATTN model, it is reduced. In this case, the
benefit we saw in the Evidence dimension from
the CO-ATTN model becomes less significant be-
cause the model also needs to consider more as-
pects of the essay, such as organization, grammar
mistakes, and so on. Our results suggest that the
co-attention mechanism of the CO-ATTN model
cannot capture these aspects significantly better
than the SELF-ATTN model. Therefore, the CO-
ATTN model only significantly outperforms the
SELF-ATTN model on Prompt 3.

8 Discussion

In Table 5, we list 10 sentences from student
RTAMV P essays and their associated attention
scores. Because we have a list of examples man-
ually extracted by our experts as important evi-
dence from the RTAMV P source article, exam-
ining RTA data helps us understand the attention
score assigned by our model. Bolded are exam-
ples extracted by the expert from the source article
that the student includes in the essay. A lower at-
tention score means this sentence is less important.
Otherwise, the score is high. As we can see, sen-
tences 1, 2, 3, and 4 are low attention sentences,
sentences 5, 6, and 7 are mid attention sentences,
and sentences 8, 9, and 10 are high attention sen-
tences. The attention scores reflect the importance
of these sentences accurately.

Sentence 1 is a short and general sentence re-
lated to the source article, but it has no specific
evidence from it. Sentence 2 even has no content
related to the source article. Sentence 3 has many
details related to the source article. However, it
still has no evidence directly from the source ar-
ticle. Sentence 4 mentions “The author did con-
vince me that winning the fight against poverty is
achievable in our lifetime” which comes from both
the prompt and the source article, but this state-
ment is so general that almost every student men-
tions this statement in the essay which makes this
statement not distinguishable. For these reasons,
these four sentences receive low attention scores.

Although sentence 5 is short, it mentions one
piece of evidence. Sentence 6 talks about farm-
ing which is a topic from the source article. In
the article, the things listed in this sentence are
things the farmer needs to worry about. However,
this sentence indicates “the farmer don’t have to
worry” because of the MVP project. Sentence 7
also mentions conditions of hospitals nowadays.



However, it mentions not only water but also elec-
tricity which is more than Sentence 5. For these
reasons, these three sentences receive mid atten-
tion scores from low to high.

The last three sentences receive high attention
scores because they all use more pieces of evi-
dence directly from the source article. Sentence 8
talks about the school, and Sentence 9 talks about
the hospital. Sentence 10 talks about farming.
However, sentence 10 receives the highest atten-
tion score, because it mentions evidence from both
before and after the MVP project.

No. Sentences Attention
1 Life in Kenya is hard. 0.00173
2 In this essay I will give my top 3 rea-

sons why.
0.00174

3 Because like I said, we have more
advanced & better & more qualified
materials than them, and these days
kids & adults are spoiled, we have
phones stores, houses & even shoes
and clothes.

0.00243

4 The author did convince me that
winning the fight against poverty
is achievable in our lifetime be-
cause she showed me how many
people in Sauri, Kenya need our help
against poverty.

0.00229

5 Water is connected to the hospi-
tals.

0.02936

6 So the farmer don’t have to worry
all the time that him or his family
won’t have enough food to eat and
the farmer have to worry that their
kids will get hungry and then sick.

0.05580

7 The hospital aslo has water and
electricity.

0.07746

8 Also, there were no school fees, and
the school now serves lunch for the
students because they didn’t have
any midday meals to provide them
with energy they need to help them
with the rest of their days.

0.19483

9 In 2008 though, when they checked
for progress, the hospital had
medicine, free of charge, with run-
ning water and electricty.

0.20177

10 Also farmers could not afford fer-
tilizer and irrigation but now they
placed irrigation and have them
fertilizer for the crops.

0.25855

Table 5: Example attention scores of essay sentences.

From these sentences, we can also see that the
attention score depends on neither the length of
the sentence nor only the specificity of the sen-
tence. It instead depends on how many impor-
tant pieces of evidence there are in the sentence.
For example, Sentence 3 is long and talks about
some details of our modern life. Although it also

talks about quality materials or better housing and
clothing compared to people living in Kenya, it re-
ceives a low attention score because there is no
specific evidence directly from the source article.
In contrast, Sentence 9 is shorter than Sentence 3.
However, it receives a higher attention score be-
cause it mentions many pieces of evidence from
the source article.

Overall, the CO-ATTN model seems to capture
the importance of sentences by assigning reason-
able attention scores based on the relevance of the
sentence to the source article.

9 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we presented a co-attention based
neural network model that outperforms a state of
the art attention based neural network model for
essay scoring, not only for RTA Evidence assess-
ment but also for holistic assessment of ASAP
source-dependent responses. Advantages of our
model are that it does not need any expert pre-
processing of the source article; the input of this
model is only the raw student essay and its source
article. Moreover, our model somewhat captures
the importance of different pieces of evidence, al-
though it is not specifically designed for this pur-
pose. However, quantitative experiments that can
answer whether the attention scores are correlated
to the importance of different pieces of evidence
need to be done. Also, this leads to an interesting
future investigation, development of a neural net-
work approach that both has an acceptable score
prediction, and can simultaneously generate evi-
dence lists from the source article. Another inter-
esting future investigation could be examining the
ability of this model to generalize to a new prompt.

Acknowledgments

We would like to show our appreciation to Tazin
Afrin and Luca Lugini for their comments on an
earlier version of the paper. We are also im-
mensely grateful to every member of the RTA
group for sharing their pearls of wisdom with us.

The research reported here was supported, in
whole or in part, by the Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through
Grant R305A160245 to the University of Pitts-
burgh. The opinions expressed are those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the Insti-
tute or the U.S. Department of Education.



References
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene

Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Cor-
rado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp,
Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal
Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh
Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schus-
ter, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever,
Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke,
Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals,
Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke,
Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. 2015. TensorFlow:
Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous sys-
tems. Software available from tensorflow.org.

Dimitrios Alikaniotis, Helen Yannakoudakis, and
Marek Rei. 2016. Automatic text scoring using neu-
ral networks. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages
715–725.

Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2004. Automated essay
scoring with e-rater R© v. 2.0. ETS Research Report
Series, 2004(2).

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009.
Natural language processing with Python: analyz-
ing text with the natural language toolkit. ” O’Reilly
Media, Inc.”.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

Jill Burstein, Karen Kukich, Susanne Wolff, Chi
Lu, Martin Chodorow, Lisa Braden-Harder, and
Mary Dee Harris. 1998. Automated scoring using a
hybrid feature identification technique. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th international conference on Compu-
tational linguistics-Volume 1, pages 206–210. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

François Chollet et al. 2015. Keras. https://
keras.io.

Richard Correnti, Lindsay Clare Matsumura, Laura
Hamilton, and Elaine Wang. 2013. Assessing stu-
dents’ skills at writing analytically in response to
texts. The Elementary School Journal, 114(2):142–
177.

Yann Dauphin, Harm de Vries, and Yoshua Bengio.
2015. Equilibrated adaptive learning rates for non-
convex optimization. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, pages 1504–1512.

Fei Dong and Yue Zhang. 2016. Automatic features
for essay scoring–an empirical study. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1072–1077.

Fei Dong, Yue Zhang, and Jie Yang. 2017. Attention-
based recurrent convolutional neural network for au-
tomatic essay scoring. In Proceedings of the 21st
Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL 2017), pages 153–162.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Nitin Madnani, Jill Burstein,
and Swapna Somasundaran. 2014. Content impor-
tance models for scoring writing from sources. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), volume 2, pages 247–252.

Annie Louis and Derrick Higgins. 2010. Off-topic es-
say detection using short prompt texts. In Proceed-
ings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Fifth Workshop on In-
novative Use of NLP for Building Educational Ap-
plications, pages 92–95. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Nathan Ong, Diane Litman, and Alexandra
Brusilovsky. 2014. Ontology-based argument
mining and automatic essay scoring. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation
Mining, pages 24–28.

Ellis B Page. 1968. The use of the computer in ana-
lyzing student essays. International review of edu-
cation, 14(2):210–225.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–
1543.

Peter Phandi, Kian Ming A Chai, and Hwee Tou Ng.
2015. Flexible domain adaptation for automated es-
say scoring using correlated linear regression. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
431–439.

Zahra Rahimi and Diane Litman. 2016. Automati-
cally extracting topical components for a response-
to-text writing assessment. In Proceedings of the
11th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Build-
ing Educational Applications, pages 277–282.

Zahra Rahimi, Diane Litman, Richard Correnti, Elaine
Wang, and Lindsay Clare Matsumura. 2017. As-
sessing students use of evidence and organization
in response-to-text writing: Using natural language
processing for rubric-based automated scoring. In-
ternational Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Edu-
cation, pages 1–35.

Zahra Rahimi, Diane J Litman, Richard Correnti, Lind-
say Clare Matsumura, Elaine Wang, and Zahid Kisa.
2014. Automatic scoring of an analytical response-
to-text assessment. In International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, pages 601–610.
Springer.

https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://www.tensorflow.org/
https://keras.io
https://keras.io
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1162
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1162


Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2017. Bidirectional attention
flow for machine comprehension. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR).

Kaveh Taghipour and Hwee Tou Ng. 2016. A neural
approach to automated essay scoring. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1882–1891.

Theano Development Team. 2016. Theano: A Python
framework for fast computation of mathematical ex-
pressions. arXiv e-prints, abs/1605.02688.

Haoran Zhang and Diane Litman. 2017. Word embed-
ding for response-to-text assessment of evidence. In
Proceedings of ACL 2017, Student Research Work-
shop, pages 75–81.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02688
http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02688
http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02688

