




































Multimodal Neural Machine Translation for Low-resource Language Pairs using Synthetic Data


Proceedings of the Workshop on Deep Learning Approaches for Low-Resource NLP, pages 33–42
Melbourne, Australia July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

33

Multimodal Neural Machine Translation for Low-resource
Language Pairs using Synthetic Data

Koel Dutta Chowdhury
ADAPT Centre

School of Computing
Dublin City University

Dublin, Ireland
koel.chowdhury@adaptcentre.ie

Mohammed Hasanuzzaman
ADAPT Centre

School of Computing
Dublin City University

Dublin, Ireland
mohammed.hasanuzzaman@adaptcentre.ie

Qun Liu
ADAPT Centre

School of Computing
Dublin City University

Dublin, Ireland
qun.liu@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract

In this paper, we investigate the effec-
tiveness of training a multimodal neu-
ral machine translation (MNMT) sys-
tem with image features for a low-
resource language pair, Hindi and En-
glish, using synthetic data. A three-
way parallel corpus which contains
bilingual texts and corresponding im-
ages is required to train a MNMT sys-
tem with image features. However,
such a corpus is not available for low re-
source language pairs. To address this,
we developed both a synthetic train-
ing dataset and a manually curated de-
velopment/test dataset for Hindi based
on an existing English-image parallel
corpus. We used these datasets to
build our image description transla-
tion system by adopting state-of-the-
art MNMT models. Our results show
that it is possible to train a MNMT
system for low-resource language pairs
through the use of synthetic data and
that such a system can benefit from im-
age features.

1 Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a surge in ap-
plication of multimodal neural models as
a sequence to sequence learning problem
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Kalchbrenner and
Blunsom, 2013; Cho et al., 2014b) for solving
different tasks such as machine translations
(Huang et al., 2016), image and video descrip-
tion generation (Karpathy and Fei-Fei, 2015;

Kiros et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2015; Venu-
gopalan et al., 2014), visual question answer-
ing (Antol et al., 2015), etc. However, neural
machine translation (NMT), which is an inher-
ently data-dependent procedure, continues to
be a challenging problem in the context of low-
resourced and out-of-domain settings (Koehn
and Knowles, 2017). In other words, there is
a concern that the model will perform poorly
with languages having limited resources, espe-
cially in comparison with well-resourced major
languages.

Although English(En) and Hindi(Hi) lan-
guages belong to the same family (Indo-
European), they differ significantly in terms of
word order, syntax and morphological struc-
ture (Bharati et al., 1995). While English
maintains a Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) tem-
plate, Hindi follows a Subject-Object-Verb
(SOV) convention. Moreover, compared to
English, Hindi has a more complex inflec-
tion system, where nouns, verbs and adjec-
tives are inflected according to number, gen-
der and case. These issues, combined with the
data scarcity problem, makes Hi→En machine
translation a challenging task.

Bilingual corpora, which are an important
component for machine translation systems,
suffer from the problem of data scarcity when
one of the languages is resource-poor. To
achieve better quality translation, a potential
solution is to extend along the language di-
mension to construct bilingual corpora. In
particular, for a distant language pair such as
Hindi and English, building a bilingual corpus
can prove to be a useful endeavor in multiple
aspects.



34

We are inspired by the recent successes of
using visual inputs for translation tasks (see
Section 2 for relevant studies). For translat-
ing image descriptions, given both the source
image and it’s description, it can be seen that
both modalities can bring more useful infor-
mation for generating the target language de-
scription. With the goal of preventing a low-
resource language such as Hindi from being
left behind in the advancement of multimodal
machine translation, we take the first steps to-
wards applying MNMT methods for Hi→En
translation.

Our contributions in this study are as fol-
lows:

• To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to tackle the problem of multimodal
translation from Hindi into English.

• We examine if visual features help to im-
prove machine translation (MT) perfor-
mance in low resource scenarios.

• We investigate whether the multimodal
machine translation system for less-
resourced language can benefit from syn-
thetic data.

• We augment the Flickr30k dataset with
synthetic Hindi descriptions, obtained
from a MT system.

• We manually develop a validation and
test corpus of the English counterpart in
the Flickr30k dataset. We plan to re-
lease this dataset publicly for research
purposes.

This paper is divided as follows: Section 2
provides the necessary background and estab-
lishes the relevance of the presented work,
both in terms of low-resourced MT and MT in
multimodal contexts. Section 3 describes the
overall methodology. In Section 4 we outline
the backgrounds of datasets used for training,
validation and testing. Section 5 provides de-
tailed descriptions of the multimodal models
used in our experiments. Section 6 details the
experimental set-ups. Results and analysis are
presented in Section 7. Finally, in Section 8,
we provide conclusions and indicate possible
directions for future work.

2 Related Work

There has been some previous work on us-
ing visual context in tasks involving both neu-
ral machine translation (NMT) and image de-
scription generation (IDG) that explicitly uses
an encoder-decoder framework as an instan-
tiation of the sequence to sequence (seq2seq)
learning problem (Cho et al., 2014a). Vinyals
et al. (2015) proposed an IDG model that uses
a vector, encoding the image as input based on
the sequence-to-sequence framework. Specia
et al. (2016) introduced a shared task to inves-
tigate the role of images in Multi-modal MT.
Similarly, Huang et al. (2016) introduced a
model to associate textual and visual features
extracted with the VGG19 network for trans-
lation tasks (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014).
Elliott et al. (2015) generated multilingual im-
age descriptions using image features trans-
ferred from separate non-attentive neural im-
age description models. Calixto et al. (2017a)
carried out experiments to incorporate spatial
visual information into NMT using a separate
visual attention mechanism. Although these
approaches have demonstrated the plausibil-
ity of multilingual natural language processing
with multiple modalities, they rely exclusively
on the availability of a large three-way paral-
lel corpus (bilingual captions corresponding to
the image) as training data.

Having enough parallel corpora is a big chal-
lenge in NMT and it is very unlikely to have
millions of parallel sentences for every lan-
guage pair. Therefore, quite a few attempts
have been made to build NMT systems for
low-resource language pairs (Sennrich et al.,
2016; Zhang and Zong, 2016) which focused
on building NMT systems in a low-resource
scenario. They incorporated huge monolin-
gual corpus in the source or target side. Gul-
cehre et al. (2017) proposed two alternative
methods to integrate monolingual data on tar-
get side, namely shallow fusion and deep fu-
sion. In shallow fusion, the top K hypothe-
ses (produced by NMT) at each time step t
are re-scored using the weighted sum of the
scores given by the NMT(trained on parallel
data) and a recurrent neural network based
language model (RNNLM). Whereas in deep
fusion, hidden states obtained at each time
step t of RNNLM and NMT are concatenated



35

and output is generated from that concate-
nated state.

Sennrich et al. (2016) incorporated mono-
lingual data on the target side to investi-
gate two methods of filling the source side of
the monolingual data. In the first method,
they used a dummy source sentence for every
target sentence, while in the second method
synthetic source sentences were obtained via
back-translation. Their results found that the
second method is more effective. In a sim-
ilar vein, Zhang and Zong (2016) explored
the effect of incorporating large-scale source-
side monolingual in NMT in many ways. In
the first approach, inspired by Sennrich et al.
(2016), they built a baseline system and then
obtained parallel synthetic data by translat-
ing the monolingual data. This parallel data,
along with the original data, is used again for
training an attention-based encoder-decoder
NMT system. Their second method involved
the multi-task learning framework to gener-
ate the target translation and the reordered
source-side sentences at the same time. They
discovered that the use of source-side mono-
lingual data in NMT is more effective than in
SMT.

A few other popular approaches in this area
involve using a method called transfer learn-
ing which focuses on sharing parameters, such
as source side word-embeddings across related
language pairs. Zoph et al. (2016) focus on
training a model on high resource language
pair and then using learned parameters to
train the low resource language pair. How-
ever, it requires selecting closely related high
and low resource language pairs. So this ap-
proach might not work if the language pairs
are distant.

Most of the previous related work on this
problem of low-resource NMT has tried to in-
corporate monolingual data in source or target
side. The effect of adding monolingual data in
NMT is similar to that of building language
model (LM) on large-scale monolingual data
in SMT. While in SMT it can make the out-
put more fluent, adding monolingual data does
not contribute much in improving adequacy
for NMT.

3 Methodology Overview
We formulate the task of augmenting the
Flickr30k dataset with Hindi descriptions as
a multimodal NMT task. The task is defined
as follows.

To produce a target side description of an
image i in Flickr30k dataset, a MT system
may use unimodal information such as text
in the form of description for image i in the
source language En, as well as multimodal in-
formation such as text plus visual features em-
bedded in the image i itself. Our overall ap-
proach consists of the following steps.

• Due to the unavailability of in-domain
Hindi-English parallel corpus for our cap-
tion translation task, we use a general
domain Hindi-English parallel corpus (re-
ferred as Hic − Enc hereafter) which
is compiled from a variety of existing
sources. Details of the dataset are de-
scribed in Section 4.

• Building a phrase based statistical ma-
chine translation(PBSMT) system using
Hic − Enc parallel corpus. To create
a synthetic in-domain Hindi-English par-
allel corpus for the image descriptions
translation task, we translate the English
descriptions of Flickr30k dataset (referred
to as En (Manl.Trans.)) into Hindi, using
a PBSMT system. We take motivation
for using the PBSMT system over NMT
from the work carried out by Kunchukut-
tan et al. (2017). For Hi →En transla-
tion, their system achieves better results
with PBSMT over NMT when trained on
the same corpus.

• We divide the En (Manl.Trans.) into
training, validation and test set and
call these as Ent (Manl.Train.Trans.),
End (Manl.Dev.Trans.) and Enr
(Manl.Test.Trans.), respectively. We
translate the Ent (Manl.Train.Trans) into
Hindi using the PBSMT system and call
these as Hit (Syn.Train.Trans).We manu-
ally translate End (Manl.Dev.Trans) and
Enr (Manl.Test.Trans) into Hindi. We re-
fer to these manually translated English
descriptions as Hid (Manl.Dev.Trans)
and Hir (Manl.Test.Trans).



36

• We use synthetic training data to build
a text-only baseline NMT system. In
particular we use Ent (Manl.Train.Trans)
and its automatically translated Hindi
counter part Hit (Syn.Train.Trans) to
train the system. In addition to this,
we use Hid (Manl.Dev.Trans.) and End
(Manl.Dev.Trans.) to tune the system.

• Visual input may provide right-angled
information that is free of the natural
language ambiguities and can serve as
extraneous information to textual fea-
tures for machine translation in mul-
timodal scenarios. This motivates us
to extract deep visual semantic fea-
tures from the entire image. We use
a pre-trained-convolutional neural net-
work(CNN) model to extract visual global
features for all the images in Flickr30k
dataset.

• We build MNMT system using
the Ent (Manl.Train.Trans.)-Hit
(Syn.Train.Trans.) parallel corpus
and the extracted visual features. We
use Hid (Manl.Dev.Trans.) and End
(Manl.Dev.Trans.) to tune the system.

• Finally, we translate Hir
(Manl.Test.Trans.) into English and
measure the performance with reference
to Enr (Manl.Test.Trans.)

4 Data
Hic −Enc: In order to generate the synthetic
data by means of back-translation, we use the
general domain IITB English-Hindi Corpus to
train a PBSMT system. The corpus is a com-
pilation of parallel corpora collected from a
various existing sources such as OPUS (Tiede-
mann, 2012), HindEn (Bojar et al., 2014b)
and TED (Abdelali et al., 2014) as well as
corpora developed at the Center for Indian
Language Technology, IIT-B 1 over the years
(Kunchukuttan et al., 2017).

Hit(Syn.Trans) : We divide the En-
glish descriptions of Flickr30k dataset con-
sisting of 158,915 sentences into training,
development and test sets. The train-
ing dataset (Ent(Manl.Trans)) contains

1www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in

Hindi-English

(out-of-domain)

Parallel Corpus

  English Image

   Descriptions

    (in-domain)

Images

PBSMT System

 Synthetic Hindi Image

        Descriptions

       Multimodal NMT System

Image features

CNN

Figure 1: Architecture of the Hi-En MNMT
System.

156,915 sentences, the development dataset
(End(Manl.Trans)) contains 1,000 sentences
and the test set (Enr(Manl.Trans)) contains
1000 sentences. We use the PBSMT sys-
tem trained on Hic − Enc to translate the
Ent(Manl.Trans) set into Hindi by means
of back-translation. Such a strategy repre-
sents the case where there is no parallel re-
sources available but domain-specific mono-
lingual data can be translated via an ex-
isting MT system and further provided as
a training corpus to a new MT system.
Hid(Manl.Trans) and Hir(Manl.Trans) :
for manually curating the dataset, we
were assisted by two bilingual speakers of
Hindi and English. One of them trans-
lated the datasets End(Manl.Trans) and
Enr(ManlTrans) into Hindi while the other
speaker verified the same.

The examples of manually translated de-
scriptions are shown in Table 4.

Data #Sentences #TokensEn Hi
Train 1,492,827 20,667,259 22,171,543
Dev 3207 68459 74027

Table 1: Statistics of data sets used to train
PBSMT system

 www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in


37

Data–set #sentences
Monolingual 45,075,279

Table 2: Additional monolingual (Hi) text
used for training the language model to cre-
ate synthetic Hindi data

Data–set #sentences
Monolingual 20,638,520

Table 3: Additional monolingual (En) text
used for training the general domain PBSMT
system

5 Multimodal NMT Architecture

In our experiments, we use models which can
essentially be thought of as extensions of the
attentive NMT framework of Bahdanau et al.
(2015). However, following Calixto et al.
(2017b) we have included an additional visual
component for incorporating the visual fea-
tures from images. For the encoder, we use a
bi-directional recurrent neural network (RNN)
with gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Cho et al.,
2014a), while the concatenation of forward and
backward hidden states, hi = [

−→
hi ,
←−
hi ] serves as

the final annotation vector for a given source
position i. In subsections 5.2 and 5.3 we de-
scribe the two multi-modal NMT models used
in our experiments. For a detailed description
of these models, we refer the reader to Calixto
et al. (2017b).

5.1 Image feature extraction

For all the images, the global image fea-
ture vectors, which are the 4096D activa-
tions of the penultimate fully connected layer
FC7, (henceforth referred to as q), are ex-
tracted using a publicly available pre-trained
model VGG19-CNN (Simonyan and Zisser-
man, 2014) which is trained for classifying im-
ages into one out of 1000 Imagenet classes
(Russakovsky et al., 2015). In our experiment,
we pass all images in our dataset through the
pre-trained 19-layers VGG network (VGG19-
CNN) to extract global image features and in-
corporate them - (i) to initialise the encoder
hidden state and (ii) as additional input to
initialise the decoder hidden state.

English Source
Sentence

Hindi Translation
(Manual)

A man in an orange
hat starring at

something .

एक नारंगी टोपी म एक
आदमी घरू रहा है |

People are fixing the
roof of a house .

लोग एक घर क छत
ठ क कर रहे ह |

Group of Asian boys
wait for meat to

cook over barbecue .

ए शयाई लड़क का
समहू बारबे ू पर
खाना बनाने के लए
मांस का इंतजार करता

है |
The person in the

striped shirt is
mountain climbing .

धार दार शट म य
पहाड़ चढ़ाई कर रहा |

Table 4: Examples of manual curated captions
of the Flickr30k English descriptions in Hindi
using PBSMT system. First column repre-
sents the original English captions. Second
column represents the manually curated En-
glish captions in Hindi.

5.2 IMGE: Image for encoder
initialization

Instead of initializing the hidden state of the
encoder with the zero vector −→0 , as in the orig-
inal attention-based NMT model of Bahdanau
et al. (2015) we use two new single-layer feed-
forward neural networks to compute the initial
states of the forward and backward RNN, re-
spectively.

We use Equation (1) to compute a vector
d from the global image feature vector q ∈
R4096:

d = W2I .(W1I .q + b1I) + b2I . (1)

Here W and b denote the projection matrix
and bias vector, respectively, such that W1I ∈
R4096×4096 and b1I ∈ R4096 while W2I and b2I
project the image features into the same di-
mensionality as the hidden states of the source
language encoder.

The encoder hidden state is initialized by
the feed-forward networks computed as fol-
lows:

←−
h init = tanh(Wfd + bf ),
−→
h init = tanh(Wbd + bb), (2)



38

where b and W are respectively the bias vec-
tor and the multi-modal projection matrix for
projecting the image features d into the en-
coder hidden state’s dimensionality. The suf-
fix ‘f ’ (‘b’) corresponds to forward (backward)
states.

5.3 IMGD: Image for decoder
initialization

A new single-layer feed-forward neural net-
work is used for incorporating an image into
the decoder. Originally, the initial hidden
state of the decoder is computed from the
encoder’s hidden states, often from concate-
nation of the last hidden states of the en-
coder forward RNN and backward RNN, re-
spectively −→h N and

←−
h 1, or from the mean

of the source-language annotation vectors hi.
However, here we compute the initial hidden
state s0 of the decoder by including the image
features as additional inputs as follows:

s0 = tanh(Wdi[
←−h 1;
−→h N ]) + Wmd + bdi, (3)

where Wdi and bdi are learned model param-
eters while the image feature d is projected
into the decoder hidden state dimensionality
by the multi-modal projection matrix Wm.

As before, given the global image vector
q ∈ R4096, the vector d is calculated from
Equation (1). However, in the present case,
the image features are projected into the same
dimensionality as the decoder hidden states by
the parameters W2I and b2I .

6 Experiment Set–Up

In this section, we briefly describe the experi-
mental settings used to generate the synthetic
Hindi data and further expand it into a multi-
modal NMT framework.

The Hindi side of the Hic − Enc is nor-
malized using the Indic_NLP_Library2 to en-
sure the canonical Unicode representation. We
used the scripts from the above library to tok-
enize and normalize the Hindi sentences. For
English, we used the scripts from the Moses
tokenizer tokenizer.perl3 to tokenize and low-

2https://bitbucket.org/anoopk/indic_nlp_
library

3https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/
blob/RELEASE-3.0/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.
perl

ercase the English representations for our ex-
periments. We use settings similar to that of
(Kunchukuttan et al., 2017) to develop Hit.
They used the news stories from the WMT
2014 English-Hindi shared task (Bojar et al.,
2014a) as the development(dev) and test cor-
pora which we concatenate together to create
our dev set. The training and dev corpora
consist of 1,492,827 and 3,207 sentence seg-
ments respectively. We used the HindMono
corpus (Bojar et al., 2014b) which contains
roughly 45 million sentences to build our lan-
guage model in Hindi. The corpus statistics
are shown in Table.1 and Table.2. For train-
ing the Hic − Enc corpus, we use the Moses
SMT system (Koehn et al., 2007) . We use the
SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) for building a
language model and GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2000) with the grow-diag-final-and heuristic
for extracting phrases from Hic − Enc .The
trained system is tuned using Minimum Error
Rate Training (Och, 2003). For other param-
eters of Moses, default values are used. If the
sentences in English or Hindi are longer than
80 tokens, they are discarded. To measure the
performance of the system, we also translate
the Enr testset into Hir both manually and
automatically.

We also perform Hindi→English (Hi→En)
translation using a PBSMT system with the
general domain Hic−Enc corpus. We use the
News Crawl articles 2016 from the WMT17 4
as additional English monolingual corpora to
train the 4-gram language model. This contain
roughly 20 million sentence for English. (Table
3).

To build our Multi-modal NMT systems we
use OpenNMT-py (the pytorch port of Open-
NMT (Klein et al., 2017)) following the set-
tings of Calixto et al. (2017b) which imple-
ments the encoder as a bi-directional RNN
with GRU, one 1024D single-layer forward
RNN and one 1024D single-layer backward
RNN. Throughout the experiments, the mod-
els are parameterised using 620D source and
target word embeddings, and both are trained
jointly with the model. All non-recurrent
matrices are initialised by sampling from a
Gaussian distribution (µ = 0, σ = 0.01), re-

4http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/
translation-task.html

https://bitbucket.org/anoopk/indic_nlp_library
https://bitbucket.org/anoopk/indic_nlp_library
https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/RELEASE-3.0/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.perl
https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/RELEASE-3.0/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.perl
https://github.com/moses-smt/mosesdecoder/blob/RELEASE-3.0/scripts/tokenizer/tokenizer.perl
http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task.html
http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task.html


39

current matrices are random orthogonal and
bias vectors are all initialised to 0. Dropout
with a probability of 0.3 in source and tar-
get word embeddings, in the image features
(in all MNMT models), in the encoder and de-
coder RNNs inputs and recurrent connections,
and before the readout operation in the de-
coder RNN was applied. Following (Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016), dropout to the encoder
bidirectional RNN and decoder RNN using the
same mask in all time steps are also applied.
The models are trained for 25 epochs using
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with learning
rate 0.002 and mini-batches of size 40, where
each training instance consists of one English
sentence, one Hindi sentence and one image.

Finally, we evaluate translation quality
quantitatively in terms of BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002) and METEOR (Denkowski and
Lavie, 2014) and report statistical significance
for the metrics using approximate randomisa-
tion computed with MultEval (Clark et al.,
2011).

7 Results and Analysis
7.1 Quantitative Analysis
We develop the following five systems -

• PBSMTout: a phrase based machine
translation system trained on the general-
domain Hic −Enc corpus.

• PBSMTIn: a phrase based machine trans-
lation system trained on the in-domain
Hiit −Enit corpus.

• NMTtext: a text-only NMT system trained
on the in-domain Hiit −Enit corpus.

• IMGD: the multimodal machine system
that uses images as an additional input at
the decoding stage.

• IMGE : the multimodal machine system
that uses images to initialise the encoder
hidden state.

The comparative evaluation results of our sys-
tems are presented in Table 5.

Evaluation is performed against the English
translations of the test set using standard
MT evaluation metrics, with BLEU and ME-
TEOR (multeval implementation, but with
METEOR 1.5).

Hi→ En BLEU METEOR
PBSMTout 21.6 29.6
PBSMTin 22.7 30.2
NMTtext 23.3 29.7
IMGD 24.2(↑ 0.9) 30.7(↑ 1)
IMGE 23.9 29.9

Table 5: Evaluation metrics scores Hi-En
translation systems before and after applying
the image features on manually curated dev
data. Bold numbers indicate that improve-
ments are statistically significant compared to
NMTtext with p = 0.05

Figure 2: Example from the Flickr30k dataset

We see from the results that the text-only
NMT model outperforms phrase based SMT
model in terms of BLEU score. Our results
indicate that incorporating image features in
multimodal models helps, as compared to our
text-only SMT and NMT baselines. This is re-
flected in the fact that both the image models
are shown to produce better results in terms
of BLEU scores with respect to both the SMT
and NMT text-only counterpart.

Although IMGE yields only little improve-
ment over the text-only NMT counterpart,
IMGD performs consistently better in terms
of both metrics (BLEU by ↑ 0.9) and ( ME-
TEOR by ↑ 1) than the strong text-only NMT
and SMT baseline.

7.2 Qualitative Analysis
In order to gain a qualitative insight into spe-
cific differences between the text-only and im-
age NMT models, we highlight some instances
as follows:

English reference: two people wearing
odd alien-like costumes , one blue and one



40

purple , are standing in a road .
Manual Source: तदो लोग अजीब वदेशी
जसैी वशेभषूा पहनन,े एक नीले और एक बगनी,
एक सड़क म खड़े ह।
NMT: two people dressed in exotic cos-
tumes wear a blue and one flag in a blue
, are standing in a road .
MNMT: two people wearing funny for-
eign attire, one blue and one purple , are
standing in a street .

In the first entry, although the NMT sys-
tem without images incorrectly translated the
color ‘purple’ (as can be seen from Figure. 2,
where the costumes are clearly in two colors)
the multi-modal model translated it correctly,
yielding an improvement in the sentence-level
BLEU (↑ 21.47) score. In terms of trans-
lations, we see that both the models extrap-
olate the reference and translate “alien-like
costumes” into “exotic costumes” (text-only
model) and as a “funny foreign attire” (mul-
timodal model). We attribute this to the fact
that the training set is small and contains dif-
ferent forms of biases and unwarranted infer-
ences (van Miltenburg, 2016).

English reference: two young children
are on sand.
Manual Source: दो छोटे ब े रेत पर ह।
NMT: two little kids are on the sand.
MNMT: two small children are on sand.

For this particular example, the overall mean-
ing of the source description has been cor-
rectly preserved into the target side descrip-
tion for the outputs generated by both mod-
els. However, if we closely look into each of
the example, we note the difference in entity
and its associated attribute. For example, the
word-choice for the entity children in reference
source changes to the term kids for text-only
NMT but remains intact for MNMT model.
Similar trend is observed for the attribute of
the entity where the young in the reference
source is replaced with little and small for
the text and image models respectively. Al-
though every target side entity-attribute pair
is semantically close to the source side entity-
attribute pair-they may vary in terms of their

usage in conventional English language. Com-
pared to the terminology obtained without
the help of the image ( little-kids- 1417), the
one obtained with the help of image ( small
children-1595) tends to be more widely used
in standard spoken English according to the
’Corpus of Contemporary American English’
5.

The above examples clearly asserts the pos-
itive impact of multimodal models in transla-
tion both in quantitative and qualitative sense.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented the results of using synthetic
Hindi descriptions of Flickr30k dataset gen-
erated via back-translation for multimodal
machine translation and provided benchmark
baseline results on this corpus.

Our study shows that despite being trained
on the same in-domain En–Hi training data,
there are inconsistencies in translation qual-
ity between the SMT and NMT system, at
least in terms of evaluation metrics. These re-
sults are not necessarily surprising given that
the grammatical syntax between the two lan-
guages is poorly represented in the synthetic
Hindi training data. In addition to this, Hindi
as a language presents many of the well-known
issues that NMT currently struggles with (re-
source sparsity, rich morphology and complex
inflection structure). An approach worth con-
sidering to address the divergence in word or-
der of the En-Hi language pair is the pre-
reordering approach such as the one taken by
Ramanathan et al. (2008) to build stronger
baseline systems. We will also investigate if
incorporating local, spatial-preserving image
features can provide more cues to an NMT
model as an extension of this work.

In future, we will conduct a more structured
study to extend this approach to different lan-
guage pairs and data scenarios. In addition,
we plan to include human evaluation rigor-
ously in our studies to confirm that the MT
systems are extended to enhance the transla-
tion quality and not simply be tuned to auto-
matic evaluation metrics.

5https://corpus.byu.edu/coca/

 https://corpus.byu.edu/coca/


41

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by Science Founda-
tion Ireland in the ADAPT Centre for Digital
Content Technology. The ADAPT Centre for
Digital Content Technology is founded under
the SFI Research Centres Programme (Grant
13/RC/2106) and is co-funded under the Eu-
ropean Regional Development Fund. The au-
thors would like to thank Longyue Wang and
Meghan Dowling for providing many good
suggestions of improvements, as well as our
anonymous reviewers for their valuable com-
ments and feedback.

References
Abdelali, A., Guzman, F., Sajjad, H., and Vogel,

S. (2014). The amara corpus: Building parallel
language resources for the educational domain.
In LREC, volume 14, pages 1044–1054.

Antol, S., Agrawal, A., Lu, J., Mitchell, M., Batra,
D., Lawrence Zitnick, C., and Parikh, D. (2015).
Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 2425–2433.

Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2015).
Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning
to Align and Translate. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,
San Diego, California.

Bharati, A., Chaitanya, V., Sangal, R., and
Ramakrishnamacharyulu, K. (1995). Natural
language processing: a Paninian perspective.
Prentice-Hall of India New Delhi.

Bojar, O., Buck, C., Federmann, C., Haddow, B.,
Koehn, P., Leveling, J., Monz, C., Pecina, P.,
Post, M., Saint-Amand, H., et al. (2014a). Find-
ings of the 2014 workshop on statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the ninth work-
shop on statistical machine translation, pages
12–58.

Bojar, O., Diatka, V., Rychlỳ, P., Stranák, P.,
Suchomel, V., Tamchyna, A., and Zeman, D.
(2014b). Hindencorp-hindi-english and hindi-
only corpus for machine translation. In LREC,
pages 3550–3555.

Calixto, I., Liu, Q., and Campbell, N. (2017a).
Doubly-Attentive Decoder for Multi-modal Neu-
ral Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
55th Conference of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers,
Vancouver, Canada (Paper Accepted).

Calixto, I., Liu, Q., and Campbell, N. (2017b). In-
corporating global visual features into attention-
based neural machine translation. CoRR,
abs/1701.06521.

Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bah-
danau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., and Ben-
gio, Y. (2014a). Learning Phrase Representa-
tions using RNN Encoder–Decoder for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1724–
1734, Doha, Qatar.

Cho, K., Van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bah-
danau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., and
Bengio, Y. (2014b). Learning phrase repre-
sentations using rnn encoder-decoder for sta-
tistical machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.1078.

Clark, J. H., Dyer, C., Lavie, A., and Smith, N. A.
(2011). Better hypothesis testing for statisti-
cal machine translation: Controlling for opti-
mizer instability. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies: short papers-Volume 2, pages 176–181. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Denkowski, M. and Lavie, A. (2014). Meteor Uni-
versal: Language Specific Translation Evalua-
tion for Any Target Language. In Proceedings of
the EACL 2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, Gothenburg, Sweden. The Associa-
tion for Computer Linguistics.

Donahue, J., Anne Hendricks, L., Guadarrama, S.,
Rohrbach, M., Venugopalan, S., Saenko, K., and
Darrell, T. (2015). Long-term recurrent convo-
lutional networks for visual recognition and de-
scription. In The IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

Elliott, D., Frank, S., and Hasler, E. (2015). Mul-
tilingual image description with neural sequence
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.04709.

Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. (2016). A Theoret-
ically Grounded Application of Dropout in Re-
current Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, NIPS, pages
1019–1027, Barcelona, Spain.

Gulcehre, C., Firat, O., Xu, K., Cho, K., and
Bengio, Y. (2017). On integrating a language
model into neural machine translation. Com-
puter Speech & Language, 45:137–148.

Huang, P.-Y., Liu, F., Shiang, S.-R., Oh, J., and
Dyer, C. (2016). Attention-based multimodal
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the First Conference on Machine Translation:
Volume 2, Shared Task Papers, volume 2, pages
639–645.



42

Kalchbrenner, N. and Blunsom, P. (2013). Re-
current continuous translation models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1700–1709.

Karpathy, A. and Fei-Fei, L. (2015). Deep visual-
semantic alignments for generating image de-
scriptions. In The IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representa-
tion(ICLR).

Kiros, R., Salakhutdinov, R., and Zemel, R. S.
(2014). Unifying visual-semantic embeddings
with multimodal neural language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1411.2539.

Klein, G., Kim, Y., Deng, Y., Senellart, J., and
Rush, A. M. (2017). Opennmt: Open-source
toolkit for neural machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.02810.

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch,
C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B.,
Shen, W., Moran, C., Zens, R., et al. (2007).
Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th an-
nual meeting of the ACL on interactive poster
and demonstration sessions, pages 177–180. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Koehn, P. and Knowles, R. (2017). Six challenges
for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03872.

Kunchukuttan, A., Mehta, P., and Bhattacharyya,
P. (2017). The iit bombay english-hindi parallel
corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.02855.

Och, F. J. (2003). Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics-Volume 1,
pages 160–167. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Och, F. J. and Ney, H. (2000). Giza++: Training
of statistical translation models.

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J.
(2002). BLEU: a Method for Automatic Evalu-
ation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for com-
putational linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadel-
phia, Pennsylvania.

Ramanathan, A., Hegde, J., Shah, R. M., Bhat-
tacharyya, P., and Sasikumar, M. (2008). Sim-
ple syntactic and morphological processing can
help english-hindi statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Third International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing: Volume-I.

Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J.,
Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy,
A., Khosla, A., Bernstein, M., et al. (2015).
Imagenet large scale visual recognition chal-
lenge. International Journal of Computer Vi-
sion, 115(3):211–252.

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. (2016).
Improving neural machine translation models
with monolingual data. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL 2016, August
7-12, 2016, Berlin, Germany.

Simonyan, K. and Zisserman, A. (2014). Very deep
convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.

Specia, L., Frank, S., Sima’an, K., and Elliott, D.
(2016). A shared task on multimodal machine
translation and crosslingual image description.
In Proceedings of the First Conference on Ma-
chine Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task Pa-
pers, volume 2, pages 543–553.

Stolcke, A. (2002). Srilm-an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Seventh international con-
ference on spoken language processing.

Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. (2014).
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, pages 3104–3112.

Tiedemann, J. (2012). Parallel data, tools and in-
terfaces in opus. In LREC, volume 2012, pages
2214–2218.

van Miltenburg, E. (2016). Stereotyping and
bias in the flickr30k dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.06083.

Venugopalan, S., Xu, H., Donahue, J., Rohrbach,
M., Mooney, R., and Saenko, K. (2014). Trans-
lating videos to natural language using deep
recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.4729.

Vinyals, O., Toshev, A., Bengio, S., and Erhan,
D. (2015). Show and tell: A neural image cap-
tion generator. In Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), 2015 IEEE Confer-
ence on, pages 3156–3164. IEEE.

Zhang, J. and Zong, C. (2016). Exploiting source-
side monolingual data in neural machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1535–1545.

Zoph, B., Yuret, D., May, J., and Knight, K.
(2016). Transfer learning for low-resource neural
machine translation. pages 1568–1575.


