



















































Hate Speech Dataset from a White Supremacy Forum


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Abusive Language Online (ALW2), pages 11–20
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

11

Hate Speech Dataset from a White Supremacy Forum

Ona de Gibert Naiara Perez Aitor Garcı́a-Pablos Montse Cuadros
HSLT Group at Vicomtech, Donostia/San Sebastián, Spain

{odegibert,nperez,agarciap,mcuadros}@vicomtech.org

Abstract

Hate speech is commonly defined as any com-
munication that disparages a target group of
people based on some characteristic such as
race, colour, ethnicity, gender, sexual orienta-
tion, nationality, religion, or other characteris-
tic. Due to the massive rise of user-generated
web content on social media, the amount of
hate speech is also steadily increasing. Over
the past years, interest in online hate speech
detection and, particularly, the automation of
this task has continuously grown, along with
the societal impact of the phenomenon. This
paper describes a hate speech dataset com-
posed of thousands of sentences manually la-
belled as containing hate speech or not. The
sentences have been extracted from Storm-
front, a white supremacist forum. A custom
annotation tool has been developed to carry
out the manual labelling task which, among
other things, allows the annotators to choose
whether to read the context of a sentence be-
fore labelling it. The paper also provides a
thoughtful qualitative and quantitative study of
the resulting dataset and several baseline ex-
periments with different classification models.
The dataset is publicly available.

1 Introduction

The rapid growth of content in social networks
such as Facebook, Twitter and blogs, makes it im-
possible to monitor what is being said. The in-
crease of cyberbullying and cyberterrorism, and
the use of hate on the Internet, make the identi-
fication of hate in the web an essential ingredient
for anti-bullying policies of social media, as Face-
book’s CEO Mark Zuckerberg recently acknowl-
edged1. This paper releases a new dataset of hate
speech to further investigate the problem.

1https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
switch/wp/2018/04/10/transcript-of-mark-zuckerbergs-
senate-hearing/

Although there is no universal definition for
hate speech, the most accepted definition is pro-
vided by Nockleby (2000): “any communication
that disparages a target group of people based on
some characteristic such as race, colour, ethnicity,
gender, sexual orientation, nationality, religion, or
other characteristic”. Consider the following2:

(1) “God bless them all, to hell with the blacks”

This sentence clearly contains hate speech against
a target group because of their skin colour. How-
ever, the identification of hate speech is often not
so straightforward. Besides defining hate speech
as a verbal abuse directed to a group of people
because of specific characteristics, other defini-
tions of hate speech in previous studies care to in-
clude the speaker’s determination to inflect harm
(Davidson et al., 2017).

In all, there seems to be a pattern shared by most
of the literature consulted (Nockleby, 2000; Djuric
et al., 2015; Gitari et al., 2015; Nobata et al., 2016;
Silva et al., 2016; Davidson et al., 2017), which
would define hate speech as a) a deliberate attack,
b) directed towards a specific group of people, and
c) motivated by actual or perceived aspects that
form the group’s identity.

This paper presents the first public dataset of
hate speech annotated on Internet forum posts in
English at sentence-level. The dataset is publicly
available in GitHub3. The source forum is Storm-
front4, the largest online community of white na-
tionalists, characterised by pseudo-rational discus-
sions of race (Meddaugh and Kay, 2009), which
include different degrees of offensiveness. Storm-
front is known as the first hate website (Schafer,
2002).

2The examples in this work may contain offensive lan-
guage. They have been taken from actual web data and by no
means reflect the authors’ opinion.

3https://github.com/aitor-garcia-p/hate-speech-dataset
4www.stormfront.org



12

The rest of the paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 describes the related work and contex-
tualises the work presented in the paper; Section
3 introduces the task of generating a manually la-
belled hate speech dataset; this includes the de-
sign of the annotation guidelines, the resulting cri-
teria, the inter-annotator agreement and a quantita-
tive description of the resulting dataset; next, Sec-
tion 4 presents several baseline experiments with
different classification models using the labelled
data; finally, Section 5 provides a brief discussion
about the difficulties and nuances of hate speech
detection, and Section 6 summarises the conclu-
sions and future work.

2 Related Work

Research on hate speech has increased in the last
years. The conducted studies are diverse and work
on different datasets; there is no official corpus for
the task, so usually authors collect and label their
own data. For this reason, there exist few publicly
available resources for hate speech detection.

Hatebase5 is the an online repository of struc-
tured, multilingual, usage-based hate speech. Its
vocabulary is classified into eight categories: ar-
chaic, class, disability, ethnicity, gender, national-
ity, religion, and sexual orientation. Some stud-
ies make use of Hatebase to build a classifier for
hate speech (Davidson et al., 2017; Serra et al.,
2017; Nobata et al., 2016). However, Saleem et al.
(2016) prove that keyword-based approaches suc-
ceed at identifying the topic but fail to distinguish
hateful sentences from clean ones, as the same vo-
cabulary is shared by the hateful and target com-
munity, although with different intentions.

Kaggle’s Toxic Comment Classification Chal-
lenge dataset6 consists of 150k Wikipedia com-
ments annotated for toxic behaviour. Waseem and
Hovy (2016) published a collection of 16k tweets
classified into racist, sexist or neither. Sharma
et al. (2018) collected a set of 9k tweets contain-
ing harmful speech and they manually annotated
them based on their degree of hateful intent. They
describe three different classes of hate speech.
The definition on which this paper is based over-
laps mostly with their Class I, described as speech
a) that incites violent actions, b) directed at a par-
ticular group, and c) with the intention of convey-

5https://www.hatebase.org/
6https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-toxic-comment-

classification-challenge/data

ing hurting sentiments.
Google and Jigsaw developed a tool called Per-

spective7 that measures the “toxicity” of com-
ments. The tool is published as an API and gives a
toxicity score between 0 and 100 using a machine
learning model. Such model has been trained on
thousands of comments manually labelled by a
team of people8; to our knowledge, the resulting
dataset is not publicly available.

The detection of hate speech has been tackled in
three main different ways. Some studies focus on
subtypes of hate speech. This is the case of Warner
and Hirschberg (2012), who focus on the identifi-
cation of anti-Semitic posts versus any other form
of hate speech. Also in this line, Kwok and Wang
(2013) target anti-black hate speech. Badjatiya
et al. (2017); Gambäck and Sikdar (2017) study
the detection of racist and sexist tweets using deep
learning.

Other proposals focus on the annotation of hate
speech as opposed to texts containing derogatory
or offensive language (Davidson et al., 2017; Mal-
masi and Zampieri, 2017, 2018; Watanabe et al.,
2018). They build multi-class classifiers with the
categories “hate”, “offensive”, and “clean”.

Finally, some studies focus on the annotation
of hate speech versus clean comments that do not
contain hate speech (Nobata et al., 2016; Burnap
and Williams, 2015; Djuric et al., 2015). Gi-
tari et al. (2015) follow this approach but further
classify the hateful comments into two categories:
“weak” and “strong” hate. Del Vigna et al. (2017)
conduct a similar study for Italian.

In all, experts conclude that annotation of hate
speech is a difficult task, mainly because of the
data annotation process. Waseem (2016) con-
ducted a study on the influence of annotator
knowledge of hate speech on classifiers for hate
speech. Ross et al. (2016) also studied the relia-
bility of hate speech annotations and acknowledge
the importance of having detailed instructions for
the annotation of hate speech available.

This paper aims to tackle the inherent subjectiv-
ity and difficulty of labelling hate speech by fol-
lowing strict guidelines. The approach presented
in this paper follows (Nobata et al., 2016; Bur-
nap and Williams, 2015; Djuric et al., 2015) (i.e.,
“hateful” versus “clean”). Furthermore, the anno-
tation has been performed at sentence level as op-

7https://www.perspectiveapi.com
8https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/23/technology/google-

jigsaw-monitor-toxic-online-comments.html



13

posed to full-comment annotation, with the pos-
sibility to access the original complete post for
each sentence. To our knowledge, this is the first
work that releases a manually labelled hate speech
dataset annotated at sentence level in English posts
from a white supremacy forum.

3 Hate Speech Dataset

This paper presents the first dataset of textual hate
speech annotated at sentence-level. Sentence-level
annotation allows to work with the minimum unit
containing hate speech and reduce noise intro-
duced by other sentences that are clean.

A total number of 10,568 sentences have been
extracted from Stormfront and classified as con-
veying hate speech or not, and into two other aux-
iliary classes, as per the guidelines described in
Section 3.2. In addition, the following informa-
tion is also given for each sentence: a post identi-
fier and the sentence’s position in the post, a user
identifier, a sub-forum identifier9. This informa-
tion makes it possible re-build the conversations
these sentences belong to. Furthermore, the num-
ber of previous posts the annotator had to read be-
fore making a decision over the category of the
sentence is also given.

3.1 Data extraction and processing
The content was extracted from Stormfront using
web-scraping techniques and was dumped into a
database arranged by sub-forums and conversation
threads (Figea et al., 2016). The extracted forum
content was published between 2002 and 2017.
The process of preparing the candidate content to
be annotated was the following:

1. A subset of 22 sub-forums covering diverse
topics and nationalities was random-sampled
to gather individual posts uniformly dis-
tributed among sub-forums and users.

2. The sampled posts were filtered using an au-
tomatic language detector10 to discard non-
English texts.

3. The resulting posts were segmented into sen-
tences with ixa-pipes (Agerri et al., 2014).

4. The sentences were grouped forming batches
of 500 complete posts (∼ 1,000 sentences per
batch).

9All the identifiers provided are fake placeholders that
facilitate understanding relations between sentences, Storm-
front users, etc., but do not point back to the original source.

10https://github.com/shuyo/language-
detection/blob/wiki/ProjectHome.md

The manual annotation task was divided into
batches to control the process. During the anno-
tation of the first two batches, the annotation pro-
cedure and guidelines were progressively refined
and adapted. In total, 10,568 sentences contained
in 10 batches have been manually annotated.

A post-processing step was performed to filter
excessively long or short sentences. The cleansing
process removed sentences shorter than 3 words or
longer than 50 words. In total, 652 sentences were
discarded, which represent 6.17% of the original
dataset. The resulting dataset (henceforth referred
to as the “clean” dataset) is the one described in
Section 3.4 and used for experimentation in Sec-
tion 4. The release of the dataset will contain both
the raw sentences without any post-processing and
the clean version, both annotated.

3.2 Annotation guidelines
Schmidt and Wiegand (2017) acknowledge that
the procedure for hate speech annotation is fairly
vague in previous studies, which translates into
low agreement scores. In this study, all the annota-
tors together created and discussed the guidelines
to ensure all participants had the same understand-
ing of hate speech. The final guidelines consider 4
types of sentences:

3.2.1 HATE
Sentences in this category contain hate speech.
Hate speech is a

a) deliberate attack
b) directed towards a specific group of people
c) motivated by aspects of the group’s identity.

The three premises must be true for a sentence to
be categorized as HATE. Consider the following
examples:

(2) “Poor white kids being forced to treat apes
and parasites as their equals.”

(3) “Islam is a false religion however unlike
some other false religions it is crude and
appeals to crude people such as arabs.”

In (2), the speaker uses “apes” and “parasites” to
refer to children of dark skin and implies they are
not equal to “white kids”. That is, it is an attack to
the group composed of children of dark skin based
on an identifying characteristic, namely, their skin
colour. Thus, all the premises are true and (2) is
a valid example of HATE. Example (3) brands all



14

people of Arab origin as crude. That is, it attacks
the group composed of Arab people based on their
origin. Thus, all the premises are true and (3) is a
valid example of HATE.

3.2.2 NOHATE
This label is used to categorise sentences that do
not convey hate speech per the established defini-
tion. Consider the following examples:

(4) “Where can I find NS speeches and mu-
sic, also historical, in mp3 format for free
download on the net.“

(5) “I know of Chris Rock and subsequently
have hated him for a long time.”

Example (4) mentions National Socialism (“NS”),
but the user is just interested in documentation
about it. Therefore, the sentence itself is not an at-
tack, i.e., premise a) is not true, despite the sound
assumption that the speaker forms part of a hat-
ing community. Thus, (4) is not a valid instance
of HATE. Example (5) is directed towards an indi-
vidual; thus, premise b) is false and the sentence
is not a valid example of HATE, despite the sound
assumption that the attack towards the individual
is based on his skin colour.

Finally, it must be emphasized that the pres-
ence of pejorative language in a sentence cannot
systematically be considered sufficient evidence to
confirm the existence of hate speech. The use of
“fag” in the following sentence:

(6) “Two black fag’s holding hands.”

cannot be said to be a deliberate attack, taken with-
out any more context, despite it likely being offen-
sive. Therefore, it cannot be considered HATE.

3.2.3 RELATION
When (6) (repeated as (7.1)) is read in context:

(7.1) “Two black fag’s holding hands.”
(7.2) “That’s Great!”
(7.3) “That’s 2 blacks won’t be having kids.”

it clearly conveys hate speech. The author is cele-
brating that two people belonging to the black mi-
nority will not be having children, which is a delib-
erate attack on a group of people based on an iden-
tifying characteristic. The annotation at sentence-
level fails to discern that there exists hate speech in
this example. The label RELATION is for specific
cases such as this, where the sentences in a post

do not contain hate speech on their own, but the
combination of several sentences does. Consider
another example:

(8.1) “Probably the most disgusting thing I’ve
seen in the last year.”

(8.2) “She looks like she has some African
blood in her, or maybe it’s just the makeup.”

(8.3) “This is just so wrong.”

Each sentence in isolation does not convey hate
speech: in (8.1) and (8.3), a negative attitude is
perceived, but it is unknown whether it is targeted
towards a group of people; in (8.2), there is no
hint of an attack, not even of a negative attitude.
However, the three sentences together suggest that
having “African blood” makes a situation (what-
ever “this” refers to) disgusting, which constitutes
hate speech according to the definition proposed.

The label RELATION is given separately to all
the sentences that need each other to be under-
stood as hate speech. That is, consecutive sen-
tences with this label convey hate speech but de-
pend on each other to be correctly interpreted.

3.2.4 SKIP
Sentences that are not written in English or that
do not contain information as to be classified into
HATE or NOHATE are given this label.

(9) “Myndighetene vurderer n om de skal f per-
manent oppholdstillatelse.”

(10) “YouTube - Broadcast Yourself.”

Example (9) is in Norwegian and (10) is irrelevant
both for HATE and NOHATE.

3.3 Annotation procedure
In order to develop the annotation guidelines, a
draft was first written based on previous similar
work. Three of the authors annotated a 1,144-
sentence batch of the dataset following the draft,
containing only the categories HATE, NOHATE
and SKIP. Then, they discussed the annotations
and modified the draft accordingly, which resulted
in the guidelines presented in the previous sec-
tion, including the RELATION category. Finally, a
different batch of 1,018 sentences was annotated
by the same three authors adhering to the new
guidelines in order to calculate the inter-annotator
agreement.

Table 1 shows the agreements obtained in terms
of the average percent agreement (avg %), av-
erage Cohen’s kappa coefficient (Cohen, 1960)



15

(avg k), and Fleiss’ kappa coefficient (Fleiss,
1971) (fleiss). The number of annotated sen-
tences (# sent) and the number of categories to la-
bel (# cat) are also given for each batch. The re-
sults are in line with similar works (Nobata et al.,
2016; Warner and Hirschberg, 2012).

# sent # cat avg % avg k fleiss

1 1,144 3 91.03 0.614 0.607
2 1,018 4 90.97 0.627 0.632

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreements on batches 1 and 2

All the annotation work was carried out using a
web-based tool developed by the authors for this
purpose. The tool displays all the sentences be-
longing to the same post at the same time, giving
the annotator a better understanding of the post’s
author’s intention. If the complete post is deemed
insufficient by the annotator to categorize a sen-
tence, the tool can show previous posts to which
the problematic post is answering, on demand, up
to the first post in the thread and its title. This con-
sumption of context is registered automatically by
the tool for further treatment of the collected data.

As stated by other studies, context appears to be
of great importance when annotating hate speech
(Watanabe et al., 2018). Schmidt and Wiegand
(2017) acknowledge that whether a message con-
tains hate speech or not can depend solely on the
context, and thus encourage the inclusion of extra-
linguistic features for annotation of hate speech.
Moreover, Sharma et al. (2018) claim that context
is essential to understand the speaker’s intention.

3.4 Dataset statistics

This section provides a quantitative description
and statistical analysis of the clean dataset pub-
lished. Table 2 shows the distribution of the sen-
tences over categories. The dataset is unbalanced
as there exist many more sentences not conveying
hate speech than ‘hateful” ones.

Table 3 refers to the subset of sentences that
have required reading additional context (i.e. pre-
vious comments to the one being annotated) to
make an informed decision by the human anno-
tators. The category HATE is the one that requires
more context, usually due to the use of slang un-
known to the annotator or because the annotator
needed to find out the actual target of an offensive
mention.

Assigned label # sent %

HATE 1,119 11.29
NOHATE 8,537 86.09

RELATION 168 1.69
SKIP 92 0.93
total 9,916 100.00

Table 2: Distribution of sentences over categories in the
clean dataset

Context used No context used

HATE 22.70 77.30
NOHATE 8.00 92.00

Table 3: Percentage of sentences for which the human
annotators asked for additional context

The remaining of the section focuses only on
the subset of the dataset composed of the cate-
gories HATE and NOHATE, which are the core of
this work. Table 4 shows the size of said subset,
along with the average sentence length for each
class, their word counts and their vocabulary sizes.

HATE NOHATE

sentences 1,119 8,537
sentence length 20.39 ± 9.46 15.15 ± 9.16

word count 24,867 144,353
vocabulary 4,148 13,154

Table 4: Size of the categories HATE and NOHATE in
the clean dataset

Regarding the distribution of sentences over
Stormfront accounts, the dataset is balanced as
there is no account that contributes notably more
than any other: the average percentage of sen-
tences is of 0.50 ± 0.42 per account, the total
amount of accounts in the dataset being 2,723. The
sub-forums that contain more HATE belong to the
category of news, discussion of views, politics,
philosophy, as well as to specific countries (i.e.,
Ireland, Britain, and Canada). In contrast, the sub-
forums that contain more NOHATE sentences are
about education and homeschooling, gatherings,
and youth issues.

In order to obtain a more qualitative insight of
the dataset, a HATE score (HS) has been calculated
based on the Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI)
value for each word towards the categories HATE
and NOHATE. PMI allows calculating the corre-



16

lation of each word with respect to each category.
The difference of the PMI value of a word w and
the category HATE and the PMI of the same word
w and the category NOHATE results in the HATE
score of w, as shown in Formula 1.

HS(w) = PMI (w, HATE)−PMI (w, NOHATE) (1)

Intuitively, this score is a simple way of captur-
ing whether the presence of a word in a HATE con-
text occurs significantly more often than in a NO-
HATE context. Table 5 shows the 15 most and least
hateful words: the more positive a HATE score, the
more hateful a word, and vice versa.

HS HS

ape 6.81 pm -3.38
scum 6.25 group -3.34

savages 5.73 week -3.13
filthy 5.73 idea -2.70
mud 5.31 thread -2.68

homosexuals 5.31 german -2.67
filth 5.19 videos -2.67
apes 5.05 night -2.63

beasts 5.05 happy -2.63
homosexual 5.05 join -2.63

threat 5.05 pictures -2.60
monkey 5.05 eyes -2.54

libtard 5.05 french -2.52
coon 5.05 information -2.44

niglet 4.73 band -2.44

Table 5: Most (positive HS) and least (negative HS)
hateful words

The results show that the most hateful words
are derogatory or refer to targeted groups of hate
speech. On the other hand, the least hateful words
are neutral in this regard and belong to the se-
mantic fields of Internet, or temporal expressions,
among others. This shows that the vocabulary is
discernible by category, which in turn suggests
that the annotation and guidelines are sound.

Performing the same calculation with bi-grams
yields expressions such as “gene pool”, “race
traitor”, and “white guilt” for the most hateful cat-
egory, which appear to be concepts related to race
issues. The less hateful terms are expressions such
as “white power”, “white nationalism” and “pro
white”, which clearly state the right-wing extrem-
ist politics of the forum users.

Finally, the dataset has been contrasted against
the English vocabulary in Hatebase. 9.28% of
HATE vocabulary overlaps with Hatebase, a higher
percentage than for NOHATE vocabulary, of which
6.57% of the words can be found in Hatebase.
In Table 6, the distribution of HATE vocabulary
is shown over Hatebase’s 8 categories. Although
some percentages are not high, all 8 categories are
present in the corpus. Most of the HATE words
from the dataset belong to ethnicity, followed by
gender. This is in agreement with Silva et al.
(2016), who conducted a study to analyse the tar-
gets of hate in social networks and showed that
hate based on race was the most common.

category % examples

archaic 2.46 div, wigger
ethnicity 41.63 coon, paki
nationality 7.03 guinea, leprechaun
religion 1.34 holohoax, prod
gender 36.05 bird, dyke
sexual orientation 2.34 fag, queer
disability 2.01 mongol, retarded
social class 7.14 slag, trash

total 100.00

Table 6: Distribution of HATE vocabulary over Hate-
base categories

4 Experiments

In order to further inspect the resulting dataset
and to check the validity of the annotations (i.e.
whether the two annotated classes are separable
based solely on the text of the labelled instances) a
set of baseline experiments have been conducted.
These experiments do not exploit any external re-
source such as lexicons, heuristics or rules. The
experiments just use the provided dataset and
well-known approaches from the literature to pro-
vide a baseline for further research and improve-
ment in the future.

4.1 Experimental setting
The experiments are based on a balanced subset of
labelled sentences. All the sentences labelled as
HATE have been collected, and an equivalent num-
ber of NOHATE sentences have been randomly
sampled, summing up 2k labelled sentences. From
this amount, the 80% has been used for training
and the remaining 20% for testing.

The evaluated algorithms are the following:



17

• Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Hearst
et al., 1998) over Bag-of-Words vectors.
Word-count-based vectors have been com-
puted and fed into a Python Scikit-learn Lin-
earSVM11 classifier to separate HATE and
NOHATE instances.
• Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), as

described in (Kim, 2014). The implementa-
tion is a simplified version using a single in-
put channel of randomly initialized word em-
beddings12.
• Recurrent Neural Networks with Long Short-

term Memories (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997). A LSTM layer of size
128 over word embeddings of size 300.

All the hyperparameters are left to the usual val-
ues reported in the literature (Greff et al., 2017).
No hyperparameter tuning has been performed.
A more comprehensive experimentation and re-
search has been left for future work.

4.2 Results
The baseline experiments include a majority class
baseline showing the balance between the two
classes in the test set. The results are given in
terms of accuracy for HATEand NOHATE individu-
ally, and the overall accuracy, calculated according
to the equations 2, 3 and 4, where TP are the true
positives and FP are the false positives.

AccHATE =
TPHATE

TPHATE + FPHATE
(2)

AccNOHATE =
TPNOHATE

TPNOHATE + FPNOHATE
(3)

AccALL =
TPALL

TPALL + FPALL
(4)

We show the accuracy for the both complemen-
tary classes instead of the precision-recall of a sin-
gle class to highlight the performance of the clas-
sifiers for the both classes individually. Table 7
shows the results of using only sentences that did
not require additional context to be labelled, while
Table 8 shows the results of including those sen-
tences that required additional context. Not sur-
prisingly, the results are lower when including sen-
tences that required additional context. If a hu-
man annotator required additional information to

11http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html
12https://github.com/dennybritz/cnn-text-classification-tf

make a decision, it is to expect that an automatic
classifier would not have enough information or
would have a harder time making a correct pre-
diction. The results also show that NOHATE sen-
tences are more accurately classified than HATE
sentences. Overall, the LSTM-based classifier ob-
tains better results, but even the simple SVM using
bag-of-words vectors is capable of discriminating
the classes reasonably well.

AccHATE AccNOHATE AccALL

Majority n/a n/a 0.50
SVM 0.72 0.76 0.74
CNN 0.54 0.86 0.70

LSTM 0.76 0.80 0.78

Table 7: Results excluding sentences that required ad-
ditional context for manual annotation

AccHATE AccNOHATE AccALL

Majority n/a n/a 0.50
SVM 0.69 0.73 0.71
CNN 0.55 0.79 0.66

LSTM 0.71 0.75 0.73

Table 8: Results including sentences that required ad-
ditional context for manual annotation

4.3 Error Analysis
In order to get a deeper understanding of the per-
formance of the classifiers trained, a manual in-
spection has been performed on a set of erro-
neously classified sentences. Two main types of
errors have been identified:

Type I errors Sentences manually annotated as
HATE but classified as NOHATE by the system,
usually due to a lack of context or to a lack of
the necessary world knowledge to understand the
meaning of the sentence:

(11) “Indeed, now they just need to feed them-
selves, educate themselves, police them-
selves ad nauseum...‘

(12) “If you search around you can probably
find “hoax of the 20th century” for free on
the net.”

In (11), it is not clear without additional context
who “themselves” are. It actually refers to people
of African origin. In its original context, the author



18

was implying that they are not able to feed, police
nor educate themselves. This would make the sen-
tence an example of hate speech, but it could also
be a harmless comment given the appropriate con-
text. In (12), the lack of world knowledge about
what the Holocaust is, or what naming it “hoax”
implies –i.e., denying its existence–, would make
it difficult to understand the sentence as an act of
hate speech.

Type II errors Sentences manually labelled as
NOHATE and automatically classified as HATE,
usually due to the use of common offensive vo-
cabulary with non-hateful intent:

(13) “I dont like reporting people but the last
thing I will do is tolerate some stupid pig
who claims Hungarians are Tartars.“

(14) “More black-on-white crime: YouTube -
Black Students Attack White Man For Eat-
ing Dinner With Black”

In (13), the user accuses and insults a particu-
lar individual. Example (14) is providing informa-
tion on a reported crime. Although vocabulary of
targeted groups is used in both cases (i.e., “Hun-
garians”, “Tartars”, “black”), the sentences do not
contain HATE.

5 Discussion

There are several aspects of the introduced dataset,
and hate speech annotation in general, that deserve
a special remark and discussion.

First, the source of the content used to ob-
tain the resulting dataset is on its own a source
of offensive language. Being Stormfront a white
supremacists’ forum, almost every single com-
ment contains some sort of intrinsic racism and
other hints of hate. However, not every expression
that contains a racist cue can be directly taken as
hate speech. This is a truly subjective debate re-
lated to topics such as free speech, tolerance and
civics. That is one of the main reasons why this pa-
per carefully describes the annotation criteria for
what here counts as hate speech and what not. In
any case, despite the efforts to make the annotation
guidelines as clear, rational and comprehensive as
possible, the annotation process has been admit-
tedly demanding and far from straightforward.

In fact, the annotation guidelines were crafted in
several steps, first paying attention to what the lit-
erature points about hate speech annotation. After

a first round of manual labelling, inconsistencies
among the human annotators were discussed and
the guidelines and examples were adapted. From
those debates we extract some conclusions and
pose several open questions. The first annotation
criteria (hate speech being a deliberate attack) still
lacks robustness and a proper definition, becom-
ing ambiguous and subject to different interpreta-
tions. A more precise definition of what an attack
is and what it is not would be necessary: Can an
objective fact that however undermines the honour
of a group of people be considered an attack? Is
the mere use of certain vocabulary (e.g. “nigger”)
automatically considered an attack? With regard
to the second annotation criteria (hate speech be-
ing directed towards a specific group of people),
it was controversial among the human annotators
as well. Sentences were found that attacked indi-
viduals and mentioned the targets’ skin colour or
religion, political trends, and so on. Some anno-
tators interpreted these as indirect attacks towards
the collectivity of people that share the mentioned
characteristics.

Another relevant point is the fact that the anno-
tation granularity is sentence level. Most, if not
all, of the existing datasets label full comments. A
comment might be part of a more elaborated dis-
course, and not every part may convey hate. It
is arguable whether a comment containing a sin-
gle hate-sentence can be considered “hateful” or
not. The dataset released provides the full set of
sentences per comment with their annotations, so
each can decide how to work with it.

In addition, and related to the last point, one
of the labels included for the manual labelling is
RELATION. This label is meant to be used when
two or more sentences need each other to be un-
derstood as hate speech, usually because one is a
premise and the following is the (hateful) conclu-
sion. This label has been seldom used.

Finally, a very important issue to consider is
the need of additional context to label a sentence
(i.e., the rest of the conversation or the title of the
forum-thread). It can happen to human annotators
and, of course, to automatic classifiers, as con-
firmed in the error analysis (Section 4.3). Study-
ing context dependency to perform the labelling, it
has been observed that annotators learn to distin-
guish hate speech more easily over time, requiring
less and less context to make the annotations (see
Figure 1).



19

2 4 6 8 10
0

10

20

30

Annotated batches of 500 comments each

w
it
h
co
n
te
x
t/
a
ll
it
em

s
ra

ti
o

Figure 1: Percentage of comments per batch that re-
quired additional context to be manually labelled. The
amount of context needed by a human annotator de-
creases over time.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper describes a manually labelled hate
speech dataset obtained from Stormfront, a white
supremacist online forum.

The resulting dataset consists of ∼10k sen-
tences labelled as conveying hate speech or not.
Since the definition of hate speech has many sub-
tleties, this work includes a detailed explanation of
the manual annotation criteria and guidelines. Fur-
thermore, several aspects of the resulting dataset
have been studied, such as the necessity of addi-
tional context by the annotators to make a deci-
sion, or the distribution of the vocabulary used in
the examples labelled as hate speech. In addition,
several baseline experiments have been conducted
using automatic classifiers, with a focus on exam-
ples that are difficult for automatic classifiers, such
as those that required additional context or world
knowledge. The resulting dataset is publicly avail-
able.

This dataset provides a good starting point for
discussion and further research. As future work, it
would be interesting to study how to include world
knowledge and/or the context of an online conver-
sation (i.e. previous and following messages, fo-
rum thread title, and so on) in order to obtain more
robust hate speech automatic classifiers. Future
studies could also explore how sentences labelled
as RELATION affect classification, as this sen-
tences have not been included in the experiments
presented. In addition, more studies should be per-
formed to characterize the content of the dataset

in depth, regarding timelines, user behaviour and
hate speech targets, for instance. Finally, since
the proportion of HATE/NOHATE examples tends
to be unbalanced, a more sophisticated manually
labelling system with active learning paradigms
would greatly benefit future labelling efforts.

7 Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the Euro-
pean Commission under the project ASGARD
(700381, H2020-FCT-2015). We thank the Hate-
base team, in particular Hatebase developer Tim-
othy Quinn, for providing Hatebase’s English vo-
cabulary dump to conduct this study. Finally, we
would like to thank the reviewers of the paper for
their thorough work and valuable suggestions.

References
R. Agerri, J. Bermudez, and G. Rigau. 2014. IXA

pipeline: Efficient and Ready to Use Multilingual
NLP tools. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’14), pages 3823–3828.

P. Badjatiya, S. Gupta, M. Gupta, and V. Varma. 2017.
Deep Learning for Hate Speech Detection in Tweets.
In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference
on World Wide Web (WWW 2017), pages 759–760.

P. Burnap and M. L. Williams. 2015. Cyber hate
speech on twitter: An application of machine clas-
sification and statistical modeling for policy and de-
cision making. Policy & Internet, 7(2):223–242.

J. Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for Nom-
inal Scales. Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 20(1):37–46.

T. Davidson, D. Warmsley, M. Macy, and I. Weber.
2017. Automated Hate Speech Detection and the
Problem of Offensive Language. Proceedings of
the Eleventh International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media (ICWSM 2017), pages 512–515.

F. Del Vigna, A. Cimino, F. Dell’Orletta, M. Petroc-
chi, and M. Tesconi. 2017. Hate me, hate me not:
Hate speech detection on Facebook. In Proceed-
ings of the First Italian Conference on Cybersecurity
(ITASEC17), pages 86–95.

N. Djuric, J. Zhou, R. Morris, M. Grbovic, V. Ra-
dosavljevic, and N. Bhamidipati. 2015. Hate Speech
Detection with Comment Embeddings. pages 29–
30.

L. Figea, L. Kaati, and R. Scrivens. 2016. Measuring
online affects in a white supremacy forum. IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Intelligence and Security
Informatics: Cybersecurity and Big Data, ISI 2016,
pages 85–90.



20

J. L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agree-
ment among many raters. Psychological Bulletin,
76(5):378.

B. Gambäck and U. K. Sikdar. 2017. Using convolu-
tional neural networks to classify hate-speech. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive Lan-
guage Online (ALW1), pages 85–90.

N. D. Gitari, Z. Zuping, H. Damien, and J. Long. 2015.
A Lexicon-based Approach for Hate Speech Detec-
tion. International Journal of Multimedia and Ubiq-
uitous Engineering, 10(4):215–230.

K. Greff, R. K Srivastava, J. Koutnı́k, B. R. Steune-
brink, and J. Schmidhuber. 2017. LSTM: A Search
Space Odyssey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
works and Learning Systems, 28(10):2222–2232.

M. A. Hearst, S. T. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and
B. Scholkopf. 1998. Support vector machines.
IEEE Intelligent Systems and their Applications,
13(4):18–28.

S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. 1997. Long Short-
term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–
1780.

Y. Kim. 2014. Convolutional Neural Networks for
Sentence Classification. In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2014), pages 1746–
1751.

I. Kwok and Y. Wang. 2013. Locate the Hate: De-
tecting Tweets against Blacks. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence (AAAI-13), pages 1621–1622.

S. Malmasi and M. Zampieri. 2017. Detecting Hate
Speech in Social Media. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing (RANLP 2017), pages 467–
472.

S. Malmasi and M. Zampieri. 2018. Challenges in dis-
criminating profanity from hate speech. Journal of
Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence,
30(2):187–202.

P. M. Meddaugh and J. Kay. 2009. Hate Speech or
“Reasonable Racism?” The Other in Stormfront.
Journal of Mass Media Ethics, 24(4):251–268.

C. Nobata, J. Tetreault, A. Thomas, Y. Mehdad, and
Y. Chang. 2016. Abusive Language Detection in
Online User Content. In Proceedings of the 25th In-
ternational Conference on World Wide Web (WWW
2016), pages 145–153.

J. T. Nockleby. 2000. Hate speech. Encyclopedia of
the American Constitution, 3:1277–79.

B. Ross, M. Rist, G. Carbonell, B. Cabrera,
N. Kurowsky, and M. Wojatzki. 2016. Measur-
ing the reliability of hate speech annotations: The

case of the european refugee crisis. In Proceedings
of NLP4CMC III: 3rd Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Processing for Computer-Mediated Commu-
nication, volume 17, pages 6–9.

H. M. Saleem, K. P. Dillon, S. Benesch, and D. Ruths.
2016. A Web of Hate: Tackling Hateful Speech in
Online Social Spaces. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Text Analytics for Cybersecurity and
Online Safety (TA-COS 2016).

Joseph A Schafer. 2002. Spinning the web of hate:
Web-based hate propagation by extremist organiza-
tions. Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Cul-
ture, 9(2):69–88.

A. Schmidt and M. Wiegand. 2017. A Survey on Hate
Speech Detection using Natural Language Process-
ing. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Work-
shop on Natural Language Processing for Social
Media (SocialNLP 2017), pages 1–10.

J. Serra, I. Leontiadis, D. Spathis, J. Blackburn,
G. Stringhini, and A. Vakali. 2017. Class-based
prediction errors to detect hate speech with out-of-
vocabulary words. In Abusive Language Workshop,
volume 1. Abusive Language Workshop.

S. Sharma, S. Agrawal, and M. Shrivastava. 2018. De-
gree based Classification of Harmful Speech using
Twitter Data. arXiv:1806.04197.

L. Silva, M. Mondal, D. Correa, F. Benevenuto, and
I. Weber. 2016. Analyzing the Targets of Hate in
Online Social Media. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media (ICWSM 2016), pages 687–690.

W. Warner and J. Hirschberg. 2012. Detecting Hate
Speech on the World Wide Web. In Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Language in Social Media
(LSM 2012), pages 19–26.

Z. Waseem. 2016. Are You a Racist or Am I Seeing
Things? Annotator Influence on Hate Speech De-
tection on Twitter. pages 138–142.

Z. Waseem and D. Hovy. 2016. Hateful Symbols or
Hateful People? Predictive Features for Hate Speech
Detection on Twitter. In Proceedings of the NAACL
Student Research Workshop (NAACL SRW 2018),
pages 88–93.

H. Watanabe, M. Bouazizi, and T. Ohtsuki. 2018. Hate
Speech on Twitter: A Pragmatic Approach to Col-
lect Hateful and Offensive Expressions and Perform
Hate Speech Detection. IEEE Access, 6:13825–
13835.


