









































AMTA_2018_Research_Track_v1.pdf


Fluency Over Adequacy: A Pilot Study in
Measuring User Trust in Imperfect MT

Marianna J. Martindale mmartind@umd.edu
iSchool, University of Maryland, College Park, 20740, USA

Marine Carpuat marine@cs.umd.edu
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, 20740, USA

Abstract
Although measuring intrinsic quality has been a key factor in the advancement of Machine
Translation (MT), successfully deploying MT requires considering not just intrinsic quality
but also the user experience, including aspects such as trust. This work introduces a method
of studying how users modulate their trust in an MT system after seeing errorful (disfluent or
inadequate) output amidst good (fluent and adequate) output. We conduct a survey to determine
how users respond to good translations compared to translations that are either adequate but
not fluent, or fluent but not adequate. In this pilot study, users responded strongly to disfluent
translations, but were, surprisingly, much less concerned with adequacy.

1 Introduction

Machine translation has reached a level of quality such that it can now provide fast, cheap,
“good enough” translations for a wide variety of information sources in an increasingly diverse
set of languages and dialects. These systems are becoming available for real users who have no
other way to understand content in languages in which they are not proficient. While the overall
quality of MT output is important, in practice the utility of MT also depends on the willingness
of users to accept the technology.

Trust is an important factor in that willingness regardless of use case. In the case of MT
for communication, users may choose not to communicate if they do not trust the MT available
to them. If translators do not trust the MT in their computer-assisted translation environment,
they may be less efficient. When there is a need for MT for understanding, insufficient trust in
MT may lead the user to simply avoid content in languages they do not understand. However
lack of trust is not the only issue. Implicit trust in incorrect MT can be at least as problem-
atic. Users may misunderstand inaccurately translated information, an automatically translated
website could reflect badly on the company, and inaccurate translations used in communication
could be embarrassing. However, there could be more serious repercussions if the MT is used in
critical tasks. This is not merely theoretical: In October 2017, a Palestinian man was mistakenly
arrested by Israeli police based on an inaccurate Facebook translation (Berger, 2017).

Because trust is so important, we need to understand how users modulate their trust in MT.
However trust has been a neglected element of MT evaluation to date. To be most effective,
trust evaluation must be taken into consideration not only at deployment time, but also dur-
ing research and development. Understanding what factors affect user trust can help identify
the most problematic error types, informing research directions. In this paper, we introduce a
method of studying user trust in MT in a lab setting, based on previous work on trust in other

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 13



forms of automation. We apply this approach in a pilot study comparing the effects of fluency
and adequacy errors on user trust, and find that fluency appears to have a much greater effect
than adequacy.

2 Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, there has been no prior work focused on evaluating user trust
in MT. Automatically generated confidence scores have been referred to as “trust” (Soricut and
Echihabi, 2010), but user trust has not been evaluated. There has, however, been extensive work
in human evaluation of MT quality and in user trust of other types of automation.

2.1 Human Evaluation of Machine Translation
Automated quality metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and METEOR (Banerjee and
Lavie, 2005) have been invaluable for improving and training MT systems, and have been shown
to correlate with human rankings at the system level (Papineni et al., 2002), but human judg-
ments remain the gold standard for competitions like the Workshop (now Conference) on Ma-
chine Translation (WMT) (Callison-Burch et al., 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012; Bojar
et al., 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017). However, these human judgments have focused almost
entirely on intrinsic quality rather than the user experience and particularly trust.

Common approaches to human evaluation of MT include ranking and direct assessment.
Ranking was the official metric for WMT 2008 - 2016 (Callison-Burch et al., 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011, 2012; Bojar et al., 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016). In each evaluation, participants ranked five
translations of individual segments (usually sentences) from different MT systems against each
other based on a reference translation. While rankings indicate user preference, they do not
explicitly address user trust in the system and do not directly provide insight into aspects of
quality that affect user judgments of the translation. The setting is also very different from a
typical user experience, in which they would see only one translation of a whole document with
no reference translation rather than multiple translations of individual segments and a human
translation to compare against. This difference makes it difficult to draw conclusions about the
user experience.

Direct assessment of adequacy and fluency is slightly more like the typical user experience
in that they only see one translation. WMT initially adopted a direct assessment approach for the
2006 and 2007 workshops (Koehn and Monz, 2006; Callison-Burch et al., 2007), but the inter-
annotator agreement was low that the metric was abandoned until WMT16 (Bojar et al., 2016).
The change came as a result of a pilot direct assessment, conducted in parallel to the official
rankings, that tested the technique from Graham et al. (2013) on a larger scale. Graham et al.
had found that they could improve inter-annotator agreement by accounting for the personal
preferences of the judges: They used a near-continuous scale (100 points instead of only five)
and standardized each judge’s score to a z-score based on the mean and standard deviation of
that judge’s scores. The results in the WMT16 pilot correlated so well that WMT17 used direct
assessment of adequacy as the official metric (Bojar et al., 2017). However, the measure is still
focused on intrinsic quality and the judges still only see one segment at a time rather than a
whole document.

Although there is much less research on evaluating the user experience with MT than there
is on evaluating MT quality, there have been a few user studies of MT. User studies have looked
directly at how MT is used in assimilation, dissemination, and communication contexts, but
have not focused on trust. For example, Yang and Lange (1998) looked at user reactions to
the first free online MT system, AltaVista’s Babelfish (powered by SYSTRAN). They analyzed
feedback sent to the company during the first five months the system was available. They
found the use was largely assimilation, but there were also examples of using the system for

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 14



dissemination (e.g., websites using the service to provide translations of their own site), and
communication (e.g., interacting with relatives or employees who don’t speak English). In
addition to providing insights into the applications of the system, the feedback provides positive
or negative reactions. The study does not address trust or acceptance of the system, and it would
be difficult to determine from this feedback since those who chose to contact the company may
not be a representative sample of the pool of potential users.

Hara and Iqbal (2015) conducted a user study of MT for communication. They used spo-
ken language translation, which adds speech-to-text and text-to-speech technology to the MT.
Participants were not asked to directly rate fluency and adequacy of the MT, but in the feedback
some mentioned grammatical and word order errors as well as problems with idiomatic expres-
sions. While they discussed the effects these errors had on their ability to communicate, they
did not address trust in the system.

To the best of our knowledge, the only published research specifically mentioning user trust
in MT is Karamanis et al. (2011), who conducted a qualitative study of translation practices at
a language service provider, including the use of MT. They observed that translators trusted
translations from team members more than translations from remote freelancers and that they
trusted MT and information gleaned from web searches even less. This study was focused on
the actual work practices of the translators and the high-level interactions with MT and other
translators, so it does not investigate why they distrust MT or whether they would trust one
MT system over another. This dissemination setting is also different from an online MT for
assimilation setting not only in the purpose but in the nature of the users. While translators may
use MT to translate more efficiently, for the most part they are able to translate with their own
knowledge and other resources. Those who do not know the source language are dependent on
the MT to understand the text. These differences may affect their trust in the system.

2.2 User Trust in Automation

Although trust has been largely neglected in the context of MT, it has been studied in the context
of other types of automation. It has been measured in a number of ways from simply asking the
user (Yang et al., 2016) to measuring the user’s expectations of system performance and actions
taken (de Vries et al., 2003).

In de Vries et al. (2003), they used a route-planning scenario to see what effect errors
would have on users’ trust of the system. They define trust as a user’s expectations of how a
system will perform in a situation of uncertainty with some risk associated. Participants were
asked to perform 26 route-planning tasks. For each task, they were asked to stake a bet on how
good the route would be and they were told that the credits they earned across the whole task
would affect their compensation. Ten of these trials were manual, ten automated, and in the
final six the participant was allowed to choose manual or automatic. Trust was measured based
on the user’s stated trust in the system on a five-point scale, the number of times they chose the
automated system in the last six trials, and the amount they wagered on each trial. They found
that all things being equal, users preferred manual mode, but when the automated system made
more errors, they trusted the automated system even less according to all measures.

Scenarios based on perception have also been used to explore user trust in automated sys-
tems, e.g. Dzindolet et al. (2003) and Yang et al. (2016). The latter is particularly relevant to
this work. They looked at how negative experiences can affect trust in automation for a face
recognition task. Participants were shown a set of photos of target faces to remember. They
were later shown a target photo and a distractor and were asked to identify the target photo.
They were evaluated based on their performance on the task. They were also provided with a
suggested answer which they could choose to accept or reject. Users self-reported their trust
in the system using a six-point scale. If trust were a purely statistical process, an incorrect

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 15



suggestion by the system should have the same effect on trust whether or not the user chose
to accept the system’s suggestion. However, they observed that when the participant accepted
the system’s suggestion and then learned that the answer was wrong, their trust in the system
dropped much more than when they rejected the system’s incorrect suggestion.

3 Assessing Trust in MT

Like the examples in Section 2.2, MT is a kind of automation. It performs a typically human
task (translation) and the results can be good or bad in terms of both fluency and adequacy. User
reactions to an MT system may change over time as the user is exposed to more translations and
the resulting change in trust of those interactions may not correspond with a simple statistical
measure like intrinsic quality. In the assimilation setting, users will not typically know the
adequacy of a translation but can readily judge its fluency. This means fluency may have an
immediate effect on trust while adequacy will only have an effect if the user subsequently learns
that the translation was wrong.

We can think of a user’s trust in a specific machine translation like the wagers in de Vries
et al. (2003) or the choice to agree or disagree with the system prediction in Yang et al. (2016).
As users see translations that are disfluent or inadequate, we expect that their trust in the system
will decrease. A situation where the user trusts a translation based on fluency but then sub-
sequently learns that it was not adequate could be compared to the case in Yang et al. (2016)
where users accept the system prediction and then learn that it was incorrect. If the findings
in Yang et al. also apply to the machine translation scenario, we would expect that user trust
in the MT system will go down further when they see this type of bad translation compared to
translations that are merely disfluent.

Because these fluent-but-not-adequate translations may lead the user to an incorrect con-
clusion, we will refer to them as misleading. Although misleading translations are rare–only
434 out of 43,911 segments (0.99%) in system output submissions for WMT16 (Bojar et al.,
2016), the potential for mistakes in understanding and degradation of user trust makes the trans-
lations particularly problematic when they occur. This is especially important as the MT com-
munity moves to neural machine translation (NMT), as NMT has been shown to consistently
provide more fluent translations than previous MT paradigms (Bentivogli et al., 2016; Toral and
Sánchez-Cartagena, 2017; Koehn and Knowles, 2017), but is also prone to producing output
that is fluent but unrelated to the input when there is out of domain or insufficient training data
(Koehn and Knowles, 2017).

We propose a survey-based approach to see how users react to misleading translations
as compared to their reactions to disfluent translations. Our pilot study seeks to evaluate the
following hypotheses:

H1: Exposure to good translations will maintain or increase user trust in the system

H2: Exposure to bad MT output of either type will decrease user trust in the system

H3: Misleading translations will have a bigger effect on trust than disfluent translations

For the purposes of this study, we focus on an assimilation use case, reading foreign lan-
guage news. Assimilation tasks are the most practical to implement as they do not require
specialized skills or interaction between participants. We chose the news domain because it
is an established domain for MT research and output from state-of-the art systems is available
through WMT.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 16



4 Survey Methodology

The task of studying trust in MT differs from the task of evaluating MT quality in several
important ways. MT quality evaluations are focused on a specific system or a comparison
between systems. This requires many segments each evaluated by several judges. In effect, the
segments of MT output are a sample from the population of all segments that could be translated
by the system. Trust could potentially be used as an additional dimension in such an evaluation.
However, it is valuable to study the phenomenon of user trust in MT in order to know how to
help users have an appropriate level of trust in MT output. Studying the phenomenon of trust
in MT is focused in the opposite direction of system evaluations: the users are the population
that is randomly sampled and the segments cannot be randomly selected but must be carefully
chosen to demonstrate the specific properties being compared while mediating confounding
variables.

Survey Overview For this study, we obtained Institutional Review Board approval for and
conducted a survey in which participants were shown outputs from a hypothetical MT system
constructed from actual MT output. In order to establish a baseline trust level and to account
for biases, the participants were first asked their familiarity with machine and human transla-
tion as well as their overall opinion of machine translation. After these initial questions, they
were shown a series of five machine translation outputs and asked to rate their level of trust.
Presenting a series of outputs makes it possible to study change in trust over consecutive trans-
lation examples. For each translation, they first saw only the MT output and were asked their
level of trust in that specific translation and their trust in the overall system based on all of the
translations they had seen so far. They were then shown a human translation of the text and
asked whether their judgment of the MT output had changed as well as their overall trust of the
system.

Three Conditions All participants saw the same three good (fluent and adequate) translations
in the same order to establish a baseline trust level. To test the impact of misleading translations
as opposed to good translations or obviously bad translations, the participants were split into
three groups for the fourth translation: a control group which saw another good translation; a
disfluent group which saw a disfluent but adequate translation; and a misleading group which
saw the misleading translation. These alternate translations were translations of the same pas-
sage by different MT systems to ensure that fluency and adequacy were the only difference and
not topic or complexity of the source. Finally, all participants were shown the same good trans-
lation as their fifth translation to see if changes in trust would carry over to the next translation.
The flow of the survey is illustrated in Figure 1.

Comprehension Questions for Quality Control To ensure participants were paying atten-
tion and understood the translation examples, they were also asked to answer a simple com-
prehension question for each translation before seeing the human translation. This consisted
of a choice between two gists of the translation with opposite meanings. For the misleading
translation, the correct answer was what the machine translation said rather than what it should
have said. This not only ensured that participants were being misled but also primed them with
the misleading meaning to increase the chance that they would feel misled when they saw the
human translation. An example question is shown in Figure 2.

4.1 Participants
To represent typical, non-specialist MT users, participants were recruited via Qualtrics from
their pool of participants over 18 and located in the U.S. Participants were not asked their
age, gender, or native language, as age and gender are unlikely to be relevant in understanding

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 17



Figure 1: Diagram illustrating the flow of the survey for all three groups.

machine translation output and the comprehension questions would serve to judge participants’
English language ability. Any responses that appeared to be invalid (e.g., giving the same value
for every question) were excluded. Of the remaining responses, only responses that correctly
answered all of comprehension questions for the four good translations were included in the
final analysis. From the control and misleading groups, those who incorrectly answered the
comprehension question for the fourth translation were also excluded. For the disfluent group,
the fourth comprehension question was ignored because the lack of fluency made the translation
so difficult to understand that half of the participants who answered all other comprehension
questions correctly responded incorrectly to the question.

Figure 2: Example survey question Figure 3: Example translation annotation
task question

There were a total of 89 qualifying responses, of which 32 saw the disfluent translation, 29
saw the good translation, and 28 saw the misleading translation. The background information

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 18



Group No Familiarity Some Familiarity Very Familiar
Control 60.1% 20.7% 17.2%

Disfluent 40.6% 34.4% 25.0%
Misleading 57.1% 17.9% 25.0%

All 52.8% 24.7% 22.5%

Table 1: Participant familiarity with machine translation

Group No Familiarity Some Familiarity Very Familiar
Control 65.5% 31.0% 3.5%

Disfluent 78.1% 15.6% 6.3%
Misleading 78.5% 17.9% 3.6%

All 74.2% 21.3% 4.5%

Table 2: Participant familiarity with human translation

Group Negative Neutral Positive
Control 13.8% 51.7% 34.5%

Disfluent 3.1% 65.6% 31.3%
Misleading 7.1% 35.7% 57.1%

All 7.9% 51.7% 40.4%

Table 3: Participant overall perception of MT

about the participants is summarized in Tables 1-3. In all three groups, the majority of partic-
ipants were unfamiliar with human translation and a plurality of participants were unfamiliar
with machine translation. This unfamiliarity with both human translation and machine trans-
lation fits our expectations for typical users of MT for assimilation. Initial perceptions of MT
were primarily neutral or positive.

All of the translation examples were taken from the system outputs for the news translation
task at WMT16, the 2016 Conference on Machine Translation (Bojar et al., 2016). The evalua-
tion included a ranking evaluation by MT researchers as well as a direct assessment of fluency
and adequacy by crowd-workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Based on the direct assessment,
we selected segments in three categories: “good” segments (high fluency, high adequacy), low
fluency segments, and potentially misleading (high fluency, low adequacy) segments.

To create a more realistic setting, one or two segments from the text surrounding each of the
chosen segments in the machine translation were added. This context could provide information
that clarifies (or contradicts) a single segment translation, so an annotation task was launched to
verify that these longer translations matched the original labels of good, disfluent, or misleading.
Figure 3 shows an example of one of these annotation questions. Based on those annotations,
we selected translations that were rated high fluency and high adequacy by all annotators as
good examples. The disfluent example used in the survey was chosen based on low fluency
ratings. It also had fairly low adequacy as low fluency translations were generally also rated as
low adequacy, but the adequacy score was higher than fluency. The misleading example was
moderately high fluency, low adequacy, and marked by all annotators as leading the reader to a
different meaning than the human reference translation.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 19



(a) (b)

(c)

Figure 4: System and translation trust for the control group (a), disfluent group (b), and mis-
leading group (c)

5 Results

The results from the three conditions, control, disfluent, and misleading, are shown in Figure
4 (a), (b), and (c), respectively. For each translation, the system trust score is the average of
the trust scores across all responses for that setting. The pre score is before seeing the human
translation and the post score is after. The pre translation score is the value reported by the user
and the post is that score adjusted based on the reported change in trust.

Figure 4a shows the average translation and system trust scores for the control group. The
translation trust is, not surprisingly, more volatile than the system trust. In all three condi-
tions it basically tracks the system trust but with higher peaks and lower valleys. There are
no instances where the difference between the translation trust before and after seeing the ref-
erence translation was significant (p > 0.1). This is somewhat surprising in the case of the
misleading translation which would have been expected to yield lower trust if the users un-
derstood the reference translation. Instead, the users’ opinion of the misleading translation
(M = 3.00,SD = 1.76) appears to have increased slightly when the reference translation was

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 20



revealed (M = 3.11,SD = 2.51), however, this difference is likely statistical error as the
change is not a significant increase; t(54) = −0.18, p = 0.85.

Turning to system trust, with the exception of translation 3, H1 appears to hold: the trust
in the system increases as the user sees more translations that are both fluent and adequate.
Although translation 3 was judged as both fluent and adequate in the validation task, it appears
that participants may have had difficulty understanding the translation. This confusion was not
unique to those in the control group but also appeared in the other two conditions. If we set
aside translation 3, the consistent increases in trust lead us to accept H1.

Figure 4b shows the results for the disfluent group. There was a significant negative change
between the trust in the system after the third translation (M = 3.50,SD = 1.27) and after the
disfluent translation (M = 2.31,SD = 1.47); t(62) = 3.46, p < 0.001, so we can reject the
null hypothesis and accept H2 for the case of fluency errors. It is interesting to note that when
the final translation (fluent and adequate) was displayed the trust quickly bounced back to as
high as it had been before. Figure 4c, the misleading group, also has the drop in trust on the
third translation, but the misleading translation had surprisingly little effect on the users’ trust.

The change in system trust for the misleading translation (M = −0.21,SD = 1.50) did
not have a significant effect on user trust compared with the control; t(55) = 1.36, p = 0.18,
so we cannot confirm H3: misleading translations do not appear to have a stronger effect than
fluency errors. This indicates that either fluency more strongly affects user trust than adequacy
does or users have a more difficult time judging adequacy than fluency. Previous research
(Callison-Burch et al., 2007; Graham et al., 2017) has shown that fluency and adequacy scores
are highly correlated, leading to only adequacy being measured in WMT17 (Bojar et al., 2017).
The correlation was taken to mean that adequacy was sufficient to judge translation quality. The
results of this experiment suggest that it may in fact be the case that fluency has an out-sized
effect that overshadows adequacy. The single score for adequacy should perhaps be treated as
an overall quality score rather than a true adequacy score.

6 Limitations and Future Work

This study shows that user surveys can reveal impact of different MT errors on trust. However,
it is a small scale pilot study, and further work will be needed to refine the survey design, and
further compare the impact of fluency and adequacy on user trust. We highlight limitations
identified in this study and how they could be addressed in future work.

Additional Examples A five translation sequence may not be enough to get a good sense of
how trust changes over time. For instance, based on the control group, it appears that the trust
levels off after a few good translations, but without more translations it is hard to know for sure.
In addition, participants were exposed to a single translation example for each error category.
In future experiments, having more than one series of translations would make it possible to
observe whether participant reactions are consistent across distinct representative examples.

Double-Checking Comprehension Asking comprehension questions before displaying the
reference ensured that participants understood the translation, but there was no measure of
whether they understood the reference translation. This means that those who were misled
by the misleading example might not have realized that they were misled. As suggested above,
having more than one possible misleading example would help, but it would also be useful to
repeat the comprehension question after the reference is displayed to see whether their answers
changed.

Include Obvious Errors In addition to the kind of misleading example that was tested in this
study, another type of error that could provide insight into how users perceive adequacy would

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 21



be translations that are fluent but not adequate, but the inadequacy is obvious without even
seeing the reference. Perhaps if they recognize the error in meaning immediately it will have a
stronger effect on trust than if they need to read the human translation to determine adequacy.

Users’ Involvement in Outcome One key difference between this study and previous work
on trust in automation is that this study did not provide an external motivation such as a mone-
tary incentive (as in de Vries et al. (2003)) or an evaluation of the user (as in Yang et al. (2016)).
It would be beneficial to conduct any future studies in an environment where the participants
felt more of an investment, such as through a rewards system. The users would be more intrin-
sically motivated if the test were conducted in a scenario closer to the real-world experience of
the participants. One example would be setting up conversations as in Hara and Iqbal (2015).
A social media scenario could be an alternative to two-way communication: participants could
be given a message to promote and asked whether they would be willing to use the output of
MT to post in their name in another language. Another option could be recruiting actual MT
users and mimicking their work environment. This scenario would have highly motivated and
informed participants but would be more difficult to create.

7 Conclusion

We have argued that trust is an important metric for machine translation and proposed a survey
to determine how fluency and adequacy errors affect user trust in machine translation. Because
it is impossible for MT researchers and developers to educate every possible user about the
strengths and weaknesses of MT, it is incumbent on the MT community to understand how users
modulate their trust and use that information to develop systems that encourage an appropriate
level of trust in the output.

In our study, users reacted more strongly to fluency errors than adequacy errors. If this
finding holds in large-scale studies with improvements to the experimental design as outlined in
section 6, it would have implications for the development of MT systems. Although misleading
translations are rare, the implicit trust users place in fluent translations obligates MT system
developers to pay particular attention to adequacy. Care should be taken to reduce the frequency
of misleading translations and/or to flag them as suspect and notify the user.

Acknowledgments

We thank Jen Golbeck and Hernisa Kacorri for their feedback on this work. This work was
partially supported by the Clare Boothe Luce Program.

References

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation
with improved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on
intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summarization.
volume 29, pages 65–72.

Luisa Bentivogli, Arianna Bisazza, Mauro Cettolo, and Marcello Federico. 2016. Neural versus
phrase-based machine translation quality: a case study. In Proceedings of the 2016 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Austin, Texas, pages 257–267.

Yotam Berger. 2017. Israel Arrests Palestinian Because Facebook Translated ’Good Morning’
to ’Attack Them’. Haaretz [Online; accessed 6-Dec-2017].

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 22



Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Chris Callison-Burch, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow,
Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2013. Findings of
the 2013 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Eighth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Sofia,
Bulgaria, pages 1–44.

Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Johannes
Leveling, Christof Monz, Pavel Pecina, Matt Post, Herve Saint-Amand, Radu Soricut, Lucia
Specia, and Aleš Tamchyna. 2014. Findings of the 2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, pages 12–58.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian
Huang, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo
Negri, Matt Post, Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco Turchi. 2017. Findings of the
2017 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT17). In Proceedings of the Second Confer-
ence on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Copenhagen, Denmark, pages 169–214.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias
Huck, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo
Negri, Aurelie Neveol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt Post, Raphael Rubino, Carolina
Scarton, Lucia Specia, Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos Zampieri. 2016. Findings
of the 2016 Conference on Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference
on Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, pages
131–198.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Chris
Hokamp, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Matt Post, Car-
olina Scarton, Lucia Specia, and Marco Turchi. 2015. Findings of the 2015 Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, pages 1–46.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder.
2007. (Meta-) Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech
Republic, pages 136–158.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder.
2008. Further Meta-Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Third Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Colum-
bus, Ohio, pages 70–106.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, Kay Peterson, Mark Przybocki, and Omar
Zaidan. 2010. Findings of the 2010 Joint Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation and
Metrics for Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation and MetricsMATR. Association for Computational Linguistics, Upp-
sala, Sweden, pages 17–53.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Spe-
cia. 2012. Findings of the 2012 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the Seventh Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Montréal, Canada, pages 10–51.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 23



Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2009. Findings of
the 2009 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Fourth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Athens,
Greece, pages 1–28.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, and Omar Zaidan. 2011. Findings of the
2011 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, Edinburgh,
Scotland, pages 22–64.

Peter de Vries, Cees Midden, and Don Bouwhuis. 2003. The effects of errors on system trust,
self-confidence, and the allocation of control in route planning. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 58(6):719–735.

Mary T Dzindolet, Scott A Peterson, Regina A Pomranky, Linda G Pierce, and Hall P Beck.
2003. The role of trust in automation reliance. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 58(6):697–718.

Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, Alistair Moffat, and Justin Zobel. 2013. Continuous mea-
surement scales in human evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 7th Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse. pages 33–41.

Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, Alistair Moffat, and Justin Zobel. 2017. Can machine trans-
lation systems be evaluated by the crowd alone. Natural Language Engineering 23(1):3–30.

Kotaro Hara and Shamsi T. Iqbal. 2015. Effect of Machine Translation in Interlingual Conversa-
tion: Lessons from a Formative Study. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Seoul, Republic of Korea, pages 3473–
3482.

Nikiforos Karamanis, Saturnino Luz, and Gavin Doherty. 2011. Translation practice in the
workplace: contextual analysis and implications for machine translation. Machine Transla-
tion 25(1):35–52.

Philipp Koehn and Rebecca Knowles. 2017. Six Challenges for Neural Machine Translation.
In Workshop on Neural Machine Translation. Vancouver, BC. ArXiv: 1706.03872.

Philipp Koehn and Christof Monz. 2006. Manual and Automatic Evaluation of Machine Trans-
lation between European Languages. In Proceedings on the Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. Association for Computational Linguistics, New York City, pages 102–121.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for
automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on
association for computational linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
311–318.

Radu Soricut and Abdessamad Echihabi. 2010. Trustrank: Inducing trust in automatic transla-
tions via ranking. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, ACL
’10, pages 612–621.

Antonio Toral and Vı́ctor M. Sánchez-Cartagena. 2017. A Multifaceted Evaluation of Neural
versus Phrase-Based Machine Translation for 9 Language Directions. In Proceedings of the
15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Valencia, Spain, volume 1, pages 1063–1073.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 24



Jin Yang and Elke D Lange. 1998. SYSTRAN on AltaVista a user study on real-time machine
translation on the Internet. In Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the
Americas. Springer, pages 275–285.

X Jessie Yang, Christopher D Wickens, and Katja Hölttä-Otto. 2016. How users adjust trust
in automation: Contrast effect and hindsight bias. In Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA,
volume 60, pages 196–200.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 25




