










































 

	
Challenges	in	Speech	Recognition	and		
Translation	of	High-Value	Low-Density		

Polysynthetic	Languages	
	

Judith	L.	Klavans	 judith.l.klavans.civ@mail.mil	
John	Morgan	 john.j.morgan50.civ@mail.mil	
Stephen	LaRocca		 stephen.a.larocca.civ@mail.mil	
Jeffrey	Micher		 jeffrey.c.micher.civ@mail.mil	
Clare	Voss	 clare.r.voss.civ@mail.mil	
Multilingual	Computing	and	Analytics	Branch,	Army	Research	Laboratory,	
Adelphi,	Maryland	20783,	USA	
	

Abstract 

The focus of this paper is on setting out a framework for experiments on using the latest 
machine learning techniques over speech and text data collections of highly complex lan-
guages. We are in the process of creating comparable and consistent databases with associ-
ated processing technologies of some of the world’s most challenging languages, polysyn-
thetic languages, i.e. those where one long word can express the meaning contained in a 
multi-word sentence in languages like English.   We present an end-to-end system for Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Machine Translation (MT) involving Artificial In-
telligence approaches of machine learning (ML). The ML framework uses deep learning 
since the networks we are sharing are deep in nature; this deep variant of Multi-Task ML 
(MTML) embodies human-like AI abilities to learn a language with small amounts of input 
thereby achieving a degree of AI. We explore recurrent neural networks (RNNs), long and 
short term memory network (L-STMs), bidirectional LSTMs (BiLSTM) and convolutional 
NNs (CNN) to compare and evaluate results. 

1. Motivation 

The government and military have to respond to and communicate in languages that present 
themselves in the field – whether for humanitarian aid, intelligence or other operational re-
quirements. Currently, the government and military have many language requirements, rang-
ing from interacting with coalition forces to public affairs to on-the-ground soldier interaction 
with foreign citizens to intelligence.  To quote a current Program Manager at DARPA1 in the 
Information Innovation Office (I2O):   

 
“We do not know what language will be next in line for military and national defense 
needs.  Thus, we need to be prepared with technology to handle any language of any 
complexity, and we need the capability to ramp up with small amounts of data.”   

 

                                                        
1 Dr. Boyan Onyshkevych, personal communication. 
2 https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/04/world/africa/special-forces-killed-niger.html 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 283



Increased globalization has led to an urgent need for even more and varied language capabili-
ties than in the past. As Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Mark Milley said in response to the gap in 
intelligence leading to the recent ambush against US troops in Niger: 

 
"We are training, advising and assisting indigenous armies all over the world. And I 
anticipate and expect that will increase not decrease in years to come,"2 

 
This paper presents strategies for addressing the computational and linguistic challenges 
posed by such complex languages. We address specifically the areas of automatic speech 
recognition and MT research and development in government and military settings.  

2. Research Goals 

The focus of this paper is on setting out a framework for experiments on using the latest ma-
chine learning techniques over speech, text, and data collections of highly complex languages. 
We are in the process of creating comparable databases with associated processing technolo-
gies of some of the world’s most challenging languages, those where one long word can ex-
press the meaning contained in a multi-word sentence in languages like English.  These are 
called polysynthetic languages.  To illustrate, consider the following example from Inuktitut, 
one of the official languages of the Territory of Nunavut in Canada. The morpheme -tusaa- 
(shown in boldface below) is the root, and all the other morphemes are synthetically com-
bined with it in one unit.3 
 
(1) tusaa-tsia-runna-nngit-tu-alu-u-junga  
      hear-well-be.able-NEG-DOER-very-BE-PART.1.S 
    ‘I can't hear very well.’ 
 
Kabardian (Circassian), from the Northwest Caucasus, also shows this phenomenon, with the 
root -še- shown in boldface below: 
 
(2) wə-q’ə-d-ej-z-γe-še-ž’e-f-a-te-q’əm 
      2SG.OBJ-DIR-LOC-3SG.OBJ-1SG.SUBJ-CAUS-lead-COMPL-POTENTIAL-PAST-PRF-NEG 
      ‘I would not let you bring him right back here.’ 
 
Polysynthetic languages are spoken all over the globe and are richly represented among Na-
tive North and South American families. Many polysynthetic languages are among the 
world’s most endangered languages,4 with fragmented dialects and communities struggling to 
preserve their linguistic heritage. In particular, polysynthetic languages can be found in the 
US Southwest (Southern Tiwa, Kiowa Tanoan family), Canada, Mexico (Nahuatl, Uto-
Aztecan family), and Central Chile (Mapudungun, Araucanian), as well as in Australia 
(Nunggubuyu, Macro-Gunwinyguan family), Northeastern Siberia (Chukchi and Koryak, both 
from the Chukotko-Kamchatkan family), and India (Sora, Munda family), as shown in the 
map below (Figure 1). 
 
                                                        
2 https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/04/world/africa/special-forces-killed-niger.html 
3 Abbreviations follow the Leipzig Glossing Rules; additional glosses are spelled out in full. 
4	In fact, the majority of the languages spoken in the world today are endangered and disappearing fast 
(See Bird, 2009). Estimates are that, of the approximately 7000 languages in the world today, at least 
one disappears every day  (https://www.ethnologue.com). 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 284



 

 
 

Figure 1: Polysynthetic Languages5 
 
Although there are many definitions of polysynthesis, there is often confusion on what consti-
tutes the exact criteria and phenomena (Mithun 2017). Even authoritative sources categorize 
languages in conflicting ways.6 Typically, polysynthetic languages demonstrate holophrasis, 
i.e. the ability of an entire sentence to be expressed in what is considered by native speakers to 
be just one word (Bird 2009). In linguistic typology, the opposite of polysynthesis is isolation. 
Polysynthesis technically (etymologically) refers to how many morphemes there are per word. 
Using that criterion, the typological continuum can be represented as follows: 

 
(3)  isolating/analytic languages > synthetic languages > polysynthetic languages  

 
Adding another dimension of morphological categorization, languages can be distinguished 
by the degree of clarity of morpheme boundaries. If we apply this criterion, languages can be 
categorized according to the following typological continuum: 

 
(4)  agglutinating > mildly fusional > fusional 

 
Thus, a language might be characterized overall as polysynthetic and agglutinating, that is, 
generally a high number of morphemes per word, with clear boundaries between morphemes 
and thus easily segmentable. Another language might be characterized as polysynthetic and 
fusional, so again, many morphemes per word, but so many phonological and other processes 
have occurred that segmenting morphemes becomes more challenging. 
                                                        
5 http://linguisticmaps.tumblr.com/post/120857875008/513-morphological-typology-tonal-languages.  
Map by Rodrigo Pereira. 
6 For example, the article in the Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Linguistics on “Polysynthesis: A Dia-
chronic and Typological Perspective” by Michael Fortescue (Fortescue, 2016), a well-known expert 
on polysynthesis, lists Aymara as possibly polysynthetic, whereas others designate it as agglutinative 
(http://www.native-languages.org). 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 285



So far, we have discussed the morphological aspects of polysynthesis. Polysynthesis also has 
a number of syntactic ramifications, richly explored in the work of Baker (Baker 1997; 2002). 
He proposes a cluster of correlated syntactic properties associated with polysynthesis. Here 
we will mention just two of these properties: rich agreement (with the subject, direct object, 
indirect object, and applied objects if present) and omission of free-standing arguments (pro-
drop). 

 
Polysynthetic languages are of interest for both theoretical and practical reasons, as discussed 
more fully in the next section.  On the theoretical side, these languages offer a potentially 
unique window into human cognition and language capabilities as well as into language ac-
quisition (Mithun 1989; Greenberg 1960; Comrie 1981; Fortescue 1994; Fortescue et al. 
2017).  On the practical side, they offer significant obstacles to accurate linguistic analysis as 
well as to computational modeling. 

 

3. Some Computational Challenges of Polysynthetic Languages 

Polysynthetic languages pose unique challenges for traditional computational systems (Byrd 
et al. 1986). Even in allegedly cross-linguistic or typological analyses of specific phenomena, 
e.g. in forming a theory of clitics and cliticization (Klavans 1995), finding the full range of 
language types on which to test hypotheses proves difficult. Often, the data is simply not 
available so claims cannot neither refuted nor supported fully. 
 
One of the underlying causes of this difficulty is that there are many languages for which a 
clear lexical division between nouns and verbs has been challenged; these languages are char-
acterized by a large class of roots that are used either nominally or verbally, and many of the-
se languages typically have polysynthetic features (cf. Lois & Vapnarsky 2006 for Amerindi-
an, Aranovich 2013 for Austronesian, Testelets et al. 2009 for Adyghe, Davis & Matthewson 
2009, Watanabe 2017 for Salish). Without a clear definition of what counts as a verb and 
what counts as a noun, there is no reliable way to compute significant correlations. Thus, a 
deeper understanding of polysynthetic phenomena may well contribute to a more nuanced 
understanding of cross-language comparisons and generalizations and enable researchers to 
pose meaningful and answerable questions about comparative features across languages. 
 
On the practical side, many morphologically complex languages are crucial to purposes rang-
ing from health care,7 search and rescue, to the maintenance of cultural history (Fortescue et 
al. 2017). Add to this the interest in low-resource languages (from Inuktitut and Yup’ik in the 
North and East of Canada with over 35,000 speakers, and all the way to Northwest Cauca-
sian), which is important for linguistic, cultural and governmental reasons. Many of the data 
collections in these languages, when annotated and aligned well, can serve as input to systems 
to automatically create correspondences, and these in turn can be useful to teachers in creating 
resources for their learners (Adams, Neubig, Cohn, & Bird 2015). These languages are gener-
ally not of immediate commercial value, and yet the research community needs to cope with 

                                                        
7 For example, the USAID has funded a program in the mountains of Ecuador to provide ma-
ternal care in Quechua-dominant areas to reduce maternal and infant mortality rates, taking 
into account local cultural and language needs (https://www.usaidassist.org). Quechua is high-
ly agglutinative, not polysynthetic; it is spoken by millions of speakers and has few corpora 
with limited annotation. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 286



fundamental issues of language complexity.  Finally, many of these understudied languages 
occur in areas that are key for health concerns (e.g. the AIDS epidemic) and international se-
curity. Consequently, research on these languages could have unanticipated benefits on many 
levels. 
 
Recent research (e.g. Micher 2016) has applied neural nets to one polysynthetic language to-
wards creating a feasible model for machine translation. As for speech recognition, longer 
words are generally less prone to error (Shinozaki & Furui 2001); this accounts for the fact 
that under 70% word accuracy is useful for keyword spotting, as shown in the IARPA Babel 
project8.  On the other hand, if a language has only very long “words” encompassing all the 
nouns, verbs, clitics, affixes and particles, then these languages might not conform to estab-
lished principles.  At the same time, morphological and syntactic processing of polysynthetic 
languages pose specific challenges due to the blur between the more usual morphology-syntax 
distinction (Baker 1996). On low-resource language speech recognition, based on our experi-
ence with a range of language types, we hypothesize that the most effective units of recogni-
tion might be morphemes, although many of these morphemes might have a variety of possi-
ble surface forms.  Because of the sentential nature of words in these languages, they can con-
stitute a number of unique forms, raising intriguing speech recognition challenges.  

4. Ongoing Language Research at the Army Research Laboratory 

This paper provides an overview of one aspect of multilingual language research at the Army 
Research Laboratory, presenting the approaches used in polysynthetic languages. Figure 2 
below shows which aspects of the project are being addressed.  In the presentation, we will 
discuss technical details of each component and discuss further the novel methodological con-
tributions of the research. 

 

          
Figure 2:  Overview of Speech-MT Polysynthetic Language Architecture 

                                                        
8 https://www..gov/index.php/research-programs/babel 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 287



ARL has demonstrated leading technologies in the field with critical expertise.  We are plan-
ning on developing systems, capable of performing speech translation. We are applying ma-
chine learning techniques using neural network approaches e.g. segmental recurrent neural 
networks (Kong et al. 2015, Micher 2017) and byte-pair encoding Sennrich, Haddow, Birch 
2015) to several challenging problems for polysynthetic language analysis and processing.  
For ASR, we have implemented adaptive learning for iterative ASR, incorporating principles 
from the Kaldi toolkit9 with modifications as required by different workflows and tasks. 

5. Corpus Collection - Electronically-available resources 

Only recently have researchers started collecting well-designed corpora for polysynthetic lan-
guages, e.g. for Circassian (Arkhangelskiy & Lander 2016) or Arapaho (Kazeminejad et al. 
2017).  There is an urgent need for documentation, archiving, creation of corpora and teaching 
materials that are specific to polysynthetic languages. Documentation and corpus-building 
challenges arise for many languages, but the complex morphological makeup of polysynthetic 
languages makes consistent documentation particularly difficult.  
 
The more language data that is gathered and accurately analyzed, the deeper cross-linguistic 
analyses can be conducted which in turn will contribute to a range of fields including linguis-
tic theory, language teaching and lexicography. For example, in examining cross-linguistic 
analyses of headedness, Polinsky (2012) gathered data to examine the question of whether the 
noun-verb ratio differs across headedness types across a wide sample of language types. 
However, she notes that: 

“[T]he seemingly simple question of counting nouns and verbs is a quite difficult 
one; even obtaining data about the overall number of nouns and verbs proves to be 
an immense challenge. The ultimate consequence is that linguists lack reasonable 
tools to compare languages with respect to their lexical category size. Cooperation 
between theoreticians and lexicographers is of critical importance: just as compara-
tive syntax received a big boost from the micro-comparative work on closely related 
languages (Romance; Germanic; Semitic), so micro-comparative WordNet building 
may lead to important breakthroughs that will benefit the field as a whole.” (Polin-
sky, 2012, p. 351) 

 
In recent years, there has been a surge of major research on many of these languages. For ex-
ample, the first Endangered Languages (ELs) Workshop held in conjunction with ACL was 
held in 2014 and the second in 2017.10 The National Science Foundation and the National 
Endowment for the Humanities jointly fund a program for research on ELs.11 The US gov-
ernment through IARPA and DARPA both have programs for translation, including for low 
resource languages.12 The IARPA BABEL project focused on keyword search over speech for 
a variety of typologically different languages, including some with polysynthetic features. 

                                                        
9 http://kaldi-asr.org/doc/pages.html 
10 http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~jcgood/ComputEL.html; 
http://altlab.artsrn.ualberta.ca/computel-2/. 
11 https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=12816; 
https://www.neh.gov/grants/manage/general-information-neh-nsf-documenting-endangered-
languages-fellowships. 
12 MATERIAL, https://www.iarpa.gov/index.php/research-programs/material and LORELEI, 
http://www.darpa.mil/program/low-resource-languages-for-emergent-incidents, respectively. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 288



 
Concomitant with the collection and cataloging of corpora, we are working with colleagues 
especially from the the NSF-funded EL-STEC Shared Task Evaluation Campaign project13 on 
a future shared task in order to bring linguists and computational linguists together around the 
common area: accuracy in data analysis. We aim to formulate a shared task that meets the 
goals outlined in Levow, et al. (2017), namely, to “align the interests of the speech and lan-
guage processing communities with those of … language documentation communities….”, 
guided by their design principles of realism, typological diversity, accessibility of the shared 
task, accessibility of the resulting software, extensibility and nuanced evaluation.  
 

6. Future Research and Applications 

Our next steps involve a two-phase approach, one on the ASR input and then one on the MT 
side (as shown in Figure 2.)  On the ASR side, we plan to use Multi-Task Learning (MTL)  
(Caruana 1997), using corpora from multiple languages. Multitask Learning (also known as 
Multi-Task Machine Learning MTML) is an approach to inductive transfer that improves 
generalization by using the domain information contained in the training signals of related 
tasks as an inductive bias. It does this by learning tasks in parallel while using a shared repre-
sentation; what is learned for each task can help other tasks be learned better. MTL is an es-
tablished machine learning framework that has been applied to multiple domains.    The ASR 
problem, however, brings specific language problems to any machine learning approach.  As 
noted in Hasegawa-Johnson 2017: 

 
To date, ASR has failed to achieve its potential, because successful ASR requires 
very large labeled corpora; the human transcribers must be computer-literate, and 
they must be native speakers of the language being transcribed. Large corpora are 
beyond the resources of most under-resourced language communities; we have 
found that transcribing even one hour of speech may be beyond the reach of commu-
nities that lack large-scale government funding. (Hasegawa-Johnson et al. 2017, p. 
50) 

  
This deep variant of MTML that we use embodies human-like AI abilities to learn a language 
with small amounts of input thereby achieving a degree of AI.  We build on related tech-
niques, widely used in the ASR community (Povey et al. 2011).  The original contribution 
consists of using a range of conversational modalities (news, dialog, read speech) as sources 
of data in order to realize the potential for dissimilar input to contribute to more robust output. 
We hypothesize that the MTL technique can capture features characteristic  of  the target Low 
Resource language  across dissimilar modalities and similar languages. Our approach is re-
ported in LaRocca and Morgan 2018, to appear. 

 
On the Machine Translation side, the research questions to be addressed in future work in-
clude methods to improve the performance of the existing Uqailaut morphological analyzer 
for the Inuktitut (Farley, 2009) making use of a variety of neural network approaches; im-
provements over a baseline statistical machine translation (SMT) English-Inuktitut system by 
using alternate subword units with a neural network architecture; diagnosis of which subword 
units yield the most improvement; determining how a pipelined English-Inuktitut translation 

                                                        
13 http://depts.washington.edu/uwcl/el-stec/index.php 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 289



system, with deep morpheme translation plus deep-to-surface sequence-to-sequence model 
performs compared with the best subword system; and then exploring the use of hierarchical 
structures over morphemes in a novel approach to improve over the best subword system. 
 
From an applications perspective, the outcomes of the research will be useful for a wide range 
of applications including collaboration with coalition forces and civil affairs requirements, in 
particular.  From a theoretical perspective, we contribute to a deeper understanding of the 
effectiveness of neural network architectures which take context into consideration, for exam-
ple, a recurrent neural network (RNN), a long- short term memory network (LSTM), a bidi-
rectional LSTM (BiLSTM), or a convolutional neural network (CNN).   We will reveal neces-
sary modifications in order for successful low-resource ASR and MT.  Finally, from the per-
spective of language revitalization and contributions to native communities, we explore tools 
that could be useful to teachers and language analysts as we reach the future goal of enabling 
a deep understanding of language across types and both their superficial and underlying fea-
tures. 

 
To conclude, we have set out a strategy and approach for an end-to-end speech recognition 
system along with machine translation that involves developing novel machine learning tech-
niques and computational approaches for low-resource polysynthetic languages. 
 
 
Acknowledgements:  Thanks to Roland Kuhn and Anna Kazantseva, National Research 
Council of Canada who are part of the organizing committee for the upcoming workshop on 
Polysynthetic Languages to be held at COLING 2018, in Santa Fe, New Mexico on August 
25, 2018. This workshop will be the first where both researchers and practitioners working on 
polysynthetic languages will discuss common problems and difficulties, and it is intended as 
the capstone to establishing possible collaborations and ongoing partnerships. We 
acknowledge Lori Levin, Carnegie Mellon University, for many helpful discussions on the 
nature of polysynthesis, and we are grateful to Maria Polinsky, University of Maryland, and 
Omer Preminger, University of Maryland, for enabling us to dig even deeper into some of the 
more fine-grained aspects of polysynthesis.  All errors are, of course, our own. 
 
 

References  

Adams, O., Neubig, G., Cohn, T., & Bird, S. (2015). Inducing bilingual lexicons 
from small quantities of sentence-aligned phonemic transcriptions. Proceedings of 
the International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2015). Da 
Nang, Vietnam. 

Aranovich, R. (2013). Transitivity and polysynthesis in Fijian. Language 89: 465-
500. 

Arkhangelskiy, T. A., & Lander, Y. A. (2016). Developing a polysynthetic language 
corpus: problems and solutions. Computational Linguistics and Intellectual Technol-
ogies: Proceedings of the International Conference “Dialogue 2016”, June 104, 
2016. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 290



Baker, M. C. (1996). The polysynthesis parameter. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Baker, M.C. (2002). Atoms of language. New York: Basic Books.  

Bird, S. (2009). Natural language processing and linguistic fieldwork. Computational 
Linguistics, 35 (3), 469-474. 

Byrd, R. J., Klavans, J. L., Aronoff, M., & Anshen, F. (1986). Computer methods for 
morphological analysis. Proceedings of the 24th annual meeting on Association for 
Computational Linguistics (pp. 120-127). Stroudsberg, PA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 

Caruana,	Rich,	(1997)	"Multitask	Learning."	Machine	Learning,	Vol.	28,	pp.	41-
75,	Kluwer	Academic	Publishers.	

Comrie, B. (1981). Language Universals and Linguistic Typology. Oxford: Black-
well. 

Davis, H., & Mattewson, L. (2009). Issues in Salish syntax and semantics. Language 
and Linguistics Compass 3, 1097-1166. 

Farley,	B.	(2009).	The	Uqailaut	Project.	Retrieved	from	Inuktitut	Computing:	
http://www.inuktitutcomputing.ca/Uqailaut/info.php	

Fortescue, M. (1994). Polysynthetic morphology. (R. E. al., Ed.) The encyclopedia of 
language and linguistic, 5, 2600–2602. 

Fortescue, M. (2016). Polysynthesis: A Diachronic and Typological Perspective. In 
M. Aronoff (ed.) Oxford Encyclopedia of Linguistics. Oxford, Oxford, England: Ox-
ford University Press. 

Fortescue, M., Mithun, M., & Evans, N. (Eds.). (2017). The Oxford Handbook of 
Polysynthesis. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Greenberg, J. H. (1960). A quantitative approach to the morphological typology of 
language. International Journal of Linguistics, 26, 178–194. 

Kazeminejad, G., Cowell, A., & Hulden , M. (2017). Creating lexical resources for 
polysynthetic languages—the case of Arapaho. Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on 
the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages (pp. 10-
18). Honolulu: Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Klavans, J. L. (1995). On Clitics and Cliticization: The Interaction of Morphology, 
Phonology, and Syntax. New York: Garland. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 291



Kong,	L.,	Dyer,	C.,	&	Smith,	N.	(2015).	Segmental	Recurrent	Neural	Networks.	
CoRR.	Retrieved	from	http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06018.		

LaRocca, Stephen and John Morgan (2018, to appear) “Incorporating MT into a Bi-
directional Speech Translation System for U.S. Army units”, Paper to be presented at 
the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas conference (AMTA 2018), 
Boston, Massachusetts.  March 17-21, 2018.  

Levow, G.-A., Bender, E., Littell, P., Howell, K., Chelliah, S., Crowgey, J., et al. 
(2017). STREAMLInED Challenges: Aligning Research Interests with Shared 
Tasks.  Proceedings of ComputEL-2: 2nd Workshop on Computational Methods for 
Endangered Languages. 

Lois, X., & Vapnarsky, V. (2006.). Root indeterminacy and polyvalence in Yukate-
can Mayan languages. In X. Lois, & V. Vapnarsky (Eds.). Lexical categories and 
root clauses in Amerindian languages (pp. 69-115). Bern: Peter Lang. 

Micher, Jeffrey (2016) “Machine Translation for a Low-Resource, Polysynthetic 
Language” Presentation at AMTA 2016. Austin, Texas. 

Micher, J. (2017). Improving Coverage of an Inuktitut Morphological Analyzer Us-
ing a Segmental Recurrent Neural Network. Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on the 
Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages (pp. 101-106). 
Honolulu, HI: Association for Computational Linguistics.  

Mithun, M. (1989). The acquisition of polysynthesis.   Journal of Child Language, 
16, 285–312. 

Mithun, M. (2017). Argument marking in the polysynthetic verb and its implications. 
In M. Fortescue, M. Mithun, & N. Evans (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Polysyn-
thesis (pp. 30-58).  Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Polinsky, M. (2012). Headedness, again. UCLA Working Papers in Linguistics, The-
ories of Everything. 17, pp. 348-359. Los Angeles: UCLA. 

Povey, Daniel & Ghoshal, Arnab & Boulianne, Gilles & Burget, Lukáš & Glembek, 
Ondrej & Goel, Nagendra & Hannemann, Mirko & Motlíček, Petr & Qian, Yanmin 
& Schwarz, Petr & Silovský, Jan & Stemmer, Georg & Vesel, Karel. (2011). The 
Kaldi speech recognition toolkit. IEEE 2011 Workshop on Automatic Speech Recog-
nition and Understanding. 

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., & Birch, A. (2015). Neural Machine Translation of Rare 
Words with Subword Units. CoRR, abs/1508.07909. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.07909  

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 292



Shinozaki, T., Furui, S., 2001. Error analysis using decision trees in spontaneous 
presentation speech recognition. In: Proceedings of the Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion and Understanding Conference.  Trento, Italy. 

Testelets Ya. (ed.). (2009). Aspekty polisintetizma: Očerki po grammatike ady-
gejskogo jazyka [Aspects of polysynthesis: Essays on Adyghe grammar], (pp. 17-
120). Moscow: Russian University for the Humanities. 

Watanabe, H. (2017). The polysynthetic nature of Salish. In Fortescue, M., Mithun, 
M., & Evans, N. (Eds.). (2017). The Oxford Handbook of Polysynthesis (pp. 623-
642). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 

 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 2: MT Users' Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 293




