



















































A neural interlingua for multilingual machine translation


Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 1: Research Papers, pages 84–92
Belgium, Brussels, October 31 - Novermber 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64009

A neural interlingua for multilingual machine translation

Yichao Lu∗, Phillip Keung∗, Faisal Ladhak, Vikas Bhardwaj, Shaonan Zhang, Jason Sun
{yichaolu,keung,faisall,vikab,shaonanz,jasun}@amazon.com

Amazon Inc.

Abstract

We incorporate an explicit neural interlin-
gua into a multilingual encoder-decoder neural
machine translation (NMT) architecture. We
demonstrate that our model learns a language-
independent representation by performing di-
rect zero-shot translation (without using pivot
translation), and by using the source sentence
embeddings to create an English Yelp review
classifier that, through the mediation of the
neural interlingua, can also classify French
and German reviews. Furthermore, we show
that, despite using a smaller number of pa-
rameters than a pairwise collection of bilingual
NMT models, our approach produces compa-
rable BLEU scores for each language pair in
WMT15.

1 Introduction

1.1 Multilingual Machine Translation

Neural machine translation (NMT) relies on word
and sentence embeddings to encode the seman-
tic information needed for translation. The stan-
dard attentional encoder-decoder models (Bah-
danau et al., 2015) for bilingual NMT decom-
pose naturally into separate encoder and decoder
subnetworks for the source and target languages.
This factorization has inspired various forms of
multilingual NMT models that extended the orig-
inal bilingual framework to handle more language
pairs simultaneously. We refer to NMT models
that accept sentences from one source language
and produce outputs in one target language as
‘bilingual’. We contrast this with ‘multilingual’
NMT models, which support more than one source
and/or target languages within the same model.

The naive approach to multilingual machine
translation would train a model for each language
pair, which scales quadratically with the number

∗ Equal contribution

of languages in the corpus. Instead, by com-
bining language-specific encoders and decoders
in different ways, Dong et al. (2015), Zoph and
Knight (2016), Luong et al. (2016), and Firat
et al. (2016a) have explored the one source-to-
many target, many source-to-one target, and many
source-to-many target multilingual MT settings.
The multi-way shared attention model (Firat et al.,
2016a) is closest to our work, in that they consider
the large-scale, many-to-many scenario with mul-
tiple encoders and decoders.

It is also possible to adapt existing bilingual
NMT models to the many-to-many case without
changing the architecture at all. The universal
encoder-decoder approach (Ha et al., 2016; John-
son et al., 2017) constructs a shared vocabulary
for all languages in the dataset, and use just one
encoder and decoder for multilingual translation.
In addition, Johnson et al. (2017) introduce direct
zero-shot translation, which refers to the task of
translating between language pairs without paral-
lel text or pivoting through an intermediate lan-
guage like English. Direct zero-shot translation
may yield lower BLEU scores than pivot-based
approaches, but avoids doubling the latency and
computational overhead (due to translating the
source sentence twice,) which is a concern for
large-scale, productionized MT systems.

Nonetheless, both the multi-way shared at-
tention model and the universal encoder-decoder
model suffer from certain disadvantages. For the
former, direct zero-shot translation was shown to
be impossible in Firat et al. (2016b), and there is
no indication that the model learns any kind of
shared representation across languages. For the
latter, the output vocabulary size is typically fixed
to the vocabulary size for a single target language
(i.e. roughly 20,000 to 30,000 types), regardless
of the number of languages in the corpus. Increas-
ing the vocabulary size is costly, since the training

84

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-64009


and inference time scales linearly with the size of
the decoder’s output layer.

1.2 Our Contributions

In this work, we construct an explicit neural in-
terlingua for multilingual NMT, which addresses
some of the limitations in existing approaches.
Our contributions are threefold:

Firstly, we describe an attentional neural inter-
lingua that receives language-specific encoder em-
beddings and produces output embeddings which
are agnostic to the source and target languages.

Secondly, we perform zero-shot translation
(without pivot translation) for the Fr↔Ru, Zh↔Es
and Es↔Fr pairs of the updated UN Parallel Cor-
pus (Ziemski et al., 2016). At the time of writing,
our approach is the only alternative to the universal
encoder-decoder model for direct neural zero-shot
translation. We observe a significant improvement
in zero-shot translation performance compared to
that model.

Finally, we demonstrate that our model gener-
ates useful representations for crosslingual trans-
fer learning. We use the source sentence embed-
dings from our translation model to create an En-
glish Yelp review classifier that can, through the
mediation of the interlingua, classify French and
German Yelp reviews. We also show that the sen-
tence embeddings of parallel translations are close
to each other in a low-dimensional space.

2 Model Architecture

Figure 1: Our encoder-decoder model with the neural
interlingua, trained on WMT15. The neural interlin-
gua is an attentional encoder that converts language-
specific embeddings to language-independent ones.
Here, we illustrate the flow of data from English →
Interlingua → Finnish, and Russian → Interlingua →
English.

Figure 1 illustrates our basic model architecture.
Each language has its own recurrent encoder and
decoder. We attempt to construct a neural interlin-

Figure 2: An in-depth look at the network structure
when training/predicting with an En-De batch. The En-
glish sentence is fed through the English bidirectional
LSTM encoder. The encoder states are passed into the
neural interlingua, which is an attentional LSTM en-
coder. Finally, the hidden states of the interlingua are
consumed by the German attentional LSTM decoder to
generate the German translation.

gua by passing the language-specific encoder em-
beddings through a shared recurrent layer, whose
output embeddings are then passed to language-
specific decoders.

The figure describes the flow of data in the
model; each minibatch only contains one source
language and one target language, and only the
parameters in the source encoder, interlingua, and
target decoder are used for the forward and back-
ward passes. During training, the source and target
languages in each minibatch rotate according to a
schedule (see Algorithm 1). In Figure 2, we illus-
trate how an English sentence is converted into a
German one.

As with most sequence-to-sequence models, we
can view the generation of the next token in the tar-
get sentence as the application of a series of neural
network operations on the source sentence and the
partial output thus far. We model the probability
of each target sentence as follows,

85



p(yi|y<i, x) = Dect(Inter(Encs(Embs(x))),
yi−1, hti−1)

where y is the target sentence, x is the source
sentence, Dect is the decoder for the target lan-
guage t, Inter is the neural interlingua, Encs is the
encoder for the source language s, Embs is the
word embedding matrix for s, hti−1 is the state of
the decoder at step i − 1, s ∈ {1, ..., S} is the in-
dex of the source language, and t ∈ {1, ..., T} is
the index of the target language.

The source sentence x is transformed from a se-
quence of one-hot representations to a sequence of
word embeddings Bs through Embs,

Bs = Embs(xs)

Bs is a bs×Lx matrix, where Lx is the length of
the source sentence, and bs is the size of the word
embedding for the source language s.

The sequence of word embeddings is converted
into a sentence representation Es by Encs,

Es.,i = Encs(B
s).,i

= BiLSTM(Bs.,i, h
s
i−1)

Es is a es × Lx matrix, where es is the size of
encoder’s output. The notation X.,i refers to the
ith column of the matrix X . BiLSTM is a bidirec-
tional LSTM network, with forward and backward
states hsi−1 = [

−→
h si−1,

←−
h si+1] for step i− 1.

The neural interlingua Inter is an attentional en-
coder that maps the language-specific representa-
tion Es to an interlingual representation I ,

I.,i = Inter(Es).,i
=W I [LSTM(cIi , h

I
i−1), c

I
i ] + b

I

=W I [hIi , c
I
i ] + b

I

where hIi−1 is the interlingua LSTM state for
step i − 1, cIi =

∑Lx
j=1 α

I
ijE

s
.,j is the atten-

tional context vector, αIij =
exp(eIij)∑
j exp(e

I
ij)

and eIij =

MLPI(hIi , E
s
.,j) are the normalized and unnor-

malized attention weights introduced in Bahdanau
et al. (2015), and z = [x, y] denotes the concate-
nation of the vectors x and y into a new vector z.
We perform an affine transformation with W I , bI

to project the interlingua output to the desired di-
mensions.
I is a ei × Li matrix, where ei is the size of

the interlingua’s output. The output of the neural
interlingua is always fixed in length to Li (where
Li = 50 in our experiments), regardless of the
length of the source sentence. We chose Li = 50
because, during model training, we restrict the
maximum source sentence length to 50. To avoid
learning language-specific embeddings, we do not
use indicator tokens for the source or target lan-
guages.

Finally, the decoder takes the interlingual repre-
sentation I and the partial target sentence y<i and
computes the probability distribution for the next
output token,

p(yi|y<i, x)
= Dect(I, yi−1, hti−1).,i
= softmax(W t[LSTM([yi−1, cti], h

t
i−1), c

t
i] + b

t)

= softmax(W t[hti, c
t
i] + b

t)

where cti =
∑Li

j=1 α
t
ijI.,j is the context vec-

tor at step i, and αtij are the normalized attention
weights. The decoders receive the source sentence
only through the interlingual embedding.

Like Firat et al. (2016a), the number of encoders
and decoders for our model architecture scales lin-
early (rather than quadratically) with the number
of languages. In addition, since the neural inter-
lingua provides a common source sentence repre-
sentation to all decoders, the number of attention
mechanisms also scales linearly with the number
of languages.

We note that the concept of a neural interlin-
gua is independent of the architecture that is cho-
sen. While we use a LSTM encoder-decoder
model with single-headed attention for experimen-
tal simplicity, one could also introduce a neu-
ral interlingua to a transformer network (Vaswani
et al., 2017) or a CNN encoder-decoder network
(Gehring et al., 2017) instead.

3 Experiments

We conducted 4 experiments with our model.
We compared the performance of bilingual

NMT baselines against our proposed multilin-
gual model, and observe comparable performance
across all the language pairs in WMT15.

86



Parameter Multi Bilingual-lingual
vocabulary size 30,000 30,000

source embedding size 256 256
target embedding size 256 256

output dimension 512 512
encoder hidden size 512 512
decoder hidden size 512 512

interlingua hidden size 512 -
interlingua length 50 -

encoder depth 2 4
interlingua depth 1 0

decoder depth 1 1
attention type additive additive

optimizer Adam Adam
learning rate 0.0002 0.0002

batch size 400 400

Table 1: Hyperparameters for the multilingual and
bilingual encoder-decoder models.

We found that the language-independent sen-
tence embeddings can be used for zero-shot mul-
tilingual classification. We train an English Yelp
review classifier with the interlingual embeddings
as input features, and use that model to classify
French and German reviews.

We performed direct zero-shot translation for
3 language pairs in the new UN Parallel Corpus.
For this task, our model showed an improvement
over the model architecture described in Johnson
et al. (2017). Our positive experimental finding
confirms that our model provides a new approach
for direct neural zero-shot translation.

Finally, we visualized the language-
independent sentence embeddings by projecting
them down to 2 dimensions. We observe that
parallel translations of French, German and
English sentences remain close to each other in
this low-dimensional space.

3.1 Model Training

The hyperparameters for the bilingual baseline
models and our multilingual network are summa-
rized in Table 1. Our multilingual model uses 1
bidirectional LSTM layer in the encoder for each
input language, 1 attentional LSTM layer for the
interlingua and 1 attentional LSTM layer in the
decoder for each output language. The baseline
bilingual models use 2 bidirectional LSTM layers
in the encoder and 1 attentional LSTM layer in the

decoder. We chose the Adam optimizer (Kingma
and Ba, 2015), and we used importance sampling,
as described in Jean et al. (2015), to accelerate
model training.

3.2 Language Rotation During Training

Algorithm 1: Multilingual model training
schedule on WMT15. We store the cycle of
language pairs in schedule, and xs and yt re-
fer to the source and target sentences respec-
tively.
θ ← RandomInitializer()
schedule← {}
for S ∈ {En, Fr, De, Cs, Fi, Ru} do

for L ∈ {Fr, De, Cs, Fi, Ru} do
schedule += {(En,L), (L,En)}

end
schedule += {(S, S)}

end
while True do

for (s, t) ∈ schedule do
xs ← SampleSource(s)
yt ← SampleTarget(t)
a← ForwardStep(θ, xs, yt)
∇θ ← BackwardStep(a, θ)
θ ← SGDUpdate(θ,∇θ)

end
end

The language pair schedule used during train-
ing is crucial for learning an effective sentence
representation. We provide the details in Algo-
rithm 1. In our initial experiments, we cycled
through 10 language pairs (i.e. (x → En, En →
x), x ∈ {Fr, De, Ru, Cs, Fi}), where each mini-
batch consisted of sentences from one language
pair. However, we found that the naive schedule
failed to produce a useful representation for zero-
shot translation or crosslingual text classification.
Since WMT15 is not a multi-parallel corpus, the
model essentially learns to handle two separate
tasks, namely translation from English and trans-
lation to English. For instance, since the output of
the De encoder and the En encoder would never
be used by the same decoder, there is no reason
for De and En source sentences to share the same
embedding, even if they are translations of each
other.

To encourage the model to share the encoder
representations across English and non-English

87



Source Target Bilingual Multilingual

En

Fr 34.85 33.80
De 23.67 23.37
Cs 17.60 16.62
Ru 21.26 21.92
Fi 11.55 13.34

Fr

En

30.72 30.24
De 27.08 27.29
Cs 23.00 23.87
Ru 24.14 26.15
Fi 14.77 16.58

Table 2: Comparison of BLEU scores across language
pairs in newstest2015 and newsdiscuss2015. We show
the results for the bilingual baseline NMT models and
our multilingual NMT model.

source sentences, we added an extra identity lan-
guage pair (i.e. De→De, En→ En, etc.) to the ro-
tation. The identity pair forces the source embed-
dings to be compatible with an additional decoder.
We found that when we did not include the identity
mapping task during training, the zero-shot BLEU
score was < 1.0 for the Fr-Ru language pair.

3.3 Multilingual NMT versus Bilingual NMT
We used the training corpora from the WMT15
translation task to train our encoder-decoder mod-
els. The dataset provides English ↔ (German,
French, Czech, Russian, Finnish) parallel sen-
tences. We followed the standard WMT prepro-
cessing recipes1, which are based on the Moses
library (Koehn et al., 2007). For each language,
we created a vocabulary of 30,000 word pieces
using byte pair encoding (Sennrich et al., 2016).
Sentences longer than 50 word pieces were re-
moved from the training corpus. We used new-
stest2014 and newsdev2015 as our development
set, and newstest2015 and newsdiscuss2015 as our
test set.

We compared the performance of the multilin-
gual model against bilingual baseline models. The
BLEU scores are provided in Table 2. Results are
reported on newstest2015 and newsdiscuss2015.
We see that, while the performance is broadly sim-
ilar (i.e. generally <1.0 BLEU) between the our
model and the baselines, there is a decrease in
BLEU for higher-resource languages (e.g. Fr) and
an increase in BLEU for lower-resource languages

1e.g. http://data.statmt.org/wmt17/
translation-task/preprocessed/de-en/
prepare.sh

(e.g. Fi, Ru). We suspect that this is a conse-
quence of the language pair schedule, which cy-
cles through all language pairs as though they were
equally frequent in the corpus. A similar effect
was also observed in Johnson et al. (2017).

Currey et al. (2017) have shown that (specifi-
cally in low-resource settings) using copied mono-
lingual data can improve model performance. We
followed the technique in Currey et al. (2017) to
strengthen the baseline models, but did not ob-
serve an improvement in the final BLEU score.
This may be due to the fact that even the smallest
language pair in WMT15 has 2 million sentence
pairs, which is more than 3 times larger than ei-
ther the Tr-En or Ro-En pairs discussed in Currey
et al. (2017).

As with Firat et al. (2016a), we generally see
an improvement when translating to English. We
believe that this is because the English language
model is stronger in the multilingual case, since
the English decoder sees more English text.

3.4 Zero-shot Multilingual Classification

We constructed a multilingual Yelp review dataset
from a subset of the Yelp Challenge (Round 10)
corpus. We restrict ourselves to English, French,
and German reviews. The training corpus con-
sists of 5,000 English Yelp reviews, and the test
sets contain 4,000 reviews for each language. The
French and German reviews were extracted by ap-
plying language detection on reviews from Que-
bec, Canada and Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
The review scores were binarized, where 4 and 5
star reviews were labeled as positive, and 1 and
2 star reviews were labeled as negative. We reuse
the encoders trained in Section 3.3 in this section’s
experiments.

At training time, an English Yelp review is
treated as one sentence; we do not apply sen-
tence segmentation to the review. It is passed
through the English encoder, and the neural in-
terlingua converts the English sentence represen-
tation to a fixed-length representation. To create
a feature vector for the text classifier, we apply
mean-pooling to the sentence representation. Un-
der our experimental settings, every sentence is
converted to a 512 × 50 interlingual embedding,
which is mean-pooled into a 512-dimensional vec-
tor. We then fit a logistic regression model using
this feature vector and the sentence polarity as the
binary label. The classifier is only trained on En-

88



Color Lang. Text
Green En spreads between sovereign bonds in Germany and those in other countries were relatively unaffected

by political and market uncertainties concerning Greece in late 2014 and early 2015 .
Fr par contre , la différence entre les obligations souveraines allemandes et celles d’autres pays a été

relativement peu touchée par les incertitudes politiques et les doutes des marchés concernant la Grèce
fin 2014 et début 2015 .

Ru политическая и рыночная нестабильность , связанная с ситуацией в Греции в конце
2014 - го и начале 2015 года , практически не отразилась на спредах доходности между
государственными облигациями Германии и других стран .

Red En 13 . we underscore the need to accelerate efforts at all levels to achieve the objectives of the international
arrangement on forests beyond 2015 and the need to establish a stronger , more effective and solid
arrangement for the period 2015 to 2030 ;

Fr 13 . nous soulignons qu’il faudra redoubler d’efforts à tous les niveaux pour atteindre les objectifs de
l’arrangement international après 2015 et qu’il faudra mettre en place un arrangement plus solide et
plus efficace pour la période 2015 - 2030 ;

Ru 13 . мы подчеркиваем , что необходимо активизировать усилия на всех уровнях в
интересах достижения целей международного механизма по лесам на период после 2015
года и создать действенный , более эффективный и надежный механизм на период 2015
- 2030 годов ;

Orange En the various training activities are listed in table 2 below .
Fr on énumère dans le tableau 2 ci - dessous les diverses activités de formation .
Ru в представленной далее таблице 2 приведен перечень различных мероприятий по

профессиональной подготовке .
Blue En the Conference affirms that , pending the realization of this objective , it is in the interest of the very

survival of humanity that nuclear weapons never be used again .
Fr elle affirme que , en attendant la réalisation de cet objectif , il est dans l’intérêt de la survie même de

l’humanité que les armes nucléaires ne soient plus jamais utilisées .
Ru конференция заявляет , что , пока эта цель не достигнута , необходимо в интересах

самого выживания человечества добиться того , чтобы ядерное оружие никогда не
было вновь применено .

Table 3: Text of the parallel sentences in Figure 3.

Input Language
En De Fr

Trigram 91.6% ± 0.9% 89.6% ± 0.9% 91.5% ± 0.9%
Embeddings 91.5% ± 0.9% 89.2% ± 0.9% 91.1% ± 0.9%
% Positive 82.9% 86.7% 88.5%

Table 4: Accuracy for crosslingual Yelp binary review classification. The trigram baseline model was trained
on English reviews, and tested on English reviews and English translations of French and German reviews. The
embedding-based classifier uses interlingual embeddings from our model in Section 3.3. ‘% Positive’ refers to the
proportion of the test set that has a positive label.

glish reviews.
At prediction time, we pass the text of a German

review through the German encoder and the inter-
lingua, which is again mean-pooled to form a 512-
dimensional vector. Since the interlingual repre-
sentation should be language-independent, we can
attempt to classify German reviews by providing
the vector representation of the German review to
the English classifier. We use the same process for
French reviews.

In Table 4, we compare the accuracy of the clas-
sifier trained on English review embeddings to that
of a baseline model. We established the baseline
by training a trigram classifier on the English re-
views, and used English translations of the French
and German reviews for classification. We ob-

tained the translations through the Google Trans-
late API. The classification accuracy using the in-
terlingual embeddings or the translated French and
German reviews are similar, which shows that the
embeddings have retained semantic information in
a language-independent way.

3.5 Direct Zero-shot Translation

The updated UN Parallel Corpus (Ziemski et al.,
2016), unlike the WMT corpus, is a fully multi-
parallel corpus that contains English, Spanish,
French, Arabic, Chinese and Russian text. We
used this corpus as a testbed for our zero-shot
translation experiments.

We trained our multilingual model on the UN
corpus, following the same settings that we used

89



Fr-Ru Ru-Fr Es-Zh Zh-Es Es-Fr Fr-Es
This Work 18.24 21.61 17.66 18.66 30.08 31.94
Univ. Enc-Dec 8.77 9.76 8.62 6.13 15.04 14.37
Pivot 20.87 27.34 26.03 26.01 31.84 32.93
Direct NMT 28.29 33.26 32.36 32.69 41.38 44.49

Table 5: Zero-shot BLEU scores on the UN Parallel Corpus on selected language pairs. The universal encoder-
decoder, pivot and direct NMT results were retrieved from Miura et al. (2017). Our proposed model outperforms
the universal encoder-decoder model (Johnson et al., 2017) on the zero-shot translation task.

for the WMT corpus (see Table 1 and Algorithm
1). The text was processed following the steps pro-
vided in Miura et al. (2017). We restrict the train-
ing corpus to sentence pairs that have English as
either the source or target language.

We used the Fr-Ru, Es-Zh and Es-Fr portions of
the test set from the UN corpus for the zero-shot
translation evaluation. The training dataset that we
constructed does not contain direct Fr-Ru, Es-Zh
or Es-Fr sentence pairs. The test set contains 4,000
sentence pairs for each language pair.

We examine the BLEU scores for zero-shot
translation on the UN corpus in Table 5. The uni-
versal encoder-decoder, pivot and direct NMT re-
sults were retrieved from (Miura et al., 2017). By
‘direct NMT’, we refer to a model trained directly
on the parallel text.

Our multilingual model performs significantly
better on the direct zero-shot task than the uni-
versal encoder-decoder approach of Johnson et al.
(2017). Generally, our model does not perform
as well as the pivot approach, though in the case
of Es-Fr and Fr-Es, the difference is surprisingly
small (<2.0 BLEU).

Improving direct zero-shot methods to reach
parity with pivot translation has practical conse-
quences for large-scale NMT systems, like re-
duced latency and computational overhead. (Re-
call that pivot translation must translate every
source sentence twice; first into the intermediate
language, and then into the target language.) Our
results show progress towards the goal of transi-
tioning away from pivot-based methods to neural
zero-shot translation.

3.6 Interlingua Visualization

In Figure 3, we plot the embeddings for 4 groups
of parallel sentences. Sentences from the same
group share the same color. Each group contains
one French, one English and one Russian sentence
which are parallel translations of each other. We

Figure 3: Interlingual embeddings for four groups of
parallel English, French, and Russian sentences from
the UN Parallel Corpus. The 512-dimensional mean-
pooled interlingual sentence embeddings were pro-
jected down to R2 using PCA. Refer to Table 3 for the
colors and text of the sentences.

provide the text of the embedded sentences in Ta-
ble 3.

The embeddings were generated by mean-
pooling each sentence embedding to a 512-
dimensional vector and projecting it to R2 using
PCA. From the figure, we observe a clear separa-
tion between different groups of sentences, while
sentences within the same group remain close to
each other in space. This is the expected outcome
if our model has captured language-independent
semantic information in its sentence representa-
tions.

4 Related Work

4.1 Networks with Language-specific
Encoders and Decoders

The many-to-one approach explored in Zoph and
Knight (2016) primarily considers the trilingual
case, where a multi-parallel corpus is available,
and uses 2 encoders simultaneously to provide the
source context for the decoder. We note that us-
ing 2 encoders simultaneously requires having 2
source sentences for every desired target sentence

90



at prediction time, which is not the setting that we
investigate here.

By combining a single encoder with multiple at-
tentional decoders, the one-to-many approach pre-
sented in Dong et al. (2015) showed an improve-
ment in translation performance, due to the in-
crease in the number of sentences seen by the en-
coder and through multi-task learning.

The many-to-many approach in the shared at-
tention model (Firat et al., 2016a) assigns a dif-
ferent encoder and decoder to each language, but
shares the decoders’ attention mechanisms. By
specifying a ‘universal’ attention mechanism for
all language pairs, Firat et al. (2016a) avoid cre-
ating as many attention mechanisms as there are
language pairs (i.e. avoids quadratic scaling).

However, the attention mechanism acts as the
alignment model between the source and target
sentences, and a shared attention mechanism may
be too restrictive, especially for languages that
have very different word orders. Our interlin-
gual approach relaxes the requirement of a single,
shared attention mechanism. In our framework,
there are as many attention mechanisms as there
are decoders.

4.2 Universal Encoder-Decoder Networks

Johnson et al. (2017) have foregone the use of
multiple encoders and decoders, and instead use
one universal encoder and one universal decoder.
They constructed a joint vocabulary for all lan-
guages in the corpus, consisting of word pieces
derived from a byte-pair encoding (Sennrich et al.,
2016) on the union of the vocabulary of all the
languages, and include special tokens to indicate
what the output language should be. Ha et al.
(2016) follow a similar approach, but the shared
vocabulary is constructed by prepending a lan-
guage identifier to each token.

The universal encoder-decoder approach does
have some shortcomings. Johnson et al. (2017)
rely on the existence of a shared vocabulary, which
may not be as sensible in some combinations (e.g.
Chinese and English) as in others (e.g. Spanish
and Portuguese). If the languages’ vocabularies
do not share many word pieces, then either the
decoder’s output layer will be very large, which
slows down training and inference, or the output
layer will be artificially constrained to a manage-
able size, which impacts translation performance.

Our approach, on the other hand, allows each

target language to retain its own decoder. The to-
tal vocabulary size can then expand with the num-
ber of languages without affecting training or in-
ference speed.

4.3 Zero-shot Translation

One of the challenges in multilingual MT is data
sparsity, which refers to the lack of parallel text
for every possible language pair in a corpus. Zero-
shot translation is the task of translating between
language pairs without parallel text.

An early approach to allow zero-shot translation
made use of a ‘pivot’ language in the translation
process (Boitet, 1988). For instance, in sentence-
based pivoting, the source sentence is translated
into a pivot language, and from the pivot language
translated to the target language. Various exten-
sions of the pivot technique have been proposed
over the years, see Utiyama and Isahara (2007),
Chen et al. (2017), Miura et al. (2017), Cohn and
Lapata (2007).

Universal encoder-decoder systems like John-
son et al. (2017) have demonstrated the ability to
perform direct zero-shot translation without using
a pivot language at all, albeit with a significant
BLEU reduction for some language pairs.

5 Conclusion

We incorporate a neural interlingua compo-
nent into the standard encoder-decoder frame-
work for multilingual neural machine transla-
tion, and demonstrate that the resulting model
learns language-independent sentence representa-
tions, enabling zero-shot translation and crosslin-
gual text classification.

We perform direct zero-shot translation for 3
language pairs without pivoting through an inter-
mediate language like English. We observe an
improvement in zero-shot translation performance
compared to the universal encoder-decoder results
reported in Miura et al. (2017). Furthermore, we
use the learned encoder to train an English Yelp
review classifier that can, with the help of the in-
terlingual embeddings, also classify German and
French reviews. Finally, our experiments showed
that the results from our model are comparable to
the results from bilingual baselines.

In future work, we intend to address the signifi-
cant performance gap between direct neural zero-
shot translation and pivot translation. By manipu-
lating the sentence embeddings in an appropriate

91



way, we aim to extract significant improvements
over the results presented in this paper.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-

gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In ICLR.

Christian Boitet. 1988. Pros and cons of the pivot and
transfer approaches in multilingual machine trans-
lation. In Readings in machine translation, pages
273–279.

Yun Chen, Yang Liu, Yong Cheng, and Victor OK
Li. 2017. A teacher-student framework for zero-
resource neural machine translation. ACL.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Machine trans-
lation by triangulation: Making effective use of
multi-parallel corpora. In ACL.

Anna Currey, Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone, and Ken-
neth Heafield. 2017. Copied monolingual data im-
proves low-resource neural machine translation. In
WMT.

Daxiang Dong, Hua Wu, Wei He, Dianhai Yu, and
Haifeng Wang. 2015. Multi-task learning for mul-
tiple language translation. In ACL.

Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
2016a. Multi-way, multilingual neural machine
translation with a shared attention mechanism. In
NAACL-HLT.

Orhan Firat, Baskaran Sankaran, Yaser Al-Onaizan,
Fatos T Yarman Vural, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2016b.
Zero-resource translation with multi-lingual neural
machine translation. In EMNLP.

Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis
Yarats, and Yann N Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional
sequence to sequence learning. In ICML.

Thanh-Le Ha, Jan Niehues, and Alexander Waibel.
2016. Toward multilingual neural machine transla-
tion with universal encoder and decoder. In IWSLT.

Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. On using very large tar-
get vocabulary for neural machine translation. In
ACL.

Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le, Maxim
Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat,
Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado,
et al. 2017. Google’s multilingual neural machine
translation system: enabling zero-shot translation.
In TACL.

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In ACL.

Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, Ilya Sutskever, Oriol
Vinyals, and Lukasz Kaiser. 2016. Multi-task se-
quence to sequence learning. In ICLR.

Akiva Miura, Graham Neubig, Katsuhito Sudoh, and
Satoshi Nakamura. 2017. Tree as a pivot: Syntactic
matching methods in pivot translation. In WMT.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In ACL.

Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. A compari-
son of pivot methods for phrase-based statistical ma-
chine translation. In NAACL-HLT.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In NIPS.

Michal Ziemski, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, and Bruno
Pouliquen. 2016. The united nations parallel corpus
v1. 0. In LREC.

Barret Zoph and Kevin Knight. 2016. Multi-source
neural translation. In NAACL-HLT.

92


