



















































Talking about other people: an endless range of possibilities


Proceedings of The 11th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 415–420,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5-8, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

415

Talking about other people: an endless range of possibilities

Emiel van Miltenburg
Tilburg University

C.W.J.vanMiltenburg@uvt.nl

Desmond Elliott
University of Copenhagen

de@di.ku.dk

Piek Vossen
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
piek.vossen@vu.nl

Abstract

Image description datasets, such as
Flickr30K and MS COCO, show a high
degree of variation in the ways that crowd-
workers talk about the world. Although
this gives us a rich and diverse collection
of data to work with, it also introduces un-
certainty about how the world should be
described. This paper shows the extent of
this uncertainty in the PEOPLE domain. We
present a taxonomy of different ways to
talk about other people. This taxonomy
serves as a reference point to think about
how other people should be described, and
can be used to classify and compute statis-
tics about labels applied to people.

1 Introduction

There are currently two major data sets used to
train and evaluate automatic description systems:
Flickr30K and MS COCO (Young et al., 2014; Lin
et al., 2014). Both of these data sets contain im-
ages with multiple crowd-sourced descriptions per
image. These datasets are typically used to train
data-driven natural language generation systems
to automatically learn to associate visual features
with natural language descriptions (Bernardi et al.,
2016). Following the training phase, image descrip-
tion systems are evaluated by comparing their out-
put with human generated descriptions for the same
image (using textual similarity metrics like BLEU
or METEOR, Papineni et al. 2002; Denkowski and
Lavie 2014). The standard for what the image
descriptions should look like is implicit in the cor-
pus. The only point at which any explicit guide-
lines are provided is during the crowd-sourcing
task, where annotators are given general instruc-
tions about what their description should look like.
Here are the Flickr30K instructions (the MS COCO

instructions are similar):

1. Describe the image in one complete
but simple sentence. 2. Provide an ex-
plicit description of prominent entities.
3. Do not make unfounded assumptions
about what is occurring. 4. Only talk
about entities that appear in the image.
5. Provide an accurate description of the
activities, people, animals and objects
you see depicted in the image. 6. Each
description must be a single sentence un-
der 100 characters.
(Hodosh et al., 2013, edited for brevity)

These guidelines leave much of the task open
for interpretation by the annotator. For example,
it is unclear how the descriptions will be used, or
what the target audience is (as pointed out by van
Miltenburg et al. 2017). Thus, the underspecified
nature of the task invites variation and creativity.
It is important for us to understand the extent of
this variation because image description corpora
currently set the standard for what an image de-
scription should look like.

Earlier work has looked at stereotyping behavior,
reporting bias, and the use of negations in image
descriptions (van Miltenburg, 2016; Misra et al.,
2016; van Miltenburg et al., 2016, 2017), and re-
cently Van Miltenburg et al. (2018) provided an
overview of measures to quantify diversity. This pa-
per looks at the variation in the labels used to refer
to other people, and presents a taxonomy (based on
the Flickr30K dataset) that shows the range of prop-
erties that crowd-workers consider in the descrip-
tion process. This taxonomy ranges from physical
attributes, such as hair color, to attributes concern-
ing socio-economic status (e.g. unemployed).

After discussing related work (§2), we present
our method to select person-labels and to catego-
rize (partial) labels into semantic categories (§3).



416

Following this, Section 4 shows the resulting tax-
onomy, with examples from the Flickr30K dataset.
Section 5 discusses our taxonomy in light of the
recently published Face2Text dataset (Gatt et al.,
2018), and considers the reliability of perceived
attributes. We believe these contributions will be
useful for practitioners interested in the generation
of person-descriptions. Our code and data is pub-
licly available online.1

2 Related work

Natural Language Generation researchers tasked
with describing other people have mostly been con-
cerned with generating referring expressions with-
out visual context, usually for well-known entities
(e.g. Castro Ferreira et al. 2016; Kutlak et al. 2016).
The closest related work comes from Gatt et al.
(2018) and Van Miltenburg (2016).

Gatt et al. (2018) present a dataset of images of
human faces, with multiple elicited descriptions per
image. They annotated a part of their dataset to esti-
mate how many of the descriptions refer to physical
(85%), emotional (44%), or inferred (46%) prop-
erties of the subjects depicted in the images. In
contrast, the present paper presents a more precise
taxonomy, and discusses Gatt et al.’s Face2Text
dataset in light of this taxonomy.

Van Miltenburg (2016) used the Flickr30K-
entities dataset (Plummer et al., 2015) to cluster
entity mentions based on their co-reference to the
same entities. We refer to these mentions as la-
bels. Their clustering approach yields hundreds of
groups of labels referring to similar entities. Here
is one of those clusters, relating to FACIAL HAIR:

beard, goatee, beard and mustache, gray beard,
black beard, white beard, red beard, braided beard,
gray braided beard, long, white beard, long brown
beard, flaming red beard, big beard, short beard,
bubble beard, large white beard, thick beard,
neatly trimmed beard, scruffy beard, red facial
hair

Van Miltenburg (2016) uses this example as
anecdotal evidence for the richness of image de-
scription data, without further analysis. Our paper
aims to provide a deeper analysis of the labels used
to refer to other people, by manually categorizing
the labels into semantically coherent sub-groups.
For example, if we look more closely at the FA-
CIAL HAIR cluster, we can see that these terms
include references to the KIND OF HAIR (beard,

1https://github.com/evanmiltenburg/LabelingPeople

goatee, mustache), the COLOR (gray, black, white),
LENGTH (long, short), SIZE (big, large), ORDER-
LINESS (neatly trimmed, scruffy), and PRESENTA-
TION (braided). This means that, when asked to
talk about an image, people consider at least six
different variables just to describe facial hair.

3 Method

We created a taxonomy of the labels used to refer to
other people by manually sorting the entity labels
into different semantic categories, instead of clus-
tering the labels (as in Van Miltenburg 2016). The
advantage of manually sorting the labels is that we
have full control over the categories. This makes
it possible to make more fine-grained distinctions,
and to show the breadth of the label distribution. In
this paper, we use the English Flickr30K corpus,
focusing on the different ways that crowd-workers
describe other people.

3.1 Initial selection

The starting point for our categorization is a list of
labels. We compiled this list using the Flickr30K-
entities annotations provided by Plummer et al.
(2015), and listed all labels that were classed as
PEOPLE. After normalization, we found 19,634
unique labels, which is too much to categorize by
hand.2 (It is not possible to crowd-source our cat-
egorization task, because the categories are not
known beforehand.) Hence we focus our efforts
only on the 5,526 labels that end with any of the
nouns girl, boy, woman, man, female, male, or
any of their plural forms.3 This makes the task
more manageable, but it also potentially reduces
the variation in the data because the selected labels
are more homogeneous. Nevertheless, as we will
see in Section 4, we still found a broad range of
variation in the labels.

During the categorization task, we found sev-
eral typing errors, and words unrelated to people-
labeling. We addressed these issues by semi-
automatically correcting the typing errors, and cre-
ating a list of stopwords that were automatically
removed from the labels. This further reduced the
number of unique labels-to-be-categorized from
5526 to 3401.

2We normalized the labels by lowercasing them, and re-
moving the characters @+,&().

3We applied the same approach to the attributes in the
Visual Genome dataset (Krishna et al., 2017), but for reasons
of space we focus on Flickr30K. Results are available online.

https://github.com/evanmiltenburg/LabelingPeople


417

Category Examples

ABILITY wheelchair bound, able-bodied, disabled, handicapped, blind, one-armed, legless, crippled
ACTIVITY running, chasing, waving, speaking, parachuting, roller-skating, protesting, partying, hiking
AGE young, old, middle-aged, adult, elderly, infant, twenty-something, teen-aged, adolescent
ATTRACTIVENESS attractive, beautiful, pretty, sexy, cute, ugly, adorable, hot, handsome, nice, good looking
BUILD petite, muscular, slender, lanky, heavy chested, potbellied, well built, burly, stocky, potbellied
CLEANLINESS dirty, shaggy, scruffy, muddy, disheveled, messy, well-groomed, grouchy looking, dirty faced
CLOTHING – AMOUNT shirtless, topless, barefooted, scantily clad, nude, unclothed, undressed, semi-naked, shoe-less

– COLOR green black uniformed, brightly dressed, red shirted, colorfully clothed, vibrantly colored
– KIND uniformed, casually dressed, sari-garbed, leather-clad, robed, suited, kilted, gothic-dressed

ETHNICITY african-american, asian, oriental, caucasian, chinese, foreign, middle-eastern, indian, tribal
EYES blue-eyed, brown eyed, green eyed, bespectacled, glasses-wearing, sun-glassed
FITNESS physically fit, healthy fit, in shape, healthy and fit, weak looking, out-of-shape
GROUP cast, circle, audience, crowd, ensemble, couple, team, roomful, group, trio, bunch, gathering
HAIR – COLOR blond, dark-haired, brown-haired, brunette, redheaded, fair, dark, ginger, dirty-blonde, graying

– FACIAL bearded, goateed, shaved, white-bearded, mustachioed, stubbled, green bearded, clean-shaven
– LENGTH bald, short-haired, long-haired, balding, nearly bald, partially bald, shaved head, bald-headed
– STYLE curly-haired, frizzy-haired, pony-tailed, shaggy-haired, curly, dreadlocked, spiky haired

HEIGHT tall, short, petite, taller, long, littler, tall looking, shorter, rather tall, slightly taller
JUDGMENT stylish, tacky looking, strange, silly, odd looking, hip, comical, flamboyant, shady, shadowy
MOOD happy, excited, curious, enthusiastic, tired, thoughtful, pensive, angry-looking, weary, sad
OCCUPATION military, navy, photographer, coast guard, executive, cooking professional, bartender
RELIGION muslim, hindu, amish, christian, islamic, religious, jewish, buddhist, catholic, mormon, hindi
SOCIAL GROUP homeless, goth, hippie, rasta, peasant, unemployed, poor looking, trash, middle class, high class
STATE drunk, extremely drunk, wet, bloody, pregnant, sweaty, cold, handcuffed, ill, injured, deceased
WEIGHT overweight, fat, slim, skinny, obese, plump, heavyset, heftier, mildly overweight, heavy, hefty

Table 1: Taxonomy of labels referring to other people, with selected examples for each category. All
examples are (partial) labels from the Flickr30K dataset.

3.2 Sorting procedure
We manually sorted (partial) labels into semantic
categories, shown in Table 1. Nothing crucially
hinges on these specific categories, but from our
experience with image description datasets, we be-
lieve they provide a good first approximation, cap-
turing the breadth of the labels used by the crowd.
Our sorting procedure works as follows.

1. Start with a set of labels to be categorized.
2. Remove task-specific stopwords and unrelated

phrases (e.g. a picture of ) from the labels.
This reduces the number of unique labels.

3. Select (partial) labels from the list, add them
to an existing category file, or create a new
category file with those labels.

4. Match the labels with the categories. We use a
context-free grammar (CFG, see Figure 1; im-
plemented using the NLTK, Bird et al. 2009)
because each label may consist of multiple
modifiers from different categories. For exam-
ple: African-American young man has both
ETHNICITY and AGE modifiers.

5. Remove matches from the set of labels to be
categorized.

6. Either stop categorization, or go to 3.

LABEL → MOD, GENDEREDNOUN
LABEL → MOD, MOD, GENDEREDNOUN
MOD → ABILITY | ACTIVITY | AGE | . . .
GENDEREDNOUN → woman | man | girl | boy | . . .
AGE → young | old | middle-aged | adult | elderly | . . .
ETHNICITY → African-American | Asian | oriental | . . .

Figure 1: Subset of our Context-Free Grammar,
designed to match labels with different categories
of modifiers. Production rules are based on our
category files (which are updated in step 3).

Our goal is to get an overview of the different
kinds of labels used by the crowd-workers, not to
achieve a perfect categorization of all labels. Thus,
our stopping criterion is as follows. The sorting
task is finished whenever there are no more exam-
ples matching existing categories, or warranting
new categories. New categories are warranted if
there are multiple (partial) labels that clearly fall
under the same umbrella, but do not fit into any of
the existing categories.

4 Results

We sorted the (partial) labels into 20 different cat-
egories, until we were left with only 341 labels



418

(10%) that could not be fully matched with our
categories by the CFG matcher. Examples of un-
categorized labels are birthday girl and blood pres-
sure of a man. The former could be classed as a
role associated with an event, but we did not find
many such examples. The latter is an artifact of
the automated label categorization process for the
Flickr30K Entities dataset.

Table 1 shows the 20 different label categories,
with examples for each category. With this ta-
ble, we have an empirically derived taxonomy that
provides an overview of the choices that crowd-
workers make in order to describe other people.
The different categories show the diversity and
breadth of the label distribution. In future work,
we hope to extend the coverage of our taxonomy
(ideally to all 19,634 person-labels in Flickr30K-
Entities), and present statistics about the proportion
of person-labels from the Flickr30K dataset that
fall into each category.

Our taxonomy also provides a reference point
to think about the characteristics that we would
and would not like image description systems to
describe. For example, the automatic description
of features like RELIGION, WEIGHT, or SOCIAL
GROUP would probably do more harm than good.
Table 1 also shows us what makes image descrip-
tion difficult. For this domain alone, to produce
human-like descriptions, systems need to be able
to predict 20 different kinds of features, and de-
cide which feature values are relevant to mention.
A further complication is that even after deciding
which characteristics to describe, there are still
within-category choices to be made. For example,
when describing a game of basketball, one might
choose to talk about a man playing basketball (see-
ing basketball-playing as a transient property), or
male basketball player (seeing basketball-playing
as an inherent property). These choices go beyond
the scope of this paper, but see Beukeboom 2014;
Fokkens et al. 2018 for a discussion.

5 Discussion and Future Research

5.1 Extending the taxonomy to Face2text

We obtained the Face2Text corpus (Gatt et al., 2018,
v0.1) from the authors to see to what extent our tax-
onomy could be applied to their data. The main dif-
ference between the Flickr30K-Entities labels and
the Face2Text descriptions is that the former are
part of a larger description, whereas the latter are
full-blown descriptions themselves. As a result, the

Face2Text descriptions are much longer (a mean of
26.9 tokens versus 2.4 for the Flickr30k-entities la-
bels). This leads to crowd-workers providing much
more (and seemingly more specific) information
about the people in the images. For example, there
are 24 occurrences of ‘jaw’ in Face2Text, with mod-
ifiers such as angular, pointy, traditional square to
denote the specific shape of the jaw. Such details
do not seem relevant enough to mention in a short
label, as in the Flickr30K-Entities dataset.

In future work, we hope to extend our taxonomy
to cover the Face2Text data. This would make
users more aware of the contents of the corpus,
and enable them to make a conscious choice about
the kinds of features they would like their face
description systems to generate.

5.2 Consistency is no substitute for truth

In earlier research, Song et al. (2017) present a sys-
tem that is able to predict (to varying degrees of
success) perceived social attributes from faces. Hu-
man participants rated faces from a large database
for their attractiveness, friendliness, familiarity, but
also to what extent they thought the subjects were
egotistical, emotionally stable, or responsible.4

It is important to stress that these ratings only
indicate perceived characteristics, and do not neces-
sarily reflect the actual characters of the individuals
in the dataset. More generally, even though peo-
ple may be able to consistently ascribe a particular
property to an individual, this alone does not en-
tail that the property actually applies (see Todorov
et al. 2013; Agüera y Arcas et al. 2017 for a dis-
cussion). When considering different ways to label
other people, we should ask ourselves: is it reason-
able to predict this label category based on visual
information alone?

5.3 Limitations

The approach taken in this paper has three main
limitations, which we will discuss in turn.

First, our taxonomy is based on a subset of the
person-labels in the Flickr30K-Entities dataset, and
thus may overlook other relevant label categories.

4Song et al. (2017) list the following 20 pairs of social
traits: (attractive, unattractive), (happy, unhappy), (friendly,
unfriendly), (sociable, introverted), (kind, mean), (caring,
cold), (calm, aggressive), (trustworthy, untrustworthy), (re-
sponsible, irresponsible), (confident, uncertain), (humble, ego-
tistical),(emotionally stable, emotionally unstable), (normal,
weird), (intelligent, unintelligent), (interesting, boring), (emo-
tional, unemotional), (memorable, forgettable), (typical, atypi-
cal), (familiar, unfamiliar) and (common, uncommon).



419

We emphasize that our work is not meant to pro-
vide an exhaustive categorization of the labels used
in the Flickr30K data. Rather, our goal is to high-
light the breadth of the label distribution. The fact
that the broad taxonomy developed in this paper is
based on a subset of all the labels (less than a third
of the Flickr30K data) only supports the main point
of this paper, which is that humans use a wide array
of terms to refer to other people.

Second, our taxonomy is constructed manually,
and it is unclear whether replication would yield
similar results. This is a natural result of a manual
categorization of the person labels, and it would be
interesting to see if we could automatically induce
a similar taxonomy from the corpus data (for ex-
ample using LDA; Blei et al. 2003). To facilitate
future research in this area, we made all our code
and data available online.1

Finally, our taxonomy is exclusively based on
English, without any input from other languages.
It may be the case that speakers of other languages
highlight other features, in making reference to
other people. This idea opens up another avenue of
research, asking two related questions:

1. Do speakers of the same language tend to men-
tion the same person-attributes for the same
images?

2. Are there any cross-linguistic differences in
what features are mentioned in reference to
other people?

Although some work has mentioned cross-
linguistic differences in how annotators refer to
other people (e.g. Li et al. 2016; van Miltenburg
et al. 2017), we are not aware of any systematic
study that specifically looks at how speakers of dif-
ferent languages make reference to other people,
and what features they tend to mention.

6 Conclusion

We have looked at the variation in the ways crowd-
workers talk about other people in the Flickr30K
dataset. Our main result is that this variation cov-
ers a wide range of variables, from appearance to
socio-economic status. We formalized this varia-
tion in a taxonomy of person-labels, which should
help us reflect on the image description task, and
the kinds of descriptions that image description
systems should produce. Future research should
be aware that, even though crowd-workers may
systematically produce particular labels, this does

not mean that the label is true. We encourage the
development of standards and guidelines, that tell
us which kinds of labels to use in what kind of situ-
ations. Such guidelines may benefit system evalua-
tion and help us avoid the inappropriate labeling of
other people.

Acknowledgments

This paper was written while the first author was
at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, supported by
the NWO Spinoza Prize awarded to Piek Vossen.

References
Blaise Agüera y Arcas, Margaret Mitchell, and Alexan-

der Todorov. 2017. Physiognomy’s new clothes.
Medium.

Raffaella Bernardi, Ruket Cakici, Desmond Elliott,
Aykut Erdem, Erkut Erdem, Nazli Ikizler-Cinbis,
Frank Keller, Adrian Muscat, and Barbara Plank.
2016. Automatic description generation from im-
ages: A survey of models, datasets, and evalua-
tion measures. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search, 55:409–442.

Camiel J. Beukeboom. 2014. Mechanisms of linguis-
tic bias: How words reflect and maintain stereo-
typic expectancies. In J. Laszlo, J. Forgas, and
O. Vincze, editors, Social cognition and commu-
nication, volume 31, pages 313–330. Psychology
Press. Author’s pdf: http://dare.ubvu.vu.nl/handle/
1871/47698.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009.
Natural language processing with Python: analyz-
ing text with the natural language toolkit. ” O’Reilly
Media, Inc.”.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

Thiago Castro Ferreira, Emiel Krahmer, and Sander
Wubben. 2016. Towards more variation in text gen-
eration: Developing and evaluating variation models
for choice of referential form. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
568–577, Berlin, Germany.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor uni-
versal: Language specific translation evaluation for
any target language. In Proceedings of the EACL
2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.

Antske Fokkens, Nel Ruigrok, Camiel Beukeboom,
Gagestein Sarah, and Wouter Van Attveldt. 2018.
Studying Muslim Stereotyping through Micropor-
trait Extraction. In Proceedings of the Eleventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and

https://medium.com/@blaisea/physiognomys-new-clothes-f2d4b59fdd6a
http://dare.ubvu.vu.nl/handle/1871/47698
http://dare.ubvu.vu.nl/handle/1871/47698


420

Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Albert Gatt, Marc Tanti, Adrian Muscat, Patrizia Pag-
gio, Reuben A Farrugia, Claudia Borg, Kenneth P
Camilleri, Mike Rosner, and Lonneke van der Plas.
2018. Face2text: Collecting an annotated image de-
scription corpus for the generation of rich face de-
scriptions. In Proceedings of the 11th edition of
the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC’18).

Micah Hodosh, Peter Young, and Julia Hockenmaier.
2013. Framing image description as a ranking task:
Data, models and evaluation metrics. Journal of Ar-
tificial Intelligence Research, 47:853–899.

Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-
son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen,
Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A. Shamma,
Michael S. Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. 2017. Vi-
sual genome: Connecting language and vision using
crowdsourced dense image annotations. Int. J. Com-
put. Vision, 123(1):32–73.

Roman Kutlak, Kees van Deemter, and Chris Mellish.
2016. Production of referring expressions for an un-
known audience: A computational model of com-
munal common ground. Frontiers in psychology,
7:1275.

Xirong Li, Weiyu Lan, Jianfeng Dong, and Hailong
Liu. 2016. Adding chinese captions to images. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Con-
ference on Multimedia Retrieval, pages 271–275.
ACM.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 740–755. Springer.

Emiel van Miltenburg. 2016. Stereotyping and bias in
the flickr30k dataset. In Proceedings of Multimodal
Corpora: Computer vision and language processing
(MMC 2016), pages 1–4.

Emiel van Miltenburg, Desmond Elliott, and Piek
Vossen. 2017. Cross-linguistic differences and simi-
larities in image descriptions. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Natural Language
Generation, pages 21–30, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Emiel van Miltenburg, Desmond Elliott, and Piek
Vossen. 2018. Measuring the diversity of automatic
image descriptions. In Proceedings of the 27th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1730–1741. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Emiel van Miltenburg, Roser Morante, and Desmond
Elliott. 2016. Pragmatic factors in image descrip-
tion: The case of negations. In Proceedings of the

5th Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 54–
59, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, Margaret Mitchell,
and Ross Girshick. 2016. Seeing through the human
reporting bias: Visual classifiers from noisy human-
centric labels. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
2930–2939.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes,
Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svetlana
Lazebnik. 2015. Flickr30k entities: Collecting
region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-
to-sentence models. In Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision, pages
2641–2649.

Amanda Song, Linjie Li, Chad Atalla, and Garrison
Cottrell. 2017. Learning to see people like people:
Predicting the social perception of faces. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science So-
ciety.

Alexander Todorov, Peter Mende-Siedlecki, and Ron
Dotsch. 2013. Social judgments from faces. Cur-
rent opinion in neurobiology, 23(3):373–380.

Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia Hock-
enmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to visual
denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic in-
ference over event descriptions. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:67–78.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-016-0981-7
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-016-0981-7
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-016-0981-7
http://aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1147
http://aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1147
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.320
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.320
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.320
https://doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135
https://doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135

