



















































Unsupervised Identification of Study Descriptors in Toxicology Research: An Experimental Study


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (LOUHI 2018), pages 71–82
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

71

Unsupervised Identification of Study Descriptors in Toxicology Research:
An Experimental Study

Drahomira Herrmannova, Steven R. Young, Robert M. Patton, Christopher G. Stahl
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, USA

{herrmannovad, youngsr, pattonrm, stahlcg}@ornl.gov

Nicole C. Kleinstreuer
NICEATM, NTP, NIEHS, NIH

Research Triangle Park, NC, USA
nicole.kleinstreuer@nih.gov

Mary S. Wolfe
NTP, NIEHS, NIH

Research Triangle Park, NC, USA
wolfe@niehs.nih.gov

Abstract

Identifying and extracting data elements such
as study descriptors in publication full texts is
a critical yet manual and labor-intensive step
required in a number of tasks. In this paper
we address the question of identifying data el-
ements in an unsupervised manner. Specifi-
cally, provided a set of criteria describing spe-
cific study parameters, such as species, route
of administration, and dosing regimen, we de-
velop an unsupervised approach to identify
text segments (sentences) relevant to the crite-
ria. A binary classifier trained to identify pub-
lications that met the criteria performs better
when trained on the candidate sentences than
when trained on sentences randomly picked
from the text, supporting the intuition that our
method is able to accurately identify study de-
scriptors.

Acknowledgments

Support for this research was provided by a
grant from the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences (AES 16002-001), National Insti-
tutes of Health to Oak Ridge National Laboratory.

This research was supported in part by an ap-
pointment to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
ASTRO Program, sponsored by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy and administered by the Oak
Ridge Institute for Science and Education.

This manuscript has been authored by UT-
Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-
00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy.
The United States Government retains and the

publisher, by accepting the article for publica-
tion, acknowledges that the United States Govern-
ment retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevoca-
ble, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the
published form of this manuscript, or allow oth-
ers to do so, for United States Government pur-
poses. The Department of Energy will provide
public access to these results of federally spon-
sored research in accordance with the DOE Public
Access Plan1.

1 Introduction

Extracting data elements such as study descrip-
tors from publication full texts is an essential
step in a number of tasks including systematic
review preparation (Jonnalagadda et al., 2015),
construction of reference databases (Kleinstreuer
et al., 2016), and knowledge discovery (Smal-
heiser, 2012). These tasks typically involve do-
main experts identifying relevant literature per-
taining to a specific research question or a topic
being investigated, identifying passages in the re-
trieved articles that discuss the sought after infor-
mation, and extracting structured data from these
passages. The extracted data is then analyzed, for
example to assess adherence to existing guidelines
(Kleinstreuer et al., 2016). Figure 1 shows an ex-
ample text excerpt with information relevant to a
specific task (assessment of adherence to existing
guidelines (Kleinstreuer et al., 2016)) highlighted.

1http://energy.gov/downloads/
doe-public-access-plan

http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan
http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan


72

Figure 1: Text excerpt from a reference database of rodent uterotrophic bioassay publications (Kleinstreuer et al.,
2016). The text in this example was manually annotated by one of the authors to highlight information relevant to
guidelines for performing uterotrophic bioassays set forth by (OECD, 2007).

Extracting the data elements needed in these
tasks is a time-consuming and at present a largely
manual process which requires domain exper-
tise. For example, in systematic review prepara-
tion, information extraction generally constitutes
the most time consuming task (Tsafnat et al.,
2014). This situation is made worse by the rapidly
expanding body of potentially relevant literature
with more than one million papers added into
PubMed each year (Landhuis, 2016). Therefore,
data annotation and extraction presents an impor-
tant challenge for automation.

A typical approach to automated identification
of relevant information in biomedical texts is to in-
fer a prediction model from labeled training data –
such a model can then be used to assign predicted
labels to new data instances. However, obtaining
training data for creating such prediction models
can be very costly as it involves the step which
these models are trying to automate – manual data
extraction. Furthermore, depending on the task
at hand, the types of information being extracted
may vary significantly. For example, in system-
atic reviews of randomized controlled trials this
information generally includes the patient group,
the intervention being tested, the comparison, and
the outcomes of the study (PICO elements) (Tsaf-
nat et al., 2014). In toxicology research the ex-
traction may focus on routes of exposure, dose,
and necropsy timing (Kleinstreuer et al., 2016).
Previous work has largely focused on identifying
specific pieces of information such as biomedical
events (Gonzalez et al., 2015) or PICO elements
(Jonnalagadda et al., 2015). However, depending

on the domain and the end goal of the extraction,
these may be insufficient to comprehensively de-
scribe a given study.

Therefore, in this paper we focus on unsuper-
vised methods for identifying text segments (such
as sentences or fixed length sequences of words)
relevant to the information being extracted. We
develop a model that can be used to identify text
segments from text documents without labeled
data and that only requires the current document
itself, rather than an entire training corpus linked
to the target document. More specifically, we
utilize representation learning methods (Mikolov
et al., 2013a), where words or phrases are embed-
ded into the same vector space. This allows us
to compute semantic relatedness among text frag-
ments, in particular sentences or text segments in a
given document and a short description of the type
of information being extracted from the document,
by using similarity measures in the feature space.
The model has the potential to speed up identifi-
cation of relevant segments in text and therefore
to expedite annotation of domain specific informa-
tion without reliance on costly labeled data.

We have developed and tested our approach on
a reference database of rodent uterotropic bioas-
says2 (Kleinstreuer et al., 2016) which are labeled
according to their adherence to test guidelines set
forth in (OECD, 2007). Each study in the database
is assigned a label determining whether or not
it met each of six main criteria defined by the

2https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/
evalatm/test-method-evaluations/
endocrine-disruptors/ref-data/edhts.html

https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/evalatm/test-method-evaluations/endocrine-disruptors/ref-data/edhts.html
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/evalatm/test-method-evaluations/endocrine-disruptors/ref-data/edhts.html
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/evalatm/test-method-evaluations/endocrine-disruptors/ref-data/edhts.html


73

guidelines; however, the database does not con-
tain sentence-level annotations or any information
about where the criteria was mentioned in each
publication. Due to the lack of fine-grained an-
notations, supervised learning methods cannot be
easily applied to aid annotating new publications
or to annotate related but distinct types of studies.
This database therefore presents an ideal use-case
for unsupervised approaches.

While our approach doesn’t require any labeled
data to work, we use the labels available in the
dataset to evaluate the approach. We train a binary
classification model for identifying publications
which satisfied given criteria and show the model
performs better when trained on relevant sentences
identified by our method than when trained on sen-
tences randomly picked from the text. Further-
more, for three out of the six criteria, a model
trained solely on the relevant sentences outper-
forms a model which utilizes full text. The results
of our evaluation support the intuition that seman-
tic relatedness to criteria descriptions can help in
identifying text sequences discussing sought after
information.

There are two main contributions of this work.
We present an unsupervised method that em-
ploys representation learning to identify text seg-
ments from publication full text which are relevant
to/contain specific sought after information (such
as number of dose groups). In addition, we ex-
plore a new dataset which hasn’t been previously
used in the field of information extraction.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. In the following section we provide more
details of the task and the dataset used in this
study. In Section 3 we describe our approach. In
Section 4 we evaluate our model and discuss our
results. In Section 5 we compare our work to ex-
isting approaches. Finally, in Section 6 we provide
ideas for further study.

2 The Task and the Data

This section provides more details about the spe-
cific task and the dataset used in our study which
motivated the development of our model.

2.1 Task Description

Significant efforts in toxicology research are be-
ing devoted towards developing new in vitro meth-
ods for testing chemicals due to the large num-
ber of untested chemicals in use (>75,000-80,000

(Judson et al., 2009; Kleinstreuer et al., 2016))
and the cost and time required by existing in vivo
methods (2-3 years and millions of dollars per
chemical (Judson et al., 2009)). To facilitate the
development of novel in vitro methods and as-
sess the adherence to existing study guidelines,
a curated database of high-quality in vivo rodent
uterotrophic bioassay data extracted from research
publications has recently been developed and pub-
lished (Kleinstreuer et al., 2016).

The creation of the database followed the study
protocol design set forth in (OECD, 2007), which
is composed of six minimum criteria (MC, Table
1). An example of information pertaining to the
criteria is shown in Figure 1. Only studies which
met all six minimum criteria were considered
guideline-like (GL) and were included in a follow-
up detailed study and the final database (Klein-
streuer et al., 2016). However, of the 670 pub-
lications initially considered for inclusion, only
93 (∼14%) were found to contain studies which
met all six MC and could therefore be included in
the final database; the remaining 577 publications
could not be used in the final reference set. There-
fore, significant time and resources could be saved
by automating the identification and extraction of
the MC.

While each study present in the database is as-
signed a label for each MC determining whether a
given MC was met and the pertinent protocol in-
formation was manually extracted, there exist no
fine-grained text annotations showing the exact lo-
cation within each publication’s full text where a
given criteria was met. Therefore, our goal was
to develop a model not requiring detailed text an-
notations that could be used to expedite the an-
notation of new publications being added into the
database and potentially support the development
of new reference databases focusing on different
domains and sets of guidelines. Due to the lack of
detailed annotations, our focus was on identifica-
tion of potentially relevant text segments.

2.2 The Dataset

The version of the database which contains both
GL and non-GL studies consists of 670 publica-
tions (spanning the years 1938 through 2014) with
results from 2,615 uterotrophic bioassays. Specif-
ically, each entry in the database describes one
study, and studies are linked to publications using
PubMed reference numbers (PMIDs). Each study



74

Criteria name Description
MC 1: Animal model Immature rats, ovariectomized (OVX) adult rats, or OVX adult mice

are acceptable (immature mice are not acceptable). OVX animals:
OVX should be performed between six and eight weeks of age (al-
lowing at least 14 days post-surgery before dosing for rats and seven
days post-surgery for mice). Immature rats: dosing should begin
between postnatal day (PND) 18 and PND 21, and be completed by
PND 25.

MC 2: Group size Each control group should have a minimum of three animals and
each test group should have a minimum of five animals.

MC 3: Route of administration Acceptable routes of administration: oral gavage (p.o.), subcuta-
neous (s.c.) injection, or intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection.

MC 4: Number of dose groups Minimum of two dose level groups. Must have positive control and
negative control.

MC 5: Dosing interval Dosing for a minimum of three consecutive days. Complete by PND
25 in immature animals.

MC 6: Necropsy timing Should be carried out 18-36 hours after the last dose.

Table 1: Minimum criteria for guideline-like studies. The descriptions are reprinted here from (Kleinstreuer et al.,
2016).

is assigned seven 0/1 labels – one for each of the
minimum criteria and one for the overall GL/non-
GL label. The database also contains more de-
tailed subcategories for each label (for example
“species” label for MC 1) which were not used in
this study. The publication PDFs were provided
to us by the database creators. We have used the
Grobid3 library to convert the PDF files into struc-
tured text. After removing documents with miss-
ing PDF files and documents which were not con-
verted successfully, we were left with 624 full text
documents.

Each publication contains on average 3.7 stud-
ies (separate bioassays), 194 publications contain
a single study, while the rest contain two or more
studies (with 82 being the most bioassays per pub-
lication). The following excerpt shows an example
sentence mentioning multiple bioassays (with dif-
ferent study protocols):

With the exception of the first study
(experiment 1), which had group sizes
of 12, all other studies had group sizes
of 8.

For this experiment we did not distinguish be-
tween publications describing a single or multi-
ple studies. Instead, our focus was on retrieving
all text segments (which may be related to mul-
tiple studies) relevant to each of the criteria. For

3https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid

Criteria 0 1 Total % of 1
MC 1 414 175 589 29.71
MC 2 35 577 612 94.28
MC 3 70 536 606 88.45
MC 4 309 206 515 40.00
MC 5 96 490 586 83.62
MC 6 228 340 568 59.86
GL 522 72 594 12.12

Table 2: Label statistics. Column 0 shows number of
publications per MC which did not meet the criteria and
column 1 shows number of publications which met the
criteria. The last column in the table shows proportion
of positive (i.e. criteria met) labels.

each MC, if a document contained multiple studies
with different labels, we discarded that document
from our analysis of that criteria; if a document
contained multiple studies with the same label, we
simply combine all those labels into a single label.
Table 2 shows the final size of the dataset.

3 Approach

In this section we describe the method we have
used for retrieving text segments related to the cri-
teria described in the previous section. The intu-
ition is based off question answering systems. We
treat the criteria descriptions (Table 1) as the ques-
tion and the text segments within the publication
that discusses the criteria as the answer. Given a

https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid


75

full text publication, the goal is to find the text seg-
ments most likely to contain the answer.

We represent the criteria descriptions and text
segments extracted from the documents as vectors
of features, and utilize relatedness measures to re-
trieve text segments most similar to the descrip-
tions. A similar step is typically performed by
most question answering (QA) systems – in QA
systems both the input documents and the ques-
tion are represented as a sequence of embedding
vectors and a retrieval system then compares the
document and question representations to retrieve
text segments most likely containing the answer
(Mishra and Jain, 2016).

To account for the variations in language that
can be used to describe the criteria, we repre-
sent words as vectors generated using Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013a). The following two ex-
cerpts show two different ways MC 6 was de-
scribed in text:

Animals were killed 24 h after being in-
jected and their uteri were removed and
weighed.

All animals were euthanized by expo-
sure to ethyl ether 24 h after the final
treatment.

We hypothesize that the use of word embed-
ding features will allow us to detect relevant words
which are not present in the criteria descriptions.
(Mikolov et al., 2013b) have shown that an im-
portant feature of Word2Vec embeddings is that
similar words will have similar vectors because
they appear in similar contexts. We utilize this
feature to calculate similarity between the crite-
ria descriptions and text segments (such as sen-
tences) extracted from each document. A high-
level overview of our approach is shown in Fig-
ure 2.

We use the following method to retrieve the
most relevant text segments:

Segment extraction: First, we break each doc-
ument down into shorter sequences such as sen-
tences or word sequences of fixed length. While
the first option (sentences) results in text which is
easier to process, it has the disadvantage of result-
ing in sequences of varying length which may af-
fect the resulting similarity value. However, for
simplicity, in this study we utilize the sentence
version.

Document
Criteria 

description

Segment 
extraction

Segment 
representation 

Description 
representation

Word to word similarities

Segment to description 
similarities

Candidate segments

Figure 2: High level overview of our approach. The
dotted line represents an optional step of finding
smaller sub-segments within the candidate segments.
For example, in our case, we first retrieve the most sim-
ilar sentences and in the second step find most similar
continuous 5-grams found withing those sentences.

Segment/description representation: We rep-
resent each sequence and the input description as a
sequence of vector representations. For this study
we have utilized Word2Vec embeddings (Mikolov
et al., 2013a) trained using the Gensim library on
our corpus of 624 full text publications.

Word to word similarities: Next we calculate
similarity between each word vector from each se-
quence si and each word vector from the input
description d using cosine similarity. The output
of this step is a similarity matrix Si ∈ RNi×Md
for each sequence si, where Ni is the number of
unique words in the sequence and Md is the num-
ber of unique words in the description d.

Segment to description similarities: To ob-
tain a similarity value representing the related-
ness of each sequence to the input description
we first convert each input matrix Si into a vec-
tor vi ∈ RNi by choosing the maximum simi-
larity value for each word in the sequence, that
is vi = maxrows(Si). Each sequence is then as-
signed a similarity value ri ∈ R which is calcu-
lated as ri = avg(vi). In the future we are plan-
ning to experiment with different ways of calcu-



76

lating relatedness of the sequences to the descrip-
tions, such as with computing similarity of embed-
dings created from the text fragments using ap-
proaches like Doc2Vec (Le and Mikolov, 2014).
In this study, after finding the top sentences, we
further break each sentence down into continu-
ous n-grams to find the specific part of the sen-
tence discussing the MC. We repeat the same pro-
cess described above to calculate the relatedness
of each n-gram to the description.

Candidate segments: For each document we
select the top k text segments (sentences in the first
step and 5-grams in the second step) most similar
to the description.

3.1 Example Results

Figures 3, 4, and 5 show example annotations gen-
erated using our method for the first three criteria.
For this example we ran our method on the ab-
stract of the target document rather than the full
text and highlighted only the single most similar
sentence. The abstract used to produce these fig-
ures is the same as the abstract shown in Figure 1.
In all three figures, the lighter yellow color high-
lights the sentence which was found to be the most
similar to a given MC description, the darker red
color shows the top 5-gram found within the top
sentence, and the bold underlined text is the text
we are looking for (the correct answer). Annota-
tions generated for the remaining three criteria are
shown in Appendix A.

Due to space limitations, Figures 3, 4, and 5
show results generated on abstracts rather than
on full text; however, we have observed similarly
accurate results when we applied our method to
full text. The only difference between the ab-
stracts and the full text version is how many top
sentences we retrieved. When working with ab-
stracts only, we observed that if the criteria was
discussed in the abstract, it was generally suffi-
cient to retrieve the single most similar sentence.
However, as the criteria may be mentioned in mul-
tiple places within the document, when working
with full text documents we have retrieved and an-
alyzed the top k sentences instead of just a single
sentence. In this case we have typically found the
correct sentence/sentences among the top 5 sen-
tences. We have also observed that the similar sen-
tences which don’t discuss the criteria directly (i.e.
the “incorrect” sentences) typically discuss related
topics. For example, consider the following three

sentences:

After weaning on pnd 21, the dams were
euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation and
the juvenile females were individually
housed.

Six CD(SD) rat dams, each with recon-
stituted litters of six female pups, were
received from Charles River Laborato-
ries (Raleigh, NC, USA) on offspring
postnatal day (pnd) 16.

This validation study followed
OECD TG 440, with six female
weanling rats (postnatal day 21) per
dose group and six treatment groups.

These three sentences were extracted from the
abstract and the full text of a single document
(document 20981862, the abstract of which is
shown in Figures 1 and 3-8). These three sen-
tences were retrieved as the most similar to MC 1,
with similarity scores of 70.61, 65.31, and 63.69,
respectively. The third sentence contains the “an-
swer” to MC 1 (underlined). However, it can be
seen the top two sentences also discuss the animals
used in the study (more specifically, the sentences
discuss the animals’ housing and their origin).

4 Evaluation

The goal of this experiment was to explore empir-
ically whether our approach truly identifies men-
tions of the minimum criteria in text. As we did
not have any fine-grained annotations that could
be used to directly evaluate whether our model
identifies the correct sequences, we have used a
different methodology. We have utilized the exist-
ing 0/1 labels which were available in the database
(these were discussed in Section 2) to train one bi-
nary classifier for each MC. The task of each of
the classifiers is to determine whether a publica-
tion met the given criteria or not. We have then
compared a baseline classifier trained on all full
text with three other models:

• A model which, instead of all full text, uti-
lized only the top k sentences most similar
to the given MC. The top k sentences were
identified using our model introduced in the
previous section.

• A model which utilized only the k least simi-
lar sentences.



77

Figure 3: Annotations generated using our method for the abstract from Figure 1. The sentence which was found
to be the most similar to the description for “MC 1: Animal model” is highlighted in yellow and the most similar
sequence of words within that sentence is highlighted in red. The text we are looking for is highlighted with bold
underlined text. For this example we ran our method on the abstract of the target document rather than the full text
and highlighted only the single most similar sentence.

Figure 4: Annotations generated using our method for “MC 2: Group size”. The highlighting used is the same as
in Figure 3.

• A model which utilized only k random sen-
tences (but none of the top or bottom k sen-
tences – the sentences were chosen at ran-
dom from the interval (k, n − k) where n
is the number of sentences in the document
and where sentences are sorted from the most
similar to the least similar).

The only difference between the four models is
which sentences from each document are passed to
the classifier for training and testing. The intuition
is that a classifier utilizing the correct sentences
should outperform both other models.

To avoid selecting the same sentences across the
three models we removed documents which con-
tained less than 3∗k sentences (Table 3, row Num-
ber of documents shows how many documents sat-
isfied this condition). In all of the experiments
presented in this section, the publication full text
was tokenized, lower-cased, stemmed, and stop
words were removed. All models used a Bernoulli
Naı̈ve Bayes classifier (scikit-learn implementa-
tion which used a uniform class prior) trained
on binary occurrence matrices created using 1-

3-grams extracted from the publications, with n-
grams appearing in only one document removed.
The complete results obtained from leave-one-out
cross validation are shown in Table 3. In all cases
we report classification accuracy. In the case of
the random-k sentences model the accuracy was
averaged over 10 runs of the model.

We compare the results to two baselines: (1) a
baseline obtained by classifying all documents as
belonging to the majority class (baseline 1 in Ta-
ble 3) and (2) a baseline obtained using the same
setup (features and classification algorithm) as in
the case of the top-/random-/bottom-k sentences
models but which utilized all full text instead of
selected sentences extracted from the text only
(baseline 2 in Table 3).

4.1 Results analysis

Table 3 shows that for four out of the six criteria
(MC 1, MC 4, MC 5, and MC 6) the top-k sen-
tences model outperforms baseline 1 as well the
bottom-k and the random-k sentences models by a
significant margin. Furthermore, for three of the



78

Figure 5: Annotations generated using our method for “MC 3: Route of administration”. The highlighting used is
the same as in Figure 3.

Approach MC1 MC2 MC3 MC4 MC5 MC6
Baseline 1: Most frequent label 70.35 94.43 88.74 59.48 84.30 60.44
Baseline 2: All full text 78.25 92.06 89.59 67.94 84.83 74.05
Top-k sentence 76.84 91.55 87.71 68.35 88.54 74.23
Bottom-k sentences 70.00 91.39 88.23 63.10 80.60 63.70
Random-k sentences 73.26 93.72 88.43 65.65 85.29 68.28
Number of documents 570 592 586 496 567 551
Number of pos. labels 169 559 520 201 478 333

Table 3: Evaluation results.

six criteria (MC 4, MC 5, and MC 6) the top-k
sentences model also outperforms the baseline 2
model (model which utilized all full text). This
seems to confirm our hypothesis that semantic re-
latedness of sentences to the criteria descriptions
helps in identifying sentences discussing the crite-
ria. These seems to be the case especially given
that for three of the six criteria the top-k sentences
model outperforms the model which utilizes all
full text (baseline 2) despite being given less in-
formation to learn from (selected sentences only
in the case of the top-k sentences model vs. all full
text in the case of the baseline 2 model).

For two of the criteria (MC 2 and MC 3) this
is not the case and the top-k sentences model per-
forms worse than both other models in the case
of MC 3 and worse than the random-k model in
the case of MC 2. One possible explanation for
this is class imbalance. In the case of MC 2, only
33 out of 592 publications (5.57%) represent neg-
ative examples (Table 3). As the top-k sentences
model picks only sentences closely related to MC
2, it is possible that due to the class imbalance
the top sentences don’t contain enough negative
examples to learn from. On the other hand, the
bottom-k and random-k sentences models may se-
lect text not necessarily related to the criteria but

potentially containing linguistic patterns which the
model learns to associate with the criteria; for ex-
ample, certain chemicals may require the use of a
certain study protocol which may not be aligned
with the MC and the model may key in on the
appearance of these chemicals in text rather than
the appearance of MC indicators. The situation is
similar in the case of MC 3. We would like to em-
phasize that the goal of this experiment was not
to achieve state-of-the-art results but to investigate
empirically the viability of utilizing semantic re-
latedness of text segments to criteria descriptions
for identifying relevant segments.

5 Related Work

In this section we present studies most similar to
our work. We focus on unsupervised methods for
information extraction from biomedical texts.

Many methods for biomedical data annotation
and extraction exist which utilize labeled data
and supervised learning approaches ((Liu et al.,
2016) and (Gonzalez et al., 2015) provided a good
overview of a number of these methods); how-
ever, unsupervised approaches in this area are
much scarcer. One such approach has been intro-
duced by (Zhang and Elhadad, 2013), who have
proposed a model for unsupervised Named En-



79

tity Recognition. Similar to our approach, their
model is based on calculating the similarity be-
tween vector representations of candidate phrases
and existing entities. However, their vector repre-
sentations are created using a combination of TF-
IDF weights and word context information, and
their method relies on a terminology. More re-
cently, (Chen and Sokolova, 2018) have utilized
Word2Vec and Doc2Vec embeddings for unsuper-
vised sentiment classification in medical discharge
summaries.

A number of previous studies have focused
on unsupervised extraction of relations such as
protein-protein interactions (PPI) from biomedical
texts. For example, (Quan et al., 2014) have uti-
lized several techniques, namely kernel-based pat-
tern clustering and dependency parsing, to extract
PPI from biomedical texts. (Alicante et al., 2016)
have introduced a system for unsupervised extrac-
tion of entities and relations between these enti-
ties from clinical texts written in Italian, which uti-
lized a thesaurus for extraction of entities and clus-
tering methods for relation extraction. (Rink and
Harabagiu, 2011) also used clinical texts and pro-
posed a generative model for unsupervised rela-
tion extraction. Another approach focusing on re-
lation extraction has been proposed by (Madkour
et al., 2007). Their approach is based on construct-
ing a graph which is used to construct domain-
independent patterns for extracting protein-protein
interactions.

A similar but distinct approach to unsupervised
extraction is distant supervision. Similarly as un-
supervised extraction methods, distant supervi-
sion methods don’t require any labeled data, but
make use of weakly labeled data, such as data ex-
tracted from a knowledge base. Distant supervi-
sion has been applied to relation extraction (Liu
et al., 2014), extraction of gene interactions (Mal-
lory et al., 2015), PPI extraction (Thomas et al.,
2012; Bobić et al., 2012), and identification of
PICO elements (Wallace et al., 2016). The ad-
vantage of our approach compared to the distantly
supervised methods is that it does not require any
underlying knowledge base or a similar source of
data.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we presented a method for unsuper-
vised identification of text segments relevant to
specific sought after information being extracted

from scientific documents. Our method is entirely
unsupervised and only requires the current docu-
ment itself and the input descriptions instead of
corpus linked to this document. The method uti-
lizes short descriptions of the information being
extracted from the documents and the ability of
word embeddings to capture word context. Con-
sequently, it is domain independent and can po-
tentially be applied to another set of documents
and criteria with minimal effort. We have used the
method on a corpus of toxicology documents and a
set of guideline protocol criteria needed to be ex-
tracted from the documents. We have shown the
identified text segments are very accurate. Fur-
thermore, a binary classifier trained to identify
publications that met the criteria performed bet-
ter when trained on the candidate sentences than
when trained on sentences randomly picked from
the text, supporting our intuition that our method is
able to accurately identify relevant text segments
from full text documents.

There are a number of things we plan on inves-
tigating next. In our initial experiment we have
utilized criteria descriptions which were not de-
signed to be used by our model. One possible im-
provement of our method could be replacing the
current descriptions with example sentences taken
from the documents containing the sought after in-
formation. We also plan on testing our method on
an annotated dataset, for example using existing
annotated PICO element datasets (Boudin et al.,
2010).

References
Anita Alicante, Anna Corazza, Francesco Isgrò, and

Stefano Silvestri. 2016. Unsupervised entity and
relation extraction from clinical records in italian.
Computers in biology and medicine, 72:263–275.

Tamara Bobić, Roman Klinger, Philippe Thomas,
and Martin Hofmann-Apitius. 2012. Improving
distantly supervised extraction of drug-drug and
protein-protein interactions. In Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Unsupervised and Semi-
Supervised Learning in NLP, pages 35–43. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Florian Boudin, Jian-Yun Nie, Joan C Bartlett, Roland
Grad, Pierre Pluye, and Martin Dawes. 2010. Com-
bining classifiers for robust pico element detec-
tion. BMC medical informatics and decision mak-
ing, 10(1):29.

Qufei Chen and Marina Sokolova. 2018. Word2vec
and doc2vec in unsupervised sentiment analysis



80

of clinical discharge summaries. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.00352.

Graciela H Gonzalez, Tasnia Tahsin, Britton C
Goodale, Anna C Greene, and Casey S Greene.
2015. Recent advances and emerging applications
in text and data mining for biomedical discovery.
Briefings in bioinformatics, 17(1):33–42.

Siddhartha R. Jonnalagadda, Pawan Goyal, and
Mark D. Huffman. 2015. Automating data extrac-
tion in systematic reviews: a systematic review. Sys-
tematic Reviews, 4(1).

Richard Judson, Ann Richard, David J Dix, Keith
Houck, Matthew Martin, Robert Kavlock, Vicki
Dellarco, Tala Henry, Todd Holderman, Philip
Sayre, et al. 2009. The toxicity data landscape
for environmental chemicals. Environmental health
perspectives, 117(5):685.

Nicole C. Kleinstreuer, Patricia C. Ceger, David G.
Allen, Judy Strickland, Xiaoqing Chang,
Jonathan T. Hamm, and Warren M. Casey. 2016. A
curated database of rodent uterotrophic bioactivity.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(5).

Esther Landhuis. 2016. Scientific literature: Informa-
tion overload. Nature, 535(7612):457–458.

Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed rep-
resentations of sentences and documents. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, pages
1188–1196.

Feifan Liu, Jinying Chen, Abhyuday Jagannatha, and
Hong Yu. 2016. Learning for biomedical informa-
tion extraction: Methodological review of recent ad-
vances. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07993.

Mengwen Liu, Yuan Ling, Yuan An, and Xiaohua Hu.
2014. Relation extraction from biomedical litera-
ture with minimal supervision and grouping strat-
egy. In Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM),
2014 IEEE International Conference on, pages 444–
449. IEEE.

Amgad Madkour, Kareem Darwish, Hany Hassan,
Ahmed Hassan, and Ossama Emam. 2007. Bionoc-
ulars: extracting protein-protein interactions from
biomedical text. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
BioNLP 2007: Biological, Translational, and Clini-
cal Language Processing, pages 89–96. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Emily K Mallory, Ce Zhang, Christopher Ré, and
Russ B Altman. 2015. Large-scale extraction
of gene interactions from full-text literature using
deepdive. Bioinformatics, 32(1):106–113.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. In ICLR Workshop.

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013b. Linguistic regularities in continuous space
word representations. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 746–751.

Amit Mishra and Sanjay Kumar Jain. 2016. A survey
on question answering systems with classification.
Journal of King Saud University-Computer and In-
formation Sciences, 28(3):345–361.

OECD. 2007. Test No. 440: Uterotrophic Bioassay
in Rodents. In OECD Guidelines for the Testing of
Chemicals, Section 4. OECD Publishing, Paris.

Changqin Quan, Meng Wang, and Fuji Ren. 2014.
An unsupervised text mining method for relation
extraction from biomedical literature. PloS one,
9(7):e102039.

Bryan Rink and Sanda Harabagiu. 2011. A generative
model for unsupervised discovery of relations and
argument classes from clinical texts. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 519–528. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Neil R. Smalheiser. 2012. Literature-based discovery:
Beyond the ABCs. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 63(2):218–
224.

Philippe Thomas, Tamara Bobić, Ulf Leser, Mar-
tin Hofmann-Apitius, and Roman Klinger. 2012.
Weakly labeled corpora as silver standard for drug-
drug and protein-protein interaction. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Building and Evaluating
Resources for Biomedical Text Mining (BioTxtM)
on Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC).

Guy Tsafnat, Paul Glasziou, Miew Keen Choong,
Adam Dunn, Filippo Galgani, and Enrico Coiera.
2014. Systematic review automation technologies.
Systematic reviews, 3(1):74.

Byron C Wallace, Joel Kuiper, Aakash Sharma, Mingxi
Zhu, and Iain J Marshall. 2016. Extracting pico sen-
tences from clinical trial reports using supervised
distant supervision. The Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research, 17(1):4572–4596.

Shaodian Zhang and Noémie Elhadad. 2013. Unsuper-
vised biomedical named entity recognition: Experi-
ments with clinical and biological texts. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 46(6):1088–1098.



81

A Supplemental Material

This section provides additional details and re-
sults. Figures 6, 7, and 8 show example annota-
tions generated for criteria MC 4, MC 5, and MC
6.



82

Figure 6: Annotations generated using our method for abstract from Figure 1. The sentence which was found to
be the most similar to the description for “MC 4: Number of dose groups” is highlighted in yellow and the most
similar sequence of words within that sentence is highlighted in red. The text we are looking for is highlighted
with bold underlined text. For this example we ran our method on the abstract of the target document rather than
the full text and highlighted only the single most similar sentence.

Figure 7: Annotations generated using our method for “MC 5: Dosing interval”.

Figure 8: Annotations generated using our method for “MC 6: Necropsy timing”.


