










































SMT versus NMT:
Preliminary comparisons for Irish

Meghan Dowling meghan.dowling@adaptcentre.ie
Teresa Lynn teresa.lynn@adaptcentre.ie
Alberto Poncelas alberto.poncelas@adaptcentre.ie
Andy Way andy.way@adaptcentre.ie
ADAPT Centre, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a preliminary comparison of statistical machine translation (SMT)
and neural machine translation (NMT) for English→Irish in the fixed domain of public ad-
ministration. We discuss the challenges for SMT and NMT of a less-resourced language such
as Irish, and show that while an out-of-the-box NMT system may not fare quite as well as
our tailor-made domain-specific SMT system, the future may still be promising for EN→GA
NMT.

1 Introduction

In recent times, NMT has been widely hailed as a significant development in the improvement
in quality of machine translation (MT). However, as a technique that is data-hungry, there is
a concern that languages with fewer resources may not benefit to the same degree that well-
resourced major languages do. In order to prevent a low-resource language such as Irish being
left behind in the context of these advancements, we take the first steps towards applying NMT
methods to English→Irish (EN→GA) translation.

Irish is the national and official language of the Republic of Ireland, and an official EU
language. While EN→GA MT is rarely used for comprehension purposes,1 MT is invaluable
in meeting the language rights needs of native Irish speakers. MT has already been proven
useful in the post-editing environment of an official Irish government department, where the
translation of EN→GA documents has been facilitated by a Moses-based statistical machine
translation (SMT) system (Dowling et al., 2015). The success of this domain-specific SMT
system is due in part to the availability of high quality parallel data in this particular domain
(see Table 1). The quality of MT is currently unreliable for official translation in an EU setting,
however. This is partly due to a derogation imposed on the production of official Irish language
texts in the EU.2 While the European Commission is moving towards using NMT engines in
the new eTranslation platform,3 Irish is not yet sufficiently supported.

Despite a relatively low availability of resources – in terms of both bilingual and monolin-
gual digital content – we have previously shown that a domain-tailored SMT system can achieve
promising translation quality (Dowling et al., 2015).4 The question remains whether NMT can

1Most (if not all) Irish speakers have fluency in English.
2http://publications.europa.eu/code/en/en-370204.htm
3https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/CEFDIGITAL/Machine+Translation
4Results: BLEU .43/ TER .46

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 12



achieve a similar level of usability for Irish in this setting. While the introduction of deep learn-
ing methods to the field of MT has witnessed a breakthrough in recent years, the positive impact
of NMT is not felt across the board. As Koehn and Knowles (2017) highlight, current NMT
systems can face a number of challenges when dealing with specific tasks. These challenges
include low-resourced languages, low-frequency words arising from inflection, long sentences,
and out-of-domain texts. The latter may not apply to our test case, as the success of our earlier
SMT system lies in the closed domain nature of the use case (public administration data), yet
the other factors are very real for the Irish language in general. In this study, we report on recent
scores from the training of an updated Irish SMT engine, based on our latest data sets. We then
present a preliminary NMT baseline, based on the same training and test data as previous SMT
experiments, in order to investigate its strengths and weaknesses with respect to Irish.

The paper is divided as follows: Section 2 provides the context within which our work
is relevant, both in terms of low-resourced MT and the use of MT in professional translation
environments. In Section 3 we outline the datasets we use in training and testing, and give some
background on the types and sources of this data. Section 4 details how the SMT and NMT
experiments were implemented. Section 5 provides updated results for EN-GA SMT in this
domain and establishes preliminary results for EN-GA NMT. Finally, in Section 6 we provide
some conclusions and indicate possible options for future work in this area.

2 Related Work

As discussed above, currently the primary focus of the application of Irish MT is within the
context of a professional translation workflow (involving post-editing by human translators),
and as such, progress in this area in terms of advances in state-of-the-art approaches is of inter-
est to us. For many years, there have been extensive studies to show how the integration of MT
within such a workflow (often complementary to the use of translation memory tools) improves
productivity, both in industry-based and in academic-based research (e.g. Etchegoyhen et al.
(2014); Arenas (2008)). With the introduction of NMT methods, there have been subsequent
studies examining the differences between the impact that SMT and NMT have within such a
setting. For example, Bentivogli et al. (2016) carried out a small scale study on post-editing
of English→German translated TED talks, and concluded that NMT had made significantly
positive changes in the field. Bojar et al. (2016) report a significant step forward using NMT
instead of SMT in the automatic post-editing tasks at the Conference on Statistical Machine
Translation (WMT16). More recently, Castilho et al. (2017) carried out a more extensive quan-
titative and qualitative comparative evaluation of PBSMT and NMT using automatic metrics
and professional translators. Results were mixed overall. They varied from showing positive
results for NMT in terms of improved (perceived) fluency and errors, to achieving no particular
gains over SMT at document level for post-editing. While these studies were carried out on
better resourced language pairs (English→German, Portuguese, Russian and Greek), they are
still highly relevant in indicating the potential impact that the change in MT approaches can
have in real-life translation scenarios.

Aside from examining the impact on translator productivity, there has also been increased
focus in addressing the shortcomings of NMT, such as those outlined by Koehn and Knowles
(2017). As such, a number of innovative approaches have emerged to this end. The application
of various transfer learning methods has proven successful for certain low-resourced language
(Zoph et al., 2016; Passban et al., 2017), as has the inclusion of linguistic features when ad-
dressing data sparsity that faces morphologically rich languages (Sennrich and Haddow, 2016).
Luong et al. (2015) show that the use of attention-based NMT can have positive results in many
aspects of MT, including the handling of long sentences.

In the case of Irish language, the lack of sufficient data, along with a lack of skilled re-

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 13



sources has resulted in limited progress in the area of English-Irish (EN-GA) MT to date: As
discussed in Section 1, a domain specific (public administration) SMT system is currently in
use by in-house translators in the Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht (DCHG)
(Dowling et al., 2015). DCHG is the Irish government department responsible for ensuring that
the Irish language needs of the Irish public are being met by the government. In addition, some
steps have been taken to develop a more broad domain system (Arcan et al., 2016). This current
study is, to our knowledge, the first attempt to apply NMT methods to EN-GA MT.

3 Data

In order to provide an accurate comparison in our SMT vs NMT experiments, we use the same
data sets for each approach (apart from the absence of monolingual data in the NMT set-up).
This data is almost identical to the datasets that we have used in training earlier SMT systems
Dowling et al. (2015). We indicate an extended version of a dataset with ± and our additional
datasets with † in Tables 1 and 2.

Bilingual corpora – translation model
Our data sets are based on that of our earlier SMT systems, with some additional corpora. The
domain in question is public administration. As Table 1 shows, the majority of the data used to
train the translation model was provided by DCHG. These sources include staff notices, annual
reports, website content, press releases and official correspondence. We supplement the existing
corpus with additional recently translated in-domain data provided by the DCHG. Parallel texts
from two EU bodies: the Digital Corpus of the European Parliament (DCEP) and Directorate
General for Translation, Translation Memories (DGT-TM) are included in the training data
(referred to collectively as ‘EU’ in Table 1). In addition, we include data crawled from websites5

that were deemed to contain text from a domain similar to public administration (using the ILSP
Focused Crawler (Papavassiliou et al., 2013)). Finally, we contribute a new parallel corpus,
which was collected from Conradh na Gaeilge (CnaG), an Irish language organisation which
promotes the Irish language in Ireland.

Monolingual data – language model
SMT engines require additional monolingual data in order to train a language model that helps
to improve the fluency of the SMT output. This monolingual data does not necessarily need
to be in-domain, and thus our language model is trained not only on the GA data used for
the translation model, but also on a combination of two additional out-of-domain data sets:
‘Paradocs’, a corpus of national and European legal texts from www.gaois.ie and digital
GA content we recently sourced from The University Times (UT)6.

Data–set # of words (EN) # of words (GA) # of sentences % proportion
DCHG± 995,419 1,094,707 66,214 60.86%
EU 439,262 483,149 29,445 27.06%
Crawled 213,054 234,028 11,770 10.81%
CnaG† 20,692 21,365 1,367 1.25%
TOTAL 1,668,427 1,833,249 108,796 100%

Table 1: Size and distribution of translation model training data.

5www.citizensinfo.ie (An Irish government website that provides information on public services) and www.
teagasc.ie (Website for the state agency providing research, advisory and education in agriculture, horticulture,
food and rural development in Ireland)

6The University Times is a university newspaper in Trinity College Dublin

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 14



Data–set # of words # of sentences
Paradocs 1,596,569 98,758
UT† 15,377 598

Table 2: Additional monolingual (GA) text used for training the SMT language model

4 Experiment Set–Up

4.1 SMT
To attain the most up-to-date results for this use-case, we train a phrase-based SMT system
using Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) with the training data described in Section 3. Earlier findings
showed that a 6-gram language model helps address divergent word order in EN-GA (Dowling
et al., 2015). We therefore use KenLM (Heafield, 2011) to train a 6-gram language model with
the monolingual data outlined in table 1. In addition, we implement hierarchical re-ordering
tables to address issues surrounding word order. Our earlier system was tailored to address some
consistent errors that arose from data sparsity, which resulted from inflectional variations. We
took steps to reduce the repetitive task of the translator in correcting these slight orthographic
changes at the token level. Our approach involved the introduction of an automated post-editing
(APE) module in the pipeline, which consists of hand-coded grammar rules (Dowling et al.,
2016). In order to maximise consistency with our previous work, we chose to include this APE
module in our MT experiments.

4.2 NMT
Baseline
In order to provide a preliminary NMT baseline for EN-GA in this domain, we implement a
‘vanilla’ NMT system, i.e. using default parameters where possible (this system is referred to
as NMT-base in Figure 1). We use OpenNMT (Klein et al., 2017), which is an implementation
of the popular NMT approach that uses an attentional encoder-decoder network (Bahdanau
et al., 2014). We train a 2-layer LSTM with 500 hidden layers for 13 epochs. For the sake
of comparison we use the same training data as used in the SMT system (see Table 1). The
resulting vocabulary size is 50,002 (English) and 50,004 (Irish). Note that we also apply the
APE module to the output of the NMT system.

Further NMT experiments
To add to this baseline system, we also perform a few preliminary experiments to investigate the
affect that altering parameters or using other methods would have on an EN-GA NMT system.

• NMT-250 One such experiment involves experimenting with the number of hidden layers
in our NMT system. We implement a smaller model i.e. reduced the number of hidden
states from 500 to 250. The results for this system are presented in Table 3 wherein this
system is referred to as ‘NMT-250’.

• NMT+ADAM We also experiment with implementing the stochastic gradient descent with
‘Adam’, a method for stochastic optimisation (Kinga and Adam, 2015). This method com-
putes individual adaptive learning rates for different parameters from estimates of first and
second moments of the gradients. We implement this method using the recommended
learning rate for Adam (0.001) and denote this system in Table 3 as NMT+ADAM.

• NMT+BPE In order to address the inflectional nature of the Irish language, we experiment
with the use of byte-pair encoding (BPE). BPE is a technique presented by Gage (1994)

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 15



and adapted for NMT by Sennrich et al. (2016b). In terms of MT, it aims to increase
vocabulary coverage by encoding rare and unknown words as sequences of subword units.
As data sparsity is an issue especially relevant to a low-resourced inflectional language
such as Irish, reducing out of vocabulary (OOV) words is a promising technique. This
system is referred to as NMT+BPE in Table 3 and Figure 1.

5 Results and Preliminary Analysis

BLEU BLEU+APE

35

40

45

50

sc
or

e

Figure 1: Bar graph displaying the BLEU scores of the SMT and NMT systems, with and
without the APE module applied.

Both the SMT and NMT systems were tested on the same test set that were used in earlier
experiments (Dowling et al., 2015, 2016), consisting of 1,500 in–domain sentences randomly
selected and set aside from the bilingual corpus.

BLEU +APE TER +APE
SMT 46.44 46.51 43.31 43.32
NMT 37.77 37.76 47.94 47.79
NMT+ADAM 39.51 39.56 46.98 46.81
NMT-250 35.85 35.9 50.18 50.02
NMT+BPE 40.09 40.11 46.73 46.72

Table 3: BLEU scores for SMT and NMT EN-GA systems before and after applying the auto-
mated post-editing module. The highest BLEU score and lowest TER score are highlighted in
bold.

We present our results in Table 3 and Figure 1. The results show that for our EN→GA use

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 16



case, an out-of-the-box NMT system can establish a respectable baseline of BLEU 38.04 and
TER 47.94. However, it does not achieve the same level of quality of our tailored SMT system
(showing a decrease of between 8.4 and 8.75 BLEU – see Figure 1). Some alterations proved
beneficial - the use of Adam as a stochastic optimisation method sees the NMT output increase
in BLEU score, and the use of BPE shows an even more marked improvement. Despite these
advancements, the scores are still not reaching the same quality as the SMT system.

With respect to the NMT-250 experiment, the use of 250 hidden states in lieu of 500 sees
a decrease in BLEU score. More testing will be necessary to identify the optimal number of
hidden states for EN-GA NMT.

We note that when the APE module is applied to the NMT output, we see very little change
in BLEU score, which is in line with the trends for SMT. However, it should be noted that
sentence level analysis carried out in earlier work revealed that the BLEU score increase did
not always represent better quality translation from a post-editing perspective (Dowling et al.,
2016). This prompts us to carry out some investigation in this regard.

5.1 Sentence-level BLEU
In order to gain a preliminary insight into specific differences between EN-GA SMT and NMT,
we chose to perform a sentence-level BLEU on our SMT output and NMT-base output. In
Examples 1–4, we highlight some instances where SMT out-performs NMT, and vice-versa.

(1) Source: Islands7
Irish reference: na hOileáin .
SMT: na hOileáin .
NMT: Oileáin .

(NMT decrease: -69.67 BLEU)

(2) Source: when a requester agrees to amend a request that s / he has submitted , the date of
receipt of the refined request is deemed to be the date of receipt of the FOI request .
Irish reference: nuair a chomhaontaı́onn iarrthóir leasú a dhéanamh ar iarratas a chuir sé
/ sı́ isteach , glacfar leis gurb ionann dáta faighte an iarratais leasaithe agus dáta faighte an
iarratais ar SF .
SMT: nuair a chomhaontaı́onn iarrthóir leasú a dhéanamh ar iarratas a chuir sé / sı́ isteach
, an dáta faighte an iarratais leasaithe a bheidh an dáta faighte an iarratais SF .
NMT: nuair a aontaı́onn iarrthóir iarratas ar iarratas a leasú , meastar go bhfuil an t-iarratas
faighte faighte ag an iarrthóir a bheith faighte .

(NMT decrease: -41.56 BLEU)

(3) Source: this also assists any possible reviews .
Irish reference: Cabhraı́onn sé seo le haon athbhreithniú féideartha chomh maith .
SMT: tacaı́onn aon athbhreithnithe féideartha seo freisin .
NMT: cabhraı́onn sé seo freisin le haon athbhreithniú féideartha .

(NMT increase: +51.62)

(4) Source: more about CentenaryMayo.ie :
Irish reference: tuilleadh eolais faoi CentenaryMayo.ie :
SMT: nı́os mó faoi CentenaryMayo.ie :

7This is a single word heading.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 17



NMT: tuilleadh faoi CentenaryMayo.ie :

(NMT increase: +35.0)

In Example 1, the SMT BLEU score is significantly higher than that of the NMT output.
Delving into the translations, we can see that grammatically, NMT has correctly translated the
source text (Oileáin ‘Islands’). However, the SMT system correctly translates ‘Islands’ as na
hOileáin, which literally translates as ‘the Islands’. In this domain, within the context of public
administration, it is standard for ‘Islands’ to refer to the proper noun string ‘The Islands (of
Ireland)’. This example highlights the value of a fixed domain, especially for low-resource MT.

Example 2 shows the translation of a longer sentence. It is clear, even to those unfamiliar
with the Irish language, why the SMT output prevails in this case. The first phrase in this
example is translated perfectly, when compared to the reference – meaning that it is likely
that this exact phrase or very similar phrases are present in the training data, and the SMT
system is therefore well-equipped to translate it. Looking at the NMT output we can see that a
phenomenon, not uncommon in NMT, has occurred: the translations for ‘request’ and ‘receipt’
are repeated unnecessarily (‘iarratas’ and ‘faighte’). This is sometimes referred to as ‘over-
translation’ (Tu et al., 2016) and can pose problems for NMT quality.

Examples 3 and 4 show cases where NMT produces translations with a higher BLEU score
than that of the SMT system. In Example 3, NMT outputs a more accurate verb (cabhraı́onn
‘assists’) as opposed to the SMT output (tacaı́onn ‘supports’), and in fact achieves an almost
perfect translation (freisin ‘also’ being a synonym for chomh maith ‘as well’). It also chooses
the correct inflection for haon ‘any’, which the SMT system fails to do (outputting aon). The h
inflection is required following the vowel ending on the preceding preposition le ‘with’. In Ex-
ample 4, we again see NMT achieving an almost perfect translation. The translation generated
by the SMT system in this case is not entirely incorrect. However, it could be argued that the
NMT output is more fluent. Both of these examples highlight the strength in fluency sometimes
observed with NMT.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

Our study reveals that an out-of-the-box NMT system, trained on the same EN–GA data,
achieves a much lower translation quality than a tailored SMT system, at least in terms of
automatic metrics. These results are not necessarily surprising given that Irish presents many
of the known challenges that NMT currently struggles with (data scarcity, long sentences and
rich morphology). Despite this, these preliminary experiments cannot suggest that NMT be
discounted with respect to the future of EN-GA MT. it should be noted that minimal tuning and
additional processing has been carried out to date.

In future experiments, we hope to investigate methods for tailoring NMT to this particular
domain and language pair. A possible avenue of research to explore is the inclusion of linguistic
features in NMT such as the work carried out by Sennrich and Haddow (2016). We wish to
address over-translation issues discussed in Section 5, possibly with the use of coverage vectors
(Tu et al., 2016). Another approach worth considering is addressing the divergent word order in
the EN-GA language pair with a pre-reordering approach such as the one taken by Du and Way
(2017). Methods which address data sparsity will also be investigated – options include the use
of back translation (Sennrich et al., 2016a) and/or data augmentation (Fadaee et al., 2017).

In addition, it will be important in the future to include human evaluation in our studies to
ensure that the MT systems designed for public administration use will be optimised to enhance
the task of a human translator, and will not merely be tuned to automatic metrics.

Finally, the derogation on the production of Irish language documents within the EU is

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 18



due to lift in 2021. By this point there will be a huge increase in the (already high) EN↔GA
translation demands, and national and EU bodies will need look to technological advancements
to support professional EN↔GA translators. It is vital, therefore, that MT resources are well-
developed, up-to-date and designed accordingly to meet this demand.

Acknowledgments

This work was part-funded by the Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht (DCHG)
and is also supported by the ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology, which is funded
under the SFI Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2016) and is co-funded by the Euro-
pean Regional Development Fund. We would also like to thank the four anonymous reviewers
for their useful comments.

References

Arcan, M., Lane, C., Droighneáin, E. O., and Buitelaar, P. (2016). Iris: English-Irish machine translation
system. In The International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Arenas, A. G. (2008). Productivity and quality in the post-editing of outputs from translation memories
and machine translation. Localisation Focus, 7(1):11–21.

Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. CoRR, abs/1409.0473.

Bentivogli, L., Bisazza, A., Cettolo, M., and Federico, M. (2016). Neural versus phrase-based machine
translation quality: a case study. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
NaturalLanguage Processing, pages 257–267. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bojar, O., Chatterjee, R., Federmann, C., Graham, Y., Haddow, B., Huck, M., Jimeno Yepes, A., Koehn, P.,
Logacheva, V., Monz, C., Negri, M., Neveol, A., Neves, M., Popel, M., Post, M., Rubino, R., Scarton,
C., Specia, L., Turchi, M., Verspoor, K., and Zampieri, M. (2016). Findings of the 2016 conference on
machine translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared
Task Papers, pages 131–198. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Castilho, S., Moorkens, J., Gaspari, F., Sennrich, R., Sosoni, V., Georgakopoulou, Y., Lohar, P., Way, A.,
Miceli Barone, A. V., and Gialama, M. (2017). A Comparative Quality Evaluation of PBSMT and NMT
using Professional Translators. In Proceedings of Machine Translation Summit XVI, Nagoya, Japan.

Dowling, M., Cassidy, L., Maguire, E., Lynn, T., Srivastava, A., and Judge, J. (2015). Tapadóir: Develop-
ing a statistical machine translation engine and associated resources for Irish. In Proceedings of the The
Fourth LRL Workshop: ”Language Technologies in support of Less-Resourced Languages”, Poznan,
Poland.

Dowling, M., Lynn, T., Graham, Y., and Judge, J. (2016). English to Irish machine translation with
automatic post-editing. PARIS Inalco du 4 au 8 juillet 2016, page 42.

Du, J. and Way, A. (2017). Pre-reordering for neural machine translation: Helpful or harmful? The Prague
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 108(1):171–182.

Etchegoyhen, T., Bywood, L., Fishel, M., Georgakopoulou, P., Jiang, J., van Loenhout, G., del Pozo,
A., Maucec, M. S., Turner, A., and Volk, M. (2014). Machine translation for subtitling: a large-
scale evaluation. In Proceedings of theNinth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 19



Fadaee, M., Bisazza, A., and Monz, C. (2017). Data augmentation for low-resource neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), volume 2, pages 567–573.

Gage, P. (1994). A new algorithm for data compression. The C Users Journal, 12(2):23–38.

Heafield, K. (2011). Kenlm: Faster and smaller language model queries. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 187–197. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kinga, D. and Adam, J. B. (2015). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Klein, G., Kim, Y., Deng, Y., Senellart, J., and Rush, A. (2017). Opennmt: Open-source toolkit for neural
machine translation. Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics 2017, System Demonstrations, pages 67–72.

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen, W.,
Moran, C., Zens, R., et al. (2007). Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the ACL on interactive poster and demonstration sessions,
pages 177–180. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Koehn, P. and Knowles, R. (2017). Six challenges for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation, pages 28–39.

Luong, T., Pham, H., and Manning, C. D. (2015). Effective approaches to attention-based neural ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1412–1421.

Papavassiliou, V., Prokopidis, P., and Thurmair, G. (2013). A modular open-source focused crawler for
mining monolingual and bilingual corpora from the web. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on
Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 43–51, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Passban, P., Liu, Q., and Way, A. (2017). Translating low-resource languages by vocabulary adaptation
from close counterparts. ACM Transactions on Asian and Low-Resource Language Information Pro-
cessing (TALLIP), 16(4):29.

Sennrich, R. and Haddow, B. (2016). Linguistic input features improve neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 1, Research Papers, volume 1,
pages 83–91.

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. (2016a). Improving neural machine translation models with
monolingual data. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 86–96.

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. (2016b). Neural machine translation of rare words with subword
units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 1715–1725.

Tu, Z., Lu, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, X., and Li, H. (2016). Modeling coverage for neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), volume 1, pages 76–85.

Zoph, B., Yuret, D., May, J., and Knight, K. (2016). Transfer learning for low-resource neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 1568–1575.

Proceedings of AMTA 2018 Workshop: LoResMT 2018 Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |   Page 20




