



















































Poem Machine - a Co-creative NLG Web Application for Poem Writing


Proceedings of The 11th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 195–196,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5-8, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

195

Poem Machine - a Co-creative NLG Web Application for Poem Writing

Mika Hämäläinen
Department of Digital Humanities

University of Helsinki
mika.hamalainen@helsinki.fi

Abstract

We present Poem Machine, an interactive
online tool for co-authoring Finnish po-
etry with a computationally creative agent.
Poem Machine can produce poetry of its
own and assist the user in authoring po-
ems. The main target group for the system
is primary school children, and its use as a
part of teaching is currently under study.

1 Introduction

Automatic poem generation has received a fair
share of attention in the recent years (Gervás,
2001; Colton et al., 2012; Bay et al., 2017). How-
ever, these generators can only seldom be inter-
acted with by a user. Our system, Poem Machine1,
makes poem generation an interactive NLG task
with full engagement from the user part.

In the field of computational creativity, the dis-
course has moved lately more and more towards
human-computer co-creativity. The interest does
not lie anymore on how a computer can generate
creative artifacts on its own, but rather how such
systems can be used together with human creativ-
ity to assist a person in a creative task.

Figure 1: Poem Machine poem editor.

Poem Machine works by creating a poem based
on the user defined theme or a user provided URL.

1http://runokone.cs.helsinki.fi/

This poem is presented to the user in a user in-
terface that is tailored towards co-creativity (see
Figure 1). The user can edit the poem freely by
natural gestures such as drag and drop. Further-
more, the user can consult Poem Machine’s as-
sisting functionalities to achieve his goals such as
finding rhymes or following meter.

The primary user group of interest are primary
school children, and it has been successfully used
in schools to teach children about poetry (Kantos-
alo et al., 2015). The fact that the system can cre-
ate a poem as a starting point removes the problem
of not coming up with where to start when writing.

2 Poem Generator

The single most difficult NLG task the system has
to tackle is the generation of the initial poem the
user will then start to modify. The complex mor-
phosyntax of Finnish does not make this task any
less difficult.

For morphology, we use Omorfi (Pirinen et al.,
2017), which is an FST based transducer to pro-
duce morphological forms. This tool is used
by Syntax Maker (Hämäläinen and Rueter, 2018)
which is a surface generation tool for Finnish.
It resolves morphosyntax (agreement and gov-
ernment) based on an abstract syntactic structure
filled with lemmas.

The poem generator in place is based on the one
presented in (Hämäläinen, 2018). It uses SemFi
(Hämäläinen, 2017) which is a semantic data set of
relations of Finnish words based on their syntactic
dependencies to produce poetry.

In order to initiate the poem generation, the user
is provided with a list of themes such as family or
nature. Each theme contains a list of seed nouns
that are passed on to the poem generator for pro-
ducing a novel poem. If the user provides a URL,
the contents of the link are analyzed with TreeTag-



196

ger (Schmid, Helmut, 1995) after removing boil-
erplate and the poem is generated by using those
words instead of the ones originating from SemFi.

3 User Assisting Functionality

In addition to just a one way NLG interaction in
producing the initial poem, Poem Machine sports
a multitude of user assisting functionalities.

Poem Machine can suggest phonetically simi-
lar words for words the user drags into the rhymer
tool. This tool will look up the Poem Machine
database for rhyming or alliterating words, or
words with assonance or consonance rhyme type.
Additionally, Poem Machine can asses the meter
of the poem the user is authoring. Selectable me-
ters are haiku, tanka, kalevala and so on. Poem
Machine uses Voikko 2 to divide verses into sylla-
bles to asses how well they follow the meter. For
more complex meters such as the kalevala meter,
Poem Machine provides additional stylistic feed-
back apart from syllabic count, such as the exis-
tence of alliterations and that longer words should
be placed at the end of a verse.

The user can also reconsult the poem generator
described earlier. This will generate a new verse at
the end of the poem by following the same param-
eters that were set upon the creation of the poem.

Words can also be substituted by new ones by
using the magic wand tool. Using the tool an-
alyzes the verse syntactically and looks up for a
suitable replacement for the word the wand was
dragged on from SemFi. For easier replacement,
Poem Machine will also inflect the word to match
the original morphology with Omorfi.

4 Conclusions

Poem Machine is a complex computationally cre-
ative tool for helping people create poems of their
own. The meter tool also helps people learn more
about the poetic meter. Initial observations sug-
gest that Poem Machine is successful in eliciting
motivation and provoking more interest towards
poetry in school kids.

It has been made publicly available for every-
one to use it as an online service. Thus making it
possible for the system to have more impact out-
side of the academia. Furthermore this has made
it possible for technology enthusiastic teachers to
use it as a part of their teaching without the need

2https://voikko.puimula.org/

to participate in the scientific study on its use in
classrooms.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Academy of
Finland under grant 276897 (CLiC).

References
Benjamin Bay, Paul Bodily, and Dan Ventura. 2017.

Text Transformation Via Constraints and Word Em-
bedding. In Proceedings of the Eighth International
Conference on Computational Creativity, pages 49–
56.

Simon Colton, Jacob Goodwin, and Tony Veale. 2012.
Full-FACE Poetry Generation. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Computational
Creativity, pages 95–102.

Pablo Gervás. 2001. An Expert System for the Compo-
sition of Formal Spanish Poetry. Knowledge-Based
Systems, 14(3):181–188.

Mika Hämäläinen. 2017. SemFi - Finnish Seman-
tic Data for Poem Generation. Doi: 10.5281/zen-
odo.1137734.

Mika Hämäläinen. 2018. Harnessing NLG to Create
Finnish Poetry Automatically. In Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Computational
Creativity, pages 9–15.

Mika Hämäläinen and Jack Rueter. 2018. Develop-
ment of an Open Source Natural Language Gener-
ation Tool for Finnish. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Computational Linguis-
tics for Uralic Languages, pages 51–58.

Anna Kantosalo, Jukka Toivanen, and Hannu Toivo-
nen. 2015. Interaction Evaluation for Human-
Computer Co-creativity: A Case Study. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Conference on Com-
putational Creativity, pages 276–283.

Tommi A Pirinen, Inari Listenmaa, Ryan Johnson,
Francis M. Tyers, and Juha Kuokkala. 2017. Open
morphology of Finnish. LINDAT/CLARIN digital
library at the Institute of Formal and Applied Lin-
guistics, Charles University.

Schmid, Helmut. 1995. Improvements in Part-of-
Speech Tagging with an Application to German. In
Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop.

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0950-7051(01)00095-8
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0950-7051(01)00095-8
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1137734
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1137734
http://hdl.handle.net/11372/LRT-1992
http://hdl.handle.net/11372/LRT-1992

