



















































CRF-LSTM Text Mining Method Unveiling the Pharmacological Mechanism of Off-target Side Effect of Anti-Multiple Myeloma Drugs


Proceedings of the BioNLP 2018 workshop, pages 166–171
Melbourne, Australia, July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

166

CRF-LSTM Text Mining Method Unveiling the Pharmacological Mechanism
of Off-target Side Effect of Anti-Multiple Myeloma Drugs

Kaiyin Zhou 1
Ke Ding 2

Sheng Zhang 2
Yukun Feng 2

Xiangyu Meng 3
Mo Chen 1

1. College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
2. College of Science, Huazhong Agricultural Univerisity, China

3. Center for Evidence-based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, China
4. School of Medicine, University of Colorado, U.S.

*. Correspondence author: xiajingbo.math@gmail.com

Qi Luo 2
Kevin B Cohen 4

Yuxing Wang 1
Jingbo Xia 1∗

Abstract

Off-target effects played a vital role in the
pharmacological understanding of drug effi-
cacy and this research aimed to use text min-
ing strategy to curate molecular level infor-
mation and unveil the mechanism of off-target
effect caused by the usage of anti-multiple
myeloma (MM) drugs. After training a hy-
brid CNN-CRF-LSTM neural network upon
the training data from TAC 2017 benchmark
database, we extracted all of the side effects
of 16 anti-MM drugs from drug labels, and
combined the results with existed database.
Afterwards, gene targets of anti-MM drugs
were obtained by using structure similarity,
and their related phenotypes were retrieved
from Human Phenotype Ontology. Further-
more, linked phenotypes to candidate genes
and adverse reaction of known drugs formed
a knowledge graph. Through regulation anal-
ysis upon intersected phenotypes of drugs and
target genes, an off-target effect caused by
SLC7A7 was found, which with high pos-
sibility unveiled the pharmacological mecha-
nism of side effect after using combination of
anti-MM drugs.

1 Introduction

Drug genetics aimed to discern the association be-
tween drugs and adverse reaction, and allowed to
personalized medication (Stephen, 2011). Associat-
ing off-target effects with adverse reaction of drugs
to discover the new pharmacological effect of them
is a daunting task when using experimental method
alone.(Eugen et al., 2012).

As a pioneer work, Lountkine et al.,(Eugen et al.,
2012) explored a computational method to predict
novel off-target effects of 656 marketed drugs. By

using the chemoinformatics information, like lig-
and affinity, Similarity Ensemble Approach (SEA)
(Keiser et al., 2009) was used to calculate structural
similarity of drugs and targets, and the relations be-
tween drugs and targets was rebuild. In the mean-
time, the adverse reaction (ADR) of drug targets were
curated from authoritative database including Drug-
Bank, GeneGo Metabase, and Thompson Reuters In-
tegrity. Thus, a large scale drug-target-ADR net-
work was built, and the coincidental overlap of ADR
among target gene and drugs potential gene gave illu-
minative explanation for the mechanism of off-targets
effect.

Generally, the mechanism of off-target candidate
filtering requires the prerequisite of target-drug pair
indications. So far, this pair information has been
widely predicted by inferring the similarity both in
chemical structure and relevance info. Andreas et al.,
(Andreas et al., 2007) used chemical structure infor-
mation to infer the drug-target pair, while Monica et
al., (Monica et al., 2008) used phenotypic side ef-
fect similarities to make the inference. As a large-
scale bioinformatics attempt, Mohan et al., (Mohan
et al., 2008) exploited a huge training set of 10 mil-
lion compounds with known in-vitro activities, pre-
dicted both primary and secondary pharmacology for
1279 molecules, and over 30 thousands possible in-
teractions were predicted for these drugs.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is one of the most com-
mon hematological malignancies, the incidence of
which ranks second just next to non-Hodgkin lym-
phoma. Although recent advances in MM treatment
has largely improved the patients clinical outcome, it
remains an incurable disease due to drug-resistance
and relapse which are almost inevitable (Terpos,
2017). Common adverse drug reactions (ADRs) re-
lated to anti-MM treatment include hematologic toxic
effects (eg. anemia, neutropenia and thrombocy-
topenia), thrombosis, impaired immune function, pe-



167

ripheral neuropathy, and gastrointestinal toxic effects
(eg. mucositis, diarrhea), among many others. These
ADRs bring harm to patients health and quality of
life, and may result in premature discontinuation of
treatment due to intolerance to side effects. Since the
underlying mechanisms are largely unclear, currently
they are mostly managed with symptomatic and/or
supportive care, along with dosage reduction or treat-
ment discontinuation (McCullough et al., 2018). A
better understanding on the mechanisms will help us
find ways to effectively cope with the above men-
tioned safety concerns in treating MM.

In this research, we proposed a novel pharma-
cological knowledge discovery strategy which inte-
grated both Biomedical natural language processing
(BioNLP) and medical informatics. The adverse re-
actions (ADRs) were trained by newly released ADR
training data (Demner-Fushman et al., 2018), and
were extracted on-line with large-scale of text mining
upon 16 anti-MM drugs by using conditioned random
field (CRF) and long short term memory (LSTM)
neural networks. Subsequently, Human Phenotype
Ontology (HPO) (Sebastian et al., 2017) and Ligand
Similarity prediction were used to calculate the tar-
get phenotypes. Bioinformatics analysis hinted that
an off-target gene, SLC7A7, played vital role in the
side effect of a combination usage of anti-MM drugs.

2 Material and Method

2.1 Data Resource

Marketed drugs for MM were collected from
drugs.com (Drugs). After searching anti-MM chem-
icals and removing drug synonyms, 16 drugs were
extracted from the original pharmaceutical list, and
drug targets were collected from SwissTargetPedic-
tion (David et al., 2014), as shown in supplementary
table, Table S1 (Sixteen anti-MM drugs their possible
targets). Meanwhile, drug labels were extracted from
DailyMED database (National Library of Medicine
and Services, 2005).

Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) (Sebastian
et al., 2017) provides standardized vocabulary of
phenotypic abnormalities in human diseases. From
HPO, matches of target genes and their correspond-
ing phenotype terms were retrieved, as shown in table
S2(Phenotype matching result for specific gene).

2.2 Sequence labeling by BioNLP Algorithm

2.2.1 Vector representation of tokens
Regarding the input form for a neural network, word
embedding, controlled vocabulary - DISORDER, and
part of speech (POS) are used for vector representa-
tion of tokens.

• Pre-trained Embeddings: Compared with ran-
domly initialized word embeddings, pre-trained
word embeddings generally yield better exper-
imental results. 200 dimensional embeddings
of GloVe ((Pennington et al., 2014)) was cho-
sen, instead of word2vec word vectors, as GloVe
is more preferable for named entity recognition
tasks than word2vec (Ma and Hovy, 2016).

• DISO is a standardized dictionary from Metathe-
saurus of UMLS. The dictionary consists of the
following 12 subtypes, i.e. acquired abnor-
mality, anatomical abnormality, cell or molec-
ular dysfunction, congenital abnormality, dis-
ease or syndrome, experimental model of dis-
ease, finding, injury or poisoning, mental or be-
havioral dysfunction, neoplastic process, patho-
logic function, and sign or symptom.

• The NLTK toolkit is taken into consideration to
obtain the POS of each token. Randomly initial-
ized feature weights was assigned to each POS
type, and a lookup operation convert each sen-
tence into a POS-embedding vector.

2.2.2 Integration of CRF and LSTM for
sequence labeling

For sequence labeling task as ADR extraction, CRF
is a popular mathematical method which defines the
probability of the annotation of the label sequence
L = (l1, l2, ..., ll), given the observation sequence
O = (o1, o2, ..., ol): exp(

∑
j λjtj(li−1, li,O, i)) +∑

k µksk(li,O, i)), where tj(li−1, li,O, i)) is a tran-
sition feature function that represents the transition
distribution of label pair {li−1, li} based on obser-
vation sequence O, while sk(li,O, i) refers to state
feature function that quantify the state distribution of
the label yi given the observation sequence O. The
mechanism of CRF is to optimize the parameters λj
and µk, and maximize the probability of P (L|O):
P (L|O, λ, µ) = 1Z(O)exp(

∑
j λjtj(li−1, li,O, i)) +∑

k µksk(li,O, i)), where Z(O) is for normalization
(Lafferty et al., 2001).

In the meantime, LSTM is a special Recurrent neu-
ral networks(RNNs) which could capture time dy-
namics via cycles in the graph, and especially, is capa-
ble of capturing long-distance dependencies with the
employment of a special cell and three grates, i.e. in-
put gate, forget gate, and output gate. Supposing that
t represents a time point, xt is the input vector at time
t. it, ft, ct, ot stand for different gates state at time t.
Wi, Wf , Wc, Wo are the weight matrices for hidden
state ht. Ui, Uf , Uc, Uo denote the weight matrices of
different gates for input xt. bi, bf , bc, bo denote the



168

Figure 1: The idea of the CNN-LSTM-CRF sequence
labeling method

bias vectors from different gates. And the formulas
for LSTM unit at time t are:

it = σ(Wiht−1 + Uixt + bi)
ft = σ(Wfht−1 + Ufxt + bf )
ct = ft ∗ ct−1 + it ∗ tanh(Wcht−1 + Ucxt + bc)
ot = σ(Woht−1 + Uoxt + bo)
ht = ot ∗ tanh(ct)

, (1)

where σ is the element-wise sigmoid function and ∗ is
the element-wise product. And ht is the hidden state,
namely the finally output of LSTM unit at time t.

To achieve a better semantic understanding in bio-
logic domain, a combined BLSTM-CNNs-CRF neu-
ral network was put forward by Ma et al.(Ma and
Hovy, 2016), where CNNs are utilized to model
character-level information, bi-directional LSTM
(BLSTM) is used to capture past and future infor-
mation respectively, and CRF is employed to decode
the best label sequence. In order to further improve
the labeling accuracy for this specific task, double-
BLSTM layer is taken into consideration instead of
single-BLSTM layer, namely BLSTM, mentioned in
Ma et al.(2016).

The detailed algorithm steps are shown in Figure
1. For each word in training text, the character-level
representation vector computed by CNN, the DISO
and POS feature got by lookup random initialization
weights, concatenated with word embedding vector
are designed as the input of the double-BLSTM net-
work. And the output vectors of double-BLSTM are
fed to the CRF layers to jointly decode the best label
sequence. The flowchart of a specific labeling em-
ployment example is presented in the following.

For instance, ”I have a cough.” where ”cough”
is the target word. After the sentence being sepa-
rated into words, the words are broken into letters,
which can be embedded into a one-hot vector to com-
pute the character representation vector by CNN. The
character-level representation vectors of each words,
their DISO and POS representation vector and word
embeddings, computed by glove, are combined as the
inputs of double-BLSTM, which has double-layer of
two processes, i.e. the past(left) and the future(right).
The past process takes information only from ’I’ to
’cough’ while the future process takes information
only from ’cough’ to ’I’. These two pieces of in-
formation was concatenated as the final outputs of
double-BLSTM and, simultaneously, the inputs of
CRF. With the utilization of CRF, the labels of sen-
tence are tagged as ’O O O B’.

2.3 Phenotype matching algorithm
To decide whether two phenotype words match or not,
two criteria were applied. First, both phenotypes are
available in the database with the same is a ·ID; sec-
ond, the word embedding distance of two terms are
small sufficiently. The algorithm is shown in the fol-
lowing.

• If both phenotypes are available in the database
with the same is a ·ID, the output will be True.

• If not, each target phenotype is converted into a
word embedding, and if the distance of the two
vectors is less than a threshold value t, the two
phenotype terms are matched. Otherwise, the
two terms are not matched.

Algorithm 1 Phenotype matching algorithm
Input: Term A, term B, threshold value t
Output: True/False

1: if (A ∈ HPO)
∧
(B ∈ HPO)

∧
(A · is a ·ID =

B · is a · ID) then
2: return True
3: else if Cosine Distance(A,B) < t then
4: return True
5: else
6: return False
7: end if

2.4 Flowchart of the proposed strategy for
off-target side effect prediction

The purpose of this research is to find the co-
occurrence of phenotype from both drug and the re-
lated protein, so as to illuminate the pharmacological
mechanism of the drug side effect.



169

Figure 2: Flowchart of the proposed off-target mech-
anism discovery

By using an integration of the CRF and LSTM
text mining algorithms, sequence labeling was car-
ried on to extract side effects, SEdrug, of anti-
MM drugs from DailyMed drug labels. Poten-
tial drug targets, Targetdrug, were filtered by
querying SwissTargetPredcition Database. Mean-
while, related phenotype of Targetdrug, i.e.,
Pheno(Targetdrug), was obtained by using Hu-
man Phenotyping Ontology (HPO). Subsequently,
off-target gene, Targetoff−targetdrug , of corresponding
drugs were filtered out by intersection analysis of
SEdrug and Pheno(Targetdrug).

3 Result

3.1 Database querying result

In total, 48 types of anti-MM drugs are collected by
searching drug.com. And with the 48 drug names as
searching condition, 16 different drugs and 16 corre-
sponding labels are extracted from 27 drug labels, ac-
quired by DailyMED. Among the 16 drugs, 2 are pro-
tein drugs, and the left 14 non-protein drugs are taken
to predict their potential targets with the utilization
of SwissTargetprediction, where 15 potential targets
can be obtained from each drug. Searching the 15 po-
tential targets in HPO, targets, not only our predicted
targets but also targets existing in HPO, are achieved.
With the application of HPO, drugs, potential target
genes, and corresponding phenotype are related with
each other. Meanwhile, corresponding ADRs form
acquired drug labels can be collected with the strat-
egy of sequence labeling, and improvement of the re-
lationship between drugs and ADRs can be achieved

through drugs.com, where related drugs’ ADRs are
collected. Eventually, drugs, potential targets, and
data of overlapping ADRs are acquired via artificial
recognition. And it is revealed in the result that under
the circumstance of a certain drug, its potential targets
have a tight relation with its ADRs.

3.2 Phenotype matching and phenotype
coincidence

For the trained samples in table S3, F-Score and
Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) were calcu-
lated, and a best threshold t = 0.57 was obtained.
Here F − score = 2Precision×RecallPrecision+Recall , and MCC =

TP×TN−FP×FN
2
√

(TP+FP )(TP+FN)(TN+FP )(TN+FN)
. The selection of t

is shown in figure 3. The best F-score and MCC are
0.733, 0.622 separately.

Figure 3: threshold selection for phenotype matching

By using algorithm 1, the gene whose phenotypes
in HPO are highly consistent with drug ADRs were
retrieved, and the coincidence were evaluated by Jac-
card similarity coefficient. Among all the intersection
of phenotype terms, the most prominent output pair
is melphalan-SLC7A7 for Jaccard value being 0.280
and melphalan-CA2 for Jaccard value being 0.198.
As shown in table 1, phenotype coincidence for mel-
phalan and SLC7A7/CA2 is clear, that hinted that the
two genes possibly play roles in the side effects of the
drug.

3.3 Knowledge discovery of off-target side effect

An illuminative evidence comes from Melphalan, a
common anti-MM drug. Through intersection anal-
ysis of SEMelphalan and Pheno(TargetMelphalan),
anemia, thrombocytopenia and diarrhea were found
to be the same phenotypes of the drug Melphalan and
the possible target SLC7A . Observing its target genes
are NR3C1, NR0B1, ANXA1, NOS2, NR1L2, and
its possible target gene is SLC7A, we found that, af-
ter taking another anti-MM drug Prednisone, mRNA
level of target genes goes down and that of SLC7A



170

Gene: SLC7A
Known ADRs Off-target effect
Sparse hair Alopecia
Thrombocytopenia Thrombocytopenia
Leukopenia Leukopenia
Diarrhea Diarrhea
Nausea Nausea
Anemia Anemia
Vomiting Vomiting
Muscle weakness Muscular parlysis
Respiratory insufficiency Dyspnea

Table 1: Consistency of ADRs of melphalan alkeran
evomela in clinical records and off-target curations

Figure 4: Mechanism of off-target side effects via
functioning of SLC7A7 after MVP drug usage

goes up. That made it high chance for off-target
event of SLC7A to manifest its off-target side effects:
Pheno(TargetMelphalan). Thus SLC7A is with high
chance the factor of the off-target effect.

4 Discussion

Mechanism of off-target effect is illustrated in this
section. First, literature evidences are shown to ad-
dress the side effect after anti-MM drug usage, and
then the up/down regulatory mRNA-level tendency of
on/off targets are shown.

4.1 Literature evidence
It was reported that a combined usage of melpha-
lan, prednisone, and bortezomib (MPV) is regarded
as common treatment for the high-risk MM patient,
while neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and
gastrointestinal symptoms were common after MPV
treatment (Kyle and Rajkumar., 2009).

Meanwhile, SLC7A is a heterotrimeric amino acid

transporter (HAT) y+LAT-1 gene located on chro-
mosome 14q11.2. It was reported that mutation in
SLC7A caused Lysinuric Protein Intolerance. Then,
delayed physical development, intestinal malabsorp-
tion, vomiting, and failure to thrive are the prominent
clinical manifestations (Lawson and Loyd, 2013).

4.2 Up/Down regulation of target/off-target gene

Drug usage of Prednisone is treated as exposure
in comparison analysis, and the connectivity map
(CMAP) is used to unveil the up/down regulation by
analyzing the before/after mRNA level of patience.
We input the target genes as down regulated genes
and the off-target genes as up regulated, and the out-
put off-target gene is Prednisone, with significant P
value, 0.01029.

As shown in figure 4, after taking Prednisone, as
it mentioned above, the expression levels of target
genes are down regulated while the off-target genes
are up, the steady state is broken. In this condition,
more off-target proteins lead to more combination
with Melphalan than usual, which contribute to more
significant side effects.

Here, we infer that the usage of Prednisone lead
to an up regulation of SLC7A, and it arises com-
petition between SLC7A and the drug targets, i.e.,
NR3C1, NR0B1, ANXA1, NOS2, NR1L2. The bind-
ing of SLC7A to Melphalan brings the off-target ef-
fect. Therefore, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and gas-
trointestinal symptoms can be easily observed after
combined usage of Melphalan and Prednisone.

5 Conclusion

Sequence labeling of biomedical entities, e.g., side ef-
fects or phenotypes, was a long-term task in BioNLP
and MedNLP communities. Thanks to effects made
among these communities, adverse reaction NER
has developed dramatically in recent years (Demner-
Fushman et al., 2018). As an illuminative application,
to achieve knowledge discovery via the combination
of the text mining result and bioinformatics idea shed
lights on the pharmacological mechanism research.

Acknowledgments

This work is funded by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities of China (Project
No. 2662018PY096). We expressed our gratitude to
Pierre Zweigenbaum for discussion of WAPITI and
CRF, and to Köhler Sebastian et. al. for offering help
in the HPO resource. We also thank anonymous re-
viewers for their kind suggestions.



171

References
Bender Andreas, Josef Scheiber, Meir Glick, John W.

Davies, Kamal Azzaoui, Jacques Hamon, Laszlo Urban,
Steven Whitebread, and Jeremy L. Jenkins. 2007. Anal-
ysis of pharmacology data and the prediction of adverse
drug reactions and offtarget effects from chemical struc-
ture. ChemMedChem, 2(6):861–873.

Gfeller David, Aurlien Grosdidier, Matthias Wirth, An-
toine Daina, Olivier Michielin, and Vincent Zoete.
2014. Swisstargetprediction: a web server for target
prediction of bioactive small molecules. Nucleic acids
research, 42(W1):W32–W38.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Sonya E Shooshan, Laritza Ro-
driguez, Alan R Aronson, Francois Lang, Willie Rogers,
Kirk Roberts, and Joseph Tonning. 2018. A dataset of
200 structured product labels annotated for adverse drug
reactions. Scientific data, 5:180001.

Drugs. Drugs.com. https://www.drugs.ca.

Lounkine Eugen, Michael J. Keiser, Steven Whitebread,
Dmitri Mikhailov, Jacques Hamon, Jeremy L. Jenkins,
Paul Lavan, and et al. 2012. Large-scale prediction and
testing of drug activity on side-effect targets. Nature,
486(7403):361–367.

Michael J. Keiser, Vincent Setola, John J. Irwin, Christian
Laggner, Atheir I. Abbas, Sandra J. Hufeisen, Niels H.
Jensen, and et al. 2009. Predicting new molecular tar-
gets for known drugs. Nature, 462(7270):175–181.

Robert A. Kyle and S. Vincent Rajkumar. 2009. Treatment
of multiple myeloma: a comprehensive review. Clinical
Lymphoma and Myeloma, 9(4):278–288.

John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando CN
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data.

Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Subra-
manian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016.
Neural architectures for named entity recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01360.

William E Lawson and James E Loyd. 2013. Intersti-
tial and restrictive pulmonary disorders. In Emery and
Rimoin’s Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics,
pages 1–22. Elsevier.

Xuezhe Ma and Eduard Hovy. 2016. End-to-end sequence
labeling via bi-directional lstm-cnns-crf. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.01354.

Kristen B McCullough, Miriam A Hobbs, Jithma P
Abeykoon, and Prashant Kapoor. 2018. Common ad-
verse effects of novel therapies for multiple myeloma
(mm) and their management strategies. Current hema-
tologic malignancy reports, pages 1–11.

Health National Library of Medicine, National Insti-
tutes of Health and Human Services. 2005. Daily-
med.com. https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/
dailymed/index.cfm.

Prerna Mewawalla and Abhishek Chilkulwar. 2017. Main-
tenance therapy in multiple myeloma. Therapeutic ad-
vances in hematology, 8(2):71–79.

Rao Mohan, Michael Liguori, Srinivasa Mantena, Scott
Mittelstadt, Eric Blomme, and Terry Van Vleet. 2008.
Computational prediction of off-target pharmacology
for discontinued drugs. The FASEB Journal.

Campillos Monica, Michael Kuhn, Anne-Claude Gavin,
Lars Juhl Jensen, and Peer Bork. 2008. Drug tar-
get identification using side-effect similarity. Science,
31(5886):263–266.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Man-
ning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word representa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empiri-
cal methods in natural language processing (EMNLP),
pages 1532–1543.

Köhler Sebastian, Nicole A. Vasilevsky, Mark Engelstad,
Erin Foster, Julie McMurry, Sgolne Aym, Gareth Bay-
nam, and et al. 2017. The human phenotype ontology
in 2017. Nucleic acids research, 45(D1):D865–D876.

Neidle Stephen. 2011. Cancer drug design and discovery.
Academic Press.

Evangelos Terpos. 2017. Multiple myeloma: Clinical
updates from the american society of hematology an-
nual meeting 2016. Clinical Lymphoma, Myeloma and
Leukemia, 17(6):329–339.

Zi-Hang Zeng, Jia-Feng Chen, Yi-Xuan Li, Ran Zhang,
Ling-Fei Xiao, and Xiang-Yu Meng. 2017. Induction
regimens for transplant-eligible patients with newly di-
agnosed multiple myeloma: a network meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Cancer management and
research, 9:287.

A Supplemental Material

Attached are the supplementary tables.
Table S1. Sixteen anti-MM drugs and their

possible targets, (https://github.com/
kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/
master/Table%20S1.xlsx).

Table S2. Phenotype matching result for specific
gene, (https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/
crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%
20S2.xlsx).

Table S3. Positive and negative samples and
their distance, (https://github.com/
kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/
master/Table%20S3.xlsx)

https://www.drugs.ca
https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/index.cfm
https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/index.cfm
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S1.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S1.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S1.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S2.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S2.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S2.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S3.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S3.xlsx
https://github.com/kyzhouhzau/crf-lstm-text/blob/master/Table%20S3.xlsx

