









































Proceedings of the Workshop on Intelligent Interactive Systems and Language Generation (2IS&NLG)


Proceedings of the Workshop on Intelligent Interactive Systems and Language Generation (2IS&NLG), pages 45–47,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

CheckYourMeal!: diet management with NLG

Luca Anselma, Simone Donetti, Alessandro Mazzei, and Andrea Pirone

[anselma,donetti,mazzei,pirone]@di.unito.it
Dipartimento di Informatica

Università degli Studi di Torino
C.so Svizzera 185, 10149 Torino, Italy

Abstract

CheckYourMeal! is an app designed to
manage the diet of a user. The app is a
component of a complex cloud architec-
ture designed for assisting users in their in-
teraction with food during a week. Check-
YourMeal! allows to show the results of
automatic reasoning in both graphical and
textual forms. In particular, the bilingual
English/Italian textual messages are gener-
ated server-side by using the SimpleNLG
realizer.

1 Introduction

Following a healthy diet plays a key role in the
fulfillment of a good life. Artificial intelligence
and ubiquitous computing are emerging technolo-
gies that can help people to eat in a correct way
(e.g. (Mankoff et al., 2002; Kaptein et al., 2012;
Hashemi and Javidnia, 2012)). Natural Language
Generation (NLG) can be used in the diet context
in different ways. NLG can be used to explain
the results of numeric and symbolic reasoners (e.g.
(Dragoni et al., 2017; Anselma et al., 2017)) or
can be used to motivate users toward the best di-
etetic choice. Indeed, a number of projects have
recently use NLG for guiding a user towards a vir-
tuous behavior, among them (Reiter et al., 2003;
Braun et al., 2018; Conde-Clemente et al., 2018).

MADiMan (Multimedia Application for Diet
Management) is an ongoing project1 with the aim
to build a virtual assistant that is able to: recover
the nutritional information directly from a specific
recipe, reason over recipes and diets with flexibil-
ity, i.e. by allowing some forms of diet disobe-
dience, and persuade the user to minimize such
acts of disobedience (Anselma et al., 2017). The
MADiMan architecture is composed by various

1http://di.unito.it/madiman

DB 
RecipesDB Users

Recipe QR 
Code

1. app

3. NLU/IE 
service

4. Reasoner
service

5. NLG 
service

2. DietManager
service

Figure 1: The MADiMan architecture.

modules (Fig. 1), that are a mobile app (described
in Section 2), a numerical reasoner that decides
the compatibility of a specific dish in some point
of the diet (Anselma et al., 2017), an informa-
tion extraction module used to compute the nu-
trient values of a specific recipe, a NLG service
that converts the results of the computing to tex-
tual form (Anselma and Mazzei, 2017). The rea-
soning module of MADiMan overcame reason-
able baselines in different simulation experiments
(Anselma et al., 2017, 2018). We realized the
CheckYourMeal! app in order to evaluate the per-
formance and the usability of the whole architec-
ture with human-evaluation into a realistic context.
Moreover, we have recently used the app to test
the appealing of the NL generated sentences in a
first human-evaluation experiment (Anselma and
Mazzei, 2018).

2 The CheckYourMeal! App and the
NLG service

CheckYourMeal! is an iOS app2 (developed in the
Swift functional language) designed to present the
result of the reasoning on food and diet in terms of
both graphics and textual messages. The app is a
prototype currently in a development stage.

In Fig. 2 we report three screenshots of the app.

2The app is currently in closed beta. Moreover, we plan
to release an Android version in the next future.

45



Figure 2: Three screenshots of CheckYourMeal.

The user interface is structured in three sections:
the Home section, where the users are provided
with general information, the Menu section, where
the users can see the suggestions for the next meal
and where they can input the chosen meals, and
the Profile section, where the users can modify
settings and user parameters. In the Menu sec-
tion (central screenshot in Fig. 2), the user is pre-
sented with some suggestions of meals taken from
a precompiled database of menus which are or-
dered by their distance from the ideal values of the
dietary reference values. When a user selects a
specific menu, CheckYourMeal! shows both (1) a
pie-chart and (2) a textual message which contains
information about the macronutrients values of the
chosen menu.

The server (DietManager service in Fig. 1) is
written in Java and it uses the Spring frame-
work to communicate with the CheckYourMeal!
app. The server calls the NLG service as an
external Java library compacted into a single jar
file. The NLG Service is composed by two sub-
modules: (i) a monolithic rule-based document-
sentence planner (Anselma and Mazzei, 2017)
and, (ii) a bilingual English/Italian realizer de-
fined over the SimpleNLG-it library (Mazzei et al.,
2016). The entire NLG service has been devel-
oped by using the clojure language, that is a func-
tional language running over the JVM.

The document and sentence planner follows
simple fixed schemata. All messages will be
composed by two parts: an overall evaluation
of the dish and three evaluations for carbohy-
drates, lipids, proteins. The sentences gener-
ated for expressing the appropriateness of the

specific macronutrients are positive copula sen-
tences with a predicate expressing the deviation
(i.e. rich/poor/perfect), and a PP modifier speci-
fying the macronutrient (e.g. in lipids). Moreover,
an adverb (e.g. lightly) distinguishes distinct devi-
ations from the optimal choice. Note that the sen-
tence plans generated are, apart from the lexicon,
independent from the language used. So, the user
selection of the language for the produced mes-
sages (English or Italian) corresponds to use a dif-
ferent realizer class of SimpleNLG-it. The actual
implementation of the generator allows to select
other two features concerning the lexicon (fixed or
variable) and the aggregation strategy (VP and set
aggregation). We have tested the app, by consid-
ering different values of the various features, in a
first human-evaluation experiment with 20 people
(Anselma and Mazzei, 2018).

During the demo session, we will show both the
iOS app on a mobile phone and inner workings of
the NLG Service.

3 Conclusion and Ongoing Work

In this paper we have presented the main features
of CheckYourMeal!, an iOS app developed in the
domain of the diet management. The app is used in
the MADiMan architecture to provide the results
of an automatic reasoner in terms of graphics and
short text messages.

Future development concerns the implementa-
tion of a more sophisticated method for explana-
tion in the text messages. We intend to integrate
the numerical reasoning with ontological reason-
ing to obtain a causal explanation based over the
past dishes. In the actual state of development

46



the system allows for a limited form of human-
machine interaction. In future work, we intend to
experiment too a more sophisticated form of inter-
action based on dialogue, where the system could
answer to questions concerning the compatibility
of the menu in relation to the diet history.

References
Luca Anselma and Alessandro Mazzei. 2017. An

approach for explaining reasoning on the diet do-
main. In Proc. of the 1st Workshop on Natural
Language for Artificial Intelligence co-located with
AI*IA 2017, Bari, Italy.. pages 4–17.

Luca Anselma and Alessandro Mazzei. 2018. Design-
ing and testing the messages produced by a virtual
dietitian. In Proc. of 11th International Confer-
ence on Natural Language Generation (INLG 2018).
ACL. To appear.

Luca Anselma, Alessandro Mazzei, and Franco
De Michieli. 2017. An artificial intelligence frame-
work for compensating transgressions and its appli-
cation to diet management. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics 68:58–70.

Luca Anselma, Alessandro Mazzei, and Andrea Pirone.
2018. Automatic reasoning evaluation in diet
management based on an italian cookbook. In
Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multime-
dia for Cooking and Eating Activities and Multi-
media Assisted Dietary Management. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, CEA/MADiMa ’18, pages 59–62.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3230519.3230595.

Daniel Braun, Ehud Reiter, and Advaith Sid-
dharthan. 2018. Saferdrive: An nlg-based
behaviour change support system for drivers.
Natural Language Engineering 24(4):551–588.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324918000050.

Patricia Conde-Clemente, Jose M. Alonso, and
Gracian Trivino. 2018. Toward automatic
generation of linguistic advice for saving en-
ergy at home. Soft Computing 22(2):345–359.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-2430-5.

Mauro Dragoni, Tania Bailoni, Claudio Eccher,
Marco Guerini, and Rosa Maimone. 2017.
A semantic-enabled platform for supporting
healthy lifestyles. In Proceedings of the Sym-
posium on Applied Computing. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, SAC ’17, pages 315–322.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3019612.3019835.

Baran Hashemi and Hossein Javidnia. 2012. Article:
An approach for recommendations in self manage-
ment of diabetes based on expert system. Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Applications 53(14):6–
12. Published by Foundation of Computer Science,
New York, USA.

Maurits Kaptein, Boris E. R. de Ruyter, Panos
Markopoulos, and Emile H. L. Aarts. 2012. Adap-
tive persuasive systems: A study of tailored persua-
sive text messages to reduce snacking. TiiS 2(2):10.

Jennifer Mankoff, Gary Hsieh, Ho Chak Hung, Sharon
Lee, and Elizabeth Nitao. 2002. Using low-cost
sensing to support nutritional awareness. In Proc.
of the 4th int. conference on Ubiquitous Computing.
Springer-Verlag, London, UK, UbiComp ’02, pages
371–376.

Alessandro Mazzei, Cristina Battaglino, and Cristina
Bosco. 2016. SimpleNLG-IT: adapting SimpleNLG
to Italian. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Natural Language Generation conference. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Edinburgh, UK,
pages 184–192.

E. Reiter, R. Robertson, and L. Osman. 2003. Lessons
from a Failure: Generating Tailored Smoking Ces-
sation Letters. Artificial Intelligence 144:41–58.

47


