








































The organization of lexicons: A cross-linguistic analysis of
monosyllabic words

Shiying Yang, Chelsea Sanker, and Uriel Cohen Priva
shiying_yang,chelsea_sanker,uriel_cohen_priva@brown.edu

Abstract

Lexicons utilize a fraction of licit struc-
tures. Different theories predict either that
lexicons prioritize contrastiveness or struc-
tural economy. Study 1 finds that the
monosyllabic lexicon of Mandarin is no
more distinctive than a randomly sampled
baseline using the phonological inventory.
Study 2 finds that the lexicons of Mandarin
and American English have fewer phono-
tactically complex words than the random
baseline: Words tend not to have mul-
tiple low-probability components. This
suggests that phonological constraints can
have superadditive penalties for combined
violations, consistent with e.g. Albright
(ms.).

1 Introduction

Lexicons can be considered mappings between
word meanings and phonotactically-valid se-
quences of phonemes. There are several dimen-
sions of forces shaping lexicons, based on the
frequency of each item and its phonetic distinc-
tiveness from similar items, as well as the phono-
tactic probability of the phonological sequences
within each item. For instance, underlying pres-
sures on the lexicon influence the frequency dis-
tribution of items within a lexicon (Zipf, 1929;
Piantadosi et al., 2009); Zipf’s law predicts that
frequent words should be preferentially mapped
to shorter segmental sequences.

In the absence of other pressures, syllables
and words should be maximally distinct from
one another, in order to minimize ambiguity

and potential for confusion. This pressure has
been demonstrated within phonological inven-
tories; vowel systems tend to maximize the dis-
tance between vowels (Flemming, 2004), though
other work has found a tendency for economy,
in which each feature tends to be used for mul-
tiple contrasts, particularly among consonants
(Clements, 2003; Dautriche et al., 2017). Wedel
et al. (2013) demonstrate that contrastiveness
is important in shaping lexicons; phonological
mergers are less likely when more lexical con-
trasts depend on the phonological contrast. The
pressure for contrastiveness has been demon-
strated in various experiments, in which words
with higher neighborhood density are identified
more slowly than words with lower neighbor-
hood density (Luce and Pisoni, 1998). If lex-
icons are not maximizing how distinct lexical
items are, there must be other pressures out-
weighing contrastiveness.

Using two computational studies, we exam-
ine some of the factors influencing the shapes
of items within lexicons, by comparing actual
lexicons to generated lexicons given the same
phonotactic restrictions.

1.1 Competing pressures in a lexicon

Zipf (1929) proposed the principle of least effort
as a primary force shaping phonological inven-
tories, claiming that the frequencies of sounds
within a language are negatively correlated with
their articulatory and perceptual complexity,
given a set number of contrasts. Thus, the prob-
ability of a sound would reflect its overall per-

164
Proceedings of the Society for Computation in Linguistics (SCiL) 2018, pages 164-173.

Salt Lake City, Utah, January 4-7, 2018



ceptual and articulatory cost. Consistent with
this proposal is the strong correlation between
the cross-linguistic frequency of phonemes (i.e.
what percentage of languages in UPSID have
them) and their frequency within particular lan-
guages (Sanker, 2016).

In line with this functional view, emphasizing
the communicative goal of language, Flemming’s
(2004) Dispersion Theory of contrast translated
the trade-off between speaker and listener into
three conflicting goals: “maximizing the dis-
tinctiveness of contrasts,”“minimizing articula-
tory effort” and“maximizing the number of con-
trasts.” He proposed that a phonological inven-
tory would strike a balance between these goals,
providing the most distinctive vowel system pos-
sible with a given number of contrasts, with ar-
ticulatory effort only as motivated by achiev-
ing distinctiveness. This principle should also
extend to lexicons: All else being equal, lexi-
cons should be maximally distinct. This is addi-
tionally supported by perceptual evidence that
dense lexical neighborhoods slow down process-
ing (Luce and Pisoni, 1998).

However, lexicons seem to be less dispersed
than would be expected from the pressure
of maximizing contrastiveness. Dautriche et
al. (2017) looked at the lexicons of four
Indo-European languages and found that they
were more regular (“clumpy”) than expected
by chance. Words were more similar to
each other in these languages than in gen-
erated phonotactically-controlled baseline lexi-
cons. This result parallels some work in the
segmental domain, which shows that languages
tend to reuse phonological features (Clements,
2003). However, one potential limitation of this
study is that the phonotactic restrictions were
tightly controlled, with environments extending
out to four segments, which could have con-
strained the generated lexicons beyond just cap-
turing the intended phonological constraints; in
long words, it can be unclear what segmental
range best captures the inherent phonotactic
patterns.

In order to expand the data into an unrelated
language and in particular address whether the
lexicon would pattern differently in a language

with shorter words and a denser lexicon, we com-
pared generated phonotactically-controlled lexi-
cons to the real lexicon of Mandarin Chinese in
Study 1.

1.2 An explanation of phonologically
clustered lexicons

In contrast to the dispersion account which
bases the drive for distinctiveness on commu-
nicative efficiency, Dautriche et al. (2017) at-
tributed their findings to a pressure for regular-
ity that is driven by the goal of lowering cog-
nitive costs in language acquisition and lexical
access. A different possibility is that our un-
derstanding of the forces driving a language’s
phonotactics are flawed.

Within phonological theories that address
gradient phenomena, models are generally mul-
tiplicative. For instance, in MaxEnt, as pre-
sented by Hayes and Wilson (2008), the proba-
bility assigned to a phonotactic form is e raised
to the negative sum of the weighted constraint
violations. Calculated differently, this is the
product of the probability of each individual vi-
olation occurring.

Thus, MaxEnt treats constraints as being in-
dependent (Hayes and Wilson, 2008). How-
ever, multiple languages have constraint combi-
nations which are more limited in combination
than would be predicted from their independent
probabilities (Albright, ms; Green and Davis,
2014; Shih, 2016). For example, English /æ/
and coda /z/ are attested with somewhat low
frequency, but their combination is extremely
uncommon, far below the product of their in-
dependent probabilities (Kessler and Treiman,
1997). Such patterns have been explained as
“superadditivity”(Albright, ms) or “supercumu-
lativity”(Shih, 2016), a phenomenon in which
combinations of marked structures incur addi-
tional penalties, though their co-occurrence is
not categorically disallowed.

The superadditivity effect might underlie
some of the patterns of lexicons, as it would
produce a faster drop-off in the occurrence of
low probability forms, resulting in more clus-
tering around higher probability forms than is
predicted by models in which all phonotactic

165



constraints are independent. Study 2 was de-
vised to test the null hypothesis of a multiplica-
tive grammar, in which the probability of a cer-
tain form appearing as a word is the product
of the probabilities of each of its components,
against a counter-hypothesis of a grammar in-
cluding additional penalties for combinations of
low-probability sequences; see section 3.2.

1.3 The null hypotheses: A lexicon
selected by chance

Similar to the resampling procedures used by
Dautriche et al. (2017), sample lexicons were
generated to estimate statistics of a baseline
population distribution as predicted from the
phonotactic constraints and lexicon size of Man-
darin, to be tested against measurements of the
real lexicon. A lexicon can be thought of as a
set of word forms drawn from a pool of all forms
that are licit within the phonotactic constraints
of a language. To draw a lexicon with k con-
trasting items from a constrained pool of n licit
shapes, there are

(
n
k

)
possibilities for lexicons;

generated lexicons are drawn from this pool of
possibilities.

If the lexicon is not under any pressure to
maximize either distinctiveness or regularity, the
sampling procedure from the pool of candidate
word-forms will be random; Study 1 tests the
predictions made by random sampling.

If independent phonotactic constraints are
sufficient to capture well-formedness and thus
predict frequency distributions in lexicons, prob-
abilities of phonemic shapes will follow from
probabilities of their subparts (Albright, ms).
Study 2 tests the predictions made by indepen-
dent evaluation of constraints; if constraints are
independent, generated lexicons that are ran-
domly sampled from the pool of forms based on
probabilities produced by the phonotactic con-
straints of a language without any constraint in-
teraction should have distributions similar to the
real lexicon.

Both Study 1 and Study 2 are based on con-
structing phonotactically-constrained pools of
words from which generated lexicons are sam-
pled. The word-pools and the artificial lexicons
are generated according to the parameters laid

out in the following sections, to create baselines
for evaluating what factors are influencing the
real lexicons. We aim to show that real lexi-
cons cannot be explained by randomly sampling
from a constrained phonological space and that
the constraints on the phonological space call for
a model that includes superadditivity.

2 Study 1: Evaluating the
distinctiveness of Mandarin
monosyllabic lexicon

2.1 Background

Study 1 investigated monosyllabic words in
Mandarin Chinese. Mandarin has a dense
phonological space and limited licit syllable
structures, which make it possible to enumerate
all phonologically permissible forms with rela-
tively few assumptions.

Mandarin syllables are limited to a structure
with at most four phonemes: CGVX (Li and
Thompson, 1987). C stands for a consonant
in the onset position; G stands for a glide; V
stands for a vowel; and X can either be a nasal
/n/ or /N/, or the off-glide of a diphthong. Ev-
ery syllable must have a vowel, but all other
positions can be empty (Duanmu, 2009). In
addition, each syllable has one of four phono-
logical tones. Given only these structural con-
straints, the phonological inventory would allow
7,600 possible syllables (Duanmu, 2009). Most
words in Mandarin are monosyllabic or disyl-
labic, so limitations in licit syllables result in a
rather small number of possible words.

If there is a pressure towards contrastiveness
within the lexicon, it should be particularly ap-
parent in a language with such a small number
of phonotactically licit forms. Thus, our predic-
tion was that the real Mandarin lexicon would
be more dispersed than the randomly sampled
generated lexicons.

2.2 Methods

For Study 1, we used the LDC Mandarin Lexi-
con and the corresponding frequency data from
the LDC Mandarin Callhome training tran-
scripts (Huang et al., 1997). Words which in-
clude the 5th tone (‘neutral tone’) or lack a nu-

166



clear vowel were excluded from analysis, to avoid
clitics (Chao, 1968), which would be outside the
scope of this analysis.

The crucial aspect of lexical contrast is phono-
logical form, so we based perceptual distinctive-
ness on phonemic representations rather than
phonetic measurements, using features to calcu-
late distance between consonants and distance
between formants to calculate distance between
vowels. Based on misperception studies, percep-
tual distance between the presence and absence
of a segment is highly sensitive to the segment
and its environment (Tang, 2015; Sanker, 2016);
such differences do not clearly fit into the same
system as contrasts between phonemes, so words
with different syllable structures were considered
separately. Focusing just on the monosyllabic
lexicon of Mandarin, we looked at CV (open syl-
lable) and CVX (closed syllable) structures.

2.2.1 Defining the licit structures

In order to sample generated lexicons of Man-
darin from the hypothesized phonological space
described in 1.3, a list of well-formed syllables
was generated for CV and CVX forms, to rep-
resent candidate word-forms. In order to gener-
ate such lists, all combinations of CV and CVX
structures were laid out, based on the phonologi-
cal segment inventory of Mandarin; then the licit
word-forms of the two structures were filtered
through phonotactic models, using n-grams for
phonological sequences (Jurafsky and Martin,
2008).

For CV words, well-formedness was deter-
mined using a phonological bi-gram (bi-phone)
model, in which the probability of a word was
defined as the product of the individual proba-
bilities for all segments given the phoneme im-
mediately preceding each; the probability of the
tone was conditioned on the vowel. CVX words
were evaluated similarly, but with a tri-phone
model instead of a bi-phone model due to the ex-
tra degree of freedom induced by the coda. The
probability of a word was defined as the prod-
uct of the individual probabilities for all seg-
ments given the two phonemes preceding each,
and tone was still conditioned on the vowel. Be-
cause only monosyllabic words were considered,

there is no possibility of long-distance dependen-
cies. Segment probabilities were based on all at-
tested syllables in the LDC lexicon. Under this
model, words with probabilities higher than 0
were considered well-formed. Beyond that, the
probabilities produced by this model were not
used for Study 1.

The resulting lists of forms contain 304 CV
syllables (out of 360 structurally possible com-
binations) and 544 CVX syllables (out of 1440
structurally possible combinations), which rep-
resent the number of phonotactically licit syl-
lables of these shapes. Of these, there are 187
monosyllabic words with CV structure attested
in the LDC Mandarin Lexicon and 327 words
with CVX structure. The two filtered lists of
words serve as phonologically licit pools of words
for the sampling procedure described in 2.2.3.

2.2.2 Defining the distinctiveness of
lexicons

In evaluating dispersion within lexicons, the
distinctiveness between any two segments σk
and σv is denoted as d(σk, σv). Comparisons
were conducted with corresponding segments
from the syllables being compared, e.g. com-
paring onsets to onsets.

In order to reflect the perceptual differences
between segments, the metrics for distinctive-
ness differed for consonants and for vowels. For
consonants, the distinctiveness between each
pair of sounds was determined by the number
of featural differences, which has been shown
to correlate with perceptual measures of dis-
tinctiveness (Bailey and Hahn, 2005; White and
Morgan, 2008). For example, d(/ph/, /th/) = 1,
because the two phonemes differ only in place of

articulation; d(/f/, /
>
úùh/) = 4, because the two

phonemes differ in place, continuance, delayed
release and aspiration.

For vowels, the distinctiveness was based on
the Manhattan distance between each vowel
pair in the three-dimensional vowel space de-
fined in Flemming (2004), where F1, F2 and
F3 values are mapped onto a set of integers
in each dimension, given the number of cross-
linguistically possible contrasts making use of

167



each dimension.1 This choice of metric, rather
than a feature-based metric, was due to per-
ception studies suggesting that acoustic differ-
ences provide a better model for vowel percep-
tion than a feature model does (Ettlinger and
Johnson, 2009). In order to have equal weight-
ing of contrasts between consonants and con-
trasts between vowels, measurements of vowel
distinctiveness were scaled down by 1/3.2

Each tone was treated like a distinct segment,
but with a binary measure of distinctiveness: 1
(different) or 0 (the same). This decision was
based on the paucity of available data on tone
misperception patterns among native speakers
of Mandarin and based on the variation in what
distinctiveness patterns are suggested by results
from different tasks (Huang and Johnson, 2010).

The distinctiveness of a word from each other
word was measured with the log-transformed
sum of each segment’s distinctiveness from the
corresponding segment in the other word. For
example, for a word of CVX structure Sr, a seg-
ment σk in position Φn of the syllable is denoted
by σr,Φn . The distinctiveness between 2 syllables
Sr and St, as denoted by d(Sr, St), is the log-
transformed sum of d(σr,Φpos , σt,Φpos) for all posi-
tions of the syllable POS (2.1). In addition, a 1
was added to the sum before log-transformation
so that minimal pairs would have a distinctive-
ness score larger than 0.

(2.1) The distinctiveness between word Sr and
St

d(Sr, St) = log[
∑

pos ∈ POS
d(σr,Φpos , σt,Φpos) + 1]

An average distinctiveness of all pairs of words
in the given phonological system M’ was cal-
culated for each generated lexicon (2.2). The
higher this number is, the more distinctions in
the possible phonological space the lexicon has
used.

1For example, /u/ is represented in the vowel space
as [F1: 1, F2: 1, F3: 1] and /i/ is represented as [F1: 1,
F2: 6, F3: 3], so /u/ and /i/ differ by 7 units in total.

2This scale was based on aligning the featurally-
defined distinctiveness of the three Mandarin glides (/w/,
/j/, and /4/) with the formant-based distinctiveness of
the three corresponding vowels (/u/, /i/ and /y/).

(2.2) The average distinctiveness (by word pairs)
of a size N lexicon from a given system M’

DM ′ =

∑
w ∈ WM′

∑
w ∈ WM′

d(Sw, Sw)/2

P (N, 2)/2

2.2.3 Generating baseline inventories

Baseline inventories for each syllable struc-
ture were generated in three steps. First, the
summed frequency of CV (or CVX) words in the
real monosyllabic lexicon was used to generate
a random set of words within the phonologically
licit space defined in 2.2.1. The generated lexi-
cons were then optimized to minimize differences
from the real Mandarin lexicon in lexicon size,
word frequency distribution, and individual seg-
ment frequencies. By minimizing the differences
in these parameters, we ensured that the gener-
ated baseline lexicons would be comparable to
the Mandarin lexicon. Finally, the generated
lexicons were filtered to further ensure a close
match with these parameters, limiting the gen-
erated lexicons to those with a size within 5%
of the original lexicon size and a correlation of
at least 0.95 between their segment frequencies
and the segment frequencies of Mandarin, and
between their word frequency distribution and
that of Mandarin.

These parameters served to hold articulatory
effort constant, with variation only in distinc-
tiveness, based on the assumption that the over-
all effort of a language is the mean of the effort
needed for all words of the language and the ef-
fort associated with each word is the sum of the
effort associated with all of its segments.

2.3 Results

Consistent with the central limit theorem and
the independent sampling process, the distri-
bution of distinctiveness scores of the gener-
ated lexicons of both CV and CVX struc-
tures conform to normality, as confirmed by the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (CV: p = 0.963, CVX:
p = 0.881).

168



Figure 1: Standardized D·(distinctiveness) of 389 gen-

erated CV monosyllabic lexicons.

The shaded area in Figure 1 demonstrates
the distribution of standardized distinctiveness
scores of generated lexicons of monosyllabic CV
words. Standardized distinctiveness of the real
CV monosyllabic lexicon of Mandarin (indicated
by the heavy dashed line) was greater than
roughly 67.6% of generated counterparts (indi-
cated by the light grey area). While the real
lexicon is above the mean, this result is not con-
clusive evidence that the real lexicon differs from
lexicons drawn randomly from the phonological
space, given that the real lexicon is not an out-
lier or at all close to the top or bottom 2.5% of
the distribution.

Figure 2: Standardized D·(distinctiveness) of 627 gen-

erated CVX monosyllabic lexicons.

As indicated by Figure 2, the distinctiveness
of the real monosyllabic Mandarin CVX lexicon

is better than only 17.7% of baselines. However,
the real lexicon is not enough far enough towards
the edge of the distribution to demonstrate that
it differs from lexicons drawn randomly from
the phonological space, because while it is lower
than the mean, it is not an outlier.

2.4 Discussion

Mandarin words of both CV structure and CVX
structure displayed similarly inconclusive pat-
terns. Compared to randomly generated lexi-
cons following the same parameters of phonol-
ogy, word frequency, and size, the real lexicon
was not an outlier in distinctiveness either in
CV or CVX syllables, though the real CV lexi-
con was slightly better than average among the
generated lexicons and the real CVX lexicon was
worse. Because the CV phonological space is
smaller and more saturated, it is not surpris-
ing that CV portion of Mandarin monosyllabic
lexicon would be relatively more efficient than
its CVX counterpart. However, in general, the
results did not support the hypothesis that dis-
persion plays a large role in shaping lexicons,
and are more consistent with the opposite pat-
tern of clumping, as seen in Dautriche et al.’s
(2017) results.

The inconclusive results might in part be due
to issues with the metrics used for distinctive-
ness, as perceptual data suggests that different
positions in a syllable are not equally salient. At
least within English, listeners are most sensitive
to mispronunciations in onsets, less so in codas,
and least sensitive in nuclei (Franklin and Mor-
gan, 2017), and are more accurate in perceiving
onsets than codas, though this can vary depend-
ing on listeners’ native language, even for the
same stimuli (Sanker, 2016). Given such find-
ings, different syllable positions might best be
given different weights in distinctiveness when
generating sample lexicons. Further research
into Mandarin speakers’ patterns of mispercep-
tions at the word level and the segment level
would further help in accurately quantifying dis-
tinctiveness.

169



3 Study 2: Evaluating the
well-formedness of generated
Mandarin and English
monosyllabic lexicons

3.1 Background

Study 1 shows that a lexicon might not be as
dispersed as the functional goal of communica-
tive clarity would predict. In Study 2, we ex-
amine whether this lack of dispersion can be
partially explained by gradient well-formedness
constraints shaping the lexicon, disproportion-
ately favoring words with high-probability se-
quences.

3.2 Methods

In Study 2, English and Mandarin were used as
languages for a preliminary cross-linguistic in-
vestigation. The same LDC Mandarin Lexicon
from Study 1 was used for Mandarin and the
CMU Dictionary (Weide, 2008) was used for the
phonemic representations for American English.
CMU Dictionary entries were spell-checked with
GNU Aspell to exclude rare names and borrow-
ings from other languages. Function words and
words with the rarest 1% of onsets and codas
were also excluded, due to the uniqueness of
their phonological structure, as many function
words are clitics and can be reduced more than
other words, and words with highly unusual se-
quences are likely to have unique etymologies
that do not reflect the overall pressures of the
language.

Only monosyllabic words were used. As dis-
cussed in 2.2.1, this limitation meant there were
no long-distance dependencies that needed to be
accounted for. Phonotactics were represented by
a tri-phone model of sound sequences (as intro-
duced in 2.2.1), with the predictability of each
sound based on the two preceding phonemes.
Study 2 focused on the word probabilities as-
signed to forms within the generated lexicons.
Frequencies, as captured by n-gram models in
this study, were used to approximate distribu-
tional markedness (Albright, ms). The distinc-
tion between frequency and markedness is be-
yond the scope of this paper.

Sampling followed a sampling procedure sim-

ilar to that of Study 1. First, all combina-
tions of segments in all possible syllable posi-
tions were laid out, producing lists of potential
words. Then the real monosyllabic lexicons of
Mandarin and English were used to train the
tri-phone phonotactic models for each language,
assigning log probabilities to all forms in the
word lists based on the sum of log probabilities
of each word’s components. The wordlists were
then filtered, only retaining forms with probabil-
ities larger than 0, meaning that they were well-
formed within the tri-phone model. Finally, in
order to generate the artificial lexicons for En-
glish, words were randomly taken from the fil-
tered English list, with the number of words of
different lengths kept consistent with the real
English lexicon. The same was done for Man-
darin. Thus, the generated baseline lexicons had
the same distribution of word lengths and the
same size as the real lexicons.

Distributions of log probabilities of the base-
line lexicons were compared to the real lexicons,
to test whether the probability distributions of
real lexicons differ from randomly generated lex-
icons based on phonotactic models which assume
independence of subparts more than one seg-
ment apart. Logarithmic scales for probability,
with probabilities of subparts combined multi-
plicatively, have been found previously to have
a strong positive correlation with gradient well-
formedness ratings and decisions about accept-
ability of nonce words (Frisch et al., 2000; Cole-
man and Pierrehumbert, 1997), though these
studies did not look for patterns in where the
data deviated from the model.

3.3 Results

Both in English and Mandarin, the real lex-
icons exhibited over-representation of high-
probability forms and under-representation of
low-probability forms.

The independent sampling process was essen-
tially producing replications which could be used
to bootstrap variance estimation for the esti-
mators of interest, so standard errors and con-
fidence intervals of estimators other than the
mean were constructed with the bootstrap dis-
tributions calculated using the generated sample

170



lexicons.

Figure 3: Probability density distributions of the origi-

nal and 100 generated Mandarin monosyllabic lexicons

Figure 3 illustrates the probability density dis-
tributions of the original and generated sample
Mandarin monosyllabic lexicons over word prob-
abilities as defined in the phonotactic model.
The figure demonstrates that the real mono-
syllabic Mandarin lexicon (indicated by the
dashed line) is more clustered around the higher-
probability types than the sample lexicons (in-
dicated by the light solid lines).

Three statistics were used to test whether the
distribution of log probabilities in the real lexi-
con is likely to come from the population distri-
bution. The sample means were tested against
the mean of the original lexicon in a two-tailed
test (t = −219.463, p ≈ 0.000). This shows
that the mean of word probabilities in the actual
Mandarin monosyllabic lexicon was significantly
higher than the true mean of the population dis-
tribution generated from the null hypothesis, as
measured from the generated sample lexicons.

In addition to the mean, the bootstrap per-
centile confidence intervals (CI) of variance and
skewness of the hypothesized Mandarin popu-
lation distribution were approximated. The re-
sults show that the variance of the probability
distribution of the real lexicon is significantly
lower than the variance of the generated popula-

tion (σ2original = 0.26, 95% CI: (0.93, 1.18)). The
probability distribution of the original lexicon
and the estimated population distribution are
both left-skewed (negative skewness), but the
absolute value of the skewness of the original lex-
icon is significantly smaller (skoriginal = −1.38,
95% CI: (−2.01, −1.70)).

Figure 4: Probability density distributions of the origi-

nal and 100 generated English monosyllabic lexicons

The English data (illustrated in Figure 4)
were analyzed with the same statistical meth-
ods as the Mandarin data. As in the Mandarin
results, the mean of the probability distribu-
tion of the real English monosyllabic lexicon is
significantly higher than that of the population
distribution generated from the null hypothesis
(t = −561.967, p ≈ 0.000).

The comparison in variance and skewness be-
tween the original English lexicon and the hy-
pothesized English population distribution also
exhibit results similar to the Mandarin data.
The variance of the real lexicon is significantly
lower than the variance of the generated popu-
lation (σ2original = 1.36, 95% CI: (3.05, 3.25)),
and the absolute value of the skewness of the
real lexicon is significantly smaller than that
of the skewness of the hypothesized population
(skoriginal = −0.16, 95% CI: (−0.52, −0.39)).

171



3.4 Discussion

If the lexicon is shaped only by local phonolog-
ical constraints, as controlled for in the phono-
tactic models used in the current study, sample
lexicons generated by the models should follow
roughly the same distribution as the real Man-
darin and English monosyllabic lexicons. The
results of this study provide strong evidence
against this null hypothesis.

Within both English and Mandarin, the real
monosyllabic lexicons have higher means and
smaller variance than the generated baselines,
which indicates that the real lexicons make use
of more high-probability word types than would
be expected by the phonotactic models used.
Additionally, the real lexicons were less skewed
than the baselines, meaning that the probability
distribution of the two real lexicons have thinner
or shorter tails than their corresponding baseline
lexicons, which also suggests that real lexicons
tend towards higher probability words, with a
fast drop-off in the frequency of lower probabil-
ity words. These results seem to suggest that
there is a strong superadditivity effect that pe-
nalizes words with multiple low-probability sub-
parts, potentially in combination with a ten-
dency to re-use high-probability sequences, as
suggested by Dautriche et al. (2017).

4 General Discussion

Study 1 found that in Mandarin Chinese, disper-
sion is not a prominent force in the shaping of
the lexicon; evidence for a pressure towards clus-
tering was somewhat more suggestive, though
not decisive. Study 2 showed that the lexi-
cons of Mandarin and English have more words
of higher probability and fewer words of lower
probability than would be expected by a phono-
logical model in which constraints are indepen-
dent. This result reinforces the results in Study
1, indicating a lack of dispersion and instead a
trend towards clumping within high probability
forms.

These results can fit into Albright’s (ms.)
proposed grammar of weighted constraints, in
which he suggests that inputs with multiple
markedness violations have a superadditive ef-

fect that can overcome a threshold of well-
formedness, resulting in forms which are unat-
tested despite not being directly prohibited. The
next step of Study 2 is to expand it to more lan-
guages, to test how consistent the effect of su-
peradditivity is cross-linguistically. Future work
should also investigate whether the observed
patterns in lexicons are driven by the interaction
of particular constraints, or if they result from a
general pattern in how all constraints combine.

The superadditivity account and the pre-
sented evidence are consistent with Dautriche
et al.’s (2017) findings that lexicons are more
regular than expected. However, a pressure for
“clumpiness” and a superadditivity effect make
different predictions. According to Dautriche et
al. (2017), regularity in the lexicon is due to
re-use of phonological patterns, which should
produce particularly high peaks among high-
probability forms, with less of an effect on
the low-probability tail. In the superadditiv-
ity account, regularity is due to combinations
of markedness violations resulting in such low
probabilities that many of them never appear,
resulting in a shorter and thinner tail, with less
of an effect on the shape of the peak. Both pres-
sures could also co-exist. It would be informa-
tive for future work to tease apart the predic-
tions made by each account.

172



References

Adam Albright. ms. Cumulative violations and com-
plexity thresholds.

Todd M. Bailey and Ulrike Hahn. 2005. Phoneme
similarity and confusability. Journal of Memory
and Language, 52(3):339–362.

Yuen Ren Chao. 1968. A Grammar of Spoken Chi-
nese. University of California Press, Berkeley and
Los Angeles.

George N. Clements. 2003. Feature economy in
sound systems. Phonology, 20(3):287–333.

John Coleman and Janet Pierrehumbert. 1997.
Stochastic phonological grammars and acceptabil-
ity. In John Coleman, editor, Computational
phonology: Third meeting of the ACL special in-
terest group in computational phonology, pages 49–
56, Somerset, NJ. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Isabelle Dautriche, Kyle Mahowald, Edward Gib-
son, Anne Christophe, and Steven T. Piantadosi.
2017. Words cluster phonetically beyond phono-
tactic regularities. Cognition, 163:128–145.

San Duanmu. 2009. Syllable Structure: The Limits
of Variation. Oxford University Press, New York,
USA.

Marc Ettlinger and Keith Johnson. 2009. Vowel dis-
crimination by english, french and turkish speak-
ers: Evidence for an exemplar-based approach to
speech perception. Phonetica, 66(4):222–242.

Edward Flemming, 2004. chapter Contrast and Per-
ceptual Distinctiveness, pages 232 – 276. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Lauren Franklin and James Morgan. 2017. On the
nature of vocalic representation during lexical ac-
cess. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 141(5):4038–4038.

Stefan A Frisch, Nathan R Large, and David B
Pisoni. 2000. Perception of wordlikeness: Effects
of segment probability and length on the process-
ing of nonwords. Journal of memory and language,
42(4):481–496.

Christopher Green and Stuart Davis, 2014. Per-
spectives on phonological theory and development,
in honor of Daniel A. Dinnsen, chapter Superad-
ditivity and limitations on syllable complexity in
Bambara words, pages 223–247. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam.

Bruce Hayes and Colin Wilson. 2008. A maximum
entropy model of phonotactics and phonotactic
learning. Linguistic Inquiry, 39(3):379–440.

Tsan Huang and Keith Johnson. 2010. Language
specificity in speech perception: Perception of

mandarin tones by native and nonnative listeners.
Phonetica, 67(4):243–267.

Shudong Huang, Xuejun Bian, Grace Wu, and Cyn-
thia McLemore, 1997. LDC Mandarin Lexicon.
University of Pennsylvania.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. Speech
and language processing: an introduction to natu-
ral language processing, computational linguistics
and speech recognition. Prentice Hall. Pearson Ed-
ucation, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
2nd edition.

Brett Kessler and Rebecca Treiman. 1997. Syllable
structure and the distribution of phonemes in en-
glish syllables. Journal of Memory and language,
37(3):295–311.

Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson, 1987. The
World’s Major Languages, chapter Chinese. Ox-
ford University Press.

Paul A Luce and David B Pisoni. 1998. Recogniz-
ing spoken words: The neighborhood activation
model. Ear and Hearing, 19(1):1.

Steven T. Piantadosi, Harry J. Tily, and Edward
Gibson. 2009. The communicative lexicon hy-
pothesis. In The 31st annual meeting of the Cogni-
tive Science Society (CogSci09), pages 2582–2587.

Chelsea Sanker. 2016. Patterns Of Misperception Of
Arabic Guttural And Non-Guttural Consonants.
Ph.D. thesis.

Stephanie S. Shih. 2016. Super additive simi-
larity in dioula tone harmony. In Kyeong min
Kim, Pocholo Umbal, Trevor Block, Queenie
Chan, Tanie Cheng, Kelli Finney, Mara Katz, So-
phie Nickel-Thompson, and Lisa Shorten, editors,
Proceedings of the 33rd West Coast Conference
on Formal Linguistics, pages 361–370. Cascadilla
Proceedings Project, Somerville, MA, USA.

Kevin Tang. 2015. Naturalistic speech mispercep-
tion. Ph.D. thesis.

Andrew Wedel, Scott Jackson, and Abby Kaplan.
2013. Functional load and the lexicon: Evidence
that syntactic category and frequency relation-
ships in minimal lemma pairs predict the loss of
phoneme contrasts in language change. Language
and speech, 56(3):395–417.

Robert L. Weide, 2008. The CMU pronunciation dic-
tionary. Carnegie Mellon University, 0.7a edition.

Katherine S. White and James L. Morgan. 2008.
Sub-segmental detail in early lexical representa-
tions. Journal of Memory and Language, 59:114–
132.

George K. Zipf. 1929. Relative frequency as a de-
terminant of phonetic change. Harvard Studies in
Classical Philology, 40:1–95.

173


