




































A Linguistically-Informed Search Engine to Identifiy Reading Material
for Functional Illiteracy Classes

Zarah Weiss Sabrina Dittrich Detmar Meurers

Department of Linguistics, ICALL-Research.de Group
LEAD Graduate School & Research Network

University of Tübingen
{zweiss,dm}@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de,
sabrina.dittrich@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

We present KANSAS, a search engine de-

signed to retrieve reading materials for func-

tional illiterates and learners of German as a

Second Language. The system allows teachers

to refine their searches for teaching material

by selecting appropriate readability levels and

(de)prioritizing linguistic constructions. In ad-

dition to this linguistically-informed query re-

sult ranking, the system provides visual input

enhancement for the selected linguistic con-

structions.

Our system combines state-of-the-art Natural

Language Processing (NLP) with light-weight

algorithms for the identification of relevant lin-

guistic constructions. We have evaluated the

system in two pilot studies in terms of the iden-

tification of linguistic constructions and the

identification of readability levels. Both pilots

achieved highly promising results and are be-

ing followed by full-fledged performance stud-

ies and usability tests.

1 Introduction

We present KANSAS, a linguistically-informed

search engine designed to support teachers for

adult literacy and German as a Second Language

(GSL) classes in their search for appropriate read-

ing materials.1 Functional illiteracy describes the

inability to read or write short coherent texts. This

includes the inability to comprehend everyday

reading materials such as information brochures

or operating instructions. It is a pressing issue for

modern society; approximately 7.5 million peo-

ple in Germany are functional illiterates, which

corresponds to 14.5% of the working-age popu-

lation (18-64 years) (Riekmann and Grotlüschen,

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Licence details:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

1https://www.kansas-suche.de/

2011). For teachers of adult literacy classes, it

is particularly difficult to find reading material

that is appropriate for their students. While the

need for authentic reading material with particu-

lar linguistic characteristics has also been pointed

out for foreign language teaching (Chinkina et al.,

2016), the issue in the functional illiteracy con-

text is even more pressing given that adult literacy

classrooms are highly culturally and linguistically

diverse. Learners have heterogeneous biographi-

cal and educational backgrounds, they may or may

not be native speakers of German, and their low

literacy skills may or may not be associated with

a cognitive disability, which is commonly consid-

ered to include, among others, populations with

Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), dyslexia, in-

tellectual disorders, traumatic brain injuries, apha-

sia, dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and Attention

Deficit (Hyperactivity) Disorder (Friedman and

Bryen, 2007; Huenerfauth et al., 2009). This sub-

stantial diversity has to be considered when se-

lecting teaching materials, also making the use

of textbooks particularly questionable. In prac-

tice, adult literacy teachers depend on identifying

appropriate materials for their classes online us-

ing standard content search engines like Google

or Bing. However, identifying adequate reading

material for readers with lower reading skills is

a challenging task: Huenerfauth et al. (2009) and

Feng (2009) point out that many texts that are ac-

cessible at low literacy levels actually target chil-

dren and their content may thus be ill-suited for

adult readers; texts of interest to adult readers of-

ten require higher levels of literacy. Vajjala and

Meurers (2013) show that the reading level of web

query results obtained using Bing is variable, but

on average quite high. Web content specifically

designed for readers with low reading skills is not

necessarily suited for all learners either, due to the

diversity of conditions that result in low literacy

Zarah Weiss, Sabrina Dittrich and Detmar Meurers 2018. A linguistically-informed search engine to identifiy

reading material for functional illiteracy classes. Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer

Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018). Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings

152: 79–90.

79



skills (Yaneva, 2015). Our system is designed to

support teachers in this challenging task of iden-

tifying appropriate material by combining content

queries with the flexible (de)prioritization of rel-

evant linguistic constructions and filtering results

by readability levels.

The system design is based on insights from

Second Language Acquisition (SLA) research.

Similar to SLA, the acquisition of reading and

writing skills, even in the L1, does not happen im-

plicitly through exposure but through explicit in-

struction. Thus, insights from SLA research are

highly relevant for the context of literacy train-

ing. The importance of input for successful lan-

guage acquisition is well-established in SLA re-

search (Krashen, 1977; Swain, 1985). According

to Krashen’s Input Hypothesis (Krashen, 1977),

learning is facilitated by exposure to input that

is slightly more advanced than a learner’s cur-

rent state of language competence (i+1). We pro-

mote the identification of appropriate texts by of-

fering a readability level filter that is designed

to specifically target the reading competence of

functional illiterates. Another insight from SLA

research that we included in the design of our

system is that the salience of linguistic construc-

tions and the recognition of these constructions

by the learner is a crucial component of lan-

guage learning, as established by Schmidt’s Notic-

ing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990). One prominent

approach to promote salience of linguistic con-

structions is (visual) input enhancement (Smith,

1993) in terms of, e.g., colors, font changes, or

spacing. KANSAS integrates these two aspects

by i) giving users the option to promote search

results that contain relevant linguistic construc-

tions and by ii) visually enhancing these construc-

tions in the reading text. By taking the perspec-

tive of SLA research into consideration, we also

approach a broader group of learners, including

GSL. This matches the reality of most German lit-

eracy classes, which are not only attended by na-

tive speakers with reading deficiencies but also by

some non-native speakers. Also, while KANSAS

is designed for educational purposes and focuses

on the functional illiterate reading population, it

can also facilitate the identification of well-suited

reading materials in ordinary web searches con-

ducted by users with low literacy skills, who face

the same issues as literacy teachers when it comes

to the identification of accessible reading materi-

als (Eraslan et al., 2017; McCarthy and Swierenga,

2010).

The article is structured as follows: First, we

give some background on related work. In Sec-

tion 3, we then describe our system’s technical

implementation and general workflow. We put a

special focus on its two main components: the al-

gorithm for the identification of relevant linguistic

constructions and the readability assessment algo-

rithm. We then present the preliminary evaluation

of these two algorithms from two pilot studies,

which are currently being extended by follow up

studies. We conclude with an outlook on future

steps.

2 Background

In addition to other information retrieval systems

that have been designed for the purpose of lan-

guage acquisition, our work heavily draws on pre-

vious work on readability assessment in the con-

text of SLA research, research on the accessibility

of reading materials for users with cognitive dis-

abilities, and specifically on German illiteracy re-

search.

2.1 Related Systems

The idea of retrieving and making use of authentic

web texts for language learning purposes has been

investigated in several research approaches.

The ICALL systems VIEW and WERTi provide

input enhancement techniques for websites (Meur-

ers et al., 2010). They support visually enhanc-

ing selected linguistic constructions in order to

make them more salient to the learner. Further-

more, they automatically generate fill-in-the-gap

exercises for these constructions and embed them

into the websites in real-time.

Another productive line of research investigates

the design of search engines for language learn-

ers. The REAP tutoring system (Brown and Es-

kenazi, 2004) helps selecting appropriate reading

material from a digital library data base by match-

ing texts against a student model focusing on vo-

cabulary acquisition. It has also been ported to

Portuguese (Marujo et al., 2009). Ott and Meurers

(2011) developed LAWSE, a search engine proto-

type that takes reading difficulty measures into ac-

count. A similar system is READ-X (Miltsakaki

and Troutt, 2007), a search engine that analyzes

text readability by making use of traditional read-

ability formula.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

80



Finally, the FLAIR system (Form-Focused

Linguistically Aware Information Retrieval) by

Chinkina et al. (2016) emphasizes the importance

of including grammar knowledge into such infor-

mation retrieval systems. FLAIR integrates gram-

matical patterns specified in an official English L2

class curriculum into a content-based search en-

gine. The system allows users to rerank search

results by assigning weights to linguistic construc-

tions. Furthermore, it visually enhances these con-

structions in a simple reading view and allows to

filter texts for readability based on a readability

formula. KANSAS adapts FLAIR to German and

focuses primarily on the special needs of func-

tional literacy training.

2.2 Readability Assessment

Readability assessment is the task of matching

texts to readers of a certain population based on

the (linguistic) complexity of the text. The earliest

approach is the use of simple readability formu-

las such as the Flesch-Kincaid formula (Kincaid

et al., 1975) or the Dale-Chall readability formula

(Chall and Dale, 1995); see DuBay (2006) for an

overview. These formulas are still widely used

in non-linguistic studies (Esfahani et al., 2016;

Grootens-Wiegers et al., 2015) and in information

retrieval systems (cf. Section 2.1). However, read-

ability formulas are known to be highly limited

and potentially unreliable as they only capture su-

perficial text properties such as sentence and word

length (Feng et al., 2009; Benjamin, 2012). Re-

search on readability assessment thus has shifted

towards broader linguistic modeling of syntactic,

lexical, and discourse complexity based on elabo-

rate Natural Language Processing (NLP) pipelines

and successfully adopted features from SLA re-

search (Feng et al., 2010; Vajjala and Meurers,

2012). Measures of discourse and textual cohesion

were also shown to be highly relevant for readabil-

ity assessment (Crossley et al., 2008, 2011; Feng

et al., 2009), as well as psycho-linguistic mea-

sures of language use (Chen and Meurers, 2017;

Weiss and Meurers, 2018). While most work on

readability assessment was conducted for English,

the findings have also been corroborated for other

languages such as French (François and Fairon,

2012), Italian (Dell’Orletta et al., 2011), and Ger-

man (Vor der Brück et al., 2008; Hancke et al.,

2012; Weiss and Meurers, 2018).

These data-driven machine learning approaches

to readability modeling are not feasible for these

populations due to a lack of (labeled) training data

(Yaneva et al., 2016). Although there are corpus-

based approaches to comparative readability as-

sessment for low literacy readers (cf., e.g., Feng

et al., 2009; Yaneva et al., 2016), eye-tracking

studies are more common in research on readabil-

ity assessment for these groups: Rello et al. inves-

tigate the effect of noun frequency and noun length

(Rello et al., 2013a) and the effect of number rep-

resentations (Rello et al., 2013b) on the readabil-

ity and comprehensibility of texts for Spanish L1

readers with dyslexia. Eraslan et al. (2017) inves-

tigate general information extraction strategies of

users with high functioning autism on web pages

using eye-tracking and Yaneva et al. (2015) em-

ploy eye-tracking to study attention patterns of

readers with ASD in contextualized documents

containing images as well as text material. They

derive recommendations from their findings to im-

prove text accessibility for readers with low lit-

eracy skills. Among other things, they recom-

mend the use of plain English matching Easy-to-

Read requirements as suitable in their complex-

ity for readers with ASD. With this, they link

eye-tracking research to another increasingly pop-

ular approach for the evaluation of reading ma-

terials for populations with cognitive disabilities:

the adherence to guidelines for the production of

Easy-to-Read materials. Easy-to-Read materials

are specifically designed to enhance the accessi-

bility of texts for readers with cognitive disabili-

ties; examples are the guidelines by Nomura et al.

(2010) and Freyhoff et al. (1998). These guide-

lines comment on text layout as well as on lan-

guage complexity. Yaneva (2015) operationalizes

some of the language-focused recommendations

in Freyhoff et al. (1998)’s Easy-to-Read guidelines

in terms of automatically accessible linguistic fea-

tures. She uses the resulting algorithm to evalu-

ate web material marked as Easy-to-Read docu-

ment in terms of their compliance to these guide-

lines and their similarity to material specifically

designed for two target populations of Easy-to-

Read language: readers with ASD and readers

with mild ID. Yaneva et al. (2016) use this al-

gorithm to evaluate reading materials for readers

with cognitive disabilities in terms of their com-

pliance to Easy-to-Read standards.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

81



2.3 Functional Illiteracy

Two major studies have addressed the issue of

functional illiteracy in Germany: The lea. - Liter-

alitätsentwicklung von Arbeitskräften study (“lit-

eracy development for workers”) and the leo. -

Level-One study.2 They defined degrees of (func-

tional) illiteracy and severely low reading and

writing abilities. They define functional illiteracy

as reading and writing skills at which individual

sentences may be written or read, but not coherent

texts even if they are short. Severely low reading

and writing abilities are above the level of func-

tional illiteracy, but at this level literacy compe-

tence is still highly limited and does not exceed

short or intermediate texts. In the course of these

studies, the so called Alpha Levels were devel-

oped to systematically address degrees of limited

literacy in the German population (Riekmann and

Grotlüschen, 2011). Alpha levels range from Al-

pha 1 to Alpha 6. Reading and writing skills at

Alpha Levels 1 to 3 constitute functional illiteracy,

while Alpha Levels 4 to 6 describe varying degrees

of low literacy. Table 1 displays the reading skill

dimension of these levels.

We used these descriptions of reading and writ-

ing competencies across Alpha Levels to derive

corresponding criteria reading materials have to

adhere to in order to be suitable for the respective

Alpha Levels. We excluded Alpha Levels 1 and

2, because these only apply to the character and

word level and are thus not applicable to queries

for texts. We henceforth refer to these reading lev-

els as Alpha readability levels (Alpha 3 to 6 and

above Alpha). We elaborate on our approach in

Section 3.3.

3 System Description

KANSAS focuses on the reranking of content

queries based on the prioritization of specific

grammatical constructions. With this, we follow

the approach outlined by Chinkina et al. (2016).

For this, we ported some linguistic constructions

from FLAIR to German and implemented new

constructions that are relevant to the contexts of

German illiteracy and L2 reading acquisition. Fur-

thermore, we introduced the de-prioritization of

grammatical constructions into our system to ac-

commodate for the special needs of adult liter-

acy teaching contexts. As previous systems, we

2http://blogs.epb.uni-hamburg.de/lea/,
http://blogs.epb.uni-hamburg.de/leo/.

Begin Search Web Search
Bing Search API

Text Extraction
Boilerpipe API

Linguistic Analysis
Stanford CoreNLP

Alpha Readability 
Level Classification

rule-based approach

Reranking,
Filtering by Alpha 
Readability Level,

Visualization

client server

front-end

Figure 1: Overview of the KANSAS’s workflow.

also provide reading level based filtering of texts.

However, unlike previous information retrieval

systems, we go beyond simple readability formu-

las and employ a more linguistically-informed ap-

proach to readability assessment.

3.1 Technical Implementation

KANSAS is a web-based application developed

in Java using the Google Web Toolkit (GWT).

The technical architecture including web search,

crawling, parsing, and ranking is based on FLAIR

(Chinkina et al., 2016): Remote Procedure Calls

(RPC) are used for client server communication.

The BING Web Search API version 5.03 is em-

ployed for the web search and the Boilerpipe Java

API4 for text extraction. The linguistic prepro-

cessing is performed using Stanford CoreNLP.5

The BM25 IR algorithm (Robertson and Walker,

1994) is used to combine the weights for content

fit and linguistic constructions. For the front-end

design, we use GWT Material Design6.

3.2 Workflow

Figure 1 illustrates our system architecture and

workflow. While the system’s basic architecture

strongly resembles the FLAIR pipeline described

in Chinkina et al. (2016), we did not merely re-

implement FLAIR. We systematically redesigned

the components web search, text extraction, lin-

guistic analysis, and ranking to German, and ex-

3https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/
cognitive-services/bing-web-search-api/

4https://boilerpipe-web.appspot.com/
5https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/
6https://github.com/GwtMaterialDesign

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

82



Level Reading skills

Alpha 1 pre-literal reading (character level)

Alpha 2 constructs meaning at word level

Alpha 3 constructs meaning at sentence level

Alpha 4 constructs meaning at test level and knows high-frequent words

Alpha 5/6 increasingly literate at intermediate text length

Table 1: Definition of Alpha Levels (cf. Riekmann and Grotlüschen, 2011, p. 28, Table 1).

tended them to the special needs context of adult

literacy teaching. Furthermore, we developed a

readability filter performing a refined and empir-

ically grounded classification of texts into Alpha

readability levels.

Web search. The workflow starts with the

client sending a search query to the server.

On server side, the BING Web Search API is

prompted to query for relevant search results.

While FLAIR filters these results by discarding all

texts containing less than 100 words, we set the

lower word limit to 10 words and additionally dis-

card all texts with more than 400 words as these

are necessarily unsuited for adult literacy classes.

Text extraction. To remove boilerplate and

template strings that do not belong to the web-

sites’ main textual content, we make use of the Ar-

ticleExtractor included in the Boilerpipe Java API.

We chose this extractor, which has been trained on

news articles, after piloting the performance of all

available filters.

Linguistic analysis/preprocessing. We use the

Stanford CoreNLP API to extract linguistic anno-

tations from the resulting plain texts. We use the

German shift-reduce model for parsing.

Alpha level classification. Based on the lin-

guistic analysis, we compute a set of features to

determine a text’s Alpha readability level. We as-

sign these levels to texts following a rule-based

approach, which is outlined in more detail in Sec-

tion 3.3 and evaluated in Section 4.2.

Ranking, filtering, and visualization. On the

client side, the user is asked to wait until the analy-

sis is completed. Afterwards, the user can inspect

the linguistically analyzed query results. Figure 2

shows how the results are displayed to the user:

The settings panel on the left contains range slid-

ers that allow the user to set priority weights to

a broad range of linguistic constructions. Setting

a construction’s weight to a negative value penal-

izes texts containing the construction, while posi-

tive values cause higher ranks. Each time a slider

is changed, the results are reranked accordingly

and the construction gets highlighted in the text

preview window on the right. This may either be

used for verification of the automatic analysis or

as visual enhancement for teaching purposes. The

performance of this feature is evaluated in Sec-

tion 4.1. Additionally, user may filter query re-

sults for certain Alpha readability levels. We also

re-implemented FLAIR’s visualization perspective

which allows to inspect the occurrences of con-

structions across texts.

3.3 Main Algorithms

KANSAS is based on two main algorithms: The

first algorithm concerns the extraction of linguistic

constructions from a textual document. This algo-

rithm is relevant for two important functionalities:

First, users are given the possibility to rank search

results by prioritizing and de-prioritizing certain

linguistic constructions. Second, the constructions

are visually enhanced within the text preview (cf.

Figure 2). The second algorithm classifies texts

into Alpha readability levels.

The algorithm for the detection of the construc-

tions is based on our NLP preprocessing pipeline.

In total, 85 construction types are annotated on

sentence-, phrase-, or token-level based on part-of-

speech (POS) annotations and constituency trees.

On the sentence-level, we extract sentence types

(e.g., simple or complex sentences) and question

types (e.g., wh-questions). On the phrase-level,

subordinate clause types (e.g., relative clauses) are

extracted. On the word-level, we annotate prop-

erties of verbs, adjectives, nouns, negations, de-

terminers, pronouns and prepositions. We use

Tregex to identify patterns in parse trees based

on regular expressions (Levy and Andrew, 2006).

While FLAIR, too, makes use of Tregex patterns,

we newly implemented all patterns to fit the Ger-

man syntax and POS tags. We excluded construc-

tions that are not relevant for German, such as

long and short form adjective comparative con-

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

83



Figure 2: KANSAS’s interface: This view displays the search results for the query Demokratie (“democracy”). On

the settings panel on the left, the user can assign weights to linguistic constructions and filter for Alpha readability

levels. The preview panel on the right highlights selected constructions.

structions. We also implemented new construc-

tions that are specifically relevant for the contexts

of German and adult literacy classes, such as vari-

ous constructions used for the elaboration of the

German nominal domain and verb position fea-

tures. The performance of this algorithm is evalu-

ated in sections 4.1.

The second crucial algorithm employed in

KANSAS is a sophisticated readability filter for

Alpha readability levels. In order to find texts

that match the reading skills of the intended tar-

get group, we developed a theoretically grounded

algorithm to identify readability levels for func-

tional illiterates. We based this rule-based algo-

rithm on the operationalization of criteria for the

identification of functional illiteracy levels (Al-

pha 3 to Alpha 6) (cf. Section 2.3). We used

the detailed ability-based descriptions provided

by Gausche et al. (2014) and Kretschmann and

Wieken (2010) to derive robust operationalizations

of each Alpha Level in terms of concrete text char-

acteristics along the dimensions of text length,

sentence length, sentence structure, tense patterns,

and word length and extract all linguistic features

relevant for this assessment from our NLP prepro-

cessing pipeline.7 We preferred this approach over

7The complete algorithm may be found in the Appendix

one adopting guidelines for Easy-to-Read materi-

als as done in previous work (cf. Section 2.2). Fol-

lowing the ability-based descriptions of degrees of

functional illiteracy allows us to differentiate read-

ing levels within the reach of readers with low lit-

eracy skills. Furthermore, unlike text production

guidelines, German Alpha Levels specify concrete

thresholds for most of their linguistic characteris-

tics, which allows us to evaluate materials without

using reference corpora containing reading mate-

rials that were verified to be suited for readers with

low literacy skills. This is crucial for our approach

given that such corpora are not freely available for

German.

4 System Evaluation

We have evaluated both of KANSAS’s core algo-

rithms in two pilot studies. First, we tested the

performance of our linguistic construction iden-

tification algorithm for a subset of five linguistic

constructions. Second, we evaluated the perfor-

mance of our readability assessment algorithm by

comparing it to the performance of a human expert

annotator.

in Figure 3.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

84



4.1 Identification of Linguistic Constructions

We analyzed five target constructions from our list

of overall 85 linguistic constructions. We chose

four constructions that are extracted using Tregex

patterns, because these are more elaborate and

thus more prone to errors. We also chose one con-

struction that is solely based on Stanford CoreNLP

POS tags to compare its performance to the other

constructions. Furthermore, we only chose con-

structions that are particularly relevant for adult

literacy classes. This resulted in the following tar-

get constructions:

Complex sentences are sentences that contain

more than one clause, e.g., Ich spiele und du

liest (“I am playing and you are reading”).

Haben perfect is the simple perfect formed with

haben (“to have”), e.g., Ich habe geschlafen

(“I have slept”).

Participle verbs are verbs in the non-finite form

that is used to form periphrastic tenses such

as simple perfect and past perfect.

Adjectival attributes are adjectives that are at-

tributes to noun phrases, e.g., der grüne Ball

(“the green ball”).

LSB + RSB clauses are clauses that contain at

least two verb components which are sepa-

rated by an arbitrary amount of language ma-

terial in the center of the clause, e.g., Sie hat

in der Mensa gegessen. (“She ate in the can-

teen”).8

To evaluate how robustly the algorithm identi-

fies these constructions, we analyzed five to ten ar-

ticles for each target construction. We performed

queries with our system for several search terms

and selected the highest ranking of 40 documents

after re-ranking the query results by prioritizing

the respective target construction.9 We collected

articles until we observed a sufficient amount of

instances for each target construction (15 to 59).

Table 2 reports precision, recall, and f-measure

8We refer to this type of clause as LSB + RSB clause as
a shorthand for left sentence bracket + right sentence bracket
clauses, which are names for the respective positions of the
verb components in the Topological Field Model (Wöllstein,
2014).

9We used the following query terms: Demokratie
(“democracy”), Bundestag (the German federal parliament),
Chancengleichheit (“equal opportunity”), and Bildungsmass-
nahme (“educational measures”).

for each target construction as well as the amount

of observed constructions on which the results are

based. On average we observe a satisfactory per-

Construction N Prec Rec F1

Complex sentences 43 .788 .953 .863

haben-perfect 15 1.00 .867 .929

Participle verbs 42 .929 .929 .929

Adjectival attributes 59 .946 .593 .729

LSB + RSB 31 .893 .806 .847

Mean score 38 .911 .830 .859

Table 2: Performance of identification of linguistic

constructions.

formance across all target constructs. However,

the low recall we observe for adjectival noun at-

tributes (rec. = .593) indicates that our algorithm
may yet be improved. A qualitative analysis of

the false negative instances showed that in coor-

dinated adjectival noun attributes the second ad-

jectival attribute is often but not always missed by

the algorithm. We are currently investigating the

cause for this. However, this issue is less pressing

for the system’s overall performance, since high

precision is more important for the prioritization

and visual enhancement of target constructions.

Overall, these preliminary findings are encour-

aging and give us crucial insights into which as-

pects of our algorithm require more performance

tuning. We are continuing to evaluate all construc-

tions identified by KANSAS and to further im-

prove on our construction identification algorithm.

4.2 Identification of Readability Levels

We conducted a preliminary evaluation of our

readability level filter by matching its ratings

against human expert judgments in terms of inter-

rater reliability. For this, we crawled N = 68
texts from websites that offer reading materials

for functional illiterates and German L2 learners.

We let a human annotate these texts, who was

considered an expert because she had extensively

studied the ability-based descriptions of functional

illiteracy levels by Gausche et al. (2014) and

Kretschmann and Wieken (2010) as well as the ex-

ample material provided by them in the months

prior to the annotation procedure. The human

annotations were based on annotation guidelines

that we derived from the same ability-based Alpha

Level descriptions we used for the design of our

rule-based algorithm (Weiss and Geppert, 2018).

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

85



We then automatically rated the same texts with

our Alpha readability classifier and calculated the

inter-rater reliability (IRR) of the ratings. This

procedure allowed us to obtain a preliminary eval-

uation of the performance of our algorithm despite

the lack of a suited Gold Standard.

Before we calculated the IRR, we tested for

prevalence using the Stuart Maxwell test for

marginal homogeneity but did not find any sig-

nificant prevalence. We also tested for rater bias

by calculating the coefficient of systematic bias

between two raters but did not find any signif-

icant bias. Accordingly, we calculated Cohen’s

κ (Cohen, 1960) and observed substantial agree-

ment between the human expert and our algorithm

(κ = .63). We additionally calculated weighted

κw (Cohen, 1968) in order to account for the or-

dinal structure in our data. Following Hallgren

(2012) we chose quadratic weights to differenti-

ate between degrees of disagreement between two

raters. We observe near perfect agreement for

quadratic weighted κ (κw = .90). All analyses

were conducted using used the R package IRR (v.

0.84).10

While the described procedure is only an initial

pilot study, which is limited in terms of its valid-

ity due to the lack of a second annotator, it already

shows highly promising results. We are now ad-

dressing the limitations of the pilot by evaluating

the robustness of the readability algorithm as well

as of our human rater guidelines in a more elabo-

rate study with 300 additional texts rated by two

human annotators.

5 Conclusion & Outlook

KANSAS is the first web search engine designed

to identify texts for German functional illiterates

or German as a Second Language. The system

supports the flexible (de)prioritization and visual

enhancement of 85 linguistic constructions that

are important for German adult literacy teach-

ing and GSL learning contexts. Our theoretically

grounded readability algorithm is specifically cal-

ibrated towards the needs of functional illiterates.

It thus addresses the issue that most reading ma-

terials that may be found on the Internet are ill-

suited for the special reading needs of functional

illiterates.

We presented KANSAS’s main features and

evaluated its key algorithms in two pilot studies.

10https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/irr/

Our exemplary analysis of the performance of the

identification of linguistic constructions shows a

promising overall performance with high f-scores

across four out of five constructions ranging from

0.85 to 0.93. The rule-based algorithm which rates

the readability of texts was compared with the per-

formance of a human expert annotator. We ob-

served high agreement results with a Cohen’s κ

value of 0.63 and weighted κw of 0.9. We tuned

our readability algorithm specifically towards the

target group of German functionally illiterates by

basing it on the German official criteria for the

identification of functional illiteracy levels.

Our pilot studies successfully demonstrate the

robustness of our algorithms in real-life applica-

tions. The web system is platform-independent

and freely available online. While some of the

functionality is also featured in previous work on

the FLAIR system for English, we also provide

novel features such as a sophisticated readabil-

ity filter and the de-prioritization of constructions.

Furthermore, this is the first search engine for Ger-

man functional illiteracy contexts. Due to our in-

corporation of important insights from SLA re-

search, KANSAS is also suited for the use in GSL

contexts.

Our next steps include to further refine

KANSAS’s performance and to conduct more

elaborate evaluation studies for both algorithms.

Furthermore, we are currently conducting usabil-

ity studies in which teaching practitioners from

the fields of adult literacy and GSL acquisition are

evaluating KANSAS in terms of its suitability for

real-life use.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to our project partners Theresa

Geppert, Hannes Schröter, and Josef Schrader of

the German Institute for Adult Education – Leib-

niz Centre for Lifelong Learning (DIE) for their

valuable collaboration. We also thank the anony-

mous reviewers for their insightful suggestions.

KANSAS is a research and development project

funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and

Research (BMBF) as part of the AlphaDekade11

[grant number W143500].

11https://www.alphadekade.de/

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

86



References

Rebekah George Benjamin. 2012. Reconstructing
readability: Recent developments and recommenda-
tions in the analysis of text difficulty. Educational
Psychology Review, 24:63–88.

Jonathan Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Retrieval
of authentic documents for reader-specific lexical
practice. In InSTIL/ICALL Symposium 2004.

Tim Vor der Brück, Sven Hartrumpf, and Hermann
Helbig. 2008. A readability checker with supervised
learning using deep syntactic and semantic indica-
tors. Informatica, 32(4):429–435.

Jeanne S. Chall and Edgar Dale. 1995. Readability
revisited: the new Dale-Chall Readability Formula.
Brookline Books.

Xiaobin Chen and Detmar Meurers. 2017. Word fre-
quency and readability: Predicting the text-level
readability with a lexical-level attribute. Journal of
Research in Reading, 41(3):486–510.

Maria Chinkina, Madeeswaran Kannan, and Detmar
Meurers. 2016. Online information retrieval for lan-
guage learning. In Proceedings of ACL-2016 System
Demonstrations, pages 7–12, Berlin, Germany. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

Jacob Cohen. 1968. Weighted kappa: Nominal scale
agreement provision for scaled disagreement or par-
tial credit. Psychological Bulletin, 70(4):213–220.

Scott A. Crossley, David B. Allen, and Danielle Mc-
Namara. 2011. Text readability and intuitive sim-
plification: A comparison of readability formulas.
Reading in a Foreign Language, 23(1):84–101.

Scott A. Crossley, Jerry Greenfield, and Danielle S.
Mcnamara. 2008. Assessing text readability us-
ing cognitively based indices. TESOL Quarterly,
42(3):475–493.

Felice Dell’Orletta, Simonetta Montemagni, and Giu-
lia Venturi. 2011. Read-it: Assessing readabil-
ity of Italian texts with a view to text simplifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech
and Language Processing for Assistive Technolo-
gies, pages 73–83.

William H. DuBay. 2006. The Classic Readability
Studies. Impact Information, Costa Mesa, Califor-
nia.

Sukru Eraslan, Victoria Yaneva, and Yeliz Yelisada.
2017. Do web users with autism experience barriers
when searching for information within web pages?
In Proceedings of the 14th Web for All Conference
on The Future of Accessible Work, pages 20–23.
ACM.

B. Janghorban Esfahani, A. Faron, K. S. Roth, P. P.
Grimminger, and J. C. Luers. 2016. Systematic
readability analysis of medical texts on websites of
german university clinics for general and abdomi-
nal surgery. Zentralblatt fur Chirurgie, 141(6):639–
644.

Lijun Feng. 2009. Automatic readability assess-
ment for people with intellectual disabilities. In
ACM SIGACCESS accessibility and computing, vol-
ume 93, pages 84–91.

Lijun Feng, Noémie Elhadad, and Matt Huenerfauth.
2009. Cognitively motivated features for readabil-
ity assessment. In Proceedings of the 12th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL
2009), pages 229–237, Athens, Greece. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Lijun Feng, Martin Jansche, Matt Huenerfauth, and
Noémie Elhadad. 2010. A comparison of features
for automatic readability assessment. Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 276–284.

Thomas François and Cedrick Fairon. 2012. An “AI
readability” formula for French as a foreign lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning.

Geert Freyhoff, Gerhard Hess, Linda Kerr, Eliza-
beth Menzell, Bror Tronbacke, and Kathy Van Der
Veken. 1998. Make It Simple, European Guidelines
for the Production of Easy-to-Read Information for
People with Learning Disability for authors, editors,
information providers, translators and other inter-
ested persons. International League of Societies for
Persons with Mental Handicap European Associa-
tion, Brussels.

Mark G. Friedman and Diane Nelson Bryen. 2007.
Web accessibility design recommendations for peo-
ple with cognitive disabilities. Technology and Dis-
ability, 19(4):205–212.

Silke Gausche, Anne Haase, and Diana Zimper.
2014. Lesen. DVV-Rahmencurriculum, 1 edition.
Deutscher Volkshochschul-Verband e.V., Bonn.

Petronella Grootens-Wiegers, Martine C. De Vries,
Tessa E. Vossen, and Jos M. Van den Broek. 2015.
Readability and visuals in medical research infor-
mation forms for children and adolescents. Science
Communication, 37(1):89–117.

Kevin A. Hallgren. 2012. Computing inter-rater relia-
bility for observational data: An overview and tuto-
rial. Tutorials in quantitative methods for psychol-
ogy, 8(1):23–34.

Julia Hancke, Detmar Meurers, and Sowmya Vajjala.
2012. Readability classification for German using
lexical, syntactic, and morphological features. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

87



Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages 1063–
1080, Mumbay, India.

Matt Huenerfauth, Lijun Feng, and Noémie Elhadad.
2009. Comparing evaluation techniques for text
readability software for adults with intellectual dis-
abilities. In Proceedings of the 11th international
ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and ac-
cessibility, Assets ’09, pages 3–10, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

J. Peter Kincaid, Robert P. Fishburne, Richard L.
Rogers, and Brad S. Chissom. 1975. Derivation
of new readability formulas (Automated Readabil-
ity Index, Fog Count and Flesch Reading Ease for-
mula) for Navy enlisted personnel. Research Branch
Report 8-75, Naval Technical Training Command,
Millington, TN.

Stephen Krashen. 1977. Some issues relating to the
monitor model. On Tesol, 77(144-158).

Rudolf Kretschmann and Petra Wieken. 2010. Lesen.
Alpha Levels. lea., Hamburg.

Roger Levy and Galen Andrew. 2006. Tregex and tsur-
geon: tools for querying and manipulating tree data
structures. In Proceedings of the fifth international
conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
pages 2231–2234, Genoa, Italy. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).

Luı́s Marujo, José Lopes, Nuno Mamede, Isabel Tran-
coso, Juan Pino, Maxine Eskenazi, Jorge Baptista,
and Céu Viana. 2009. Porting reap to european por-
tuguese. In International Workshop on Speech and
Language Technology in Education.

Jacob E. McCarthy and Sarah J. Swierenga. 2010.
What we know about dyslexia and web accessibility:
a research review. Universal Access in the Informa-
tion Society, 9(2):147–152.

Detmar Meurers, Ramon Ziai, Luiz Amaral, Adriane
Boyd, Aleksandar Dimitrov, Vanessa Metcalf, and
Niels Ott. 2010. Enhancing authentic web pages for
language learners. In Proceedings of the 5th Work-
shop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educa-
tional Applications (BEA), pages 10–18, Los Ange-
les. ACL.

Eleni Miltsakaki and Audrey Troutt. 2007. Read-x:
Automatic evaluation of reading difficulty of web
text. In E-Learn: World Conference on E-Learning
in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher
Education, pages 7280–7286. Association for the
Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).

Misako Nomura, Gyda Skat Nielsen, and Bror Tron-
backe. 2010. Guidelines for easy-to-read materials.
revision on behalf of the ifla/library services to peo-
ple with special needs section. IFLA Professional
Reports 120, International Federation of Library As-
sociations and Institutions, The Hague, IFLA Head-
quarters.

Niels Ott and Detmar Meurers. 2011. Information re-
trieval for education: Making search engines lan-
guage aware. Themes in Science and Technology
Education, 3(1-2):9–30.

Luz Rello, Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Laura Dempere-
Marco, and Horacio Saggion. 2013a. Frequent
words improve readability and short words improve
understandability for people with dyslexia. In IFIP
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pages
203–219, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.

Luz Rello, Susana Bautista, Ricardo Baeza-Yates,
Pablo Gervás, Raquel Hervás, and Horacio Saggion.
2013b. One half or 50%? an eye-tracking study of
number representation readability. In IFIP Confer-
ence on Human-Computer Interaction, pages 229–
245, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.

Wibke Riekmann and Anke Grotlüschen. 2011. Kon-
servative Entscheidungen: Größenordnung des
funktionalen Analphabetismus in Deutschland. RE-
PORT - Zeitschrift für Weiterbildungsforschung,
3:24–35.

Stephen E Robertson and Steve Walker. 1994. Some
simple effective approximations to the 2-poisson
model for probabilistic weighted retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th annual international ACM SI-
GIR conference on Research and development in in-
formation retrieval, pages 232–241. Springer-Verlag
New York, Inc.

Richard W. Schmidt. 1990. The role of consciousness
in second language learning. Applied Linguistics,
11:206–226.

Michael Sharwood Smith. 1993. Input enhancement in
instructed SLA. Studies in Second Language Acqui-
sition, 15(2):165–179.

Merrill Swain. 1985. Communicative competence:
Some roles of comprehensible input and compre-
hensible output in its development. In Susan M.
Gass and Carolyn G. Madden, editors, Input in sec-
ond language acquisition, pages 235–253. Newbury
House, Rowley, MA.

Sowmya Vajjala and Detmar Meurers. 2012. On im-
proving the accuracy of readability classification
using insights from second language acquisition.
In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications
(BEA), pages 163–173, Montréal, Canada. ACL.

Sowmya Vajjala and Detmar Meurers. 2013. On the
applicability of readability models to web texts. In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Predicting
and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader
Populations, pages 59–68.

Zarah Weiss and Theresa Geppert. 2018. Textles-
barkeit für Alpha-Levels. Annotationsrichtlinien für
Lesetexte. http://sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/∼zweiss/rsrc/
textlesbarkeit-fur-alpha.pdf, Bonn, Tübingen.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

88



Zarah Weiss and Detmar Meurers. 2018. Modeling the
readability of German targeting adults and children:
An empirically broad analysis and its cross-corpus
validation. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling
2018), Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. International
Committee on Computational Linguistic.

Angelika Wöllstein. 2014. Topologisches Satzmodell,
2 edition. Winter, Heidelberg.

Victoria Yaneva. 2015. Easy-read documents as a gold
standard for evaluation of text simplification output.
In Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop,
pages 30–36.

Victoria Yaneva, Irina Temnikova, and Ruslan Mitkov.
2015. Accessible texts for autism: An eye-tracking
study. In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessi-
bility, pages 49–57. ACM.

Victoria Yaneva, Irina Temnikova, and Ruslan Mitkov.
2016. Evaluating the readability of text simplifi-
cation output for readers with cognitive disabilities.
In Proceedings of the 10h International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 293–
299.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

89



A Appendices

↓A\H→ α3 α4 α5 α6 above α

α3 22 7 0 0 0

α4 3 4 0 2 0

α5 0 0 10 0 0

α6 0 0 1 6 3

above α 0 0 2 0 8

Table 3: Raw annotation counts for readability assessment performance pilot (A: algorithm; H: human).

/**

* Assign Alpha readability level given computed features

*

* @return DocumentReadabilityLevel The document’s Alpha readability level

*/

public DocumentReadabilityLevel computeReadabilityLevel() {

if (wordsPerSentence <= 10

&& nSentences <= 5

&& syllablesPerToken <= 3

&& pastPerfectsPerFiniteVerb == 0

&& future1sPerFiniteVerb == 0

&& future2sPerFiniteVerb == 0

&& depClausesPerSentence <= 0.5

&& presentPerfectsPerFiniteVerb <= 0.5

&& typesFoundInSubtlexPerLexicalType >= 0.95) {

alphaLevel = LEVEL_3;

} else if (wordsPerSentence <= 10

&& nSentences <= 10

&& syllablesPerToken <= 5

&& pastPerfectsPerFiniteVerb == 0

&& future1sPerFiniteVerb == 0

&& future2sPerFiniteVerb == 0) {

alphaLevel = LEVEL_4;

} else if (wordsPerSentence <= 12

&& nSentences <= 15

&& pastPerfectsPerFiniteVerb == 0) {

alphaLevel = LEVEL_5;

} else if (wordsPerSentence <= 12

&& nSentences <= 20) {

alphaLevel = LEVEL_6;

} else {

alphaLevel = LEVEL_N;

}

return alphaLevel;

}

Figure 3: A Java code snippet of the algorithm that assigns Alpha readability levels to texts given features such as

the number of words per sentence or the number of syllables per token.

Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at SLTC 2018 (NLP4CALL 2018)

90


