



















































Evaluation methodologies in Automatic Question Generation 2013-2018


Proceedings of The 11th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 307–317,
Tilburg, The Netherlands, November 5-8, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

307

Evaluation methodologies in Automatic Question Generation 2013-2018

Jacopo Amidei and Paul Piwek and Alistair Willis
School of Computing and Communications

The Open University
Milton Keynes, UK

{jacopo.amidei, paul.piwek, alistair.willis}@open.ac.uk

Abstract

In the last few years Automatic Question
Generation (AQG) has attracted increasing
interest. In this paper we survey the evalu-
ation methodologies used in AQG. Based
on a sample of 37 papers, our research
shows that the systems’ development has
not been accompanied by similar develop-
ments in the methodologies used for the
systems’ evaluation. Indeed, in the pa-
pers we examine here, we find a wide va-
riety of both intrinsic and extrinsic evalu-
ation methodologies. Such diverse eval-
uation practices make it difficult to reli-
ably compare the quality of different gen-
eration systems. Our study suggests that,
given the rapidly increasing level of re-
search in the area, a common framework
is urgently needed to compare the perfor-
mance of AQG systems and NLG systems
more generally.

1 Introduction

Evaluation is a critical phase for the development
of Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems.
It helps to improve performance by highlighting
weaknesses, and to identify new tasks to which
generation systems can be applied. Given that
generation systems and evaluation methodologies
should be developed hand in hand, a system-
atic study of evaluation methodologies for NLG
should take a central role in the effort of build-
ing machines which are able to reach human-like
levels of linguistic communication. Such a study
should investigate the current evaluation practices
used in various areas of NLG in order to see
their weaknesses and suggest directions to im-
prove them.

The aim of this paper is to analyze the evalu-
ation methodologies used in Automatic Question
Generation (AQG) as a representative subtask of
NLG. To the best of our knowledge, since the in-
troduction of the Question Generation Shared Task
Evaluation Challenge (QG-STEC) (Rus et al.,
2010), no attempts have been made to introduce
a common framework for evaluation in AQG.

To approach this task, we examined the papers
in the ACL anthology with a publication date be-
tween the years 2013-2018 (more precisely Jan-
uary 2013 to June 2018). Table 1 shows the distri-
bution of the papers involved in the current study
across this period. The ACL anthology website
represents a resource of inestimable value1 for this
work.

Year of publication # papers
2018 (Jan-June) 7 (so far)
2017 13
2016 9
2015 5
2014 1
2013 2

Table 1: Number of papers per year describing
question generation systems.

We used the single term question generation as
the search term with the search engine provided in
the ACL Anthology website. From the papers that
were returned by this query, we focussed only on
those papers that were about question generation
systems. This gave us 37 papers to analyze, of
which 36 were published in conference proceed-
ings and 1 was published in a journal. The num-
ber of papers by year is given in Table 1 and illus-
trated in Figure 1. Figure 1 indicates the rapid in-
crease in publications in this area in recent years.

1http://aclweb.org/anthology/

http://aclweb.org/anthology/


308

Figure 1: Number of papers on AQG published by
year in the ACL anthology.

Note that this study of the literature was carried
out in June 2018, and so several major conferences
in this area (including ACL, INLG, EMNLP and
COLING) had not taken place.2

Publication type Journal or conference name # of papers
Conference proceed-
ing

INLG 7

ACL 7
NAACL-HLT 6
Workshop on Innovative Use
of NLP for Building Educa-
tional Application

6

EMNLP 3
IJCNLP 1
EACL 1
SIGDIAL 1
COLING 1
NLPTEA 1
RANLP 1
Workshop on Representation
Learning for NLP

1

Journal Computational Linguistics 1

Table 2: Number of papers per conference pro-
ceedings or journal.

Before looking more closely at the publications
involved, let us introduce the AQG tasks studied
in these papers. AQG is the task

of automatically generating questions
from various inputs such as raw text,
database, or semantic representation
(Rus et al., 2008).

The above definition, adopted by the AQG com-
munity, leaves room for researchers to decide what
kind of questions and input work with. Following
Piwek and Boyer (2012) a particular AQG task can
be characterized by three aspects: the input, the

2A complete list of papers used in this study, as well as
useful information to reproduce the results presented in the
present paper, can be found at the following link:

https://bit.ly/2IuPJIa

output, and finally the relationship between the in-
put and the output. The 37 papers we analyzed can
be divided into the following three categories:

1. Input: text;
Output: text;
Relation: the output question is answered by
the input text or the output question asks a
clarification question about the input text.

2. Input: knowledge base structured data (for
example triples 〈subject, object, subject/ob-
ject relation〉);
Output: text;
Relation: the output question is answered by
the information structure in the input.

3. Input: image or image and text or image seg-
mentation annotations;
Output: text;
Relation: the output question is answered by
the information pictured in the input.

For the sake of simplicity we will denote with
Text2Text the task expressed by category 1,
Kb2Text the task expressed by category 2 and fi-
nally Mm2Text the task expressed by category 3,
where Mm is short for “Multi-modal”. Within
each category, we find papers with different aims.
We show these in the following list, where the
number in brackets shows how many papers fall
into that class:

1. Text2Text (30)

• Web searching (1)
• Chatbot component (1)
• Creation of comparative questions re-

lated to the input topic (1)
• Clarification questions (1)
• Question Answering (5)
• Dataset creation purpose (1)
• Educational purpose (9)
• AQG general purposes (11)

2. Kb2Text (4)

• Question Answering (1)
• Dataset creation purpose (1)
• Educational purpose (1)
• AQG general purposes (1)

3. Mm2Text (3)

https://bit.ly/2IuPJIa


309

• Data augmentation Visual Question An-
swering (VQA) purpose (1)
• AQG general purposes (2)

Regarding the papers in the Text2Text category, we
found some variety in the different types of output.
Although in the majority of cases, the system’s
output was an interrogative sentence, there are 5
papers in which the output is a “fill the gap” ques-
tion, 3 papers where output is a multiple choice
question (with its associated set of distractors) and
3 papers in which the output is a question/answer
pair. Also in both the Kb2Text and Mm2Text cate-
gories there is 1 paper each in which the output is
a question/answer pair. We also note that one pa-
per in the Text2Text category developed a question
generator which takes a paragraph of text and an
associated answer as input. In this case, the gen-
erated question must be answered by the answer
given in the input. We conclude this section by
specifying that AQG general purposes means that
the system was not tied to a particular domain or
task-dependent setting, whereas Question Answer-
ing means that the AQG system is developed in
order to be used in the Question Answering task.

2 Related Work

Two of the key references for evaluation in NLG
are Krahmer and Theune (2010) and Gatt and
Krahmer (2018). Both devote an entire section
to evaluation. In particular, Section 7 of Gatt and
Krahmer’s paper gives a helpful description of the
methodologies used in NLG for the purpose of
evaluation, alongside examples and a discussion
of the relevant problems.

Another highly relevant work is that of Gkatzia
and Mahamood (2014). Gkatzia and Mahamood
studied the use of evaluation methodologies for
NLG, performing a study which analyzed a cor-
pus of 79 conference and journal papers pub-
lished between the years 2005-2014. Their results
show the increasing prevalence of automatic eval-
uation over human evaluation and the prevalence
of intrinsic evaluation over extrinsic ones (we dis-
cuss intrinsic and extrinsic methods in Section 3).
Gkatzia and Mahamood also report that the eval-
uation approaches are correlated with the publica-
tion venue, so that papers published in the same
journal or conference tend to use the same evalu-
ation methodologies. Our paper represents a con-
tinuation and refinement of the Gkatzia and Ma-
hamood paper, with our specific focus on AQG.

Regarding more specific work on AQG we refer
to Rakangor and Ghodasara (2015) and Le et al.
(2014), both of which survey AQG, with the latter
focussing specifically on educational applications
of AQG. For each paper considered, Rakangor and
Ghodasara present the methodology used, the gen-
erated question type, the language of the generated
question, the evaluation methodologies and its re-
sults. In contrast, Le et al. report on the educa-
tional support type and the evaluation methodolo-
gies, in one table and the question type and evalu-
ation results in the other table. Although Le et al.
present these results in two tables, the tables in fact
have only one paper in common. In comparison,
in this paper we focus all our attention on the eval-
uation methodologies used. For this reason, we
report neither the systems’ specifications nor the
systems’ performance.

A final publication of importance to the cur-
rent work is the report on the Question Generation
Shared Task Evaluation Challenge (QG-STEC)
(Rus et al., 2010). In the QG-STEC, two tasks, A
and B, were defined. Although both tasks shared
the same output type, task A took a paragraph and
a target question type as input, whereas task B took
a single sentence and a target question type as in-
put. Both tasks were evaluated through a human
evaluation methodology, based on the 5 criteria:
relevance, syntactic correctness and fluency, am-
biguity, question type and variety. However, the
Inter Annotator Agreement (IAA) reached in the
evaluation phase was low. An attempt to improve
the IAA for task B is described in Godwin and Pi-
wek (2016), in which the authors define an inter-
active process where the annotators discussed their
opinions about the criteria used in the evaluation.
Although their method improves the IAA, the re-
producibility of their results is not guaranteed.

3 Evaluation methodologies for AQG

In this section we present the findings of our anal-
ysis. We focus our analysis on two dimensions: in-
trinsic evaluation methodology and extrinsic eval-
uation methodology.

Intrinsic evaluation methods measure the per-
formance of a system by evaluating the system’s
output “in its own right, either against a refer-
ence corpus or by eliciting human judgements of
quality” (Gatt and Belz, 2010, p. 264). For ex-
ample, this could involve measuring the output’s
grammaticality and fluency. The prevailing intrin-



310

sic methods are human evaluation and automatic
evaluation. In order to assess the quality of a gen-
erated sentence, the former method uses human
judgements, while the latter applies an algorithm
that automatically calculates a score, for example
by checking the similarity between the generated
sentence and a set of reference sentences.

Extrinsic methods measure the performance of
a system by evaluating the system’s output with
respect to its ability to accomplish the task for
which it was developed. An example of extrin-
sic evaluation methods is that used to evaluate the
STOP system (Reiter et al., 2003). STOP gen-
erates “short tailored smoking cessation letters,
based on responses to a four-page smoking ques-
tionnaire” (p. 41) with the aim of helping people
to give up smoking. This system was evaluated
“by recruiting 2553 smokers, sending 1/3 of them
letters produced by STOP and the other 2/3 con-
trol letters, and then measuring how many people
in each group managed to stop smoking”3. In this
case the system was evaluated in the real world
to see whether it has the desired effect, of help-
ing people to quit smoking. The results showed
that there were no relevant differences between the
STOP letters and the control letters.

3.1 A general overview
Table 3 shows the evaluation methodologies used
in the papers that we examined. With respect to

Evaluation methodologies # of papers
Text2Text Kb2Text Mm2Text Total

Intrinsic human
only

13 1 - 14

Intrinsic automatic
only

9 - 1 10

Extrinsic (human)
only

2 - - 2

Intrinsic human &
Intrinsic automatic

3 2 2 7

Intrinsic human &
Extrinsic (human)

2 - - 2

Intrinsic automatic
& Extrinsic (auto-
matic)

1 - - 1

Intrinsic human &
Intrinsic automatic
& Extrinsic (auto-
matic)

- 1 - 1

Table 3: Evaluation methodologies used.

the frequency of use of intrinsic compared to ex-
trinsic methods, Table 3 confirms the trend iden-
tified in Gkatzia and Mahamood (2014). Gkatzia
and Mahamood found out that the 74.7% of the
papers used the intrinsic evaluation method. In
our analysis we found that 83% of the papers used

3See Ehud Reiter’s blog https://ehudreiter.
com/2017/01/19/types-of-nlg-evaluation/

this methodology. However, we note that with re-
spect to Gkatzia and Mahamood’s results, we have
an inverted trend between the use of an extrinsic
method compared to both intrinsic and extrinsic.
Indeed, Gkatzia and Mahamood found that 15.2%
of the papers used extrinsic methods, against the
6% we get in our analysis, and 10.1% of the pa-
pers used both methodologies, where our analysis
shows that 11% of the papers use a combination of
both.

Furthermore, our analysis confirms the trend
between the use of automatic compared to human
intrinsic evaluation methodologies. In Gkatzia and
Mahamood (2014) the authors report that in 45.4%
of the cases human evaluation is used, whereas
in 38.2% of the cases automatic evaluation were
adopted. Similarly, our analysis shows that be-
tween the papers that prefer intrinsic evaluation
methods, 45% used human evaluation, 32% used
automatic evaluation and 23% used both human
and automatic evaluation.

Table 1 shows that in the period since 2016,
there has been a considerable increase in the num-
ber of publications in this area. It therefore makes
sense to ask whether this increase has been accom-
panied with a change in the evaluation methodolo-
gies used.

Evaluation methodologies # of papers
2013-2015 2016-2018

Intrinsic human only 6 8
Intrinsic automatic only 1 9
Extrinsic (human) only - 2
Intrinsic human & Intrinsic au-
tomatic

1 6

Intrinsic human & Extrinsic (hu-
man)

- 2

Intrinsic automatic & Extrinsic
(automatic)

- 1

Intrinsic human & Intrinsic au-
tomatic & Extrinsic (automatic)

- 1

Table 4: Variation of the evaluation methodolo-
gies used between 2013 - 2015 and between 2016
- 2018.

Table 4 shows how the range of evalua-
tion methodologies used has changed. Between
the years 2013 - 2015 only intrinsic evaluation
methodologies were used – with 75% of papers
using human evaluation, 12.5% using automatic
evaluation and 12.5% using both methodologies –
for the years between 2016 - 2018 extrinsic evalu-
ation methods have also been introduced. Indeed,
although the majority of the papers in this period
(79%) used intrinsic evaluation methods, 7% of
papers used extrinsic evaluation methods and 14%

https://ehudreiter.com/2017/01/19/types-of-nlg-evaluation/
https://ehudreiter.com/2017/01/19/types-of-nlg-evaluation/


311

used both the methodologies. We can also see a
change in the tendency to use intrinsic methods.
Between the years 2016 - 2018, 35% of the papers
used human evaluation (a decrease of 40% from
the years between 2013 - 2015), 39% of the pa-
pers used automatic evaluation (a 26.5% increase
on the years between 2013 - 2015) and 26% of the
papers used both methodologies (a 13.5% increase
on the years between 2013 - 2015).

3.2 Automatic evaluation

Table 5 presents a list of automatic metrics used in
the papers studied in the present research. From
our analysis it turns out that the most used au-
tomatic metric is BLEU followed by METEOR.
Note that Table 5 only describes those that use the
specified metrics; other papers use metrics that are
defined for the specific aims described in the paper
that introduces them.

Evaluation methodologies # of papers
Text2Text Kb2Text Mm2Text Total

BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002)

8 3 2 13

METEOR (Baner-
jee and Laviel,
2005)

4 2 1 7

ROUGE (Lin and
Och, 2004)

3 1 - 4

Precision 4 - - 4
Recall 4 - - 4
F1 4 - - 4
Accuracy 2 0 1 3
∆BLEU (Galley
et al., 2015)

- - 1 1

Embedding Greedy
(Rus and Lintean.,
2012)

- 1 - 1

Others 5 - - 5

Table 5: Automatic metrics used.

In our survey we found out that 31% of the pa-
pers used just a single metric, whereas the other
69% used more than one. The average is 2 metrics
per paper, with a minimum of 1 metric (6 papers)
and a maximum of 5 metrics (1 paper). In almost
50% of cases (9 papers), 3 metrics were used. We
noticed that only a single paper used an embed-
ding based metric (see Sharma et al. (2017)). In
a majority of studies, word-overlap based metrics
were used (see Sharma et al. (2017)).

In the last few years, many studies in NLG
have shed light on the correlation between hu-
man judgement and automatic metrics. The re-
sults, which have shown how this correspondence
is somewhat weak4, shed doubt on the feasibility

4For an in depth discussion of this point we refer to Reiter
and Belz (2009) and to Gatt and Krahmer (2018), especially
section 7.4.1 and the references presented there.

of using these metrics for evaluating the overall
quality of a system.

To the best of our knowledge, the area of AQG
is currently missing a study which aims to verify
the correlation between human judgement and au-
tomatic metrics5. Such research would have two
merits: on one hand, this kind of meta-evaluation
study would give a better characterisation of the
general problem. On the other hand, the research
could provide guidance to researchers about which
metric is most appropriate in evaluating a particu-
lar model or system.

In conclusion, we believe that research in AQG
would benefit from a systematic study that aims
to clarify the relation between different evaluation
methodologies.

3.3 Human evaluation

Among the various human evaluation methodolo-
gies, eliciting quality judgments is most common:
human annotators are asked to assess the quality
of a question based on criteria such as question’s
grammaticality and fluency. Only two papers used
a preference judgement methodology, in which the
human annotators are asked either to assess pair-
wise preference between questions or given a cou-
ple of questions, one human generated and one au-
tomatically generated, assess which one is auto-
matically generated (or which one is the the hu-
man generated). One of these papers also used
the other methodology of eliciting quality judge-
ments.

Quality judgment methodologies typically ask
annotators to use Likert or rating scales to record
their judgements. In our analysis, we found that
56% of the papers used some kind of numerical
scale. For example, human annotators were of-
ten asked to assess the grammaticality of a ques-
tion on a scale from 1 (worst) to 5 (best). On the
other hand, 44% of the papers used a linguistic
(or semantic) scale. In these cases, human annota-
tors were typically asked to classify the questions
in some category such as coherent, somewhat co-
herent or incoherent. The number of categories
used in the Likert or rating scales by the papers
that adopted quality judgment methodologies are
shown in Table 6.

Only three papers used more than one scale in
the evaluation. One of these uses a free scale in

5Yuan et al. (2017) raise some doubts about the capacity
of BLEU to effectively measure the quality of systems used
in Text2Text tasks.



312

which the annotators have to choose a positive in-
teger to count the inference steps necessary for an-
swer a question.

Number of categories # of papers
Text2Text Kb2Text Mm2Text Total

2 6 - - 6
3 6 - 2 8
4 1 1 - 2
5 8 1 - 9
7 - 1 - 1

Table 6: Number of categories used in the Likert
or rating scales.

Table 6 shows that the two most common num-
ber of categories used in the Likert or rating scales
are 3 and 5. In a recent paper, Novikova et al.
(2018) suggest that the use of a continuous scale
and relative assessments can improve the quality
of human judgments. Although in our study, we
found 2 papers that used relative assessment, we
did not find any papers that use a continuous scale.

Another interesting point is the number of anno-
tators used in the evaluation. This number varies a
lot from paper to paper. We found a minimum of 1
annotator (2 papers) to a maximum of 364 annota-
tors (1 paper). Taking the papers which provided
information on the number of annotators used (24
papers), and removing five papers that used 53, 63,
67, 81 and 364 annotators – these can be seen as
outliers – we found out that the average number of
annotators used was almost 4. The most common
number was two annotators, used by 29% (7 pa-
pers) of the papers. 3 annotators were used by 17%
(4 papers) and 4 annotators were used by 13% (3
papers). The others paper used 5, 7, 8 or 10 anno-
tators.

There is a similar breadth in the number of out-
put questions used (that is, the questions gener-
ated by the systems), and the criteria (that is, the
question features to be checked) used in the eval-
uation. The number of questions ranged from a
minimum of 60 questions (1 paper) to a maximum
of 2186 (1 paper). Amongst those papers which
actually provide this information (17 papers, or
65%), we found out that the average number of
questions used per paper is almost 493. 7 papers
(27%) did not report this information, whereas 2
papers (8%) report information about the amount
of data from which the questions were generated,
without giving the exact number of questions used
for the evaluation.

Regarding the criteria used, we noticed that
35% of the papers (8 studies) used an overall qual-

ity criterion, that is, a single criterion which was
used to evaluate the question’s overall quality. On
the other hand, 52% of the papers (12 studies) used
specific criteria, for example, question grammati-
cality, question answerability, etc. A full list of
these criteria is shown in Table 7. 13% of the pa-
pers (3 studies) used both specific criteria and an
overall criterion. As Table 7 shows, there is a wide
assortment of criteria used across the set of col-
lected papers.

Criterion used # of papers
Text2Text Kb2Text Mm2Text Total

Grammaticality 7 - - 7
Semantic correctness 4 - - 4
Answer existence 3 - - 3
Naturalness 2 1 - 3
Question type 3 - - 3
Clarity 3 - - 3
Discriminator quality 3 - - 3
Relevance 2 - - 2
Correctness 2 - - 2
Well-formedness 1 - - 1
Key selection accuracy 1 - - 1
Corrected retrieval 1 - - 1
Fluency 1 - - 1
Coherence 1 - - 1
Timing 1 - - 1
Inference step 1 - - 1
Question diversity 1 - - 1
Importance 1 - - 1
Specificity 1 - - 1
Predicate identification - 1 - 1
Difficulty 1 - - 1
Overall criterion 7 2 2 11

Table 7: Criteria used.

As we can see from Table 7, the specific cri-
teria are mainly used in the Text2Text task. Just
two criteria are used in the Kb2Text task and none
in the Mm2Text, where an overall quality criterion
was preferred. We note that some criteria, for ex-
ample timing or importance, are specific to one of
the aims of the paper in which they are used. In-
deed, as shown in the introduction, we can find
different aims behind the papers’ motivations. We
note that among the papers analyzed here, often
only little information is provided about the eval-
uation guidelines6. We cannot exclude that, given
the evaluation guidelines, some of the criteria pre-
sented in Table 7 can be collapsed together. That
is, it is possible that different researchers use dif-
ferent names in order to check the same question
feature. In order to have a better way to check
the quality across systems, we suggest that re-
searchers should publish the evaluation guidelines
used in the evaluation, as well as the quantitative
results.

6Human evaluations are driven by some annotation guide-
line which is a direct manifestation of some annotation
scheme. Whereas the latter characterize the criteria to be
evaluated, the first strictly define such criteria and suggest
how they should be evaluated.



313

Table 8 supplies an overview about the IAA
reached in the human evaluations. We note that
54% of the papers (14 studies) did not supply this
information. Only one of the two papers that used
preference judgments reported the agreement be-
tween evaluators. In that paper, Fleiss’ κ was used
to measure the IAA reached between 3 to 5 evalu-
ators. The results, for three batches with different
evaluators and questions, were 0.242, 0.234 and
0.182. Table 8 presents the IAA results reported
by the papers that used quality judgement meth-
ods. Between the papers that reported this infor-
mation, we found that the IAA was measured in
26 cases and 9 of these were measured with two
different coefficients, for a total of 35 IAA values.
The agreements were measured for specific crite-
ria or for the overall quality criterion. In one case
the agreement over all the criteria was reported. It

Metric used for calculate IAA # of criteria
measured

Average Min. Max.

Cohen’s κ 14 0.46 0.10 0.80
Krippendorff’s α 2 0.143 0.05 0.236
Fleiss’s κ 4 0.45 0.33 0.62
Pearson’s r 4 0.71 0.47 0.89
Average measure 9 0.80 0.50 0.91
k no better specified 2 0.085 0.08 0.09

Table 8: Measures of Inter-Annotator Agreement.

is notable that the agreement reached in the var-
ious evaluations is generally quite low. Indeed,
following Artstein and Poesio (2008), only agree-
ment greater than or equal to 0.8 should be consid-
ered. Quoting Artstein and Poesio, p. 591:

Both in our earlier work (Poesio and
Vieira 1998; Poesio 2004a) and in the
more recent (Poesio and Artstein 2005)
efforts we found that only values above
0.8 ensures an annotation of reasonable
quality. We therefore felt that if a thresh-
old needs to be set, 0.8 is a good value.

Taking this as an appropriate quality threshold,
among the papers that report IAA, very few eval-
uations should be considered appropriate. More
specifically, we found that only 23% (8 over 35
values) of the evaluations reported IAA scores that
were greater than or equal to 0.8.7

7Using the popular Krippendorff’s Kappa scales of inter-
pretation (Krippendorff, 1980) – where any data annotation
with agreement in the interval [0.8, 1] should be considered
good, agreement in the interval [0.67, 0.8) should be con-
sidered tentative, and data annotation with agreement below
0.67 should be discarded– we conclude that 43% (15 out of
35) of the evaluations should be considered tentative.

Checking the agreement for number of annota-
tors we found that in the case with 364 annotators
the IAA, measured for two criteria and a not better
specified κ, was between 0.08 and 0.09. We found
only 2 cases for 5 evaluators, which reported a
value of 0.05 for Krippendorff’s α and an average
measure of 0.89. Two papers used 4 annotators al-
together: one reported a value of Krippendorff’s
α of 0.236, with the other reporting a Pearson’s r
of 0.71. Another paper used 3 evaluators and the
Fleiss’s κ to measure the IAA for 4 criteria. The
results are reported in Table 8.

All other papers reporting an IAA measure were
in evaluations that used 2 annotators. The results
of these cases are shown in Table 8 highlighting
Cohen’s κ, the Average measure and Pearson’s r.8

There are sometimes attempts to design the ex-
perimental methodology to improve the level of
IAA. In order to improve the agreement, one paper
collapsed two score classes into one, whereas two
papers allowed a difference of one score between
the annotators rating. Two examples of the latter
case are the maximum value for Cohen’s κ and the
maximum value for the average measure reported
in Table 8.

We conclude this section by noting that the
problem of a low IAA was present also in the
Shared Task Evaluation Challenge (QG-STEC)
(Rus et al., 2010). In that case, an attempt to im-
prove the IAA for task B was carried out by God-
win and Piwek (2016). Godwin and Piwek define
an interactive process in which the annotators can
discuss their opinions about the criteria used in the
evaluation. At the end of the evaluation process,
repeated three times with three annotators on dif-
ferent data each time, they got high IAA with a
peak of 0.94 for one of the five criteria used in the
evaluation.

Although other papers (see for example Bayerl
and Paul (2011), Lommel et al. (2014) and Hwee
Tou Ng and Foo (1999)) propose techniques which
aim to improve the IAA, in a recent paper (Amidei
et al., 2018) we suggest thinking carefully about
this practice in the case of NLG tasks. Indeed, if
evaluation results have to inform generation sys-

8Regarding Pearson’s r, we should clarify that in the case
of 2 evaluators, IAA was measured for 3 criteria and not 4 as
reported in table 8. However, because the Pearson’s r mea-
sured for the fourth criterion was 0.71, that is the average
value, the Pearson’s r measure in the case of 2 evaluator is
exactly the one shown in Table 8. Furthermore, for the aver-
age measure there is a case with 5 annotators. Removing that
case, the average for 2 annotators is 0.79.



314

tems developers of the extent to which they can
improve the communicative power of their sys-
tems, the aim of attaining a higher IAA runs the
danger of biasing system developers towards ig-
noring important aspects of human language. An
unchecked and unquestioned focus on the reduc-
tion of disagreement among annotators runs the
danger of creating generation goals that reward
output that is more distant from, rather than closer
to, natural human-like language.

3.4 Extrinsic evaluation

As shown in Table 3, extrinsic evaluation method-
ologies are rare in the area. As reported by Gkatzia
and Mahamood (2014) this is generally true for
NLG tasks. Amongst the papers that have cho-
sen to use this kind of evaluation technique, hu-
man judges were used in 4 times out of the 6. In
the papers where human judges were not used, the
Question Generation (QG) system was tested as
a component of a Question Answering (QA) sys-
tem. The performance was evaluated by checking
the difference between the QA system without the
use of the QG system against the performance of
the QA system with the use of the QG system. The
aim of those papers was to improve QA systems by
creating more accurate question/answer pairs to be
used for training purposes.

As a consequence of the different tasks in play,
the other papers used humans in different ways.
We can find tasks such as: answer the generated
questions or use the generated questions in a web
page and then answer a survey about the utility of
those questions. Or also: engage in a conversation
with a chatbot which involves a question-based di-
alogue, and then rate the conversations.

Also in this case, the number of humans in-
volved in the evaluation varies from paper to pa-
per, ranging from 2 to 81. In contrast to the case
of intrinsic human evaluation, in this case the IAA
is not reported. We note that human agreement in
extrinsic evaluation is not as relevant as in the case
of intrinsic evaluation. Indeed, for intrinsic evalu-
ations, agreement is required to have a reliability
and validity measure of the evaluation scheme and
guidelines (Artstein and Poesio, 2008). The agree-
ment measure should gather evidence that differ-
ent humans can make similar judgements about
the questions evaluated. This fact, following Krip-
pendorff (2011) should allow us to answer the
question of: “how much the resulting data can be

trusted to represent something real”? (page 1). In
human intrinsic evaluation, the agreement can be
seen as a measure of the replicability of the results.
For example, Carletta (1996, p. 1) wrote:

At one time, it was considered suffi-
cient. . . to show examples based on the
authors’ interpretation. Research was
judged according to whether or not the
reader found the explanation plausible.
Now, researchers are beginning to re-
quire evidence that people besides the
authors themselves can understand and
make the judgments underlying the re-
search reliably. This is a reasonable re-
quirement because if researchers can’t
even show that different people can
agree about the judgments on which
their research is based, then there is no
chance of replicating the research re-
sults.

In the case of extrinsic methods, the evaluation
aim is to check if the generated sentences fulfil the
task for which they were generated. To test this,
humans need to use those sentences in real con-
texts. Now, humans make use of the same tools
in different ways, and similarly they answer ques-
tions in different ways. For this reason, it is not ex-
pected that humans reach similar results in a real
context of language use.

4 Discussion

Although systems and tools have been developed
in the AQG area over the last few years, Table
1 illustrates that this has not been accompanied
by similar improvements in evaluation methodolo-
gies. Indeed, with the exception of the Shared
Task Evaluation Challenge (QG -STEC) (Rus
et al., 2010), no attempts have been undertaken to
introduce a common framework for evaluation that
allows for comparisons between systems.

We have seen that in human evaluation, differ-
ent criteria and scales/categories are used. To ad-
dress this, we recommend that researchers share
their evaluation guidelines, and work towards
adopting common guidelines that can used to
check quality across systems. Furthermore, out of
the papers examined here, the problem of evalua-
tion validity emerges. In those studies where it has
actually been reported, the IAA is generally low.
Also in this case we suggest researchers systemat-
ically determine the IAA and share their results, as



315

well as ideas to attempt to understand and classify
any divergences between annotators.

Automatic evaluation can be thought of as a
technique to provide a way to standardize the eval-
uation. Unfortunately, a comparison of human
and automatic evaluation is missing in the area.
This makes it difficult to understand to what extent
the automatic metrics capture the systems’ quality.
Lacking such comparison, and following Reiter
(2018), we suggest considering metrics such as
BLEU as tools for systems’ diagnostic more than
evaluation techniques able to measure the output
quality of the systems.

There is scope for more extrinsic evaluation,
which can “provide useful insight of domains’
need, and thus they provide better indications of
the systems’ usefulness and utility” (Gkatzia and
Mahamood, 2014, p. 60). Unfortunately, extrinsic
evaluations are not yet widely used.

Though the QG-STEC evaluation scheme has
only limited uptake, with the much increased pop-
ularity of AQG, it is timely to revisit and address
the need for a shared evaluation scheme. The va-
riety of evaluation methodologies, as brought to
light by the present work, demonstrates how diffi-
cult it currently is to check question quality across
generation systems. This prevents us from under-
standing the actual contributions that are made by
new generation systems that are being introduced
ever more frequently.

We conclude this section with the following ob-
servation. The problem of having a high degree of
variation in methodologies is compounded by the
use of different datasets in the evaluation phase
(see Table 9). The use of a common dataset for
evaluation – as suggested by the Shared Task Eval-
uation Campaign (STEC) (Gatt and Belz, 2010) –
could remove bias coming from the training phase.
This is particularly true for generation systems that
use machine learning techniques. We note that the
high variability in the dataset used in the evalua-
tion phase is also due to the variation in the pa-
pers’ motivations. However, Table 9 suggests that
the aim of building a common framework for AQG
tasks should involve creation of a dataset to be
used only for evaluation purposes. If we want to
understand the degree to which a system advances
the state of the art, we need to compare differ-
ent systems on the same dataset, or better, a set
of datasets, of course, using the same evaluation
methodologies.

Tasks Dataset or source of test articles
Text2Text SQuAD; MS-MARCO; Wik-

iQA; TriviaQA; TrecQA;
Wikinews; Penn Treebank; QG-
STEC datasets; StackExchange;
Wikipedia; OMG! website;
Project Gutemberg; Read-
Works.org; Engarde corpus;
CrunchBase; Newswire (Prop-
Bank); textbook from OpenStax
and Saylor; not specify TOEFL
book; not specify science text
books; not specify course Web
page; not specify news articles
not specify teachers articles; 40
people’s personal data.

Kb2Text Ontology documenting K-12 Bi-
ology concepts; SimpleQues-
tions; Freebase; WikiAnswers.

Mm2Text COCO-QA; COCO-VQA;
IGCCrowd; Bing; COCO; Flickr.

Table 9: Dataset used.

An open evaluation platform in which re-
searchers share their evaluation methodologies
and their results can be effective to compare the
quality across systems. In such a platform, the
shared evaluation methodologies, alongside some
datasets used only for evaluation, can be used by
researchers to test their systems’ performance and
the results can be recorded in the open platform.
Another benefit of this platform could be to gener-
ate an evolutionary process which allows the com-
munity to select the evaluation methodologies that
are considered more effective.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we have analysed 37 papers which
were about AQG. The aim of our work was to
study the evaluation methodologies used in the
area. Our work confirms the conclusion of Gkatzia
and Mahamood (2014) for NLG in general. In
AQG we lack a standardised approach for evalu-
ating generation systems. Indeed, our overview
shows a quite variegated evaluation landscape
which prevents comparison of question quality
across generation systems. A careful look at the
papers published in the AQG area in the last five
years shows how little attention has been given to
the evaluation methodology introduced in the QG-
STEC. Given the ever-increasing number of publi-
cations in the area, a common framework for test-
ing the performance of generation systems is ur-
gently needed.

Acknowledgments

We warmly thanks the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful suggestions.



316

References
Jacopo Amidei, Paul Piwek, and Alistair Willis. 2018.

Rethinking the agreement in human evaluation
tasks. In Proceedings of the 27th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 3318–
3329.

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Laviel. 2005. Meteor:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with im-
proved correlation with human judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Transla-
tion and/or Summarization, pages 65–72.

Petra S. Bayerl and Karsten I. Paul. 2011. What deter-
mines inter-coder agreement in manual annotations?
a meta-analytic investigation. Computational Lin-
guistics, 37(4):699–725.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classi-
fication tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational
Linguistics, 22(2):249–254.

Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Alessandro Sordoni,
Yangfeng Ji, Michael Auli, Chris Quirk, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2015.
δbleu: A discriminative metric for generation tasks
with intrinsically diverse targets. In Proceedings
of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 7th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pages 26–31.

Albert Gatt and Anja Belz. 2010. Introducing shared
tasks to NLG: The TUNA shared task evaluation
challenges. in E. Krahmer and Mariët Theune
(Eds.), Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Generation Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.

Albert Gatt and Emiel Krahmer. 2018. Survey of the
state of the art in natural language generation: Core
tasks, applications and evaluation. Journal of Artifi-
cial Intelligence Research, 61(1):65–170.

Dimitra Gkatzia and Saad Mahamood. 2014. A snap-
shot of NLG evaluation practices 2005 - 2014. In
Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 57–60.

Keith Godwin and Paul Piwek. 2016. Collecting reli-
able human judgements on machine-generated lan-
guage: The case of the qg-stec data. In Proceedings
INLG16, pages 212–216.

Chung Yong Lim Hwee Tou Ng and Shou King Foo.
1999. A case study on inter-annotator agreement for
word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
ACL SIGLEX Workshop: Standardizing Lexical Re-
sources, pages 9–13.

Emiel Krahmer and Mariët Theune (Eds.). 2010. Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Generation.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.

Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: An In-
troduction to Its Methodology. Sage Publications,
Beverly Hills, CA.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2011. Computing Krip-
pendorff’s alpha-reliability. Retrieved from
http://repository.upenn.edu.

Nguyen-Thinh Le, Tomoko Kojiri, and Niels Pinkwart.
2014. Automatic Question Generation for Educa-
tional Applications The State of Art. In: van Do T.,
Thi H., Nguyen N. (eds) Advanced Computational
Methods for Knowledge Engineering. Springer,
Cham.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. 2004. Automatic
evaluation of machine translation quality using us-
ing longest common subsequence and skip-bigram
statistics. In Proceedings ACL’04, pages 605–612.

Arle Lommel, Maja Popovic, and Aljoscha Burchardt.
2014. Assessing inter-annotator agreement for
translation error annotation. In: MTE: Workshop
on Automatic and Manual Metrics for Operational
Translation Evaluation, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Jekaterina Novikova, Ondrr̆ej Dus̆ek, and Verena
Rieser. 2018. RankMe: Reliable human ratings
for natural language generation. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT, pages 72–78.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics., pages 311–318.

Paul Piwek and Kristy. E. Boyer. 2012. Varieties of
question generation: Introduction to this special is-
sue. dialogue and discourse. Dialogue and Dis-
course, 3(2):1–9.

Sheetal Rakangor and Y. R. Ghodasara. 2015. Liter-
ature review of automatic question generation sys-
tems. International Journal of Scientific and Re-
search Publications, 5(1):1–5.

Ehud Reiter. 2018. A structured review of the validity
of bleu. Computational Linguistics, 44(3):393–401.

Ehud Reiter and Anja Belz. 2009. An investigation into
the validity of some metrics for automatically evalu-
ating natural language generation systems. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 35(4):529–558.

Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and Liesl M.Osman.
2003. Lessons from a failure: Generating tailored
smoking cessation letters. Artificial Intelligence,
144(1-2):41–58.



317

Vasile Rus, Zhiqiang Cai, and Art Graesser. 2008.
Question generation: Example of a multi-year eval-
uation campaign. In Rus, V. and A. Graesser
(eds.), online Proceedings of 1st Question Genera-
tion Workshop, pages 25–26.

Vasile Rus and Mihai C. Lintean. 2012. A compari-
son of greedy and optimal assessment of natural lan-
guage student input using word-to-word similarity
metrics. In In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop
on Building Educational Applications Using NLP.

Vasile Rus, Brendan Wyse, Paul Piwek, Mihai Lintean,
Svetlana Stoyanchev, and Cristian Moldovan. 2010.
The first question generation shared task evaluation
challenge. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Natural Language Generation Conference (INLG),
pages 7–9.

Shikhar Sharma, Layla El Asri, Hannes Schulz, and
Jeremie Zumer. 2017. Relevance of unsupervised
metrics in task-oriented dialogue for evaluating nat-
ural language generation. arXiv:1706.09799.

Xingdi Yuan, Tong Wang, Caglar Gulcehre, Alessan-
dro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Saizheng Zhang.
2017. Machine comprehension by text-to-text neu-
ral question generation. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP,
pages 15–25.


