



















































Cross-cultural differences in language markers of depression online


Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Keyboard to Clinic, pages 78–87
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 5, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cross-cultural differences in language markers of depression online

Kate Loveys
Qntfy

kate@qntfy.com

Jonathan Torrez
Qntfy

jonathan.torrez@qntfy.com

Alex Fine
Qntfy

alex.fine@qntfy.com

Glen Moriarty
7 Cups of Tea

glen.moriarty@7cups.com

Glen Coppersmith
Qntfy

glen@qntfy.com

Abstract

Depression is a global mental health condition
that affects all cultures. Despite this, the way
depression is expressed varies by culture. Up-
take of machine learning technology for diag-
nosing mental health conditions means that in-
creasingly more depression classifiers are cre-
ated from online language data. Yet, culture is
rarely considered as a factor affecting online
language in this literature. This study explores
cultural differences in online language data of
users with depression. Written language data
from 1,593 users with self-reported depres-
sion from the online peer support community
7 Cups of Tea was analyzed using the Lin-
guistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC), topic
modeling, data visualization, and other tech-
niques. We compared the language of users
identifying as White, Black or African Amer-
ican, Hispanic or Latino, and Asian or Pacific
Islander. Exploratory analyses revealed cross-
cultural differences in depression expression
in online language data, particularly in relation
to emotion expression, cognition, and func-
tioning. The results have important implica-
tions for avoiding depression misclassification
from machine-driven assessments when used
in a clinical setting, and for avoiding inadver-
tent cultural biases in this line of research more
broadly.

1 Introduction

Depression is a common mental health condition
that affects more than 300 million people glob-
ally (World Health Organization, 2017). A ma-
jor contributor to the overall global burden of dis-
ease, Major Depression was indicated as the sec-
ond leading cause of years lived with disability
in 2013 (Vos et al., 2015). While effective treat-
ments for depression exist, less than half of those
affected by the condition will receive treatment
(World Health Organization, 2017). Barriers to

appropriate treatment include social stigma asso-
ciated with mental illness, a lack of resources or
trained healthcare providers, and inaccurate as-
sessments (World Health Organization, 2017).

One cause of inaccurate assessment is the use
of culturally-inappropriate or -insensitive diagnos-
tic tools; that is, administering an assessment in
a cultural context that differs from that in which
it was developed, without adaptation or validation
(Ng et al., 2016). Inaccurate assessments increase
risk of depression misdiagnosis, resulting in pa-
tients receiving either incorrect treatment or no
treatment at all; both of which may be dangerous
outcomes for the patient.

1.1 Cross-cultural differences in depression
experience and expression

According to some evolutionary psychological ap-
proaches to depression, depression is a break-
down in an evolved and adaptive response to ex-
periencing scarcity and loss, particularly in rela-
tion to goal attainment, social relationships or sta-
tus (Nesse and Ellsworth, 2009; Kirmayer et al.,
2001); thus, depression is likely to constitute part
of the human condition, in some sense indepen-
dent of culture. Across cultural contexts, depres-
sion onset is reliably related to vulnerability fac-
tors such as lack of social support, stress, un-
employment and poverty, a demanding climate,
family history of depression, adverse childhood
experiences, and a high level of trait neuroti-
cism (Chentsova-Dutton and Tsai, 2009; Kirmayer
et al., 2001; Sullivan et al., 2000; Chapman et al.,
2004). While depression affects humans cross-
culturally, cultural context nevertheless impacts
the way depression is experienced and expressed,
and plays a role in shaping a community’s gen-
eral beliefs about mental health and illness, and
how treatment is approached (Chentsova-Dutton
and Tsai, 2009; Ng et al., 2016).

78



1.1.1 Depression expression

Chentsova-Dutton and Tsai (2009) suggest that
cultural scripts about normative and deviant be-
havior impact expression of depression across cul-
tural contexts. Deviant scripts, specifically those
that pertain to depression and the expression of
distress, vary amongst cultures. This means that
depression symptoms attended to and reported
cross-culturally may vary (due to differences in
what ‘healthy’ and ‘depressed’ functioning mean
in context, as well as cultural differences in what
are socially acceptable symptoms to report (Kir-
mayer et al., 2001)).

A large body of literature suggests that cul-
tural differences in depression symptom report-
ing are reliably observed. However, how these
differences in symptom reporting are manifested
varies between studies. This is the result of varia-
tion in measurement methods (e.g., use of closed
versus open-ended self-report questions to evalu-
ate symptoms), degree of acculturation, and other
socio-demographic factors at play, such as the so-
cioeconomic status or education level of partici-
pants.

Some previous work has found cultural varia-
tion in somatic versus psychological symptom re-
porting for individuals with depression. Due to
a prevailing (implicit or explicit) belief in mind-
body dualism (Ayalon and Young, 2003) in west-
ern cultures, there is a tendency in western cul-
tures to ‘psychologize‘ the symptoms of depres-
sion, focusing on reporting psychological symp-
toms (e.g., low mood, cognitive symptoms such as
thoughts of hopelessness or excessive guilt) while
discussing depression spontaneously (Ryder et al.,
2008). Cultures that have traditionally viewed
physical and mental health as an interlinked con-
cept, by contrast, might be more likely to sponta-
neously report somatic symptoms to indicate psy-
chological distress (Ryder et al., 2008), particu-
larly in contexts where mental illness is heavily
stigmatized and thus, reporting of somatic symp-
toms is more socially acceptable (Kirmayer et al.,
2001), or somatic symptoms are more heavily em-
bedded at the forefront of the culture’s ‘script’ for
depression (Chentsova-Dutton and Tsai, 2009).
Somatization tendencies in depression symptom
reporting have been observed especially in Asian
and Middle Eastern cultures (Chan et al., 2004;
Ayalon and Young, 2003).

However, methodology for assessing depres-

sion symptoms can impact the degree of somatiza-
tion observed between cultures (Chan et al., 2004).
For example, Ryder et al. (2008) observed that
Chinese individuals with depression were more
likely to self-report somatic symptoms sponta-
neously in response to an open-ended question
about depression symptoms. When asked closed-
ended questions about depression symptoms in a
structured interview, the rate at which Chinese
individuals reported experiencing psychological
symptoms (e.g., low mood) increased.

Other literature has highlighted how cultural
variation in emotion expression norms and ide-
als impacts how individuals with depression might
express or regulate their low mood. One study
in particular compared European American and
Asian American individuals with depression to
non-depressed controls on type and degree of
emotion expression following exposure to a sad
film (Chentsova-Dutton et al., 2007). Differences
in cultural norms pertaining to emotion expression
and regulation meant that participants with depres-
sion either expressed or regulated sadness in re-
sponse to the film dependent on culture. In both
cases, emotion expression or regulation was op-
posite to the non-depressed cultural norm. Thus,
whether low mood is more likely to be expressed
or regulated by individuals with depression varies
by culture.

Membership in an individualist or collectivist
culture may also have implications for how de-
pression symptoms are reported. Individual-
ism and collectivism can influence the perceived
causes of mental health diagnoses, the way con-
ditions are conceptualized, and what is viewed to
be an appropriate treatment response (Hall et al.,
1999). Members of individualist western cultures
tend to view depression as a mental health chal-
lenge experienced by the individual, caused by
factors related to the individual specifically, and
appropriately treated at the individual level. Con-
versely, collectivist cultures are more likely to
conceptualize depression as a family, community,
or tribal problem best treated with group involve-
ment and consideration of social factors, with so-
cial factors a key contributor to the cause of ill-
ness. This may have implications for the ways in
which individuals understand and thus talk about
their depression.

79



1.1.2 Beliefs about mental illness

Beliefs about the social acceptability and causes of
mental illness can vary across cultural groups and
impact how these groups talk about depression,
whether members of the group are likely to seek
help, and whether depression symptoms are con-
sidered to be a medical problem requiring treat-
ment at all (Patel et al., 2016; Aggarwal et al.,
2014; Saraceno et al., 2007). In some contexts,
depression symptoms are viewed as a normal re-
sponse to the conditions of human life (Chentsova-
Dutton and Tsai, 2009), or are perceived to be a
‘western’ problem (Patel et al., 2016). Eastern Eu-
ropeans tend to view mild depression symptoms
and negative emotion as part of normal function-
ing (Jurcik et al., 2013; Turvey et al., 2012).

Given the clear evidence for cross-cultural dif-
ferences in depression experience, expression, and
beliefs about mental illness in the clinical litera-
ture discussed above, it follows that the ways in
which people discuss their depression symptoms
online might also vary according to culture.

1.2 Language markers of depression online

Many studies have found linguistic predictors
of depression in social media and online data
more generally. In comparison to healthy con-
trols, depressed individuals tend to write on-
line with greater self-focus (Coppersmith et al.,
2014; Preoţiuc-Pietro et al., 2015), tentativeness
(Coppersmith et al., 2015), general negativity
(De Choudhury et al., 2013), sadness (De Choud-
hury et al., 2013; Schwartz et al., 2014; Preoţiuc-
Pietro et al., 2015), anxiety (Coppersmith et al.,
2014), anger (Coppersmith et al., 2014), inter-
personal hostility (Preoţiuc-Pietro et al., 2015),
swearing (Resnik et al., 2015a), and are more
likely to display evidence of anhedonia (Preoţiuc-
Pietro et al., 2015), social problems (Schwartz
et al., 2014; Resnik et al., 2015a,b), health
and sleep issues (Schwartz et al., 2014; Resnik
et al., 2015b), inactivity (Coppersmith et al.,
2015), death interest (Coppersmith et al., 2015;
Preoţiuc-Pietro et al., 2015), perceived hopeless-
ness (Schwartz et al., 2014), and problems in key
life domains such as work or school (De Choud-
hury et al., 2013; Resnik et al., 2015b). Depressed
individuals are less likely to discuss leisure (Cop-
persmith et al., 2015), self-care or exercise (Resnik
et al., 2015b), are less likely to provide evidence
of engagement in social activities (Resnik et al.,

2015a), and are less likely to exhibit positivity in
their online language (Resnik et al., 2015a; Reece
et al., 2017).

In the studies cited above, individuals were in-
dicated to have depression based on self-reported
diagnosis or electronic medical records, and lan-
guage samples were taken from a diverse set of
social media sites and forums, such as Facebook,
Twitter, and Reddit. These findings suggest that
individuals with depression have quantifiable dif-
ferences in their use of language online, compared
to the general population. However—and crucial
to the goals of the current study—it is important
to note that most research in this area has been ei-
ther based on data taken from predominantly Cau-
casian western populations, or the cultural compo-
sition of the samples were simply not reported or
analyzed. Thus, a major question in this literature
is whether linguistic correlates of depression from
internet data hold across different cultural groups.

1.2.1 Cultural differences in online language
markers of depression

Only one study has examined cultural differences
in internet-derived linguistic markers of depres-
sion to date. De Choudhury et al. (2017) analyzed
Tweets of users who self-reported a diagnosis of
depression, ‘mental illness’, or experiencing sui-
cidal ideation in aggregate. Comparisons were
made between ‘Western’ (United States, United
Kingdom) and ‘Non-Western’ (South Africa, In-
dia) groups with the Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count (LIWC2015) software and topic modeling.
‘Non-western’ cultural groups were more likely to
inhibit expression of their mental illness experi-
ence online, which manifested in multiple ways:
1) Firstly, ‘non-western’ individuals with depres-
sion expressed higher positive affect and lower
negative affect, anger, anxiety, and sadness in
comparison to ‘western’ cultural groups.

2) Secondly, individuals from ‘non-western’
cultural groups displayed lower cognitive impair-
ment, as evidenced through greater mentions of
cognitive processes (e.g. cause, know, ought), cer-
tainty terms (e.g. always, never), discrepancies
(e.g. should, would), and perceptions (e.g. look,
heard, feeling) in comparison to ‘western’ cultural
groups.

3) Additionally, ‘western’ groups were more
likely to discuss functioning, such as social con-
cerns, health, body, and biology, than ‘non-
western’ groups. ‘Non-western’ groups were less

80



likely to discuss ’taboo’ topics such as religion,
death, and sexuality. Topic modeling further re-
vealed cultural differences. ‘Western’ cultures
were more likely to discuss social isolation, death
and self-destruction, whereas ‘non-western’ cul-
tures were more likely to discuss shame from ex-
periencing a mental illness, and make confessions
related to their mental health struggles.

These findings suggest that ‘non-western’ cul-
tural groups tend to inhibit expression of men-
tal illness in online language. In contrast, ‘west-
ern’ groups let the cognitive, emotional, and so-
cial experiences of their mental illness be more
clearly evident in online language. However,
given the nascence of this research, further re-
search is needed to replicate these findings as well
as to examine language differences amongst more
diverse cultural groups.

1.3 The present study

In the current study, we present an exploratory
analysis of differences in the linguistic expres-
sion of depression across cultural groups within
the United States. Specifically, we explore how
the language of White, Asian or Pacific Is-
lander, Black or African American, and Hispanic
or Latino individuals with depression compared
while discussing their mental health on an online
mental health support forum.

2 Methods

2.1 Data collection

Data was collected from 7 Cups of Tea, an anony-
mous online, chat-based peer support community
for emotional distress1. Users agree at signup that
their data may be used for the purposes of re-
search. All the data used for the current study was
anonymous and securely stored. This research was
performed in line with the ethical and privacy pro-
tocols outlined in detail in (Benton et al., 2017).

Data from 7 Cups takes the form of written dia-
logue between users of the service and volunteers
who are trained as “active listeners”. A fragment
of an exchange between the user of the service (U)
and the volunteer (V) might go as follows:

V: hey, hows it going
U: not so good
V: wanna tell me about it?

1https://7cups.com

For the analyses reported in this paper, we used
only text generated by users of the service, not the
volunteers providing peer support.

Users who reported depression as their primary
concern at sign up were eligible for inclusion in
analyses. Our original sample was comprised
of 23,048 conversations involving 1,937 unique
users. Users were excluded from the sample if
they did not indicate their culture, or if they se-
lected ‘Other’. This resulted in the exclusion of
199 and 130 users, respectively. The original
sample also included users identifying as Native
American or American Indian. This group was ex-
cluded from analyses since the majority of the data
among these users was not English. This resulted
in the removal of 15 users, leaving a total sample
size of 1,593.

2.2 Measures

Users of the service completed a questionnaire
at sign-up in which they provided information
about their demographic characteristics and men-
tal health. Demographic characteristics assessed
included age, gender, and ethnicity. Ethnicity re-
sponse categories were White, Asian or Pacific Is-
lander, Black or African American, Latino or His-
panic, Native American or American Indian, or
Other. Users could only select one ethnic group
category. Users also select the primary reason for
using 7 Cups, and the users above all indicated a
primary purpose of “Depression”.

3 Results

We report descriptive statistics of the sample,
LIWC analyses, and the results of a topic mod-
eling analysis.

3.1 Descriptive statistics

Data was anonymous and users were analyzed
in aggregate by cultural group. No personally-
identifiable information was available. We report
descriptive statistics to give a sense of the overall
composition of the sample.

Table 1 outlines demographic characteristics
and mental health status of participants. Over-
all, participants were predominantly female (67.3
percent), white (68.6 percent), young adults (m =
21.4, SD = 7.6), who were somewhat distressed
at sign-up (7/10). No statistically significant or
meaningful differences in age, gender, or sign-up
distress level were found between cultural groups

81



and thus, these characteristics were not controlled
for in subsequent analyses.

3.2 LIWC analyses

Next, exploratory analyses were conducted with
the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count software
(LIWC2015) (Pennebaker et al., 2015), which is
a psychometrically-validated program that eval-
uates the percentage of total words in a docu-
ment that relate to different psychological con-
structs (e.g., “emotion”, “cognition”) or life do-
mains (e.g., “health”, “social”). LIWC has been
used in prior research evaluating social media lan-
guage patterns of diverse samples with depres-
sion (Coppersmith et al., 2015; De Choudhury
et al., 2017). LIWC analyses in the present study
compared language of White, Asian or Pacific Is-
lander, Black or African American, and Hispanic
or Latino users with depression.

Language analyses with LIWC were ex-
ploratory in nature and thus we compared cultural
groups on the degree to which they expressed con-
tent about a wide range of relevant topics, includ-
ing emotion, cognitive impairment, social func-
tioning, health, and taboo topics. Given the large
amount of language comparisons made between
cultural groups, we draw the reader’s attention
to several interesting findings in light of exist-
ing cross-cultural depression literature (see Fig-
ure 1). Note also that due to the exploratory na-
ture of the current study, we do not conduct or re-
port statistical tests over the LIWC results. In the
absence of a specific hypothesis about the distri-
bution over LIWC scores, conditioned on ethnic
group and LIWC category, statistical tests such as
ANOVA would be misleading at best. We hope
that the current exploratory analyses will guide fu-
ture hypothesis-driven work.

First, cultural differences in degree and type of
emotion expression were observed. Here, emo-
tion is captured by the LIWC category “tone”,
which reprsents the ratio of positive to negative
emotion expression. Asian or Pacific Islander
users showed more inhibition of negative emotion,
whereas White and Black or African American
users expressed more negativity (in other words,
exhibited less regulation of their negative emo-
tional state). Hispanic or Latino users expressed
a large amount of both positive and negative emo-
tion compared to other groups.

Second, cultural differences in cognitive cate-

gories were observed, whereby cognitive effects of
depression were less evident in language of Asian
or Pacific Islander users.

Third, discussions of functioning were im-
pacted by culture. White users appeared less so-
cial, and were more likely to report on health
and death or self-destruction compared to other
groups. Asian or Pacific Islander users were less
open to discussing health or death, though social
terms were more present. Black or African Amer-
ican users discussed social terms to a high de-
gree, and were comparatively less likely to discuss
death, but were more willing to talk about health
compared to other groups. Opposite to Black or
African American users, Hispanic or Latino users
with depression had low mentions of social terms
and were less willing to make disclosures about
death or self-destruction, religion, or health.

Our findings suggest that different cultural
groups may be more or less willing to sponta-
neously discuss particular topics relevant to men-
tal health online. This may have implications
when looking to detect individuals with depres-
sion from online data, particularly when the sam-
ple population is culturally diverse.

3.3 Topic modeling

Users’ messages were analyzed with topic model-
ing to provide qualitative assessments of the emer-
gent topics or themes that users wished to dis-
cuss with volunteers on the platform. While topic
modeling may miss some of the fine-grained in-
sights into users’ concerns that a human observer
could provide, because it is an unsupervised, data-
driven approach to analyzing linguistic data, it of-
fers the intriguing possibility of discovering pat-
terns in users’ preoccupations that a human ob-
server would be less likely to identify.

Topics were obtained by running Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) over each cultural group’s
messages, i.e. one topic model was created per
cultural group and an individual document in each
corpus was a single user message. The data
was pre-processed by removing chat-specific stop-
words, words with very high frequency (occurring
in more than 75% of the documents) and words
that occur fewer than five times. We then used
Gensim’s implementation of multi-core LDA with
the default hyper-parameter settings and three top-
ics.

Analysis of the terms that were assigned to top-

82



Figure 1: LIWC scores across cultural groups for select themes.

Figure 2: Jaccard similarity coefficients of topics across cultural groups. Darker shades indicate stronger similari-
ties between topics.

83



Total White Asian or Pac. Islander Black or Afr. American Hisp. or Latino

Total N (N, %) 1,593 1,093 (68.6) 280 (17.6) 92 (5.8) 128 (8.0)

Demographic Variables

Age (M, SD) 21.4 (7.6) 21.7 (8.4) 21.2 (5.4) 22.0 (7.0) 19.7 (5.3)
Gender (%)
Female 67.3 65.3 66.4 78.3 78.1
Male 29.2 30.6 31.1 20.0 20.0
Other 3.5 4.0 2.5 2.2 2.3

Mental Health Variables

Sign-up Distress (M, SD) 6.9 (1.9) 6.9 (1.9) 7.1 (1.8) 6.8 (1.8) 6.4 (2.1)

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of sample demographics and mental health

Cultural Group Topic 1 Topic 2 Topic 3
Asian & Pacific Islander work need bad

sorry girl
friend love feeling
maybe guy

year friend can’t
care actually

Black or African American friend feeling work
help hard

friend need year
car care

work can’t better
trying mom

Hispanic or Latino friend can’t year
feeling hope

need bad help bet-
ter sad

work nice love de-
pression long

White need love friend
help bad

year can’t hate
come look

sorry work didn’t
better live

Table 2: Top five terms per topic across cultural groups. Italicized terms appear in top five terms for all groups.
Bolded terms only appear in the top five terms list for one cultural group.

ics per cultural group revealed that among the top
three topics for each cultural group, there was
little overlap in terms. Term overlap was mea-
sured using the Jaccard similarity coefficient and
is shown in Fig. 2. The similarity coeffecient can
be interpreted as the percent overlap of the set of
terms in each topic. A similarity coefficient of
1 would indicate that all terms assigned to two
different topics were exactly the same. Values
higher than 0.3, indicating approximately a third
of terms were shared in common between two top-
ics, occurred only four times out of fifty-four topic
comparisons. Most coefficients are closer to 0.1
and there are many topics with no term overlap.
Further work involving analysis of term overlap
among members of the same cultural group and
computing the difference in topic distribution be-
tween groups (by comparing to a single overall
topic model) would further illuminate what topi-
cal diffences there are between cultural groups.

Further analysis of the specific terms assigned
to each topic is captured in Table 2, which shows
the top five terms associated with each topic across
cultural groups. These sorts of visualizations often
resist neat, intuitive explanations. The collection

of terms in each topic do not seem to form cohe-
sive topics (e.g., emotions, relationships, etc.), and
specific terms (e.g., ‘work’, ‘friend’, and ‘need’)
appear across multiple topics, both within a single
cultural group and across cultural groups. Topics
discussed by all groups may be relevant to individ-
uals with depression cross-culturally; for exam-
ple, analyses revealed all cultural groups made dis-
closures about the topic, ‘friend’, which suggests
loneliness or ‘need of a friend’ is a concern for in-
dividuals with depression that cuts across culture.
However, the collection of terms in each topic does
vary across cultural groups, indicating that there
are differences in the themes discussed by users
belonging to different cultures. Further work is
likely to involve mapping the original chat mes-
sages to the topics they are most likely to belong
to in order to extract human-interpretable descrip-
tions of the different topics.

4 Discussion

Our overall conclusion is consistent with existing
cross-cultural depression research (De Choudhury
et al., 2017), namely: there are cross-cultural dif-
ferences in online language of individuals with

84



depression. Our results highlight the importance
of creating culturally-adapted depression classi-
fiers as automated assessments become increas-
ingly commonplace in the treatment and identifi-
cation of mental health issue, and suggest a role
for research of this kind in developing culturally
sensitive clinical instruments for measuring de-
pression.

Our study included a broad range of cultural
groups analyzed relative to previous work. More-
over, our use of both closed- and open-vocabulary
analyses allowed for both theory-informed and
data-driven analyses of language of many diverse
cultural groups with depression, which similarly
complements the currently existing body of litera-
ture on this subject.

A few caveats are worth noting. First, the
data reported here was taken from a peer support
community specifically for providing emotional
support. It is therefore unclear whether and to
what extent our findings generalize to other on-
line spaces such as social media, where discus-
sions about mental health are not explicitly en-
couraged, and where anonymity is not guaranteed.
Some previous work has identified cross-cultural
differences in language about mental health on so-
cial media, albeit for different cultural groups to
the present study (De Choudhury et al., 2017).
This suggests that our results are unlikely to reflect
idiosyncratic properties of the platform, though a
rigorous examination of this question must be left
to future work.

Second, data about participants’ country of res-
idence and extent of acculturation were missing.
Thus, the extent to which users were acculturated
to western beliefs about mental illness or held tra-
ditional mental health beliefs of their culture is
somewhat unclear. There is evidence to suggest
acculturated individuals report symptoms differ-
ently compared to individuals more entrenched in
the health beliefs that prevail in their culture (Jang
et al., 2005). For example, it was not clear from
the available data whether an individual identify-
ing as ‘white’ was a white American or, for in-
stance, a white German living in the United States.
This is relevant since it is reasonable to suppose
that white Americans and white Germans are not
identical to each other in the way they think and
talk about mental health. Similarly, it is plausi-
ble that a third-generation Korean American, on
the one hand, and a Korean citizen living in the

United States, on the other, would both identify
as “Asian American”, though it would be odd to
classify these individuals as having the same cul-
ture for the purposes of the current analysis. The
relative frequency of these types of observations is
unknown.

A third limitation of this study was the labels
used to define groups in our dataset, which in-
clude a mix of ethnic and racial groups. These
labels were determined by the peer support com-
munity. While our cultural group labels were im-
perfect, we were still able to observe meaningful
differences between groups, as well as to conduct
a more fine-grained cultural analysis comparative
to prior literature in this area, which compared
‘Western’ to ‘non-Western’ cultures (De Choud-
hury et al., 2017).

This paper adds to a small but growing liter-
ature examining cross-cultural differences in the
way symptoms of depression are expressed in
online language data. Our findings have im-
portant implications for designing automated de-
pression assessments with online data, and sug-
gest that making good predictions about men-
tal health on the basis of language data will re-
quire taking cultural/ethnic identity into account.
Should machine-driven depression assessments be
deployed in a clinical setting, culturally sensi-
tive classifiers may be necessary to avoid misdi-
agnosis, a key barrier to receiving effective treat-
ment for depression (World Health Organization,
2017). In future and ongoing work, we plan
to extend these analyses to mental health condi-
tions apart from depression, or to focus on depres-
sion subtypes, and to deepen this approach by us-
ing our exploratory analyses as a springboard for
hypothesis-driven work oriented towards inform-
ing mental health-related interventions and mental
health policy.

5 Conclusion

In conclusion, findings from this exploratory study
suggest there are cultural differences in online lan-
guage of individuals with depression. Differences
found in the degree to which culturally-diverse in-
dividuals with depression express particular top-
ics relevant to mental health online suggest care-
ful attention is required to the cultural contexts in
which language classifiers for depression are de-
ployed. Appropriate adaptations, such as depres-
sion classifiers made for the cultural group of in-

85



terest, may be necessary to avoid misclassifica-
tion and thus, inappropriate treatment responses.
Moreover, these findings suggest a path forward
for empirically-driven assessment and creation of
cultural sensitivity best practices for online ther-
apy and peer support, based on the concerns and
experiences of the people seeking help.

6 Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the members of
the 7 Cups of Tea community for their participa-
tion in this research and analysis. Without their
participation, this research would not be possible.

References
Neil Krishan Aggarwal, Madhumitha Balaji, Shuba

Kumar, Rani Mohanraj, Atif Rahman, Helena
Verdeli, Ricardo Araya, MJD Jordans, Neerja
Chowdhary, and Vikram Patel. 2014. Using con-
sumer perspectives to inform the cultural adaptation
of psychological treatments for depression: a mixed
methods study from South Asia. Journal of affective
disorders, 163:88–101.

Liat Ayalon and Michael A Young. 2003. A com-
parison of depressive symptons in African Ameri-
cans and Caucasian Americans. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 34(1):111–124.

Adrian Benton, Glen Coppersmith, and Mark Dredze.
2017. Ethical research protocols for social media
health research. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 94–102.

Bibiana Chan, Gordon Parker, Bibiana Chan, and Gor-
don Parker. 2004. Some recommendations to as-
sess depression in Chinese people in Australasia.
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
38(3):141–147.

Daniel P Chapman, Charles L Whitfield, Vincent J
Felitti, Shanta R Dube, Valerie J Edwards, and
Robert F Anda. 2004. Adverse childhood experi-
ences and the risk of depressive disorders in adult-
hood. Journal of affective disorders, 82(2):217–225.

Yulia E Chentsova-Dutton, Joyce P Chu, Jeanne L
Tsai, Jonathan Rottenberg, James J Gross, and Ian H
Gotlib. 2007. Depression and emotional reactivity:
variation among Asian Americans of East Asian de-
scent and European Americans. Journal of abnor-
mal psychology, 116(4):776.

Yulia E Chentsova-Dutton and Jeanne L Tsai. 2009.
Understanding depression across cultures. Hand-
book of depression, 2:363–385.

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, and Craig Harman.
2014. Quantifying mental health signals in Twitter.

In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguis-
tic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 51–60.

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, Craig Harman, and
Kristy Hollingshead. 2015. From ADHD to SAD:
Analyzing the language of mental health on Twit-
ter through self-reported diagnoses. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics
and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to
Clinical Reality, pages 1–10.

Munmun De Choudhury, Michael Gamon, Scott
Counts, and Eric Horvitz. 2013. Predicting depres-
sion via social media. ICWSM, 13:1–10.

Munmun De Choudhury, Sanket S Sharma, Tomaz
Logar, Wouter Eekhout, and René Clausen Nielsen.
2017. Gender and cross-cultural differences in so-
cial media disclosures of mental illness. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing,
pages 353–369. ACM.

Gordon C Nagayama Hall, Anita Bansal, and Irene R
Lopez. 1999. Ethnicity and psychopathology: A
meta-analytic review of 31 years of comparative
MMPI/MMPI-2 research. Psychological assess-
ment, 11(2):186.

Y Jang, G Kim, and D Chiriboga. 2005. Acculturation
and manifestation of depressive symptoms among
Korean-American older adults. Aging & Mental
Health, 9(6):500–507.

Tomas Jurcik, Yulia E Chentsova-Dutton, Ielyzaveta
Solopieieva-Jurcikova, and Andrew G Ryder. 2013.
Russians in treatment: The evidence base supporting
cultural adaptations. Journal of clinical psychology,
69(7):774–791.

Laurence J Kirmayer et al. 2001. Cultural variations in
the clinical presentation of depression and anxiety:
implications for diagnosis and treatment. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 62:22–30.

Randolph M Nesse and Phoebe C Ellsworth. 2009.
Evolution, emotions, and emotional disorders.
American Psychologist, 64(2):129.

Lauren C Ng, Jessica F Magidson, Rebecca S Hock,
John A Joska, Abebaw Fekadu, Charlotte Hanlon,
Janina R Galler, Steven A Safren, Christina PC
Borba, Gregory L Fricchione, et al. 2016. Proposed
training areas for global mental health researchers.
Academic Psychiatry, 40(4):679–685.

Vikram Patel, Dan Chisholm, Rachana Parikh, Fiona J
Charlson, Louisa Degenhardt, Tarun Dua, Alize J
Ferrari, Steve Hyman, Ramanan Laxminarayan,
Carol Levin, et al. 2016. Addressing the burden of
mental, neurological, and substance use disorders:
key messages from disease control priorities. The
Lancet, 387(10028):1672–1685.

86



James W Pennebaker, Ryan L Boyd, Kayla Jordan, and
Kate Blackburn. 2015. The development and psy-
chometric properties of LIWC2015. Technical re-
port.

Daniel Preoţiuc-Pietro, Johannes Eichstaedt, Gregory
Park, Maarten Sap, Laura Smith, Victoria Tobol-
sky, H Andrew Schwartz, and Lyle Ungar. 2015.
The role of personality, age, and gender in tweet-
ing about mental illness. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clini-
cal Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical
Reality, pages 21–30.

Andrew G Reece, Andrew J Reagan, Katharina LM
Lix, Peter Sheridan Dodds, Christopher M Danforth,
and Ellen J Langer. 2017. Forecasting the onset and
course of mental illness with Twitter data. Scientific
reports, 7(1):13006.

Philip Resnik, William Armstrong, Leonardo
Claudino, and Thang Nguyen. 2015a. The
University of Maryland CLPsych 2015 shared task
system. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychol-
ogy: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality,
pages 54–60.

Philip Resnik, William Armstrong, Leonardo
Claudino, Thang Nguyen, Viet-An Nguyen,
and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2015b. Beyond LDA:
exploring supervised topic modeling for depression-
related language in Twitter. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and
Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to
Clinical Reality, pages 99–107.

Andrew G Ryder, Jian Yang, Xiongzhao Zhu, Shuqiao
Yao, Jinyao Yi, Steven J Heine, and R Michael
Bagby. 2008. The cultural shaping of depression:
somatic symptoms in China, psychological symp-
toms in North America? Journal of abnormal psy-
chology, 117(2):300.

Benedetto Saraceno, Mark van Ommeren, Rajaie Bat-
niji, Alex Cohen, Oye Gureje, John Mahoney,
Devi Sridhar, and Chris Underhill. 2007. Barriers
to improvement of mental health services in low-
income and middle-income countries. The Lancet,
370(9593):1164–1174.

H Andrew Schwartz, Johannes Eichstaedt, Margaret L
Kern, Gregory Park, Maarten Sap, David Stillwell,
Michal Kosinski, and Lyle Ungar. 2014. Towards
assessing changes in degree of depression through
Facebook. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology:
From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages
118–125.

Patrick F Sullivan, Michael C Neale, and Kenneth S
Kendler. 2000. Genetic epidemiology of major de-
pression: review and meta-analysis. American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry, 157(10):1552–1562.

Carolyn L Turvey, Gerald Jogerst, Mee Young Kim,
and Elena Frolova. 2012. Cultural differences in
depression-related stigma in late-life: a comparison
between the usa, russia, and south korea. Interna-
tional psychogeriatrics, 24(10):1642–1647.

Theo Vos, Ryan M Barber, Brad Bell, Amelia Bertozzi-
Villa, Stan Biryukov, Ian Bolliger, Fiona Charlson,
Adrian Davis, Louisa Degenhardt, Daniel Dicker,
et al. 2015. Global, regional, and national inci-
dence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for
301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188
countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the
global burden of disease study 2013. The Lancet,
386(9995):743–800.

World Health Organization. 2017. Depression fact
sheet.

87


