



















































Challenges in Finding Metaphorical Connections


Proceedings of the Workshop on Figurative Language Processing, pages 1–6
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Challenges in Finding Metaphorical Connections

Katy Ilonka Gero
Columbia University

katy@cs.columbia.edu

Lydia Chilton
Columbia University

chilton@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

Poetry is known for its novel expression us-
ing figurative language. We introduce a writ-
ing task that contains the essential challenges
of generating meaningful figurative language
and can be evaluated. We investigate how
to find metaphorical connections between ab-
stract themes and concrete domains by ask-
ing people to write four-line poems on a given
metaphor, such as “death is a rose” or “anger
is wood”. We find that only 24% of poems
successfully make a metaphorical connection.
We present five alternate ways people respond
to the prompt and release our dataset of 186
categorized poems. We suggest opportunities
for computational approaches.

1 Introduction

Poetry expresses the feelings or emotions of an
experience, often relying on figurative language
to communicate an otherwise elusive idea. This
makes poetry an exciting genre for those interested
in generating figurative language.

Recently, researchers have made progress in
computationally generating poetry (Ghazvinine-
jad et al., 2016; Veale, 2013). However, in a sur-
vey of computer generated poetry, Oliviera (2017)
notes that while poetic text must convey a concep-
tual message, this requirement is “often only softly
satisfied”.

We focus on creating intentionally meaningful
lines of poetry. Poems generated from a single
theme such as “love” can rely on language related
to the theme, but are often ambiguous and have
no clear meaning. Although ambiguity can be a
desirable property in poetry, it makes it difficult
to evaluate whether the meaning is intentional, or
being attributed by the reader. We propose gen-
erating poetry from a metaphor such as “love is a
rock”. These poems can still have some ambigu-
ity, but we can evaluate whether readers can detect

Surrender is a book
it’s pages contain paragraphs of regret
chapters of inaction
an epilogue of defeat

Figure 1: Example poem for “surrender is a book”.

their metaphorical meaning or not.
In this paper, we introduce a short poetry writ-

ing task that contains the essential challenges of
generating meaningful figurative language. We
establish a baseline for how well amateur writ-
ers perform and show that evaluators achieve high
agreement.

The task is to write a four-line poem contain-
ing a given metaphor such as “love is a rock”
or “death is a stream.” Although these poems
leave room for interpretation and novelty, we can
evaluate whether or not they successfully express
the given metaphor. An example poem from our
dataset is shown in Figure 1.

Our study generates a dataset that includes suc-
cessful poems, which generative computers sys-
tems may model or use as inspiration, as well as
unsuccessful ones, which let us better understand
the task and discover common failure points.

This paper makes the following contributions:

• Introducing a writing task that is short and
contains the essential challenges of meaning-
ful figurative language.

• A dataset of 186 poems, and their associated
meta-data, annotated with their coherence to
the prompt metaphor. 1

• A categorization of common failure cases in
how a poem relates to its prompt.

1http://github.com/kgero/metaphorical-connections

1



2 Related Work

Procedural poetry, in which poets use algorithmic
processes to create their work, has a long history
preceding the invention of modern computers and
continues strong today (Parrish, 2018; Montfort,
2017). In computer science, the generation of po-
etry represents a challenge to generate emotional,
creative, and meaningful text.

Some work analyzes the stylistic features of
contemporary poetry (Kao and Jurafsky, 2012;
Kaplan and Blei, 2007) and others build gener-
ative systems that output poems (Netzer et al.,
2009; Colton et al., 2012; Manurung et al., 2000).
A recent neural-network based system, Hafez
(Ghazvininejad et al., 2016), produces rich sound-
ing sonnets. This is a promising computational ap-
proach to achieve the stylistic aspects of poetry.
However, it is an open problem whether compu-
tational approaches can produce the structural or
meaningful aspects of poetry.

Generating metaphors is a challenge in artifi-
cial intelligence (Veale et al., 2016). Gagliano
et al. (2016) use word embeddings to find con-
nector words between two conceptual domains to
aid in making metaphorical connections. Veale
and Hao (2007) mine metaphorical relations using
Google search results for adjectives that describe
both terms. Later work (Veale, 2013) generates
one line expressions from conceptual metaphors.
It remains a challenge to expand a metaphor into a
poem that expresses the feelings or emotions of an
experience.

3 Experiment and Methodology

In this experiment, we ask 200 amateur writers to
write four-line poems that use a given metaphor.
Each writer is given one metaphorical prompt.

We base this poetry-writing task on expressing
a metaphor because metaphors are a common but
challenging aspect of poetry, and we can evaluate
whether the poem expresses the given metaphor.

The metaphorical prompts are created by ran-
domly combining one concrete noun and one po-
etic theme, a technique introduced by Gagliano et
al. (2016). We use their lists of concrete nouns
and poetic themes, a subset of which are shown in
Table 1. Because the concrete and poetic words
are paired randomly, we expect this task to be
difficult—people may struggle to find a metaphor-
ical connection between the words.

concrete nouns poetic themes
bed loss

horse confusion
bell faith
book freedom
ship grace
wing hate
wood jealousy
room love

Table 1: Example words in the concrete noun and po-
etic theme lists, from (Gagliano et al., 2016). An ex-
ample prompt metaphor, created by randomly drawing
one word from each list, could be “faith is a horse”.

We recruit 200 people from Amazon Mechani-
cal Turk. Each writer is given one of the following
10 randomly generated metaphorical prompts:

• “Anger is wood”
• “Compassion is blood”
• “Death is a rose”
• “God is a breath”
• “Grace is a garden”
• “Hate is a mist”
• “Hope is a ship”
• “Immortality is a room”
• “Peace is a rock”
• “Surrender is a book”

We ask them each to write a four-line poem co-
herent with the prompt metaphor. They are told
to not use the exact words of the metaphor as
given but rather express the idea the metaphor rep-
resents. They are also told to use stylistic ele-
ments of poetry such as rhyme, alliteration, and
line breaks. We collect 20 poems on each of the
10 metaphors. Workers are only allowed to write
one poem and are paid $1 for the task.

The authors of the paper independently evaluate
the poems. We analyze the success of the poems
by indicating whether or not a poem contained
its given metaphor. For poems that did not con-
tain the given metaphor, we used grounded theory
(Strauss and Corbin, 1990) to develop categories
of how they failed. These categories include: not
related at all, containing only one of the concepts,
and three non-metaphorical connections. Example
poems for each category are found in Figure 2.

2



A. NO CONNECTION: JUST ABOUT ANGER
My anger is solid and vast
The ghosts of my present, the ghosts of my past
I can’t break through the tunnel of time
My anger is vicious, my anger is mine

B. ATTRIBUTIONAL CONNECTION: WOOD IS ANGRY
The bench of pine wood planks
Held up peoples glutes
Till the people went home for the night
leaving the bench, angry, in abandonment

C. OFFSET CONNECTION: ANGER IS A FIRE
Wood is a place where a fire of anger

can be lit like a sparrow.
Both anger and fire work to light up a room.
Wood is the conductor of rage, the spite that turns heads.
Like ants marching through its hollow shell,

wood is a source of fury.

D. INCOHERENT CONNECTION
Thoughts of breeze, my anger is teaming,
of rapture I freeze, my boiling pot is steaming,
tired of despair, my wood is drying,
once so full of anger & rage, now I feel like I am dying.

E. METAPHORICAL CONNECTION
the anger grew, like a tree
this large, immovable object had taken root
casting shade on even the happiest parts of my life
I could let it consume me, or cut it down

Figure 2: Example poems for the given metaphor
“anger is wood”. We show one example for each of the
four failure cases and one for a successful metaphorical
connection.

4 Results

On average people take 13.6 minutes on this writ-
ing task. 14 poems were plagiarized and removed
from consideration, leaving 186 poems for the re-
sulting analysis. The two evaluators had 97%
observed agreement on whether the poem suc-
cessfully made the given metaphorical connection.
24% of poems, or 45 poems, were found to be suc-
cessful by at least one of the evaluators. 7% of po-
ems were off-topic. Similarly the evaluators had
97% observed agreement on whether the poems
were off-topic or not.

In the remaining poems, the poem used the
words in the metaphor but did not make a
metaphorical connection between the words. Our
grounded theory found four alternate ways of re-
lating the given concepts in the poem: no connec-
tion, attributional connection, offset connection,
and incoherent connection.

Raters had a 69% agreement on these cate-
gories, indicating that it is sometimes ambiguous

which error is made. Sometimes this is due to dif-
ferent interpretations of the poem and sometimes
this is due to evaluators determining that a given
poem didn’t cleanly sit into a single category. For
the remaining analysis, if evaluators disagreed on
which category to place a poem in, a poem is con-
sidered to be in both categories.

The fraction of poems in each category is re-
ported in Table 2. By looking at the other ways
poems relate to the prompt, we learn the tactics
people use when attempting to complete this task.

4.1 Categorization of Poems

We categorize six distinct ways poems relate to the
prompt. We define and discuss the categories be-
low. Figure 2 provides example poems for each
category, while Table 2 reports the fraction of po-
ems in each category.

4.1.1 Off-Topic
A poem is off-topic if it fails to include aspects of
either word in the metaphor. For the prompt “sur-
render is a book” a poem might be about the loss
of a lover, which has no relation to “surrender” or
“book”. 7% of poems are off topic. Although peo-
ple write a poem, this is a case when the worker
does not truly attempt to do the task.

4.1.2 No Connection
A poem has no connection if it explores the con-
ceptual domain of only one word in the metaphor
or does not relate the two conceptual domains.
In Figure 1A, the poem talks only about feeling
angry, “My anger is vicious”, with no reference
or connection to wood. There is only a vague
attempt to connect anger with wood in the line
“my anger is solid”; although wood is solid, many
things are solid and this is not enough to establish
a metaphorical connection.

This is the most common failure case for po-
ems, with 41% of all poems placed in this cate-
gory. Possibly these poems intended to express a
connection, but the result was too vague and evalu-
ators couldn’t detect one. Alternatively, the writer
couldn’t find a metaphorical connection and sim-
ply wrote what they could about one of the words.

4.1.3 Attributional Connection
A poem has an attributional connection if it at-
tributes the abstract concept directly to the con-
crete noun. In Figure 1B, the poem says the
“[wooden] bench, [is] angry”. Although this

3



prompt metaphor off-topic no connection attributional offset incoherent metaphorical
surrender is a book 0.11 0.53 0.47 0.11 0.05 0.05

death is a rose 0.00 0.30 0.55 0.40 0.20 0.10
god is a breath 0.00 0.26 0.21 0.11 0.47 0.11

grace is a garden 0.00 0.67 0.11 0.22 0.39 0.17
immortality is a room 0.05 0.58 0.05 0.11 0.47 0.21

compassion is blood 0.11 0.37 0.05 0.05 0.21 0.26
peace is a rock 0.10 0.45 0.10 0.10 0.05 0.35
hope is a ship 0.07 0.36 0.14 0.14 0.36 0.36
anger is wood 0.05 0.37 0.00 0.32 0.21 0.37
hate is a mist 0.11 0.26 0.05 0.00 0.26 0.47

all 0.07 0.41 0.17 0.15 0.26 0.24

Table 2: Success rates of the 10 metaphorical prompts. The fraction of successful poems is highlighted in blue.
The bold number represents the most common connection for each prompt. Because poems can be placed in two
categories if evaluators disagree, numbers do not add to 1 horizontally.

poem uses figurative language by personifying the
bench, it is not coherent with the given metaphor.

This category is an especially common error for
poems about the prompts “death is a rose” (55%)
and “surrender is a book” (53%). Many poems
said “the rose died” or “I surrender to the book”.
We posit that these connections are easier than
metaphorical connections because they do not re-
quire a shared third aspect which writers have to
generate themselves.

4.1.4 Offset Connection
A poem has an offset connection if it expresses a
shared feature between one word in the metaphor
and another word very related to the other word in
the metaphor. In Figure 1C, the poem talks about
the “fire of anger” for which “wood is a source
of fury”; the poem is about the offset metaphor
“anger is fire”. “Death is a rose” had 40% of
poems categorized as an offset connection; most
commonly these poems talk about “life is a rose”
and note that life, like roses, must end in death.

We suggest that writers make this error because
they are looking for any connection they can find,
even if the connections are not directly linked
to the given metaphor. An offset connection in-
creases the search space by allowing for connec-
tions within a broader set of domains.

4.1.5 Incoherent Connection
A poem has an incoherent connection if it relates
the two words in the metaphor but in an unclear
way. In Figure 1D, the poem says “anger is team-
ing, ... my wood is drying” with no supporting text
to explain how these two concepts are related.

In this case writers acknowledge both words in
the prompts but either do not attempt to connect
them or connect them in an incoherent way.

4.1.6 Metaphorical Connection
A poem has a successful metaphorical connection
if it relates the two words metaphorically in the
way provided by the given metaphor and under-
stood by the evaluators. In Figure 1E, the poem
says that “anger grew, like a tree ... it had taken
root”. This poem takes several aspects of wood
and coherently applies them to anger. Although
this poem talks primarily about a tree, we do not
consider this an offset connection because trees
are the only source of wood.

Each of the given metaphors had at least one
successful poem. All of our successful poems
made creative connections, like “Immortality lies
just down the hall / The path to it is not easy to
find”. Failed poems tended to repeat the same con-
nections, like “I am surrounded by four walls in-
definitely”.

5 Discussion

The rate of success between different prompts
varies greatly, from 5% for “surrender is a book”
to 47% for “hate is a mist”. Some prompts are
more likely to result in different kinds of connec-
tions, like offset connections, than others. What
explains these varying success rates?

We first explore whether word similarity be-
tween the two words in the prompt could ac-
count for this variability. In Figure 3, we plot
WORD2VEC2 word similarity against success rate
for our 10 prompts. Based on these 10 data points,
it seems that word similarity is not a strong pre-
dictor of users making a metaphorical connection.
This suggests that people are not picking up on ex-
isting connections but finding new, creative ways
to relate the words.

2https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/

4



Figure 3: Fraction of successful poems as a function of
the similarity between the words in the prompt.

Although we see no correlation between word
similarity and success rate, it could be that
WORD2VEC is not accurately modeling previous
associations people may bring to the task. Other
models of semantic relatedness may be able to bet-
ter predict the success of people in the task.

Looking at the least successful prompts, we
note that they use sensible but not metaphorical
connections. The prompt “death is a rose” has
many attributional connections saying “the rose
died”. Though sensible, it is not a metaphor. Sim-
ilarly, the prompt “surrender is a book” often re-
sulted in poems saying “I surrendered to the book”
which is a connection, but does not express the tar-
get metaphor. In contrast, “anger is wood” had
a high success rate. These words could also be
connected by saying “the wood is angry” but this
rarely happened, possibly because this phrase is
not as sensible as “the rose died.”

We hypothesize that if two words can be sen-
sibly connected, people are likely to write a poem
with this connection without checking whether the
connection meets the target metaphor. If this does
explain the varying success rates, it is likely that
computational systems will have similar problems.

6 Future Work

We believe this task is a good candidate to test the
ability of computers to automatically generate co-
herent poetry or to see how computational tech-
niques could help novices better complete the task.

Further work could explore how computational
techniques can aid in the evaluation of this task.
This feedback could help people write success-
ful poems, particularly if told which error they

are making. Can metaphor detection techniques,
such as those based on conceptual metaphor the-
ory (Shutova and Sun, 2013), evaluate whether a
poem expresses its given metaphor? Can we de-
tect what connections are being made?

Computer evaluation would also help further
computer generation. Can the work of Veale
(2013), which generates poetic metaphorical ex-
pressions, be extended to produce poems similar
to the successful ones found in the paper? If we
could express the target metaphor as a constraint,
can computational techniques like those used in
Hafez (2016) write poems based on metaphors,
not just themes?

There is high potential for computational tools
to aid people in this task. Given that only 24% of
writers successfully wrote poems to a metaphori-
cal prompt, there is an open problem of how to im-
prove on this baseline. Future work could design
computational aids, like those in (Gagliano et al.,
2016), to suggest possible metaphorical connec-
tions that writers could accept or reject, similar to
other creative writing aids (Clark et al., 2018).

Beyond poetry, helping people find connections
between two domains has far-reaching applica-
tions from science education (Glynn, 1991) to
product design (Hope et al., 2017). This is a hall-
mark of human intelligence that can be computa-
tionally supported.

7 Conclusion

In this paper we introduce a short poetry writing
task that gets at the heart of meaningful figurative
language. We collect 186 amateur examples and
find that only 24% of poems successfully make
the metaphorical connection, indicating that this
task is hard but possible. The most common fail-
ure case is when poems make no connection be-
tween the words (41%). Other poems may fail by
making a non-metaphorical connection or a con-
nection with the wrong word.

We see potential in this task as a demonstra-
tion of computational creativity and figurative lan-
guage generation. By analyzing the common er-
rors we show ways in which improvements can be
made. We believe that computational systems can
improve upon this baseline.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship Grant No. DGE 16-44869.

5



References

Elizabeth Clark, Anne Spencer Ross, Chenhao Tan,
Yangfeng Ji, and Noah A Smith. 2018. Creative
writing with a machine in the loop: Case studies on
slogans and stories.

Simon Colton, Jacob Goodwin, and Tony Veale. 2012.
Full-face poetry generation. In ICCC, pages 95–
102.

Andrea Gagliano, Emily Paul, Kyle Booten, and
Marti A Hearst. 2016. Intersecting word vectors to
take figurative language to new heights. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Lin-
guistics for Literature, pages 20–31.

Marjan Ghazvininejad, Xing Shi, Yejin Choi, and
Kevin Knight. 2016. Generating topical poetry. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1183–1191.

Shawn M Glynn. 1991. Explaining science concepts:
A teaching-with-analogies model. The psychology
of learning science, pages 219–240.

Tom Hope, Joel Chan, Aniket Kittur, and Dafna Sha-
haf. 2017. Accelerating innovation through analogy
mining. CoRR, abs/1706.05585.

Justine Kao and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. A computational
analysis of style, affect, and imagery in contem-
porary poetry. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT
2012 Workshop on Computational Linguistics for
Literature, pages 8–17.

David M Kaplan and David M Blei. 2007. A computa-
tional approach to style in american poetry. In Data
Mining, 2007. ICDM 2007. Seventh IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, pages 553–558. IEEE.

Hisar Manurung, Graeme Ritchie, and Henry Thomp-
son. 2000. Towards a computational model of po-
etry generation. Technical report, The University of
Edinburgh.

Nick Montfort. 2017. The Truelist. Counterpath.

Yael Netzer, David Gabay, Yoav Goldberg, and
Michael Elhadad. 2009. Gaiku: Generating haiku
with word associations norms. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguis-
tic Creativity, pages 32–39. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira. 2017. A survey on intelligent
poetry generation: Languages, features, techniques,
reutilisation and evaluation. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Natural Language
Generation, pages 11–20.

Allison Parrish. 2018. Articulations. Counterpath.

Ekaterina Shutova and Lin Sun. 2013. Unsupervised
metaphor identification using hierarchical graph fac-
torization clustering. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 978–988.

Anselm Strauss and Juliet M Corbin. 1990. Basics of
qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures
and techniques. Sage Publications, Inc.

Tony Veale. 2013. Less rhyme, more reason:
Knowledge-based poetry generation with feeling,
insight and wit. In ICCC, pages 152–159.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2007. Comprehending
and generating apt metaphors: a web-driven, case-
based approach to figurative language. In AAAI, vol-
ume 2007, pages 1471–1476.

Tony Veale, Ekaterina Shutova, and Beata Beigman
Klebanov. 2016. Metaphor: A computational per-
spective. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies, 9(1):33–54.

6


