



















































Lexical Conceptual Structure of Literal and Metaphorical Spatial Language: A Case Study of "Push"


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Spatial Language Understanding (SpLU-2018), pages 31–40
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lexical Conceptual Structure of Literal and Metaphorical
Spatial Language: A Case Study of Push

Bonnie Dorr
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition

15 SE Osceola Ave
Ocala, FL 34471
bdorr@ihmc.us

Mari Broman Olsen
Microsoft Natural Language Experiences

One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

molsen@microsoft.com

Abstract

Prior methodologies for understanding spatial
language have treated literal expressions such
as Mary pushed the car over the edge dif-
ferently from metaphorical extensions such as
Mary’s job pushed her over the edge. We
demonstrate a methodology for standardizing
literal and metaphorical meanings, by build-
ing on work in Lexical Conceptual Struc-
ture (LCS), a general-purpose representational
component used in machine translation. We
argue that spatial predicates naturally extend
into other fields (e.g., circumstantial or tempo-
ral), and that LCS provides both a framework
for distinguishing spatial from non-spatial, and
a system for finding metaphorical meaning ex-
tensions. We start with MetaNet (MN), a large
repository of conceptual metaphors, condens-
ing 197 spatial entries into sixteen top-level
categories of motion frames. Using naturally
occurring instances of English push, and ex-
pansions of MN frames, we demonstrate that
literal and metaphorical extensions exhibit pat-
terns predicted and represented by the LCS
model.

1 Introduction

This paper explores representation and distribu-
tion of spatial metaphoric language, by identifying
instances from the MetaNet (MN) repository of
metaphors (David and Lakoff, 2013; Dodge et al.,
2015; Stickles et al., 2015), clustering them ac-
cording to common expressions (e.g., “change of
location”), and representing both the literal and
metaphorical senses of these expressions as com-
binations of primitives from Lexical Conceptual
Structure (LCS) (Jackendoff, 1983, 1990; Dorr,
1993; Dowty, 1979; Guerssel et al., 1985).

We leverage the LCS Verb Database (Dorr et al.,
2001), taking LCS as the underlying spatial lan-
guage meaning representation for literal senses,
and aligning these with representations for their
corresponding metaphorical representations. For

example, the expression push over the edge has
a literal (spatial) MN sense, “change of location,”
that is represented as CAUSE GO Loc in the LCS,
but its metaphorical MN sense, “change of state,”
is represented as CAUSE GO Ident. As an illustra-
tion of this contrast, the expanded LCS representa-
tions that include these primitive combinations are
shown below:
• Literal (spatial): Mary pushed the car over

the edge
[Cause MARY

[Go Loc CAR

[Toward Over <location>]]],
<location>=EDGE]

• Figurative (metaphorical): Mary’s job
pushed her over the edge
[Cause JOB

[Go Ident MARY

[Toward At <result(property)>]]],
<result(property)>=CRAZY]

The focus here is not on the processes necessary
for distinguishing between literal and metaphor-
ical senses, but rather on the representational for-
malism and organizing principles underlying both.
The intention is to lay the foundation for subse-
quent application of additional context and higher
order processes for disambiguation, such as visual
grounding (Wilks, 1995) or beliefs and inference
(Ballim et al., 2007). The main lesson of this study
is that there are similarities between the literal and
metaphorical expressions, and that these can be
seen through analysis into LCS primitives without
extra visual/reasoning evidence.

As a starting point for exploring metaphoric
language, 197 spatially grounded metaphors were
identified in MN from the total collection of 684
MN entries. These were organized into a smaller
set of classes (139) through automatic identifi-
cation of duplicated phrases (e.g.,“change of lo-
cation”), and then further reduced to 16 classes
of metaphorical LCS representations, paired with

31



their corresponding spatially grounded counter-
parts in the Loc(ational) field.

To explore the diversity in naturally occurring
texts, we used a corpus of around 30k Word doc-
uments from the Microsoft language resource li-
brary, and available for research. The docu-
ments had been harvested from an approved in-
dex of websites (excluding sites that are copy-
righted, marked do not crawl, adult content, and
other restrictions)1 and targeted specific English
locale settings,2 as represented by properties of the
file format.

An initial search with text processing tools for
Windows (public and proprietary) yielded more
than 10k en-us sentences for the following spatial
and motion strings: extend, span, contain, come,
go, push, pull, enter, exit, rise, fall, skyrocket,
plummet, turn back, forge ahead, headway, get out
of, get into, drive, be down, be up, be in, be out,
guide, follow, sprint, creep, drain, move along, ad-
vance. We scoped this to just under 2k “Push Sen-
tences” – small enough to review, but large enough
to present an interesting distribution of forms.

The availability of these two resources enabled
the systematic division into LCS classes based
on common pairs, and the exploration of natu-
rally occurring instances of them, without requir-
ing a large-scale manual annotation effort. The
16 resulting LCS classes correspond to group-
ings based on common pairs of metaphorical and
spatial LCS’s, as extracted from the LCS Verb
Database, as in the example above: CAUSE GO
Loc (literal)↔ CAUSE BE Ident (metaphorical).

Examples of derived classes are shown here:

• Class 1 (Being at a Location)
– Spatial/Literal: The ice pushed away

from the Arctic and into the Atlantic
(GO LOC TOWARD).

– Metaphorical: My mind pushed away
all the frustration (GO IDENT STATE)

• Class 4 (Manner of Motion)
– Spatial/Literal: The woman pushed

aside the book and fell asleep (CAUSE
GO LOC MANNER)

1Nevertheless we may not share the extracted sentence
corpus without seeking permission from the document au-
thors. We do not think this negates the conclusions of this
paper, as the corpus is referential, and the examples not un-
usual.

2English locales include US, Australia, Canada, New
Zealand, Great Britain, and others.

– Metaphorical: The team should push
aside thoughts of failure (CAUSE GO
PERC MANNER)

• Class 5 (Movement along a path)
– Spatial/Literal: Mary pushed the car

over the edge (CAUSE GO LOC PATH)
– Metaphorical: Mary’s job pushed her

over the edge (CAUSE GO IDENT
STATE)

We used the Push Sentences to examine these
derived classes systematically, analyzing their spa-
tial/metaphorical distribution, as well as the cov-
erage of the spatially based derived metaphor
classes. This systematic comparison identified
missing metaphor entries in MN, as well as
metaphorical instances of push not occurring in
the corpus, that we found attested in a general web
search of the pattern.

The pairing of MN entries with their LCS rep-
resentations has enabled identification and repre-
sentation of literal/metaphorical pairs that can be
used for downstream natural language understand-
ing. Our corpus-based research both supports
the derived classes, and suggests expansion of
them. This treatment of both literal and metaphor-
ical extensions of the predicates also provides a
framework for a structured search of both possi-
ble gaps in the metaphor inventory, and possible
metaphoric extensions of individual predicates.

Prior work (Jackendoff, 1996; Levin, 1993;
Olsen, 1994; Kipper et al., 2007; Palmer et al.,
2017) has suggested that there is a close relation
between underlying lexical-semantic structures of
predicates and their syntactic argument structure.
It has been claimed that prepositional argument
constraints on motion predicates need not dis-
tinguish between literal and metaphorical senses
(Chang et al., 2007, 2010). We take this earlier
work a step further by examining generalizations
of systematicity at the syntax-semantics interface
between literal and metaphorical senses of spatial
and motion predicates.

Section 2 provides background on metaphor
and how it has been represented, generally and
for computational applications. We introduce the
LCS representation and MN resource, and de-
scribe how we extracted spatial metaphors from
the latter and represented them by the former.
We illustrate the work with an excerpt of a ta-
ble provided in the supplemental material. Sec-

32



tion 3 describes the mapping of spatial metaphors
to LCS. Section 4 discusses the Push Sentences.
We show how to represent push metaphors in LCS
according to the derived spatial metaphor classes,
extend the classes to address cases of push ab-
sent from MN examples, and the converse: ex-
amples predicted to occur that were absent from
the corpus. We conclude that the richness of
the syntactic patterns available to Spatial (literal)
uses of verbs and related nominals are also avail-
able to their metaphorical counterparts, thus pro-
viding a structured way to investigate and repre-
sent metaphorical data, including future work ex-
ploring whether and why distributional differences
may occur. In Section 5 we discuss related work
(Cascades (David et al., 2016)) and future ex-
plorations (multilingual representation, for which
LCS was originally designed).

2 Background

Lexical Conceptual Structure (LCS) (Jackendoff,
1983, 1990; Dorr, 1993; Dowty, 1979; Guerssel
et al., 1985) has been used for a range of different
applications, including interlingual machine trans-
lation (Habash and Dorr, 2002), lexical acquisition
(Habash et al., 2006), cross-language information
retrieval (Levow et al., 2000), language generation
(Traum and Habash, 2000), and intelligent lan-
guage tutoring (Dorr, 1997).

LCS primitives are defined so that their combi-
nation captures syntactic generalities: actions and
entities must be systematically related to a syntac-
tic structure. Constraints operate on three dimen-
sions: (1) spatial, (2) causal, and (3) field. The
primitive building blocks include GO, STAY, BE,
GO-EXT, ORIENT, and also an ACT primitive de-
veloped by Dorr and Olsen, (1997). These prim-
itives come from the spatial dimension and have
the following syntactic and semantic argument se-
lection constraints:
Events (Argument1, Argument2):

GO(Thing, Path) Jen ran home
STAY(Thing, Position) Jen remained home
ACT(Thing, Thing) Jen ate dinner

States (Argument1, Argument2):
BE(Thing, Position) Jen was home
ORIENT(Thing, Path) The sign points to the exit
GO-EXT(Thing, Path) The highway runs
through Montana

In the Causal dimension, predicates CAUSE
and LET have two arguments: a Thing or Event,

and a State or Event. The Field dimension de-
scribes Argument relations as:

(Loc)ational (pertaining to space/motion)
(Poss)essional (ownership)
(Temp)oral (time)
(Ident)ificational (state)
(Circ)umstantial (situation)
(Exist)ential (existence)
(Perc)eptual (perception)
(Comm)unicational (communication)

The latter two fields (Perceptual and Communica-
tional) correspond to two domains added by Olsen
et al. (1997) beyond the original LCS conceptual-
ization of Jackendoff (1983; 1990), enabling cov-
erage of a wider range of metaphorical extensions.

Within the LCS framework, both literal (spatial)
and figurative (metaphorical) meanings are cap-
tured for a wide range of verbal constructions. The
spatial dimension of the LCS representation (i.e.,
the (Loc)ational field) serves as the basis of the lit-
eral meaning, thus enabling straightforward exten-
sion to the other fields to represent the metaphor-
ical meaning. This extension supports a system-
atic mapping of spatial meaning to surface realiza-
tions. This systematicity correspondingly carries
over to metaphorical counterparts and a system-
atic surface realization is available for both types
of meanings.

For example, the GO primitive in the Loc field
projects a prepositional phrase containing a loca-
tion, such as over the edge, whereas the GO prim-
itive in the Ident field projects an adjectival phrase
containing a property, such as crazy. Additional
examples of the three dimensions above are dis-
cussed in Section 3.

This paradigm is consistent with that of Neu-
man et al., (2013) in large-scale metaphor identifi-
cation, which takes meanings of the word as literal
(or non-metaphorical) based on “how close the
word’s sense is to its embodied origins,” vs. de-
termining the same by frequency, commonsense,
or selectional preference strategies.3

Representations of spatial relations and their
metaphorical extensions to other domains have
been the subject of numerous studies (Talmy,
1985; Gentner, 2001). The benefit of this LCS-
based grounding of metaphorical expressions in
their spatial counterparts is that it is possible to
leverage a set of principled mappings from LCS to

3Even so they acknowledge that identifying metaphors is
difficult even for humans.

33



Class 1: Be at Location (MN: EXPERIENCED STATE IS PROXIMATE OBJECT)
Examples: ...a headache approaching (MN); ...migraine pushed itself through skull (Push Sentences)
Spatial/Literal: Metaphorical:

LCS: go loc [state] toward y
RED: GO LOC TOWARD

LCS: go ident y toward [state]
RED: GO IDENT STATE

Class 4: Manner of Motion (MN: GUIDED ACTION IS GUIDED MOTION ALONG PATH)
Examples: ...guided through the task (MN); ...pushed products to marketplace (Push Sentences)
Spatial/Literal: Metaphorical:

LCS: cause x go loc y toward z [manner]
RED: CAUSE GO LOC MANNER

LCS: cause x go perc y toward z [manner]
RED: CAUSE GO PERC MANNER

Class 5: Change of Location (MN: CHANGE OF STATE IS CHANGE OF LOCATION)
Examples: ...fell into depression (MN); ...pushed her over the edge (Push Sentences)
Spatial/Literal: Metaphorical:

LCS: cause x go loc toward y [location]
RED: CAUSE GO LOC PATH

LCS: cause x go ident y toward [state]
RED: CAUSE GO IDENT STATE

Table 1: Sample of LCS-Based Classification for Literal (Spatial) and Metaphorical Senses with Examples from
MN and ‘Push’ Sentences

syntactic realizations for a wide range of verb se-
mantics within 192 verb classes of (Levin, 1993),
augmented by 44 additional classes that were
subsequently added (Dorr, 1997) and further en-
hanced for aspectual composition (Olsen, 1994;
Dorr and Olsen, 1997; Dorr et al., 2001).

For a rich source of metaphoric constructions,
we leveraged MetaNet (MN), a repository of
metaphors represented in accordance with princi-
ples of conceptual metaphor theory, introduced by
Lakoff and Johnson (1980). The metaphors each
map a Source domain (e.g. “life”) to a Target
domain (e.g. “journey”), yielding metaphors like
Life is a journey.

Both Source and Target domains are themselves
represented as rich conceptual frames in MN. For
example, someone lives a life, with a span, possi-
bly with a companion, and a goal, etc. These map
to elements of the ‘journey’ frame as, respectively,
journey-er, the journey event and companion, and
the destination.

Additional MN mappings in the network of con-
cepts include stops, paths, locations along the way,
vehicles, etc. Examples of surface realizations are
also included with the metaphor, e.g. His life has
taken a good course and He has changed his direc-
tion in life, and taken a more spiritual path. (Neu-
man et al., 2018; David and Lakoff, 2013; Dodge
et al., 2015; Stickles et al., 2015)

In addition, frames can be linked to frames, and
metaphors to metaphors, defining larger networks.
For example, “CAUSED CHANGE OF STATE”
is subcase of “CAUSATION”, and makes use of
“CHANGE OF STATE” (Neuman et al., 2018).

We look at metaphors comprised of a mapping
between a concept for a literal expression typi-

cally related to space or motion like “CHANGE
OF LOCATION,” and the corresponding concept
for the metaphorical sense, e.g., “CHANGE OF
STATE.” So, for example, the surface realization
pushed him over the edge is an (adapted) exam-
ple associated with a mapping between the literal
meaning of push (CHANGE OF LOCATION) and
the metaphorical meaning of push (CHANGE OF
STATE) which, in this case, could be paraphrased
as go crazy.

3 Spatial Language Metaphors:
Mapping to Lexical Semantic
Representations

Understanding how spatial expressions relate to
objects and situations in the real world can enable
an understanding of abstract notions that “inherit”
properties of their spatial analogues. Even with-
out the context of a visual stream (Wilks, 1995)
or access to beliefs and inferential processes (Bal-
lim et al., 2007), it is possible to support sentence-
processing applications (e.g., grammar checking)
by relying on a lexical-semantic representation
that enables uniform syntactic analysis, within a
framework that supports downstream processing
for disambiguation.

We conducted an analysis of the MN metaphor
repository, identifying 197 spatially grounded
metaphors and collapsing these into 139 unique
spatial expressions. We then categorized these into
16 semantically motivated classes based on pair-
ings between LCS primitives for the spatial/literal
sense and LCS primitives for the metaphorical
sense. Table 1 shows representative spatial and
metaphorical cases for the three derived classes
introduced in Section 1, together with examples

34



Table 2: Excerpt of Derived Classes for Literal (Spatial) and Metaphorical Senses with MN and ‘Push’ Examples

from MN and Push Sentences. Each class has one
of 16 labels (e.g., “Be at Location” or “Manner of
Motion”). A single MN entry is shown in the ta-
ble for each class, e.g., “EXPERIENCED STATE
IS PROXIMATE OBJECT”, although, in general,
each class may be associated with multiple MN
entries.

In each class, an LCS representation is provided
for the Spatial/Literal sense and another LCS
is provided for the Metaphorical sense. These
LCS’s are indexed by a set of “reduced” primi-
tives (RED), such as “GO LOC TOWARD,” that
represent the salient components of the full LCS.
The coupling of the reduced primitives for the lit-
eral sense with those of the metaphorical sense
are what enabled the development of each of the
16 classes. For example, the “Be at Location”
class emerged from the coupling of “GO LOC TO-
WARD” with “GO IDENT STATE,” as well as ad-
ditional couplings that are further fleshed out in a
supplemental resource described in Section A. The
16 derived classes were named once they emerged
from these couplings.

It is interesting to note that the three Push ex-
amples in Table 1 (one per each of Class 1, 4, and
5) were not available in MN, but were mined from
the Push Sentences. Out of all 16 classes, only
Class 2 (Force Acting on Motion) contained MN
sentences with the word push. These were in fact

the only sentences in the entire MN inventory that
contained the word push:
• ...her parents kept pushing her [into an ar-

ranged marriage]4

• ...Democrats push through historic, contro-
versial healthcare legislation5

• ...Bloomberg goes to Washington to push gun
laws6

As such, this study has revealed several cases
of Metaphors containing the word push that were
not found in MN, but were systematically iden-
tified and accordingly classified. More specifi-
cally, with the exception of the derived classes 7,
8, and 13, examples were extracted anew from
Push Sentences and assigned to the appropriate
derived classes per LCS-based predictions (e.g.,
migraine pushed itself through her skull).7 We
therefore systematize the MN representation of
Space/Motion and extend its coverage. Coupled
with the LCS Verb Database this extended MN
provides a framework for future research in En-
glish and other languages.

4from MN entry “CAUSED CHANGE OF STATE IS
CAUSED CHANGE OF LOCATION”

5from MN entry “ENACTING LEGISLATION IS CAUS-
ING MOTION ALONG A PATH”

6from MN entry “INCITING GOVERNING ACTION IS
FORCED MOVEMENT”

7For Classes 7, 8, and 13, no example was found in the
Push sentences.

35



Table 2 shows an excerpt of a table provided in
the supplemental material. The first column pro-
vides the name of the newly emerged class from
this study. The next two columns contain the
LCS’s and corresponding reduced primitives for
the Literal (Spatial) and Metaphorical senses, re-
spectively. The “Examples” column contains ex-
amples from MN. The “PUSH EXAMPLE” col-
umn contains additional metaphorical expressions
extracted from the Push Sentences—a representa-
tive sample of the total number of 1655 sentences
containing the word push. The supplemental ma-
terial also includes hyperlinked MN entries for
each example associated with each class, enabling
the addition of new metaphors to MN.

Note that metaphorical extensions of spatial no-
tions such as up, down, into, from, to, over to ab-
stract notions in MN such as go crazy, become
depressed, feel badly can enable realizations of
metaphorical expressions that mirror those of their
literal (spatial) counterparts. Motion frames are
systematically realized in language with motion
syntax. Metaphorical extensions of spatial lan-
guage analogously would similarly permit a vari-
ety of motion expression forms.

This observation has been leveraged for nat-
ural language analysis in writing assistance ap-
plications (Chang et al., 2007, 2010), relying on
the subcategorization frame parallels in literal and
metaphoric language. For example, consider the
derived Manner of Motion class 4 (guide, lead,
launch, shove, roll, walk, run, climb, hike,...).
Verbs in this class describe translational motion of
a particular type, in the spatial (literal) meaning.
In the spatial domain, these verbs may also have
complements that signify the PATH of the mo-
tion, as well as the beginning and ending points of
the Path (SOURCE, GOAL). If the motion is self-
propelled, the verbs appear in intransitive con-
structions8 with various verb-phrase arguments
expressing the beginning, extent, and end of the
motion:

• We’re running.
• We’re walking on the Burke-Gilman Trail.
• We’re rolling on the Burke-Gilman Trail

from Golden Gardens Park.

• We’re hiking to the Ballard Locks on the
Burke-Gilman Trail.

8(Levin, 1993)’s class of Roll Verbs has finer-grained clas-
sifications.

Similarly, verbs like push/pull inherently en-
code an exertion of force,9 patterning like motion
verbs with all the predicted complements (gener-
ally appearing transitively).

• We’re pushing (the stroller).
• We’re pushing the stroller on the trail
• We’re pushing the stroller on the trail from

the park.

• We’re pushing the stroller to the locks from
the park.

Additionally, these verbs can have temporal ad-
juncts, e.g. on Tuesday, this summer. Therefore
we expect (and see) a wide variety of preposi-
tional phrases associated with verbs, and natural
language understanding needs to be appropriately
constrained. Chang et al. (2007; 2010) observed
that complements of motion verbs appeared in the
same constructions, whether the meanings were
literal or metaphorical, and therefore attachment
in parsing of prepositional phrases could be guided
by similar constraints, permitting (but not requir-
ing) a beginning, extent, and end of the motion.

• He’s just walking through life. [PATH]
• We’re running the conference from Friday,

June 1, through weekend, to Monday June 4.

• The responsibility drove her over the edge.
• We’re pushing the meeting back to next Fri-

day.

In the Push Sentences we see similar variety
in the derived classes that employ these verbs.
For example, Push your way through finals is un-
derstood by metaphorical extension of spatially-
related motion examples such as Push your way
through the crowd. More generally, organizing
metaphors into LCS-based classes enables the pre-
diction of possible syntactic realizations on the
surface.

An important contribution of this work de-
rives from the LCS-based organizational structure,
which enables enrichment and expansion of MN,
as discussed further in Section 5.

4 Case Study: push

Prior work (Chang et al., 2007, 2010) was de-
signed to enable writing assistance (e.g. grammar

9(Levin, 1993)’s Verbs of Exerting Force

36



Part of Speech Spatial Metaphorical Unknown
Verbs: 998 46% (459) 52% (514) 2% (25)
Nouns: 637 70.6% (450) 26.5% (169) 2.8% (18)
Adjectives: 20 45% (9) 55% (11) (0)

Table 3: Summary of Spatial and Metaphorical Usages
for push in 1655 sentences/lines of the Corpus

checking) as an application for deep understand-
ing of lexical conceptual structure, including di-
rectional and spatial language. This earlier work
proposed that spatial expressions enable structural
realizations across both literal and metaphorical
usages across languages, with examples from En-
glish, Spanish, German, French, and Japanese. In
this section we illustrate the validity of this as-
sumption for spatial expressions involving push,
exploring both spatial and metaphorical usages de-
rived from the Push Sentences.

In our analysis, we found that 52% of the verb
occurrences of in the Push Sentences were used in
their metaphorical sense. So, although only 28%
of metaphors in MN had spatial origins, spatial
expressions involving push were prevalent in the
form of metaphorical extensions and, moreover,
even in these extended senses adhered to syntactic
structures and complements of their spatial coun-
terparts. Therefore, it is important to capture the
cross-field units of meaning (something akin to ex-
ert force against some form of resistance) while
also supporting predictable cross-field surface re-
alizations.

After discarding 71 instances from the 1726
sentences with the string push as irrelevant (lines
of code, Pushkin, etc.), we categorized the remain-
ing 1655 instances by part of speech, and identi-
fied, context permitting, whether the use was spa-
tial or metaphorical.

The results in Table 3 show almost 40% of the
uses across parts of speech were metaphorical,
with 52% of the 998 Verbs and 55% of the Adjec-
tives (20). Of the 998 verbs, the metaphorical uses
included technical terms (push notifications (to
someone)), political advocacy (e.g. push legisla-
tion, a referendum, an agenda),10 marketing (push
a brand, Christmas specials), and motivation
(push into college, push through AP classes). Spa-
tial uses included push a button/laundry cart/box.
Sentences with Unknown verb uses did not pro-
vide enough context to identify whether they re-
ferred to spatial or metaphorical pushing, for ex-

10See (David et al., 2016) for extensive discussion of ad-
vocacy pertaining to gun rights.

Noun type Spatial Metaphorical Unknown
Simple: 118 36.4% (43) 54.2% (64) 9.3% (11)
Agentive: 7 0% (0) 57% (4) 43% (3)
Compound: 512 79.3% (406) 18.5% (100) 1.2% (6)

Table 4: Noun Spatial and Metaphorical Usages for
push by Subtype

ample (you push through and nature sings; always
push and do not pull, the work done in pushing
back the atmosphere).

We note, in particular, that both the verbal
and nominal uses exhibit similar syntactic struc-
tures to both the literal (spatial) and figura-
tive (metaphorical) usages. For example, as
shown in Table 4, the 637 nouns included sim-
ple spatial/metaphorical examples terms (a push
into college/the door) and metaphorical agentives
(drug/token/domino pusher).11 Compounds in-
cluded spatial phrases (push button, push-button,
pushbutton, push/pull handle, pushpin, push-ups,
push piers) and metaphorical phrases (push factor,
push-notification, push web services, push promo-
tion strategies, push-in class services, push sub-
scription).12,13

In LCS, these would be treated as conflational
variants or divergences (Dorr, 1993). The nominal
would express a conflated EVENT that could be
the subject of a predicate, for example A push into
college gave Mary her start.

Finally, we discovered that push can appear in
most spatial/motion metaphor categories, as indi-
cated in italicized examples inserted into Table 2,
and also into supplemental material. We show ex-
amples in English, and suggest meanings that may
not be idiomatic in English, but could be predicted
in other languages (e.g. based on fields). In each
of these cases, the meaning of push was consistent
with its role as a verb of exerting force, potentially
causing motion. With the addition of these exam-
ples, it is clear that our LCS-based structuring of
MN has allowed us to systematically predict and
find Metaphors not found in MN.

We do not claim that the categorization is
ready to be standardized, or that the distribution
is representative—be it across texts, across spa-
tial/motion predicates, across languages for verbs
meaning ‘push’, of all the metaphors involving

11The other examples toolpusher, pedal pusher cannot be
analyzed with confidence given the short contexts.

12Unknown again had limited context, e.g. “short re-
sponse plyo push-up.”

13Hyphenated, closed, and open compounds were included
in each case.

37



‘push’ in English, or in any other way. We offer
the numbers and text examples14 as qualitative ev-
idence of the breadth and variety of metaphorical
extensions in naturally occurring texts.

5 Discussion and Future Work

The work presented in this paper is complemen-
tary to, and not incompatible with, downstream vi-
sual grounding for disambiguation (Wilks, 1995)
or belief ascription for metaphor identification
(Ballim et al., 2007). The LCS framework aims to
provide a systematic mapping to surface realiza-
tions, without requiring disambiguation, but still
enabling further distinctions to be made between
literal and metaphorical meanings through addi-
tional context such as visual inputs or higher order
beliefs and reasoning and others, including selec-
tional restrictions and word embeddings (Dinh and
Gurevych, 2016).

Collapsing the spatially-motivated metaphors
into semantic classes is similar to the Cascade ap-
proach (David et al., 2016) that uses the MN foun-
dation as a starting point. Both LCS and Cas-
cades provide a framework within which to bring
order to the collection of observations: hierarchi-
cal concepts in the case of Cascades and lexical-
conceptual structure in the case of the framework
described in this paper. The lexical conceptual
structure focuses on how the semantics of lit-
eral and metaphorical verbs projects into syntax,
whereas Cascades describe how the semantics of
individual metaphors organize hierarchically, and
how they relate to grammatical constructions.

The LCS framework offers consistent structure
across literal and metaphoric domains within and
between languages. It may be that the variation we
see in which lexical elements are used in languages
can be attributed to the different perspectives on
the events they name, similar to the particulars in
the two perspectives on gun rights. For example,
are there meaningful differences in the use of push
in English, mirroring Spanish uses of promover,
impulsar, inculcar, esforzar in Table 5?

The Cascades approach suggests there is a con-
tinuum from literal to metaphorical—that the di-
viding line is not clear. Our data analysis of spa-
tially motivated metaphors revealed the validity
of this continuum. This suggests future research
on adding a continuous dimension beyond what

14Examples have been truncated or otherwise adapted in
accordance with Microsoft company policy

E: The NRA pushed the pro-gun legislation (through
congress).

S: La NRA promovió / impulsó la legislación pro-
armas (en el congreso).

E: My parents pushed me to succeed.
S: Mis padres me inculcaron el tratar de ser exitoso.
E: I pushed myself through my AP classes.
S: Me esforcé mucho con las clases avanzadas.
E: The ice cream shop pushed peppermint for the holi-

days. (as in encouraged sales).
S: La heladerı́a promovió / intentó / colocó / insistió

mucho con el helado de menta en las fiestas.
Table 5: Spanish Usages of English push

is provided in the LCS framework. For example,
when one army pushes another back to a posi-
tion, or the US pushes the indigenous peoples to
a reservation, there is no contact involved, but the
pushing seems more direct (and probably would
involve contact if challenged) than pushing some-
one over the (metaphorical) edge or pushing a bill
through congress.

Another promising avenue for future research
would be the identification of multilingual equiv-
alents of the 139 unique spatial expressions that
were extracted from MN in this study. Such an
endeavor would involve the construction of anal-
ogous representations of these 139 cases for other
languages–thus enabling a cross-lingual mapping
that would yield potential metaphorical exten-
sions. Testing these metaphorical extensions
would proceed in each language by examining
cross-field analogues, as in the English case. Ulti-
mately, it would be critical to demonstrate the mul-
tilingual relevance of this representational map-
ping for processes such as PP attachment.

Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge and thank three
anonymous reviewers for their careful reading of
our manuscript and their many insightful com-
ments and constructive suggestions. The first au-
thor is supported, in part, by the Institute for Hu-
man and Machine Cognition. The second author
is supported, in part, by Microsoft.

References
Afzal Ballim, Yorick Wilks, and John Barnden. 2007.

Belief Ascription, metaphor, and Intensional Identi-
fication. Words and Intelligence I: text, Speech and
Language technology 35:217–253.

Su Chin Chang, Ravi C. Shahani, Domenic J. Cipol-
lone, Michael V. Calcagno, Mari J. B. Olsen,
and David J. Parkinson. 2007. Linguistic Object

38



Model. 7,171,352. http://patft.uspto.
gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=
PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PALL&p=1&u=
%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsrchnum.htm&
r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=7171352.PN.&OS=PN/
7171352&RS=PN/7171352.

Su Chin Chang, Ravi C. Shahani, Domenic J. Cipol-
lone, Michael V. Calcagno, Mari J. B. Olsen, and
David J. Parkinson. 2010. Lexical Semantic Struc-
ture. 7,689,410. http://patft.uspto.
gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=
PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PALL&p=1&u=
%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsrchnum.htm&
r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=7689410.PN.&OS=PN/
7689410&RS=PN/7689410.

Oana David and George Lakoff. 2013. Wikis, Beans
and Cats: The Cascade Theory of Metaphor. In
12th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference
(ICLC 12). Edmonton, Canada.

Oana David, George Lakoff, and Elise Stickles. 2016.
Cascades in Metaphor and Grammar: A Case Study
of Metaphors in the Gun Debate. Constructions and
Frames 8(2):214–253.

Erik-Lân Do Dinh and Iryna Gurevych. 2016.
Token-Level Metaphor Detection using NeuralNet-
works. In Proceedings of The Fourth Workshop on
Metaphor in NLP, Association for Computational
Linguistics / San Diego, CA, 17 June 2016. pages
28–33.

Ellen Dodge, Jisup Hong, and Elise Stickles. 2015.
MetaNet: Deep Semantic Automatic Metaphor
Analysis. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop
on Metaphor in NLP. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 40–49.

Bonnie J. Dorr. 1993. Machine Translation: A View
from the Lexicon. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bonnie J. Dorr. 1997. Large-Scale Dictionary Con-
struction for Foreign Language Tutoring and Inter-
lingual Machine Translation. Machine Translation
12:271–322.

Bonnie J. Dorr, Mari Olsen, Nizar Habash, and Scott
Thomas. 2001. LCS Verb Database Documentation.
http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/˜bonnie/
Demos/LCS_Database_Documentation.
html.

Bonnie J. Dorr and Mari Broman Olsen. 1997. De-
riving Verbal and Compositional Lexical Aspect for
NLP Application. In Proceedings of the 35th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and Eighth Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 151–158.

David Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Dedre Gentner. 2001. Spatial Metaphor in Temporal
Reasoning.

M. Guerssel, K. Hale, M. Laughren, B. Levin, and
J. White Eagle. 1985. A Cross-linguistic Study of
Transitivity Alternations. In W. H. Eilfort and P.
D. Kroeber nad K. L. Peterson, editor, Papers from
the Parasession in Causatives and Agentivity at the
Twenty-first Regional meeting of the Chicago Lin-
guistic Society, pages 48–63.

Nizar Habash and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2002. Handling
Translation Divergences: Combining Statistical and
Symbolic Techniques in Generation-Heavy Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference
of the Association for Machine Translation in the
Americas. Tiburon, CA, pages 84–93.

Nizar Habash, Bonnie J. Dorr, and Christof Monz.
2006. Challenges in Building an Arabic GHMT
system with SMT Components. In Proceedings of
the 7th Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas. Boston, MA, pages 56–
65.

Ray Jackendoff. 1983. Semantics and Cognition. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ray Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structures. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ray Jackendoff. 1996. The Proper Treatment of Mea-
suring Out, Telicity, and Perhaps Even Quantifica-
tion in English. Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 14:305–354.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2007. A Large-scale Classification
of English Verbs. In Language Resources and Eval-
uation.

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors
we live by. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. The University
of Chicago Press.

Gina Levow, Bonnie J. Dorr, and Dekang Lin. 2000.
Construction of Chinese-English Semantic Hierar-
chy for Cross-language Retrieval .

Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, Yohai Cohen, Mark Last,
Shlomo Argamon, Newton Howard, and Ophir
Frieder. 2013. Metaphor Identification in Large
Texts Corpora. http://journals.plos.
org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0062343.

Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, Yohai Cohen, Mark
Last, Shlomo Argamon, Newton Howard,
and Ophir Frieder. 2018. MetaNet Metaphor
Wiki, Version updated 3 January. https:
//metaphor.icsi.berkeley.edu/pub/
en/index.php/MetaNet_Metaphor_Wiki.

39



Mari Broman Olsen. 1994. The Semantics and Prag-
matics of Lexical and Grammatical Aspect. Studies
in the Linguistic Sciences 24(1–2):361–375.

Mari Broman Olsen, Bonnie J. Dorr, and Scott Thomas.
1997. Toward Compact Monotonically Composi-
tional Interlingua Using Lexical Aspect. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Interlinguas in MT .
San Diego, CA, pages 33–44.

Martha Palmer, Claire Bonial, and Jena D. Hwang.
2017. VerbNet: Capturing English Verb behavior,
Meaning and Usage.

Elise Stickles, Oana David, and Eve Sweetser. 2015.
Grammatical Constructions, Frame Structure, and
Metonymy: Their Contributions to Metaphor Com-
putation. In Proceedings of the 11th Meeting of the
High Desert Linguistics Society (HDLS). pages 317–
345.

Leonard Talmy. 1985. Lexicalization patterns; Seman-
tic Structure in Lexical Forms 3:56–149.

David Traum and Nizar Habash. 2000. Generation
from Lexical Conceptual Structures. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Applied Interlinguas, North
American Association for Computational Linguis-
tics / Applied NLP Conference. pages 34–41.

Yorick Wilks. 1995. Language, Vision and Metaphor.
Artificial Intelligence Review 9:273–289.

A Supplemental Material: Metaphor
Classes, Examples, LCSs

A supplemental resource (spreadsheet) has been
provided in .zip format at:
https://www.dropbox.com/s/
4vm0ddulemcbnoa/NAACL-2018_Camera_
Ready_Metaphor_Classes.zip?dl=0

The top level file inside of the .zip file above is:
20180314-Final Metaphor Classes&Examples&
LCSs(NAACL-18).htm

This is a worksheet that contains two tabs, cover-
ing both Spatial Classes and Mappings into LCS
structures for literal and metaphorical meanings:

• Tab 1: Spatial Classes - 16 spatial classes, di-
vided according to 139 unique spatial expres-
sions, with members corresponding to 197
hyperlinked MN metaphors. MN Metaphor
categories that have been mapped into LCS
structures in Tab 2 are listed at the top of each
class in column B and highlighted in orange.
• Tab 2: LCS Mappings - Mappings from

16 spatial classes into LCS structures for
both the physical/literal meaning and the
metaphorical meaning. Includes examples,
variables and constants, sample verbs, and

hyperlinks to the relevant MN metaphor
cases. Examples in Column I are either found
on the web (links provided) or adapted from
the Push sentences.

40


