



















































Accommodation of Conversational Code-Choice


Proceedings of The Third Workshop on Computational Approaches to Code-Switching, pages 82–91
Melbourne, Australia, July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

82

Accommodation of Conversational Code-Choice

Anshul Bawa Monojit Choudhury Kalika Bali
Microsoft Research

Bangalore, India
{t-anbaw,monojitc,kalikab}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Bilingual speakers often freely mix lan-
guages. However, in such bilingual con-
versations, are the language choices of
the speakers coordinated? How much
does one speaker’s choice of language
affect other speakers? In this paper,
we formulate code-choice as a linguis-
tic style, and show that speakers are in-
deed sensitive to and accommodating of
each other’s code-choice. We find that
the salience or markedness of a language
in context directly affects the degree of
accommodation observed. More impor-
tantly, we discover that accommodation of
code-choices persists over several conver-
sational turns. We also propose an alter-
native interpretation of conversational ac-
commodation as a retrieval problem, and
show that the differences in accommo-
dation characteristics of code-choices are
based on their markedness in context.

1 Introduction

Code-switching (CS) refers to the fluid alter-
ation between two or more languages within a
conversation, and is a common feature of all
multilingual societies. (Auer, 2013). Multilin-
gual speakers are known to code-switch in spo-
ken conversations for a variety of reasons, moti-
vated by information-theoretic and cognitive prin-
ciples, and also as a result of numerous social,
communicative and pragmatic functions (Scotton
and Ury, 1977; Söderberg Arnfast and Jørgensen,
2003; Gumperz, 1982).

Code-choice refers to a speaker’s decision of
which code to use in a given utterance, and in
case of a CS utterance, to what extent the differ-
ent codes are to be used. Depending on the soci-
olinguistic and conversational context, a speaker’s

code-choice may be unexpected and noticed by
other speakers, and is likely to affect other speak-
ers’ subsequent code-choice. In other words,
speakers may accommodate to each other’s code-
choice, positively or negatively (Genesee, 1982).

In this work, we propose a set of metrics to
study the social accommodation of code-choice
as a sociolinguistic style marker. We build upon
the existing framework on accommodation by
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2011) and adapt
that for code-choice by introducing relevant fea-
tures for code-choice. We then motivate and illus-
trate the effect of code markedness on the degree
of accommodation - the more salient code is more
strongly accommodated for. We further generalize
the framework to also account for delayed accom-
modation, instead of only next-turn or immediate
accommodation.

In addition, we introduce an alternative view of
accommodation as a query-response task, and em-
ploy mean reciprocal rank, a well-understood met-
ric from the domain of Information Retrieval, as a
metric for latency of accommodation. We mea-
sure how quickly a style marker (code-choice in
our case) introduced by a speaker is retrieved by
the other speaker during the conversation. Our
approach is developed for analyzing code-choice
but is applicable to other dimensions of linguis-
tic style as well (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010).
This presents an alternative view of conversational
style accommodation and offers a simple but ef-
fective way of measuring, characterizing and even
predicting elements of conversational style.

We test this formulation on two CS conversa-
tional datasets - dialog scripts of bilingual Indian
movies (in English and Hindi) and a transcrip-
tion of real-world conversations between Spanish-
English bilinguals in Florida, US. In both the
corpora, we observe strong signals of interper-
sonal code-choice accommodation for the salient
or marked code. We also observe that on average,



83

the marked code is accommodated within the first
three to four conversational turns, beyond which
the effect of accommodation on code-choice de-
cays gradually. Contextually-unmarked code is
less strongly accommodated for, even when it oc-
curs relatively infrequently within a conversation.

As far as we know, this is the first computa-
tional study of code-choice accommodation, and
first work that introduces and formalizes the con-
cept of delayed accommodation, that can be ap-
plied to other style dimensions as well.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
We describe the background and related work in
Section 2, which motivates the first formulation of
code-choice accommodation in Section 3. We im-
prove this by formulation by modifying the fea-
tures in Section 4. We generalize the formulation
to multiple turns and introduce the analogy to re-
trieval in Section 5, along with the results. We
wrap up with a discussion in Section 6 that we
conclude in Section 7.

2 Related Work

CS is employed by speakers to signal a common
multilingual identity(Auer, 2005), and can be ef-
fectively used to reduce (or increase) the perceived
social distance between the speakers (Camilleri,
1996). As a marker of informality, it has been
shown to lower interpersonal distance (Myers-
Scotton, 1995; Genesee, 1982).

Common structural patterns in CS as well as
the choice to switch between languages have
been the focus of many linguistic studies(Poplack,
1988)(Auer, 1995). As CS is typically used as a
conversation strategy by bilinguals who are profi-
cient in both languages (Auer, 2013), it is not sur-
prising that certain pragmatic and socio-linguistic
factors, such as formality of context (Fishman,
1970), age (Ervin-Tripp and Reyes, 2005), expres-
sion of emotion (Dewaele, 2010) and sentiment
(Rudra et al., 2016), are found to signal language
preference in CS conversations. A Twitter study
of CS patterns across several geographies (Rijh-
wani et al., 2017), also suggests that there might be
complex sociolinguistic reasons for code-choice.
Thus, CS, and the choice of language or code
in which one communicates during a multilingual
conversation, could be considered a marker of lin-
guistic style.

Communication accommodation theory (Giles
et al., 1973; Giles, 2007) states that speakers shift

their linguistic styles towards (or away from) each
other in a conversation for social effect. In the
CAT framework, the interlocutors’ desire for ‘so-
cial approval’ results in an attempt to match each
other’s linguistic style. Accommodation has been
studied for many markers of linguistic style like
tense, negations, articles, prepositions, pronouns
and sentiment (Taylor and Thomas, 2008; Nieder-
hoffer and Pennebaker, 2002).

Since it is possible to convey the same semantic
content while widely varying the extent of CS, we
also consider code-choice as a linguistic style di-
mension. Therefore, we expect to observe accom-
modation in terms of code-choice in similar man-
ner to that of variables for other linguistic styles.
While there have been linguistic and small-scale
studies (Sachdev and Giles, 2004; Bourhis, 2008;
Bissoonauth and Offord, 2001; y Bourhis et al.,
2007) that argue for prevalence of code-choice ac-
commodation, there are no large-scale quantitative
or computational studies that corroborate this and
shed light on the various patterns of code-choice
accommodation. Further, these studies rely on
simple correlation-based measures.

The first computational study of linguistic style
accommodation (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2011) shows that it is highly prevalent in Twit-
ter conversations. They use binary features for
the presence of various psychologically meaning-
ful word categories as described by the LIWC
method(Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010) to iden-
tify stylistic variations in tweets. They then de-
fine a probabilistic framework that mathematically
models style accommodation in terms of the like-
lihood of an addressee to respond in the same style
as the speaker.

Though CS is similar enough to other kinds of
linguistic style to allow analysis using the same
framework, it also differs from them in being
a strong sociological indicator of identity (Auer,
2005) and in not being processed nonconsciously
(Levelt and Kelter, 1982). We demonstrate that a
model that does not account for these crucial dif-
ferences fails to capture the accommodative pat-
terns of code-choice. Because of being processed
consciously, code-choice also exhibits accommo-
dation over several conversational turns, an ef-
fect which is not observed as strongly for other
style dimensions (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2011). Long-term effects in accommodation have
received very little attention, and have mostly



84

studied based on crude conversation-level correla-
tion values (Niederhoffer and Pennebaker, 2002).

3 Accommodation of Code-Choice as
Linguistic Style

As a first step, we adapt an existing framework
(Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011) that quan-
tifies accommodation of a given linguistic style.
Any linguistic feature is said to exhibit accommo-
dation if it is more likely to be expressed in re-
sponse to a dialog that also expresses it, than oth-
erwise. In other words, an accommodative feature
in a dialog begets the same feature in the next dia-
log. We use the term ‘dialog’ or ‘turn’ to refer to a
single spoken utterance or dialog within a conver-
sation, and the term ‘speaker’ to refer to conversa-
tion participants. This framework thus restricts the
definition of accommodation to only single-turn
effects.

3.1 Measuring Accommodation

Mathematically, let F denote some binary feature
over a dialog (we describe the features themselves
in Section 3.2 below). F is said to exhibit accom-
modation if the likelihood of a user expressing F
increases when F has been expressed in the previ-
ous dialog. We define the degree of accommoda-
tion as follows

Acm(F ) = P
(
δdFi

∣∣δdFi−1)− P (δdFi ) (1)
Here, dialog di−1 immediately precedes dialog

di, and δdF is the event that the dialog d exhibitsF .
The first term can be thought of as the reciprocity
over F . The second term is the fraction of dialogs
in the corpus for which F = 1, which is also the
empirical probability of observing F in a dialog d.

Instead of computing these likelihoods over the
entire corpus, we could also compute them in-
dividually for each speaker, and doing so yields
a fairer condition for accommodation. Different
speakers can have widely different base likeli-
hoods. This metric requires an average speaker to
reciprocate more than their own (individual) base-
line likelihood of expressing F , rather than sim-
ply more than the population baseline. Denoting
the event that a dialog d is spoken by a speaker s
as δS(d)=s, we redefine accommodation as follows

(Es denotes an expectation over all speakers s)

Acm∗(F ) = Es
(
Acms(F )

)
= Es

(
P
(
δdFi

δS(d)=s
∣∣δdFi−1)

− P (δdFi δS(d)=s)
) (2)

3.2 Measuring Code-Choice
Our general hypothesis is that code-choice is re-

ciprocated in a bilingual conversation. To mea-
sure this, we introduce simple binary features for
presence of each code, along the lines of the bi-
nary features in (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al.,
2011), with individual language expression substi-
tuting for the style dimensions. For each language
L, we define a feature FL indicating, for a dialog
d, if the dialog contains words in the language L.
The event that dialog d is at least partially in L,
is denoted by δdFL . In other words, δ

FL
d is true if

the language L is expressed in dialog d, and false
otherwise.

3.3 Data
We employ two datasets of bilingual conversa-
tions, each in a different conversational context
and a different pair of languages, to test the oc-
currence of code-choice accommodation. Table 1
reports the number of dialogs and words for the
two datasets, and the fraction of words that are in
English.

Dataset Dialogs Words %En
Movies (En-Hi) 20.1K 240K 24.1
Bangor (Es-En) 18.5K 216K 62.9

Table 1: Conversational dataset overview

Hindi Movies
The data comprises of scripts of 32 Hindi movies
released between 2012 and 2017. 17 of these
scripts were collected by Pratapa and Choudhury
(2017) from scripts posted online1. We collected
15 scripts of our own from a similar online source2

and parsed them replicating the methodology of
Pratapa and Choudhury (2017).

All the scripts have word-level language tags
as created by the language identification system
from (Gella et al., 2013). The language labels on
manual inspection were found to have significant

1https: //moifightclub.com/category/scripts
2http://www.filmcompanion.in/category/fc-pro/scripts/



85

amount of noise, we corrected frequently observed
errors with manual supervision.

Each dialog is assumed to be in response to the
immediately preceding dialog within a scene. We
restrict our analysis to dialogs that are between no
more than two speakers, to avoid confounding ef-
fects of multi-party conversations on accommoda-
tion. This also filters out most dialogs in the scripts
which are not conversational in nature.

Movie conversations, even though imagined,
are designed to sound natural, and therefore, are
suitable for studying style accommodation, as
is argued in Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lee
(2011), and also multilingualism (Bleichenbacher,
2008) and code-choice (Vaish, 2011). It is true
that movie dialogs promote stereotypes that may
affect characters’ expression of code-choice, how-
ever accommodative effects can still be expected to
play out largely independent of such stereotypes.
There have been several linguistic and quantitative
studies on Hindi-English CS in Hindi movies (Par-
shad et al., 2016; Lösch, 2007; Pratapa and Choud-
hury, 2017).

Bangor Corpus
We use the Bangor Miami corpus3 of word-
level language labeled transcripts of spoken con-
versations between Spanish-English bilinguals in
Florida, US. The original dataset contains 56 con-
versations, from which we selected 40 conversa-
tions that have non-trivial amount of English and
Spanish, and sufficient dialogs from each speaker.

Figure 1 shows the fraction of Spanish used by
a dyad of speakers in a sample conversation from
this dataset (the complement fraction being En-
glish). Intuitively, we expect our metrics to cap-
ture how coordinated two speakers are.

3.4 Results
Table 2 shows the metrics from Section 3.1 com-
puted over the features in Section 3.2 on the two
datasets.

While these numbers do suggest that accom-
modative effects are present, they seem to be fairly
weak. The rate of reciprocation is only slightly
higher than the base rate, and in some cases the
difference isn’t statistically significant.

However, looking at individual differences in
these values reveals an interesting observation.
For each speaker s in the Movies dataset, we

3http://bangortalk.org.uk/speakers.php?c=miami

Figure 1: Fraction of Spanish over time in a con-
versation. The x-axis denotes consecutive dia-
log pairs, with dialog i above aligned with dialog
i+ 1 below, so two aligned bars denote two con-
secutive dialogs.

Dataset Code (L) Acm(FL) Acm∗(FL)

Bangor En 0.06† 0.04
Es 0.12 0.09

Movies En 0.10 0.06
Hi 0.02† -0.02†

Table 2: Accommodation values for different
codes. Values with a (†) are not significant. Sig-
nificance forAcm(F ) is computed using Fisher’s
exact test, and significance for Acm∗(F ) is com-
puted using one-tailed paired t-test.

plot in Figure 2, the rate of accommodation by s,
Acms(F ), against the respective base rate P (dFs ),
for F ∈ {FEn, FHi}.

Clearly, we see that a high base rate of expres-
sion corresponds to far less accommodation. In
other words, the instances of code-choice that are
uncommon and therefore unexpected within the
conversational context are likely to be accommo-
dated for. In a conversation that is predominantly
in Hindi, a dialog uttered in Hindi carries little
salience and doesn’t stand out. This code-choice is
unlikely to be registered as a communicative sig-
nal or a marked expression of any linguistic style,
and therefore wouldn’t elicit accommodation. En-
glish and Spanish are respectively less common in
Movies and Bangor, and indeed their rates of ac-
commodation are higher than the rates for the cor-
responding dominant languages.

Since the metrics in Section 3.1 compute like-
lihoods over all instances of code-choice irrespec-
tive of salience, the observed rates of accommoda-
tion are low. We borrow the notion of markedness
of code-choice, as described in Myers-Scotton
(2005), and incorporate it into our framework, as



86

Figure 2: Variation of accommodation rate
against base rate. Observed rate (x + y) can
vary between 0 and 1. The highlighted region
denotes positive accommodation and a low base
rate (x < 0.5 and y > 0). In contrast, all other re-
gions, as demarcated by dashed lines, are sparser.

described in the next section.

4 Marked Code-Choice Features

4.1 Code Salience

As shown earlier, measuring accommodation
makes sense only over marked instances of code-
choice. Thus, for every conversation in our
dataset, we identify the marked language, and
measure accommodation only over that language.
We choose a conversation as the unit for decid-
ing if a code is marked because the set of speak-
ers and the conversation context typically dictates
code-choice in multilingual societies.

A language is considered marked if it is the
non-dominant language - we keep the threshold of
markedness at no more than 40% of total words in
the entire conversation. We discard highly mixed
conversations where none of the languages meets
the threshold. This consideration also makes the
calculation of accommodation more robust, as for
a high fraction of incidence of a code, the effect of
the previous turn would be harder to isolate.

4.2 Threshold of Occurrence

Another limitation of the formulation in Section
3 is that it doesn’t incorporate the extent of pres-
ence of each code in a dialog. Consequently,
even named entities, frequently borrowed words
and frozen expressions from the marked language,
would be considered as candidates for accommo-

dation. The Bangor corpus came with named-
entity tags, and in the Movies corpus we removed
all character names from the dialogs, but we were
not aware of any NER system for Hindi-English
CS data that we could have used to remove other
named entities. Ideally, we would like to exclude
all such words from the triggers expected to elicit
accommodation, as their usage isn’t stylistically
marked (Auer, 1999). The word-level language
tags also have some amount of noise, and it is de-
sirable to use features that are resilient to it.

Besides, it is possible that a relatively high in-
cidence of marked code in a dialog is perceived
as a stronger style marker, and is perhaps accom-
modated for more strongly than a lower incidence.
We introduce a simple fraction-based thresholding
that allows us to test the same.

For every dialog d, we define feature FL,τ such
that dFL,τ = 1 if and only if (a) d is sufficiently
long and (b) fraction of words of d in the marked
language L is more than τ . We consider an ut-
terance to be sufficiently long if it contains more
than 4 words, as this is expected to filter out most
frozen expressions and named entities that may
be borrowed from one language to another. We
show results for accommodation of Fτ for τ ∈
{0, 0.2, 0.5}. While F0 would capture presence of
even one word in a marked code, F0.2 represents a
non-trivial occurrence and F0.5 represents major-
ity occurrence of the marked code in context.

5 Beyond Immediate Accommodation

The metrics in Section 3 and those in Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al. (2011) only consider the im-
mediate next turn as a candidate for reciprocation.
However, it is possible for accommodative effects
to span a few conversation turns. Consider the fol-
lowing snippet from one of the conversations in
Bangor (Spanish code is in bold and its translation
is in italics).

In cases like this, the content of the conversa-
tion prevents a possibility of accommodating im-
mediately, but the speaker Sarah still reciprocates
Paige’s code-choice at the first instance possible.
We can test if such cases of delayed accommoda-
tion are indeed common in the data, by extending
our formulation to an arbitrary number of turns.
We extend Equation (2) below, and Equation (1)
can be extended analogously.



87

Paige i wanna see them.
Sarah pick. pick like (name) flowers or ...
Paige ¡ay qué lindo está ese!

oh, how pretty that is!
ok, enter the date.
it will be ...

Sarah may.
Paige may. ninth?
Sarah ninth.
Paige two thousand and eight.

and then you put what you want.
(name) trip?

Sarah no te cabe.
it doesn’t fit you.
just (name).

5.1 Generalization of Immediate
Accommodation

The baseline rate of a speaker s using a feature F
across n (consecutive) turns is the likelihood that
at least one the n turns expresses F , and is given
by 1− (1−ps)n, where ps is simply P (dFs ). For a
speaker s, the rate of n-turn accommodation is the
increase in likelihood of occurrence of F in either
of the n dialogs ds,1 to ds,n, conditioned on the
event that the preceding dialog d0 expresses F .

Acmn,s(F ) = P
( n∨
i=1

(
dFs,i
)∣∣∣dF0 )

−
(
1− (1− ps)n

) (3)
Acm∗n(F ) = Es

(
Acmn,s(F )

)
(4)

When n = 1, this resolves to Equation (2). Note
that d1 to dn are the first n dialogs spoken by s
immediately after the dialog d0. As before, Es
denotes expected value over all speakers.

5.2 Accommodation as Retrieval
Responding to marked code-choice with marked
code-choice can be thought of or reformulated as
a retrieval task. For a speaker s, each instance of
a dialog addressed to s with a feature F would
be a query posed to s. The next n dialogs spo-
ken by s would be the top-n retrieved responses
to the query. We are interested in the retrieval of
responses that also have feature F , so we call a re-
sponse with feature F to be relevant response and
irrelevant otherwise, in keeping with the standard
terminology in information retrieval. We consider
s to have retrieved a relevant response in n-turns
if at least one of the first n responses is relevant.

When formulated this way, the recall of s, the
probability of retrieving a relevant response, is

precisely equal to the first term in Equation 3, the
probability using F in responding to a dialog cF .
The second term in Equation 3 is the expected
value of recall under the independence assump-
tion, i.e., if s randomly introduces marked code
at every turn with probability ps. Therefore, a
speaker is accommodative if their recall is higher
than that of this random baseline.

A popular metric to evaluate retrieval systems
is the mean reciprocal rank (MRR). The recipro-
cal rank of a query response is the multiplicative
inverse of the rank of the first relevant response.
The MRR of a system is simply the mean of the re-
ciprocal ranks of all its responses. Since we expect
the accommodative speaker to have a higher recall
than the random baseline, we also expect the ac-
commodative speaker to have a higher MRR, with
the difference from baseline MRR being propor-
tional to its accommodativeness.

Not only does this present an alternative view
of accommodation and exposes well-studied for-
malisms and concepts from information retrieval,
but the ability to capture speakers’ styles as re-
sponse characteristics also facilitates predictive
conversational modelling.

Mean reciprocal ranks for the random baselines
can be computed analytically as follows. We first
compute the expected reciprocal rank r for any
given query as a function of the correctness prob-
ability ps. For the first relevant response to be at
rank i, all previous responses must be irrelevant.
Since each response is relevant with a probability
ps, the probability of the i-th response being the
first relevant response is given by :

P
(
rps =

1

i

)
= (1− ps)i−1 ∗ ps (5)

The baseline MRR of a speaker s, denoted by
Bases, is then the expected value of r, also as
function of ps :

Bases = E
(
rps
)

=
∞∑
i=1

(1− ps)i−1 ∗ ps/i

= − ps
1− ps

ln ps

(6)

The overall baseline MRR,Base is then simply
Es(Bases). We compare the observed MRR on
the data (denoted by Obs) with the expected MRR
of the random baselines (Base), with their differ-
ence being indicative of the degree and immediacy
of accommodation.



88

(a) Bangor; L = Es for solid lines (significant for n < 6)
and L = En for dashed (significant for n < 4).

(b) Movies; L = En. Significant for n < 4.

Figure 3: Accommodation rates (Acm∗n(FL,τ ))
versus n. Red, green and blue lines indicate τ =
0, 0.2 and 0.5 respectively. Accommodation of
Hindi is not significant.

5.3 Results and Observations

Figure 3 shows the trends in Acm∗n(FL,τ ) for dif-
ferent values of n, L and τ . Significance scores
are computed in the same way as for Table 2.

Table 3 shows the real and baseline MRR values
for each corpus over different values of τ .

It is evident that accommodation of code-choice
is a prevalent and robust phenomenon. The values
of accommodation are consistently positive for all
the different marked-code features, languages and
datasets, and for low values of n.

In Table 3, the less common codes in each
dataset, Es and En respectively, have a lower
baseline while having comparable or even higher
observed MRRs as their more common counter-
part. This reiterates that accommodation is more
pronounced for more marked codes.

From Figure 3, a higher fraction of marked code
(τ = 0.5) does not seem to elicit stronger accom-
modation than τ = 0. However, it is important to
note that the base rate for F0 is much higher than
that of F0.5, so in relative terms, the latter exhibits

MRR τ Bangor Movies
Es En En Hi

Obs
0

0.48 0.52 0.67 0.62
Base 0.18 0.34 0.32 0.40
Obs

0.2
0.46 0.54 0.57 0.45

Base 0.15 0.26 0.25 0.35
Obs

0.5
0.46 0.49 0.54 0.4

Base 0.12 0.22 0.15 0.25

Table 3: Mean Reciprocal Ranks of the observed
responses (Obs) and the random baseline (Base)
for different features Fτ and different corpora.

a stronger tendency to accommodate (since the in-
crease over respective base rate is identical). The
difference between the retrieval characteristics for
the different thresholds is more salient in Table 3
- higher thresholds correspond to a smaller aver-
age likelihood, and lower baseline MRRs. The dif-
ference between observed and baseline MRR does
slightly increase with τ , making higher fraction of
marked code somewhat more accommodated for.

In contrast to English, the accommodation for
Hindi code-choice in conversations dominated by
English is not significant. This suggests that Hindi
code isn’t marked even when it is the minority
code in a scene, an inference that aligns with the
claim from Myers-Scotton (2005) that Hindi is not
marked in Hindi movies, even when it is the non-
dominant language in context.

Hindi in Movies and English in Bangor have
a lower strength of accommodation than their re-
spective counterparts, even when measured over
conversations where they are uncommon. Not
only is accommodation stronger for Spanish, it
also persists for more number of turns as com-
pared to English. This suggests that the context
of markedness is larger than the immediate con-
versation, and the being the dominant language of
the corpus as a whole reduces markedness.

In most cases, accommodation is salient and
significant even after a few turns. Delayed accom-
modation is as prevalent as immediate accommo-
dation. And the likelihood of a given speaker re-
ciprocating code-choice in kind, remains signifi-
cant for several turns in a conversation.

6 Discussion

Accommodation is prevalent and robust, but not
universal. While it is observed across conver-
sations spanning different media and language



89

pairs, there is significant variation among speakers
within a dataset. As many as 18% of the speakers
exhibit what may be considered negative accom-
modation, or non-accommodation. Half of these
do so with a value of Acm∗1(F0) less than −0.10.

It is in fact known that accommodation or con-
vergence is neither a universal nor a positive in-
terpersonal strategy (Genesee and Bourhis, 1988;
Giles et al., 1991; Burt, 1994). In-group/out-group
identity as well as attitudes towards CS and the
languages involved can cause negative accommo-
dation as well as a negative perception of accom-
modation. Burt (1994) show that while conver-
gence is largely viewed positively, some multilin-
gual speakers may oppose it as either misplaced
solidarity with an in-group, or a slur on the lan-
guage capability of an interlocutor.

While we work under the assumption that code-
choice is a style dimension, largely independent of
content, it is in fact influenced by factors like topic
(Sert, 2005) and sentiment (Rudra et al., 2016).
These influences could either align or compete
with the socially accommodative code-choice, and
this explains several-turn accommodation - it is
not always possible to accommodate immediately.
The difference between code-choice and other lin-
guistic style markers is also indicated by the poor
results of Section 3, which naively applies the
style accommodation framework to code-choice.

It is worth noting that the baselines throughout
the paper assume that speakers do not adjust their
overall rate of employing a particular code, in or-
der to accommodate. This is in fact a fairly strict
assumption. In fact, the same speaker typically has
widely varying base rates in conversations with
multiple other speakers. The extent of marked
code to be used is itself often negotiated within
a conversation, and adjusting one’s base rate can
be construed as accommodation, and harder to an-
alyze. Nevertheless, this assumption gives us a
strong and realistic baseline to judge the observa-
tions against.

One limitation of our formulation is that we
do not look at individual words. Word or code
saliency in context is actually more complex that
just language saliency in current conversation.
Some words are more marked than others, with
borrowed words carrying very little salience. It
would be nice to have more complex features,
aware of the syntactic structure of dialogs. It
would also be worthwhile to apply this formula-

tion to study conversation-wide accommodation
effects and convergence of code-choice at scale.

7 Conclusion

We demonstrate that code-choice is a marker of
linguistic style, and when it is marked in context,
it is interpersonally accommodated for. We extend
the probabilistic formulation to multiple conversa-
tion turns, and show equivalence with a retrieval
task, both facilitating better conversational analy-
sis of code-choice in particular and style interac-
tions in general.

In the future, we would like to use richer and
linguistically motivated features for code-choice,
including parts-of-speech, and indicators of bor-
rowing across languages. Another generalization
would be to also study LIWC words and markers
of sociolinguistic style in this framework. Finally,
longer-term accommodation effects, like conver-
gence being succeeded by divergence, or topical
effects on convergence, remain to be explored us-
ing a quantitative method like ours.

References
Peter Auer. 1995. The pragmatics of code-switching:

a sequential approach. In Lesley Milroy and Pieter
Muysken, editors, One speaker, two languages,
pages 115–135. Cambridge University Press.

Peter Auer. 1999. From codeswitching via language
mixing to fused lects: Toward a dynamic typology
of bilingual speech. International journal of bilin-
gualism, 3(4):309–332.

Peter Auer. 2005. A postscript: Code-switching and
social identity. Journal of pragmatics, 37(3):403–
410.

Peter Auer. 2013. Code-switching in conversation:
Language, interaction and identity. Routledge.

Anu Bissoonauth and Malcolm Offord. 2001. Lan-
guage use of mauritian adolescents in education.
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Develop-
ment, 22(5):381–400.

Lukas Bleichenbacher. 2008. Multilingualism in the
movies: Hollywood characters and their language
choices, volume 135. BoD–Books on Demand.

Richard y Bourhis, Shaha El-Geledi, and Itesh
Sachdev. 2007. Language, ethnicity and intergroup
relations. In Language, discourse and social psy-
chology, pages 15–50. Springer.

Richard Y Bourhis. 2008. The english-speaking com-
munities of quebec: Vitality, multiple identities and
linguicism. The Vitality of the English-Speaking



90

Communities of Quebec: From Community Decline
to Revival, Montréal, Centre détudes ethniques des
universités montréalaises, Université de Montréal.

Susan Meredith Burt. 1994. Code choice in intercul-
tural conversation. Pragmatics. Quarterly Publi-
cation of the International Pragmatics Association
(IPrA), 4(4):535–559.

Antoinette Camilleri. 1996. Language values and iden-
tities: Code switching in secondary classrooms in
malta. Linguistics and education, 8(1):85–103.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon,
and Susan Dumais. 2011. Mark my words!: lin-
guistic style accommodation in social media. In
Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
World wide web, pages 745–754. ACM.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lillian Lee.
2011. Chameleons in imagined conversations: A
new approach to understanding coordination of lin-
guistic style in dialogs. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 76–87. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jean-Marc Dewaele. 2010. Emotions in multiple lan-
guages. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK.

Susan Ervin-Tripp and Iliana Reyes. 2005. Child
codeswitching and adult content contrasts. Interna-
tional Journal of Bilingualism, 9(1):85–102.

J.A. Fishman. 1970. Sociolinguistics: a brief intro-
duction. Newbury House language series. Newbury
House.

Spandana Gella, Jatin Sharma, and Kalika Bali. 2013.
Query word labeling and back transliteration for
indian languages: Shared task system description.
FIRE Working Notes, 3.

Fred Genesee. 1982. The social psychological signifi-
cance of code switching in cross-cultural communi-
cation. Journal of language and social psychology,
1(1):1–27.

Fred Genesee and Richard Y Bourhis. 1988. Evalua-
tive reactions to language choice strategies: The role
of sociostructural factors. Language & Communica-
tion, 8(3-4):229–250.

Howard Giles. 2007. Communication accommodation
theory. Wiley Online Library.

Howard Giles, Nikolas Coupland, and IUSTINE Cou-
pland. 1991. 1. accommodation theory: Communi-
cation, context, and. Contexts of accommodation:
Developments in applied sociolinguistics, 1.

Howard Giles, Donald M Taylor, and Richard Bourhis.
1973. Towards a theory of interpersonal accommo-
dation through language: Some canadian data. Lan-
guage in society, 2(2):177–192.

John J Gumperz. 1982. Discourse strategies, volume 1.
Cambridge University Press.

Willem JM Levelt and Stephanie Kelter. 1982. Surface
form and memory in question answering. Cognitive
psychology, 14(1):78–106.

Eva Lösch. 2007. The construction of social distance
through code-switching: an exemplary analysis for
popular indian cinema. Department of Linguistics,
Technical University of Chemnitz.

Carol Myers-Scotton. 1995. Social motivations for
codeswitching: Evidence from Africa. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Carol Myers-Scotton. 2005. Multiple voices: An intro-
duction to bilingualism. Wiley-Blackwell.

Kate G Niederhoffer and James W Pennebaker. 2002.
Linguistic style matching in social interaction. Jour-
nal of Language and Social Psychology, 21(4):337–
360.

Rana D. Parshad, Suman Bhowmick, Vineeta Chand,
Nitu Kumari, and Neha Sinha. 2016. What is India
speaking? Exploring the “Hinglish” invasion. Phys-
ica A, 449:375–389.

Shana Poplack. 1988. Contrasting patterns of code-
switching in two communities. Codeswitching:
Anthropological and sociolinguistic perspectives,
215:44.

Adithya Pratapa and Monojit Choudhury. 2017. Quan-
titative characterization of code switching patterns
in complex multi-party conversations: A case study
on hindi movie scripts. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 75–84.

Shruti Rijhwani, Royal Sequiera, Monojit Choudhury,
Kalika Bali, and Chandra Sekhar Maddila. 2017.
Estimating code-switching on Twitter with a novel
generalized word-level language identification tech-
nique. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
ACL.

Koustav Rudra, Shruti Rijhwani, Rafiya Begum, Ka-
lika Bali, Monojit Choudhury, and Niloy Ganguly.
2016. Understanding language preference for ex-
pression of opinion and sentiment: What do Hindi-
English speakers do on Twitter? In EMNLP, pages
1131–1141.

Itesh Sachdev and Howard Giles. 2004. Bilingual ac-
commodation. The handbook of bilingualism, pages
353–378.

Carol Myers Scotton and William Ury. 1977. Bilingual
strategies: The social functions of code-switching.
International Journal of the sociology of language,
1977(13):5–20.

Olcay Sert. 2005. The functions of code-switching in
elt classrooms. Online Submission, 11(8).

https://books.google.co.in/books?id=-wtiAAAAMAAJ
https://books.google.co.in/books?id=-wtiAAAAMAAJ


91

Juni Söderberg Arnfast and J Normann Jørgensen.
2003. Code-switching as a communication, learn-
ing, and social negotiation strategy in first-year
learners of danish. International journal of applied
linguistics, 13(1):23–53.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: Liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of language
and social psychology, 29(1):24–54.

Paul J Taylor and Sally Thomas. 2008. Linguistic style
matching and negotiation outcome. Negotiation and
Conflict Management Research, 1(3):263–281.

Viniti Vaish. 2011. Terrorism, nationalism and west-
ernization: Code switching and identity in bolly-
wood. FM Hult, & KA King, K. A (Eds.). Edu-
cational linguistics in practice: Applying the local
globally and the global locally, pages 27–40.


