



















































Understanding the Effect of Gender and Stance in Opinion Expression in Debates on "Abortion"


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Computational Modeling of People’s Opinions, Personality, and Emotions in Social Media, pages 69–75
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Understanding the Effect of Gender and Stance on Opinion Expression in
Debates on “Abortion”

Esin Durmus
Cornell University

ed459@cornell.edu

Claire Cardie
Cornell University

cardie@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on understanding lin-
guistic differences across groups with different
self-identified gender and stance in expressing
their opinions about ABORTION. We provide a
new dataset consisting of users’ gender, stance
on ABORTION, as well as the debates in ABOR-
TION drawn from debate.org. We use the gen-
der and stance information to identify signif-
icant linguistic differences across individuals
with different gender and stance. We show the
importance of considering the stance informa-
tion along with the gender, since we observe
significant linguistic differences across indi-
viduals with different stance even within the
same gender group.

1 Introduction

Understanding the differences in writing style and
content across different demographic groups has
been an important research focus (Argamon et al.,
2003; Chong and Druckman, 2007). For exam-
ple, Schler et al. (2006) has studied how the writ-
ing style and the content of blogs varies with the
age and the gender of the blogger. We hypothe-
size that to study the actual linguistic differences
across different gender groups’ opinion expression
on a topic, it is necessary to control for the differ-
ences that could potentially be correlated with the
individuals’ stances on the topic rather than their
gender.

In this paper, we analyze linguistic factors that
are significantly different across individuals with
different gender and stance. We limit out discus-
sions to the topic of ABORTION in order to con-
trol for the differences in language that are corre-
lated with the topic. We include the text of de-
bates where a FEMALE and a MALE with oppos-
ing stances on ABORTION discusses some aspect

of this topic. We observe significant differences in
language usage across FEMALE and MALE. More-
over, we see significant differences even within a
gender when the individuals’ stances on the topic
is different. This suggests that the stance informa-
tion should be taken into account while studying
the impact of differences in demographics on lan-
guage use. The main contributions of our study
are three-fold:

• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work which computationally studies the ef-
fect of gender in opinion expression account-
ing for the individuals’ stance.

• We provide a dataset of debates on ABOR-
TION and user information of the debaters
participated in these debates.

• We investigate which linguistic features are
important for discriminating between groups
with different gender and stance in express-
ing opinions about ABORTION.

2 Related Work

There has been a tremendous amount of work
on understanding differences in writing styles be-
tween gender groups. Argamon et al. (2003)
has found that females use many more pro-
nouns whereas males use noun specifiers more
frequently in British National Corpus covering
a range of genres. Litvinova et al. (2017) has
looked at the differences in the frequencies of
some parts of speech (POS) between different
genders in Russian written texts. Morphologi-
cal features have shown to be important to dis-
criminate between genders in many European lan-
guages (Mikros, 2013; Bortolato, 2016). Schofield
and Mehr (2016) has studied significant linguistic
and structural features of dialogue to differentiate
genders in conversation and analyzed how these

69



effects relate to existing literature on gender in
film.

Mohammad and Yang (2011) has shown that
there are marked differences across genders in
how they use emotion words in work-place email.
They found that women use many words from
the joy-sadness axis, whereas men prefer terms
from the fear-trust axis. Thelwall et al. (2010) has
looked at the comments on MySpace and found
that females are more likely to give and receive
more positive comments than are males, but there
is no difference for negative comments.

Although previous work investigates discrim-
inative features to distinguish between different
gender groups, the effect of the stance on the
linguistic differences across these groups has not
been very well studied. It has been shown that
people with different stance talk about a partic-
ular topic in a different way (Chong and Druck-
man, 2007; Diermeier et al., 2012; McCaffrey and
Keys, 2000). Given that the linguistic differences
may also be correlated with the stance on a topic,
to better understand the actual effect of gender vs
stance, we propose a controlled setting where we
can account for differences in stance on the topic.
This allows us to study the effect of gender and the
stance simultaneously.

3 Data Description

For this work, we present a dataset of 1639
debates on ABORTION from October of 2007
until November of 2017 drawn from debate.org1.
The dataset includes information for 1545 users
that participated in debates on ABORTION. 265
of these users have identified their gender as
FEMALE and 648 of them have identified their
gender as MALE. Some examples for the debate
titles on ABORTION are as follows: “ABORTION
IS A CHOICE, NOT A RIGHT.”, “ABORTION
IS GENERALLY IMMORAL.”,“ABORTION IS
MURDER AND SHOULD BE ILLEGAL.”. From
1639 debates on ABORTION, we limit our study to
the debates in which one debater identifies their
gender as FEMALE and the other one identifies
their gender as MALE. We preferred to include
only the debates where a debater interacts with
someone having opposing gender since it controls
for the linguistic differences that can be correlated
with interacting with people from the same vs.

1The dataset will be made publicly available at
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/ esindurmus/.

different gender group.

Opinions on Abortion. Each user profile on
debate.org includes the user’s opinions on the
most controversial debate topics2. As ABORTION
is one of these controversial topics, each user
shares their stance on ABORTION3: either PRO (in
favor), CON (against), N/O (no opinion), N/S (not
saying) or UND (undecided). To study how the
stance along with the gender of the debaters af-
fect the language, from the debates including de-
baters with opposing genders, we keep the de-
bates where each debater identifies their stance
on ABORTION either as PRO or CON and two de-
baters’ self-identified stance on ABORTION is op-
posing (e.g. if DEBATER 1’s stance on ABORTION
is PRO then DEBATER 2’s stance is CON).
This controlled setting allows us to study the dif-
ferences in linguistic features across people with
different self-identified gender and stance when
they are interacting with someone from the oppos-
ing gender and stance.
In the following sections, we will use the fol-
lowing abbreviations: (PRO-FEMALE) for the de-
baters who self-identified their gender as FEMALE
and their stance on ABORTION as PRO, (CON-
FEMALE) for the debaters who self-identified their
gender as FEMALE and their stance on ABORTION
as CON. Similarly, for MALE, we use the abbrevi-
ations PRO-MALE and CON-MALE.

4 Divergence of language across different
groups

To understand how people with different genders
(FEMALE and MALE) and stance (PRO and CON)
talk about ABORTION, first, we applied the method
proposed by Monroe et al. (2009). This method
estimates the divergence between the two groups’
language by modeling word-usage as multinomial
distributions smoothed with a uniform Dirichlet
prior. The divergence between these two distribu-
tions is measured by log-odds ratio. Table 1 shows
the most discriminating words for each side of ev-
ery combinations of FEMALE/MALE genders and
PRO/CON sides4.
We observe that people who are PRO vs CON
use different terminologies to refer to the same
concept. For example, PRO- uses the word “fe-

2http://www.debate.org/big-issues/
3The website asks the users if ABORTION should be legal

or not.
4We performed stemming and lemmatization on the text.

70



PRO-FEMALE fetus, right, woman, sex, body, care, medical, emotion, really, alive.
CON-FEMALE baby, kill, cause, murder say, moral, wrong, abortion, human, womb.
PRO-MALE will, women, birth, pain, force, pregnancy, good, bad, society, reason.
CON-MALE human, unborn, kill, innocent, life, baby, development, crime, wrong, alive.
PRO-FEMALE sex, people, woman, adopt, care, choice, pregnancy, emotion, really, child, legal.
PRO-MALE moral, source, argument, will, human, conclusion, show, given, claim, logic.
CON-FEMALE baby, I’m, woman, don’t, health, want, mother, birth, think.
CON-MALE human, argument, fetus, right, unborn, crime, case, moral, definition, claim.

Table 1: The most discriminating words for FEMALE/MALE genders and PRO/CON sides (e.g. first two
rows shows the words which are important to discriminate between the word-usage distribution of PRO-
FEMALE and CON-FEMALE. The most discriminating words for PRO-FEMALE includes “fetus”, “right”,
and “woman” while the most discriminating words for CON-FEMALE includes “baby”, “kill”, and “ba-
bies”.).

tus” while CON- emphasizes words like “baby”
and “unborn”. This distinction is mainly be-
cause PRO- differentiates between a “fetus” and
“baby” as they claim that a “fetus” is not alive
and does not have rights unlike a “baby”. How-
ever, CON- mainly argues that life starts at con-
ception. This suggests that the differences in ter-
minology can be indicative of the differences in
stance. Also, the discriminative words suggests
that different gender groups have different mo-
tivations and justifications for their stance. We
see that the words used by PRO-MALE focuses
more on to the ethical, moral aspects of abortion,
and how society perceives ABORTION, providing
examples from other sources. However, PRO-
FEMALE emphasizes more on women’s rights and
choices. Moreover, while CON-MALE emphasiz-
ing more on the morality and human rights to
justify their arguments, CON-FEMALE emphasizes
more on women, women’s health and provides
more personal information and experiences. This
initial analysis suggests that there may be signif-
icant differences in language usage of different
groups and the aspects these groups focus on. In
the next section, we conduct a more fine-grained
analysis for certain linguistic features to explore
which linguistic features are important to discrim-
inate between these groups.

5 Analysis

In this section, we analyze the important features
to discriminate the opinions from people with dif-
ferent genders and stance. We describe the lin-
guistic features for which we observe a significant
difference for at least one the four groups.
For our analysis in this section, we combined

all the text utterances of PRO-FEMALE, CON-
FEMALE, PRO-MALE, and CON-MALE from the
debates. Then, we split combined text for each
group to sentences. Our final dataset includes
2716 sentences for PRO-FEMALE, 2215 sentences
for CON-FEMALE, 3010 sentences for PRO-MALE
and 2444 for CON-MALE. All our analysis in this
section is done at the sentence-level.

(a) Ratio of Negations (b) Ratio of Question Words

Figure 1: Ratio of negations and questions to
number of tokens. PRO-MALE and PRO-FEMALE
uses significantly more negation marks than CON-
MALE and CON-FEMALE. CON-FEMALE uses
significantly more question words than any other
group.

Sentence length. Previous work has found
that when mean sentence length is calculated,
women come out as the wordier gender in writing
(Weitz, 1976; Mulac and Lundell, 1994). How-
ever, in our experiments, we find that number of
tokens of the text of CON-MALE is significantly
higher than PRO-MALE and CON-FEMALE (p <
0.05)5. Similarly, number of characters of the
text of CON-MALE is significantly higher than

5All reported p values are computed with Welch’s t-test.
71



(a) Ratio of Proper Nouns (b) Ratio of Cardinals (c) Ratio of Existentials (d) Ratio of Entity Type ’Per-
son’

Figure 2: Ratio of Proper Nouns, Cardinals, Existential “there” and PERSON named entity.

(a) Ratio of Negative Affect
Words

(b) Ratio of Positive Affect
Words

(c) Ratio of Ambiguous Af-
fect Words

(d) Sentiment polarity

Figure 3: Ratio of negative, positive and ambiguous affect words, and sentiment polarity.

PRO-MALE (p < 0.05). We do not observe any
significant differences in sentence length between
other groups.

(a) Ratio of Second Person
Pronouns

(b) Ratio of Third Person Pro-
nouns

Figure 4: Ratio of number of personal pronouns to
number of tokens.

Personal pronouns. Gleser et al. (1959) and
Mulac et al. (1986) have shown that women fre-
quently are the higher users of the personal pro-
nouns when the entire category of personal pro-
nouns is considered. Despite this finding, we do
not observe any significant differences across dif-
ferent groups when we look at the total number of
personal pronouns. We also do not observe any
significant difference across these groups in first-

person pronoun usage. Figure 4 shows the ratio
of number of second-person pronouns and third-
person pronouns to number of tokens for each
group. We find that PRO-FEMALE uses signif-
icantly more6 third person pronouns than PRO-
MALE. Moreover, CON-FEMALE uses signifi-
cantly (p < 0.05) more second person pronouns
than any other group.

Negation. Mulac et al. (2000) has shown that
male uses more negation words than female in a
setting where 36 female and 50 male managers
giving professional criticism in a role play. In
our experiments, we did not observe significant
differences across individuals with different gen-
ders; however, we observed significant differences
across individuals with different stance. Figure
1(a) shows the ratio of negation marks to number
of tokens. PRO-MALE and PRO-FEMALE uses sig-
nificantly more (p < 0.001) negation marks than
both CON-MALE and CON-FEMALE.

Question words. We look at the ratio of to-
tal number of question words7 to number of to-
kens. As we see in Figure 1(b), CON-FEMALE uses

6Our comparisons are made after we normalize the feature
values with number of tokens in the sentences.

7includes “why”,“when”,“how”,“what”,“who”,“whose”,
“whom”,“where”, “whose”,“whether”.

72



significantly more question words than any other
group (p < 0.0001). We observe that the question
words are used not only to ask questions but also
to form adjective clauses. These clauses are used
to provide more specific information.

POS tag types. In Figure 2, we see the ratio of
Proper Nouns 2(a), Cardinals 2(b), and Existential
“there” 2(c) to number of tokens for each group.
We observe that CON-MALE uses significantly
more (p < 0.001) Proper Nouns than both PRO-
FEMALE and CON-FEMALE. Moreover, PRO-
MALE uses significantly more (p < 0.001) Proper
Nouns than PRO-FEMALE. We find that users use
Proper Nouns generally to cite relevant sources.

CON-MALE uses significantly more Cardinals
than any other group8. PRO-FEMALE uses sig-
nificantly more Cardinals than CON-FEMALE and
PRO-MALE (p < 0.05). We observe that Cardi-
nals are used to refer to a source or something hap-
pened in the past (e.g. to provide a date).
We also find that CON-FEMALE and PRO-MALE
uses significantly more existential “there” than any
other group (p < 0.001) and CON-MALE uses
significantly more existential “there” than PRO-
FEMALE (p < 0.05).

Named Entity Mentions. For each entity type
such as PERSON, LOCATION, ORGANIZATION,
we look at the ratio of words belonging to these
classes to number of tokens. As 2(d) shows, CON-
MALE has significantly more mentions for entity
type PERSON than any other group. We observe
that CON-MALE uses PERSON entity type while
citing other people’s ideas.

Affect and Sentiment. We used Wordnet-
Affect (Valitutti, 2004) to find affective concepts
correlated with affective words and compare the
affective concepts across these different groups.
We look at the words associated with negative,
positive and ambiguous emotions. Figure 3 shows
the ratio of negative 3(a), positive 3(b) and am-
biguous 3(d) affect words to number of tokens
for each group. We find that CON-FEMALE uses
significantly more (p < 0.05) negative and posi-
tive affect words than any other group and PRO-
FEMALE uses significantly more ambiguous affect
words any other group (p < 0.05). We also look at
the overall sentiment of the sentences and we see
that both CON-FEMALE and PRO-FEMALE have
significantly more positive sentiment than PRO-
MALE (p < 0.05). Although we observe that

8p < 0.0001 for CON-FEMALE and PRO-MALE, p < 0.05
for PRO-FEMALE.

female uses more affect and sentiment words in
some cases as also found by Danner et al. (2001),
the usage of affect and sentiment words changes
depending on the stance.
Our analysis in this section shows that there are
significant differences in linguistic features be-
tween different genders and the individuals with
different stance within the same gender group. For
example, we see that the linguistic differences in
use of negation is more correlated with stance than
the gender. This finding highlights the importance
of accounting for the stance information to under-
stand actual linguistic differences between differ-
ent genders.

6 Task : Predicting the gender and the
stance.

In the previous section, we demonstrate some lin-
guistic differences between groups with different
gender and stance. This analysis highlights the im-
portance of considering the stance while analyzing
the differences in opinion expression for different
gender groups. In this section, we look at whether
the linguistic features we analyze in the previous
section are predictive of the group of the person
who utters a given piece of text. From the debates
we described, we extracted all the turns and la-
bel whether they come from PRO-FEMALE, CON-
FEMALE, PRO-MALE or CON-MALE. Our dataset
for this task includes 451 turns9. The task is given
a turn, predicting which one of these four groups
the person who utters this turn belongs to.

6.1 Methodology

We treat this task as a multi-class (4-class) classi-
fication task and we used Logistic Regression10.
We evaluate prediction accuracy, precision and
recall using 5-fold cross validation approach. We
pick the model parameters for each split with
3-fold cross validation on the training set. We
perform ablation tests for the linguistic features
analyzed in the previous section.

9 105 of them are coming from CON-MALE, 120 of them
are coming from CON-FEMALE, 127 of them are coming
from PRO-MALE, and 99 of them are coming from PRO-
FEMALE.

10with one-vs.-rest strategy. We optimized the regularizer
(`1 or `2) and the regularization parameter C (between 10−5

and 105).
73



Features Accuracy Precision Recall
Majority 26.61 6.65 25.00
Length 27.48 19.82 26.65
Tf-idf 43.46 43.86 42.82
Negation 29.25 14.84 27.06
Named entity: PERSON 31.04 23.30 28.78
Questions 32.37 18.00 29.77
Ambiguous affect words 29.92 21.08 27.93
Tf-idf+Questions+Ambiguous affect words 44.34 44.01 43.34

Table 2: Results for the ablation tests. The best model includes Tf-idf, Questions and Ambiguous affect
words features.

6.1.1 Baselines
Majority. Picking the majority group from the
training data, as the predicted group.
Length. Using number of tokens in the utterance
as a feature.

6.2 Result and Analysis

Table 2 includes the macro-average scores for the
baselines and results for the ablation tests for the
linguistic features performing better than the base-
lines. We see that Tf-idf features perform signifi-
cantly better than baseline. We see that important
Tf-idf features corresponds to the discriminative
words described in Section 4. These features in-
clude “kill”, “murder”, “right”, “life”, “woman”,
“baby”, “mother” etc. This suggest that Tf-idf fea-
tures are helpful to capture the differences in ter-
minology and the motivation behind an individ-
ual’s reasoning. We see that some of the linguis-
tic features such as Negation, Named Entity: PER-
SON, Questions and Ambiguous affect words that
we find to be discriminative in Section 5 have sig-
nificantly more predictive power than majority and
length baselines. The best predictive model in-
cludes Tf-idf features, questions, and Ambiguous
affect words.

7 Conclusion

In this paper we show that accounting for the
stance is important in order to effectively study the
difference in linguistic features between different
genders. We used both stance and gender infor-
mation of the users and we analyzed differences
in language across these different groups. We find
that some linguistic features are more correlated
with the stance of the individuals while others are
more correlated with the gender. As a future di-
rection, we would like to explore methods for rep-

resenting user information, that captures various
aspects of a user such as education level, political
ideology, and religious beliefs, in order study lin-
guistic difference across different groups of people
in a more controlled manner.

8 Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by NSF grant
SES-1741441 and DARPA DEFT Grant FA8750-
13-2-0015. The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the official
policies or endorsements, either expressed or im-
plied, of NSF, DARPA or the U.S. Government.
We thank Faisal Ladhak, Ana Smith, Amr Sharaf
and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
feedback and suggestions. We also thank the Cor-
nell NLP group for their insightful comments.

References
Shlomo Argamon, Moshe Koppel, Jonathan M. Fine,

and Anat Rachel Shimoni. 2003. Gender, genre, and
writing style in formal written texts.

Claudia Bortolato. 2016. Intertextual distance of func-
tion words as a tool to detect an author’s gender: A
corpus-based study on contemporary italian litera-
ture. Glottometrics, 34:28–43.

Dennis Chong and James N. Druckman. 2007. Fram-
ing theory. Annual Review of Political Science,
10(1):103–126.

Deborah D Danner, David A Snowdon, and Wallace V
Friesen. 2001. Positive emotions in early life and
longevity: Findings from the nun study. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80(5):804–813.

Daniel Diermeier, Jean-Franois Godbout, Bei Yu, and
Stefan Kaufmann. 2012. Language and ideology
in congress. British Journal of Political Science,
42(1):3155.

74



Goldine C. Gleser, Louis A. Gottschalk, and Watkins
John. 1959. The relationship of sex and intelligence
to choice of words: A normative study of verbal be-
havior. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 15(2):182–
191.

Tatiana Litvinova, Pavel Seredin, Olga Litvinova, and
Olga Zagorovskaya. 2017. Differences in type-
token ratio and part-of-speech frequencies in male
and female russian written texts. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Stylistic Variation, pages 69–73.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Dawn McCaffrey and Jennifer Keys. 2000. Com-
petitive framing processes in the abortion debate:
Polarization-vilification, frame saving, and frame
debunking. The Sociological Quarterly, 41(1):41–
61.

GK Mikros. 2013. Systematic stylometric differences
in men and women authors: a corpus-based study.
Issues in quantitative linguistics 3. Dedicated to
Karl-Heinz Best on the occasion of his 70th birth-
day, pages 206–223.

Saif M Mohammad and Tony Wenda Yang. 2011.
Tracking sentiment in mail: How genders differ on
emotional axes. In Proceedings of the 2nd work-
shop on computational approaches to subjectivity
and sentiment analysis, pages 70–79. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Burt L. Monroe, Michael Colaresi, and Kevin M.
Quinn. 2009. Fightin words: Lexical feature selec-
tion and evaluation for identifying the content of po-
litical conflict.

Anthony Mulac and Torborg Louisa Lundell. 1994.
Effects of gender-linked language differences in
adults’ written discourse: Multivariate tests of
language effects. Language & Communication,
14(3):299–309.

Anthony Mulac, Torborg Louisa Lundell, and James J.
Bradac. 1986. Male/female language differences
and attributional consequences in a public speak-
ing situation: Toward an explanation of the gen-
derlinked language effect. Communication Mono-
graphs, 53(2):115–129.

Anthony Mulac, David R Seibold, and Jennifer Lee
Farris. 2000. Female and male managers and profes-
sionals criticism giving: Differences in language use
and effects. Journal of Language and Social Psy-
chology, 19(4):389–415.

Jonathan Schler, Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon,
and James Pennebaker. 2006. Effects of age and
gender on blogging. In Computational Approaches
to Analyzing Weblogs - Papers from the AAAI Spring
Symposium, Technical Report, volume SS-06-03,
pages 191–197.

Alexandra Schofield and Leo Mehr. 2016. Gender-
distinguishing features in film dialogue. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Lin-

guistics for Literature, pages 32–39. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mike Thelwall, David Wilkinson, and Sukhvinder Up-
pal. 2010. Data mining emotion in social network
communication: Gender differences in myspace.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence and Technology, 61(1):190–199.

Ro Valitutti. 2004. Wordnet-affect: an affective exten-
sion of wordnet. In In Proceedings of the 4th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 1083–1086.

Shirley Weitz. 1976. Sex differences in nonverbal com-
munication. Sex Roles, 2(2):175–184.

75


