















































Lexical Networks in !Xung


Proceedings of the 15th SIGMORPHON Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology, pages 11–20
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 The Special Interest Group on Computational Morphology and Phonology

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17

11

Lexical Networks in !Xung

Syed-Amad Hussain
Department of Computer Science

The Ohio State University
amadh881@gmail.com

Micha Elsner
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
melsner0@gmail.com

Amanda Miller
[24]7.ai

San Jose, California
amanda.miller@247.ai

Abstract

We investigate the lexical network proper-
ties of the large phoneme inventory South-
ern African language Mangetti Dune !Xung as
it compares to English and other commonly-
studied languages. Lexical networks are
graphs in which nodes (words) are linked to
their minimal pairs; global properties of these
networks are believed to mediate lexical ac-
cess in the minds of speakers. We show that
the network properties of !Xung are within the
range found in previously-studied languages.
By simulating data (”pseudolexicons”) with
varying levels of phonotactic structure, we
find that the lexical network properties of
!Xung diverge from previously-studied lan-
guages when fewer phonotactic constraints are
retained. We conclude that lexical network
properties are representative of an underlying
cognitive structure which is necessary for ef-
ficient word retrieval and that the phonotac-
tics of !Xung may be shaped by a selective
pressure which preserves network properties
within this cognitively useful range.

1 Introduction

We investigate the lexical network proper-
ties (LNPs) of the Southern African language
Mangetti Dune !Xung (hereafter !Xung) as they
compare to previously-studied languages. !Xung
has 87 consonant phonemes, substantially larger
than most of the world’s languages (Miller, 2016;
Miller-Ockhuizen, 2003; Dickens, 1994; Mad-
dieson, 2013). Many of these sounds are clicks,
typologically rare sounds found mostly in South-
ern Africa. In !Xung, close to 90% of con-
tent words begin with an initial click. While
these properties place !Xung distinctly apart from
most commonly-studied languages at the phone-
mic level, we analyze its lexical network (LN)
to determine whether its mental lexicon is struc-
turally different from those of languages with

smaller inventories.
In a LN, as shown in Figure 1, nodes represent

words and edges between nodes represent mini-
mal pairs (Vitevitch, 2008). Vitevitch (2008) ar-
gues that the high connectivity and tendency to-
ward clustering found in the English language lex-
icon are important aids to word learning and re-
trieval; later work finds similar properties in other
lexicons (Arbesman et al., 2010; Shoemark et al.,
2016). Some claims about the linguistic relevance
of LNPs have been qualified by experiments show-
ing that certain property values are inherent to
the construction process of the network and can
be replicated even when words are sampled from
simple generative processes (Stella and Brede,
2015; Gruenenfelder and Pisoni, 2009; Turnbull
and Peperkamp, 2016; Brown et al., 2018), though
all these studies except Brown et al. point out that
the LNs of natural languages maintain some dis-
tinctive properties.

Because !Xung has a very large phoneme in-
ventory, it might in principle have very different
network properties from previously studied lan-
guages. Any given word might have far more min-
imally different neighbors; alternately, the words
might be spread out more thinly across a wider
phonemic space. Our main questions in this study
are (1) whether the network properties of !Xung
differ from those of previously-studied languages,
and, (2) if not, what phonological properties of the
language lead to this network structure despite the
large phoneme inventory?

Our initial analysis shows that most of the LNPs
of !Xung lie within the range of values found
for other languages in previous work. We next
look at how these properties might vary over a
range of lexicon sizes. Because large lexicons for
!Xung are not available, we conduct these anal-
yses on simulated data (“pseudolexicons”) sam-
pled from trigram models, following Gruenen-



12

Figure 1: Example lexical network centered around the
word “plan”: (Turnbull and Peperkamp, 2016, Fig. 1).

felder and Pisoni (2009). Though this analysis
must be considered preliminary due to the weak-
ness of the trigram model, a comparison against
the reported values from Shoemark et al. (2016)
again finds no substantial difference. Having an-
swered our first question, we turn to the second:
we construct pseudolexicons with varying degrees
of phonological structure, following Turnbull and
Peperkamp (2016), and compare them to one an-
other. We show that !Xung is more susceptible to
the loss of phonotactic structure than English; sim-
plistic sampling procedures create extremely un-
natural lexicons due to the inventory size. To de-
termine what phonotactic properties give the ac-
tual lexicon its shape, we create additional pseu-
dolexicons that focus on specific phonological
properties of !Xung. We find that pseudolexicons
based on syllabic structure, including the syllable
type inventory and co-occurrence restrictions on
onset and rhyme within the syllable, move closer
to the properties of the actual language, although
a disparity still remains present. Overall, we find
that !Xung has similar LNPs to previously studied
languages. However, experiments with sampled
lexicons show that when its syllable structure is
disrupted, disparities between !Xung and English
arise, hinting at a greater reliance on phonotactics
to maintain the shape of the network.

2 Background

We conduct our analysis on LNs to derive cogni-
tive and phonotactic conclusions. Vitevitch (2008)
first presents this network model which assigns
words as nodes and minimal pairs between these
words as edges. He finds that lexical retrieval and
language acquisition is aided by higher network
density – largely defined by the network proper-
ties of assortative mixing and average clustering
coefficient. Vitevitch (2008) and subsequent work

on networks (Shoemark et al., 2016; Turnbull and
Peperkamp, 2016) describe network structure in
terms of four properties: Fraction in Largest Is-
land is defined as the percent of the lexicon that
is connected to the largest component, or island,
in the network and characterizes the global con-
nectivity of the network. The remaining three
properties are calculated within this largest island:
Degree Assortativity Coefficient shows the ten-
dency of nodes to be connected to other nodes with
similar degrees, where with higher values the cen-
tral “hubs” of the network are connected to one
another (Newman and Girvan, 2003); Average
Shortest Path Length (ASPL) averages the min-
imum number of hops it takes to get between any
two nodes in the largest island, similar to the game
“Six Degrees to Kevin Bacon”; average Cluster-
ing Coefficient (CC) is defined as the number of
edges that exist between neighbors divided by the
number of possible edges between neighbors and
can be thought of as “are my neighbors also neigh-
bors with each other” or “do all my friends know
each other?”.

Later work on this model points out that
network statistics are affected by lexicon size,
phoneme inventory size, word length distribution,
and the inclusion of morphological variants (Shoe-
mark et al., 2016). Since these cannot all be con-
trolled in cross-linguistic comparisons, indirect
comparisons are often made. The phonological
properties of the language can be used to generate
pseudolexicons sampled from character language
models, which are examined over several lexicon
sizes. The trends for each language are then com-
pared qualitatively against each other language.

Further work expands the use of pseudolexicons
to determine the source of the network property
statistics (Turnbull and Peperkamp, 2016). Instead
of attempting to replicate the real phonotactic reg-
ularities of the language, pseudolexicons can vary
in how many, and which, phonotactic properties
of the original language they retain. By com-
paring several such pseudolexicons, Turnbull and
Peperkamp (2016) conclude that the typical range
of values of average CC are intrinsic to all LNs,
typical values of largest island size and ASPL are
determined by phonological rules, and degree as-
sortativity may reflect some higher-level organiza-
tion principle within the lexicon.

While this kind of previous research has estab-
lished that some lexical network properties depend



13

on phonology, their experiments tell us relatively
little about what specific phonological constraints
have the greatest effect. In order to do so, we must
move beyond comparing real languages to sam-
ples from generic statistical processes like ngram
models and create distributions which enforce in-
dividual phonotactic constraints.

We employ a series of pseudolexicons which
preserve various aspects of !Xung phonology to
determine which phonological rules within these
languages are responsible for preserving the typ-
ical values of largest island size and ASPL. We
find that constraints on click placement and sylla-
ble structure can explain most, but not all the dif-
ference between randomly generated pseudolexi-
cons and the real data.

3 Phonological Properties of !Xung

Mangetti Dune !Xung belongs to the Kxa lan-
guage family (formerly known as the North-
ern Khoisan branch of the Khoisan family), and
is a member of the Northern branch of the
Juu subgroup, according to the classification of
Sands (2003). The complete sound inventory
of Mangetti Dune !Xung is provided in Miller
(2016). Mangetti Dune !Xung contains 87 con-
sonants, 45 of which are click consonants; its
vowel inventory is also extremely large. There are
only five contrastive vowel qualities, but there are
many contrastive vocalic phonation types (modal,
breathy, epiglottalized and glottalized), and the
language also contrasts oral vs. nasal vowels.
Nasality can combine with all the different phona-
tion types, though there are some restrictions on
which vowel qualities can combine with epiglot-
talization and nasalization. In addition, !Xung is a
tone language; each mora may bear one of 4 dis-
tinct tone levels with some restrictions on their co-
occurrence (Miller-Ockhuizen, 2003), leading to
7 possible contrastive tone patterns that occur on
content words. (In our analysis, for purposes of
determining minimal pairs, the tones are consid-
ered as contrastive features of the vowels.) Over
90% of content words in !Xung commence with a
click consonant, while function words largely be-
gin with a pulmonic (non-click) consonant.

Miller-Ockhuizen (2003) describes the phonol-
ogy of a related Juu lect, Ju’hoansi. All na-
tive roots within Ju’hoansi (and !Xung) are ei-
ther monosyllabic or bisyllabic with loan words
constituting any trisyllabic roots. A syllable con-

sists of an onset consonant followed by a 1 or 2-
vowel nucleus with 2-vowel nuclei only occurring
within the first syllable. The only coda consonants
are nasals which end some monosyllabic roots.
Within a word, 89 consonant types can occur in the
initial position while only 4 types occur in medial
position. Initial consonants are 91% pulmonic and
velaric plosives, which includes all click types,
with fricatives and nasal or liquid sonorants con-
stituting the rest of the occurrences. Medial con-
sonants are effectively limited to the sonorants B
and R (98% of medial consonants) and the nasals
m and n. Guttural consonants and vowels only
occur within the initial syllable and both never
co-occur within the same syllable. The extensive
co-occurrence restrictions in !Xung continue be-
tween tone and guttural vowels and consonants
where, for instance, roots with partially epiglotal-
lized vowels are always bitonal while roots with
fully epiglottalized vowels are level toned. There
are also several co-occurrence restrictions based
on place of articulation with cross-height cross-
place dipthongs only occurring in roots with back
clicks and dipthongs with epiglottalized vowels
and pharyngeal consonants causing the dipthon-
gization of following front vowels. See Miller
(2016) and Heikkinen (1986) for differences be-
tween Ju’hoansi and !Xung.

4 Basic properties

We begin by establishing the actual LNPs of the
!Xung lexicon and comparing them to previous
work.

4.1 Methodology

Our !Xung corpus contains 974 words, collected
and transcribed into IPA as part of field work
(Miller et al., 2008). For comparison, we use
an English lexicon containing the 974 highest
frequency words from the Fisher corpus (Cieri
et al., 2004), converted to IPA using the CMU
dictionary— though we do not believe that the
!Xung lexicon contains strictly the most frequent
words of the language, we do believe that the field
workers chose to record words which they encoun-
tered frequently in storytelling and conversation.

We build each LN by assigning words as nodes
and minimal pairs as edges. We build and analyze
our networks using the python NetworkX pack-
age. From these networks, we derive the Fraction
in Largest Island, Degree Assortativity, ASPL, and



14

Figure 2: Two panels of Figure 4 from Shoemark et al.,
with superimposed dots for !Xung; colored lines show
real language, dotted lines show pseudolexicons.

Average Clustering Coefficient. We then qualita-
tively compare these results to the values for the 8
reported languages1 in Shoemark et al. (2016).

4.2 Results

The LN degree statistics are summarized in Table
2. Despite the potential for very large or small
numbers of minimal pairs per word, we find that
the actual maximum degree (number of pairs) is
14, the minimum is 1, and most words have about
4 neighbors. Lexical network properties are shown
in Table 1. (Comparison values for the LNPs are
derived from Shoemark’s Figure 4 by reading the
graph at the smallest lexicon size available; two
panels of this graph are reproduced as Figure 2.)
!Xung’s value for Fraction in Largest Island falls
within the observed range of variation; for Aver-
age Shortest Path and Degree Assortativity, !Xung
represents an extreme of the observed values, but
falls quite close to the measurements for German.
Only for Clustering Coefficient is the !Xung value
an outlier; !Xung is more tightly clustered than the
other languages in the sample.

5 Analysis 1

The analysis above did not show definitive differ-
ences between !Xung and previously studied lan-
guages, but, as argued by Shoemark et al. (2016),
LN measurements are best viewed as trends over
several lexicon sizes rather than point measure-
ments. With the limited data available for !Xung,

1Seven Indo-European languages of Europe: English,
Dutch, German, Polish, French, Spanish and Portuguese—
and one language isolate: Basque.

Property !Xung Closest value
% Lgst. Island 36.5 32 (Dutch)
ASPL 8.74 8 (German)
Deg. Assrt. 52.8 52 (German)
CC 52.4 35 (Polish)

Table 1: Lexical network properties of !Xung, along
with closest comparison values from Shoemark et al.
(2016).

Median degree 4
Mean degree 4.357
Min degree 1
Max degree 14
Degree std. dev. 2.749

Table 2: Degree (minimal pair) statistics of !Xung.

we cannot obtain more than 974 actual words; in-
stead, we follow previous work in using sampled
data as a proxy. Though sampled data cannot
be considered fully reliable, it can help us to un-
derstand whether !Xung phonology would proba-
bly create extreme LNP values if more data were
available, or whether the outcomes would likely
remain in the typical range.

5.1 Methodology

To create pseudolexicons that most accurately cap-
ture the phonotactics of each language, we use
a trigram model with Ney’s absolute discount-
ing(Ney et al., 1994)2. Using these probabili-
ties, we can extend the lexicon size by simulating
“words” similar to those in the actual language.

We train the trigram models using the SRI Lan-
guage Modeling (SRILM) Toolkit (Stolcke, 2002;
Stolcke et al., 2011). We generate pseudolexicons
of size 210, 211, 212, and 213 for each language
(we did not generate a 213 length pseudolexicon
for English) and average relevant network statis-
tics over 50 trials.

5.2 Results

The trendlines appear in Figure 3. In an initial
overview, we see that !Xung trend lines are sim-
ilar to those for trigram-sampled English for most
of the properties; Fraction in Largest Island trends
upward (the network grows more connected), as
does Degree Assortativity (“hubs” in the network

2Previous work used Kneser-Ney smoothing (Chen and
Goodman, 1999); this is not as suitable for character-level
modeling, since it uses a type-based backoff strategy de-
signed for the sparsity of word rather than character statistics.



15

Figure 3: Trigram pseudolexicon network property val-
ues for trigram pseudolexicons of English and !Xung,
and natural English data.

grow closer together), while clustering coefficient
remains flat. The trend for ASPL differs (!Xung
remains flat while English, like most languages
in Shoemark’s sample, increases). However, there
are long flat intervals in Shoemark’s trendlines for
ASPL in German, Dutch and Portuguese.

For most of the LNPs, the slope of the nat-
ural English trendline is similar to that for tri-
gram English, indicating that the language model
is a reasonable proxy for additional data. How-
ever, for Fraction in Largest Island, the slope is
reversed; real English grows less rather than more
connected. This is probably due to the different
lexical strata within English (less common words
are often borrowings with different phonological
patterns) (Shoemark et al., 2016). Without addi-
tional !Xung data, we cannot know how well the
trigram LM corresponds to the real trendlines for
!Xung, nor whether the real slope for Fraction in
Largest Island would increase or decrease. How-
ever, increasing slopes are linguistically plausible;
Spanish and Portuguese have increasing Largest
Island sizes.

Overall, then, the trendlines for !Xung are plau-
sibly within the range of variation shown by pre-
viously studied languages. The analysis below
shows that trigrams are a poorer proxy for the
!Xung lexicon than for English, generating a re-
alistic size for the largest island but erroneous val-
ues for shortest path and assortativity, so these re-
sults must be taken with a substantial grain of salt.
However, like the LNP statistics above, they repre-
sent converging evidence that !Xung’s lexical net-
work is not a linguistic outlier in the same way as
its phonemic inventory.

6 Analysis 2

Analysis 1, like the preliminary examination,
showed that the LNPs of !Xung broadly resem-
ble those of previously studied languages. This
raises the question: what phonological properties
allow !Xung to have similar LNPs to these lan-
guages despite having a much larger phoneme in-
ventory? In this analysis, we employ the methods
used by Gruenenfelder and Pisoni (2009); Stella
and Brede (2015); Turnbull and Peperkamp (2016)
to create pseudolexicons with varying levels of
phonological structure. A comparison of these
pseudolexicons highlights the phonotactic dispar-
ities between !Xung and English.

6.1 Methodology

For each of our corpora, we generate the fol-
lowing pseudolexicons also used in Turnbull and
Peperkamp (2016): Uniform – randomly se-
lects from the phoneme inventory; Zipfian – ran-
domly selects from the phoneme inventory given
a Zipfian distribution; Scrambled – scrambles the
phonemes of a word in place; Bigram – like the
previously mentioned trigram LM; Trigram. We
also create a Unigram pseudolexicon which ran-
domly selects from the actual phoneme distribu-
tion. Pseudolexicons which sample single letters
are given the same word length distribution as the
original lexicon. Examples of words from these
pseudolexicons are shown in Table 4 within the
appendix. We compare the network properties
of these pseudolexicons (averaged over 50 trials)
within each language.

Since the pseudolexicons represent artificial
distributions, which are known a priori to differ
from the true distribution of words in the language,
null hypothesis significance testing is inappropri-
ate to assess the degree of difference— an arbi-
trarily small p-value could always be obtained by
sampling more data. Instead, we use Cohen’s d as
a measure of the effect size; d measures the differ-
ence between means scaled by the standard devia-
tion.

6.2 Results

Table 3 shows the results, also plotted in Fig-
ure 4. The lower right panel shows that only
the bigram and trigram lexicons generate realis-
tic sizes for the largest island. Other pseudolex-
icons are highly disconnected. This is especially
the case for !Xung relative to English; for instance,



16

Unif Zipf Scram Unig Bigr Trigr Natural
% Lgst. (mean) 0.7 24.9 6.1 9.0 41.7 37.7 36.6
% Lgst. (d) -246.9 -6.0 -15.1 -15.3 2.6 0.6
% Lgst. (mean) 8.6 32.1 12.5 18.3 33.3 36.6 38.4
% Lgst. (d) -30.3 -4.6 -13.4 -9.8 -3.5 -1.1
ASPL (mean) 2.0 4.4 5.8 5.9 3.9 3.7 8.7
ASPL (d) -17.9 -13.6 -1.9 -3.1 -24.0 -23.7
ASPL (mean) 5.1 4.2 6.0 5.9 4.6 5.2 6.1
ASPL (d) -1.4 -12.1 -0.1 -0.4 -7.5 -3.1
DA (mean) -27.0 35.1 26.9 31.5 80.1 80.5 52.8
DA (d) -3.7 -2.6 -2.1 -2.0 11.2 14.4
DA (mean) 39.1 32.6 46.8 45.8 71.1 72.3 43.6
DA (d) -0.5 -3.6 0.5 0.5 7.8 8.0
CC (mean) 35.6 58.7 50.1 48.9 58.6 60.8 52.4
CC (d) -0.7 2.1 -0.4 -0.7 3.5 4.2
CC (mean) 37.3 44.1 39.0 36.3 42.9 42.5 36.5
CC (d) 0.2 4.1 0.7 -0.1 3.5 2.9

Table 3: Pseudolexicon LNPs (!Xung in white, English in gray); mean and Cohen’s d versus the natural language.

Figure 4: Network property values for pseudolexicon
models of English and !Xung, ordered by phonotactic
similarity to the natural language, with right-most be-
ing the natural language itself.

the English uniform pseudolexicon (far left) has
nearly 10% of the nodes in the largest island, while
!Xung has essentially none on average, with ex-
tremely high variance. This disparity between lan-
guages is caused by the large phonemic inven-
tory, which creates fewer minimal pair matches
when randomly sorted, as in the uniform, Zipfian,
scrambled, and unigram pseudolexicons. !Xung
thus serves as a counterexample to recent claims
that simplistic random lexicons created with un-
igram sampling can mimic the properties of real
LNs (Brown et al., 2018). The disparity begins
to shrink as the pseudolexicons become more nat-
ural, suggesting that disparities due to the large

phonemic inventory are reduced by phonological
structure and that phonotactic constraints on word
forms in !Xung lead the lexicon to include more
minimal pairs.

For the lexicons with reasonable island sizes,
the values of clustering coefficient are relatively
stable across all pseudolexicons, as in Turnbull
and Peperkamp (2016), though again highly vari-
able for the Uniform lexicon. The shortest path
and associativity measures show that Bigram and
Trigram lexicons are more compact and central-
ized than the actual lexicon for both !Xung and
English (paths are shorter and associativity is
higher). However, these differences are larger for
!Xung than for English as measured by Cohen’s d.
The Unigram and Scrambled lexicons, meanwhile,
are more realistically dispersed, but also discon-
nected (< 10% of nodes in the largest island).

Overall, the results show that the network struc-
ture of !Xung reflects properties which go beyond
the frequencies of individual segments, including
some characteristics which are poorly captured
even by trigram models. The differences between
simple pseudolexicons and the real properties of
the language are generally greater (in terms of d)
for !Xung than for English. Thus, we conclude
that the !Xung network is less resilient to phono-
tactic disruption than the English network.



17

English !Xung
Uniform NsT, iEhh, iZgmU ‚u}h‚e
Zipfian oUp@, O@EN@, NOæOs óm̀n|̊n|h, g{Ǹ̀!, g|ho
Scrambled ETlih, @wrdn@IN,

krlj@Ea@n
@̀{N, e̊N!he, ‚aàh!

Semi-
Scrambled

(N/A) {N@̀, N̊!hee, !àh‚a

CV Enf@zamEs, vIlOk-
itdr, nna@ln

n@̋!’ùN|, g{áXúB,
ŚinòZ

KCV (N/A) N!dóm, }’zùs’,
g{lÚs

Free O+R (N/A) !‚on‚a, dZ‚a, g{‚oĳn

Pos. O+R (N/A) g}@́, N!òĳvà, wì
Syllable (N/A) N̊|h ú́in, {àòn,

g!‚@mHè
Unigram wjork, sEgit, njNe úŃ{úlùb, téùXàĳà,

íl{!̀iò
Bigram rnOsm, Oj@, tekjks !Pḿ, máĳ̀ìi, |’ùB‚an

Trigram plæN, lIN, hæv N̊|h ù̀i, N̊|h‚ulà, t‚ah

Natural
Lexicon

hElTi, w@nd@rIN,
kEr@lajn@

{@̀N, N̊!hee, !‚aàh

Table 4: Three random words from pseudolexicons.

7 Analysis 3

We continue our investigation by attempting to
determine which phonotactic properties of !Xung
might be most important in maintaining its struc-
ture. Several properties of !Xung phonology might
be important in constraining its network structure.
These include its relatively simple syllabic struc-
ture, the positional constraints on initial medial
consonants, and the co-occurrence restrictions on
consonants and vowels within the syllable. To
highlight these properties, we compare our Scram-
bled pseudolexicon to pseudolexicons designed to
respect some of these properties.

7.1 Methodology

In the CV lexicon, we extract a distribution over
word templates by transforming each consonant
into C and each vowel into V, then generate each
word by sampling a template from this distribution
and filling it with random consonants and vow-
els sampled from the unigram distribution. The
CV pseudolexicon forces the generated words to
contain reasonable proportions of vowels and con-
sonants, but it does not enforce any positional
constraints; words may contain unnatural features
like illegal codas, sequences of vowels which do
not form diphthongs, and medial clicks. We next
test the effect of the constraint that !Xung content
words tend to begin with a click, by generating
a Semi-scrambled lexicon (scrambling each real
word in place, but any present click stays at the
initial position) and KCV (like CV, except that the

Figure 5: LNPs in Analysis 3.

initial syllable will begin with a click and subse-
quent ones will only contain vowels and pulmonic
consonants). Examples of words from these pseu-
dolexicons can be found in Table 4.

We next syllabify the !Xung corpus (treating
each sequence of vowels as a syllable nucleus and
maximizing onsets). We use this database of sylla-
bles to create a sequence of pseudolexicons which
sample larger prosodic units rather than single seg-
ments. These pseudolexicons are length-matched
to the original corpus in number of syllables (not
segments). Free Onset+Rhyme forms syllables by
sampling attested onsets and rhymes, but draws
them from anywhere in the corpus, ignoring po-
sitional constraints. Positional Onset+Rhyme en-
forces placement constraints on consonants by
sampling word-initial, medial and final onsets and
rhymes from separate distributions. Finally, Syl-
lable samples whole syllables from the correct po-
sitional distributions, enforcing the co-occurrence
constraints between onsets and rhymes as well as
the placement constraints.

7.2 Results

The results (averaged over 50 trials) are shown in
Table 5. The CV lexicon, which forces words to
contain realistic proportions of vowels and conso-
nants, roughly triples the largest island size versus
the Scrambled lexicon, but does not create a real-
istic LN. Forcing clicks to occur only at word be-
ginnings does relatively little; neither the Semis-
crambled nor KCV lexicons look very different
from the CV lexicon. Lexicons formed using ac-



18

Scram Semi CV KCV Free
Ons+Rhy

Posit.
Ons+Rhy

Syll Trigr Natural

% Lgst. (mean) 6.1 13.6 18.6 20.3 57.4 55.7 40.6 37.7 36.6
% Lgst. (d) -15.1 -17.2 -9.2 -8.4 3.5 2.6 1.2 0.6
ASPL (mean) 5.8 5.7 5.2 5.4 3.3 3.8 5.9 3.7 8.7
ASPL (d) -1.9 -5.0 -5.5 -7.6 -5.1 -3.6 -4.1 -23.7
DA (mean) 26.9 38.8 43.8 43.0 47.0 43.6 59.6 80.5 52.8
DA (d) -2.1 -3.7 -1.1 -1.3 -1.1 -1.1 2.5 14.4
CC (mean) 50.1 55.2 47.4 46.1 63.1 62.9 51.2 60.8 52.4
CC (d) 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 0.1 0.1 -0.1 0.1

Table 5: Statistics of phonotactically targeted pseudolexicons (mean and Cohen’s d versus natural language).

tual onsets and rhymes attested from the corpus
have much larger island sizes— in fact, larger
than the real graph (56% vs 36%). The Positional
Onset+Rhyme model is quite similar to the On-
set+Rhyme model across all the LNPs. Finally, the
Syllable lexicon has a realistic island size (41%),
and is wider than the Onset+Rhyme or Trigram
networks, with an average path length of 5.9 (vs
3.3-3.8, compared with the actual 8.7)3.

Comparing the Onset+Rhyme models to the
CV lexicon, we find that the syllabic structure of
!Xung helps to ensure that the network is con-
nected. Surprisingly, positional constraints on
consonant placement (clicks at the beginning, re-
stricted set of medials) have a limited impact
on the shape of the network; KCV is similar
to CV, and Positional Onset+Rhyme to Free On-
set+Rhyme. However, the co-occurrence restric-
tions on onset and rhyme within the syllable, for
instance, constraints on gutturals, are important
in limiting connectedness and creating the long
shortest-path distances of the real lexicon, since
both these properties appear only in the pseudolex-
icon which samples whole syllables as units. Co-
occurrence restrictions within the syllable widen
the LN by preventing the formation of a mini-
mal pair which would be phonologically unnatu-
ral, since its onset and rhyme would not match.

8 Conclusion

Overall, we find that the network properties of
!Xung do not substantially differ from previously
studied languages despite fundamental phonolog-
ical disparities. This supports the argument of

3Cohen’s d estimates a slightly larger effect separating
the ASPL for Syllable from the natural language than On-
set+Rhyme; this is because Syllable has a substantially lower
variance.

Vitevitch (2008) that the LNPs indicate an under-
lying cognitive structure. Vitevich proposed that
the global shape of the network enables efficient
word learning and retrieval from memory; it is also
plausible that the network structure is necessary to
avoid confusing large numbers of minimal pairs in
auditory perception. In any case, the preservation
of this global structure suggests a selective pres-
sure shaping the phonotactics of these languages
(and others with large inventories) — phonotac-
tic rules may arise and change over time in ways
that preserve the network properties within a cog-
nitively useful range. For instance, the differences
between randomly scrambled and syllabic pseu-
dowords indicate that the restricted syllable inven-
tories of !Xung and Ju may force words to cluster
more tightly in the LN, compensating for the large
number of contrastive phonemes. In other words,
the underlying universal structure may be, not lin-
guistic, but cognitive. This universal architecture
may require certain patterns of connectivity within
the lexicon, and these, in turn, may entail particu-
lar phonotactic patterns.

Looking forward, we plan to expand our cur-
rent LN analysis to include data from relatives of
!Xung such as Ju|’hoansi,4 as well as languages
with small phoneme inventories, such as certain
Polynesian languages5. Through this, we hope
to uncover how our hypothesis operates across a
range of inventory sizes and types.

Additionally, we plan to investigate the func-

4We conducted a preliminary analysis of a 3733-word lex-
icon of Ju|’hoansi collected by Biesele et al. (2006) and found
similar results to those we obtained from !Xung. However,
the IPA transcription of this data is not consistent, so we have
chosen not to present it here.

5Hawai’ian was previously studied by Arbesman et al.
(2010) who found a comparatively larger giant component
and shorter average path lengths than several other languages;
however, they did not control for lexicon size.



19

tional load and potential confusability of !Xung
phonemic contrasts. A LN assumes real world
speakers can distinguish perfectly between mini-
mal pairs. However, with the large phoneme in-
ventory of !Xung, these clicks may be confus-
able in real speech, cf. (Fulop et al., 2004). We
hope to determine how the network properties
change when potential confusions between sounds
are taken into account.

Acknowledgements

We thank Rory Turnbull, Philippa Shoemark, Eric
Fosler-Lussier, the attendees of OSU’s Workshop
on the Emergence of Linguistic Universals and
Phonies discussion group, and six anonymous re-
viewers for their many helpful comments and sug-
gestions. This work was funded by NSF 1422987
to the second author.

References

Samuel Arbesman, Steven H Strogatz, and Michael S
Vitevitch. 2010. The structure of phonological
networks across multiple languages. International
Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, 20(03):679–685.

M. Biesele, B. C. Boo, H. K. Gcao, G=/kao M.
/K, Kaqece K N!., A. Miller, /A. F /Kunta, and
C. N! Tsamkxao F. /U. /Ui. 2006. Ju|’hoansi Dic-
tionary, Revised version of Dickens, P. Ju|’hoan-
English – English-Ju|’hoan Dictionary. unpub-
lished manuscript, The Kalahari People’s Founda-
tion and The Ju—hoan Transcription Group.

Kevin S. Brown, Paul D. Allopenna, William R. Hunt,
Rachael Steiner, Elliot Saltzman, Ken McRae, and
James S. Magnuson. 2018. Universal features in
phonological neighbor networks. Computing Re-
search Repository, arXiv:1804.05766. Version 1.

Stanley F Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An
empirical study of smoothing techniques for lan-
guage modeling. Computer Speech & Language,
13(4):359–394.

Christopher Cieri, David Miller, and Kevin Walker.
2004. The Fisher corpus: a resource for the next
generations of speech-to-text. In Proceedings of
LREC, volume 4, pages 69–71.

P. Dickens. 1994. Ju|’hoan-English English-Ju|’hoan
Dictionary. Koppe.

Sean A Fulop, Peter Ladefoged, Fang Liu, and Rainer
Vossen. 2004. Yeyi clicks: Acoustic description and
analysis. Phonetica, 60(4):231–260.

Thomas M Gruenenfelder and David B Pisoni. 2009.
The lexical restructuring hypothesis and graph the-
oretic analyses of networks based on random lexi-
cons. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 52(3):596–609.

Terttu Heikkinen. 1986. Outline of the phonology of
the !Xũ dialect spoken in Ovamboland and west-
ern Kavango. South African journal of African lan-
guages, 6:18–28.

Ian Maddieson. 2013. Vowel quality inventories. In
Matthew S. Dryer and Martin Haspelmath, editors,
The World Atlas of Language Structures Online.
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropol-
ogy.

A. Miller, L. Namaseb, S. Sands, S. Shah, M. Aromo,
C. Augumes, R. Fransisko, T. Kaleyi, D. Prata, and
S. Riem. 2008. Mangetti Dune !Xung Dictionary.
unpublished manuscript, The Ju|’hoan Transcription
Group, The Kalahari People’s Foundation, The Uni-
versity of Namibia and Northern Arizona University.

Amanda L Miller. 2016. Posterior lingual gestures and
tongue shape in Mangetti Dune !Xung clicks. Jour-
nal of Phonetics, 55:119–148.

Amanda Miller-Ockhuizen. 2003. The Phonetics
and Phonology of Gutturals: A Case Study from
Ju|’hoansi. Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics
Series. Routledge.

Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. 2003. Mix-
ing patterns and community structure in networks.
In Statistical mechanics of complex networks, pages
66–87. Springer.

Hermann Ney, Ute Essen, and Reinhard Kneser. 1994.
On structuring probabilistic dependences in stochas-
tic language modelling. Computer Speech & Lan-
guage, 8(1):1–38.

Bonny Sands. 2003. Juu subgroups based on phono-
logical patterns. In Khoisan languages and linguis-
tics: Proceedings of the 1st International Sympo-
sium, pages 85–114.

Philippa Shoemark, Sharon Goldwater, James Kirby,
and Rik Sarkar. 2016. Towards robust cross-
linguistic comparisons of phonological networks. In
Proceedings of the 14th SIGMORPHON Workshop
on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonol-
ogy, and Morphology, pages 110–120.

Massimo Stella and Markus Brede. 2015. Pat-
terns in the english language: phonological net-
works, percolation and assembly models. Journal
of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
2015(5):P05006.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM-an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Seventh international
conference on spoken language processing.



20

Andreas Stolcke, Jing Zheng, Wen Wang, and Vic-
tor Abrash. 2011. SRILM at sixteen: Update and
outlook. In Proceedings of IEEE automatic speech
recognition and understanding workshop, volume 5.

Rory Turnbull and Sharon Peperkamp. 2016. What
governs a language’s lexicon? Determining the or-
ganizing principles of phonological neighbourhood
networks. In International Workshop on Com-
plex Networks and their Applications, pages 83–94.
Springer.

Michael S Vitevitch. 2008. What can graph theory tell
us about word learning and lexical retrieval? Jour-
nal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
51(2):408–422.


