








































Decomposing phonological transformations in serial derivations

Andrew Lamont
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
alamont@linguist.umass.edu

Abstract

While most phonological transformations
have been shown to be subsequential, there
are tonal processes that do not belong to any
subregular class, thereby making it difficult
to identify a tighter bound on the complex-
ity of phonological processes than the regu-
lar languages. This paper argues that a tighter
bound obtains from examining the way trans-
formations are computed: when derived in se-
rial, phonological processes can be decom-
posed into iterated subsequential maps.

1 Introduction

Phonological transformations map underlying repre-
sentations (UR) onto surface forms (SF). The maps
between UR and SF are known to be REGULAR
(Johnson, 1972; Kaplan and Kay, 1994), meaning
they can be modeled with finite state transducers
(FST). This generalization is stated as the Regular
Hypothesis (1).

(1) Regular Hypothesis: Phonological transfor-
mations are regular.

The Regular Hypothesis is not strong enough.
There are many regular maps that are phonologi-
cally implausible, and most UR 7→SF maps belong
to the SUBREGULAR classes shown in Figure 1.
The majority are in the SUBSEQUENTIAL classes
in gray. Bidirectional long-distance processes like
stem-controlled vowel harmony belong to the more
powerful WEAKLY DETERMINISTIC class (Heinz
and Lai, 2013). Only two tonal processes, un-
bounded tonal plateauing and conditional rightward

spreading (in bold), have been shown to not belong
to any subregular class (Jardine, 2016a).

Because of their wide empirical coverage and
computational properties, the union of the subse-
quential classes was an early candidate for a tighter
bound on the complexity of phonological processes
than the regular class (Chandlee and Heinz, 2012;
Gainor et al., 2012). Heinz (forthcoming) states this
as the Subsequential Hypothesis (2). The Subse-
quential Hypothesis is stronger than the Regular Hy-
pothesis, while maintaining its uniform generaliza-
tion over all phonological transformations.

(2) Subsequential Hypothesis: Phonological
transformations are left- or right-subsequential.

In light of the weakly deterministic and regu-
lar processes, the Subsequential Hypothesis is too
strong. Because there are phonological transforma-
tions that are not subregular, there is not a uniform
revision of the Subsequential Hypothesis stronger
than the Regular Hypothesis. Jardine (2016a) argues
that only tonal processes exceed the weakly deter-
ministic class, so a possible revision states that seg-
mental processes are weakly deterministic and tonal
processes are regular.1 In short, from examining the
UR 7→SF maps on their own, there is no subregu-
lar class that subsumes all phonological transforma-
tions.

This paper argues that a uniform revision of the
Subsequential Hypothesis obtains by examining not
only the UR 7→SF maps, but also how their deriva-
tions are computed. There is an open question in

1Tutrugbu vowel harmony challenges this generalization
(McCollum et al., 2017).

91
Proceedings of the Society for Computation in Linguistics (SCiL) 2018, pages 91-101.

Salt Lake City, Utah, January 4-7, 2018



dissimilation
(Payne, 2014)

consonant harmony
(Luo, 2017)

bounded copying
(Chandlee and Heinz, 2012)

local processes
(Chandlee, 2014)

vowel harmony
(Heinz and Lai, 2013)

stem-controlled
vowel harmony

(Heinz and Lai, 2013)

bidirectional harmony

unbounded circumambient
processes (Jardine, 2016a)

unbounded
tonal plateauing
(Jardine, 2016a)

conditional right-
ward spreading
(Jardine, 2016a)

non-regular

regular

weakly deterministic

left-
subsequential

right-
subsequential

Figure 1: Subregular hierarchy of phonological transformations (based on Jardine’s Figure 1 (2016, 263))

phonological theory whether UR7→SF maps are de-
rived in one fell swoop, or whether they are bro-
ken down into sub-derivations. For example, con-
sider the sibilant harmony process that transforms
the UR /sasasaS/ into the SF [SaSaSaS] in Figure
2. The dashed line directly from the UR to the SF
shows the PARALLEL derivation, where every /s/
changes at the same time. The solid lines from UR
to SF via two intermediate forms show the SERIAL
derivation, where only one /s/ changes at a time.
Each line represents one computation made by the
phonology. Both derivations yield the same SF, the
parallel derivation in one step and the serial in three.

/sasasaS/ sasaSaS saSaSaS [SaSaSaS]

Figure 2: Serial and parallel sibilant harmony

In a parallel derivation, the SF is derived di-
rectly from the UR, so the derivation is exactly the
UR 7→SF map. Because they are identical, parallel
derivations have the same computational complex-
ity as UR 7→SF maps. This paper argues that in a
serial derivation, where the SF is derived gradually
over a number of steps, each step is subsequential.
This is stated as the Serial Subsequential Hypoth-
esis (3). Restricting each step to making a single
change requires iterating processes. The solid lines
in Figure 2, represent a process that changes one
/s/, which applies three times to gradually yield the

SF. As Section 4 argues, this restriction also predicts
that some regular maps are not possible phonologi-
cal processes.

(3) Serial Subsequential Hypothesis: Phonologi-
cal transformations are decomposable into iter-
ated left- or right-subsequential maps.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 re-
views the characterization of the classes in Figure
1 in terms of FSTs, providing empirical examples,
and discusses the serial counterparts of the subreg-
ular classes. Section 3 demonstrates that the regu-
lar tonal processes can be broken down into subse-
quential steps in a serial derivation. Sections 4 and
5 discuss the predictions of the Serial Subsequential
Hypothesis and conclude.

2 Phonological transformations and FSTs

2.1 Subsequential transformations
Subsequential transformations include local pro-
cesses like place assimilation, and unidirectional
long-distance processes like regressive sibilant har-
mony. They can be computed by SUBSEQUENTIAL
FSTS (Mohri, 1997). These are deterministic FSTs
where every state is accepting. When the end of the
input is reached, an additional string is appended
to the output, determined by the current state the
machine is in. This can be thought of as stand-
ing in for transitions on boundary symbols (Chom-
sky and Halle, 1968). LEFT-SUBSEQUENTIAL

92



FSTs (L-SFST) read inputs left-to-right; RIGHT-
SUBSEQUENTIAL FSTs (R-SFST) read inputs right-
to-left.

Example subsequential FSTs are given in Figures
3 and 4 for a toy sibilant harmony system. The ma-
chines remember the identity of the first sibilant they
read. If the first sibilant is /s/, they transition to
state q1; if /S/, state q2. That information and the
current position in the input determine what is writ-
ten to the output. In the diagrams, the end-of-input
string is shown after states’ labels. λ stands for the
empty string, so neither machine appends to the out-
put when the input is exhausted.

The L-SFST in Figure 3 reads inputs left-to-right.
The leftmost sibilant controls harmony, yielding
progressive sibilant harmony, such as that in Aari
(Hansson, 2010, 51). Table 1 gives sample deriva-
tions; the I row gives the current symbol in the input
read by the FST, Q the state the machine is in, and
O the string written to the output.

q0 : λ

q1 : λ

q2 : λ

a:a

s:s

S:S

a:a
s:s
S:s

a:a
s:S
S:S

Figure 3: L-SFST for progressive sibilant harmony

/saSaSa/7→[sasasa]
I s a S a S a
Q q0 → q1 → q1 → q1 → q1 → q1 → q1
O s a s a s a λ
/Sasasa/ 7→[SaSaSa]
I S a s a s a
Q q0 → q2 → q2 → q2 → q2 → q2 → q2
O S a S a S a λ

Table 1: Sample derivations for the L-SFST in Figure 3

The R-SFST in Figure 4 is the mirror image of the
L-SFST in Figure 3. It reads inputs right-to-left, so
the rightmost sibilant controls harmony, yielding re-
gressive harmony, such as that in Navajo (Hansson,
2010, 43). For the URs in Table 1, this machine pro-

duces SFs with the opposite direction of harmony:
/saSaSa/ 7→[SaSaSa]; /Sasasa/7→[sasasa].

q0 : λ

q1 : λ

q2 : λ

a:a

s:s

S:S

a:a
s:s
S:s

a:a
s:S
S:S

Figure 4: R-SFST for regressive sibilant harmony

The direction in which subsequential FSTs read
inputs determines whether a long-distance process is
regressive or progressive. That is, R-SFSTs model
regressive harmony, but L-SFSTs cannot. The R-
SFST in Figure 4 first identifies a trigger and remem-
bers its identity. This is enough information to write
the correct output for every target in the input. A
L-SFST would read the targets first, and face the in-
surmountable problem of anticipating the identity of
the trigger. Until it finds the trigger, a L-SFST does
not have enough information to write the correct out-
put for a target. Because the trigger may be arbitrar-
ily far away, the L-SFST would have to wait until
the end of the input to correctly output the targets.
Because FSTs cannot remember arbitrarily long se-
quences, this strategy fails.

The FSTs in Figures 3 and 4 compute the UR7→SF
maps and, equivalently, the parallel derivations of
these processes. Once the machines transition into a
harmonizing state, q1 or q2, they remain in that state
until the input is exhausted, because the only transi-
tions from these states are self-loops. The machines
therefore apply harmony to every focus in an UR.2

In the corresponding serial derivation, each com-
putation applies harmony to only one sibilant in the
input. Compare the L-SFST in Figure 3 to its serial
counterpart in Figure 5. In the latter, the unfaithful
transitions, i.e. the arcs leaving q1 on S and q2 on s,
lead to a state q3, where the input is copied faithfully
to the output. Thus, once this machine makes a sin-

2In a phonological rule of the form A → B / C D, A is called
the focus, B the structural change, C D the context, and CAD
the structural description.

93



gle change, it transitions to a state where it is unable
to make any further changes. Restricted to making
one change at a time, inputs with multiple foci must
pass through the machine a number of times before
the final SF is computed.

q0 : λ

q1 : λ

q2 : λ

q3 : λ

a:a

s:s

S:S

a:a
s:s

S:s

a:a
S:S

s:S

a:a
s:s
S:S

Figure 5: L-SFST for serial progressive sibilant harmony

Subsequential FSTs have enough memory to
compute long-distance processes like sibilant har-
mony. To satisfy the restriction that they make only
one change, they simply have to remember whether
they have already made a change. In the L-SFST in
Figure 5, this is implemented by transitioning into
the faithful state q3 on the unfaithful arcs leaving q1
and q2. This modification does not require any addi-
tional computational power, so the serial FST is still
left-subsequential.

2.2 Weakly deterministic transformations
Weakly deterministic maps are defined as length-
and alphabet-preserving3 compositions of a left-
subsequential and a right-subsequential map (Heinz
and Lai, 2013), and include long-distance bidi-
rectional processes like stem-controlled vowel har-
mony. Because SFSTs are limited to unidirec-
tional long-distance processes, they are not powerful
enough to compute these maps on their own. Char-
acterizing these maps in terms of independent uni-
directional processes is empirically sound, as block-
ing and other restrictions can vary with directional-
ity (Rose and Walker, 2011).

Emphasis spreading in South Palestinian Arabic
is an illustrative example. Emphasis spreads bidi-
rectionally from a pharyngealized segment. Exam-
ples are given in (4-6) (Al Khatib, 2008; Jardine,

3These restrictions are necessary to define a subregular
class. Without them, composing a left- and right-subsequential
map can produce any regular map (Elgot and Mezei, 1965).

2016a); targeted segments are underlined in the SFs.
Regressive spreading is unrestricted; the final ob-
struent in (4) triggers pharyngealization of the en-
tire word. Progressive spreading is blocked by /i,
S, j, dZ/; pharyngealization in (5) affects one vowel
and is stopped by the /j/. In (6), there are no block-
ers, and the medial stop triggers pharyngealization
of the entire word.

(4) /Xaj:a:tQ/ 7→ [XQaQjQ:aQ:tQ] ‘tailor’

(5) /sQaj:a:d/ 7→ [sQaQj:a:d] ‘hunter’

(6) /PatQfa:l/ 7→ [PQaQtQfQaQ:lQ] ‘children’

While this process is beyond the capability of a
subsequential FST, it can be computed by feeding a
UR into a left-subsequential FST and its output into
a right-subsequential FST. Table 2 makes this ex-
plicit, showing emphasis spreading as the outcome
of ordering progressive spreading before regressive
spreading. Though the SFSTs are not shown here,
these processes can be computed by a left- and right-
subsequential FST, respectively. As with sibilant
harmony, these SFSTs can be restricted to making
only one change without affecting their computa-
tional complexity. Thus, because weakly determin-
istic maps can be decomposed into subsequential
maps, they can be further decomposed into iterated
subsequential maps in a serial derivation.

UR /Xaj:a:tQ/ /sQaj:a:d/ /PatQfa:l/

L→R — sQaQj:a:d PatQfQaQ:lQ
R→L XQaQjQ:aQ:tQ — PQaQtQfQaQ:lQ

SF [XQaQjQ:aQ:tQ] [sQaQj:a:d] [PQaQtQfQaQ:lQ]
Table 2: Emphasis spreading as two directional processes

2.3 Regular transformations
Weakly deterministic maps can be decomposed into
two unidirectional processes because each process
has a single trigger. Thus, even though crucial in-
formation may be at a distance from a target, a sub-
sequential FST can identify the trigger before it en-
counters a target. This is not the case with regular
transformations that are UNBOUNDED CIRCUMAM-
BIENT, meaning crucial information lies both to the
left and to the right of a target and may be arbitrarily
far away in both directions (Jardine, 2016a). This

94



property means that a subsequential FST will not
have enough information when it reaches a target to
write the correct output (see Jardine (2016a) for a
formal account). In the attested unbounded circum-
ambient processes, the crucial information consists
of a trigger and a blocker, as in conditional right-
ward spreading, or two triggers, as in unbounded
tonal plateauing.

Conditional rightward spreading (CRS) is a pro-
cess in Copperbelt Bemba that exemplifies the com-
bination of a trigger and a blocker. Tone bearing
units (TBU) surface with high tones if there is a high
tone to the left and there is no high tone at the right
edge of the prosodic word; examples are given in
(7-8) (Bickmore and Kula, 2013; Kula and Bick-
more, 2015; Jardine, 2016a). High tones are indi-
cated with an acute accent (V́) and low tones with
a grave accent (V̀). When no underlying high tones
are present, words surface with all low tones (7a).
In words with high tones and underlyingly tone-
less final vowels, the rightmost high tone spreads
all the way to the right edge; in (7b-c), the sub-
ject marker /bá-/ provides the high tone. Word-
final high-tones block conditional rightward spread-
ing, and high tones only spread across two TBUs; in
(8), the locative enclitic /=kó/ provides the blocker.

(7) a. /u-ku-tul-a/ 7→ [ùkùtùlà] ‘to pierce’
b. /bá-ka-fik-a/ 7→ [bákáf́ıká] ‘they will ar-

rive’
c. /bá-ka-mu-londolol-a/ 7→

[bákámúlóóndólólá] ‘they will intro-
duce him/her’

(8) a. /bá-ka-pat-a=kó/ 7→ [bákápátàkó] ‘they
will hate’

b. /bá-mu-luk-il-a=kó/ 7→ [bámúlúk̀ılàkó]
‘they will plait a bit for him’

c. /bá-ka-londolol-a=kó/ 7→
[bákálóòndòlòlàkó] ‘they will intro-
duce’

CRS cannot be decomposed into two unidirec-
tional processes because a subsequential FST will
not have enough information once it encounters a
target TBU. Reading inputs left-to-right, a L-SFST
remembers whether a triggering high tone is present,
but cannot anticipate whether a blocking high tone is

present word-finally. Likewise, reading right-to-left,
a R-SFST remembers whether a blocker is present,
but cannot anticipate the presence of a trigger.

Unbounded tonal plateauing (UTP) exemplifies
the combination of two triggers. TBUs surface with
high tones if there is a high tone to the left and
a high tone to the right; examples from Luganda
are given in (9-10) (Hyman and Katamba, 2010;
Jardine, 2016a). Underlyingly toneless TBUs in
phrases without high tones (9a) and in phrases with
only one high tone span (9b) surface with low tones.
In words with multiple high tone spans, underly-
ingly toneless TBUs flanked by two high tones sur-
face with high tones (10).

(9) a. /mu-tund-a/ 7→ [mùtùndà] ‘seller’
b. /mu-tém-a/ 7→ [mùtémà] ‘chopper’

(10) a. /mu-tém-a-bi-siḱı/ 7→ [mùtémáb́ıśıḱı]
‘log-chopper’

b. /tw-áa-láb-w-a walúsimbi/ 7→ [twáálábwá
wálús̀ımb̀ı] ‘we were seen by Walusimbi’

c. /tw-áa-génd-a na=byaa=ba=walúsimbi/
7→ [twáágéndá nábyáábáwálús̀ımb̀ı] ‘we
went with those of Walusimbi’

Like CRS, UTP cannot be decomposed into two
unidirectional processes. A SFST reading the input
in either direction will have only seen one trigger
when it identifies a target. Because both triggers
must be present for an underlyingly toneless TBU
to surface with high tone, the SFST will not have
enough information to write the correct output.

Jardine (2016a) argues that CRS and UTP must
be modeled by non-deterministic FSTs. Unlike fi-
nite state acceptors, non-deterministic FSTs cannot
in general be determinized (Lothaire, 2013), and can
compute regular maps that deterministic FSTs can-
not. The FST for UTP is given in Figure 6 (Jardine,
2016a, 268). Following Jardine (2016a), tonal FSTs
read inputs in TBU-sized chunks; U indicates a TBU
unspecified for tone and H a high-toned TBU. An-
ticipating Section 3, while the circumambient pro-
cesses cannot be decomposed into two subsequential
maps like weakly deterministic processes, they can
be decomposed into arbitrarily many iterated subse-
quential maps in a serial derivation.

Non-determinism allows the FST to anticipate the
presence of a second trigger, effectively granting it

95



q0

q1

q2

U:U

H:H
H:H

H:H
U:H

H:H

U:U

Figure 6: Non-deterministic FST for UTP (based on Jardine’s
Figure 5 (2016, 268))

unbounded lookahead. The FST in Figure 6 accepts
an input with exactly one high tone only if it takes
the lower path, transitioning to q2 on its high tone.
Inputs with more than one high tone must take the
upper path, transitioning to q1 on the first high tone.
In this state, high tones are written for unspecified
TBUs. Reading inputs without high tones, the FST
does not transition out of q0, and faithfully maps the
input string. Table 3 gives sample derivations.

/UUHUU/7→[UUHUU]
I U U H U U
Q q0 → q0 → q0 → q2 → q2 → q2
O U U H U U
/HUUUH/7→[HHHHH]
I H U U U H
Q q0 → q1 → q1 → q1 → q1 → q2
O H H H H H

Table 3: Sample derivations for the FST in Figure 6

Unlike weakly deterministic maps, which can be
decomposed into two independently attested sub-
sequential processes, Jardine (2016a) argues that
unbounded circumambient processes are different.
Taking a derivational perspective, Section 3 argues
that in a serial derivation, the regular tonal maps
can be decomposed into empirically-motivated sub-
sequential processes that are iterated.

3 Decomposing regular transformations in
serial derivations

This section presents the main contribution of this
paper, that, under a serial derivation, the compu-
tation of the unbounded circumambient processes
can be decomposed into iterated subsequential maps
which are empirically motivated. In a serial deriva-
tion, the left high tone trigger is always adjacent to
the target, so no step depends on non-local informa-

tion on both sides. By exploiting this locality, FSTs
in serial do not require unbounded lookahead, obvi-
ating nondeterminism. In parallel, this connection
is not obvious, and the computation requires non-
determinism just like the UR7→SF map.

The tonal processes discussed in §2.3 have been
characterized as spreading (Kisseberth and Odden,
2003; Kula and Bickmore, 2015). Spreading in-
volves associating a tone onto a TBU adjacent to a
TBU already associated with that tone. This is rep-
resented visually in Figure 7 for UTP; solid lines in-
dicate associations between tones and TBUs (here
syllables) in the UR and dashed lines indicate new
associations. The high tones of the UR /HUUUH/
trigger spreading, which is assumed to be progres-
sive (Hyman, 2011), yielding the SF [HHHHH].

σ σ σ σ σ

H H

Figure 7: UTP as high tone spreading

Evidence supporting a spreading analysis comes
from inhibitory effects by blockers, which produce
partial spreading. A clear example of this is found
in Digo, where voiced obstruents impede high tone
spreading; examples are given in (11-12) (Kisse-
berth, 1984). In these examples, UTP is fed by
a process that displaces a high tone to the word-
final vowel, which realizes as a final rise-fall con-
tour (V̌V̂). The displaced high tone of the subject
prefix /á-/ realizes as this final rise-fall in isolation
(11a). In (11b-c), the object prefix /á-/ provides a
second high tone, creating the context for UTP. Verb
stems with initial voiceless obstruents show right-
ward spreading (11b), but stems with initial voiced
obstruents do not (11c).

The words in (12) have verb stems with initial
high tones that interact with the displaced high tone
of the tense/aspect prefix /ká-/, creating the context
for UTP. The high tone on the verb stem spreads
rightwards until it reaches a voiced obstruent. In
(12a), rightward spreading is blocked entirely, be-
cause the voiced obstruent is adjacent to the left high
tone. In (12b), the voiced obstruent is further away,
so the high tone spreads, but only across one syllable
before it is blocked.

96



(11) a. /á-na-tsukur-a/ 7→ [ànàtsùkǔrâ] ‘he/she is
taking’

b. /á-na-á-tsukur-a/ 7→ [ànàátsúkúrâ] ‘he/she
is taking them’

c. /á-na-á-demurir-a/ 7→ [ànàádèmùřırâ]
‘he/she is scolding them’

(12) a. /a-ká-ézeker-a/ 7→ [àkàézèkěrâ] ‘he/she
has thatched with/for’

b. /a-ká-súrubik-a/ 7→ [àkàsúrúb̌ık-â]
‘he/she is strong/firm’

The pattern in Digo reveals a local relation be-
tween the target and left high tone trigger in UTP.
TBUs to the right of a voiced obstruent do not sur-
face with high tones because the left high tone can-
not spread across voiced obstruents to establish ad-
jacency. These facts receive a natural explanation
under a spreading analysis.

Further evidence for UTP being sensitive to lo-
cality comes from Saramaccan Creole. Saramac-
can Creole has an underlying three-way contrast
between high-toned TBUs, low-toned TBUs, and
TBUs unspecified for tone. UTP only targets un-
specified TBUs. When a low tone intervenes be-
tween either high tone and a span of toneless TBUs,
plateauing is blocked; examples are given in (13-14)
(Good, 2004; McWhorter and Good, 2012). When
toneless TBU spans contact only one high tone, they
surface with default low tone (13a). When toneless
TBUs are flanked by two high tones, as with the sub-
ject and verb in (13b), they surface with high tones.
The high tones must be adjacent to the toneless span
as the examples in (14) show. In (14a), two low
tones intervene between the left high tone and the
toneless span, and in (14b), the intervention is be-
tween the toneless span and the right high tone. In
both cases, spreading is blocked and the unspecified
TBUs surface with low tones.

(13) a. /páúlu lÈgÈdÈ/ 7→ [páúlù lÈgÈdÈ] ‘Paul
lies’

b. /d́ı wómi kulé alá/ 7→ [d́ı wómı́ kúlé àlá]
‘the man runs there’

(14) a. /d́ı ká̀ımà kulé alá/ 7→ [d́ı ká̀ımà kùlé àlá]
‘the alligator runs there’

b. /d́ı wómi bà wáta/ 7→ [d́ı wómı̀ bà wátà]
‘the man carried water’ (Good, p.c.)

The Saramaccan Creole pattern supports the gen-
eralization drawn from Digo that the left high tone
trigger must be adjacent to a target TBU. Further, it
also shows that the right high tone trigger must be
adjacent to the span of toneless TBU targets. This
indicates that the structural description is subject to
locality constraints defined over the tonal tier rather
than being unbounded over the timing tier (Jardine,
2016b; Jardine, 2017).

The locality between the left high tone trigger and
the target may be implicit in the UR 7→SF map, but
it is made explicit in a serial derivation. Consider
Figure 8, which gives the serial derivation of the
UR7→SF map in Figure 7. In each step, the target
is adjacent to the left high tone trigger, but may be
at a distance from the right trigger. Because only the
triggering high tone to the right is ever at a distance,
no single step is unbounded circumambient.

σ σ σ σ σ

H H
→

σ σ σ σ σ

H H
→

σ σ σ σ σ

H H

Figure 8: UTP as high tone spreading in a serial derivation

Each step in the serial derivation of UTP is right-
subsequential and can be computed by the R-SFST
in Figure 9. Reading an input without a high tone,
the R-SFST does not transition out of q0, and faith-
fully outputs the input. Likewise, inputs with one
high tone span do not trigger any changes (e.g.
/UUHUU/ in Table 4). On inputs with U. . . H se-
quences, the R-SFST transitions to q2, where it waits
to identify a HU string. If it does, it writes two high
tones to the output and makes no more changes (e.g.
/HUUUH/ in Table 4). If the input ends before an-
other high tone trigger is identified, the end-of-input
function writes a toneless TBU to the output.

q0:λq1:λq2:Uq3:λ

U:U

H:H

H:H

U:λ

U:U

H:HH

H:H
U:U

Figure 9: R-SFST for serial UTP

Looking for a string of a bounded length obviates
the need for non-determinism. The R-SFST only
needs to lookahead one segment at a time once it

97



finds the right high tone trigger and a toneless TBU.
State q2 enables lookahead. Transitioning to q2, the
R-SFST writes nothing onto the output; instead it re-
members that it has seen one U. Rather than having
to memorize an arbitrarily long sequence of toneless
TBUs, the self-loop on q2 allows it to keep one in
memory. If the input ends in q2, the memorized U
is written to the output. Otherwise, if a second high
tone is found, the memorized U is forgotten, and a
second high tone is written to the output.

/UUHUU/7→[UUHUU]
U U H U U I

q2 ← q2 ← q1 ← q0 ← q0 ← q0 Q
U U λ H U U O
/HUUUH/7→[HHUUH]

H U U U H I
q3 ← q2 ← q2 ← q2 ← q1 ← q0 Q
λ HH U U λ H O

Table 4: Sample derivations for the FST in Figure 9

CRS can be similarly broken down. The R-SFST
in Figure 10 computes each step in a serial deriva-
tion, using exactly the same lookahead strategy as
the R-SFST for UTP in Figure 9. The only differ-
ence is that it checks for a blocker rather than a trig-
ger. Reading an input right-to-left, if the first TBU is
high-toned, the machine transitions directly from the
starting state to the faithful state q2 (bounded spread-
ing is assumed to be a separate process). Otherwise,
it looks for a HU sequence and spreads the high tone.

q0:λq1:Uq2:λ
U:λ

H:H

U:U

H:HHH:H
U:U

Figure 10: R-SFST for serial CRS

4 Discussion

Phonologists have long debated whether to describe
phonological processes as applying in parallel or in
serial. In rule-based models, the debate is whether
a rule applies simultaneously to a string with mul-
tiple foci (Chomsky and Halle, 1968; Anderson,
1974) or whether rules apply to each focus one-by-

one (Howard, 1972; Johnson, 1972; Lightner, 1972;
Kenstowicz and Kisseberth, 1977). In constraint-
based models, the debate is whether competing pos-
sible outputs may differ from inputs in unlimited
ways, as in parallel Optimality Theory (Prince and
Smolensky, 1993/2004), or whether they can only
differ from the input by only one change, as in Har-
monic Serialism (McCarthy, 2000, et seq.), where
the derivation iterates until converging. This is a
fundamental question in phonological theory.

This paper has argued that serial phonological
models, where only one focus is changed at a
time, are advantageous to characterizing the class of
UR7→SF maps. Parallel models of phonology, where
derivations are identical to UR7→SF maps, do not
offer stronger generalizations than the Regular Hy-
pothesis. Serial models, on the other hand, allow for
the decomposition of UR 7→SF maps, yielding the
Serial Subsequential Hypothesis. The Serial Subse-
quential Hypothesis is stated as a uniform general-
ization over phonological transformations and does
not need to distinguish between segmental and tonal
processes. This is desirable as a general, restrictive
characterization.

As a general characterization, it can reduce the
computational differences between related phono-
logical processes. Consider the case of UTP, which
avoids sequences of H. . . U. . . H from surfacing
(Yip, 2002). Cross-linguistically, this sequence is
also avoided by deleting the second high tone, giv-
ing maps like /HUH/7→[HUU]. Examples of this
progressive lowering process in Barasana are given
in (15-16) (Gomez-Imbert and Kenstowicz, 2000;
Gomez-Imbert, 2001; Hyman, 2010); the tilde ∼
marks nasalized stems. This is also attested in
Yongning Na (Michaud, 2017). The high tone of
the diminutive suffix /-áka/ surfaces when attached
to stems with all high-toned TBUs (15a) and stems
with UH contours (15b). Attaching the suffix to
stems with HU contours creates a H. . . U. . . H se-
quence, triggering the diminutive high tone to lower
(16). Progressive lowering also targets the underly-
ing high tone on the suffix /-́:ri/ (16c). This process
is left-subsequential; the L-SFST in Figure 11 com-
putes the UR7→SF map.

(15) a. /∼kúbú-áka/ 7→ [∼kúbúákà] ‘small
shaman’

98



b. /gohé-áka/ 7→ [gòhéákà] ‘small hole’

(16) a. /∼céda-áka/ 7→ [∼cédààkà] ‘a bit of
pineapple’

b. /∼céda-a-áka/ 7→ [∼cédàààkà] ‘a small
pineapple’

c. /∼céda-a-́:ri-áka-re/ 7→ [∼cédààr̀ıàkàrè]
‘small pineapples-OBJ’

Progressive lowering and UTP target the same
marked structure. In a parallel derivation, lan-
guages like Luganda use a regular process to re-
pair H. . . U. . . H sequences, while languages like
Barasana use a subsequential repair. This compu-
tational gap disappears in a serial derivation, where
both repairs comprise iterated subsequential maps.

q0:λ q1:λ q2:λ

U:U

H:H

H:H

U:U H:U
U:U

Figure 11: L-SFST for progressive lowering

As a restrictive characterization, the Serial Sub-
sequential Hypothesis predicts that certain regular
maps are not possible phonological transformations.
For example, consider a variant of Saramaccan Cre-
ole, Saramaccan′, in which low tones do not act
as blockers. In Saramaccan′, arbitrarily many low
tones may intervene between a toneless TBU and
the two triggering high tones, yielding maps such
as /HLmULnH/7→[HLmHLnH], where L indicates a
low-toned TBU. This cannot be modeled by an it-
erated subsequential map, as there is no guarantee
that a SFST will identify the second high tone trig-
ger within a bounded distance from the target. Be-
sides its larger alphabet, the non-deterministic FST
for Saramaccan′ in Figure 12 is indistinguishable
from that for UTP in Figure 6. Without consider-
ing the derivation, it is not clear how to predict the
non-existence of Saramaccan′, or for that matter, any
regular map in a principled way.

While the Serial Subsequential Hypothesis ex-
cludes some regular maps like Saramaccan′, it also
overgenerates. Consider the phonological rule ∅ →
ab / a b. Kaplan and Kay (1994) demonstrate that
iteratively applying this rule n ≥ 1 times to an input
/ab/ produces the context-free string set anbn. Such
a derivation is within the scope of the Serial Subse-

q0

q1

q2

L:L
U:U

H:H
H:H

L:L
H:H
U:H

H:H
L:L
U:U

Figure 12: Non-deterministic FST for Saramaccan′

quential Hypothesis, because the rule can be com-
puted subsequentially. The overgeneration caused
by this particular rule stems from its ability to ap-
ply without motivation. Moreton (2004) argues that
constraint-based frameworks like Optimality The-
ory, which limit processes to apply only if motivated
by marked structures, avoid circular processes and
infinite augmentation. In the case of inserting [ab]
into the string, there is no clear improvement in these
terms. Imposing restrictions of this sort from for-
mal phonological analyses is a promising direction
to take to characterize the class of serial SFSTs.

5 Conclusion

This paper argued that a phonologically uniform
characterization of UR7→SF maps obtains under a
serial model of phonology. Phonological transfor-
mations can be decomposed into iterated left- or
right-subsequential maps, when computed in se-
rial. Combined with restrictions already imposed on
phonological computations, the Serial Subsequen-
tial Hypothesis was argued to make restrictive typo-
logical predictions. This demands a precise charac-
terization of the class of maps produced by iterating
subsequential maps, and is left to future work.

The result of this paper draws on the interac-
tion between formal language theory and tradi-
tional phonology. The decision to examine whether
UR7→SF maps are computed in parallel or serial
is not arbitrary, but has been an important ques-
tion in phonological research for decades. A formal
language understanding of phonological transforma-
tions is enriched by an appreciation for the models
that compute them. Likewise, the models should be
restricted by a knowledge of the formal language
landscape. The interface between these two disci-
plines can produce interesting generalizations and
should continue to be probed.

99



Acknowledgments

This work has greatly benefited from discussions
with Carolyn Anderson, Thomas Graf, Jeff Heinz,
Adam Jardine, Gaja Jarosz, John McCarthy, Joe Pa-
ter, Brandon Prickett, Kristine Yu, participants in the
Phonology Reading Group and Sound Workshop at
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and the
audience at NECPHON 11, as well as comments
from three anonymous reviewers for SCiL 2018.
This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation through grant BCS-424077. All remain-
ing errors are of course my own.

References
Sam Al Khatib. 2008. On the directionality of emphasis

spread. In Susie Jones, editor, Proceedings of the 2008
annual conference of the Canadian Linguistic Associ-
ation.

Stephen R. Anderson. 1974. The Organization of
Phonology. Academic Press, New York.

Lee S. Bickmore and Nancy C. Kula. 2013. Ternary
spreading and the OCP in Copperbelt Bemba. Studies
in African Linguistics, 42:101–132.

Jane Chandlee and Jeffrey Heinz. 2012. Bounded
copying is subsequential: Implications for metathesis
and reduplication. In Proceedings of SIGMORPHON
2012, pages 42–51.

Jane Chandlee. 2014. Strictly local phonological pro-
cesses. Ph.D. thesis, University of Delaware.

Noam Chomsky and Morris Halle. 1968. The Sound
Pattern of English. Harper & Row, New York.

C. C. Elgot and J. E. Mezei. 1965. On relations defined
by generalized finite automata. IBM Journal of Re-
search and Development, 9:47–68.

Brian Gainor, Regine Lai, and Jeffrey Heinz. 2012.
Computational characterizations of vowel harmony
patterns and pathologies. In Proceedings of the 29th
West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, pages
63–71.

Elsa Gomez-Imbert and Michael Kenstowicz. 2000.
Barasana tone and accent. International Journal of
American Linguistics, 66:419–463.

Elsa Gomez-Imbert. 2001. More on the tone versus pitch
accent typology: Evidence from Barasana and other
Eastern Tukanoan languages. In Shigeki Kaji, editor,
Proceedings of Symposium Cross-Linguistic Studies of
Tonal Phenomena: Tonogenesis, Japanese Accentol-
ogy, and Other Topics, pages 369–412.

Jeff Good. 2004. Tone and accent in Saramaccan: chart-
ing a deep split in the phonology of a language. Lin-
gua, 114:575–619.

Gunnar Ólafur Hansson. 2010. Consonant Harmony:
Long-Distance Interactions in Phonology. University
of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

Jeffrey Heinz and Regine Lai. 2013. Vowel harmony and
subsequentiality. In Proceedings of the 13th Meeting
on the Mathematics of Language, pages 52–63.

Jeffrey Heinz. forthcoming. The computational nature
of phonological generalizations. In Larry Hyman and
Frans Plank, editors, Phonological Typology. Mouton.

Irwin Howard. 1972. A Directional Theory of Rule
Application. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

Larry M. Hyman and Francis Katamba. 2010. Tone, syn-
tax and prosodic domains in Luganda. ZAS Papers in
Linguistics, 53:69–98.

Larry M. Hyman. 2010. Amazonia and the typology of
tone systems. Technical report, UC Berkeley Phonol-
ogy Lab Annual Reports.

Larry M. Hyman. 2011. Tone: Is it different? In John
Goldsmith, Jason Riggle, and Alan C. L. Yu, editors,
The Handbook of Phonological Theory, pages 197–
239. Blackwell Publishing, Malden, MA, 2 edition.

Adam Jardine. 2016a. Computationally, tone is different.
Phonology, 33:247–283.

Adam Jardine. 2016b. Locality and Non-Linear Repre-
sentations in Tonal Phonology. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Delaware.

Adam Jardine. 2017. The expressivity of autosegmental
grammars. Unpublished manuscript.

C. Douglas Johnson. 1972. Formal Aspects of Phonolog-
ical Description. Mouton, The Hague.

Ronald Kaplan and Martin Kay. 1994. Regular models
of phonological rule systems. Computational Linguis-
tics, 20:331–378.

Michael Kenstowicz and Charles Kisseberth. 1977. Top-
ics in Phonological Theory. Academic Press, New
York.

Charles W. Kisseberth and David Odden. 2003. Tone.
In Derek Nurse and Gérald Philippson, editors, The
Bantu languages, pages 59–70. Routledge, London.

Charles W. Kisseberth. 1984. Digo tonology. In George
N. Clements and John Goldsmith, editors, Autoseg-
mental Studies in Bantu Tone, pages 105–182. Foris
Publications, Dordrecht.

Nancy C. Kula and Lee S. Bickmore. 2015. Phrasal
phonology in Copperbelt Bemba. Phonology, 32:147–
176.

Theodore M. Lightner. 1972. Problems in the Theory of
Phonology. Linguistic Research, Inc., Edmonton.

M. Lothaire. 2013. Applied Combinatorics on Words.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Huan Luo. 2017. Long-distance consonant agreement
and subsequentiality. Glossa, 2(52).

100



John J. McCarthy. 2000. Harmonic serialism and paral-
lelism. In Masako Hirotani, Andries Coetzee, Nancy
Hall, and Ji-Yung Kim, editors, Proceedings of the
North East Linguistics Society 30, pages 501–524.
GLSA, Amherst, MA.

Adam McCollum, Eric Baković, Anna Mai, and Eric
Meinhardt. 2017. Conditional blocking in Tutrugbu
requires non-determinism: implications for the sub-
regular hypothesis. Presentation at NELS 48.

John H. McWhorter and Jeff Good. 2012. A Grammar
of Saramaccan Creole. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin.

Alexis Michaud. 2017. Tone in Yongning Na. Language
Science Press, Berlin.

Mehryar Mohri. 1997. Finite-state transducers in lan-
guage and speech processing. Computational Linguis-
tics, 23:269–311.

Elliott Moreton. 2004. Non-computable functions in Op-
timality Theory. In John J. McCarthy, editor, Optimal-
ity Theory in Phonology: A Reader, pages 141–163.
Blackwell Publishing, Malden, MA.

Amanda Payne. 2014. Dissimilation as a subsequen-
tial process. In Jyoti Iyer and Leland Kusmer, editors,
NELS 44, volume 2, pages 79–90.

Alan Prince and Paul Smolensky. 1993/2004. Optimality
Theory: Constraint Interaction in Generative Gram-
mar. Blackwell Publishing, Malden, MA.

Sharon Rose and Rachel Walker. 2011. Harmony sys-
tems. In John Goldsmith, Jason Riggle, and Alan C.
L. Yu, editors, The Handbook of Phonological Theory,
pages 240–290. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA, 2 edi-
tion.

Moira Yip. 2002. Tone. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

101


