















































Annotation Schemes for Surface Construction Labeling


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on

,

Linguistic Annotation, Multiword Expressions and Constructions (LAW-MWE-CxG-2018), page 1
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, August 25-26, 2018.

1

Annotation Schemes for Surface Construction Labeling

Lori Levin
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA, USA
lsl@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

In this talk I will describe the interaction of linguistics and language technologies in Surface Construction
Labeling (SCL) from the perspective of corpus annotation tasks such as definiteness, modality, and
causality. Linguistically, following Construction Grammar, SCL recognizes that meaning may be carried
by morphemes, words, or arbitrary constellations of morpho-lexical elements. SCL is like Shallow
Semantic Parsing in that it does not attempt a full compositional analysis of meaning, but rather identifies
only the main elements of a semantic frame, where the frames may be invoked by constructions as well
as lexical items. Computationally, SCL is different from tasks such as information extraction in that it
deals only with meanings that are expressed in a conventional, grammaticalized way and does not address
inferred meanings. I review the work of Dunietz (2018) on the labeling of causal frames including causal
connectives and cause and effect arguments. I will describe how to design an annotation scheme for
SCL, including isolating basic units of form and meaning and building a “constructicon”. I will conclude
with remarks about the nature of universal categories and universal meaning representations in language
technologies. This talk describes joint work with Jaime Carbonell, Jesse Dunietz, Nathan Schneider, and
Miriam Petruck.

Bio

Lori Levin received a B.A. in linguistics from the University of Pennsylvania in 1979 and a Ph.D. in
linguistics from MIT in 1986. She is a Research Professor at the Language Technologies Institute at
Carnegie Mellon University, specializing in language technologies for low-resource languages. She is
also co-Chair of the North American Computational Linguistics Olympiad.

References
Jesse Dunietz. 2018. Annotating and automatically tagging constructions of causal language. Ph.D. dissertation,

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.


