



















































Dynamics of an idiostyle of a Russian suicidal blogger


Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Keyboard to Clinic, pages 158–167
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 5, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

 
 
 

 
  

 

 

 

 

  

Dynamics of an Idiostyle of a Russian Suicidal Blogger 

 

Tatiana A. Litvinova
1 
 Olga A. Litvinova

1
 Pavel V. Seredin

1,2
 

 
1
RusProfiling Lab,  

Voronezh State Pedagogical University 

86 Lenina ul., Voronezh, 394043, Russia 

centr_rus_yaz@mail.ru  
2
Department of Solid State Physics and Nanostructures, 

Voronezh State University 

1 Universitetskaya pl., Voronezh, 394018, Russia 

paul@phys.vsu.ru 

 

Abstract 

Over 800000 people die of suicide each year. It is es-

timated that by the year 2020, this figure will have in-

creased to 1.5 million. It is considered to be one of the 

major causes of mortality during adolescence. Thus 

there is a growing need for methods of identifying su-

icidal individuals. Language analysis is known to be a 

valuable psychodiagnostic tool, however the material 

for such an analysis is not easy to obtain. Currently as 

the Internet communications are developing, there is 

an opportunity to study texts of suicidal individuals. 

Such an analysis can provide a useful insight into the 

peculiarities of suicidal thinking, which can be used to 

further develop methods for diagnosing the risk of sui-

cidal behavior. The paper analyzes the dynamics of a 

number of linguistic parameters of an idiostyle of a 

Russian-language blogger who died by suicide. For the 

first time such an analysis has been conducted using the 

material of Russian online texts. For text processing, 

the LIWC program is used. A correlation analysis was 

performed to identify the relationship between LIWC 

variables and number of days prior to suicide. Data 

visualization, as well as comparison with the results of 

related studies was performed. 

1 Introduction 

The development of Internet communication 

has paved the way for extensive studies into the 

reflection of personality traits, mental state, 

moods, and emotions in writing. One of the char-

acteristic features of recent studies of the issue has 

been the collaborations of computational linguists 

and psychologists. A distinctive example of such 

an interaction is Computational Linguistics and 

Clinical Psychology Workshop held annually 

since 2014 and aimed at bringing together “com-

putational linguistics researchers with clinicians to 

talk about the ways that language technology can 

be used to improve mental and neurological 

health” (http://clpsych.org). One of the important 

problems in the field is to develop methods of 

identifying individuals with high suicide risks 

based on the analysis of their written texts includ-

ing online texts, i.e. forums (Desmet and Hoste, 

2018), tweets (Burnap et al., 2015; Fodeh et al., 

2017), blogs (Guan et al., 2015) etc. The main 

idea of such work is to use automatic text classifi-

cation to detect suicide-related content (see 

Gomez, 2014 for review).  

There is no doubt as to its significance, howev-

er most studies rely on manual annotation of train-

ing material from the point of view of estimating 

suicidal behavior risks of authors of texts. How-

ever, as was rightfully pointed out by Homan et 

al. (2014), “the mental state of another individual, 

observed from a few lines of text often written in 

an informal register is necessarily hard to discern 

and, even under less noisy conditions, extremely 

subjective … This makes annotation quite a chal-

lenge, and does not reveal in an objective fashion 

a tweeter’s true mental state” (р. 114).  

One of the promising areas of research is analy-

sis of social media texts by people who publicly 

stated that they have tried to take their own life 

(Wood et al. 2014; Coppersmith et al., 2016). 

However, it is questionable if it is possible to gen-

eralize obtained findings regarding behavior of su-

icide attempters to the completers (DeJong et al., 

2010).  

It also should be noted that only limited number 

of works in this booming line of language-related 

suicide risk detection consider dynamics of lan-

guage variables and/or mental state of individuals. 

For example, Choudhury et al. (2016) proposed 

methodology to infer which individuals could un-

dergo transitions from mental health discourse to   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

158



 
 
 

 
  

 

suicidal ideation. The authors showed a number of 

markers characterizing these shifts including so-

cial engagement, manifestation of hopelessness, 

anxiety and impulsiveness based on a small subset 

of Reddit posts. Coppersmith et al. (2016) exam-

ined data from Twitter users who have attempted 

to take their life and provide an exploratory analy-

sis of patterns in language and emotions prior to 

their attempt. One of the interesting results found 

in this study is the increase in the percentage of 

tweets expressing sadness in the weeks prior to a 

suicide attempt, which is then followed by a no-

ticeable increase in anger and sadness emotions 

the week following a suicide attempt.  

It should be emphasized that most research in 

language-based suicide risk detection has em-

ployed English language materials with texts in 

other languages not being sufficiently addressed, 

with few exceptions (Desmet and Hoste, 2014; 

Guan et al., 2015; Litvinova et al., 2017). 

Corbitt-Hall et al. (2016) analyzed Facebook 

users' (namely college students) abilities to notice, 

recognize, and appropriately interpret suicidal 

content and their willingness to intervene and 

found out that college students are responsive to 

suicidal content on Facebook. It is obvious that it 

is viable to get new insights into the language of 

suiciders and share this knowledge with a wider 

audience of social media users in order to facili-

tate suicide prevention for different language and 

cultures. 

In order to develop methods of evaluating sui-

cidal risks based on linguistic analysis, it is ex-

tremely important to analyze texts by people who 

died by suicide. However, such an analysis is 

made more complicated due to limited access to 

relevant data. Texts of suicide notes have long 

been employed in corresponding studies as well as 

literary texts by individuals who died by suicide 

(Baddeley et al., 2011; Stirman and. Pennebaker, 

2001). However, as stated by Litvinova et al. 

(2017), “there are certain restrictions associated 

with the nature of texts and their authors’ person-

alities, which prevents the results from being ex-

trapolated into the entire population” (p. 247). 

However, the development of Internet communi-

cations (publicly accessible blogs, tweets or Face-

book) resulted in the fact that scholars have been 

able to access very valuable linguistic data con-

taining texts by individuals who died by suicide as 

well as new data sources for the study of suicidal 

behavior. 

Texts of blogs as a prevalent form of communica-

tion in expressing emotion and sharing infor-

mation are particularly significant. However, stud-

ies of online texts by individuals who died by sui-

cide are still very limited in number (Li et al., 

2014). Besides, the dynamics of linguistic pa-

rameters as the author’s death approached has not 

been sufficiently investigated while the analysis of 

the dynamics of an idiostyle would allow a more 

profound insight into a psychological state of a su-

icidal individual resulting in the development of 

diagnostic tools.  

All of the above were the prerequisite for the 

objective of the paper which is to investigate the 

dynamics of linguistic parameters of a Russian-

language blog of a software engineer from Mos-

cow, the creator of the website mysuicide.ru, one 

of Russia’s largest suicide websites, who died by 

suicide at the age of 30, in order to attempt to 

sketch the suicidal process.  To be consistent with 

a unified classification method, the language pat-

terns of the blog were analyzed using the Russian 

version of the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 

(LIWC) program (Pennebaker, 2007), a text anal-

ysis software program that provides over 80 psy-

chologically meaningful language variables, such 

as emotion and self-referencing words. 

2 Material and methods  

2.1 Material 

The material of the study were LiveJournal 

blogs by the user light_medelis (http://light-

medelis.livejournal.com/) The user also had a 

name lm_diary (http://lm-diary.livejournal.com/) 

The accounts belong to Sergey Makarov, the crea-

tor of the website mysuicide.ru, one of Russian In-

ternet’s (Runet) largest websites, containing sui-

cide-related content. Blog entries used as a data 

source for this study are publicly available. These 

blog entries are extracted from the corpus of Rus-

sian texts RusSuiCorpus
1
 which consists of the 

blogs written by individuals who died by suicide. 

It currently contains texts by 45 Russian individu-

als aged from 14 to 30. The total volume of the 

corpus is about 200 000 words. All the texts are 

manually collected from publicly available source 

and represent blog posts by individuals who died 

by suicide (blogs from LiveJournal) (Litvinova, 

2016). The fact that suicides had actually took 
                                                      
1
 Currently the corpus is available by request at 

centr_rus_yaz@mail.ru  

159



 
 
 

place was checked by analyzing friends’ com-

ments, media texts, etc.  

Sergey died by suicide on December 12, 2005, 

which became known based on his friends’ com-

ments on LiveJournal and media. The website 

mysuicide.ru was shut down after its creator as 

well as a few other regular visitors died by sui-

cide. The events got a wide media coverage.  

We took a look at S. Makarov’s two blogs as 

they were both on different topics. The blog 

lm_diary is more personal and looks like a per-

sonal diary as the author describes his feelings and 

suffering (for further reference it will be called 

PD1). The blog light_medelis dealt with discus-

sion of suicide-related content, depression, etc. 

(for further reference it will be called PD2). Both 

blogs were updated almost up to the day of the au-

thor’s death, but PD1 was being updated from Ju-

ly 28, 2004 till December 11, 2005, PD2 from 

June 13, 2003 till December 11, 2005. For a cor-

rect comparison of the obtained data we chose the 

texts written over the same time period, i.e. the 

PD2 entries starting from July 28, 2004 were ana-

lyzed. All the author’s texts (blog entries as well 

as author’s comments) written on the same day 

were entered into the same file named according 

to the entry date. That was done separately for 

each PD1 and PD2. The texts not written by the 

author (citations, including “hidden” ones, for ex-

ample, news without quotes, links, etc.) were re-

moved manually. 

2.2 Methods 

The texts were processed using the LIWC2007 

software with Russian dictionary (Kailer and 

Chung, 2011). Apart from a standard dictionary, 

we developed a set of our own (“users”) dictionar-

ies in accordance with LIWC2007 manual:  

− a dictionary of demonstrative pronouns and 

adverbs - Deictic,  

− a dictionary of intensifiers and downtowners 

- Intens,  

− a dictionary of perception vocabulary  - 

PerceptLex,  

− a dictionary of pronouns and adverbs de-

scribing the speaker (self-references) - Ego,  

− a dictionary of emotional words - Emo (nega-

tive and positive);  

− a dictionary of pronouns with subcagories 

(personal, indicative etc.) – Pronouns; 

− a dictionary of Russian most frequent words 

– Freq., etc. 

The users’ dictionaries were compiled using 

available dictionaries and Russian thesauri. As a 

Russian dictionary that came with the software 

was a translation of a corresponding English dic-

tionary, we have to check it manually and make 

some corrections. 

The values of 142 text parameters were extract-

ed. Further we chose the frequency parameters, 

i.e. those differing from zero in more than 50 % of 

the texts (in both blogs). At this point of the anal-

ysis the number of the text parameters went down 

to 66. Pearson’s correlation analysis was then car-

ried out to identify the correlation between each of 

the chosen LIWC variables and the number of 

days prior to the death.  

3 Results and discussion 

As a result of correlation analysis, 8 out of the 

chosen text parameters (LIWC variables) correlat-

ed with the number of days prior to the death in 

PD1: 

− common verbs; 

− personal pronouns; 

− the overall pronouns; 

− words describing social processes (mate, 

talk, they, child);  

− prepositions: 

− preposition ‘with’; 

− numerals; 

− pronoun ‘I’. 

As for PD2, 9 out of the chosen text parameters 

correlated with the number of days prior to the 

death: 

− the percentage of words describing the 

writer (“I”, “my” and its forms; the expression “in 

my opinion”, etc.) (“Ego”);  

− words describing affect (happy, cried, 

abandon);  

− the conjunction “and”;  

− personal pronouns; 

− the overall pronouns;  

− words describing positive emotions;  

− conjunctions;  

− words describing achievements (earn, he-

ro, win); 

−  pronoun ‘I’. 

All the correlations are positive (with Pearson’s 

r 0.2-0.3, р<0.05), i.e. as the date of the death ap-

proached, the values of the above parameters 

drop. In both types of blogs there is a dependence 

between the number of days prior to the death and 

the proportions of personal pronouns, overall pro-

nouns, “I” pronouns, words describing positive 

emotions. 

160



 
 
 

  

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

As we can see, a considerable part of the cor-

relations is made up of the parameters associated 

with the frequency of pronouns. The significance 

of the analysis of pronouns in written documents 

as an unobtrusive way of assessing underlying 

psychological processes has been described a lot 

(Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010). 

Note that in the study by Litvinova et al. (2017) 

using the material of RusSuiCorpus it was shown 

that Russian online texts by suicidal individuals 

contain more function words, verbs, conjunctions, 

cognitive words, commas, fewer prepositions, 

comparison words and pronouns compared to the 

texts by the control group (with no consideration 

of the time factor). These texts appear to be more 

abstract and contain fewer spatial references. 

Texts by suicidal individuals were also found to 

contain more words for negative emotions and 

fewer of those describing social relations and per-

ception (particularly visual), which is indicative of 

these people being more preoccupied with their 

own thoughts and isolated from the outside world. 

As we can see from the example of an individual 

whose texts are part of the corpus, some of the 

above parameters also correlate with the number 

of days prior to the death.  

For a detailed analysis of the behavior of the 

chosen text parameters the data was visualized.  

We designed the dependencies of the intensity of 

posting (in terms of the number of words per day) 

for both blogs on the number of days prior to the 

death in the same graph (Fig. 1). 

 
Fig. 1. Graph of the dependency of the intensity of 

posting (in words) on the number of days prior to the 

death for both blogs 

 

As can be clearly seen from the experimental 

data presented in Fig. 1, several periods of peaks 

and drops in the intensity of posting are typical 

of both blogs. At certain points the intensity is 

identical for both blogs. For a further analysis we 

chose five periods when there is a peak in the in-

tensity for both blogs at a time. We then calcu-

lated the average values of the above text param-

eters at the specified peaks. The obtained results 

are presented graphically (Fig. 2-9) with the av-

eraged values of a text parameter in the analyzed 

periods along with the standardized dependence 

of the intensity of posting (for PD1 and PD2). To 

build the dependencies, we have performed min-

max normalization of the intensity of posting in 

the chosen periods (number of words per day).  

Let us take a closer look at some of the pa-

rameters that were commonly used for other lan-

guages in studies of the dynamics of the parame-

ters of a suicidal individual’s idiostyle using the 

LIWC software. In these studies (see the review 

of the results in paper by Li et al., 2014) the re-

searchers relied on the existing conceptions of 

suicidogenesis according to which a suicide is 

associated with a growing social isolation (the 

sociological concept), feeling of hopelessness, 

sadness, and despair (the psychological concep-

tions of suicide). Therefore a special attention is 

paid to the analysis of the frequency of the pro-

nouns “I” and “we”, words describing social pro-

cesses; the number of words describing positive 

and negative emotions.  

In some studies it was shown that as the date 

of the suicide approaches, the frequency of the 

pronouns “I” increases while the number of the 

pronouns “we” decreases; there are fewer words 

describing social processes as well as positive 

emotions and more words describing negative 

emotions. However, in some other studies the re-

sults were the opposite (Li et al., 2014). 

Since the parameters “Percentage of Words 

Describing the Writer (self-references)” and 

“Percentage of the Pronouns “I”” are closely re-

lated, we are considering them together (Fig. 2-

3).  

In the personal diary PD1 the percentage of the 

words of the above category is consistently high at 

the peak periods, but during the last period the 

number of such words drops significantly as well 

as the intensity. 

  

161



 
 
 

 

 
a) 

 
b) 

 

Fig. 2. Graphs of changes in the parameter  

“Percentage of Words Describing the Writer 

(“Ego”)”: а – PD1, b – PD2 

 

However, in the texts in PD2 despite a peak dur-

ing the last period there is also a drop in the fre-

quency of linguistic units that describe the author, 

which does not agree with the results showed in 

some studies using literary texts but is consistent 

with the results obtained in paper by Li et al. (2014) 

where the methodology and material (blog texts 

were examined over a year prior to the author’s 

death) are most similar to those we chose to em-

ploy. When we analyzed texts we have noticed an 

increasing use of impersonal sentences describing 

writer feelings and states in this period, but this fact 

needs further investigation. 

  
 

 
a) 

 
b) 

 

Fig. 3. Graphs of changes in the parameter  

“Percentage of the Pronouns “I””: а – PD1, b – PD2 
 

The results of the analysis of the behavior of the 

parameter “Percentage of Words Describing Social 

processes” (Fig. 4) in the texts we have analyzed 

are in good agreement with those obtained in other 

studies: immediately prior to the death the propor-

tion of such words in texts drops, which is con-

sistent with the sociological conception of 

suicidogenesis (Stirman and Pennebaker, 2001; see 

also Choudhury et al., 2016, for similar finding in 

reduced social engagement as a marker of shift to 

suicidal ideation).  

 

 

162



 
 
 

  

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 
a) 

 
b) 

Fig. 4. Graphs of changes in the parameter “Percent-

age of Words Describing Social processes”: а – PD1, 

b – PD2 

 

Analyzing words describing emotions is an es-

sential part of studying texts by suicidal individ-

uals (Fig. 5).  

As our analysis showed no correlations be-

tween the percentage of words describing nega-

tive emotions in a text and the number of days 

prior to the death, only the behavior of the pa-

rameter “Percentage of Words Describing Posi-

tive Emotions” was visualized.  

In the personal diary PD1 the percentage of 

words describing positive emotions drops as so 

does the intensity of posting. In the texts in PD2, 

however, in the last period the percentage of 

words of the above group rises as so does the in-

tensity of posting.  

 
a) 

 
 

b) 
 

Fig. 5. Graphs of changes in the parameter “Per-

centage of Words Describing Positive Emotions”: а – 

PD1, b – PD2 

 

An increase in the proportion of words de-

scribing positive emotions in the period prior to 

suicide was identified in 4 out of 9 studies ana-

lyzing the writing of suicidal individuals using 

LIWC (Li et al., 2014), which may be associated 

with an improvement in the author’s psychologi-

cal state following the decision to die. 

Let us examine the dynamics of some other 

parameters that have not been dealt with in stud-

ies of changes in an idiostyle of suicidal individ-

uals. In both blogs we can see a drop in the num-

ber of verbs in the time in the run up to the sui-

cide (Fig. 6) as well as the number of personal 

pronouns (Fig. 7).  

163



 
 
 

 
a) 

 
b) 

 

Fig. 6. Graphs of changes in the parameter  

“Common verbs”: а – PD1, b – PD2 

 

Let us look at the dynamics of such parame-

ters as the proportion of conjunctions (Fig. 8) 

and prepositions (Fig. 9).  

As can be seen, the behavior of the category 

“Conjunctions” was different in the two diaries. 

While in PD2 the number of conjunctions was 

dropping in the time in the run up to the suicide, 

in contrast, in PD1, as the analysis suggests, it 

was on the rise mainly due to a high frequency of 

the conjunction “and”.  

 

 
a) 

 
b) 

 

Fig. 7. Graphs of changes in the parameter  

“Personal pronouns”: а – PD1, b – PD2 

 

The proportion of prepositions was dropping in 

the last period on both diaries. As was already 

noted, in the study comparing blogs of suicidal 

individuals and texts by the control group 

(Litvinova et al., 2017), it was found that on av-

erage texts by the former contain more function 

words in total, verbs, conjunctions but fewer 

prepositions. It is of interest that as was shown in 

(Litvinova et al., 2016) using texts by healthy in-

dividuals (students who had done psychological 

tests), overall for texts by individuals with high 

risks of autoaggressive behavior (according to 

the results of psychological tests), a lower lexical 

diversity, fewer prepositions, more pronouns 

overall, particularly personal ones with a higher 

index of logical cohesion (created due to more 

conjunctions) are typical. 

164



 
 
 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
a) 

 
b) 

 

Fig. 8. Graphs of changes in the parameter  

“Conjunctions”: а – PD1, b – PD2 

 

In this study a neuropsycholinguistic interpre-

tation of the data is set forth. Therefore the anal-

ysis of conjunctions and prepositions in their dy-

namics is seen as essential for further studies of 

the dynamics of an idiostyle of suicidal individu-

als. Hence it was found that in blogs by the sui-

cidal individual in the time in the run up to the 

suicide there are fewer self-references, words de-

scribing social interactions, verbs, prepositions, 

but (in one of the diaries) there is a stable high 

number of conjunctions (mostly the conjunction 

“and”) as well as words describing positive emo-

tions.  

We assume that the above indicates that there 

is a drop in the suicidal individual’s activity (a 

reduction in the proportions of self-references, 

verbs), growing isolation from the world (a re-

duction in the proportion of deictic elements – 

prepositions and pronouns) in the time immedi-

ately prior to the suicide.  

 
a) 

 
b) 

 

Fig. 9. Graphs of changes in the parameter  

“Prepositions”: а – PD1, b – PD2 

 

Note that the above changes occur in the time 

of around three months prior to the suicide. 

There is a clear indication that the final decision 

had already been made. It is also worth noting 

that in this period the depression symptoms got 

more severe and the antidepressants that were 

being taken seemed to be working less.  

4 Limitations 

As any case study, this work has a number of 

limitations. We only analyzed blogs of one per-

son who suffered from depression and wrote a lot 

about his mental health and willingness to die by 

suicide. It is essential in future work to make 

comparison of his writing to the blogs by people 

who did not die by suicide and to the blogs by 

people who died by suicide but never discussed 

their plans concerning suicide. This could high-

light some universal linguistic patterns of dy-

namics of idiostyle of suiciders. 

165



 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 Conclusions and future work 

Our study extends the findings of psycholinguis-

tic analysis of suicides to the online document form. 

Besides, this study analyzed Russian material, 

whereas most previous studies have only analyzed 

English material or material from other languages 

translated into English before analysis.  

A unique aspect of the current study is that we 

used blog entries that were written in Russian and 

were analyzed by means of the Russian version of 

the LIWC. The results of our study that are certainly 

preliminary have proved that it is viable to use 

software, particularly LIWC with a Russian diction-

aries, for processing a large massive of texts in or-

der to identify stable and varying characteristics of 

idiostyle with respect to topic dimension. However, 

it will be necessary to verify and expand internal 

Russian dictionary and to create special dictionaries 

for suicide-related studies as it was done for Chi-

nese (Lv et al., 2015). In addition, we are planning 

to extend the list of linguistic parameters and add 

linguistic complexity, syntactic parameters, etc. in 

particular.  

We argue that it would be rational to perform 

multivariate analysis to reveal how different linguis-

tic parameters best predict time course of suicide.  

Based on the results of the data visualization, 

changes in the chosen text parameters are generally 

nonlinear. Therefore, while analyzing the dynamics 

of a suicidal individual’s idiostyle, it is not sufficient 

to choose text parameters using only a correlation 

data analysis that involves searching for linear con-

nections without visualizing the behavior of the text 

parameters over different periods. The contradictory 

results obtained in the existing research dealing with 

the character of the dynamics of linguistic parame-

ters of texts by suicidal individuals, among other 

things, might be due to not enough attention being 

given to the behavior of each parameter at different 

periods. 

In addition, the above contradictions might be 

accounted for by the fact that in the existing studies 

texts of different genres and mostly literary works 

are analyzed. As our study suggests, the differences 

in the behavior of text parameters might emerge 

even in an Internet blog that can obviously be repre-

sented by different subgenres. Besides, the above 

differences in the results of the study might be due 

to the fact that literary texts are mostly employed 

that were written over a long period of time and a 

character of changes in the text parameters might be 

affected by age as well. Thus the behavior of the pa-

rameters of texts by different authors written over 

the same time period, e.g., a year prior to the death, 

should be investigated in future studies. It also 

seems promising to seek to identify the correlations 

between the text parameters and the ordinary num-

ber of a text (entry), but not only the number of days 

prior to the death as we have done in the present 

study as changes in the behavior of linguistic pa-

rameters might be not only due to those in the au-

thor’s state but also with some events in their lives 

that affect the intensity of posting. 

Despite the above difficulties, the study indicates 

that it is searching for tendencies and analyzing the 

dynamics of the behavior of the text parameters that 

allows a more profound insight into the cognitive 

characteristics of suicidal individuals and a further 

development of predictive models of assessment of 

suicide risks based on a linguistic analysis em-

ployed for online texts as well.  Studying such texts 

using modern methods of NLP and data mining 

would allow one to develop a new set of tools for 

identifying individuals with suicidal behavior 

tendencies. This could be instrumental for practic-

ing psychologists in their daily work resulting in a 

screening system for monitoring publicly available 

messages on social media as well as to identify in-

dividuals with high risks of suicidal behavior. 

Acknowledgments 

Funding of the projects N МК-4633.2016.6 “Pre-

dicting Suicidal Tendencies of Individuals Based 

on Their Speech Production”, N МК-5718.2018.6 

“Speech portrait of the extremist: corpus-statistical 

research (on the material of the extremist forum 

“Kavkazchat”) from the RF President's grants for 

young scientists is gratefully acknowledged. 

References 

A. Kailer and Cindy K. Chung, 2011. The Russian 

LIWC2007 dictionary. Austin, TX: LIWC.net. 

Anthony Wood, Jessica Shiffman, Ryan Leary, Glen 

Coppersmith, 2016. Language signals preceding 

suicide attempts. In CHI 2016 Computing and 

Mental Health Workshop, San Jose, CA. 

Bart Desmet and Veronique Hoste, 2014. Recognising 

Suicidal Messages in Dutch Social Media, in Pro-

ceedings of LREC 2014 – Ninth international con-

ference on language resources and evaluation, 

pages 830–835. 

Bart Desmet and Véronique Hoste, 2018. Online sui-

cide prevention through optimised text classifica-

166



 
 
 

tion, Information Sciences, 439–440: 61-78. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2018.02.014  

Christopher M. Homan, Ravdeep Johar, Tong Liu, 

Megan Lytle, Vincent Silenzio, Cecilia O. Alm, 

2014. Toward macro-insights for suicide preven-

tion: Analyzing fine-grained distress at scale, in 

Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational 

Linguistics and Clinical Psychology, pages 107–

117. 

Darcy J. Corbitt-Hall, Jami M. Gauthier, Margaret 

Taylor Davis and Tracy K. Witte, 2016. College 

Students' Responses to Suicidal Content on Social 

Networking Sites: An Examination Using a Simu-

lated Facebook Newsfeed. Suicide & life-

threatening behavior, 46(5): 609-624. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/sltb.12241  

Glen Coppersmith, Kim Ngo, Ryan Leary, Anthony 

Wood, 2016. Exploratory analysis of social media 

prior to a suicide attempt. In Proceedings of the 

Third Workshop on Computational Linguistics and 

Clinical Psychology, pages 106-117. 

Guan L, Hao B, Cheng Q, Yip PS, Zhu T., 2015. 

Identifying Chinese microblog users with high sui-

cide probability using internet-based profile and 

linguistic features: Classification model, JMIR 

mental health, May 12;2(2):e17. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/mental.4227  

James W. Pennebaker, 2007. The development and 

psychometric properties of LIWC2007. Austin, TX: 

LIWC.net. 

Jenna L Baddeley, Gwyneth R Daniel, James W. 

Pennebaker, 2011. How Henry Hellyer’s use of 

language foretold his suicide. Crisis 32(5): 288–

292.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1027/0227-5910/a000092   

John Pestian, Henry Nasrallah, Pawel Matykiewicz, 

Aurora Bennett, and Antoon Leenaars, 2010. Sui-

cide note classification using natural language 

processing: a content analysis, Biomed Inform In-

sights, 3: 19–28. 

Jose M. Gomez, 2014. Language technologies for sui-

cide prevention in social media, in Proceedings of 

the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in 

the 5th Information Systems Research Working 

Days (JISIC). 

Li Guan, Bibo Hao, Qijin Cheng, Tingshao Zhu, 

2015. Identifying Chinese Microblog Users With 

High Suicide Probability Using Internet-Based 

Profile and Linguistic Features: Classification 

Model. JMIR Ment Health, 2(2):e17,   

http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/mental.4227  

M Lv, A Li, T Liu, T Zhu, 2015. Creating a Chinese 

suicide dictionary for identifying suicide risk on 

social media, PeerJ. Dec 15;3: e1455. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1455  

Munmun De Choudhury, Emre Kiciman, Mark 

Dredze, Glen Coppersmith, and Mrinal Kumar. 

2016. Discovering Shifts to Suicidal Ideation from 

Mental Health Content in Social Media. In Pro-

ceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 

Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '16). ACM, 

New York, NY, USA, pages 2098-2110.   

https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858207  

Peter Burnap, Walter Colombo, Johnatan Scourfield, 

2015. Machine Classification and Analysis of Sui-

cide-Related Communication on Twitter, Proceed-

ings of the 26th ACM Conference on Hypertext & 

Social Media, pp. 75-84.   

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2700171.2791023.  

Samah Fodeh, Joseph Goulet, Cynthia Brandt, Al-

Talib Hamada, 2017. Leveraging Twitter to better 

identify suicide risk, in Proceedings of The First 

Workshop Medical Informatics and Healthcare 

held with the 23rd SIGKDD Conference on 

Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 1-7. 

Shannon W. Stirman and James W. Pennebaker, 

2001. Word use in the poetry of suicidal and non-

suicidal poets. Psychosomatic Medicine, 63(4): 

517-522. 

Tatiana A. Litvinova, 2016. Corpus studies of speech 

of individuals who committed suicides. Russian 

Linguistic Bulletin, 7(3): 133—136. 

http://doi.org/10.18454/RULB.7.16  

Tatiana A. Litvinova, Pavel V. Seredin, Olga A. 

Litvinova, Olga V. Romanchenko, 2017. Identifi-

cation of Suicidal Tendencies of Individuals Based 

on the Quantitative Analysis of Their Internet 

Texts, Computación y Sistemas, 21(2): 243-252. 

Tatiana Litvinova, Olga Zagorovskaya, Olga 

Litvinova, Pavel Seredin, 2016. Profiling a set of 

personality traits of a text’s author: a corpus-

based approach, Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-

ence, Vol. 9811, pp. 555–562. 

http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43958-7_67  

Tim M. H. Li, Michael Chau, Paul S. F. Yip, and Paul 

W. C. Wong, 2014. Temporal and Computerized 

Psycholinguistic Analysis of the Blog of a Chinese 

Adolescent Suicide, Crisis: The Journal of Crisis 

Intervention and Suicide Prevention, 35(3), 168-

175. http://doi.org/10.1027/0227-5910/a000248  

Timothy M. DeJong, James C. Overholser, and Craig 

A. Stockmeier, 2010. Apples to oranges?: A direct 

comparison between suicide attempters and suicide 

completers. Journal of Affective Disorders, 124(1-

2), 90–97. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2009.10.020  

Yla R. Tausczik, James W. Pennebaker. 2010. The 

Psychological Meaning of Words: LIWC and 

Computerized Text Analysis Method.  Journal of 

Language and Social Psychology, 29(1): 24–54. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0261927X09351676 

167


