



















































Stance-Taking in Topics Extracted from Vaccine-Related Tweets and Discussion Forum Posts


Proceedings of the 3rd Social Media Mining for Health Applications (SMM4H) Workshop & Shared Task, pages 5–8
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

5

Stance-taking in topics extracted from
vaccine-related tweets and discussion forum posts

Maria Skeppstedt1,2, Manfred Stede2, Andreas Kerren1
1Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden

{maria.skeppstedt,andreas.kerren}@lnu.se
2Applied Computational Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany

stede@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract
The occurrence of stance-taking towards vac-
cination was measured in documents extracted
by topic modelling from two different corpora,
one discussion forum corpus and one tweet
corpus. For some of the topics extracted, their
most closely associated documents contained
a proportion of vaccine stance-taking texts that
exceeded the corpus average by a large mar-
gin. These extracted document sets would,
therefore, form a useful resource in a process
for computer-assisted analysis of argumenta-
tion on the subject of vaccination.

1 Introduction

Opinions towards vaccination that are expressed in
discussion forums and in social media, as well as
frequently occurring arguments given in support
of these opinions, might help us to better under-
stand reasons behind vaccine hesitancy.

There are previous studies in which such texts
have been manually analysed (Grant et al., 2015;
Faasse et al., 2016), as well as studies in which
topic modelling has been applied for analysing
texts about vaccination (Tangherlini et al., 2016;
Surian et al., 2016; Skeppstedt et al., 2018).

Through topic modelling, it is possible to auto-
matically extract topics that occur frequently in a
text collection. For topic modelling to be a useful
strategy for mining text collections for frequently
occurring arguments, however, at least some of the
topics extracted must correspond to stance posi-
tions or arguments given for these positions.

The aim of this study is to investigate if topic
modelling is suitable for extracting arguments
from two types of document collections that con-
sist of laymen-produced texts about vaccination.
We, therefore, measured the occurrence of stance-
taking towards vaccination in the documents that
were most closely associated with automatically
extracted topics from two different corpora.

2 Background

There are previous studies that use topic mod-
elling in computer-assisted processes to find fre-
quently occurring arguments in a document collec-
tion (Sobhani et al., 2015; Skeppstedt et al., 2018).
Documents that had been manually annotated as
not containing argumentation/stance-taking were,
however, removed in those two previous studies,
i.e., no evaluation of the effects of including neu-
tral documents when performing topic modelling
was carried out. For most types of document col-
lections, it is not known beforehand in which doc-
uments a stance towards the target of interest is
taken or not. Therefore, the setting used here is
more widely applicable, i.e., to use topic mod-
elling on an entire text collection, without remov-
ing documents in which no stance is taken. In both
of these two previous studies, the topic modelling
algorithm NMF (Lee and Seung, 2001), i.e., Non-
negative Matrix Factorisation, was shown appro-
priate for extracting arguments from short argu-
mentative texts. We, therefore, used this algorithm
in our experiments.

3 Method

We used topic modelling to automatically extract
important topics from two different vaccination
corpora, both consisting of English text that pre-
dominantly had been written by people without a
medical background. We, thereafter, measured the
proportion of stance-taking texts among the texts
that were most related to these topics, and com-
pared it to the proportion of stance-taking texts in
the entire corpus.

3.1 Document collections

As a proxy for texts containing arguments, we
used texts in which stance is expressed, since such
texts are likely to also contain a motivation for the



6

position taken. The documents, from each of the
two corpora, were divided into two groups based
on whether they had been annotated as taking a
stance towards vaccination or not, i.e., into the two
groups stance-taking and non-stance-taking.

The first collection consists of posts from
discussion threads on the topic of vaccination
(Skeppstedt et al., 2017) that contain at least one
of the following character combinations: “vacc”,
“vax”, “jab”, “immunis”, and “immuniz”. Posts
annotated as taking a stance for or against vac-
cination were combined into the group stance-
taking texts, and posts annotated as undecided
were assigned the category non-stance-taking.

The second collection consists of tweets
containing the HPV vaccine-related keywords
“HPV”, “human papillomavirus”, “Gardasil”, and
“Cervarix” (Du et al., 2017). We combined
tweets annotated according to the categories Pos-
itive and Negative to form the category stance-
taking tweets, and tweets annotated as Neutral and
Unrelated as non-stance-taking tweets.

Before applying topic modelling, the following
were removed from the texts: standard English
stop words, the terms that had been used for gath-
ering the documents, hash tags, user names, URLs
and links. Duplicated and near-duplicated doc-
uments were also removed from the collections.
Documents with identical spans of texts that con-
sisted of more then eight consecutive tokens were
counted as near-duplicates. For documents con-
sisting of ten or fewer tokens, a shorter (propor-
tional to the length) cut-off was instead applied for
classifying two documents as near-duplicates.

3.2 Applying topic modelling

Separate topic models were constructed for the
two document collections, using the NMF class
from scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). For
each topic extracted by the NMF model, the cor-
responding terms and documents associated with
the topic are given as output, as well as their level
of association with the topics.

The output of the NMF algorithm is non-
deterministic, typically generating slightly differ-
ent topics when run several times. Therefore, to
achieve more reliable results, we followed an ap-
proach, for instance used by Baumer et al. (2017),
in which the algorithm is re-run several times and
only topics that occur in the output from all re-
runs are retained. Before checking which topics

occurred in all re-runs, potential outliers were re-
moved from the set of outputs from the re-runs.

We ran the algorithm 100 times with the setting
to, for each re-run, return a term set consisting of
the 50 terms most closely associated with each of
the topics extracted by the algorithm. A topic was
counted as stable when there was at least a 70%
overlap between the pairs of term sets returned for
a topic, for all 90 retained re-runs of the algorithm.

Potential outliers among the outputs were de-
termined by measuring the average term overlap
between the re-run outputs. That is, for each re-
run, one combined set consisting of all terms as-
sociated with all topics from this re-run was con-
structed. Thereafter, the average overlap between
this combined term set and the corresponding sets
from the other re-runs was measured, i.e., the com-
bined term sets constructed in the same fashion for
each one of the other re-runs. The outputs from
the 10% of the re-runs that had the lowest overlap
were discarded as potential outliers, and were thus
not included when calculating the stability of the
extracted topics.

To avoid having to decide on a fixed number of
topics in advance, which is normally required from
an NMF user, we started by requesting the algo-
rithm to extract 20 topics, and thereafter gradually
decreased the number of topics requested until a
maximum of 25% of the extracted topics were dis-
carded as non-stable.

4 Results

After the near-duplicate filtering were 1,108 and
2,250 documents retained, for the discussion
threads and the tweets, respectively. The propor-
tions of stance-taking documents among the doc-
uments that were ranked by the algorithm as the
top-n documents most typical to the extracted top-
ics are shown in Table 1. These were compared to
the 95% confidence interval for the proportion of
stance-taking documents among n documents ran-
domly sampled from the corpus.1 Measurements
were carried out for n=35 and n=100. The method
used had yielded 90 re-run outputs, which each
one of them contained a slightly different docu-
ment ranking for the topics extracted. For each
of the topics, we therefore extracted the 100 most
top-ranked documents for every re-run, and ranked

1Calculated according to Preston (2012), i.e., 95% of
all possible samples of size n yield a proportion p̂ within
1.96

√
p (1− p) /n of the true proportion p.



7

Topics for discussion threads Stance top n
n=35 n=100

people/think/mmr/like/child/really 71% 79%

rubella/women/immune/pregnant/girl 94% 88%
risk/child/disease/risks/carry/catching 82% 90%
immunity/herd/checked/wanes 85% 84%

mumps/meningitis/urabe/uk/mmr 88% 83%

000/10/offit/theory/cope/think/paul 74% 75%

children/damaged/unvaccinated 77% 83%

cough/whooping/brother/caught/mum 80% 80%

stance in entire corpus 80% 80%

corpus stance, 95% conf. interval ± 13 ± 7.9

Topics for tweets Stance top n
n=35 n=100

cancer/cervical/cause/prevention 42% 46%

girls/boys/10/need/vaccinated 74% 73%
vaccine/safe/child/effects/study 60% 70%
cancers/caused/related/prevent/protect 57% 45%

rhode/island/graders/mandates/7th 51% 51%

teens/getting/cdc/vaccinations 48% 56%
women/men/young/risk/infection/ask 48% 43%

vaccination/rates/low/states/adolescent 74% 65%
vaccinates/tdap/safety/teen 51% 57%
shot/got/doctor/tomorrow/arm 57% 52%

health/public/mandate/dept/activists 40% 41%

love/epidemic/documentary/television 14% 31%

vax/anti/age/cdc/proven/harm/govt 80% 76%
stance in entire corpus 44% 44%

corpus stance, 95% conf. interval ± 16 ± 10

Table 1: The proportion of stance-taking documents
among the top 35 and 100 most typical documents for
each extracted topic. Each topic is represented by its
most closely associated terms.

these documents according to the sum of the docu-
ments topic-association value over the 90 re-runs.

For the figures in Table 1, the stance propor-
tion that lies below the 95% confidence interval
for the stance proportions of n randomly selected
documents is marked with italics and those that lie
above are marked in boldface. That is, the doc-
ument rankings (top 35 or top 100) that contain
a smaller or larger density of stance-taking texts,
than had the same number of documents been ran-
domly selected, are marked in italics or boldface.

For discussion forum texts, for which the
collection-level proportion of stance-taking was
already high, the proportions among the docu-
ments extracted for the topics were similar to

the document-level proportion. The general trend
was a slight increase in stance-taking documents,
with one topic that had a stance-taking proportion
above the 95% confidence interval for the top-35
documents and two topics that fulfil this criterion
for the top-100 topics.

Also for the tweets, a majority of the topics
had associated documents with a proportion of
stance-taking that did not differ significantly from
a random sampling from the document collection.
However, some of the topics contained a very high
proportion of stance-taking, in comparison to the
proportion in the entire document collection. This
resulted in that, for the tweets, there was a statis-
tically significant difference for three topics also
when extracting only the top 35 most typical doc-
uments. These top 35 documents were made up
of document sets consisting of semantically co-
herent tweets. The topic girls/boys/10... mainly
consisted of posts advocating HPV vaccine for
both boys and girls, often also providing the ar-
gument that it prevents cancer. The documents be-
longing to vax/anti/age/... typically took the op-
posite stance, and often contained a questioning
of whether there is a proof that HPV vaccination
prevents cancer, or warnings against perceived ad-
verse effects of HPV vaccination. The topic vacci-
nation/rates/low..., which consisted of expressions
of worries about HPV vaccination rates being low,
forms an example of that stance-taking does not
always imply that arguments are given. That is,
although most of the tweets associated with this
topic clearly take a stance in favour of vaccination,
no direct arguments are given here.

There was also one tweet topic with a
very low proportion of stance-taking among
its associated documents, that is, the topic
love/epidemic/documentary... which consisted of
many tweets that, in different ways, but in a neutral
manner, announced a documentary about HPV.

5 Discussion and conclusion

A typical practical application of the method stud-
ied here would be the case in which an ana-
lyst aims at finding frequently occurring vaccine-
related arguments in a document collection that is
too large for a fully manual analysis. The analyst
would then instead perform an analysis at which
only a subset of the texts would be read, i.e., those
automatically extracted through topic modelling.

We have here shown, for the two document



8

collections investigated, that there are topics ex-
tracted which have associated documents that con-
tain a larger proportion of vaccine stance-taking
texts than the average document collection. That
is, these document sets would form a useful
resource for such an analyst who searches for
vaccine-related argumentation.

The fact that there might also be topics extracted
which do not contain argumentation, i.e., topics
similar to the love/epidemic... topic, should not
pose a large obstacle to the analysis, as long as
there are other topics that have associated doc-
uments in which stance is taken. That is, at
least for the documents extracted for the topic
love/epidemic..., it is evident after reading only
a few documents, that this topic is uninteresting
for the task of finding argumentation. Documents
closely associated with such topics can, therefore,
be excluded from the analysis after a quick inspec-
tion. This would enable the analyst to focus on
the other topics, which have associated documents
that do contain argumentation.

Acknowledgments

The study was funded by the Swedish Research
Council (Vetenskapsrådet), through the project
“Navigating in streams of opinions: Extracting
and visualising arguments in opinionated texts”
(No. 2016-06681).

References
Eric P. S. Baumer, David Mimno, Shion Guha, Emily

Quan, and Geri K. Gay. 2017. Comparing grounded
theory and topic modeling: Extreme divergence
or unlikely convergence? Journal of the Asso-
ciation for Information Science and Technology,
68(6):1397–1410.

Jingcheng Du, Jun Xu, Hsingyi Song, Xiangyu Liu,
and Cui Tao. 2017. Optimization on machine learn-
ing based approaches for sentiment analysis on HPV
vaccines related tweets. J Biomed Semantics, 8(1):9.

Kate Faasse, Casey J. Chatman, and Leslie R. Martin.
2016. A comparison of language use in pro- and
anti-vaccination comments in response to a high pro-
file Facebook post. Vaccine, 34(47):5808–5814.

Lenny Grant, Bernice L. Hausman, Margaret Cash-
ion, Nicholas Lucchesi, Kelsey Patel, and Jonathan
Roberts. 2015. Vaccination persuasion online: A
qualitative study of two provaccine and two vaccine-
skeptical websites. J Med Internet Res, 17(5):e133.

Daniel D. Lee and H. Sebastian Seung. 2001. Al-
gorithms for non-negative matrix factorization. In

Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 556 – 562.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Edouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Scott Preston. 2012. Math 158: Confidence inter-
val for a proportion. http://www.oswego.edu/
˜srp/158/CI%20Proportion/CI%20for%20a%20
Proportion.pdf.

Maria Skeppstedt, Andreas Kerren, and Manfred Stede.
2017. Automatic detection of stance towards vac-
cination in online discussion forums. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Digital Dis-
ease Detection using Social Media 2017 (DDDSM-
2017), pages 1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Maria Skeppstedt, Andreas Kerren, and Manfred
Stede. 2018. Vaccine hesitancy in discussion fo-
rums: Computer-assisted argument mining with
topic models. In Building Continents of Knowl-
edge in Oceans of Data: The Future of Co-Created
eHealth, number 247 in Studies in Health Technol-
ogy and Informatics, pages 366–370. IOS Press.

Parinaz Sobhani, Diana Inkpen, and Stan Matwin.
2015. From argumentation mining to stance clas-
sification. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Argumentation Mining, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Didi Surian, Dat Quoc Nguyen, Georgina Kennedy,
Mark Johnson, Enrico Coiera, and Adam G Dunn.
2016. Characterizing Twitter discussions about
HPV vaccines using topic modeling and community
detection. J Med Internet Res, 18(8):e232.

Timothy R. Tangherlini, Vwani Roychowdhury, Beth
Glenn, Catherine M. Crespi, Roja Bandari, Akshay
Wadia, Misagh Falahi, Ehsan Ebrahimzadeh, and
Roshan Bastani. 2016. ”Mommy blogs” and the
vaccination exemption narrative: Results from a
machine-learning approach for story aggregation on
parenting social media sites. JMIR Public Health
Surveill, 2(2):e166.


