















































An Evaluation of Lexicon-based Sentiment Analysis Techniques for the Plays of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing


Proceedings of Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature, pages 139–149
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, August 25, 2018.

139

An Evaluation of Lexicon-based Sentiment Analysis Techniques  
for the Plays of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing 

Thomas Schmidt 
Media Informatics Group 
Regensburg University 

93040 Regensburg, Germany 
thomas.schmidt@ur.de 

 
Manuel Burghardt 

Computational Humanities Group 
Leipzig University 

04109 Leipzig, Germany 
burghardt@informatik.uni-

leipzig.de 

Abstract 

We present results from a project on sentiment analysis of drama texts, more concretely the 
plays of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. We conducted an annotation study to create a gold standard 
for a systematic evaluation. The gold standard consists of 200 speeches of Lessing’s plays and 
was manually annotated with sentiment information by five annotators. We use the gold stand-
ard data to evaluate the performance of different German sentiment lexicons and processing 
configurations like lemmatization, the extension of lexicons with historical linguistic variants, 
and stop words elimination, to explore the influence of these parameters and to find best prac-
tices for our domain of application. The best performing configuration accomplishes an accu-
racy of 70%. We discuss the problems and challenges for sentiment analysis in this area and 
describe our next steps toward further research.    

1 Introduction 
As drama provides a number of structural features, such as speakers, acts or stage directions, it can be 
considered a literary genre that is particularly convenient and accessible for computational approaches. 
Accordingly, we find a number of quantitative approaches for the analysis of drama in general (cf. Fucks 
and Lauter, 1965; Solomon, 1971; Ilsemann; 2008), but also with a focus on the analysis of emotion 
(Mohammad, 2011) and sentiment (Nalisnick and Baird, 2013). More concretely, Mohammad (2011) 
uses the NRC Emotion Lexicon (Mohammad and Turney, 2010) to analyze the distribution and the pro-
gression of eight basic emotions in a selection of Shakespeare’s plays. Nalisnick and Baird (2013) focus 
on speaker relations to analyze sentiment in Shakespeare’s plays.  

The goal of our study is to extend these existing approaches to computational sentiment analysis by 
taking into account historic, German plays. Further, we address some of the limitations of the current 
research on sentiment analysis in drama (Mohammad, 2011; Nalisnick and Baird, 2013), e.g. the ad hoc 
usage of sentiment lexicons without any pre-processing steps or other adjustments (Mohammad, 2011; 
Nalisnick and Baird, 2013). Our main contribution to the field of sentiment analysis for drama is the 
systematic evaluation of lexicon-based sentiment analysis techniques for the works of the German play-
wright Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. The evaluation takes into account a number of existing sentiment 
lexicons for contemporary German language (Võ et al., 2009; Clematide and Klenner, 2010; Mohammad 
and Turney, 2010; Remus et al., 2010; Waltinger, 2010) and various related NLP techniques, such as 
German lemmatizers, stop words lists and spelling variant dictionaries. The various combinations of 
existing lexicons and NLP tools are evaluated against a human annotated subsample, which serves as a 
gold standard. 

2 Related Work: Sentiment Analysis in Literary Studies 
As literary scholars have been interested in the emotions and feelings expressed in narrative texts for 
quite some time (cf. Winko, 2003; Mellmann, 2015), it is not surprising that computational sentiment 
analysis techniques have found their way into the realm of literary studies, for instance with Alm and 
Sproat (2005) and Alm et al. (2005), who examined the sentiment annotation of sentences in fairy tales. 
Other examples include Kakkonen and Kakkonen (2011), who used lexicon-based sentiment analysis to 



140

visualize and compare the emotions of gothic novels in a graph-based structure. Ashok et al. (2013) 
found a connection between the distribution of sentiment bearing words and the success of novels. Els-
ner (2012) included sentiment analysis to examine the plot structure in novels. In the same area, Jockers 
(2015) authored several blog posts about the use of sentiment analysis for the interpretation and visual-
ization of plot arcs in novels. Reagan et al. (2016) extended Jockers work and use supervised as well as 
unsupervised learning to identify six core emotional arcs in fiction stories. Jannidis et al. (2016) used 
the results of lexicon-based sentiment analysis as features to detect “happy endings” in German novels 
of the 19th century. Heuser et al. (2016) used crowdsourcing, close reading and lexicon-based sentiment 
analysis to connect sentiments with locations of London in 19th century novels and visualize the infor-
mation on maps of historic London. Kim et al. (2017) used lexical emotion features as part of a bigger 
feature set to successfully predict the genre of fiction books via machine learning. Buechel et al. (2016) 
identified the historical language of past centuries as a major challenge for sentiment analysis and there-
fore constructed a sentiment lexicon for the use case of 18th and 19th century German to analyze emo-
tional trends and distributions in different genres. 

3 Evaluation Design 
3.1 Corpus 
In order to investigate the practicability of lexicon-based sentiment analysis techniques for historical 
German drama, we gathered an experimental corpus of twelve plays by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, 
which comprises overall 8,224 speeches. The plays were written between 1747 and 1779. Eight of the 
dramas are attributed to the genre of comedy while three are tragedies and one is referred to as dramatic 
poem. The most famous plays of the corpus are “Nathan der Weise” and “Emilia Galotti”. The average 
length of the speeches of the entire corpus is 24.15 words; the median is 13 words, which shows that the 
corpus consists of many rather short speeches. The longest speech consists of 775 words. Also note that 
the plays have very different lengths, with the shortest consisting of 183 and the longest of 1,331 
speeches. All texts in our corpus are available in XML format and come with structural and speaker-
related information for the drama text1. 

3.2 Gold Standard Creation 
To be able to assess the quality of results from our evaluation study of lexicon-based approaches to 
sentiment analysis in Lessing’s plays, we created a human annotated gold standard for 200 speeches. It 
is important to note that we were primarily interested in the overall sentiment of a self-contained char-
acter speech, as speeches are typically the smallest meaningful unit of analysis in quantitative ap-
proaches to the study of drama (cf. Ilsemann, 2008; Wilhelm, Burghardt and Wolff, 2013; Nalisnick and 
Baird, 2013). To create a representative sample of the 200 speeches, several characteristics of the corpus 
were taken into consideration: First, we only selected speeches longer than 18 words, which represents 
-25% of the average word length of speeches of the corpus, as we wanted to eliminate very short 
speeches that may contain no information at all. In related work, very short text snippets have been 
reported to be problematic for sentiment annotation, due to the lack of context and content (Alm and 
Sproat, 2005; Liu, 2016, p. 10). From the remaining speeches, we randomly selected speeches so that 
the proportion of speeches per drama in our gold standard represents the proportion per drama of the 
entire corpus, i.e. there are proportionally more speeches for longer dramas. We reviewed all speeches 
manually and replaced some speeches that consisted of French and Latin words, since those speeches 
might be problematic for our German speaking annotators. The final gold standard corpus had an aver-
age length of 50.68 words per speech and a median of 38 with the longest speech being 306 words long. 

Five annotators, all native speakers in German, annotated the 200 speeches. During the annotation 
process, every speech was presented to the annotators with the preceding and the subsequent speech as 
contextual information. For the annotation scheme, we used two different approaches, which are ori-
ented toward similar annotation studies (Bosco et al., 2014; Saif et al., 2014; Momtazi, 2012, Takala et 
al., 2014). First, annotators had to assign each speech to one of six categories: very negative, negative, 
neutral, mixed, positive, very positive. We refer to this annotation as differentiated polarity. In a second 
step, participants had to choose a binary polarity: negative or positive. This means, if annotators chose 
                                                        
1 All electronic texts were gathered from the TextGrid Repository (https://textgridrep.org/repository.html). 
 



141

neutral or mixed in the first step, they had to choose a binary polarity based on the overall tendency. 
With the first annotation, we wanted to gather some basic insights into sentiment distributions. However, 
several studies have shown that the agreement is very low for differentiated schemes like this (Momtazi, 
2012; Takala et al., 2014); therefore, we also presented the binary annotation. Figure 1 illustrates the 
annotation scheme. 

Figure 1. Example annotation 
 

All five annotators had two weeks of time to conduct the entire annotation of 200 speeches, inde-
pendently from each other. According to the annotators, the task took around five hours. An analysis of 
the differentiated annotations shows that the majority of annotations are negative or very negative (47%), 
while positive or very positive annotations are rather rare (16%). The results of the annotation also show 
that mixed (23%) and neutral (14%) annotations are a relevant annotation category as well. For the 
binary annotation, 67% of the annotations are negative and 33% are positive. 

We analyzed the agreement of the annotations with Krippendorff’s α (Krippendorff, 2011) and the 
average percentage of agreement of all annotator pairs (APA). Table 1 summarizes the results for the 
agreement of both annotation types. 

 
 Krippendorff’s α APA 

Differentiated polarity 0.22 40% 

Binary polarity 0.47 77% 

 
Table 1. Measures of agreement 

 
Krippendorff’s α and the average percentage of agreement of all annotator pairs point to a low agreement 
for the differentiated polarity. The degree of agreement is moderate for the binary polarity according to 
the interpretation of Landis and Koch (1971). 

Since the degree of agreement is considerably higher for the binary polarity, we only regarded the 
binary polarity for the construction of our gold standard corpus. We selected the polarity chosen by the 
majority (>=3) of the annotators as the final value in our gold standard. This approach leads to 61 
speeches being annotated as positive and 139 as negative. The entire gold standard corpus with all 
speeches, the final annotations and all other annotation data are publicly available2.  

3.3 Parameters of Evaluation 
The results of automatic sentiment analysis approaches are influenced by a number of parameters. To 
find out which configuration of parameters yields the best results for historic plays in German language, 
we evaluated the following five variables: 
 

                                                        
2 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1f72hS2WDRBOrxzSY_tsM_igChG2bvxYTyMVZP6kOnuk/edit#gid=0 



142

i) Sentiment lexicon 
A sentiment lexicon is a list of words annotated with sentiment information. These words are also re-
ferred to as sentiment bearing words (SBWs). We identified five general purpose sentiment lexicons for 
German and evaluated their performance: SentiWortschatz (SentiWS, Remus et al., 2010), the Berlin 
Affective Word List (BAWL, Võ et al., 2009), German Polarity Clues (GPC; Waltinger, 2010), the Ger-
man translation of the NRC Emotion Lexicon (NRC, Mohammad and Turney, 2010) and a sentiment 
lexicon by Clematide and Klenner (2010), further referred to as CK. Note, that all of the sentiment 
lexicons have different sizes and were created in different ways. They also differ in their overall com-
position: Some have simple binary polarity annotations, i.e. a word is either positive or negative. We 
refer to this kind of annotation as dichotomous polarity. Others have additional polarity strengths, which 
are values on a continuous scale e.g. ranging from -1 (very negative) to +1 (very positive) (SentiWS, 
CK, BAWL). Most of the lexicons consist of the base forms of words (lemmas), but some are manually 
appended with inflections of the words (SentiWS, GPC). Besides the lexicons, we also created and 
evaluated a combination of all five lexicons. To do this, we simplified the basic idea of sentiment lexicon 
combination by Emerson and Declerk (2014), i.e. we merged all words of all lexicons. If words were 
annotated ambiguously, we selected the polarity annotation that occurred in the majority of lexicons. 
For this process, we only regarded the dichotomous polarity of the lexicons. 
 
ii) Extension with linguistic variants 
The development of the aforementioned lexicons is based on modern online lexicons (Võ et al., 2009), 
corpora of product reviews (Remus et al., 2010), news articles (Clematide and Klenner, 2010) and the 
usage of crowdsourcing (Mohammad and Turney, 2010). Therefore, the lexicons were rather created to 
be used for contemporary language than for poetic German language of the 18th century. Some early 
studies in this area already identified the problem of historical language for contemporary sentiment 
lexicons (Alm and Sproat, 2005; Sprugnoli et al., 2016; Buechel et al., 2016). To examine this problem, 
we used a tool of the Deutsches Textarchiv (DTA) that produces historical linguistic variants of German 
words, e.g. different orthographical variants a word had throughout history (Jurish, 2012). The tool also 
provides historical inflected forms of the words. We used this tool to extend the sentiment lexicons as 
we gathered all historical linguistic variants for each word of every lexicon and added those words to 
the lexicon with the same polarity annotation of the base. This procedure increased the size of the lexi-
cons to a large degree, since for every orthographic variant all inflections were added (example: size of 
BAWL before extension: 2,842; after extension: 75,436). However, one of the dangers of this approach 
is the possible addition of words that are not really sentiment bearing words, which may skew the po-
larity calculation. Further, the DTA tool has not yet been evaluated for this specific use case, so the 
quality of the produced variants is unclear. Hence, we evaluate the performance of the lexicons in their 
basic form (noExtension) as well as with the extension (dtaExtended). 
 
iii) Stop words lists 
We also analyzed the influence of stop words and frequently occurring words of the corpus on the sen-
timent calculation. Saif et al. (2014) showed that the elimination of these words can have a positive 
influence on performance of sentiment analysis in the machine learning context. Stop words and fre-
quent words might skew sentiment calculation of lexicon-based methods as well, since some of the 
lexicons actually contain stop words. There are also some highly frequent words in our corpus that are 
listed in many of the lexicons as sentiment bearing words, but are actually overused because of the 
particular language style of the 18th century. We use different types of stop words lists to explore the 
influence of those types of words:  

• a basic German stop word list of 462 words (upper and lower case; standardList),  
• the same list extended by the remaining 100 most frequent words of the entire Lessing corpus 

(extendedList), 
• and the same list manually filtered by words that are indeed very frequent, but are still sentiment 

bearing (e.g. Liebe/love; filteredExtendedList).  
 
Besides, we also evaluate the condition to use no stop words list at all (noStopWords). 
 



143

iv) Lemmatizers 
We evaluate lemmatization by using and comparing two lemmatizers for German: the treetagger by 
Schmidt (1995) and the pattern lemmatizer by De Smedt and Daelemans (2012). Many of the lexicons 
only include base forms of SBWs, so lemmatization is a necessary step for those lexicons to identify 
inflections. However, due to the general problems of automatic lemmatization in German (Eger et al., 
2016) and the special challenges historical and poetic language pose to automatic lemmatizers, mistakes 
and problems might occur that distort the detection of SBWs. Besides the general comparison between 
the two lemmatizers and no lemmatization at all, we also compared the automatic lemmatization with 
the manually added inflections some lexicons contain and the extension with inflections by the tool of 
the DTA. 
 
v) Case-sensitivity 
Related studies with lexicon-based methods typically lowercase all words for reasons of processing and 
normalization (Klinger et al., 2016). We wanted to explore if case affects the evaluation results (caseSen-
sitive vs. caseInSensitive), as several words in German have a change in meaning depending on case, 
especially with regard to their sentiment. 

3.4 Sentiment Calculation 
To calculate the sentiment of a speech we employed a simple term counting method, often used with 
lexicon-based methods (Kennedy and Inkpen, 2006). The number of positive words according to the 
used configuration of parameters is subtracted by the number of negative words to get a general polarity 
score. If this score is negative, the speech is regarded as negative, otherwise as positive. If a sentiment 
lexicon contains polarity strengths for the SBWs, we additionally used these values in a similar way to 
calculate a sentiment score. Therefore, for these lexicons we calculated and compared two scores: one 
for dichotomous polarity and one for polarity strengths. 

4 Results 
In this chapter we present results from our evaluation of all possible combinations of the previously 
described parameters in comparison to the human annotated gold standard data. We used well-estab-
lished metrics for sentiment analysis evaluation (Gonçalves et al., 2013). Our main metric is accuracy, 
which is the proportion of the correctly predicted speeches of all speeches. To get a more holistic view 
of the results, we also looked at recall, precision and F-measures. We furthermore analyzed the metrics 
for positive and negative speeches separately. Since our gold standard has an overrepresentation of neg-
ative speeches, misbehaviors of configurations like a general prediction of negative speeches would 
otherwise go undetected. We use the random baseline, the majority baseline and agreement measures as 
benchmarks. Because of the unequal distribution, the random baseline is set to 0.525 and the majority 
baseline is set to 0.695 for the accuracy. Mozetic et al. (2016) propose the average percentage of agree-
ment of all annotator pairs (APA, 77%) as baseline for sentiment analysis evaluations. We also take this 
baseline into account when assessing the performance. 

As we analyzed more than 400 different configurations, we are not able present all evaluation results 
in detail in this paper. However, an evaluation table of the best configurations ordered by accuracy is 
available online3. Note that we removed configurations from the table that tend to predict almost all 
speeches as negative and therefore accomplish accuracies close to the majority baseline, but are actually 
flawed. Figure 2 shows a snippet of the top part of the table. 

 

                                                        
3 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1yOv0U99SDI0dFUkctJcGmTXHSxcRByRJihnqRhEIkNY/edit#gid=0 



144

 
 

Figure 2. Table snippet of the results of the evaluation of all configurations 
 

Table 2 reduces the results to the best configurations of every single sentiment lexicon and shows the 
corresponding accuracies as well as F-measures for both polarity classes (positive/negative). 

 

lexicon exten-sion 
lemmati-

zation stop words case 
accu-
racy 

F-Posi-
tive 

F-Nega-
tive 

SentiWS 
(Polarity 

Strengths) 

dtaEx-
tended treetagger noStopWords caseInSensitive 0.7 0.46 0.79 

Combined 
Lexicon 

dtaEx-
tended treetagger noStopWords caseInSensitive 0.68 0.44 0.77 

CK 
(Polarity 

Strengths) 

dtaEx-
tended treetagger 

enhancedFil-
teredList caseSensitive 0.6 0.55 0.65 

GPC dtaEx-tended pattern 
enhancedFil-

teredList caseSensitive 0.6 0.72 0.42 

NRC dtaEx-tended treetagger noStopWords caseInSensitive 0.53 0.44 0.59 

BAWL dtaEx-tended treetagger noStopWords caseInSensitive 0.49 0.50 0.46 

 
Table 2. Best configurations per sentiment lexicon 

 
In the following we summarize the main findings of our evaluation study: 
• The overall best performance is delivered by the SentiWS lexicon and the combined lexicon if 

the remaining parameters are the same 

• When a lexicon has polarity strengths, calculation with those always outperform calculations with 
the dichotomous polarity of the lexicon. Apart from BAWL, the general rule is that lexicons with 
polarity strengths (SentiWS, CK) in general outperform all other lexicons with only dichotomous 
polarities (GPC, NRC) 

• The extension with historical linguistic variants consistently yields the strongest performance 
boost for all lexicons. The extension with historical inflections is better than just automatic lem-
matization. 



145

• Stop words lists have differentiated influences. Some lexicons (e.g. GPC) tend to excessive pre-
diction of one polarity class, because of stop words and frequent words. However, this does not 
always lead to worse accuracies but in-depth word analysis shows incorrect sentiment assign-
ments to words. We therefore recommend the usage of stop word lists when lexicons contain stop 
words or when stop words are generated by means of additional NLP processes. The best rated 
lexicons (e.g. SentiWS) are not influenced by stop words at all. 

• Both lemmatizers perform almost equally good. A detailed analysis of the results shows that both 
lemmatizers have problems with the historical language of the speeches. However, for lexicons 
that consist only of base forms, lemmatization leads to a better overall performance. The results 
for lexicons with manually added inflections show that those inflections work better than the 
automatic lemmatization. For many lexicons, a combination of both yields better results. 

• Case-sensitivity does not have an effect on the overall quality of sentiment evaluations in our test 
corpus. 

The best overall performance is accomplished with the polarity strengths of the SentiWS lexicon ex-
tended with historical linguistic variants, lemmatization via treetagger, no stop words lists and ignoring 
case-sensitivity. The accuracy for this performance is 0.705 with 141 speeches correctly predicted. This 
result is over the benchmark of the random and majority baseline but below the average percentage of 
agreement of the annotator pairs (77%). 

5 Discussion and Outlook 
We made several contributions to the research area of sentiment analysis in historical drama texts, one 
being the creation of an annotated corpus of drama speeches. However, there are some limitations con-
cerning the annotation study: We identified low to mediocre levels of agreement among the annotators 
for the polarity annotation. The low level of agreement for annotation schemes with multiple categories 
is also found in several other research areas (Momtazi, 2012; Takala et al., 2014). The mediocre levels 
of agreement for the binary annotation are in line with similar research in the field of literary texts (Alm 
and Sproat, 2005; Alm et al., 2005) and texts with historical language (Sprugnoli et al., 2016). However, 
compared to other types of text, the agreement for the binary polarity is rather low (e.g. Thet et al., 2010; 
Prabowo and Thelwall, 2009). Sentiment annotation of literary texts seems to be a rather subjective and 
challenging task. Our annotators also reported difficulties due to the lack of context and general prob-
lems in understanding the poetic and historical language of Lessing. Note that many of the challenges 
very likely occurred because the annotators were non-experts concerning the drama texts. Some feed-
back of the annotators also points to the possibility that the used annotation schemes were not sufficient 
or representative for the application area of sentiment in historical plays. Another limitation is the small 
size of the corpus: 200 speeches amount to 2% of the speeches of our original Lessing corpus. While 
such small sample sizes are not uncommon for sentiment annotation of literary texts (Alm and Sproat, 
2005), they certainly lessen the significance of the results. To address some of the mentioned limitations, 
we are planning to conduct larger annotation studies with trained experts in the field of Lessing, more 
speeches and a more sophisticated annotation scheme. 

Our major contribution is the systematic evaluation of different configurations of lexicon-based sen-
timent analysis techniques. Many of our findings are important not only for sentiment analysis of Ger-
man drama texts, but for sentiment analysis of corpora with historical and poetic language in general. 
We identified SentiWS (Remus et al., 2010) as the best performing lexicon for our corpus. The accuracy 
of the combined lexicon is overall slightly lower than the top rated SentiWS-configuration. The reason 
for this might be the extension of SentiWS by many problematic and distorting sentiment bearing words 
that can be regarded as noise. Furthermore, the transfer of some problems of other lexicons, like the 
missing of manually added inflections, may be responsible for the decreased performance of the com-
bined lexicon as compared to SentiWS alone.   

We highly recommend the usage of sentiment lexicons with polarity strengths, since they consistently 
outperform dichotomous polarity calculations. This proves that for calculation purposes, sentiment bear-
ing words are better represented on a continuous scale. The calculation with polarity strengths seems to 
better represent human sentiment annotation than the usage of dichotomous values (+1 / -1), as many 



146

sentiment bearing words indeed have different intensities that are perceived differently by human anno-
tators and therefore should also be weighted differently for the automatic sentiment calculation. 

The noticeable and consistent performance boost from the extension of lexicons by historical linguis-
tic variants highlights the linguistic differences between the contemporary language of the lexicons and 
the historical language of the 18th century. The creation of sentiment lexicons, especially for the histor-
ical language of past centuries, is a beneficial next step and possibilities for historical German are al-
ready examined (Buechel et al., 2016). Considering stop words, we highly recommend checking senti-
ment lexicons for highly frequent words of the corpus, especially for historical and poetic language. The 
meaning concerning the sentiment of words can differ throughout history (Hamilton et al., 2016) and is 
also dependent on the linguistic style of a specific author. Therefore, stop words and other highly fre-
quent words might have different sentiment connotations in contemporary and historic German lan-
guage. It also shows that historic language poses challenges for automatic lemmatization, as it is not as 
effective as the extension by historical inflections. 

Overall, we were able to achieve acceptable levels of accuracy with our best performing configuration 
(70%), considering the basic methods used, the linguistic challenges the corpus poses and the mediocre 
levels of agreement of the annotators. Furthermore, we did not consider sentiment classes like neutral 
or mixed, although the annotation study showed that many speeches of the corpus are actually not strictly 
positive or negative. However, accuracy results in other application areas of sentiment analysis like 
product reviews or social media are generally higher, e.g. around 90% (Vinodhini and Chandrasekaran, 
2012). Besides the historical and poetic language difficulties, common problems of lexicon-based meth-
ods like the handling of irony and negations are certainly additional reasons for the mediocre accuracies. 
Based on our results, we consider the usage of general purpose lexicons alone as not sufficient to achieve 
acceptable accuracy scores. Using the results of the planned large-scale annotation studies, we will try 
to create corpora for evaluation and the development of more sophisticated methods of sentiment anal-
ysis, such as machine learning and hybrid techniques in order to improve accuracy and integrate other 
polarity classes as well. 

We are also aware that more complex emotional categories like anger, trust or surprise are also of 
interest for sentiment analysis in literary texts (Alm and Sproat, 2005; Mohammad, 2011). While at the 
moment resources and best practices to include emotional categories in sentiment analysis are rare (Mo-
hammad and Turney, 2010), we are expecting substantial progress from an ongoing shared task on im-
plicit emotion recognition to gather more insights into this area4. 

Another limitation of the presented results is that we only regarded speeches for sentiment analysis. 
However to further explore the possibilities and use cases for sentiment analysis on drama texts, we 
developed a web tool5 for the exploration of sentiment in Lessing’s plays. The tool visualizes the results 
of the best performing configuration of our evaluation study. Literary scholars can explore sentiment 
polarity distributions and progressions on several levels, i.e. for the whole play, for single acts, scenes 
and speeches, but also for individual speakers or for the relationship between two speakers. Further, we 
also integrated the results of sentiment calculation with the NRC Emotion Lexicon (Mohammad and 
Turney, 2010), so besides polarity, more complex emotion categories like anger and surprise can be 
explored as well.  

As an example, Figure 3 illustrates the polarity progression for Lessing’s “Emilia Galotti” throughout 
the five acts of the play. On the x-axis, every act is represented by a bar. On the y-axis the polarity of 
the entire act is represented as an absolute value. The tool also enables the analysis of normalized values, 
e.g. by the length of the text unit. The tool shows that based on our polarity calculation the play starts 
with a rather positive polarity in the first act, but becomes more and more negative as the play progresses. 

                                                        
4 More information about this shared task: http://implicitemotions.wassa2018.com/ 
5 http://lauchblatt.github.io/QuantitativeDramenanalyseDH2015/FrontEnd/sa_selection.html 



147

 
 

Figure 3. Polarity progression for Emilia Galotti per Act 
 

This tool only represents a first prototype. Meanwhile, we are working close with literary scholars to 
gather more insights into needs and requirements for the literary analysis of emotion and sentiment in 
drama texts. By extending our corpus to other authors and eras, we also plan to explore sentiment anal-
ysis on drama texts beyond Lessing’s plays.  

Reference 
Alm, C. O., Roth, D., & Sproat, R. (2005). Emotions from text: machine learning for text-based emotion prediction. 

In Proceedings of the conference on human language technology and empirical methods in natural language 
processing (pp. 579-586). Association for Computational Linguistics 

Alm, C. O. & Sproat, R. (2005). Emotional sequencing and development in fairy tales. In International Conference 
on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (pp. 668-674). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

Ashok, V. G., Feng, S., & Choi, Y. (2013). Success with style: Using writing style to predict the success of novels. 
In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp. 1753-1764). 

Bosco, C., Allisio, L., Mussa, V., Patti, V., Ruffo, G., Sanguinetti, M., & Sulis, E. (2014). Detecting happiness in 
Italian tweets: Towards an evaluation dataset for sentiment analysis in Felicitta. In Proc. of the 5th International 
Workshop on Emotion, Social Signals, Sentiment and Linked Opena Data, ESSSLOD (pp. 56-63). 

Buechel, S., Hellrich, J., & Hahn, U. (2016). Feelings from the Past – Adapting Affective Lexicons for Historical 
Emotion Analysis. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology Resources and Tools for Digital 
Humanities (LT4DH) (pp. 54-61). 

Clematide, S. & Klenner, M. (2010). Evaluation and extension of a polarity lexicon for German. In Proceedings 
of the First Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis (pp. 7-13). 

De Smedt, T. & Daelemans, W. (2012). Pattern for Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13, 2031–
2035. 

Eger, S., Gleim, R., & Mehler, A. (2016). Lemmatization and Morphological Tagging in German and Latin: A 
Comparison and a Survey of the State-of-the-art. In LREC. 

Elsner, M. (2012). Character-based kernels for novelistic plot structure. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of 
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 634-644). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 

Emerson, G. & Declerck, T. (2014). SentiMerge: Combining sentiment lexicons in a Bayesian framework. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Lexical and Grammatical Re-sources for Language Processing (pp. 30-38). 

Fucks, W. & Lauter, J. (1965). Mathematische Analyse des literarischen Stils. In Kreuzer, H. & Gunzenhäuser, F. 
(Hrsg.), Mathematik und Dichtung, (pp. 107-122). München: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung 



148

Gonçalves, P., Araújo, M., Benevenuto, F., & Cha, M. (2013). Comparing and combining sentiment analysis meth-
ods. In Proceedings of the first ACM conference on Online social networks (pp. 27-38). ACM. 

Hamilton, W. L., Clark, K., Leskovec, J., & Jurafsky, D. (2016). Inducing domain-specific sentiment lexicons from 
unlabeled corpora. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (Vol. 2016, p. 595). NIH Public Access. 

Heuser, R., Moretti, F., & Steiner, E. (2016). The emotions of London. Retrieved from https://litlab.stan-
ford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet13.pdf 

Ilsemann, H. (2008). More statistical observations on speech lengths in Shakespeare’s plays. Literary and Linguis-
tic Computing, 23(4), 397-407. 

Jannidis, F., Reger, I., Zehe, A., Becker, M., Hettinger, L. & Hotho, A. (2016). Analyzing Features for the Detection 
of Happy Endings in German Novels. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09028. 

Jockers, M. L. (2015). Revealing sentiment and plot arcs with the syuzhet package. Retrieved from 
http://www.matthewjockers.net/2015/02/02/syuzhet/ 

Jurish, B. (2012). Finite-state Canonicalization Techniques for Historical German. PhD thesis, Universität Pots-
dam (defended 2011). URN urn:nbn:de:kobv:517-opus-55789. 

Kakkonen, T. & Kakkonen, G. G. (2011). SentiProfiler: creating comparable visual profiles of sentimental content 
in texts. In Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage (pp. 62-69). 

Kennedy, A., & Inkpen, D. (2006). Sentiment classification of movie reviews using contextual valence shifters. 
Computational intelligence, 22(2), 110-125. 

Kim, E., Padó, S., & Klinger, R. (2017). Prototypical Emotion Developments in Literary Genres. In Proceedings 
of the Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Human-
ities and Literature (pp. 17–26). 

Klinger, R., Suliya, S. S., & Reiter, N. (2016). Automatic Emotion Detection for Quantitative Literary Studies. In 
Digital Humanities Book of Abstracts 2016. 

Krippendorff, K. (2011). Computing Krippendorff's Alpha-Reliability. Retrieved from http://repository.up-
enn.edu/asc_papers/43 

Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 
33(1), 159-174. 

Liu, B. (2016). Sentiment Analysis. Mining Opinions, Sentiments and Emotions. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Mellmann, K. (2015). Literaturwissenschaftliche Emotionsforschung. In: Rüdiger Zymner (Hg.): Handbuch Lite-
rarische Rhetorik. Berlin/Boston, 173-192. 

Mohammad, S. (2011). From once upon a time to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in novels and fairy tales. 
In Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, 
and Humanities (pp. 105-114). Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Mohammad, S. M., & Turney, P. D. (2010). Emotions evoked by common words and phrases: Using Mechanical 
Turk to create an emotion lexicon. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 workshop on computational ap-
proaches to analysis and generation of emotion in text (pp. 26-34). Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Momtazi, S. (2012). Fine-grained German Sentiment Analysis on Social Media. In LREC (pp. 1215-1220). 

Mozetič, I., Grčar, M., & Smailović, J. (2016). Multilingual Twitter sentiment classification: The role of human 
annotators. PloS one, 11(5), e0155036. 

Nalisnick, E. T. & Baird, H. S. (2013). Character-to-character sentiment analysis in shakespeare’s plays. In Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 479–483). 

Prabowo, R., & Thelwall, M. (2009). Sentiment analysis: A combined approach. Journal of Informetrics, 3(2), 
143-157. 

Reagan, A. J., Mitchell, L., Kiley, D., Danforth, C. M., & Dodds, P. S. (2016). The emotional arcs of stories are 
dominated by six basic shapes. EPJ Data Science, 5(1), 31. 



149

Remus, R., Quasthoff, U. & Heyer, G. (2010). SentiWS-A Publicly Available German-language Resource for Sen-
timent Analysis. In LREC (pp. 1168-1171). 

Saif, H., Fernandez, M., He, Y., Alani, H. (2014). On Stopwords, Filtering and Data Sparsity for Sentiment Anal-
ysis of Twitter. In: Proc. 9th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC) (pp. 810-817). 

Schmid, H. (1995). Improvements in Part-of-Speech Tagging with an Application to German. In Proceedings of 
the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop. 

Solomon, M. (1971). Ein mathematisch-linguistisches Dramenmodell. Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und 
Linguistik, 1(1), 139-152. 

Sprugnoli, R., Tonelli, S., Marchetti, A., & Moretti, G. (2016). Towards sentiment analysis for historical texts. 
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 31(4), 762-772. 

Takala, P., Malo, P., Sinha, A., & Ahlgren, O. (2014). Gold-standard for Topic-specific Sentiment Analysis of 
Economic Texts. In LREC (Vol. 2014, pp. 2152-2157). 

Thet, T. T., Na, J. C., & Khoo, C. S. (2010). Aspect-based sentiment analysis of movie reviews on discussion 
boards. Journal of information science, 36(6), 823-848. 

Vinodhini, G., & Chandrasekaran, R. M. (2012). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining: a survey. International 
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering, 2(6), 282-292. 

Võ, M. L., Conrad, M., Kuchinke, L., Urton, K., Hofmann, M. J., & Jacobs, A. M. (2009). The Berlin affective 
word list reloaded (BAWL-R). Behavior research methods, 41(2), 534-538. 

Waltinger, U. (2010). Sentiment Analysis Reloaded: A Comparative Study On Sentiment Polarity Identification 
Combining Machine Learning And Subjectivity Features. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference 
on Web Information Systems and Technologies (WEBIST '10) 

Wilhelm, T., Burghardt, M., & Wolff, C. (2013). “To See or Not to See” - An Interactive Tool for the Visualization 
and Analysis of Shakespeare Plays. In R. Franken-Wendelstorf, E. Lindinger, & J. Sieck (Eds.), Kultur und 
Informatik: Visual Worlds & Interactive Spaces (pp. 175–185). Glückstadt: Verlag Werner Hülsbusch.  

Winko, S. (2003). Über Regeln emotionaler Bedeutung in und von literarischen Texten. In: Fotis Jannidis & 
Gerhard Lauer & Matias Martinez & SW (eds.): Regeln der Bedeutung. Zur Theorie der Bedeutung literarischer 
Texte. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter, 329-348. 


