



















































CAS: French Corpus with Clinical Cases


Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (LOUHI 2018), pages 122–128
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

122

CAS: French Corpus with Clinical Cases

Natalia Grabar
UMR CNRS 8163 – STL

F-59000 Lille, France
natalia.grabar@univ-lille.fr

Vincent Claveau, Clément Dalloux
CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France

vincent.claveau@irisa.fr
clement.dalloux@irisa.fr

Abstract

Textual corpora are extremely important for
various NLP applications as they provide in-
formation necessary for creating, setting and
testing these applications and the correspond-
ing tools. They are also crucial for designing
reliable methods and reproducible results. Yet,
in some areas, such as the medical area, due to
confidentiality or to ethical reasons, it is com-
plicated and even impossible to access textual
data representative of those produced in these
areas. We propose the CAS corpus built with
clinical cases, such as they are reported in the
published scientific literature in French. We
describe this corpus, currently containing over
397,000 word occurrences, and the existing
linguistic and semantic annotations.

1 Introduction

Textual corpora are extremely important for vari-
ous NLP applications as they provide information
necessary for creating, setting and testing these
applications and the corresponding tools. Yet, in
some areas, due to confidentiality or to ethical rea-
sons, it is complicated and even impossible to ac-
cess representative textual data. Medical and le-
gal areas correspond to such examples: in the le-
gal area, information on lawsuits and trials remain
confidential, while in the medical area, the med-
ical secret must be respected. In both situations,
personal data cannot be used. For several years
now, anonymization and de-identification methods
and tools have been made available and provide
competitive and reliable results (Ruch et al., 2000;
Sibanda and Uzuner, 2006; Uzuner et al., 2007;
Grouin and Zweigenbaum, 2013) reaching up to
90% precision and recall. But even de-identified
data may be difficult to be freely accessed and
used for the research purpose because there is a
risk of re-identification of people, and more par-
ticularly of patients (Meystre et al., 2014; Grouin

et al., 2015) because several medical histories are
unique, or because of other reasons. Hence, the
application of the de-identification tools on per-
sonal data often does not permit to make these
data freely available and usable within the research
context.

Yet, there is a real need for the development of
methods and tools for several applications suited
for such restricted areas. For instance, in the med-
ical area, it is important to have suitable tools for
information retrieval and extraction, for the re-
cruiting of patients for clinical trials, and for per-
forming several other important tasks such as in-
dexing, study of temporality, negation, etc. (Embi
et al., 2005; Hamon and Grabar, 2010; Uzuner
et al., 2011; Fletcher et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2013;
Campillo-Gimenez et al., 2015; Kang et al., 2017).
Another important issue is related to the reliability
of tools and to the reproducibility of study results
across similar data from different sources. The sci-
entific research and clinical community are indeed
increasingly coming under criticism for the lack
of reproducibility in the biomedical area (Chap-
man et al., 2011; Collins and Tabak, 2014; Cohen
et al., 2016), as well as in other areas. First step
towards the reproducibility of results is the avail-
ability of freely usable tools and corpora. In our
work, we are mainly concerned by building freely
available corpora from the medical area.

The purpose of our work is to introduce the
CAS corpus with French medical data, containing
clinical cases such as those published in scientific
literature or used for the education and training of
medical students. In what follows, we first present
some works on creation of medical corpora stress-
ing more particularly on corpora freely available
for the research (Section 2). We then introduce
and describe the CAS corpus in French (Section
3) and its current annotations. We conclude with
some directions for the future work (Section 4).



123

2 Freely available clinical corpora

Within the medical area, we can distinguish two
main types of medical corpora: scientific and
clinical. Scientific corpora are issued from sci-
entific publications and reporting. Such corpora
are becoming increasingly available for the re-
search thanks to the recent and less recent initia-
tives dedicated to the open publication, such as
those promoted by the NLM (National Library
of Medicine) through the PUBMED portal1 and
specifically dedicated to the biomedical area, and
by the HAL2 and ISTEX3 initiatives, which pro-
vide generic portals for accessing scientific pub-
lications from various areas, including medicine.
Such corpora describe the research works, their
motivation, methods, results and issues on precise
research questions. Other portals may also provide
access to scientific literature following specific
purposes, like indexing of reliable literature, such
as proposed by HON (Boyer et al., 1997), CIS-
MEF (Darmoni et al., 1999), and other similar ini-
tiatives (Risk and Dzenowagis, 2001). Thanks to
some research works, there are also scientific cor-
pora which provide precise annotations and cate-
gorizations. These are mainly built for the pur-
poses of challenges (Kelly et al., 2013; Goeuriot
et al., 2014) but may also be provided from works
of researchers, such as POS-tag (Tsuruoka et al.,
2005) and negation (Szarvas et al., 2008) anno-
tated corpora. As for clinical corpora, they are
related to hospital and clinical events of patients.
Such corpora typically describe medical history of
patients and the medical care they are undergo-
ing. It is complicated to obtain free access to this
kind of medical data and, for this reason, there are
very few clinical corpora freely available for the
research. In our work, we are mainly interested
in clinical corpora: the proposed literature review
of the existing work is aimed at clinical corpora
which are freely available for the research. We
present here the main existing clinical corpora.

MIMIC (Medical Information Mart for Inten-
sive Care) corpora, now in their version III, pro-
vide the largest available set of structured and un-
structured clinical data in English. MIMIC III is a
single-center database comprising information re-
lating to patients admitted to critical care units at a
large tertiary care hospital. These data include vi-

1https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
2https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/
3https://www.istex.fr/

tal signs, medications, laboratory measurements,
observations and notes charted by care providers,
fluid balance, procedure codes, diagnostic codes,
imaging reports, hospital length of stay, survival
data, and more. The database supports applica-
tions including academic and industrial research,
quality improvement initiatives, and higher educa-
tion coursework (Johnson et al., 2016). These data
are widely used by researchers, for instance for the
prediction of mortality (Anand et al., 2018; Feng
et al., 2018), for the diagnosis identification and
coding (Perotte et al., 2014; Li et al., 2018), for
the study of temporality (Che et al., 2018) or for
the identification of similar clinical notes (Gabriel
et al., 2018) to cite just a few of such works. Data
from these corpora are also used in challenges,
such as I2B2, N2C2 and CLEF-eHEALTH.

I2B2 (Informatics for Integrating Biology and
the Bedside)4 is an NIH-funded initiative promot-
ing the development and test of NLP tools for
healthcare improvement. In order to enhance the
ability of NLP tools to process fine grained in-
formation from clinical records, I2B2 challenges
provide sets of fully deidentified clinical notes en-
riched with specific annotations (Uzuner, 2008;
Uzuner et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2013), such as: de-
identification, smoking status, medication-related
information, semantic relations between entities,
or temporality. The clinical corpora and their an-
notations built for the I2B2 NLP challenges are
available now for the general research purposes.

N2C2 (National NLP Clinical Challenges)5,
held for the first time in 2018, is dedicated to the
inclusion of patients in clinical trials and the de-
tection of adverse-drug events.

CLEF-eHEALTH challenges6 held in 2013 and
2014 provide annotations for the detection of dis-
orders and normalization of abbreviations, in 2016
the focus was done on structuring of Australian
free-text nurse notes, and in 2016 and 2017 death
reports in French, provided by the CépiDc7, have
been processed for the extraction of death causes.

Finally, medical data, close to those handled in
the clinical context, can be found in the clinical tri-
als protocols. One example is the corpus of clini-
cal trials annotated with information on numerical

4https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets/
Main.php

5https://n2c2.dbmi.hms.harvard.edu/
6https://sites.google.com/site/

shareclefehealth/
7http://www.cepidc.inserm.fr/

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/
https://www.istex.fr/
https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets/Main.php
https://www.i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets/Main.php
https://n2c2.dbmi.hms.harvard.edu/
https://sites.google.com/site/shareclefehealth/
https://sites.google.com/site/shareclefehealth/
http://www.cepidc.inserm.fr/


124

A term female infant was born by vaginal delivery with normal birth weight, body length and APGAR
score, from a 42-year-old mother with 13 previous pregnancies resulting in 3 miscarriages and 10 live
births. The mother had no history of antenatal medical illness nor of exposure to smoking, drinking and
other drugs. At birth, general and systemic examination revealed a round face, single palmar crease,
left precordial systolic murmur. Two hours after birth a deterioration of the general condition occurred,
with generalized hypotonia, cyanosis, poor feeding. The blood count revealed white blood cell count
of 35.6*10 /µL with 20.6*10 /µL, 57.9% monocytes, normal neutrophils, lymphocytes and eosinophils
count, hemoglobin levels of 19.1 g/dl and 27*10 /µL platelets count. The acute phase reactants were neg-
ative. Because she maintained the altered general condition and the platelets ranged between 17-18 *10
/µL, on the 8th day after birth she was referred to our unit for proper diagnosis and treatment. Physical
examination showed a phenotype suggestive for Down syndrome, later confirmed by karyotyping (47,
XX + 21). She was lethargic, tachypneic and a systolic heart murmur was observed. The liver was 2 cm
below the right costal margin, along with a slight enlargement of the spleen. The laboratory tests on the
first day of admission in our unit revealed a white blood count of 15.8*10 /µL, with an abnormal mono-
cyte count (increased absolute and percentile count: 5.66*10 /µL, respectively 35.5%), normal absolute
neutrophil count (5.53*10 /µL), a hemoglobin level of 15.9 g/dl and severe thrombocytopenia (15*10
/µL). The biochemical parameters including electrolytes, uric acid, creatinine, bilirubin, liver enzymes
were normal. The serum lactate dehydrogenase was raised. The bacterial culture work-up and titers of
antibodies against toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, hepatitis C, HIV were negative.
The peripheral blood smear presented atypical cells. The bone marrow aspiration showed hemodiluted
aspirate with blast cells. Immunophenotyping revealed 23% blast cells, positive for megakaryocytic
markers (CD42b, CD41, CD61), myeloid markers (CD33), progenitor cell markers (CD117, CD34)
and T cell marker - CD7 positive. MPO and HLA/DR were negative. The mutational status of AM-
LETO, PML-RARα, FLT3 and NPM1 fusion genes came out absent. The positive diagnosis was acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL).
The echocardiography found a patent foramen ovale. The infant underwent chemotherapy according
to the Down syndrome-specific AML chemotherapy protocol, consisting in four cycles of treatment: the
first two cycles (induction phase) included combinations of cytarabine and liposomal daunorubicin and
the last two cycles (consolidation phase): etoposide, cytarabine and mitoxantrone. Our patient aquired
clinical and hematological remission without serious adverse events.

Figure 1: Example of clinical case

values in English (Claveau et al., 2017), and on
negation in French and Brazilian Portuguese (Dal-
loux et al., 2018).

3 The CAS corpus

3.1 Content of the corpus

We present the CAS corpus in French. It contains
clinical cases such as published in scientific liter-
ature and training material. Cases from these dif-
ferent sources are included in the corpus. Usually,
the source data are available as pdf files. Their
conversion in the text format is automatic but then
needs to be fully checked out in order to correct
potential segmentation errors (remove the paratext
specific to a given journal, verify the conversion of
columns, of end of lines and pages, etc.).

Similarly to clinical documents, the content of
clinical cases depends on the clinical situations

which are illustrated and on the disorders, but also
on the purpose of the presented cases (description
of diagnoses, treatments or procedures, expected
audience, etc.).

Figure 1 presents an example of clinical case in
English. Such data are de-identified by the auhors
and their publication is done with the written per-
mission of patients. The case reports can be re-
lated to any medical situation (diagnosis, treat-
ment, procedure, follow-up...) and to any disor-
der. Publication of clinical cases usually has di-
dactic purposes: train medical students, report on
unusual or new clinical situations, present novel
treatment or imaging issue... A typical structure
of publications with clinical cases starts with the
introduction to the clinical situation, then one or
more clinical cases are presented to support the
situation. Schemas, imaging, examination results,



125

word PoS lemma uncert. uncert. CUI neg neg
cue scope cue scope

L’ B-determiner le O O O O O
adolescent B-common noun adolescent O O B-C0205653 O O
parait B-present verb form paraı̂tre B-u-1 O O O O
triste B-adjective triste O B-u-1 O O O
et B-coordination conjunction et O O O O O
ne B-adverb ne O O O B-n-1 O
parle B-present verb form parler O O O O B n-1
pas B-adverb pas O O O I-n-1 O
. B-ending punctuation mark . O O O O O

Table 1: Example of the annotated sentence from the corpus (B-u-x stands for the beginning of the uncertainty cue
or scope number x, B-n-y for the negation cue or scope number y)

patient history, lab results, clinical evolution, treat-
ment, etc. can also be provided for the illustra-
tion of clinical cases. Finally, these clinical cases
are discussed. Hence, such cases may present an
extensive description of medical problems. Such
publications gather medical information related to
clinical discourse (clinical cases) and to scientific
discourse (introduction and discussion). Related
scientific literature is also provided.

As we can see from Figure 1, the clinical part
of publications on clinical cases may be very sim-
ilar to clinical documents: it describes patients,
and proposes their diagnosis based on examina-
tion, imaging, and biological and genetic informa-
tion. Besides, numerical values and abbreviations
are also present. Misspellings, which are quite fre-
quent in clinical documents, may be missing in
publications on clinical cases.

3.2 Annotation of the corpus

Currently, the corpus contains linguistic and se-
mantic annotations.

At the linguistic level, the corpus is PoS-tagged
and lemmatized with a tool developed in-house
and available as a web-service at https://
anonymized_url. Then, several layers of se-
mantic annotation are performed automatically:

• Concept Unique Identifiers (CUI) corre-
sponding to French terms from the UMLS
(Lindberg et al., 1993) for single or multi-
word terms. For multi-word terms, the an-
notations exploits the IOB (Inside-Outside-
Begin) format. For instance, the two-word
term vitamine B12 is encoded as follows:

... O
vitamine B-C0042845
B12 I-C0042845
... O

In the current version of the corpus, in case
of several concurrent CUIs, only the longest,
and supposedly more precise, CUIs are kept.
For instance, carence en vitamine B12 (defi-
ciency in B12 vitamin) (C0042847) will be pre-
ferred to vitamine B12 (C0042845);

• Negation. Negation indicates whether a given
disorder, procedure or treatment are present
or not in the medical history and care of a
given patient. For this reason, its annota-
tion and detection are important. We adopt
the approach proposed by Fancellu et al.
(2016) and adapted for French by Dalloux
et al. (2018) based on Machine Learning
techniques trained on annotated data. This
follows a two-step process: (1) the nega-
tion markers are detected with a specifically
trained CRF; (2) the scope of each detected
marker is found with a neural network (Bi-
LSTM with a CRF layer). On the French and
English data tested, the detection of negation
gives up to 0.98 for the cues and 0.86 for their
scope;

• Uncertainty. Uncertainty is also an inte-
gral part of medical discourse and should be
taken into account for a more precise com-
puting of the status of disorders, procedures
and treatments. A set of markers has been
built manually. It contains simple and com-
plex lexical markers like probablement, cer-
tainement (probably, certainly) and morpholog-
ical cues like conditional verbs (indiquerait,
proviendrait (should indicate, may be caused by)).
These markers and cues are projected on the
corpus and their scope are found by heuristic
rules. Detection of uncertainty gives about

https://anonymized_url
https://anonymized_url


126

type # annotations
CUI 47,708
uncertainty 4,723
negations 4,620

Table 2: Statistics on annotations

0.90 F-measure for the cues and 0.80 for the
scope.

Since there may be several markers of negation
and uncertainty in a sentence, they are numbered
with their scopes accordingly.

In Table 1, we present an excerpt from the cor-
pus with all the aforementioned linguistic and se-
mantic annotations for the sentence L’adolescent
paraı̂t triste et ne parle pas. (The teenager seems to be
sad and doesn’t speak.)

3.3 Annotation statistics

Overall, the corpus currently contains 20,363 sen-
tences and over 397,000 word occurrences exclud-
ing punctuation marks. Table 2 indicates the num-
ber of units automatically recognized for each cat-
egory.

4 Conclusion

We presented a new corpus in French which pro-
vides medical data close to those produced in the
clinical context: description of clinical cases and
their discussion. Overall, the corpus currently
contains over 397,000 word occurrences exclud-
ing punctuation marks. The corpus is currently
annotated with several layers of information: lin-
guistic (PoS-tagging, lemmas) and semantic (the
UMLS concepts, uncertainty, negation and their
scopes). The corpus will be enriched with more
clinical cases published. Other annotation layers
will be added and their correctness cross-validated
by human annotators. The enriched version of the
corpus will undergo a more detailed description,
such as statistics on age and gender of patients,
their diseases, or the sources of publications.

Besides, similar corpora will be built for other
languages. For instance, the repository of clinical
cases in English is available on a dedicated web-
site Archive of Clinical Cases8 respecting the Cre-
ative Commons License.

The very purpose of our work is to make these
annotated corpora freely available for research.
We expect that this may encourage development of

8http://www.clinicalcases.eu

robust NLP tools for medical free-text documents
in French and other languages.

Acknowledgements

This work was partly funded by the French gov-
ernment support granted to the CominLabs LabEx
managed by the ANR in Investing for the Future
program under reference ANR-10-LABX-07-01.

The authors would like to thank Cyril Grouin
for the discussions on existing medical corpora
and the reviewers for their helpful comments.

References
RS Anand, P Stey, S Jain, DR Biron, H Bhatt, K Mon-

teiro, E Feller, Ranney ML, Sarkar IN, and Chen
ES. 2018. Predicting mortality in diabetic icu pa-
tients using machine learning and severity indices.
In AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc, pages 310–319.

Celia Boyer, O Baujard, Vincent Baujard, S Aurel,
M Selby, and RD Appel. 1997. Health on the net
automated database of health and medical informa-
tion. Int J Med Inform, 47(1-2):27–9.

B Campillo-Gimenez, C Buscail, O Zekri, B Laguerre,
E Le Prisé, R De Crevoisier, and M Cuggia. 2015.
Improving the pre-screening of eligible patients in
order to increase enrollment in cancer clinical trials.
Trials, 16(1):1–15.

Wendy W Chapman, Prakash M Nadkarni, Lynette
Hirschman, Leonard W D’Avolio, Guergana K
Savova, and Ozlem Uzuner. 2011. Overcoming bar-
riers to nlp for clinical text: the role of shared tasks
and the need for additional creative solutions. J Am
Med Inform Assoc, 18(5):540–543.

Z Che, S Purushotham, K Cho, D Sontag, and Y Liu.
2018. Recurrent neural networks for multivariate
time series with missing values. Sci Rep, 8(1):6085.

Vincent Claveau, Lucas Emanuel Silva Oliveira, Guil-
laume Bouzillé, Marc Cuggia, Claudia Maria Cabral
Moro, and Natalia Grabar. 2017. Numerical eligi-
bility criteria in clinical protocols: annotation, auto-
matic detection and interpretation. In AIME (Artifi-
cal Intelligence in Medicine in Europe).

K. Bretonnel Cohen, Jingbo Xia, Christophe Roeder,
and Lawrence E. Hunter. 2016. Reproducibility in
natural language processing: A case study of two r
libraries for mining pubmed/medline. In LREC Int
Conf Lang Resour Eval, pages 6–12.

FS Collins and LA Tabak. 2014. Nih plans to enhance
reproducibility. Nature, 505:612–613.

Clément Dalloux, Vincent Claveau, Natalia Grabar,
and Claudia Moro. 2018. Portée de la négation :
détection par apprentissage supervisé en français et
portugais brésilien. In TALN 2018, pages 1–6.

http://www.clinicalcases.eu


127

SJ Darmoni, JP Leroy, F Baudic, M Douyère, J Piot,
and B Thirion. 1999. CISMeF: cataloque and index
of french speaking health resources. In Stud Health
Technol Inform, pages 493–6.

PJ Embi, A Jain, J Clark, and CL Harris. 2005. Devel-
opment of an electronic health record-based clinical
trial alert system to enhance recruitment at the point
of care. In Ann Symp Am Med Inform Assoc (AMIA),
pages 231–35.

Federico Fancellu, Adam Lopez, and Bonnie Webber.
2016. Neural networks for negation scope detection.
In An Meeting of the Ass for Comp Linguistics, vol-
ume 1.

M Feng, JI McSparron, DT Kien, DJ Stone,
DH Roberts, RM Schwartzstein, A Vieillard-Baron,
and LA Celi. 2018. Transthoracic echocardiogra-
phy and mortality in sepsis: analysis of the mimic-iii
database. Intensive Care Med, 44(6):884–892.

B Fletcher, A Gheorghe, D Moore, S Wilson, and
S Damery. 2012. Improving the recruitment activ-
ity of clinicians in randomised controlled trials: A
systematic review. BMJ Open, 2(1):1–14.

RA Gabriel, TT Kuo, J McAuley, and CN Hsu. 2018.
Identifying and characterizing highly similar notes
in big clinical note datasets. J Biomed Inform,
82:63–69.

Lorraine Goeuriot, Liadh Kelly, Wei Li, Joao Palotti,
Pavel Pecina, Guido Zuccon, Allan Hanbury, Gareth
Jones, and Henning Müller. 2014. Share/clef ehealth
evaluation lab 2014, task 3: User-centred health
information retrieval. In CLEF, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (LNCS), pages 43–61. Springer.

Cyril Grouin, Nicolas Griffon, and Aurélie Névéol.
2015. Is it possible to recover personal health infor-
mation from an automatically de-identified corpus of
French EHRs? In Proc of LOUHI, Lisbon, Portugal.

Cyril Grouin and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2013. Au-
tomatic de-identification of french clinical records:
Comparison of rule-based and machine-learning ap-
proches. In Stud Health Technol Inform, Proc of
MedInfo, volume 192, pages 476–80, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

T Hamon and N Grabar. 2010. Linguistic approach for
identification of medication names and related infor-
mation in clinical narratives. J Am Med Inform As-
soc, 17(5):549–54.

Alistair E.W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, Lu Shen, Li wei
H. Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghassemi,
Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony
Celi, and Roger G. Mark. 2016. MIMIC-iii, a freely
accessible critical care database. Scientific Data,
3(160035):1–9.

Tian Kang, Shaodian Zhang, Youlan Tang, Gregory W
Hruby, Alexander Rusanov, Noemie Elhadad, and

Chunhua Weng. 2017. EliIE: An open-source infor-
mation extraction system for clinical trial eligibility
criteria. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 24(6):1062–1071.

Liadh Kelly, Lorraine Goeuriot, Hanna Suominen,
Danielle L. Mowery, Sumithra Velupillai, Wendy W.
Chapman, Guido Zuccon, and Joao Palotti. 2013.
Overview of the share/clef ehealth evaluation lab
2013. In CLEF, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS). Springer.

M Li, Z Fei, M Zeng, F Wu, Y Li, Y Pan, and J Wang.
2018. Automated ICD-9 coding via a deep learning
approach. In IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioin-
form.

DA Lindberg, BL Humphreys, and AT McCray. 1993.
The unified medical language system. Methods Inf
Med, 32(4):281–291.

Stephane Meystre, Shuying Shen, Deborah Hofmann,
and Adi Gundlapalli. 2014. Can physicians recog-
nize their own patients in de-identified notes? In
Stud Health Technol Inform 205, pages 778–82.

Adler Perotte, Rimma Pivovarov, Karthik Natarajan,
Nicole Weiskopf, Frank Wood, and Noémie El-
hadad. 2014. Diagnosis code assignment: models
and evaluation metrics. J Am Med Inform Assoc,
21:231–237.

Ahmad Risk and J Dzenowagis. 2001. Review of inter-
net information quality initiatives. Journal of Medi-
cal Internet Research, 3(4).

Patrick Ruch, Robert H. Baud, Anne-Marie Rassinoux,
Pierrette Bouillon, and Gilbert Robert. 2000. Med-
ical document anonymization with a semantic lexi-
con. In Ann Symp Am Med Inform Assoc (AMIA),
pages 729–733, Los Angeles, CA.

T Sibanda and O Uzuner. 2006. Role of local context in
de-identification of ungrammatical, fragmented test.
In NAACL-HLT 2006, New York, USA.

Weiyi Sun, Anna Rumshisky, and Özlem Uzuner. 2013.
Evaluating temporal relations in clinical text: 2012
i2b2 challenge. JAMIA, 20(5):806–813.

G Szarvas, V Vincze, R Farkas, and J Csirik. 2008.
The BioScope corpus: annotation for negation, un-
certainty and their scope in biomedical texts. In
BIONLP, pages 38–45.

Y Tsuruoka, Y Tateishi, JD Kim, T Ohta, J Mc-
Naught, S Ananiadou, and J Tsujii. 2005. Devel-
oping a robust part-of-speech tagger for biomedical
text. LNCS, 3746:382–392.

O Uzuner. 2008. Second i2b2 workshop on natural
language processing challenges for clinical records.
In Ann Symp Am Med Inform Assoc (AMIA), pages
1252–3.

O Uzuner, Y Luo, and P Szolovits. 2007. Evaluating
the state-of-the-art in automatic de-identification. J
Am Med Inform Assoc, 14:550–563.



128

Özlem Uzuner, Brett R South, Shuying Shen, and
Scott L DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/va challenge on
concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text. J
Am Med Inform Assoc, 18(5):552–556.


