



















































Event versus entity co-reference: Effects of context and form of referring expression


Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Models of Reference, Anaphora and Coreference, pages 97–103
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

Event versus entity co-reference:
Effects of context and form of referring expression

Sharid Loáiciga1 Luca Bevacqua2 Hannah Rohde2 Christian Hardmeier3
1CLASP, University of Gothenburg

2Department of Linguistics and English Language, University of Edinburgh
3Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University
sharid.loaiciga@gu.se lbevacqu@ed.ac.uk

hannah.rohde@ed.ac.uk christian.hardmeier@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

Anaphora resolution systems require both an
enumeration of possible candidate antecedents
and an identification process of the antecedent.
This paper focuses on (i) the impact of the
form of referring expression on entity-vs-
event preferences and (ii) how properties of
the passage interact with referential form.
Two crowd-sourced story-continuation exper-
iments were conducted, using constructed and
naturally-occurring passages, to see how par-
ticipants interpret It and This pronouns fol-
lowing a context sentence that makes avail-
able event and entity referents. Our partici-
pants show a strong, but not categorical, bias
to use This to refer to events and It to refer
to entities. However, these preferences vary
with passage characteristics such as verb class
(a proxy in our constructed examples for the
number of explicit and implicit entities) and
more subtle author intentions regarding subse-
quent re-mention (the original event-vs-entity
re-mention of our corpus items).

1 Introduction

A challenge in discourse interpretation is the res-
olution of referring expressions, particularly those
whose meaning is compatible with many potential
antecedents. To take an example like (1), a pas-
sage may introduce a number of entities and situ-
ations that a subsequent sentence might refer to.

(1) Everybody who is involved with this debate
has been struggling over me and
my personality. [ParCorFull]

For a sentence following (1), certain expressions
would be resolved unambiguously to a unique en-
tity (e.g., to the speaker for a 1st person singu-
lar pronoun I) or would easily be linked to the
only compatible referent in the context (e.g., to
the group of relevant individuals described as Ev-
erybody for a 3rd person plural pronoun They).
Other expressions are compatible with more than

one entity (e.g., the debate or the personality for a
pronoun It) and therefore create potential ambigu-
ity. Making matters worse, the antecedent of some
expressions can be either an entity or something
more abstract: an event or situation or idea. Such
expressions include personal pronouns like It and
demonstrative pronouns like This/That.

Given the complexity of identifying a set of can-
didate abstract antecedents in a given context and
then determining whether a particular expression
is re-mentioning one of those abstract antecedents
or a more concrete entity, many co-reference sys-
tems focus only on nominal antecedents (e.g.,
BART, Stanford’s sieve-based, HOTCoref (Vers-
ley and Björkelund, 2015)). However, event in-
stances are also referential.1

This paper asks when and to what degree event
instances serve as antecedents when a competing
entity referent is also available. The goal is to
model human choices as a baseline to inform co-
reference systems. We report two psycholinguistic
studies that use a story-continuation task to mea-
sure participants’ resolution of pronouns It and
This.

Improving our understanding of the interpreta-
tion of the “difficult” anaphoric cases is a step to-
wards better anaphora and co-reference systems.
It has been noted that current systems struggle to
identify this type of reference and that anaphoric-
ity determiners have poor performance (Heinzer-
ling et al., 2017). It, This and That are also fre-
quent in dialogue data for which co-reference sys-

1 Here we call event what is more commonly known
as abstract anaphora (cf. Dipper and Zinsmeister (2010);
Nedoluzhko and Lapshinova-Koltunski (2016)). We take as
an event any non-nominal relationship for the pronouns It and
This and a textual antecedent in the form of a text span of vari-
able length (e.g., a word, a clause, several sentences). Textual
means that anaphoric relations for which some type of infer-
ence is necessary are not included, e.g., bridging or extra-
textual reference. The term event reference is founded upon
Webber (1986), and we set on the name event for the sake
of consistency with the annotation in the corpus used in the
second study presented here.

97



tems’ performance is particularly low (Eckert and
Strube, 2000; Müller, 2007). In addition, pronoun
function is relevant to the evaluation of machine
translation systems since different functions entail
different translations according to the constraints
of the language pair and can thus affect perfor-
mance (Guillou, 2016).

2 Related Work

Both corpus-based and psycholinguistics works on
the interpretation of anaphoric expressions con-
centrate on the identification of the antecedents
of nominal expressions. Abstract anaphora—
anaphora that involve reference to abstract entities
such as events or states (Asher, 1993)—is much
less studied from both fields, as evidenced by the
little amount of annotated data available (Dipper
and Zinsmeister, 2010; Poesio, 2015).

Corpus-based studies of pronouns are often
done in relationship to the texts on which co-
reference resolution systems will be trained and
tested. With the clear aim to improve preci-
sion, the authors of these systems have an interest
in quantifying “non-anaphoric” pronouns for pre-
venting their resolution. We know for instance,
that about 5% of referential pronouns and 71%
of demonstratives in dialogue data refer to events
(Müller, 2007; Poesio, 2015), whereas about 3%
of referential it pronouns in written text of various
genres refer to events (Evans, 2001).

In psycholinguistic research, on the other hand,
the focus has been on using theoretical constructs
of complexity, salience, and focus to capture co-
reference patterns. The demonstratives This and
That have been grouped together, assuming that
they behave in the same manner, but potentially
differently from It. Brown-Schmidt et al. (2005)
analyze It vs That and report a preference for That
if what is referred to is a composite (e.g., I’ll have
the hamburger and fries. I’ll have that, too.), in-
dependent of other metrics of the salience of the
referent. Building on the Centering co-reference
model (Grosz et al., 1995), Passonneau (1989) an-
alyzes intra-sentential instances of It vs That with
an explicit NP antecedent. She reports that It is
used to refer to the center (most often the subject),
whereas That favors non-centers.

Corpus-based studies offer insights about lan-
guage use, since the written texts they are based
on are, after all, natural passages. They offer bet-
ter estimates for building systems that will be used

on those texts. Corpus-based studies, on the other
hand, do not offer any explanation as to why a
particular item follows a certain distribution, and
they grant little control over the confounding vari-
ables responsible for that distribution. In this re-
spect, psycholinguistics studies provide more suit-
able methods for capturing the cognitive processes
behind naturally occurring phenomena. We there-
fore start the next section with a study using con-
structed passages to allow for careful control over
format and content.

3 Study 1: Constructed passages

A story-continuation experiment was conducted
to establish a baseline rate at which participants
assign It/This pronouns to entity vs event an-
tecedents. By varying a property of the con-
text sentence, we test how malleable the two pro-
nouns’ respective co-reference preferences are.
A 2x2 design manipulated the context sentence
(alternating/non-alternating verb) and the pronoun
prompt (It/This, as in (2)-(3)).

(2) The train from the Highlands arrived
promptly. It/This

(3) The balloon with the red hearts popped noise-
lessly. It/This

The availability of entities for anaphoric resolu-
tion is dependent on the argument structure of the
previous predicates. Alternating verbs can have an
intransitive as well as a transitive use: the first usu-
ally describes a change of state (4-a), and the latter
specifies, in subject position, which entity brought
on the change (4-b). Conversely, non-alternating
verbs do not allow a transitive use (5).2

(4) a. The snow melted.
b. The heat melted the snow.

(5) a. The battery died.
b. * The heat died the battery.

Manipulating the verb in the context sentence af-
fects the argument realization options associated
with the predicate: Non-alternating verbs like ar-
rive permit only a single realization with the entity
that arrives always in subject position; alternat-
ing verbs like pop are compatible with realizations

2 Jespersen (1927) collects verbs undergoing alternation
in a “move and change class”. They have also been referred
to as respectively causative and anticausative (or inchoative)
verbs (Schäfer, 2009); the phenomenon has also been studied
as “causative-inchoative alternation” (Haspelmath, 1993).

98



where the entity that pops appears in subject posi-
tion or object position. For alternating verbs, an
explicit agent entity can be introduced (I popped
the balloon) or left implicit, as in (3).

One hypothesis is that alternating verbs could
make available an additional (implicit) agent who
might provide more entity co-reference opportuni-
ties and thereby increase entity co-reference and
reduce event co-reference. Another hypothesis
is that non-alternating verbs may make salient
one single (explicit) entity by eliminating com-
petition from other (implicit) entities and thereby
yield more entity co-reference and less event co-
reference. The existence of an external, un-
specified argument in the syntax of alternating
verbs is still controversial (Embick, 2004; Schäfer,
2009), but the cognitive accessibility of a possible
agentive entity arises from the very fact that the
causative alternation exists.

Although differences have been observed be-
tween the use of proximal and distal demonstra-
tives this and that (Çokal et al., 2014), we targeted
only one demonstrative pronoun in order to sim-
plify the design. This is in keeping with observa-
tions about the functional grouping of a number
of pronouns (zeros, demonstratives, and personal
pronouns) when used deictically (Webber, 1990).

3.1 Materials
The 24 experimental items consisted of a context
sentence and a pronoun prompt, as in (2)-(3). Par-
ticipants saw all items, with either It or This. Sub-
ject NPs were modified (8 nouns with pre-nominal
adjectives, 8 nouns with post-nominal preposi-
tional phrases, 8 nouns with post-nominal rela-
tive clauses). The verb used an adverbial or par-
ticle predicate (roughly half alternating, half non-
alternating). The head of the subject NP was al-
ways the only singular entity, with any other men-
tioned entities being incompatible with 3rd person
singular co-reference (e.g., we or the red hearts).3

The 24 experimental items were interleaved
with 40 filler items. These included 20 passages
with a context sentence mentioning one or two en-
tities, followed by a discourse adverbial prompt
(e.g., As a result, Then), 16 passages for an unre-
lated experiment involving mentions of companies
and other organisations, and 4 catch trials with an
obvious correct response (e.g., Caleb did all the

3 The data to reproduce our experiments and the
full models can be found on https://github.com/
sharidloaiciga/event_vs_entity.

cooking for the BBQ even though he hates BBQ.
He prefers mac ’n ).

3.2 Participants

Twenty-seven monolingual English-speaking par-
ticipants aged 19-63 (mean age 36, σ=11.2; 15
male) were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (Munro et al., 2010; Gibson et al., 2011) and
received $4 for an estimated 30-minute task.

3.3 Procedure

Continuations were collected via a web-based in-
terface that participants could access from their
own computer. Each item was presented on a page
by itself with a text box for participants to use for
writing their continuation.

3.4 Annotation and analysis

Continuations for experimental items were anno-
tated for type of co-reference (entity vs event).
The four authors of this paper shared the annota-
tion such that all target continuations were coded
by two annotators. To be conservative, annota-
tors were blind to the It/This prompt condition and
agreed to err on the side of annotating a pronoun
as ambiguous if the pronoun could be interpreted
plausibly as coreferential with an event or an entity
(e.g., The brand new siren sounded loud. [omitted
pronoun] startled some people).

Using mixed-effects logistic regression, we
modeled the binary outcome of entity or event co-
reference with fixed effects for prompt type, verb
class, and their interaction, with maximal random
effects structure when supported by the data (Barr
et al., 2013). Where a model did not converge,
we removed random correlations. All factors were
centered. Reported p-values are from glmer model
output using the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015)
in R (R Development Core Team, 2008).

3.5 Results

Of the 626 total continuations, we excluded 128
that were judged by one or more annotators to be
ambiguous (or for which the annotators gave con-
flicting annotations) as well as 55 that used the
prompt in another way (e.g., This noun). This
left 443 continuations with either entity or event
co-reference. Note that at the analysis stage,
2 of the 24 verbs were re-classified as alternat-
ing verbs, shifting the original even split be-
tween alternating/non-alternating verbs. However,

99



glmer models are understood to be robust against
datasets that are not perfectly balanced.

The results (see Figure 1) show a strong, but not
categorical, bias to use It to refer to entities and
This to refer to events. In addition, verb type im-
pacts co-reference, whereby verbs that permit al-
ternations yield more event co-reference than non-
alternating verbs. This is in keeping with our sec-
ond hypothesis that the salience of the single argu-
ment of non-alternating verbs may have attracted
more entity co-reference.

0

25

50

75

100

It This

Prompt condition

%
 E

ve
nt

 c
or

ef
er

en
ce

Verb type

Alternating

Non−alternating

Error bars represent the standard error.

Coreference choices with IT and THIS prompts

Figure 1: Study 1 results by prompt and verb type.

The prompt type × verb type model of co-
reference choice confirms a main effect of prompt
type (β=5.100, p<0.001) and a main effect of verb
type (β=1.437, p<0.05). There was no prompt ×
verb type interaction (β=-1.350, p=0.22).4

4 Study 2: Corpus passages

4.1 Materials

The 48 target passages are minimally edited
sentences extracted from the ParCorFull corpus
(Lapshinova-Koltunski et al., 2018). This is a
German-English parallel corpus annotated with
full co-reference. Although the corpus is designed
for nominal co-reference, it includes annotations
of two types of antecedents: entities and events.
Entities can be either pronouns or NPs, whereas
events can be VPs, clauses or a set of clauses.

ParCorFull includes texts from TED talks tran-
scripts and also newswire data.5 Since pronouns

4 Inspection of Figure 1 suggests a possible interaction
whereby the effect of verb type looks stronger in the It condi-
tion than in the This condition. The lack of a significant inter-
action in the model may reflect the fact that the co-reference
rate for non-alternating verbs in the This condition is already
near ceiling and there may be little room for (measuring) a
further increase.

5 Specifically, the ParCorFull corpus includes the datasets

are generally more frequent in the TED talks genre
than news, we concentrated on this portion of the
corpus only. Twelve examples of each It-entity,
It-event, This-entity, and This-event were selected.
In comparison to the sentences from Study 1, the
corpus sentences were relatively long; therefore,
simplified or shortened versions were used.

Additionally, the target passages were inter-
leaved with 52 filler items. From these, 24 were
extracted from ParCorFull sentences with no an-
notation and a continuation starting with an ad-
verbial expression was prompted (e.g., The en-
cyclopedia business in the days of leatherbound
books was basically a distribution business. Even-
tually, ). 24 other fillers were extracted from
the OntoNotes corpus (Pradhan et al., 2013) for
a dataset for an unrelated experiment involving
mentions of companies and other organisations, as
in Study 1. A final 4 fillers repeated the catch trials
from Study 1.

4.2 Participants

Nineteen monolingual English-speaking partici-
pants aged 23-44 (mean age 30, σ=6.5; 13 male)
were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
and received $7 for an estimated 50-minute task.

4.3 Procedure, annotation, and analysis

The procedure was identical to that in Study 1.
The annotation followed that described for Study
1. As an illustration, example (6) shows a pas-
sage whose original co-reference relation was one
between an it pronoun and an entity antecedent.
The continuations in (7) were annotated as event
co-reference (7-a), entity co-reference (7-b), and
no co-reference when the It prompt was classed as
being used pleonastically (7-c).

(6) You carry a phone. It knows where you are.
[original co-reference: entity∼it]

(7) a. You carry a phone. This is something that
just about everyone does these days.

b. You carry a phone. It is capable of con-
necting you to others and the world around
you.

c. You carry a phone. It wouldn’t hurt you to
call once in a while.

The binary outcome of entity/event co-reference

used in the ParCor corpus (Guillou et al., 2014), the DiscoMT
workshop (Hardmeier et al., 2016) and the test sets from the
WMT 2017 shared task (Bojar et al., 2017).

100



was again modeled with a logistic regression. We
included fixed effects for prompt type, original
passage co-reference (entity/event), original pas-
sage referring expression (it/this), and the 2-way
and 3-way interactions. All factors were centered.

4.4 Results

Of the 788 total continuations, we excluded 94 that
were judged by one or more annotators to be am-
biguous (or for which the annotators gave conflict-
ing annotations) as well as 98 that used the prompt
in another way (e.g., This noun). This left 596 con-
tinuations with either entity or event co-reference.

0

25

50

75

It This

Prompt condition

%
 E

ve
nt

 c
or

ef
er

en
ce

Original 
passage type

Entity

Event

Error bars represent the standard error.

Coreference choices with IT and THIS prompts

Figure 2: Study 2 results by prompt and original co-
reference (collapsing over original it/this pronoun type)

The results (see Figure 2) follow those of Study
1 for the prompt manipulation: Event co-reference
is higher with This than It. Event co-reference fur-
ther increases when the original passage contained
event co-reference. The model (prompt type ×
original passage type × original passage pronoun)
confirms a main effect of prompt type (β=2.529,
p<0.001) and a main effect of original passage
type (β=3.053, p<0.001), with no effect of orig-
inal pronoun or any significant interactions.

5 Discussion

The two studies show divergent co-reference dis-
tributions for the personal pronoun It and the
demonstrative This: a bias towards entity co-
reference for It and a bias for event co-reference
for This. As far as we know, this pattern has been
proposed (Dipper and Zinsmeister, 2010), but not
properly measured. Given the oft-assumed divi-
sion of labor between these two pronouns, what is
notable is their flexibility. Neither form was found
to be used categorically in Study 1 or Study 2.

Interestingly, the study with the constructed

passages showed that verbs which permit an agent
alternation as either an implicit or explicit argu-
ment are more prone to trigger an event co-referent
than an entity one. This finding is potentially use-
ful as an additional feature for anaphoricity detec-
tion or event mention identification in co-reference
resolution systems.

Furthermore, we saw a bias towards event co-
reference for the corpus passages in Study 2 that
were known to have yielded event co-reference in
their original passages. This suggests that there
are properties of the context sentence that may
make salient an event over an entity. If there
are event-favoring properties of the context sen-
tence that human participants are sensitive to, it is
a tractable task to build automatic classifiers that
learn to recognize such properties. This supports
the idea that the task of differentiating anaphoric
and pleonastic instances of It (Evans, 2001; Boyd
et al., 2005; Bergsma and Yarowsky, 2011; Lee
et al., 2016; Loáiciga et al., 2017) could poten-
tially improve performance.

Although presumably (machine) learnable, the
question of what exactly constitutes an event re-
mains unanswered. A number of ambiguous ex-
amples which were excluded from our analysis in-
cluded entities that are close to their entailed event
(e.g., The bomb that the arsonists had planted ex-
ploded violently) or that were very abstract (e.g.,
The greatest opportunity materialized unexpect-
edly. It/This was almost like magic.).

6 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper reports an investigation on abstract
anaphora. Specifically, two studies targeted the
ambiguity that occurs when entity and event an-
tecedents are available for the pronouns It and
This. A clear pattern emerged whereby It fa-
vors entity co-reference and This favors event co-
reference. This pattern is also affected by the num-
ber of arguments that the main verb can take. Al-
though further investigation is needed regarding
the properties of events, their salience, and the
gray area between events and entities, our results
take a first step towards disentangling the behavior
of less well-understood anaphoric relations.

Acknowledgments

Christian Hardmeier was supported by the
Swedish Research Council under grant 2017-930,
Neural Pronoun Models for Machine Translation.

101



References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects

in Discourse. Springer, Netherlands.

Dale J. Barr, Roger Levy, Christoph Scheepers, and
Harry J. Tily. 2013. Random effects structure for
confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal.
Journal of memory and language, 68(3):255–278.

Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve
Walker. 2015. Fitting linear mixed-effects mod-
els using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software,
67(1):1–48.

Shane Bergsma and David Yarowsky. 2011. NADA:
A robust system for non - referential pronoun detec-
tion. In Iris Hendrickx, Sobha Lalitha Devi, António
Branco, and Ruslan Mitkov, editors, Anaphora Pro-
cessing and Applications: 8th Discourse Anaphora
and Anaphor Resolution Colloquium (DAARC),
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 12–
23. Springer, Faro, Portugal.

Ondřej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann,
Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian Huang,
Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara
Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri, Matt
Post, Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco
Turchi. 2017. Findings of the 2017 conference
on machine translation (wmt17). In Proceedings
of the Second Conference on Machine Translation,
Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 169–214,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Adriane Boyd, Whitney Gegg-Harrison, and Donna K.
Byron. 2005. Identifying non-referential it: a
machine learning approach incorporating linguisti-
cally motivated patterns. In Proceedings of the
ACL Workshop on Feature Engineering for Machine
Learning in Natural Language Processing, pages
40–47, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Donna K. Byron, and
Michael K. Tanenhaus. 2005. Beyond salience:
Interpretation of personal and demonstrative
pronouns. Journal of Memory and Language,
53(2):292–313.

Derya Çokal, Patrick Sturt, and Fernanda Ferreira.
2014. Deixis: This and That in written narrative dis-
course. Discourse Processes, 51(3):201–229.

Stefanie Dipper and Heike Zinsmeister. 2010. Towards
a standard for annotating abstract anaphora. In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC Workshop on Language Re-
source and Language Technology Standards state
of the art, emerging needs, and future developments,
LREC10-W4, pages 54–59, Valleta, Malta. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Miriam Eckert and Michael Strube. 2000. Dialogue
acts, synchronising units and anaphora resolution.
Journal of Semantics, 17(1):51–89.

David Embick. 2004. Unaccusative syntax and verbal
alternations. In Artemis Alexiadou, Elena Anag-
nostopoulou, and Martin Everaert, editors, The Un-
accusativity Puzzle: Explorations of the Syntax-
Lexicon Interface, pages 137–158. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, New York.

Richard Evans. 2001. Applying machine learning to-
ward an automatic classification of it. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 16(1):45–57.

Edward Gibson, Steve Piantadosi, and Kristina Fe-
dorenko. 2011. Using mechanichal turk to obtain
and analyze english acceptability judgments. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass, 5(8):509–524.

Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Wein-
stein. 1995. Centering: A framework for modelling
the local coherence of discourse. Computational
Linguistics, 21(2):203–225.

Liane Guillou. 2016. Incorporating Pronoun Function
into Statistical Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Aaron Smith, Jörg
Tiedemann, and Bonnie Webber. 2014. ParCor 1.0:
A parallel pronoun-coreference corpus to support
statistical MT. In Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, LREC 2014, pages 3191–3198, Reykjavik,
Iceland. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Christian Hardmeier, Jörg Tiedemann, Preslav
Nakov, Sara Stymne, and Yannick Versely.
2016. DiscoMT 2015 Shared Task on Pro-
noun Translation. LINDAT/CLARIN digital
library at Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics, Charles University in Prague.
http://hdl.handle.net/11372/LRT-1611.

Martin Haspelmath. 1993. More on the typology of
inchoative/causative verb alternations. In Bernard
Comrie and Maria Polinsky, editors, Causatives and
transitivity, pages 87–120. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.

Benjamin Heinzerling, Nafise Sadat Moosavi, and
Michael Strube. 2017. Revisiting selectional pref-
erences for coreference resolution. In Proceedings
of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1332–1339,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Otto Jespersen. 1927. Modern English grammar on
historical principles, Part III: Syntax (Second Vol-
ume). Allen and Unwin, London.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski, Christian Hardmeier,
and Pauline Krielke. 2018. ParCorFull: a parallel
corpus annotated with full coreference. In Proceed-
ings of 11th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 00–00, Miyazaki, Japan. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA). To
appear.

102



Timothy Lee, Alex Lutz, and Jinho D. Choi. 2016. QA-
It: classifying non-referential it for question answer
pairs. In Proceedings of the ACL 2016 Student Re-
search Workshop, pages 132–137, Berlin, Germany.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sharid Loáiciga, Liane Guillou, and Christian Hard-
meier. 2017. What is it? disambiguating the dif-
ferent readings of the pronoun “it”. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1325–1331,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Christoph Müller. 2007. Resolving It, This, and That
in unrestricted multi-party dialog. In Proceedings
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL07, pages 816–823,
Prague, Czech Republic. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL).

Robert Munro, Steven Bethard, Victor Kuperman,
Vicky T. Lai, Robin Melnick, Christopher Potts,
Tyler Schnoebelen, and Harry Tily. 2010. Crowd-
sourcing and language studies: the new generation
of linguistic data. In Proceedings of the NAACL
HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Lan-
guage Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages
122–130. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Anna Nedoluzhko and Ekaterina Lapshinova-
Koltunski. 2016. Abstract coreference in a
multilingual perspective: a view on czech and
german. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Coreference Resolution Beyond OntoNotes, COR-
BON 2016, pages 47–52, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rebecca J. Passonneau. 1989. Getting at discourse ref-
erents. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 51–59, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Massimo Poesio. 2015. Linguistic and cognitive evi-
dence about anaphora. In Massimo Poesio, Roland
Stuckardt, and Yannick Versley, editors, Anaphora
Resolution: Algorithms, Resources and Application,
pages 23–54. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.

Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Hwee Tou Ng, Anders Björkelund, Olga Uryupina,
Yuchen Zhang, and Zhi Zhong. 2013. Towards ro-
bust linguistic analysis using OntoNotes. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 143–
152, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

R Development Core Team. 2008. R: A Language and
Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
ISBN 3-900051-07-0.

Florian Schäfer. 2009. The causative alternation. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass, 3(2):641–681.

Yannick Versley and Anders Björkelund. 2015. Off-
the-shelf tools. In Massimo Poesio, Roland
Stuckardt, and Yannick Versley, editors, Anaphora
Resolution: Algorithms, Resources and Applica-
tions, pages 237–266. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Hei-
delberg.

Bonnie Webber. 1986. Findings of the 2016 WMT
shared task on cross-lingual pronoun prediction. In
Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing,
TINLAP-3, pages 158–163, Las Cruces, New Mex-
ico. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bonnie L. Webber. 1990. Structure and ostension in the
interpretation of discourse deixis. Technical Report
MS-CIS-90-58, University of Pennsylvania, Depart-
ment of Computer and Information Science.

103


