



















































Constructing a Lexicon of English Discourse Connectives


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2018 Conference, pages 360–365,
Melbourne, Australia, 12-14 July 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

360

Constructing a Lexicon of English Discourse Connectives

Debopam Das and Tatjana Scheffler and Peter Bourgonje and Manfred Stede
Applied Computational Linguistics

UFS Cognitive Sciences
University of Potsdam / Germany

firstname.lastname@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract

We present a new lexicon of English dis-
course connectives called DiMLex-Eng,
built by merging information from two an-
notated corpora and an additional list of
relation signals from the literature. The
format follows the German connective lex-
icon DiMLex, which provides a cross-
linguistically applicable XML schema.
DiMLex-Eng contains 149 English con-
nectives, and gives information on syn-
tactic categories, discourse semantics and
non-connective uses (if any). We report
on the development steps and discuss de-
sign decisions encountered in the lexicon
expansion phase. The resource is freely
available for use in studies of discourse
structure and computational applications.

1 Introduction

Discourse connectives are generally considered to
be the most reliable signals of coherence relations,
and they are widely used in a variety of NLP tasks
involving the processing of coherence relations,
such as discourse parsing (Hernault et al., 2010;
Lin et al., 2014), machine translation (Meyer et al.,
2011), text summarization (Alemany, 2005), or ar-
gumentation mining (Kirschner et al., 2015). Ac-
cordingly, corpora annotated for discourse con-
nectives and coherence relations have been devel-
oped for different languages.

In addition to discourse-annotated corpora, a
lexicon of discourse connectives, giving the list
of connectives for a language, along with useful
information about their syntactic and semantic-
pragmatic properties, can also serve as a valu-
able resource. Such lexicons were developed and
are becoming more and more available in dif-
ferent languages, beginning with German (Stede

and Umbach, 1998), later for Spanish (Briz
et al., 2008) and French (Roze et al., 2010), and
more recently for Italian (Feltracco et al., 2016),
Portuguese (Mendes et al., 2018) and Czech
(Mı́rovský et al., 2017).

We present a lexicon of English discourse con-
nectives called DiMLex-Eng, which is developed
as a part of the Connective-Lex database1 at the
University of Potsdam. It includes 149 connec-
tives, a large part of which was compiled from
the annotations of the Penn Discourse Treebank
2.0 (Prasad et al., 2008). We expanded that list to
include additional connectives from the RST Sig-
nalling Corpus (Das et al., 2015) and relational in-
dicators from a list supplied by Biran and Ram-
bow (2011). For organizing the entries in the lexi-
con, we use the format of DiMLex, a lexicon of
German connectives (Stede and Umbach, 1998;
Scheffler and Stede, 2016). For each entry in
DiMLex-Eng, we provide information on the pos-
sible orthographic variants of the connective, its
syntactic category, non-connective usage (if any),
and the set of discourse relations indicated by the
connective (with examples from corpora). We de-
scribe our criteria for filtering connective candi-
dates for inclusion in the lexicon, and give an out-
look on the relationship between connectives and
the broader range of ‘cue phrases’ or ‘AltLex’ ex-
pressions in language.

2 Sources of English connectives

2.1 The PDTB corpus connective list
The Penn Discourse Treebank corpus (PDTB,
Prasad et al., 2008) is the best-known resource for
obtaining English connectives. In the PDTB, con-
nectives are defined as discourse-level predicates
that take as their arguments two abstract objects
such as events, states, and propositions, and that

1http://connective-lex.info/

 http://connective-lex.info/


361

number category number category

67 ADVP 2 NN
25 phrase 2 JJ
20 IN 2 INTJ
26 PP 1 VB
12 RB 1 RBR
8 CC 1 NNP
2 UCP 1 WHNP

Table 1: Distribution of syntactic types for con-
nectives in the PDTB.4

are generally expressible as clauses.2 In addition
to explicit connectives, the PDTB contains implicit
connectives: In the absence of an explicit connec-
tive, annotators insert an extra one that best signals
a relation between two discourse segments. The
PDTB also provides annotations of AltLex (alter-
native lexicalization) for instances where adding
an implicit connective would lead to a redundancy
in expressing the relation, since it is already con-
veyed by an indicative phrase.

The PDTB annotators were given the above-
mentioned definition of ‘connective’ and asked to
identify words/phrases that accord to this defini-
tion. In the end, 100 distinct connectives were
marked in the corpus. This list of words was later
routinely used by researchers working on shallow
discourse parsing in order to find connective can-
didates in text. However, since the list of connec-
tives is based on annotations of a particular corpus,
no claim of exhaustivity of this list was ever raised.
Since the corpus is annotated with parse trees and
sense relations, the distribution of syntactic types
and semantic relations attested for each connective
can also be extracted. Table 1 shows the overall
distribution of syntactic types for the connectives
in the PDTB (note that one connective can have
several syntactic types).

2.2 The RST Signalling Corpus

The RST Discourse Treebank (RST-DT, Carlson
et al., 2003) is the largest and most widely-used
corpus for developing discourse parsers for the
framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann

2In some exceptional cases, the arguments in the PDTB
can also be realized as non-clausal structures, such as VP
coordinates, nominalizations, or anaphoric expressions rep-
resenting abstract objects.

4‘Phrase’ indicates that the connective consists of more
than one partial tree; otherwise, the single category that dom-
inates the entire connective was chosen.

and Thompson, 1988). In contrast to the PDTB,
it does not contain any markup of connectives;
rather, it is restricted to representing the coherence
relations among text segments. Recently, however,
the RST-DT has been enriched with markup on re-
lation signals in the RST Signalling Corpus (Das
et al., 2015) (henceforth RST-SC): Going through
every coherence relation in the corpus manually,
the authors decided for each what signal (if any)
can be located in either of the two related spans,
which would aid the reader in identifying the rela-
tion. This goal leads to marking not only connec-
tives, but also other lexical, semantic, syntactic,
layout, or genre-based features. In the RST-SC,
about 18 percent of all the relations are indicated
by connectives or other discourse markers, which
are distributed over 201 different types.

2.3 RST-DT relational indicator list

Also aiming at identifying lexical signals of re-
lations, Biran and Rambow (2011) used a semi-
automatic approach: They extracted all instances
of relations (i.e., pairs of two text spans) from
the RST-DT, and automatically identified the most
indicative (1..4)-grams of words using a variant
of TF/IDF. The n-grams were ranked, and an
empirically-determined cutoff demarcated the list.
The authors were specifically interested in argu-
mentative relations and thus added a manual fil-
tering step for a relevant subset of RST rela-
tions. However, they made a list of 230 indica-
tors for all relations available.5 The indicators
range from one to four-word expressions, many of
which qualify as discourse connectives: conjunc-
tions (but, although), prepositional phrases (for in-
stance, in addition) or adverbials (probably).

The list also contains items belonging to differ-
ent lexical categories, such as nouns (statement,
result), verbs (concluded, to ensure) or other el-
ements which simply comprise random strings of
words and do not neatly represent any syntactic
constituents (e.g., and we certainly do, and just
as we). These items would be rejected as dis-
course connectives by any definition from the liter-
ature, and the procedure was of course not meant
to result in a list of connectives per se. Yet, us-
ing this procedure, one could expect to also find
quite a few proper connectives. As an explana-
tion of why their number is, however, relatively

5http://www.cs.columbia.edu/˜orb/code_
data.html

http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~orb/code_data.html
http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~orb/code_data.html


362

small, note that relations are often realised with-
out any explicit connective, thus lowering their co-
occurrence numbers. Additionally, since a con-
nective can be ambiguous in terms of the senses
it represents, its distribution relative to one partic-
ular sense is less pronounced when it also accom-
panies other senses.

3 DiMLex

We chose to develop DiMLex-Eng using the for-
mat of the German DiMLex (DIscourse Marker
LEXicon).6 Its current version (Scheffler and
Stede, 2016) contains an exhaustive list of 275
German discourse connectives. Following Pasch
et al. (2003), (with one modification to be dis-
cussed in the next section), a connective in DiM-
Lex is defined as a lexical item x which has the
following properties: (i) x cannot be inflected; (ii)
the meaning of x is a two-place relation; (iii) the
arguments of this relation are propositional struc-
tures; (iv) the arguments can be expressed as sen-
tential structures. This definition is comparable to
the one used in the PDTB. Both frameworks con-
sider a connective as a relational signal taking two
semantic arguments.

For each entry, DiMLex provides a number of
features, characterizing its syntactic, semantic and
pragmatic behaviour. DiMLex has recently been
incorporated in the Connective-Lex database (see
Section 1), developed as part of the European
COST action TextLink7, and DiMLex-Eng is be-
ing included there as well.

4 Merging the sources into DiMLex-Eng

Our selection of entries in DiMLex-Eng follows
from what we consider as English discourse con-
nectives. The definition is partly based on that
used for German connectives in DiMLex (pro-
vided in Section 3), and further modified by in-
corporating some features from the annotation in
the PDTB. We consider a word or phrase x as a
connective in English if it has the following prop-
erties:

• x cannot be inflected.
• The meaning of x is a two-place relation.
• The arguments of this relation are abstract

objects (propositions, events, states, or pro-

6https://github.com/discourse-lab/
dimlex/

7http://www.textlink.ii.metu.edu.tr/
connective-lex

cesses).
• Usually, the arguments are expressed as

clausal or sentential structures. However,
they can also be expressed by phrasal struc-
tures (e.g., noun phrases beginning with con-
nectives like according to, because of, or
given) as long as they denote abstract objects.

Furthermore, we used the following two lexico-
graphic exclusion criteria to determine whether a
connecting phrase x which signals a coherence re-
lation (as defined above) warrants inclusion in the
lexicon as a connective entry:

1. x should be a fixed expression and cannot be
freely modified by inserting other material.

2. x is not semantically compositional with re-
spect to its component parts.

Criterion 1 excludes free phrases such as for
this reason which can be modified: for this excel-
lent reason, for these reasons, etc. Criterion 2 ex-
cludes phrases which consist of a connective and
an intensifier/adverb such as particularly if or es-
pecially when (here, only if and when are consid-
ered connectives with their own lexicon entries),
and also items comprising two connectives such
as and therefore or but at the same time. Accord-
ing to this criterion, however, phrases such as even
though and even if are considered to be distinct
connectives, since their meaning is not straightfor-
wardly compositional.

Once we decided on the definition of English
connectives, we began compiling the lexicon with
entries from the PDTB 2.0. We decided to include
all 100 explicit connectives from the corpus, be-
cause they adequately fulfill our definitional re-
quirements for connectives.

In the lexicon expansion phase, we first added
more connectives from the RST-SC (Das et al.,
2015). We observed that of the 100 PDTB con-
nectives included in the initial version of DiMLex-
Eng, 71 connectives are also found in the RST-SC,
adding up to 3.390 instances (of marker tokens or
phrases). More importantly, in the opposite direc-
tion, from the RST-SC, we added 46 connectives
(which do not occur in the PDTB) to DiMLex-
Eng. The resulting 146 entries cover 3.721 in-
stances in the RST-SC (an extra 331 compared to
the initial version of DiMLex-Eng). The RST-SC
contains 201 types (3.899 instances). Note that we
add only a subset of these to DiMLex-Eng due to
the restrictions on entries explained above. With
our extended lexicon, we now cover 117 of 201

https://github.com/discourse-lab/dimlex/
https://github.com/discourse-lab/dimlex/
http://www.textlink.ii.metu.edu.tr/connective-lex
http://www.textlink.ii.metu.edu.tr/connective-lex


363

types (58%) and 3.721 of 3.899 instances (95%),
compared to 35% (types) and 87% (instances) for
the initial lexicon version that included just the
PDTB-based list.

In the final phase of entry collection, we con-
sulted the relational indicator list of Biran and
Rambow (2011), and screened out only those
items which satisfy our definition of discourse
connective. We found that of the 230 entries in
the Biran and Rambow list, seven items overlap
with our 44 entries already selected from the RST-
SC. Additionally, 12 of the 230 items were in the
list initially extracted from the PDTB 2.0. Upon
manual evaluation of the remaining 211 entries,
we found five more connectives that we added to
our lexicon.

5 Populating the lexicon entries

DiMLex-Eng includes significant lexicographic
information about the syntactic and semantic-
pragmatic properties of connectives. For syntac-
tic and other non-discourse features of a connec-
tive entry, it specifies: (i) possible orthographic
variants, (ii) ambiguity information (whether the
lexical item also has non-connective readings),
(iii) the syntactic category of the connective (see
Table 1; mainly: adverb, subordinating con-
junction/preposition, coordinating conjunction, or
phrase), (iv) possible coherence relations ex-
pressed by the connective, (v) examples8 of rela-
tions associated with the connective .

The semantic information about coherence re-
lations was derived from the observed corpus in-
stances in the cases of connectives from the PDTB
and RST-SC. That is, each entry lists all coherence
relations with which the connective occurred, to-
gether with frequency information.

For encoding the lexicographic features in
DiMLex-Eng, we use the format of DiMLex,
which provides a cross-linguistically applicable
XML schema. Figure 1 shows a representation of
the lexical entry for by contrast in DiMLex-Eng.
The entry shows that by contrast is a PP which
can be used to signal three possible coherence re-
lations: CONTRAST (occurring 11 out of 27 times
when by contrast was used as a connective in the
corpus), JUXTAPOSITION (12 times), and OPPO-
SITION (4). The lexicon is being extended with

8Mostly taken from the PDTB, RST-SC and Corpus
of Contemporary American English (https://corpus.
byu.edu/coca/)

corpus examples for each sense, where available.

6 Summary and Outlook

We have presented DiMLex-Eng, a lexicon of En-
glish discourse connectives, compiled from anno-
tated corpora and modeled after DiMLex, a lexi-
con of German discourse connectives. The con-
nectives in DiMLex-Eng are lexically frozen ex-
pressions (e.g., because, furthermore, since) that
correspond to what are described by Danlos et al.
(2018) as primary connectives (with respect to
their degree of grammaticalization). The knowl-
edge of such connectives along with their man-
ually curated syntactic and discourse attributes,
as the one offered by DiMLex-Eng, are valu-
able in areas such as language learning and con-
trastive discourse studies. Also, the connectives in
DiMLex-Eng, together with other coherence rela-
tion signals, can serve as a valuable resource for
discourse parsing and related applications.

Coherence relation signals, not necessarily re-
stricted to being discourse connectives, may also
comprise many other items, which are discussed
under the labels of cue phrase (Knott and Dale,
1994), secondary connective (Danlos et al., 2018),
AltLex expression (Prasad et al., 2008), or re-
lational indicator (Biran and Rambow, 2011).
These are more difficult to describe systematically
and hence are less amenable to a lexical treatment;
we leave it to future work to extend DiMLex-Eng
into this direction.

We would like to point out that using the ap-
proach of selecting words and phrases that fre-
quently co-occur with coherence relations, we find
only 24 words or phrases that fulfill the constraints
of true (primary) connectives, compared to the
complete lexicon of 149 entries. This seems to im-
ply that simple statistical co-occurrence measures
are not sufficient for identifying discourse connec-
tives, which must satisfy syntactic and semantic
criteria, as well.

Another approach for automatic generation of
discourse connective lexicons is by translational
mapping between parallel corpora, which we are
pursuing in ongoing work (Bourgonje et al., 2017),
following up on earlier studies such as that of Car-
toni et al. (2013). We hope to use this approach to
identify additional connectives for DiMLex-Eng
as well as establish and enhance correspondences
between DiMLex-Eng and other similar connec-
tive lexicons.

https://corpus.byu.edu/coca/
https://corpus.byu.edu/coca/


364

<entry id="67" word="by contrast">
<orths>

<orth canonical="0" orth_id="67o1" type="cont">
<part type="phrasal">By contrast</part>

</orth>
<orth canonical="1" orth_id="67o2" type="cont">

<part type="phrasal">by contrast</part>
</orth>

</orths>
<syn>

<cat>PP</cat>
<sem>

<pdtb2_relation anno_N="27" freq="11"
sense="Comparison.Contrast" />

</sem>
<sem>

<pdtb2_relation anno_N="27" freq="12"
sense="Comparison.Contrast.Juxtaposition" />

</sem>
<sem>

<pdtb2_relation anno_N="27" freq="4"
sense="Comparison.Contrast.Opposition" />

</sem>
</syn>

</entry>

Figure 1: DiMLex-Eng entry for the connective by contrast.



365

Acknowledgments

Our work was financially supported by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), as part of (i)
project A03 in the Collaborative Research Center
1287 ”Limits of Variability in Language” and (ii)
project ”Anaphoricity in Connectives”.

References
Laura Alonso i Alemany. 2005. Representing dis-

course for automatic text summarization via shal-
low NLP techniques. PhD dissertation, Universitat
de Barcelona.

Or Biran and Owen Rambow. 2011. Dentifying justifi-
cations in written dialogs by classifying text as argu-
mentative. International Journal of Semantic Com-
puting, 5(4):363–381.

Peter Bourgonje, Yulia Grishina, and Manfred Stede.
2017. Toward a bilingual lexical database on con-
nectives: Exploiting a German/Italian parallel cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the Fourth Italian Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, Rome, Italy.

Antonio Briz, Salvador Pons Borderı́a, and José Por-
tolés. 2008. Diccionario de partı́culas discursivas
del español.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen
Okurowski. 2003. Building a discourse-tagged cor-
pus in the framework of Rhetorical Structure The-
ory. In Jan van Kuppevelt and Ronnie Smith, edi-
tors, Current Directions in Discourse and Dialogue.
Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Bruno Cartoni, Sandrine Zufferey, and Thomas Meyer.
2013. Annotating the meaning of discourse connec-
tives by looking at their translation: The translation-
spotting technique. 4:65–86.

Laurence Danlos, Kateřina Rysová, Magdaléna
Rysová, and Manfred Stede. 2018. Primary and
secondary discourse connectives: definitions and
lexicons. Dialogue and Discourse. To appear.

Debopam Das, Maite Taboada, and Paul McFetridge.
2015. RST Signalling Corpus, LDC2015T10. Lin-
guistic Data Consortium.

Anna Feltracco, Elisabetta Jezek, Bernardo Magnini,
and Manfred Stede. 2016. LICO: A Lexicon of Ital-
ian Connectives. In Proceedings of the Second Ital-
ian Conference on Computational Linguistic (CLiC-
it 2016).

Hugo Hernault, Hemut Prendinger, David duVerle,
and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2010. HILDA: A Discourse
Parser Using Support Vector Machine Classification.
Dialogue and Discourse, 1(3):1–33.

Christian Kirschner, Judith Eckle-Kohler, and Iryna
Gurevych. 2015. Linking the thoughts: Analysis of
argumentation structures in scientific publications.
In Proceedings of the 2015 NAACL-HLT Confer-
ence.

Alistair Knott and Robert Dale. 1994. Using linguistic
phenomena to motivate a set of coherence relations.
Discourse Processes, 18(1):35–62.

Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. 2014. A
PDTB-Styled End-to-End Discourse Parser. Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 20(2):151184.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Amalia Mendes, Iria del Rio, Manfred Stede, and Fe-
lix Dombek. 2018. A Lexicon of Discourse Mark-
ers for Portuguese: LDM-PTs. In Proceedings of
the 11h International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), Miyazaki, Japan.

Thomas Meyer, Andrei Popescu-Belis, Sandrine Zuf-
ferey, and Bruno Cartoni. 2011. Multilingual Anno-
tation and Disambiguation of Discourse Connectives
for Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the SIG-
DIAL 2011 Conference, SIGDIAL ’11, pages 194–
203, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Jir̆ı́ Mı́rovský, Pavlı́na Synková, Magdaléna Rysová,
and Lucie Polı́ková. 2017. CzeDLex A Lexicon
of Czech Discourse Connectives. In the Prague
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, volume 109,
pages 61–91.

Renate Pasch, Ursula Braue, Eva Breindl, and
Herrmann Ulrich Waner. 2003. Handbuch der
deutschen Konnektoren. Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin/New York.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bon-
nie Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank
2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2008), Marrackech, Morocco.

Charlotte Roze, Danlos Laurence, and Philippe Muller.
2010. LEXCONN: a French Lexicon of Discourse
Connectives. In Multidisciplinary Approaches to
Discourse - MAD 2010, Moissac, France.

Tatjana Scheffler and Manfred Stede. 2016. Adding
Semantic Relations to a Large-Coverage Connective
Lexicon of German. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), Portoroz̆, Slovenia.

Manfred Stede and Carla Umbach. 1998. DiMLex:
A lexicon of discourse markers for text generation
and understanding. In Proceedings of the 17th in-
ternational conference on Computational linguistics
- Volume 2. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

http://www.dpde.es
http://www.dpde.es
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2015T10
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324912000307
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324912000307
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2132890.2132912
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2132890.2132912
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2132890.2132912
https://doi.org/10.1515/pralin-2017-0039
https://doi.org/10.1515/pralin-2017-0039
https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00511615
https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00511615

