



















































Comparative Analysis of Neural QA models on SQuAD


Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine Reading for Question Answering, pages 89–97
Melbourne, Australia, July 19, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

89

Comparative Analysis of Neural QA models on SQuAD

Soumya Wadhwa Khyathi Raghavi Chandu Eric Nyberg

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{soumyaw, kchandu, en09}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

The task of Question Answering has
gained prominence in the past few decades
for testing the ability of machines to un-
derstand natural language. Large datasets
for Machine Reading have led to the de-
velopment of neural models that cater to
deeper language understanding compared
to information retrieval tasks. Different
components in these neural architectures
are intended to tackle different challenges.
As a first step towards achieving gen-
eralization across multiple domains, we
attempt to understand and compare the
peculiarities of existing end-to-end neu-
ral models on the Stanford Question An-
swering Dataset (SQuAD) by performing
quantitative as well as qualitative analysis
of the results attained by each of them. We
observed that prediction errors reflect cer-
tain model-specific biases, which we fur-
ther discuss in this paper.

1 Introduction

Machine Reading is a task in which a model reads
a piece of text and attempts to formally represent it
or performs a downstream task like Question An-
swering (QA). Neural approaches to the latter have
gained a lot of prominence especially owing to the
recent spur in developing and publicly releasing
large datasets on Machine Reading and Compre-
hension (MRC). These datasets are created from
different underlying sources such as web resources
in MS MARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016); trivia
and web in QUASAR-S and QUASAR-T (Dhin-
gra et al., 2017), SearchQA (Dunn et al., 2017),
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017); news articles in
CNN/Daily Mail (Chen et al.), NewsQA (Trischler
et al., 2016) and stories in NarrativeQA (Kočiskỳ

et al., 2017). Another common source is large un-
structured text documents from Wikipedia such as
in SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), WikiReading
(Hewlett et al., 2016) and WikiHop (Welbl et al.,
2017). These different sources implicitly affect the
nature and properties of questions and answers in
these datasets. Based on the dataset, certain neural
models capitalize on these biases while others are
unable to. The ability to generalize across differ-
ent sources and domains is a desirable character-
istic for any machine reading system. Evaluating
and analyzing systems on QA tasks can lead to in-
sights for advancements in machine reading and
natural language understanding, and Peñas et al.
(2011) have also previously worked on this.

One of the first large MRC datasets (over 100k
QA pairs) is the Stanford Question Answering
Dataset (SQuAD) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). For
its collection, different sets of crowd-workers for-
mulated questions and answers using passages ob-
tained from ∼500 Wikipedia articles. The answer
to each question is a span in the given passage, and
many effective neural QA models have been devel-
oped for this dataset. Our main focus in this work
is to perform comparative subjective and empirical
analysis of errors in answer predictions by four top
performing models on the SQuAD leaderboard1.

We focused on Bi-Directional Attention Flow
(BiDAF) (Seo et al., 2016), Gated Self-Matching
Networks (R-Net) (Wang et al., 2017), Docu-
ment Reader (DrQA) (Chen et al., 2017), Multi-
Paragraph Reading Comprehension (DocQA)
(Clark and Gardner, 2017), and the Logistic Re-
gression baseline model (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)
We mainly choose these models since they have
comparable high performance on the evaluation
metrics and it is easy to replicate their results due
to availability of open source implementations.

1https://rajpurkar.github.io/
SQuAD-explorer/

https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/
https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/


90

While we limit ourselves to in-domain analysis of
the performance of these models on SQuAD in
this paper, similar principles can be used to ex-
tend this work to study biases of combinations of
different models on different datasets and thereby
understand the generalization capabilities of these
neural architectures.

The organization of the paper is as follows. Sec-
tion 2 gives a comprehensive overview of the mod-
els that are compared in further sections. Section 3
describes the different experiments we conducted,
and discusses our observations. In Section 4, we
summarize our main conclusions from this work
and describe our vision for the future.

2 Relevant Neural Models

We present a brief overview of the models which
we considered for our analysis in this section.

Bi-Directional Attention Flow (BiDAF): This
model, proposed by Seo et al. (2016), is a hi-
erarchical multi-stage end-to-end neural network
which takes inputs of different granularity (char-
acter, word and phrase) to obtain a query-aware
context representation using memory-less context-
to-query (C2Q) and query-to-context (Q2C) atten-
tion. This representation can then be used for dif-
ferent final tasks. Many versions of this model
(with different types of input features) exist on
the SQuAD leaderboard, but the basic architec-
ture2 (which we use for our experiments in this pa-
per) contains character, word and phrase embed-
ding layers, followed by an attention flow layer, a
modeling layer and an output layer.

Gated Self-Matching Networks (R-Net): This
model, proposed by Wang et al. (2017), is a multi-
layer end-to-end neural network whose novelty
lies in the use of a gated attention mechanism so
as to give different levels of importance to differ-
ent passage parts. It also uses self-matching at-
tention for the context to aggregate evidence from
the entire passage to refine the query-aware con-
text representation obtained. The architecture con-
tains character and word embedding layers, fol-
lowed by question-passage encoding and match-
ing layers, a passage self-matching layer and an
output layer. The implementation we used3 had
some minor changes for increased efficiency.

2
https://allenai.github.io/bi-att-flow/

3
https://github.com/HKUST-KnowComp/R-Net

Document Reader (DrQA): This model, pro-
posed by Chen et al. (2017), focuses on answering
open-domain factoid questions using Wikipedia,
but also performs well on SQuAD (skipping the
document retrieval stage). Its implementation4

has paragraph and question encoding layers, and
an output layer. The paragraph encoding is
computed by representing each context as a se-
quence of feature vectors derived from tokens:
word embedding, exact match with question word,
POS/NER/TF and aligned question embedding,
and passing these as inputs to a recurrent neural
network. The question encoding is obtained by us-
ing word embeddings as inputs to a recurrent neu-
ral network.

Multi-Paragraph Reading Comprehension
(DocQA): This model, proposed by Clark and
Gardner (2017), aims to answer questions based
on entire documents (multiple paras) rather than
specific paragraphs, but also gives good results
for SQuAD (considering the given paragraph as
the document). The implementation5 contains
input, embedding (character and word-level),
pre-processing (shared bidirectional GRU be-
tween question and passage), attention (similar
to BiDAF), self-attention (residual) and output
(bidirectional GRU and linear scoring) layers.

Logistic Regression (LR): This model was pro-
posed as a baseline in the SQuAD dataset paper
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and uses features based on
n-gram frequencies, lengths, part-of-speech tags,
constituency and dependency parse trees of ques-
tions and passages as inputs to a logistic regression
classifier6 to predict whether each constituent span
is an answer or not.

3 Experiments and Discussion

We trained the aforementioned end-to-end neu-
ral models and compare their performance on the
SQuAD development set which contains 10,570
question-answer pairs based on Wikipedia articles.

3.1 Quantitative Analysis

To perform a systematic comparison of errors
across different models, we investigate the predic-
tions based on the following criteria.

4
https://github.com/facebookresearch/DrQA

5
https://github.com/allenai/document-qa

6
https://worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/

0xd53d03a48ef64b329c16b9baf0f99b0c/

https://allenai.github.io/bi-att-flow/
https://github.com/HKUST-KnowComp/R-Net
https://github.com/facebookresearch/DrQA
https://github.com/allenai/document-qa
https://worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/0xd53d03a48ef64b329c16b9baf0f99b0c/
https://worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/0xd53d03a48ef64b329c16b9baf0f99b0c/


91

3.1.1 Span-Level Performance
The span-level performance is measured typically
by Exact Match (EM) and F1 metrics which are
reported with respect to the ground truth answer
spans. These results are summarized in Table 1.
The DocQA model gives the best overall perfor-
mance which aligns well with our expectation, ow-
ing to the usage of and improvements in the prior
mechanisms introduced in BiDAF and R-Net.

Model BiDAF R-Net DrQA DocQA LR
EM (%) 67.67 70.12 66.00 71.60 40.14
F1 (%) 77.31 78.94 76.28 80.78 50.98
Correct Sentence (%) 91.05 92.37 92.40 93.77 83.30

Table 1: Span and Sentence Level Performance

3.1.2 Sentence-Level Performance
To investigate trends at different granularities, we
also measure sentence retrieval performance. The
context given for each question-answer pair is
split into sentences using the NLTK sentence to-
kenizer7, and the sentence-level accuracy of each
of the models is computed (Table 1). Since the
default sentence tokenizer for English in NLTK is
pre-trained on Penn Treebank data which contains
formal language (news articles), we expect it to
perform reasonably well on Wikipedia articles too.
We observe that all the models have high sentence-
level accuracy, with DocQA outperforming the
other models with respect to this metric as well.
Interestingly, DrQA performs better on sentence
retrieval accuracy than both BiDAF and R-Net, but
has a worse span-level exact match score, which
is probably because of the rich feature vector rep-
resentation of the passage due to the model’s fo-
cus on open domain QA (and hence retrieval).
But, none of these neural models have near-perfect
ability to identify the correct sentence, and ∼90%
accuracy indicates that even if we have a perfect
answer selection method, this is the best EM score
we can achieve. However, incorrect span identifi-
cation contributes more to errors in prediction for
all the models, as seen from the disparity between
the sentence-level accuracies and the final span-
level exact match score values.

3.1.3 Passage Length Distribution
We analyze the impact of passage length on er-
rors, since this can be an important factor in deter-
mining the difficulty of understanding the passage.
As seen in Figure 1, DocQA performs the best on

7
http://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.html

shorter passages, while R-Net and BiDAF are ob-
served to be better for longer passages. However,
there are no systematic error patterns and overall
error rates, surprisingly, are not much higher for
longer passages. This means that predictions on
long passages are almost as good as on short (pre-
sumably easier to understand) passages.

3.1.4 Question Length Distribution
We also do a similar error analysis for questions of
different lengths. Since there are very few ques-
tions which have length greater than 30, the es-
timate for range 30-34 is not very reliable. In
Figure 2, we observe that the error rate first de-
creases and then increases for BiDAF, DrQA and
DocQA. A plausible explanation for this is that
shorter questions contain insufficient information
in order to be able to select the correct answer span
and can hence be confusing, but it also becomes
difficult for end-to-end neural models to learn a
good representation when the question becomes
longer and syntactically more complicated. How-
ever, R-Net has an irregular trend with respect to
question length, which is difficult to explain.

3.1.5 Answer Length Distribution
For answers of varying lengths, the error rates are
shown in Figure 3. Again, estimates for answers
with length >16 are not very reliable since data
is sparse for high answer lengths. Here, we ob-
serve an increasing trend initially and then a slight
decrease (bell shape). This conforms to the hy-
pothesis that shorter answers are easier to predict
than longer answers, but only up to a certain an-
swer length (observed to be around 7 for most
models). The slightly better performance for very
long answers is likely due to such answers having
a higher chance of being (almost) entire sentences
with simpler questions being asked about them.

3.1.6 Error Overlap
In Table 2, we analyze the number of erroneous
predictions which overlap for different pairs of
models, i.e., which belong to the intersection of
the sets of incorrect answers generated by models
in each (row, column) pair. Thus, the values in
the table represent a symmetric matrix with diago-
nal elements indicating the number of errors which
each model commits. This analysis can be use-
ful while determining suitable models for creating
meta ensembles since a low incorrect answer over-
lap indicates that the combined predictive power

http://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.html


92

Figure 1: Percentage of total QA pairs for each range of passage lengths which have incorrect predictions
by different models

Figure 2: Percentage of total QA pairs for each range of question lengths which have incorrect predictions
by different models

of the pair of models under consideration is high.
We observe that most overlap values are in the

range 20-25% indicating that an ensemble might
give considerably better performance than individ-



93

Figure 3: Percentage of total QA pairs for each answer length which have incorrect predictions by
different models

ual models. DocQA paired with other models gen-
erates low values, as expected, but the least value
is observed for the DocQA-DrQA pair probably
because they both use very different feature rep-
resentations and architectures, and hence generate
diverse outputs. Note that DrQA is not the second
best performing model (among the ones we ana-
lyzed) when considered independently, but might
add more value to an ensemble because of the ob-
served answer overlap trends.

Model BiDAF R-Net DrQA DocQA LR
BiDAF 32.33 21.97 22.56 21.22 26.58
R-Net 21.97 29.88 22.06 21.35 24.99
DrQA 22.56 22.06 34.00 20.95 27.49
DocQA 21.22 21.35 20.95 28.40 23.59

LR 26.58 24.99 27.49 23.59 59.86

Table 2: Incorrect Answer Overlap (%)

One way in which this analysis can help in explor-
ing ensemble-based methods is that instead of try-
ing all possible combinations of models, we can
adopt a greedy approach based on the incorrect an-
swer overlap metric to decide which model to add
to the ensemble (and only if it leads to a statisti-
cally significant difference in this overlap). After
determining an approximately optimal set of mod-
els which such an ensemble should be composed

of, each of these models can be trained indepen-
dently followed by multi-label classification (to
select one of the generated answers) using tech-
niques like logistic regression, a feed-forward neu-
ral network or a recurrent or convolutional neural
network with input features based on the question,
the passage and their token overlap. The entire
network can also be trained end-to-end.

Also, all 5 models combined have an error over-
lap of 13.68%, i.e., if we had a mechanism to
perfectly choose between these models, we would
get an Exact Match score of 86.32%. This indi-
cates that future work based on ensembling differ-
ent neural models can give promising results and
is worth exploring.

An example of a passage-question-answer that
all of the models get wrong is:
Passage: The University of Warsaw was estab-
lished in 1816, when the partitions of Poland
separated Warsaw from the oldest and most
influential Polish academic center, in Krakow.
Warsaw University of Technology is the second
academic school of technology in the country,
and one of the largest in East-Central Europe,
employing 2,000 professors. Other institutions
for higher education include the Medical Uni-
versity of Warsaw, the largest medical school



94

in Poland and one of the most prestigious, the
National Defence University, highest military
academic institution in Poland, the Fryderyk
Chopin University of Music the oldest and largest
music school in Poland, and one of the largest in
Europe, the Warsaw School of Economics, the
oldest and most renowned economic university
in the country, and the Warsaw University of
Life Sciences the largest agricultural university
founded in 1818.
Question: What is one of the largest music
schools in Europe?
Answer: Fryderyk Chopin University of Music

This passage-question-answer is difficult for auto-
matic processing because there several entities of
the same type (school / university) in the passage,
and the question is a paraphrase of one segment
of a very long, syntactically complicated sentence
which contains the information required to be able
to infer the correct answer. This presents an inter-
esting challenge, and such qualitative observations
can be used to formulate a general technique for
effectively testing machine reading systems.

3.2 Qualitative Analysis

For qualitative error analysis, we sample 100
incorrect predictions (based on EM) from each
model and try to find common error categories.
Broadly, the errors observed were either because
of incorrect answer span boundaries or inability to
infer the meaning of the question / passage. Exam-
ples of each error type are shown in Table 3, and
these are further described below.

3.2.1 Boundary-Based Errors

Incorrect answer boundary (longer): This er-
ror category includes those cases where the pre-
dicted span is longer than the ground truth answer,
but contains the answer.

Incorrect answer boundary (shorter): This er-
ror category includes those cases where the pre-
dicted span is shorter than the ground truth answer,
and is a substring of the answer.

Soft Correct: This error category includes those
cases where the prediction is actually correct, but
due to inclusion / exclusion of certain question
terms (such as units) along with the answer, it is
deemed incorrect.

3.2.2 Inference-Based Errors
Multi-Sentence: This error category includes
those cases where inference is required to be per-
formed across 2 or more sentences in the given
passage to be able to arrive at the answer, which
leads to an incorrect prediction based on only 1
passage sentence.

Paraphrase: This error category includes those
cases where the question paraphrases certain parts
of the sentence that it is asking about which makes
lexical pattern matching difficult and leads to er-
rors in prediction.

Same Entity Type Confusion / Unit Confusion:
This error category includes those cases where the
question is about an entity type which is present
multiple times in the passage and the model re-
turns a different entity than the ground truth entity
but of the same type.

Requires World Knowledge: This error cate-
gory includes questions which can not be an-
swered using the given passage alone and require
external knowledge to solve, leading to incorrect
predictions.

Missing Inference: This category includes
inference-related errors which don’t belong to any
of the other categories mentioned above.

3.2.3 Observations
In this section, we record the main observations
from our qualitative error analysis and analyze po-
tential reasons for the error trends observed. Fig-
ure 4 shows the different types of errors in predic-
tions by various models.

We observe that BiDAF makes many boundary-
based errors which indicates that a better output
layer (since this is responsible for span identifica-
tion – although errors might have percolated from
previous layers, most of these are cases where
the model almost got the correct answer but not
exactly) or some post-processing of the answer
might help improve performance. Paraphrases
also contribute to almost 15% of errors observed
which indicates that the question and the relevant
parts of the context are not effectively matched in
these cases.

We observe that R-Net makes fewer boundary
errors, perhaps because self-attention enables it
to accumulate evidence and return better answer
spans, although this leads to more errors of the



95

Error Type Passage Question Predicted Answer
Incorrect
answer
boundary
(longer)

... survey of 4,745 North American Lutherans aged 15-65
found that, compared to the other minority groups under con-
sideration, Lutherans were the least prejudiced toward Jews.
Nevertheless, Professor Richard (Dick) Geary, ...

What did a survey of North
American Lutherans find that
Lutherans felt about Jews
compared to other minority
groups?

15-65 found that, com-
pared to the other mi-
nority groups under
consideration, Luther-
ans were the least prej-
udiced toward Jews

Incorrect
answer
boundary
(shorter)

... In the United States, in order for a prescription for a con-
trolled substance to be valid, it must be issued for a legiti-
mate medical purpose by a licensed practitioner acting in the
course of legitimate doctor-patient relationship. The filling ...

What conditions must be met
to prescribe a controlled sub-
stance?

issued for a legitimate
medical purpose

Soft Correct ... for that time. The vBNS installed one of the first ever
production OC-48c (2.5 Gbit/s) IP links in February 1999
and went on to upgrade the entire backbone ...

What did the network install in
1999?

OC-48c (2.5 Gbit/s) IP
links

Multi-
Sentence

... User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is an example of a data-
gram protocol. In the virtual call system ... model. The X.25
protocol suite uses this network type.

X.25 uses what type network
type?

protocol suite

Paraphrase ... rather than consumers. There is no known case of any
U.S. citizens buying Canadian drugs for personal use with a
prescription, who has ever been charged by authorities.

Has there ever been any-
one charged with importing
drugs from Canada for per-
sonal medicinal use?

has ever been charged
by authorities

Same Entity
Type / Unit
Confusion

... after the 1973 oil crisis, Honda, Toyota and Nissan, af-
fected by the 1981 voluntary export restraints, opened US as-
sembly plants and established their luxury divisions (Acura,
Lexus and Infiniti, respectively) to distinguish themselves
from their mass-market brands.

Name a luxury division of
Toyota.

Acura, Lexus and In-
finiti

Requires
World
Knowledge

... disobedience in opposition to the decisions of non-
governmental agencies such as trade unions, banks, and pri-
vate universities can be justified if ...

What public entity of learning
is often target of civil disobe-
dience?

governmental

Missing In-
ference

... Killer T cells are a sub-group of T cells that kill cells
that are infected with viruses (and other pathogens), or are
otherwise damaged or dysfunctional. As with B cells ...

What kind of T cells kill
cells that are infected with
pathogens?

sub-group

Table 3: Examples of error types observed in the qualitative analysis - blue indicates ground truth

Figure 4: Distribution of errors by various models across different categories using manual inspection

‘shorter’ answer type than ‘longer’. Also, miss-
ing inference contributes to almost 20% of the ob-
served errors (not including multiple sentences or
paraphrases).

Paraphrasing is the most frequent error category
observed for DrQA, which makes sense if we con-

sider the features used to represent each passage,
such as exact match with a question word, which
depend on lexical overlap between the question
and passage.

We observe that DocQA makes many boundary
errors too, again making more mistakes by pre-



96

dicting shorter answers than expected in most of
the observed cases. A better root cause analysis
can be performed by visualizing outputs from dif-
ferent layers and evaluating these, and we leave
this in-depth investigation to future work. Also,
the high number of Soft Correct outputs across all
models points to some deficiencies in the SQuAD
annotations, which might limit the reliability of
the performance evaluation metrics.

Although these state-of-the-art deep learning
models for machine reading are supposed to have
inference capabilities, our error analysis above
points to their limitations. These insights can
be useful for developing benchmarks and datasets
which enable realistic evaluation of systems which
aim to ‘solve’ the RC task. In Wadhwa et al.
(2018), we take a first step in this direction by
proposing a method focused on questions involv-
ing referential inference, a setting to which these
models fail to generalize well.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work, we analyze - both quantitatively and
qualitatively - results generated by 4 end-to-end
neural models on the Stanford Question Answer-
ing Dataset. We observe interesting trends in the
analysis, with some error patterns which are con-
sistent across different models and some others
which are specific to each model due to their dif-
ferent input features and architectures. This is im-
portant to be able to interpret and gain an intu-
ition for the effective functions that different com-
ponents in a neural model architecture perform
versus their intended functions, and also to un-
derstand model-specific biases. Eventually, this
can enable us to come up with new models in-
cluding specific components which tackle these er-
rors. Alternatively, the overlap analysis demon-
strates that learning ensembles of different neural
models to combine their individual strengths and
quirks might be an interesting direction to explore
to achieve better performance.

Even though the scope of this paper is restricted
to SQuAD, similar analysis can be done for any
datasets / models / features, to gain a better under-
standing and enable a better assessment of state-
of-the-art in neural machine reading. To this end,
we also performed some preliminary experiments
on TriviaQA so as to analyze the difference be-
tween the properties of the two datasets, but were
unable to replicate the published results owing to

pre-processing / hyperparameters. We will con-
tinue to work on this since the ability of a model
to generalize and to be able to learn from a par-
ticular domain and transfer some knowledge to a
different domain is a very exciting research area.

We also believe that such analysis can help cu-
rate datasets which are better indicators of the ac-
tual natural language ‘reading’ and ‘comprehend-
ing’ capabilities of models rather than falling prey
to shallow pattern matching. One way to achieve
this is by building new challenges that are specif-
ically designed to put pressure on the identified
weaknesses of neural models. Thus, we can move
towards the development of datasets and models
which truly push the envelope of the challenging
machine reading task.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Chaitanya Malaviya and
Abhishek Chinni for their valuable feedback, and
the Language Technologies Institute at CMU for
the GPU resources used in this work. We are
also very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments and suggestions, which
helped us polish the presentation of our work.

References
Danqi Chen, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D Man-

ning. A thorough examination of the cnn/daily mail
reading comprehension task.

Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and An-
toine Bordes. 2017. Reading wikipedia to an-
swer open-domain questions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.00051.

Christopher Clark and Matt Gardner. 2017. Simple
and effective multi-paragraph reading comprehen-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10723.

Bhuwan Dhingra, Kathryn Mazaitis, and William W
Cohen. 2017. Quasar: Datasets for question an-
swering by search and reading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03904.

Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mike Higgins, Ugur
Guney, Volkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017.
Searchqa: A new q&a dataset augmented with
context from a search engine. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05179.

Daniel Hewlett, Alexandre Lacoste, Llion Jones, Illia
Polosukhin, Andrew Fandrianto, Jay Han, Matthew
Kelcey, and David Berthelot. 2016. Wikireading: A
novel large-scale language understanding task over
wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics

http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1145
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1145
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1145


97

(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1535–1545, Berlin,
Germany. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehen-
sion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551.

Tomáš Kočiskỳ, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom,
Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis,
and Edward Grefenstette. 2017. The narrativeqa
reading comprehension challenge. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.07040.

Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao,
Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng.
2016. Ms marco: A human generated machine
reading comprehension dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09268.

Anselmo Peñas, Eduard H Hovy, Pamela Forner,
Álvaro Rodrigo, Richard FE Sutcliffe, Corina
Forascu, and Caroline Sporleder. 2011. Overview
of qa4mre at clef 2011: Question answering for ma-
chine reading evaluation. In CLEF (Notebook Pa-
pers/Labs/Workshop), pages 1–20.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2016. Bidirectional attention
flow for machine comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01603.

Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Har-
ris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Ka-
heer Suleman. 2016. Newsqa: A machine compre-
hension dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09830.

S. Wadhwa, V. Embar, M. Grabmair, and E. Nyberg.
2018. Towards Inference-Oriented Reading Com-
prehension: ParallelQA. ArXiv e-prints.

Wenhui Wang, Nan Yang, Furu Wei, Baobao Chang,
and Ming Zhou. 2017. Gated self-matching net-
works for reading comprehension and question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 189–198.

Johannes Welbl, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian
Riedel. 2017. Constructing datasets for multi-hop
reading comprehension across documents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.06481.

https://aclweb.org/anthology/D16-1264
https://aclweb.org/anthology/D16-1264
http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03830
http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03830

