



















































The Coptic Universal Dependency Treebank


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2018), pages 192–201
Brussels, Belgium, November 1, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

192

The Coptic Universal Dependency Treebank

Amir Zeldes and Mitchell Abrams
Department of Linguistics, Georgetown University
{amir.zeldes,mja284}@georgetown.edu

Abstract
This paper presents the Coptic Universal De-
pendency Treebank, the first dependency tree-
bank within the Egyptian subfamily of the
Afro-Asiatic languages. We discuss the com-
position of the corpus, challenges in adapt-
ing the UD annotation scheme to existing con-
ventions for annotating Coptic, and evaluate
inter-annotator agreement on UD annotation
for the language. Some specific constructions
are taken as a starting point for discussing sev-
eral more general UD annotation guidelines,
in particular for appositions, ambiguous pas-
sivization, incorporation and object-doubling.

1 Introduction

The Coptic language represents the last phase of
the Ancient Egyptian phylum of the Afro-Asiatic
language family, forming part of the longest con-
tinuously documented human language on Earth.
Despite its high value for historical, comparative
and typological linguistics, as well as its cultural
importance as the heritage language of Copts in
Egypt and in the diaspora, digital resources for the
study of Coptic have only recently become avail-
able, while syntactically annotated data did not ex-
ist until the beginning of the present project. This
paper presents the first treebank of Coptic, con-
structed within the UD framework and currently
encompassing over 20,000 tokens. In this section
we give a brief overview of some pertinent facts
of Coptic grammar, before moving on to describ-
ing how these are encoded in our corpus.

Unlike earlier forms of Ancient Egyptian,
which were written in hieroglyphs or hieratic
script throughout the first three millennia BCE,
Coptic was written starting in the early first mil-
lenium CE using a variant of the Greek alphabet,
with several added letters for Egyptian sounds ab-
sent from Greek. Figure 1 shows the script, which
was originally written without spaces (the Greek

loan word#uxh ‘psyche’ is visible at the top left).
Manuscript damage, also shown in the figure, rep-
resents a frequent challenge to annotation efforts
(see Section 7).

Figure 1: Excerpt from a papyrus letter by Besa, Abbot
of the White Monastery in the 5th century, showing text
without spaces and a lacuna. Image: Österreichische Na-
tionalbibliothek, http://digital.onb.ac.at/rep/
access/open/10099409.

Modern conventions separate Coptic text into
multi-word units known as bound groups (Lay-
ton, 2011, 19-20) using spaces, based on the pres-
ence of one stressed lexical item in each group.
This leads to multiple units being spelled together
which would normally receive separate tokens and
part of speech tags in annotated corpora. Similarly
to languages such as Arabic, Amharic, or Hebrew,
simple examples include noun phrases or preposi-
tional phrases spelled together, as in (1), or clitic
possessors spelled together with nouns, as in (2).1

(1) /m:p:ran hm-p-ran ‘in-the-name’

(2) rnt=k rnt=k ‘name-your (SG.M)’

However, Coptic fusional morphology can be
much more complex than in Semitic languages,
for several reasons. Developing from a morpho-
logically rich synthetic language through an ana-
lytic phase in Late Egyptian, Coptic has fusional
morphology and is usually seen as an agglutinative

1We follow common Egyptological practice in separating
lexical items within bound groups by ‘-’ and clitic pronouns
by a ‘=’.

http://digital.onb.ac.at/rep/access/open/10099409
http://digital.onb.ac.at/rep/access/open/10099409


193

or even polysynthetic language (Loprieno, 1995,
51). Similarly to inflection in Hausa, auxiliaries
and clitics attach to verbs as in (3), and unlike
in Semitic languages, compounds are spelled to-
gether and do not allow intervening articles. The
language also exhibits frequent verb-object incor-
poration, complicating word segmentation for tok-
enization (see Grossman 2014), as in the complex
verb shown in (4). Such complex verbs can be
embedded in word formation processes, leading to
nominalizations such as (5).

(3) a:f:/wtb
a-f-hōtb

m:p:rmnkhme
m-p-rmnkēme

PST-3.SG.M-kill ACC-the-Egyptian
‘he killed the Egyptian’

(4) /etb:#uxh
hetb-psychē
kill-soul
‘(to) soul-kill’ (incorporated)

(5) mnt:ref:/etb:#uxh
mnt-ref-hetb-psychē
ness-er-kill-soul
‘soul-killing’ (lit. ‘soul-kill-er-ness’)

Finally, some auxiliaries, such as the optative in
(6) may either fuse with and even circumfix adja-
cent pronouns as in (7), or in some cases exhibit
‘zero’ forms for pronouns, as in (8).

(6) ere:p:rwme cwtm ero=k
ere-p-rōme sōtm ero=k
OPT-the-man hear to-you.2SG.M
‘may the man hear you’

(7) e:f:e:cwtm ero=k
e-f-e-sōtm ero=k
OPT-3.SG.M-OPT-hear to-you.2SG.M
‘may he hear you’ (circumfix auxiliary)

(8) ere:cwtm ero=f
ere-sōtm ero=f
OPT+2.SG.F-hear to-him.3.SG.M
‘may you hear him’ (SG.F subj, fused)

Representing these discontinuous and null phe-
nomena within the UD framework is difficult in
the first instance because of their intrinsic com-
plexity (for example, UD prohibits null pronoun
nodes, even in enhanced dependencies), but is
further complicated by the use of existing stan-
dards in Coptic tokenization and tagging, which
we present next.

2 Previous work

Of the vast literary, documentary and epigraphic
material available in Coptic, print editions have fo-
cused on a small subset of early literature in the
Sahidic dialect of Upper Egypt, the most promi-
nent of six major dialects (see Shisha-Halevy
1986), which is also considered to be the classical
form of the language. While all examples in this
paper come from Sahidic sources, we believe that
the analyses will generalize well to other dialects,
which we intend to approach in the future.

Sizable digital corpora, which have only re-
cently become available in machine readable
formats (see Schroeder and Zeldes 2016 on
the Coptic Scriptorium project and http://
marcion.sourceforge.net/, which pro-
vides transcriptions of multiple out of copyright
editions) have generally followed the same path
of starting with classic Sahidic authors. Other
targeted projects have focused on translations
from Greek, and especially the Bible, e.g. the
Digital Edition of the Coptic Old Testament in
Göttingen (Behlmer and Feder, 2017), but also
tracking Greek influence in Coptic in general (Al-
mond et al., 2013). Finally Some other projects
are advancing the availability of documentary,
mostly papyrus materials as well (notably http:
//papyri.info/), which are as yet only digi-
tized in small quantities.

Although there is a plan to build a constituent
treebank of hieroglyphic Ancient Egyptian (Polis
and Rosmorduc, 2013), it is as yet unavailable.
The UD Coptic Dependency Treebank represents
the first dependency treebank for the entire Egyp-
tian language family as well as the only publicly
available treebank for Coptic in particular, and for
any phase of Egyptian in general.

As a basis for the Coptic Treebank, we selected
data from Coptic Scriptorium (available at http:
//copticscriptorium.org/; see the next
section for the specific genres and texts), for two
main reasons: 1. the data is freely available un-
der a Creative Commons license, facilitating its
re-annotation and distribution; and 2. the data is
already tokenized and POS tagged, using a native
Coptic POS tagging scheme. Using the Coptic
Scriptorium (CS) corpora therefore substantially
reduces the required annotation effort, but imposes
certain constraints on the segmentation and tag-
ging schemes chosen, which will be presented in
Section 4.

http://marcion.sourceforge.net/
http://marcion.sourceforge.net/
http://papyri.info/
http://papyri.info/
http://copticscriptorium.org/
http://copticscriptorium.org/


194

source genre documents tokens sents
translated
Apophthegmata Patrum hagiography 1–6, 18–19, 23–26 1,318 62
Gospel of Mark Bible (narrative) Chapters 1–6 7,087 248
1 Corinthians Bible (epistle) Chapters 1–6 3,571 124
original
Shenoute, Discourses 4 sermons Not Because a Fox Barks 2,553 97
Shenoute, Canons 3 sermons Abraham our Father (XL93-94) 579 26

Acephalous 22 (YA421-28) 1,703 43
Letters of Besa letters Letters 13, 15, 25 1,981 93
Martyrdom of Victor martyrdom Chapters 1–6 1,985 88
total 20,777 781

Table 1: Texts and genres in UD Coptic.

3 Texts

The selection of texts for the Coptic Treebank was
meant to satisfy four criteria:

1. Data should be freely available

2. A range of different genres should be covered

3. Text types should be chosen which are inter-
esting to users

4. Data should resemble likely targets for auto-
matic parsing using the treebank for training

A dilemma in realizing 3. is that typical UD
users interested in computational linguistics, cor-
pus linguistics and language typology may have
different interests than Coptologists: the former
may prefer texts which resemble other treebank
texts or are even available in other languages, such
as the Bible, while the latter may be most inter-
ested in classic Coptic literature by prominent au-
thors such as Shenoute of Artipe, archmandrite of
the White Monastery in the 3rd–4th centuries.

To balance these needs, we decided to include
both translated Biblical material and original Cop-
tic works, with a view to allowing comparisons
with other languages for which Bible treebanks are
available, as well as studies of untranslated Coptic
syntax. Table 1 shows the selection of texts cur-
rently available in the corpus.

4 Segmentation

While all digital corpora of Coptic referenced in
Section 2 separate bound groups, for treebanking
purposes we require a more fine grained tokeniza-
tion. The only tokenization for which NLP tools

are available is the one used in the Coptic Scripto-
rium project, though automatic segmentation ac-
curacy is currently around 94.5% (Feder et al.,
2018), meaning that working with data that is al-
ready gold-segmented is highly desirable. As a re-
sult, the Coptic Treebank inherits some segmenta-
tion guidelines, which will be discussed below.2

To represent Coptic segmentation correctly, at
least three levels of granularity are required: at the
highest level, bound groups, which are spelled to-
gether, can be regarded as a purely orthographic
device, similar to fused spellings of clitics in En-
glish, but much more common. To represent these
in the CoNLL-U format, we use multi-tokens and
the property SpaceAfter=No on non final tokens,
as shown in Table 2 for the two bound groups
‘in|his|deeds of|soul-killing’, which contains the
deverbal incorporated noun from (5). This practice
corresponds to the same guideline used in Semitic
languages, such as Arabic or Hebrew, which use
multi-tokens to represent multiword units with a
single lexical stress. The second level of granular-
ity corresponds to POS-tag bearing units, which
correspond to CoNLL-U tokens.

Finally, for units below the POS tag level, such
as components of incorporated ‘soul-killing’, we

2Compatibility with existing resources will motivate sev-
eral annotation guidelines below; following reviewer com-
ments we suggest this is in keeping with Manning’s Law: it
offers satisfactory linguistic analysis (rule 1, evidenced by
use in existing linguistic studies), allows for consistent hu-
man annotation (rule 3, see Section 4 on agreement), and
forms a standard comprehensible to and used by non-linguist
annotators (rule 5). We also attempt to follow rule 2 in ad-
hering to decisions in other languages to allow for typolog-
ical comparison where possible. Finally, we have reason to
believe the present scheme works well for parsing and down-
stream NLP tasks (rule 6), though evaluating these is outside
the scope of this paper.



195

text= ... /nnef/bhue mmntytref/etb#uxh
transc=... hn|nef|hbēue m|mnt-ref-hetb-psuxē
gloss= ... in|his|deeds of|ness-er-kill-soul
...
12-14 /nnef/bhue
12 /n in ADP PREP 14 case Orig=/

p p
n|SpaceAfter=No

13 nef his DET PPOS ... 14 det SpaceAfter=No
14 /bhue deeds NOUN N 9 obl
15-16 mmntref/etb#uxh
15 m of ADP PREP 16 case Orig=

p p
m|SpaceAfter=No

16 mntref/etb#uxh soul-killing NOUN N 14 nmod Morphs=mnt:ref:/etb:#uxh

Table 2: Segmentation in CoNLL-U format for a sentence fragment. The lemma column has been filled
with glosses for convenience, and features in column 6 have been omitted for space.

use the MISC column to reproduce the morpho-
logical segmentation of complex items, as shown
in the final column in the example, using hyphens
as morpheme separators. Although we considered
using sub-tokens to represent incorporation, and
using the compound relation, we decided against
this in order to maintain parity with CS tokens and
segmentation practices, and to match up with the
practice in Hebrew and Arabic, which use sub-
tokens for constituents of bound groups (and not
for smaller units, e.g. portmanteau compounds in
both languages3). This also allows us to benefit
from existing POS tagging software to feed auto-
matic parsing. At the same time, because we have
a morphological analysis of complex tokens in the
tagged source corpora, we retain this information
in the MISC column, and a version of the data in-
stantiating the components as tokens could be pro-
duced fully automatically if needed. The MISC
column is also used to hold an attribute Orig with
original forms of tokens as spelled in the source
manuscripts, which often deviate from standard
spellings or contain added optional diacritics (the
word form column is always normalized). As a
result the data can be used to train automatic nor-
malization tools.

A further complication arises in the case of
fused auxiliaries and pronouns, as in the cases
from examples (7) and (8). Here too, a solution
splitting the fused form into three tokens would
be conceivable, in order to represent the circum-
fix auxiliaries. However, CS guidelines do not
tokenize such units apart, instead using portman-
teau tags such as AOPT PPER (optative auxiliary,
fused with personal pronoun), and a lemma join-
ing the lemmas of both units via an underscore. A

3e.g. Hebrew רמזור ramzor ’stop-light’ (a portmanteau,
lit. ‘light-cue’), which is left unsegmented as a single token.
We thank an anonymous reviewer for providing this example.

potential pitfall of splitting these units is that, if we
consider a form such as e-f-e to consist of three to-
kens, there is a chance that automatic taggers and
parsers will tag one of the two ‘e’ vowels correctly
as an auxiliary, but not the other, leading to an in-
coherent analysis.4 The token efe, by contrast, will
always receive a single tag, and since the form is
unambiguous, it will always be correct. While we
would not prioritize ease of tagging over an ad-
equate linguistic analysis, we feel that, coupled
with the desire to maintain parity with larger cor-
pora, Manning’s Law favors this analysis, which
is unambiguous, deterministic and easy to convert
into a different form if necessary using the native
XPOS tags.

We therefore decided to retain CS tokeniza-
tion practices with regard to fused forms, both in
order to benefit from existing NLP tools and to
retain parity with the un-treebanked source cor-
pora, which contain a variety of additional non-
linguistic annotations. In order to adhere to strict
UPOS and UD dependency relations, we have
opted to always tag such cases by reference to the
argument pronoun, i.e. a form such as ‘efe’ is
tagged as PRON and labeled nsubj, not AUX/aux.
The native CS XPOS tag nevertheless uses the
portmanteau notation, and the MISC field includes
a segmented form, which can be converted into a
subtoken representation if desired.

4The form e in Coptic is highly polysemous: it can stand
for the preposition meaning ‘to’, a relativizer, an adverbial
subordinating conjunction, a focus marker, the second person
singular feminine (in some inflections), and more. One re-
viewer has asked whether contemporary taggers are actually
susceptible to such errors, and the answer in our experience
has been positive, probably because ‘e’ and ‘f’ are among the
most common Coptic tokens. Additionally, due to null forms
associated with the 2.SG.F subject (cf. (8) for example) and
UD’s policy against null subject nodes, fused forms become
unavoidable.



196

5 POS tags

Coptic Scriptorium offers two tagsets with differ-
ent levels of granularity: CS Fine and CS Coarse,
distinguishing 44 and 23 tags respectively. Due to
the possibility of a number of portmanteau tags in
fusional cases, the CS Fine tagset effectively in-
cluded 15 additional distinct labels arising from
the cross-product of fusable parts-of-speech.

Table 3 gives the mapping between CS tags and
UPOS, but excluding portmanteau tags. In all
cases of portmanteau tags, we adopt the strategy
outlined in the previous section, of giving con-
tent words priority over function words, and more
specifically, of preferring arguments over fused
auxiliaries.

Coptic auxiliaries fall into two main syntac-
tic classes: main clause auxiliaries (e.g. past
tense, CS APST) and subordinating auxiliaries
(e.g. precursive, APREC, which roughly means
‘after [VERB]ing, ...’. The tag A* in Table 3 stands
for any main clause auxiliary (12 CS Fine tags),
while subordinating auxiliary tags are listed sepa-
rately, all corresponding to SCONJ in UPOS. The
entry P* stands for four pronoun tags mapped to
PRON, and V* stands for all CS verbal tags.

CS UPOS CS UPOS
A* AUX FUT AUX
ACAUS VERB IMOD ADV
ACOND SCONJ N NOUNADV ADV ADJ
ALIM SCONJ NEG ADV
APREC SCONJ NPROP PROPN
ART DET NUM NUM
CCIRC SCONJ PDEM DET
CCOND SCONJ P* PRON
CFOC PART PPOS DET
CONJ CCONJ PREP ADP
COP PRON PTC PART
CPRET AUX PUNCT PUNCT
CREL SCONJ UNKNOWN X
EXIST VERB V* VERB
FM X

Table 3: Mapping of CS Fine tags to UPOS.

A point worth noting is that although the CS
tags are generally more fine grained than UPOS,
no CS tag maps unambiguously to UPOS ADJ.
This is because true adjectives are extremely rare
in Coptic, limited to about a dozen items, which
can appear immediately following a noun they
describe. For almost all attributive modification,
Coptic uses an ‘of’-PP, i.e. a ‘wise man’ is simply
a ‘man of wisdom’. Due to the fact that true ad-
jectives are so rare in Coptic (all are archaisms left

over from Late Egyptian), and the fact that some
can also be used in the ‘of’ construction as though
they were nouns, the CS tagset does not reserve
a POS tag for them. However for the handful of
items that do occur as adjectival modifiers (post-
nominal, not mediated by ‘of’), we use the amod
relation and UPOS ADJ based on the relation.

Additionally, some CS tags provide morpho-
logical information that would otherwise be lost
in UPOS, but can be represented in UD features
(CoNLL-U column 6), which are outlined in the
next section.

6 Morphological features

Morphological features are automatically added
to the corpus using DepEdit,5 a freely available
Python library for manipulating dependency data
in the CoNLL-U format (see Peng and Zeldes
2008). Some of the morphological feature cate-
gories are trivial to assign based on word forms,
such as gendered and numbered article forms, or
pronoun types.

However there are also some features that can
be derived from native POS tags, such as mood
and polarity: the imperative CS tag VIMP can
be used to feed the UD Mood=Imp feature, and
some auxiliaries are inherently negative, feeding
the Polarity=Neg feature. For example, Cop-
tic distinguishes some tenses with paired negative
and positive auxiliaries (e.g. CS tags APST and
ANEGPST for positive and negative past tense).
Some tensed auxiliaries are exclusively negative,
such as the perfective negative conjugation (CS
ANY, cf. Loprieno 1995, 221), which roughly
translates into a clause modified by ‘not yet’ which
has no morphologically positive counterpart. All
forms of such auxiliaries are automatically flagged
as Polarity=Neg based on CS tags.

Finally, Coptic possessive determiners indicate
gender and number for both the possessor and pos-
sessed, as in languages such as French or Ger-
man, and therefore we use the ‘layered feature’
facility in the CoNLL-U format, distinguishing
Gender and Number from Gender[psor] and
Number[psor] for possessor features, as in (9),
which shows a masculine singular noun possessed
by an article agreeing with these features, but also
marking a third person singular feminine posses-
sor.

5https://corpling.uis.georgetown.edu/
depedit/

https://corpling.uis.georgetown.edu/depedit/
https://corpling.uis.georgetown.edu/depedit/


197

(9) pec:hi
pes-ēi
her-house (house = Masc. Sg.)
Gender=Masc|Gender[psor]=Fem|
Number=Sing|Number[psor]=Sing|
Person=3|Poss=Yes|PronType=Prs
‘her house’

7 Dependencies

7.1 Absent relations

UD Coptic uses all UD relations, with the excep-
tion of expl and clf, since the language does not
have expletive pronouns or classifiers. Among the
recommended and frequently used subtypes, we
do not use the :pass subtypes (i.e. nsubj:pass and
aux:pass) due to the ambiguous nature of Coptic
passives. While there is a morphological form,
the ‘stative’ (CS tag VSTAT) which can express a
stative passive for transitive verbs, as in (10), the
same form simply means persisting in a state for
intransitive verbs, as in (11).

(10) p:hi
p-ēi

kht
kēt

the-house build.VSTAT
‘the house is built’

(11) p:moou
p-moou

/olq
holkj

the-water sweet.VSTAT
‘the water is sweet6’

In both cases, the sense is not actional. For the ac-
tional passive more directly translating the English
passive, Coptic uses an ambiguous 3rd person plu-
ral, as in (12). When an oblique agent is sup-
plied which conflicts in agreement with the non-
referential 3rd person plural, it is possible to dis-
tinguish active plural from the passive, as shown
in (13).

(12) a:u:/otb:f
a-u-hotb-f
PST-3.PL-kill-3.SG.M

‘they killed him/he was killed’

(13) a:u:/otb:f
a-u-hotb-f

/itn:te:chime
hitn-te-shime

PST-3.PL-kill-3.SG.M by-the-woman

‘he was killed by the woman’
(lit. ‘they killed him by the woman’)

However since cases like (13) are rare, we have
6Many words translated as adjectives in English are verbs

in Coptic: the intransitive infinitive hlokj means ‘become
sweet’, and the corresponding stative holkj means ‘be sweet’.
Morphologically both are verbal forms in Coptic.

opted not to distinguish passives, annotating 3rd

person plural verbs uniformly with regular depen-
dent nsubj and aux children (i.e. active syntax).

7.2 Other problematic constructions
During the annotation process, we encountered
several problems and special constructions high-
lighting the complications of adapting the UD an-
notation scheme to Coptic. One difficulty was
handling lacunae in the data: since we wanted to
include some major literary texts in their entirety
which are only attested in damaged manuscripts,
we were not able to select only texts with com-
plete sentences, and we also expect parsers trained
on our data to be applied to damaged text. In cases
where the damaged words can be reconstructed
with high confidence (usually meaning that at least
their POS tag can be assigned), words are attached
as usual. For more incomprehensible or very frag-
mentary phrases, especially those tagged as CS
UNKNOWN (UPOS: X), we attach all tokens to
the root as dep. For linguistically interpretable
scribal errors, by contrast, we use the reparandum
label, using the general UD guidelines for disflu-
ency annotation.

As an example of a more linguistic issue with
Coptic annotation, we consider the case of appo-
sitions that are non-adjacent, as the current UD
guidelines define appositional modifiers as “im-
mediately following the first noun that serves to
define, modify, name, or describe that noun”.7

This definition assumes that appositions are adja-
cent, with nothing intervening between two nomi-
nals. However, this is problematic for some Coptic
constructions where enclitic particles, mostly bor-
rowed from Greek such as de ‘but, and’, must ap-
pear in the second position in the sentence (imme-
diately following the first stressed word), breaking
up two appositional nominals, as shown in (14).

(14) p:rro
p-rro

de
de

dioklhtianoc
Dioklētianos

a:f:/rokeue
a-f-hrokeue

the-king but Diocletian PST-3SGM-amble
‘but the Emperor Diocletian went about’

Since the very same two nominals would be con-
sidered an apposition if the particle did not occur,
and since the particle is always a clause-level de-
pendent that invariably appears in second position,
we decided to analyze this construction as appos.8

7http://universaldependencies.org/u/
dep/appos.html, accessed 2018-07-10.

8An anonymous reviewer has suggested creating a sub-

http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/appos.html
http://universaldependencies.org/u/dep/appos.html


198

Further difficulties in applying UD guidelines
to Coptic arise in handling direct objects. Cop-
tic exhibits a regular alternation or differential ob-
ject marking depending on tense/aspect distinc-
tions. In the durative tenses (Layton, 2011, 233–
250), including indicative present, future and im-
perfect, objects are usually mediated by the prepo-
sition n: n- ‘of’ (or before pronouns, taking the
form mmo= mmo=), as in (15), whereas in other
tenses featuring an auxiliary before the subject,
objects are enclitic, appearing directly after the
verb without a preposition (this is known as Stern-
Jernstedt’s Rule, Jernstedt 1927), as shown earlier
in (12).

(15) ce:/wtb
se-hōtb

mmo:f
mmo=f

3.PL-kill ACC-3.SG.M

‘they are killing him’

The fact that these object positions are semanti-
cally identical has led us to analyze both construc-
tions as obj. This has the uncomfortable result of
the same preposition n- sometimes acting as an ad-
nominal modifier marker (nmod, in a literal ‘of’-
PP), and sometimes as an accusative case marker,
similarly to the analysis of the differential object
marking preposition et in the UD Hebrew treebank
(only used with definite objects). The advantage
is that it is easier to use the corpus to extract all
object arguments of a certain verb, or to identify
all cases of transitive verbs in general. As a crite-
rion for objecthood, we use the possibility of the
Stern-Jernstedt alternation: this criterion is more
easily decidable than other tests which have been
advocated, such as passivization (Zeman, 2017),
since passives are not always reliably identifiable
in Coptic (see above), though if passivizability is
taken as a criterion (cf. Przepiórkowski and Pate-
juk 2018) then objects mediated by the preposi-
tional case marker are in fact equally passivizable
as well.

A further complication in Coptic direct objects
arises from the fact that object clauses can co-
occur with correlate pronouns in the main clause,
as shown in Figure 2. In adopting the analysis
in the figure we followed the practice found in

type for these cases, e.g. appos:disjoint. While this would
certainly be possible, such cases are overall rare, making such
a label potentially very sparse. Conversely, it is fairly easy to
locate such cases based on the dependency graph if needed,
and from a linguistic perspective, there is nothing unusual
about such appositions – the unusual construction is more
properly the particle invariably appearing in second position.

most UD treebanks, tolerating obj and coreferen-
tial ccomp for one verb, despite some misgivings.9

Although this analysis conforms to the practice
in other treebanks, we are still considering alter-
natives, such as marking the pronoun in the matrix
clause as expl, or using dislocated for the clause.
However these solutions also lead to odd splits,
whereby a pronoun could be expletive if the object
clause was mentioned, but an object if the clause is
fully pronominalized (i.e. when only a pronoun is
used). Using dislocated is also counter-intuitive,
since the clause is not actually out of place: it is in
its expected position (not topicalized or unusually
postponed). Finally some have proposed mark-
ing either the nominal argument or the clause as
oblique (Przepiórkowski and Patejuk, 2018), but
this seems odd too, since each construction in iso-
lation looks like a core object.

8 Evaluation

In this section we evaluate the application of the
UD annotation scheme to Coptic by conducting an
inter-annotator agreement experiment using three
pairs of annotators. We report label scores (LS)
using Cohen’s Kappa and % unlabeled attachment
score (UAS) with and without punctuation.

The annotators include two pairs of BA stu-
dents with three semesters of Coptic but no experi-
ence with corpus annotation or dependencies, and
a third pair consisting of one MA student with two
semesters of Coptic but substantial experience an-
notating English (and some Coptic) dependencies,
and one professor proficient in Coptic and depen-
dency annotation (these are also the co-authors of
the present paper, and will be referred to as the
‘Expert’ group below).10 For the undergraduate
students, labeled group A and B, we conducted

9We take this to be a still open point, which we are looking
forward to discussing: The current UD guidelines explicitly
rule out multiple obj relations, but do not specifically refer to
obj + ccomp, which Przepiórkowski and Patejuk (2018) take
to be equivalent. Other UD literature has been ambivalent
about ruling out multiple obj dependents in general (Zeman,
2017, 290). In practice, we have seen UD treebanks in multi-
ple languages allow obj + ccomp, such as UD German-GSD,
UD English-EWT, the UD French treebanks and others. Ger-
man cases in particular seem to mirror the construction above,
e.g. Ich finde es wirklich toll, dass es Euch jetzt gibt!, lit. “I
find itobj really cool, that you existccomp now!”.

10An anonymous reviewer has inquired whether the de-
velopers of the annotation scheme also taught the annotators
Coptic, thereby facilitating higher than expected agreement.
This was actually not the case: the BA students studied Cop-
tic at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, apart from the au-
thors, and the MA student studied Coptic independently using
a textbook.



199

f na čoo s če ou rmnkah an pe
3SGM FUT say 3SGF that a earth-man not COP

root

nsubj

aux obj

mark
det advmod

cop

ccomp

Figure 2: Analysis of a doubled object clause construction: He would say (it) that he is not an earthly man.

annotators tokens UAS (% agreement) LS (kappa)
punctuation no punctuation punctuation no punctuation

Group A: Pre-Adjud. 276 81.1% 79.0% 0.78 0.75
Group A: Post-Adjud. 319 87.7% 86.5% 0.88 0.86
Group B: Pre-Adjud. 287 84.3% 82.9% 0.79 0.76
Group B: Post-Adjud. 297 86.5% 84.6% 0.81 0.79

Expert 703 96.0% 95.8% 0.93 0.92

Table 4: Agreement Scores. ‘no punctuation’ denotes scores with punctuation removed from evaluation

two experiments: a pre-adjudication round and a
post-adjudication round. In pre-adjudication, an-
notators only read the online UD Coptic guide-
lines without any prior annotation experience. Af-
terwards, student annotators discussed points of
disagreement with the professor and adjudicated
their sentences, before proceeding to the post-
adjudication round, in which we expected annota-
tors to fare better. Annotators had unlimited time
to complete the task and the text in all rounds was a
portion of the Martyrdom of St. Victor, which was
presented together with a standard literary trans-
lation. As an annotation interface, we used the
Arborator (Gerdes, 2013).

Table 4 compares the results of the three pairs
of annotators. All results are divided into two sec-
tions: with and without punctuation.11 Results are
further separated into pre-adjudication and post-
adjudication for the two undergraduate groups.

As shown, the expert annotator scores and the
student annotator scores after post-adjudication
exhibit relatively high levels of agreement. Within
the label score (LS) category, expert annotators
scored k = 0.92 without punctuation and 0.93
with punctuation, both of which can be considered
very good agreement. Post-adjudication, group
B produced a label score (LS) of 0.81, while
group A scored 0.88. Both of these scores can

11Scores that include punctuation are based on punctuation
attachment to the root, but Udapi (Popel et al., 2017) is used
to automatically attach punctuation according to UD guide-
lines for the final adjudicated gold version.

be interpreted as strong agreement, and notice-
ably higher than scores between 0.75–0.79, which
were achieved solely by reading the guidelines and
without previous annotation experience.

Unlabeled attachment scores (UAS) also shows
good results. Expert annotators achieve 95.8%
without punctuation and 96.0% with, and the
student groups have reasonable post-adjudication
agreement scores as high as 86.5% and 87.7%,
respectively. We observed notable improvements
from pre-adjudication to post-adjudication from
the student groups. This shows that annotation ac-
curacy on this task can improve after experience
and discussing common annotation errors.

The fact that annotators are non-native speakers
with limited experience with the language likely
affects the inter-annotator agreement results and
makes this a challenging task relative to evalua-
tions in other languages, such as English. Berzak
et al. (2016) report an agreement experiment on
English dependencies with a UAS score of 97.16%
and an LS score of 96.3%, conducted on section 23
of the Wall Street Journal corpus (Marcus et al.,
1993). Although the labeled score is evaluated
as % agreement rather than kappa, these results
likely outperform our scores. However in a more
challenging task of annotating English tweets, Liu
et al. (2018) report a UAS score of 88.8% and LS
score of 84.3%, showing that quality can vary sub-
stantially across text types.12

12We do not mean to imply that Coptic data is similar to



200

Bamman et al. (2009) report results from a
dependency annotation experiment on Ancient
Greek with an attachment score of 87.4% and
a label score of 85.3%. While this experiment
wasn’t within the UD framework, it offers compa-
rable agreement scores with respect to non-native
speaker annotation. The scores presented in their
study are close to the attachment scores from our
undergraduate student annotator pairs, though ad-
mittedly Coptic and Greek are typologically very
distant. Scores from other African languages are
scarce, but Seyoum et al. (2018) report a kappa
score of 0.488 for agreement on UD relations for
the morphologically rich language Amharic. This
score is interpreted as moderate agreement and is
substantially lower than our label scores.

We conducted an error analysis to find com-
mon areas of disagreement. While some errors
can be attributed to simple, non-systematic mis-
takes, many high frequency errors are the result of
complicated constructions or alternative interpre-
tations of the text, which is at times not trivial to
translate. The majority of disagreements for the
expert annotators pertained to coordination scope
(which is often ambiguous in the translation); con-
fusion over labeling objects (obj) and obliques
(obl), often due to annotating more closely to the
source language or the available translation’s in-
terpretation; and whether an item has an (obl) re-
lation to a verb or an (nmod) relation to its de-
pendent noun in constructions that are close to
light-verb constructions, but not entirely lexical-
ized. Coordination proved challenging for longer
ambiguous sentences where, as non-native speak-
ers, we relied on our own interpretation of the text
for parsing. Confusion over labeling items as obj
and obl can also be attributed to similar syntactic
environments where objects and obliques are both
mediated by the preposition n: n- ‘of’.

9 Conclusion

In this paper we presented the Coptic Universal
Dependency Treebank, the first treebank in the
UD project from the Egyptian phylum of the Afro-
Asiatic language family, and the first Coptic tree-
bank in general. Our evaluation shows that UD
guidelines can be applied to Coptic consistently,
with rising accuracy based on annotator experi-
ence. We are currently expanding the treebank

tweets, but rather point out the variability in UD agreement
scores depending on context.

and aim to reach a size allowing for the training
of robust parsers and evaluating parsing results on
Coptic in future shared tasks.

The discussion has also shown that there are a
number of challenges in adapting the UD scheme
for Coptic, some of which are shared with other
languages: in particular, we advocate a less strict
interpretation of adjacency constraints for the ap-
pos relation, which would also be needed for
languages such as Classical Greek, and raise is-
sues with the consistent encoding of pronomi-
nal/clausal double object constructions, as well
as differential object marking and the handling of
ambiguous passivization. We look forward to dis-
cussing these issues with the UD community.

Acknowledgments

This work is funded by the National Endowment
for the Humanities (NEH) and the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) (grants HG-229371 and
HAA-261271). Special thanks are due to Eliz-
abeth Davidson for work on annotating multi-
ple documents in the treebank, as well as to Is-
rael Avrahamy, Asael Benyami, Yinon Kahan and
Oran Szachter for annotating sections of the Mar-
tyrdom of Victor. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments on previous ver-
sions of this paper.

References
Mathew Almond, Joost Hagen, Katrin John, To-

nio Sebastian Richter, and Vincent Walter. 2013.
Kontaktinduzierter Sprachwandel des Ägyptisch-
Koptischen: Lehnwort-Lexikographie im Projekt
Database and Dictionary of Greek Loanwords in
Coptic (DDGLC). In Perspektiven einer corpus-
basierten historischen Linguistik und Philologie,
pages 283–315, Berlin. BBAW.

David Bamman, Francesco Mambrini, and Gregory
Crane. 2009. An ownership model of annotation:
The Ancient Greek dependency treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 8), pages
5–15, Groningen.

Heike Behlmer and Frank Feder. 2017. The com-
plete digital edition and translation of the Coptic
Sahidic Old Testament. A new research project at
the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humani-
ties. Early Christianity, 8:97–107.

Yevgeni Berzak, Yan Huang, Andrei Barbu, Anna Ko-
rhonen, and Boris Katz. 2016. Anchoring and agree-
ment in syntactic annotations. In Proceedings of
EMNLP 2016, pages 2215–2224, Austin, TX.



201

Frank Feder, Maxim Kupreyev, Emma Manning, Caro-
line T. Schroeder, and Amir Zeldes. 2018. A linked
Coptic dictionary online. In Proceedings of LaT-
eCH 2018 - The 11th SIGHUM Workshop at COL-
ING2018, pages 12–21, Santa Fe, NM.

Kim Gerdes. 2013. Collaborative dependency anno-
tation. In Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing
2013), pages 88–97, Prague.

Eitan Grossman. 2014. Transitivity and valency in con-
tact: The case of Coptic. In 47th Annual Meeting of
the Societas Linguistica Europaea, Poznań, Poland.

Peter V. Jernstedt. 1927. Das koptische Praesens und
die Anknüpfungsarten des näheren Objekts. Dok-
lady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 1927:69–74.

Bentley Layton. 2011. A Coptic Grammar, third edi-
tion, revised and expanded edition. Porta linguarum
orientalium 20. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.

Yijia Liu, Yi Zhu, Wanxiang Che, Bing Qin, Nathan
Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2018. Parsing tweets
into Universal Dependencies. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 965–975.

Antonio Loprieno. 1995. Ancient Egyptian. A Linguis-
tic Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Special Is-
sue on Using Large Corpora, Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(2):313–330.

Siyao Peng and Amir Zeldes. 2008. All roads lead
to UD: Converting Stanford and Penn parses to En-
glish Universal Dependencies with multilayer anno-
tations. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on
Linguistic Annotation, Multiword Expressions and
Constructions (LAW-MWE-CxG-2018), pages 167–
177, Santa Fe, NM.

Stéphane Polis and Serge Rosmorduc. 2013. Build-
ing a construction-based treebank of Late Egyptian:
The syntactic layer in Ramses. In Stéphane Polis
& Jean Winand, editor, Texts, Languages & Infor-
mation Technology in Egyptology. Selected papers
from the meeting of the Computer Working Group
of the International Association of Egyptologists,
pages 45–59. Presses Universitaires de Liège.

Martin Popel, Zdenek Zabokrtský, and Martin Vojtek.
2017. Udapi: Universal API for Universal Depen-
dencies. In Universal Dependencies Workshop at
NoDaLiDa 2017, pages 96–101.

Adam Przepiórkowski and Agnieszka Patejuk. 2018.
Arguments and adjuncts in Universal Dependencies.
In Proceedings of COLING2018, pages 3837–3852,
Santa Fe, NM.

Caroline T. Schroeder and Amir Zeldes. 2016. Raiders
of the lost corpus. Digital Humanities Quarterly,
10(2).

Binyam Ephrem Seyoum, Yusuke Miyao, and Baye Yi-
mam Mekonnen. 2018. Universal Dependencies for
Amharic. In Proceedings of LREC 2018, pages
2216–2222, Miyazaki, Japan.

Ariel Shisha-Halevy. 1986. Coptic Grammatical
Categories. Structural Studies in the Syntax of
Shenoutean Sahidic. Pontificum Institutum Bib-
licum, Rome.

Dan Zeman. 2017. Core arguments in Universal
Dependencies. In Proceedings of the Fourth In-
ternational Conference on Dependency Linguistics
(Depling 2017), pages 287–296, Pisa, Italy.


