



















































Creating a WhatsApp Dataset to Study Pre-teen Cyberbullying


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Abusive Language Online (ALW2), pages 51–59
Brussels, Belgium, October 31, 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

51

Creating a WhatsApp Dataset to Study Pre-teen Cyberbullying

Rachele Sprugnoli1, Stefano Menini1, Sara Tonelli1, Filippo Oncini1,2, Enrico Maria Piras1,3
1Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, Trento, Italy

2Department of Sociology and Social Research, University of Trento, Via Giuseppe Verdi 26, Trento
3School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Verona, Piazzale L. A. Scuro 10, Verona, Italy

{sprugnoli;menini;satonelli;piras}@fbk.eu
filippo.oncini@unitn.it

Abstract

Although WhatsApp is used by teenagers as
one major channel of cyberbullying, such in-
teractions remain invisible due to the app pri-
vacy policies that do not allow ex-post data
collection. Indeed, most of the information
on these phenomena rely on surveys regarding
self-reported data.

In order to overcome this limitation, we de-
scribe in this paper the activities that led to
the creation of a WhatsApp dataset to study
cyberbullying among Italian students aged 12-
13. We present not only the collected chats
with annotations about user role and type of
offense, but also the living lab created in a col-
laboration between researchers and schools to
monitor and analyse cyberbullying. Finally,
we discuss some open issues, dealing with eth-
ical, operational and epistemic aspects.

1 Introduction

Due to the profound changes in ICT technologies
over the last decades, teenagers communication
has been subjected to a major shift. According
to the last report by the Italian Statistical Insti-
tute (ISTAT, 2014) in Italy 82.6% of children aged
11-17 use the mobile phone every day and 56.9%
access the web on a daily basis. Despite being
of fundamental importance for teenagers’ social
life, the use of these new technologies paved the
way to undesirable side effects, among which the
digitalisation of traditional forms of harassment.
We refer to these form of harassment as “cyber-
bullying”. Should we adopt a narrow definition,
cyberbullying refers only to actions repeated over
time with the aim to hurt someone. By defini-
tion, cyberbullying is in fact ‘an aggressive, in-
tentional act carried out by a group or individ-
ual, using electronic forms of contact, repeatedly
and over time against a victim who cannot easily
defend him or herself’ (Smith et al., 2008). In

everyday life, however, the notion of cyberbully-
ing indicates each episode of online activity aimed
at offending, menacing, harassing or stalking an-
other person. The latter definition of cyberbully-
ing is the one currently adopted in most of the re-
search conducted on this phenomenon and in the
present work. The phenomenon has been recog-
nised as a ubiquitous public health issue, as the
literature clearly highlights negative consequences
for teenagers: studies show that victims are more
likely to suffer from psychosocial difficulties, af-
fective disorders and lower school performance
(Tokunaga, 2010). Since the difference between
cyberbullying and traditional forms of bullying
lies in the intentional use of electronic forms of
contact against the designed victim, data on verbal
harassment and cyberbullying stances are particu-
larly useful to analyse the phenomenon. However,
due to the private nature of these verbal exchanges,
very few datasets are available for the computa-
tional analysis of language. It should be noted
that the possibilities offered by social networking
platform to share privately content among users
combined with the increasing digital literacy of
teenagers has the paradoxical effect to hinder the
possibility to scrutinize and study the actual cyber-
bullying activities. For instance, although What-
sApp is used by teenagers as one major channel of
cyberbullying (Aizenkot and Kashy-Rosenbaum,
2018), their interactions remain invisible due to
the privacy policies that impede ex-post data col-
lection. Most of the information on these phe-
nomena, though, relies on surveys regarding self-
reported data. Yet, specifically for this reason,
the possibility to study how cyberbullying interac-
tions and offenses emerge through instant messag-
ing app conversations is crucial to fight and pre-
vent digital harassment.

In this light, this paper presents an innovative
corpus of data on cyberbullying interaction gath-



52

ered through a WhatsApp experimentation with
lower secondary school students. After outlining
the CREEP project1 (CybeRbullying EffEcts Pre-
vention) during which the activities were carried
out, and the living lab approach that led to the cre-
ation of the corpus, we present the provisional re-
sults of the computational analysis.

In the discussion, we address the main ethical
concerns raised by the experimentation and we
discuss the implications of such a methodology
as a tool for both research and cyberbullying
prevention programs. Annotated data, in a stand-
off XML format, and annotation guidelines are
available online2.

NOTE: This paper contains examples of lan-
guage which may be offensive to some readers.
They do not represent the views of the authors.

2 Related Work

In this Section we provide an overview of datasets
created to study cyberbullying, highlighting the
differences with respect to our Whatsapp corpus.

The sources used to build cyberbullying
datasets are several and cover many different web-
sites and social networks. However, the main dif-
ferences are not in the source of the data but in the
granularity and detail of the annotations. Reynolds
et al. (2011) propose a dataset of questions and
answers from Formspring.me, a website with a
high amount of cyberbullying content. It consists
of 12,851 posts annotated for the presence of cy-
berbullying and severity. Another resource de-
veloped by Bayzick et al. (2011) consists of con-
versation transcripts (thread-style) extracted from
MySpace.com. The conversations are divided into
groups of 10 posts and annotated for presence and
typology of cyberbullying (e.g. denigration or ha-
rassment, flaming, trolling). Other studies cover
more popular social networks such as Instagram
and Twitter. For example, the dataset collected
from Instagram by Hosseinmardi et al. (2015),
consists of 2,218 media sessions (groups of 15+
messages associated to a media such as a video or
a photo), with a single annotation for each media
session indicating the presence of cyberagressive
behavior. The work by Sui (2015) is instead on
Twitter data, presenting a corpus of 7,321 tweets

1http://creep-project.eu/
2http://dh.fbk.eu/technologies/

whatsapp-dataset

manually annotated for the presence of cyberbul-
lying. In this dataset, other than cyberbullying, the
authors provide different layers of associated in-
formation, for example the role of the writer, the
typology of attack and the emotion. The afore-
mentioned works have two main differences with
respect to the data presented in this paper. First,
each annotation refers to an entire message (or a
group of messages) and not to specific expressions
and portions of text. Second, the categories used
for the annotation are more generic than the ones
adopted in our guidelines.

A more detailed investigation on the cyberbul-
lying dynamics can be found in Van Hee et al.
(2015b,a) presenting the work carried out within
the project AMiCA3, which aims at monitoring
web resources and automatically tracing harmful
content in Dutch. The authors propose a detailed
analysis of cyberbullying on a dataset of 85,485
posts collected from Ask.fm and manually anno-
tated following a fine-grained annotation scheme
that covers roles, typology of harassment and level
of harmfulness. This scheme has been recently ap-
plied also to English data (Van Hee et al., 2018).
This approach is different from the previous ones
since its annotations are not necessarily related
to entire messages but can be limited to shorter
strings (e.g., single words or short sequences of
words). We found this approach the more suitable
for our data, allowing us to obtain a detailed view
of pre-teens use of offensive language and of the
strategies involved in a group with ongoing cyber-
bullying. The details on how we use the guidelines
from the AMiCA project (Van Hee et al., 2015c) as
the starting point to define our annotation scheme
can be found in Section 5.

Another important difference between our cor-
pus and the datasets previously discussed is the
source of our data. Indeed, among the many avail-
able instant messaging and social media platforms,
WhatsApp is not much investigated because it is
private, thus an explicit donation from the chat
participants is required to collect data (Verhei-
jen and Stoop, 2016). Although in the last few
years WhatsApp corpora have been released in
several languages including Italian (see for exam-
ple the multilingual corpus built in the context
of the “What’s up, Switzerland?” project4 (Ue-

3https://www.lt3.ugent.be/projects/
amica

4https://www.whatsup-switzerland.ch/
index.php/en/

http://creep-project.eu/
http://dh.fbk.eu/technologies/whatsapp-dataset
http://dh.fbk.eu/technologies/whatsapp-dataset
https://www.lt3.ugent.be/projects/amica
https://www.lt3.ugent.be/projects/amica
https://www.whatsup-switzerland.ch/index.php/en/
https://www.whatsup-switzerland.ch/index.php/en/


53

berwasser and Stark, 2017), these corpora have
been collected with the goal to investigate spe-
cific linguistic traits such as code-switching, or to
study whether the informal language used in the
chats affects the writing skills of students (Do-
rantes et al., 2018; Verheijen and Spooren, 2017).
With respect to the aforementioned works focused
on the analysis of linguistic phenomena in What-
sApp, our aim is to study a social phenomenon,
that is cyberbullying, by analysing how it is lin-
guistically encoded in WhatsApp messages. Even
if the relation between cyberbullying and What-
sApp is strong, no annotated corpus of WhatsApp
chats has been released so far. Therefore, our cor-
pus represents a novel resource, useful to study
in particular cyberbullying in classmates’ groups
(Aizenkot and Kashy-Rosenbaum, 2018).

3 Project Description

The corpus presented in this paper is part of
the CybeRbullying EffEcts Prevention activities
(CREEP), a larger project based in Italy and sup-
ported by EIT Digital5, for the monitoring of
cyberbullying and the assistance of students and
teachers. The project goals are i) to develop ad-
vanced technologies for the early detection of cy-
berbullying stances through the monitoring of so-
cial media and ii) to create a virtual coaching sys-
tem for communicating preventive advice and per-
sonalised messages to adolescents at risk of cyber-
bullying aggressions. To this purpose, one of the
means to reach the objectives is the realisation of
a living lab, namely an in vivo research method-
ology aimed at co-creating innovation through
the involvement of aware users in a real-life set-
ting (Dell’Era and Landoni, 2014). This ap-
proach permits to tackle the cyberbullying phe-
nomenon within the social media platform from a
user-centric perspective, thereby favouring the co-
creation of prevention strategies whilst avoiding
top-down planning. When applied to the school
context, the living-lab approach presents a three-
fold advantage. Researchers gain ecological valid-
ity by studying the phenomenon with target users
through a role-play experiment. Teenagers can ac-
tively engage in the participatory design without
being used as passive research subjects. Schools
can count on a supplementary tool for raising
awareness on cyberbullying and give pupils addi-
tional means to understand the phenomenon first-

5https://www.eitdigital.eu/

hand.
The creation of the corpus required the involve-

ment of students in a role-playing simulation of
cyberbullying and has so far involved three lower
secondary schools’ classes of teenagers aged 12-
13 from 2 different schools based in Trento, in
the North-East of Italy. The experimentation it-
self, described in the next section, was embedded
in a larger process that required four to five meet-
ings, one per week, involving every time two so-
cial scientists, two computational linguists and at
least two teachers for the class. The content of the
meetings is briefly described below:

1. Lecturing on cyberbullying. Researchers
introduce the theme of cyberbullying and
elicit personal experiences and students’
opinions.

2. Pilot annotation of online interactions.
Students in pairs annotate semantically six
online threads gathered from Instagram and
Twitter. They discuss the hate speech cate-
gories that will be then annotated also in the
WhatsApp interactions.

3. Introducing the experimentation. Re-
searchers present the experimentation, both
the practicalities and the rules of the role-
playing.

4. Participatory analysis. Researchers present
the preliminary analysis of the experimenta-
tion and elicit students interpretations of the
data gathered.

5. Feedback to teachers and parents (optional
but recommended). Researchers present the
whole project to parents of students involved
and teachers, discussing results and future ac-
tivities.

The relevance and implications of this approach
are presented in Section 6.

4 WhatsApp Experimentation

The choice of WhatsApp is based on two main
considerations: first, the application is one of the
most preferred and used messaging applications
(Fiadino et al., 2014). In 2015, almost 60% of
Italian teens aged 12-17 used the app (Save the
Children, 2014). In fact, in each class involved
in the living lab, around 70% of the children al-
ready had an active WhatsApp account on their

https://www.eitdigital.eu/


54

Scenario Type of addressed problem
Your shy male classmate has a great passion for classical dance.
Usually he does not talk much, but today he has decided to invite
the class to watch him for his ballet show.

Gendered division of sport
practices

Your classmate is very good at school, but does not have many
friends, due to his/her haughty and ‘teacher’s pet’ attitude. Few
days ago, s/he realised that his/her classmates brought cigarettes
to school and snitched on them with the teacher. Now they will
be met with a three days suspension, and they risk to fail the year.

Interference in others’
businesses

Your classmate is very good at school, and everyone think s/he is
an overachiever. S/He studies a lot and s/he never goes out. S/He
does not speak much with his/her classmates, that from time to
time tease him/her for his/her unsocial life. Things have slightly
changed recently: your classmates mum convinced teachers to
increase the homework for all the students. A heedless teacher
revealed the request to the class, and now some students are very
angry at him/her.

Lack of independence, parental
intromission.

Your shy classmate is good in all subjects but in gymnastics. For
this reason, his/her classmates often tease on him/her when s/he
exercises. Recently, the class has found out a video on the social
network Musical.ly, where s/he dances gracelessly, on a 90s song
that no one has never heard before.

Web virality

Table 1: Scenarios adopted in our experimentation.

personal smartphones. Only a minority (around
5 or 6 teens) used their parents’ smartphones to be
able to participate. Second, the app provides all
the functionalities of social networking services,
and Whatsapp classmates’ groups are identified by
other studies as contexts of cyberbullying perpe-
tration (Aizenkot and Kashy-Rosenbaum, 2018).
Overall, a total number of 70 students participated
in the experimentation.

After receiving the necessary authorisation
from the school director, the school board, and
teenagers’ parents, the researchers presented the
experimentation to the participants, conceived as
a role-play. In each class, two WhatsApp groups
with around 10 teens were created. Teachers were
part of the groups and could assist to the conver-
sation, but they never actively participated to the
chat. In each group, one researcher played for the
whole time the role of the victim. Students were
instead given the following roles: cyberbully (2
students), cyberbully assistants (3-4 students), and
victim assistants (3-4 students). Teachers divided
the classes and assigned the roles to pupils, so
to take into account previous class dynamics and
childrens personalities. Each role-play lasted for 3

days, after which pupils changed roles within the
same chat; students were allowed to participate in
the chat only after the school hours, and could be
excluded for a short time in case of misbehaviour.
Teachers and researchers used dedicated mobile
phones provided by the project, not their private
ones. Each chat started with the following basic
rules:

• Offenses must target only the designated vic-
tim (the researcher)

• Bad words are allowed, but do not exaggerate

• Do your best to play your role and try to in-
teract in a realistic way

• Stick to the roles previously defined

• Do not hesitate to quit the chat if you feel of-
fended

• Use the chat only after school hours

Moreover, in order to trigger the conversation,
several scenarios, previously discussed and agreed



55

by the students, opened the role-play. The sce-
narios, reported in Table 1, aim to address differ-
ent types of problematics that teenagers can en-
counter, from the gendered division of sport prac-
tices to the embarrassment caused by a viral video.
At the end of the experimentation, a two-hour
meeting with each class was organised to reflect
with students and teachers on the content of the
conversation, and to discuss some of the taken-for-
granted aspects of cyberbullying and raise aware-
ness on teenagers. During this occasion, students
could reflect on the experience, highlight with re-
searchers and teachers the most problematic inter-
actions, and point out the benefits and drawbacks
of the methodology.

Three middle-school classes were involved in
this experimentation. Since WhatsApp groups
are closed and not accessible from the outside, a
preliminary agreement was signed involving stu-
dents’ parents, teachers and headmasters to allow
the activity. The threads were then saved in anony-
mous form and manually annotated by two ex-
pert linguists. The original names were not com-
pletely removed, but they were replaced by ficti-
tious names, so that it was still possible to track all
the messages exchanged by the same person.

5 Corpus Description

The corpus of Whatsapp chats is made of 14,600
tokens divided in 10 chats. All the chats have
been annotated by two annotators using the CAT
web-based tool (Bartalesi Lenzi et al., 2012)
following the same guidelines.

Our guidelines are an adaptation to Italian of
the “Guidelines for the Fine-Grained Analysis
of Cyberbullying” developed for English by the
Language and Translation Technology Team of
Ghent University (Van Hee et al., 2015c). Follow-
ing these guidelines, the annotator should identify
all the harmful expressions in a conversation
and, for each of it, he/she should annotate: (i)
the cyberbullying role of the message’s author;
(ii) the cyberbullying type of the expression; (iii)
the presence of sarcasm in the expression; (iv)
whether the expression containing insults is not
really offensive but a joke. The guidelines identi-
fies four cyberbullying roles: Harasser (person
who initiates the harassment), Victim (person
who is harassed), Bystander-defender
(person who helps the victim and discourages the
harasser), Bystander-assistant (person

who takes part in the actions of the harasser).
As for the type of cyberbullying expressions,
we distinguish between different classes of
insults, discrimination, sexual talk and aggres-
sive statements: Threat or blackmail,
General Insult, Body Shame, Sexism,
Racism, Curse or Exclusion, Insult
Attacking Relatives, Harmless
Sexual Talk, Defamation, Sexual
Harassment, Defense, Encouragement
to the Harassment, and Other. Each
message in the chat can contain more than
one expression to be annotated with a different
associated type thus making the annotation
fine-grained. For example the message fai schifo,
ciccione! / you suck, fat guy is made of two
harmful expressions e.g. [fai schifo,]General Insult
[ciccione!]Body Shame.

With respect to the original guidelines by Van
Hee et al. (2015c), we added a new type of insult
called Body Shame to cover expressions that
criticize someone based on the shape, size, or
appearance of his/her body. We did this addition
because body shaming has become an important
societal issue that according to existing literature
has a strong impact on the cybervictimization
of teens and pre-treens (Frisén et al., 2014;
Berne et al., 2014). We have also changed
the original type Encouragement to the
Harasser into Encouragement to the
Harassment, so to include all the incitements
between the bully and his/her assistants. We
indeed noticed that the exhortations to continue
the persecution and the expressions of approval
for insults and acts of intimidation do not have
a single direction (that is, from the assistants to
the bully) but all the people taking part in the
harassment encourage each other.
We calculated the inter annotator agreement
between our annotators on one of the chats, made
of 1,000 tokens and belonging to the scenario
about the video posted on musical.ly. Results
are shown in Table 2 in terms of Dice coefficient
(Dice, 1945) for the extension of the annotated
expression and in terms of accuracy for the
attributes associated to each message. Since
that the roles where pre-defined, we did not
measure the agreement on the assignment of the
cyberbullying roles. Results are satisfactory given
that the agreement is equal or above 0.8 both for
the extension and the attributes. These scores are



56

Extension Attributes
Dice coefficient Accuracy

exact match partial match type sarcasm non-offensive
0. 80 0.88 0.87 1 1

Table 2: Results of Inter Annotator Agreement

TYPES ROLES
Defense 381 (31.7%) Bystander assistant 358 (29.8%)
General Insult 313 (26.0%) Harasser 343 (28.5%)
Curse or Exclusion 200 (16.6%) Bystander defender 334 (27.7% )
Threat or Blackmail 81 (6.7%) Victim 168 (14.0%)
Encouragement to the Harassment 63 (5.2%)
Body Shame 45 (3.7%) OFFENSIVE
Discrimination-Sexism 45 (3.7%) non-offensive 0
Attacking relatives 28 (2.3%)
Other 24 (2%) SARCASM
Defamation 23 (1.9%) sarcasm 27 (2.2%)
TOTAL 1203

Table 3: Annotated data on WhatsApp data

higher than those reported for the annotation made
using the guidelines to which we were inspired
(Van Hee et al., 2015b). This difference could
be explained by the fact that our annotators were
directly involved in the creation of our guidelines.

Table 3 reports statistics about the annotated
data in the WhatsApp chats. We identified a total
of 1,203 cyberbullying expressions, correspond-
ing to almost 6,000 tokens: this means that the
phenomenon we are investigating covers 41.1%
of the whole corpus. Roles are quite balanced
in the chats with many interactions among all
the participants. Expressions of type Defense
written by the victim or bystander defenders
are the most numerous (31.7%): they include
expressions in support of the victim specifying
his/her positive characteristics (e.g., secondo me
è bravo! / I think he’s good!) but also showing
disapproval and indignation (e.g., lasciatelo stare!
/ leave him alone!). Undesirable sexual talk (type
Sexual harassment) and expressions of
discrimination that are based on the victim’s race,
skin color, ethnicity, nationality, or religion are
never found in the WhatsApp corpus. Besides,
all rude remarks and bad words are offensive
in the context in which they are used (i.e., the
non-offensive tag is never used). The de-
fenders of the victim often fight back responding
to attacks with insults (e.g., le sfigate siete voi
/ you are the losers) and threats (e.g. Se non la

smetti la vedrai con tutti noi / If you do not stop
you will see it with all of us). These types of
expressions correspond to the 37.1% of the anno-
tations with the role Bystander-defender.
Almost all the expressions in the category
Curse or Exclusion (96%) are aimed at
detaching the counterpart from social relations
with expressions such as chiudi il becco / shut
up, nessuno ti vuole / nobody wants you, cambia
classe / change class. The strong majority of
insults of type Attacking relatives, corre-
sponding to 82.1%, are addressed to the mother
(e.g., Tua madre fa schifo quanto te / Your mother
sucks as much as you do) whereas the others are
attacks to sisters, brothers and friends in general.
Different scenarios bring out different types of
cyberbullying expressions and thus different types
of insults. For example, the scenario about the
ballet has a high presence of expressions with a
sexist nature, starting from the idea that ballet
is an activity only for girls, e.g. Balli anche
te cosı̀ da gay? / Do you dance so gay too?).
The scenario related to the video on musical.ly
has attracted many comments on the appearance
of the victim and, as a consequence, we have
high occurrence of insults of type Body Shame.
Typically, these insults contain references to
animals stressing the heaviness of the victim, for
example Dimagrisci elefante / lose weight, you
elephant, Sembra un bisonte quando corre! / He



57

looks like a bison when he runs!.

6 Discussion

The use of a simulation to create the corpus de-
scribed in the previous sections raises a number
of issues. A detailed and thorough exploration of
such issues is beyond the scope of the present pa-
per and it would require a paper in its own right.
Nonetheless, in this last section we discuss some
of the issues faced with no pretense of exhaustive-
ness, distinguishing between operational, ethical
and epistemic issues. As we shall see, though,
there are considerable overlaps among these cat-
egories.

6.1 Operational Issues

First and foremost, the creation of a WhatsApp
corpus has required several accompanying mea-
sures. The effort required to gather the corpus is
only a fraction of the overall effort needed to set
up the living lab. Participation of schools was en-
sured by making data gathering only a part of a
larger set of activities aimed at paving the way for
experimentation (lecture, annotation) and provid-
ing teachers and parents, our internal stakehold-
ers, with results to be further used for educational
purposes (feedback). All these activities required
to invest extra-time. At the same time, though,
the prolonged involvement and exchanges with
students and teachers allowed us to build a trust
meant to ensure a smooth participation to the role-
playing and avoid that researchers are perceived as
judgmental.

A second issue, partially related to the former, is
the need of a consistent engagement of researchers
in the creation of the corpus. The experimentation,
far from having a predictable behaviour, needed
to be monitored to ensure that participants would
adhere to the rules (i.e. not insulting each other)
or stop interacting. This required making several
decisions (e.g. sending private messages to remind
the rules to specific students) to avoid the failure of
the role-playing. Borderline cases were frequent
and each required choices to be made on the fly.
As a rule, researchers adopted a flexible approach
towards rule-breaking, deeming that an excessive
intervention would have broken the ‘suspension of
disbelief’ of the role-playing.

On a separate note, the unfolding of the re-
search process required to make some decisions
regarding conflicting needs. For instance, the stu-

dents without a smartphone were excluded from
the role-playing experimentation. We evaluated
the possibility to provide a smartphone to these
students to avoid their exclusion from the activi-
ties of the rest of the classmates. The option was
ruled out preferring realism over participation.

6.2 Ethical Issues

The ethical issues were a main concern since
the drafting of the study design. The study has
been co-designed with the schools involved and
parents’ informed consent was gathered before-
hand. The role-playing methodology was adopted,
among other considerations, as it did not require
gathering sensitive information regarding minors.
Students were assigned a role and they were asked
to play it considering a fictional (even if realistic)
scenario, so no information regarding lived expe-
riences was collected.

Beside these formal considerations, ethics has
been a central concern of the research team
throughout the process and it was addressed by-
design as far as possible. As briefly mentioned in
the Project description (see Section 3), the role-
playing activity was part of a larger set up. The
purpose was to ensure a framing of the experimen-
tation and its possible outcomes in a broader per-
spective, allowing students to play different roles.
Therefore, the introductory lecture in class ad-
dressed the issue of cyberbullying adopting a dis-
tal perspective (cyberbullying as a topic). The an-
notation phase required students to be exposed to
the raw material of cyberbullying in all its unpleas-
antness but filtering their perception by adopting
the perspective of researchers (cyberbullying as
an object of study). The role-playing was per-
formed after each student had already been famil-
iarized with cyberbullying. The role-playing al-
lowed a protected space to experiment cyberbul-
lying, avoiding students to impersonate the bul-
lied (victims were always impersonated by re-
searchers) and experiencing different roles (cyber-
bullying as a lived experience from multiple per-
spectives: bully, support to the bully, support to the
victim). The participatory analysis allowed stu-
dents to retrospectively frame and provide mean-
ing to the lived experience in a protected environ-
ment (cyberbullying as a prop for reflectivity). The
whole process was designed to allow the honest
and realistic outburst during the role-playing but
framing it with accompanying measures aimed at



58

avoiding/minimizing the negative effects of harsh
interactions during the role-playing. The presence
and vigilance of two researchers and a teacher in
each phase of the process ensured a failsafe mech-
anism to prevent the derangement of the experi-
ment and its containment.

6.3 Epistemic Issues

At last, we shall address the issue of validity of
the corpus created with the experimentation. Can
the corpus be considered a substitute for a set of
actual interactions or should it be considered just
as the result of a playful experience with little (if
any) resemblance to reality? The lack of a What-
sApp corpus of non-simulated cyberbullying ac-
tivities does not allow for a comparison to assess
the plausibility of the cyberbullying interactions
gathered. Evaluating the realisticness of such in-
teractions is both the main challenge and the key
to replicate and extend the methodology adopted
to other domains. While a clear-cut methodology
to perform such evaluation was not developed for
the case at hand, we tentatively assessed the plau-
sibility of the corpus indirectly.
Since we could not assess the verisimilitude of the
outcome (i.e. corpus) we collected information to
evaluate the credibility of the process. We focused
on three dimensions:

• observer effect, to estimate the self-
censorship implied in being watched by
adults;

• evolution of the interaction, to estimate the
resemblance to actual online harassing;

• engagement in the interaction, to understand
the constant awareness of being involved in a
simulated activity.

The classes did not seem too worried about be-
ing under observation. Both classes had already
experienced cyberbullying issues in the past years
and teachers were informed by the students about
it. In those occasions, to the surprise of the teach-
ers, students voluntarily showed them the text to
request their help, despite the presence of vul-
gar content. Moreover, during the experimenta-
tion, researchers had to remind several students to
behave themselves and remember the basic rules
of roleplaying. As for the evolution of the in-
teraction, students declared that the experimenta-
tion mirrored a ‘normal’ heated conversation on

WhatsApp, with violent but short-lived outbursts
regarding a single issue. About the engagement in
the interaction, the participatory analysis revealed
that some participants were forgetful of the text
they sent, as if they got carried away by the role
playing. While we are aware that a only a thor-
ough methodology could respond to the question
of the validity of the corpus gathered through the
role playing, these preliminary findings suggest
that the spirit of the game may lead participants
to act with in a way that resembles real life.

7 Conclusions

In this work, we present and release a WhatsApp
dataset in Italian created through a role-play by
three classes of students aged 12-13. The data,
which are freely available, have been anonymized
and annotated according to user role and type of
insult. Given the difficulty to retrieve WhatsApp
data, since their chats are only accessible to the
group members, we believe that datasets of this
kind can give a better insight into the language
used by pre-teens and teens in closed communities
and into the dynamics of cyberbullying. The work
has also highlighted the importance of creating a
living lab with a setting suitable for experimenta-
tion and educational activities. Nevertheless, sev-
eral open issues must be taken into account, from
ethical issues related to exposing pre-teens to of-
fensive language, to the problem of data realistic-
ness when using a role-play environment.

Acknowledgments

Part of this work was funded by the CREEP
project (http://creep-project.eu/), a
Digital Wellbeing Activity supported by EIT
Digital in 2018. This research was also sup-
ported by the HATEMETER project (http://
hatemeter.eu/) within the EU Rights, Equal-
ity and Citizenship Programme 2014-2020. In ad-
dition, the authors want to thank all the students
and teachers who participated in the experimenta-
tion.

References

Dana Aizenkot and Gabriela Kashy-Rosenbaum. 2018.
Cyberbullying in whatsapp classmates groups: Eval-
uation of an intervention program implemented in
israeli elementary and middle schools. New Media
& Society, page 1461444818782702.

http://creep-project.eu/
http://hatemeter.eu/
http://hatemeter.eu/


59

Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, Giovanni Moretti, and
Rachele Sprugnoli. 2012. Cat: the celct annotation
tool. In In Proceedings of LREC 2012, pages 333–
338.

Jennifer Bayzick, April Kontostathis, and Lynne Ed-
wards. 2011. Detecting the presence of cyberbully-
ing using computer software. In 3rd Annual ACM
Web Science Conference (WebSci 11), pages 1–2.

Sofia Berne, Ann Frisén, and Johanna Kling. 2014.
Appearance-related cyberbullying: A qualitative in-
vestigation of characteristics, content, reasons, and
effects. Body image, 11(4):527–533.

Claudio Dell’Era and Paolo Landoni. 2014. Living
lab: A methodology between user-centred design
and participatory design. Creativity and Innovation
Management, 23(2):137–154.

Lee R Dice. 1945. Measures of the amount of ecologic
association between species. Ecology, 26(3):297–
302.

Alejandro Dorantes, Gerardo Sierra, Tlauhlia
Yamı́n Donohue Pérez, Gemma Bel-Enguix,
and Mónica Jasso Rosales. 2018. Sociolinguistic
corpus of whatsapp chats in spanish among college
students. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Workshop on Natural Language Processing for
Social Media, pages 1–6.

Pierdomenico Fiadino, Mirko Schiavone, and Pedro
Casas. 2014. Vivisecting Whatsapp Through Large-
scale Measurements in Mobile Networks. SIG-
COMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 44(4):133–134.

Ann Frisén, Sofia Berne, and Carolina Lunde. 2014.
Cybervictimization and body esteem: Experiences
of swedish children and adolescents. European
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 11(3):331–
343.

Homa Hosseinmardi, Sabrina Arredondo Mattson, Ra-
hat Ibn Rafiq, Richard Han, Qin Lv, and Shivakant
Mishr. 2015. Prediction of cyberbullying incidents
on the Instagram social network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1508.06257.

ISTAT. 2014. Il Bullismo in Italia: Com-
portamenti offensivi tra i giovanissimi.
https://www.istat.it/it/files/
2015/12/Bullismo.pdf. [Online; accessed
26-July-2018].

Kelly Reynolds, April Kontostathis, and Lynne Ed-
wards. 2011. Using machine learning to detect cy-
berbullying. In Machine learning and applications
and workshops (ICMLA), 2011 10th International
Conference on, volume 2, pages 241–244. IEEE.

Save the Children. 2014. I nativi digitali. Conoscono
davvero il loro ambiente? . https://www.
savethechildren.it/blog-notizie/
i-minori-e-internet-italia-infografica.
[Online; accessed 25-July-2018].

Peter K. Smith, Jess Mahdavi, Manuel Carvalho, Sonja
Fisher, Shanette Russell, and Neil Tippett. 2008.
Cyberbullying: its nature and impact in secondary
school pupils. Journal of Child Psychology and Psy-
chiatry, 49(4):376–385.

Junming Sui. 2015. Understanding and fighting bul-
lying with machine learning. Ph.D. thesis, Ph. D.
dissertation, The Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison, WI,
USA.

Robert S. Tokunaga. 2010. Following you home from
school: A critical review and synthesis of research
on cyberbullying victimization. Computers in Hu-
man Behavior, 26(3):277 – 287.

Simone Ueberwasser and Elisabeth Stark. 2017. Whats
up, switzerland? a corpus-based research project in
a multilingual country. Linguistik online, 84(5).

Cynthia Van Hee, Gilles Jacobs, Chris Emmery, Bart
Desmet, Els Lefever, Ben Verhoeven, Guy De Pauw,
Walter Daelemans, and Véronique Hoste. 2018. Au-
tomatic detection of cyberbullying in social media
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05617.

Cynthia Van Hee, Els Lefever, Ben Verhoeven, Julie
Mennes, Bart Desmet, Guy De Pauw, Walter Daele-
mans, and Véronique Hoste. 2015a. Automatic de-
tection and prevention of cyberbullying. In Interna-
tional Conference on Human and Social Analytics
(HUSO 2015), pages 13–18. IARIA.

Cynthia Van Hee, Els Lefever, Ben Verhoeven, Julie
Mennes, Bart Desmet, Guy De Pauw, Walter Daele-
mans, and Véronique Hoste. 2015b. Detection and
fine-grained classification of cyberbullying events.
In International Conference Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing (RANLP), pages 672–
680.

Cynthia Van Hee, Ben Verhoeven, Els Lefever, Guy
De Pauw, Véronique Hoste, and Walter Daelemans.
2015c. Guidelines for the fine-grained analysis
of cyberbullying. Technical report, Language and
Translation Technology Team, Ghent University.

AJP Verheijen and WPMS Spooren. 2017. The impact
of whatsapp on dutch youths school writing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Conference on CMC and Social
Media Corpora for the Humanities (cmccorpora17).
Bolzano: Eurac Research.

Lieke Verheijen and Wessel Stoop. 2016. Collecting
facebook posts and whatsapp chats. In International
Conference on Text, Speech, and Dialogue, pages
249–258. Springer.

https://www.istat.it/it/files/2015/12/Bullismo.pdf
https://www.istat.it/it/files/2015/12/Bullismo.pdf
https://www.savethechildren.it/blog-notizie/i-minori-e-internet-italia-infografica
https://www.savethechildren.it/blog-notizie/i-minori-e-internet-italia-infografica
https://www.savethechildren.it/blog-notizie/i-minori-e-internet-italia-infografica

