









































AMTA_2018_Research_Track_v1.pdf


 

Register-sensitive Translation:
A Case Study of Mandarin and Cantonese 

Tak sumWong
John Lee

Abstract 
This paper describes an approach for translation between Chinese dialects that can produce 
target sentences at different registers.  We focus on Mandarin as the source language, and 
Cantonese as the target.  Mutually unintelligible, these two varieties of Chinese exhibit dif-
ferences at both the lexical and syntactic levels, and the extent of the difference can vary 
considerably depending on the register of Cantonese.  Since only a modest amount of paral-
lel data is available, we adopt a knowledge-based approach and exploit lexical mappings 
and syntactic transformations from linguistics research.  Our system parses a source sen-
tence, uses register-annotated lexical mappings to translate words, and then performs word 
reordering through syntactic transformations.  Evaluation shows that translation models that 
match the required register of the target sentences yield better translation quality. 

1. Introduction 

A large number of Chinese dialects are spoken in different regions of China. Many of these 
dialects are not mutually intelligible (Killingley, 1993; Szeto, 2000); indeed, the differences 
between the major Chinese varieties have been described as being “at least on the order of the 
different languages of the Romance family” (Hannas, 1997: 198), or “roughly parallel to Eng-
lish, Dutch, Swedish, and so on among the Germanic group of the Indo-European language 
family” (Mair, 1991: 3).  This paper describes an approach for translating between Chinese 
dialects, focusing on Mandarin as the source language and Cantonese as the target language. 

Mandarin, also known as P t nghuà, is considered standard Chinese and is the domi-
nant variety in mainland China.  Spoken by more than 55 million people, Cantonese, the 
“most widely known and influential variety of Chinese other than Mandarin” (Matthews and 
Yip, 2011), is the dominant variety of Chinese spoken in Hong Kong.  In Hong Kong, Can-
tonese is used mainly in speech, while Mandarin is dominant in written contexts.  This divi-
sion of labor is somewhat comparable, for example, to the usage patterns of Swiss German 
dialects and standard German in Switzerland. 

Although mutually unintelligible in their spoken form, Cantonese and Mandarin are 
genetically related, having both developed from Middle Chinese.  They share similar writing 
systems, as well as many cognates.  Most Mandarin lexical items can also be used in Canton-
ese.  In a study on the Leipzig-Jakarta list of 100 basic words (Tadmor et al., 2010: 239–241), 
60% of the Mandarin-Cantonese word pairs have identical written forms, most of which have 
highly regular phonological correspondence; a further 20% have the same core morpheme (Li 
et al., 2016).  However, lexical items in Cantonese can vary considerably depending on the 
register, i.e., language variation according to context (Halliday and Hasan, 1989; Quirk et al., 
1985).  Low-register Cantonese, typified by casual, informal speech, is often peppered with 
lexical items that are not used in Mandarin; in higher-register Cantonese, more lexical items 
are shared with the standard Chinese lexicon.  Put otherwise, “an increase in informality cor-

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 89



responds to an increase in the number of Cantonese lexical items occurring in speech which 
makes it less like the lexicon of standard Chinese. … On the other hand, an increase in the 
formality of the social context calls for a corresponding increase in the number of standard 
Chinese lexical items occurring in the utterance (but of course pronounced in Cantonese).” 
(Bauer, 1988: 249).  These variations among different registers make Cantonese a challenging 
target language for a case study for machine translation (MT) among Chinese dialects. 

Most MT systems do not yet take the notion of register into account.  A recent study 
on English-to-German translation found that both manually and automatically translated texts 
differ from the original texts in terms of register (Lapshinova-Koltunski and Vela, 2015).  
Neither does mainstream MT evaluation explicitly consider appropriateness in register, de-
spite recent studies which argue it should (e.g., Vela and Lapshinova-Koltunski, 2015).  In 
this paper, we propose and evaluate a knowledge-based MT system that can translate Manda-
rin input into Cantonese at different registers. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  In the next section, we outline previous 
research on MT for dialects in China and beyond.  In section 3, we describe our translation 
approach.  In section 4, we report both automatic and human evaluation, and analyze the main 
sources of error.  Finally, we conclude in Section 5. 

2. Previous work 

A number of previous studies are related to our research in terms of language, data genre, and 
approach.  Among the earliest attempts on translation between Chinese dialects is the knowl-
edge-based approach taken by Zhang (1998), although no evaluation was reported.  Xu and 
Fung (2012) developed a Cantonese-to-Mandarin MT system that is appended to an automatic 
speech recognition system for Cantonese, allowing it to output transcription in Mandarin Chi-
nese.  The translation capability was implemented with a cross-lingual language model with 
Inversion Transduction Grammar constraints for syntactic reordering. 

Dialect MT is often applied to the task of television subtitle generation.  Volk and 
Harder (2007) implemented an MT system, already in production use, for subtitle machine 
translation from Swedish to Danish.  The system was trained using a statistical MT system, 
using a parallel corpus with 1 million subtitles.  It has been further improved with morpho-
logical annotations (Hardmeier and Volk, 2009). 

The translation approach taken in this paper is most similar to the knowledge-based 
system for translating standard German to Swiss German dialects, reported in Scherrer and 
Rambow (2010) and Scherrer (2011).  Their approach uses a word list, compiled by experts, 
to handle lexical differences; and a set of syntactic transformations, defined by constituent-
structure trees, to change sentence structures from German to Swiss German.  Most rules 
achieved 85% accuracy or above.  The system customizes the target sentence by selectively 
applying these rules according to the intended dialect area in Switzerland.  Our approach also 
customizes the target sentence, but according to the register level rather than dialect area.  

3. Approach 

Statistical machine translation (MT) and neural network approaches have been successfully 
applied on many language pairs (Koehn et al., 2007), including dialects and other closely re-
lated languages (e.g., Volk and Harder, 2007; Delmonte et al., 2009).  One critical require-
ment for these approaches is the availability of a large amount of parallel sentences.  In our 
case, due to the lack of standard written form for Cantonese, and the dominance of Mandarin 
in the written context, parallel Mandarin-Cantonese sentence pairs do not exist in large quan-
tity.  Taking a statistical approach to generate target sentences at different registers would 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 90



compound the data sparseness issue, since both low- and high-register training data would be 
needed. 

Despite the relative paucity of parallel data, Cantonese has been extensively studied by 
linguists (Zeng, 1993; uyáng, 1993; etc.).  It is thus less costly to exploit existing resources 
such as word lists and syntactic transformations, than to collect bilingual sentence pairs to 
overcome data sparseness.  Hence, we adopt a knowledge-based approach for Mandarin-to-
Cantonese translation, similar to that of an MT system for translating standard German into 
Swiss German dialects (Scherrer and Rambow, 2010; Scherrer, 2011).  Our approach consists 
of three steps.  First, it uses the Stanford Chinese parser to perform word segmentation, part-
of-speech (POS) tagging and dependency parsing (Levy and Manning, 2003).  Second, it uses 
forward maximal matching to look up Mandarin-to-Cantonese lexical mappings (Section 3.1), 
conditioned on POS information and register requirement (Section 3.2).  Finally, it applies 
syntactic transformations on the output, with word re-ordering when warranted (Section 3.3). 

3.1. Lexical mappings 

The lexical mapping contains pairs of equivalent Mandarin and Cantonese words, taken from 
a parallel corpus of transcribed Cantonese speech and Mandarin Chinese subtitles (Lee, 2011).  
The speech was transcribed from television programmes broadcast in Hong Kong within the 
last decade by Television Broadcasts Limited.  The Cantonese and Mandarin text were manu-
ally word-segmented and aligned.  The TV programmes span a variety of genres, including 
news programmes, current-affairs shows, drama series and talk shows.  These programs not 
only include vocabulary from widely different domains, but also contain Cantonese spoken in 
different registers.  The most formal language is used in news, and the most colloquial in 
drama series and talk shows.  We harvested all word alignments from the corpus to create 
lexical mappings.  We further supplemented these mappings with a Cantonese-Mandarin dic-
tionary that is freely available from the website of Kaifang Cidian (http://kaifangcidian.com). 

Overall, our mappings cover 35,196 distinct Mandarin words.  Out-of-vocabulary 
Mandarin words are likely to be infrequently used words; these words, fortunately, tend to be 
rendered in the same way in Cantonese, and therefore our system leaves them unchanged in 
the target sentence. 

3.2. Annotation on lexical mappings 

A Mandarin word may have multiple possible Cantonese translations.  This is often because 
the Mandarin word has multiple meanings, but may also be due to different levels of the regis-
ter of the Cantonese target word.  To guide our system in choosing the most appropriate map-
ping, we annotate the lexical mappings with the POS of the Mandarin word and the register 
level in Cantonese.  We follow the tagset of the Penn Chinese Treebank (Xia, 2000) in the 
POS annotation.  We label the register level of the Cantonese word, labeling as ‘low’, ‘high’, 
or ‘both’. 

Table 1 shows several examples.  The Mandarin word ràng  can either mean ‘to give 
way’, or ‘to let’, both as a verb.  In the former case, it has an identical Cantonese counterpart, 
yeuhng  ‘to give way’; in the latter case, however, it must be translated as the Cantonese 
dáng  ‘to let’.  The Mandarin word de  is also highly ambiguous.  As a relativizer, it is 
tagged as “DEC” and its Cantonese equivalent is ge .  As a sentence-final particle, it is 
tagged as “SP”, with its high-register translation as ge , but its low-register translation as ga 

.  Table 2 shows an application of these mappings to translate a Mandarin sentence.   
For the mappings of the 1000 most frequent Mandarin words, we manually annotated 

the POS and register information.  In terms of POS, 32 Mandarin words required POS specifi-

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 91



cation for semantic disambiguation.  In terms of register, 174 Mandarin words have different 
high- and low- register translations into Cantonese. 

Mandarin word Mandarin 
POS

Cantonese 
register

Cantonese word 

ràng  ‘to give way’ VV both yeuhng  ‘to give way’ 
ràng  ‘to let’ VV both dáng  ‘to let’ 
de DEC/DEG both ge  
de  SP high ge  
de  SP low ga  

Table 1. Example lexical mappings from Mandarin to Cantonese, specified by Mandarin POS 
and Cantonese register. 

English ‘I (really) have meal first before doing homework!’ 
Source 
(Mandarin) 

  
 w  shì xi n ch le fàn zài zuò zuòyè de . 
 PN VC AD VV AS NN AD VV NN SP  
 1SG COP first eat PFV meal then do homework SFP   

High-register 
target  
(Cantonese) 

  
 ngóh haih s n sihk jó faahn joi jouh g ngfo ge . 
 PN VC AD VV AS NN AD VV NN SP  
 1SG COP first eat PFV rice then do homework SFP   

Low-register 
target  
(Cantonese) 

  
 ngóh haih sihk jó faahn s n joi jouh g ngfo ga . 
 PN VC VV AS NN AD AD VV NN SP  
 1SG COP eat PFV rice first then do homework SFP   

Table 2.  Application of the lexical mappings on Table 1 and syntactic transformation on Ta-
ble 3 on an example Mandarin source sentence to generate its high-register and low-register 
Cantonese target sentence. 

3.3. Syntactic transformations 

In a comparative analysis of Cantonese and Mandarin, uyáng (1993: 274) noted that al-
though their “grammatical structure is similar in most major respects, the differences are not 
insignificant”. These differences include the use of modal verbs and predicative adjectives; 
the expression of epistemicity and comparative construction; the word order in double object 
constructions; and the system of sentence-final particles, which is significantly more compli-
cated in Cantonese.  Further, in a quantitative comparison between Mandarin and Cantonese, 
Wong et al. (2017) showed that Mandarin adverbs are replaced by Cantonese auxiliaries in a 
number of cases.  

Similar to Scherrer (2011), we express syntactic transformations as tree pairs.  Rather 
than constituent trees, however, we used the Stanford dependencies for Chinese (Chang et al., 
2009), and also annotated their register level.  The system incorporates 10 such transforma-
tions, the most frequent of which are shown in Table 3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 92



Construction Register Mandarin Cantonese 
low  … <verb> 

advmod(<verb>, ) 
<verb> …  
discourse:sp(<verb>, ) 

low / / /  <adjective> 
advmod(<adjective>,  

/ / / ) 

<adjective> / / /  
advmod(<adjective>,  

/ / / ) 

Adverb  
position 

both <verb> /  
advmod(<verb>,  

/ ) 

 <verb>  
advmod(<verb>, ) 
advmod(<verb>, ) 

Ditransitive 
construction 

both <verb> <nouni> <nound> 
obj(<verb>, <nound>), 
obj(<verb>, <nouni>) 

<verb> <nound> <nouni> 
obj(<verb>, <nound>), 
obj(<verb>, <nouni>) 

Comparative 
construction 

low  <noun> <adjective> 
prep(<adjective>, ) 
pobj( , <noun>) 

<adjective>  <noun> 
prep(<adjective>, ) 
pobj( , <noun>) 

Adverbs vs. 
auxiliaries 

low  <verb> 
advmod(<verb>, ) 

<verb>  
aux(<verb>, ) 

Question con-
struction 

both <verb> …  
discourse:sp(<verb>, ) 

<verbi>  <verbj>  
conj(<verbi>, <verbj>) 
adv(<verbj>, ) 

Table 3.  Syntactic transformations from Mandarin to Cantonese. 

4. Evaluation 

For evaluation, we used two test sets that correspond to high- and low-register Cantonese.  
The “High Register” test set consists of speeches in the Hong Kong Legislative Council 12th 
October, 2017, and their official translation into Mandarin.1  The set contains 176 sentences, 
with 29 as the median sentence length.  The “Low Register” test set is extracted from a Can-
tonese movie produced by students as a term project at a university in Hong Kong, with their 
Mandarin subtitles.  This set contains 391 sentences, with 6 as the median sentence length.  
We first report results with automatic evaluation measures (Section 4.1), and then discuss 
results from a human evaluation on both translation quality and register appropriateness (Sec-
tion 4.2). 

4.1. Automatic evaluation 

As shown in Table 4, we evaluated two translation models.  The “High Register” model ex-
cludes lexical mappings and syntactic transformations that are labelled as ‘low’, while the 
“Low Register” model excludes mappings and transformations that are labelled as ‘high’ 
(Section 3.2).  We evaluated translation quality using the translation edit rate (Snover et al., 
2006) (TER).  TER is similar to the Word Error Rate, but also allows “shift” as an edit in ad-
dition to insertion, deletion, and substitution. 

On both datasets, both the “High Register” and “Low Register” models outperform the 
“no change” baseline, i.e., output the Mandarin source sentence as target sentence.  The TER 
of this baseline is lower for the “High Register” dataset, confirming that high-register Canton-
ese more closely resembles Mandarin.  

                                                      
1 Retrieved from http://webcast.legco.gov.hk/public/zh-hk . 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 93



On the low-register set, the “Low Register” model gave better performance than the 
“High register” model; and vice versa on the high-register set.  This suggests that our lexical 
mappings succeed in capturing Cantonese usage at different registers.  Overall performance is 
higher on the high-register set, reflecting the difficulty in predicting sentence-final particles, 
which are missing in the Mandarin source sentences and must be inserted more frequently in 
the low-register set.  Elsewhere, disfluencies, false-starts, slangs, and English code-switching 
(Chan, 1998) also contributed some of the other errors.  

Model Low Register test set High Register test set 
Baseline (No change) 59.13% 49.40% 
High Register 53.34% 45.32% 
Low Register 52.56% 45.50% 

Table 4.  TER for Mandarin-to-Cantonese translation on two register levels. “High-register 
test set” include news, legco; “low-register test set” includes movies, drama 

4.2. Human evaluation 

To perform a more detailed analysis on translation quality and register appropriateness, we 
randomly selected 90 Mandarin sentences for human evaluation; 40% of these were drawn 
from the High Register test set, and 60% from the Low Register test set.  

Translation quality.  We translated these 90 sentences with the translation model with 
matching register (Section 4.1).  We then asked two native speakers of Cantonese to judge the 
quality of the system output, rating each as “Wrong”, “Fair”, or “Good”.  “Wrong” means the 
MT output contains at least one obvious mistake; “Fair” means the output is technically cor-
rect but can be made more fluent. On average, 62% of the sentences were rated as “Good”, 
12% rated as “Fair”, and 26% as “Wrong’.  In some cases, inappropriate Cantonese words are 
chosen because of semantic ambiguity for the Mandarin word.  In others, dependency parsing 
errors affected the detection of some of the syntactic transformations.  

Register appropriateness.  In a second evaluation, we generated low- and high-register 
Cantonese output from the same 90 pair of Mandarin sentences, and asked two native speak-
ers of Cantonese to choose which one has lower register.  On average, 86% of the human 
judgment corresponded with the system’s. 

5. Conclusion 

We have presented an approach for translation between Chinese dialects, and implemented it 
for Mandarin-to-Cantonese translation.  The MT system uses lexical mapping from Mandarin 
to Cantonese, coupled with syntactic transformations defined with dependency trees.  A sig-
nificant novelty is that the lexical mappings are register-sensitive.  Automatic evaluation 
shows that translation models that match the required register of the target sentences yield 
better translation quality, and significantly outperformed a baseline.  Further, in human 
evaluations, 62% of the sentences were rated as “good”, and 86% of the system output 
matches human judgment on its level of register.  In future work, we plan to apply this ap-
proach to other Chinese dialects, and to allow more fine-grained specification of Cantonese 
register. 

Acknowledgement 

This work is partially supported by Knowledge Transfer Initiatives in Business, Law and Lib-
eral Arts and Social Sciences Disciplines (project #6354028), and by a Strategic Research 
Grant (project #7004494) at City University of Hong Kong. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 94



References 
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2015). Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align 

and Translate. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations 
(ICLR). 

Bauer, R. S. (1988). Written Cantonese of Hong Kong. Cahiers de linguistique – Asie orientale, 
17(2):245 293. 

Chan, B. H.-S. (1998). How does Cantonese-English code-mixing work? In Language in Hong Kong at 
Century’s End, M. C. Pennington (ed.), pages 191 216, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 

Chang, P.-C., Tseng, H., Jurafsky, D., and Manning, C. D. (2009). Discriminative Reordering with Chi-
nese Grammatical Relations Features. In Proceedings of SSST. 

Delmonte, R., Bristot, A., Tonelli, S., and Pianta, E. (2009).  English/Veneto resource poor machine 
translation with STILVEN. In Proceedings of ISMTCL, Bulag 33:82 29, Besancon, France. 

Halliday, M. and Hasan, R. (1989). Language, Context and Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-
semiotic Perspective. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Hannas, W. C. (1997) Asia’s orthographic dilemma. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Hardmeier, C. and Volk, M. (2009). Using Linguistic Annotations in Statistical Machine Translation of 
Film Subtitles. In Proceedings of NODALIDA. 

Huang, G., Gorin, A., Gauvain, J.-L., and Lamel, L. (2016).  Machine Translation Based Data Augmen-
tation for Cantonese Keyword Spotting. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal processing (ICASSP). 

Killingley, S. Y. (1993). Cantonese. Lincom Europa: Newcastle. 

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen, W., 
Moran, C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., and Herbst, E. (2007). Moses: Open 
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of ACL. 

Lapshinova-Koltunski, E. and Vela, M. (2015). Measuring ‘Registerness’ in Human and Machine Trans-
lation: A Text Classification Approach. In Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on Discourse in Machine 
Translation. 

Lee, J. (2011). Toward a Parallel Corpus of Spoken Cantonese and Written Chinese. In Proceedings of 
IJCNLP. 

Lee, S. and Chan, K. K. W. (2017). From Cantonese L2 data to theoretical analysis: An Analysis of 
Num-Cl-N construction in Cantonese. In Proceedings of 22nd International Conference on Yue 
Dialects. 

Levy, R. and Manning, C. D. (2003). Is it harder to parse Chinese, or the Chinese Treebank?. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL.  

Li, D. C. S., Wong, C. S. P., Leung, W. M. and Wong, S. T. S. (2016). Facilitation of transference: The 
case of monosyllabic salience in Hong Kong Cantonese. Linguistics, 54(1):1 58. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 95



Mair, V. H. (1991). What is a Chinese “dialect/topolect”? Reflections on some key Sino-English linguis-
tic terms. Sino-Platonic Papers, 29: 1–31. 

Matthews, S. and Yip, V. (2011). Cantonese: A comprehensive grammar. New York: Routledge. 

uyáng, J. (1993). P t nghuà Guãngzh uhuà de b jiào y  xuéxí (The comparison and learning of Man-
darin and Cantonese). Peking: China Social Science Press. 

Prokopidis, P., Karra, V., Papagianopoulou, A., and Piperidis, S. (2008). Condensing Sentences for Sub-
title Generation. In Proceedings of Linguistic Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC). 

Ramsey, S. R. (1987). The Languages of China. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., and Svartvik, J. (1985).  A Comprehensive Grammar of the Eng-
lish Language. Longman, London, UK. 

Scherrer, Y. (2011). Syntactic transformations for Swiss German dialects. In Proceedings of EMNLP. 

Scherrer, Y. and Rambow, O. (2010). Natural Language Processing for the Swiss German Dialect Area. 
In Proceedings of KONVENS. 

Snover, M., Dorr, B., Schwartz, R., Micciulla, L., and Makhoul, J. (2006). A Study of Translation Edit 
Rate with Targeted Human Annotation. In Proceedings of Association for Machine Translation in 
the Americas (AMTA). 

Szeto, C. (2000). Testing Intelligibility among Sinitic Dialects. In Proceedings of the Conference of the 
Australian Linguistic Society. 

Tadmor, U., Haspelmath, M. and Taylor, B. (2010). Borrowability and the notion of basic vocabulary. 
Diachronica, 27(2):226–246. 

Vela, M. and Lapshinova-Koltunski, E. (2015).  Register-based Machine Translation with Text Classifi-
cation Techniques. In Proceedings of MT Summit XV: MT Researchers’ Track. 

Volk, M. and Harder, S. (2007). Evaluating MT with translations or translators. What is the difference? 
In Proceedings of MT Summit XI.  

Wong, T.-S., Gerdes, K., Lee, J. and Leung, H. (2017). Quantitative Comparative Syntax on the Canton-
ese-Mandarin Parallel Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of International Conference on De-
pendency Linguistics. 

Xia, F. (2000). The Part-Of-Speech Tagging Guidelines for the Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0). IRCS 
Technical Reports Series. 38. 

Xu, P. and Fung, P. (2012). Cross-Lingual Language Modeling with Syntactic Reordering for Low-
Resource Speech Recognition. In Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL. 

Zeng, Z. (1986). Colloquial Cantonese and Putonghua Equivalents. Hong Kong: Joint Publisher. 

Zhang, X. (1998). Dialect MT: A Case Study between Cantonese and Mandarin. In Proceedings of the 
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics. 

Proceedings of AMTA 2018, vol. 1: MT Research Track Boston, March 17 - 21, 2018   |  Page 96




