



















































Does Ability Affect Alignment in Second Language Tutorial Dialogue?


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2018 Conference, pages 41–50,
Melbourne, Australia, 12-14 July 2018. c©2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

41

Does Ability Affect Alignment in Second Language Tutorial Dialogue?

Arabella Sinclair Adam Lopez
Christopher G. Lucas
University of Edinburgh

s0934062@sms.ed.ac.uk
{alopez,clucas2}@inf.ed.ac.uk

Dragan Gasevic
Monash University

dragan.gasevic@monash.edu

Abstract

The role of alignment between interlocu-
tors in second language learning is dif-
ferent to that in fluent conversational di-
alogue. Learners gain linguistic skill
through increased alignment, yet the ex-
tent to which they can align will be con-
strained by their ability. Tutors may use
alignment to teach and encourage the stu-
dent, yet still must push the student and
correct their errors, decreasing alignment.
To understand how learner ability interacts
with alignment, we measure the influence
of ability on lexical priming, an indicator
of alignment. We find that lexical prim-
ing in learner-tutor dialogues differs from
that in conversational and task-based di-
alogues, and we find evidence that align-
ment increases with ability and with word
complexity.

1 Introduction

The Interactive Alignment Model (Pickering and
Garrod, 2004) suggests that successful dialogue
arises from an alignment of representations (in-
cluding phonological, lexical, syntactic and se-
mantic), and therefore of speakers’ situation mod-
els. This model assumes that these aspects of the
speakers’ language will align automatically as the
dialogue progresses and will greatly simplify both
production and comprehension in dialogue.

In a Second Language (L2) learning setting, a
learner will have a more limited scope for align-
ment due to their situational understanding, and
their proficiency will dictate to what extent they
are capable of aligning lexically, syntactically
and semantically (Pickering and Garrod, 2006).
Even once a situational alignment is reached (i.e.
the learner understands the context of their in-

terlocutor’s interaction with them) there remains
the question of the learners receptive vs. pro-
ductive vocabulary knowledge (words they under-
stand when others use them vs. words they can use
themselves), both of which are active in L2 dia-
logues (Takač, 2008) and constrain their scope for
alignment. Student alignment therefore will also
be influenced by the tutor’s strategy; or by how
much of the student’s receptive language the tutor
produces which facilitates the student productive
ability in this context.

We expect that alignment within L2 learner di-
alogue will differ from alignment in fluent dia-
logues due to the different constraints mentioned
above (Costa et al., 2008). We also expect learn-
ers to align to their interlocutor to a compara-
tively greater degree than found in native dialogue.
This is both because of the difficulty of the task
leading to a greater need for alignment (Picker-
ing and Garrod, 2006), and because we know that
an L2 learner’s lexical complexity increases in a
dialogue setting due to the shared context words
within that dialogue, compared to the level at
which they are capable of expressing themselves
in monologue (Robinson, 2011).

In order to find out whether ability affects align-
ment in L2 dialogue, we investigate lexical prim-
ing effects between L2 learner and tutor. Priming
is a mechanism which brings about alignment and
entrainment, and when interlocutors use the same
words, we say they are lexically entrained (Bren-
nan and Clark, 1996). We compare the effects
against two different corpora: task-based (Ander-
son et al., 1991) and conversational (Godfrey et al.,
1992), and between different levels of L2 student
competency. We expect that alignment of tutor to
student and vice versa will be different, and that
the degree of alignment at a higher level of L2
learner competence will be more similar to that of
conversational dialogue than that at a lower level



42

(Sinclair et al., 2017). We are interested in the dif-
ference between tutor-to-student (TS) and student-
to-tutor (ST) alignment, as there are various fac-
tors which could contribute to both increased and
decreased alignment to that existing between two
fluent interlocutors (Costa et al., 2008).

1.1 Motivation
By examining alignment differences, we aim to
better understand the relationship between tutor
adaptation and L2 learner production. This under-
standing can inform analysis of “good” tutoring
moves, leading to the creation of either an L2 tu-
toring language model or more informed L2 dia-
logue agent design, which can exploit this knowl-
edge of effective tutor alignment strategy to con-
tribute to improved automated L2 tutoring. The
potential benefits of automated tutoring for L2 di-
alogue1 have already been seen through the suc-
cess of apps such as Duolingo2 bots which allow
the user to engage in instant-messaging style chats
with an agent to learn another language. Adap-
tion of agent to learner however is an ongoing
research task, although outside L2 tutoring, is a
well-explored area (Graesser et al., 2005). Align-
ment, or “more lexical similarity between student
and tutor” has been shown to be more predic-
tive of increased student motivation (Ward et al.,
2011), and agent alignment to students’ goals can
improve student learning (Ai et al., 2010). We
build on previous research by investigating lexi-
cal priming effects for each interlocutor in dia-
logue both within- and between-speaker, and at
different ability levels in L2 dialogue. This adds
the dimension of lexical priming and individual
speaker interactions to the work of Reitter and
Moore (2006) and the inspection of student to tu-
tor, and within-speaker priming to that of Ward
and Litman (2007b). By also making comparisons
across L2 ability levels, we can now analyse prim-
ing effects in terms of L2 acquisition. Similar
work in this area outside the scope of this paper
includes work analysing alignment of expressions
in a task-based dialogue setting (Duplessis et al.,
2017) and the analysis of alignment-capable dia-
logue generation (Buschmeier et al., 2009).

In addition to informing dialogue tutoring agent
design, this work has potential to augment exist-
ing measures of linguistic sophistication predic-

1Also know as Dialogue-based Computer Assisted Lan-
guage Learning (CALL)

2bots.duolingo.com

tion (Vajjala and Meurers, 2016) to better deal
with individual speakers within a dialogue, us-
ing alignment as a predictor of learner ability as
has been suggested by Ward and Litman (2007a).
Dialogue is inherently sparse, particularly when
considering the lexical contribution of a single
speaker. Accordingly, alignment could be a use-
ful predictor of student receptive and productive
knowledge when in combination with lexical com-
plexity of the shared vocabulary.

1.2 Research Questions
We present evidence which strengthens our hy-
pothesis that tutors take advantage of the natural
alignment found in language, in order to better in-
troduce, or ground3 vocabulary to the student; in
other words, scaffolding4 vocabulary from recep-
tive to productive practice in these dialogues.

Our work investigates the following research
questions:

RQ1 How does L2 dialogue differ from task-
based and conversational in terms of align-
ment?
We find ST alignment has the strongest ef-
fect within L2 dialogue.

RQ2 Does alignment correlate with ability in L2
dialogue?
We find priming effects are greater at
higher levels of student ability.

RQ3 Does linguistic sophistication of the lan-
guage used influence alignment of speakers
at different ability levels in L2 dialogue?
We find the more complex the word, the
greater the likelihood of alignment within
L2 dialogue.

2 Corpora

We compare the alignment present within three di-
alogue corpora: L2-tutoring, conversational and
task-based. A summary of the corpora is pre-
sented in Table 1. The Barcelona English Lan-
guage Corpus (BELC) (Muñoz, 2006) was gath-
ered at four different periods over the course of

3Grounding in dialogue consists of the participants estab-
lishing a common basis, or ground, on which their communi-
cation takes place. This can be viewed as a strategy for man-
aging uncertainty and therefore error handling in dialogue
(Skantze, 2007).

4Scaffolding (Wood et al., 1976) provides a metaphor to
the kind of temporary support at successive levels of develop-
ment needed to construct knowledge, or to support learning.



43

Corpus Type English Dialogues
BELC L2 tutoring non-native

(levels 1-4)
118

Switchboard conversational fluent 1155
Map Task task-based fluent 128

Table 1: Corpora types and details. Map Task is
referred to in later diagrams as MT, Switchboard
as SB. The levels in BELC indicate increasing
learner ability, with 1 indicating the lowest ability
level and 4 the highest.

three years, with the students involved receiving
approximately one school year of weekly English
tuition between sessions. Table 2 shows a short
20-utterance long extract from a dialogue. The
Switchboard Corpus is conversational dialogue
over telephone between two fluent English speak-
ers (A and B), and MapTask is a task-based dia-
logue where the instruction-Giver (G) directs the
instruction-Follower (F) from a shared start point
to an end point marked on G’s map but which is
unknown to F, who also has access to a similar
map, although some features may only be present
on one of the interlocutors’ copies.

3 Methods

To address RQ1 and RQ2, section 3.1 discusses
how we measure lexical priming so that we can
compare priming effects in different situations.
Section 3.2 discusses the measure we use for word
complexity in order to address RQ3, so that we can
use this as an additional parameter in our model.

3.1 Lexical Convergence

Lexical priming predicts that a given word (target)
occurs more often closely after a potential prime
of the same word than further away. In order to
measure lexical convergence, we count each word
used by the speaker being considered as a potential
prime. Following Ward and Litman (2007b), who
measure the lexical convergence of student to tutor
in physics tutorial dialogues, we only count words
as primes if in WordNet (Miller, 1995), the word
has a non-empty synset5 e.g. if there was a choice
of potential words and the speaker used the same
word as their interlocutor, this can be counted as a
prime, since it was not simply used because it was
the only choice.

Since the learning content of L2 dialogues is the

5This also has the effect of removing function words from
consideration.

Tutor Student
do you have a bedroom for just you ?

yes .
ok .
how many beds are there in your room ?

two .
two beds .

two beds .
ok one for you...

... and his friend algúns amigos .
and a friend that’s good .
hmm what is the room like ?

hmm...
tell me about your room .

my room ?
uhhuh .
describe it .

my room is...
there’s two beds...

...very big...
uhhuh .

Table 2: Example of lexical alignment in BELC
dialogue. room, beds and friend are examples of
lexical alignment from student to tutor and from
tutor to student respectively. Underlined text in-
dicates within-speaker (TT or SS) alignment, and
bold text indicates between-speaker (TS or ST)
alignment (algúns amigos means some friends).

language itself, we group the words into word fam-
ilies, which is a common method used to measure
L2 student vocabulary (Graves et al., 2012). We
do this by lemmatizing6 the words in a text, and
counting lemmas used by the speaker as prime.
Thus, we count the forms want, wants, wanted &
wanting as a single word.

We also distinguish between the speakers when
looking at between-speaker, or comprehension-
production (CP) priming where the speaker first
comprehends the prime (uttered by their inter-
locutor) and then produces the target, and within-
speaker or production-production (PP) priming,
where both the prime and the target are produced
by the same speaker. Since we are also interested
in tutor T behaviour vs. student S in these inter-
actions we map PP priming to TT and SS respec-
tively and CP to TS and ST.

6Using NLTK (Loper and Bird, 2002)



44

Lexical Repetition
In our data, each repetition of an occurrence of a
word W at distance n is counted as priming7 where
W has a non-empty synset, and is of the same
word-family as its prime (section 3.1). Each case
where W occurs but is not primed n units before-
hand in the dialogue, is counted as non-priming.
Our goal is to model p̂(prime|target, n), that is
the sampling probability that a prime is present
in the n-th word before target occurs. Without
lexical priming’s effect on the dialogue, we would
assume that

p̂(prime|target, n) = p̂(prime|target).

The distance n between stimulus and target is
counted in words, as this has the advantage over
utterances for capturing within-utterance priming
and is less sensitive to differences in average ut-
terance length between corpora when comparing
priming effects. Words were chosen as the closest
approximate available to time in seconds as mea-
sured in Reitter and Moore (2006). We look for
repetitions within windows of 85 words8.

Generalized Linear Mixed Effects Regression
For the purposes of this study, following Reit-
ter and Moore (2006), we use a Generalized Lin-
ear Mixed Effects Regression Model (GLMM). In
all cases, a word instance t is counted as a rep-
etition at distance d if at d there is a token in
the same word-family as t. To measure speaker-
speaker priming effects, we record both the prime
and target producers at d. GLMMs with a binary
response variable such as ours can be considered a
form of logistic regression.We model the number
of occurrences prime = target|d ≤ n (where n
is window size) of priming being detected9. We
model this as binomial, where the success proba-

7The use of priming is not intended to imply that priming
is the only explanation for lexical repetition

8We chose this window size based on Reitter and Moore
(2006) using an utterance window of 25 and a time window
of 15 seconds. We calculated the average number of words to
occur in the utterance window chosen, and the average num-
ber of words which are spoken in the 15 second window and
chose the average of the two as our window.

9For example, if we were only interested in priming
within a window size of 3 words, In table 2, for the student’s
first use of the word beds we would record 3 data points:
(window:1, target:bed, role:SS, prime=target:0), (window:2,
target:bed, role:ST, prime=target:1), (window:3, target:bed,
role:ST, prime=target:0) indicating there is a prime for our
target beds at distance 2. The number of trials = target words
× window size.

bility depends on the following explanatory vari-
ables: Categorical: corpus choice, priming type
from speaker role, ability level; and Ordinal: word
frequency, as explained in Section 3.2. The model
will produce coefficients βi, one for each explana-
tory variable i. βi expresses the contribution of
i to the probability of the outcome event, in our
case, successful priming, referred to as priming ef-
fect size in the following sections. For example,
the βi estimates allow us to predict the decline of
repetition probability with increasing distance be-
tween prime and target, and the other explanatory
variables we are interested in; we refer to this as
the probability estimates in in subsequent sections.
The model outputs a statistical significance score
for each coefficient, these are reported under each
figure where relevant.

3.2 Complexity Convergence

To capture linguistic complexity within the prim-
ing words, we use Word Occurrence Frequency
(WOF) as a predictor of the relative difficulty of
the words used. We use log(WOF ) to normalise
the deta before using it as a factor in our model.
WOF has been found to predict L2 vocabulary
acquisition rates - the higher frequency of a word,
the more exposure a student has had to it, the
more likely they are to learn it faster (Vermeer,
2001). Word Frequency has also been shown to
act as a reasonable indication of word ‘difficulty’
(Chen and Meurers, 2017). We therefore expect a
negative correlation between learner level and fre-
quency of vocabulary used, given a certain prime
window. We gathered frequency counts from the
Google News Corpus introduced by Mikolov et al.
(2013), for its size and diverse language.

4 Results

4.1 Lexical Convergence Cross Corpora

To find how L2 dialogue differs from task-based
and conversational in terms of alignment (RQ1),
we investigate the priming effects present across
corpora of different speaker roles. Figure 1 shows
that the BELC corpus has a similar asymmetry in
speaker alignment to MT, and that the alignment
of speakers in SB is more symmetrical, mirroring
the speakers’ equal role in the dialogue. This can
be seen in the different priming effects between
speakers in BELC and MT, and the same effects
between speakers in SB. Figure 2 shows the dif-
ferent decay of repetition probability with window



45

Figure 1: Priming effects of distance across Corpora for different speaker roles. S:Student, T:Tutor,
F:Follower, G:Giver, A& B:Speaker A& B. AB indicates alignment of A to B. CP: comprehension-
production, or between-speaker priming, PP: production-production, or within-speaker priming. The
results are all significant with (p < 0.0001) except BB within Switchboard, with (p < 0.01).

Figure 2: Decaying probability estimates for window lengths for different speaker roles across corpora.
Formula : lemma occ∼window + role ∗ corpus

size for the different roles for all three corpora.
This shows the same symmetry and asymmetry
of between- and within-speaker repetition decay
probability as Figure 1.

4.2 Lexical Convergence by Level
We investigate priming effects within BELC be-
tween levels to find whether alignment correlates
with ability in L2 dialogue (RQ2). Figure 3 shows
the strong student-tutor priming occurring at each
ability level, and the general increase in priming
effect size as ability level increases for all prim-
ing types. When comparing both Figure 1 and 3,
we see that as ability level increases, BELC prim-
ing effect sizes tend towards those seen in Switch-
Board, particularly those of ST and TS, the ef-
fect size of which also becomes more symmetrical
with ability level, although the imbalance between
SS and TT priming remains similar to that of Map-
Task.

We also examine the model predictions for dif-
ferent window sizes for different conditions. Fig-
ures 4 and 5 describe the relationship between role

and ability level on the probability of seeing a
prime word at different window sizes. Figure 4
shows a sharper decay in the probability of tutor to
student (TS) priming than in student to tutor (ST)
priming. Figure 5 shows that tutor self-priming
is more probable at lower ability levels, and that
ST alignment at lower levels is less likely than at
higher levels of ability.

4.3 Linguistic Complexity Convergence

Exploring the question of whether linguistic so-
phistication of the language used influences align-
ment of speakers at different ability levels in L2
dialogue (RQ3); we find log(WOF ) to have a sig-
nificant negative correlation (p < 0.0001) with
priming effects. Thus the more complex the word
(as measured by a lower WOF ), the greater the
likelihood of alignment. Figure 6 shows the prim-
ing effects of WOF . It shows that priming effects
of WOF are stronger for ST and TT, than for the
other roles, but this difference is less pronounced
at higher levels than it is for lower levels of abil-
ity. The ST shows the most marked difference in



46

Figure 3: Priming effect sizes under different
speaker role situations, across levels in BELC. Ef-
fects estimated from separately fitted nested re-
gression models for each subset of BELC split by
level(1-4). The results are all significant (p <
0.0001).

effect between low and high levels, lowest at the
highest ability. Per role, priming effect is gener-
ally smaller at higher ability levels than lower.

Figures 7 and 8 show the effects of WOF on
level and role respectively. In Figure 7, lower
log(WOF ) values are indicative of more complex
words. In such cases (see Figure 7, column 1),
the repetition probability is higher for high ability
students, compared to low ability students. This
stands in contrast to higher log(WOF ) values, in-
dicative of less complex words, where the repeti-
tion probability is now lower for high ability stu-
dents compared to low ability students (see Fig-
ure 7, column 6). Figure 8 shows differences in
self-priming and within speaker priming, in that
for both TS and ST, the probability of repetition is
greater for higher frequency words, while for TT
and SS, the probability of repetition is higher for
lower frequency words.

5 Discussion

The three spoken dialogue corpora we investigated
demonstrate a significant effect of distance be-
tween prime and target in lexical repetition, pro-
viding evidence of a lexical priming effect on word
family use. We also found evidence of priming
for each interlocutor in both between-speaker and
within-speaker roles.

ST alignment has the strongest effect within
L2 dialogue. To find how L2 dialogue differs

from our other two corpora in terms of role (RQ1),
we measured the priming effects for Tutors (TT,
TS) and Students (SS, ST) and find it asymmet-
ric in the same manner as for the task-based di-
alogue MT. This is in contrast to the symmetric
effects in the conversational dialogue of SB (Fig-
ure 1). ST alignment also has the greatest prim-
ing effect compared to the other roles in BELC,
which supports our hypothesis that student-to-
tutor alignment is an artefact of both tutor scaf-
folding, and students’ productive range benefiting
from the shared dialogue context.

When considering within-speaker priming, it is
also interesting to note that TT priming has a more
marked effect than SS priming, similar to the rela-
tionship between GG and FF in Map Task. We in-
terpret this similarly to Reitter and Moore’s (2006)
comparison of Map Task and Switchboard, in that
since the task-based or tutoring nature of the di-
alogue is harder, the leading speakers use more
consistent language in order to reduce the cogni-
tive load of the task (tutoring/instruction-giving).

Priming effects are greater at higher levels
of student ability. In order to investigate our
main hypothesis, that ability does affect alignment
(RQ2), we measured priming effects in different
ability levels of L2 tutorial dialogue (Figure 3),
and found that priming effects are greater at higher
levels of student ability, which provides evidence
that as ability increases, dialogues have more in
common with conversational dialogue. We also
measured how role influences these priming ef-
fects (Figures 4 and 5) and hypothesise that the
faster decay of TS repetition probability (Figure 5)
is an indication that the tutor is using the immedi-
ate encouraging backchanneling seen in the repe-
tition in Table 2. We note (Figure 4) that tutor-to-
tutor repetition is more probable at lower levels,
which supports the above hypothesis. Addition-
ally, student-to-tutor repetition probability is more
likely at higher levels which is a good indication
that student ability is higher, since we argue that
they are now able to align to their interlocutor.

The more complex the word, the greater the
likelihood of alignment within L2 dialogue.
Lastly, to find whether linguistic sophistication of
language aligned to is affected by ability (RQ3),
we investigated the influence of word frequency
on alignment within BELC. Figure 7 shows that
at lower log(WOF ) values (which we use to in-



47

Figure 4: Decaying repetition probability estimates depending on the increasing distance between prime
and target, contrasting different speaker roles at different levels.
Formula : lemma occ∼window + role ∗ categorical level

Figure 5: Decaying repetition probability estimates depending on the increasing distance between prime
and target, contrasting different speaker roles at different levels.
Formula : lemma occ∼window ∗ role+ categorical level

Figure 6: Word Occurrence Frequency Priming ef-
fects under different selections of role and level
situations in BELC. Each model was separately
fitted on the relevant subset of data to show the
priming effect sizes for Word Occurrence Fre-
quency. (L1:SS, L2:TS and L3:ST are insignifi-
cant, all other results are significant with at least
p < 0.001 and most with p < 0.0001.

dicate more complex words), repetition probabil-
ity is higher in the higher ability levels compared
to the lower levels, and at higher log(WOF ), the
repetition probability of the higher ability levels

is now lower than at the lower levels. This has
interesting implications for using these results as
features for student alignment ability prediction.
This fits with the Interactive Alignment Model
(Pickering and Garrod, 2004), which suggest that
alignment will happen more with greater cogni-
tive load, and (Reitter and Moore, 2006), who
find stronger priming for less frequent syntactic
rules which supports the cognitive-load explana-
tion. The stronger priming effect identified for less
frequent vocabulary also supports this hypothesis.
Figure 6 shows the priming effects are slightly
smaller at higher ability levels. Log(WOF ) has a
negative correlation, meaning there is more likely
to be alignment the lower the WOF . The results
at each level have a similar priming effect distri-
bution over role, with the most marked difference
in priming effect being for ST (Student to Tutor
alignment), which shows a decrease in priming ef-
fect for harder words at higher ability levels. This
provides an interesting first indication that there is
a measurable effect of student leveraging contex-
tual vocabulary to augment their productive reach
in L2 dialogue.



48

Figure 7: Decaying repetition probabilities of different log(WOF ) values on probability of word occur-
rence by level. Lower log(WOF ) values correspond to lower frequency, an indication of more complex
words, and higher frequency as less complex words.
Formula : lemma occ∼window + log(WOF ) ∗ categorical level

Figure 8: Decaying repetition probabilities of different log(WOF ) values on probability of word occur-
rence by role. Higher log(WOF ) indicates easier words.
Formula : lemma occ∼window + log(WOF ) ∗ role

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We see these results as an indication that measur-
ing lexical alignment combined with lexical so-
phistication of vocabulary has potential as a pre-
dictor of student competency. We also hypothe-
sise that measurements of ‘good tutoring’ actions
could consist of how and to what extent tutors
adapt interactively to individual students’ needs in
terms of their conversational ability. Tutor self-
priming seems to be an interesting possible feature
for measuring this adaption. We want to further in-
vestigate different measures of alignment and both
lexical and syntactic complexity to inform sys-
tems that aim to automate L2 tutoring. We plan
to consider which speaker introduces the word be-
ing aligned to, in order to better understand the
relationship between productive and receptive vo-
cabulary of the student in dialogue settings. It is
also important to separate the effects of priming
per se from other factors that can influence lexi-
cal convergence, such as differences in vocabulary
and topic specificity. As a first step toward that
goal, we plan to compare lexical convergence in
the original corpus with convergence in matched

baselines of randomly ordered utterances (Dup-
lessis et al., 2017), which will account for vocabu-
lary effects and corpus-specific factors. To explore
more measures of word complexity in addition to
simple WOF, we will further investigate measures
specific to L2 dialogue, such as the English Vo-
cabulary Profile (EVP) (Capel, 2012), with word
lists per CEFR10 level, or measures such as counts
of word sense per word, or whether a word is con-
crete or abstract11, exploiting existing readability
features (Vajjala and Meurers, 2014).

Acknowledgements

Thanks to Amy Isard, Maria Gorinova, Maria
Wolters, Federico Fancellu, Sorcha Gilroy, Clara
Vania and Marco Damonte as well as the three
anonymous reviewers for their useful comments
in relation to this paper. A. Sinclair especially ac-
knowledges the help and support of Jon Oberlan-
der during the early development of this idea.

10The Common European Framework of Reference
(CEFR) defines the 6 levels of english proficiency in ascend-
ing order as: A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, C2.

11Using WordNet or other word/lemma concreteness rat-
ing database.



49

References
Hua Ai, Rohit Kumar, Dong Nguyen, Amrut Nagasun-

der, and Carolyn P Rosé. 2010. Exploring the ef-
fectiveness of social capabilities and goal alignment
in computer supported collaborative learning. In In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Sys-
tems, pages 134–143. Springer.

Anne H Anderson, Miles Bader, Ellen Gurman Bard,
Elizabeth Boyle, Gwyneth Doherty, Simon Garrod,
Stephen Isard, Jacqueline Kowtko, Jan McAllister,
Jim Miller, et al. 1991. The hcrc map task corpus.
Language and speech, 34(4):351–366.

Susan E Brennan and Herbert H Clark. 1996. Concep-
tual pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 22(6):1482.

Hendrik Buschmeier, Kirsten Bergmann, and Stefan
Kopp. 2009. An alignment-capable microplanner
for natural language generation. In Proceedings of
the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 82–89. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Annette Capel. 2012. Completing the english vocabu-
lary profile: C1 and c2 vocabulary. English Profile
Journal, 3:e1.

Xiaobin Chen and Detmar Meurers. 2017. Word fre-
quency and readability: Predicting the text-level
readability with a lexical-level attribute. Journal of
Research in Reading, pages n/a–n/a. JRIR-2017-01-
0006.R1.

Albert Costa, Martin J Pickering, and Antonella So-
race. 2008. Alignment in second language dialogue.
Language and cognitive processes, 23(4):528–556.

Guillaume Dubuisson Duplessis, Chloé Clavel, and
Frédéric Landragin. 2017. Automatic measures to
characterise verbal alignment in human-agent inter-
action. In 18th Annual Meeting of the Special Inter-
est Group on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL),
pages 71–81.

John J Godfrey, Edward C Holliman, and Jane Mc-
Daniel. 1992. Switchboard: Telephone speech cor-
pus for research and development. In Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, 1992. ICASSP-92.,
1992 IEEE International Conference on, volume 1,
pages 517–520. IEEE.

Arthur C Graesser, Patrick Chipman, Brian C Haynes,
and Andrew Olney. 2005. Autotutor: An intelli-
gent tutoring system with mixed-initiative dialogue.
IEEE Transactions on Education, 48(4):612–618.

Michael F. Graves, Diane August, and Jeannette
Mancilla-Martinez. 2012. Teaching Vocabu-
lary to English Language Learners. TESOL
Press/Teachers College Press.

Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002. Nltk: The natu-
ral language toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL-02
Workshop on Effective tools and methodologies for
teaching natural language processing and computa-
tional linguistics-Volume 1, pages 63–70. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jef-
frey Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781.

George A Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–
41.

Carmen Muñoz. 2006. Age and the rate of foreign lan-
guage learning, volume 19. Multilingual Matters.

Martin J Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. Toward
a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral
and brain sciences, 27(2):169–190.

Martin J Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2006. Align-
ment as the basis for successful communication. Re-
search on Language and Computation, 4(2-3):203–
228.

David Reitter and Johanna D Moore. 2006. Priming of
syntactic rules in task-oriented dialogue and spon-
taneous conversation. In Proceedings of the An-
nual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, vol-
ume 28.

P. Robinson. 2011. Second Language Task Complex-
ity: Researching the Cognition Hypothesis of Lan-
guage Learning and Performance. Task-based lan-
guage teaching : issues, research and practice. John
Benjamins Publishing Company.

Arabella Sinclair, Jon Oberlander, and Dragan Gasevic.
2017. Finding the zone of proximal development:
Student-tutor second language dialogue interactions.
SEMDIAL 2017 SaarDial, page 134.

Gabriel Skantze. 2007. Error Handling in Spoken Di-
alogue Systems-Managing Uncertainty, Grounding
and Miscommunication. Gabriel Skantze.

Višnja Pavičić Takač. 2008. Vocabulary learning
strategies and foreign language acquisition. Mul-
tilingual Matters.

Sowmya Vajjala and Detmar Meurers. 2014. Exploring
measures of readability for spoken language: Ana-
lyzing linguistic features of subtitles to identify age-
specific tv programs.

Sowmya Vajjala and Detmar Meurers. 2016.
Readability-based sentence ranking for eval-
uating text simplification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.06009.

Anne Vermeer. 2001. Breadth and depth of vocabulary
in relation to l1/l2 acquisition and frequency of in-
put. Applied Psycholinguistics, 22(2):217234.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S2041536212000013
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2041536212000013
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9817.12121
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9817.12121
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9817.12121
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=aqXpMG5ZenwC
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=aqXpMG5ZenwC
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=aqXpMG5ZenwC


50

Arthur Ward and Diane Litman. 2007a. Dialog con-
vergence and learning. In Proceedings of the 2007
conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education:
Building Technology Rich Learning Contexts That
Work, pages 262–269. IOS Press.

Arthur Ward and Diane Litman. 2007b. Measuring
convergence and priming in tutorial dialog. Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh.

Arthur Ward, Diane Litman, and Maxine Eskenazi.
2011. Predicting change in student motivation by
measuring cohesion between tutor and student. In
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications,
pages 136–141. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

David Wood, Jerome S Bruner, and Gail Ross. 1976.
The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of
child psychology and psychiatry, 17(2):89–100.


