




































Predicting Cognitive Effort in Translation Production 

Yuxiang Wei 
Centre for Translation and Textual Studies 

Dublin City University  
Ballymun Road, Dublin 9 

Dublin, Ireland 
yuxiang.wei3@mail.dcu.ie 

 

Abstract 

 In view of the “predictive turn” in Translation 
Studies (Schaeffer et al., 2019), there has been 
increasing interest in investigating particular 
features of the text which can predict translation 
efficiency and the cognitive load of translating 
and post-editing. However, hypotheses of such 
kinds have often been on the basis of descriptive 
means in lack of rigorous statistical test on a large 
scale. In this regard, this paper seeks to 
empirically study the cognitive effort of 
translating and Machine Translation (MT) post-
editing in relation to different predictor variables 
including word frequency, word translation 
entropy, and syntactic choice entropy, making use 
of a large dataset from the CRITT Translation 
Process Research Database (CRITT TPR-DB, see 
Carl et al., 2016) which incorporates multiple 
languages and translation production modes. 

Cognitive effort is measured by eye-movement 
behavioural data, assuming that an increase in the 
number or duration of eye fixations on particular 
words or lexical items of the text indicates an extra 
processing cost in producing the translation of the 
corresponding items. These measures of cognitive 
effort are statistically correlated with frequency 
and entropy values of the Source Text words, 
followed by a qualitative analysis of the instances 
where these variables tend to cause increased 
processing effort in the translating and post-
editing process.  

With a particular focus on ambiguity resolution 
and the influence of formulaic expressions, the 
qualitative analysis intends to explain whether and 
how the resolution of the competition between 
different interpretations of a potentially 
                                                
 © 2019 Yuxiang Wei. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 
CCBY-ND. 

ambiguous item causes additional processing 
effort in translating and post-editing, as well as to 
study the influence of context on this 
disambiguation process. This analysis 
complements the statistical correlation between 
the eye fixation data and the frequency/entropy 
values of the source text, in an effort to explore 
dependable means for predicting the cognitive 
effort of translating and post-editing. 

This investigation sheds light on possible 
correlations of the statistical metrics of the textual 
material to fixation-based measurements of 
cognitive effort in translation production, so that 
the effort can be predicted via these variables. 
Complemented by the qualitative analyses, it also 
contributes to the description, explanation, and 
prediction of translating and post-editing 
behaviour. 

 

References 
Carl, Michael, Moritz Schaeffer, and Srinivas Banga-

lore. 2016. The CRITT Translation Process Re-
search Database. In Michael Carl, Srinivas Banga-
lore, and Moritz Schaeffer (Eds.), New Directions in 
Empirical Translation Process Research (pp. 13-
54). New York: Springer. 

Schaeffer, Moritz, Jean Nitzke, and Silvia Hansen-
Schirra. 2019. Predictive turn in translation studies: 
Review and prospects. In Stanley D. Brunn and Ro-
land Kehrein (Eds.), Handbook of the Changing 
World Language Map. Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer. 

 

 

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 17


