



















































Event Structure Representation: Between Verbs and Argument Structure Constructions


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 100–109
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

100

Event Structure Representation: Between Verbs and Argument Structure
Constructions

Pavlina Kalm
Dept. of Linguistics

Univ. of New Mexico
pavlinap@unm.edu

Michael Regan
Dept. of Linguistics

Univ. of New Mexico
reganman@unm.edu

William Croft
Dept. of Linguistics

Univ. of New Mexico
wcroft@unm.edu

Abstract

This paper proposes a novel representation of
event structure by separating verbal seman-
tics and the meaning of argument structure
constructions that verbs occur in. Our model
demonstrates how the two meaning represen-
tations interact. Our model thus effectively
deals with various verb construals in differ-
ent argument structure constructions, unlike
purely verb-based approaches. However, un-
like many constructionally-based approaches,
we also provide a richer representation of the
event structure evoked by the verb meaning.

1 Introduction

Verbal semantics is an area of great interest
in theoretical and computational linguistics (e.g.
(Fillmore, 1968; Fillmore et al., 2003; Talmy,
1988; Dowty, 1991; Croft, 1991, 2012; Valin and
LaPolla, 1997; Levin, 1993; Kipper et al., 2007;
Ruppenhofer et al., 2016). It has been widely
recognized that verb meaning plays an important
role in the syntactic realization of arguments and
their interpretation (Levin, 1993). VerbNet (Kip-
per et al., 2007) and FrameNet (Fillmore et al.,
2003; Ruppenhofer et al., 2016) are large on-
line resources on verb meanings that have been
developed in recent years. VerbNet, an exten-
sive verb classification system inspired by Levin
(1993), defines verb classes based on verbal se-
mantics and the syntactic expression of arguments.
FrameNet uses the theory of Frame Semantics
(Fillmore, 1982, 1985) to classify lexical units into
frames based on their meaning and their semantic
and syntactic combinatorial properties with other
event participants.

Providing an effective model to represent event
structure is essential to many natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) tasks. Recent meaning represen-
tation frameworks employed in NLP (Banarescu

et al., 2013; Hajič et al., 2012; Abend and Rap-
poport, 2013), are largely concerned with iden-
tifying event participants and their roles within
the event. Most meaning representations use a
lexically-based approach that assumes that the lex-
ical semantics of a verb determines the comple-
ments that occur with it in a clause.

However, lexically-based models for event
structure do not provide a complete representation
since verbs can occur in various argument struc-
ture constructions (Goldberg, 1995, 2006; Iwata,
2005). Depending on the semantics of the argu-
ment structure construction, a verb can be con-
strued in many different ways. For example, a verb
such as kick can occur in various semantically dif-
ferent constructions, as shown below (Goldberg,
1995, 11).

(1) Pat kicked the wall.

(2) Pat kicked the football into the stadium.

(3) Pat kicked Bob the football.

(4) Pat kicked Bob black and blue.

Kick can be construed as a verb of contact by
impact when it occurs in the force construction in
(1) (Levin, 1993, 148). It can be construed as a
verb of throwing in the caused motion construction
in (2) (Levin, 1993, 146). Kick can also be con-
strued as a transfer verb in the transfer of posses-
sion construction in (3) or a change of state verb
in the resultative construction in (4).

Goldberg (1995) argues that argument structure
constructions carry meanings that exist indepen-
dently of verbs. She develops a constructional ap-
proach in which argument structure meaning and
verb meaning combine to specify the event struc-
ture. We introduce a model in which event struc-
ture is derived from argument structure meaning
and verb meaning. The argument structure mean-
ing is based on the semantic annotation scheme



101

developed in Croft et al. (2016, 2018), which spec-
ifies the causal interactions between participants in
the event. The verb meaning is a causal network
which in many cases is more elaborate than the
causal chain specified by the argument structure
construction, but uses the same inventory of causal
relations as the argument structure meanings. The
argument structure meaning is annotated on indi-
vidual clauses, and the verb meaning is retrieved
from a resource based on VerbNet and FrameNet.

Our event structure representation offers a
richer model when compared to exclusively
lexically-based or constructionally-based re-
sources on verb meaning. We describe below how
our representation captures both the construc-
tional meaning and the verb meaning, and how we
map the former onto the latter. Having a two-facet
representation helps us to effectively deal with
verb construals as well as more complex event
structures evoked by different event types.

2 Constructional meaning representation

The representation of constructional meaning uses
a small set of causal chains that schematically
represent the event structure evoked by argument
structure constructions. Causal chains consist
of event participants, a limited set of force dy-
namic relations between participants, and infor-
mation about the participants’ subevents. Cross-
linguistic evidence indicates that argument real-
ization is best explained by transmission of force
relations (Talmy, 1988; Croft, 1991, 2012).

Force-dynamic relations are defined based on
existing literature on force dynamic interactions
(Talmy, 1988) and event semantics (Dowty, 1991;
Tenny, 1994; Hay et al., 1999; Valin and LaPolla,
1997; Verhoeven, 2007; Croft, 2012). Force dy-
namic relations may be causal (Talmy, 1988) or
non-causal (Croft, 1991), such as a spatial re-
lation between a figure and ground in a physi-
cal domain. Causal chains represent force dy-
namic image schemas that correspond to estab-
lished configurations of causal and non-causal re-
lations between participants and their subevents.
The subevents for each participant are specified
for qualitative features that describe the states or
processes that the participant undergoes over the
course of the event (Croft et al., 2017).

2.1 Why constructional causal chains aren’t
enough

A causal chain model of constructional meaning is
not a comprehensive representation of verb mean-
ing. A richer representation of verbal event struc-
ture is needed for various event types.

An example of a complex event type that de-
mands a more detailed event structure represen-
tation is ingestion. An example with eat such as
Jill ate the chicken with chopsticks illustrates this
point. In the causal chain analysis of the argu-
ment structure construction depicted in Figure 1,
the chopsticks are analyzed as an Instrument.

Figure 1: Change of state causal chain

However, the semantic role of the chopsticks in
an eating event is quite different from that of a
more prototypical instrument participant, such as
a hammer in a breaking event (e.g. Tony broke the
window with a hammer). In particular, the role
of the chopsticks in the event structure is more
complex. Unlike the hammer which breaks the
window, the chopsticks do not eat the food. The
chopsticks are used to move food to the Agent’s
mouth rather than eating the chicken. This con-
trasts with the role of the hammer which directly
causes the breaking of the window. Consequently,
one can use an argument structure construction
without an Agent with break (The hammer broke
the window) but not with eat (*The chopsticks ate
the chicken). The causal chain in Figure 1 does
not capture this fine grained semantic distinction
between these two types of instrument roles.

Table 1 contains a list of event types in the phys-
ical and mental domains that require a more fine
grained event structure representation. A short
description of the event structure is provided for
each event type to illustrate how the causal rela-
tions between participants in these event types are
too complex to be accurately represented by causal
chains associated with the semantics of argument
structure constructions.

In this paper, we present a verb meaning rep-
resentation that aims to provide a richer model
for event structure such that subtle semantic dif-
ferences between participant roles can be made
explicit. We accomplish this by introducing a
separate richer representation for the verbal event



102

Event type Event description Example

Ingestion (e.g. eat, drink)
An Eater uses a Utensil which moves the Food
to the Eater’s mouth and the Eater consumes the
Food.

Jill ate the chicken with chopsticks.

Vehicular motion (e.g.
drive, ride)

A Rider enters a Vehicle (or a Driver uses a ve-
hicle) which then transports the Rider/Driver to
a Destination.

Brenda went to Berlin by train.

Perception (e.g. look,
listen)

A Perceiver uses an Implement which then al-
lows the Perceiver to view a Target. They looked at the cranes with binoculars.

Cooking (e.g. bake, cook) A Cook puts Food in a Cooking containerwhich then cooks the Food by emitting heat. I baked the potatoes in the oven.

Searching/Finding (e.g.
find, look for)

A Searcher searches in a Location and mentally
attends to a Searched item by searching for it.
The Searched item is in a spatial relation with
the Location.

I searched the cave for treasure.

Creation (e.g. paint,
make)

A Creator has an idea (i.e. mental experience)
of a Design which then the Creator creates by
producing a Creation using an Instrument.

Claire drew a picture.

Emission (e.g. flash,
gush)

An Emitter creates an Emission with respect to
a Ground. The Emission is also in a Path rela-
tion with the Emitter.

The well gushed oil.

Physical sensation (e.g.
hurt, break)

An Agent’s action results in an effect (e.g.
harm) of the Agent, their Body part, or some
other animate entity.

Tessa sprained her ankle.

Table 1: Event types with complex event structures

structure.

3 Verbal meaning representation

Our representation of the verbal event structure
uses a network model which consists of causal
relations between participants and participants’
subevents, not unlike causal chains. However, ver-
bal networks contain richer information about the
participants’ causal relations that are not evoked
by the argument structure construction and are
therefore not represented in causal chains.

Each causal network is associated with an event
type evoked by the verb meaning. For example,
an Ingestion network represents the event struc-
ture associated with verbs of eating. As shown in
Figure 2, the Ingestion network is cyclic and non-
branching1: the Eater uses the Utensil (“Manipu-
late” relation) to reach the Food (“Force” relation).
The Food moves to the Eater’s mouth (“Path” re-
lation) and is subsequently consumed by the Eater
(“Force” relation)2.

Unlike the causal chain representation, the ver-
bal network representation allows for a direct
causal relation between the Eater and Food. This

1Although the Ingestion network is non-branching, we
have not ruled out the possibility of branching in other verbal
networks. However, so far we have not come across a verbal
network that requires a branching representation.

2Following Croft (1991, 2012), causal relations are repre-
sented by an arrow and non-causal relations are represented
by a straight line in the diagram.

accommodates the semantics of ingestion events
in which the Eater, rather than the Utensil, con-
sumes the Food.

Figure 2: Ingestion network

Two participants in the network are involved in
more than one causal relation. The Eater and Food
have three distinct roles in the event structure. The
Eater is the Agent who initiates the event; it is the
ground that is in a Path relation with the Food, and
it is also the consumer of the Food. The Food is
an endpoint of the Force relation; it is a motion
theme that is in a Path relation with the Eater, and
it is also a Patient in a Change of State event as it
gets consumed.

Since causal networks may be cyclic, the di-
rection and ordering of causal relations within the
network is more clearly represented if participants
and the relations between them are depicted in a
linear fashion, similarly to causal chains. “Un-
threading” a linear path in the network represents
the sequence of subevents better than a network
representation. As shown in Figure 3, the Eater
and Food occur twice in the unthreaded version of
the causal network.



103

Figure 3: Unthreaded Ingestion network

Since the unthreaded version lays out the par-
ticipants’ relations in a linear chain, this represen-
tation also includes information about the change
that each participant undergoes in its subevent(s).
The network representation in Figure 2 does not
include these labels due to a lack of space. We use
the unthreaded version of verbal networks in the
remainder of this paper to illustrate the mapping
of the semantics of argument structure construc-
tions onto the verbal event structure.

3.1 Mapping causal chains into verbal
networks

Argument structure constructions may evoke only
part of the verbal event structure. That is, causal
chains may evoke a subset of participants and
the relations between them in the verbal network.
Mapping a causal chain into a network allows us to
provide a comprehensive event structure represen-
tation that accounts for the meaning of the argu-
ment structure construction as well as the meaning
evoked by the verb.

In many cases, there is a considerable overlap
in the two types of representations, i.e. a one-to-
one mapping exists between participants and their
relations in the causal chain and in the verbal net-
work. This is usually the case with simple event
types, e.g. Motion or Force verbs (see Figure 6 in
section 3.2 and Figure 11 in section 4). However,
the mapping becomes more complicated when a
causal chain is mapped into a complex network
that contains additional participant relations not
present in the causal chain.

Figure 4 demonstrates the mapping between
a causal chain associated with the example Jill
ate the chicken with chopsticks and the Inges-
tion network. The network representation con-
tains additional participant relations that are not
evoked by the causal chain. The correct mapping
of participants from the causal chain to the net-
work is achieved by linking participants by their
subevents and relations. In addition, the sequence
of subevents in the causal chain and in the network
must follow the same order. As a result of this
constraint, the dotted lines that link participants in
causal chains and networks should not cross each

other.

Figure 4: Causal chain (upper part of the diagram) to
network (lower part) mapping

The causal chain participants and their relations
are mapped into the network as follows: Jill, the
Agent in the causal chain, is linked to the Eater.
Although there are two instances of Eater in the
network event structure, the Agent is only linked
to the Eater which is the initiator of the causal
chain. This is because the Eater must be in a direct
Manipulate relation with the Utensil. In addition,
both the Agent and the Eater are labeled Volitional
(VOL3). Chopsticks are labeled Internal (INTL4)
in the causal chain and are therefore linked to the
Internal participant in the causal network, which is
the Utensil. The Patient, a change of state (COS5)
theme, is linked to the Food participant at the end
of the verbal network which is also labeled COS.

The Food and Eater participants that are in a
Path relation with each other constitute a part of
the verbal event structure and are therefore repre-
sented in the causal network; however, they are not
evoked by the argument structure construction. As
a result, there is no direct linking of these partici-
pants to the causal chain.

3.2 Structure of verbal causal networks
Examining the more complex verbal networks in
Table 1 has led us to conclude that networks can be
analyzed as a concatenation of less complex event
types. Networks can be thought of as being made
up of subchains. Each subchain denotes a force
dynamic image schema that is used to describe
the semantics of argument structure constructions.
The internal structure of verbal networks is thus
composed of subchains that can be used indepen-
dently as simple networks or concatenated to each
other to form complex networks.

3Volitional describes an entity who exerts volitional force
to bring about an event.

4Internal is used for participants that undergo internal
change.

5COS is used for participants that undergo some change
of their physical state in the event. In our analysis, a theme in
an event of destruction is analyzed as a COS theme.



104

Subchains are not random subparts of a verbal
causal network. A subchain is a subpart of a com-
plex network that can be expressed by itself with a
main verb. For example, the Motion subchain can
be expressed by a motion verb such as move as in
He moved the ball. The Manipulate network can
be expressed by a manipulate verb such as use as
in He used the shovel. The Force network can be
expressed with a verb of force such as hit as in He
hit the ball, and the Change of State network can
be expressed with a verb of change of state such
as break as in The vase broke.

The concatenation analysis of causal networks
can be illustrated on the unthreaded version of the
Ingestion network as shown in the bottom part
of Figure 5. The event structure for ingestion
verbs can be analyzed as being composed of five
subchains: (1) a Manipulate image schema be-
tween the Eater and the Utensil, (2) a Force im-
age schema between the Utensil and the Food, (3)
a Motion image schema between the Food and
the Eater, (4) a Force image schema between the
Eater and the Food, and (5) a Change of State im-
age schema that contains only one participant, the
Food.

Figure 5: Concatenation of image schemas in the In-
gestion network

The Manipulate image schema describes a
causal chain in which an Agent uses an Instrument
to interact with another physical entity. The phys-
ical interaction between an Instrument and Food
describes a Force image schema which, in more
general terms, denotes an event in which a physi-
cal entity interacts with another physical entity (a
theme) by exerting physical force and thus caus-
ing the theme to undergo some physical change,
e.g. a translational motion or a change of state.
Alternatively, the physical entity that initiates the
Force relation comes into contact with the theme
without any physical change taking place. The
Motion image schema describes a causal chain in
which a motion theme moves along a path with re-

spect to some ground. The Change of State image
schema describes a single-participant causal chain
in which a theme undergoes a change of state. The
change of state event may be initiated by an exter-
nal entity, such as an Agent in this ingestion ex-
ample.

Subchains denoting image schemas may be
concatenated in various ways to form complex net-
works; however, they must be connected by one
shared participant. Each participant that occurs in
two subchains, i.e. as the endpoint of the first sub-
chain and also the initiator of the next subchain in
the verbal causal network, has two separate labels
that describe the participant’s subevent.

To illustrate this point further, let’s consider a
Motion event. Motion may be concatenated with
an external cause (e.g. Force), as in the exam-
ple Steve tossed the ball to the garden (VerbNet).
The Agent Steve exerts force on the Moved Entity
ball, which consequently undergoes motion. The
Moved Entity is in a path relation with the Ground
garden. The Moved Entity is both an endpoint of
the Force image schema (labeled EXIST6) and a
motion theme in the Motion image schema (la-
beled MOT7), as shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6: Concatenation of Force and Motion

Each network consists of a core subchain which
corresponds to a particular event type. For ex-
ample, in networks with motion verbs, the core
subchain consists of two participants: a motion
theme or figure which is in a path relation with
a ground (Talmy, 1974). To distinguish the core
subchain from a concatenated subchain, partici-
pants and their relations in the core subchain are
highlighted in bold, as shown in Figure 6.

6EXIST is used to signal the presence of a participant, i.e.
that it is part of the event but does not necessarily undergo a
change of state or other changes on the qualitative dimension.

7MOT is used for themes that undergo motion in motion
events.



105

3.3 Network participants and overlap

Verbal event structure determines the participants
and their roles in causal networks. In our net-
work representation, we include all participants
that are obligatorily evoked by the verb. To ensure
that our networks for event types are comprehen-
sive, we consult VerbNet and FrameNet databases
for their semantic identification of event partici-
pants (i.e. Roles in VerbNet and Core Frame Ele-
ments in FrameNet). Our labels for network par-
ticipants are chosen based on the participant’s role
in a given verbal event structure (not unlike Frame
Elements in FrameNet); the labels are not meant
to be interpreted as semantic role labels.

Including only the participants that are obliga-
torily evoked by verbal semantics results in causal
networks that are closely related but not identi-
cal. Consequently, some event types have mul-
tiple networks that partially overlap. For exam-
ple, the event structure for vehicular motion (VM)
verbs, such as drive and ride, overlaps since they
share event participants, i.e. a Rider, Vehicle, and
Destination (see Figure 7). However, their event
structure representations are not identical. Ride
and drive evoke different initiators of the causal
network, as shown in Figure 7 (cf. FrameNet’s
Ride vehicle, Operate vehicle, and Cause motion
frames).

Figure 7: Vehicular Motion network for ride (a) and
drive (b).

The core subchain in both VM networks is a
Motion image schema which describes the rela-
tion between a Rider and Destination; however,
unlike other Motion networks, the VM network is
more complex since VM verbs obligatorily evoke
a Vehicle as an additional participant in the event
structure.

As depicted in Figure 7, the relation between
the initiators (i.e. Rider and Driver) and the Ve-

hicle in these two types of VM networks is dif-
ferent. In the Drive network, a Driver drives a
Vehicle (Manipulate image schema) to transport a
Rider (Force image schema) to a Destination (Mo-
tion image schema). Figure 8 shows a mapping of
the causal chain associated with the example He
drove him to the hospital to the Drive verbal causal
network8. The Vehicle in the network is not linked
to any participant in the causal chain since it is not
expressed by the argument structure construction.
However, it is represented in the causal network
because it is evoked by the semantics of drive.

Figure 8: Causal chain to network mapping for drive

Ride evokes a similar network representation
that partially overlaps with the Drive network.
However, in the Ride network, a Rider boards a
Vehicle (Motion image schema) which transports
the Rider (Force image schema) to a Destination
(Motion image schema). Unlike the Drive net-
work, the Ride network is cyclic, i.e. the Rider is
involved in more than one relation. This is illus-
trated on the mapping of the causal chain associ-
ated with the example Brenda went to Berlin by
train to the Ride network in Figure 9.

Figure 9: Causal chain to network mapping for ride

The Path relation between the Rider and the Ve-
8Drive can also occur in an argument structure construc-

tion in which the Agent and the Theme are conflated (e.g. He
drove to Santa Fe). In this example, the Agent is linked to
both the Driver and Rider in the verbal network. A distinct
verb for conflated Driver and Rider is used in Dutch (Jens
Van Gysel, pers. comm.) and Korean (Sook-kyung Lee, pers.
comm.)



106

hicle is usually not syntactically expressed in ar-
gument structure constructions with VM verbs in
English; however, it is evoked by the verbal se-
mantics of ride verbs. The Instrument is linked
to the Vehicle and the Theme to the Rider in the
network.

Overlapping of verbal causal networks is com-
mon in our event structure representation. Another
case of network overlapping can be found with the
ingestion verbs eat and feed, as shown in Figure
10.

Figure 10: Ingestion network for eat (a) and feed. (b)

Feed in (b) obligatorily evokes an external ini-
tiator, i.e. a Feeder, which is different from an
Eater. The Ingestion network for eat in (a) does
not include a Feeder since eat does not obligato-
rily evoke this participant. The two networks share
most of the event participants; however, we pro-
vide a separate representation for each event struc-
ture since the networks do not overlap fully.

4 Representing construals with causal
networks

Using the analysis of image schema concatenation
to form complex networks allows us to provide a
more comprehensive representation of event struc-
ture for examples in which a verb meaning has
different construals. As noted in the introductory
section of this paper, a verb can have more than
one construal depending on the argument struc-
ture construction in which it occurs. To demon-
strate how our network representation deals with
this issue, we will return to the construals of kick
discussed in the Introduction.

Our causal chain analysis distinguishes the vari-
ous meanings of kick by having a causal chain rep-
resentation for the constructional semantics. How-
ever, an additional layer of information must be

included to indicate which part of the event struc-
ture is evoked by the verb meaning and which part
comes from the meaning of the argument struc-
ture construction. In particular, a causal chain
analysis of constructional meaning does not con-
vey that kick is a Force verb, rather than a Motion
verb, when it occurs in a Motion construction or in
other construals. Our model pairing constructional
meaning (i.e. causal chains) with verb meaning
(i.e. verbal networks) provides an event structure
representation that accounts for verb construals in
various constructions.

4.1 A Motion construal of kick

Kick can occur in a caused motion construction,
as in Pat kicked the football into the stadium. As
shown in Figure 11, the core event type in the
network representation for this example is iden-
tified as Force. The Force image schema de-
scribes a causal relation between an Agent and
a Force Theme evoked by the verb kick. Since
the argument structure construction describes a
Motion event, a Motion schema is concatenated
onto the Force image schema. That is, the argu-
ment structure construction evokes a more com-
plex event structure in which the Force Theme
is also in a Path relation with a Ground. The
Force Theme football is both an endpoint of the
Force relation as well as a motion theme in the
Motion image schema.

Figure 11: Concatenation of Motion and Force

The two representations for the motion argu-
ment structure constructions with toss in Figure
6 and kick in Figure 11 demonstrate that adding
verb meaning to the analysis of event structure al-
lows us to differentiate the semantics of these two
examples. In the network representation of toss,
the core subchain is identified as a Motion image
schema since toss is a motion verb. As a result, the
motion theme is labeled Moved Entity. The event
structure evoked by the construction Steve tossed
the ball to the garden adds a Force image schema



107

to the Motion subchain.
The network representation of the motion ex-

ample with kick in Figure 11 is different. Force is
identified as the core subchain since kick is a Force
verb. The motion theme is labeled Force Theme.
The event structure evoked by the construction Pat
kicked the football into the stadium adds a Motion
image schema to the Force subchain. The distinct
labels for participants in each network are moti-
vated by the core subchain which is evoked by the
verb meaning.

4.2 COS and Transfer construals of kick

Our representation also allows us to differentiate
the event structure evoked by the COS argument
structure construction Pat kicked Bob black and
blue from the verbal semantics of kick. The core
event type profiles a causal relation between an
Agent and a Force Theme. As shown in Figure
12, the Force Theme is identified as both the end-
point of the Force image schema as well as a COS
theme in the COS image schema evoked by the
constructional semantics.

Figure 12: Concatenation of Change of State and Force

Figure 13 shows our event structure representa-
tion for kick in a Transfer construction as in Pat
kicked Bob the football. Similarly to the network
representation in Figure 11 and 12, the core event
type in the network is Force. The Transfer argu-
ment structure construction adds a Recipient Bob
who is in a Control relation with the Force Theme
football.

Figure 13: Concatenation of Transfer and Force

As these examples demonstrate, verbal causal
networks provide more detailed information about
the event structure than causal chains. Using the
notion of image schema concatenation allows us to
deal with various verb construals in different argu-
ment structure constructions. Our event structure
representation represents verb meaning and con-
structional meaning, and distinguishes one from
the other.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we present a model of verb meaning
representation that accounts for the semantics of
argument structure constructions as well as verbal
event structures associated with event types. Our
proposed causal networks for verb meanings rep-
resent richer event structures associated with com-
plex event types. Our network representations can
also deal with verb construals in various argument
structure constructions.

The verbal causal networks are more general
than VerbNet classes and subclasses which are
based on Levin (1993) argument structure con-
structions. As a result, they subsume more than
one VerbNet class. The networks are also more
general than frames in FrameNet. In some cases,
our networks link to higher order non-lexical
frames in FrameNet. However, this is not always
the case. In many cases, our networks link to mul-
tiple less schematic lexical frames.

Verbal networks will be stored with verbs in
VerbNet in the relevant classes. For example, the
Ingestion network will be linked to the follow-
ing VerbNet classes: chew-39.2, dine-39.5, eat-
39.1, gobble-39.3.-1, and gorge-39.6. Given the
direct correspondence between verbal networks
and VerbNet classes, our verbal analysis provides
the same verb coverage of corpus data as Verb-
Net (cf. Palmer et al. (2005) for VerbNet’s cover-
age of the Penn Treebank II). An automated anal-
ysis and linking of networks to verbal entries in
corpora will use existing computational methods
for verb sense disambiguation (Loper et al., 2007;
Chen and Palmer, 2009; Brown et al., 2011; Peter-
son et al., 2016) to accomplish a correct match of
verb senses to verbal networks.

A near-term objective of our work is to design a
computational model that automates the mapping
between the participants in the different networks.
Given a causal chain, a verbal event network, and
a set of possible links, the task is to determine



108

the path through the network that describes an
event. Developing such a computational model
will be complicated by the multiple possible in-
teractions of verb meaning and accompanying ar-
gument structure construction, the many possible
concatenations of image schemas, the need to re-
spect the dimensionality of the links in the causal
representations, as well as how to account for co-
ercion and construal. A starting point is to recog-
nize that argument structure constructions are de-
fined by a small set of force dynamic relations, and
these relations also define verbal networks. The
next step toward a computational model will be to
extract constructional meaning from raw text, to
be reported on in future work.

Currently, our event structure representation
covers physical and mental domains. However,
there are many complex event types in the social
domain that need to be analyzed. Among others,
verbs of transfer of possession and communica-
tion, which make up a large portion of the verbal
lexicon in the social domain, all involve complex
cyclic networks which will benefit from a seman-
tic representation that is separate from the argu-
ment structure construction meaning.

6 Acknowledgments

This research was partly funded by grant number
HDTRA1-15-0063 from the Defense Threat Re-
duction Agency to the last author.

References
Omri Abend and Ari Rappoport. 2013. Universal con-

ceptual cognitive annotation (ucca). In Proceedings
of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 228–
238.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cau, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Phillipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract meaning representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop.

Susan Windisch Brown, Dmitriy Dligach, and Martha
Palmer. 2011. VerbNet class assignment as a WSD
task. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Con-
ference on Computational Semantics. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jinying Chen and Martha S. Palmer. 2009. Improv-
ing English verb sense disambiguation performance
with linguistically motivated features and clear sense
distinction boundaries. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 43(2):181–208.

William Croft. 1991. Syntactic categories and gram-
matical relations: the cognitive organization of in-
formation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

William Croft. 2012. Verbs: aspect and causal struc-
ture. Oxford University Press.

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, and Michael Regan.
2016. Annotation of causal and aspectual struc-
ture of events in RED: a preliminary report. In 4th
Events Workshop, 15th Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, NAAACL-HLT 2016, pages 8–17. Strouds-
burg, Penn: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, and Michael Regan.
2017. Integrating decompositional event structure
into storylines. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Events and Stories in the News, pages 98–109.

William Croft, Pavlı́na Pešková, Michael Regan, and
Sook-kyung Lee. 2018. A rich annotation scheme
for mental events. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Events and Stories in the News, pages 7–17.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. Language, 67:547–619.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. Lexical entries for verb.
Foundations of Language, 4(4):373–393.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1982. Frame semantics. In The
Linguistic Society of Korea, editor, Linguistics in
the morning calm, pages 111–137. Seoul: Hanshin.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of
understanding. Quaderni di semantica, 6:622–54.

Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and
Miriam R. Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet.
International Journal of Lexicography, 16:235–50.

Adele E. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Con-
struction Grammar Approach to Argument Struc-
ture. Chicago: University of Chicago Pres.

Adele E. Goldberg. 2006. Constructions at work: the
nature of generalization in language. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr
Sgall, Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fucı́ková,
Marie Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Se-
mecký, Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman,
Zdeňka Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012.
Announcing prague czech-english dependency tree-
bank 2.0. In LREC, pages 3153–3160.

Jennifer Hay, Christopher Kennedy, and Beth Levin.
1999. Scalar structure underlies telicity in “de-
gree achievements”. In Tanya Matthews and Devon
Strolovitch, editors, Proceedings of SALT, volume 9,
pages 127–144. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.



109

Seizi Iwata. 2005. Locative alternation and two levels
of verb meaning. Cognitive Linguistics, 16(2):355–
407.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2007. A large-scale classification of
English verbs. English Resources and Evaluations,
42:21–40.

Beth Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alterna-
tions: a preliminary investigation. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Edward Loper, Szu-Ting Yi, and Martha Palmer. 2007.
Combining lexical resources: mapping between
Propbank and VerbNet. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Workshop on Computational Linguis-
tics, Tilburg, the Netherlands.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: an annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Daniel Peterson, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Martha Palmer,
and Daisuke Kawahara. 2016. Leveraging verbnet
to build corpus-specific verb clusters. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Joint Conference on Lexical and
Computational Semantics, pages 102–107.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miria
R. L. Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson,
Collin F. Baker, and Jan Scheffczyk. 2016.
FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Practice.
http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu.

Leonard Talmy. 1974. Semantics and syntax in mo-
tion. In John Kimball, editor, Syntax and Semantics
4, pages 181–238. New York: Academic Press.

Leonard Talmy. 1988. Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 2:49–100.

Carol L. Tenny. 1994. Aspectual roles and the syntax-
semantics interface. Dordrech: Kluwer.

Robert D. Van Valin and Randy J. LaPolla. 1997. Syn-
tax: structure, meaning, and function. Cambridge
University Press.

Elisabeth Verhoeven. 2007. Experiential Construc-
tions in Yucatec Maya: a typologically based analy-
sis of a function domain in a Mayan language. John
Benjamins Publishing Company.


