





























Aligning the IndoWordNet with the Princeton WordNet

Nandu Chandran Nair
DISI

University of Trento
Trento,Italy

nandu.chandrannair
@unitn.it

Rajendran S Velayuthan
CEN

Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham
Coimbatore,India

rajushush@gmail.com

Khuyagbaatar Batsuren
DISI

University of Trento
Trento,Italy

k.batsuren@unitn.it

Abstract

The IndoWordNet is an Indian language lexi-
cal resource. The project started with Hindi
WordNet, which was manually built from var-
ious resources with the preference for culture-
specific synsets. Other languages were added
later. The development approach used in In-
doWordNet is very similar to that used in
Princeton WordNet (PWN). PWN is a seman-
tic network where English synsets are nodes,
and semantic relations are edges connecting
them. Due to the popularity of PWN, In-
doWordNet also connected Hindi and English
languages through direct (synonymy) and hy-
pernymy linkages between their synsets. Due
to the diversity of the languages, these link-
ages generate three types of mappings between
IndoWordNet and PWN which generate the
misalignment. This paper proposes to align
the IndoWordNet with PWN using a large
scale lexical-semantic resource called Univer-
sal Knowledge Core (UKC), which forms a
semantic network where nodes are language-
independent concepts. In the UKC semantic re-
lations connect concepts and not synsets.

1 Introduction
Studies are in progress to make language resource
development process cheap and quick, but even
now, the process demands considerable resources
and expert support. The generation of a lan-
guage resource is influenced by many factors such
as large global speaker population, high economic
power, or high political interests (Stüker, 2009).
As a result the majority of languages are under-
resourced (Besacier et al., 2014). Even in 2019,
if we use google translator for one of the offi-
cial Indian languages, Malayalam, we can notice
how a few words remain unrecognized (Figure 1).
Consider the sample Malayalam sentence: “രാമു
ച ി കഴി ില(Ramu chammanthy kazhikkilla),
translated as “Ramu will not eat”. Here, “Cham-
manthy” is an Indian dish, and the translator has

Figure 1: Missing term in translator

failed to find an appropriate translation for this
word. A language resource that allows culture-
specific words should have the missing term in the
target translation.
Back in 2006, the joint efforts of differ-

ent universities and research groups across In-
dia made it possible to develop the IndoWord-
Net(Bhattacharyya, 2010) - the first wordnet for In-
dian languages. IndoWordNet was developed to
capture the cultures of India in length and breadth
by including 18 languages out of 22 official lan-
guages(Bhattacharyya et al., 2010). Hindi Word-
Net(Narayan et al., 2002)developed at IIT Bombay,
India was used as the source wordnet for IndoWord-
Net. Other WordNets in IndoWordNet were ex-
tended from Hindi WordNet with culture-specific
and language-specific synsets. In this paper, we use
the notation “IndoWordNet” to refer to the project
and notation “IWN” to refer to on the Hindi Word-
Net. The IndoWordNet team followed Princeton
WordNet(PWN)(Fellbaum, 2012) principles at a
minimum level during the development.
The IndoWordNet team also focused on the

translation(Chakrabarti and Bhattacharyya, 2004)
across Indian languages and English and they iden-
tified the challenges for linking Hindi with En-
glish(Saraswati et al., 2010). Based on this, In-
doWordNet team proposed direct (synonymy) and
hypernymy linkages. These types of linkages even-
tually cause different types of associations between
the synsets of IWN and PWN. Our challenge is to
align IWN with PWN. This could allow to generate
automatic dictionary across terms and also highlight



the diversity among languages (Giunchiglia et al.,
2017).
Our approach involves the usage of a large scale

lexical-semantic resource called Universal Knowl-
edge Core (UKC)(Tawfik et al., 2014). UKC forms
a semantic network of language-independent con-
cepts, which are linked with semantic relations. In
our approach, we group the IWN synsets into three
groups. We process each group of synsets in such a
way to make them in a single group where one IWN
synset has a concept in UKC.We have aligned IWN
with PWN and find around 20K new concepts for
PWN. Also, we identified around 3K synsets from
IWN, which have no hypernym relations with other
synsets.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section

II briefly describes IWN, PWN, and other multilin-
gual resources like EuroWordNet, Global WordNet
Grid and UKC. Section III describes the issues in
the mapping of IWN with PWN. The detailed de-
scription of our approach is provided in section IV.
In section V, the results obtained from the project
are given. Finally, our conclusions and directions
for future work are presented in section VI.

2 Background

Many multilingual wordnets such as EuroWord-
Net (Vossen, 1998), MultiWordNet (Pianta et al.,
2002), and Global WordNet Grid (Pease et al.,
2008) have been built based on PWN. EuroWord-
Net (EWN) languages are linked to a list of un-
structured English word meaning. EWN has word-
nets with the same structure as PWN. By translat-
ing words from PWN, MultiWordNet is adapted to
the hierarchical structure of PWN and concepts of
western culture. Global WordNet Grid combines
wordnets and connects them to an ontology that con-
tains core concepts of PWN like “person”. Hence,
concepts from many languages are defined using
English in Global WordNet Grid aligned with the
ontology of PWN, and in this paper, we focus on
wordnet from India generated based on Hindi.
India is very diverse in many ways: religion, cul-

tures, languages, etc. As many as 880 languages
are spoken in India, and 22 official languages are
adopted by different states and union territories.
Hindi is one of the official languages of India. Hindi
belongs to the Indo-Aryan language family, a sub
group of Indo-European language family. Hindi,
like any language, is enriched with concepts that are
cultural manifestations. These concepts are avail-

able as lexical items in Hindi but may not be avail-
able in other languages. For example, the case of
kinship terms in English. Figure 2 shows the eight
words used for “cousin” based on maternal and pa-
ternal relationships.

Figure 2: “Cousin” in English and Hindi

A project to develop a linked lexical knowledge
base of Indian languages from Indo-Aryan, Dravid-
ian and Sino-Tibetan language families is known
as IndoWordNet. It was coordinated by IIT Bom-
bay, India with the assistance of research groups
from different parts of India. Universities in var-
ious parts of India were responsible for the devel-
opment of each language wordnet. Other languages
were translated fromHindiWordNet to generate the
IndoWordNet’s respective wordnets. Synsets are
linked by relations such as hypernymy or meronymy
or troponymy. The same synset identifier main-
tained across the languages. IndoWordNet were
used in the following projects conducted at In-
dia: Indian Language to Indian Language Machine
Translation (ILILMT), Cross-Lingual Information
Access (CLIA) and Indian language sentiment anal-
ysis (Dash et al., 2017).
One of the challenges of IndoWordNet team

was the term translation from the Indian languages
to English (Chakrabarti and Bhattacharyya, 2004).
The study (Saraswati et al., 2010) lists the chal-
lenges faced when linking IWN and English synsets.
The work proposed two types of linkages for con-
necting IndoWordNet synsets with English synsets:
direct and hypernymy. The direct linkage oc-
curs if synsets from IWN have synonyms in En-
glish and hypernymy linkages occur if synsets from
IWN have no equivalents in English WordNet but
only are general synsets. Possible areas of hy-
pernymy linkages can be: kinship relations, mu-
sical instruments, kitchen utensils, tools, species
and grains(Saraswati et al., 2010). Hence we can
argue that PWN and IWN have different hierar-
chy between synsets. Figure 3 shows that in the
PWN, the word “chair” has parent “seat” and “seat”



has parent “furniture”. In IWN, “chair” has four
parents,“artifact”,“thing”,“being” and “seat”. And
“seat” does not have “furniture” as a parent but “ar-
tifact”,“thing”, and “being” as parents.

Figure 3: Ontology in PWN and IWN

Two methods are usually used to develop word-
nets: merge (Snow et al., 2007) and expansion
(Balkova et al., 2004). The merge approach uses
the available language resources such as corpora,
dictionary, or wordnet to create unique language-
dependent wordnet. The merge approach relies en-
tirely on language experts, and the resources being
available. Also, the resultant wordnet from merge
approach will have concepts that do not exist in
PWN. For example, Dutch WordNet from EWN.
The expansion approach translates a set of synsets
from wordnet into a target language. The expan-
sion has the advantage of extending semantic rela-
tions of the source wordnet and the disadvantage of
being biased towards the source wordnet with less
consideration towards finding the target wordnet’s
novel concepts. This means that the wordnet result-
ing from expansion approach has extensive cover-
age of concepts from the PWN, if PWN is used for
translation. One such example is the SpanishWord-
Net from EWN.
Here we follow a third, somewhat different ap-

proach. We take two available wordnets, namely
PWN and IWN, and we align them using the UKC
so that the synsets in IWN and PWNwhich have the
same meaning are put in correspondence. Hence
our approach avoids the biasing towards any lan-
guage, especially English, and hence finding the
missing concepts is less hard than EWN. Also, our
approach belongs on top of the previous approaches
since we use existing wordnets, and saves time by
not to focus on generating wordnet.
The UKC is also a multilingual lexical database

based on the WordNet principles, but in the UKC
the meaning is represented using lexical concepts.
The UKC considers a concept as a mental repre-

sentation of what is perceive. As such it is lan-
guage independent(Giunchiglia et al., 2018). The
UKC has been designed in such a way that there
is no bias towards any language and culture which
makes the UKC extendable and open. UKC con-
tains the lexicons and lexico-semantic relations for
338 languages, containing 1,717,735 words and
2,512,704 language-specific word meanings along
with 107,196 lexical concepts excluding named en-
tities (Batsuren et al., 2019).
UKC has two components: Language Core (LC)

and Concept Core (CC). In LC, each synset is as-
sociated with one language and at least one word
within that language. The synsets are linked with
concepts, satisfying the condition that each synset
is linked with only one concept. CC is a seman-
tic network where nodes are language-independent
concepts. Each concept has a unique id which dif-
ferentiates it from any other concept. The CC has
a set of semantic relations between the nodes that
relate the meanings of the concepts.
In addition to this, UKC also handles the lexi-

calized missing concept known as lexical gaps for a
language by adding a new concept for that language
along with a gloss. This gloss considers a local lan-
guage description of the missing synset. UKC han-
dles the languages independently and is capable of
performing language similarity and diversity stud-
ies(Giunchiglia et al., 2017). UKC was used as the
core source for finding cross-lingual evidence in a
multilingual task (Batsuren et al., 2019). The stud-
ies (Bella et al., 2017) and (Bella et al., 2016) ex-
plain some applications of UKC. Figure 4 shows
how the synsets of English and Italian are concepts
aligned in UKC. LC has the vocabularies for the
concepts “chair”, “seat” and “furniture” in English
and Italian languages.

3 Problem Definition

Indian languages and English derive from differ-
ent cultures and show language specific phenomena
such as complex predicate structure(Chakrabarti
et al., 2007). The linkages between IWN and En-
glish mentioned above cause three types of map-
pings between the IWN and PWN synsets: one to
one mapping, many to one mapping, and one to zero
mapping.
In this paper, we take mapping in the sense of

“adding an equivalence relation for each synset in
IWN to the closest synset in PWN”. Such types
of mappings vary upon the languages. For exam-



Figure 4: UKC conceptual mappings between English
and Italian

ple, the study in (Cristea et al., 2004) highlights the
alignment problems between PWN and the Roma-
nian wordnet. Let us consider the three groups of
mapping we have identified,

• One to one mapping:
A synset from IWN has a corresponding synset
in PWN and these synsets has one meaning. In
Figure 5, the gloss from IWN “ जसने जन्म न
लया हो ” (jisne janm na liya ho) which means
“Who didn’t born yet” has one correspond-
ing synset “[unborn]” in PWN. Such type of
synsets are those common in both cultures, like
“chair”.

Figure 5: Example for one to one mapping

• Many to one mapping:
Many synsets from IWN has a corresponding
single synset in PWN that has the same mean-
ing. In Figure 6, the glosses “वह स्थान जो पिव-
तर् माना जाता हो ” (vah sthan joh pavitrh mana
jatha ho) and “देव स्थान या पुण्य स्थान ” (dev
sthan ya puny sthan) which mean “A place
which is sacred ” and “A place which is holy

or divine ” respectively, have only one corre-
sponding synset “[holy place; sanctum; holy]”
in PWN. It means that the two specific con-
cepts in one language are mapped to a general
concept in another language.

Figure 6: Example for many to one mapping

• One to zero mapping:
One synset from IWN does not has a corre-
sponding synset in PWN that has the same
meaning. In Figure 7 the gloss “मनुष्य के
जीवन में अलग-अलग गर्ह के िन श्चत भोगकाल
” (manushy ke jeevan mem alagu-alagu gra-
hom ke nishchith fogkaal) has no correspond-
ing synset in PWN. The meaning of the gloss
is “The period of definite companionship in
many planets in human life”. This word use
when someone having a bad time period in
their life and is related to planets in Indian as-
trology.

Figure 7: Example for one to zero mapping

The mappings limit IWN to be part of multilin-
gual wordnets. We propose an approach that fo-
cuses on concepts that allows to link the languages
independently which forms a single resource.

4 Aligning IWN with PWN
Our solution described below can be applied to
wordnets of any language. We use the UKC to map
the synsets between IWN and PWN that correspond
to a single concept. While doing this we define three
types of associations between the synsets of IWN
and UKC. They are:



• Group A
One synset from IWN has a corresponding
single concept in UKC. These are the IWN
synsets that have one to one mapping with
PWN.

• Group B
Many synsets from IWN have a correspond-
ing single concept in UKC. These are the IWN
synsets that have many to one mapping with
PWN.

• Group C
One synset from IWN does not have a concept
in UKC. These are the IWN synsets that have
one to zero mapping with PWN.

Our proposed approach for aligning IWN with
PWN is explained below,

1. Set up the UKC
This step focuses on preparing the UKC for
the alignment of IWN with PWN. To take ad-
vantage of the PWN hierarchy, the UKC uses
synsets from PWN as the concepts. This in
turn makes sure the IWN synset aligned with
the UKC concepts will associate the corre-
sponding PWN synset. Also, it helps the UKC
generating newUKC ids for those IWN synsets
which do not correspond to UKC (and there-
fore) to PWN.

2. Classify the IWN synsets
Classify the total synsets of IWN based on
the association types (A, B and C) mentioned
above. This step allows us to know the nature
of concepts between IWN and PWN.

3. Process group A synsets
The group A synsets of IWN are aligned with
PWN. Hence it can be imported into the UKC.
So the rest of the synsets from IWN could be
new concepts for PWN.

4. Process group B synsets
We analyzed the group B synsets and we found
that it is a collection of 454 sub trees. The root
element of each sub tree has a corresponding
concept in the UKC. An interesting observa-
tion is that width and depth of the sub trees
could be used to study the nature of lexical
gaps between Indian languages and English.

5. Process group C synsets
We checked to find any synset from group C

can be the child to group A synsets. Hence,
we found 9,174 synsets are new synsets for
PWN and 3021 synsets have no connection
with other synsets of IWN.

5 Results

Table I presents the conceptual mappings between
IWN and PWN using UKC based on the groups A,
B and C. The final alignment between the IWN and
the PWN are validated by the linguists. Let us con-
sider the results in detail below,

• Group A
There are 11,212 group A synsets in IWN and
the UKC has corresponding 11,212 concepts.
So IWN is imported into the UKC as a new
language, Hindi. Figure 8 shows the alignment
of the concept “unborn” in UKC. Here, there
is a one to one mapping between synset and
concept. The concept is linked with synsets of
each languages.

Figure 8: Group A synsets alignment

• Group B
There are 12,048 group B synsets in IWN. The
UKC has corresponding 454 concepts. The
remaining 11,594 concepts are new concepts
for the UKC. And also these 11,594 synsets
are new synsets in the PWN. The research
question here is to investigate whether the new
identified synsets are lexical gaps or not. We
are hoping to study the 454 sub trees and iden-
tify the areas resulting the lexical gaps. Fig-
ure 9 shows the alignment of the concept “holy
place” in the UKC, one concept in CC is linked
with one synset from each language. The UKC
solves the many to one mapping by adding a
new concept which has id -11111.



Table 1: Conceptual mappings between IWN and PWN using UKC

IWN UKC PWN
Groups #synsets #concepts #new concepts #new synsets
A 11,212 11,212 0 0
B 12,048 454 11,594 11,594
C 12,195 0 9,174 9,174
total 35,455 11,666 20,768 24,290

Figure 9: Group B synsets alignment

• Group C
There are 12,195 group C synsets in IWN.
The UKC has no corresponding concepts. So
the 9,174 concepts are new for the UKC. Out
of these concepts 3021 concepts have no hy-
pernym relations with other 32,434 IWN con-
cepts. Hence, 9,174 synsets are new for the
PWN and need to investigate whether they are
lexical gaps for the PWN. Figure 10 shows
the alignment of a culture specific concept in
the UKC. The UKC added a new concept in
CC without the hypernymy relation and linked
with the languages.

Figure 10: Group C synsets alignment

Like PWN, also in the IWN, various cases of
polysemy have been found out(Peters and Peters,

2000). The polysemous 4906 synsets can be either
homonymy, specialization polysemy, metonymy,
metaphoric polysemy, or compound polysemy
(Freihat et al., 2016). However, since this was out
of the scope of the project we did not work on this
further.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper describes the initial stage of the genera-
tion ofmultilingual resources in a cheaper and faster
way. We proposed an approach to align the In-
doWordNet, which is the first lexical resource in In-
dian languages, with the PWN by taking advantage
of existing linkages between the IWN and the PWN
synsets.However, rather than focusing on the lexi-
calization problems and polysemy in IWN, we gave
full attention to map one synset from IWN to one
concept in UKC. The alignment of IWN with the
PWN helps to connect more languages. We could
integrate as many languages since the UKC forms a
semantic network between concepts rather than be-
tween synsets of a language. We plan to integrate
more Indian languages from IndoWordNet. Fig. 11
sample diagram of expected alignment. In Figure
11, concepts are linked with synsets from languages
English and two Indian languages, Malayalam and
Hindi.

Figure 11: Alignment of the IndoWordNet with the
PWN using UKC



Acknowledgments
We thank the University of Trento, Italy for allow-
ing us to be involved in this project and for provid-
ing the facilities and full support for the successful
completion.
Our heartfelt thanks to Professor Fausto

Giunchiglia who gave us his continuous guidance
and valuable comments during the project.
The team from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham,

India showed full dedication towards participation
in the project.
This work has been supported by the European

Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme under grant agreement No. 810105 (Cy-
CAT)
Our project is a sample work which we hope will

motivate many people to take part in the develop-
ment of under-resourced languages.

References
Valentina Balkova, Andrey Sukhonogov, and Sergey
Yablonsky. 2004. Russian wordnet. In Proceedings
of the Second Global Wordnet Conference.

Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, Gábor Bella, and Fausto
Giunchiglia. 2019. Cognet: a large-scale cognate
database. In Proceedings of ACL 2019, Florence,
Italy.

Gabor Bella, Fausto Giunchiglia, and Fiona McNeill.
2017. Language and domain aware lightweight on-
tology matching. Journal of Web Semantics, 43:1–17.

Gábor Bella, Alessio Zamboni, and Fausto Giunchiglia.
2016. Domain-based sense disambiguation in mul-
tilingual structured data. In The Diversity Workshop
at the European Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(ECAI).

Laurent Besacier, Etienne Barnard, Alexey Karpov, and
Tanja Schultz. 2014. Automatic speech recognition
for under-resourced languages: A survey. Speech
Communication, 56:85–100.

Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. Indowordnet. In In Proc.
of LREC-10. Citeseer.

Pushpak Bhattacharyya, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek
Vossen. 2010. Principles, construction and applica-
tion of multilingual wordnets. In Proceedings of the
5th Global Word Net Conference (Mumbai-India).

Debasri Chakrabarti and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2004.
Creation of english and hindi verb hierarchies and
their application to hindi wordnet building and
english-hindi mt. In Proceedings of the Second Global
Wordnet Conference, Brno, Czech Republic. Citeseer.

Debasri Chakrabarti, Vaijayanthi Sarma, and Pushpak
Bhattacharyya. 2007. Complex predicates in indian

language wordnets. Lexical Resources and Evaluation
Journal, 40(3-4).

Dan Cristea, Catalin Mihaila, Corina Forascu, Diana
Trandabat, Maria Husarciuc, Gabriela Haja, and
Oana Postolache. 2004. Mapping princeton word-
net synsets onto romanian wordnet synsets. Roma-
nian Journal of Information Science and Technology,
7(1-2):125–145.

Niladri Sekhar Dash, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Jy-
oti D Pawar. 2017. The WordNet in Indian Lan-
guages. Springer.

Christiane Fellbaum. 2012. Wordnet. The Encyclopedia
of Applied Linguistics.

Abed Alhakim Freihat, Fausto Giunchiglia, and
Biswanath Dutta. 2016. A taxonomic classification
of wordnet polysemy types. In 8th Global WordNet
conference, pages 105–113.

Fausto Giunchiglia, Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, and Gabor
Bella. 2017. Understanding and exploiting language
diversity. In IJCAI, pages 4009–4017.

Fausto Giunchiglia, Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, and
Abed Alhakim Freihat. 2018. One world–seven
thousand languages. In Proceedings 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing, CiCling2018, 18-24 March
2018.

Dipak Narayan, Debasri Chakrabarti, Prabhakar Pande,
and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2002. An experience in
building the indo wordnet-a wordnet for hindi. In First
International Conference on Global WordNet, Mysore,
India.

Adam Pease, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen.
2008. Building the global wordnet grid. CIL18.

Wim Peters and Ivonne Peters. 2000. Lexicalised sys-
tematic polysemy in wordnet. In LREC.

Emanuele Pianta, Luisa Bentivogli, and Christian Gi-
rardi. 2002. Multiwordnet: developing an aligned
multilingual database. In First international confer-
ence on global WordNet, pages 293–302.

Jaya Saraswati, Rajita Shukla, Ripple P Goyal, and Push-
pak Bhattacharyya. 2010. Hindi to english wordnet
linkage: Challenges and solutions. In Proceedings of
3rd IndoWordNet Workshop, International Conference
on Natural Language Processing 2010 (ICON 2010).

Rion Snow, Sushant Prakash, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew Y Ng. 2007. Learning to merge word senses. In
Proceedings of the 2007 joint conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing and computa-
tional natural language learning (emnlp-conll), pages
1005–1014.

Sebastian Stüker. 2009. Acoustic modelling for under-
resourced languages. Ph.D. thesis, Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology.



Ahmed Tawfik, Fausto Giunchiglia, and Vincenzo Mal-
tese. 2014. A collaborative platform for multilingual
ontology development. World Academy of Science,
Engineering and Technology, 8(12):1.

Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to eurowordnet. In Eu-
roWordNet: A multilingual database with lexical se-
mantic networks, pages 1–17. Springer.


