



















































GASC: Genre-Aware Semantic Change for Ancient Greek


Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Computational Approaches to Historical Language Change, pages 56–66
Florence, Italy, August 2, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

56

GASC: Genre-Aware Semantic Change for Ancient Greek
Valerio Perrone
Amazon, Berlin∗

vperrone@amazon.com

Marco Palma
University of Warwick
m.palma@warwick.ac.uk

Simon Hengchen
University of Helsinki

simon.hengchen@helsinki.fi

Alessandro Vatri
University of Oxford

The Alan Turing Institute
avatri@turing.ac.uk

Jim Q. Smith
University of Warwick

The Alan Turing Institute
j.q.smith@warwick.ac.uk

Barbara McGillivray
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute

bmcgillivray@turing.ac.uk

Abstract

Word meaning changes over time, depending
on linguistic and extra-linguistic factors. Asso-
ciating a word’s correct meaning in its histori-
cal context is a central challenge in diachronic
research, and is relevant to a range of NLP
tasks, including information retrieval and se-
mantic search in historical texts. Bayesian
models for semantic change have emerged as a
powerful tool to address this challenge, provid-
ing explicit and interpretable representations
of semantic change phenomena. However,
while corpora typically come with rich meta-
data, existing models are limited by their in-
ability to exploit contextual information (such
as text genre) beyond the document time-
stamp. This is particularly critical in the case
of ancient languages, where lack of data and
long diachronic span make it harder to draw
a clear distinction between polysemy (the fact
that a word has several senses) and seman-
tic change (the process of acquiring, losing,
or changing senses), and current systems per-
form poorly on these languages. We develop
GASC, a dynamic semantic change model
that leverages categorical metadata about the
texts’ genre to boost inference and uncover
the evolution of meanings in Ancient Greek
corpora. In a new evaluation framework, our
model achieves improved predictive perfor-
mance compared to the state of the art.

1 Introduction

Change and its precondition, variation, are inherent
in languages. Over time, new words enter the lex-
icon, others become obsolete, and existing words
acquire new senses. These changes are grounded
in cognitive, social, and contextual factors, and
can be realized in different ways. For example,
in Old English thing meant ‘a public assembly’1

∗Work done prior to joining Amazon.
1In the remainder of this paper, we use emphasis to refer

to a word and ‘single quotes’ for any of its senses.

and currently it more generally means ‘entity’. Se-
mantic change research has a number of practical
applications, beyond historical linguistics research,
including new sense detection in computational lex-
icography and information retrieval for historical
texts that allows to restrict a search to certain word
senses (e.g. the old sense of the English adjective
nice as ‘silly’). To take an example from recent
semantic change in English, the verb tweet used
to be uniquely associated with birds’ sounds and
has recently acquired a new sense related to the so-
cial media platform Twitter. However, in this as in
many other cases, the original sense co-exists with
the new one, and specific contexts or genres will se-
lect one over the other. This is known as synchronic
variation, and can be successfully modelled prob-
abilistically, as advocated by several authors (see
e.g. Jenset and McGillivray (2017)). The close
relationship between innovation and variation is
well-known in historical linguistics, and critical
to ancient languages. Indeed, the unavailability
of balanced corpora due to the limited amount of
data at our disposal makes it crucial for models to
explicitly account for confounding variables like
genre, so as to enable them to use all existing data.

To address these challenges, we introduce GASC
(Genre-Aware Semantic Change), a novel dynamic
Bayesian mixture model for semantic change. In
this model, the evolution of word senses over time
is based not only on distributional information
of lexical nature, but also on additional features,
specifically genre. This allows GASC to decouple
sense probabilities and genre prevalence, which
is critical with genre-unbalanced data such as an-
cient languages corpora. The value of incorporat-
ing genre information in the model goes beyond
literary corpora and historical language data and
can be applied to recent data spanning over a period
of time where text type information is critical, for
example in specialized domains. Explicitly mod-



57

elling genres also makes it possible to address a
number of additional questions, revealing the genre
most likely associated to a given sense, the most
unusual sense for a genre, and which genres have
the most similar senses. Naturally, this framework
can be applied to different categorical metadata
about the text, such as author, geography, or style.

Ancient Greek is an insightful test case for sev-
eral reasons. First, Ancient Greek words tend to
have a particularly high number of senses (Clarke,
2010), and Ancient Greek texts display a large num-
ber of literary genres. Second, we can use data
spanning several centuries. Third, Ancient Greek
scholarship provides high-quality data to validate
automatic systems. Top-quality transcribed An-
cient Greek texts are available, eliminating the need
for OCR correction. Finally, polysemous words are
particularly sensitive to register variation and the
distribution of senses can vary greatly across reg-
isters (Leiwo et al., 2012). As most extant texts
are literary and relatively conservative from a lin-
guistic perspective, we expect genre (the type of a
text) and register (the fact that different varieties of
language are used in particular situations) to play
a significant role in the variation of sense distri-
butions in polysemous words. The word mus, for
instance, can mean ‘mouse’, ‘muscle’, or ‘mussel’.
The effect of genre on the distribution of its mean-
ing can be estimated visually from Figure 1. In this
graph, lines represent the percentage of the occur-
rences of the target word in a literary genre across
centuries, while bars represent the percentage of
the occurrences of a specific sense of the target
word across centuries. If any line shows a similar
trend to that of any set of bars, we may estimate
that genre might play a more decisive role than di-
achrony in determining variation in the distribution
of senses. Here, the distribution of ’muscle’ over
time (pink bars) closely follows the distribution
of this word in technical genres over time (blue
line), suggesting that the effect of genre should be
incorporated into semantic change models.

2 Related work

Semantic change in historical languages, especially
on a large scale and over a long time period, is
an under-explored, but impactful research area.
Previous work has mainly been qualitative in na-
ture, due to the complexity of the phenomenon (cf.
e.g. Leiwo et al. (2012). In recent years, NLP
research has made great advances in the area of

semantic change detection and modelling (for an
overview of the NLP literature, see Tang (2018)
and Tahmasebi et al. (2018)), with methods rang-
ing from topic-based models (Boyd-Graber et al.,
2007; Cook et al., 2014; Lau et al., 2014; Wijaya
and Yeniterzi, 2011; Frermann and Lapata, 2016),
to graph-based models (Mitra et al., 2014, 2015;
Tahmasebi and Risse, 2017), and word embeddings
(Kim et al., 2014; Basile and McGillivray, 2018;
Kulkarni et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2016; Du-
bossarsky et al., 2017; Tahmasebi, 2018; Rudolph
and Blei, 2018; Jatowt et al., 2018; Dubossarsky
et al., 2019). However, such models are purely
based on words’ lexical distribution information
and do not account for language variation features
such as text type because genre-balanced corpora
are typically used.

With the exception of Bamman and Crane (2011)
and Rodda et al. (2017), no previous work has fo-
cussed on ancient languages. Recent work on lan-
guages other than English is rare but exists: Falk
et al. (2014) use topic models to detect changes in
French and Hengchen (2017) uses similar methods
to tackle Dutch. Cavallin (2012) and Tahmasebi
(2018) focus on Swedish, with the comparison of
verb-object pairs and word embeddings, respec-
tively. Zampieri et al. (2016) use SVMs to assign a
time period to text snippets in Portuguese, and Tang
et al. (2016) work on Chinese newspapers using
S-shaped models. Most work in this area focusses
on simply detecting the occurrence of semantic
change, while Frermann and Lapata (2016)’s sys-
tem, SCAN, takes into account synchronic poly-
semy and models how the different word senses
evolve across time.

Our work bears important connections with the
topic model literature. The idea of enriching topic
models with document-specific author meta-data
was explored in Rosen-Zvi et al. (2004) for the
static case. Several time-dependent extensions
of Bayesian topic models have been developed,
with a number of parametric and nonparametric
approaches (Blei and Lafferty, 2006; Rao and Teh,
2009; Ahmed and Xing, 2012; Dubey et al., 2013;
Perrone et al., 2017). In this paper, we transfer such
ideas to semantic change, where each datapoint is
a bag of words associated to a single sense (rather
than a mixture of topics). Excluding cases of in-
tentional ambiguity, which we expect to be rare,
we can safely assume that there are generally no
ambiguities in a context, and each word instance



58

Figure 1: Distribution of mus ‘mouse’/‘muscle’/‘mussel’ by genre vs its senses over time. Lines track mus propor-
tions in each genre and century, while bars show the mus occurrence proportions with each sense and century.

maps to a single sense.

3 The model

We start with a lemmatized corpus pre-processed
into a set of text snippets, each containing an in-
stance of the word under study (referred to as “tar-
get word” in the remainder). Each snippet is a
fixed-sized window W of 5 words to the left and
right of the target word. The inferential task is to
detect the sense associated to the target word in the
given context, and describe the evolution of sense
proportions over time.

The generative model for GASC is presented in
Algorithm 1 and illustrated by the plate diagram in
Figure 2. First, suppose that throughout the corpus
the target word is used with K different senses,
where we define a sense at time t as a distribution
ψtk over words from the dictionary. These distribu-
tions are used to generate text snippets by drawing
each of their words from the dictionary based on a
Multinomial distribution (line 13 in Algorithm 1).
Based on the intuition that each genre is more or
less likely to feature a given sense, we assume that
each of G possible text genres determines a dif-
ferent distribution over senses (lines 3-4). Each
observed document snippet is then associated with
a genre-specific distribution over senses φt

gd
at time

t, where gd is the observed genre for document d.
Crucially, conditioning on the observed genre we
have a specific distribution over senses account-

ing for genre-specific word usage patterns (line
11). On the other hand, to make sure senses can
be uniquely identified across genres, we associate
each sense to the same probability distribution over
words for all genres. We let word (line 7) and sense
distributions (line 4) evolve over time with Gaus-
sian changes, ensuring smooth transitions. The
coupling between sense probabilities over time is
controlled by Kφ, the sense probability precision
parameter, so that the larger Kφ, the stronger the
coupling between the sense probabilities over time.
We place a Gamma prior over Kφ with hyperpa-
rameters a and b (line 1), and infer Kφ from the
data. We fix Kψ, the word probability precision
parameter.

Hyperparameter settings The model can be ap-
plied to different inferential goals: we can focus
on the evolution of sense probabilities or on the
changes within each sense. For each of these aims,
we can use several hyperparameter combinations
for Kφ, which is drawn from the prior distribution
as determined by a and b, and Kψ. Specifically,
we consider the following 3 settings. Setting 1:
a = 7, b = 3, Kψ = 10, as in Frermann and La-
pata (2016). Setting 2: a = 7, b = 3, Kψ = 100.
This aims at enforcing less variation within senses
over time. Setting 3: a = b = 1, Kψ = 100. This
still keeps the bag of words stable for each sense,
but also induces less smoothing for sense proba-
bilities over time. Setting 3 allows probabilities



59

to vary widely across centuries. We also expect
a large Kψ to reduce the likelihood of dramatic
changes within the same sense across contiguous
time periods, and to favour the emergence of new
senses. If not otherwise specified, we use setting
3. Other settings (like setting 3 with Kψ = 10) are
not recommended since allowing relevant changes
over time both in sense probabilities and bag of
words might harm interpretability. A final param-
eter is the window size W , namely the number of
words surrounding an instance of the target. While
larger windows increase the range of captured de-
pendencies, noise can be introduced in the form of
irrelevant contextual words. As in SCAN, we fixed
the window size W to 5 for all methods.

Algorithm 1: GASC generative model
1 Draw Kφ ∼ Gamma(a, b);
2 for time t = 1, . . . , T do
3 for genre g = 1, . . . , G do
4 Draw sense distribution φtg |

φ−tg ,K
φ ∼ N(12(φ

t−1
g + φ

t+1
g ),K

φ)

5 end
6 for sense k = 1, . . . ,K do
7 Draw word distribution

ψtk | ψ−t,Kψ ∼
N(12(ψ

t−1
k + ψ

t+1
k ),K

ψ)

8 end
9 for document d = 1, . . . , Dt do

10 Let gd be the observed genre;
11 Draw sense

zd | gd ∼ Mult(softmax(φt
gd
));

12 for context position i = 1, . . . ,W do
13 Draw word

wd,i ∼ Mult(softmax(ψt,zd));
14 end
15 end
16 end

Posterior inference For posterior inference, we
extend the blocked Gibbs sampler proposed in Fr-
ermann and Lapata (2016). The full conditional is
available for the snippet-sense assignment, while to
sample the sense and word distributions we adopt
the auxiliary variable approach from Mimno et al.
(2008). The sense precision parameters are drawn
from their conjugate Gamma priors. For the dis-
tribution over genres we proceed as follows. First,
sample the distribution over senses φtg for each
genre g = 1, . . . , G following Mimno et al. (2008).

Then, sample the sense assignment conditioned
on the observed genre from its full conditional:
p(zd | gd,w, t, φ, ψ) ∝ p(zd | gd, t)p(w | t, zd) =
φtg

∏
w∈w ψ

t,zd
w . This setting easily extends to sam-

ple genre assignments for tasks where, for example,
some genre metadata are missing.

4 Evaluation framework

Evaluating models tackling lexical semantic
change is notoriously challenging. Frameworks
are either lacking or focus on very specific types of
sense change (Schlechtweg et al., 2018; Tahmasebi
et al., 2018). Exceptions are Kulkarni et al. (2015),
Basile and McGillivray (2018) and Hamilton et al.
(2016), who focus on the change points of word
senses. However, in the case of Ancient Greek
(and other historical languages), corpora typically
contain gaps and uneven distribution of text genres,
and semantic change is so closely related to poly-
semy that it is hard to find a specific point in time
when a new sense emerged in the language. There-
fore, it is more appropriate to take a probabilistic
approach to model sense distribution, and devise an
evaluation approach that fits this. Although histori-
cal dictionaries and traditional philology describe
the evolution of word senses over time, they do
not necessarily reflect the evidence from corpora
on which models can be evaluated, and often only
provide insights into the appearance of a new sense,
rather than the relative predominance of a word’s
senses across time. These reasons led us to craft
a novel evaluation dataset and framework, which
reflects the data on which the model is evaluated,
and allows for a finer-grained evaluation of the
predominance of word senses across time.

4.1 Ancient Greek corpus

We used the Diorisis Annotated Ancient Greek Cor-
pus (Vatri and McGillivray, 2018), consisting of
10,206,421 lemmatized and part-of-speech-tagged
words. The corpus contains 820 texts spanning
between the beginnings of the Ancient Greek liter-
ary tradition (8th century BC) and the 5th century
AD. The corpus covers a number of Ancient Greek
literary and technical genres: poetry (narrative,
choral, epigrams, didactic), drama (tragedy, com-
edy), oratory, philosophy, essays, narrative (histo-
riography, biography, mythography, novels), geog-
raphy, religious texts (hymns, Jewish and Chris-
tian Scriptures, theology, homilies), technical lit-
erature (medicine, mathematics, natural science,



60

zd

gd

wd,iwd,izd

gd

zd wd,i

gd

φtg
φt−1g φ

t+1
g

κφa, b

ψtkψt−1k ψ
t+1
k

κψ

WW W

DtDt−1 Dt+1

G

K

Figure 2: GASC plate diagram with 3 time periods.

tactics, astronomy, horsemanship, hunting, politics,
art history, rhetoric, literary criticism, grammar),
and letters. In technical texts, we expect polyse-
mous words to have a technical sense. On the other
hand, in works more closely representing general
language (comedy, oratory, historiography) we ex-
pect words to appear in their more concrete and less
metaphorical senses; we cannot assume that this
distribution holds in a number of other genres such
as philosophy and tragedy. Whilst genre-annotated
corpora are not especially common in NLP, where
most tasks rely on specific genres (e.g. Twitter) or
on genre-balanced corpora such as COHA (Davies,
2002), they are more prevailing within humanities,
and especially classics. Additionally, research on
automated genre identification has been flourishing
for decades (e.g. Kessler et al. (1997)), making the
need for genre information in a potential corpus
not as much of a hindrance as can be thought.

4.2 Log-likelihood evaluation

First, we compared GASC with the state-of-the-art
(SCAN) in terms of held-out data log-likelihood.
We chose 50 targets that could be identified as pol-
ysemous (e.g. the verb legō, whose senses are
‘gather’ and ‘tell’) based on two criteria: high fre-
quency and a a suitably clear-cut range of meanings.
We initially based our selection on the secondary
literature and chose 17 words from the well-studied
vocabulary of Ancient Greek aesthetics (Pollitt,
1974). We complemented this selection with the
inclusion of the 33 most frequent clearly polyse-
mous words identified by an Ancient Greek expert

in a frequency-ranked word list extracted from the
Diorisis corpus. The necessity to identify manu-
ally suitable words led us to limit their number to
50. For each one of these target words, we ran-
domly divided the corpus into a train (80%) and
test set (20%). Results on the 50-word dataset are
in Section 5.

4.3 Expert annotation

To evaluate our method against ground truth, we
proceeded as follows. We selected three three
target words (mus ‘mouse’/‘muscle’/‘mussel’ and
harmonia ‘fastening’/‘agreement’/‘musical scale,
melody’, and kosmos ‘order’/‘world’/‘decoration’)
based on their frequency and clear-cut polysemy,
as indicated by the standard scholarly Ancient
Greek-English dictionary (Liddell et al., 1996)
and traditional philological scholarship on their se-
mantics (Pollitt 1974 on harmonia and kosmos).
These words are especially suitable for an ex-
ploratory case study because they exhibit an ab-
stract sense and a concrete counterpart in gen-
eral, non-technical vocabulary, and are attested in
most of the time periods covered by the corpus
and across different literary genres. Two Ancient
Greek experts manually annotated the whole cor-
pus by tagging the senses of the target words in
context. One expert selected the correct sense for
each occurrence of mus and harmonia, and the
other expert performed the same task on kosmos.
The results of each expert’s annotation task were
not reviewed by the other expert (Vatri et al. 2019
for the dataset). Table 1 shows an example from the



61

annotated dataset for the word kosmos. The annota-
tors also marked when the semantic annotation was
purely based on the target word context, which is
the evidence on which the model can rely (category
“collocates”). Only annotations based on collocates
were retained in the evaluation. Using this infor-
mation, the relative frequency of each sense for
each target word in any time slice becomes com-
putable, and was used to create ground-truth data
on the diachronic predominance of a word’s senses
as reflected in the corpus.

4.4 Automatic sense labelling

For every time period T , inferred sense k, and
genre G, GASC outputs a distribution of words
with associated probabilities. For instance, the out-
put for kosmos (‘order’, ‘world’, or ‘decoration’)
in oratory at time 0 includes:
T=0,k=0:
aêr (0.069); mousikos (0.059); gê (0.056); harmonia

(0.034); ouranos (0.033); logos (0.030);
gignomai (0.021); sphaira (0.021); pselion
(0.020); apaiteô (0.019);

T=0,k=1:
polis (0.035); asebeia (0.014); politeia (0.012);

proteros (0.012); naus (0.012); pentêkonta
(0.011); aei (0.011); hama (0.011) ; peripeteia
(0.011); oikia (0.011).

These distributions can be interpreted by experts
based on the meanings of the words they group
and thus associated to the senses of the target word.
Here,K = 0 includes aêr (‘air’), gê (‘earth’), oura-
nos (‘sky’), and sphaira (‘sphere, globe’), which
point to the meaning of kosmos as ‘world’. The list
for K = 1 includes polis (‘city’), asebeia (‘impi-
ety’), politeia (‘constitution’), and oikia (‘house-
hold’), which point to the meaning of kosmos as
‘order’. On the other hand, the expert annotation
provides lists of corpus occurrences of the target
word, each associated to a sense label. In Table 1,
the sense label is ‘kosmos-world’ and we can asso-
ciate lemmas such as ouranos ‘sky’ and sphairoei-
des ‘spherical’ to this sense, as these lemmas occur
in the corpus context of this target word.

To evaluate against expert annotation, we auto-
matically match the word senses assigned by the
annotators (denoted by s) with the senses outputted
by the model (denoted by k). To achieve this, we
first measured how closely each model sense k
matches each expert sense s. We assigned a confi-
dence score to every possible (k, s) pair by compar-
ing the words associated to k in the model output
and the words co-occurring with the target word
in the annotated corpus sentences labelled with the
expert-assigned sense s. For kosmos with k = 0,

we compare words from the model output, such as
ouranos ‘sky’, gê ‘earth’, and sphaira ‘sphere’ with
words from the context of the annotated sentences,
such as sphairoeides ‘spherical’ and ouranos ‘sky’.
We then considered two elements. For words from
the model output, we consider the normalized prob-
ability with which these words wi are associated to
the model sense k, i.e. P (wi|k). For kosmos, aêr
‘air’ is associated to probability 0.069, gê ‘earth’
to 0.056, and ouranos ‘sky’ to 0.033. For the con-
text words from the annotated data, we consider
the degree to which these words are associated to
an expert sense. In the example of kosmos from
Table 1, this is calculated based on how many dif-
ferent senses a context word like ouranos ‘sky’ or
sphairoeides ‘spherical’ is associated to. To mea-
sure this degree of association we define the expert
scorem(wi, s) of word wi as 1 divided by the num-
ber of senses assigned by the experts to this word.
If the word is associated to only one sense s in
the annotated data, its expert score m(wi, s) will
be highest (1); if it is associated to two senses,
its expert score is 0.5; if it is not assigned to the
sense s by the experts, its expert score m(wi, s) is
0. Formally, we define the confidence score of a
pair of model sense k and expert-assigned sense s
as conf(k, s) =

∑
i P (wi|k)∗m(wi, s). The score

is highest when P (wi) and m(wi, s) are highest
for all words. In extreme cases, P (wi) will be 1 if
the model estimated wi to be associated to sense
k with probability 1 and m(wi, s) is 1 (i.e. wi is
only found in contexts labelled as s by the experts).
This points to k and s being associated to the same
words, and thus being the same sense. The confi-
dence is lowest when k and s do not share words,
in which case either P (wi) = 0 or m(wi, s) = 0.
In contrast with clustering overlap techniques like
purity or rand index, we ensure words with a higher
inferred probability and uniquely associated to a
sense weigh more. The confidence scores were
used to find the best matching pair (k, s): for every
expert sense s we selected the sense(s) k for which
conf(k, s) was higher than the random baseline
(1 over the number of expert senses) and higher
than the sum of the 2d and 3rd best confidence
scores, when possible, or assigned NA when both
conditions were not matched. We consider NA as
an additional expert sense whenever the expert as-
signed a sense based on other factors than lexical
context.

After matching inferred and expert-assigned



62

date genre author work target word sense id
-335 Technical Aristotle De Mundo kosmos kosmos:world

Table 1: Example from annotated dataset displaying Tou de sumpantos ouranou te kai kosmou sphairoeidous
ontos kai kinoumenou kathaper eipon (“The whole of the heaven, the whole cosmos, is spherical, and moves
continuously, as I have said”), containing the target kosmos and its expert-assigned sense ‘world’ (date: 335 B. C.).

senses, we computed precision and recall. For ev-
ery target word and matched pair (s, k), a word is
considered correctly assigned to sense k if it also
appeared within a 5-word window of the target
word in the expert annotation for s. In the example
above for kosmos, k = 0 and s=‘kosmos-world’,
one such word is ouranos ‘sky’ as it appears in the
model output for k = 0 and in the context win-
dow of a sentence labelled as ‘kosmos-world’ by
the annotators. Moreover, we weighted each word
by the inferred probability to account for the dif-
ferent degrees of association of words to senses.
Specifically, we defined precision as the ratio be-
tween the number of words correctly assigned to
k, weighted by their respective normalised model-
estimated probabilities, and the number of words
assigned to k by the model. This metric is based
on the distributional hypothesis whereby words oc-
curring in similar contexts tend to exhibit similar
meanings. We computed precision after stop word
removal, limiting the noise from uninformative con-
textual words. We defined precision in terms of the
words assigned to a sense also appearing within a 5-
word window of the target in the expert annotation.
Our model, as SCAN, only considers those con-
text words to determine word senses, and for the
ground truth evaluation we only retained the cases
in which the annotators could disambiguate words
based purely on their context. We defined recall as
the ratio between the number of all words correctly
assigned to k (weighted by their probabilities) and
number of words assigned to sense s by the experts
(weighted by their expert scores). For each model,
precision and recall scores for each (s, k) pair were
averaged and used as final scores. Since recall di-
rectly depends on the number of expert words, the
metric can only be used to compare models for a
specific target word. While the proposed assess-
ment focusses on dynamic mixture models, it can
be generalised to any probabilistic model by con-
sidering the posterior probability of the gold word
sense.

5 Experiments

Predictions on held-out words Considering the
50-word dataset described in Section 4, we eval-
uated the predictive performance in terms of log-
likelihood of held-out data for SCAN (not using
any genre information), GASC-all (GASC with
all the G = 10 available genres) and GASC-narr
(GASC with 2 genres, Narrative vs. non Narrative).
Narrative and Technical are such that all 50 words
occurred at least once in the training and test sets,
and analogous results are obtained when GASC
with Technical vs. non Technical. For each model,
we compared the 3 hyperparameter settings previ-
ously reported, with higher scores indicating that a
model is better at explaining unseen data.

Figure 3 shows predictive log-likelihood scores
for a range of K, with the results averaged over 50
leave-one-out folds. Each time, the scores were av-
eraged under the final 10 samples of the latent vari-
ables, out of 1000 MCMC iterations. On average,
GASC-narr consistently outperforms SCAN across
every K and hyperparameter setting. On the other
hand, SCAN has a higher held-out log-likelihood
than GASC-all. Exploiting some information on
the genre yields better predictions, while using all
genres attested in the corpus is not effective as
some genres are not sufficiently represented by the
data. Figure 3 also shows that the best predictions
over unseen data are obtained for K between 10
and 15. Higher K values tend to introduce noisy
senses with no improvement for the model output.
In addition, Setting 3 worked better or on par with
other settings. In the next section, we fix the hyper-
parameters and use a validation set of words that
were not part of the 50 targets of this experiment.

Ground truth recovery We explored the ability
to recover ground truth when available. For mus,
experts annotated 205 instances, of which 198 were
assigned to one of the 3 senses ‘mouse’, ‘mussel’,
and ‘muscle’; out of these 198 assignments, 114
were based on lexical contextual information only
(category ‘collocates’) and were retained for the
evaluation. For harmonia, the number of annotated
occurrences was 599, of which 411 were of the type



63

Figure 3: Held-out mean log-likelihood varyingK (the
larger, the better). Shaded areas are ± 1 standard error.

harmonia ‘agreement, harmony’ Technical (ρ = 0.888, p < 0.0001)Narrative (ρ = 0.719, p = 0.006)
Essays (ρ = 0.561, p = 0.046)

‘fastening’ Narrative (ρ = 0.663, p = 0.013)
‘stringing, music scale’ Technical (ρ = 0.817, p = 0.001)

Philosophy (ρ = 0.632, p = 0.02)
Essays (ρ = 0.598, p = 0.031)

kosmos ‘decoration’ Narrative (ρ = 0.887, p = 0.001)Technical (ρ = 0.705, p = 0.023)
Oratory (ρ = 0.664, p = 0.036)

‘order’ Technical (ρ = 0.875, p = 0.001)
Narrative (ρ = 0.862, p = 0.001

‘world’ Technical (ρ = 0.792, p = 0.006)
Oratory (ρ = 0.723, p = 0.018)

mus ‘mouse’ Narrative (ρ = 0.813, p = 0.001)Essays (ρ = 0.743, p = 0.004)
‘muscle’ Technical (ρ = 0.766, p = 0.002)
‘mussel’ Narrative (ρ = 0.736, p = 0.004)

Essays (ρ = 0.736, p = 0.004)
Poetry (ρ = 0.613, p = 0.026)

Table 2: Correlations between senses and genres for
manually annotated target words.

‘collocates’. For kosmos, 1,411 occurrences were
annotated, of which 1,406 were assigned to a sense,
and in 1,102 cases the annotation was of the type
‘collocates’. Only the annotations of the type ‘col-
locates’ were kept for the expert sense distribution,
and thus for the evaluation. We identified genres
with the largest effect on the distribution of senses
by the Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient for
each word-sense s between the frequency f(s) of
s across centuries and the frequency f(s, g) of s in
each genre g across centuries (Table 2). Significant
correlation between f(s) and any f(s, g) suggests
that variation in the frequency of a word sense
across centuries is not due to diachronic change,
but to how frequently s is attested in g in each
century (and, ultimately, to the amount of texts rep-
resenting g in each century). Given the amount of
available data and the size of the correlations, we
considered the genres Technical and non-Technical
for mus and harmonia, and both Technical and

non-Technical and Narrative and non-Narrative for
kosmos. These words were selected as examples
of polysemous words (a) with a range of clearly
distinct senses (such as ‘mus’, whose three senses
are strikingly diverse), (b) attested in most, if not
all, the time periods covered by the corpus, and
(c) attested across a number of genres. As expert
annotations of semantic change in Ancient Greek
corpora are virtually unavailable, this choice also
allowed us to leverage ground truth for validation.

We compared SCAN with GASC and GASC-
independent, a simpler version that fits indepen-
dent models to sets of documents sharing the same
genre, so that parameters and senses are inferred in-
dependently across genres (while in GASC senses
are shared but their probability distributions are
independent across genres). First, we compared
word senses across time with expert-annotated data.
Figure 4 shows the time distribution of the senses
of kosmos in the expert annotation (top) and as out-
putted by SCAN and GASC run on Narrative vs.
non-Narrative (bottom). For non-narrative texts,
the GASC sense distribution successfully captures
the ‘world’ sense arising only after 400 BC, which
is less clear for SCAN. Second, we computed pre-
cision, recall, and F1 scores (the harmonic mean of
precision and recall) to determine how closely the
words assigned to a sense match the ones assigned
by experts (Table 3). For GASC, the values average
precision, recall, and F1-score for {Technical, non-
Technical} for mus and harmonia and {Narrative,
Non-Narrative} for kosmos. The results show that,
for the most represented targets, genre information
improves the ability to recover the ground truth.

6 Conclusion

We introduced GASC, a Bayesian model to study
the evolution of word senses in ancient texts. We
performed this analysis conditional on the text
genre, demonstrating that the ability to harness
genre metadata addresses a fundamental challenge
in disambiguating word senses in ancient Greek. In
experiments we showed that GASC provides inter-
pretable representations of the evolution of word
senses, and achieves improved predictive perfor-
mance compared to the state of the art. Further, we
established a new framework to assess model accu-
racy against expert judgement. To our knowledge,
no previous work has systematically compared the
estimates from a statistical model to manual seman-
tic annotations of ancient texts.



64

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Figure 4: Expert annotation (top) vs SCAN and GASC (bottom). Each stacked bar represents all kosmos occur-
rences in a given time. Colours denoting senses are matched between plots. Both shades of orange map to ‘order’,
but the fourth sense in (B) and (D) is NA (i.e., conf(k, s) not higher than the random baseline and not higher than
the sum of 2nd and 3rd best confidence scores).

Word/Model SCAN GASC-independent GASC
P R F1 P R F1 P R F1

mus 0.430 0.477 0.452 0.420 0.442 0.431 0.224 0.298 0.253
harmonia 0.527 0.708 0.603 0.582 0.729 0.646 0.497 0.481 0.484
kosmos 0.405 0.586 0.478 0.362 0.447 0.399 0.525 0.611 0.595

Table 3: SCAN vs GASC on mus (‘mouse’, ‘muscle’, ‘mussel’), harmonia (‘abstract’, ‘concrete’, ‘musical’), and
kosmos (‘order’, ‘decoration’, ‘world’) in terms of precision (‘P’), recall (‘R’), and F1-score (‘F1’).

This work can be seen as a step towards the de-
velopment of richer evaluation schemes and mod-
els that can embed expert judgement. Future work
could encode more structured cross-genre depen-
dencies, or allow for change points that occur in
the light of exogenous forces by historical events.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by The Alan Turing In-
stitute under the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1 and
the seed funding grant SF042. We would also like
to thank Viivi Lähteenoja for her work on the an-
notation of the word kosmos, Dr Lea Frermann for
her advice, Prof Geoff Nicholls for his insights on
the model, as well as the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments.

References
Amr Ahmed and Eric P. Xing. 2012. Timeline: A dy-

namic hierarchical Dirichlet process model for re-
covering birth/death and evolution of topics in text
stream. UAI, abs/1203.3463.

David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2011. Measuring

Historical Word Sense Variation. Proceedings of the
11th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Li-
braries, pages 1–10.

Pierpaolo Basile and Barbara McGillivray. 2018. Dis-
covery Science, volume 11198 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, chapter Exploiting the Web for
Semantic Change Detection. Springer-Verlag.

David M. Blei and John D. Lafferty. 2006. Dynamic
topic models. ICML, pages 113–120.

Jordan Boyd-Graber, David M. Blei, and Xiaojin Zhu.
2007. A topic model for word sense disambiguation.
EMNLP.

Karin Cavallin. 2012. Automatic extraction of poten-
tial examples of semantic change using lexical sets.
In KONVENS, pages 370–377.

Michael Clarke. 2010. Register Variation. In Egbert J.
Bakker, editor, A companion to the Ancient Greek
language, pages 120–33. Wiley-Blackwell, Chich-
ester/Malden, Mass.

Paul Cook, Jey Han Lau, Diana McCarthy, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2014. Novel word-sense identifica-
tion. In Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics: Technical Papers, pages 1624–1635.



65

Mark Davies. 2002. The Corpus of Historical Ameri-
can English (COHA): 400 million words, 1810-2009.
Brigham Young University.

Avinava Dubey, Ahmed Hefny, Sinead Williamson,
and Eric P. Xing. 2013. A Nonparametric Mixture
Model for Topic Modeling over Time. SDM, pages
530–538.

Haim Dubossarsky, Simon Hengchen, Nina. Tah-
masebi, and Dominik Schlechtweg. 2019. Time-out:
Temporal referencing for robust modeling of lexical
semantic change. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan
Grossman. 2017. Outta control: Laws of semantic
change and inherent biases in word representation
models. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1136–1145.

Ingrid Falk, Delphine Bernhard, and Christophe
Gérard. 2014. De la quenelle culinaire à la quenelle
politique : identification de changements séman-
tiques à l’aide des Topic Models. In 21ème con-
férence sur le Traitement Automatique des Langues
Naturelles, page 443.

Lea Frermann and Mirella Lapata. 2016. A Bayesian
model of diachronic meaning change. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
4:31–45.

William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky.
2016. Diachronic word embeddings reveal statisti-
cal laws of semantic change. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, volume 1, pages 1489–1501.

Simon Hengchen. 2017. When Does it Mean?: De-
tecting Semantic Change in Historical Texts. Ph.D.
thesis, Université libre de Bruxelles.

Adam Jatowt, Ricardo Campos, Sourav S Bhowmick,
Nina Tahmasebi, and Antoine Doucet. 2018. Every
word has its history: Interactive exploration and vi-
sualization of word sense evolution. In Proceedings
of the 27th ACM International Conference on Infor-
mation and Knowledge Management, pages 1899–
1902. ACM.

Gard B. Jenset and Barbara McGillivray. 2017. Quan-
titative Historical Linguistics. A Corpus Framework.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Brett Kessler, Geoffrey Numberg, and Hinrich Schütze.
1997. Automatic detection of text genre. In Pro-
ceedings of the eighth conference on European chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 32–38. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Yoon Kim, Yi-I Chiu, Kentaro Hanaki, Darshan Hegde,
and Slav Petrov. 2014. Temporal analysis of lan-
guage through neural language models. ACL 2014,
page 61.

Vivek Kulkarni, Rami Al-Rfou, Bryan Perozzi, and
Steven Skiena. 2015. Statistically significant de-
tection of linguistic change. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on World Wide Web,
pages 625–635. International World Wide Web Con-
ferences Steering Committee.

Jey Han Lau, Paul Cook, Diana McCarthy, Spandana
Gella, and Timothy Baldwin. 2014. Learning word
sense distributions, detecting unattested senses and
identifying novel senses using topic models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 259–270.

Martti Leiwo, Hilla Halla-aho, and Marja Vierros.
2012. Variation and Change in Greek and Latin.
Papers and monographs of the Finnish Institute
at Athens. Foundation of the Finnish Institute at
Athens, Helsinki.

Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, Henry Stuart
Jones, and Roderick McKenzie. 1996. A Greek-
English lexicon, 9th ed. edition. Clarendon PressOx-
ford University Press, Oxford New York.

David Mimno, Hanna Wallach, and Andrew McCallum.
2008. Gibbs sampling for logistic normal topic mod-
els with graph-based priors. In NIPS workshop.

Sunny Mitra, Ritwik Mitra, Suman Kalyan Maity,
Martin Riedl, Chris Biemann, Pawan Goyal, and
Animesh Mukherjee. 2015. An automatic ap-
proach to identify word sense changes in text media
across timescales. Natural Language Engineering,
21(5):773–798.

Sunny Mitra, Ritwik Mitra, Martin Riedl, Chris Bie-
mann, Animesh Mukherjee, and Pawan Goyal. 2014.
That’s sick dude!: Automatic identification of word
sense change across different timescales. In Pro-
ceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 1020–1029.

Valerio Perrone, Paul A. Jenkins, Dario Spanò, and
Yee Whye Teh. 2017. Poisson random fields for dy-
namic feature models. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 18(127):1–45.

Jerome Jordan Pollitt. 1974. The ancient view of Greek
art: criticism, history, and terminology. Number 26
in Yale publications in the history of art. Yale Uni-
versity Press, New Haven. OCLC: 299700455.

Vinayak Rao and Yee Whye Teh. 2009. Spatial nor-
malized gamma processes. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pages 1554–1562.



66

Martina A. Rodda, Marco S.G. Senaldi, and Alessan-
dro Lenci. 2017. Panta Rei: Tracking Semantic
Change with Distributional Semantics in Ancient
Greek. Italian Journal of Computational Linguis-
tics, 3:11–24.

Michal Rosen-Zvi, Thomas Griffiths, Mark Steyvers,
and Padhraic Smyth. 2004. The author-topic model
for authors and documents. Proceedings of the 20th
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
pages 487–494.

Maja Rudolph and David Blei. 2018. Dynamic embed-
dings for language evolution. In Proceedings of the
2018 World Wide Web Conference on World Wide
Web, pages 1003–1011.

Dominik Schlechtweg, Sabine Schulte im Walde, and
Stefanie Eckmann. 2018. Diachronic usage related-
ness (DURel): A framework for the annotation of
lexical semantic change. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, NAACL 2018.

Nina Tahmasebi. 2018. A study on word2vec on a his-
torical Swedish newspaper corpus. In CEUR Work-
shop Proceedings. Vol. 2084. Proceedings of the
Digital Humanities in the Nordic Countries 3rd Con-
ference, Helsinki Finland, March 7-9, 2018. Univer-
sity of Helsinki, Faculty of Arts.

Nina Tahmasebi, Lars Borin, and Adam Jatowt. 2018.
Survey of computational approaches to lexical se-
mantic change detection. Research Data Journal for
the Humanities and Social Sciences.

Nina Tahmasebi and Thomas Risse. 2017. Finding in-
dividual word sense changes and their delay in ap-
pearance. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference Recent Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, RANLP 2017, pages 741–749.

Xuri Tang. 2018. A state-of-the-art of semantic change
computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09872.

Xuri Tang, Weiguang Qu, and Xiaohe Chen. 2016. Se-
mantic change computation: A successive approach.
World Wide Web, 19(3):375–415.

Alessandro Vatri, Viivi Lähteenoja, and Barbara
McGillivray. 2019. Ancient Greek Semantic
Change - Annotated Datasets and Code [dataset].
doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4445420.

Alessandro Vatri and Barbara McGillivray. 2018. The
Diorisis Ancient Greek Corpus. Research Data
Journal for the Humanities and Social Sciences.

Derry Tanti Wijaya and Reyyan Yeniterzi. 2011. Un-
derstanding semantic change of words over cen-
turies. In Proceedings of the 2011 international
workshop on DETecting and Exploiting Cultural di-
versiTy on the social web, pages 35–40. ACM.

Marcos Zampieri, Shervin Malmasi, and Mark Dras.
2016. Modeling language change in historical cor-
pora: The case of Portuguese. In Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris,
France. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).


