




































A Green Approach for an Irish App (Refactor, reuse and keeping it real) 

Monica Ward 

Dublin City University 

Ireland 

monica.ward@dcu.ie 

Maxim Mozgovoy 

University of Aizu 

Japan 

mozgovoy@u-aizu.ac.jp 

 

Marina Purgina 

University of Aizu 

Japan 

mapurgina@gmail.com 

 

 Abstract 

There is a lack of apps for learning Irish, 

and while there is a potential demand for 

such apps, good quality, pedagogically 

sound apps are difficult to develop.  This 

paper reports on a green approach to de-

velop an app for learning Irish.  It refactors 

and reuses an existing app (WordBricks, 

Mozgovoy and Effimov, 2013) and adapts 

it for Irish.  The app uses existing Irish 

NLP resources, specifically Uí 

Dhonnchadha’s Finiate Stage Mophologi-

cal Analyser (2002) and Lynn’s Irish par-

ser and treebank (2016), as part of the app.  

The app was developed in conjunction 

with teachers to ensure that it was curric-

ulum-aligned and testing with the target 

learner group (primary school learners) 

before actual deployment in a real class-

room. The app has been used by a variety 

of classes, ranging in age from 7 to 11 

years of age.  Results indicate that the app 

is usable and enjoyable for learners and 

teachers report that it is beneficial for their 

students.  It would not have been possible 

to build the app in a relatively short period 

of time without adopting a green (i.e. re-

factor, reuse and real) paradigm. 

1 Introduction 

Irish is one of the two official languages of Irish 

along with English.  However, only a relatively 

small percentage of the population speak it as an 

L1.  Nearly all students study the language in 

school with primary school children studying the 

language for around 30 minutes each day and 

secondary school students for 160 minutes a 

week.  The teaching of the language is currently 

very traditional, with a ‘chalk and talk’ and ‘sage 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 

on the stage’ approach prevailing.  There is a space 

for more modern resources for the teaching and 

learning or Irish.  This paper provides an overview 

of a mobile Irish language app, Irish WordBricks, 

that allows learners to practice the construction of 

grammatically correct sentences in Irish. The Irish 

WordBricks app uses a visual learning paradigm 

and can be used by learners of all ages. 

1.1 Language Learning Apps 

Language learning is difficult and anything that 

helps the learning process is to be welcomed.  

Motivation is very important in learning (Dörnyei 

& Ushioda, 2013; Ushioda, 2013), particularly in 

language learning as the challenges involved and 

the application of the knowledge acquired may be 

difficult.  In recent years, there has been an 

increasing use of technology in the language 

learning process.  One area of expanding interest 

is that of language learning apps.  These apps let 

students learn a language on a mobile device, with 

an anytime, anywhere approach.  Some of the 

most commonly used apps are Duolingo, Buso 

and Memrise.  These apps are free to use for the 

basic components and learners can pay extra to 

have access to more advanced features and 

additional resources.  Many of these apps are used 

in the informal learning space, but could be used 

in the formal as well. Duolingo (n.d.) is probably 

the best know language learning app and is 

currently available in 33 languages, mainly the 

most commonly spoken languages but it also 

includes Irish (954,000 learners), Welsh (347, 000 

learners), Navajo (251,000 learners) and Klingon 

(500,000 learners).  It works on a translation 

approach whereby learners have to translate 

works between their L1 and the target L2 in both 

directions.  It uses a gamified approach to learning 

(Nacke and Deterding, 2017; Reinhardt, J., & 

Sykes, 2014) and it can be beneficial for some 

learners.  Duolingo uses a community 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 80



development approach but also has a team of 

developers working behind the scenes.    

1.2 Irish App Development Challenges 

Language learning apps, such as Duolingo, Buso 

and Memrise, are often enjoyable and can be 

pedagogically informed.  However, they may not 

be suitable in some learning contexts.  For 

example, they may not cover all aspects of the 

language learning process (which is very difficult 

to do), their pedagogical approach may focus on 

one particular strategy and learners may have 

needs that are not met by these apps.  Learners 

cannot construct their own sentences and are 

constrained by the sentences already predefined in 

the app.  It would be beneficial to have other apps 

and technology-based resources for learners. 

There are many challenges to be overcome to 

develop a language learning app for any language.  

The field of Computer Assisted Language 

Learning (CALL) (Beaty, 2013; Levy and 

Stockwell, 2013) is a multi-disciplinary one 
involving language teachers, linguistics, 

pedagogical specialists, Natural Language 

Processing (NLP) experts, software engineers, 

programmers, user interface designers and, of 

course, language learners.  Access to sufficient 

financial resources, adequate time and availability 

of relevant experts is also important.  This is the 

ideal scenario and one that rarely exist, even for 

some of the Most Commonly Taught Languages 

(MCTLs).  In reality, CALL researchers and 

practitioners must be resourceful and use 

whatever resources and skills are available to 

them.  The challenges are even greater for Less 

Commonly Taught Languages (LCTLs) where 

there is usually less of everything.  There is 

usually not a multidisciplinary team available to 

develop CALL resources, there are fewer 

financial resources and often not many available 

experts to contribute to the design and 

development process.   

ICALL (Intelligent CALL) is a branch of CALL 

that includes the use of NLP resources in the 

design and development of CALL resources 
(Heift and Schulz, 2007).  Many LCTLs are also 
Lesser Resourced Languages (LRLs) and there is 

often a lack of suitable, good quality NLP 

resources for LCTL CALL researchers to 

leverage.   This is the case for most of the Celtic 

languages, although there are some high quality 

resources available for specific language and 

functions.  For example, in the case of Irish, there 

is a Finite State Morphological Analyser (Ui 

Dhonnachada, 2002) and a parser (Lynn, 

2016) that are of high quality and available for 

CALL resources to use.  Mobile Assisted 

Language Learning (MALL) is of growing 
interest within the CALL community in recent 

years ((Holden & Sykes, 2011; Kukulska-Hulme, 

2009; Kukulska-Hulme, 2012; Stockwell, 2012)) 

and there are many MALL apps being developed, 

particularly for the MCTLs. 

Irish is a compulsory subject in Irish primary 

and secondary schools, although some students 

can get an exemption from studying the language.  

Reasons for exemptions include having a learning 

difficulty (e.g. dyslexia) or if the student came to 

Ireland after a certain age.  In Irish primary 

schools, teachers are generalists and teach all 

subjects to their students, including Irish.  At 

second level, teachers are specialists and will have 

four years of undergraduate study in their subject 

and two years postgraduate study in education.  

There are several issues to consider in relation to 

Irish language teaching.  Most teachers, both at 

primary and secondary level, are not native 

speakers of the language.  Primary teachers in 

particular have many subjects to cover and Irish is 

only one of them, so the level of ability in Irish 

can vary widely from one teacher to another.  

Some primary teachers are passionate about Irish, 

while others less so.  Some teachers may lack 

confidence in their Irish language ability and this 

can have an impact on their teaching of the 

language.  At second level, there is currently a 

shortage of Irish language teachers and it is hard 

from schools to find qualified teachers. 

Language pedagogy is a specific branch of 

pedagogy.  It is different from studying a subject 

like biology or history and it is important that 

teachers have knowledge of language teaching in 

order to help their students learn more efficiently, 

effectively and enjoyably.  Learning a language 

does not just involve the four basic skills (reading, 

writing, listening and speaking), but involves 

cultural awareness and pragmatics, learning new 

sounds, having the courage to make mistakes and 

learn from them and sometimes thinking about 

things in a completely new way.    In Ireland, 

students learn a Modern Foreign Language (MFL) 

(e.g. French, German or Spanish) in secondary 

school.  MFL teachers study all aspects of 

language pedagogy.  However, primary school 

teachers will only have limited exposure to 

language pedagogy as part of their pre-service 

teacher undergraduate study and will only have a 

limited knowledge of CALL.  In some university 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 81



departments there is a separate department for 

Irish and a different one for Modern Foreign 

Languages and this can sometimes mean that 

there may be a lack of cross-over knowledge in 

relation to language pedagogy and CALL.  Also, 

there may be a focus on traditional aspects of 

language teaching with less space for more 

modern or innovative approaches.  This in turn 

can result in less positive learning experiences for 

students learning Irish compared with a MFL.  

Their level of language attainment after 13 years 

of study is also quite low (Harris et al, 2006). Of 
course, there have been changes over the years 

and there are places where there is excellent and 

innovative teaching taking place, but there are still 

schools where there is plenty of room for 

improvement.  The lack of teachers compounds 

this problem.  

Irish has a paradoxical role in Ireland.  Devitt 

et al. (2018) report on primary school 

children’s attitude towards the language and 

their varying level disengagement with the 

language.  Research shows that people value the 
language, they see it as part of Irish identify and 

recognise the cultural importance of the language 

(Darmody and Daly, 2015).  However, when it 
comes to the classroom, sometimes they are less 

enthusiastic.  Less importance may be attached to 
Irish language homework and some parents may 

prefer their child to study a ‘useful’ language like 

Spanish or Chinese.  All Irish language 

speakers in Ireland also speak English and the 

lack of utilitarian value can impact perception 

of the language (Laoire, 2005).  The 
paradoxical role of Irish can impact on teachers.  

They can feel the societal weigh of responsibility 

for teaching the language, yet feel little support 

from parents for the actual teaching of Irish.  

Negative attitudes towards the language can be 

demotivating for both teachers and students. 

      

Irish App Development Challenges 

Challenge Comment 

CALL 

development is 

difficult 

Difficult for any language, 

more so for Less 

Resourced Languages like 

Irish 

Irish language 

teaching 

Few teachers are L1 

speakers, lack of 

confidence, not a focus for 

some 

Irish language 

pedagogy 

Pedagogy is improving 

but room for improvement 

Paradoxical 

attitudes towards 

the language 

Culturally valued, but less 

positive in reality 

 

Table 1: List of Irish app development challenges 

1.3 WordBricks 

WordBricks is an interactive language learning 

app (Mozgovoy & Efimov, 2013).  It was 

originally designed for adult learners (Japanese 

university students) of English.  It is based on a 

visual learning paradigm, somewhat similar to the 

interface used in the visual programing language 

Scratch (Resnick et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2013) 

and other work with blocks to illustrate grammar 

points Ebbels (2007).  Each part of speech (POS) 

is given a different shape and colour (e.g. all verbs 

are blue and start with a straight edge).  Learners 

can construct grammatically correct sentences by 

putting different parts of speech in the correct 

order in a sentence.  In fact, learners can only 

construct grammatically sentences – the app will 

not allow them to put POS in the wrong place.  

The motivation behind the app was to enable 

learners to experiment with different sentences 

and play around with word order so that they 

could familiarise themselves with the structure of 

a language.  When language students use a book 

to learn a language, they are often restricted to a 

limited number of example sentences or exercise 

sentences.  They have to consult with their teacher 

if they want to check the correctness of sentences 

they construct themselves.  This limits the 

freedom they have to work without teacher 

support and may restrict their motivation to try out 

new sentences for fear of making mistakes.  The 

visual learning paradigm used by the app 

facilitates the pattern matching aspect of language 

learning, as the more sentences a student 

constructs, the more obvious the patterns become.  

Figure 1 shows an example of a sentence in 

English. The verb component ‘saw’ in blue and 

starting with a straight edge.  It expects a subject 

that has a rounded side (in this case ‘we’) at the 

start of the sentence and it expects an object after 

the verb ‘saw’.  The object in this case is ‘things’ 

and it can be qualified by the words ‘many’ and 

‘interesting’ as these are the correct shapes (parts 

of speech) that can precede the object ‘things’.   

The full sentence of Figure 1 is ‘We saw many 

interesting things in the museum’ (although ‘The 

interesting things saw we in the museum’ would 

also be accepted). 

 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 82



 
 

Figure 1: A sentence for the original WordBricks 

app for English 

2 Approach 

As with many Lesser Resourced Languages and 

LCTLs, Irish is under-served by CALL resources.  

It is not financially attractive for commercial 

entities to develop CALL resources for Irish.  

However, there are some good resources recently 

developed for learners.  For example, Irish 101 on 

the FutureLearn platform is an online MOOC for 

learning Irish and culture (Irish101, n.d.).  It is 

very successful and has had learners from all over 

the world studying Irish.  Dalton and Devitt 

(2016) have developed a successful online 

detective game for primary school students.  

Hainey et al. (2016) provide an overview of game-

based language learning resource at primary 

school level, including for language, and they note 

that many of them use commercial off the shelf 

(COTS) games.  This is often not an option in the 

Irish context.  As noted above, it is a challenge to 

develop CALL resources for Irish.  Limited 

resources (financial, NLP and time) and lack of 

relevant experts demands a smart approach.  A 

combination of refactoring, reuse and real-world 

focus were used to develop the Irish WordBricks 

app.   

 

2.1 Refactoring 

Refactoring is the process by which existing code 

is changed without changing its external 

behaviours (Fowler, 2018).  Refactoring usually 

takes place when a code smell (lovely term) is 

detected (e.g. when something ‘wrong’ is 

noticed).  This means that developers will review 

code that is unusually slow or could be improved 

(noticed by a ‘code smell’).  It can be done to 

improve maintainability and extensibility. 

Refactoring in this case took place in the context 

of making an existing app work in other contexts. 

WordBricks was initially developed as an app for 

Japanese university students of English (Park et 

al., 2016) and needed to be refactored to work for 

Irish.  The app had been successfully developed 

and used in a Japanese university, so the 

technology and the pedagogy had been tested and 

proved successful (Park et al., 2016).  The aim 

was to refactor the English version of WordBricks 

so that it could be used to develop an app for Irish.  

The target user group, the setting and the devices 

used to run the app were all different.  The original 

WordBricks was designed for adult learners to use 

outside of the classroom setting on a mobile 

phone.  While it might be obvious, It is important 

to remember that education with adults 

(androgogy) is different to that with children 

(pedagogy) (Knowles, 1968).  The Irish 

WordBricks app was aimed at young primary 

school learners, in a classroom setting on the 

teacher’s laptop or a tablet.  The refactoring 

process would involve keeping the same front-end 

functionality and User Interface (UI), but rework 

the back-end so that it was language independent. 

 

2.2 Reuse 

There were two elements that were reused in the 

development of the Irish WordBricks app.  The 

first was the reuse of the original WordBricks app 

itself. The second element was the reuse of 

existing Irish NLP resources.  These were the 

Finite State Morphological Analyser (FSMA) (Uí 

Dhonnchadha, 2002) and the Irish language parser 

(Lynn, 2016).  The FSMA analyser is a high 

quality NLP resource for Irish and it produces 

Irish morpho-syntactic tags for an input sentence.  

The FSMA was used manually initially to check 

part of speech information when developing 

example sentences for the Irish WordBricks app.  

The Irish Parser produces treebank information 

for an input sentence.  The idea was to use the 

knowledge in these resources to ensure the 

accuracy of the grammar constructions and words 

used in the Irish WordBricks app.  

2.3 Real-World Focus 

Many language learning apps and resources get 

built, tested in a controlled environment and never 

make it out to the wild (i.e. the real world).  This 

may be because the app may not be sufficiently 

robust for external use or may need additional 

resources that are not available in the real world 

setting.  Another reason that this sometimes 

happens is if the app is not curriculum-aligned.  

Curriculum-alignment is a key factor in CALL 

real-world usage for any language (Bax, 2003; 

Chambers and Bax (2006) and also for Irish 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 83



(Ward, 2007). The school curriculum, at both 

primary and secondary level, is packed.  Teachers 

do not have spare teaching time to devote to 

additional, optional extras.  Therefore, if an app is 

not curriculum-aligned teachers will be reluctant 

to use it. In order for an app to be actually useful 

for teachers and students, it must be designed with 

a real world focus from the start and be 

cognoscente of the actual deployment context and 

real world conditions prevailing in the learning 

environment.  The Irish WordBricks app was 

designed using a user-centre design approach 

whereby the teachers were consulted at an early 

stage in the design process about what topics 

should be covered and how the app could be 

deployed in the classroom.  They decided that 

possession, doing something, feeling something, 

location and asking questions where important 

topics to have in the app.  The presumption was 

that the teacher would have already taught a topic 

before the students would use the app i.e. the 

app would be a tool rather than a tutor (Levy, 

1997).   
 

3 Methodology 

The process of developing the Irish WordBricks 

(IWB) app took place in several phases.  In the 

initial phase, the Irish CALL researcher worked in 

parallel with several primary school teachers and 

the WordBricks developers on possible 

grammatical constructs.  The Irish CALL 

researcher and the teachers reviewed the Irish 

syllabus and current textbooks to decide on the 

topics to be covered and the vocabulary to be used 

in the app.  The WordBrick developers worked on 

refactoring their app so that it would work for Irish 

as well as English.  They then worked on 

incorporating the required grammatical 

information and vocabulary into the WordBricks 

infrastructure to create the first version of the Irish 

WordBricks app.  In this Phase, the (Finite State 

Morphological Analyser (FSMA, Uí 

Dhonnchadha, 2002) was used (manually) to 
check the POS of each of the words in the example 

sentences and vocabulary lists.  The information 

was passed to the WordBricks developers using an 

informal, ad-hoc structure and they incorporated 

it into their WordBricks engine (see Figure 2). 

An iterative, agile approach was adopted, 

whereby one topic (grammatical construction) 

was implement and tested by the WordBricks 

developers, the CALL researcher and the teacher 

and checked for correctness before implementing 

another topic.  The target learner group (primary 

school children) also tested the app at an early 

stage to ensure that they could use it without any 

difficulties. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Phase 0 of Irish WordBrick development 

 
Figure 3 shows the informal ad-hoc format used 

for the construction ‘to have’.  The WordBrick 

developers had no prior knowledge of Irish and it 

was necessary to explain both the vocabulary and 

part of speech information to them. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Sample informal information for ‘to 

have’ construction 

 

In Phase 1 of the IWB development, the individual 

example sentences where encoded in an XML file.  

All known words (with their POS information) 

were stored in the IWB app so that learners could 

construct their own new sentences as well as 

constructing the example sentences. This involved 

the Irish CALL researcher providing the 

WordBrick developers with the example 

sentences and the relevant vocabulary list 

specifying the POS of each word.  This enabled 

the IWB app to be developed using the same 

black-box architecture as the original English 

WordBricks app (see Figure 4).  While this was 

very beneficial, it was quite limiting as it was 

IWB 

Engine 

IWB 

App 

Vocabulary and 

POS info in 

informal, ad-hoc 

format 

Have     

Format:  bí (verb) + optional article + 

noun + (with pronoun) or (with Prep + Noun) 

 

Example 1  
Tá hata agam.  I have a hat.  

 

Example 2  
Bhí an hata agam. I had the hat. 

     

Tok.   Lem. POS                             Meaning 

Tá     bí      Verb Verb+VI+PresInd  Is 

Bhí    bí      Verb VI+PastInd+Len   Was 

hata   hata  Noun Masc+Com+Sg    hat 

agam  ag     Pron  Prep+1P+Sg        (with me) 

 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 84



difficult to decide how best to structure the 

information and there was an associated 

turnaround time to enter new examples into the 

app. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 4: Phase 1 of the Irish WordBricks app 

 
In Phase 2 of the IWB development, existing NLP 

resources for Irish were used to automate the 

process and enable learners to have access to a 

wider range of vocabulary.  The Irish WordBricks 

app was developed on the basis of Uí 

Dhonnchadha’s (2002) Finite State 

Morphological Analyser (FSMA) for Irish, 
Lynn’s Irish parser (2015) and the Irish treebank 

(universal dependencies version, Lynn and Foster 

(2016). The user inputted sentence is passed to the 

FSMA for Irish (Uí Dhonnchadha, 2002).  The 
FSMA produces Irish morpho-syntactic tags 

which are passed to the Irish parser (Lynn, 2016).  

The parser’s output is then fed into the Irish 

WordBricks engine which takes maps the 

sentence into an XML structure.  This XML data 

is passed into the IWB App where the learner can 

see the individual words and then construct a 

grammatically correct sentence. (see Figure 5). 

The Irish WordBricks app relies on the underlying 

NLP tools to handle ambiguity.  One advantage of 

dealing with learners with a low level of language 

ability is that their choice of words is usually 

limited and they are unlikely to (be able to) 

construct complex sentences.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 5: Phase 2 of the Irish WordBricks app 

using existing NLP resources 

 

The topics covered in the IWB app include: to 

have something (Tá hata agam.), to do something 

(Tá Seán ag rith), feelings (Tá áthas ar Liam), 

location (Tá leabhar ar an mbord) and questions 

(An raibh Áine ag ithe?).  Figure 6 shows the 

construction of simple sentence (Tá hata agam – 

I have a hat).  If the word is the correct place, the 

learner will see the brick turning yellow and the 

word will clock into place.   

 
 

Figure 6: Eample of a simple sentence in Irish 

WordBricks 

 

Figure 7 shows an example of location (Tá 

leabhar ar an mbord – there is a book on the 

table).  
 

 
 

Figure 7: Example of location sentnce in Irish 

WorBricks 

 

Figure 8 shows two sentences lined up together 

and illustrates how students can benefit from this 

visual learning approach (e.g. colours and shapes) 

to remember language and part of speech patterns 

in a sentence.   

 

 
 

Figure 8: Example of two similar sentences lined 

up together in Irish WordBricks 

 

Figure 9 shows how the app prevents a student 

from constructing a grammatically incorrect 

sentence.  The student is trying to add the article 

IWB 

Engine 

IWB 

App 

Vocabulary 

and POS info 

in XML 

format 

Tá hata ag Seán FSMA Parser 

IWB 

Engine 

IWB 

App 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 85



‘na’ (definite plural) to a singular noun (hata – 

hat) and app does not let the student place the 

word there. 
 

 
 

Figure 9: Example of Irish WordBricks 

preventing the construction of an incorrect 

sentence 

4 Results 

The app was initially tested with four adult 

learners of Irish.  Their feedback was positive and 

they like the user interface and felt the app was 

easy to use.  The app has been used by a variety of 

primary school learners (Purgina et al., 2017) 
over a period of three years (including this year).  

The app has been used by second class students 

(7-8 years old), third class students (8-9 years old) 

and fifth class students (10-11 years old).  The app 

was used by three 3rd year classes (n=72) and two 

5th year classes (n=44) in Year 1, three 2nd year 

classes (n=72) and two 5th year classes (n=52) in 

Year 2 and three 5th year classes (n=75) in Year 3.  

There were two primary schools involved – one 

all-boys and one all-girls. Three teachers were 

involved in the consultations about the content of 

the app. 

The IWB app has been used in a variety of 

ways. Initially it was used in a whole class setting. 

This involved the teacher showing the students a 

particular construct (e.g. to have Tá hata agam – 

I have a hat).  This involved putting the IWB on a 

laptop and using an android emulator to run the 

app and show it to the class via a data projector.  

The teacher would then ask some students to come 

up and construct the example sentences in front of 

the class. Then several students were chosen to 

construct their own sentences for the class.  This 

approach worked reasonably well but more 

students wanted to use the app than time 

permitted.  However, this was the only possible 

way of using the app as there were no computers 

or tables in the school for student use. 

In the second year, students were given tablets 

to run the IWB app.  Initially, they use the tablets 

in pairs but then they were given individual tablets 

to work with.  This had the advantage of enabling 

students to work at their own pace.  This is very 

important in a subject like Irish where there is a 

wide range of ability in each class.  One slight 

disadvantage with this approach, is that students 

try to get the example sentences done as quickly 

as possible so they can construct their own 

sentences.  Sometimes they try to set up loads of 

words and they can lose focus on the pedagogical 

aspects of the app.  

In the third year (this current year), the 

deployment of the app is more structured.  The 

teacher revises a particular construct with the 

students and asks them to write their own 

sentences on paper.  The students can use the app 

to do the example sentences and then they can 

input their own sentences.  This structured 

approach appears to be working well.  In the first 

version of the app, the vocabulary was fixed and 

was based on the words that the students had 

studied with their teacher.  In the second version 

of the app, the students have the facility to enter 

their own words. 

Feedback from the students and teachers to 

date has been very positive.  In the Irish language 

learning context, qualitative research is very 

important (Ward, 2018).  The students find the app 

easy to use, they think it helped them to learn 

Irish, and most importantly, they enjoyed using 

the app (“Really good, fun and easy to use”).  The 

students had many suggestions for future 

improvements.  For example, they would like it to 

be more gamified (“Maybe a challenge mode to 

test you“), “To challenge people online and get 

points for longer sentences“, they would like 

translations (“Every Irish word & English 

subtitles“) and they would like more words (“Add 

new verbs and different names“).  Some students 

wanted to know when they could download the 

app (“Great help, can’t wait until it’s on the app 

store :-)“) which is encouraging.  One student had 

a great insight into the app “I love the method it 

uses to create sentences.  It’s a bit like a puzzle in 

a way.  I also adore the trial and error style”. 

The teachers also had positive feedback.  They 

were happy with the topics covered and were glad 

to see the level of interaction and engagement of 

the students with the app.  Usually, their Irish 

lessons do not generate the same buzz in the 

classroom. 

5 Discussion 

It would not have been possible for the CALL 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 86



developer to develop the Irish WordBricks app 

from scratch in a reasonable timeframe.  The fact 

that the original WordBricks app could be 

refactored to produce the Irish WordBricks app 

meant that learners could start using the app in a 

period of months rather than years.  WordBricks 

has already been tried and tested with real users 

and had the WordBricks team demonstrated that it 

was a useful and viable app for learners.  This 

gave confidence to the Irish WordBricks team that 

the aim of developing a useful, enjoyable app for 

Irish language learners was feasible rather than a 

pipedream. 

It was very important that real learners used the 

app in their real world setting.  The IWB app was 

curriculum-aligned right from the start and 

teachers were consulted throughout the design and 

development process.  Learners were asked for 

their feedback and each version of the IWB app 

has included improvements based on their 

feedback.  For example, students wanted to be 

able to save their sentences and this is now 

possible.  Students wanted to be able to type in 

their own words and they can now do this.   

From a technical perspective, the new version 

of the Irish WordBricks app allows for greater 

flexibility and demonstrates the power and 

potential of reusing existing NLP resources in the 

development of CALL resources for Irish.  It 

would not have been possible to develop such a 

resource in a relatively short timeframe from 

scratch and it would have required technical and 

linguistic knowledge of Irish that only a very few 

people possess.    Existing resources from Irish 

NLP researchers (Uí Dhonnchadha 2002, 2009; 

Lynn, 2016; Lynn and Foster, 2016) were 

invaluable in this regard. 

6 Conclusion 

Irish, like the other Celtic languages, would 

benefit from having more resources available for 

language learners.  However, it is difficult to build 

robust, grammatically accurate, enjoyable 

resources for students.  The IWB app works due 

to a variety of factors.  The motivation behind the 

development of the app was strong – teachers, 

students and the CALL researcher knew that there 

was a real need for such an app.  There was a 

multidisciplinary team involved in its 

development including teachers, students, CALL 

researchers, education design specialists and app 

developers.  The concept and reality of the app 

had been proven in another domain.  The IWB 

team was aware of, and consistently conscious of 

the real world deployment context of the app.  An 

important aspect to be emphasized is that the 

system has been used by a variety of students 

ranging in age from 7 to 11 years and the final 

product is enjoyable for students and teachers 

also. The design and development of the IWB app 

demonstrates the power of refactoring, reuse and 

keeping it real. 

 

References 

Bax, S. (2003). CALL—past, present and 

future. System, 31(1), 13-28. 

Chambers, A., & Bax, S. (2006). Making CALL work: 

Towards normalisation. System, 34(4), 465-479. 

Dalton, G., & Devitt, A. (2016). Gaeilge Gaming: As-

sessing how games can help children to learn 

Irish. International Journal of Game-Based Learn-

ing (IJGBL), 6(4), 22-38. 

Darmody, M., & Daly, T. (2015). Attitudes towards the 

Irish Language on the Island of Ireland. 

Devitt, A., Condon, J., Dalton, G., O'Connell, J., & Ní 

Dhuinn, M. (2018). An maith leat an Ghaeilge? An 

analysis of variation in primary pupil attitudes to 

Irish in the growing up in Ireland 

study. International Journal of Bilingual Education 

and Bilingualism, 21(1), 105-117. 

Dörnyei, Z., & Ushioda, E. (2013). Teaching and 

researching: Motivation. Routledge. 

Duolingo (n.d.) Available at: https://www.duo-

lingo.com/ 

Ebbels, S. (2007) Teaching grammar to school-aged 

children with specific language impairment using 

shape coding. Child Language Teaching and Ther-

apy 23 (1), 67–93. 

Fowler, M. (2018). Refactoring: improving the design 

of existing code. Addison-Wesley Professional. 

Hainey, T., Connolly, T. M., Boyle, E. A., Wilson, A., 

& Razak, A. (2016). A systematic literature review 

of games-based learning empirical evidence in 

primary education. Computers & Education, 102, 

202-223. 

Harris, J., Forde, P., Archer, P., & Nic Fhearaile, S. O 

Gorman, M.(2006). Irish in primary school: Long-

term national trends in achievement. 

Heift, T., & Schulze, M. (2007). Errors and 

intelligence in computer-assisted language 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 87



learning: Parsers and pedagogues. Routledge.  

Holden, C. L., & Sykes, J. M. (2011). Leveraging 

mobile games for place-based language 

learning. International Journal of Game-Based 

Learning (IJGBL), 1(2), 1-18. 

Irish 101, n.d. Irish 101: An introduction to Irish 

language and culture.  Available at: 

https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/irish-

language  

Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2009). Will mobile learning 

change language learning?. ReCALL, 21(2), 157-

165. 

Kukulska‐Hulme, A. (2012). Mobile‐Assisted 

language learning. The encyclopedia of applied 

linguistics. 

Laoire, M. Ó. (2005). The language planning situation 

in Ireland. Current Issues in Language 

Planning, 6(3), 251-314. 

Levy, M. (1997). Computer-assisted language 

learning: Context and conceptualization. Oxford 

University Press. 

Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2013). CALL dimensions: 

Options and issues in computer-assisted language 

learning. Routledge. 

Lynn, T., (2016).  Irish Dependency Treebanking and 

Parsing.  PhD Thesis. 

Lynn, T., & Foster, J. (2016). Universal dependencies 

for Irish. In Celtic Language Technology 

Workshop (pp. 79-92).  

Mozgovoy, M. & Efimov, R. (2013) WordBricks: a 

virtual language lab inspired by Scratch 

environment and dependency grammars. Human-

centric Computing and Information Sciences 3 (1), 

1–9. 

Nacke, L. E., & Deterding, C. S. (2017). The maturing 

of gamification research. Computers in Human 

Behaviour, 450-454. 

Park, M., Purgina, M., & Mozgovoy, M. (2016). 

Learning English Grammar with WordBricks: 

Classroom Experience. In Proceedings of the 2016 

IEEE International Conference on Teaching and 

Learning in Education. 

Purgina, M., Mozgovoy, M., & Ward, M. (2017). 

MALL with WordBricks–building correct 

sentences brick by brick. CALL in a climate of 

change: adapting to turbulent global conditions–

short papers from EUROCALL 2017, 254. 

Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J. (2014). Special issue 

commentary: Digital game and play activity in L2 

teaching and learning. Language Learning & 

Technology, 18(2), 2-8. 

Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., 

Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., & Kafai, Y. 

(2009). Scratch: programming for all. 

Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60-67. 

Stockwell, G. (2012). Mobile-assisted language 

learning. Contemporary computer-assisted 

language learning, 16(3), 24-31. 

Uí Dhonnchadha, E. (2002). An analyser and 

generator for Irish inflectional morphology using 

finite-state transducers (Doctoral dissertation, 

Dublin City University).  

Uí Dhonnchadha, E. (2009). Part-of-speech tagging 

and partial parsing for Irish using finite-state 

transducers and constraint grammar (Doctoral 

dissertation, Dublin City University).  

Ushioda, E. (Ed.). (2013). International perspectives 

on motivation: Language learning and professional 

challenges. Springer. 

Ward, M. (2007). The integration of CL resources in 

CALL for Irish in the primary school context 

(Doctoral dissertation, Dublin City University). 

Ward, M. (2018). Qualitative research in less 

commonly taught and endangered language CALL. 

Wilson, A., Hainey, T., & Connolly, T. M. (2013). 

Using Scratch with primary school children: an 

evaluation of games constructed to gauge 

understanding of programming 

concepts. International Journal of Game-Based 

Learning (IJGBL), 3(1), 93-109. 

 

Proceedings of the Celtic Language Technology Workshop 2019 Dublin, 19–23 Aug., 2019 | p. 88


