




































 
 
 
 

Surveying the potential of using speech technologies for post-editing 
purposes in the context of international organizations: 

What do p​rofessional translators think? 

Jeevanthi Liyanapathirana 
World Trade Organization 

 Rue de Laussane 154 
Geneva, Switzerland 

jeevanthi.liyana@wto.org 

Pierrette Bouillon 
Fac. de traduction et d’interprétation 

University of Geneva, 1211 
Geneva, Switzerland 

pierrette.bouillon@unige.ch 

Bartolomé Mesa-Lao 
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya 

Av. Tibidabo, 39-43  
08035 Barcelona, Spain 

bmesa@uoc.edu 

 

 
 ​Abstract 1

The present study has surveyed professional      
translators working in six international     
organizations in order to know more about their        
views and attitudes with regard to new       
translation workflows involving two different     
types of technologies, i.e. machine translation      
and speech recognition. The main aim of this        
survey was to identify how feasible it is to         
implement new post-editing workflows in an      
international organization using speech as an      
input method to edit inaccurate machine      
translation outputs. Overall, the results suggest      
that the surveyed translators ​do not hold a        
negative view on the use of ASR as part of their           
translation workflow, which provides a     
promising first step towards investigating the      
integration of speech based post-editing to      
translation workflows for productivity and     
ergonomic gains.  

1 Introduction 

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) software     
has quietly created a niche for itself in many         
situations of our daily lives (Joscelyne, 2018). It        
can be found at the other end of        
customer-support hotlines, it is built into      
operating systems and it is offered as an        
alternative text-input method for smartphones.     
On another front, given the significant      
improvements in Machine Translation (MT)     
quality and the increasing demand for      

1 ​© ​This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 4.0 
licence, no derivative works, attribution, CCBY-ND. 

translations, post-editing of MT has become a       
popular practice in the translation industry, since       
it has been shown to allow for larger volumes of          
translations to be produced saving time and       
costs. Workflows in the translation industry have       
experienced a significant transformation and it is       
in this new context that speech technology is        
likely to contribute to further innovation. With       
post-editing services becoming common practice     
among language service providers and speech      
recognition gaining momentum, it seems     
reasonable to start exploring interplays between      
both fields to create new business solutions and        
workflows (Mesa-Lao, 2014b). Most traditional     
international organizations with translation needs     
(see section ​3.2​) have already added a machine        
translation component as one of the resources       
offered to their human translators. However, not       
much has been said yet when it comes to the          
attitude of such professional translators using      
machine translation and, more specifically, using      
speech technology to edit machine translation      
outputs in the context of a large scale        
international organization.  
 
In this study, we conducted qualitative research       
on the usage of speech and post-editing in a         
selected set of large scale international      
organizations. ​To our knowledge, this is the first        
study conducted on using post-editing and      
speech together in large scale international      
organizations. The paper is structured as follows:       
section 2 mentions related work for this study,        
followed by our method in section 3. Section 4         
describes the results, leading to the discussion       
and conclusions in section 5.  

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 149



 
 
 

2 Related work 

The use of speech as an input method to interact          
with computers and generate text is as old as the          
idea of computers themselves. In the context of        
machine-aided human translation and human-     
aided machine translation, different scenarios     
have been investigated where human translators      
are brought into the loop interacting with a        
computer through a variety of input modalities to        
improve the efficiency and accuracy of the       
translation process. 

In the context of translation, dictaphones were a        
popular tool in the context of large international        
organisations in the 1960s and 1970s and       
professional translators often collaborated with     
transcriptionists to dictate their translations. In      
the 1990s and 2000s, computational researchers      
began to explore ASR for translation purposes.       
Such developments focused mainly on reducing      
ASR word error rates by combining ASR and        
MT (Vidal et al., 2006). More recently, further        
efforts have been made by Translation Studies       
scholars in order to assess the performance of        
translation students and professionals when using      
commercial ASR systems (Dragsted et al., 2011;       
Zapata, 2012); to assess and analyze professional       
translators’ needs and opinions about ASR      
(Ciobanu, 2014, 2016, and 2018), and to explore        
ASR in mobile and multimodal environments      
(Zapata, 2016a,b). More recently, the potential of       
using ASR for post-editing purposes has also       
been investigated (García-Martínez et al., 2014;      
Mesa-Lao, 2014a,b; Torres-Hostench et al.,     
2017, and Zapata et al., 2017). For example, it         
was shown in previous pilot experiments that       
post-editing with the aid of a speech recognition        
system was the fastest method for translation       
(Zapata et al., 2017), that voice input is more         
interesting than the keyboard alone for      
post-editing (García-Martínez et al., 2014) and      
that 12 out of 15 translators would welcome the         
integration of voice as one of the possible input         
modes for performing PE tasks (Mesa-Lao,      
2014a,b). 

ASR systems have the potential to improve the        
productivity and comfort of performing     
computer-based tasks for a wide variety of users,        
allowing them to enter both text and commands        

into the computer using just their voice.       
However, further studies need to be conducted in        
order to build up new knowledge about the way         
in which state-of-the-art ASR software can be       
applied to one of the most common tasks        
translators face nowadays, i.e. post-editing of      
MT outputs.  

The present study has two related objectives: 

a) To understand the current situation of      
technology usage (specifically speech    
technologies) in selected international    
organizations with substantial translation    
needs. 

b) To analyze the potential of introducing      
speech technologies to post-edit MT     
within such organizations. 

As a first step towards these two objectives, the         
following section describes our pilot survey in       
detail, our participants’ profile and our      
methodology. 

3 Method 

In order to answer our research questions, we        
used two steps. As a first step, we investigated         
the current usage of translation technology      
solutions in a selected set of organizations. As a         
second step, we selected a set of professional        
translators from those organizations to gain      
further insights about their perceptions on using       
speech and other tools as part of their translation         
workflow.  

3.1 Overview 

As part of this research, two main questionnaires        
were designed and deployed as a survey. The        
first survey was distributed to a total of ​six         
organizations and contained six questions about      
current translation technology usage. This survey      
was filled up by technology managers in the        
respective organizations. The second survey     
consisted of 15 questions targeting professional      
translators working in the selected international      
organizations. Both surveys were carried out in       
March 2019.  

3.2 Participants profile 

This study involved five large scale international       
organizations based in Geneva and one large       

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 150



 
 
 
scale international organization based in     
Luxembourg. 
17 participants were selected from these six       
organizations using snowball sampling. The     
selected group included 11 females and 6 males,        
belonging to different age groups (3 translators       
between ages 20-35, 8 between 36-50, and 6        
older than 50). All 17 participants are       
professional translators within these    
organizations, with multiple years of translation      
experience (7 translators with +20 years      
experience, 2 with 16-20 years, 3 with 11-15        
years, 1 with 6-10 years, and 4 translators        
between 0-5 years experience). Their language      
combinations involved translating to/from    
English, French, Russian, and Spanish. The      
sample included translators working with     
different post-editing scenarios, i.e. post-editing     
via typing, translation from scratch using speech,       
translation from scratch using a keyboard,      
translation from scratch using a dictaphone, and       
post-editing via speech (Figure 1).  
 
16 out of the 17 translators were familiar with         
standard computer-aided translation software    
(i.e. SDL Trados) and 14 out of the 17 translators          
claimed to be familiar with different categories       
of speech technologies which will be described       
in detail in the analysis section. In addition, 6         
translators declared to use speech input methods       
in their day to day life (e.g. to dictate messages          
in a smartphone or to issue commands to Google         
Home, Amazon Alexa, etc.). 
 

3.3 Procedure 

In the first questionnaire, the managerial staff of        
each organization received a short questionnaire      
via email where they had to answer 6 simple         
questions on their current translation workflows.      
The second questionnaire was distributed     
internally by each international organization to      
their professional translators and contained 15      
questions covering the following topics: 
 

1. General information about their profile:     
including age, translation experience    
(years), employment status, and    
exposure to CAT tools.  

2. Current translation workflow (translating    
from scratch, post-editing by typing,     

post-editing by speech, and use of      
dictaphones). 

3. Information about their usage of ASR as       
compared to other input methods (e.g.      
typing), and their likes and dislikes about       
it. 

4. Their attitude towards different methods     
of translation, including speech based     
post-editing. 

 
The first questionnaire consisted of open-ended      
questions. The second questionnaire was a mix       
of different types of questions: multiple choice       
questions, preference ranking questions, and     
dichotomous questions. These questionnaires can     
be found in the appendices (A and B).  
 

3.4 Data collection and analysis 

Regarding questionnaires’ data, responses to     
quantitative items were entered into a      
spreadsheet, where mean responses were     
calculated. For binary or numeric results, the       
results were plotted in graphs to have a clearer         
overview. Open-ended questions and comments     
were analysed separately.  

4 Survey Results 

4.1 Distribution of translation technology    
among translators 

As explained in section 3.3, the translators       
provided information on the translation     
technologies they involve in their translation      
processes. Figure 1 displays the results. The       
translators could select different technologies at      
the same time, since they could be competent in         
multiple translation workflows.  

 
Figure 1. Translation technology usage among 

translators 

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 151



 
 
 
10 out of 17 translators use typing to post-edit, 9          
out of 17 already use speech recognition for        
translating (from scratch), and 4 out of 17        
translators use a dictaphone for translation. Thus,       
the selected set of translators can be considered        
as representative of the variety of techniques       
used in international organizations. Also, these      
data show that usage of speech for the purpose of          
translating is not uncommon in the selected       
environments (at least 9 out of 17 translators are         
already competent in workflows involving ASR). 

4.2 Usage of speech-based input methods 
In order to determine why participants would       
decide to use ASR in the future to post-edit MT,          
we asked them to rate the importance of eight         
different reasons, on a scale from 1 to 8, being 8           
the lowest in importance. The scale was 1 to 8          
since there are eight reasons to be ranked by the          
translators - see Appendix B. The top reason for         
deciding to use ASR was that using speech was         
considered to be faster by the surveyed       
translators, followed by speech helping them      
with ergonomy. The mean value of the translator        
input score was neither negative nor positive       
with regard to the notion of speech technologies        
being accurate, providing a mean value of 4.0        
(Table 1). 
 

Reason Mean 

Using speech is less tiring for me 3.9 

Using speech is faster for me 2.4 

Using speech is easier for me 3.7 

Speech is a cool technology 6 

Not many other alternatives for me 7.1 

Personal preference 5 

Speech technologies are accurate 4 

Speech helps me with ergonomy 2.6 

 
Table 1. Ranking of reasons for using       
speech-based inputs in translation, rated on a       
scale from 1 (highest) to 8 (lowest). 

4.3 Usage of non-speech input methods 

Participants were also asked about their reasons       
for choosing non-speech input methods (i.e.      
keyboard and mouse). They rated the importance       
of six reasons on a scale from 1 (the most          
important) to 6 (the least important). The scale        
was 1 to 6 since there are six reasons to be           
ranked by the translators - see Appendix B. Table         
2 describes the reasons why translators would       
not use speech input. 
 

Reason Mean 

Not using speech is easier. 3.7 

Speech requires a lot of training 4 

Speech is frustrating 3.4 

Speech is not faster 3.7 

To rest my voice after speaking 3.5 

Speech is trendy but not efficient 2.7 

 
Table 2. Ranking of reasons for choosing       
non-speech input methods, rated on a scale from        
1 (highest) to 6 (lowest). 
 
The results were not very conclusive, but the        
main reason for their negative perception on       
speech technologies was their concern about its       
efficiency, which confirms the “neutral” attitude      
towards accuracy of speech recognition in Table       
1. 
 
The surveyed translators also provided open      
ended comments about negative views on using       
speech recognition. It was interesting to see how        
the biggest negative point of using speech       
recognition would be the noise factor (11 people        
out of 17 think speech recognition will disturb        
colleagues when working in an open space). This        
issue illustrates that using speech technologies in       
an organization would involuntarily depend on      
logistics factors. 9 out of 17 thought that using         
speech recognition can be tiring as well.  
 

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 152



 
 
 

 
Figure 2. Translator views on using speech 
recognition for translation purposes. 

4.4 Preferred choice of input method by      
translators based on requirement 

The sampled translators were asked whether they       
would choose speech input or typing when       
considering the six reasons mentioned in the       
Figure 3 below. 

 
Figure 3. Choice of input method by the        
percentage of translators (speech/typing). Data     
labels illustrate percentages. 
 
As can be seen from the results in Figure 3, a           
higher number of translators are open to the idea         
of using speech as a faster (73%) and less tiring          
(67%) input method when compared to typing.       
However, while the majority of the translators       
think that using speech as an input method is         
faster (73%), 79% do not believe that it is more          
accurate than typing, which agrees with our       
findings in Table 1 and 2. 
 

4.5 Openness to different workflows 

Since one of the main objectives of this study         
was to identify the potential of introducing       
speech input for post-editing purposes,     
translators were also asked about their openness       
to different workflows during translation. Figure      
4 displays the results of our survey. 8 out of 17           

translators were open to the idea of speech-based        
post-editing for translation and only 2 out of 17         
assumed that mixing speech and post-editing      
together would be confusing.  
 

 

Figure 4. Translators’ openness to different      
translation workflows. 

As a second step, we further analyzed the        
translator’s opinions in Figure 4, this time       
considering their current translation approaches     
as well. We analyzed the current translation       
workflow of each translator against the following       
three new workflows: 1) speech-based     
post-editing, 2) typing based post-editing, and 3)       
using either speech or typing post-editing but not        
together. Translators were divided into two      
categories based on their current skills: using       
dictaphone/any type of speech recognition tool      
and using typing for translation purposes. Figure       
5 shows the translators’ breakdown of openness       
to different workflows based on their translation       
workflow experience.  
 

 

Figure 5. Breakdown of openness to new       
workflows based on translator profiles.  

As expected, 7 out of 8 translators willing to use          
speech-based post-editing were already using     
either dictaphones or speech recognition tools,      

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 153



 
 
 
which explains their positive attitude towards      
using speech along with MT post-editing.  

4.6 Translator input on their choice of      
preferred method 

As part of the second questionnaire, translators       
were asked to elaborate on when they would use         
translating from scratch, when they would prefer       
to post-edit via keyboard and when they would        
be interested in using speech as input to their         
translation workflow (results are displayed in      
Appendix D, E, and F). The main factor of         
choosing post-editing instead of typing from      
scratch was the availability of high quality       
machine translation or translation memory     
suggestions (11 out of 17 translators).      
Translators also mentioned that they would      
post-edit if “the translation does not require       
creativity” (2 translators), when “the translation      
has to be more accurate than fluent” (1        
translator), and when “the translation has to be        
done quickly” (1 translator). Translators also      
mentioned that they would choose speech      
technologies to translate when “the text to be        
translated is long” (6 translators) and “when       
speech recognition quality is good with less       
errors” (4 translators). This feedback emphasizes      
the necessity of having not only high quality        
speech recognition, but also better machine      
translation/translation memory output, if we want      
to invite more translators to the idea of        
speech-based post-editing.  
 
5       Discussion and Conclusion 
 
Many other questions regarding the effective use       
of ASR in translation could be surveyed, but this         
preliminary study shows that our sample of       
professional translators do not hold a negative       
view on the use of ASR as part of their          
translation workflow. In general, our findings      
suggest that professional translators working in      
the context of an international organization can       
benefit from the integration of ASR as one of the          
possible input methods when translating from      
scratch or when editing text for post-editing       
purposes.  
 
The main findings of this study are: 

1. Speech as an input method (i.e. ASR or        
dictaphones) is mainly used by     
translators to translate from scratch,     
rather than to post-edit MT output.  

2. The majority of the surveyed translators      
believed that speech is faster than typing       
and less tiresome (more ergonomic).     
However, they are still in doubt      
regarding the accuracy level of available      
speech recognition toolkits.  

3. Along with the necessity of high-quality      
ASR software solutions, this survey     
exposed multiple other factors which     
make translators more inclined towards     
the use of speech-based post-editing.     
These factors include working with     
high-quality machine translation or    
translation memory suggestions, larger    
amounts of texts for translation, and the       
possibility to use private or protected      
workstations for translation purposes    
using ASR. Provided that these     
requirements are met, the majority of      
translators were open to try speech-based      
post-editing as a new translation     
workflow.  

These observations thus provide a promising first       
step for us to continue towards a more ambitious         
study, where we will conduct quantitative      
research evaluating the productivity gains     
derived from speech-based post-editing. We also      
plan to investigate how currently available CAT       
tools with integrated speech support (e.g.      
Matecat, memoQ, and SDL Trados) can be used        
for this purpose.  

We thus conclude this first survey on translators’        
perceptions on using ASR in large scale       
international organizations with positive results.  
 
Acknowledgement  
We would like to thank our anonymous       
participants from different international    
organizations for their valuable time and      
involvement in this preliminary survey. 
 
 
 
 
 

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 154



 
 
 
References 
 

Ciobanu, D. (2014). Of Dragons and Speech       
Recognition Wizards and Apprentices. ​Revista     
Tradumàtica​, 12: 524–538. 

Ciobanu, D. (2016). Automatic Speech Recognition in       
the Professional Translation Process. ​Translation     
Spaces​, 5(1): 124–144. 

Ciobanu, D. (2018). Automatic Speech Recognition in       
the professional translation process. In     
Ehrensberger-Dow, M., Englund Dimitrova, B.     
(Eds). ​Exploring the Situational Interface of      
Translation and Cognition ​(123–143). John     
Benjamins Publishing Company.  

Dragsted, B., Mees, I. M., and Hansen, I. G. (2011).          
Speaking your translation: students’ first encounter      
with speech recognition technology. ​Translation &      
Interpreting​, 3(1): 10–43. 

García-Martínez, M., Singla, K., Tammewar, A.,      
Mesa-Lao, B., Thakur, A., Anusuya, M. A.,       
Bangalore, S., Carl, M. (2014). SEECAT: ASR &        
Eye-tracking Enabled Computer-Assisted   
Translation. In ​Proceedings of the 17th Annual       
Conference of the European Association for      
Machine Translation​, pages 81–88, Dubrovnik,     
Croatia 

Joscelyne, A. (2018). Translators in the Algorithmic       
Age. Briefing based on the TAUS Industry Leaders        
Forum, Amsterdam, Netherlands.  

Matecat. (2019). ​Advanced options – Matecat​.           
[online] Available at: ​https://www.matecat.com/       
phrase-based-vs-neural-mt-webinar-questions/adva
nced-options/ [Accessed 17 Apr. 2019]. 

Mesa-Lao, B. (2014a). Post-editing through Speech      
Recognition: A Feasibility Study with Post-editor      
Trainees. Abstract from 2014 ​CRITT - Conference:       
Translation in Transition: Between Cognition,     
Computing and Technology - Copenhagen     
Business School, Frederiksberg, Denmark​. 

Mesa-Lao, B. (2014b). Speech-Enabled    
Computer-Aided Translation: A Satisfaction    
Survey with Post-Editor Trainees. In ​Workshop on       
Humans and Computer-assisted Translation​, pages     
99-103, Gothenburg, Sweden. 

SDL. (2018). ​Increase your translation speed in 2018               
with voice recognition software​. [online] Available           
at: ​https://www.sdltrados.com/video/increase-your-   
translation-speed-in-2018-with-voice-recognition-s
oftware/128377/ [Accessed 17 Apr. 2019]. 

Torres-Hostench, O., Moorkens, J., O’Brien, S., and       
Vreeke, J. (2017). Testing interaction with a       

Mobile MT post-editing app. Translation &      
Interpreting, 9(2):138-150. 

Vidal, E., Casacuberta, F., Rodríguez, L., Civera, J.,        
Martínez-Hinarejos. C.D. (2006).   
Computer-Assisted Translation Using Speech    
Recognition. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech,      
and Language Processing​, 14(3): 941-951.  

Zapata, J. (2016a). Translating On the Go?       
Investigating the Potential of Multimodal Mobile      
Devices for Interactive Translation Dictation.     
Revista Tradumàtica​, 14: 66–74. 

Zapata, J. (2016b). Translators in the Loop: Observing        
and Analyzing the Translator Experience with      
Multimodal Interfaces for Interactive Translation     
Dictation Environment Design. PhD thesis.     
University of Ottawa. 

Zapata, J., Castilho, Sh., and Moorkens, J. (2017).        
Translation dictation vs. post-editing with     
cloud-based voice recognition: a pilot experiment.      
In ​Proceedings of MT Summit XVI 2​, Nagoya,        
123–136. 

 

Appendices 
 
Appendix A. First questionnaire 
 
1) What type of CAT tools do you use in your 

organization? Please name them.  

2) Do the employees of your organization use 
dictaphone to translate? If yes, please mention 
what the resources and toolkits are.  

3) Do the employees of your organization use 
speech recognition toolkits to translate? If yes, 
please mention what the resources and toolkits 
are.  

4) Do the employees of your organization use 
machine translation suggestions during 
translation? If yes, please mention what the 
resources and toolkits are.  

5) Do the employees of your organization use 
machine translation suggestions to post-edit by 
typing? If yes, please explain.  

6) Do the employees of your organization use 
speech recognition techniques to post-edit 
machine translation suggestions? If yes, please 
explain.  

 
   

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 155



 
 
 
Appendix B. Second questionnaire 
 

 ​Questions 

1) What is your age range?  

a) 20-35                b) 35-50  c) 50 or more   

 

2) What type of translation experience do you 
have? 

a) I work in an academic organization 

b) I work in an international organization 

c) I have experience in both 
(academic/international organizations)  

 

3) How long have you worked in the translation 
industry (experience can be academic or 
industrial)? 

a) 0-5 years  b) 6-10 years  c) 11-15 years   

d) 16-20 years  e) 20+ years 

 

4) Which are your language pairs during 
translation? e.g. English-French, etc.  

 

5) Which of these statements is applicable to you? 
Multiple statements can be applicable, since you 
might be using different techniques for different 
requirements. 

a) I use translation suggestions (MT/TM) for my 
translation purposes and I type to work on them.   

b) I use a dictaphone for translating from scratch.   

c) I use speech recognition toolkits (e.g. Dragon) to 
speak out my translations from scratch (and then 
correct them if necessary). 

d) I use speech recognition toolkits (e.g. Dragon) to 
post-edit translation suggestions (MT/TM).  

e) I prefer to type and translate from scratch.  

 

6) Do you use any computer-assisted translation 
tools (e.g. SDL Trados)? If so, which ones? 

 

7) Have you used any speech recognition toolkit for 
other purposes, e.g. SIRI. Please explain briefly. 

 

8) Following are some of the major reasons ​for 
using speech-based input methods​ (according to 

previous research). Could you please rank them 
according to the importance?  

1 would be the most important, and 8 would be the 
least important​. 

Reason  Rank 

Using speech is less tiring for me.   

Using speech is faster for me.     

Using speech is easier for me.   

Speech  is a cool technology.   

There are not many other alternatives for me.   

Using speech is a personal preference.   

Speech  technologies are accurate.   

Speech  helps me with ergonomy.    

   

9) Following are some of the reasons for not using 
speech-based input methods. Could you please 
rank them according to the importance? 

1 would be the most important, 6 would be the 
least important 

Reason  Rank 

Not using speech is much easier for me.   

Speech requires a lot of setup and training   

I get frustrated using speech.    

Using speech is not faster (at least for me).    

I don’t use speech to rest my voice.   

Using speech is just trendy, but not efficient.   

 

 ​10) Which technique would you use (speech 
recognition or typing ) during the translation? 
Please use “yes” and “no” in each column. 

 

 

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 156



 
 
 

Feature  Typing  Speech 

For ease of use when translating     

For high translation speed     

For using less effort     

For fun     

For higher accuracy     

To follow trends     

 

11)​ ​Please type “yes” or “no” next to each of these 
statements according to your own personal 
views. 

 

Feature  no/yes 

Speech recognition disturbs colleagues   

Setting up speech recognition is frustrating   

Fixing speech recognition errors is tiring   

Using speech recognition can be tiring.     

 

12) Could you please mention reasons or situations 
you came across when you preferred 
post-editing translation suggestions rather than 
typing from scratch? 

 

13) Could you please mention reasons or situations 
you came across when you preferred translating 
from scratch rather than post-editing machine 
translation suggestions? 

 

14) As part of our research, we are investigating 
whether we can use speech technology for 
post-editing.​ ​In this hypothetical scenario, the 
users will get a machine translation suggestion 
or a translation memory suggestion for a given 
input. We would like to see if translators can use 
speech commands to post-edit the translation 
suggestion (the suggestions can come from 
translation memories or machine translation). 

 

Could you please type "yes" next to the statement 
that is most applicable to you? 

a) Yes, I am open to the idea of speech-based 
post-editing. 

b) Yes, I would like to use speech for translation, 
but without having to work on translation 
suggestions coming from translation memories or 
machine translation. This setup would be 
confusing. 

c) Speech is not an option for me. I still enjoy 
translating from scratch via keyboard without 
having to work on machine translation outputs. 

d) Speech is not an option for me. I still enjoy 
translating from scratch via keyboard and I am 
happy to use machine translation outputs as a 
starting point.  

 

15) Please mention situations where you would like 
to use speech technologies as a translation 
support (​e.g. I would use it for long paragraphs, I 
would use it for short sentences, etc.​). 

 

Appendix C. Tool Usage in organizations 
 
 

Category  Details 

CAT tools used  Eluna, SDL Trados and 
Multitrans, DtSearch, 
MultiTerm, 
Groupshare, Euramis,  
memoQ, SmartLing. 

MT tools  WipoTranslate, DeepL, 
eTranslate 

Usage of dictaphone  2 organizations out of 5. 
One out of those two uses 
the dictaphone very rarely.  

Speech recognition usage 
(e.g. Dragon) 

4 organizations out of 5 
use speech recognition. 

Machine translation 
usage 

4 organizations out of 5 
use machine translation. 

Post-editing using typing  4 organizations out of 5 
use post-editing using 
typing. 

Post-editing using speech  Only one translator of one 
organization could be 
found using post-editing 
using speech.  

 

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 157



 
 
 
Appendix D. When would you choose post-editing             
machine translation instead of typing from           
scratch?  
 

Reason  Frequency 

When MT/TM quality is good  11/17 

When accuracy is more 
important than fluency 

1/17 

When translation does not need 
creativity 

2/17 

To translate quickly  1/17 

 

 
Appendix E. When would you choose typing             
from scratch instead of post-editing machine           
translation? 

 

Reason  Frequency 

When MT/TM quality is not 
good 

13/17 

When fluency is more important 
than accuracy 

1/17 

When text is short  2/17 

When creativity is necessary  1/17 

 

 

Appendix F: When would you choose speech       
technologies to translate? 

 

Reason Frequency 

To translate long texts 
(paragraphs, articles) 

6/17 

I would use it anytime if the 
speech recognition quality is 
good 

4/17 

I would only use it to dictate 
long texts where post-editing is 
too much effort 

1/17 

To translate quickly 1/17 

 

 

 
 

 Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 158


