




































Machine Translation in the Financial Services Industry: a Case Study 
 

Mara Nunziatini 

Welocalize Italy S.r.l. 

Via Alserio 22, Milan, Italy 
mara.nunziatini@welocalize.com 

 Abstract 

The use of Machine Translation is 

spreading quickly in the translation 

industry. While its implementation is 

smooth in some contexts, in the regulated 

services industry it certainly seems 

trickier. In particular, the financial 

services industry can be considered a less 

conventional scenario within which to 

implement MT. This paper explains how 

MT was successfully implemented in the 

workflow of a translation company 

specialized in financial services, and how 

freelance translators got positively 

involved in the process. 

1 Introduction  

Welocalize Italy S.r.l. is Welocalize’s Italian 

headquarter, based in Milan. This hub used to be 

a translation company on its own and was recently 

merged into Welocalize to become its FSI-

specialized translation hub. The greater part of its 

business, since its foundation, has always been 

focused on the translation of financial, tax and 

legal documents. In order to stay in step with 

competitors and trends in the translation industry, 

and to offer a wider range of services and more 

flexibility to its customers, the company started 

thinking of implementing Machine Translation in 

its workflow. In this paper we will describe how 

we implemented MT in this regulated sector.  

  

2 Description of the Company  

2.1 Client Base  

The company’s client base boasts a relevant 

number of faithful, long-time customers which 

mainly includes large Italian enterprises, SMEs 

and multi-national auditing companies (or their 

Italian subsidiaries), but also banks and lawyers.  

Every year, for marketing, tax or legal 

purposes, these customers need to translate 

financial texts (mainly Financial Statements and 

Transfer Pricing documentation) and/or legal 

documents and, after years of cooperation, many 

clients have become familiar with the company’s 

Project Managers and salespeople. However, in 

order to retain key customers, find new clients and 

keep up with competition, the company started 

facing the need of providing lower prices and 

shorter turnaround times, while still delivering top 

quality – a fundamental aspect of the FSI industry. 

In the meantime, the global translation industry 

started talking about neural MT (Castilho et al., 

2017), and all the major LSPs were already 

implementing MT in their workflow, therefore 

offering more competitive prices and shorter 

turnaround times. Similarly, the LSP we are part 

of has been using MT for many years, and was 

already implementing neural MT (Schmidt and 

Marg, 2018).  

2.2 Description of the Business  

Our company’s business concentrates in one peak 

season which approximately starts in March and 

ends in June, this is the time when Italian 

enterprises (or foreign enterprises with an Italian 

subsidiary) listed on the stock market publish their 

Financial Statements in Italian and in English, so 

as to reach a bigger number of stakeholders. 

Another busy season corresponds with the 

publication of half-yearly financial statements 

(end of summer till October, approximately).  

Another relevant part of the business, but with 

reduced volumes compared to Financial 

Statements, regards Transfer Pricing 

documentation. For this type of content, there is 

not really a peak season – rather, these translation 

© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative 
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 57



requests come in continuously, in a more or less 

regular fashion. Transfer Pricing documents are 

aimed at proving that the prices of goods and 

services which are exchanged among subsidiaries, 

affiliates or controlled companies are in line with 

the arm’s length principles 1 . These are usually 

drafted in English in the case of multi-national 

companies and need to be translated into Italian 

for tax purposes.  

The greater part of Financial Statements is 

translated from Italian into English, while the 

greater part of Transfer Pricing documentation is 

translated from English into Italian.  

2.3 Technology Resources  

As for technology resources, the company was not 

advanced before the merger. Only recently has 

this business started using CAT tools as part of the 

standard workflow. In fact, this hub used to 

implement a traditional translation and 

proofreading workflow with automation of 

processes being non-existent. Documents to be 

translated were sent by email to the translator, 

who was asked to deliver a final file in the same 

format and layout as the original. Besides, the 

Translation Management System in use offered 

basic functionalities only. For this reason, projects 

were handled without the file having been 

uploaded to any CAT tool, and management of 

resources like TMs and glossaries was completely 

manual, time-consuming and not so efficient.  

After the merger, the use of CAT tools and 

bilingual files started to be implemented in the 

workflow, TM management became more 

efficient, while in the translation industry MT was 

a topic more and more discussed.  

Thanks to implementing a new TMS and 

creating centralized translation memories in a 

more structured way, we managed to build up 

significant and good-quality TMs for the main 

subjects translated (Financial Statements, Transfer 

Pricing, Non-Financial Statements, etc.). These 

memories were very helpful when exploring the 

use of MT for our group. 

2.4 External Vendors  

Vendor database is not very big and mainly 

comprises reliable English and Italian native 

speakers who have been working for the company 

                                                      
1  OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational 
Enterprises and Tax Administrations, July 2017. 

for several years already. These vendors 

specialize in translating financial documents and 

have a high productivity in terms of words 

translated per day, thanks to their multi-year 

experience and personal linguistic resources.  

However, the vendor base is so small that 

Project Managers end up working always with the 

same translators, who often get fully booked, 

especially during peak season. The average 

freelancer is highly experienced in the subject 

matter and, due to our own processes, some of 

them were only recently introduced to the use of 

CAT tools and other automation aids. The greater 

part of them had never heard anything about MT.  

The small vendor base started to be a blocker 

for the growth of the company. It is more and more 

difficult to find financial translators with enough 

experience who are reliable and affordable, so 

production really depends on this small base’s 

availability. Furthermore, while the trend in the 

industry overall is to cut costs, these experienced 

freelancers tend to increase their rates.  

3. Need to Implement MT and Challenges to 

Implementation  

The possibility of offering MT as part of the 

services has begun to look attractive and indeed 

necessary, but is it possible to implement MT in 

the FSI?  

3.1 The Importance of Quality  

Financial translation requires great attention to 

details as even a small mistake can lead to a major 

problem. Financial translation requires expertise 

and experience, as the importance of integrity and 

accuracy of information in financial documents 

cannot be underestimated.  

3.2 Terminology  

Translating terminology, and doing so 

consistently, is a major challenge in the financial 

world. It is fundamental to ensure consistency and 

comparability between documents of the same 

company related to different periods (i.e. to 

compare quarterly and annual reports). Financial 

terms can be intricate and represent a challenge for 

translators who do not have understanding of or 

experience in financial translation. Understanding 

concepts in their context is very important in 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 58



financial translation – and we know this is one of 

the weak points of MT. Just to mention a couple 

of tricky examples, “ammortizzare” in Italian is 

translated “amortize” if we are talking of 

intangible assets, while is translated “depreciate” 

if we are talking about tangible assets. Another 

tricky one is “periodo” which is translated “year” 

in yearly Financial Statements but “period” in 

half-yearly Financial Statements. Terminology 

must also be compliant with IFRS2 (International 

Financial Reporting Standards), i.e. a set of 

accounting standards developed by the IASB 

(International Accounting Standards Board).  

Besides, date format and currency format may 

vary a lot depending on customer’s preference (as 

at 31 December 2018, as of December 31, 2018…) 

just like currency format (EUR, €, euro, Euro). 

3.3 Numbers Localization  

In financial documents, numbers matter greatly. 

Besides, when doing financial translation, 

numbers must be localized (Italian and English 

use different decimal and thousand separators). 

An error in the positioning of a comma, an excess 

digit or omission of a digit mean thousands in 

monetary losses.  

3.4 Timeliness  

During peak season, the business becomes 

especially fast-paced and constrained by time, lots 

of requests come in every day that add on to the 

already booked translations. Translations need to 

be delivered in a very short time as it is very 

important that these documents do not miss any 

deadline. However, in most of the cases, the 

greater part of trusted translators and reviewers 

are already fully-booked. For this reason, 

salespeople cannot give clients the translation they 

want in the time they need and are left with 

nothing better to offer than a longer turnaround 

time or a lower quality.  

3.5 Confidentiality  

Financial documents need to be secure since they 

disclose private company information. They must 

remain private and handing them over to third 

parties poses great risks. It is extremely important 

that the company uses reliable tools, since the LSP 

must ensure that no data are shared externally.  

  

                                                      
2 https://www.ifrs.org/ 

4 Description of Engine Selection and MT 

Implementation Process  

After having identified all the possible 

requirements and challenges, we decided to start 

the engine selection process with the help of the 

company’s Machine Translation team.  

Our ideal candidate was a state-of-the-art, 

customizable engine which is compatible with the 

CAT tools used internally. Besides, in order to be 

cost-effective for production, it must deliver good-

quality output. Last but not least, the engine must 

by no means represent a risk for data privacy, and 

its price had to be in line with the company’s 

budget. In 2018, when the implementation process 

began, “state-of-the-art” meant “neural”. 

The potential candidates identified were 3: 

• Option 1: a generic financial neural 

machine translation engine; 

• Option 2: a generic non-customizable 

neural machine translation system; 

• Option 3: a customizable neural machine 

translation provider, which allowed us to 

create two engines (one to translate 

Transfer Pricing documentation from 

English into Italian, and another to 

translate Financial Statements from 

Italian into English).  

Option 1 and 2 were the first options to come 

in, while Option 3 was identified only at a later 

stage and trained with our TMs. All the three 

Options are neural engines, but at a first glance we 

would think Option 3 would suit us best as it is 

customizable. However, the most important 

criteria to choose the best engine was the quality 

of the output, so we proceeded to test the quality 

of each engine’s raw output.  

4.1 Testing Option 1 vs. Option 2  

The quality test was run on a 2500-word sample 

from a Financial Statements which was translated 

from English to Italian with both options. Quality 

check consisted of a full post-editing of both raw 

outputs by two native speaker in-house post-

editors specialized in financial translation. Quality 

was evaluated by comparing the amount and type 

of changes, and the time linguists spent to fix them 

was calculated. As for the types of mistakes, we 

noticed that certain issues appeared both in Option 

1 and Option 2’s output. The linguists flagged 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 59



more or less the same amount of grammar issues, 

untranslated content, mistranslations and 

inconsistent terminology in both outputs. Option 

1’s output showed a bigger amount of formatting 

issues and omissions, while Option 2’s output, 

being Option 2 a generic engine, showed a bigger 

amount of key terminology issues.  

To sum up, both engines proved to have pros 

and cons, and we decided to think of what kind of 

mistakes were quicker and easier to spot and fix. 

Formatting can be fixed pretty quickly, and 

terminology can also be fixed easily by connecting 

a glossary to the project, while omissions are the 

trickiest issues. For this reason, and also because 

Option 1 was not compatible with the CAT tools 

used internally, we decided that Option 2 would 

be a better candidate.  

4.2 Testing Option 2 vs. Option 3  

Then, Option 3 was also proposed by the 

company’s Machine Translation team and new 

tests were carried out to evaluate the quality of 

Option 3’s output compared to the two original 

options. The second test phase was divided into 2 

steps: automatic scoring and human evaluation.  

For automatic scoring, we use a proprietary 

tool that outputs a number of industry-standard 

automatic metrics, such as BLEU, GTM, Meteor, 

NIST, PE Distance, TER (TAUS, 2012). We 

typically run this tool on two sets of input: source 

+ MT vs. human reference from a TM (during 

engine building), as well as source + MT vs. 

human post-edited reference (during pilot and 

production). The table below shows the results 

from scenario 1, i.e. the human reference was not 

specifically created by translators performing PE 

on the MT output. 

  

 
Table 1. Results of automatic scoring.  

  

As showed in the table, Option 1 obtained the 

worst score for both language pairs, Option 2 

obtained the best score for Italian into English and 

Option 3 obtained the best score for English into 

Italian.  

After human evaluation, Option 1 was 

excluded again, and Option 2 was also excluded 

since the quality did not prove to be significantly 

better than Option 3 for Italian into English. 

Option 3 was the preferred from a linguistic point 

of view, but also because it is cheaper compared 

to the other options, the lexical coverage is much 

wider, and it can be customized and updated.  

4.3 Evaluating Option 3’s raw output 

We then started the third phase of the testing 

process. This test was aimed at analysing and 

scoring the accuracy and fluency of the raw output 

and validate the results of the automatic scoring 

(Marg, 2016). It also allowed us to identify the 

typical issues in the MT output, and to start putting 

together post-editing instructions. The test was 

performed by two linguists for each language pair 

(2 for Italian into English and 2 for English into 

Italian).  

4.3.1 Results for English into Italian  

The test for English into Italian was performed by 

two native in-house translators specialized in 

financial translation. The text translated was a 

piece of Transfer Pricing document. Both linguists 

scored accuracy and fluency consistently.  

As for accuracy, the major issues concern 

mistranslations (calques, antonyms, positive to 

negative sentence or vice versa), omissions 

(especially missing numbers) and terminology.  

As for fluency, there seemed to be a shared 

opinion as to the grammar mistakes (gender and 

number agreement, wrong and/or missing 

prepositions, consecutio temporum, translation of 

modal verbs) and locale adaptation (numbers and 

measurements were not localized).  

4.3.2 Results for Italian into English  

The test for Italian into English was performed by 

two external preferred native translators who 

specialize in financial translation (Plitt and 

Masselot, 2010). The text translated was a piece 

of Financial Statements. Also in this case, both 

linguists scored accuracy and fluency 

consistently.  

As for accuracy, major issues concerned 

mistranslations (proper nouns and acronyms 

replaced by random words) and omissions. 

Terminology also appeared to be problematic, 

while numbers were not missing in MT output for 

this language pair.  

As for fluency, major issues concerned word 

order (which often mirrors Italian word order), 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 60



grammar (primarily verb tenses) and locale 

adaptation (numbers and measurements were not 

localized).  

To sum up, some types of issues were spotted 

in both language pairs, while others were language 

pair specific.  

5 MT into Production: Preliminary Phase  

Having chosen the preferred MT engine and 

identified the main potential issues, we decided to 

run a few more tests to analyse more deeply the 

mistake trends for each language pair. The results 

of the analysis showed that, to achieve publishable 

quality – required for our business – a full-post 

editing was necessary. Originally, to reach the 

required quality, we implemented a TP process 

which envisaged a first step (Translation) and a 

second step (Proofreading). In the MT pilot 

projects, we decided to keep two steps to ensure 

top quality: post-editing and review – basically the 

translation step was replaced by post-editing.  

5.1 Onboarding Freelance Post-Editors  

We then started thinking of the new workflow and 

how it would merge with our existing vendor base. 

As mentioned above, it did not include any 

experienced post-editors. For this reason, we 

started organizing non-mandatory Machine 

Translation Post-Editing training for the suitable 

vendors in our database (Massardo et al., 2016). 

We sent them an invite and explained them that 

we were implementing MT in our workflow and 

they would be offered MT post-editing tasks in the 

near future. 

We gave three training sessions: one in 2018 

and two in 2019. The training we gave in 2018 was 

a generic MTPE training and applied to all 

language pairs and domains, while of the two 

training sessions we gave in 2019 one was focused 

on post-editing our engine’s raw Transfer Pricing 

translation from English into Italian, and the other 

was focused on post-editing our engine’s raw 

Financial Statements translation from Italian into 

English in a CAT tool environment. Apart from 

covering the topics already discussed in the 2018 

edition, the 2019 training also focused on the most 

frequent mistakes delivered by our engine and on 

how MT was introduced in the workflow. In 

                                                      
3  As explained in the ISO 18587:2017 standard, which 
provides guidelines for the process of full, human post-editing 

of machine translation output. 

March 2019 our database included a number of 

new post editors specialized in finance.  

  

5.2 Instructions for Linguists  

We decided to create an instructions file for 

linguists to be sent over with each project, in order 

to remind them the guidelines for full post-editing3 

and the most frequent known engine errors 

(Joscelyne, 2008). 

Apart from indicating the above-mentioned 

most frequent mistakes for each language pair, 

instructions warned linguists about some strange 

errors delivered by the engine in very short strings 

only, which are always a challenge for MT. 

Basically, proper nouns (company names, 

cities…) and acronyms (GBP, HPC…) are 

frequently replaced by random words. Sometimes 

errors delivered by neural MT engines cannot be 

fixed by implementing changes in the engine 

directly, so for the time being we decided to 

mention this issue in the instructions.  

The instructions file also included other useful 

key take-aways, suggestions and reminders on 

how to perform post-editing and review of 

postedited content in a CAT tool environment, like 

how to understand if the translation of the segment 

comes from TM or MT, and the indication to 

follow the TM as for preferred date and currency 

format.  

6 MT into Production: Pilot Phase  

As mentioned above, projects with PE are handled 

the same way of the standard TP projects, with 

translation being replaced by post-editing, plus 

three new steps: pre-editing, pretranslation with 

MT and post edit distance measurement, all 

performed by our internal staff.  

After having ascertained that a project is 

suitable for MTPE by following some internal 

criteria, we start the pre-editing step, which 

consists of some minor interventions on the source 

file to facilitate machine processing, like running 

a spell-check and removing double spaces. We 

then upload the file on the CAT tool and 

pretranslate number-only and untranslatable-only 

segments. Number-only segments are 

automatically localized by the CAT tool – this way 

we reduce the risk of having them mistranslated or 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 61



not localized. Untranslatable-only segments are 

short segments made up by proper names, 

company names, acronyms (like EBIT, EBITDA) 

or characters (%, €, - ...) that do not change from 

Italian into English and vice versa. 

Then, the file is pretranslated with the project 

TM: the TM is leveraged down to 75% Fuzzy 

matches. Anything that does not have a ≥75% 

match in the TM is considered a New Word 

segment, that is sent to MT. This threshold was 

chosen because our internal linguists did not find 

Fuzzy matches below 75% to be very useful as a 

starting point for translation. For the time being, 

we like forcing post-editors to work on machine 

translated content, so, to reduce the temptation of 

writing the translation from scratch, we 

pretranslate with MT the matches below 75% and 

New Word segments. The file is then sent to post-

editors along with instructions, and after post-

editing is complete, the reviewer, who also 

received the instructions, can start working on the 

file.  

Since one of the most delicate issues regards 

key terminology consistency, we associate an 

empty glossary to each project. Linguists are 

required to populate it during the translation step 

with key terminology which is translated wrongly 

or inconsistently by the MT engine. CAT tool’s 

QA check – which is set up internally upon project 

creation – will automatically deliver an error 

message every time a term in the glossary is not 

translated properly. These glossaries will also be 

used to update the MT engine. 

After the translation is delivered to the 

customer, we run an auto scoring test on the MT 

post-edited segments only to see how much of the 

raw output was changed, and send a survey to the 

linguists so that they can express their opinion on 

the quality of the raw output and provide 

suggestions for improvement. These last two steps 

are extremely useful for the future updating of the 

engine.  

So far, we have run a fairly big amount of pilot 

projects, and the results in terms of productivity 

increase for both language pairs are satisfactory. 

Productivity increase varies depending on many 

factors – vendor’s experience with MTPE 

(Guerberof, 2009) and individual speed, source 

file, language pair, client requirements, etc. – but 

on average it ranges between 20-25%. We expect 

this percentage to increase after engine updating 

and fine-tuning. We ensured that the quality of the 

final translation was of the same high standard as 

before by running the same QA processes.  

7 Vendors’ Feedback  

Translators often get stressed when they hear the 

word “machine translation”, especially the ones 

who are more reluctant to try out new 

technologies. As mentioned above, many 

translators of our vendor base are not familiar with 

CAT tools and are not willing to learn how to use 

them. Some of them are so experienced, 

productive and used to work “the old way” that 

they see anything technologically new as 

something that will affect them negatively. 

To sum up, our background was not really the 

most suitable within which to implement MT, 

however, some of the freelancers were happy and 

curious to take part to the training and the pilot 

projects. They wanted to start getting familiar with 

machine translation, since more and more LSPs 

are implementing it in their workflow – this 

therefore means more job opportunities for them, 

as well as an increase in productivity.  

In all the training sessions we gave, resources 

asked how the implementation of MT will affect 

their rates. We were expecting a lot of concerns on 

this matter (this was also flagged by O’Brien et al., 

2009), so we decided to keep the rates unchanged 

during the pilot phase – basically matches 

pretranslated with MT were paid like new words 

for all projects. This way we managed to convince 

many of them to give MT a try.  

As mentioned earlier, a short questionnaire was 

sent to all the vendors who took part to the pilot 

projects in order to gather feedback and 

suggestions. The answers show that the greater 

part of them feels the MT output was overall 

useful as a starting point for their translation, and 

that in most cases they used big portions of MT 

raw output, introducing minor changes only. 

Many of them stated they felt they worked faster 

thanks to MT and that they are willing to work on 

more MTPE projects. Besides, they were left some 

blank space where to add suggestions and a 

description of the most common issues they found 

in the raw output. Among the issues flagged by 

linguists, apart from the ones already discussed, 

the problem of aligning with client’s preferred 

format for amounts and dates was raised, as well 

as the lack of creativity of the engine and 

misinterpretation of the meaning of some 

sentences.  

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 62



  

References 

Castilho, Sheila, Joss Moorkens, Federico Gaspari, Iacer 

Calixto, John Tinsley and Andy Way. 2017. Is Neural 

Machine Translation the New State of the Art? 

Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 108. 

Guerberof, Ana. 2009. Productivity and quality in MT 

post-editing. Proceedings of MT Summit XII - 

Workshop: Beyond Translation Memories: New Tools 

for Translators MT, Ottawa, Canada. 

Joscelyne, Andrew. 2008. Post-editing: Update on Best 

Practices, TAUS Report. 

Marg, Lena. 2016. The Trials and Tribulations of 

Predicting Machine Translation Post-Editing 

Productivity. Presented at the 2016 Language 

Resources Evaluation Conference (LREC). 

http://www.lrecconf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/8

10_Paper.pdf Accessed 16 April 2019 

Massardo, Isabella, Jaap van der Meer, Sharon O’Brien, 

Fred Hollowood, Nora Aranberri and Katrin 

Drescher. 2016. MT Post-Editing Guidelines. TAUS 

Signature Editions. 

O’Brien Sharon, Johann Roturier, Giselle de Almeida. 

2009. Postediting Machine Translation Output 

Guidelines. Proceedings of MT Summit XII – 

Tutorials, Ottawa, Canada. 

Plitt, Mirko and François Masselot. 2010. A productivity 

test of statistical machine translation post-editing in a 

typical localisation context. Prague Bulletin of 

Mathematical Linguistics, 93:7– 16. 

Schmidt, Tanja and Lena Marg. 2018. How to Move to 

Neural Machine Translation for Enterprise-Scale 

Programs—An Early Adoption Case Study. 

Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the 

European Association for Machine Translation, 

Alicante, Spain. 

TAUS - Enabling better translation. 2012. Advancing 

Best Practices in Machine Translation Evaluation, 

TAUS Labs Report. 

 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 63


