




































Would MT kill creativity in literary retranslation? 

Mehmet Şahin 
Izmir University of Economics / Depart-

ment of Translation and Interpretation 
rbsmsahin@gmail.com 

Sabri Gürses 
Independent Scholar 

sgurses@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

The increasing number of retranslations 
and wider availability of their texts on the 
Internet is expected to create a positive 
impact on MT systems by producing more 
matches. Yet, we argue that retranslations 
conducted using MT would differ from 
those completed without any recourse to 
MT in terms of creative solutions. This pa-
per aims to discuss the possible effects of 
MT on retranslation of literary texts with 
a focus on creativity. 21 fourth-year T&I 
students translated two excerpts from 
Robinson Crusoe into Turkish, one with, 
and one without the help of an online MT 
service. We included the analysis of four 
different translations of the same text 
available on the market, in terms of crea-
tivity. Analysis of solutions produced for 
252 translation units suggests that the use 
of MT is likely to hinder creativity for 
novice translators for English-Turkish lan-
guage pair. 

1 Introduction 
Retranslation requires high level of creativity and 
originality. Although the range and volume of 
digitally-available and copyrightless literary 
works is growing, the classics remain the most 
attractive texts for   translators and publishers, and 
thus the most frequently subject to retranslation in 
many contexts.  

The rise of artificial intelligence (AI) and dom-
inance of high-quality machine translation (MT) 
and computer-aided translation (CAT) tools in the 
translation profession brings the need to recon-
sider the assessment of retranslations of literary 
works. The digitization and online availability of 
the texts of earlier translations as processable data 

for MT providers is likely to encourage retransla-
tors to have recourse to such tools.   

In this paper, we report on a small-scale exper-
iment to demonstrate the potential effects on cre-
ativity of using MT for retranslation.  We explore 
two possible effects of MT. On the one hand, we 
can argue that in retranslations, it is desirable to 
focus on the more lexically and syntactically com-
plex structures in the source text, rather than the 
relatively easier parts. In this case, using MT 
might give translators freedom to engage in a 
more intense focus on such key sections of the 
text, and thus boost creativity.  On the other hand, 
MT is likely to inhibit translators, particularly 
novices, by appearing to make the translation pro-
cess more straightforward than it actually is. This 
approach risks undermining critical thinking pro-
cess, and constraining the capacity to find creative 
solutions to translation problems.  

Furthermore, the use of MT in literary retrans-
lation raises another issue explored in studies, pla-
giarism in translations. The widespread use of MT 
is likely to hinder detection of plagiaristic ele-
ments in retranslation, since it can pave the way 
for a new mode of “translation”, namely transcol-
lage. We discuss this recent trend, based on the 
current examples, and the possible repercussions 
of MT-driven retranslation. 

2 Background 
In the current study, we investigate the level of 
creativity in MT-supported retranslations. This 
brings into focus several key concepts, such as 
retranslation, plagiarism, and the use of MT for 
literary translation, and creativity in retranslation. 

2.1 Retranslation 
Retranslation is defined as “either the act of 
translating a work that has previously been 
translated into the same language, or the result of 
such an act, i.e. the retranslated text itself.” 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 26



(Gürçağlar, 2009). Retranslation in literature adds 
value to, repairs and competes with the earlier 
efforts, and through this evolutionary process 
creates a genealogy and history of translation. In 
a retranslation, as well as seeking the translator’s 
personal voice, one may feel the need to 
understand the retranslator’s agenda. Without 
such a new voice, perspective or agenda, it may 
even be difficult to describe it as a translation. In 
most cases, the repetitive or plagiaristic elements 
are clearly seen in the text. 

2.2 Plagiarism 
Plagiarism in translation has been a topic of 
discussion for the last two decades in various 
contexts, especially in Turkey (Turell, 2004; 
Gürses, 2007; 2008; 2011). This phenomenon was 
investigated in a two-year scientific project 
funded by The Scientific and Technological 
Research Council of Turkey (Şahin, Duman & 
Gürses, 2015a). One of the findings of the project 
was that of 28 different Turkish retranslations of 
Robinson Crusoe, only two showed satisfactory 
level of originality. The boom in retranslations of 
classics in Turkey is strongly linked to profit-
oriented publishing policies fed by plagiarism 
(Şahin, Duman & Gürses, 2015b). Currently, two 
possible approaches to detect plagiarism in 
retranslations are document collusion programs, 
such as CopyCatch Investigator ®, and qualitative 
analysis of translations. Yet, the use of MT for 
literary translation is expected to pose new 
challenges. 

2.3 MT for literary texts 
The use of MT for literary translation has become 
a topic of discussion in translation circles. The 
view that MT cannot be used for literary texts is 
now being challenged. 

Moorkens et al. (2018), in their study investi-
gating post-editing of literary texts, concluded 
that “all participants prefer to translate from 
scratch, mostly due to the freedom to be creative 
without the constraints of segment-level segmen-
tation, those with less experience find the MT sug-
gestions useful.” The use of MT for English-Turk-
ish language pair also was investigated in several 
studies for different text genres, including literary 
texts with SMT paradigm (Şahin 2014, Şahin & 
Dungan 2014). Findings emphasized low quality 
of MT output was quite low in those experiments 
and the negative attitude of translators to using 
MT in the translation process, especially for liter-
ary texts. 

2.4 Creativity in retranslations 
Retranslations are expected to offer the readers 
novel and better solutions, thus require 
retranslators to show more creativity, which “is 
most usefully defined as something which 
happens in translation and is demanded of 
translators.” (Sullivan, 2013).  Sullivan also 
argues that “[a]lthough literary texts are by no 
means the only texts which prompt creative 
responses, they are an important resource for 
promoting student creativity and language 
sensitivity.” (2013) 

Paul Kussmaul (2000), one of the leading 
scholars focusing on creativity in translation, ar-
gues that “[s]cenic visualisations […] contribute 
to the novelty of a translation and help make it a 
creative product.” The question of increasing use 
of MT in translation could contribute to creative 
solutions has not yet been answered. However, re-
cent studies touch upon the issue peripherally, and 
provide empirical evidence. 

In one of those studies, Toral (2019) investi-
gated whether there is evidence of post-editese, 
and how PE differs from HT, in a corpus of news 
articles for different language pairs. By looking at 
the so-called ‘translation universals’ (Baker, 
1993), Toral found that “PEs tend to be simpler 
and more normalised and to have a higher degree 
of interference from the source text than HTs.”. 

Stressing that “We need to help translators ex-
pand their creative repertoires of translation strat-
egies.”, Robinson (1998) disassociates creativity 
from convergent thinking which entails “avoiding 
errors by narrowing in on the most conventional 
solution and refusing to take, or even to contem-
plate taking, risks — and enjoyment”. 

In our study, we define creative translation as 
solutions that go beyond literal translation and dif-
fer from the MT solution. In line with these con-
siderations, we addressed the following questions: 

• How does MT-aided retranslation affect 
novice translators’ creativity in literary 
texts for the English-Turkish language 
pair? 

• What is the opinion of novice translators 
in regard to the use of MT in literary re-
translation? 

3 Method 
We conducted a small-scale experiment with 21 
fourth-year translation and interpreting (T&I) 
students following a course on literary translation, 
and with some experience in post-editing. They 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 27



translated into Turkish two excerpts (142 words 
and 145 words in length) from Robinson Crusoe. 
This classic has been frequently retranslated 
(about 30 times) into Turkish in the last three 
decades. Some of these retranslations are, partly 
or fully, available on the Internet. 

The participants were divided into two groups. 
The first group translated the first excerpt using 
Internet resources on an online word-processing 
program, and the second excerpt by post-editing 
the Google Translate output, again using any In-
ternet resources. The second group completed the 
translation task in the opposite order in terms of 
mode; that is the first excerpt was post-editing and 
the second was unaided human translation. The 
maximum time allowed for each task was one 
hour. Upon completion, the participants also 
wrote a short paragraph expressing their opinion 
about MT-aided and unaided literary translation.  

Each translation was transferred to a Google 
Spreadsheet, and in each translation six transla-
tion units were selected for analysis in each mode 
(HT and MT+PE), according to where creativity 
was expected to come into play. 

3.1 Sample Text 
I was born in the year 1632, in the city of 

York, of a good family, though not of that coun-
try, my father being a foreigner of Bremen who 
settled first at Hull. 

He got a good estate by merchandise and, 
leaving off his trade, lived afterward at York, from 
whence he had married my mother, whose rela-
tions were named Robinson, a very good family 
in that country, and from whom I was called Rob-
inson Kreutznaer; but by the usual corruption of 
words in England we are now called, nay, we call 
ourselves, and write our name “Crusoe” and so my 
companions always called me. 

I had two elder brothers, one of which was 
lieutenant colonel to an English regiment of 
foot in Flanders, formerly commanded by the fa-
mous Colonel Lockhart, and was killed at the bat-
tle near Dunkirk against the Spaniards. 

What became of my second brother, I never 
knew, any more than my father and my mother 
did know what was become of me.  

Being the third son of the family, and not bred 
to any trade, my head began to be filled very 
early with rambling thoughts.  

My father, who was very ancient, had given 
me a competent share of learning, as far as 
house-education and a country free school gener-
ally go, and designed me for the law; but I would 
be satisfied with nothing but going to sea; and my 

inclination to this led me so strongly against the 
will, nay, the commands of my father, and 
against all the entreaties and persuasions of my 
mother and other friends, that there seemed to be 
something fatal in that propensity of nature, tend-
ing directly to the life of misery which was to 
befall me. 

3.2 Analysis 
We categorized translation solutions as follows: 

• literal translation 

• MT solution (literal, creative, or errone-
ous translation) 

• creative solution (going beyond literal 
translation) 

• undertranslation (not conveying the mes-
sage fully) 

• mistranslation (conveying the message 
incorrectly) 

• untranslated (omitting the whole unit) 
We only used four of the published translations: 

the first translation, and three retranslations. We 
analyzed the translations in terms of the expres-
sions in bold, a total of 252 translation units. We 
acknowledge that some categories can overlap; 
for example, a literal translation solution can over-
lap with solutions found in previous translations. 
We coded each solution according to the catego-
ries listed above. 

4 Results 
The analysis of student translations based on MT 
solutions and previous translations provided 
results regarding the effect of using MT in literary 
translation on creativity. 

4.1 Initial observations 
MT output produced by Google Translate seems 
consistent with unaided translation outputs 
(student translations as well as retranslations 
already available in the market) in terms of 
sustaining-adapting words; neither output 
localizes. For example, the human translator and 
retranslators have not focused on the readers’ 
perspective: ‘Flanders’ is transferred unchanged 
without giving the reader Flamand / Flemish 
context. Only two students in HT mode noted this 
and localized the word, whereas MT output in 
French does this automatically. 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 28



MT output also seems to present translations 
more faithful to the source text structure. Profes-
sional as well student translators tend to divide 
long sentences into parts, unlike MT. The ten-
dency to keep the form of the original may be a 
sign and test of creativity from the perspective of 
the translator; so translational strategies correlate 
with creativity. 

9 out of 12 translation units were translated by 
MT incorrectly and one translation unit was un-
dertranslated. Other two translation units were 
translated accurately, one literally and one crea-
tively. 

4.2 Student translations 
Time spent for translation both in HT and MT+PE 
modes was very close (See Table 1). Although the 
participants spent almost as much time as the 
other mode adjusting the MT output (see Table 1), 
in most instances they preferred to maintain MT 
output. The number of mistranslations was high in 
both modes, mostly due to comprehension 
problems. The participants did not check earlier 
published translations during the experiment. 

As can be seen in Charts 1-3, the percentage of 
creative solutions that the participants produced is 
higher in the HT mode. In the MT+PE mode, the 
participants preferred to rely on MT solutions, 
whether literal or erroneous, to a considerable ex-
tent. Approximately, 23% of the translation solu-
tions by Group 1 and 59% of Group 2 originated 
from the MT output, which was obtained through 
Google Translate. We observed overlapping solu-
tions by MT, retranslators, and student translators 
as well. For example, the word “ancient” is trans-
lated into Turkish inaccurately not only by Google 
Translate, but also by retranslators and students, 
except for one. The translation unit “I was born” 
is translated as “doğdum” by MT and this solution 
is kept by all of the participants in MT+PE mode, 
whereas only two out of 10 participants used this 
solution in HT mode. Only about 7% of transla-
tion solutions produced by the student translators 
were exactly similar to those in earlier published 
translations included in our study. 
 

4.3 Student views 
Only two out of 21 participants found MT+PE 
more efficient, the remainder complained about 
the difficulty of post-editing and stated that they 
preferred translating from scratch. This was 
mostly due to the complex sentence structures in 

the source text. Three of the comments by the 
participants are as follows: 

 
G2-S5 (Group2-Student5) 

It took the same time for me to post-edit a MT and 
to translate a similar text on my own. Machine 
translation fails to successfully translate such 
complex sentence structures, and there seems to 
be many mistakes in the MT, I would have 
preferred to translate the first part myself, upon 
seeing the MT. Translating on my own, for me was 
rather easier when compared to post-editing, as 
MT often seemed to confuse me with both its word 
choices and sentence structure changes. I had to 
pay more attention to the text due to these 
elements. As for the translation process itself, I 
found the text to be complex on a similar level but 
very much enjoyed translating it since it was a 
literary translation and a challenge on its own. 

 
G2-S8 

Even though the post editing and translation 
processes took a similar amount of time for me, 
post editing process was more efficient and easier 
when we consider the translation of the text. 
Except for the long sentence in second paragraph, 
sentence structures were good enough, and I did 
not need to change sentence structures so much. 

 
G2-S11 

Even though there are some advances in MT 
systems, non-similar language pairs (e.g. Turkish 
and English in this case, as they are from different 
language families) still seem to be problematic for 
MT. Some words were translated incorrectly, and 
disentangling the mess caused by the lengthy 
sentences of the source text proved to be more 
challenging than making the translation from 
scratch. 
The translation (and not MT) was easier, and I felt 
like I had more command over the process than in 
the first step of the assignment. As far as the time 
spent on each task is concerned, it seems plausible 
to think that long and complex sentences, in the 
current technical circumstances, should be 
handled by human translators rather than 
automated processes. 

 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 29



 

 
Chart 1. Translation solutions by Group 1 (n=10) 

 

 
Chart 2. Translation solutions by Group 2 (n=11) 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 30



 
Chart 3. Translation solutions by all participants (n=21) 

 
 

Table 1. Average time spent on translation tasks 
 

 G1 G2 

 HT MT+PE HT MT+PE 
Average 

time spent 
in minutes 

20.8 20 18.18 16.18 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 31



5 Conclusion 
Our study focused on the question how the use of 
MT in translation of literary texts affects 
creativity. We used a qualitative analysis of  a 
small set of data produced by fourth-year T&I 
students. 

Toral (2019) warns that “the extensive use of 
PE rather than HT may have serious implications 
for the target language in the long term, for exam-
ple that it becomes impoverished (simplification) 
and overly influenced by the source language (in-
terference).” This finding is relevant to our study 
as well because novice translators are also suscep-
tible to interference of source language due to lit-
eral solutions provided by MT services. In another 
relevant study, Vanmassenhove, Shterionov, and 
Way (2019) observed that “the process of MT 
causes a general loss in terms of lexical diversity 
and richness when compared to human-generated 
text.”  

Our findings generally corroborate Toral’s 
(2019) and Vanmassenhove, Shterionov, and 
Way’s (2019) findings  that students created less 
original solutions with MT aid; and more original 
in non-MT mode . A parallel can be drawn with a 
driverless car: when controlled by humans, the 
number of routes expand, and safety is increased.  
We also found that novice translators had diffi-
culty in analyzing complex sentence structures, 
and hence mistranslated the high number of units 
in our analysis. Yet, this might be due to time pres-
sure, as they were limited to one hour to complete 
the translation task in a laboratory setting. 

As Kussmaul (2000) states “We are faced here 
with a specific feature of creativity in translating, 
which at first sight seems to be a paradox. On the 
one hand translators can fulfil the requirement of 
novelty only if they move away from the source 
text; on the other hand, it may be more adequate 
for the overall purpose not to move very far from 
the source text and thus be less creative.” (p. 124). 
In this regard, MT use seems to be an adequate 
choice because of the linearity it presents. Yet, lit-
erary translation, and retranslation in particular, 
requires creativity entailing novel solutions. Un-
like the conclusion of Moorkens et al. (2018), our 
participants, relatively inexperienced, found MT 
suggestions rather unhelpful, as reported in their 
post-experiment reflections. 

Our results suggest that assuming that MT to 
Turkish continues to develop, it will help the 
translator to produce more creative retranslations, 
and may help free the translator from laborious 

work and become more creative and open to ex-
periment.  

However, we argue that, even in its present 
state, using MT may help the translator 1) to check 
work, 2) or to create work by editing, 3) and  to 
see her good and bad points. Nevertheless, start-
ing with MT-editing may be time consuming, so 
probably own translations should be compared 
with the MT version. But if translators feel that it 
will be difficult to be creative, then they could 
start with MT version. We know that editors in 
publishing houses are uninterested in whether the 
text is human or MT, or even group work, they 
merely need a usable, original text from a human 
translator as named author who is  legally respon-
sible for the text.   

But then, even if this is true for translation, in 
the case of retranslation, it becomes complex, as 
MT or HT may resemble other retranslations. Our 
experiment is important because it shows that, 
even though there exist  several retranslations of a 
work, translations of greater creativity are possi-
ble in HT and even in MT. In fact, we may say 
that, if used wisely, MT becomes a tool for the re-
translator in the same way as past HTs of the same 
text in the same language, and it is extremely 
likely that MT aid will eventually become as com-
mon as dictionaries are today.  

One drawback in our investigation is that stu-
dents have not yet achieved professionalism and 
professional attitudes, meaning they do not yet be-
have like professional translators in the field. In 
literary retranslation business, it is always a point 
of interest whether the retranslator considered 
other translations and whether there is any corre-
lation with the current retranslation. This looking 
up and preliminary research process is in fact cru-
cial if the republisher and retranslator intends to 
add value to the product; but in the Turkish case, 
our analysis of the published texts revealed no 
such an intention. The added value has been new-
ness in translation alone, without new forewords 
by specialists in the field or footnotes to reveal the 
historical context. This shows that MT may add 
much value to the translation; for example, 
Google Translate has a pronunciation/reading 
tool, and words can be searched on the Internet for 
images, dictionary and encyclopedia entries. Yan-
dex Translator has added previous Russian to 
English literary translations to its database, which 
are revealed if you try to translate from a Russian 
classic. As these tools evolve, they will probably 
either make retranslation unnecessary or make hu-
man retranslation evolve into a cyborg translation, 
in which the personal translation will be available 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 32



for the consumer. In addition, we may be witness-
ing a shift from the question of whether the trans-
lator will use MT, to the question of whether MT 
will need a translator, and in the case of retransla-
tion, the answer is, not necessarily.  

But today, even though the translation from, 
say, Finnish to English has developed greatly 
(Robinson 2019), translations into Turkish still 
have to catch up, and this makes our analysis nec-
essary. In the Turkish case, we need to be aware 
that there is a market for plagiarism in retransla-
tions; these are produced with methods such as re-
newing, changing the words, syntax, and some-
times, collaging different translations, which we 
call transcollaging. The producer of plagiarism 
does not aim at better texts, although this is possi-
ble, but usually they aim only to hide resem-
blances. The problem here is to decide whether 
MT is consistently repeating the same translation, 
or whether it is evolving, changing every day and 
giving different solutions to different users. If the 
latter is the case, a plagiarist (or so-called transla-
tor) may use MT to get a literary retranslation 
without recourse to other human retranslations, 
and there will be nothing beyond an IP number to 
identify him. This is a problem for attention and 
our investigation, which reveals similarities 
among Crusoe retranslations, plagiarisms and stu-
dent works must be borne in mind in future anal-
yses. 

We should note that the source text in our study 
contains structures and expressions that could 
pose challenges for translators, whether profes-
sional or student. MT use can be more helpful for 
relatively easier literary texts. Further experi-
ments should be conducted with different texts, 
and as well as with professional translators. Fi-
nally, comparing different online MT services, 
such as Bing Translator and Yandex and other of-
fline commercial systems, in addition to Google 
Translate, would enable us to better assess the po-
tential of MT use for creativity in retranslation. 
  

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 33



References 

Baker, Mona. 1993. Corpus linguistics and translation 
studies: Implications and applications. Text and 
technology: In honour of John Sinclair, 233:250. 

Gürses, Sabri. 2007. “İntihal Kültürü” [Culture of Pla-
giarism]. Varlık 1194: 9–16. 

Gürses, Sabri. 2008. Çeşitli Örneklerle Çeviri İntihal-
leri [Plagiarism in Translation through Examples]. 
In Proceedings of the Colloquium on Translation 
Ethics: Ethical Issues in Translation and in Trans-
lation Profession? [Çeviri Etiği Toplantısı: Çeviri ve 
Çevirmenliğin Etik Sorunları]. İstanbul: Istanbul 
University Publications. 

Gürses, Sabri. 2011. Translational Plagiarism: National 
History, Global Prospects. Çeviribilim 4: 6–7. 

Kussmaul, Paul. 2000. Types of creative translating. 
Benjamins translation library, 39, 117-126. 

Malmkjær, Kirsten. 2019. Translation and Creativity. 
New York and London: Routledge. 

Moorkens, Joss, Toral, Antonio, Castilho, Sheila, and 
Andy Way. 2018. Translators’ perceptions of literary 
post-editing using statistical and neural machine 
translation. Translation Spaces, 7(2), 240-262. 

Robinson, Douglas. 1998. 22 Theses on Translation. 
http://home.olemiss.edu/~djr/pages/writer/arti-
cles/html/22theses.html 

Robinson, Douglas. 2019. Nasıl Çevirmen Olunur. 
Translated by Sabri Gürses. İstanbul: Çeviribilim. 

Sullivan, Carol. 2013. Creativity. Handbook of Trans-
lation Studies  Volume 4, pp. 42–46. John Benjamins 
Publishing Company. 

Şahin, Mehmet. 2014. Using MT post-editing for trans-
lator training», Tralogy [En ligne], Tralogy II, Ses-
sion 6 - Teaching around MT / Didactique, ensei-
gnement, apprentissage, mis à jour le : 
25/08/2014,URL : http://lodel.irevues.inist.fr/tral-
ogy/index.php?id=255 

Şahin, Mehmet, and Nilgün Dungan. 2014. "Transla-
tion testing and evaluation: A study on methods and 
needs." Translation & Interpreting 6.2: 67-90. 

Şahin, Mehmet, Duman, Derya, Gürses, Sabri, Kaleş, 
Damla, and David Woolls. 2018. "Toward an Empir-
ical Methodology for Identifying Plagiarism in Re-
translation." In Perspectives on Retranslation: Ide-
ology, Paratexts, Methods, edited by Özlem Berk 
Albachten and Şehnaz Tahir Gürçağlar, 166-191. 
New York: Routledge. 

Şahin, Mehmet, Duman, Derya, and Sabri Gürses. 
2015a. Plagiarism in Translation (Grant No: 
112K388). Final Report, Ankara: The Scientific and 
Technological Research Council of Turkey. 

Şahin, Mehmet, Duman, Derya, and Sabri Gürses. 
2015b. Big business of plagiarism under the guise of 
(re) translation: The case of Turkey. Babel, 61(2), 
193-218.  

Tahir Gürçağlar, Şehnaz. (2009). Retranslation. In M. 
Baker, & G. Saldana (Eds.), Routledge Encyclope-
dia of Translation Studies (pp. 233-236). New York 
and London: Routledge. 

Taivalkoski-Shilov, Kriistina (2018). Ethical issues re-
garding machine (-assisted) translation of literary 
texts. Perspectives, 1-15. 

Toral, Antonio. 2019. Post-editese: an Exacerbated 
Translationese. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00900. 

Toral, Antonio, and Andy Way. 2018. What level of 
quality can Neural Machine Translation attain on lit-
erary text?. In Translation Quality Assessment (pp. 
263-287). Springer, Cham. 

Turrell, Teresa M.. 2004. Textual kidnapping revisited: 
The case of plagiarism in literary translation. Inter-
national Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 
11, 1–26. 

Vanmassenhove, Eva, Dimitar Shterionov, and Andy 
Way. (2019). Lost in Translation: Loss and Decay of 
Linguistic Richness in Machine Translation. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1906.12068. 

 

The Qualities of Literary Machine Translation Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 34


