




































MTPE in Patents: A Successful Business Story 

Valeria Premoli 

Aglatech14 S.p.A 

vpremoli@aglatech14.it 

Elena Murgolo 

Aglatech14 S.p.A 

emurgolo@aglatech14.it 

Diego Cresceri 

Creative Words 

diego.cresceri@creative-

words.com 
 

 Abstract 

This paper illustrates how we successfully 

implemented MTPE in our workflow and 

how the decision of having our own en-

gine turned out to be decisive. After hav-

ing compared different solutions, we de-

cided to choose an MT provider that could 

train an engine on our behalf with our ma-

terial (TMs and glossary in the field of 

mechanics) to translate patents upon cus-

tomers’ request. After the training, we 

tested the new engine to evaluate the MT 

output. Because the quality was so good, 

we decided to create an in-house team of 

post-editors, coordinated by one of our 

senior translators. Due to the increasing 

request from some of our customers, we 

needed also some external post-editors to 

count on, so we contacted an LSP special-

ized in post-editing and we offered them 

training in patents post-editing. The chal-

lenge for the future is to involve more 

freelancers and to be able to overcome the 

resistance that many of them still have to-

wards Machine Translation. 

1 Introduction 

Up until a few years ago, machine translation 

(Machine Translation, MT) technology was still at 

a stage in which its commercial deployment was 

not possible. In most fields, Rule-based and 

Statistical MT, up to Hybrid MT, were not precise 

enough and the post-editing phase was always 

deemed too time-consuming and resource-

intensive to be used in LSPs and companies in 

                                                 
 © 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Crea-
tive Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, 

CCBY-ND. 

general. This scenario changed completely with 

the introduction of Neural MT. 

Suddenly, language providers around the world 

found themselves facing a growing request for 

post-editing services, especially in the areas where 

light post-editing was a feasible option.  

However, in the field of Intellectual Property, 

customers still tend to request Human Translation, 

probably worried that MTPE will not meet the 

required standards in terms of accuracy and 

precision. 

Only relatively recently, about two years ago, 

we were asked to start post-editing texts in the 

mechanics field and we were faced with a new 

challenge, since at the time we had never done 

MTPE and we didn’t know how to proceed. 

We committed to find the best way to satisfy our 

customers’ needs and decided to create our own 

customized engine. 

The challenges we had in front of us were the 

selection of an MT provider that could provide an 

engine with a good enough output to be 

implemented without causing production losses; 

the training of an in-house team, the so-called 

“Tech Team”, to make the most of this new 

technology; and the training of external resources 

to face the growing volumes of MTPE requests. 

2 Data Collection 

Our company is specialized in the translation of 

patents. The two main areas in which we work are 

Mechanics and Life Sciences, with many subfields 

such as Automotive, Biology, Medical devices, 

Chemistry and so on. Some of our customers 

started to express an interest in MT and asked us if 

we were able to offer Post-Editing services in order 

to reduce costs and above all turnaround times. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 36



Therefore, we decided to explore the options 

offered by the market. Our first choice has been to 

train our own engine with a popular MT provider. 

At that time, though, we were completely new to 

this and we didn’t have the required knowledge to 

do that, also because we didn’t have a person that 

could work full-time on this project. We decided 

then to opt for a provider that could train an engine 

on our behalf using the materials we could 

provide. The mechanics field has been our first 

choice because the volumes we received from said 

customers were high and we thought that the 

training of new resources could be easier in this 

field than in the Life Sciences one. We collected 

all the material we had in order to send it to the 

provider, and then exported all the Translation 

Memories concerning such field in .tmx format 

(Automotive, Devices, Mechanics, Electronic 

Consumer, Electronics, Medical Devices). Due to 

the amount of TUs provided, we were offered the 

opportunity to go for a PNMT specialization. 

Besides the Translation Memories, we also 

exported our Termbase (which covers different 

domains) filtering only the mechanics related 

terms. The engine has been trained within a month 

and after this period we have been able to deploy 

it and to start using it in a test phase, called Proof 

of Concept. 

3 PoC 

Once the new engine had been trained with the 

material we provided and with few additional 

documents, the service provider offered us a two-

week testing period (PoC – Proof of Concept). 

The two main objectives were to test the 

environmental setup of the CAT tool integrated 

API, and the quality of the trained engine. 

We received a short briefing at the beginning of 

the test period and were in regular contact with the 

support team of the service provider. Then, we 

scheduled a wrap-up call to report our findings, 

after which the engine was fully deployed for the 

mechanical and electrotechnical patents that re-

quired MT translation and post-editing. 

3.1 Connecting the Engine 

The plug-in for our CAT tool of choice is 

structured to combine TMs’ results up to a certain 

fuzzy threshold, which can be set by the user 

based on the particular requirements of each 

project, and the automatic translation of all 

remaining segments, namely those with either no 

results from the TMs or with fuzzy percentages 

inferior to such threshold. 

The results, be it fuzzy matches or automatic 

translation, is applied to the file to be translated af-

ter a pre-translation to be launched either during 

the creation of the project or in a second, separate 

step. The text will then appear in the CAT’s editor 

as a fully translated text with different colour cod-

ing to show the origin of each translated segment 

(fuzzy or AT). 

One of the main problems is that, in case of a 

mismatch between the threshold of look-up match 

for the TM concordance search and the value for 

MT translation, the CAT is unable to insert the AT 

during the pre-translation step. Although the issue 

was partially solved by matching the two values, 

the solution was only satisfactory to a limited ex-

tent, and it appears to have been solved only in 

later versions of the plug-in. 

3.2 MT Output Evaluation 

The crucial issue during the PoC was to establish 

whether the MT raw output’s quality was high 

enough to constitute a solid base for a substantial 

increase in productivity. 

To this end, two translators with previous patent 

translation and proofreading experience were ap-

pointed to the testing, one full-time, the other on a 

4-hours-a-day basis. 

A feedback form was provided to monitor the 

type, frequency, and severity of the mistakes in the 

output. It was mainly focused on finding out what 

kind of mistakes were present in the translation 

and which of these could have a feasible solution 

to be implemented on our side, or by the service 

provider. 

Severity was scaled from 0 to 3 (0 = Not under-

standable, 1= hardly understandable, 2= under-

standable, 3= good). 

As it turned out, the quality was very high, with 

only ten not understandable segments in the course 

of nine projects (about 48,000 words), and six 

hardly understandable ones. These fifteen seg-

ments received a low score because of grammati-

cal errors of various kind (concordance masculine-

feminine, singular-plural, etc.), because of a too 

literal translation, or because the machine 

“guessed” words it had never encountered before, 

creating non-existing, half translated compounds. 

We found very few punctuation mistakes, 

mostly added spaces. 

All in all, however, the most troubling issue 

was, and still is, the fact that single terms are not 

translated consistently throughout the translation. 

In the strictly regulated field of patents, where the 

consistency of the translation is of the foremost 

importance, also from a legal point of view, the 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 37



translation of a single term with different equiva-

lents in the target language leads to a huge waste 

of time and cognitive resources on the part of the 

post-editor. 

Moreover, since Italian is an inflecting lan-

guage, the replacement of such wrongly translated 

words turned out to be very time-consuming. 

Unfortunately, this issue still has no satisfactory 

solution, even though Glossaries offer a partial 

improvement (however, glossaries seem to work 

on a ‘search and replace’ basis, namely the engine 

translates the whole text, automatically choosing 

the Italian equivalent, and then forces the term 

from the glossary of choice on the target text, thus 

creating masculine-feminine concordance mis-

takes. Also, once a term was inserted in a glossary, 

the machine was not able to automatically apply 

the respective singular or plural forms or to de-

cline verbs). 

4 Tech Team 

To maximise the engine’s profitability, it was 

decided to create an in-house team of full-time 

post-editors to process all the PE requests from 

various clients.  

4.1 Recruitment of the Team 

The choice of the team in such a project is crucial. 

As a future-oriented company, we are aware that 

MT and PE in our industry are not only the future, 

but already the present. At the same time, we un-

derstand that many freelancers are reluctant to try 

it out and fear that machines will take their place. 

This is why we have decided to create an in-house 

team with new people, instead of outsourcing 

post-editing (at least during this first phase). We 

decided to look for newly graduated, tech-ori-

ented translators, with the idea that they could 

have fewer prejudices and less resistance towards 

Machine Translation. We re-allocated one internal 

resource, who, together with three other people 

we hired, formed the so-called “Tech Team”, 

namely a group of full-time in-house post-editors. 

Also, one of the in-house translators was ap-

pointed as coordinator for the project and had the 

task of coordinating the post-editing team and 

manage any possible technical issue that came up, 

possibly by keeping in contact with the provider’s 

support service. 

4.2 Training 

The initial training of our internal team was a 

practical explanation by the two translators who 

had tested the engine during the PoC step. 

Based on actual projects to be then delivered to 

clients, the new post-editors were shown both the 

technical aspects of the CAT tool interface, and the 

linguistic issues connected with the MT output. 

All our in-house PE staff was simultaneously 

trained in post-editing and in patent translation, 

creating a very practical learning environment. In-

stead of generic notions about PE in general, they 

learned “on the field” how to apply their linguistic 

and proofreading skills to such a technical field. 

After a couple of months of use, we scheduled a 

training session by an external expert who, based 

on the results of a few short tests carried out by the 

in-house post-editors, created a training program 

for the company’s management and employees. 

The test that the in-house post-editors per-

formed was a Human Evaluation Test, focused on 

fluency and accuracy, scored based on type and 

frequency of errors. The results showed an out-

standing performance by the MT engine. 

 
Figure 1. Fluency and Accuracy Performance of 

the Mechanical Engine. 

As we expected, terminology errors were the 

most frequent, followed by mistranslations and in-

consistencies. 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 38



 
Figure 2. Average # of errors per category. 

Training started from a base level, explaining 

what MT is and how it integrates into the business’ 

workflow, to a practical module containing Post-

editing guidelines. 

5 External Post-Editors 

5.1 Training on Patents 

As volumes became higher and the request for PE 

translations from some customers increased, we 

decided to look for external post-editors. We al-

ready knew an Italian company whose core busi-

ness is post-editing, so we decided to involve 

them in our project. It turned out to be a win-win 

situation: we got the expertise in MTPE and we 

offered them training in patent translation. Our 

Recruitment Specialist, who used to be an internal 

translator and now recruits and qualifies new re-

sources, prepared a training session to explain 

what a patent is and which are the characteristics 

of patents in relation to the translation. 

The difficult part for them was to learn how to 

post-edit patents, because you have to maintain 

consistency in the terminology and you need to re-

main extremely literal. Nothing should be deleted, 

all the words of the source text should be trans-

lated in the target, paying attention for example to 

definite and indefinite articles. 

We have fully reviewed all the translations re-

ceived from said other company in order to send 

feedback that could help them improve and learn 

how to post-edit patents. 

5.2 External Resources: Partner LSP 

A third-party company was contacted that had 

been providing post-editing services in a variety of 

verticals since early 2017. Given the specific na-

ture of the first MTPE projects (big volumes, low 

quality expected), they had created a team of 

newly graduated linguists, who they then trained 

remotely on post-editing. Such LSP was ap-

proached to provide post-editing services for pa-

tents, and they thought it could be a good fit pro-

vided that they could be given specific training on 

patent translation. They selected an initial team of 

12 of their best post-editors (based on their will-

ingness to participate, knowledge of technical 

translation, and availability) and asked them to 

join for a live training by our Recruitment Special-

ist. The training consisted of some theoretical in-

formation about patents’ structure, terminology 

and style, which are quite peculiar. After the onsite 

training, a trial period was agreed, in order for the 

team to get up to speed and fully understand the 

requirements. Transparency on the post-editors’ 

background, full cooperation on their training and 

open feedback were paramount in the success of 

this initiative. After the initial 12 post-editors, 

more linguists have been successfully added to the 

team, with training provided remotely. 

5.3 External Resources: Freelancers 

When the LSP was approached and asked to pro-

vide a team of post-editors, they were chosen from 

an existing database of newly graduated linguists 

that were then specifically trained on post-editing. 

When the team was originally formed, different re-

cruiting methods had been used, including direct 

contact with universities and use of social media 

(posts and job offers on Facebook proved effective 

considering the age of the target required). In most 

cases, the job offer was accepted with no reluc-

tancy from the young professionals that had little 

or no previous on-field experience with transla-

tion. However, when respondents had previous (5+ 

years) experience on the market, they tended to 

consider post-editing more as a low-level, degrad-

ing task and reacted with strong criticism to the job 

offer, with some extreme occasions where the LSP 

was even considered fraudulent and scammy. 

When we tried to involve our existing freelanc-

ers in this process we faced more difficulties. We 

especially noticed a certain amount of distrust to-

wards the quality of the output and the compensa-

tion rates. To ease the passage to PE and to avoid 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 39



confusion as much as possible, we still continue 

paying our freelancers on a word count basis, cal-

culating a discount grid based on CAT analysis. 

Both fuzzy matches and MT-translated words are 

calculated as percentages from the full rate. Many 

“old-style” translators still think that MT is some-

thing bad because they don’t know how to use it 

effectively to transform it into a super-efficient 

tool. They see it as something that can reduce their 

income, because MTPE rates are lower, but with-

out considering it a way to boost their productiv-

ity. We have seen that the reality in our case is dif-

ferent, and we tried to use the data we collected 

during the training in order to convince them. 

When we showed the good output of our engine 

and the productivity of our in-house post-editors, 

some of our freelancers were positively surprised 

and decided at least to try. As we did with the 

third-party company, we always sent exhaustive 

feedback after our revision step and, in the end, 

some of them accepted to work in this way from 

time to time. We still face some reluctance, but we 

are working hard to change their minds and 

demonstrate that MT could be a good choice in 

some cases. 

6 Resources’ Reluctancy 

One of the main challenges we face today is to 

overcome the reluctancy of freelance translators 

to work with MT. As the number of clients 

requiring post-editing services increases, and with 

the growing interest of the industry towards MT, 

AI, and PE, we felt the need to keep up with the 

new developments of technology and with the 

changes that it is bringing about in the translation 

market. To that end, we believe that our 

freelancers need to know exactly what post-

editing is and how to take advantage of machine 

translation as a productivity tool, in order to 

translate faster but with the same quality. 

To better understand the mindset of the free-

lancers we want to involve in post-editing, we re-

cently conducted an anonymous survey, asking 71 

professional translators in our database to answer 

a few short questions about MT and PE.  

 

Figure 3. Age range of the respondents. 

64,79% of the respondents had already worked 

in post-editing, while 35,21% of the people in-

volved only had experience with “human” transla-

tion so far, mainly because they’ve never been 

asked to do that (80,77%). Only 4 participants 

stated they were completely against post-editing. 

When asked why, they answered that the rates are 

too low and the output quality too low to be a valid 

aid in the translation process. A few also claimed 

that, after many years of experience, they do not 

believe that the productivity increase would be 

enough to justify the lower rates, especially since 

they believe they are still faster at translating in the 

traditional way. 

Less than half of the respondents (43,66%) had 

never taken part in a training session on post-edit-

ing but most of them would be interested in attend-

ing in the future (81,25%). This latter figure is of 

particular interest because it shows that providing 

training solutions could help overcome the distrust 

towards MT and PE. 

  
Figure 4. Percentage of translators who would 

like to attend MTPE training in the future. 

Based on these findings we organised two train-

ing sessions, one in Milan and one in Bologna. The 

44 freelancers who attended the sessions received 

a specific training encompassing a general intro-

duction on MT and its history, and an in-depth ex-

planation about the different types of post-editing 

(particularly, full and light post-editing) and the 

typical errors found in MT pre-translated texts. Af-

terwards, they took part in a practical session led 

by our in-house post-editors where they had the 

chance to put into practice all the information pre-

viously received. We then sent a follow-up survey, 

the results of which showed that most people, that 

is 25 out of 30 respondents, were very satisfied and 

willing to start post-editing for us in the near fu-

ture. 

To ease the transition to the new tasks, we felt 

that reassuring them that they will continue receiv-

ing “human” translation jobs would be helpful to 

help them break the proverbial ice. They were also 

given a chance to talk with our internal post-edi-

tors and to ask them for tips and tricks to tackle any 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 40



typical MT error, and to further discuss how to 

take full advantage of these new tools. 

Considering these results and the many opin-

ions gathered talking to freelancers and other pro-

fessionals working in LSPs, we believe that 

providing training to demonstrate how useful MT 

can be and how to get the most out of its integra-

tion in the workflow, instead of simply forcing 

translators to become full-time post-editors, and 

supporting the transition with feedback after each 

job is a good way to help them overcome their in-

itial fear and resistance.  

7 Conclusion 

Post-editing is the future in our industry. In most 

industry-specific conferences MT is one of the 

main topics and it is clear that LSPs should be able 

to meet the requests of the market in order to 

remain competitive and to be able to satisfy their 

customers. 

Our experience, at the moment, is limited, for 

various reasons, the most relevant being the fact 

that our use of MTPE is bound to the request 

thereof by a customer. Most clients are still reluc-

tant to the use of MT, therefore we focused on the 

fields in which such requests are more common.  

This means that, for now, we can only offer our 

clients MTPE services in very specific subjects, 

namely mechanical and chemical patents from 

English into Italian, at least in case we have to pre-

translate the text with our engine. 

This being said, the results are still very satis-

fying: last year we MT-processed about 5.5 mil-

lion words, 2 million of which were post-edited 

by external resources (12 translators and 1 re-

viewer) and the remaining 3.5 million by our 4 in-

house post-editors. 

Since many of our customers are now asking 

PE for different fields of application and different 

language combinations, for example German or 

French into Italian, we are planning to explore 

new possibilities, such as new customised en-

gines. It shall also be interesting to consider train-

ing our own engine on the premises, in the begin-

ning surely with the support of a specialised ser-

vice provider, and see how this technology can 

help us face turnaround times that are becoming 

tighter and tighter. 

The hardest thing to overcome will surely be 

the reluctance of many translators to get involved 

in PE projects, so one of our goals is to convince 

them to try out this working mode and become 

full-fledged post-editors. The key to this is to have 

them understand that MT can be a tool that can 

help them boost their productivity while maintain-

ing high standards of quality. 

This kind of reluctance and suspicion was ex-

pressed also by some in-house translators, who 

were used to “old-style” translation. After attend-

ing the same training session as our freelancers and 

after being shown the actual potential of MT, they 

post-edited their first texts. When we asked again, 

they stated that their productivity actually in-

creased thanks to the good output of the engine. 

Based on our experience so far, we strongly be-

lieve that a key factor to succeed is to present PE 

not as the substitution of Humans by Machines, the 

reduction of translators’ usefulness to the confines 

of accessories to the computer, or the conversion 

of people themselves to automatons. 

At the same time, we are committed to train and 

involve newly graduates and young translators or 

post editors who, with their fresh approach to tech-

nology, will help shape the “augmented transla-

tors” of the future. 

MTPE must be understood as a positive and 

handy new skill that will allow linguists to work at 

their full-potential and take maximum advantage 

from this increasingly tech-dominated world. 

We believe that, even though the request for pa-

tent post-editing is still low when compared to the 

request for human translation, the future of trans-

lation will turn out to be increasingly technological 

and MT-centred. 

 

Proceedings of MT Summit XVII, volume 2 Dublin, Aug. 19-23, 2019 | p. 41


