



















































Ellipsis in Chinese AMR Corpus


Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning Representations, pages 92–99
Florence, Italy, August 1st, 2019 c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

92

Ellipsis in Chinese AMR Corpus

Yihuan Liu1 Bin Li 1 Peiyi Yan 1 Li Song 1 Weiguang Qu 2
1School of Chinese Language and Literature

Nanjing Normal University
2School of Computer Science and Technology

Nanjing Normal University
lyh.njnu@gmail.com

Abstract
Ellipsis is very common in language. It’s nec-
essary for natural language processing to re-
store the elided elements in a sentence. How-
ever, there’s only a few corpora annotating the
ellipsis, which draws back the automatic de-
tection and recovery of the ellipsis. This pa-
per introduces the annotation of ellipsis in Chi-
nese sentences, using a novel graph-based rep-
resentation Abstract Meaning Representation
(AMR), which has a good mechanism to re-
store the elided elements manually. We an-
notate 5,000 sentences selected from Chinese
TreeBank (CTB). We find that 54.98% of sen-
tences have ellipses. 92% of the ellipses are
restored by copying the antecedents’ concepts.
and 12.9% of them are the new added con-
cepts. In addition, we find that the elided el-
ement is a word or phrase in most cases, but
sometimes only the head of a phrase or parts
of a phrase, which is rather hard for the auto-
matic recovery of ellipsis.

1 Introduction

With the rapid development of artificial intelli-
gence (AI), natural language progressing is one
of significant applications of AI, and it has made
outstanding progress in several basic techniques,
such as syntactic analysis and semantic analysis.
The former is relatively mature, while the latter
needs more efforts (Sun et al., 2014). For example,
in the SRL(Semantic Role Labeling)-only task of
the CoNLL 2009, the highest score in English is
86.2% and in Chinese it is 78.6% (Hajič et al.,
2009). In addition, a common issue for the cur-
rent semantic parser is that they ignore the elided
element which is not overt in the surface form,
but necessary in the understanding of the sentence.
That elided element is more often referred as ellip-
sis in linguistic.

Ellipsis is a common linguistic phenomenon
across languages. The traditional linguistic re-

searches pay more attention to the formal con-
struction, and don’t regard ellipsis as an impor-
tant factor. Although some theoretical achieve-
ments have been made in the classifications and
restrictions of ellipsis (Lobeck, 1995; Merchant,
2004, 2007). There are still debates in the defi-
nition of ellipsis, the identity constraint between
antecedents and the elided element etc. (Phillips
and Parker, 2013) .

Most current corpora don’t annotate the elided
element. A few corpora view ellipsis as an expe-
diency for some irregular sentences, and annotate
the elided element roughly. Such as Penn Tree-
bank (PTB for short) (Marcus et al., 1993, 1994),
Chinese Treebank (CTB) (Xue et al., 2005),
Prague Dependency TreeBank (PDT) (Böhmová
et al., 2000; Hajičová et al., 2001) and Univer-
sal Treebank (McDonald et al., 2013; Nivre et al.,
2016). It is noticeable that Ren et al. (2018) build
a treebank with focusing on ellipsis in context for
Chinese. But the corpus only contains 572 sen-
tences from a microblog corpus, and the annota-
tions exclude the elided words which can’t be said
but play an important role in the understanding of
the sentence.

This paper uses a novel framework to re-
store the elided elements in the sentence,
which is named Abstract Meaning Representa-
tion (AMR)(Banarescu et al., 2013). AMR repre-
sents the whole sentence meaning with concepts,
which are mainly abstracted from its correspond-
ing words occurring in the sentence. Based on
AMR, Chinese AMR (CAMR) makes some adap-
tations to accommodate Chinese better. What’s
more, CAMR develops corresponding restoration
methods for different types of ellipses, which
makes the restoration more reasonable and com-
plete.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we discuss the definition of ellipsis and



93

gives a broader definition, which refers to all phe-
nomena wherein the elided elements are necessary
for the meaning of the sentence but not overt in the
sentence. In addition, we introduce the representa-
tion for ellipsis in PTB, PDT. In Section 3, we de-
scribe three methods to restore ellipsis in CAMR.
And in Section 4 , we introduce the Chinese AMR
corpus which includes 5,000 sentences from the
newspaper portion of CTB. and we present some
statistics and analysis based on this corpus. Then
we conclude our paper with a summary of our con-
tribution in Section 5.

2 Related Work

As we mentioned above, the definition of ellipsis
is an unsolved issue. Many linguists have been
trying to define it from different aspects.

2.1 Definition of Ellipsis

To improve the agreement and the accuracy of
annotation, it is necessary for annotators to un-
derstand what is ellipsis. Arnauld and Lancelot
(1975) first mentioned ellipsis in their work Gen-
eral and Rational Grammar. And they defined it
as a pragmatic phenomenon which omits some re-
dundant words for concision. Jespersen (1924)
gave a semantic ellipsis, He assumed that gram-
marians should always be wary in admitting el-
lipses except where they are absolutely necessary
and where there can be no doubt as to what is un-
derstood. Carnie (2013) assumed that ellipses are
phenomena where a string that has already been
uttered is omitted in subsequent structures where
it would otherwise have to be repeated word for
word. While Lobeck (1995) viewed ellipsis as a
mismatch of phonological content and semantic
content, He thought ellipsis means deleting some
words which can be inferred from context.

There are other definitions of ellipsis. Quirk
et al. (1972) assumed that ellipsis is purely a sur-
face phenomenon. In the strict sense of ellipsis,
words are elided only if they are uniquely recov-
erable. There is no doubt as to what words are to
be supplied, and it is possible to add the recov-
ered words to the sentence. The definition was re-
ferred to the restraint of ellipsis. Ren et al. (2018)
gave a definition of ellipsis in the practice of natu-
ral language processing. It views ellipsis as textual
omission of words or phrases expressing a seman-
tic role in a sentence, which are optional but not
obligatory.

Comparing all definitions above, the consensus
is that there are elided elements that are helpful
for the understanding of the sentence, and can be
recovered from context. This paper follows that
consensus and gives a more broad definition for el-
lipsis. It encompasses all phenomena wherein the
elided elements which are necessary for the under-
standing of the sentence don’t refer to a token in
the surface form. There are mainly two differences
between this definition and others, which are:

• The restoration do not have to be unique and
unambiguous.

• The restoration do not have to be written in
the surface form.

The traditional theory requires the restoration of
ellipsis must be unique and ambiguous. But some-
times the elided words can’t not be uniquely and
unambiguously restored. For example, in the sen-
tence 1 is a headless nominal, and the subject of跳
舞(dance) is omitted. Due to lack of contextual in-
formation, we only know that the elided elements
refer to a dancer or some dancers, but we don’t
know exactly who it is. Since the elided elements
are important in the meaning of the sentence, we
add a new concept person in the ellipsis site and
consider this special headless nominal as ellipsis.

(1) 跳舞 的 走了
dance DE go ASP
“The dancer has gone.”

(2) 他想 吃 苹果
he want eat apple
“He wants to eat an apple.”

In most cases, The restoration can be said in the
surface form, and it makes the sentence regular.
But sometimes, the restoration will make the sen-
tence illegal, which means the restoration is only
in semantic level. For example, in the sentence 2,
the subject of 想(want) and 吃(eat) is 他(he), but
他(he) occurs once in the sentence. According to
the theta criterion, each argument is assigned to
one and only one theta role, it needs to add an-
other argument to meet the criterion and present
the whole sentence meaning. But the recovered
sentence “他想他吃苹果。”(“He wants him to
eat an apple.”) is illegal. Considering the seman-
tic importance of the missing argument, we regard
this sharing argument as ellipsis, too.



94

As the goal of the annotation is to present the
complete meaning of the sentence, we focus on
the semantic aspect than syntactic aspect. And the
scope of ellipsis is obviously more extensive than
the traditional one. The typical types like VP ellip-
sis, NP ellipsis and some special phenomena like
headless nominal and sharing argument are cov-
ered by ellipsis.

2.2 Ellipsis Representation in PTB and PDT

Most current corpora rarely annotate ellipses, only
a few corpora have represented part of ellipses
with some particular labels, such as PTB, CTB and
PDT. Since CTB follows the annotation principles
of PTB on the whole, we only describe the repre-
sentation strategies for ellipsis of PTB and PDT.
By comparing the ellipsis representation in these
two corpora, we assume that both of them only
handle some typical ellipses, and their tree struc-
tures are hard to representation ellipsis.

PTB is a large corpus which mainly contains
phrase structure annotation. It incorporates the
concept of empty category which is introduced in
Generative Grammar. Empty category plays a part
in syntactic structure and semantic structure, but
it has no corresponding phonological content in
the sentence, whose performance is similar with
ellipsis. In fact, some types of empty categories
are covered by ellipsis. So PTB including empty
category representation can provide scant help for
ellipsis research.

The specific representation method for ellipsis
includes two steps. Firstly, PTB annotates the
corresponding empty category label in the ellipsis
site. Secondly, PTB attaches the id to the labels
to contact the empty category and the related ele-
ments in the sentence (Xue et al., 2005).

In Figure 1, 公司(company) is a sharing argu-
ment, which is shared by the verb计划(plan) and
增加(increase). PTB regards the elided argument
as PRO, and assigns the label NONE - * PRO * to
the ellipsis site. The id -1 behind the empty cat-
egory label corresponds to the superior node NP-
PN-SBJ, which indicates that the elided element is
公司(company).

(3) 公司 计划增加 产量
Company plan increase output
“The company plans to increase output.”

PDT includes three layers which are morpho-
logical layer, syntactic layer and semantic layer.

Figure 1: Empty categories in PTB

Each level annotates the morphological, syntac-
tic and semantic information respectively. At the
syntactic layer, it annotates the overt words in the
sentence, and it restores the elided elements at the
semantic layer. The methods of representing el-
lipsis in PDT are more complex than PTB, which
mainly include three steps. Firstly, it adds a new
node. Then it judges the category of ellipsis and
represent it with corresponding label. At last, if
there is an antecedent, it will use the coreference
link to associate the new node with its antecedent
node (Mikulová, 2014; Hajič et al., 2015).

(4) 公司 计划增加 产量
Company plan increase output
“The company plans to increase output.”

Figure 2: Ellipsis representation in PDT

Figure 2 shows the annotation of Example 3
in PDT. Similar with PTB, PDT also adds a new
node for the elided element, and marks it as #Cor,
which means the elided element is the subject in
the object clause of the control verb 计划(plan).
Because of the antecedent公司(company), coref-
erence link is also added to contact the restored el-
ement with its antecedent, as shown by the dotted
arrow.

Although PTB and PDT have designed special
labels for ellipsis, but they lack complete resolu-
tion to deal with some special ellipses. For exam-



95

ple, the two corpora have no ability to represent
the subtle semantic difference between the elided
elements and its antecedent. And both of them re-
store the elided elements by adding a new node,
which make the tree structure more complex, es-
pecially when the elided elements occur repeat-
edly in the same sentence. What’s more, to rep-
resent the identity of the elided element and its an-
tecedent, a coreference link or other similar marks
is added to contact them. In that case, the tree
structure is changed into a graph structure.

2.3 Concept-to-word Alignment in CAMR
To represent the whole meaning of the sentence
in Chinese, CAMR has made some adaptations to
accommodate the linguistic facts of Chinese, and
one of the special adaptations is alignment. It uses
the sequence number of words in the sentence as
the concept id of the notional word, which real-
izes the concept-to-word alignment in the annota-
tion (Li et al., 2017).And this adaptation helps to
represent the elided element more intuitional and
convenient.

(5) 他1想2 吃3苹果4

he want eat apple
“He want to eat an apple.”

w/want-01
:arg0() h/he
:arg1() e/eat-01

:arg0 h
:arg1 h2/apple

x2/想-02
:arg0() x1/他他他
:arg1() x3/吃-01

:arg0 x1/他他他
:arg1 x4/苹果

As shown on the textual representation on the
left, English AMR does not align the concepts
with the words, it assigns the first letter of the
word to its concept. When the elided element is
restored, its antecedent is not very straightforward,
especially when the sentence is complex and there
are some other words that have same first letter
as the antecedent. Specifically, the elided element
他(he) is represented by the initial letter “h” of its
antecedent. To annotate and understand the sen-
tence, we need spend time in finding what the
initial letter exactly denotes. It is more likely to
cause lower efficiency and higher error rate. While
CAMR aligns the concepts to their words, and
makes the ellipsis representation more clearly.

3 Ellipsis Presentation in CAMR

As we described above, PTB and PDT mainly
restore the elided element by referring to its an-

tecedent. CAMR also represents ellipsis with the
help of antecedent, but sometimes the sentence
has no antecedent, or the reference of the elided
element is not identical but similar with its an-
tecedent. Referring to its antecedent is not rea-
sonable any more. Considering these different lin-
guistic performances of ellipsis, CAMR develops
corresponding methods to represent them reason-
ably, which are:

• Copy the antecedent, if there is an antecedent,
and the reference of antecedent and the elided
element is identical.

• Add a new concept, if there is no antecedent.

• Add a new concept and copy the antecedent,
if there is an antecedent, but the reference of
antecedent and the elided element is not iden-
tical.

3.1 Copy the Antecedent
When the antecedent can be found in context,
CAMR directly copies the antecedent’s concept
and fills the copied concept in ellipsis site to re-
store the elided element. It is noticeable that
CAMR does not increase new concept like PTB
and PDT. The concept of the elided element and
antecedent will be merged into one concept. In
CAMR graph, the concept of the elided element
and antecedent share the same concept node. the
elided element and its antecedent are dominated
by different elements, thus the semantic structure
of the sentence becomes a graph.

(6) 公司1 计划2增加3 产量4

Company plan increase output
“The company plans to increase output.”

x2/计划-01
:arg0() x1/公公公司司司
:arg1() x3/计划-01

:arg0 x1/公公公司司司
:arg1 x4/产量

Comparing Figure 1, Figure 2 and Figure 3 ,
CAMR does not add a new concept NONE - *
PRO * or #Cor for the elided element like PTB
and PDT. It copies the node of antecedent 公
司(company) directly, and combines the two ar-
guments into one node. The node公司(company)
represents the elided element and its antecedent at
the same time. Since the node 计划(plan) and



96

Figure 3: Copy the antecedent in CAMR

the node 增加(increase) both are fathers of 公
司(company), which makes the structure of this
sentence a typical graph.

This representation method in CAMR can re-
duce the total amount of node and make the struc-
ture of the whole sentence as clear as possible. The
advantage of graph structure benefits when the
same elided element occurring repeatedly many
times in the sentence. Since no matter how many
times the elided element occurs, the number of
nodes in the graph will not increase.

3.2 Add New Concepts
When the elided element has no corresponding an-
tecedent in the sentence, the method of copying
the concept of antecedent directly is no longer ap-
plicable. In this case, CAMR adds a new concept
for ellipsis. Specifically, CAMR firstly judges the
semantic categories of the elided element and adds
an appropriate abstract concepts, such as person
and thing. Then it analyses the semantic relation-
ship between the new concept and other concepts.
And the whole sentence’s meaning is to represent
completely.

(7) 跳舞1的2走3了4

dance DE go ASP
“The dancer has gone.”

x3/走-01
:arg0() x6/person

:arg1(x2/的) x1/跳舞-01
:aspect x4/了

Traditionally, it is assumed that the headless rel-
ative construction such as 跳舞的(the dancer), is
a contextual variant of the formal nominal struc-
ture. When the head is the subject or object of the
adjunct in this nominal structure, it can be elided
(Huang, 1982). In general, there is no antecedent,
and the elided elements are abstract. In Exam-
ple 7, the elided head of 跳舞的(the dancer) is

走-01

person

跳舞-01

:arg0-of的

:a
rg
0

了

:aspect

Figure 4: Add a new concept in CAMR

vague. It might be a dancer or some dancers. So
CAMR adds an abstract concept person to con-
tact 走(walk) and 跳舞(dance), and completes
the whole sentence meaning. In these relations,
the semantic relation label arg0-of between per-
son and 走(walk) is an inverse relation of arg0,
which is used to maintain a single-rooted structure
of CAMR graph.

3.3 Add a New Concept and Copy the
Antecedent

There is a special ellipsis where the antecedent
can be found in the sentence, but the reference of
the elided element and its antecedent is not iden-
tity. Previous ellipsis researches tend to neglect
that semantic nonidentity. Even though PDT has
realized that there are differences between the two
items in the comparison structure, the annotation
schemes can’t represent this semantic difference
properly. To represent the whole sentence mean-
ing reasonably, CAMR combines the two method
described above. That is adding new concepts and
then copying the antecedent. Specifically, accord-
ing to the semantic category of the elided element,
CAMR adds a new concept. Then it analyzes the
relation between the elided element and its an-
tecedent, and represents this relationship with spe-
cial semantic relation labels.

(8) 你1 的2收入3 比4 我5高6

you DE income than I high
“Your income is higher than mine.”

x6/高-01
:arg0() x3/收收收入入入

:arg1(x2/的) x1/你
:compare-to(x4/比) x8/thing

:poss() x5/我
:dcopy() x3 s/收收收入入入



97

高-01

收入

你

:p
o
ss

的

:a
rg
0

thing

我

:p
o
ss

:com
pared-to

:dcopy

Figure 5: Add a new concept and copy the antecedent

The Example 8 is a comparative structure. 你
的收入(your income) and 我(I) are asymmetri-
cal in syntactic structure. 我(I) is an incomplete
and abbreviated form in semantic expression (Li,
1982). Since the purpose of this sentence is ac-
tually to emphasize the difference between the
two items 你的收入(Your income) and 我的收
入(my income), it is obviously unreasonable to
copy the concept directly. So we first add a con-
cept thing and then use a special semantic relation
label dcopy, which is added in CAMR to indicate
that the elided element and the antecedent belong
to the same category, but they refer to different ob-
jects in real world.

We further find that there are residual modifiers
of the elided elements in Chinese sentence, and
these modifiers are the cues which remind us to
pay attention to the reference of the elided ele-
ments and its antecedent. In Example 6, Exam-
ple 7, the elided element is a word or a complete
phrase exactly. While in Example 8, the elided ele-
ment is the head of the phrase我的收入(I income,
my income). Sometime it might be more complex.
the elided elements are parts of a phrase.

(9) 你1 的2高中3 老师4 比5 我6的7年轻8

you DE high school teacher than I DE young
”Your high school teacher is younger than
mine.”

x8/年轻-01:
:arg0() x4/老师

:arg1(x2/的) x1/你
:mod() x3/高中

:compare-to(x5/比) x10/person
:poss(x7/的) x4/我
:dcopy() x3 x4/高高高中中中老老老师师师

In Example 9, the elided elements are 高中老

年轻-01

老师

你

:p
os
s

的
高中

:m
od

:a
rg
0

person

我

:p
oss
的

:com
pared-to:dcopy

Figure 6: The elided elements are parts of a phrase

师(high school teacher), which are parts of the
phrase 我的高中老师(my high school teacher).
We are trying to refine the guidelines to represent
these different elided elements reasonably, and we
will discuss this type of ellipsis in the future.

In conclusion, CAMR can represent the elided
element more concisely and show the relationship
between the elided element and its antecedent in
detail. These three methods can handle most el-
lipses and represent the semantics of the whole
sentence, which determines it is a more reasonable
annotation scheme to represent ellipsis.

4 Statistics and Analysis

We annotate 5,000 sentences from Penn Chinese
Treebank CTB8.0. Based on this data, we show
the proportion of ellipsis and how common it is in
Chinese. And we find that the length of the sen-
tence affect the distribution of ellipsis indeed. We
also analyze how the added concept work in ellip-
sis.

4.1 Proportion of Ellipsis in Chinese

As shown in Table 1, the first column Type con-
tains three items. Among them, Overall means all
5,000 sentences in the corpus. The rest columns
represent three statistical indicators,which show
the number of tokens, concepts and sentences of
ellipsis and overall. In Chinese AMR corpus, we
restore 5,787 tokens and 4,178 concepts. And we
find that 2,749 sentences are with ellipsis. That is,
54.98% of sentences contain ellipsis, which proves
that ellipsis is very common in Chinese.

We further show the proportion of three meth-
ods for ellipsis mentioned in Section 3. As shown
in Table 2, copying the antecedent is the most
popular methods in the corpus, which means that
among all elliptical sentences (2,749 sentences),
2,537 sentences appear the identical antecedent.
Almost 92% of ellipses can be restored by copy-



98

Type Token Concept Sentence
Ellipsis 5,787 4,178 2,749
Overall 13,2981 12,0991 5,000
Ratio 4.35% 3.45% 54.98%

Table 1: Proportion of ellipsis in Chinese AMR Corpus

Type Token Concept Sentence
Copy the antecedent 5,143 3,567 2,537
Add a new concept 284 258 230
*Add & Copy 360 353 267

* is the abbreviation of Add a New Concept and
Copy the Antecedent

Table 2: Frequency of three methods for ellipsis

Type Token Concept
Ellipsis 32.58 31.11
Overall 26.6 24.2

Table 3: Average token count and concept count in per
sentence

ing its antecedent directly. This high proportion
shows that the antecedents are of great importance
to restore the elided element, which explains why
most current ellipsis models rely on antecedents
for ellipsis recognition and restoration.

4.2 The Length of the Elliptical Sentence

The statistics also prove that length of the sentence
will affect the distribution of ellipsis. There are
two ways to measure the length of a sentence. One
is based on words, the length of a sentence refers
to the number of words that make up the sentence.
The other is based on concepts, the length of a sen-
tence refers to the number of concepts that make
up the semantic meaning of a sentence.

The average length of elliptical sentences is
about 6 units longer than the regular sentences in
the corpus, whether in terms of words or concepts.
The reason is that the longer the sentence is, the
more complex the semantic structure is and the
richer the semantic information is. Therefore, it
is more likely to delete some words from the sen-
tence.

4.3 The Added Concept for Ellipsis

CAMR adds new concepts to represent ellipsis
when there is no antecedent or the reference of
the elided element and its antecedent is different.

Type Concept Frequency Ratio
thing 110 38.73%

Add a new concept person 103 36.27%
country 8 2.82%
thing 294 81.67%

Add & Copy person 35 9.72%
animal 4 1.11%

Table 4: The added concept for ellipsis

CAMR also adds abstract concepts when we anno-
tate proper nouns, special quantity types and spe-
cial semantic relationships. For example, when
annotating quantitative phrases for weight, we first
add a concept mass-quantity . These added con-
cepts should be excluded in statistics.

As shown in Table 4, the frequency of thing and
person is much higher than other concepts. The
reason is mainly that they are more abstract. We
usually add thing and person when the elided ele-
ment is not clear.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we uses a novel graph-based frame-
work AMR, which mainly represents the elided
element by copying its antecedent, adding a new
concepts, or we combining the two methods when
the reference of the elided elements and its an-
tecedent is not identical. On the basis of Chinese
AMR corpus, which contains 5,000 sentences se-
lected from CTB, we show how common ellipsis
is in Chinese, and we prove that the length of the
sentence affect the distribution of ellipsis indeed.
The average length of elliptical sentences is about
6 units longer than the regular. We further show
the added concept for ellipsis.

In the future, we will discuss ellipses which are
the head of a phrase or just parts of a phrase in
detail. And we intend to apply the research result
to Chinese AMR parser, to improve its ability to
identify and restore ellipsis in Chinese sentences.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful for the comments of the review-
ers. This work is the staged achievement of
the projects supported by National Social Science
Foundation of China (18BYY127) and National
Science Foundation of China (61772278).



99

References
Antoine Arnauld and Claude Lancelot. 1975. General

and Rational Grammar: the Port-royal Grammar.
Mouton Hague, Paris,France.

L Banarescu, C Bonial, S Cai, and et al. 2013. Ab-
stract meaning representation for sembanking. In
Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Work-
shop Interoperability with Discourse, pages 178–
186.

Alena Böhmová, Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, and Barbora
Hladká. 2000. The prague dependency treebank: a
three-level annotation scenario. In TreeBank: Build-
ing and Using Parsed Corpora.

Andrew Carnie. 2013. Syntax-a generative introduc-
tion. Wiley Blackwell, London, UK.

Jan Hajič, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-
son, and et al. 2009. The conll-2019 shared
task:syntactic and semantic dependencies in multi-
ple language. In Proceedings of the 13th Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL): Shared Task.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, and et al. 2015. Deletions
and node reconstruction a dependency-based multi-
level annotation scheme. In Proceedings of Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
pages 17–31.

Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Barbora Hladká, Martin
Holub, and et al. 2001. The current status of the
prague dependency treebank. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Text, Speech and
Dialogue.

G Huang. 1982. The syntactic function and semantic
function of ‘de’structure. Studies in Language
and Linguistics, 1.

Otto Jespersen. 1924. The Philosophy of Grammar.
Groge Allen & Unwin LTD, London, UK.

Bin Li, Yuan Wen, Lijun Bu, and et al. Annotating the
little prince with chinese amrs.

Bin Li, Yuan Wen, Lijun Bu, and et al. 2017. A com-
parative analysis of the amr graphs from english and
chinese corpus of the little prince. Journal of Chi-
nese Information Processing, 31.

L Li. 1982. The Sentence Pattern in Modern Chinese.
The Commercial Press, Beijing, China.

Anne Lobeck. 1995. Ellipsis Functional Heads, Li-
censing, and Identification. Oxford University
Press, New York, US.

Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and et al. 1994. The penn
treebank: annotating predicate argument structure.
In Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language
Technology Workshop.

Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: the penn treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, and et al. 2013. Univer-
sal dependency annotation for multilingual parsing.
In Proceedings of the 51th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jason Merchant. 2004. Fragments and ellipsis. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 27(6):661–738.

Jason Merchant. 2007. There kinds of ellipsis: Syntac-
tic, semantic, pragmatic? In Semantic Workshop.

Marie Mikulová. 2014. Semantic representation of el-
lipsis in the prague dependency treebanks. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and Speech Processing, pages 125–138.

Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, and et al. 2016. Universal de-
pendencies v1: A multilingual treebank collection.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Colin Phillips and Dan Parker. 2013. The psycholin-
guistics of ellipsis. Lingua, 151.

Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech,
and Jan Svartvik. 1972. A Grammar of Contempo-
rary English. Longman Singapore, Singapore.

Xuancheng Ren, Xu Sun, Bingzhen Wei, Weidong
Zhan, and et al. 2018. Building an ellipsis-aware
chinese dependency treebank for web text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

Maosong Sun, Ting Liu, Donghong Ji, and et al. 2014.
Frontiers of language computing. Journal of Chi-
nese Information Processing, 28.

N Xue, F Xia, F Chiou, and et al. 2005. The penn chi-
nese treebank: Phrase structure annotation of a large
corpus. Natural Language Engineering, 11(2):207–
238.


