



















































Building English-to-Serbian Machine Translation System for IMDb Movie Reviews


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 105–113,
Florence, Italy, 2 August 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

105

Building English-to-Serbian Machine Translation System
for IMDb Movie Reviews

Pintu Lohar, Maja Popović and Andy Way
ADAPT Centre

Dublin City University
Ireland

name.surname@adaptcentre.ie

Abstract

This paper reports the results of the first ex-
periment dealing with the challenges of build-
ing a machine translation system for user-
generated content involving a complex South
Slavic language. We focus on translation of
English IMDb user movie reviews into Ser-
bian, in a low-resource scenario. We explore
potentials and limits of (i) phrase-based and
neural machine translation systems trained on
out-of-domain clean parallel data from news
articles (ii) creating additional synthetic in-
domain parallel corpus by machine-translating
the English IMDb corpus into Serbian. Our
main findings are that morphology and syntax
are better handled by the neural approach than
by the phrase-based approach even in this low-
resource mismatched domain scenario, how-
ever the situation is different for the lexical as-
pect, especially for person names. This finding
also indicates that in general, machine transla-
tion of person names into Slavic languages (es-
pecially those which require/allow transcrip-
tion) should be investigated more systemati-
cally.

1 Introduction

Social media platforms have become hugely pop-
ular web-sites where Internet users can commu-
nicate and spread information worldwide. Social
media texts, such as user reviews and micro-blogs,
are often short, informal, and noisy in terms of lin-
guistic norms. Usually, this noise does not pose
problems for human understanding, but it can be
challenging for NLP applications such as senti-
ment analysis or machine translation (MT). Addi-
tional challenge for MT is sparseness of bilingual
(translated) user-generated texts, especially for
neural machine translation (NMT). The NMT ap-
proach has emerged in recent years and already re-
placed statistical phrase-based (PBMT) approach
as state-of-the-art. However, NMT is even more

sensitive to the low-resource settings and domain
mismatch (Koehn and Knowles, 2017). Therefore,
the challenge of translating user-generated texts is
threefold, and if the target language is complex,
then fourfold.

In this work, we focus on neural machine
translation of English IMDb movie reviews into
Serbian, a morpho-syntactically complex South
Slavic language. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first experiment dealing with machine
translation of user-generated content involving a
South Slavic language. The main questions of
our research described in this work are (i) What
performance can be expected of an English-to-
Serbian machine translation system trained on
news articles and applied to movie reviews? (ii)
Can this performance be improved by translating
the monolingual English movie reviews into Ser-
bian thus creating additional synthetic in-domain
bilingual data? (iii) What are the main issues and
what are the most important directions for the next
experiments?

In order to answer these questions, we build
a neural (NMT) machine system on the publicly
available clean out-of-domain news corpus, and a
phrase-based (PBMT) system trained on the same
data in order to compare the two approaches in this
specific scenario. After that, we use these two sys-
tems to generate synthetic Serbian movie reviews
thus creating additional in-domain bilingual data.
We then compare five different set-ups in terms of
corpus statistics, overall automatic scores, and er-
ror analysis.

All our experiments were carried out on pub-
licly available data sets. In order to encourage fur-
ther research on the topic, all Serbian human trans-
lations of IMDb reviews produced for purposes of
this research are made publicly available, too1.

1https://github.com/m-popovic/imdb-corpus-for-MT



106

2 Related Work

A considerable amount of work has been done
on social media analysis, mostly on the senti-
ment analysis of user-generated texts, but many
publications deal with different aspects of transla-
tion of user-generated content. Some papers in-
vestigate translating social media texts in order
to map widely available English sentiment labels
to a less supported target language and thus be
able to perform the sentiment analysis in this lan-
guage (Balahur and Turchi, 2012, 2014). Sev-
eral researchers attempted to build parallel corpora
for user-generated content in order to facilitate
MT. For example, translation of Twitter micro-
blog messages by using a translation-based cross-
lingual information retrieval system is applied in
(Jehl et al., 2012) on Arabic and English Twit-
ter posts. (Ling et al., 2013) crawled a consider-
able amount of Chinese-English parallel segments
from micro-blogs and released the data publicly.
Another publicly available corpus, TweetMT (naki
San Vicente et al., 2016), consists of Spanish,
Basque, Galician, Catalan and Portuguese tweets
and has been created by automatic collection
and crowd-sourcing approaches. (Banerjee et al.,
2012) investigated domain adaptation and reduc-
tion of out-of-vocabulary words for English-to-
German and English-to-French translation of web
forum content. Estimation of comprehensibility
and fidelity of machine-translated user-generated
content from English to French is investigated
in (Rubino et al., 2013), whereas (Lohar et al.,
2017) and (Lohar et al., 2018) explore maintaining
sentiment polarity in German-to-English machine
translation of Twitter posts.

Whereas South Slavic languages are generally
less supported in the NLP, they have been investi-
gated in terms of user-generated content. For ex-
ample, sentiment classification of Croatian Game
reviews and Tweets is investigated in (Rotim and
Šnajder, 2017), and (Ljubešić et al., 2017) pro-
poses adapting a standard-text Slovenian POS tag-
ger to tweets, forum posts, and user comments on
blog posts and news articles. These languages
have been dealt with in machine translation re-
search as well. (Maučec and Brest, 2017) gives
an overview of Slavic languages and PBMT, and
(Popović and Ljubešić, 2014) explores similari-
ties and differences between Serbian and Croat-
ian in terms of PBMT. Linguistic characteristics of
South Slavic languages which are problematic for

PBMT were investigated in (Popović and Arčan,
2015), and (Popović, 2018) compares linguisti-
cally motivated issues for PBMT with those of the
recently emerged NMT.

However, to the best of our knowledge, MT of
user-generated texts involving South Slavic lan-
guages has not been investigated so far. In this
work, we present the first results of translating En-
glish IMDb movie reviews into Serbian.

3 Data Sets

We carried out our experiments using the publicly
available ”Large Movie Review Dataset”2(Maas
et al., 2011) which contains 50, 000 IMDb user
movie reviews in English. The data set is mainly
intended for sentiment analysis research, so each
review is associated with its binary sentiment po-
larity label ”positive” or ”negative”. Negative re-
views have a score ≤4 out of 10, positive reviews
have a score ≥7 out of 10 and the reviews with
more neutral ratings are not included. The over-
all distribution of labels is balanced, namely 25k
positive and 25k negative reviews. In the entire
collection, no more than 30 reviews are allowed
for any particular movie.

For our experiments, we kept 200 reviews (100
positive and 100 negative) containing about 2, 500
sentences for testing purposes, and used the re-
maining 49, 800 reviews (about 500k sentences)
for training. Human translation of the test set
into Serbian, which is necessary for fast automatic
evaluation of MT outputs, is currently in progress,
and at the time of our first experiment described
in this work, Serbian reference translations were
available for 33 test reviews (17 negative and 16
positive) containing 485 sentences (208 negative
and 277 positive).

For the baseline out-of-domain training, we
used the South-east European Times (SEtimes)
news corpus (Tyers and Alperen, 2010) consisting
of about 200k parallel sentences from the news ar-
ticles. In order to be able to compare the results
with the in-domain scenario, the development set
is extracted from the SETimes corpus, too.

4 Expanding English IMDb Reviews into
a Bilingual Training Corpus

The Serbian language is generally not very well
supported in terms of NLP resources. The
English-Serbian publicly available parallel OPUS

2http://ai.stanford.edu/ amaas/data/sentiment/



107

data3 consists mostly of subtitles, which are rather
noisy. The only really clean parallel corpus there
is “SEtimes”, which is the reason why we used
it for the baseline system in our first experiments
– we wanted to avoid any effects of noisy data.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no pub-
licly available parallel corpora containing user-
generated texts in Serbian.

Therefore, we created synthetic IMDb parallel
corpus by translating English IMDb reviews into
Serbian using our baseline systems. This tech-
nique is shown to be very helpful for NMT sys-
tems (Sennrich et al., 2016; Poncelas et al., 2018;
Burlot and Yvon, 2018) and has become a com-
mon practice in the development of NMT systems.
It is usually called “back-translation”, because the
monolingual in-domain data is normally written
in the target language and then translated into the
source language. In this way, the synthetic corpus
consists of noisy source and clean natural target
language texts. In our case, however, we are inter-
ested in translating into Serbian but we do not have
any movie reviews in Serbian, only in English
(the source language). Therefore, we actually ap-
plied the “forward-translation” technique, which
is also shown to be helpful, albeit less than back-
translation (Park et al., 2017; Burlot and Yvon,
2018).

In our case, we expected it to be even more sub-
optimal than for some other language pairs, be-
cause our target language is more complex than
the source language in several aspects. The Ser-
bian language, as other Slavic languages, is mor-
phologically rich and has a rather free word or-
der. Furthermore, unlike other Slavic languages,
it is bi-alphabetical (with both Latin and Cyril-
lic scripts) so attention should be payed in order
not to mix the two scripts in one corpus. Another
possible inconsistency in corpora is different han-
dling of person names – in Cyrillic, only transcrip-
tion is possible, whereas in Latin both transcrip-
tion as well as leaving the original are allowed.
Apart from this, all person names are declined, as
in other Slavic languages.

Usually, back- and/or forward-translation is per-
formed by an NMT system in order to improve
the performance of a baseline NMT system. Re-
cently, a comparison between NMT and PBMT
back-translation (Burlot and Yvon, 2018) shown
that using a PBMT system for synthetic data can

3http://opus.nlpl.eu/

lead to comparable improvement of the baseline
NMT system with a lower training cost. There-
fore, we decided to use and compare both ap-
proaches for improving our baseline NMT system.

5 Experimental Set-up

For our experiment, we have built one PBMT
English-to-Serbian system using Moses
toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007) and four English-to-
Serbian NMT models using OpenNMT (Klein
et al., 2017) in the following way:

• Train an out-of-domain PBMT system on the
SEtimes corpus.

• Train a baseline out-of-domain NMT system
on the SEtimes corpus.

• Translate the English IMDb training cor-
pus into Serbian using the PBMT system,
thus generating a synthetic parallel corpus
IMDbpbmt.

• Translate the English IMDb training corpus
into Serbian using the baseline NMT system,
thus generating a synthetic parallel corpus
IMDbnmt.

• Train a new NMT system on the SEtimes cor-
pus enriched with the IMDbpbmt corpus.

• Train another NMT system using SEtimes
corpus enriched with the IMDbnmt corpus.

• Train one more NMT system using SEtimes
corpus enriched with both IMDbpbmt and
IMDbnmt corpora (IMDbjoint).

Table 1 shows the statistics for each of the
three training corpora (SEtimes, IMDbpbmt and
IMDbnmt), for the development set, as well as for
the test set. First, it can be noticed that the IMDb
training corpus contains more than twice segments
and running words than the English part of the SE-
times corpus, and it has a much larger vocabulary.
Another fact is that, due to the rich morphology,
the Serbian SEtimes vocabulary is almost twice
as large as the English one. Nevertheless, this is
not the case for the synthetic IMDb data, where
the Serbian vocabulary is only barely larger or
even comparable to the English one. This confirms
the intuition about sub-optimal forward translation
mentioned in the previous section – machine trans-
lated data generally exhibit less lexical and syn-
tactic variety than natural data (Burlot and Yvon,



108

train reviews segments words (en) voc (en) words (sr) voc (sr)
SEtimes (natural) / 224167 4675549 81064 4439280 155447
IMDb (natural) 49800 536433 11313315 223972 / /
IMDbpbmt 49800 536433 / / 12012734 236272
IMDbnmt 49800 536433 / / 11077566 195912

dev (SEtimes) / 1000 20338 4757 19244 6806
OOV rate [%] SEtimes 0.25 5.6 0.48 7.9

IMDb 1.29 19.9 / /
IMDbpbmt / / 2.21 29.0
IMDbnmt / / 2.18 29.0

test (IMDb) 33 485 8530 2548 7630 3220
OOV rate [%] SEtimes 1.16 17.5 1.83 22.2

IMDb 0.24 4.2 / /
IMDbpbmt / / 2.39 27.4
IMDbnmt / / 2.76 32.3

Table 1: Corpus statistics

2018), and here we are additionally dealing with a
scarce out-of-domain MT system translating into
a more complex language.

For the development set, as intuitively expected,
out-of-vocabulary rates are smaller for the in-
domain SEtimes corpus, and for the less morpho-
logically complex English language. As for the
test set, the English part behaves in the same way,
namely the OOV rates are smaller when compared
to the in-domain IMDb training corpus. However,
for the synthetic Serbian data, the OOV rates are
comparable with those of the out-of-domain devel-
opment corpus and much higher than for develop-
ment corpus when compared to its in-domain the
SEtimes corpus, which again illustrates the effects
of sub-optimal synthetic data.

6 Results

6.1 Overall Automatic Evaluation
We first evaluated all translation outputs using
the following overall automatic MT evalua-
tion metrics: BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002),
METEOR (Lavie and Denkowski, 2009),
TER (Snover et al., 2006), chrF (Popović, 2015)
and characTER (Wang et al., 2016). BLEU, ME-
TEOR and TER are word-level metrics whereas
chrF and characTER are character-based metrics.
BLEU, METEOR and chrF are based on precision
and/or recall, whereas TER and characTER are
based on edit distance. The results both for the
development as well as for the test set can be seen

in Table 2.
The results for the development set are as it

could intuitively be expected: the best option is to
use a NMT system trained on the in-domain data
(baseline), and using any kind of additional out-
of-domain data deteriorates all scores.

As for the test set, it could be expected that the
scores will be worse than for the development set.
However, several interesting tendencies can be ob-
served. First of all, the baseline NMT system out-
performs the baseline PBMT system despite the
scarcity of the training corpus and domain mis-
match (Koehn and Knowles, 2017), however only
in terms of word-level scores – both character-
level scores are better for the PBMT system. Fur-
thermore, adding IMDbpbmt data deteriorates all
word-level scores and improves both character-
level scores. On the other hand, adding IMDbnmt
data improves all baseline scores, but the improve-
ments of the character-based scores are smaller
than those yielded by adding the IMDbpbmt cor-
pus. Finally, using all synthetic data IMDbjoint im-
proves all scores (except BLEU) over the baseline,
however the improvements are smaller than the
improvements of each individual synthetic data
sets (IMDbnmt for word-level scores and IMDbpbmt
for character-level scores).

6.2 Automatic Error Analysis

In order to better understand the character-metrics
preference for the PBMT-based systems, we car-



109

(a) Overall automatic evaluation scores for the development set (SEtimes)

development set (SEtimes)
system training corpus BLEU↑ METEOR↑ TER↓ chrF↑ chrTER↓
PBMT SEtimes 33.1 29.4 48.9 61.2 41.5
NMT SEtimes 39.2 32.2 42.6 62.7 39.1

SEtimes+IMDbpbmt 36.2 30.8 44.7 61.1 41.0
SEtimes+IMDbnmt 38.1 31.7 43.0 61.6 40.1
SEtimes+IMDbjoint 35.1 30.2 45.5 59.8 41.9

(b) Overall automatic evaluation scores for the test set (IMDb)

test set (IMDb)
system training corpus BLEU↑ METEOR↑ TER↓ chrF↑ chrTER↓
PBMT SEtimes 10.8 18.6 69.1 40.5 56.3
NMT SEtimes 13.7 19.2 65.8 37.4 61.4

SEtimes+IMDbpbmt 11.6 19.0 66.9 40.7 55.3
SEtimes+IMDbnmt 14.7 20.4 63.2 38.8 60.2
SEtimes+IMDbjoint 13.3 19.7 64.8 40.6 55.5

Table 2: Overall word-level and character-level automatic evaluation scores for the development (SEtimes) and the
test (IMDb) corpus.

ried out a more detailed evaluation in the form of
error classification. Automatic error classification
of all translation outputs is performed by the open
source tool Hjerson (Popović, 2011). The tool is
based on combination of edit distance, precision
and recall, and distinguishes five error categories:
inflectional error, word order, omission, addition
and mistranslation. Following the set-up used
for a large evaluation involving many language
pairs and translation outputs in order to compare
the PBMT and NMT approaches in (Toral and
Sánchez-Cartagena, 2017), we group omissions,
additions and mistranslations into a unique cate-
gory called lexical errors. The results for both de-
velopment and for the test set can be seen in Ta-
ble 3 in the form of error rates (raw error count
normalised over the total number of words in the
translation output).

Again, the findings for the in-domain develop-
ment set could be intuitively expected, and are
in line with the findings of (Toral and Sánchez-
Cartagena, 2017): the NMT system better handles
grammatical features (morphology and word or-
der) than the PBMT system, whereas there is no
difference regarding lexical aspect.

The tendencies for the inflectional errors are
same for the test set. The lowest inflectional er-
ror rate can be observed for the baseline NMT sys-
tem, and it is slightly increased when the IMDbnmt
corpus is added. Other three systems, involving

the PBMT approach, exhibit much more inflec-
tional errors. For the other two error categories,
the situation is slightly different. Word order is
also better for the baseline NMT system than for
the PBMT system, however adding the IMDbnmt
corpus does not improve it whereas the IMDbpbmt
corpus does. Possible reason is the free word order
in the Serbian language, so that the system trained
on IMDbpbmt data simply generated the word order
closest to the one in the reference translation. As
for the lexical errors, it can be seen that the lexi-
cal error rate is much higher for the baseline NMT
system than for the baseline PBMT system, which
corresponds to the domain-mismatch challenge for
NMT (Koehn and Knowles, 2017). Furthermore,
the highest reduction of this error type is achieved
when the IMDbpbmt corpus is added.

6.3 Manual Inspection of Lexical Errors

In order to further explore the increase of the lex-
ical errors in systems involving the NMT model,
we carried out a qualitative manual inspection of
three translation outputs: from the baseline NMT
system, from the NMT system with additional
IMDbpbmt corpus, and from the NMT system with
additional IMDbnmt corpus.

We found out that in general, there are many
person names (actors, directors, etc., as well as
characters) in the IMDb corpus. As mentioned in
Section 4, Serbian (Latin) allows both transcrip-



110

(a) Error rates (%) for the development set (SEtimes)

development set (SEtimes)
system training corpus inflection word order lexical
PBMT SEtimes 15.4 5.3 36.1
NMT SEtimes 11.8 4.0 36.1

SEtimes+IMDbpbmt 12.5 4.4 37.2
SEtimes+IMDbnmt 11.8 4.1 36.6
SEtimes+IMDbjoint 12.6 4.4 38.0

(b) Error rates (%) for the test set (IMDb)

test set (IMDb)
system training corpus inflection word order lexical
PBMT SEtimes 14.2 5.1 54.1
NMT SEtimes 10.0 4.9 60.1

SEtimes+IMDbpbmt 14.4 4.6 53.7
SEtimes+IMDbnmt 10.4 5.0 57.3
SEtimes+IMDbjoint 13.4 4.7 53.8

Table 3: Results of automatic error analysis including three error categories for the development (SEtimes) and
test (IMDb) corpus.

tion as well as leaving the original names, but it
should be consistent in a text. Whereas in the
test reference translation the names were left in
the original, neither of the MT systems handled
the names in a consistent manner. Both PBMT
and NMT-based systems generated originals, tran-
scriptions and sometimes unnecessary translations
of the names in a rather random way, and in ad-
dition, NMT-based systems often omitted or re-
peated (the parts of) the names.

This finding could explain both the increase of
the lexical error rates as well as decrease of the
character-level overall scores for the NMT-based
systems. Several examples can be seen in Table 4,
and for each example, the best version of the given
name is shown in bold. The names on the left were
problematic for the baseline NMT system and then
improved (albeit not always in the perfect way)
by adding the IMDbpbmt corpus, but not improved
(or even worsened) by adding the IMDbnmt cor-
pus. The names on the right were treated properly
both by the baseline NMT system as well as by the
IMDbnmt system, however the IMDbpbmt system
transcribed the first name thus making it more dis-
tant from the reference, and unnecessarily trans-
lated the second name as though it were a common
noun.

This finding, together with the facts described
in Section 4, indicate that Serbian, as well as
other Slavic person names and other name enti-

ties should be further investigated in the context of
machine translation, not only for movie reviews or
other types of user-generated context, but in gen-
eral.

7 Summary and Outlook

In this work, we focused on the task of building
an English-to-Serbian machine translation system
for IMDb reviews. We first trained a phrase-based
and a neural model on out-of-domain clean par-
allel data and used it as baselines. We then gen-
erated additional synthetic in-domain parallel data
by translating the English IMDb reviews into Ser-
bian using the two baseline machine translation
systems. This “forward-translation” technique
improved the baseline results, although “back-
translation” (translating natural Serbian texts into
English) would be more helpful. Further analysis
shown that morphology and syntax are better han-
dled by the neural approach than by the phrase-
based approach, whereas the situation is different
for the lexical aspect, especially for person names.
This finding also indicates that in general, ma-
chine translation of person names into Slavic lan-
guages (especially those which require/allow tran-
scription) should be investigated more systemati-
cally.

The most important directions for the future
work on user-generated texts are finding appropri-
ate Serbian texts (for example, movie review ar-



111

IMDbpbmt is better IMDbnmt is better
source best Clark Kent to watch Patrick Duffy
reference najbolji Clark Kent gledati Patricka Duffyja
SEtimes best Kent pratiti Patrick Duffy
SEtimes+IMDbpbmt najbolji Klark Kentu da gledaju Patrik Dafi
SEtimes+IMDbnmt best Kent Kent pratiti Patrick Duffy
source the Richard Donner Cut Kate Winslet (as Rose)
reference verziju Richarda Donnera Kate Winslet (kao Rose)
SEtimes odlaska Richard Cut Winslet (kao Jack)
SEtimes+IMDbpbmt Ričard Donner smanji Kate Winslet (kao ruža)
SEtimes+IMDbnmt Richard Cut Cut Kate Winslet (kao Rose)
source Lester’s Superman II
reference Lesterov Supermen II
SEtimes ’s Superman II
SEtimes+IMDbpbmt Lestera u Superman II
SEtimes+IMDbnmt ’s Superman II
source scriptwriter Tony Morphett
reference scenarista Tony Morphett
SEtimes scenarista Tony Tony
SEtimes+IMDbpbmt scenarista Toni Morphett
SEtimes+IMDbnmt scenarista Tony Tony

Table 4: Examples of different name entities (person names)

ticles in the news) and using them for enlarging
the in-domain part of the training corpus by back-
translation, as well as enlarging out-of-domain
data by cleaning the subtitles corpora, and by
back-translating monolingual Serbian news arti-
cles. In addition, more IMDb reviews should
be evaluated in future experiments. Apart from
this, future work should involve other types of
user-generated content, such as product or hotel
reviews and micro-blog posts, as well as other
(South) Slavic languages.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the ADAPT Cen-
tre for Digital Content Technology at Dublin City
University, funded under the Science Founda-
tion Ireland Research Centres Programme (Grant
13/RC/2106) and co-funded under the European
Regional Development Fund.

References

Alexandra Balahur and Marco Turchi. 2012. Multi-
lingual Sentiment Analysis using Machine Transla-
tion? In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop in Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment
Analysis, pages 52–60, Jeju, Korea.

Alexandra Balahur and Marco Turchi. 2014. Com-
parative Experiments Using Supervised Learning
and Machine Translation for Multilingual Senti-
ment Analysis. Computer Speech and Language,
28(1):56–75.

Pratyush Banerjee, Sudip Kumar Naskar, Johann Ro-
turier, Andy Way, and Josef van Genabith. 2012.
Domain Adaptation in SMT of User-Generated Fo-
rum Content Guided byOOV Word Reduction: Nor-
malization and/or Supplementary Dat. In Proceed-
ings of the 16th Annual Conference of the European
Association for Machine Translation (EAMT 2012),
pages 169–176, Trento, Italy.

Franck Burlot and François Yvon. 2018. Using Mono-
lingual Data in Neural Machine Translation: a Sys-
tematic Study. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT 2018), pages 144–
155, Belgium, Brussels.

Laura Jehl, Felix Hieber, and Stefan Riezler. 2012.
Twitter Translation Using Translation-based Cross-
lingual Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 7th Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT
2012), pages 410–421.

Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean
Senellart, and Alexander M. Rush. 2017. Open-
nmt: Open-source toolkit for neural machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics-
System Demonstrations, pages 67–72, Vancouver,
Canada.



112

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for SMT. In Proceedings of 45th
annual meeting of the ACL on interactive poster
& demonstration sessions, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn and Rebecca Knowles. 2017. Six Chal-
lenges for Neural Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine
Translation, pages 28–39, Vancouver.

Alon Lavie and Michael J. Denkowski. 2009. The ME-
TEOR Metric for Automatic Evaluation of Machine
Translation. Machine Translation, 23(2-3):105–
115.

Wang Ling, Guang Xiang, Chris Dyer, Alan Black, and
Isabel Trancoso. 2013. Microblogs as Parallel Cor-
pora. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2013), pages 176–186, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Nikola Ljubešić, Tomaž Erjavec, and Darja Fišer. 2017.
Adapting a State-of-the-Art Tagger for South Slavic
Languages to Non-Standard Text. In Proceedings of
the 6th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language
Processing (BSNLP 2017), pages 60–68, Valencia,
Spain.

Pintu Lohar, Haithem Afli, and Andy Way. 2017.
Maintaining Sentiment Polarity of Translated User
Generated Content. The Prague Bulletin of Mathe-
matical Linguistics, 108(1):73–84.

Pintu Lohar, Haithem Afli, and Andy Way. 2018. Bal-
ancing Translation Quality and Sentiment Preserva-
tion. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the Ameri-
cas (AMTA 2018), pages 81–88, Boston, MA.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham,
Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts.
2011. Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
Human Language Technologies (ACL-HLT 2011),
pages 142–150, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Mirjam Sepesy Maučec and Janez Brest. 2017. Slavic
languages in phrase-based statistical machine trans-
lation: a survey. Artificial Intelligence Review,
51(1):77–117.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wie-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2002), pages 311–
318, Philadelphia, PA.

Jaehong Park, Jongyoon Song, and Sungroh Yoon.
2017. Building a Neural Machine Translation Sys-
tem Using Only Synthetic Parallel Data. CoRR.

Alberto Poncelas, Dimitar Shterionov, Andy Way,
Gideon Maillette de Buy Wenniger, and Peyman
Passban. 2018. Investigating Back translation in
Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
21st Annual Conference of the European Associa-
tion for Machine Translation (EAMT 2018), Ali-
cante, Spain.

Maja Popović. 2011. Hjerson: An Open Source
Tool for Automatic Error Classification of Machine
Translation Output. Prague Bulletin of Mathemati-
cal Linguistics, 96:59–68.

Maja Popović. 2015. chrF: character n-gram F-score
for automatic MT evaluation. In Proceedings of the
10th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2015), pages 392–395, Lisbon, Portugal.

Maja Popović. 2018. Language-related issues for
NMT and PBMT for English–German and English–
Serbian. Machine Translation, 32(3):237–253.

Maja Popović and Mihael Arčan. 2015. Identify-
ing main obstacles for statistical machine transla-
tion of morphologically rich South Slavic languages.
In Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of
the European Association for Machine Translation
(EAMT 2015), pages 97–104, Antalya, Turkey.

Maja Popović and Nikola Ljubešić. 2014. Explor-
ing cross-language statistical machine translation for
closely related South Slavic languages. In Proceed-
ings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Language
Technology for Closely Related Languages and Lan-
guage Variants, pages 76–84, Doha, Qatar.

Leon Rotim and Jan Šnajder. 2017. Comparison of
Short-Text Sentiment Analysis Methods for Croat-
ian. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Balto-
Slavic Natural Language Processing (BSNLP 2017),
pages 69–75, Valencia, Spain.

Raphael Rubino, Jennifer Foster, Rasoul Samad Zadeh
Kaljahi, Johann Roturier, and Fred Hollowood.
2013. Estimating the Quality of Translated User-
Generated Content. In Proceedings of 6th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (IJCNLP 2013), pages 1167–1173, Nagoya,
Japan.

Iñaki San Vicente, Iñaki Alegria, Cristina Espa na
Bonet, Pablo Gamallo, Hugo Goncalo Oliveira,
Eva Martinez Garcia, Antonio Toral, Arkaitz Zubi-
aga, and Nora Aranberri. 2016. TweetMT: A Paral-
lel Microblog Corpus. In Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016), Portorož, Slovenia.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Improving Neural Machine Translation Mod-
els with Monolingual Data. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL 2016), pages 86–96,
Berlin, Germany.



113

Matthew Snover, Bonnie J. Dorr, Richard M. Schwartz,
and Linnea Micciulla. 2006. A Study of Transla-
tion Edit Rate with Targeted Human Annotation. In
Proceedings of the 7th Conference of Association for
Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA 2006),
pages 223–231, Cambridge, MA.

Antonio Toral and Vı́ctor Manuel Sánchez-Cartagena.
2017. A Multifaceted Evaluation of Neural versus
Statistical Machine Translation for 9 Language Di-
rections. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (EACL 2017), Valencia, Spain.

Francis M Tyers and Murat Serdar Alperen. 2010.
South-east European Times: A parallel corpus of
Balkan languages. In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on Exploitation of Multilingual Resources
and Tools for Central and (South-) Eastern Euro-
pean Languages, pages 49–53, Valetta, Malta.

Weiyue Wang, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Hendrik Rosendahl,
and Hermann Ney. 2016. CharacTer: Translation
Edit Rate on Character Level. In Proceedings of
the 1st Conference on Machine Translation (WMT
2016), pages 505–510, Berlin, Germany.


