




































Modelling word translation entropy and syntactic equivalence with
machine learning

Bram Vanroy, Orphée De Clercq, Lieve Macken
LT3, Language and Translation Technology Team

Ghent University
Belgium

firstname.lastname@ugent.be

Previous research suggests that translation prod-
uct features such as word translation entropy
(WTE) and the degree of syntactic equivalence
(SE) correlate with cognitive load (Schaeffer et al.
(2016)), and Sun (2015), respectively). WTE
quantifies the number of translation choices at
word level that a translator is confronted with,
whereas SE quantifies the syntactic (dis)similarity
between a source and target text. In Vanroy et al.
(2019), we found that when a source word has
multiple possible translations (WTE), a translator
may require more cognitive effort to find the suit-
able translation; and different syntactic structures
of the source segment vis-à-vis the proposed target
segment may lead to an increased cognitive effort
(SE). Consequently, a high average WTE or dis-
similar syntactic structures for a given source text
and its translation would indicate that a text was
difficult to translate.

The current research aims to predict WTE of a
source text as well as its SE to a target text with-
out having access to the actual translation prod-
ucts. We do that by training machine learning
(ML) systems on a parallel corpus to model these
features. We focus on English to Dutch translation,
and we use the Dutch Parallel Corpus (Macken
et al. (2011); DPC) as our parallel dataset. Unlike
the work done in the Translation Process Research
Database (Carl et al., 2016) which uses multiple
translations of the same text, we calculate a word’s
translation entropy based on how it has been trans-
lated across the whole corpus. We investigate dif-
ferent ML architectures, and features ranging from
the sentence to the morphosyntactic level (for the
latter, see Tezcan et al. (2017)). The goal is that by

c© 2019 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 4.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

only feeding a source sentence into the systems,
they can predict that sentence’s average WTE and
SE.

In addition, we investigate whether we can go
one step further and use machine translation (MT)
systems as an approximation for human transla-
tions for the specific task above. This would mean
that we do not need human translations nor ML,
and that we can confidently use MT to generate
a translation and calculate WTE and SE between
the source text and the machine translated target
text. To explore the feasibility of this approach,
we reuse WTE and SE that were calculated on
DPC. Then we translate the source text of that cor-
pus with MT and calculate WTE and SE for these
translations. Correlating the WTE and SE values
from the human translations and those of the MT
version indicates how confidently MT can be used
as a proxy for human translations in this task.

This study is carried out in the framework of the
PreDicT project1 (Predicting Difficulty in Transla-
tion), which aims to develop a translatability pre-
diction system for English-Dutch that not only au-
tomatically assigns a global difficulty score to a
given source text, but also identifies the passages
in the source text that are difficult to translate.

References

Carl, M., Schaeffer, M. J., and Bangalore, S.
(2016). The CRITT translation process research
database. In Carl, M., Bangalore, S., and Scha-
effer, M. J., editors, New directions in empiri-
cal translation process research, New frontiers
in translation studies, pages 13–54. Springer,
Cham, Switzerland.

1https://research.flw.ugent.be/en/
projects/predict

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 3



Macken, L., De Clercq, O., and Paulussen, H.
(2011). Dutch parallel corpus: A balanced
copyright-cleared parallel corpus. Meta: Jour-
nal des traducteurs, 56(2):374–390.

Schaeffer, M., Dragsted, B., Hvelplund, K. T.,
Balling, L. W., and Carl, M. (2016). Word
translation entropy: Evidence of early target lan-
guage activation during reading for translation.
In Carl, M., Bangalore, S., and Schaeffer, M.,
editors, New directions in empirical translation
process research, pages 183–210. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, Cham, Switzerland.

Sun, S. (2015). Measuring translation difficulty:
Theoretical and methodological considerations.
Across languages and cultures, 16(1):29–54.

Tezcan, A., Hoste, V., and Macken, L. (2017). A
neural network architecture for detecting gram-
matical errors in statistical machine translation.
The Prague bulletin of mathematical linguistics,
108(1):133–145.

Vanroy, B., De Clercq, O., and Macken, L. (2019).
Correlating process and product data to get an
insight into translation difficulty. Perspectives,
pages 1–18.

MEMENTO Dublin, Aug. 20, 2019 | p. 4


