



















































Toward Dialogue Modeling: A Semantic Annotation Scheme for Questions and Answers


Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 230–235
Florence, Italy, August 1, 2019. c©2019 Association for Computational Linguistics

230

Toward Dialogue Modeling: A Semantic Annotation Scheme for
Questions and Answers

Marı́a Andrea Cruz Blandón, Gosse Minnema, Aria Nourbakhsh
Maria Bortichev, Maxime Amblard

LORIA, UMR 7503, Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria
Nancy, France

{mariaandrea.cruzblandon, gosseminnema}@gmail.com
aria.nourbakhsh@outlook.com

{maria.boritchev, maxime.amblard}@univ-lorraine.fr

Abstract

The present study proposes an annotation
scheme for classifying the content and dis-
course contribution of question-answer pairs.
We propose detailed guidelines for using the
scheme and apply them to dialogues in En-
glish, Spanish, and Dutch. Finally, we report
on initial machine learning experiments for au-
tomatic annotation.

1 Introduction

Question-answer pair (QAP) labeling is the prob-
lem of characterizing the content and discourse
contribution of questions and answers using a
small but maximally informative tagset that can be
consistently applied by both human annotators and
NLP systems. QAP labeling has many potential
use cases, for example as a preprocessing step for
dialogue modeling systems or for chatbots. The
problem is not new: in the NLP literature, differ-
ent aspects of QAP tagging have been addressed
in the context of question answering systems (Li
and Roth, 2002), question generation systems (e.g.
Graesser et al., 2008), and dialogue act classifi-
cation (e.g. Allen and Core, 1997; Stolcke et al.,
2000).

However, we see several gaps in the literature:
existing approaches to QAP classification often do
not cover the full range of questions and answers
found in human dialogues and are limited in the
types of semantic information that they cover. To
address these issues, we propose a new annota-
tion scheme that was developed based on corpora
of natural conversations in several languages (En-
glish, Spanish, and Dutch) and provides several
layers of annotations for QAPs. Notably, where
applicable, we annotate the semantic role of the
questioned constituent in questions and their cor-
responding answer (e.g. ‘Does she live in Paris
or London?’ ⇒ LOCATION), which we believe is

an informative, yet easy definable way of globally
characterizing the content of a QAP.

Our paper has two main contributions: the an-
notation scheme itself (section 3) and two ways
of applying it to real data. We developed detailed
and explicit guidelines for human annotators, and
tested these on corpus data (section 4.1). Addi-
tionally, we started experimenting with machine
learning approaches for automating part of the an-
notation process (section 4.2).

2 Related Work

Our annotation scheme is related to two exist-
ing schemes in particular. The first of these is
Freed (1994), which categorizes questions along
an information continuum that ranges from ques-
tions purely asking for factual information to ques-
tions that convey, rather than request, (social) in-
formation. Within this continuum, questions are
divided into classes that are defined based on a
combination of formal (syntactic) and functional
criteria. Both of these ideas are also used in
our scheme: our question types are also distin-
guished by whether they ask or convey informa-
tion (‘phatic questions’ and ‘completion sugges-
tions’ fall into the latter category) and are defined
as combinations of specific forms and functions.

Another related scheme is Stolcke et al. (2000),
an adapted version of DAMSL (‘Dialog Act
Markup in Several Layers’, Allen and Core 1997),
an annotation scheme for dialogue acts (including
QAPs). The scheme includes a set of eight dif-
ferent question types (e.g. yes/no questions, wh-
questions, rhetorical questions) that has consider-
able overlap with our set of question types.

3 Annotation scheme

Annotated information is split between two main
‘layers’: question/answer type and feature (se-



231

mantic role). Every question or answer is assigned
at least a type tag, and depending on the type, a
feature tag.

3.1 Questions

The question tagset was designed in a corpus-
driven way, starting with two basic types and ex-
panding the tagset based on corpus data. Our
starting assumption is that the corpora would con-
tain at least two well-known and well-defined cat-
egories of questions: yes/no questions and wh-
questions (Freed, 1994). In our opinion, both of
these types are useful a priori, because they are
each associated with a clear set of syntactic, se-
mantic, and pragmatic characteristics (at least for
the languages that are included in this study). Pro-
totypical English yes/no questions are character-
ized by subject-auxiliary inversion and do-support
(syntax), express a proposition that could be true
or false (semantics), and their answers are ex-
pected to either confirm or deny this proposition
(pragmatics). On the other hand, a prototypical
English wh-question contains a fronted constituent
that starts with a wh-word (syntax), expresses a
proposition with missing information (semantics),
and expects the answerer to supply this missing
information (pragmatics) (Freed, 1994).

Next, we looked for questions in our corpora
that did not correspond to either of the two pro-
totypes and extended the scheme to fit them (see
table 1 for the final scheme and examples). First,
there are questions that are similar to wh-questions
or yes/no questions but have a deviant form (e.g.
wh-in-situ questions like ‘You saw what?’, or
yes/no questions without inversion such as ‘You
saw him?’). We decided not to introduce new cat-
egories for these on the basis of their semantics
and pragmatics.

A second group of questions has the syntac-
tic characteristics of a yes/no question or a wh-
question, but a different pragmatics and/or seman-
tics. For example, the asker of the question sug-
gests a way to complete the utterance of the previ-
ous speaker, and the expected answer would con-
firm or deny this suggestion. This is subtly dif-
ferent from a prototypical yes/no question because
the asker of the question does not necessarily ask
their interlocutor to confirm the truth value of the
suggestion (e.g. A: it includes heat and uhm, I
think B: Water?, SCoSE/Amy, line 746-7471). We

1See section 4.1.2 for information about our corpora.

call these types of questions completion sugges-
tions.

Tag Name Tag Name

YN Yes/No question WH Wh-question
CS Completion suggestion PQ Phatic question
DQ Disjunctive question

Table 1: Question types

The third group of questions appear to be a
yes/no question or a wh-question, respectively, but
their context and intonation make clear that the
asker is not actually interested in the confirmation
or denial of the proposition. Instead, such ques-
tions can have various so-called phatic functions,
i.e. their semantic content is less important than
their social and rhetorical functions (Freed, 1994;
Senft, 2009). We call this type of questions phatic
questions (e.g. right? / oh yeah? / you know?).2

Finally, some questions containing a disjunc-
tion (e.g. ‘Do you go on Monday or on Tues-
day?’) are semantically and pragmatically sim-
ilar to wh-questions, but are syntactically closer
to yes/no questions. This kind of questions, like
yes/no questions, exhibits subject-auxiliary inver-
sion (at least in English), but does not ask for the
confirmation or denial of the proposition that it ex-
presses. Instead, it expects the answerer to provide
some missing information with the set of options
to choose from. We call this type of questions dis-
junctive questions (sometimes also called alterna-
tive questions in the literature).

3.2 Features

Wh- and disjunctive questions are always ‘about’
a particular constituent (e.g. ‘Which man is run-
ning?’, ‘Do you want coffee or tea?’). The fea-
ture, or semantic role of this constituent provides
information about the content of the question and
the expected answer (e.g. if the questioned con-
stituent is an AGENT then it is likely that the an-
swer will refer to a person). Detecting semantic
roles requires semantically analyzing the sentence,
but for wh-questions, wh-words often provide cues
(e.g. ‘where’ for LOCATION). Our feature anno-
tations follow the feature set (see table 2) and the

2Note that our use of the term phatic question is some-
what broader than the phatic information question described
in Freed (1994); for example, our definition also includes
rethorical questions, while in Freed’s scheme, these are not
included.



232

mapping from (English) wh-words to features pro-
posed in Boritchev (2017) (adapted from Jurafsky
and Martin 2000).

Tag Name Tag Name

TMP Temporality OW Owner
LOC Location RE Reason
AG Agent TH Theme
CH Characteristic

Table 2: Features

3.3 Answers

The main intuition underlying our answer annota-
tion scheme is that question types restrict their an-
swers: for example, yes/no questions are prototyp-
ically answered by ‘yes’ or ‘no’, and wh-questions
ask for a constituent with a particular feature. Ta-
ble 3 summarizes our answer types and their cor-
responding question types. Among these types of
answers, there may be overlaps. For example, a
‘deny the assumption’ answer can be thought of as
a negative answer because it is possible that they
share the same grammatical and semantic struc-
ture. Different factors including the context and
prosody are relevant to decide overlapping tags.

Some questions are not followed by answer. We
distinguish between two situations. First, there are
questions that receive a reply that, while not pro-
viding the information asked for in the question,
clearly do respond to it. For example, in the QAP
A: ‘When will you guys get off?’ / B: ‘My last exam
is like . . . I don’t know’ (SCoSe/Amy, line 243-
244), B’s response does not answer A’s question
directly but does engage with it as there is a log-
ical connection between finishing the exams and
going on vacation. In such cases, the response is
tagged as unrelated topic (UT) because it is about
a different topic but still responds to the question.
By contrast, when there is no response at all, no
answer should be annotated.

4 Annotation Experiments

In this section, we discuss our experiments with
applying the scheme manually (section 4.1) and
using machine learning techniques (section 4.2).

4.1 Manual annotation

We have experimented with applying the scheme
on real-world data. Our experiment consists of

Tags Name Question Type

PA Positive Answer YN, CS
NA Negative Answer YN, CS
FA Feature Answer DQ, WH
PHA Phatic Answer YN, CS, DQ, WH, PQ
UA Uncertainty Answers YN, CS, DQ, WH, PQ
UT Unrelated Topic YN, CS, DQ, WH, PQ
DA Deny the Assumption YN, CS, DQ, WH, PQ

Table 3: Answers

two parts: writing annotation guidelines to explic-
itly define the annotation process and annotating
701 questions across three languages, namely, En-
glish, Spanish, and Dutch.3

4.1.1 Annotation guide
In order to help annotators apply the scheme con-
sistently, we wrote annotation guidelines for En-
glish, which include examples and instructions
for how to use the annotation software (ELAN
2017, Sloetjes and Wittenburg 2008). The annota-
tion procedure guides the annotator in identifying
questions, dealing with transcription errors, deter-
mining question types, and adding tags for addi-
tional information such as features, complexity,
and indirectness.

Some question types have a very specific pro-
totypical syntactic form (e.g. wh-questions),
whereas other questions can have several differ-
ent forms (e.g. phatic questions). We exploit this
by defining a precedence order for question types,
which serves as a filter for identifying questions.
The precedence order lists question types from the
most specific to the most general ones, i.e. from
questions with easily identifiable characteristics to
those that can have different forms as it is the case
for the phatic questions. The precedence order
is as follows: (1) Wh-questions, (2) Disjunctive
questions, (3) Yes/No questions, (4) Completion
suggestions (5) Phatic questions.

4.1.2 Corpora
We annotated several dialogues from three differ-
ent corpora in three languages: the Saarbrücken
Corpus of Spoken English (SCoSE) (Norrick,
2017), a corpus of face-to-face conversations; the
CallFriend corpus (Spanish) (Canavan and Zip-
perlen, 1996), a corpus of phone conversations;

3Our guidelines and annotations are available in
our repository at https://github.com/andrea08/
question_answer_annotation.

https://github.com/andrea08/question_answer_annotation
https://github.com/andrea08/question_answer_annotation


233

Annotators Ao κ

Questions 0.73 0.63
Features 0.90 0.67
Answers 0.59 0.49

Table 4: Cohen’s Kappa score (κ) and observed agree-
ment (Ao) for gold standard dialogue.

and the Spoken Dutch Corpus (CGN) Oostdijk
2001, a corpus of phone conversations. The pur-
pose of annotating these dialogues was to test the
annotation scheme on different languages and pro-
duce annotated data.

We annotated all questions in a subset of 4,939
utterances from the SCoSE corpus. Of these,
3,578 utterances were used to build the ‘gold
standard’ corpus (used for calculating agreement
scores and training machine learning algorithms).
The remainder of the corpus was used as a test
set in the machine learning algorithms. Further-
more, we annotated questions and answers from
2,618 and 935 utterances of CallFriend and CGN
corpora, respectively. We relied primarily on the
transcriptions of the corpora; in case of doubt, we
made use of the audio recordings as well.

4.1.3 Results
We annotated 701 questions (Q) and 483 answers
(A), distributed as follows: 422 (Q) / 289 (A) in
the ScoSE corpus; 87 (Q) / 72 (A) in the CGN
corpus; and 192 (Q) / 122 (A) in the CallFriend
corpus. A descriptive analysis of our annotations
shows that yes/no questions are the most common
type in the three corpora, 40% (Spanish), 42%
(English) and 64% (Dutch).

To evaluate the annotations, inter-annotator
agreement was calculated based on a subset of
the gold standard corpus.4 Table 4 illustrates the
values of observed agreement (Ao) and Cohen’s
κ (Cohen, 1960) obtained for question, feature
and answer annotation. The agreement values ob-
tained for question types were over 0.6 (for all
annotators combined). This would generally be
considered to be a ‘moderate’ level of agreement
(Landis and Koch, 1977). A large share of our
disagreements came from phatic questions; dis-
tinguishing these from other question types some-
times relies on subtle pragmatic and semantic con-

4This subset consists of the 690 utterances jointly anno-
tated by all three annotators.

textual judgements. Agreement for answer types
is lower than for question types because ques-
tion types restrict answer types and hence ques-
tion type disagreements can cause answer type dis-
agreements.

In order to improve the annotation guidelines,
we systematically examined all of the disagree-
ments, most of which fell into one of four cat-
egories: (1) Simple mistakes, such as missing a
question or choosing an (obviously) wrong tag.
(2) Disagreements as a consequence of a previous
disagreement; e.g., wh-questions need feature an-
notations, but phatic questions do not. In this case,
a disagreement about the question type can cause
further disagreement about feature type. (3) Miss-
ing instructions in the annotation guidelines for
handling particular situations, e.g. annotating ut-
terances containing interruptions. (4) Utterances
whose interpretation was ambiguous and depends
on subtle intonational or contextual cues for which
it is hard to formulate a general rule.

4.2 Machine learning

We also conducted preliminary machine learning
experiments for automating the annotation pro-
cess. For the moment, we focus only on question
type classification for English dialogues. So far,
the approach that shows the most promising re-
sults is a decision tree algorithm (Quinlan, 1986)
that takes as input a set of hand-designed features
representing formal characteristics of a question,
such as its length, the presence of a wh-word, and
the presence of words such as really? or you
know? Our full feature set is given in Table 5.
Note that these features are quite superficial and
do not take into account the discourse context of
a question. Still, the algorithm achieves an accu-
racy score of 0.73 and an F1-score of 0.58, outper-
forming our majority-class baseline algorithm by
a wide margin (acc. = 0.47, F1 = 0.31).5

Analysing the effect of the features in the pre-
dictions of the decision tree, we found that the
majority of the mistakes were associated with the
length of the questions. From the questions that
were misclassified and had a length less than 6 (26
questions), 50% were wrongly predicted as phatic
questions. Particularly, as with manual annota-
tions, phatic questions that contain wh-words were
source of disagreement and misclassified. Table

5A global F1 score was calculated by macro-averaging
the scores for individual classes.



234

6 shows the confusion matrix for all the question
types.

Feature Description Value

has wh Contains a wh-constituent True, False

has or Contains the word “or” True, False

has
inversion

Verb before NP (based on shal-
low parse)

True, False

has tag Contains a tag (‘isn’t it’, ‘right’) True, False

last utt
similar

Question shares ≥ 50% of its
words with the previous utter-
ance

True, False

last utt
incomplete

Previous utterance is interrupted
(marked with special transcrip-
tion symbol)

True, False

has cliche Contains a phatic marker (‘you
know?’, ‘really?’)

True, False

length Number of words Numerical

Table 5: Extracted features for the classification task

YN DQ PQ CS WH Support

YN 74 1 8 3 2 88
DQ 0 3 0 0 0 3
PQ 7 0 15 0 8 30
CS 1 0 0 0 0 1
WH 10 0 9 0 43 62

Table 6: Confusion matrix of decision tree prediction.
Testing data set, 184 questions.

Furthermore, we experimented with two neu-
ral architectures, a bag-of-words (BOW) classi-
fier and a recurrent neural network (RNN), to test
what input representations are most informative.
However, so far these models suffer from over-
fitting and perform worse than the decision tree
model (BOW: acc. = 0.76, F1 = 0.44; RNN:
acc. = 0.54, F1 = 0.24). We expect these mod-
els to perform better when more training data is
available.

5 Conclusion

This paper introduced a new annotation scheme
for question-answer pairs in natural conversation.
The scheme defines five question types and seven
answer types based on a mix of formal and func-
tional criteria. An annotation guide was developed
and multi-lingual corpora were annotated. Inter-
annotator agreement scores were moderately high;
a qualitative analysis of disagreements led to im-
provements to the annotation guidelines. Initial

machine learning experiments show that a simple
decision tree algorithm achieves above-baseline
performance, but much work remains to be done
for making automatic annotation practically fea-
sible. For future work, we would also like to
expand the multilingual component of our work
by adding language-specific guidelines, annotat-
ing more corpora, and adapting our machine learn-
ing algorithms to different languages.

Acknowledgements

This paper was written while the first authors
(Cruz Blandón, Minnema, Nourbakhsh) were en-
rolled in the European Master Program in Lan-
guage and Communication Technologies (LCT)
and were supported by the European Union Eras-
mus Mundus program.

References
James Allen and Mark Core. 1997. Draft of DAMSL:

Dialog act markup in several layers. https:
//www.cs.rochester.edu/research/
speech/damsl/RevisedManual/, accessed
January 22, 2019.

Maria Boritchev. 2017. Approaching dialogue model-
ing in a dynamic framework. Master’s thesis, Uni-
versité de Lorraine.

Alexandra Canavan and George Zipperlen. 1996.
CALLFRIEND, Spanish-Non-Caribbean Dialect
(LDC Catalog Number: LDC96S58).

Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20(1):37–46.

ELAN (version 5.2). 2017. The Language
Archive, Max Planck Institute for Psycholin-
guistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. https:
//tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/.

Alice F. Freed. 1994. The form and function of ques-
tions in informal dyadic conversation. Journal of
Pragmatics, 21(6):621 – 644.

Art Graesser, Vasile Rus, and Zhiqiang Cai. 2008.
Question classification schemes. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Question Generation.

Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2000. Speech
and Language Processing: An Introduction to Nat-
ural Language Processing, Computational Linguis-
tics, and Speech Recognition, 1st edition. Prentice
Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 33(1):159–174.

https://www.cs.rochester.edu/research/speech/damsl/RevisedManual/
https://www.cs.rochester.edu/research/speech/damsl/RevisedManual/
https://www.cs.rochester.edu/research/speech/damsl/RevisedManual/
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC96S58
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC96S58
https://doi.org/10.1177/001316446002000104
https://doi.org/10.1177/001316446002000104
https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/
https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/


235

Xin Li and Dan Roth. 2002. Learning question clas-
sifiers. In COLING ’02 Proceedings of the 19th in-
ternational conference on computational linguistics,
pages 1–7.

Neal Norrick. 2017. SCoSE part 1: Complete conver-
sations. English Linguistics, Department of English
at Saarland University.

Nelleke Oostdijk. 2001. The design of the Spoken
Dutch Corpus. Language and Computers, 36:105–
112.

J. Ross Quinlan. 1986. Induction of decision trees.
Machine learning, 1(1):81–106.

Gunter Senft. 2009. Phatic communion. In Gunter
Senft, Jan-Ola stman, and Jef Verschueren, editors,
Culture and language use, pages 226–233. John
Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Han Sloetjes and Peter Wittenburg. 2008. Annotation
by category: ELAN and ISO DCR. In LREC.

Andreas Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Eliza-
beth. Shriberg, Rebecca. Bates, Daniel. Jurafsky,
Paul Taylor, Rachel Martin, Carol Van Ess-Dykema,
and Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational linguistics, 26(3):339–373.

https://ca.talkbank.org/access/SCoSE.html
https://ca.talkbank.org/access/SCoSE.html

